The Young Man's Monitor.
OR A modest Offer toward the Pious, and Virtuous Composure of Life FROM Youth
to Riper Years.

By Samuel Crossman, B.D.

Wherewithal shall a Yo^ng man cle^nse his way? By taking heed th^reto
according to thy Word,

Psalm. 11 99. Verecundo Adolescence quid amabilius? Pera
Gratum est, quod patriae civem, populoque dedisti;
Si facis, ut Patriae sit idoneus, etc. Iuvenal.
London, Printed by I.H. and are to be sold by S. Thompson, at the Bishops head
in St. Paul's Churchyard, and T. Parkhurst, at the three Crowns at the lower
end of Cheapside, near the Conduit. 1664.

The Epistle to the Reader: More particularly to Parents.
Courteous Reader!
YOu are here presented with these ensuing Pages, intended for the endearing of
God, and the bringing up a good report upon Piety, and Virtue, in the hearts,
and hearing of Young Persons, if by any means the Generation now rising up
might become (what we are all so justly desirous they should be) (...) S^g^s
Buling.
a real blessing to the next Age. P^e^itia citra pu^^ilitatem, ad (...) is ^^
(...) habitu^ sequa^. E^asm. C^ne. de pu. les.
Wisely taken off from the Follies, and Vices of Youth; timely and truly
persuaded to the love of all goodness; and in conclusion, (as Origin to his
Father) the dear joy of Parents; Eu^^ci^, and felix pro^e^ies, in qua Parents
renovati; ut quasi secundo vivere incipiant, qui alioqui statim desicer^nt.
Calvin.
the happy revival of their fading life; the praise and beauty of the Land.

The Paper (such as it is) was first sent as a more private Letter to the
Children, and Servants of some Friends, for their encouragement and direction
in the good ways of God: though since thus far enlarged, as you now receive it.

The truth is, the season under which it was drawn up, both then, and now, was
unto flesh and blood sadning enough; and too disadvantagious to the competent
rendering a work of this nature (as the words of the wise had need be)
acceptable, and set in some good order, for the gaining of the shie affections
of Youth to any good resentment, or acceptance of their own welfare.

But what God in his high wisdom appoints, we must not sinistrously charge with
harshness or folly. What he is pleased inwardly to sweeten, we may not
ungratefully call bitter, nor unadvisedly open our lips with uncomely
complaints thereof. Lam. 3.22
It is of his (free and dear) mercies (must we all say, and that cheerfully
too) that we are not consumed.

Reader! you are not, neither shall you here be challenged into the fields of
Contention. Nature indeed is very forward (as the Disciple in the Gospel) to
draw its Sword: but we scarce any of us well know, (though we are all too
favorable interpreters of our selves) what spirits we are of. So easy is it
to mistake carnal passion, (for that which is far higher and more divine) a
truly gracious composure in Religion.

We might all too truly confess with the Father; Ecclesi^e nomine armamini, and
contra E^clesiam dimicatis. Aug.
We can easily arm on almost all sides, under those golden names of God, and
his Church: and yet as readily turn the Cannons mouths in conclusion against
them both.

It may justly become the sore lamentation, which we may all mournfully take up
for these last days; That Peace, the sweetest of mercies, the sum and scaling
up of all other blessings (as the (...)Pax oma^um benedictionum sigillum, and
obsig^atio est. Abaib.
(Jews so cheerfully delight to call it) is through our great unworthiness
judicially taken away from amongst the Sons of men. Love, the rich, and
precious perfume of life, the peculiar character of the true Disciple, the
pathetical recommendation of a dying Savior, how is it (as the beauty of
Israel) fallen in the streets! Nobleness, and Sweetness of spirit are put away
as strangers, that have no form nor comeliness in them. A common good (the great
and just concernment of all) how, oh! how is it unknown, unregarded of most? It
may lie (like him in the Gospel) wounded upon the rode, and yet scarce any that
turns aside to comfort it, or to show any friendly kindness to it.

A Catiline (says the Catilinam quocu^que in populo videas, quocu^qu^ sub a^e*
s^d aec Brutus crit, Bruti nec, a^^culus usquam. Juv.
Sa^yrist) a troubler of mankind, grows as the weed, almost every where. But a
Brutus, a worthy Patriot, that bears the welfare of others, the true prosperity
of his native Land, upon his heart, and sets his eyes perpetually thereon for
good, such an one is a rare Jewel; worthy of all honor, and embraces wherever
he is found.

Such enobled Spirits (says the great Orator in his affectionate language)
they are the dear offspring, the delight and care of God. A divine race, it is
from the Omnes qui patri^m co^serva ^at, a^^uveri^t, and auxerint certus ^is i^
coelo ac definitus locus, ubi be^ti. (...) sempiterno fra^^ntur, hiac p^o^eci,
huc reveituntur. Cicero in Somn. Scip.
Heavens they come down to us: and to the Heavens again, when ever they take
their leaves of us, shall they triumphantly return.

But oh! that our heads were Fountains, and our eyes Rivers of tears. For
amongst all the children that Nature has brought forth, they are few that take
her by the hand, and wisely lead her. Amongst the numerous Family, that are
registered unto Religion, few that are willing to be true to God, or kind to
each other.

Therefore must the pious mourn, and the lover of his Country go with the
Prophet into his secret places, and weep bitterly, crying out with that holy
man; Quis non vita etiam sua redimeret sub motum istud infinitum dissidi^
scandalum? Mart. Bue.
Who would not be willing with the price of his very life, to redress and heal
that endless strife and variance, so unkindly sprung up amongst us.

These are (as the Bella geri placuit mullos babitura triumphos. -- Pares
aquilae, and pila n^^antia pilis. Luc.
Poet sadly sung) the wars that can never be crowned with any triumph. The
amazing prospect, (our hearts must even tremble at the very uttering of it)
where Bibles against Bibles, are the known Ensigns on both sides. As if
Religion had sounded a Martial Alarm, calling her Children, (like those Young
men before Abner and Joab) to arise, and slay each other.

Thus with the foolish Bees, instead of gathering true honey, we quarrel and
sling each other; Hi wotus (...), atque i^^c certamina (...) pulveris exigu^
^acta compressa quiescant. V.^.G^^
Till death comes in, and parts all, by throwing its dust upon our cold hearse.
And then shall these combats (will we, nill we break up, and be no more.

In the mean time, this Spirit (we must all confess) it is not of God. The
banner of Christ is a banner of love. And our best Character will be meekness,
and Gentleness, as becomes us in the Lord. It were no betraying of the Sacred
Principles of Religion for all the true Professors of it, to conclude, (as
Alexander well answered one that importuned him to sharpness;) (...) Nar. de
Alex.
Rigor may please you: but mildness, and sweetness will best become me.

They are indeed days of great agitation wherein we live. Great thoughts of
heart on the right hand, and on the left. And there is doubtless much of the
truth of God in Concernment upon the Stage; which in its time shall safely
rest, (as the Arc) upon a quiet Mountain. We may adventure it (as David)
against the greatest Giants, in fighting the Lords Battles. With its own bare
arm (as the (...) Veritas potens, and superabit.
Ancients are wont proverbially to say) shall it win it self the victory.

But there is withal too much of the wrath and frowardness of man, as dross
immixed with this Gold, both Pro, and Con. So that the gracious heart could
almoct conclude; It is safer being a sorrowful mourner for both: then a fiery
party in either.

I confess, I think there is no sober Christian, but is ready in a mixture
between joy, and grief to say, (as that great man, great for Piety, great for
Learning, a little before his death to his bosom Friend;) Cognori per gratiam
D. i, quid sit habere pro certa norma salutis verbum Dei: and quid sit humana
somma, placitaque sequi. Cyrillus nupe^us Constable. Patriar, vide Hottinger in
vita ejus.
I have known through the grace of God, what it is to have the Word of God for
the sure and trusty rule of Salvation unto me: and what it is to follow the
v^in dreams and pleasures of men.

The Concerns of Religion are exceeding great, and ponderous. God and Man will
expect, God and Man will allow, that all be cordial and upright in them.

Only the pleasure of our Father still is; that we graciously temper, and carry
Moses his meekness, with Moses his zeal. Deporting our selves in the profession
of his name, as the Sun in the Spring; which so shines, as not to scorch.
Retaining all due candor, as men; while we further profess to honor and serve
holiness and peace in a higher capacity, as Christians.

And oh! that we might see those Magnalia Dei; those great things of God, and
of Religion, (the very ornamen^s and beauties of holiness) revived, and
espoused amongst us. Repentance from dead works to serve the living God. Faith
unfeigned, Faith without Complements; thinking so well of God, as to repose our
selves, and dearest Concerns cheerfully upon him, his power, and faithfulness
in Christ. An holy care to lead a right godly course of life; placing Religion
(where of right it justly, and only centers;) (...) Ignat.
not in formal, or contentious words: but in a willing, and faithful practice.
Putting off (what none indeed can be very willing to keep on) the old man, with
all the odious lusts thereof. Walking (as the ransomed of the Lord) in newness
of spirit, newness of life. Pressing heartily after the mark. Rejoicing day by
day in all the sweet hopes that are set before us; till the seed time shall
reach the harvest, and the sheaf of glory be reapt, and seen with joy in the
Believers bosom.

This, oh! this was the Religion, so many righteous men have wished so well
unto, and longed so much to see; such Gospel, such gracious days of the Son of
Man. Thus might we also honorably answer, (as Nehemiah) we are doing a great
work, the work of God, and of our Souls; and have neither desire, nor leave to
come down, suffering that to cease, while we wear out our precious time, and
gain no more, than (what may well be wept out again) the distempering of our
weak, and tender minds into high Fevers, and passions by the angry strife of
Tongues.

God Almighty grant, we may at length reach the Apostles great charge; Ephesians. 4.15
and follow the truth in love. Tender of the truth; that it be not changed into
a lie. Cordial toward love; that it sustain no wrong, while we seem in the
pursuit of truth. Remembering with our selves (as the Father) how unnatural, and
even Prodigious it would be to have the Quid facit ^s pectors Christianoruis
lupovum s^ritas? Cyp.
Wolfs savage heart found in the Lambs bosom.

Oh! thou the God of so great forbearance, and tenderness toward us all; give
unto us also of that sweet spirit of thine; bowels of mercies, kindness, and
humbleness of mind each toward other. Pity thy weak and froward Children. Roll
away our reproach, and let our eyes yet see that dear, and sacred thing; the
Pa^ optima v^rum quas nobis na. (...) dedi S^llius.
Jewel of Nature, the Honor of Religion, the Promise of God, the great Desire
of all gracious hearts, Peace, thy Peace, upon this thine Israel.

Reader!

I had purposed some further instructions here to the Elder. To have entreated
you respectfully as Fathers. That you might (as David) walk with a perfect
heart ( Verior cujusque fama e domo emanat. Bacon fidel. Ser.
where indeed the integrity of the heart is most tried) in the midst of your
house. And with Abraham, bring up your children, (how mean soever outwardly,
yet) each one as the Child of a Prince; for God, and the praise of his Name.
For your Ego te non Catilinae genui, sed patriae. Fulvius ^^lio suo.
Country, and the welfare thereof; to minister before both, in the lovely
services of righteousness all their days.

But a weighty providence from the Lord intervening takes off my hand for the
present. Let it be accepted, oh Lord! that it was in mine heart to have served
thee therein.

This only shall I abruptly now say; you have given in your Pledges to
Posterity, and are leaving your Children, as Absaloms Pillar in the Valley, to
preserve your names when you are gone. Oh! let your care be such concerning
them, your carriage so Exemplary before them; that your selves may become true
Benefactors: and your Children a real Treasure to the next Age; rendering your
names thereby, as sweet odours to all.

So might you welcome your death with pleasant smiles when ere it comes.
Assuring your dearest Friends (as that pious Emperor upon his deathbed so
cheerfully said to his;) Lubens jam morior, quandequidem talem reliquero
filium. Anto. dict.
I am now willing indeed to die: since I shall leave a living Monument, a Child
of mine, to hold up the Lamp in my stead, to serve unto Virtue when I am gone.

So might it be further acknowledged by others at your Funeral, when your dust
shall lie silent before them, (as was said of Theodosius to his just and
deserved honor;) Theodosius Impe. necessi^ a ^obis ta^^us, sed (...) totus;
elquit ^nim libeos suos in ^uibus d^(...) ig^os^re. Hist vitae Theod. ^mper.
A great man, a good man is this day taken from us. He is gone, but not wholly.
He has left (part of himself,) his hopeful Children, here behind him. In them
may we see the fair Fruits of a pious Education; in them we freely acknowledge
much of the Fathers worth, and goodness still surviving. By them (as Abel)
though dead, he yet lives, and daily renews a virtuous example before us.

The Lord thus bless the arising Generation amongst us; vouchsafing this
sweet, and pleasing mercy, as his choice favor; till it become the joy, and
beauty of our dear, and native Land. The Lord thus shine (with his Lamp) upon
your Tabernacles, and your Childrens Children unto many Generations after you.
In the affectionate desires whereof I rest,

Your Friend, and Servant, in the just obligements of Nature, and Grace, Samuel
Crossman.

Errata.
Reader!
YOu are much desired heartily to excuse, and with your Pen to correct the many
Errata's which in the Authors absence have unawares sl^pt through the Press.
Amongst diverse others, these at first sight appeared in a Cursory view of some
few Pages.

Page 4. in the quot. read Persius. p. 21 (...). p. 55. line 5. r. astliction,
9.80. l. 19. r. regret. ^. 142. quo ^. ovis twice. p. 147, quot. r. humilitas.
p. 155. quo. ^. co^vexaque. p. 184. quo^. r. candidissim. e. p. 193. l. 15. r.
con: ^^s p. 219. l. 8. r. ingenious. p. 221. l. 25. r. thread. p. 17. l. 19. in
the Poems, for circl'st, r ceil'st.

You will easily find several other mistakes of the like nature. As also
mispointings, and mispellings. Especially in the Marginal Notes. Wherein the
Hebrew, initial Letters are often set for final; and Accents some omitted,
others misplaced in the Greek. But these Errata's are far the least; and little
danger in them: if we carefully prevent that great, and common one, so incident
both to Writer and Reader; A practical neglect after all, of any good counsel,
how usefully soe^er given, how affectionately soever for present received.

To the Children, and Servants of my dear Neighbors at, etc. My Christian
love, with desires of your real welfare in this life, and that which is to come.
Ingenuous Youths!
UPon whom the eyes of all are justly set; observing your present carriage, and
further waiting what your following years will prove. Pro. 20.11.
Even a Child ( though but a child) is known by his doings; whether his work be
pure, and whether it be right. Sit virilis ^etas jure fructiosior: erit tamen
juve^tus i^terim ama^ilio.
So early does nature put forth its inclinations, and discover it self.

May your youth be as the Spring for loveliness; your riper years as the Summer
for real fruitfulness.

CHAPTER I. The Introduction, or previous Entrance into the ensuing Discourse.
YOu are now entering a troublesome sinful world; and are therein to be pitied:
You are now upon your great preparations for E^ernity; and therein had need be
seriously counseled, and advised. Me thinks I see you just setting forth in
your great journey, your long journey, whence you shall not return; a journey
which will prove either. Heaven, or Hell to every one of you in the end. How
much depends upon this moment, it may be you scarce believe, you little
consider for the present: though afterward your selves shall plainly see this
Life has been but a restless Voyage, (...) Mu^idus hic est via and vad^m ad
mundum suturum. Majemonides.
the World a tempestuous Sea, your Bodies the frail Vessels wherein you sail,
and Time the Charon, the Boatman to wast you over these Waters, and set you
upon another shore; delivering you up there (as the Soldiers in the Acts
presented Paul) before your Judge, the Supreme Judge of all Flesh in order to
your final and solemn Trial.

It is on this great Errand of God, and of your Souls that these present Lines
are sent unto you. You will, I hope, both willingly, and seriously peruse them.
A wise Son hears Instruction, but the scorner causes shame. It is a kindness
to show the wandering Child the way to his Fathers house; and truly I have
greatly desired amongst many other cares justly incumbent upon me, as I am able
to further you heavenward, and to prepare your hearts, while you are yet
young, as a generation for the Lord. Your natures are too easily disposed to
receive evil impressions. Satan sees it; and w^tches be times to forestall your
tender minds therewithal. It must be our care early to recommend, and your
duty readily to comply with better things: that as the yielding ^ax you may now
Ul^m and mode l^^tu^ es; nunc, in^^c properandas and acri singendus ^ine si^e
rota. Persius.
receive those impressions of God, and goodness, upon your spirits; which may
become some step toward your happy sealing up to the day of redemption. Accept
then, I pray you, of this plain Paper; it is the best Token I have to send: And
Oh! that through the blessing of the Lord, it may prove a good Token for you to
receive.

It is sadly evident that many, too many, losing their tender, their first
years, in conclusion lose their souls also. And it is as undoubtedly certain,
that gracious Counsel (however hardly thought of by most) might be ^o the young
man the best Guide of his Youth, to preserve him from the paths of the
Destroyer. Consider what is laid before you, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things.

Our own true welfare (we may freely grant) is, and justly ought to be the
desire of all: the right way to it i^ known, or understood of very few. I^ was
the sad observation of the wise^ of men; The (...). 10.15.
labor of the foolish wearieth him (as well it may) because he knows not how
to go to the City. Mercy is not missed, because it is not sought: but because
men will not be persuaded to seek it, where alone it may be found. Most men
spend their choice and precious days in a vain shadow, and go down in the end
thereof to everlasting sorrows. You have the world now before you, your own
mercy or misery yet to choose, and be you sure, as you now choose, so shall you
speed hereafter. Oh! be your own true friends, and choose ye that which is
good, while, it may be obtained; and that good part shall never be taken from
you.

You are now Flowers in their bloom; Your Friends delight; your Countries hope.
It lies very much in your Sphere to be either a crown of rejoicing to them, or
to bring down their gray hairs with sorrow to the grave. Primiti^ (...)
primitie ^oetatis D^o s^^rae.
You are those first Fruits, those green ears of corn, which should be offered
to the Lord. For his sake, for your own sakes, for your Parents, and Coun^^i^s
sikes, embrace your own mercies, your own true good; before your Sun be set,
and your hopes cut off for ever.

Others have been sometimes young, as you now are; and cannot be altogether
strangers to the young man's heart, the young man's thoughts and ways. It is
very likely your vain minds will be easily now taken with vain things. But
observe if they be not still secretly afraid, meditating terror, and crying
out, I shall one day be called to a strict account for all this. In this
suspense, it may be, you may stick long; not able to joy much in the ways of
sin; nor yet fully willing to leave them, and seek the Lord. Sometimes faintly
praying; and yet inwardly shrinking back, and still loath to receive indeed the
grace that you seem to1 pray for. As the Father freely confessed the prayers of
his youth had also been. Direvam, da (...): sed (...) modo. Time^^^ ^ni^ re me
cito exa^dires, and ^ito san^ss. Aug. C^n*
I said indeed with my lips Lord I give: and yet in my heart I was too willing
to give longer day, and could have said, Lord! pray, not yet. I was even afraid
lest thou should hear me too soon, and too soon heal, and subdue my
corruption for me. Thus is the mind for a time like the wavering scales;
rising, and falling; going, and coming ere it can settle with the true poize,
and weight.

If Satan in this conflict prevails, your slavish fears will wretchedly
degenerate, and grow worse, turning into an inward hatred of God, and his good
ways; a disdainful loathing of Gods people; a continual backwardness to your
own duty. Which God of his mercy prevent.

But if through grace you be enabled to overcome; you will find your fears
clearing up unto more kindliness, and a willingness on your part to retain them
still; you will find gracious desires springing up by them, Oh! that God would
pardon my sin. Lord! give me Christ, or else I dye. From thence by tender steps
(which I have not time now to express) will God lead you, and will not forsake
you, or despise the d^y of your small things. And oh! that you may be thus led
by the hand of the Lord, till you both see, and receive the blessed reward of
the righteous, the salvation of your souls.

Think not that your present condition, your present Transibit volupt as,
manebit reatus, momentan^um quod delectat, aetern^m quod cruciat.
pleasures will last long; No, no; as Adonijahs feast, these banquets will soon
be broken up in a tragic amazement: Pro. 14.13.
The end of that mirth (is coming, fast enough, and) it will be heaviness. The
sore of your Conscience will shortly g^ngrene, if it be not timely dressed, and
bound up in the Balsom of Christ's blood. The World will quickly fail you, and
be as worthless dust under your feet. Your Friends now so dear to you, and you
to them, shall suddenly go their way to their long home, and leave you to
follow their cold clay, as Mourners to their Grave: And that which kn^cks still
nearer at your door; your Festinat e^im decurrere velo^ slosculus agustae
^^^seraeque bre^^ssirea (...) forty. Juven.
life it self is continually spending upon the quick stock, the oil hourly
consuming in the Lamp; and your pleasing guest (so dearly desired to stay with
you) tied up by an higher hand to a very short space of time; allowed only as a
way faring man to visit you, and must (be you never so unwilling) hasten on his
journey, quit his lodgings, an^ be gone again from you.

Think not that you shall esc^pe, that you shall be excused because young: the
dead shall stand, the small as well as the great, before the Lord. And your
death is already upon its march toward you; and shall arrest you, it may be at
unawares, telling you, (ripe or unripe) the Sickle must now be put in, and you
cut up, and carried before the Lord.

Oh Young Man! what will thou do in that solemn day? Then will grace be needed,
then will the necessity and worth of it be better understood than now it is.
Prepare, oh prepare to meet thy God.

Now it may be thy Conscience is not yet settled upon its lees, or seared
through long custom in sinning, which yet it too soon may be; Thy Heart is yet
as the heart of Josiah, tender and even melting within thee; As yet the World
with its distracting cares is not crept in to hinder or overcharge thee;
Hitherto the holy Spirit of grace even striveth with thee. Do thou know
indeed? Or have thou seriously considered what this season is, what all these
things mean, and at what pass thy present condition stands? Oh be persuaded to
use means in time before the disease get too strong an head. Physicians tell us
on the one hand, Quicquid moves a principio move. Hip.
Of all Physic that is the hopeful Physic that is timely taken. And
experience tells us as sadly on the other hand; it is Aegre reprehendas quod
sinis co^suescere. Hier.
hard, hard indeed to turn out sin when it has been once suffered to settle,
and strengthen it self by long connivance and entertainment.

Oh! let not time wait all the day long in vain upon thee: oh! let not the
Spirit of the Lord, as in the days of the old world, strive in vain with thee.
Whomsoever thou deniest, deny not God any thing that he asks thee; whatsoever
thou refusest, refuse not Heaven. God is graciously willing with it, thy soul
may be everlastingly happy by it; Return, return, and live.

It is well worthy of observation, that in the Hebrew, the same word that
signifies a (...) juvenus a (...) selegit, quasi ad o^^^s operas select^s.
Buxt^^f.
Chosen person, is commonly used throughout the Scripture to signify also a
Young person. It seems the Lord would have young people a choice people. Oh!
translate you this Hebraism into English, and show your selves a chosen
generation, a peculiar people, Children (as is said in Daniel) that may be able
to stand before the Lord and King of the whole earth. Let others, if they needs
will, be as dross, worthless dross, which no man values, in which no man takes
delight. But as for you aspire after nobler things. Oh! strive for your parts
to be as so many vessels of Gold, for the praise and service of your Creator.

Where are now those Isaacks, that meditate while they are young? Those Jacobs
that prize and seek the heavenly blessing betimes? Where are now those
Solomon's, that study to know and serve the God of their Fathers? Those Obadiahs
that fear the Lord from their youth? Where are now those Hebrew children, that
ask their Parents (as those in the Law) wha^ mean the Sabbaths and Ordinances
of the Lord, that they may also keep them? Or where shall we now find those
Sons of wisdom, that being enticed by sinners consent not, but refrain their
feet from evil courses, and keep themselves from the paths of the Destrover?

Me thinks you should often call to mind the Example of Samuel; who ministered
and served before the Lord while he was yet but a child. You cannot forget the
good carriage of those children, which so affectionately sung Hosannahs unto
Christ. We can truly tell you for your encouragement, the Lord ordains, the
Lord accepts praise out of the mouths of babes and children. Whoever
quenches them, God will not despise them.

These are the young man's lookingglasses; the young man's patterns and
presidents that he should imitate and copy out. Oh! let not the memory of such
die while you live, preserve them alive in your gracious carriage and
co^versation.

Neither are other Examples wanting. Did you but read the life of that Josiah
of his age, King Edward the sixth; that Phoenix of his time, Pr^nce Henry; that
truly noble Lord, the young Lord Harrington; with many others, who blossomed as
the Almond tree betimes; whose holy and virtuous conversations, whose sweet and
gracious expressions should be the young man's peculiar study and delight; Did
you I say but read these, or wash your morning thoughts in the serious
remembrance of them; as that noble Roman chose to wash his hands every morning
in that Basin wherein he had the Picture of virtuous Cato in sight afresh
before him for his imitation; It would even provoke you to be in love with all
goodness for their sakes. You would even sit down and weep, as the Emperor did
at the sight of Alexanders Tomb, to think how far others have gone in their
early years heavenward; and you so backward, so far yet behind. Oh! that you
would make it henceforth the real Motto of your youth, which was once the
Swan-like Song of the dying Martyr, None but Christ, None but Christ.

CHAP. II. The Young Man's Case, and Concernments as they now lie before him,
stated and offered to his consideration.
YOu have more particularly two great Concerns lying now upon your hand which
had need both of them be seriously thought upon, and duly provided for before
you slip any longer time. The one is the wise ordering and improvement of this
present life; which is commonly spoiled in youth, and scarce ever recovered in
riper years. The other the religious providing for a better, which no man can
be too diligent in. He that is truly faithful in either, will be in some
measure conscionable in both. These has God joined together; and happy is that
man who has learnt to give each its due, and through a well led life with men
on earth, to pass to a better with God himself hereafter in heaven.

It will be your wisdom to understand aright the good consistency of both
these together. That so you may neither on the one hand think hardly of
religion, as that which quenches the subordinate sweetness of life; as that
which overthrows what were otherways lovely in nature: Nor yet on the other
hand content your selves with bare nature, without the true grace of God; which
is ten thousand times more worth, and better indeed than life it self. Be ye in
Gods name frugal of all the just comforts of this life, slight them not, waste
them not, they are the dear gifts of God, the God of all our mercies, the
portion that is given us outwardly under the Sun. But if the Lord be willing to
sanctify these, and bestow yet greater then them upon us; let us not neglect,
let us not despise our own advantages: but accept it with all humble
thankfulness, that our water may thus be turned into wine.

Now therefore that you may the more understandingly comport with these great
Concerns, and the better see what lies before you; it will be very necessary
for you (what you can) solidly to inform and satisfy your selves very
particularly in these three things.

1. The world into which you are now come, and for a time to live; what that is.

2. The great ends for which you are thus set on shore, and now sent hither;
what they are.

3. The true way and means whereby these righteous and desirable ends might be
at length happily attained.

He that once understands where he is, what he has indeed to do, and how he
may fairly and safely compass his work, needs not stand idle in the
Marketplace, he has enough to take up both his hands, and heart withal. God
grant that you may go ingenuously into your Lords Vineyard, 1 The world into
which we are come, what that is.
and willingly work the work for which you were sent into the world.

First, Then be contented to sit down, and consider what kind of world this is
into which you are now come. It may avail you in the sequel of your life to
have thoroughly known it, ere you be further involved in it.

It is a world that too much encumbers most: but solidly contenteth none. Our
Stage indeed whereon to act: but not our Bed whereon to rest. The Ancients, who
observed and enquired very studiously after it, have plainly told us what we
shall ^lso find it, A (...) Inimicus vest amici tectus. Buxtorf. Flo. Heb.
true Enemy in the disguised clothes and habit of a Friend. The Young man by
mistake fondly calls it Naomi, and says it is ple^sant. The Elder by
de^r-bought experience finds it Marah, and cries out, oh! it is bitter. Such is
this world as the Tents of Kedar, which you are now for a season come to take
up your quarters in. It was once indeed a beautiful Palace, the glory of God
shining without any clouds in its full brightness upon it. The furniture of it,
when God took the first Inventory thereof, all exceeding good. But now sin has
marred it like that girdle by the river Euphrates, as a Vesture it is changed,
and its former beauty is departed from it. Satan is now by the permission of
God become the Prince and God of this world. The furniture of it now joyless
enough. 1 John 2.16. Ambitiosus ho^os, and opes, and saeda voluptas, Haec tria
(...) trino numine mundus h^bet. Mantuan.
All that is in the world (and that All both scant and sad enough) is the lust
of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. The Favorites of it
Gods Foes; Whosoever will be the friend of this world makes himself the enemy
of God. Sweet Children! slatter not your selves with vain hopes; this is not
your resting place; arise, it will deceive you, it will destroy you.

Here may we too truly so the course of nature daily set on fire. The children
of men (whom God has made all of one blood, that we might unsainedly seek the
good each of other) almost every man breathing -- Qua terra (...) sera regnat
Evi^nys, In fact^us jurasse (...). Ovid.
strife, hunting his brother with a net, lying in wait to revile, to supplant,
and to destroy. Here may we, as sad spectators, behold before our eyes the
righteous ends of Creation almost every where perverted, and the good Creatures
of God vilely abused, and made subject to bondage, to serve the lusts, the
beastly lusts of sinful men. Such I may once more inform you, is the world that
you are now as strangers and pilgrims come into.

If afterward you meet with rough waters, and m^nifold troubles scarce now it
may be so much as expected or looked for by you; you must not marvel, as if some
strange thing befell you; remember this only word, it is the World a raging Sea
which cannot rest whereon you sail.

If temptations hereafter on all sides endanger your souls; you are also
forewarned of it. This is that wilderness, where so many fiery Serpents will be
stinging of us. Trust not, oh! trust not to that which has undone so many.
Though it appear as the plains of Sodom once to Lot, like the garden of God for
sensual pleasantness choose it not; Melior ^st hora una refrigerit in mundo
futuro, quam tota ^ita mundi hujus. Pirke Abhoth.
it must as Sodom be destroyed. This, and no better, is the world into which we
may now sadly welcome you. You may write upon these doors, and safely conclude
as the Hebrews piously do in their similiar Proverb: (...)
One hours sweet refreshment in that world which is to come, is far to be
preferred before an whole life in this.

2. But now secondly, 2 (...) and, for which, w^^r they are.
being come, as God once said to Elijah, so may I to you; What makes you here?
(...) ^gnimur, ^ersius.
What have you ^ere to do? Enquire humbly at the Word of God, weigh things as
you are able in your own consciences, and judge impartially, what you think God
sent you into the world for.

The end in any action, though it be the last thing that is actually attained
and reached unto; yet must it be the first thing that is espoused, and thought
upon. Before we let the Arrow go, we had need take heed our eye be first upon
the White. You are as Servants going to Market, upon your Masters business,
Dear Children! be willing to take your Errand carefully; and God Almighty
grant, that when you go home in the Evening of your Life to stand before your
Master you may be able truly to say, John 17.4.
Father I have glorified thy name on earth, I have (truly, though but weakly)
finished the work thou gave me to do.

You came not hither to trisle away your precious hours in vain pastimes; No,
no; time is of it self without these too nimble, and h^stens too fast from us.
You came not hither to tre^sure up further wrath against the day of wrath; our
danger is too great already. You came not hither upon a sensual errand, to make
provision for the lusts of the flesh; as if the Soul had nothing to do, but to
become (as many would have it) Hi quibus in solo v^vend^ causa palato (...).
a Cook, or Cupbearer, or some Kitchin-servant to the body. You came not
hither, Gehazi like, to run after the Chariot wheel of a foolish sickle world,
for change o^ Raiment, or pieces of Silver. Take heed you embase not your
selves to any of these things; they are far below you as Men, much more below
you as Christians.

Exci^mur ^a melio^, magni^^dine rerum. Salust (...) (...).
You came hither upon business of more consequence. On that great Errand
wherein every creature so justly owes it self; to glorify that God, which
gave you your life and brea^h. You came hither as the sick man un^o change of
air, for recovery, and cure. You came hither to employ an immortal soul in the
study of Eternity; and in a spirit of enlargement and nobleness to look after
those future things which shortly shall come to pass.

In plainest terms; You came hither to settle the great case of your Souls
heavenward on such solid terms, that neither the troubles of life, nor the
very stroke of death should ever hereafter be able to amaze you. You came
hither to seek the Lord, and his face; reconciliation, and communion with him,
whom you must enjoy; or dye, and fall for ever.

Oh dear Youths! these are the great ends of life, if you can apply your tender
minds, (too tender I fear to close far with such ponderous matters) yet these
and no less than these are the sacred ends of life, and your just duty if you
can receive it.

And who indeed can have the heart to refuse or wave the righteous pleasure of
the Lord herein? Is it worth the time to design (so earnestly as most do) such
inferior things as Honors, Estates, and Friends here? And shall it not much
more become us to rouse up our minds to nobler things, things worth the
thoughts, worthy of the cares of an immortal Soul? How we may most silially,
and fully serve the glory of our great Creator? How we may most surely escape
the snares of death? And in the end inherit the long longed for crown of life?
If others can find no better employment than with Claudius Soldiers to gather
Cockles, or with the poisonous Spider to make sorry traps to catch silly
worthless Flies in. If they will needs (as too too many daily do) with the
Serpent go upon their belly, and lick the dust; Atque assig^t humi divinae
particulam aurae. Horat.
unworthily chaining down an heaven-born spirit to poor unsuitable and earthly
things: Yet let them be no Presidents unto you. Call you upon your souls (as
that holy man did) to remember their Country and Kindred above. (...). Men's
^ominis est e^us ala. Chrysostom 3. The way and means by which to attain those
ends
God has given you the wings of nobler desires heavenward, oh clip not those
golden wings but make your flight as the Dove unto the Arc. Walk you in Gods
name in the way that is most excellent, and covet you the best things.

Thirdly, You have now understood both where you are, and what you have to do.
It ^ests still thirdly that you carefully consider, by what true means these
great ends are to be at length attained and enjoyed. The glory of God, the
glory of God it is most men's language: few men's care. The persecutor in Isaiah
could say, Let Isa. 66.5.
God be glorified, when he for his part went about whatever he could by his
bitterness against Gods people to dishonor him. Heaven and happiness are
easily pretended to; but not so easily enjoyed. Neglect and slightiness in the
means of our salvation is the Epidemical disease; here we commonly stumble, and
fall. Most men could soon be persuaded to like of the end: but they can fearce
away with the means.

Well, the c^se is however stated unalterably to our hands; whether we like or
like it not. Our way of coming to the blessed favor of God, (and oh that our
hearts may be solemn indeed in these solemn things) our way, I say again, is
that new and living way by Christ, and the Covenant of free grace. Joh. 14.6.
Ambulare vis? Ego sum via; ^alli no^ viz? Ego sum veritas; mo^i non vis? Ego
sum vita. Aug.
He is the way, the truth, and the life: no man comes to the Father but by
him. Our way unto any sweet communion with the Lord, or consequently glory in
the end for our own dear souls, is by the real renewing of our inner man, and
sound conversion toward God. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
For what communion (thinks any man) is light likely to have with darkness? Or
what fellowship (if we will needs remain in our sins) can Christ have with
Belial?

We are now come to the great knot, that sore difficulty, wherein your present
thoughts should be so justly taken up; whereupon the Crisis and decision of
your future state so certainly will depend. Oh! that the Lord may please to
bring you under the bond of his Covenant, and make you partakers of this great,
this blessed, and honorable change from nature to grace, from the power of
Satan to the Kingdom of God. Knowledge and education may make an external
Professor: But it is only Regeneration that makes a true Christian. Conversion
(we may all with blushing confess) with many it is plainly despised: with most
it is secre^ly disregarded, as a matter of great and deep thoughts of heart,
and so we set up the exterior prof^ssion of the name of God without any
serious travel in it. But this will serve no man's turn; it is a truth shall
live when we are dead; No Regeneration, no Salvation. Joh. 3.3.
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

This is that ingrafting of the wild branch into the good Olive, that it may
bring forth better fruit. This is as the first Resurrection unto life, which
must forerun any ascension unto glory. This is that fresh and lively drawing of
the glorious Image of God upon those dark hearts, which lay before as the Earth
in its first Chaos, void and without form, or beauty. Oh! that men would
forbear their hard thoughts and censures of God, and the sweet workings of his
grace. There may be many weaknesses even in gracious hearts according to the
frailty of humane nature while they are under the hand of God in the
transacting of this great and unusual work. There may, and will be sore throws
and pangs accompanying of it, wherever it is truly wrought. But still these
things need not be matter of reviling, matter of distaste, or discouragement
unto any. What God himself sowes is here sown in weakness. And as for the thing
it self, this new birth, this new life, this renewing of the inward man must
indispensably and certainly be if we desire any part or place in that new
Jerusalem which is above.

This is the very posture of things before you, these are those ancient
Landmarks which none may remove. What oh! what manner of persons then ought
you to be? What continual and serious care are you obliged henceforth to take
lest you should do the work of the Lord and your own souls slightly.

CHAP. III. Counsel and Advice propounded for the right Guidance and
Improvement of the Young Man's present Condition to his Own and Others Solid
Comfort.
YOu cannot now account (as too many do) gracious Counsel in the Lord either
needless, or burdensome. No, no, it is as an excellent Oil that needs break no
man's head. The needful and happy Clue to carry us through all our present
Labyrinths. The true Index of a sweet and hopeful disposicion. (...), etc.
Herod.
So (says the Historian) shall any man become surely eminent and prosperous;
if he be deliberate, and willing to steer his course by the compass of Good
Counsel.

It is the neglect of this that casts so many sad shipwracks upon the shore.
Headiness Vis consil^^ expers (...). Horat
rusheth on and is confident, but never prospers. There are and will be those
heart breaking groans in another world which may justly endear good Counsel to
us while we have a day to live. Prove. 5.12.
How have I (will the poor damned one day say) how have I hated instruction,
and my heart despised reproof!

Dear Youths! stop not your ear as the deaf Adder to the instructions of
wisdom, let them be unto you as the weights to the Clock, that set it into an
orderly motion of going. As the welcome friendly gales of wind, which carry the
ship (that might otherways have lain becalmed) the fairer, the faster and
straiter toward its desired haven.

It is a spur to quicken our pace, a guide to direct our way, which the wise in
heart will esteem as the Poet of old: (...). Menander* Counsel propounded
twofold: 1 More principal in reference to Religion.
A sacred thing of great safety and usefulness to all.

The Counsels and requests I have now more particularly to lay before you for
the guidance of your youth are of a twofold nature.

1. The first relating more immediately to Religion between God and your own
souls.

2. The other to your relative condition, 2 More subordinate in reference to
Civil Conversation.
and converse which you are entering into here with men. Though therein also
Religion is still greatly concerned. In both I shall endeavor all plainess,
and practicalness; and not to cast in matters of doubt and division. Such
things are at any time more ready to humor the wrath of man, than to work the
righteousness of God. The Temple is then best built when there is the least
noise of knocking o^ hammers heard about it.

It will be your part, and that which God himself will look for at your hands;
not barely to read, or to rest your selves in the verbal commendation of pious
truths; (which nature is very desirous to sit down upon, as they on this side
Jordan, and go no farther toward the Holy Land,) you are to compose your selves
forthwith to enter upon the real practice of the good will of God concerning
you. And oh! that the Lord who alone teaches to profit would please to give
these sorry Lines any place of abode in your hearts, to your souls just
furtherance and edification in the Lord.

In the great Concernments of Religion, 1 General Counsel touching Religion. A
right understanding and esteem of it.
as Man is far the noblest Creature in the world: So is Religion still the
highest enoblement that he is possibly capable of. A right understanding in it,
a wise and cordial consistency with it, (that we may not in effect dishonor
what we seem to respect, by an undue professing of it) these are mercies of an
high nature, and come only from the Father of lights.

The heart that is thus upright with God carries always a great presence and
blessing with it, 2 Chro. 16.9.
The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, and he will
show himself strong in behalf of those whose hearts are thus perfect toward
him. We may here safely sing with the Psalmist, Psalm. 128.1.
Blessed is every one (be he never so mean otherways) that fears the Lord,
and (thus) walks in his ways.

The Heathen though wandering in too much darkness, have yet usually had so high
a sense of this, as ascribe all their welfare to their fidelity and care in
their Religion. Thus the great Orator No^ calliditate, ant ^obore; sed pietate,
ac religione omnes gentes nationes que superaru^t. Cicero.
even boasts of his Romans; that it was neither their Policy, nor their
Strength, but their Piety which became the advancement of their Nation. Lo
here! how they who had not the Law, became yet a Law to themselves; oh let us
be provoked to a better emulation by them.

But I shall endeavor to be yet more particular with you, that you may not on
either hand (as too many in these perilous days are sadly sound to do)
miscarry in these tremendous matters of Religion.

First then, 2 Particular Counsels, 1 A due reverence and knowledge of God.
Entertain from your youth up Optime de D^o existim^re piet^^^ ^si exo^^^^^m.
August.
pious and reverent thoughts of God; live in the constant acknowledgement of
him in ^ll your ways; let your hearts dwell in the religious sense of his
Deity; his Holiness, and Omnisciency, and they shall lay a divine weight upon
both heart and life. It is a fundamental principle which God himself stands
much upon. Heb. 11.6.
He that comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him.

In the Old Testament we read, (...) st^ltus a (...) cecidit. C^i ratio and
^ens co^cidit ut stulte ac turpiter seatiat, and agat.
The fool (and never any but the fool) has said in heart there is no God. And
in the New Testament Ephesians. 2.12.
the Apostle tells us of some that were without God in the world. Not that God
intends to let them so escape and pass away: No, no; though they would have
nothing ^o do with God, God has yet something to do with them, but the
Scripture thus records them for practical Atheists against God, because they
care not to know, or interest themselves by true grace in him.

But as for you see that you set the Lord always at your right hand lest at
any time you offend against him. Quicquid agis m^^do surt^mve pal^nve momento,
Insp^ctatorem semper a l^sse D^u^. Prud. Hymn.
Live continually as in his sight; for the truth is, you, and all your ways
are naked and open before him. Harbor not that thought in your mind, venture
not upon that action though never so seemingly secret in your life; which you
would be ashamed to own, or avouch as yours before the Lord. Still meditate the
Omnisciency and greatness of the presence in which we always all of us are,
and how all our present ways, will we, ^ill we; must one ^ay abide the
touchstone of ^ public ^id at the Bar of God. Choose him in your Youth; and he
shall be a God ^ll-sufficient unto you through your w^o^e life.

Yet rest not your selves too much on this general reverence toward God: but
modestly press after the most particular and filial knowledge of him. You may
freely (...) as Moses without offense; Exodus 33.18.
I beseech thee show me thy glory. He is that God in whom you live, and have
your being; the God of all your mercies and good things, with whom (if ever you
become happy) you are to live to all Eternity. You cannot, sure you cannot but
holily desire the utmost acquaintance before hand with him.

How earnestly, how affectionately was this pious study recommended in the
Primitive times! Their Language me thinks might even enfl^me us. Omnis
sapienti^ bo^^^, (...) sita ^st, (...), Deum cogn^^cat and colat. Hoc ^ostrum
dogma, be (...), ^ (...) Lactant. lib. 3.
I testify (says Lactantius) I proclaim it as far as ever I can make this
voice of mine to be heard, I declare to all the world; that this is our great
Maxim, and Principle, the true Knowledge and Worship of God, it is the just
sum of all Wisdom. This, this is that the Philosophers so anxiously sought
after: but poor men they groped in the dark, and could never find it.

Dear Youths! you are willing to learn and gain acquaintance with men: Jon.
17.3. 2 A p^ous recourse to the Scriptures for attaining this knowledge
Oh! be ye not strangers unto God. I commend, and leave it with you under this
great assurance; It would most certainly become life eternal (to any of you
thus) to know the only true God, and him whom he has sent Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Let your f^ar and profession of him and his name be always guided
by his pure Word. It is your Chard and Compass; your Pole and Star; in Gods
name sail by it.

Whatever other desirable enjoyments God has given you, (...) Omnia (...) m^a
and tua non ^equantur ei. Buxr. Flo. Hebr.
this without an Hyperbole far excels them all: we may safely conclude with the
Ancients, The whole World has no Jewel like to this.

Read daily, meditate reverently in those holy Scriptures. They are the
Christians Treasury; the field where the heavenly Pearl must be sought, may be
found.

There shall you meet with History none so sacred, none so ancient; Promises
none so heavenly, none so cordial; Quicquid docetur est ^eritas, quicquid
^^ecipitur bonitas, quicquid promittitur felicitas, Hugo.
Precepts none so righteous, none so holy. Deuteronomy. 4.8.
For what nation is there so great, that has Ordinances and Laws so righteous,
as all this Law which the Lord your God sets before you. Let these
Scriptures be ever more your Songs in the house of your pilgrimage.

Men may fondly magnify profane and Philosophical Writings; as somewhat of
inferior usefulness many of them have: and we both may and should freely and
honorably acknowledge the common gifts of our Creator wherever we find them.
But still in all things that concern our conversation, and souls comfort, to
the Law and to the Testimony, as the standing and unalte^^ble manifestation
which God has been pleased to leave extant of his Will unto the ends of the
World.

In your reading, begin always with Prayer; humbly entreating the Lord, that
he would show you the wonders of his Law. In your hearing attend with the
greatest reverence; still remembering the Ordinance is high, though the
Instrument may be mean; the Treasure heavenly, though the Vessel be but earthy.
In your applying, force not the Scripture from its native intendment and
meaning to the humor of times; the biass or interest of your own opinions or
affections whatsoever. Let all your Sint castae deliciae mea, Scripturae tuae;
nec s^llar in ^is, ^ec sallam ex eis. Aug. Confess.
converse therewith be in all chastity and pureness of mind, take Gods Word as
God gives it, and resign your selves into a pious obedience to it.

Remember Timothy, and be ye provoked to an holy emulation, he had known the
Scriptures from a Child; it is they which under God are able to make you wise
unto salvation. Your knowledge in other things may be a^ Brass: your knowledge
in these will be as Gold; Praes^at pa^cula ex meliore so^entia degustaff^, quam
de ignobilior^ multa. Cael. Rod.
greater riches, and of greater worth. Happy is that man that is an Ezra, a
ready Scribe graciously versed and acquainted in the Law of his God.

It is too likely you may live to hear and see great contentions in the World
about Religion; Lo here is Christ, and lo there! but go not you forth after
them; be not led by the insinuations of men, whereby they cunningly lie in
wait on almost all hands to deceive.

I have often been ready to say within my self, Lord! give me a Religion
according to thy holy Scriptures, truly built upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles: or I have no great desire to any at all. Here our foot
stands upon firm ground; Here we may safely repose our wearied hearts; Here
we may confidently adventure the great concerns of our dear immortal souls;
Here have we the faith of God himself, the true and faithful God, solemnly
plighted unto us, that we shall not be ^eceived in our way, that we shall not
be disappointed in the end. Oh! stir not from the horns of this Altar, from
this City of Refuge lest you die. Be you, I pray you, guided by the good Word
of God; the Heavens and the For^h shall pass away, and the boisterous wills of
men shall come to naught: but the Word of the Lord shall endure for ever.

Thirdly, 3 A real study in the knowledge of our selves and our present misery.
Next after this general fidelity to the Scriptures draw nearer home, and let
them more particularly inform you in the true knowledge of your selves. This is
that Terraincognita, that unknown Land, which so few make any discovery of.

Many are great Travelers, ready Historians; scarce any Age, any Country, or
City, but they are familiarly acquainted with it. The S^^s, and utmost Isles;
the very Deserts, and remotest Mountains they can discourse particularly of
them Per^grini sunt ^^ magis in sua natura, in sua anima, quam in Iudicis
silvis, and igno^^s ^civ^s. Mo^n.
. But still are too great strangers at home, there is one Cabinet scarce yet
ever unlocked, one book scarce ever yet opened, they are little read in their
own hearts. May be it is because the reckoning is long, and we but little
provided to clear is; The Leaf where we should read is much blotted, and we
take little delight to look into these things.

But Dear Children! say not you so. Neglect will scarce pay that debt which
grows of it self daily greater; or pacify that Creditor who takes the contempt
worse than the debt it self. Know therefore (and you cannot indeed but know)
that you, even you, have gone astray from the womb; and are, though but young
people, yet old sinners, Tantillu^ puer, tantus peccator.
great sinners, Gospel-sinners; and that God expects true repentance, true
faith at your hands, as well as any, if you desire any part in the Kingdom of
God.

The story is sad; but true, and we may relate it. Man enters into the World at
traitors gate; born in sin, and conceived in iniquity. His body frail and mean
as the dust; a common Hospital for almost all diseases, which successively one
after another come and take up their quarters perforce there. Pars divina in
homine mersa. Sen
His mind, as Nebuchadnezars, degraded, and cast down from its former
excellency among the beasts of the field; and there it now walks. His
understanding, that bright and precious Lamp, is gone out, nor does he now lift
up his eyes any longer to know the Lord. But sinks down in great stupidity of
spirit, as one regardless which way Eternity goes, as one utterly alienated
from the life of God through the ignorance that is in him. His Conscience that
noble watch, and under God the very Corrector assectuum, animae paedagogus.
Origon.
Lifeguard of his soul, stands no longer upon its watch Tower: but lies as
one that faints; spreading its hands, bleeding, and dying at the Gates. The
inferior servants, the affections, all in an uproar and confusion, Iudas-like
betraying their Master; rending themselves from their just service, and hasting
to ingratiate and let out themselves to a foolish treacherous World.

He that might have been sometime saluted, and that truly too, Iedidiah the
beloved of the Lord, the Son of God, and Heir of glory: His blood is now
stained, the entail justly cut off, and he must be arraigned under that joyless
title Loammi, none of Gods, but a child of wrath, a stranger from the Covenant
of promise. Under the guilt of sin, and he knows it not. Under the power of
sin, and he feels it not. Responsible to God for all he now does, and yet
regards it not. Within a days march (for ought he knows) of death and
judgment, and yet ^ies it not to heart. His eyes has he closed, and he knows
not the things of his own peace.

These things, Sirs, are no hidden secrets; The Heathen though at a great
distance, yet they easily saw Man's misery, and frequently made both
affectionate and voluminous lamentations over him. Imbecillitatis exemplum,
temporis spolium, fortune Jesus, inconsta^ti^ imago; putredo i^ exordio, ^llua
in omni vita, ^^^a ver^^ium in ^oile, etc ^ Solon.
He that converses but the least with their W^itings, will soon understand what
sorry titles of honor, what mean and sad descriptions they bestowed upon their
own nature, and its present condition in the World. The pattern of frailty, the
spoil of time, the sport of fortune, the very picture of sickleness;
silthiness from the birth, too too much a least all his life, no better than a
feast for worms in death. This was the Language they generally gave of Man, and
they thought they miscalled him not.

Poor men! they were eye witnesses indeed of the sickness: they saw things were
ill, but they scarce understood the rise and cause of the disease. They could
only cry out in the general, (as one of them bitterly did:) Woe, woe is me,
and yet what is it that I cry out so mournfully of? (...). Euripid.
Oh! it is the manifold miseries we lie exposed unto.

Dear Youths, you must be persuaded to sit down and apply the Story. The case
is naturally yours, the case is too truly every man's. Oh! smite upon your
Sensus miseriae, approximatio misericordiae.
breasts in a due sense of these things, and say with David, I, Lord! I am the
man. It is I who have thus sinned against heaven, and am no more worthy to be
called thy Son.

Fourthly, 4 An unsained seeking after our recovery by Christ.
This being your wound, where shall we now find any balm or healing for it? We
are not likely you see to stay long here on earth: and without pardon of sin we
can never expect to come at heaven. The love, the dear love of God through sin
is already lost; the life of grace extinguished; a debt and guilt the saddest,
the greatest that ever were, con^racted; the comforts of this present life
decayed; the strength and sting of death exceedingly increased. We may now too
truly name our selves Magor-Missabib, fear and terror round about. Yet be not
too much dismayed, there is hope in Israel concerning our case. And I may and
must (though not without much trembling) invite you this day to Jesus Christ.
Oh! hunger and thirst after him and his righteousness; that in him your sins
may be covered, and your souls clothed with the garments of salvation. It is
not Music, it is not Wine that a condemned person desires: but a Pardon. Go
you and do likewise.

I told you even now a saddening story: I may now bring you tidings of a more
welcome one. Oh! receive it as becomes you in the Lord.

The Father of mercies has from his Sanctuary looked down upon our low estate.
He saw we were sold for bondmen, and for bond-women; falling into the hands of
Satan, and misery for ever; There was no eye to pity us; Our own strength and
righteousness departed from us; The redemption of our souls likely to cease for
ever.

In these great streights his bowels were moved to have compassion on us. His
own arm undeserved, undesired brought salvation to us. The work was great, and
he trusts no meaner Person than his own Son with it. Him the Father sends and
seals; Him he gives to death, and raises up to life; and Nostri causa sustinuit
nasci, mori, sepeliri, etc. Bern.
all for this sweet end, that he might be a Act. 5.31.
Prince and a Savior to give repentance and forgiveness of sins to such poor
Creatures as You and I are. Behold the love wherewith the Father has loved us.

The Son accepts it. As it was written in the Volume of Gods Book, he is
content to come. If his Death will procure our Life he goes willingly to it. He
submits himself by imputation to be made sin, Qui in se long sanctissi^us,
imputatione tamen sistitur peccatorum maximus.
who yet actually knew no sin; that we, worthless we, might be made the
righteousness of God in him.

In pursuance of this unsearchable and unutterable love it is that the Spirit
of God so often knocks at our hearts; That the Ambassadors of Christ are sent
in such earnestness unto us, to beseech us to be reconciled unto God; That the
Word of the Lord is left, as his Agent, always Resident in our houses, to
treat with us that we might receive the pardon of sin, and live.

This is that rich grace which the Prophets so long ago enquired after, and
prophesied of. And this in the Lords name I humbly encourage and exhort you in.
Pardon of sin may verily be had; only seek it a^ight. Turn not the grace of
God, I charge you, into wantonness. Boast not you, as if your condition were
therefore out of danger, because there are it may be some sovereign Antidotes
in the shop, or a rich Cordial in the glass: The sick man may nevertheless
languish, and die if he makes not a real use of them.

Oh! go humbly to the Lord, go by Prayer, go by Faith, go with a full purpose
of heart, that if the Lord shall please to speak peace, you will no more return
to folly. Prostrate your selves, spread your case before him, tell him, it is
not Corn, or Wine, or Oil that you come for: but the light of his Countenance.
Tell him, oh tell him it is the pardon of your sins, and justification in the
blood of his Son, that is to you the mercy of all mercies, which you above all
things stand in most need of; and that (if he would please to give you leave)
this is all your desire and humble boldness; by the hand of faith to touch his
golden Scepter, to take hold of his tender mercies in Christ, and live.

It may be he will say, as in the Gospel, Son! arise; Daughter! arise; be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.

I could even bitterly mourn, that this sacred mercy, this fundamental mercy is
no more in all our thoughts. Men may weary themselves in wide discourses to
find out wherein their chief happiness consists, and who is at length the happy
man: But alas! the wise man needs not glory in his wisdom, the rich man may
forbear boasting in his riches. We may once for all, Psalm. 32.1. 5 An holy care
to walk worthy of Christ in all our ways.
once for ever conclude with David, It is he, and none but he, whose sins are
pardoned, whose iniquities in Christ are covered, who is the truly blessed man
before the Lord.

Fifthly, If God shall show this great mercy, in the fifth place be you careful
to return the answer of a good conscience; and give up your selves entirely and
unf^inedly to the Lord in a truly gracious life. Therefore indeed has the dear
grace of God appeared in the world, to enoble our conversations above the
principles or course of nature to an higher life, the life of grace. And if any
shall ask more narrowly, what Christianity means: We may answer in the language
of that holy Christianorum om^is religio sine sc^lere, and sine macula vivere.
Lact.
man, This is the sum of the Christians Religion, to live free from sin and
wickedness in the world.

It is manifestly the highest testimony and commendation that we poor creatures
are ever able to give to Religion; when we do not barely complement it,
Ephraim-like, with No^ magna loquimur: sed magna ^ivimus. Min^r. Felix.
goodly words: but practically offer our selves (such as we are) to the service
of it; endeavoring to acquit our selves in the just performance of great and
gracious things.

The Christian (says the Christianus ^emo ^ecte dictur; nisi qu Christo mo
ibus prout val ^ co^^ua^ur. Cypr.
Father) then, and then only shows himself worthy of his Christian name when he
walks in his Conversation Christianly. By this shall men know that we like our
Religion indeed, that we account the Lord faithful, and his righteous ways
worth our careful walking in. The Gospel deserves it, men expect it, we should
fulfill it. Mic. 4.5.
All people (are ready enough and) will walk every one in the name of his God:
and let us also (though upon better grounds) walk in the name of the Lord our
God for ever and ever.

But alas! herein Christianity covers its face, sits down with tears upon its
cheeks, and bewailes it self as one neglected, too much neglected on all hands.
Me thinks I hear its groans as in the Lamentations, Is it nothing to you, oh!
all you that pass by? You that are called Christians, and which is yet more,
you that have come forth as Protestants from the Corruptions of former Ages,
that ye might (as Israel going out of the Land of Egypt) the better serve the
Lord; when, oh when shall wisdom be practically justified of these her children?

The profane man does the Devils work with all his might; he runs violently to
the utmost excess of riot. The worldly man his heart takes not its rest in the
night; he is drudge enough, and enough to the world for the recompense he is
ever like to have from it. These spare no pains: but act like themselves, too
true to their principles (such as they are) wherever they come. But oh! the
professors of the everlasting Gospel, how do they faint in the head of the
Streets! How cold and weak are they! How sparing and slow to adorn the Doctrine
of God and our Savior! With Ananias and Saphira we keep backpart of the price.
We offer the form, but too often withhold the power. Oh Sirs! if we have judged
Religion worth professing: let us also judge it worth the practizing. It may be
our care and labor of love may one day be found as a sweet memorial before the
Lord.

Dear Youths! You will meet with many (it may be) possing a Iehu's pace in the
Omnes dispulare (...). Sen.
Opinions and Traditions of men, (for indeed a carnal forwardness in such
things, whether on the right hand, or on the left, costs us not much, it is
self-grown, nature can afford it.) But oh Lord! how rare a thing does it still
remain! to find an Hezechiah, that can testify upon his deathbed in what
uprightness he has walked before the Lord all his life. Israel may be as the
sand by the Seashore for common profession: but these will still be too near
the Lords reckoning, One of a City, and two of a Tribe, that is very few.

Wherefore I will even entreat you to revive that sweet Inscription which was
once engraven upon Aarons breast plate, oh! Copy it out fair in your lives, and
be ye Holiness to the Lord. Let this be your kindness to that sacred Name of
God by which you are called; not to leave it (as too many do) subject to
everyones In nobis Christus patitur opprobrium; in nobis lex Christiana patitur
maledictum. Salvian. 6 A recourse in all our sorrows to the Comforts of
Religion as our best Cordials.
reproach by the carelessness of your carriage: but by the cleanness and
vertuousness of your deportment whatever you can to make it a praise in the
Earth.

Sixthly, When at any time your tender hearts shall be desirous to refresh and
ease themselves from the sorrows of this life: Evermore go to God and the sweet
comforts of Religion.

This was the solemn counsel and farewell the Jews were wont to leave with their
dearest Friends when most overwh^lmed with sadness, (...) consolatiotem tobis e
Caelis Optamus. Majem.
We wish you (as the best Cordial) the comforts of heaven.

We might herein not without just indignation say (as Elijah once did) Is it
because there is no God in Israel, that men send to Baal-Zebub the God of
Ekron? Is it because the All-sufficient God is become as an empty Vine, that
there is such hurrying after the world and its fading comforts? The provocation
and indignity that is herein offered to the Lord is exceeding high; it is in
effect a denying of that God that is above. Oh that men would not deal so
dishonourably by Religion. That whereunto we appeal for our future salvation:
in the name of God let us therewith consist for our present consolation.

It was from hence the Martyrs drew all their joys. They justly might, and did
thank the Lord for it, that their Prisons were to them as Palaces; their chains
as so many bracelets of Gold. It was Religion that feasted them in their
dungeons; that enabled them to write so cheerfully to their Friends, (as many
of them did) I am in the esteem of men in hell for outward misery: But I am in
my own sense as in heaven for all inward comfort in the Lord.

And it is from hence that we also (if we be not wanting to our selves) may as
well draw waters of joy for our souls out of the Wells of salvation. Dear
Children! be persuaded whenever you have occasion in the day of your sadness to
make use of Religion, it may be you may find it your best comforter in the
whole world.

Cheerfulness is indeed that Mannah which nature is so desirous as often as may
be to taste of: and God is as freely willing that we should have it. He has
provided that for us; Psalm. 79.11.
Joy is sown for the righteous. And he has invited us to that, Rejoice in the
Lord ye righteous, Psalm 32.11.
and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart.

You may soon find in the Lord all apposite and suitable comforts for every
condition. There is an estate for the poor, strength for the weak, a Father for
the Fatherless, pardon for the bleeding sinner, healing for the broken in
heart, a better world for those that are graciously weary of this, immortality
and blessedness for all that choose and love it. Heaven and happiness so
transcendent, so glorious, that we may modestly say, the Ad illud coelum coeli,
etiam terrae nostrae caelum terra est. Aug.
heavens which we here behold are but as earth, without form and beauty, in
comparison of that Heaven of heavens which God has appointed for the
everlasting rest, the true home and habitation of his people. Such a God and
such comforts are enough, when ever we are to walk through the valley of the
shadow of death we need fear no evil, these joys of the Lord may be an
everlasting strength unto us.

There can be no affliction so sad, but you may arise and lead your captivity
captive. You may make the proudest of them, as Adonibezek, serve under your
Table.

Or as Tamberlane did by his conquered foes, make them draw at your Chariot
wheels, and serve to the increase of your triumph. Let the fiercest Lion come
against you when it will, you, as Sampson, may overcome it, and may propose it
as your Christian Riddle, Judge. 14.14.
that out of the eater (the most devouring affliction) can you fetch meat.
Religion allows all its true followers to rejoice in the very face of
tribulations, knowing that they (how unlikely soever) yet work for us a far
more exceeding eternal weight of glory.

There can no outward enjoyment whatsoever come to your hand, but it might be
hereby refined and improved sevenfold unto you. Your bad things might be made
good: and your good things better. This, this is that true Philosophers stone,
that turns all into Gold, all into Mercy. We know (says the Apostle, and it is
no dubious conjecture: but a truth may be safely built upon) all things work
together for good to them that love God.

Once more then sweet Children! let me commend you to God and the comforts of
his grace. Be not your own foes. Seek not the living among the dead; Quaerit^
quod quaerit^, sed no^ (...) quaeritis. Aug.
look not for comfort where it is not: neglect it not where it is to be had.
But humbly say unto God, Thou oh Lord! shale be my hope: Thy Word and thy
Promises my Souls Comforters in the land of the living.

CHAP. IV. More subordinate Advice in reference to the right ordering of our
Civil Conversation and Concerns in the World.
I Have now laid before you some of those more ponderous points of your
concernment and duty between God and your own souls. I shall at present add no
further therein. The Lord himself by his own good Spirit supply and suggest the
things of your everlasting peace yet more particularly and distinctly unto you.

It remains now (according to the method I formerly mentioned and proposed)
that I should leave with you some (though more inferior) advice touching your
Civil Converse with men, and good management of your outward condition here in
the world; That you may behave your selves wisely, sociably, and virtuously in
all.

The Philosophers had a great apprehension of a good Genius standing at the
door to (...) Ceberis Tab.
inform the green minds of Youth what they should do, and how they might most
virtuously enter the stage of life. They might cloudily mistake the name, (as
in most things they darkly did,) but both they and we must all acknowledge the
ponderous necessity of the thing it self; That there be all timely care for the
due Conduct and Culture of life.

You are now going into Civil Society amongst men, where very much of the
comfort and sweetness of life depends upon our mutual acquitting our selves
each to other in the good offices of Virtue and Humanity. These are in their
place as the true current lawful Coin, which should pass freely to and fro for
the upholding all sweet and desirable intercourse and commerse each with other,
without which we should be but as so many angry wasps, though shut up together
in the same nest. Or as wild Bears, grumbling savagely one by another in the
same common Den.

It was the glory of the Gospel, that it did not make void, but establish the
Law. And it is our comfort before the Lord, that we need not, neither are we
called so to profess Homo supponitur in Christiano.
Christianity as to put off Humanity. If any shall frowardly so do, he erreth
exceedingly from the Faith, and brings up an evil and unjust report upon the
good name of God and his righteous ways.

The care which in this respect lies before you, and cannot but be exceeding
dear unto you is briefly this: To consider how you may go in and out through
the great hurry and tumult of vicissitudes and various troubles continually
rattling about us here; so as to be neither burdensome to your selves, nor
others: but cheerfully composed and settled in your minds; sweetly useful and
serviceable unto all. Such an one we may honorably Enroll and Surname, a true
Citizen and Denizon amongst mankind, made free, and meet for converse with a
civil world.

This is in a great measure that good which God has laid out for the Sons of
men. Very desirable with all, Eccl. 10.15.
but rarely attained by any. The labor of the foolish (experience sadly shows
us) wearieth him, for he knows not the way unto the City.

1 General Advice, A cordial imbracement of Virtue and declining of all Vice.
In your pressing after these things, the most comprehensive and general rule
that I can safely and heartily commend unto you, is plainly this. A rule worthy
to be transmitted as a Treasure from the Father to the Son, and his Child's
Child after him. Semita tranquillae per virtut^m patet gnica vitae Juvenal.
Cordially espouse all Virtue: Constantly hate and decline all Vice. Never was
Virtue any man's real hinderance in ought that is desirable: nor Vice a true
means of good to any. But as the daughters of Heth to Rebeccah, that which will
make our very life a burden, and wearisom to us if our souls shall match
themselves unto it.

Virtue, we are usually told, if we could behold it with the eyes of our
bodies, it would attract all affections to it; it would draw all men into an
exstacy and admiration of it.

Seneca goes yet further, telling us, (and that truly) in this veiled
condition, wherein it goes up and down almost incognito in the world; In omnium
animos lumen suum immittit, etiam qui non sequuntur eam vident, etc. Seneca.
It yet darteth some rays upon all men's minds, insomuch that they who embrace
it not cannot but see it, and highly respect it.

But Vice whatever interest it has unduly gained in most men's affections, soon
hastens in all men's experience to this joyless upshot. It Nocte dieque suum
gestabit pectore testem. Juvenal.
disturbs and clouds us with guilt and fears within ourselves. It renders us
odious and unsavory, slighted and rejected with others. It wastes Estates. It
blasts Reputation. It embaseth the Mind. It corrupts the Life. It drags down
the whole man to shame and misery. It is the Philosophers Sphinx, which however
it may seem to propound toys, yet devoureth all (as that did) who fall
unwisely into its Embraces. It is a deceitful Laba^ that changes our wages. We
may go out after it with the Prodigal, pleasant and full of hopes, but shall
too soon return like him with rags and hunger.

This is the general Rule which cannot, which will not fail any that are true
to it. The Lord give you hearts to put it upon trial, and to abide all your
days by it. And it shall assuredly keep you in your goings out and comings in
from those manifold evils which most men by their own wretchedness pull down
upon themselves.

2 Particular Advice threefold.
For more particular directions; It were improper for me to expatiate too far,
or to turn a Letter into a Treatise. Amongst many other things of great weight
it shall suffice at present to tell you, you will have exceeding much need of
these three in your pursuance of such a comfortable life here on earth.

1. You will have great need of a rare government over your selves; that there
be no disorders within doors at home.

2. You will have great need of the utmost prudence for the dexterous disposal
of all your affairs, that there be no miscarriage in the practical part of your
life abroad.

3. You will have great need of much humanity for your better converse with all
persons, that there be no violating of the Laws of civil Society, the dear and
common interest of mankind.

Upon these few hinges the chief Concerns of this present life do very much
turn. Where these are safely settled, Virtue has its triumph, We the
tranquillity of our minds, Our Conversation its just composure, and all the
blasts of adversity shall be no more able to do any prejudice, than the clouds
which are so far inferior can do unto the Sun, whose Orb and motion are both
exceeding high above them.

First, 1 Particular Advice. A due poize and Government over our selves, and
affections.
You will have great need of a rare Government over your selves, a choice poize
continually upon your own spirits; keeping your affections, as the Centurions
Servants, in all subjection, meekly to go or come, as the occasion and matter
shall require.

This is that noble conquest which Solomon in the wisdom of God so highly
commends. Prove. 16.32.
Stronger is he that rules his own spirit than he that takes a City. This is
that desirable Kingdom, that the meanest Subject without the least disturbance
of the Government under which he lives may happily attain. Si vis esse rex,
ostendam tibi regnum, rege teipsum.
Are you desirous (says the Philosopher) of a Kingdom? I can presently show
you one; rule wisely over your own self.

A profuse and impotent letting out of the heart upon these inferior things
betraies us too surely to every emergent temptation, and proves usually in a
short time (like Sampsons fond love) Iussisti Domine! and sic est, ut omnis
inordinatus affectus sit sibi paena. Aug.
our enthralment, our shame, and death. Pro. 25.28.
A City broken down, and without walls (so sad a prospect the Holy Ghost tells
us) is that man that has no rule over his own spirit.

Man is the noblest Creature in the whole World, and his Government of highest
moment. To see him sit clothed, and in his right mind; every thought, every
affection, as so many wheels in their proper place, at their true motion, oh!
it is the honourablest sight amongst all the manifold works of God upon the
face of the Earth.

Dear Children! Beg and strive that this may be your happy lot. Every one of
you in your several times another Socrates; that it may be said of you as of
him, whoever observes you, That you are still walking in Eodem semp. r^^cedibat
vultu, de Socr. dict.
one and the same virtuous frame of mind, one and the same cheerful complexion
of countenance.

You will see some, Heraclitus-like, bitterly passionate almost to death for
every light trivial cross. Others again, Democritus-like, as wide on the other
hand, ever frothy, ready to laugh at their own shadow. But you will still find
it, in the sequel of your life, your honor as to men, and your great comfort
as to your selves; to keep a juster reine over your affections. We may say of
our affections, as we use to say of fire, and water, They are good Servants,
but bad Masters. You may safely take it as your vade mecum along with you, in
reference to the things of this life, Fortem posse animum qui far quoat
quoscu^que labores, resctat irassi, cuniat nil. Juvenal.
Desire not any thing immoderately, fear not any thing too anxiously. Delight
not in any thing too excessively. Lament not any thing too ^itterly. All these
are but as so many several sorts of moral drunkenness. We may be affectionate:
we must not be immoderate. The enjoyment of our selves, and the serenity of our
minds is still more than all.

It is time, it is high time for you to be previously considering with your
selves; it may be the Lord has laid out for some of you a tempestuous voyage
upon these Seas. More indignities, more repulses from the world; More
unkindnesses, more revilings from men; More chastenings under his own hand;
More sickness, more poverty; More of trials every way than you are yet aware
of. Are you strengthening your selves in your patience to possess your souls,
and in all sweet composure to bear them when they shall indeed come? That you
may say as Job, It is but the thing that I have prepared and looked for, that
is come upon me; I will with patience accept it, and will not charge God
foolishly.

It may be on the other hand some of you the Lord may enlarge your border; and
bring you forth as Vessels unto some service and honor in your Generation. Are
you now timously instructing your selves in the vanity, the dangers, and
continual restlesness of high enjoyments; the manifold temptations that attend
them; the strict accounts that must be given of them; Sapienti viro incessu;
modestior. Sen.
that so you may pass (as becomes the wise) with a due modesty of spirit into
them?

This, Dear Children, is that sobriety of mind that I have desired to set
before you. Oh that you may be able when it comes to your trial to consist with
it, and to know Alteram sortem been pr^eparatum pectus. Hor.
how to abound or want; how to live in honor or obscurity, entertaining with
sweetness whatsoever condition the All-wise Disposer of all things shall order
for you.

Secondly, 2 Particular Advice. Much true prudence for the dexterous disposal
of all affairs.
You will have as great need of the utmost Prudence for the dexterous disposal
of all your affairs without doors, that there be no Miscarriage in the
practical part of your life abroad. The natural Eye may direct the body: but it
is (...) Plato.
Prudence only that can inform and conduct the life. The understanding of the
Prudent (we are told from the Lord himself) it is that which directs his way.
This is that wise Pilot that best steers the Ship, and preserves it from all
the rocks of danger that lie in our way. The Physician of life that preserves
the Conversation in health, and upon its feet. Wisdom is the principal thing;
above all getting let us labor to get understanding.

Foolishness it is the Souls Apoplexy, wherein all the noble faculties of the
mind are cast into a dead sleep. The Souls Dream, wherein meephansies swim up
and down, but little true reason. It is a Sampson, whose eyes are out, the
scorn and derision of all. It is the unskilful hand that mars that brings to
dishonor every action, every vessel that comes under the wheel. It is the
blind Traveller, that continually stumbles wherever he goes, and still knows
not whereat. It is the dead Fly, that corrupts the whole box of Ointment. The
least mixture of it immediately stains and overcasts many virtuous actions.

Take heed Dear Children! that you become not such unsavory salt, that such
folly cause not you to go astray in the progress of your life. Let Solomon's
Prayer in his Youth be your daily entreaty unto God. Give thy Servant oh Lord!
an understanding heart, 1 King. 3.7, 9.
that I may know how to go out and come in, discerning between good and evil.

Life is a Theater full of action, the Scenes thick and various; a multitude of
fresh occasions continually crowding in upon us; our Time short, the
Opportunities of actions seldom seen till they be slipped by and gone. These
things will call for a world of wisdom to contrive and order all for the best.

Well in this great and difficult case, let Prudence be the Sollicitour to
attend and look after it. As the handmaid of the mind, that may go to the door
when these occasions shall thus earnestly knock; that may take their Errand
distinctly, give them their Answerfully; treating every Occurrence of life
fairly, without precipitancy, without delay.

It is the great honor of Prudence that it is (as Ezechiels vision) full of
eyes; able to look upon Praesentia ordinat, futura providet, praeterita
recordatur.
time past, time present, and time to come: making all these several winds to
fill her sails, to serve her in her voyage, for the dispatch of her work.

1. It will be the work and care of true Prudence to look back upon time past
by way of reflection, that the former Errata's and miscarriages of life may be
henceforth corrected, prevented, and seen no more. Who so is wise his own
failings shall become his teachers, and charge him that he return no more to
folly.

2. It will be the further task of Prudence to look circumspectly to the
present. It is all the time we have any certain hold of, we may well be choice
of it.

Prudence is herein very sollicitous.

1. That nothing be now done in vain, Omnis labor aliquo referatur, aliquo
respiciat. Sen.
but for good and weighty ends. Ends so righteous, that they may be fairly
vindicated; So lovely, that they may be worthy to be embraced; So useful, that
they cannot be refused. The wise man is able at any time to answer in all his
actions as once David to his brethren, 1 Samuel 17.29.
There is just cause for what I have done.

2. That nothing be done by uncomly means: but such as may be truly righteous
in their nature, best serviceable to the end, and honorable for us to make use
of. Alexander (how desirable soever it might have been unto him) would by no
means unhandsomly steal a victory; and the virtuous heart scorns and refuses to
debase it self to do evil that good may come of it.

3. That nothing be done Seclera impetu; bo^aco, silia ^o^a valescunt. Tacitus.
rashly: but upon well digested thoughts, concocted by just deliberation. The
understanding (as the living Spirit in the Prophets vision) moves the wheels;
whither that is to go the wheels go, and without that they stir not.

4. That nothing be done boisterously: Omnis ex ^^suinitate s^^^^^^ est. Seneca.
but calmly, not with much noise: but rather with good effect. Our minds may
run much upon the thunder and earthquake: but the Prophet tells us, it was in
the still small voice that the presence of God was rather found. Soft words and
hard arguments we usually say make the best ^isputation: and we may as safely
conclude, meekly, but surely, is the honourablest character in almost any
prosecution.

5. That nothing be done unseasonably, but as Apples of Gold in Pictures of
Silver: being humbly studious to approve our selves in this, followers of God;
that our works might also for their measure have somewhat of beauty in their
season.

6. That nothing be done excentrically, which lies not so properly within our
sphaere: but a studious adorning of our own Province, a careful attending to
that which is incumbent upon us. The Creatures beneath us are not so senseless
but they hearken to God in this; and strictly confine themselves to their
peculiar task. It shall be our honor also before the Lord, to preserve our
selves from that arraignment, Who required these things at your hands? Duly to
watch our own vineyard, and to make our station a praise to all that shall
behold it.

7. And lastly, That nothing be done negligently: but with a due strength and
industry. Faint offers of action are but poor insignificant Ciphers with
Prudence; she allows them no place in her Ethics. She is very desirous fairly
to finish whatever she undertakes. And wishes that all would take it as their
memorial sentence, Whatsoever their band finds to do, Eccl. 9.10
that they would do it with all their strength, since there is no work nor
invention in the grave, whither we shortly are going.

3. The work of Prudence is not yet finished; in the last place it opens its
eye also upon time to come. Folly indeed scarce stirs much out of its own
doors; takes no great delight in going much forth. But it is the proper nature
of an enlarged mind, (...) Aquila in nubibus.
to make, as the Eagle, toward Heaven, to desire, as it can, to look over the
wall and, see toward Eternity. To go out, as Isaac, into the fields, and meet
with its future condition by previous meditation.

Herein it is still the task and office of Prudence to stand in the watchtower,
and found the Trumpet: To foresee the evil, Pro. 22.3.
and hide it self, and, (as those that feared the Lord amongst Pharaohs
servants) to get out of the way of harm and danger against the hail and storm
comes.

Thus does it belong to Prudence to espy opportunity while it is yet at a
distance, and to get it self in a posture beforehand: whether it be for
avoiding of misery, or for the attaining of mercy; that it be not taken as the
foolish Virgins, slumbring, and ar unawares.

These are the cares that Prudence takes, in this wariness does she proceed in
all her ways. So Falli nou potest: sal^ere non vult. Auct. lib. 4. de Vict.
circumspect, that she cannot be deceived by others; and yet still so virtuous
that she scorns to have any deceived by her. Her whole carriage is full of
beauty, and her works shall soon praise her in the gates.

It is true, such Wisdom is high, and very few attain it; but it is
nevertheless our standing duty, and could we reach it, our conversations would
be no longer like the ordinary rate of the ex tempore every-day carriage of the
world, without form or comeliness: but like Moses in the Mount, shining with the
very rays of the glory of God upon it.

Dear Youths! be you willing to apply your hearts to all this wisdom, and to
endeavor henceforth to begin to walk thus wisely in a perfect way. Light
cannot more excel Darkness than Wisdom excels Folly. The Lord grant,
whatever others do, that Wisdom may be practically thus justified in you as her
children.

This is the second thing so importantly needful for you, a spirit of wisdom (
as eyes in the wilderness) to guide you in all your way.

Thirdly, 3 Particular Advice. Sweetness and humanity for our better Converse
with all men.
You will have great need of much Humanity for your better converse with all
persons: that there may be no violating of the laws of Civil Society, the dear
and common Interest of Mankind.

Sensum a coelesti demissum travimus arce, mutuus ut nos affectus petere
auxilium and praestare juberet. Juvenal.
We are none of us born to live Stoically, in a Coll, alone by our selves: but
in a more open air, conversive with others, useful to many, loving and just to
all.

Prudence without this degenerates into a vicious subtilty and crastiness.
Fortitude without this into a savage cruelty and violence. Diligence without
this may fill its barns with Dives, but it hides its eyes from its own flesh,
and starves the poor Lazarus at the door. And at length Nature it self without
this becomes like Nebuchadnezzar, fit to be driven from among men, remaining a
stupid barbarous thing, its heart as the heart of a beast, too brutish within
it.

Civil and loving Society it is the great Exchange of Nature: where we should
all meet, not for ostentation and complements, but for real mutual Proprium hoc
statuo est virtutis, conciliare animas hominum and ad usus suos adjungere.
Cicer.
accommodation. It is Natures Table of Ordinary: where the several Lodgers may
come and take their diet with the greater refreshment together. It is its
County-feast: where strangers become fairly acquainted, and readily embrace
each other upon the welcome account of a common relation. It is the universal
Character, intelligible with all. It is the traveling Language, which alone
frees us from being Barbarians to others, and they to us.

This is its short Description. An Ape^les if he were to draw it in its most
lively complexion before us, must present it (as that neat Orator) with its Nec
alia ejus sacies, quam seveni coeli ac nite^tis. Sen.
face serene and clear as the sky, having no clouds to disgrace or obscure it.

Its carriage is every way answerable. It behaves not it self unseemly. It is
not austere and froward: but exceeding mild, and very taking. Not subject to
the least exception, but highly dear to all.

As to its deportment, it is not nicely artificial or affected: neither is it
willing to be sordid or neglected. It tempers its carriage as its clothes,
(such as it may best dispatch its business in) for decency, and for service.

It is burdensome to none by unseasonable visits, by idle interruptions, by
wearisome detainments, by fruitless discourses, by importunate or unbecomming
requests. It has not so learnt the Laws of converse. These Solaecisms in
conversation were not to offer good company: but to commit a violent and
forcible assault upon civil Society.

It cordially honors and affects a public and common good. Reckoning that its
private Cabin shares with the common condition of the Ship; and that the best
way to secure that is to help what we can in the preserving of the Vessel. He
that truly seeks the good of others, does therein ultimately, a kindness also
to himself.

It sometimes allows it self a little to study the dispositions of others. Not
as a Fluterer, that it might see how to insinuate it self, or humor them in
evil. Not as a P^rate, to find where nature is weakest, and might be easiest
boarded by some crafty design: but as the Physician studies his Patient, for
the more dexterous and friendly application of it self.

It readily respects and values endowments and gifts in others. It acknowledges
them precious Jewels from the Father of Lights, and heartily wishes much good
and honor may they do to those on whom they are bestowed.

It buries also with as much modesty their weaknesses, saying, The Lord in
Christ may have forgiven them. I may and will humbly pray for them: and if I
have opportunity, will endeavor in a spirit of meeknes to heal them, but it
would by no means become me unkindly to grate or take in them.

It has a very happy disposition as to the easy forgetting of injuries: And
it is likewise as happy in the constant, the ready, and grateful remembrance of
kindnesses. It takes little delight in burdening its memory with the evils of
others; there is no such desirableness in them, they are Errata's the sooner
expunged the better. It rather stores its mind with the candid thoughts of its
own duty, as the better and more becoming treasure. It striveth cordially to
overcome evil with good, and abhors as much where it receives good to render
evil.

It cheerfully rejoices with them that rejoice, feasting it self with the good
of others, as if they were so many dishes at its own table.

It condoles likewise as affectionately with the afflicted, and freely puts it
self in mourning at its own charge; as being one nearly related, of the same
kindred and family of mankind.

Thus is it both able and ready to serve in any capacity, to accommodate its
self to every office, for the repairing of the breaches too too open every
where. To the weak it makes it self weak, to the strong it becomes strong; it
stoops and becomes all things (still virtuously) unto all, that so by any means
it might serve some.

To its Superiors it is respectful. To its Equals it is loving. To its
Inferiors it is courteous. To All it is truly candid. Affable and temperate in
speech. Clean and modest in behavior. Pleasant and ingenuous in countenance.
And above all kindly affectionate and gentle in heart. Thus does it show forth
it self with a constellation of many virtues united and shining together.

This was above all his other conquests Cyrus his most renowned Victory (as
Xenophon tells us) without wounds or scars to himself: without grievance or
regret to others. (...) Xenophon Orat. de Ages. Reg.
The places that were impregnable by strength of arms, he overcame and took
them by his rare and unparallelled humanity.

Many Daughters have done virtuously, but this for sweetness in an angry world
seems greatly to excel them all.

Ita facillime sine invidia invenias laudem, and amicos pares. Teren.
Such love shall justly deserve, and easily procure love back again; love free
from envy, respect without constraint. Oh ^ that you dear Children! may walk
with so happy, so even a foot in all your ways.

CHAP. V. Instruction in respect of relation, and a right deportment therein.
BUt this precedent Subject being exceeding large, even as large as life it
self with all the various occurrences and passages of it; I must forbear the
further unfolding of it; it is more than this present Paper is able to admit. I
shall only now request you.

1. As Children, to an obediential carriage toward your Parents.

2. As Servants, to a due subjection toward your Masters.

1 A Children toward Parents.
First, As Children in relation to your Parents; Let it not seem a burden to you
to honor them as becomes you in the Lord. God does not so much urge your duty
upon you by force of bare command: but fatherly sweetens it with a very welcome
and grateful promise. Ephesians. 6.2.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother; which is the first Commandment with promise.
Be you truly dutiful to those from whom, under God, your life came: and God
shall pour forth his dear blessing upon you, and your whole life, all your
days in the Land of the living. Sow not sparingly, if you desire to reap
plentifully.

Writers have been on all hands voluminous in this righteous and lovely
subject, and have frequently told us Deo and parentibus non possumus reddere
aequalia. Cajetan.
There is no equal requital can be made to God, or Parents. So great is your
debt, so great is your duty to both. The Pl^t^rch de amore fraterno.
Heathen have been very full and express in it; professing that it is no ways
enough that we barely refrain such evil courses as would become a positive
grief and sorrow to Parents; which yet too many will not forbear: but it will
be further expected that we do not privatively detain from them that joy and
comfort which is their just due: but endeavor in the most filial deportment to
lay before them all sweet matter of gladness and of rejoicing.

Honor them, and obey them. It was no meaner Person than our Savior himself,
of whom we read, that he went down with Joseph and Mary his Mother, Luke 2.51.
and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them. Lo! here an example indeed; Be
ye followers of Christ as dear Children.

Accept their Counsels with thankfulness; They are the counsels of their
long-drawn experience, and may be of great use, faithful guides through your
following life. Bear their rebukes with meekness; they are the rebukes of
Parents, that have authority over you; they are the fruits of tenderest love,
which your selves know they so affectionately bear unto you.

Despise not their age though frail; slight not their persons though mean.
Divulge not their infirmities, though many; lest the Curse of Cham overtake
you, for adding to their weakness your wickedness.

These things it may be the Lord may thus order for your trial, for the more
kindly and genuine expression of your duty. Pro. 23.22.
Hearken unto thy Father that begat thee, and despise not thy Mother when she
is old. Where the hedge is lowest God repairs it strongest; that our duty might
still remain inviolable.

If they be, as Jacob, in any straights; be you, as Joseph, their staff; or
like the pious Stork, (...) a beneficentia, nam genetricum senectam educant,
etc. Buxt.
the nourisher of their Age. If God shall hereafter shine upon you, and raise
your future condition to an honor amongst men; Hide not your eyes from your
meaner Parents. Acknowledge them cheerfully, Honor them willingly. Behave your
selves in their presence very respectfully. Say still as that Lewis the 13th.
King of France; Though I be now Superior to many others, I am still Inferior
to my Parents.

The glory of the Aged is their experience and their wisdom. The glory of the
young man is his modesty and submission. And we may truly say, as the Apostle
in a case not altogether unlike, He that honors not his natural Parents whom
he has seen; how shall he honor his heavenly Father whom he has not seen?

Your Parents have hitherto cared for you with an exceeding great care; and
what shall now be done for them? Oh! requite their affectionate tenderness
toward you with a filial Ingenuity and Respectfulness toward them. A se migrat,
and abhomin^e totus transit in besliam, pattern pietatis immemor, gratiae
genitoris oblitus.
He were hard-hearted indeed, and unnatural beyond expression, who could
requite his Parents evil for all their good.

Secondly, As Servants in relation to your Masters. 2 As Servants toward
Masters.
Be ye indeed their Servants to whom you yield your selves to obey. Your very
relation speaks you not your own: but theirs. If you receive their wages, do
not your own, much less Satan's work.

Be you to your several Masters as Eleazar once to Abraham, religious, prudent,
Genesis 24.
industrious, and faithful in all your Masters business. Interesting the Lord
(as he) by humble prayer in all your undertakings. Careful (as he also was)
though at the greatest distance from your Masters eye. Speaking (as he likewise
did) becomingly of the Family in the hearing of strangers; and very desirous
(as he still showed himself) that your Masters affairs might prosper under your
hands.

Such a Servant the heart of his Master shall rejoice, and easily trust in him.
Such a Servant we may truly say, is already preferred to an higher place. The
Apostle plainly tells us, that such serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3.24
and shall of him receive the reward of inheritance. Faithful Servants
(whatever others do) God will take a particular care of them, and will see that
their wages shall not be abridged or detained from them. Their Masters may
account with them for their outward service: but when they have so done, God
will assuredly yet further requite them an hundred fold, because they have done
this thing in the singleness of their hearts, serving their Masters as in the
sight of God, and for his sake.

You are ready it may be sometimes too dejectedly to sit down and complain,
That the Orb and Sphaere in which you are placed is low and mean; (and so
indeed comparatively it is) but still it is such that the Lord reckons his very
Gospel stands capable of receiving great luster, much honor from you and your
gracious carriage. It is you that in so particular a manner may adorn the
doctrine of God and our Savior. Tit. 2.10.
To be saved by the Gospel is much: but to be an ornament to the Gospel seems
more; yet this may the meanest, the poorest Servant be. And oh what praise
(like the widows mite above the stately gifts of richer ones) does it offer to
the name of the Lord! when a Child of God entitled to heaven, can bring down
his heart willingly to stoop and serve him in the meanest capacity which he
shall please to set him in here on earth. Blessed are those Servants whom the
Lord when he comes shall sind so doing.

Be ye then satisfied, rest your selves contented in the condition wherein the
Lord has called you.

Service may seem some Eclipse: but still (as the Eclipse) it needs no^ ^e
total. Your Si qui^ existi^at servitutem in totu^ hominem (...), pars ejus
melior est excepta. Ser^^ est, se^ sort^^^^, liber. Seneca.
nobler part, your soul, (without the least injury to your service) may
nevertheless fairly enjoy a divine liberty.

Service and freedom the Lord himself tells us, are sweetly compatible. You may
be servants to others accordin to the flesh: and yet as truly the Lords freemen
walking in much liberty of Spirit.

Cast not away your encouragements. Let not the comforts that are so peculiarly
su^ed to your condition seem mean in your eyes. A virtuous Epi^letus may at any
time live s^ better, and more honorably upon his poor service, than a vicious
Nero upon a whole Empire.

Your service in your several places for the present, it is not your M^sters
advantage only, but your own als^; it is your preparation and making ready for
your selves against the (...), wherein we may all too ^ruly conclude; ^vil
courses under another roof are rarely mended, very sel^om redressed when we
come to live under our own. Be ^^^eful to serve the Families wherein you ^^r
pre^en^ (...); diligently, cherfully, and (...) now, and in that sweet habitu^l
^^^^sition you shall gr^w up and beco^e a blessing to yours, whenever God shall
make you (...) by your selves.

CHAP. VI. Characters of the truly virtuous Young Man.
First Negative.
I Have thus far exhorted you. I shall now endeavor once more to write the
Vision before you; and make it what I can (as in the Prophet) plain upon the
Tables, that you may see, as in a glass, what manner of young persons I have
been recommending, and am still setting before you for your imitation.

Negative.
1. I shall first describe them by their negative Characters, what they are
not; That you may therein understand what you also ought to keep your selves
free from.

Affirmative.
2. I shall describe them by their affirmative Characters what they plainly
are; That you may therein see what you likewise ought to be.

First, Negatively the Young Person of virtue or hopefulness, 1 Negative, what
he is not.
he is

1. Not one that ^ver r^viles Religion or religious people. Oh! no; Though as
yet he has not much understanding in these things: yet he sees Religion it is
Nihil in rebus humanis religione praes^antius, etc. Lac^ant.
sacred. The preserver of a most divine Correspondency between Heaven and
Earth. Our Prerogative above the Beasts; The sweet means of our Converse with
the Lord; The greatest appeal that can be made; The highest claim that man can
possibly say toward Eternity. Contempt herein he finds it so odious ^uod in
religio^em d^omam committitur, i^ omnium s^^tur inju^^iam. Live.
hat all Ages have even trembled at it; and the very Heathen would never bear
it against their sorry Idols: much less dares ^e contumeliously offer it
against the true God.

This is Crimen laesae Majestatis; High Treason against the throne and dignity
of Heaven. Vengeance in these cases is very particularly the Lords: And he will
Violata^um ^^ligionum alula, atque al^^ div^is^ est p^^na: s^d ub^qu^ aliqu^.
Sen.
surely and soon enough see to the repaying of it. Which made the Prophet cry
out so earnestly to some insolent and overdaring spirits in his time, Now
therefore be ye not mockers, Isa. 28.22.
lest your bonds be made strong. He that has not so much Reverence as to spare
Religion from reproaching that; not Humanity as to forbear godly persons from
deriding them: let him yet have so much Wisdom, so much Pity, as to spare
himself.

It was the settled and unalterable description which David long ago gave of a
godly man, a man likely to dwell in the Tabernacle of the Lord, In whose eyes a
vile person is contemned: Psa. 15.4.
but he honors them that fear the Lord. The Image of God should be exceeding
lovely, his grace highly honorable wherever we find it, though but in the
meanest of his people. What we discern of weakness not yet removed, not yet
healed, may be pitied, but must not be scorned. Where Religion is wantonly
scoffed at without doors in others; It is to be feared, and more than feared,
it is neglected enough, and wretchedly trodden under foot at home.

2. Not one given to foolish gaming. Oh! no; It is not for him that comes into
the world a Child of wrath, born in sin; it is not for him whose very Condition
and Religion (if he seriously bethinks himself of either) call aloud unto him
for tears, and daily repentance; It is not for him who has no more but these
few and frail days wherein to provide for that solemn thing Eternity, or else
lie down with everlasting burnings; It is not for such an one to become a vain
gamester. He has other things, matters of greater weight and moment which will
call for his time and utmost care, he is scarce at leisure to trifle with
unmanly games.

Ingenuous divertions where they are Cum animos relaxare Iuvenes velint,
caveant intemperantiam, meminerint verecundie. Cice.
wisely chosen, harmlesly and Voluptates commendat rarior usus. Juvenal.
seldom used, timely and willingly parted with, might possibly be winked at.
Both body and mind may sometimes modestly beg their remedy. And let them have
it, so they take it but as a remedy; and make it not worse than the disease.

Generous actions Religion is not so Stoical as to condemn them. They are
commanded, they shall be commended. Whatsoever things are honest, Phil. 4.8.
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are lovely; if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise; we have free leave, and are invited to address
our selves unto them. And happy is that young man whose hopeful disposition
presses early, as David, into the Camp, and even longs to employ it self in
such noble undertakings. He that passes by shall bless him in the name of the
Lord, and say, Go on and prosper.

But effeminate games can claim no kindred, neither can they expect that they
should ever be recorded in Letters of Gold, or mentioned in the Congregation of
the Lord, like Mordecay's good services unto honor. No, no; They are (as
Alexander wittily said in Plutarch) neither true Jest: nor good Earnest.
Neither fair Play: nor sober Work. But of a far sadder nature; when such
serious things, as Estates, and the welfare of whole Families are unnaturally
thrown away upon idle and foolish Dice.

They are too commonly seeming sports, real vexations; Actaeons hounds kept for
pleasure: but in a short space devour their M^ster; the deflouring of the mind;
the gratifying of Satan; the unhinging of the whole man from things of nobler
worth toward God, or toward our Country. Experience has too often stood with
tears in her eyes, and even wept in the sight of all men over these things;
complaining, what you account the pastime of particular persons, I must lament
as the danger of thousands, as that sore evil which unworthily softens and
corrupts the Spirit of Nations into degeneracy and sloth; No^ est tantum ab
hostibus armatis aeta^ nostrae p^rt^u^, quantum a circumsusis undique
volup^atibus. Live.
opening the gates to any enemies, inviting and letting in the Trojan horse of
all calamity. Thus with the Roman Emperor we greedily take the Cup because it
is pleasant; but it proves poison, and in conclusion our death. These things
please not so much one way, but they wound as much another. Whosoever seems
here to win, all are sure to go away great losers. The Gamester always rashly
stakes, and too commonly plays away his dear immortal soul in his games.

3. Not a Sabbath breaker. Oh no; He that dares be so bold on the Lords day
will not stick to be f^^ worse upon another. Where a Sabbath of so few hours
becomes wearisome to us on Earth; Good Lord! what would that man do with an
everlasting Sabbath in Heaven?

It becomes the true Disciple to awake, and arise early that morning. To awake
(as the Apostle says) out of sin unto righteousness; (...)Ignat.
and to put himself in remembrance, that this is the day of his Saviors
Resurrection; the flower of time, a Princess amongst all other days; the day
for his solemn avouching of his Religion in the sight of God, Angels, and Men
that this is the day wherein the Lord has appointed to speak with him, and
hear from him; wherein to give him ^ meeting about the great affairs of his
Soul. He dares not neglect so blessed an opportunity, he knows not whether he
shall ever live till another Sabbath comes about. He says within himself as in
the Primitive times, Christianus sum; diem Dominicum congrua religionis
devotione observare, omittere non possum Acta Mar. apud Bar.
I am a Christian, and dare not omit the due observing of this day.

Oh the sad ruins of thousands for the controversy of violated Sabbaths^
Persons, Families, Countries have died under it. For Gods sake, even for Gods
sake let the terror of the Lord in the remembrance of such sad Judgments
persuade you. And charge your selves afresh every Sabbath morning, with what
solemness you possibly can, not to speak your own words, not to think your own
thoughts: but thoughts meet for a Sabbath, and settle your selves heartily to
sanctify this day of the Lord. Where the religious care of these choice
Seasons dies, it is too too commonly and sadly seen, little goodness, little
loveliness, little of the true fear of God there lives.

4. Not one given to vain speech. 4 Neg. Char.
Oh! no; The sober Young Man finds a field large enough to walk in to refresh
himself and others with harmless discourse: he desires not to break the hedge,
or run over to speak with sin.

He understand; those words which are but Ciphers as to sense, may be Figures
of too great number as to sin. He hears there may be, and often are whole
slouds of words in bulk, where there are scarce the least drops of good reason
or wisdom to be found in them. And it makes him still the more cautious that he
opens not his lips at any time foolishly.

He judges speech should be a Lecture of wisdom to the hearers. The matter
always weighty; the manner of expression ingenuous and comely: without which
he concludes with the great Philosopher, (...) Sermo de mambus inanis crit.
Arist. Phy. de vacuo.
Speech about vain things, when all is done, will be but vain and worthless.

He chooses to have his discourse rather of Sermo oritur no^ de villis
domibusve alienis, ^ee male neene Lepos sallet: s^d quod magis ad nos pertinet,
and nescire malu nest, agilamus utrumae, devitiis homines, as ^^^t ^irtute
beati. Herat.
things than of persons. Sometimes of Virtue, and the amiableness of that.
Sometimes of the great Works and Providence of God, and the rare glory that is
visible and transparent in them. At other times of History, and the pleasing
Records so serviceable to the enlarging and settling of wisdom, that are found
therein. But above all he delights to fix most upon his own duty, and the Lords
mercies in Christ, that he may be a frequent remembrancer to himself in them.

He has heard, that his speech it is his peculiar Excellency above the beasts
of the field, and he dares not imbase it to things so unbecoming, so far below
him. He is modestly silent while the Ancient are before him; waiting for their
words, as for the dew. And when at any time he has just occasion to speak, his
Motto and Maxim is, Certe ordata brevi loquentia nihil possit esse divinius.
In tanta verborum pa^simonia quanta saecunditas. Erasm.
Not how much, but how well.

His words are always free from Assentation; he flatters no man. Free from
Moroseness; he causelessly offends no man. Free from Affectation; he brings
them not forth for vain glory: but for use.

The care that he bestows upon his speech is plainly this. That it may be truly
accented with Discretion, uttered with Modesty, seasoned with Grace,
continually shedding and sending forth a sweet odor wherever he becomes. He
easily persuades himself, That Tongue would scarce be fit to praise God in
heaven, which has been used to filthy and light words here on earth.

5 Neg. Char.
5. Not one that is ever found in a lie. Oh! no; Truth is always lovely,
falsehood odious. Where the tongue is false to the heart; the heart is surely
false to it self, false to God. The Lord accepts it as a letter in that sacred
name whereby he is pleased to be known to the Sons of men; That he is A God of
Truth. Deuteronomy. 32.4.
And a Lie whatever excuses and pretensions it may have, (as it is never
wanting that way) yet we know its kindred, and whence it comes. It is the base
born of Satan. He is a Liar, and the Father of it. Joh. 8.44^ (...) mendacium
no^ habit pedes, quibus co^si^lat. Talm.
Oh! that we may all take heed, how we nurse his brats in our bosoms.

The way of lying, It is a short-lived cheat, where the deceit (when all is
done) will quickly put forth its blushing face, and to our shame appear. The
Liar (say the Learned among the Jews) he may vapor a while: but he has no
legs whereon to travel long.

It is a very low kind of policy; when to save our selves we stab the truth.
When to gain a little repute (which yet is never solidly got by lying) we
hazard our very souls. When we are so desirous of some shelter for sin; that
rather than fail, we make up an hedge for it (as the Prophet says) of briars
and thorns set up against the Lord. Isa. 27.4.
In this case the Liar too truly fulfils the old Proverb. And shows himself,
Erga homiaes timidi: erga Deum audaces.
by his pleading not guilty, fearful of men: but by his inward falseness, a
wretched contemner of the all-seeing, the heart-searching God.

In lower things, the Clock is prized by its true going. The Money is valued
when it is no Counterfeit. And that Young Man shall be accounted a branch of
hope indeed, whose tongue is as choice Silver, and his words, words of
ingenuity and truth. The fault that is yet but one, he will not make it two by
denial. He may have many weaknesses: but still takes care, that he may be
believed in what he speaks; and therefore resolves the whole world shall not
justly charge him with a lie.

6 Neg. Char.
6. Not one that takes the name of God in vain. Oh! no; he knows God
over-hears, and will not hold him guiltless that dares do it. He is thankful
that he may have leave to use it in Prayer; he delights to meet with it in
reading the Scriptures: but he loves it too well, to abuse it irreverently in
his lips.

It was a good Counsel, once well given by a Royal Parent to his Son; K. James
to P. Hen. (...)
Let the name of God be more sparingly in your mouth: but more abundantly in
your heart.

The Jews of old accounted the name Jehovah so sacred, that they durst not
utter it. Buxt. lex.
The High Priest alone, and that in the Temple only, but once in the year, at
their solemn Feast, while he blessed the people, might have leave to mention
it: For others, it was death. And I have read of a poor begging Jew, Le^s.
Phil^l. Hebr.
in these later and modern times, that had a great Alms offered him on these
terms, but to pronounce that Word, who yet refused it. They wound up the string
too high, and became superstitious. The Christian abates that, but continues
truly reverent, and willingly fears this glorious and fearful name, Deuteronomy. 28.58.
The Lord his God.

Dear Children! be you admonished in this weighty matter; and I hope you will
take great heed that you offend not with your tongue.

He that must needs at almost every word cry oh Lord! does not so much say, oh
Lord! help; but rather, oh Lord! come and punish my sin.

7. Not one that profanes that sacred name of God by wretched swearing, 7 Neg.
Char.
by horrid Oaths. Oh! no; an Oath was never allowed, but in ponderous and
weighty Cases. And the holy Language still tells us, by the Conjugation wherein
the word is only used, we should be rather (...) la ^phal. absque parente Kal.
quia nemo jurare nisi jure adactus debet. Zech. 5.3, 4.
passive than active. No further acquainted with an Oath, than when we are
solemnly called upon by Authority not to be denied.

There is a curse from God, a flying Roll, which, how unwelcome soever, shall
yet enter into the house of the swearer, and shall remain there, though sore
against his will, till it, has recovered the glory of Gods name which he had
wronged. There is but little gained by sin; men do but provoke the Lord to
their own confusion.

The nations which knew not God; were yet a Law to themselves, and a great
example to all Posterity in the condemning of this odious sin. With the
Scythians the Swearers punishment was loss of his Estate. With the Persians
servitude and bondage. With the Grecians the cutting off their ears, as those
that had infected the ears of others. With the Romans it was throwing down from
a steep high Rock. Thus have they born their testimony before us, that we might
receive instruction from a foolish people, and learn in them our own duty.

Me thinks Dear Children! you should be every one saying to your selves, I see
now indeed the Lord has severely charged me (as once the Emperor Augustus to
the Praetors of Rome,) Suet. in vit. etc.
that his name should not be vilely trodden under foot, or abused by wretched
Oaths in my lips.

He that will not so much as forbear these for Gods sake, bears but very little
respect to God or his commands. Other sins have their several excuses, such as
they are, though but sorry ones. This is that has nothing to say for it self.
No cause for it; no sweetness, no pleasure, no profit in it; no credit, no
advantage by it; Licentia juranda facit ut sides rara sit. Gualt.
neither believed nor trusted, one grain the more for it. Others are weary of
it, the Offender himself has not the face to plead for it. Of all men the
Swearer sins upon the hardest terms. And he Qui jurat cum repit, quid non
adultus faciet? Quintil.
that ventures upon so heinous a sin while he is young; oh what a monster may
he become ere he die!

8. Not one that abuses himself or the good Creatures of God unto drunkenness.
8 Neg. Char.
Oh! no, It is not for young men to drink wine, nor for the lovers of virtue to
mingle strong drink. He has heard, the most holy men in Religion, the most
renowned amongst the Nations, the most Honorable in their several Ages, were
all of them men of great abstinence. He fears sacrificing to Bacchus would be a
breaking off with Apollo; and falling into drunkenness a drowning of (those
rare jewels) Understanding, Memory* and Senses. And therefore for their sakes,
whether he eats or drinks, that Golden Rule of Solomon's is still his memorial,
Eccl. 10.17.
In due season; for strength, and not for drunkenness.

The Grave (that undesired thing) how is it visited by thousands, and ten
thousands before its time! and what Bill of mortality can be made of it but
only this? It was Plures gela* quam gladius.
their cups which were the bearers, and brought the dropsy corpse so soon
thither* Oh! what mean we to complain so unkindly of the shortness of life*
when it is our own hand, our own intemperance that cuts the thread and hastens
death.

But thus (as a great Writer observes,) (...). Plutarch.
The Drunkard will needs have his lust, though it costs him his very life.

Men may through softness flatter, and with words too smooth tell us, the
drunkard is no man's so but his own: but the Lord has other Language wherewith
to salute him, Woe to the drunkards of Ephraim. Isa. 28.1.
Woe to him that dares thus deface the Image of God upon him; that being born a
man, yet chooses to make himself a beast. Woe to him that says to Conscience,
Ancillam dominari, and dominam ancillari summa abufio. Bern.
bow thou down and Sense shall stamp upon thee; Ebriosus consundit naturam,
amittit gratiam, perdit gloriam. Amb.
that plucks reason from the chair, and sets up a Phaeton there; Ebrietates
animos in furorem adducunt. Seneca.
madness and fury to overthrow the Chariot, and proclaim his own shame before
all. Woe to him that fills every Table with vomits, that sells his heart to
work wickedness, and becomes the Devils Dequoy to draw others to all excess of
riot, and at last to drown them with himself inperdition. Woe to him that by
one sin makes way for others, for legions to follow; that by Drunkenness makes
way for Contentions, for Murders, and for Uncleanness. Woe to him that has
forsaken the Lord, the Fountain of living waters, and makes his belly his God:
that man's end will be destruction. Yea lastly, Woe once more to him that makes
so many weeping eyes, so many aching hearts in his sad Family at home. The
Children cry, there is no bread; The dear Mother sighs, and replies; Whence my
Babes! can I satisfy you? My Husband alas! is no longer my praise in the
gates, but goes from me to sit with vain persons, till the wine and strong
drink inflame him; foolishly talking all the day there as the Sons of Belial,
of matters not convenient for them: while we, poor we, are left to naked walls,
to rags, and hunger at home.

Oh Drunkard, Drunkard! What have thou done? Thou have even consulted shame to
thine House, reproach to Religion, poverty to thy Estate, diseases to thy Body,
everlasting danger to thy precious Soul, infection to all that shall ever keep
thy company, sorrow of heart to thy tender Family, which thou ought to have
been a crown of rejoicing unto. Therefore hear thou the Word of the Lord, thou
that have so often enlarged thy desires as hell after other cups: Thus faith
the Lord, Thou shall surely drink of a cup of bitterness and trembling from the
fury of the Lord. Thou shall be drunk, but not with wine; thou shall be
overcome, but not with strong drink. Then may thou fall, and rise no more.
Thus, even thus shall Adonijahs feasts break up with amazement, and Belshazzars
cups with trembling.

You are, it may be, almost wearied with this long Relation: but from such
considerations should we gather up instruction and warning for our own Souls.
The Spartans were wont, when at any time their Servants were drunk, to bring
them in presence before their Children, that the odiousness of their carriage
might breed the deeper hatred of the vice. You have also now seen the Drunkard
in some part of his vileness: though in modesty much has been forborne of that
filth and leudness wherewith he might too truly be charged. Oh that you may
never commit such folly in Israel. Let who will live in revelings and excess;
drown not you a noble mind in slouds of drunkenness. Let the counsel which
Cyrus once gave his Soldiers be your measure; what is truly convenient for
you; and not what would (...) Xenoph. de Instit. Cyri.
overcharge nature unto drowziness; nor inflame it unto madness. The drunkard
may jovially call for much now: but this he may and cannot but know the score
runs daily on, and his reckoning will be very sore in the great day.

9. 9 Neg. Char.
Not one that is profuse or riotous in any of his expenses. Oh! no; where
Frugality is not our Steward and Treasurer; we shall have but little employment
for Liberality, as our Almoner. He that will needs be lavish in his
superfluities, will soon find himself (though but little to his own comfort)
unavoidably straightned in his very necessities.

It was the sharp, yet just observation of the Nullum crimen abest facinus que
libidinis, ex quo paupertas Romana perit. Juv.
Satyrist, when Rome had once parted with their former virtuous Frugality: they
became forthwith a sad spectacle of all manner of vice and debauchery. Their
fall must be our Young Man's, and indeed all men's caution and warning.

It may be thought too inferior for a virtuous mind, an heart aiming at
heaven, to stoop so low as the regard and looking after these pecuniary
matters. Deus est ita Artifex magnus i^ magnis, ut non sit minor inparvis. Aug.
But it is no dishonor to be faithful and wise in that which is least, as well
as that which is greatest. The Sun takes care to cherish the sorry Hyssop by
the wall, as well as the lofty Cedar in Lebanon. And he that has an earthly
indigent Body (as his Souls poor kindred) lying upon his hand to be daily
provided for, must not disdain to take some thoughts for those due
accommodations that are fit for it.

The evils are very sore which are under the Sun on both sides. There is that
neither regards what he has, nor what he needs: but sensually,
Epicurus-like, rusheth forth into all excess. There is also that possesses
much, and yet, Manifesta phrenesis; ut locuples mori^tar, egenti vivere sato.
Juv.
Tantalus-like, he even famisheth in the midst of his abundance, and has not
an heart to allow himself to taste in the least measure of the good thereof. So
rare is the true use of present things.

It is left to our care and wisdom to sail warily between both these rocks. The
truly prudent and gracious person takes himself allowed on the one hand, to eat
his bread with gladness, and to rejoice before the Lord in all that he puts
his hand unto What God has given him he wisely partakes of it, and keeps his
enjoyments from rust by a temperate use. But he is still as cautious on the
other hand, that he run not himself upon any exorbitant excess, or Dives-like
deliciousness; of life; to consume* fair estate (which might be his dear
Childrens comfort when he is gone) upon his present foolish lusts.

He looks first at what he needs; and says, In necessariis est salus, ^^
supersluis laqueas. Sal.
that is but little, and may suffice him; more were useless, and would ensnare
him.

He looks next at what he has, and says; it is that measure which a higher
wisdom than his own has laid out for him, and it becomes him that his mind
inwardly, and expenses outwardly be both willingly sured thereunto.

The riotous sails by a far other Compass. Poor man! It is a title of
generousness, an umbrage of honor that he affects: and it is a cloud of
disgrace and general slighting that in the end he reaps. He hastens with the
Prodigal to a luxurious life: and still with the Prodigal he hastens as fast to
disappointments, to husks, to hunger and want. He may be progressive for a
while: but no man can ever be truly successeful in ways of evil.

We may write him down (as in the Prophet) A man that shall not prosper in any
of his ways.

1. His Estate left him by the care and affection of his dear Friends (which he
ought for their likes to preserve as a Jewel and memorial of their Parental
love) by this usage is soon forced away, and takes its leave of him.

Neither does that go altogether alone.

2. His Credit, which was sometimes as so much current Coin, of great value;
His respect, which formerly waited so fresh and so acceptably upon him; the
Golden Sun being gone, these pleasant rays, of course withdraw themselves, and
shine no longer.

3. His costly pleasures, which were so lately his too too improper pastimes,
these also come no more to make merry with him. The guest grows low, and these
dishes are set no longer for his Mess, or within his reach. Hardly so much as
any memorial left of them, save only a bitter taste upon the poor Conscience,
scarce ever it may be to be washed down. One only undesirable associate left to
bear him company, that Ead in illa quae erat in abund. intia, libido manet.
Cic. de Catelin.
same luxurious disposition, which brought him to all this, will still hang
about him to continue his reproach, and to make him yet more miserable.

4. The greatest sufferer is yet behind. The next thing that is trodden down
under his luxurious excess, is nature it self, and his own conversation. Good
Lord! what dishonest and dishonorable courses are they enforced to comply
withal, for the gratifying of a voluptuous mind! Righteousness it self shall
now be ravished, rather than reduce his extravagancies, or any thing of his
former riotousness should be abated. The Historians observation is too readily
drunk down as his Maxim, Si aerarium ambitione exbauserimus, per sielera
supplesdum (...). Taci.
The estate is exhausted by ambition, and must be recruited, though by the
greatest wickedness.

He is now ready to do his devotions in the cutthroat Chapel Caelius Rhodig.
Pausanias tells us of in Acrocorinth, dedicated to Necessity and Violence. I Will
becomes henceforth a man of rapine and wretchedness. His feet (as the Apostle
informs us) are swift to shed blood; Romans 3.15, 16.
Destruction and misery are (too truly found) in all his ways.

By this time he may spare himself the labor of making a Will, or choosing
Executors: the male administration of his own life prevents them both, and he
lives the rest of his days an eclipsed man, in great obscurity.

He is at length sensible in what great ingratitude to the providence of God,
in what great unnaturalness to his own Family, he has sued a dishonorable
fine, and cut off the intail and inheritance from his poor Children: leaving
them nothing to inherit but their Fathers shame. He sees likewise his Esteem
withering before his face as the Figtree at the root. And being Cum non amplius
si^, quod sucris; on ultracrit quod esse velis
now no more what sometimes he was, he has no longer any desire to be at all.
He is ashamed of himself, weary of life, and yet poor man, no way fit for death.

Such in conclusion is the spendthrifts race; no way desirable for any man
(...) after him. Oh! that all would be truly wise, and forbear bringing upon
themselves (what they are so loath withal) sorrows and streights in their
latter end.

Dear Children! Affect not you too tender an education. It will but enfreble
Nature from virtuous Actions: and you know not what hardship God may expose any
of you unto yet ere you die.

Affect not too costly an education: he, and he only is fit to enjoy much, that
knows how to live with little.

Deal by the Estates which God in his providence shall please to give you, as
Cicero once ingeniously and prudently advised, No (...) laudeada res est
samiliaris, ut canbi(...). Ci(...) ^ss. to Neg. (...).
Let them not be so close locked up, but that Wisdom and Liberality may have the
Key, and at any time come freely to them: neither let them lie so loose and
open, that Prodigality should at her pleasure abuse and waste them.

10. Not one (lastly) that idly or sloathfully wastes his precious time. Oh!
no; He looks upon his time as his choicest treasure; a price put into his hands
by the Lord for sacred ends, a price greater than all his Friends here can ever
leave him, and therefore studies above all things how to make the most of it.

Nil preciosius tempore, and her! nihil hodie to tilius: transeunt dus salutis
and nin^o cogitat. Bern.
Time is usually a commodity exceeding variously prized in the world. Some
scarce know what to do with it; it is to them a waste and wearisome thing. The
Lord Fatherly gives a space for repentance; and yet it cannot enter into our
minds, that this is that day of grace. Others again find every minute of great
worth, they could put the most refuse and spare hours to a good use; to Prayer,
Reading, Meditation, or some great employment Heavenward. What their Earthly
Calling can spare, their Heavenly has full occasion for. So that between both
we have as much as we can well attend to, though we had (as in the Fable) Argus
hundred Eyes, and Briareus hundred Hands. Oh! that we were wise, to gather up
these filings of Gold, and to redeem our time as becomes us in the Lord.

Non au^i, sed hone jacturam desleo Cicero.
It was indeed an ingenuous, and yet a sad sigh, which one once fetched, when he
told his Friend; It was not for the loss of an Estate, it was not for the loss
of Relations, it was not for the loss of Honors, or any such things that he
wept: but for (that dear thing) Time, which had been too quick for him, and was
now slipped by, but not improved. Time fruitlessely passed will easily make an
aching heart.

The ingenuous Young Man listens, and hears all this; he lays it up amongst
his Treasures, saying privately to himself, Take heed oh my soul! that thou
provest not a foolish Phrygian, beginning then to become wise, when it will be
too late.

It is recorded of Julius Caesar to his great honor, That in all his affairs,
he was never known to omit any opportunity, nor to refuse any pains; by which
means he became so great. I will not say, Be ye ambitious of his Honor: but I
must say, Be ye imitat^rs of his Industry. Accounting with yourselves (as the
Father piously of old) that labor is the honorable School of Virtue; (...).
Lahoriosa vita zirtutis s^^ola. Chryl. Pro. 22.29
wherein your proficiency would soon appear to all. Such an one, Solomon at a
great distance, foresees what advancement he would soon come to, See thou a
man diligent in his business? he shall stand before Kings, he shall not stand
before mean persons.

These things are, and most justly may be the Young Man's Lecture, they walk
with him, they talk with him. Wherever he goes he is still pondering of them.

He considers his outward man, and observes godly diligence, inherits a
blessing, while negligence goes clothed in rags. He considers his inward man,
and fears (if time be carelessly lost here,) Eternity of happiness, will very
hardly be found hereafter. He that labors not painfully in hi^ Calling, both
Spiritual and Civil here on Earth, his heart is not right in the sight of God;
his own Conscience will tell him, he has no lot nor part in that rest, which
remains for the people of God in He^ven.

CHAP. VII. Affirmative Characters what the virtuous Young Man is and ought to
be.
YOu have now received some Negative Characters, and description of the Young
Person that is worthy of commendation and love indeed. That we might plainly
understand what he is not, what he ought not to be. And oh that you likewise
may cordially hate the work of them that thus turn aside, and for your parts
unfainedly meditate a better course of life.

We will now look to the right hand, Affirmatively, and consider what the
virtuous Young Person is, and ought to be, in whole heart are the ways of God.
We might almost make our bo^st here, and say, in some measure as in the Psalms,
Grace is poured into his lips, and he is much fairer than the common Race of
the Children of men.

He is one whose mind is richly inlayed, like the Kings Daughter all glorious
within; curiously wrought by the hand of the Spirit. There may you find the
Prophets Vision, Jerusalem pourtraied upon a tyle. Much of the very glory of
Heaven it self drawn upon his tender soul: His heart is as a living Temple for
the Holy Ghost. Anima amans sertur votis, trabitur d^siderus; rapitur, atque
^labitur a s^ipsa, ut ^eo fruatur. Manual. Aug.
His thoughts and affections as perfumed Odours, aspiring and ascending
continually as pillars of Incense heavenward. He comes forth out of the
purple morning of his youth, as the Bridegroom out of his Chamber, as the Sun
out of the dawning East, and rejoices to run the Godly Race. More particularly.

1. He is one that chooses the fear of the Lord with his whole heart: 1
Affirm. Char.
For he knows it is to God he stands, or it is to God he falls. Others are
vain, others are profane: but so dares not he, because of the fear of the Lord.

He believes the Scripture, and accounts it no burden, no sadning: but a Jewel
well worth his carefullest preserving and laying up, Isa. 33.6.
The fear of the Lord is his treasure. Wherever this is wanting he reckons that
place an habitation of Dragons; undesirable, unsafe for any man to live in. And
Abraham said, Genesis 20.11.
Surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they will stay me.

He has heard, all true wisdom, wherever it is, may be found out and known by
this; This is its first and great principle, Psalm. 111.10. Noveris teipsum, ut
Deum timeas; noveris Deum ut ipsum diligas. In altero ad samentiam imtraris, in
altero consummaris. Bern. saper Cant.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. This is to him as the due
ballast to the Ship, which makes the Vessel indeed loome somewhat deeper: but
keeps it from tossing too lightly upon the uncertain waters. It composeth his
whole Conversation to great sobriety and stedfastness.

There is a sleighty sort of profession, too frequently up and down the world
in these last days, without much mixture of this weighty grace in it. But he
easily concludes, that man's Religion, will soon prove as salt that has lost
its savor, and quickly go out into some stinch. Oh! what shipwreck of faith,
and all good conscience, must needs follow there, where the heart stands in no
awe of God. Facile deviat a justitia, qui timorem dei excussit.
The Father long ago gave over that man as an hopeless Patient: He will soon be
out of his way in point of conversation: that sets light by the true fear of
God in point of affection.

It is a sad note, but it is a true one, That man that will not fear God
willingly; shall be made (though little to his comfort) to do it by force. What
most would seem to refuse, none shall be able to exclude. That dread of God
which they flee from, shall pursue them, and overtake them between the straits.
God will (be we never so loath) be feared of all. But woe be to that man, who
having refused filial fe^re, as a grace, is constrained to lie under the
scourgings of a judicial trembling, as his torment for ever and ever. The Lord
preserve you from it.

But now it is still a note as comfortable on the other hand, to every true
Child of God, that accepts his gracious fear cheerfully; the Lord will himself
become their shelter, and City of refuge, that their hearts may quietly return
to their rest, and need no more be amazed at any terror outwardly. God would
not have his dear people, fear the fears of others. Only let us sanctify the
Lord of Hosts i^ our hearts, Psa. 8.14.
and he shall be for a Sanctuary unto us.

The case is truly weighty on both sides. The serious Young Person takes it up,
goes with it into the Sanctuary, and there weighs it before the Lord, and at
length comes forth cordially contented, that the just fear of God, should be to
him (as to the Patriarks of old) the great Badge and Cognizance of his Religion.

2. He is one to whom the Lord Jesus Christ is exceeding precious. 2 Affirm.
Char.
He loves his Father, he loves his Mother: but still says, Jesus Christ alone,
he, and none but he can be my Savior. He could herein even break forth into an
holy triumph, and begin (with (...) Greg. Naz.
the Father) to sing the Songs of the Lamb; The Savior is born; oh! glorify
the Lord. He has appeared on Earth; be ye henceforth lift up ye everlasting
Gates. The Bridegroom is shortly returning again; oh light your Lamps, and go
out to meet him. Sing to the Lord in the joy of this salvation; Oh! let all the
earth praise the Lord.

The Iron, though senseless, willingly moves toward the Loadstone, and is loath
to part any more from it. Christ is his Lodestone, and his heart is even
constrained and drawn out with great affection after him. If the presence of
the Sun, be that which alone makes day to the dark world: The enjoyment of
Christ is more to him; the light of life, that makes a day of grace; the chief
of his comforts, (...) Chrysostom.
his heaven, his all.

He could say wi^h pious Suenes, in the midst of the greatest discouragements,
I will follow my Savior in liberty* and bondage; in prosperity, and adversity;
in life, and death. Whilst the smallest thread of life remains in my heart, or
the least measure of warm breath shall sit upon my trembling lips. Him will I
love, and combat for him against the gates of hell.

All in Christ is excee^ing dear to him. His Offices, his Ordinances, his
Person. He pleases himself, to be often piously thinking, what Christ has
done for him; but above all, in the thoughts of what glory he shall shortly
have with him.

Such a Savior he cannot but dearly love, the desire of his soul is toward
him; and having heard by the hearing of the ear a report so sweet, and so
comfortable concerning him, he henceforth even longs till he may come where
he may see him. In the mean time he waits with patience, and says with Peter,
though trembling, yet truly, Joh. 21.17.
Lord! thou know all things: thou know that I love thee.

3. He is one that greatly reverenceth, 3 Affirm. Char.
and desires much enjoyment of the Spirit of God. What others either carelessly
know not, or carnally speak evil of, he has set his heart much upon.

He sees the Spirit of this world, and what that is; a foolish, low, worthless,
and froward thing. It is to him, as Saul in his fury; and he desires it should
sway no Scepter in his bosom.

The Spirit of God, he understands it is far nobler; a Spirit of power: and yet
so of power, as it is withal, a Spirit of much sweetness and love. A Spirit
indeed of many excellencies, rarely contempered together. A Spirit of power, 2 Timothy 1.7.
of love, and of a sound mind, which makes him still cry, as David, Psalm. 51.12.
Lord! uphold me with thy free Spirit: Which is as the pleasant (...) Ver.
Sept. Ex utrisque, spiritu liberali, and imperatorio, me sustenta.
Emphasis of the radical word imports, Thy Princely, generous, ingenuous, and
noble Spirit. A Spirit of Divine Conduct, a Spirit of Sovereign Command. So fit
to guide, so able in the greatest straights to order, to govern, and lead the
whole man.

The Spirit of God, may be unworthily blasphemed by some, and falsely pretended
to by others: but it carries its own testimony with it; bright rays of divine
luster and beauty will quickly appear, quickly shine forth, and show
themselves, wherever it truly comes.

He understands (as indeed the poor Heathen likewise did) in the affairs of
this life, there is nothing of worth to be performed, without the common gifts
of it. No Nemo unquam sine astatu aliquo divino, vere magnus evasit. Cicero.
man (said the great Orator) ever became eminent, without some peculiar
breathings of a divine spirit upon him.

And in the concernments of grace, he sees yet more plainly; Missus est
Spiritus Sanctus, ouo vasacordium preparentur, and vinum novam in utres nov^s
infundatur. Man. Aug.
it is by this good Spirit of God, that we poor earthen Vessels, are prepared
to receive any heavenly treasures.

This is as Zerubhabel, without which, the work of the Temple goes not on. No
praying, no hearing, no duty, no service, no true professing of Christ, without
this Spirit. 1 Cor. 12.3.
No man can say (in language acceptable to God) that Jesus is the Lord but by
the Holy Ghost.

This is that blessed Guide, which should lead him into all truth; the
Comforter he so much longs for, which should relieve his soul; the Spirit of
Witness, which is to seal him up to safety, and keep him always ready, to the
great day of Redemption.

He humbly purposes, through grace never to grieve, never to quench, this
Spirit. He esteems it as the Sun to the Day, as the Soul to the Body; and begs
of God, that he may all his days live in it, and in all his ways be led by it.

4. He is one that desires and labors 4 Affirm. Char.
to acquit himself Christianly toward his Conscience. This is that Theme, so
slightly talked of almost every where. He is willing to sit down, and study it
more seriously before the Lord.

He takes notice, it is set as Gods Vicegerent for the government of all his
ways, and under him to be his greatest comforter or tormentor; which may
Conscientiam accepimus que divelli a nobis non potest. Cicero. pro Clu.
not be despised, neither can it with all our frowardness be deposed.

This is that faithful Register, that (against the wills of many) so Quocunque
^ado, co^scientia mea mecum est; portans secum quicquid in ea posai, sive
bonum, sive mahum. Bern. Med.
carefully transcribes, and preserves forthcoming, upon indeleble Characters,
whatever is put into its hands, whether good or evil.

He is loath it should slumber in his bosom, as those Idols in the Psalmist,
which have eyes, Psalm. 115.5, 6.
and see not; ears, and hear not; neither do they understand. And he is as
cautious, that it be not causelessly frighted, or superstitiously put in fear
where no fear is. That usually proves (as the Geas superstitions obnoxia,
religioni adversa. Tacit.
Historian easily saw) a deifying indeed of our own Idols: but an open neglect
of the true God, and in conclusion, a carnal treading down all good Religion.

He therefore takes great heed, that his conscience be not overruled, and
brought in bondage by Customs, Times, Interests, Examples, or whatever is not
of God. He brings it frequently to God, and his word; he dares not perplex it
with perverse disputings, or endless intricacies: but leaves this one great
charge instead of many with it; Know thou (oh my conscience!) The voice of the
shepherd: but trouble not thy self whatever strangers shall buz in thine ear,
or say unto thee. Mat. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Thus to treat our Conscience were honorable indeed. It might put some period
to our wearisom strifes, and would certainly become the praise of profession,
and our great rejoicing before the Lord. Conscience though it riots not: yet it
feasteth, and being duly respected, is truly pleasant, ever cheerful. And happy
is that Young Man, who reflecting upon his former ways, can in his riper
years, truly read those great words of the Apostle, Acts 24.16.
and say, Herein have I exercised my self, to have always a Conscience void of
offense toward God, and toward man.

5. He is one that loves and delights 5 Affi^m. Char.
indeed in his Bible. It is to him the Oracle of God; and he is willing it
should be the man of his Counsel.

It is no offense to him that he finds it (as the Father) in its phrase so
Institui a^mum intendare in Scripta^as fa^ctas. Ia^eri illas incessu hamil^s,
saccessu excelsas, velatas mysteriis, and odihostes ejus ^chementer. Aug.
Confess. lib. 3. and lib. 13.
familiar and open; he finds it nevertheless in its success exceeding powerful,
filled every where with the deep mysteries of God. And he accounts it a sin of
a very high nature for any to neglect or esteem lightly of it.

He could heartily write upon it, Lady Ia^ Gr^y in Fox.
as once that noble Lady, the night before she suffered, in the first Leaf of
(...) Testament she gave her Sister; I have here sent you good Sister! a book;
which although it be not outwardly trimmed with Gold, and Pearls: yet inwardly
is more worth than all precious stones. It is the Book dear Sister! of the Law
of the Lord. It is his Testament and last Will, which he bequeathed unto us
poor wretches, which shall lead you unto the path of eternal joy.

He sees the great instability, the tossings and unfruitfulness of men in
Religion; (...) Chrysostom.
and fears it arises from their being too great strangers to the Word of God.
And therefore endeavors for his part, wisely, and graciously to prevent the
growing of such evils upon himself: and believes, a pious and constant converse
with the Scriptures, the readiest and loveliest way thereunto.

He therefore rests not (as too many fondly do) in a thin verbal commendation:
but presses still further after, the most familiar acquaintance, with these
sacred and only evidences of his heavenly inheritance; making much conscience
of putting in practice that faithful advice of the (...) (...) nego^^ (...) and
^a^a legi. Pu^e. Abhoth.
Ancients, Wisely to contract his occasions in the World, that he may have the
more leisure and freedom to read and meditate, and that day by day, in the good
word of God.

He remembers with himself, the Tables of old were carefully kept in the Arc.
And that he might never lose his Bible, he lays it up safely in his best
Spo^sa Ca^^sti est arca testament^. Hier. 6 Astum. Chat.
Cabinet, his very heart.

6. He is one that willingly prepares, and composes himself to some honest
calling, wherein he may live afterward serviceable and comfortably in his
Generation. He is loath to come into the world as an useless Cipher, or to stand
in it as a Tree that cumbers the ground; and therefore often forethinks with
himself, how he may appear in his time, with somewhat of true worth upon the
Stage. He reckons his life as a Lamp; which should be giving some light to
others, while it spends it self. And is very prone to conclude with him, who
was wont to say, There is too little difference between him that is dead
indeed, and him that lives dead in point of usefulness.

The Lord has committed to all some Talents for improvement, though with great
variety. To some more eminently, those of the inward man, for counsel and
direction. To others more manifestly those of the outward man, for labor and
exercise. It will be expected at all our hands, that we bind not up our Lords
Talent in a Napkin: but as we are individually qualified, we should address our
selves, and cheerfully attend our measure of service to the good of the whole.

We are all of us Gods witnesses, that throughout the whole Creation, from the
Angel in heaven, to the Hyssop by the wall; from the Sun in the Firmament, to
the waters in the hidden veins of the Earth, all of them labor to perform
those good offices, which God in his wisdom has created them unto. Thus is
uselesseness to all these a thing unknown.

The industrious Young Man is willing to take example from them: and desires
not to stand idle in the Market place; while all other Creatures are thus
diligently at work in the Lords Vineyard.

His first care is in the choice of his Calling. Wherein he observe ^00 many
miscarry. Some by unadvisedness therein, bind themselve; (as it were)
Apprentices to continual temptations; and in effect, necessitate themselves to
the promoting and service of (what no man should abet or shelter) sin and
vanity in the World. Others again, match themselves to employments, which their
dispositions can never affect; and so Consuctudo, contra naturam tyrannos
quaedam est; and cita ac levi occasion corru^. Aug.
toil in them (as the Slave in the Turks Galleys) heavily and unwillingly all
their days.

These Rocks, he endeavors wisely to shun. And therefore aims that his
Calling, may he in its nature, just and lawful. In its discharge, comporting
with a public good, and serviceable to his private support. In its kind, he
remembers the Lacedaemonians wisdom, and seeks to have it in some measure
suited to his own Versate din quid far recusent, quid valiant hume^. Horat.
abilities and inclinations. And because in these things he is young,
unexperienced, and very subject to mistake: he refers himself very far, to the
riper judgment, and disposal of his Friends.

His next care is, concerning his due carriage in his Calling. Having thus
chosen, he now setles his mind, Suum singulis vivendi genus, est quasi statio.
Calv. Institut.
reckons his Calling, the Sphaere, and Station which God has set him in, and
studies henceforth how to adorn his Province. A homely Cottage well kept may
yield a delightsome abode. And the meanest Calling may be highly beautified by
a wise carriage in it.

He is very desirous to be truly dexterous, and skilful in it. His affections
are even enflamed, having observed the Scripture to take such an honorable
notice of Tubal Cain, as being an Instructor of Artificers. Genesis 4.22
So lovely is ingeniousness, even in these lower things, before the Lord. For
the encouragement whereof he is pleased to record it as proceeding from his own
Spirit; That Bezaliel was so skilful about the work of the Tabernacle. Exodus
31.2^3.
See, says God (and let no man slight it) I have called Bezaliel by name, and
have filled him with the Spirit of God in wisdom, and all manner of
workmanship. Isa. 28.26
It is his God that teaches, even the Plowman his discretion.

He is further willing to be heartily painful. Cheerfully submitting himself to
that great Law, which is now unalterably imposed on all flesh; In the sweat of
our brows to eat our bread.

He flatters not himself with great expectations of building his nest on high.
Duty is his; the Lord has left that with him. Disposal is the Lords; and he is
contented it should rest there. A blessing from God, that indeed he counts much
upon, and joys greatly in it: but as concerning the World, he easily sees, all
things are, and will be here, full of disappointments, vanity, and vexation of
spirit.

He takes himself concerned, be his Calling never so plain, to commend his
endeavors, and all their success by prayer to the Lord; in the Language of the
Psalmist, Let the beauty of the Lord my God be upon me; Psalm. 90.17.
establish thou the work of my hands, yea, the work of my hands establish thou
it.

Thus our Young Man chooses, and thus he travelleth in his Calling. He that
passes by may justly break forth, and say, The Lord be with you, we bless you
in the name of the Lord.

7. He is one that is easily contented with almost any food and raiment. 7
Affirm. Char.
He sees the time of his life, in the whole of it, is like to be but short: and
he concludes with himself, it were very preposterous, very unbecoming, if our
thoughts about such inferior things as these should be very long.

Fond cares about the body, prove commonly, as Absalom, that stole away the
hearts of Israel from one more righteous than himself; from David, his Father.
These also too frequently entice away the strength of the mind after them; they
love to hunt abroad; but they even No^ tanto (...) ^etur corpo^ris cultus, usi
prius neglecta (...). (...).
starve the precious soul, and leave that neglected, and disrespected enough at
home.

He therefore shares the dividend, as equally as he can, between them both.
Somewhat (he is sensible) he owes to both; and is willing to wrong neither. His
(...). H^b^tis ingenii signum est, in rebus corporis immorari. Cura omnis ad
animum est transferenda. Epictet. Enchir.
soul shall have the first fruits, as an offering due to that. The remains and
gle^nings he thinks will be enough, and may well serve for the body.

In his diet, V^ctus ratio, quo simplicior ^o ^^clio^. Aphoris. Med.
he hears plainness and temperance, breed the kindliest health and constitution
of body; the freshest agility and liveliness of mind; preserving life (so
dearly desired of all) with much sweetness, and freedom from diseases, through
the blessing of the Lord, unto gray hairs. Such are the fruits of Temperance;
it makes a fair amends in the end: whether it pleases or no for the present.

These things, the sober Young Man accounts matters of weight, too great to be
h^zarded, Vitellius-like, for the humouring of an irrational appetite, and
therefore resolves to be justly tender of them.

Comeditur quantum ad famem; b^bitur quantum satis pudicis and castis. Sunt
omnia quasi comederit and biberit disciplinam. Tertul. Apol.
The ancient care, and carriage of the Primitive Christians is highly
honorable in this respect, and he is willing to take it for his Golden Rule.
He eats what may temperately allay his hunger, he drinks what may equally
quench his thirst. Such a proportion in both, as may become the modest and
chaste to allow themselves. His whole deportment shows, while his Religion is
the Theory, his Conversation is the Praxis. He so eats, and so drinks, as one
that receives Instruction as well as food, as one that is ever mindful of the
righteous Laws of Christian Discipline; and does all (that he does) to the
glory of God.

It is to him a maxim not altogether contemptible, To rise up from Table, as
well as sit down with some stomach. The Italian Proverb frequently whispers him
in the ear as he sits at meals, If you would eat much, eat little. Oppress not
nature, quench not the fire by casting too much fuel upon it.

His health, it is to him as the salt and sauce; which give the relish to every
dish upon the Table. It is his best bed-maker, that makes his bed so easy to
rest on, and his sleep so refreshful to him. It is his taster to all the
comforts of life; without which nothing savours, nothing pleases. And therefore
he bids farewell to those surfeiting dishes, which would otherways banish, and
force away so sweet, so pleasant a Companion from him.

The endowments of his mind, and their exercise are to him still far dearer. It
is by them that the Soul looks forth out of her Mansion of the body; appears at
the Casement of the Senses; and shows her self fair as the Morning, clear as
the Sun; a Princess indeed, the Daughter of the great King.

He would not for a world, that the least indignity should be offered to so
Noble a Guest, or any obstruction put upon those honorable operations, it is
so divinely employed in. That the motion of those Golden Wheels should be
clogged by any Kitchen dust, or filth getting within them.

He allows his body very much respect, as remembering it shall be one day
Copartner with him in glory. But desires it still to rest satisfied with what
is fit for it in its place; that as Servi tu ei, qui fecit te; ut tibi fer^iat
quod factum est propter tu. Tibi Caro. Tu D^o. Aug.
a Servant it may be always ready ^t the Souls beck; a weapon of righteousness
to serve the glory of the Lord.

In his habit, his clothes are to him the sad memorial of his sin, the covering
of his shame; taken up at the second hand, having been either Hanc onis olim
gestavit nec aliud interim quam obis fait. Mor. Utop.
the Lodging of Worms, or the every-day Coats of Beasts, before ever they were
his. He remembers, and thinks on these things; and sits down, finding but cold
encouragement to be proud of his Clothes.

The utmost that he henceforth aims at is a clean and decent plainness.
Concluding (...) Xen. Lac. Resp.
(as Lycurgus amongst his Laced^monians) that it is he, the endowments of his
mind, the comlines of his body, which must rather be an ornament to his
clothes, than they to him. He is willing with that Ambassador, to wear his
Doublet of Cloth of Gold, with a plainer baize Coat over it without. Any
Garments satisfy him outwardly; so he may but have ( his Cloth of Gold
underneath) an enlarged heart toward God and goodness inwardly.

It is enough to him if he has, with Jacob, any convenient raiment to put on.
He Adhibenda est munditia, non odiosa, neque exquisita nimis; tantum quae
fugiat agrestem and inhumanam negligentiam. Cicero.
troubles not himself with a restless affectation and niceness about trifles;
what trimming or what Lace, he knows Wisdom and Virtue are far the best. The
Peacock may be the gayer, but the Eagle is still the far nobler bird. Vestitus
insignis, ac mollis, superbiae vexill^m; nidu^ luxuriae. Aug. Caesar. dict.
And indeed clothes with any, are but like the Sign over the door, which tell
all men what kind of shop and mind there is within.

8. He is one of great modesty, 8 Affirm. Char.
and chastity in all his carriage. This he reckons his Shibboleth, his nearest
trial; wherein nature must, and soon will discover it self, whether filthiness,
or holiness; the righteous commands of God, or the wretched lusts of the flesh
be dearest to it.

This is indeed the dangerous A labor procli^is ad lividinem.
season of his life. The Archers begin now to shoot sore temptations, and
enticing thoughts rush in thick upon him. But he goes to Gods Armory, he takes
up his Bible, and often reads the Fathers conversion-Scripture, praying the
Lord that it may prove his also, and a preservative to him from the power of
evil; Romans 13.13.
Not in chambering, and wantonness: but in putting on the Lord Christ. We may I
see in a few words understand all of us, what our life and great care should be.

These last days of the World are greatly sunk from a generous nobleness, and
man-like delight in heroical a^chievements, to a Spirit of Novi seculum hoc,
quibus moribus sit; malus, bonum malum esse vult, ut si^ s^^ similis, -- hiulca
g^ns, Plau. in Trin.
effeminacy and so^tness. It is not desirable, nor indeed altogether convenient
to lay before the chaste Reader much description of it. Let it be thrown
amongst the works of darkness, to be brought to light no more, let it so die,
the sooner the better. Only we cannot be ignorant, we are born to far higher
things; toward God, toward our native Country, and toward ou^ own Souls: than
wanton Complements, and dalliances of the Flesh. And oh that all would know, a
Sard^napalus life, seldom but meets with a Sardanapalus's death. Babylon shall
one day receive for all her luxury wherein she has been so profuse; measure
for measure, from the avenging ^and of God. How much she has lived
deliciously, Rev. 18.7
so much sorrow and torment give her. Such is the sad Exit of a loose and
vicious life; he dies, and is numbered for ever amongst the unclean.

These things are the Young Man's warning pieces; and for their sakes he is
resolved to stand upon his guard, and to abstain from all appearance of evil.
Wantonness in Gestures, obscaeness in Speeches, lasciviousness in Actions,
(however too much favored by others) are to him as the sulphurous sparks of
Aetna, as so many flames breaking forth from the bottomless pit; the shame of
the Actor, the danger of the Spectator; an immodest abusing of nature, an open
defiance to all Virtue, and which is yet far more, an high contempt poured
forth in the fa^e of Religion it self. His Soul, as the righteous soul of Lot,
is grieved, and he turns away from them.

Ubi Deus, ibi pudicitia. Hieron.
Chastness is still exceeding dear, and honorable in his eyes. As the cleanness
of the vessel, where the heavenly Treasures should be put, the clearness of the
Paper, whereon the words of life should be written; the Souls fidelity to God
under all allurements to the contrary, its victorious triumph and conquest over
the snares of Satan. He willingly cuts off all occasions, which might in the
least endanger or stain the purity of his mind, and watcheth^to the utmost,
that he may keep himself unspotted of these pollutions of the flesh.

He first makes a Covenant with his eye Time vid^re, unde possis cadere. Aug.
that it should not rove after vanity. He knows the heart is weak, and too
prone to be drawn away by it. He hears of some that have eyes full of adultery,
2 Pet. ^14.
that cannot cease from sin, (the sad character of too many) but he desires to
feast his on the good Word of God; and then without rolling to or fro, to look
straight forward, and to ponder the path of his feet. Prove. 4.25, 26.


He sets the like guard upon all his other Senses, remembering the sage (^though
almost Paradoxal) counsel of the Obstiue quinque ^enest^as; ut laceat domus,
and habitans in illa. Erpen. in Proverb. Arab.
Ancients, Shut up those five windows, that the house may shine the clearer,
and the noble Inhabitant (the soul) may rest the safer.

He then wisely withholds making provision ^or the flesh: Lest Periclitatur
castitas in delitiis, humilit^s in divitiis, veritas in multiloquio, charitas
in hoc ^equam seculo. Bern.
giving lust its baits, it should become as the Sons of Zervia, too hard for
him. Fullness of bread and idleness were Sodoms sins; and all unnatural
leudness, was by and by Sodoms shame.

Strange and light attire, it is to him a thing needless to provide it;
burdensome to mind it, and when all this is done, disgraceful to wear it. He
has heard the Ancients much condemn it, and he does not desire it.

But above all, he charge his heart, that it should not dare to dally with
any lustful thoughts, though never so secretly. Vos s^Satan eleta admissa
punitis: apud nos and ipsum cogitare, est peccare. Minut. Faelix.
Sin is sin in the root, as well as in the fruit; in the thoughts as truly as
in the actions; and S^tan will soon grow bolder. If he once gets footing so far
as the heart, he will sc^rce be so modest as to stay long there. The fire once
kindled there, will quickly break out further; Out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth will speak, the hands will act, and will no^, be restrained.

Or however his danger is still the same; where sin seeks most for shelter in
the secret chambers of the heart: there, even there Gods searchers come most.
God will have the secretest Cabinet opened. Where his sins burn most, the eye
of God shall find him out. The unclean person may take it as a Mean Tekel
written upon the wall for him. I the Lord search the heart, Ier. 17.10.
and try the reins to give unto every man according to his ways, and according
to the fruit of his doings.

Finally, He concludes, as we all likewise justly may, that our body; ought to
b^ the Temples of the Holy Ghost. If he could break away from other
considerations, and set light by them: yet the dread of God comes in; and curbs
him, with this tremendous warning in his ear, 1 Cor. 3.17.
If any man shall de^ile the Temple of God, that man shall God destroy. Oh
Sirs! it is no deceiving our selves, or dallying with sin; God cannot be mocked.

9. One that wisely lays up all the memorable experiences and observations of
his Youth for the better instruction of his riper years. 9 Affirm. Char.
These are that good Treasure so well worth our gathering; the safest and
trusty guides of life. The Eleazars, the faithful servants with which the most
tender mind, as Rebeccah, is very inclinable to go along.

Per varios usus artem expertentia fecit, Exemplo mons^raente viam. -- Manil.
It is by them that so many Arts and honorable Seize have been hatched
up, and brought by degrees to any maturity. Books and bare reading may render
us nicely witty and ingenuous for airy discourse: but it is still left to
further experience to settle and furnish us out more solidly for real affairs.
We may reckon, and not misreckon neither, as usus me genuit, matter peperit
memoria. Sophiam me Graii vocant, ^os sapientiam. Affran.
Affranius the old Poet, in hi^ famous Inscription upon the doors where the
Roman Senators so frequently met. If Wisdom be the Child, Experience seems the
Parent that brought it forth; and Memory the Mother in whose bosom it rests
and still lies.

It runs much in all our minds naturally to say, (as he in the Gospel,) Except
I see I will not believe. Nihil est in intellect^ quod non prius suit in sensit.
Knowledge it seems must come in by the broad gates of the Senses, ere it can
have its access to the mind, or any private audience in those inward Chambers.

The ingenuous Young Man hears all this. And what Historians tell us was
engraven of old upon Plato's Seal, he is freely willing it should be the
sententious Motto of his Arms: (...) usus iis omnibus dominatur. Buxt. Flo.
Hebr.
Experience (when all is done) is the great Governess, that bears the best
rule in all things.

And therefore that he might not lose the surest means for his good
information, or live upon trembling uncertainties all his days; he agrees
heartily with himself, to get the best and ^ullest satisfaction that he can, as
an eye-witn^ss in all things. And therein resolves more particularly, 1. To
keep a Diary and just account of all the sore judgments of God upon wicked men
in his time. For they are indeed as the severity of God upon Shiloe; as
devouring flames upon our neighbors house, and may well be a near warning to
us. They are as the stroke upon the two first Captains and their Fifties; that
we might fall upon our faces, and say, Oh my Lord! let my life be precious in
thy sight, 2 Kings 1.14.
I will henceforth fear, and not dare to do thus presumptuously. 2. Of all the
Lords tender mercies toward his faithful servants. The hidden Mannah wherewith
he inwardly so often feasts them. The manifold sweet outward deliverances,
wherein he so remarkably in their greatest straights owns them. Which makes him
cry out as the Queen of Sheba, 1 Kings 10.8.
Blessed are these thy servants* oh Lord! Happy are they that are in such a
case, whose God is the Lord. Oh! that I may be also as one of those, upon whom
thine eyes are thus for good continually. 3. He is as desirous to preserve the
Register of all the Lords dealings by him in particular, and whatever befalls
him from his Youth. Herein the Lord plainly charge him, (as Moses of old
adjured the Israelites,) Thou shall well consider in thine heart, Deuteronomy. 8.2, 5.
and remember all the way that I have hitherto led thee; to try thee, and to
prove thee, that thou might in the following part of thy life, know and
acknowledge the God of all thy mercies.


Dear Children! these things I commend unto you with the utmost Cordialness,
that I am able. He is a Scholar indeed, that is Gods Scholar; and he learns
indeed, that meditates in the Works, as well as in the Word of God.

Here you may see all things, as in a glass before you. Here you may gather
every one of you, a little History of your own, wi^h great delight and profit.

Be oh! I pray, be you truly careful herein, and it shall be a sweet means to
make you wise in your Generation, as men; to establish you in a great composure
of Spirit in all your profession, as Christians.

10 Affirm. Char.
10. One that willingly bears in mind that great Memonto, which the Lord has so
particularly given in charge to Young People: Eccl. 11.9.
Rejoice oh Young Man! (^ if so thou dare, and thine heart can serve thee to
sport securely in thine own ruin) but know that for all these things God will
bring thee into judgment.

This is that day, that shall come as a snare and destruction from the Almighty
upon the Children of Men. A day that all are enough warned of; a day that few
duly provide for. This is that day that shall decide that great Case, which
has so long depended; that shall resolve that Question of all Questions, which
to this hour hovers, and passes to and ^ro so thoughtfully in all men's minds:
Number. 16.5.
Then shall the Lord show who is holy, and who are his.

This is that day wherein the World to its utter astonishment (as Joseph's
Brethren, troubled at the unexpected ^ight of one so little looked for, so
little delighted in) shall yet once again hear and see more of Christ: That the
residue o^ the great work of Redemption might be finished, and the Kingdom
delivered up according to the earnest longing of the whole Creation, in the
fullness of its glory to the Father.

This is once more that day, wherein grace, and Veniet dies illa, in qu^ plus
valebunt pura corda, quam aslutaverba. Index nee falletur verbis, nee sl^cletur
donis. Bern.
grace alone shall find favor in the eyes of God. Hypocrisy shall then
shelter none; Estates shall then buy off none; It is the just Judge of the
whole Earth, who sits then upon our trials, and a righteous judgment,
according as every man's Case shall then be sound, he will impartially pass.

None can here plead ignorance, o^ say, Jude ver. 14.
they heard not of it. Enoch the seventh from Adam (so long ago prophesied of
this (so openly, that who would might understand it) Behold, he comes with ten
thousand of his Saints.

We cannot make our selves strangers to it. The blind and the deaf both heard
and saw it. The poor Heathen awaked as amazed men, and said one to another;
This World will one day have a tragic end, and we shall all be certainly
judged for what we now do.

Quae quidem and Philosophorum muadi opinio est, omnia quae ceratmus igae
peritura. Hieron.
Their Philosophers they freely yielded it. Their Huic luci sinem impovent cum
fata supremum, Iudicium Aetherius pater excercebit in omnes, judicium humano
generi imperiumqae verendum. Sybil. apud Lactant. Communis mundo suberest
rogus. Lucan.
Esse quoque i^ fatis reminiscitur assore tempus;
Quo mare, quo tellu, convexaque regia coeli
Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret.
Ovid. Metam
Sybils and Poets daily sung of it. And all flesh may now without further
thought or doubt sit down and confess with the Apostle, (...) We know we must
all (none excep^ted) appear before the judgment seat of Christ (in the
solemnest case that ever was tried) to receive of him according to the things
done in the body; whether they be good, or whether they be evil, 2 Cor. 5.10.

Oh Young Man! Young Man! how often have thou seriously thought of this day? A
day wherein these eyes of thine shall see Christ himself coming in the clouds,
with great power and glory: from the brightness of whose presence, Heaven and
Earth shall be ready to flee away.

Then shall thou see th^se Royal Officers of State, the Angels of Heaven, so
numerously up and down amongst us, attending their Masters business, summoning
the Graves of the Earth, calling to the Waters of the Sea, to deliver up their
dead (almost now forgotten) that have been so long since committed to them.

Then shall thou hear the shrill voice of the last Trumpet, sounding that
solemn Call to all Flesh; Arise ye dead! and come unto judgment. Oh how loath
will the Sinner be, to rise at the ringing of this Watch-bell! How little heart
will he have to put on his old clothes of sinful Flesh, and appear in them
before the Lord! How loath to meet with his body in so sad a place, upon so sad
an occasion; Infelici Collegio colligandi, sempiternis involventur incendiis,
qui socii suerunt in vitiis. Ber. Med.
that they may now together as joyless Companions, receive the bitter wages of
all their former sins.

Then shall you see the Prophets Vision, dry bones live indeed; then shall the
dead awake from their Long sleep: the Father with the Son, the Poor with the
Rich, and go to receive every one their several Sentence from the Lord.

Then must, the Sun be content to be darkened, and the Moon (to the amazement of
all beholders) shall become as blood. Then must the Stars, like withered
leaves, fall from their places. The Floods roaring, the Earth flaming, the
Elements melting, the Heavens, like a Scrowl of Parchment, passing away; and
almost all Flesh shreeking, and crying out, In vain have we flattered our
selves, in vain have we put far from us the evil day. Notwithstanding all our
lothness it is come; even the day of his wrath, and who can stand before him?

Then comes forth the definitive Sentence from the Judge's own lips, to the
godly on the right hand, Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared (so long by me,
desired so affectionately by you) Enter ye (now at length once for ever) into
the joy of your Lord.

Then also comes forth that heartwounding Condemnation on the left hand, Mat.
25.41.
Depart from me ye Cursed (go, go, cursed ye are, and shall now to your own
everlasting smart feel it, far from any rays of blessedness shining upon you
shall your place henceforth be, and your condition as far from rest or ease)
Depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels.

Then shall that slighted word Eternity, trampled so much under foot now, be
found, and felt a ponderous thing indeed. Eternitas efficit bonum infinite
melius; and malum infi^^te pejus. Lessius.
This oh! this shall make the night of Sinners sorrow so doleful to him; there
shall never, never, never, more arise or shine any day upon him.

Never so many aching hearts, never so many pale faces seen together since the
World began. Then shall the stout hearted be spoiled, and he that knew not how
to brook the fe^r of the Almighty here on earth, his spirits shall then fail
him apace, his heart shall thenceforth meditate terror, and his own tongue
confess, his punishment is now become greater than he knows either how to Heu
miser peccator! quo fugies? Latere erit impossible, apparere iatolerabilt.
Ansel.
avoid, or how possibly to bear.

This great day is to the pious young man, the Memorial of all Memorials; a
cogent, and constraining argument to bring him into Gods Vineyard. As the
Apostle calls it, the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11.
and he is willing it should persuade him.

He goes up to his Watchtower, he concludes with himself; what ever lies
neglected, this day must be timely provided for: and he prepares unfainedly
(as he is able) for it.

1. He first spreads his hands toward heaven, and draws with much humility
toward God. Having been so exceeding sinful hitherto; he is loath to be false,
or further dilingenuous now. He freely confesses guilty. And what could easily
enough be proved against him, if he should go about to deny it, he filially
acknowledges; passing sentence upon himself, as one whom God for his manifold
and heinous sins, most righteously might condemn. Yet still hoping the Lord
will give him the benefit of his reading, and the blessed favor of that sweet
Scripture. 1 Cor. 11.31.
He that judges himself, shall not be judged of the Lord.

2. He then beforehand entreats the Judge himself (for the Lord in his
stupendous mercy allows it) to become his Advocate. He dares not indeed trust
his Case in any meaner hands. He now puts the very hopes of his life in his
Saviors righteousness; saying, That, and that alone is the righteousness, that
can answer for him in times to come.

3. He lastly resolves to set the straightest steps, to take the greatest heed
to his whole Conversation: doing those things only now, which may be fairly
responsible, and abound to his good account then. And so he waits till the Lord
shall please to call for him.

In this posture he watches day and night; left the spirit of slumber (which is
fallen upon these last days) should at any time overtake him. And wishes that
all men had also the ear of the Learned, to Seu vigilo intentus studiis, seu
dormio seviper. Iudicis aetherei nostras tuba personat aures. Schoon. ex H^cion.
hear (as the Father of old) the voice of the last Trumpet sounding continually
from heaven unto them.

He sadly sees indeed, what is doing, or rather every where misdoing in the
World. Some contending too unkindly, too unnaturally, too unbecoming Christians
each with other; as if Christ were now divided, and Religion, contrary to its
own sweet nature, setting up a fiery standard, and the Professors of it (to the
amazement of all beholders) transported into a spirit of inhumane fury, every
man against his Neighbor. Which makes him cry out with the Tantaene animis
coelestibus irae? Virg. Aenead.
Poet; Oh Friends! is it possible, that heavenly minds should harbor such
earthly passions?

He sees others, panting as eagerly after the very dust of the earth, to the
apparent hazard of what is infinitely more worth, Heaven, and Everlasting
happiness. So that the very Child might too justly upbraid them in the words of
the Vide, vide, dum terram desondit; ut ca^^lum amittit. Demad.
Philosopher, See, see, how they grasp after Earth: to the loss, the utter loss
of Heaven it self.

He sees in conclusion almost all men too near the words of the Psalmist,
Walking in a vain shadow.

But he for his part thinks himself highly calle^ of God to another temper of
heart, a far better course of life. And therefore pitcheth upon this one
request, as that which of all other most concerns him, Oh let me be found of
thee my Lord! at that day in peace.

11. 11 Affirm. Char.
He is onee that aims to make his every-day Conversation a just Copy, and
Pattern of his whole life. He considers how ^itly the day resembles life:
seeming indeed but an Epitomy, (...) Abridgement, and lesser Map of it. And
therefore he awakes in the Morning with the cheerful remembrance of God.

He delights also to rise as early ^ that he might gain some fresh, persumed,
and previous thoughts before o^ her affairs crowd in upon him ^ accounting it
very Tarpis qui alto sole semilomnis jacet, cujus vigilia medio die incipit.
Sen. Trag.
unbecoming, and the open Symptom of an ignoble hopeless disposition; To fold
the arms to any longer sleep, when God brings in so fair, so bright a Lamp, as
the rays of the Sun, for us to rise by.

He enters the day with Prayer, and Reading: seeking to interest the Lord and
take fresh counsel from his Word for all the following occasions of the day. He
goes forth from chance to his Calling, endeavoring painfully, and patiently to
undergo the service, and evils of the day, with an unbroken mind. Anima mea
quid fecilte body? etc. quod malum sanasti? Seneca de ira.
He sets down in the Evening, and Pythagoras-like, makes up the accounts of the
day now past; He commends his Soul to God at night, as one ready to take his
leave of the World, to whom it would be no surprise, though his bidding good
night, should be his parting with his Friends indeed; his undressing, his
putting off all things here; his Bed, his Grave; and his sleep, a sleeping with
his Fathers, till the sweet Morning of the Resurrection, when he might awake,
satisfied in Gods likeness, and see the Sun of righteousness shining upon him
indeed.

Thus with the Rose he lifts up his face toward the Sun in the Morning,
perfumes the ambient air with a fragrant odor all the day. And still with the
Rose, vails up his head at night, with a fresh dew from heaven, resting, and
lodging upon him.

So sweet a life, so daily a death oh! how familiar, how welcome, and easy
would they make death it self (as a friend of long acquaintance, and
beforehand provided for) when ever i^ comes indeed.

13. 12 Affi^m. Char.
Lastly, and more comprehensively. He is one whose growth is an entire growth;
of the min^ within, as well as of the body without. In Virtue, as well as in
Stature. It is his daily care, and prayer that he may grow in wisdom, and
savor with God, and Man.

He esteems it the beauty of his Youth, to be truly respectful to the Aged.
Cred^vant hoc grande ne^as, and norte piandum, si ^ iuvenis vetulo ^o^
assurrexerat. Juv.
Nature presented it as ^ matter of high concern to the blind Heathens: and the
Lord himself hat^ more expressly required it at our hands. Lev. 19.32.
Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man,
and fear thy God. I am the Lord. God scarce takes himself to be duly feared:
where this is neglected.

He is one who foresees his Parents shortly giving up their places, and leaving
him, as the branch of their hope to succeed therein. He takes it to be his just
debt, both to them, and to himself, to be (what his Name in the holy Language
well suggesteth to him,) (...) silius a (...) aedificavit, quasi in quo dom^s
de futuro sit ^edificanda.
The wise builder up of the Family when they are gone. The strength, the stay,
and ornament of it; that it may live, and become a Famimily of some praise and
honor amongst the thousands of Israel.

He is one that takes care to naturalize himself betimes to virtuous habits of
diligence and goodness; watching, and declining the very occasions, and first
entertainments of Vice; Pare is malis assuc^isse magnam est mal^in. Erasm. de
pueris lib. Instit.
Left Nature should be wooed, and too easily carried away by such had Suitors;
and evil courses (like the Sons of Zervia) in a little process of time Sero
recusat serre, quod s^mel subut jugum. Sen.
become too hard for him.

He is one that walks cheerfully in his station; is merry and sins not:
pleasant, but not frothy: Serious, but not melancholy. One that by sweetness of
nature and disposition; one that by meekness of carriage and conversation
renders himself lovely to all.

His Parents shall look upon him with comfort, and say, My Child! my heart
rejoices, even mine; because thou have chosen the ways of Wisdom. His
Neighbors shall enquire after him, and propounding him as an example to their
own Families, shall even bless the breasts which gave him suck, and account
that Parent happy, who has such Arrows in his Quiver, he may speak with his
adversary in the gate.

And now such, oh! such for Piety, and Virtue are you desired to be. Whom all
that know you may esteem and Surname according to that old, Amor, and deliciae
generis humani. de Tito dict.
yet honorable phrase, The love and delight of mankind.

CHAP. VIII. The Necessity, and great Advantagiousness of true Grace in any
Condition whatsoever.
PUt the Case as impartially as you can yet nearer your selves, and see what
great, what real advantages the grace of God might yield unto you, in whatever
capacity or condition God shall set you.

First, Cafe 1.
If you be born of mean Parents, and poor. The meanness of your condition will
plainly need, and the grace of God will readily yield you much refreshment. The
(...) Non est pauper, nisi qui scientia pauper est. Nedar.
Ancients have long ago justly concluded, whatever verdict men may piss; There
is no man properly poor, dishonourably poor; but he that is pior in Grace and
Knowledge.

You have, it may be, no house on Earth: You have the more need of a Mansion in
Heaven. Scarce so much as Clothes for your tender body: the more necessity of
Garments of salvation for your soul. Few Friends, and no Inheritance that you
are ever like to possess on Earth. Oh! what cause have you to entreat the Lord
to be your God, and to give you an inheritance amongst his Saints in light.
Little or no Education here for accomplishing, or polishing of nature: How
great an Enoblement would it now be unto you, to be made partakers of that
Spirit, and Grace of God; which makes the righteous more excellent than his
Neighbor!

Such grace will be truly more to you than all riches. It will preserve you
from contempt; for who dares despise him whose goings are with God? It will
make you welcome to all good men; for the grace of your lips every man shall be
a friend unto you. It will procure you an ^rgh testimonial of honor from the
Lord. I know thy poverty: but thou art rich. It will truly prefer you before
those, who upon all other accounts are far your Superiors. The odds indeed is
great: but the decision, and determination of the case, God has for your
encouragement made it very clear, Eccl. 4.13
Better is a poor, and wise Child; than an old, and foolish King who will be no
more admonished. In a word, it will cause your faces to shine; it will fill
your hearts with comfort; it will be the forerunner of endless glory.

You may here modestly smile and tell any man, as once Antisthenes answered
Socrates, when Socrates asked him, What makes thee, oh Antisthenes! so
cheerful, when it is known thou have so little? He heartily replies, (...).
Xen. Con.
Because I plainly see true riches, and poverty lodge not in our houses, and
coffers: but in our souls, and minds. There he enjoyed inwardly, what men had
thought he wanted outwardly.

The destruction of the poor (Solomon tells us) is their poverty. And so indeed
too commonly it proves. But it needs not be so with you. See dear Children! oh!
see, what a sweet relief you might have to your mean Condition. Accept it, I
pray you, and seek it carefully; that in the day of your accounts, it may be
said to your honor, This is that poor child, that in much poverty, and
affliction received the Gospel. Let him now enter into the joy of his Lord.

Secondly, Case 2.
Has the Lord by your Friends provided for you a larger measure, in the good
things of this life? You had need now take all care, that your mind for its
part be as rich as your Estate. You are like to inherit Isreal's blessing, Josh.
34.13, 14.
Houses that you builde^ not, and Vineyards that you planted not. You cannot
now refuse Isreal's duty, Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in
sincerity, and truth.

You can do no less in thankfulness to him from whom you have received all. You
can do no less in the sense of your own accounts; whose reckoning will be not
like the poor man's for one Talent: but for ten. Where much is given, it is but
righteous, and we must not take it ill, if much be required.

Riches without Grace, Estate without Wisdom, alas! what are they^ As the
Indians Gold, which they know not what use or improvement to make of it. You
might say as he, Here is the ^re, and here is the wood: but where is ^he
Sacrifice for the Lord? Quamvis illa sit plena: dum te inanem video, divitem
noaputabo. Cicero. Paradox.
An house ^ull of these (as the Orator wittily said) will never make a rich
man.

It is the prefixing of the Figure, that makes the following Ciphers
significant. It is the stamp upon the Silver, that makes it current Coin. And
we may more truly say, It is the grace of God that is the figure of account; it
is the Image of God that is this ^oyal stamp, whereby our enjoyments become so
valuable, and blessings un^o us.

Without this they will be but as ^ewel to our lusts; and as the glass of
seeming honey, wherein the wasp dies. To the ungracious, his Estate is a curse,
his enjoyments a snare, like Dives his barns, where their Master; ^he, and his
heart too lodge day and night. A price is put into his hand, and he has no
heart to make use thereof. No understanding to dispose, and order it to the
praise of God.

It is Grace when all is done, that is as salt, and keeps these things from
putrefying. Oh! for your very estates sake, be ye gracious. And while the Lord
in much goodness thus brings, and leaves them with you; Say you as Manoah once
did, Oh! let my Lord come again, and show me how I shall order them, and make
friends for my sou^ out of the Mammon of this world.

Thirdly, Case 3.
Has the Lord given you comeliness of person? Should you now harbor a profane
ungodly heart under that fair and amiable complexion; it were as rotten bones
under a fair Tomb; or as the Apples of Sodom, beautiful, and fresh afar off:
but nothing save dust, and smo^k nearer hand, too like Apelles his rare Picture
of Cherries, so curiously drawn that (Historians tell us) the Birds came flying
to it: but returned empty: they quickly found it was no Cherries; but a sorry
painted cloth. And such will your beauty be, if it be but an outward one,
whose verdure (be we never so loath) must soon decay. Isa. 40.6.
All flesh is grass, and the goodliness thereof, (be it never so lovely) as the
flower of the field: which may blow pleasantly with the morning, but must as
certainly to its funeral, and with the Evening hang down its head, and die. The
Lord make you comely with a truer, and more lasting comeliness; the beauties of
holiness, which abide for ever.

We read of one Alcibiades, Plutarch in vita Alcibiad.
Socrates his Scholar, that he was the beauty of all Athens, another Absalom,
for comeliness of person outwardly: but the reproach of mankind, another Nero
for all viciousness, and odiousness of nature inwardly. Oh! take heed, a second
Alcibiades be found in none of you. Play not the hypocrite; if thy body which
is but the Cabinet, be so richly enamelled, so curiously wrought by the hand of
the Lord: Oh! beg of God, that thy soul, the jewel within, may be somewhat
Gratier est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus. Case 4.
suitable, adorned with the blessed graces of his spirit.

Fourthly, Is thy body, as course clay walls; but plain, and homely to look
upon? Yet be not discouraged. It is no dishonor to be as the Tents of Kedar
outwardly: so thou be as the Curtains of Solomon inwardly.

Caesar's Garland of Laurel was enough to compensate the blemish of his
baldness. Crates his learning rendered him dear, and honorable to all
notwithstanding the crookedness o^ his back. And you may reckon beyond them
both, and say; The ornaments of grace, 1 Pet. 3.4.
it is they, that are ^ greatest price in the sight of God. And these may lodge
as the Pearl in a Potest ex casa vir magnus exire, and ex deformi br^^lique
corpusculo sormosus animus. Sen.
for ry shell.

A withered arm, a lame leg, a poo^ crooked body, no form, no comeliness that
thou should be desired; Wha^ then? Has God given thee a wise and
understanding mind to know him A faithful, and willing heart to wall uprightly
before him? The amends is made, a thousand times over. The crazy body now so
frail, now so shapeless, Phil. 3.21.
shall be one day fashioned like un^ the glorious body of Christ himself: and
all thy present deformities shall then be done away. In the mean^ time thy soul
is as a Diamond, though in a craggy shapeless rock. Thou hal^ wherein humbly to
rejoice. Satisfy thy self, though thou have not the beauty of the Lilly: thou
art inwardly adorned, and have that which is far greater: the beauty of a Child
of God. Thus might grace supply the heart-sadning defects of nature. Seek ^ou
the Lord, and all these comforts shall be yours.

Fifthly, Case 5.
Some of you it may be God has endued with much sweetness of na^ural
disposition. He that looks upon you, is ready to love you, and say (as Christ
in the Gospel) Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God. You are already as the
Ring of Gold for choiceness of temper, and metal. Oh! that God would now set
his grace, which is the Jewel of all Jewels, as the Diamond in this Ring, and
you are then happy for ever.

This is that orient Pearl, that Cy^iu in his time so highly delighted in;
professing to his Friend Gobrias, (...). Multo ^nibi jucundius hummitatis, quam
militavis scicatte opera desig^^e. Xenoph. de Institut. Cyri.
That ^he thought it rather became him, and he ^as sure far more pleased him,
to attend the study of a due Philanthropia (for that was his own very word)
toward all, then to gird up his mind to the conquest of Nations, and discipline
of War.

Cyrus his candor in this may we be ours. And methinks the ve^ dust of good
nature deserves to fin^ much favor in all men's hearts. Le^ us in Gods name,
dearly cherish ^. Let it be as Abigail once modes^^ offered, 1 Samuel 25.41.
An handmaid to wash the fee^ of the Servants of our Lord.

But still we must freely say; To b^ loving to men, and stubborn to God of a
sweet nature toward them, at hard hearted against him; kind ^ others, and
unkind to our own souls this is an hard character; oh ^ that ^ may be none of
yours. We may sa^ to such a one as Christ; One thing yet lacking; and it is ten
thousand pities thou should go to thy grave without it. Oh ^ make thy peace
wit^ God in the blood of Christ, and all is well.

Sixthly, Case 6.^
and lastly, To others of you it may be God has given choice part enlarged
capacities, a measure of understanding above many. Oh! be not now li^e that
Image in Daniel, having you head an head of Gold, for knowledge but your heart
of courser metal; and your feet, feet of clay and earth, as to your
conversation.

It was said of Galba in respect of his crooked body; his rare wit took up very
inferior Ingenium Galbe male habitat.
Lodgings, and resided far beneath it self in an exceeding mean Cottage. But
the Story is far sadder, where a good head has the ill neighborhood of a bad
heart; where understanding is called for as an Achitophel, to contrive evil,
and becomes a Pander to all wickedness.

If God has given such intellectual endowments to any of you; can thou
satisfy thy self to debase these sweet parts, to serve sin with them? Shall
they be put to grind in that Mill? How is the beauty of Israel fallen? And the
light within thee led captive to the works of darkness? Can thou find in
thine heart to carry these golden Vessels of the Temple down to Babylon, to
profane them there? Oh! no; they are for an high er, and more honorable use,
to minister before the Lord of the whole earth in them. He that is wise, let
him be wise for God* and not like that sad character (too often verified) Wise
to do evil, but having no knowledge to do good.

If thou be, as Daniel, skilful in ^ll the learning, and knowledge of the
Chaldeans: be also as he, of an excellent spirit, that it may be said of thee
as of him, The spirit of wisdom, and knowledge, even the spirit of God above is
found in thee.

If thou be, as Moses, learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians: What
think thou in the most serious thoughts of thine heart, Can thou look with
much affection toward the Israel of God? Can thou esteem reproach with them
great: ricnes than all the treasures of Egypt? Can thou, deal freely, can
thou* look away from the things that are seen, to an invisible God, and the
recompense of a future reward? It was not Moses his Egyptian learning; it was
not Daniels Chaldean knowledge: but the grace of God which made them both so
justly renowned to Posterity. Here may we piously say with that holy man, a few
grains of this Gold, how does it excel many pounds of Lead! Sapit qui
Christian lapit.
the least measure of sanctified knowledge, oh Lord! how unspeakably to be
preferred before our supercilious pride in other things? This (oh that we could
heartily read those words after God) this is life eternal to know thee the only
true God, Joh. 17.3
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

It is a sore lamentation, and sight sad enough, (and yet oh Lord! too common
in Israel) to see choice parts spending their strength, as some rich soil, in
nursing hone, but noisome weeds.

Oh let not the complaint of former Ages be revived in any of you; Surgunt
indocti and rapi^nt coelum; dum nos cum doctrinis nostris detru dimur in
gehennam.
The illiterate arise, and press apace in at the Kingdom of Heaven: while we
with all our unsanctified Learning, are thrust down to hell.

The strength of your judgment is able in some measure to present unto you the
ways of God in their true amiableness; it is able to rescue you from the
follies, and mistakes that the weaker are entangled in. Your discerning is
clearer and more piercing, able to see the shortness, and emptiness of what
others in their ignorance so highly admire; it is able in some measure to
determine your will, (which in the foolish is more stubborn) it is able to
persuade and beat some sway with the affections, which are all inclinable to be
ruled by it.

I even entreat and beseech you for the Lords sake; you that have known thus
distinctly to do well: do not you dare, do not you adventure to do ill. Oifer
your selves, and your parts such as they are, Araunah-like, cheerfully,
faithfully, and ingenuously to the Lord, and his service in your generation.

None so well deserves them; it was he that gave them, who can also at his
pleasure take them away again at any time, and turn your wisdom into
foolishness, if you be found abusing of it, as a weapon unto unrighteousness.
Be you then of all men; you, and your hopeful parts, for God, and not for
another.

I am, I confess, very desirous to persuade you in the Lord. Oh! that I could
more affectionately travel with you, till Christ be formed in you.

To me the strife of men is wearisome; their threatenings, their flatteries,
their applause, their revilings are all of them wisely, meekly, and silently to
be over-looked, by him that truly means peace on earth, or glory in heaven.
He were yet to seek (says a Qui nescit serre calumnias, co^vicia, injurias,
nescit vivere. Melch. Adam in vita Chytraei.
worthy man) how to live; that knows not how to digest and put up such trials
as these.

Contend who will; let me serve the Lord in the Converting of any lost soul
from the error of its evil ways to the Kingdom of our God.

Fulfill ye, I pray you, my joy; both mine, and yours. So shall this present
Letter in future times become a comfortable Memorial to me, a comfortable
Memorial to you.

CHAP. IX. Caveats against several more obvious dangers, whereat so many Young
Persons stumble, and fall for ever.
I Have still some serious Caveats of great concernment unto you, which I must
needs desire you to take careful notice of, Nihil proderit dare piaecepta, nisi
amouris obstantia praeceptis. Seneca.
without which my writing, and your reading would both be in vain.

My Pen I perceive hastily out-runs the measure of a Letter: but I will say, as
sometimes the Apostle did, To me thus to write is not grievous: but for you it
may be profitable.

As ever therefore you desire to be your own true Friends,

First, Caveat 1.
Take Heed of yielding to the least known sin. By lesser sins at first does the
Devil draw to the greatest wickedness at last. 2 Kings 8.13.
Is thy Servant a dog (says he, and it may be he spoke as he then thought)
that I should do this thing? But in process of time, we find for all that, he
did it.
Evil has too much of a cursed fruitfulness going along with it. This Peccatum
semper pregnans, aliud ex alio gignit.
Serpent, if sustered, will soon increase to a great brood. The Poet could even
challenge the World upon this score; Quisnam hominum est, quemtu contention
vid^risuno Flagitio. Juvenal.
Tell me the man (if you can any where find such a one) that was ever content
with one single sin? Our promises may be (as usually they are in such cases) it
shall be but once: but these promises will soon lie broken at our feet; and the
sin iterated, it may be, an hundred times over. So hard is it to recover out of
Satan's snares, or to make any retreat when once engaged in evil.

He that hates sin, as sin, has Joseph's ingenuous answer in readiness,
against every temptation, Genesis 3.9.9
How shall I commit this great wickedness, and sin against God? Conscience once
embased, the heart once prostituted to vicious courses, is not easily recovered
to the true fear of the Lord.

Affl^ctions may seem as Gall for bitterness: but sin is always as Poison for
real danger, and deadliness. Oh! pledge not the Devil in this Cup; oh! take not
the least drop of it at his hands. There is no sin so small, but it is able to
weigh down the soul for ever into Hell.

Caveat 2.
Secondly, Take heed likewise, oh! take great heed of falling into bad Company
Solitudo mehor coetu malo. Erpen. pro Arab.
Better by far (^aies the Proverb of the Ancients) to be altogether alone, than
(troubled with what is much worse) bad Company.

With such you expose your Malignus comes canbdissimae ^p^imoque ^doli
rubiginem (...) sa^lin. e assricabit. Seneca.
tender natures, your most hopeful dispositions to be easily corrupted; with
such the filth of your company, how odious soever, secretly cleaves unto you,
and will insensibly become yours.

He that goes in, and sits with them, seems as it were offering to take,
and desirous to get acquaintance with Hell before his time. Say you as Jacob,
Genesis 49.6
Oh my soul* come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly mine honor
be not thou united.

These are seeming Friends: but real Foes. To whom we might too justly say, (as
he) Is this your kindness to your Friend, to become my s^ares, and enticements
unto evil? Or with the Philosopher, (...). Arist.
Oh Friends! amongst hundreds of such companions, scarce one real virtuous
Friend to be found.

Thousands have died, and perished for ever of the infection they have caught
from sinful company. Leaving this sad Epitaph upon their Grave stone, for the
warning of others after them; Bad Company in life, is too ready a way to worse
Company in death.

The honest Traveller will scarce willingly ride much in the Thieves Company,
if he can avoid it. And we may all say of the profane Companion; he steals at
least our good name, and time; if not all virtuous inclinations also from us.
Men that see not your hearts inwardly, will not stick to esteem, (...) Inquiry
socium, and intelliges virum. Mibhch. Happen.
and judge both of you, and them according, to the company you keep outwardly.
It became even proverbial with the Jews; If you can first tell me, what kind of
Company he keeps; I can then safely tell you, such he also is himself.

Despise none; you may, an^ should show your selves meek, and truly courteous
toward all: but still choose the ingenuous only, the virtuous and the harmless
for your companions.

The Dove flocks not with Ravens* Be you as David, Psalm. 119.63.
Companions of al^ them that fear the Lord. Or as Solomon after him, Pro. 2.20.
Walking in the way of good men, keeping the paths of the righteous. And it
shall turn to you for a testimony, and blessing. It shall become (as the
Facillime in optimam partem dign^scuntur adolescentes, qui se ad claros, and
sapientes viros, be^ reipublice consulentes contuler^at. Cicero.
Orator well observed,) A swe^^ specimen of a good nature, inclining (...)
self very apparently toward Wisdom and Virtue.

Do you indeed love your heavenly Father? You cannot then conso^^ with those
who tear and blaspheme that worthy name of his by profane oaths. Is Jesus
Christ truly precious to you? You cannot then possibly delight your selves in
them who ^rea^ under foot the Son of God, and account the blood of the Covenant
an unholy thing. Oh I deliver your own souls; Pray them to leave their s^i^ing,
or tell them plainly, you must for the future leave their Company.

Thirdly, Caveat 3.
Take heed in the next place of the sins of youth. Satan fishes with one bait
for the Old man; with another for the Young: but death is still in both.

Present vanities will soon grow stale, and unpleasing. Satan will be forced to
change these for other; that the mind may be carried on, and delayed with
foolish hopes of better contentment in them. The delightful pleasures of Youth
will give way to the -- Aetas animus que virilis Quaerit opus, and amicitias
inseruit honori, etc
anxious cares of riper years. Thus Sin runs its round: but still retains its
interest; suiting it self with much variety to our several Ages, and tempers as
we pass through them.

But in the mean time we may truly enough observe; as Youth has its peculiar
diseases, its violent burning Fevers, to which it is naturally subject: So
has it, its peculiar corruptions; levity, wantonness, and h^adiness whereto it
is spiritually a much exposed. These are the Young man's dangers, which need,
(as the (...). Chry^
Father well observed) the streight^ rein and bridle.

Oh keep your selves, as Davi^ from your iniquity, and lie not dow^ in the dust
with your bones full of the sins of your Youth.

There are many sins, it is no thank^ to us we commit them not; we are scarce
so much as tempted to them. To refuse a dear, a pleasing sin, wh^^ it is fairly
offered; Posse and nolle nobile.
this, oh! the shows the uprightness and noblene^ of the heart.

He that can find in his heart t^ deny his own longing nature; he the in the
fear of the Lord restrains hi^ own disposition, that he might no^ offend; he
that in a spirit of Christian resolution, and nobleness cuts off ^i^ Plurimum
profecit, qua sibi plarinum displicere didicit. Calv. Instlt.
right hand, and plucks out his right eye for Christ's sake, this, oh ^ this is
the true Disciple indeed.

We may say here (as God once said of Abraham) By this we know that he fears
God, seeing he has not withheld his dearest, his darling Isaac from him. Oh!
be you persuaded to turn ^way your eyes from bosom vanities. Set your greatest
watch, where you ^ie in greatest danger. 2 Timothy 2.22.
Flee youthful ^usts: but follow after righteousness.

Fourthly, Caveat 4.
Take heed yet further that you neglect not your day of grace. Let Esaus loss
be your warning. Time was when he carelessly slighted, that which afterward he
sought with tears, with bitter tears; but sound no place for repentance. Such
tears you will see dropping from many eyes another day.

There are two Rocks, whereat most miscarry in this matter.

1. By slum^ering, and taking no notice of Gods call.

2. By faint promises, which never ripen to performance.

Take you great heed of both.

Concerning the first; There are those golden opportunities of mercy, wherein
the Lord seeks to save that which is lost. Rev. 2.21.
I gave her (says God) a space to repent. This great gift it may be the Lord
in much mercy sets before you. And your selves are best privy to those choice
seasons, wherein the Lord comes upon this great occasion and knocks at your
door. Sometimes by Sickness, sometimes by Parental Counsel, sometimes by more
public Ordinances, sometimes by his more remarkable divine judgments upon
sinners. While the Lord is thus speaking to you, your hearts (as those
Disciples) even burn within you; your very Souls telling you it is the voice of
Christ, graciously calling you to repentance. Oh! seek the Lord while he may be
found.

True opportunity in most cases is a rare thing, and comes but seldom: but had
need be embraced with both hands when it comes. It will be too late (said the
(...) Cum praeteriit tempus cessat ulterior oblationi locus. Buxtorf. Flo. Hebr.
Ancients) to tender our Sacrifice, when the appointed time is past, and gone.

Behold this is the day of your visitation; oh! that it may prove the day of
your regeneration, and true acquaintance with the things of your everlasting
peace.

Your Father, your Master calls you in the Morning; and you arise, and go about
his work. Well Sirs! let me also counsel you, as Eli once counseled Samuel;
listen diligently, and it shall come to pass if the Lord thy God shall thus
call thee, thou shall answer, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears.

Concerning the second, our evasions, and procrastinations with the Lord; we
must all freely confess; delays and faint promises for the future, they are
but the artificial excuses of an unwilling mind for the present. Like the
goodly words of the Son in the Parable, that says, but never goes into the
Fathers Vineyard.

How piously did St. Austine bemoan the treachery of his own heart, for a due
warning to all posterity in this matter! Modo, ecce modo; sine p. ^lulum. Sed
modo and modo, non habebant modum: Et sine paululum in longum ^bat. Aug. Confess.
I begged (says he) longer day, promising, presently Lord! By and by; have but
a little patience with me, and I will come. But oh! (says he) that Presently
lingered beyond all bounds of modesty, and this By and by proved a long day, and
loath to come.

Dear Youths! if these vows of the Lord be upon you, defer not to pay them. And
cast not your selves by delays upon that sad Dilemma; That your own Promises
should be as your handwriting to the Obligation: and yet your Conversation
render you guilty of non-payment.

Caveat 5.
Fifthly, Take heed, yet again, of the sins of the Times wherein you live. All
Ages, all Places have their peculiar reigning sins. And most men will needs
vainly follow the present fashion in sins, as well as clothes; though they lose
their very souls by it.

These last days are the sad receptacle of almost all precedent corruptions.
The Lord himself has told us, they are and will be very perilous days. Days
wherein that undesirable thing Sin will every where too much abound. Nature
(the Terra malos homines nunc educat, atque pusillos. Juven.
Satyrist could long ago observe) grows now in its old age very degenerous; we
had need watch to the utmost, and keep our garments.

The Boat usually goes full of Passengers, and carries multitudes down the
stream with it. And who so in the fear of God, or love of righteousness,
departs from the iniquity of the times; that man makes himself a prey in the
gate. Aristides his justice costs him his life; and Socrates his fidelity to
one only, as the true and living God, in the rage of a giddy multitude,
procured his death. So dangerous always is it, to dissent from present times,
be they never so vicious.

But as for you, my Friends^ be ye careful indeed you oppose no man wilfully:
but be ye still as careful, that you follow no man in evil course^s wickedly.

It was not without cause told us; The whole world (as now it is) lies in
wickedness. 1 John. 5.19. Jam 4.4.
And if any man will be the friend of this world, (he enters that friendship
upon very hard terms) he must thereupon become the enemy of God. So difficult,
and even impossible is it, for any man to serve two Masters.

In these sore straights, Young Man! what will thou do? Before thou resolvest
to sin with the world now; seriously ask thine heart this one question, Can
thou be content to fare as the world fares, to be condemned, and suffer with it
hereafter?

Ungodly men will (...). Obstapescunt, ut ad rei insuetae spectaculum. Beza.
Jam. 4.4.
wonder (it will be a piece of strange, and amazing news) that others run not
with them to the same excess of riot; that others are not vile, and vain as
well as they: but you are Travelers, whatever others do, on the right hand, or
on the left; you must not turn aside, but mind your journey.

The Nations might do as they would by their Idols: Deuteronomy. 18.14.
but Moses plainly tells Israel, The Lord their God had not suffered them to
deal so by him. Not durst Ioshah soon after, judge the Jews strange
uncertainty, his sufficient excuse or security. Josh. 24.15.
If (says he) it seems evil in your eyes, (and the case is there hard indeed,
where the righteous service of the Lord seems evil to any) yet (says Ioshuah
however) I and mine are bound to serve the Lord.

Noah had perished in the waters, if times had carried him. Lot had burnt in
Sodom, if the Multitude had swayed with him. The sins of times Gods people may
always be pious mourners for them: but never profane practicers of them. Be ye
(whatever others are) righteous in your generation before the Lord.

Sixthly, Caveat 6.
Take heed yet further, that you enter not upon Religion at first,
superficially, slightily, or carnally. Religion is solemn; and had need be
solemnly, and reverently approached unto.

Mistakes here are very easily run into: but more hardly redressed; the forest
mistakes in the whole world. And yet (says the Nihil est facilius quam seipsum
fallere, quisque sibi ipsi judere est bene^ olus. Basil.
Father) there is scarce any thing more common, then for men to deceive their
own souls; and go (as the Prophet expresses it) with a lie in their right hand
all their days. Their Religion they judge is good, and they are willing (as
others also ^re) to be of it, and so they conclude without further troubling
themselves, that all will be well.

I write not this to upbraid any; but may, and must freely say thus much to
all, The truest Religion falsely taken up, will be but as the Arc to the
Philistims: it may increase our torments, but will never save our souls.

If we shall climb up to Religion some other way, and not by the true door; if
we shall crowd into profession, without a wedding garment, the time is coming
we shall be found out; and our own conscience which have thus lied to the Holy
Ghost, shall even fail within us, and leave us speechless at the Bar of God, as
those that have not the least excuse for themselves.

There is a time, Dear Youths! (your own consciences cannot but tell you so)
wherein Religion must be first embraced on Earth: if ever you desire glory or
happiness in Heaven. Now he that begins amiss, is like to make but very bad
work ever after. Things once mislearned are exceeding hardly unlearnt. And
truly where one takes up the profession of the Name of God sincerely, and upon
Gospel terms: it may be feared there are too many who receive it unworthily,
and to their own condemnation.

Some lose their souls while they seek (with the blinded Jews) to establish
their own righteousness. Other hearing Religion much commended. and seeing
somewhat of amiableness, and beauty in it; they hastily catch up some flashy,
heady, ceremonial, or remote opinion, as best pleases them, and think they
have enough; and so never regard to know what sound conversion, and true
communion with God means all their days. Others again, (and herein I am more
particularly speaking to your caso, the Lord grant you may truly lay it to
heart) others I say, as Children, and Servants to satisfy the desires, and
counsel of their religious Parents and Friends, yield, and do those things
outwardly, which they bear no true affection unto inwardly. Oh wretched
hypocrisy! at the same time seemingly to stand in some fear of Man: but none
of God.

Well, whosoever can deceive men, no man can mock the Lord. His eyes are eyes
of fire, and all men shall know, that he searches the heart, and tries the
reins.

Where Spiritual things are Carnally undertaken, the evils that too necessarily
ensue thereupon, are exceeding many. The fruit of the whole undertaking is
inevitably lost; The Duty that seems offered, is not at all discharged; The
Comforts, the dear comforts of Godliness are all locked up, as mercies
peculiarly reserved for sincere, and better hearts; The Profession that is thus
made will quickly decay, and die in disgrace. The heart Nemo potest personam
fictam diu serre.
can never hold out long in that which is but personated, and so little
delighted in. Only the evil and guilt of the miscarriage, that will still
remain, and must be elsewhere answered for. So little shall any man gain that
goes to build upon the sands.

The further he goes, the more he wanders, and will sadly find at last; He that
begins not duly with Christ as the Author, can scarce expect to find him in the
end the Finisher, or ^^owner of his faith.

Yet notwithstanding all this, what just cause of sorrow may it be to all sober
hearts, to consider, What har^ and unkind usage, what disingenuous and careless
handling, that sacred thin^ Religion in most Ages meets withal from the hands
of a froward carna^ World?

Well, take you this Item with you all your days; whatever you do in the
matters of Religion, do it heartily, reverently, Gospelly, and humbly; as in
the sight of God, the all-seeing, the jealous God.

Where God sees he cannot be cordially believed, or feared; take outward shows
who will, they are of little value in the account of God.

These (says the Haec folia sunt, nos sructus quaerimus. Aug. Pro. 23.26
Father) are but worthless leaves: we must still demand, and call for real
Fruits. If the Lord asks or accepts any thing, it must justly be the best we
have, Give me thine heart my Son!

Now the Lord himself direct you, and give you a right entrance into his right
ways; with that kindliness of Repentance, that truth of Faith, that soundness
of Conversation, that you may not run in vain, losing the things you seem to
have wrought; but may in the end happily obtain the crown of life.

Happy is that man that can truly say, the Foundation stone is thus laid; the
Top stone shall also in Gods good time be as certainly vouchsafed with those
gladsome shoutings to the God of such great and unexpected mercies, Grace,
Grace.

Caveat 7.
Seventhly, Take heed yet once more in the last place, if God has enkindled any
heavenly affections in you now; that you lose not your first love afterward.

The kindness of your youth, it is dear, it is lovely in the sight of God.
Christ looked upon the young man in the Gospel, and loved him. God sees, and
takes it well; that it is in your hearts while you are young to enquire after
him. These first ripe grapes (I might reverently say as in the Prophet) they
are the fruits, that his righteous soul desires.

Oh! let not your present convictions, your present willingness, your present
delight in the good Word of God, in the sweet Sabbaths of God, in the dear
people of God: Oh! let not all this verdant hopefulness of your youth vanish as
a morning cloud, or like the early dew.

I give you this particular warning, because (...), Satanici (...). ad Proverb.
(...).
miscarriages are so sadly frequent in all Ages of this nature. And because I
further know Satan will come to winnow you. With this temptation if you live,
you may assure your selves he will assault you with it. I have been too
forward, too zealous, too careful for Religion while I was young; I will even
spare my self now. Thus are the first days of many Professors, sadly clouded
with lukewarmness, formality, wordly policy, and earthly mindedness ere they
die.

But I hope you will not dare so to do. True motion is always most intense,
the nearer it comes unto its Center. And if you be truly aiming for Heaven, you
will daily renew your strength, and be loath to slacken your pace, when it
grows nearest night.

Relapses in nature (Physicians tell us) are very sore: Relapses in Profession
are still far sorer. How oh! how shall such be ever renewed again unto
repentance!

Dear Youths! your thoughts are yet green, your years hitherto but little
experienced. You have scarce yet known how bitter and evil a thing it is to
forsake the fountain of living waters, and God grant you never may. But are you
willing to believe what God shall testify in this matter? Then may you soon
understand; the Backslider (though but in heart) shall quickly have gall, and
wormwood enough in his Cup, Pro. 14.14
He shall be filled (says the Lord) with his own ways.

Or are you further desirous to hear what Experience has also to testify in
this weighty case? Then may the horror of Judas, the despairing groans of
Spira, become your warning. They wretchedly departed from the Profession they
had sometimes made in their former years; and poor men, never joyed good hour
after.

I cannot but even beseech you in the Language of the Ancients. Commusoratione
movearts, super pueritia tua; and nesias cibus igni. Erpen. proverb, Arab.
Oh! spare, for Gods sake, spare your sweet Youth, take some pity upon it, and
give not that lovely flesh of yours for food to everlasting burnings.

Gods Children should be as those Hebrew Servants, staying with him for the
love they bear unto him. He has the words of Eternal life, and whether else
can they find in their hearts to go? If any man draw back, this is the sad
message must be sent after him, Heb. 10.38.
the Lord shall have no pleasure in him. Men shall also scorn him, and say;
this is salt which has lost its savor; tread it henceforth under foot.

Ah poor man! it had been better for him, (a sad Better God knows, but) it had
been better for him (said the Apostle) never to have know the way of
righteousness: 2 Pet. 2.21.
than after he has known it to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto
him.

Be you then, as Josiah, gracious in your Youth: but be ye also even to
Gray-hairs as aged Israel; waiting for the salvation of God, when you come to
dye.

CHAP. X. The Objections that usually ensnare, and detain young people,
answered.
I Have now counseled you, but shall I say, I have also persuaded you? It is
likely you have your discouragements. I know you cannot be without some
recoylings of nature. Trifles and vanities will hang (it may be) about your
mind, as being loath to be now shaken off. An holy man found it so, which made
him complain as we also, too truly may; Detinebant me ^ugae nugarum, and
vanitates vanitatum. Plusque in me valebat deterius inolitum; quam melius
insolitum. Aug.
My former customs, though worse, were plainly too strong, and trod down
things far better; because they had been, as yet, but little used.

The most righteous ways of God, they are indeed blessed, they are safe, they
are honorable: but still they are scarce pleasing to flesh, and blood. Our
wretched hearts are too like distempered stomachs, that are easily distasted;
and find no relish in the most wholesome food.

I am sensible also how busy Satan stands at your right hand, ready to resist
you; continually incensing, and prejudicing your thoughts all that ever he can
against your own mercies. He that makes it his wicked trade, to pervert the
right ways of God, will be forward enough to tell you, as once he did Eve; You
may eat of the forbidden fruit, and yet not die. You may forbear this serious
care, and yet speed well at last. But oh! believe him not; his Crocodile
flatteries have undone thousands at his feet. He that was a liar, and a
murderer from the beginning, will scarce be either true, or kind to you.

He may seem now a smooth and pleasing Tempter: but he will soon become as
open, and forward an (...) Satan hora periculi certissime accusabit. Buxtorf.
Flo. Hebr.
Accuser. Those very sins he now enticeth to, when time shall serve, in the
presence of God, of Angels, and of Men, will he be ready with all their
aggravations to charge you with. As you love your souls resist him; and account
it an essential Principle in true Religion, to give a constant Nay to all his
temptations.

Let Men and Devils say what they will, sin is sin still. An evil (says the
very Parva, inquis, ves est: atqui magna culpa. Cicer.
Heathen,) that must not be pleaded for, that cannot be excused. An unexcusable
breach of a righteous Law; the utmost endangering of a precious and immortal
soul; Omne peccatum (in quantum possit) est Deicidium.
a wretched, and ungrateful flying in the face of a most tender, and loving
Father. This is that Rabshekah, that blasphemes the God of Heaven; that Achan
that troubles the whole Creation; this oh! this is that Accursed thing, that
brings evil upon our selves; that Needle, that too surely draws a thread of
divine vengeance after it.

Let Men, and Devils say what they will, there must be sowing to the Spirit
here; if we expect to reap a blessed harvest hereafter. Nature tells us so;
Experience tells us so; all the World knows it is so. No running the Race now,
(says the (...), etc. Chrysoft.
Father) and there can be no Crown in the end; No fighting the good fight in
the Valley, and there can be no triumph of victory, or honor upon the
Everlasting Hills. There must be striving to the utmost, if we desire to enter
in at the straight Gate. The Kingdom of Heaven should even suffer violence, and
the violent are to take it by an holy force.

Up then, in the name of God, and be a doing; let nothing hinder you. Consider,
call your thoughts to a solemn, and impartial debate; lay your case in the
balances of the Sanctuary. See, oh! see how Eternity lies at stake; your
Candle is shortly going out; tomorrow, it may be, will not serve for that which
may be done to day.

You have had your time of Childhood; wherein according to the infant
feebleness of your minds, You spoke as Children, 1 Cor. 13.11.
you understood as Children, you thought as Children: but now it is time, it is
high time to outgrow those days of Vanity. What the Lord in much mercy winckt
at then; would very ill Idem manebat, sed non idom decebat. Cicer.
become you now. As you become men, it will be expected, and it will be your
honor, to put away Childish things. These Years, and this Age Haec aetas aliam
vitam adfert, alios mores postulat. Tetent. Object. 1.
call upon you to converse with more serious things; the things that belong to
your souls everlasting peace.

First, Say not any of you within your selves, in way of objection, I am too
young for those things. He that is old enough to sin, cannot think himself too
young to repent. Does God say, To day, while it is called to day, and dare
thou speak of to Morrow? Thou would not adventure to answer thy Natural
Parents with such delays; how can God take them well at thine hands?

Let the pious expostulation of the Quamdi^, oh a^^ma mea! Cras, Cras? Cur no^
Hodie? Cur non haec hora, finis turpitudinis tuae. Aug.
Father with his soul, be rather the language of thine heart also within thee.
How long, oh my Soul! how long must this be all thy note, to Morrow, to Morrow?
And why not now? Why not this very hour, a period to all thy former filthiness?

For how indeed can thou content thy self, to venture so much as a day
longer in thy present condition; without the pardon of sin, without the favor
of God, without any solid provisions for another world? The hazard is verily
great, that thou ar^ running. Oh! consider seriously what thou do. If thy
soul, and the saving of it be unto thee, (as certainly it is) more than all the
world besides; take thy best time for thy best work. Arise as Abraham, while it
is yet early in the morning of thy life, and go about it. Fear not, it shall be
no injury to thy following life, that thou have acquainted thy self with God,
that thou have embraced his good ways, while thou art young. The Sun in the
Spring when it arises soonest, all men observe; the days are then, far the
sweetest, Object ^
far the chearliest.

Secondly, Say not, Such a strict religious care, I see but few of my equals
that undertake it. It has been indeed the sad complaint of all Ages, that
goodness is too rare, and virtuous men Ra^ quippe boni; nu^^ro vi^ sunt
totidem, quot Thebarum portae, vel divitis ostia Ni^i. Juvenal.
exceeding few. But it shall be the more lovely, the more honorable, that good
things are found in you, (as in that Child of Jeroboam) toward the Lord God of
Israel.

The disobedience of others (how evil soever in them) may serve the more highly
to commend your obedience in the sight of God, and men. It is praiseworthy
indeed to shine as the Lilly among the Thorns, to be sound Esto cum pa^uro
oli^a. Erpen. in Proverb. Arab.
(as the Proverb of the Ancient advises) like the fruitful Olive in the midst
of Thistles.

Be you an example in Gods good way; unto all: let none be snare^ in evil unto
you. Corrupt examples' may sway with weak minds: but the wise in heart will
rather regard, and consider what is their duty.

If most shall vilely c^st away their dear immortal souls, as if no mercy, no
salvation were tendered unto them; be you so much the more careful to ^ave
yours. Though you should travel somewhat solitary here on Earth: yet comfort
your selves, you shall meet with good company in Heaven.

What Themistocles once wrote, setting up a Bill upon an house he had to be
let, adding for encouragement sake to them that should hire it, this
commendation; There are good neighbors about it. This, oh! this is indeed the
happiness of heaven. Consocia^i choris Angelorum; intueri Patriarchas, and
Prophetas; videre Apostolos, atque omnes sanclos; videre eliam Parents
nostros, Oh quam gloriosa sunt haec. Manual. Aug.
The Saints, and Angels of God, the Prophets, the Apostles, and blessed
Martyrs, with all your godly friends are all there.

There may you meet with Daniel, who purposed while he was young, that he would
not defile himself. There may you see the three Children, whom the very sl^mes
could not affright, from choosing to trust, and serve the Lord in their tender
years.

Be you also (whatever others are,) like the vision of the Almond-tree, holily
ambitious to blossom with the first.

Thirdly, Object. 3
Say not, it is hard; and truly though I dare not altogether deny: it: yet I
scarce know how to like, or love it. Can thou love sin, and can thou not
love grace? Is it an easy thing to serve Satan, and hard to serve the Lord?
These are strange objections ^e never thus learned Christ. It has been wont to
be said by holy men that were before us; Illud grave quod in ^terman jugulabil.
Salvian.
Those are of all other to be reckoned the hard things, which injure the
precious soul, and hazard Eternity.

But can thou be indeed against the true fe^r of God, and the making of thine
own Calling, and Election sure? Oh! tremble, and know; it is hard entering such
unrighteous dissents, and standing out with God, we are not any of us stronger
than he.

It was once indeed the Fathers case; Ego ^ram, qui volebam; go etiam ^^am, q^i
^ol^b^^; Ego, ego eram; n^c plene ^olens; nec ^lene vole^s. Ideo ^ecum
contendeb^m, etc. Aug. Con.
I was (says he) both willing, and unwilling; my Conscience fr^ely gave its
Yea: but my Affections were so shameless, as to return their Nay. But I arose,
and contended with my self; till my backward heart became at length better
persuaded. Dear Youths! you ^re (it seems) too far involved in the same
conflict; oh! come forth, as honorably in the like gracious resolution.

Our stubborn, and humorous wills left c^relesly to themselves, Lord! what
utter woe, and distress will they soon bring upon the whole man? Thou that
canlt not fare with thy duty, how will thou ever be able to fare with thy
misery, and that for ever? If duty may be disingenuously put off now: yet will
not that be so answered, or sent away then.

And should there be any neglect, or miscarrying in this great matter; it is
thy self, thy dear self, that is like to be the sufferer, and bear the smart of
it.

Come, come, be not unwilling with thine own duty, be not averse toward that
which would in conclusion prove thy greatest mercy. The painful Countryman is
never more in his Element, never better pleased; then when he is laboriously at
work in his Calling. And if we be indeed the Servants and Children of the Lord,
it must, and well may be our meat, and drink, to do the will of our heavenly
Father.

Fourthly, Obj^ct. 4.
Say not, The pleasures of sin are sweet, and I would fain have my time, and
share in them. God grant you better Sweets than they will ever prove. More
lawful, more real. Of these we must all say with the Poet, Plus aloes, quam
mellis habent. Juv.
They have more of the Aloes, than of the Honey in them.

Young Palates indeed are usually taken with any green raw fruits: but their
end is bitter. Satan has learnt how to bait the sharp hook, how to guild the
bitter pill artificially enough. He easily over-reaches our credulous minds,
but his deceit, and our -- Virgo sormosa superne Desiuit in turpem piscem
malesuada voluptas.
disappointment will too soon appear.

What Nature is now so fond of, Grace would even in an holy scorn trample under
its feet, saying as once St. Austine; Quas amittere voluplates metus suil; ja^
ai nul^re ga^d^^m trat^ Aug.
The pleasures I was sometimes afraid to part with, it is now my greatest joy
to be clearest from them.

The^e are those at this day in Hell; that are sick enough, sick at heart, of
those very pleasures which they themselves (when time was) so violently lusted
after; and could now wish they had never known, or called of them.

Oh! that you would tender your souls health, and be persuaded to forbe^r them.
Ple^sures you may have; only fo^her sinful ones. God would have none be duil;
though he bids all be innocent. Heaven it self shall be 1 Paradise of divine
delights for the People of God. A virtuous heart me thinks should scorn Sin for
its pastime: and should not Nihil liberale, quod non idem, and justum. Cicero.
think so well of transgression; as to dare to take it for its recreation: but
modestly chooses things harmeless, and ingenuous, and gracious, and therein
only takes delight.

There are more noble, and peculiar entertainments for the mind: as well as
carnal surfettings for the body. The soul has also its delights, more divine,
more enduring. And oh! how well would it become us, to bethink our selves, and
choose (as the Angels) to feast on such heavenly food: rather than with bruit
beasts to immerse our selves in the fordid lusts of the slesh.

Oh! how did the Heathen both chide, and grieve to see Nature abused, under
sensual pleasures! Tu, cum tibi, D^us dederit animum, quo nihil est
pr^estartius ^eque divi^ius; sic t^, inse abjicies a que prosternes; ^t nihil
int^r t^, a^que quad^uped^m put^s interesse? Cicero.
Can thou (says one of them) after God has given thee a mind, then which
there is nothing in the whole world more noble, or divine: Caust thou so
prostitute, and debase thy self, that there shall scarce remain any longer
difference between thee and the sorry beasts?

Let us take the words, as spoken to our selves; and life up your inclinations,
Dear Youths! toward those cleaner pleasures; which may best answer their own
name, which may best become you, and your nature.

If others shall please themselves in wanton plays; the whole Creation may be
your Theater, where you may daily see a lively Scene, all variety upon the
Stage, every Crea^ur^ acting us part, and the Glory of God, to the just
admiration of all Spect^tors ^is^l^ied in the whole. If others delight
themselves in idle book; you may rejoice in the L^w of the Lord* and say wi^h
David; Psalm. 104.34.
My meditati^^ of him shall be sweet unto me. Religion wants nor its true
delights; let i^ no wan^ its due p^ofessors.

Object. 5.
Fif^hly, Say not, Alas! I know n^^ what to do, far wiser than I, the p^ud^m*
the ancient are at great c^nt^oversie abo^^ Religion, who can tell where to
pitch? It is true, Vetus alque antiqua simultas Immortale odium, and nunquan
sa^abile vulnus ard^t adhu^. Juvenal.
it is too sadly true. There are many pious men, that may, and doubtless have
much sweet communion with the Lord; who yet through the straightness, and
frowardness of their own hearts, will have but little each with other. Thus men
wrangle themselves into a life, too joyless to themselves, too dishonorable to
the Lord.

Cadmus Teeth of strife seem every where sown, and coming up very thick. We
might justly renew Erasmus his sad complaint of the former Age; Esserbuit
co^tentio, r^frixit charitas. Creverunt ar^iculi, decr^vit since^it^^. Erasm.
Contention lives, while love, and sweetness dies. Tenets of faith are usually
multiplied, while sincerity goes as palpably down the wind. Such is our wound;
oh! that God would drop into it the balsom of love, oh! that he would bind it
up, and become our healer.

But because men can, (or rather will,) agree no better; refer thy self, and
thy thoughtful heart to God and his Word. Give credence in the strength of his
grace to what he is there pleased to express, or promise to thee. Depend upon
him according to all that he has there allowed thee. And compose thy self to
be entirely at his command. Aiming that whenever thou come to die, thou
may resign thy self to God with these few words unfainedly breathed forth; I
have in my weak measure kept the word of thy patience on earth: And now oh
Lord! be thou pleased to remember thy Servant according to this word of thine,
wherein thou have caused me, and I upon thy invitation, have taken boldness,
for to hope*

Religion (however pulled several ways) is of it self a quiet, and striseless
thing. Holy indeed; but harmless. Divine; but still shining forth in much
plainess, and simplicity. And be you, as near as you can of that Religion, Luke
2.14.
which gives Glory to God on high, on earth peace, and good will toward men.
Oh! that the Lord would hasten such sweet times of refreshment from his own
presence amongst us.

In the mean season, if you see somewhat of inferior diversity in gracious
hearts, a peculiar feature (as it were) upon several faces, who have yet
somewhat of true life, and beauty shining in each; be not too much amazed.
Remember Solymans great delight, at the variety of flowers in his Garden,
professing himself highly pleased in this; Though they were various, they were
still sweet, and comely flowers. Or rather call to remembrance the Fathers
pious, and ingenious Allusion; Tunica Christi inconsutilis fuit: at vestis
Ecclesiae versicolor. I^ vest varietas sit: at scissura non fit. Vide Bac. de
unitate Eccl.
Joseph's Coat may be of several colors: so it be without a rent.

If you also see uncomely contentions even unto Paroxysm's, and the utmost
bitterness; (as once between the Apostles themselves it sadly was) step in, and
tell them they are brethren; desire them to be kinder to each other; The Master
is at hand.

If you shall lastly see, and hear great controversies, and little agreement;
yet know, there is a true, and plain way that leads unto life. The way fating
upon, though a fool, needs not err therein.

Go (...) to God, and he will show thee, (...) ^^w, and living way, which
conducteth unto himself. There are many (oh that they were not so many) that
quarrel themselves carnally to Hell: be thou cordial with God, laborious in the
profession of his name; so shall hearty Faith, and unfeigned obedience become
thy safe and honorable convoy unto Heaven.

Whoever quarrel in other things; no man shall blame thee, no man shall charge
thee with folly for these.

Sixthly, Object. 6.
Say not, lastly, I have a greater discouragement yet behind, then I almost
dare make known; some of my Friends are not so willing to have me mind such
things, or meddle much with Religion. It is a sore temptation where the
Complaint is true. What shall that poor Child do, whom God has spoken to (as
once to the children of Israel in the Land of Egypt) and his very heart even
melts within him, opening it self day and night, as Daniels window, toward
Jerusalem; and yet all the countenance he has from the Family, is like that
churlish speech of Pharaoh, He is idle, he is idle, increase his burden, and
let him not go to ^erve the Lord? This is indeed the ^rial of all trials,
wherever it falls. A (...) straight which needs tears, rather ^han words.

Oh that none would lay this stone ^f stumbling before young people! ^est it
unhappily revives that undesired ^^gh, used by some in the Primitive (...); Our
Parents are become unto us, (...) the Ostrich in the wilderness; and almost the
murderers of our souls. * Parents nostros sensimus parricidas. Cyprian.
Peremptores, potius quam Parents. Bern. Isa. 37.3.
It (...) hard for any to be an hindrance, ^here they ought rather to be a
fur^erance. To be found a real offense, (...) discouragement to the least of
Christ's little ones.

Here have we cause to renew the ^mentation in the Prophet, and say; ^he
children are once more come to the ^^rth; and there wants strength to bring
(...).

Here will be need of much wis^ome, and choiceness of spirit; more ^^an such
tender years commonly at^^in un^o: to cut the tread aright, so (...) obey the
Lord, as to show the ut^ost tenderness of disobeying or dis^^easing Friends:
Post Deum diligere, and honorare Parents, est pictatis: plusquam D^^m, esset
impietalis.
and yet so to ful^^ll our respect to them, as not to forget we still owe (as
the Debro affectum parenti; sed majus obsequium debeo salutis auctori. Ambros.
Father well states it) a far greater unto God.

The Lord himself put the everlasting arms underneath, and bear up those
discouraged children whose hard lot this is, till he has brought them with joy
to his own bosom.

But this case blessed be God, is rare; the case of very few, and I hope, none
of yours. Be you modest, I charge you; Cast not the blame upon others, to
excuse your selves. God easily sees through such pretenses, and understands
right well where the fault still chiefly lies.

You know not the heart of a Parent. It is natural to them (though evil, and
too regardless of themselves) to desire the welfare of their Children. Your
Parents have been often instilling good things, have been previously laying in
ponderous memorials upon your tender minds. They have with much c^re brought
you up to reading. They have procured you that treasure of all treasures, the
Bible; they have recommended it to you, as, your Saviors Legacy, where you may
find the words of eternal life; your safest guide, your best Friend when they
are gone.

So that you may justly confess, (as Memi^i, ut illa cum solicitudine ingenti
monuerit. Aug. Con.
St. Austine concerning his Mother Monica) with how great solicitousness of
heart they have often admonished you in the Lord. Whose Counsels you ought to
receive (as Iunius the instructions of his Father,) Vix unquam sine lachrimis
audiebam: ita me vehementer afficiebat rei argumentum, and dicentis auctoritas.
Junius de se in vita sua.
Scarce ever without tears. So greatly might the weight of the Argument, so
greatly might the authority of the Speaker affect, and move you.

And must it now be objected, or dare you now say, your Friends are unwilling
with your souls good? It is likely they would not have you pretend Religion, to
be stubborn against them. It is very likely, they would not have you Factious;
they are (it may be) lo^h you should be Superstitious: but still they would
have you Pious.

See then, Sweet Youths I how little of real discouragement lies before you.
Your nearest Friends are ready to say unto you, as once Cyrus, to the
trembling, Ezra. 1.3.
and willing Jews; Go up, and the Lord your God be with you. Be ye then, I pray
you, toward God, Children of great willingness; toward your Parents blameless,
and without rebuke; drawing the love of all unto you, in the Families wherein
you dwell.

CHAP. XI. The Conclusion of the whole by way of Exhortation.
ANd now what hinders, but that all this might be willingly embraced,
faithfully practiced, the life of grace cordially espoused, and your Souls for
ever saved? Your Friends they desire it. Your own everlasting welfare is bound
up in it. And God himself from Heaven calls unto you for it. What answer can
you now tender; but as Christ in the Psalms? Lo I come to do thy will oh God!
Concluding with the Father; Dignus plane ^st morte, qui tibi Christ! recusat
vivere. Bern.
He were justly worthy to be cut off by death; that should refuse, on such
sweet terms to close with a gracious life.

Oh! require not the Lord, and your own Souls, so unkindly. Give not your years
to vanity, nor your precious time to that which will not comfort in the end.
Sins in Youth, will most certainly become sorrows in Age. It is usually said;
Iaveni parandum; seni uterdum. Sen.
Youth lays in, and Age lives upon it. The one sows, the other reaps. Oh! sow
that now, which may be worth the reaping afterward.

How loath would you be to have your own life now, become your death hereafter?
To have the foolish sins of your Youth, to stand between you, and your
everlasting real happiness? Your present vain pleasures made your arraignment,
your condemnation, your utter undoing in the day of Judgment? This would prove
like the Roman Soldiers Grapes; short pleasures, sorry pleasures, joyless
pleasures; dearly bought, and dearly paid for.

Thus might you feather the Arrow that wounds you from your own wing; and in
the end sit down with that sad number, who all the year long sigh over this
doleful note; (...) Chry.
For a few short pleasures have we purchased to our selves, innumerable, and
everlasting torments.

Well; however, I pray know you cannot be so slighty, so careless now: but you
shall be as solemn, and perplexed then. Oh peccata, peccata! duin suadetis
ungitis; cum suasistis pungitis. Aug.
Sin cannot please so much in the commission: but it will torment far more,
when it comes to be suffered for, and the Sinner to be brought forth to
execution.

Go Christless before the Lord, and there shall be no Parent there able, or
willing to countenance you; no excuse there to be made for you; no hope, no
comfort left in your own consciences to relieve you. Oh! treasure not up to
your selves wrath, against that day, that dreadful day of wrath.

How tremendous, and heart-piercing are the Examples which God has set as so
many flaming swords before you; that you might take timely warning, and not
rush upon your own destruction? Ishmael scoffs at Religion, and is cast out of
his Fathers house, and the house of God for ever. Absalom proves rebellious
against his Parents, and shortens his own life untimely by it. The Children
mock the Prophet, and die under the fierce anger of the Lord, while they are
doing of it.

I tell you Sirs, God will be avenged of Children, as well as Elder people; of
poor, of rich, of any, if they shall dare to sin against him. Let not the Devil
deceive you, oh! slatter not your selves. These things has God written for the
particular admonition of young people, and will expect that you should bear
them in mind. Oh! lay such memorials upon your hearts, and receive instruction
from them.

But if after all, any of you should be secretly unwilling; and all this
counsel from the Lord, should be a burden, and weariness unto you: you must
then once more go with me to the door of the Tabernacle, that I may there
reason further with you before the Lord.

And truly I must now even heartily chide with you. Oh Sirs! do but consider
what you do. How unreareasonable, how unrighteous it is. How unanswerable, how
unsafe it is like to prove.

Will you have Bibles, and will you not believe them? Will you be called
Christians, and will you live like Heathens? Have you immortal souls Anima
insiguis Dei imagine, illustris sinulitadine, habet in sese quo admoncatur,
etc. Aug. Med.
shining with such bright rays of the sacred Image of God upon them; and will
you needs wilfully damn them? Has God given you religious Parents, tender of
you, as of the apple of their own eye; and will you not be counseled by them?
Are you resolved to be a shame to your Friends in Life, and a terror to your
selves in Death? Can it possibly enter into your minds, to think, that ever any
good will come of sinful courses? Or that ever you should have cause to repent
your selves of any thing heartily done in obedience to the Commands of God, for
the good of your Souls? Has God solemnly sworn, The soul that sins, (be he
who he will) that soul shall die; and can you suppose, he will break his word
for you? Can you so much as imagine, that the most holy God, who is a God of
pure eyes, and hates iniquity, can you any way encourage your selves to hope,
that he will open Heaven Gates at the last day, to the impenitent, to the
ungodly, who scorn their duty, who slight their mercy? Do you expect a new day
of Grace, when this is gone; that you make such waste of your present time? Do
you think everlasting burnings are so easily undergone, that you make such slow
haste to flee from the wrath that is to come? Is it not enough, that you were
born in iniquity; but you will stubbournly die in your sins also?

Nay then, Ichabod, Ichabod; your glory, and our hopes are both departed. Sons
of Belial (against all the sweet counsels of God to the contrary) will you
needs wretchedly make your selves? Children (as the (...) Ausque jugo; qui
jugum salutavis doctrinae, and discipline. excussit. Glass. Homo nequain; neque
rei, neque frugis bo ae. Diusius, etc.
word too sadly imports) that have broken the yoke, becoming henceforth
altogether unprofitable, both to your selves, and others; never likely to
emerge, or rise more to any glory.

Then may Satan justly enough take up his taunt, and triumph; (as the Father
represents it) Non tuus est servus, oh Jesus! sed meus; quae mea sunt, cogi^at,
agitat. Ambros^
He a Servant of thine? No, Lord! It is my work, that he all the day does; it
is my sinful motions, he chiefly delights in. There can be no plea made for
him. He is (whatever he may vainly think of himself) not thine, but mine.

Yea, then your Parents (though loath such words should ever come from them)
will be enforced to cry out; How have we brought forth to the grave, and our
breasts given suck to the Destroyer? Then may David's mourning be heard again in
their Tents; Oh Absalom! my Son, my Son! how art thou fallen, and dying, as the
sinful dies; in the crimson guilt, the bloody gore of all thy sins! At these
sad rates are the righteous counsels of the Lord rejected, and set at naught.

But ere we thus part, I pray know, It is no less than Life, or Death, that now
stands before you, waiting for your Yea, or Nay. It is so small, or inferior
matter, of little moment, of light consequence, that you are now to give your
answer in. It is Heaven, it is Eternal life; I need say no more, it is your own
happiness for ever, and ever; how can you turn your backs upon it?

Yea, further know, there have been those among the poor Heathens, that never
durst think thus lightly of sin, as you do. They always held it the greatest
evil, and Peccati dolor, and maximus, and. eternus ^. Cicer.
the sorrows of it the heaviest sorrows in the whole world. There have been
tender hearted Ninevites, that have come to God at one call, and gladly closed
with their own mercy. And there yet are at this day (how backward soever you
may be) thousands filially returning as the Prodigal, with tears of joy to
their Fathers house; longing for him, and welcome to him; going where there is
(what they, and you likewise want) Bread of life, and change of Raiment* that
you might be clothed. Oh why should you stand out against such sweet mercy,
and harden your selves so unnaturally, to your own destruction?

You might yet further know, (though it will be sad enough to know it) there is
never a Companion of yours, with whom you have now sinned; but shall be ready
to witness against you. Never a leaf in all your Bible; but shall be enough to
condemn you. To! con^ in^ar testibus, quot me unquam monuivicat. Anselm. Med.
Ministers, Parents, Friends, and Foes shall all come forth against you. And
oh! how cutting will it be, to be made a spectacle of scorn to God, to Angels,
and to Men? How wounding to thy astonished heart to become an everlasting By
word, upbraided of all, pitied of none. It is the condition (will they say)
that he has long ago deserved; and let him bear it. This (as (...) Basil.
an holy man rightly observed,) will make thy load, and burden heavy indeed.

Yea, God himself, who here has wooed, and so often, so long, even waited to
be gracious, shall then Tu justus Iudex signans peccata; siluisti, patiens,
suisli, Va mihi, demum loqueris, quasi parturiens. Aug. Med.
set every sin in order before you, and make your guilty Consciences with
everlasting blushings to own them.

Then (says the Father) shall it be said in the audience of Heaven and Earth;
Ecce homo, and opera ejus. Bern.
Behold the man, and all that ever he did; let it be had in everlasting
remembrance, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

Then shall your selves also look back upon that dear Salvation that you have
negligently lost; that wretched misery that you have wilfully brought upon your
selves, and sink down with heartbreaking sighs, and horror at the Bar of
Christ. Then may you be ready to take your last leave of all comfort, and say;
Farewell my day of Grace, which is now gone, and never more to shine upon such
a wretch as I am. Come in all ye my heinous sins, and the bitter remembrance of
you. -- Assiduis circumvolat alis Saeva dies animi seclerumque in pectore
Dirae. Stat.
The Lord has sent you to stand as adversaries of terror round about me.
Sting, as so many fiery Serpents in this bosom of mine, and spare not. Oh!
that you might have leave to make an utter end, and rid me out of all my pain.

Oh how will the tears trickle down, to see the Lord so gracious, so loving to
others; and yet so justly severe, and full of indignation toward you! To see
those that prayed, while you slept; that so willingly kept the Lords Sabbaths,
while you as constantly profaned them; to see those that ^^isely redeemed that
time, which you so lavishly wasted; to see those very persons, so well known to
you, (it may be your near acquaintance,) in the Kingdom of God, and your selves
shut out.

Then, though never till then, will the heart that has held out as long as
ever it could, begin to falter and fail. Then shall the lips break forth with
that righteous acknowledgment, I am undone, undone for ever; and my destruction
is of my self.

Oh my dear Friends? my bowels even yearn for you. Have thou but one blessing?
oh my Father! bless our Young People, even them also, that they may turn to
thee, and live.

But I cannot thus leave you. My Errand, I confess, is now even done: but your
duty henceforth to be taken up, and still carefully carried on. I may justly
say of this whole Letter, (as once the Habes a patre munus, marce sili! quod
perinde erit, ut acceperis. Cicer.
Roman Orator well said to his Son,) It will be of more, or less service to
you, as you make it truly practicable in the sequel of your life.

Counsel stored by us in Books, and neglected in life; it is like the co^
vetous man's bags of Gold, which lie wholly dead, and no good use made of them.

Suffer me then once more, for greater sureness sake, to rehearse my Message
again unto you.

It is you, Dear Youths! to whom I am (as the Ad vos, meus serv^o, oh Iuve^es!
slos etatis, etc. Aug.
Father affectionately said) in this Paper to apply my self: It is you who have
yet seen but the third hour of the day, with whom the Message (whether it
lives, or whether it dies) must now be finally left.

You are desired in the higest Name that can be used, in the Name of the great
and most glorious God, who made the Heavens, and the Earth, and gave you that
breath* you breathe between your Nostrils; You are desired in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, who freely shed his precious blood in a readiness to redeem,
and cleanse you from all your sins; You are desired in this great and dreadful
Name, and by all the respect you bear unto it, to remember your Creator in the
days of your Youth. You are desired to strive to enter in at the straight
Gate. You ^^e desired to accept the richest, the gre^^est gift, that God
himself ever b^stows upon any, his own dear Son. You are desired to be kind to
your own Souls, and to lay up a good foundation against times to come. You are
desired to come and live with God for ever.

Dear Youths! what do you purpose to do in this great matter? These are not
Requests to be slighted, these are not Requests to be denied. Such a capacity
for mercy, how would the damned prize it! oh! let not the living set light by
i^. Quod in uno boc amittitur momento, non poterit reparari in omni seculo.
Gerh. Meditat.
This short moment (how meanly soever you may think of it) once wretchedly
lost, and an Age will not recover, Eternity it self (as long as it is) will
never restore the like advantages to your souls again.

And now are you, oh! are you at length willing to go about this blessed work,
and become happy for ever, if there may be yet any hope in Israel concerning
your case?

Behold! the arms of Mercy are open ready to embrace you, whatever is past; how
unkind, how heinous soever, God is ready to forgive, willing to forget it. He
calls Heaven, and Earth to record, if you miscarry, let the blame lie where it
ought, it shall not be his. Ezekiel. 33.11.
As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but
that he turn from his wicked way and live. Turn ye, (oh! now unweariedly does
the Lord renew his call) turn ye from your evil ways; for why (why indeed)
will ye die oh house of Israel? Such are the Fathers bowels toward us, too too
regardless of our selves.

What answer (as the Revocas errantem, invitas repugnantem, amplexaris
redeuntem. Ecce Domine Deus salutis meae! quid opponam nescio; quomodo
respo^deam ignoro. Anselm. Med.
Father piously said) can ever be solidly made, if such bowels of love, such
dear, such free salvation as this, should be ungratefully slighted?

Oh let your hearts even melt, and your very souls be dissolved within you. If
the Lord be willing, be not you unwilling, neither let these tender arms of
mercy be spread forth all the day long in vain.

Behold! the Lord Jesus Christ, at the Fathers right hand, making continual
intercession; and the poor of the flock are his care, the weary, and broken in
spirit the Objects of his pity. It is their names he bears on his breast plate,
and commends with such endearing arguments unto the Father. Suppose your selves
hearing him, calling to you, and arguing with your trembling thoughtful hearts
on this wise: Wherefore think thou poor soul! was I numbered amongst the
transgressors, and made a man of sorrows? Wherefore was my Side pierced with
the Spear, my Head with Thorns, and my dearest Blood poured forth? What do
thou conceive should move me, to take upon me Humane Nature, and become so near
akin unto thee, if it had not been to perform the office of a (...)
Kinsman, Vind^x, qui sure consanguinitatis motus, causam propinqui sui
intersecti asserit. Glassius. Such, oh! such is Christ to us.
and take the right of thy Redemtion upon me? What could have persuaded me to
sustain the bitter, the accursed death of the Cross, if it had not been to save
such as thou art from thy sins? Have thou no need of my Righteousness? What
shall I do for thee? What do thou want? What is it thy thirsty affections
most pant after, for thy souls good? Speak freely, and forbear not, I am now
ascended, to my Fathers right hand, and able to relieve thee. Where are thy
Prayers, and I, my Self, will present them to my Father as from me; perfumed
with the sweet incense of my righteousness, and he will show favor unto thee.

Oh blessed encouragement! here is the Golden Scepter held sorth indee^. What
answer will thou now return to all this such overflowing love of so dear a
Savior? Sit down with thy self poor Heart! Meditatio quid d^sit, docet: Oration
ne d^sit, obtinet. Bern.
Advise by meditation what to ask; and then send forth Faith, and Prayer as
the trusty, and successful Messengers to fetch in supply.

Go thy ways, take thy life in thy hands as once Hester did, present thy
Petition, and say, as she still did; If I have found favor in thine eyes, oh
Lord! let my life, (the life of my soul) be given me at my request. Do thou
cry, and he will hear. He will graciously wash thy leprous soul in his own
blood, and send his blessed Spirit, as the Chariots, and Horsemen of Israel to
prepare, and bring thee safely to glory.

Behold! also the holy Angels of God waiting, Guident cum been agimus; quoties
a bono deviamus, A^gelos suo gau^io d^sraud^mus. Solil. Aug.
ready to rejoice in your, even in your Conversion. There is not the meanest,
the poorest of you; but your Repentance might become an occasion of much joy in
Heaven. It is a fresh feast to those noble Creatures to see the least increase
of the Kingdom of God. To see though but one single sheep added to the flock of
Christ. So precious is Grace, so dearly is the recovery of a lost soul esteemed
on high.

I might further tell you, the damned themselves even groan unto you: saying
(as in the Parable) Oh! take warning by us, and come not into this place of
torments. There is not one, no, throughout the whole Creation, there is not so
much as one, that can heartily say unto you; Go on in evil ways, and prosper.
I charge you before the elect Angels, and as you tender their Nolite
co^tristare spiritum, nolite Angelos Sanctos in coelo, gaudiis spoliare. Luther.
comfort; I charge you by the flaming p^ins, and cries of the damned, and as
you would be loath to share with them i^ all their M^series; take heed, take
serious heed to the saving of your souls.

All the divine threatenings of God stand naked, and open before you, as the
handwriting upon the wall, that stand not there for naught. They sound as so
many shrill Trumpets from Mount Ebal; and they also charge you to break off
your sins by repentance. Or else, as sure as God is in Heaven; iniquity will
one day become your ruin.

All the sweet Promises are lastly appointed to attend your encouragement, and
furtherance in your Salvation. They are sent forth in Gods name to invite you
to his blessed kingdom; and to assure you from him, whatever pains you
faithfully take heavenward, your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. These
are the Christians choice Feast, and Christi prov^ssione^, Christianorum days.
Banquet; the Promises that you so joyfully should study; that speak so
comfortablie, and withal as truly to the weary soul. God himself has made
them, and Veraxin prom ssio^e, pote^s (...) exhibitione. Ber.
he will fulfill them. It is the Concern of his glory to make good the word,
that is gone out of his lips: his faithfulness lies at stake therein. Whosoever
comes unto him, (thus filiallie quoting, and relying upon hi^ Fathers word) he
will in no wise cast him out. Come you, and welcome.

Your work is good, your wages will be great; your fellow Servants, the
Excellent of the Earth; your Master you are to go unto, the lovingest, the
^blest, the Faithfullest, the justest, the k^ndest that ever was served. Wha^
can you possibly scruple? Or where can you mend your selves? Speak your hearts,
and spare not. What danger think you can come of being safely reconciled unto
the Lord? What hinderance shall this be to any to be made an Heir of the Crown
of life? What wrong to others, to save our selves? What discredit to become a
Child of the most High? What Embasement of spirit, to be renewed in our minds
to the blessed Image of God? Or what sadness can this ever occasion to be
entitled to everlasting joys.

We must even blush, and holily fall out with our selves in the language of the
Father, saying as he; U^de ho^ monstrum, and quare istud? Imperat animus
corpori, and paretur statim: imperat sibi, and resistitur. Aug.
Whence, oh my soul! whence is this horrid, this strange, and unreasonable
thing; that thou will be under no Command, accept of no mercy heavenward?

Men may revile, and our own wretched hearts may suspect the holy Counsels of
God: but the ways of the Lord are right, and happy is that man that chooses
to walk therein. He shall be able to lift up his face with Comfort, not ashamed
of his God, nor disappointed of his hope ^hen the greatest p^rt of the World ^n
the very depths of all distress, and horror shall call, (but alas in v^in)
(...) Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them.

Awake then I beseech you, for the Lords s^ke; while it is yet the morning of
your life, the flower of your ye^rs. Let your life be (what indeed ^ll our
lives ought to be) a living Epistle, a fair exemplification of the Gospel; that
men may see in you, what in Primitive times the very Heathen saw, so legible in
Christians then. Vide Christia^os, ^^id agunt; and evidenter de ips^ Christo
sciri po^^^est, quid doceat. Salvian.
The true portraiture of your Saviors life, the just account of his Doctrine
in the answerableness of your deportment, and conversation.

Awake, and arise, sh^ke your selves from the dust, and vanities of Youth;
Bring a blessing with you into your Generation; the Wo^ld in these l^st
declining Times greatly needs it. Carry a blessing hence with you, when ere you
die, your selves shall reap the sweet, and everlasting comfort of it.

Your work is great, your day is sh^^t; the Master impor^^^te, and your promise
is already passed.

To recoile now were (as the Deum in pollicitatione faller^. Aug.
Father well said) to keep back part of the price, and even to lie to the Holy
Ghost; To make our selves guilty of the greatest Vovens, and non solvens, quid
nisi pejero. Bern.
perjury before the Lord. Oh ^ hasten, and put on the garments of your Elder
Brother. Gird up the loins of your mind, and run your Race. Hasten, and linger
not; lest night overtake you, and you sit for ever mourning under the region,
and shadow of death. See that ye covet earnestly the best things. Set your
hearts unmoveablie upon heaven, and ^ll the glory of it. Say humbly to the
Lord, as Luther; Valde proteslatus sum, me (...) it a sati^ri. Luth.
You neither can, nor dare take these so^^y earthly things for your portion.

Strive, as Jonathan to climb up the Rock. Love, and Fear the Lord. Honor and
obey your Parents, Be careful, and redeem your own time. Design, as becomes
you^ an ingenuous ^ife on Earth. Design, above all, a glo^ious life in he^ven;
and God, your God shall be with you.

I might now leave your Parents, and ne^r^^t Friends to ple^d this righteous
c^use of the Lord, yet further with you. You cannot be strangers to all their
affectionate, and daily prayers on your behalf; their ardent, and even restless
desires of your welfare.

You are to them their dear Ascanius's; on whom their Omnis in Ascanio chari
stat cura Parentis. Virgil.
hearts so much are set; in whom (as Jacob in Benjamin) their life is almost
bound up, and their Parental cares, night and day, longing and waiting, scarce
desirous of any greater joy than this; To see their Children walking (wisely)
in the truth: 2 John v. 4.
as we have (all) received a Commandment from the Father.

Me thinks both I, and you, cannot but hear them, spe^king to you, in the very
language of their hearts, (as once Tibi persuade, te mihi qu^dem esse long
charissimum: sed multo sore chariorem, si talibus mo^umentis praec^ptis que
laetaber^. Cicero.
Cicero, so Father-like to his Son;) Know, my Child! thou art already exceeding
dear unto me: but shall yet become far dearer, if thou shall hearken to wise
Counsel, and thine own welfare.

What words can I further use? I charge you by all the sparks of filial good
nature that are yet alive in any of your bosoms; oh! quench not these
affections. Oh! frustrate not these so righteous expectations of your indulgent
Parents. Let me, oh! let me persuade you, and rely upon you; that you will not
be wanting to your selves, whatever in you lies, to greaten their dearest
love, and affection toward you.

In which hopes, I take my leave, and part at present with you. Oh! let me
rejoice in the day of Christ, that this Letter has not been in vain unto you.
Let no man ^^spise your Youth, though young in years, be ye (as the (...)
Jews were wont proverbially to say) as the Aged in all gravity and wisdom of
carriage. Fare ye well. The Lord himself make you branches of righteousness;
Sapientia pater, licet annis t^ue^. Buxt.
bringing forth every one of you, fruits unto holiness, that God the, Lord, may
be glorified. Amen, Amen.

My Son! be wise, and make my heart glad: that I may answer him that
r^proache^h me,

Pro. 27.11. FINIS.
THE Young Man's MEDITATION, OR Some few Sacred POEMS UPON Select Subjects, and
Scriptures.
By Samuel Crossman, B.D.

No^ modo divina contemplantur, sed and Cantica, and Hymnos ad Deum
Sacratioribus omnis generis mel^orum, and carminum rhythmis g^a^iter
con^^run^t. Philo de Religios. in Egypt. apud Eus^b.

A Verse may find him whom a Sermon fl^es,
And turn del^ght into a Sacrifice.
Mr. Herberts Temple.

London, Pr^nted by I. H. and are to be sold by S. T^ompson, at the Bishops
head in St. Paul's Churchyard, and T. Parkhurst, at the three Crow^s at the
lower end of Cheapside, near the Conduit. 1664.

The Gift.
If thou know the gift of God, etc.

Joh. 4.10.
1.
THis is the Gift, thy Gift oh Lord*
The token of thy dearest love:
The orient jewel of thy word;
Sent down my thankfulness to prove.
2.
Great is his gift in all men's eyes,
Who gives himself, his Friend to save.
My Lord does more, for Foes he dies.
This Gift no parallel may have.
3.
Great is the Gift, the Giver great;
Both justly to a wonder rise.
Thou giv'st thy Lamb to thine for meat:
And for their Sins a Sacrifice.
4.
But Lord! whilst thou thus giv'st to thine,
Others arose to vie with thee.
The World, and Satan did combine,
And they would needs a giving be.
5.
Satan, sins pleasures offered,
And almost forced them upon me.
But while they bloomed, they withered.
And Lord! thy Gift my choice shall be.
6.
Then did the World its gayes present,
And still alluring cried, see, see;
Here Is that may rather give content.
But Lord! thy Gift my choice shall be.
7.
These cannot give, they would s^eal away
From me my He^v'n, my heart from thee.
What ever they offer, I Will say nay.
Still Lord! thy Gift my choice shall be.
All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof as the flower of the field.
The grass withers, the flower s^deth, but the Word of our God shall stand for
ever,

Isa. 40.6, 8.
1.
Welcome sweet words; is it is most meet,
We will you in our bosoms hide.
Sweet words for present; but most sweet,
Because for ever you abide.
2.
All flesh is as the fading grass,
The voice from Heaven to Earth thus cried.
The whole Worlds glory away does pass;
But Lord! thy words they still abide.
3.
Man speaks, but all his words are wind;
They ebb, and flow with time, and tide:
Fit Emblems of his fickle mind.
But Lord! thy words they still abide.
4.
Our selves sometimes stand promising
Great things, while we by thee are tried.
Our blossoms fall, no fruit they bring.
But Lord thy words they still abide.
5.
Blessed words, Dear Lord* no words like thine;
In darkness, light through them is spied.
Till death, and after death they shine;
Then Lord! even then thy words abide.
6.
These words the Lamb's sweet writings be
Of love, and dowry to his Bride.
Here may his Saints their portions see,
Portions which ever shall abide.
7.
Welcome sweet words! sweet words indeed;
Heaven's Agent here, to Heaven our Guide.
What ever is needless, these we need.
Lord let these words with us abide.
Upon the Fifth of November.
The Archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him. But his
Bow abode in strength,

Genesis 49.23, 24.
1.
THe day allows thy praises Lord!
Our grateful hearts to thee shall sing;
Our thankful lips they shall record
Thine ancient loves Eternal King!
2.
Our Land shall boast, the holy One
My great preserver is become*
My Friend, my Foes has overthrown,
And made the pit they dug their ^oome.
3.
With Parthian bows the Archers came,
Romes poisonous oil on the Arrows shone;
Thy Turtle was the Archers aim.
Shoot, shoot, says Satan, all is our own.
4.
Fond foolish Rome, how dat'st oppose
Whom God in his safe bosom lays?
Thy malice may it self disclose;
But frustrate still shall turn to praise.
5.
The Crozier staff, thy Triple Crown,
Those ensigns of deceit, and pride,
Thy Purple Robe, thy blazed Renown
The dust shall ever, ever hide.
6.
Thy Merchants shall thy fall lament;
Thy Lovers all in sackcloath mourn:
While Heaven, and Earth in one consent
Shall sing Amen, let Babylon burn.
7.
Then Lord! thy Spouse whose dropping eyes,
Whose sighs, whose sufferings prove her thine;
Shall from her pensive sorrows rise,
And as the Lamb's fair Bride shall shine.
8.
Sweet day! sweet day when shall it be?
Why stays my Lord? Dear Savior come.
Thy mourning Spouse cries after thee,
Stay with me here, or take me home.
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed,
Isa. 53.5.
1.
THus died the Prince of life, thus he
That could not die, even died for me.
My thoughtful heart, Lord! shall arise,
And ponder these deep mysteries.
2.
What means his death, who knew no sin?
Or what my life, who live therein?
Mine was the debt, and death my due,
Though thou wast pleased thy Son to sue.
3.
Thou Lord I wast pleased on him to lay
The debt, and he the price to pay.
Thy Gospel feasts, though sweet to me,
Are the Emblems of his Agony.
4.
And oh! how great his sufferings were;
Who the wrath of God, and man did bear.
The Father then forsakes the Son;
And Creatures against their Maker run.
5.
Judas betraies, Disciples flee;
Whilst Jews, and Romans crucify.
Hereat the Sun furls up his light,
And clothes the Earth in sable night.
6.
The joyless Stars even seemed to say,
Israel had quenched the Lamp of day.
The stubbourn Mountains they lament,
The Rocks they are asunder rent,
7.
The Graves their sealed doors unclose,
The Dead awakened also rose.
The amazed Centurion mourning cries,
Oh! it is the Son of God, that dies.
8.
Thus these all labor to consels
Thy Deity, thy righteousness.
Enough dear Lord! these offer me
Supports for the utmost faith in thee.
God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Gal. 6.14.
1.
MY Song is love unknown;
My Saviors love to me.
Love to the loveless shown,
That they might lovely be.
Oh who am I,
That for my sake
My Lord should take
Frail flesh, and die.
2.
He came from his blessed Throne,
Salvation to bestow:
But men made strange, and none
The longed-for Christ would know.
But oh! my Friend;
My Friend indeed,
Who at my need
His life did spend.
3.
Sometimes they strew his way,
And his sweet praises sing;
Resounding all the day,
Hosannah's to their King.
Then Crucify
Is all their breath,
And for his death
They thirst, and cry.
4.
Why, what has my Lord done?
What makes this rage, and spite?
He made the Lame to run,
He gave the Blind their sight.
Sweet injuries!
Yet they at these
Themselves displease,
And against him rise.
5.
They rise, and needs will have
My dear Lord made away,
A Murderer they save:
The Prince of life they slay.
Yet cheerful he
To suffering goes,
That he his Foes
From thence might free.
6.
In life no house, no home,
My Lord on earth might have:
In death no friendly tomb,
But what a Stranger gave.
What may I say?
Heaven was his home;
But mine the tomb
Wherein he lay.
7.
Here might I stay, and sing;
No story so divine.
Never was love, dear King!
Never was grief like thine.
This is my Friend,
In whose sweet praise
I all my days
Could gladly spend.
The Pilgrims Farewell to the World.
For we have here no continuing City, but we seek one to come, Heb. 13.14.
1.
Farewell poor World! I must be gone,
Thou art no home, no rest for me:
I Will take my staff, and travel on,
Till I a better World may see.
2.
Why art thou loath my heart! oh! why
Do thus recoil within my breast?
Grieve not, but say farewell, and fly
Unto the Arc, my Dove! there is rest.
3.
I come, my Lord! a Pilgrims pace,
Weary, and weak, I slowly move;
Longing, but cannot yet reach the place,
The gladsom place of rest above.
4.
I come, my Lord! the slouds here rise,
These troubled Seas foam naught but mire:
My Dove back to my bosom Flies.
Farewell, poor World! Heaven's my desire.
5.
Stay, stay, said Earth, whither fond one?
Here Is a fair World, what would thou have?
Fair World? oh! no; thy beautie's gone,
An heavenly Canaan Lord! I crave.
6.
Thus the ancient Travelers, thus they
Weary of Earth, sighed after thee.
They are gone before; I may not stay,
Till I both thee, and them may see.
7.
Put on my Soul! put on with speed;
Though the way belong, the end is sweet.
Once more, poor World! Farewell indeed;
In leaving thee, my Lord I meet.
Christ's future coming to Judgment, the Christians present Meditation.
Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, Rev. 1.7.
1.
BEhold! he comes, comes from on high;
Like lightning through the flaming sky.
The Saint's desire, the Sinner's fear,
Behold! that solemn day draws near.
2.
He comes, who unto Judgment shall
All flesh to his Tribunal call.
Me thinks I see the burnished Throne
Whereon my Savior sits alone.
3.
Me thinks I see at his right hand
His smiling Saints in triumph stand.
Me thinks I hear condemned ones
Howling their never-dying groans.
4.
Me thinks I see even Time expire,
The Heavens, and Earth on flaming fire.
Think not, my Soul! thy self to hide;
Thou can not 'scape, but shall be tried.
5.
Lo! here the Book whence Justice reads
Sentence on Sinners sinful deeds.
Lo! here the Mercy Psalm, wherein.
My Judge speaks pardon to my sin.
6.
I tremble Lord! yet must I say,
This is my longed-for wedding day.
My Bridegroom is my Sovereign Lord,
My Jointure drawn in his fair Wo^d.
7.
My Mansion built by him on High;
Where I may rest eternally.
Then come, my Lord! dear Savior! come,
And when thou please take me home.
Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus! come quickly.
The Resurrection.
Though after my skin worms destroy this body: yet in my flesh shall I see God,
Job 19.26.
1.
MY Life's a shade, my days
Apace to death decline:
My Lord is life, he will raise
My dust again, even mine.
Sweet truth to me!
I shall arise,
And with these eyes
My Savior see.
2.
My peaceful grave shall keep
My bones till that sweet day,
I wake from my long sleep,
And leave my bed of Clay.
Sweet truth to me!
I shall arise,
And with these eyes
My Savior see.
3.
My Lord his Angels shall
Their Golden Trumpets sound;
At whose most welcome call
My grave shall be unbound.
Sweet truth to me! etc.
4.
I said sometimes with tears,
Ah me! I Am loath to die.
Lord! silence thou those fears;
My life's with thee on high.
Sweet truth to me! etc.
5.
What means my trembling heart
To be thus shie of death?
My life, and I shall not part,
Though I resign my breath.
Sweet truth to me! etc.
6.
Then welcome harmless grave;
By thee to Heaven I Will go;
My Lord his Death shall save
Me from the flames below.
Sweet truth to me!
I shall arise,
And with these eyes
My Savior see.
Heaven.
When shall I come, and appear before God? Psalm 42.2.
First Part.
1.
SWeet place! sweet place alone!
The Court of God Most High,
The Heaven of Heavens, the Throne
Of spotless Majesty!
Oh happy place!
When shall I be
My God! with thee
To see thy face?
2.
The stranger homeward bends,
And sigheth for his rest:
Heaven is my home, my Friends
Lodge there in Abraham's breast.
Oh happy place!
When shall I be,
My God! with thee
To see thy face?
3.
Earth's but a sorry Tent,
Pitched for a few frail days;
A short-leas'd Tenement.
Heaven's still my song, my praise.
Oh happy place! etc.
4.
These lower rooms, these here
Thou do with Roses pave,
And (...) with Crystal clear:
But Heaven, oh! Heaven I crave.
Oh happy place! etc.
5.
No tears from any eyes
Drop in that holy Quire:
But death it self there dies,
And sighs themselves expire.
Oh happy place! etc.
6.
There should temptations cease,
My frailties there should end;
There should I rest in peace
In the arms of my best Friend.
Oh happy place!
When shall I be,
My God! with thee
To see thy face?
Second Part.
1.
Jerusalem on high
My Song, and City is:
My home when ere I die,
The Center of my bliss.
Oh happy place! etc.
2.
Thy Walls sweet City! thine
With Pearls are garnished;
Thy Gates with praises shine;
Thy Streets with Gold are spread.
Oh happy place! etc.
3.
No Sun by day thines there;
Nor Moon by silent night.
Oh! no; these needless are;
The Lamb's the Cities light.
Oh happy place! etc.
4.
There dwells my Lord, my King,
Judged here unfit to live.
There Angels to him sing,
And lowly homage give.
Oh happy place!
When shall I be,
My God! with thee
To see thy face?
5.
The Patriarchs of old
There from their travels' cease:
The Prophets there behold
Their longed-for Prince of peace.
Oh happy place! etc.
6.
The Lamb's Apostles there
I might with joy behold:
The Harpers I might hear
Harping on Harps of Gold.
Oh happy place! etc.
7.
The bleeding Martyrs they
Within those Courts are found;
Clothed in pure array,
Their seats with glory crowned.
Oh happy place! etc.
8.
Ah me! ah me! that I
In Kedars Tents here stay!
No place like this on high;
Thither, Lord! guide my way.
Oh happy place!
When shall I be,
My God! with the^
To see thy face?
FINIS.

