THE Counterfeit Convert DISCOVERED, OR William Haworth's Book, entitled [ The
Quaker converted to Christianity re-established] Refuted. Wherein his absurd
Assertion, viz. That our [own] Righteousness consists in the Gifts and Virtues
which the Spirit of God works in our Minds, etc. is manifested. The Doctrine of
Justification by a Righteousness wholly without us, Examined. His several
Arguments to prove the first Risings in the Heart to Evil to be the Sins of
Unconsenting Persons, Answered. And his several Scoffs, Falsehoods, Slanders,
Contradictions and Confusions, in the said Book, Represented.

By John Crook and William Bayley.

Also an Answer to the Postscript at the End of William Haworth's wicked
pamphlet called An Antidote, etc By C. T.

Rabanus on Job 33.4 Quantum est periculis his qui scripturas sensu corporeo
legunt ( i. e.) In what Danger are they that read the Scriptures in a carnal
Sense.

Luther on Gal. 2.16. Christ apprehended by Faith, and dwelling in us, is our
Righteousness, for which we are justified, or reputed Just.

To whom shall I speak, and give Warning, that they may hear? behold their Ear
is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken; behold the Word of the Lord is unto
them a Reproach, they have no Delight in it,

Jer. 6.10. They have healed the hurt of the Daughter of my People slightly,
saying, Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace,

Jer. 6.14. TO THE READER
AS the fining Pot for Silver (says Solomon) so is a Man to his Praise; but as
a wash-pot to the Filth, so is an evil Man to his Shame. William Haworth's Book
of twenty four Sheets is as this wash-pot, which is filled with the Filth of
Scoffs, Slanders, Falsehoods, Contradictions and Confusions, as by this
Rejoinder is made manifest; Unhappy Man, that is a Ham to himself, and a Judas
to that Truth which once he tasted.

For rebuking his Rebellion, and reproving his hard Language, he has fallen
upon me, as the Men of Sodom did upon righteous Lot, for seeking to stop and
turn him, as the just Man did his Neighbors from the Way of their Wickedness:
But he being impatient of all Admonition (for that Cause) has abusively called
we Knave, Jugler, Cheat, Mountebank, etc. as the Sodomites pressed sore upon
the Man, even Lot.

But (as one says) when Men are resolved to walk in the Sparks of their own
kindling, and shall not only reject, but vilify and scorn the Admonitions of
the Almighty, by what Hand soever administered, it is a Sign that Destruction is
coming upon them like an armed Man; and it is said of Hophni and Phyneas the
Priests, That they hearkened not to the Voice of their Father, because the Lord
would slay them.

But my Adversary reads and understands the Scriptures, as some Men do Acts of
Oblivion and general Pardon, who are apt to conclude all are pardoned, and
there is no Danger now of being called in Question, etc. But the more
considerate Reader diligently searches and peruseth the Exceptions and
Conditions of such Discharges, lest they should both deceive themselves, and
those that are apt to be too credulous of such Reports.

I was willing his Book should have dyed of it self (not expecting my Silence
would have been interrupted, as I find it is) (1 st) Because it is so confused
and void of Method as well as Matter: (2 dly) Because it is hard to be
distinguished whose Words they are, mine or his, being often times both in the
same Charaster, whether out of Ignorance or Design, let the Reader judge: (3
dly) There is nothing new in it, but what has been answered over and over,
though managed by abler Adversaries then W. Haworth.

But being of late informed of a 3 d and 4 th Book of his which since I hear
are both answered by others, where he seems to boast, that he has one whole
Book which lies at our Doors unanswered; and further says, Let them reply if
they will or dare; all which I could have passed by, knowing the Temper of the
Man; but for the sake of some that are apt to value Men beyond their Worth, and
then to have their Faith with Respect to those men's Persons; and others that
intend well, but are so frighted by great Words and hardened Confidence, that
they dare not trust their own Experience; and also being importaned thereunto
upon William Haworth's persisting in his clamorous Abuses, I have at last made
public this Rejoinder, which has been prepared and layn by me above a Years
Time.

Our Book called Rebellion rebuked contained between six and seven Sheets,
about ten Months after the Publication of ours comes forth W. Haworth's Reply
to it of twenty four Sheets, which according to his Multiplication of Time and
Paper, our Rejoinder should be about eighty Sheets of Paper, and we three full
Years about it.

But knowing much better how to spend our Time, I have (though briefly) replied
to most of the Pages of the first Part under these three Heads, viz. 1, Title
Rejoinder; 2, Scoffs and Scorns; 3. Contradictions and Confusions; under some
of these Heads the Reader may find whatever seems to have Weight in it.

My Purpose is not (by Epistle) much longer to detain the Reader; William
Haworth began to cast the first Stone, and persues that Work like those that
winked with their Eyes, and ran upon Steven, whom nothing could appease but
that Martyr's Blood.

My Delight is not in Contention, but in Peace; but when men. Gehazi-like, will
rise up against the Spirit of their Master (whom they pretend to serve) saying
as he did, My Master has spared Naaman this Syrian, but as the Lord lives, I
will run after him, and take somewhat of him, etc. we cannot but reprove them,
as Elisha did; for as the precious Sons of Sion are comparable to fine Gold, so
the Scripture also affirms, God shall cast away the wicked as Dross; and
further says, Reprobate Silver shall men call them.

I desire the Reader in his Perusal of this Reply to observe the Particulars
following.

1. That although I have made Use of some few Quotations out of our own
Countrymen, yet I do not say but they differed from us in some other Things.
2. When thou shall find the Antecedency or Precedence of the Spirit of God
pleaded for, it is not intended in Opposition or Contempt of the holy
Scriptures, but as that which must be first received and relied upon, to give
the true and right Understanding of them. 3. When thou read me pleading for
the Light of Christ in every man, it is not to advance ny natural Ability
without this supernatural Aid, but that Obedience may be yielded to the
Requirings of this Light, whereby it does prove its own Sufficiency in
discovering and contradicting Self in Man, that by the daily Denial thereof, we
may become the Disciples of Christ. 4. When my Adversary cites Scriptures for
to oppose Justification to Sanctification, or to plead for Justification
without Works of Sanctification, and I gainsay him herein, it is because the
Scriptures in that Case only deny their Merit to justify without Christ. 5.
When thou find me pleading the Necessity of good Works in justified Persons,
it is only according to that ancient Maxim ( non propter, sed secundum) i. e.
not for them as meritours, but according to them, as that which God has joined
together, and no man ought to put them assunder. 6. When thou observest me
opposing my Adversary's Imputation of Righteousness, it is not because I deny
imputed Righteousness, but his Application of it to the Ungodly, while in their
Ungodliness, contrary to 1 John 3.7. Little Children let no Man deceive you, he
that does Righteousness is righteous even as Christ is righteous. 7. When thou
find me affirming (in Contradiction to my Adversary) that if the first
rising to Evil be the Sin of unconsenting Persons, that judges and denies them;
then (I say) it is no matter who consents or who denies, if he that denies
sins, as well as he that consents; and yet I do not deny inward motions to
Sin to be evil in themselves.
Lastly, I desire the Reader to observe throughout this whole Book this
Agreement between my Adversary and I, ( viz.) That the true Knowledge of the
Doctrines in Controversy must be inwardly taught by the Spirit, as he says,
p. 66. And both in our Preachings and Writings (says he) we are for an
experimental spiritual Knowledge of Christ, etc. So that when either of us
speak of Christ, thou art to understand it of a spiritual and experimental
Knowledge of Christ, and the like thou art to understand of Faith and
Justification, etc. they must be all inwardly taught by the Spirit, that our
Knowledge may be experimental and spiritual, else it is but dogmatical and
historical, which (says my Adversary, p. 66.) is not sufficient for Salvation.
These Things being diligently observed may both help the Reader, and in a great
measure put an End to all Contention between us and our Adversaries.

John Crook.

A Brief REIOYNDER TO William Haworth's EPISTLE.
John Crook, PAssing by many Impertinencies and Reflections besides what is
here animadverted upon under the following Heads, I have for brevity sake
returned this Rejoinder, etc.

W. Haworth, That Meeting was beneficial to us by Reason of a Concession from
thee at that time, viz. That the New Creature was an higher thing then the
Light within, and you did but point out People to the Light, in order to the
New Creature, Epist. page 2.

Crook, If by a higher Thing thou intendst a further State then a bare having
of the Light, or then the first believing in it (if so) then I affirm the same
still; and the End of our directing People to the Light [is] that they might be
newborn Babes, and Children of Light, by believing in it: otherwise the bare
believing that there is such a Light, and that they have it, will not be
sufficient for them, except they be regenerated by it. I hope, when you meet
with this, it will be as beneficial as that Meeting thou speak of. But then,
William, thou must repent of calling the Light a rotten, corrupt and unsound
Thing, and of saying, thou scarce know one Gospel truth but it contradicts,
page 149. and page ibid.

Haworth, I have heard thee my self say, He brought his Son out of Egypt ( i.
e.) out of the Egyptian-darkness of our hearts: Does not this take off from the
History? Epist. p. 7.

Crook, No more then those words, Hebr. 6. Seeing they crucified again to
themselves the Son of God, etc. do take off from the History of his being
crucified without the Gates of outward Jerusalem; and Rev. 11.8. there is
inward or spiritual Egypt and Sodom, spoken of, where also our Lord was
crucified: And is there not Darkness in that Egypt? Oh, William! the Reason why
thou art such a Stranger to these things, is because Nullum elimentum in suo
loco gravescitur; He that is in Union with thick Darkness, feels not the Misery
and Pain of it.

Haworth, That Work of the Spirit in our Hearts is not God's, Son, etc.

Crook, Thou speak indiffinitely, as if the Work of the Spirit in our hearts
was in no sense in Scripture called God's Son, contrary to the Apostle's
Testimony, Gal. 1.16. When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me. Was not this
the Work of the Spirit in the Apostle's heart, etc?

Haworth, But this is not so bad as to say, the Only-begotten Son, begotten in
us, etc.

Crook, Thou misrepresentest my words, spoken about twelve years since; for I
^sed the [word] Only-begotten only in Opposition to any other Power besides the
Lord's own Arm to form and reveal his Son in the hearts of his Children, as thy
Friend thou speak of, if yet alive, may remember.

Haworth, I have been an hundred times hurried into your Way and Opinions, like
a Child tossed to and fro with every Wind of Doctrine; but I am brought now to
a consistency and fixedness, Epist. p. 12, etc.

Crook, Or Way is the Light, and they that walk in it are out of all Hurries
and Tossings; and for Opinions, thou art no now hurried amongst them, and
tossed one while upon Absurdity, and another while upon Self-contradiction; and
for the consistency and fixedness thou speak of, I refer the Reader to thy
Confusions and Contradictions, as collected under that Title Page, for his
further conviction and Information.

Haworth, Thou art the dearer to us, John, that thou have been once a Stone in
Christ's Building, Epist. p 12, etc.

Crook, Does thy calling me Mountebank, Jugler, Jesuit, Ape, Equivocator,
covering my Poison with gilded words. etc. manifest a comparative degree of
Dearness to thee? What then is thy positive? And if a Stone once in Christ's
Building be thus called, what Names will thou give to those Stones yet unhewn?
And if to hold a total falling away from Grace be Arminianism and Jesuitism, as
thou say, Epist p. 2. then I having been once a Stone in Christ's Building,
must needs be safe at last: And if I am indeed so dear to you, show it to the
World by thy Recantation for thy Ab^sing of me by Revilings, etc.

Haworth, Some of old pretended they were sent to preach the Everlasting
Gospel, in opposition to the old Gospel. In the Revelations some are spoken of,
that talked of the Depths which John adds Satan to: This has been my
Temptation, and am confident is thine now, Epist. p 12, etc.

Crook, We may in our time (without Antiquity) find out many preaching another
or new Gospel that yet pretend highly to the Old, like those false Teachers
that were so stiff for outward things, in opposition to that Spirit the
Galatians (that began well) began in; and doubtless this is one of the Depths
of Satan, to draw the Mind from the Light of the Spirit within. And I do
believe thee, that as it was, so it is still, thy Temptation to oppose the
Everlasting Gospel, under color, that thou know not one Gospel Truth but
the Light within contradicts, as thou say: And for thy Confidence, its but
like to thy consistency and fixedness. But I will assure thee, I neither itch
to be a Doctor of Allegories, nor yet to exercise my self in things too high
for me; Glory to Abraham's God, who has weaned me from it. Therefore take heed
of thy Confidence, for else it will deceive thee, to the Ruin of thy Soul.

Haworth, The Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation be upon thee while thou art
reading these following Lines, etc.

Crook, Have thou such a high Conceit of thy own Writings that they cannot be
understood without divine Revelation, and ye denies the Antecedency of the
Spirit and Light of Christ within, to be necessary to the true understanding of
the holy Scriptures, and the Mysteries of God therein mentioned.

Haworth, In vain was that Revelation of the Everlasting Gospel to Adam, if the
Light within would have showed it, Book, p. 4, etc.

Crook, In vain had that Revelation been, if Adam had not had some Light
within, to see what was tendered and made known to him.

Haworth, Let us see what Faith it was that these departed from in 1 Timothy 19.

Crook, Instead of she wing what Faith they departed from, thou (either
ignorantly or wilfully) take up the time about the Faith they turned to, and
embraced after their departure, which is nothing to the purpose; for my words
are these, And others departed from that Faith which Paul exhorts Timothy to
hold fast, in Opposition to thy asserting it impossible to forsake the Gospel,
being once truly received. And thus, like the Horse mumbling the T^istle, thou
art unwilling to let it alone, and yet know not how to answer it.

Haworth, Thou had better not named that Scripture, etc.

Crook, It had better for thee indeed that I had neither named it, nor thou
gone about to answer it; for then had thou saved thy Credit.

Haworth, God's essential Power cannot be communicated; for then would the
Creature, to whom it is communicated, be Omnipotent, Book, p. 6, etc.

Crook, Who would think that a man that pretends so highly to Scripture Rule,
should be so much besides it, as to use [Terms] of Distinction not once named
in Scripture? its sufficient to silence all Flesh, that both Scripture and
experienced Saints do tell us, That the Spirit it self bears witness in them,
and that they were made Partakers of the Divine Nature and Power of God,
whereby they were more then Conquerors, and able to do all things, etc. without
busying the mind with forged Notions and unscriptural Distinctions, etc.

Haworth, Either thou have forgotten that this Phrase, which I make use of, was
ever used by Paul, Gal 4.19. or else thou do plainly gibe at the Apostle and
Church of Galatians, at least through our Sides thou woundest them; they had
some Knowledge of Christ, but it was too confused and dim, p 10, etc.

Crook, I very well remembered the Apostle's words in Gal. 4.19. b^t find no
such words as [ distinctly] formed in you; [ dim and too confused] are
imaginary words of thy own coining; as if Christ could be formed in a man, and
yet that man in whom he is so formed, either to be wholely ignorant of it, or
so confused and dim that he is unable to disting ish it from any thing else; so
that this Falsehood and Confusion may be added to the rest; for I neither forgot
the Place, nor yet gibe at the Apostle: Neither do I believe, that either the
Apostle and thy self, or the Church of Galatia and thy Church at Hartford to be
in such Union, that the hitting of you must needs wound them through your sides.

Haworth, Now, John, is this Language becoming thee, viz. Paul, what is thy
Labor and Travail worth, whenas thou have not brought the Galatians to have
Christ formed in them? And, Paul, what a Church is this Church thou writest to
in Galatia? and what a Pastor, Preacher and Apostle art thou? and what dear
Brethren are they to thee, etc? p 10, etc.

Crook, Thou art like him that makes a Man of Straw, and then to show his
Valor fights with it. Thou know I use no such Language to Paul, nor the
Church of Galatia in my whole Book; but thou, like a man having lost his way,
pryes into every Turning to recover his Loss, yet the more he goes on the
further he is out of his Way: But why do thou plead for mixed Communions with
such as are turned to another Gospel, whom the Apostle calls bewitched and
foolish, and thought to be made perfect by the Flesh, being removed from the
Grace and Spirit of Christ, into which he begat them at the first, when they
began well, and therefore his Labor and Travail was both of Worth and Value,
and not in vain, as thine and others are at this day, who like those false
Teacher (the Apostle speaks against) do but make Work for the true Laborers to
travail in Birth again, to recover your Proselytes out of those outward things
and forms, to have Christ truly formed in them, that neither the people
themselves, nor the true Ministers, may be perplexed, or stand in doubt of
them, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 4.20. But whither art thou going, Friend? Is
thy pleading for such mixed communion the way to be a Pastor of a separate
Church at Hartford, or to be a Parish Priest again? Think not that this turning
will set thee right ( viz. because the Apostle calls the Galatians Little
Children and Brethren. etc. for these and such like are but amicable terms,
frequently used in Scripture, and does not always imply them so called to be
Children in a spiritual Sense, and Brethren in the true Gospel-Brotherhood; as,
Christ calling him Friend that had not on the Wedding Garment, and yet was not
really so in the Sense he calls his Disciples ( no more Servants but Friends;)
and Stephen, Acts 7.2. calls the High Priests and Jews Men, Brethren and
Fathers; and Paul, Acts 23.1. calls the Council Brethren, etc.

Haworth, I Will grant, that the main Work was to preach the Gospel, they did but
preach the Law in Subserviency to the Gospel; thus they were Ministers not of
the Letter only, for this does but kill, but of the Spirit, p 12, etc.

Crook, If preaching the Law be in order to the Gospel, to prepare the Spirit
of man by convincing of Sin, and so humbling the Soul to a welcome reception of
the Grace of the Gospel, etc. as thou affirmest, p. 11. then why is it not as
main a work to preach the Law? or is there a way to Salvation from Sin, without
being first convinced of Sin, etc? But let the Readers observe how thou
swarvest that from thy Rule (thou pleadest so much for) Subserviency is a term
not used in Scripture, and besides thou addest the word [ Only] for the
Scripture says, Able Ministers, not of the Letter, and thou addest [ Only]
which is an Addition to Scripture; but in further Confusion and to thy own
Consutation, thou makes Christ the Author of both, saying, He wounds at well as
heals, and kills as well as makes alive; the one he does by the preaching of
the Law, the other by the Gospel: Does not this prove Law and Gospel to be one
in their End and Nature, for which thou tauntest so much at me, and spendest
the whole 13th page by way of Derision, saying, It will cost me some Sweat to
untye this Knot, etc. But before thou art aware thou have done it. For if it be
Christ that kills by the Law (as thou say) and Christ that makes alive by
the Gospel: Is not [he] one and the same, and is not his End the same, like a
wise Physician to cure and restore his Patient?

Haworth, The Law in its own Nature is spiritual, page 16, etc.

Crook, And is not the Gospel so too? What is it this man quarrels with? is it
not written, The Ministration of Condemnation is glorious, but the Ministration
of the Spirit exceeds in Glory? In it self it is not glorious, but dreadful and
terrible; but because of its End, by convincing of Sin, and so humbling the
Soul to a welcome reception of Christ, or the Grace of the Gospel, as thy self
speaks, p. 11. And the Apostle does not say the Ministration of the Spirit
[differed] (in Nature and Kind) but exceeded in Glory, and therefore says;
Diversity of Ministrations, but by the same Lord or Spirit, page 11, etc.

Haworth, Yet hitherto tends this admitting of no Distinction of Law and
Gospel, p. 13.

Crook, My words are not so, but thus, viz. Why do thou divide betwixt Law
and Gospel? Surely thou art not so ignorant as thou make thy self, as if
there were no diffence between distinguishing and dividing. But because the
Scripture distinguishes between Father, Son and Spirit, therefore by thy
Logic they are divided: and because the Scripture distinguishes between
Justification and Sanctification, therefore it divides them according to thy
dealing with me; for I ask, why thou dividest between Law and Gospel, and thou
abusest and pervertest my words, as if I admitted of no Distinction between
them: Is this sair dealing, William Haworth? But remember for the time to come,
That a Man may lawfully Distinguish where he ought not to Divide, as is proved.

Haworth, The Law is spiritual (i. e.) requires that all the Thoughts of Man,
and Desires and Motions of the Heart should be holy and spiritual continually,
p. 14. etc.

Crook, Here thou have plainly confessed to that which thou have been so long
fighting against, viz. that the Law is spiritual, etc. and is not the Gospel
spiritual also? if yea, are they not One in Nature (I never laid in Degree) but
want in Degree varies not the Truth in Nature and Kind; and is it the End of
the Law to require that all the Thoughts of Man, and Desires and Motions of the
Heart should be holy and spiritual continuaelly? does not the Gospel also do
the same? how now William? who is infatuated now? to speak that thou never
intendest, viz. that Law and Gospel are One in the End and Nature, as thou
speak, p. 12. But more of this may be seen in Title Contradictions, etc. and
Title Scoffs, etc.

Haworth, I challenge thee to produce one Scripture where Law and Spirit ^re
one, etc.

Crook, If I prove that the Word or Term Law is applied to the Spirit, I make
good my own Assertion, and overthrow thy vain boasting Challenge: Now the Law
is called Truth, Psalm. 119.142. So is the Spirit, 1 John 2.27. and 1 John 5.6.
The Law is called Light, Prove. 6.23. and so is the Spirit; If the Eye be single
the whole Body is full of Light, Romans 7.14. We know the Law is spiritual; how
do thou know it? I feel it in my Mind, by the Spirit says Beza, and also a
Law in my Members warring against it, Romans 8 2. The Law of the Spirit of Life
which is in Christ Jesus, etc. says Beza, is the Power and Authority of the
Spirit, against which is set the Tyranny of Sin. Thus he, etc. The Term Law is
applied, both to Works and to Faith, or the Spirit in Opposition to Works, Romans
3.27. The Law is also called the Testimony, to the Law and to the Testimony,
Isa. 8. The two Tables of the Law are called the Testimony, Exodus 25.16,21. The
Gospel, or Spirit, is called the Testimony, 1 Cor. 2.1. 2 These. 1.10. Romans 7.7.
Except the Law had said, thou shall not lust, by Law is understood, the Law of
the Spirit; for the outward Law says not so. 1 Timothy 2.6. Where Christ is
called the Testimony, who gave himself a Ransom for all men, that Testimony in
due time, etc. by all which it may appear, notwithstanding William Haworth's
vain Challenge, and confident to the contrary, that the Term Law and Testimony,
etc. are applied to Christ, to the Spirit, and to the Gospel, or New Testament.

Haworth, I have known the Spirituallity of the Law convincing me of that to be
Evil, which you say is not Sin (viz) Evil Thoughts arising in my Heart, though
not consented to.

Crook, Here thou confessest, that the Spirituallity of the Law (which was the
thing I affirmed to be one in End and Nature with the Gospel) to be the Spirit
or Power of God, which is called the Gospel, and is said, Hebr. 4.12. to be A
Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart, which thou say, it does
in thee, this must needs be the Spirit, by thy own Acknowledgment, p. 14.
calling the Law a fit Instrument for the Spirit to make use of; so that it is
the Spirit's Work whatever is the Instrument; that is the Agent by thy own
Acknowledgment.

But I perceive the Scriptures quoted by me have qualified thy Heat, page 15.
so that now it is the Doctrine of the Gospel, not Law [ taken strictly] etc.
but it may be called the Law, so it be not [ taken strictly] but in a mild or
common Acceptance, so that thou have both made the Challenge, viz. to produce
one Scripture where Law and Gospel are Terms that signify the same Thing, as I
asserted (and to which thou make this Challenge, and also undertakest to make
it good against thy self.)

Haworth, My tasting of the Grace of Jesus Christ was the Reason why I did not
take up with the Quakers Christ, finding so much Sweetness and Comfort in the
Knowledge of him crucified, and so abhorring to believe in the Light within, as
the Christ of God.

Crook, David invites to Tasting, as the best Way of knowing how Good and
Gracious the Lord is, Psalm. 34.9. and Paul also accounted the Revelation of
Christ within to be the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ, Gal. 1.12,15,16.
compared with Phil. 3.8,10,11. And called me by his Grace to reveal his Son in
me, but contrariwise that which thou callst the Grace of Jesus Christ, caused
thee to abhor believing in any such Revelation of Christ the Light within,
whereby it is manifest, thou have not so learned Christ, as the Apostle did, viz
Living and dwelling in him, and by hearing of him, and being taught by him, but
by Hatred, and despising art grown past Feeling of these things, according to
Ephesians. 4.18,19,20,21.

Haworth, Well, now let these stand together, and John, do thou speak for thy
self; either these are no Quakers and thou disownest them and their Writings,
or the Light within, not Jesus of Nazareth, is the Quakers Christ, so not the
Lord's Christ, therefore John thus do but juggle, etc. By this you may know
what he means by his Testimony to Jesus in the latter End of his Book, p. 18.
etc.

Crook, The Page before is stuffed with railing Accusations which have been
sufficiently spoke to by G. W. W. P. against Faldo, and I. Pennington's late
Book, titled, The Flesh and Blood of Christ, etc. I say Christ is not divided,
and thou art a Transgressor for putting asunder what God has joined together;
Jesus of Nazareth calls himself the Light of the World; and thou confessest, as
before is showed, that it is neither Law nor Gospel that convinces the
Unbelieving World, but the Spirit making Use of them: Now is not the Father,
the Son and the Spirit [ One] 1 John 5.7. And this is the Lord Christ, that is
[ One] with the Father, and thought it no Robbery to be equal with God; and
this is no juggling, but plain Scripture-dealing, as they that are spiritual can
judge what I say to be the Truth, as it in Jesus, but without the Spirit no Man
can say that Christ is the Lord, 1 Cor. 12 3. and if any Man will be ignorant,
let him be ignorant, 1 Cor. 14.38. but the Spirit of Blindness, like a Man in
the dark, makes thee so suspicious and jealous, that although I speak never so
plain, Nichode muslike thou cryest out, how can these Things be, when the
Inconsistency is in thy self: And what I speak in the latter End of my Book, as
well as what I speak of in the Beginning, is what I believe in my Heart; and
thy calling of me Jugler and Mountebank, etc. are but as Gems in my Crown, but
shall be as black Charges against thee in the Day of thy Arraignment.

Haworth, This Blood and Sufferings of Christ, the Value of them toward God
for the Expiation of the Guilt of Sin, I apply to my own Soul, that is guilty
of the Breach of the Law, and have Peace hereby, Romans 5. p. 19, etc.

Crook, I wonder thou should so soon forget thy self, who in p. 14, 15.
say, that neither Law nor Gospel can either convince or convert without the
Spirit, but as the Spirit uses them, being as a fit Instrument for the Spirit;
and yet thou that have the Filth of Sin remaining in thee, can apply to thy
own guilty Soul the Value of Christ's Blood, etc. and have Peace thereby, while
Christ told his poor Disciples, without him they could do nothing; and the
Apostle said, it was God ( by his Spirit) that made Christ their Righteousness
and Redemption, etc. not their own Application of them to their guilty Souls,
as thou speak, like a Man void of all Sense of what thou say, etc. that
Faith which gave them Peace with God, purified their Hearts, and kept Christ
dwelling therein, as a Prince in them, being stronger then he that is in the
World.

Haworth, I charge thee with the highest Blasphemy imaginable, etc. if thou
do it knowingly and wittingly, such as never shall be forgiven, if thou
attribute any of these Titles (viz. Firstborn of every Creature, the
Brightness of his Father's Glory, the eternal Word, the Alpha and Omega, the
All in all) to any Thing that is in Man, besides the very Person of JESUS
CHRIST, p. 19. etc.

Crook, The very repeating of this Paragraph and Charge is sufficient to show
its Folly, and vain Boasting of its Author, who now by his Words allows the
very Person of Jesus Christ to be in man, and yet says p. 4. His Righteousness
is wholely without him, etc. take his Words strictly, and they import (1) that
those Titles mentioned by him, belong only to the Person of Jesus Christ. (2)
That this Person is in man. (3) That it is Blasphemy in the highest, to
attribute any of those Titles to any thing in man, besides the very Person of
Jesus Christ. Now if he meant otherwise (viz) That it is the highest Blasphemy
to attribute any of these Tules to any thing in man, but only to the Person of
Jesus Christ without man; and also, that by the Person of Jesus Christ, he
means as he says, viz. that the Eternal Word, and first born of every
Creature, the first and the last, the All in All, is this Person; then he does
not only exclude God the Father, Son and holy Spirit from being in Man, ( i.e.)
Saints or others, contrary to the whole Corrent of Scripture dialect; but also
falls into the Nestorian Opinion, viz That in Christ were two Persons as well
as Natures: Besides it is Blasphemy to limit and shut out the holy only One, for
how is he then the All in All? is he in all, and yet must we be charged with
Blasphemy for consessing him or his Name in his People? But further, if by the
Person of Christ he intends not as he says, viz. the Eternal Word, or Deity
of the Father, or Son, etc. but only the prepared Body, that the Son took upon
him in Time, then he does not only vary from the Creed of a Trinity of
coeternal Persons, but also himself is guilty of Blasphemy, in attributing
those Titles to the Body which properly belongs to him that took it, viz. the
Eternal Word, the only Potentate, the Alpha and Omega, the All in All, etc.
who was before that Body was: But if William Haworth will allow neither the
Eternal Word, nor the firstborn of every Creature to have any Place in Man,
then what is become of his Convert to Christianity, he is but a counterfeit
Convert, and he and his Leader are both Aliens, without God, and without Christ
in the World.

Haworth, The Scriptures are revealed by the Apostles, and by the Wisdom and
Judgment of Man, enlightened by the same Spirit that gave them forth, we may
attain the Knowledge of them, and not without, p 21. etc.

Crook, Thou speak now like a Quaker; take heed of making thy self a
Transgressor any more, by the denying the Necessity of the Light and Spirit
within to understand the Scriptures, or by condemning the Quakers for preaching
the Light, in the first Place to give People the Knowledge both of Christ and
Scriptures.

Haworth, Thou must understand ( by these heavenly Things themselves) either
Christ himself, or the Church and People of God, who are the heavenly
Jerusalem, or Heaven it self, whereinto Christ is entered with his Blood, p.
21. etc.

Crook, How now William? how doubtful art thou of the heavenly things
themselves? is this thy Fixedness and Consistency, that they must be something,
but what thou do not know? and yet say, I must understand what they are;
but surely it must not be by thy doubtful Teaching: But tell me, what purisying
needed either Christ himself, or Heaven it self? and by what better Sacrifices?
Heb. 9.23. we read Ver. 9. and 14. that the Conscience was to be purged by the
Blood of Christ; and this must needs be known in the Church and People of God,
whom thou confesses are the heavenly Jerusalem which is the City of the living
God, where both God and Jesus the Mediator, and the Blood of Sprinkling, etc.
are come to by the Saints ( viz.) Heb. 12.22,23,24.

Haworth, I ask now whether the Scriptures or our Imaginations and Thoughts be
the Rule, whereby we are to measure God and true Righteousness, p. 21. etc.

Crook, Is thy Memory so bad, or thy Ignorance so great, to ask such a
Question, which thy self resolvest in the same Page? or art thou still in thy
skiptical Mind (as thou speak of thy self) seeing thou sayd'st but just
before, that it must be by the same Spirit that gave forth the Scripture, that
we can understand them, and not without; have thy Thoughts and Imaginations so
great, and the Spirit of God so little a Share in what thou do, which makes
thee so soon forget its Usefulness to measure divine Things; but I even tremble
at thy ignorant Confidence, to talk at this rate of measuring the unmeasurable
God, and that by the Scriptures, or our own Thoughts, without naming his Spirit.

Haworth, The Scripture no where condemns Man's Conceivings of God by the
Scripture, and according to them, p. 22. etc.

Crook, Thou art condemned here out of thy own Mouth, who say, it must be
Man enlightened by the same Spirit that gave them forth, and not otherwise.

Haworth, If John Crook consents to the Truth of this Principle, viz. That such
is the Purity of God, that nothing is accepted by him, but what is every Way (
or entirely) complete and perfect, if so, p. 23. etc.

Crook, I grant this, as also himself has done in p. 26.

Haworth, Then he believes that the Righteousness within, which consists in the
Virtues and Gifts of the Spirit in every Quaker is every way perfect and
complete, etc.

Crook, Let the Reader judge if the latter be a necessary Consequence from the
former; but because some whole pages following in his Book are stuffed with
Arguments and Consequents of the like nature about the same Subject, to prevent
his Boasting if possible) I shall here once for all return a sober Answer, viz.
I believe, that the Holiness and Righteousness in the Hearts of God's people,
which purely consists in the Virtues and Gifts of the Spirit, which is one with
the Father and the Son, it is entirely complete and perfect as to Nature and
Kind, which is sufficiently demonstrated by those worthy men Dr. Preston and
Dr. Sibbs:

See Preston's Title, Man's Vprightness, page 214. Because the New Adam
otherwise should not be so effectual as the old; the new Adam should not be so
powerful to communicate Grace and Life, as the old Adam is to instill
Corruption and Sin; for this Sin that has been conveyed to us by the first
Adam, has an Integrity in it, it has gone over the whole Soul, there is a
whole Body of Death, that has possessed us: now should there not be in those
redeeming Actions by Christ a contrary Integrity and Perfection, a throughout
Holiness, as I may call it? the Plaster then should be narrower then the Sore,
and the Remedy should be inferior to the Disease. Beloved, you know a Leprosy
is gone all over: except the Holiness went all over too, from top to toe, I
say, there would not be an Answerableness in the second Adam, he should not be
able to do as much Good as the first was able to do Hurt -- 2 dly, The Work of
Redemption should be done but by halves, if the Lord should dispense with
imperfect Holiness: The Works of Creation you know were perfect; God looked
upon all his Works, and saw that they were very Good. Beloved, Do you think the
Works of Redemption should come short of the Works of Creation? Are not they
likewise Perfect? When the Lord shall look on that Work, shall he not say
likewise, It is very good?

Page 216. If the Heart of Man be not entire, if the Work of Grace be not
throughout, if there be a Defect in the Principle and Constitution of it, there
should be a defect in the Work of Redemption, that cannot be, etc.

Page 219. Blessed are the Pure in Heart: Now what is it to be pure? That is
pure which is full of it self, and has no other heteregenial thing mingled
with it; so that heart is pure, which has no Sin in it, which is holy, which
has a renewed quality of Grace, which has an inward regenerate Man, that will
mingle with no Sin; that is full of it self, and admits not the mixture of any
Sin, etc.

Page 221. When thou had the Prophet that would have separated the Precious
from the Vile in thy heart, as well as to do it in the Companies of men, etc.

Page 222. -- So my Beloved, it is not the having of Impurities in the Heart,
that makes the Heart imperfect; but it is the suffering of them to be mingled
even with the inward Frame of the Heart. The Doctor also affirms, That without
this Holiness and Righteousness, none can be saved, etc.

See Dr. Preston, ibid. p. 243. -- I say, Let any Man's Heart be of this
Constitution, that he neglects the smallest Commandment, that he has not a
special Eye to the Observance of them, a special Care to keep them, he is
unsound and rotten at the Heart, he shall never be saved, continuing such.
Prove. 19.16. -- He that keeps the Commandments, keeps his own Soul; but he that
despises his Way, shall dye for it. Thus far Dr. Preston.

Now Dr. Sibbs's Soul-Conflicts, page 224. The Happiness of Man consists
chiefly in a gracious Frame of Spirit and Actions suitable, sweetly ssuing
therefrom. Ibid. page 156. Christ will never give over, till by his Spirit he
has made our Nature Holy and Pure as his own, till he has taken away not only
the Reign but the very Life and Being of Sin out of our Hearts; that to this
End he leaves his Spirit and Truth in the Church to the End of the World, that
the Seed of the Spirit may subdue the seed of the Serpent in us; and that the
Spirit may be a never failing Spring of all Holy Thoughts, Desires and
Endeavors in us, and dry up the contrary Issue and Spring of Corrupt Nature.
Grace is nothing else but that blessed Power, whereby as spiritual we gain upon
our selves as carnal, page ibid. It is a good Trial of a Man's Condition to
know what he esteems to be himself. A godly Man counts the inward man, the
sanctified part, to be himself; whereby he stands in relation to Christ and a
better Life, page 101. Thus far Sibbs. But if I should have writ half so much,
I should have been censured for idolizing and setting up Man's Own
Righteousness as W. Haworth calls the Righteousness within, that consists in
the Virtues and Gifts of the Spirit; but these serious Men speak no such
Language, etc.

Haworth, And for this Compleatness is accepted; and that it will hold the Test
before God's Tribunal, and so will justify us; and it is beyond the
Righteousness of the Elect Angels, ibid. etc.

Crook, Such as are Witnesses of this blessed Work within, are accepted of God,
but not barely for that Holiness and Righteousness sake, as it is a Work
within, but for his sake that is both the Author and Finisher of the whole Work
of Man's Redemption; For as the Builder is more honorable then the House, so
is Christ then his Work, Heb. 3.3. He has made us accepted in the Beloved,
Ephesians. 1.6. And chosen us through Sanctification of the Spirit and Belief of
the Truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. And this will hold the Test, and these by this Faith
are and shall be justified before God's Tribunal. And that it is beyond the
Righteousness of the Elect Angels, is both an ignorant and needless Question.

Haworth, I fly by Faith, which the Spirit works in me by the hearing of the
Gospel to Jesus Christ, to deliver me from the Wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 10. p.
28.

Crook, This flying in thy own Will is like to thy applying of him, which I
spoke to before: Christ says, No man can come to me, except my Father which
sent me draws him, Joh. 6.44. But this (viz.) [ I fly] sounds like a
customary word, only gotten by rote, while the true Believer depends upon God
and Christ, to receive the immediate Ability to use and exercise Grace and
Virtue aright, for the further Growth and Increase; for, Grace dorment will not
save us, says Dr. Sibbs, Soul's Conflict, page 105. and further says, The
first Justice begins within, when there is a due Subjection of the Soul to the
Spirit, etc. Now, had thou born the Indignation, etc. and waited with David
in the Way of God's Judgments, then with Paul thou would have said, I thank
God through Jesus Christ that is come unto me, and made himself known in and
unto me by his Spirit, that takes of his Blood and Virtue and shows them unto
me, and applys them as proper Remedies to cure my Malady, and enriching Jewels
to make me glorious. But thy Speech bewrayes thee; thou want the Shibboleth
of a true regenerate Man.

Haworth, I perceive this by what thou say here, that thou have tasted but
very scantily of the Wrath of God in thy Conscience, otherwise thou would not
have such sleighting Thoughts of it, as to apprehend it to be attoned any other
way then by Christ's bearing it, who sweat drops of Blood under it, and thy
unacquaintedness with the Nature of Faith, in that thou call it, an Easy
Way, p. 28. etc.

Crook, I shall not make thee my Confessor of what I have tasted; but if thou
had not fled the Judgment, it had been better for thee, then to escape it to
get Ease in the Flesh. I know him in whom I have believed, and received the
Atonement as the true Christians did, by having the Witness of it in my self.
And thou do but flatter thy self, and falsely accuse me, in saying, I
apprehend Sin and Wrath to be attoned any other way then by Christ bearing it;
for I never said nor thought so: But this I say knowingly, That it is not the
bare believing of the Doctrine of Atonement from the Record of Scripture
without (though that be true) that is the real Passification to the saving of
the Soul in God's sight, except the inward Testimony of it by the in dwelling
Presence of Christ be witnessed in the Heart: All Books were written to amend
this One Book of our Hearts and Cons^ence, says Dr. Sibbs, ibid. page 61. and
though we have not a Book to look on, yet we may look with Comfort into the
Book of our own hearts, and read what God has written there by the Finger of
his Spirit, etc. I have the rather inserted this here, that thou may not
forget to search this Book or Record, and to be well acquainted with what is
written there; for such to be sure can never undervalue the Drops of Blood that
he sweat for them, nor be ignorant of the Nature of true and living Faith, nor
call the daily looking unto and depending upon God, as the Eye of the Maiden
unto her Mistress, an easy Way.

Haworth, Ah John! what meanest thou to turn the Scoffer, like Julian? Do the
Saints find it an Easy Way, who cry out daily, Lord help our Unbelief? p. 29,
etc.

Crook, My words are these, viz. An Easy Way if thou could escape God's
Vengeance, by casting it all upon Christ, by imagining his doing and suffering
God's Pleasure to be reckoned thine, by a bare Belief of it wholely without
thee. Thou would tempt the Reader (by leaving out these last words) to
believe me to be a Julian, as the Devil tempted Christ to cast himself down,
abusing the Scripture.

But let the Reader judge by my words together what a scoffing Julian I am; if
we compare Mark 9.24. and 14, 15, 16, 17. verse. it will not appear, that that
Saint (as thou call him there spoken of) knew much of thy Faith; if he was
like thee in any thing, it was in that he joined with the disputing Scribes
against the Disciples of Christ: But those that are Saints indeed find [that]
no less Power then [that] which raised up Christ from the dead, is able to make
them believe is that Christ, to the saving of the Soul; and they had need of
daily help against the springings of the bitter Root of Unbelief in themselves:
But to be wise to dispute of Salvation is one thing, and to be wise unto
Salvation through Faith in Christ Jesus is another. But I say still, Its an
Easy Way to Salvation, if thou can escape by casting all God's Vengeance on
Christ, by imagining his doing and suffering God's Pleasure to be reckened
thine by a bare believing of it wholely without thee; for, do not all the
Ungodly in England generally believe it? But says Dr. Sibbs ( Soul's Conflict)
It were an Easy Thing to be a Christian, if Religion stood only in a few
Outward Works and Duties; but to take the Soul to ta^k, and to deal roundly
with our own Hearts, and to let Conscience have its full Work, and to bring the
Soul into Spiritual Subjection unto God, this is not so easy a Matter, p. 228.

Haworth, Ah John Crook, here thou stumblest at the Cross of Christ, and art
leavened in thy Mind with hellish Socinianism, the Dirt will out at last John;
here thou art plainly ashamed of the Cross of Christ, dares not own that the
Wrath of God was upon Christ: O repent John, p. 29. etc.

Crook, I know not what a great Cross it is for a Debtor, that knows his
Creditor to be fully satisfied, and paid his Debt (by another in his stead) to
believe it to be so: But indeed it is a Cross to be stumbled at, and a strange
thing for a poor Debtor to be told, he must believe his Debts are paid, and his
Creditor is satisfied, while his Creditor keeps him still in Prison, and calls
to him every Day for full Payment; this is cross to sound Judgment and good
Understanding: But if this be all the Acquaintance thou have with the Cross of
Christ, I will assure thee thou art far enough from being his Disciple, etc.

But why do thou dare me William? am I all of a sudden changed in thy
Opinion, from a Knave and a juggling Mountebank (as thou call me) unto such a
tender-conscienced Man, that I dare not speak otherwise then I believe? who
plays Tricks now William? making me believe, that if I will own what thou
would have me, then thou will believe me; yet when I have given Testimony to
the Blood of Christ, and many other Things, even as thy self in Words
professest to believe, yet for so doing thou call my Person a Knave and a
Mountebank, and my Belief a Juggle: But thy Speech bewrayes thee, for these
Words, viz. If thou dare, etc. is their Hectoring Language thou comparest me
to: But if the Reader please to examine his daring Challenge, he will find it
to be this, viz. to own that the Wrath of God was upon Christ, and that God
poured out all his Wrath upon his Son, and that these Words prove it, Gal. 3.
He was made a Curse for us, for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs
on a Tree; this is that he so dares me to; and if I will not be convinced by
this Proof, I must repent of the Thoughts of my Heart, though never so right in
this Matter, viz. I believe that Christ bore our Sins in his Body on the Tree,
that we being dead to Sin, should live in Righteousness, by whose Stripes we
are healed, 1 Pet. 2.24. I dare and do own, that what Christ suffered, it was
for us, and that the weighty Sense of the Misery due to Mankind for Sin fell
upon him, as the squeezing of Grapes in a Wine Press, which caused him to sweat
like Drops of Blood in his Agony, Luke 22.44. all this we believe, and
according to holy Scripture: But let us now consider William Haworth's Belief,
and we shall find this to be one Article of his Faith, viz. That Christ when he
suffered was not innocent, and as guilty God poured out all his Wrath upon him,
etc. Christ had the Guilt of Sin really charged upon him, what else is to be
understood by these Words, viz. he was made Sin for us, Epist. etc. which is
more then I dare affirm; for what Job said of his own Integrity may much more
be testified of Christ's Innocence (to wit) That he did not let that go till he
dyed, neither was Guile found in his Mouth. And whatever thine and others
Conceivings are of the Sufferings of Christ, I dare say, that no Man can
conceive, much less express what they were in the deep Travail of his Soul,
when he poured it out, an Offering for Sin, and the heavy Sense of Man's Misery
fell upon him, etc. only those that have had Fellowship with him in his
Sufferings, and been made conformable to his Death (in their Mealure) are his
Witnesses of what he suffered, by the good Experience he has given them,
through the Revelation of his holy Spirit in their Hearts; such know something
of the Sufferings of Christ, and the Benefit of them to their own Souls, etc.
Yet is not the Freeness of Forgiveness, nor the free Grace and Mercy of God to
Sinners destroyed thereby, that truly believe in the Light of Christ Jesus, and
repent of the Evils that are made manifest to them by the same; neither is the
Work of Sanctification and Regeneration, by all that Christ has done or
suffered, made less necessary to the inheriting the Kingdom of God and
everlasting Salvation; nor are the Exhortations to Men and Women, to follow
Holiness, and to work out their own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, either
weakened in themselves, or made indifferent to Believers; nor is the inward
Work of redeeming the Heart and Mind out of the World (to be fully set upon
things above) by the Spirit and Power of Christ within to be neglected or
disesteemed, by laying all the Stress upon what Christ has done and suffered
without us, etc.

For though Christ be both a general and particular Savior, yet the Benefit
accruing to Men by him, as the general Savior, is known and received only
where he is witnessed a particular Savior; for Christ in man becoming the Hope
of Glory, and Man being changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even
as by the Spirit of the Lord, is the Salvation, and the Perfection of every
true Christian: I have been the larger now upon this Subject, that I may be
excused from writing any more about it in this Reply.

Haworth, What would thou, John, have more then Faith? page 29. etc.

Crook, My Words are these, viz. I find thee like the Pharisees of old flying
from the Wrath to come, by casting all God's Vengeance upon Christ, an easy
Way, if thou could so escape it, by imagining his doing God's Pleasure, and
suffering God's Displeasure to be reckoned thine by a bare Belief of it,
wholely without thee. To all which he returns this Answer, viz. What would
thou, John, have more then Faith? Of which let the Reader judge, if this be not
his Hope and Belief (viz.) that he shall escape God's Wrath and Vengeance, and
consequently be saved, by a bare Belief that Christ has done God's Will, and
suffered his Displeasure, wholely without him, in his stead; as if we were to
understand no more by all Exhortations to Holiness, and perfect Obedience to
God's Holy Will and Commandments, then that Christ, and not we, is to be [only]
the Subject of all those Exhortations and Commands. If it be asked, whether a
man may escape God's Wrath and Vengeance, by a bare Believing that Christ has
done and suffered God's Pleasure, wholely without him? William Haworth answers,
What would thou [ man] have more then Faith? But the Apostle James answers,
Will thou know, O vain man! that Faith without Works is dead.

Haworth, He that works not, but believes, Romans 4. There it Faith only, a bare
Belief, John, what say thou to that? though that Faith that is justifying,
will work by Love, yet it receives no Efficacy from its being accompanied with
Works, as to our Justification, but from the Object without, p. 29. etc.

Crook, I say, thou have answered thy self, that it is not a bare Belief
without Works; for thou say, it is a working Faith; and if it were not so,
it must needs be a dead Faith. And the Apostle Paul speaks not of a bare
believing excluding its operative Nature, no more then the Apostle James does
of Works excluding believing, but both agree, that Justification is by a living
working Faith: When the Apostle excludes Works from Justification, he
excludes them only under the Notion or Conceit of Merit, in which Sense the
Jews urged the Necessity of them in that Business. There is no Opposition
between Grace and Works, but a clear Consistency, except or unless by Works we
understand Merit.

And to say, it receives no Efficacy from its being accompanied with Works, is
little less in plain English, then to say, if it did not work, it would be as
efficacious to Justification, which is both contrary to Scripture, and this
received Doctrine ( viz.) Where Christ removes the Guilt of Sin, he also
removes the Filth of Sin, Justification and Sanctification being inseparable
Companions; and Justification is never without Sanctification; for no Persons
are the Subjects of Gospel. Justification, as ungodly, or, as in their sins,
but, as being sanctified, and the Filth of Sin removed, so then justified, not
in Sin, but in the Truth, and Righteousness of Christ, they being washed, etc.
according to 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and BY THE
SPIRIT of our God, according to this Maxim, that without Likeness of
Disposition, there can be no Likeing of each other.

Haworth, Enough if thou wast real in thy Expressions, p. 29. etc.

Crook, That the Reader may bear witness to W. H's Acknowledgment, that what I
have said is enough, I shall set down my Words, and abide by them, to save
further dispute about this Point ( viz.) I know and believe Salvation, by the
imputed, reckoned and real everlasting Righteousness of Jesus Christ brought
nigh. Which Confession of mine he acknowledges to be enough, if real, etc.

Haworth, I had thought that Faith had been the Substance of things hoped for;
that by Faith Christ dwelt in our Hearts, p. 30. etc.

Crook, This he speaks of the imputed Righteousness of Christ brought nigh,
which is a large Confession to the Inherentness, or Indwelling of Christ, and
consequently his Righteousness in the Hearts of true Believers; and that which
he calls the Substance of things hoped for, he says, is in their Hearts also.
Now if all these things be so nigh, what is the Cause that W. H. and I are so
far assunder?

Haworth, This is true, plainly understood as spoken, page 31. etc.

Crook, These are my Words he confesses unto, speaking of the Imputed
Righteousness of Christ, which in the Fullness of time was manifest in and by
him, and in due time made mine, by the Work and Application of his Spirit in my
Inward Parts. This is true, says W. H. So that I need take no further Notice
of his Cavils against it, seeing he has so fully confessed to the Truth of it.

Haworth, If this [ Him] was to be understood of the true Christ, we need not
one Word further, p. 32. etc.

Crook, My Words are (viz) And God is well pleased or satisfied in and with [
Him] in whom I am accepted, etc. Now I do declare it is the true Christ that I
intended by [ Him] so that it is needless for me to reply one Word further, as
himself confesses

Haworth, Christ of himself, and his Merit is not sufficient, unless something
wrought by the Light in us does join its Merit with him, page 33. etc.

Crook, This is scoffingly spoken, in Contempt, not only of what I have said,
but also of the Works of the Spirit, as appears by his own Words ( viz.) Thou
would have the Works that are wrought by the Spirit have some Share in
Acceptance. What would this man say, if he durst speak plainly? as if the
Spirit in its working did lessen the worth and sufficiency of Christ; or as if
W. H. contemned that Ancient, Orthodox Saying ( viz.) It is not propter, but
secundum (i. e.) We are accepted, not for, nor yet without where there is a
Capacity, but according to GOOD WORKS. But this man would make the works of the
Spirit, and the work of Christ to be like Israel and Amalek: No Acceptance of
an Israelite by the Merit of Christ unless the Works of the Spirit, like the
Name of Amalek be quite blotted out from having any thing to do with it.

Haworth, What the Lord does, is really done, etc.

Crook, I Oppose Reallity to thy Imagination, not to any Act of God; for in the
New Creation as well as the Old, God says, Let it be so, and it is so: But I
am jealous thou and others imagine that to be so which is not so in this great
Case. Therefore do not deceive thy self and others by calling the strength of
Imagination Reality, and a confident Presumption a Living Faith.

Haworth, But indeed this Righteousness is not at a Distance from us, but put
upon us by the Father's Gift; Ye have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. It is the best
Robe put upon us, etc. And all that Righteousness that is within us of
Sanctification, is but the Fruit of this; it was merited and purchased for us
by this, p. 34, etc.

Crook, I have spoken to this Subject under Title Contradiction and Confusion.
The Words he so wars against are these, (viz.) Thou believe to be saved by a
Righteousness wholely without thee, Reckoned, but not Real, which Righteousness
Christ wrought One Thousand Six Hundred Years since ( not that we undervalue
that Righteousness, nay, cursed is he that so does) really no nearer to thee
then the Place where he personally lived and dyed. Now I desire the Reader to
consider, if his Proof consutes this, (viz.) Gal. 3.27. For as many of you as
have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; this is that Righteousness
that is imputed to us, and procures the Discharge from our Sins or Debts, by W.
Haworth's own Acknowledgement. This being Baptized into Christ is explained by
the same Apostle, Romans 6.3,4,5,6. Know ye not that so many of us as were
baptized into Christ, were baptized into his Death; therefore we are buried
with him by baptism into Death, that like as Christ was raised from the Dead by
the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in Newness of Life; for if
we have been planted together in the Likeness of his Death, we shall be also in
the Likeness of his Resurrection; knowing this, that our Old Man is crucified
with him, that the Body of Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve Sin. And this Phrase, We have put on Christ, is also expounded by the
same Apostle, Romans 13.12,13,14. And let us put on the Armor of Light, so that
we walk honestly, as in the Day time; not in Gluttonny and Drunkenness, neither
in Chambering and Wantonness, nor in Strife and Envy; but put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lust of it. The
Translators on the Margin say, To put on Christ is to possess Christ, to have
him in us, and us in him. So that by his own Proof, expounded by Men wiser then
himself, in this Point, casts his Cause quite against him, and makes him say,
That to possess Christ in us, is the Real, Imputed or reckoned Righteousness of
Christ, in which the True Believer is accepted of God, and not by a
Righteousness wholly without us, no nearer to us then the Place where Christ
personally lived and dyed, which W. Haworth would maintain; else, why does he
so bend his Force against my words? And if that be the best Robe put upon us
(as he speaks) why does he so violently contend for another to be imputed to
us? or if they be both one (as he seems to make them) why does he quarrel with
me for maintaining that they ought not to be put assunder? Neither does the
Scripture call them Two Righteousnesses, as W. H. does in the next Page.

Haworth, But it seems there is another Righteousness, in which we may be
saved, and which is by the Quakers valued at a higher rate; and that
Righteousness may be and is brought nearer to you Quakers, then this to us
Christians, p. 34, etc.

Crook, It is thy Work to make two Righteousnesses of Christ; We say, that
whoever has Christ within, in his Heart, cannot undervalue the Righteousness
that Christ wrought in his own Person without, nor yet miss of the Acceptance
with God through him, nor can such a one be deprived of the Benefits and
Privileges thereof. But Thousands called Christians believe the History of
what Christ did and suffered, and the Imputation of that Righteousness to
Sinners, that will perish for all that Belief; because Christ is not formed in
their Hearts.

But it is sad to see men professing Goristianity, to be troubled and
disquieted because Christ is come so near as to dwell in the Hearts of the
faithful; its a great sign that that Man's Heart is not right. But why is W.
Haworth so angry that Christ is come so near the Quakers? Did he not say even
now, That Christ was put upon us by the Father's Gift, etc?

Haworth, Who of us ever denied that we were to have a Real Righteousness in
Sanctification? but this is not to justify us, p. 35, etc.

Crook, Thy words savor as if the Righteousness thou expectest to be saved and
justified by, is but historical or imaginary on thy part, and is not attended
with Reality, Evidence and Certainty that the Righteousness of Sanctification
is attended with.

And if I should infer from thy words, that it is reallity thou sightest
against, thy words will more certainly justify me, then ever such a Faith (in
God's light) will justify thee, by an Imagination of Righteousness without a
real Enjoyment of it, we say God has joined what Christ did outwardly and what
he does inwardly together, to complete the Work of Man's Salvation and
Redemption. We say of Heart-Holiness wrought by the Spirit of God, that it is
such a causality as (sine qua non) without it no man shall see the Lord to his
Eternal Comfort. But on the contrary, the pure in Heart do and shall (to their
Joy) behold him forever. And we say with the Apostle, viz. He that does
Righteousness is the justified Man, or is righteous, as Christ is righteous. W.
Haworth says, He that believes Christ's Righteousness to be imputed to him, is
justified, or righteous, as Christ is righteous, by that bare Faith without
Works, etc. The Difference I refer to the Balance of the Sanctuary, there to
be weighed by the conscientious Reader.

Haworth, We have Two Righteousnesses by Christ, etc. page 35.

Crook, This is an Unscriptural Saying, not according to the wholesome Form of
Sound Words, which ought to be kept to: But however, they are one in Nature and
Kind.

Haworth, We must be without or free from all manner of Good, as Christ was
without or free from all manner of Evil in the Point of Justification, p. 36,
etc.

Crook, Who ever before thee affirmed such Doctrine (except the Ranters?) what
our Hearts and Minds, Bodies and Souls, must be as much without Grace and the
Spirit of God, and as free from all manner of Good when we are justified, as
Christ was without or free from all manner of Evil: Then the greater Sinners,
the fitter Subjects for Justification. And the Apostle must needs be quite out
when he gives Thanks to God (Col. 1.12.) who has made us meet to be Partakers
of the Inheritance, etc. Was this Meetness a Freedom from all manner of Good,
etc? But let us trace this a little further (viz.) What becomes of the Light of
Christ in Man, that makes manifest and reproves in the Conscience for Sin? is
that so bad, and free from all manner of Good, that there is not one Good
Property belongs to it? Why then (page 19.) do thou call it a Spark of that
Light Adam had in Innocence? Surely it is not so bad then as to be free from
all manner of Good, seeing God created Man in his own Image, and it was Good.
What is that Faith which sees and lays hold of that Righteousness? Is this as
free from all manner of Good as Christ was from Evil? But whence come all those
Breathings and Pantings, Hungrings and Thirstings after Righteousness? were all
such Persons then justified? or were those Buddings as free from all manner of
Good as Christ was from Evil? Hear Dr. Sibbs, The Bud of a Good Desire, and the
Blossom of a Good Resolution, and the Fruit of a Good Action, all comes from
God. Then not as free from all manner of Good as Christ was from Evil. Nay,
says the Doctor, The Light whereby we know, and the Guidance whereby we
choose, that is from a higher agent then our selves, cap. 15. Soul's-Conflict,
page 220. Then Man is not as free from all manner of Good, when he is
justified, as Christ was from Evil.

Haworth, The Gifts and Virtues that God's Spirit works in us are our own
Righteousness, in Contra-distinction to the Righteousness whereby we are
justified, p. 36. etc.

Crook, It Is well thou art so far informed since thy last Book, that they are
not divided, but distinguished, and that Christ is the Author of both.

Haworth, The Gifts and Virtues of the Spirit are really in our Minds, this is
the Righteousness that sanctifies, p. 36. etc.

Crook, So then by thy Doctrine our own Righteousness sanctifies, and Christ's
Righteousness justifies: But seeing by thy own Confession Christ is the Author
of both, why do thou call the one ours, and the other his? is Christ divided?

Haworth, Christ had the Guilt of Sin really charged on him, p. 37. etc.

Crook, This makes good my Charge against him, viz that Christ was not innocent
when he suffered etc. contrary to the Scriptures, which testify that the Just
suffered for the Unjust: But let us consider his Phrase, The Guilt of Sin
really charged on him; this Word [ Really] as it respects the Act of God, is
interpreted by himself, p. 33. What the Lord does is so, or really done; and as
it respects Man, p. 35. he says, Who of us ever denied that we were to have a
Real Righteousness, etc. Now let the judicious Reader consider how W. H. can
clear himself from Blasphemy, in saying, Christ had the Guilt of Sin really
charged upon him; neither will those Words of the Apostle help him, viz. For he
has made him to be Sin for us, that knew no Sin; this last Clause, viz. that
knew no Sin, plainly discharges Christ from being really guilty, or having the
Guilt of Sin really charged on him, and convicts W. H. as really guilty of
Blasphemy against the innocent, and the just, and holy One of God.

Haworth, If he had not Sin on him, God in Righteousness could not have
punished this innocent Lamb: But thou art ashamed ( I tell thee) of Christ's
Cross, p. 37. etc.

Crook, As a guilty Man, that has spoke more then he can prove, he shuffles
out the main Matter of the Charge against him, viz. the Guilt of Sin really
charged on Christ; so that I may take it for granted he sees his Blasphemy in
that, though he loves not the Sight so well as to confess his Error in plain
Words: But why William do thou (a guilty Man) take upon thee to measure the
Omnipotency of the Almighty? is not this Pride in thee with a witness; but to
prove Christ really guilty he says, God in Righteousness punished this
INNOCENT LAM^: Now if to deny this Confusion against Christ be a Denial of the
Cross of Christ, I tell thee then I am ashamed of it.

Haworth, Paul in Romans 7. complains of Sin, yet says, there is no
Condemnation, Romans 8.1. etc. p. 78. etc,

Crook, What an Abuse is this put upon Paul's Words? why did he complain then?
if God was pleased, why was he displeased? But the Apostle is speaking of
several Conditions that he passed through (as the whole Chapter manifests)
not that he was in them all at the same Moment of Time (viz.) Under the Law,
without the Law, and delivered from the Law, a wretched Man ( because of the
Body of Sin) and such a Saint also that no Condemnation belonged to him;
therefore himself distinguishes both the Time by the Word [ Now] there is no
Condemnation, etc and Manner or Condition of his Change viz. To abide in
Christ, and not to walk after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, clearly
implying, that if he neglect the Spirit, and walk after the Flesh, there will
then be Condemnation.

Haworth, As if Christ might not work Virtues in our Hearts, which we express
in our Lives, and yet these be but our own Righteousness, etc. as if because
the Spirit works Love in me, therefore it is not my Love, etc.

Crook, I have mentioned this (under Title Contradiction) I desire the Reader
to observe, how within six Lines after (quite contrary) he says, None ever did
or can show Christ's Virtues, in their Lives, that were not first justified by
imputed Righteousness, and yet here he says, The Virtues which Christ works in
our Hearts, and we express in our Lives, are but our own Righteousness:
Observe, and yet is wrought by Christ, so that we may be found in our own
Righteousness, and yet at the same Time be justified by the imputed
Righteousness of Christ, without Works [Oh Confusion!] But let us examine his
Reason for what he says ( viz.) because the Spirit works Love in me, therefore
its my Love, etc. by the same Reason Christ's Righteousness may be called my
Righteousness, by thy own Confession, p. 34. saying, Indeed this Righteousness
is not at a Distance from us, but put upon us by the Father's Gift.

Thou have now spoiled all, after thou have taken a great deal of Pains to
prove the Righteousness that Christ works in us and the Righteousness that
indeed is not at a Distance from us, but put upon us by the Fathers's Gift (as
thou say) to be two Righteousnesses; and here thou give a very good Reason
why they cannot be two, but must needs be one, viz. For the Spirit works Love
in me, therefore it is my Love, so Christ works Righteousness in me, therefore
it is my Righteousness; and Christ imputes his Righteousness to me, and indeed
it is not at a Distance from me, but put upon me by the Father's Gift therefore
it is my Righteousness: And thus thou have brought Christ's Two Righteousnesses
(as thou call them) into One, and proved that I may call it Mine, for the
same Reason that I may call the Love that the Spirit works in me My Love.

Haworth, How can thou in Conscience go about to make People believe that we
preach, the worst People have the greatest Right to Christ's Righteousness, p.
42. etc.

Crook, I meddle not with your preaching, but with what thou have printed, viz.
That we must be without, or free from all Good, as Christ was without, or free
from all Evil, when Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us to justify us, or
in point of Justification; and for the Gifts and Virtues of the Spirit, which
God himself works in our Minds, and we express these outwardly in our
Observation of the Moral Law, in our walking amongst men; this say thou, is
properly our own Righteousness, etc. therefore our own Righteousness, says W.
H. (who mixeth my words with his) and then asks how I can in Conseience go
about to make the People believe, etc. while his own words tend so much to
Rantism and Looseness.

Haworth, I challenge thee and all the Quakers in England to prove that Christ
bound the Moral Law to any of his Disciples closer, or faster then Moses, p 43.

Crook, If Looseness be not pleaded for, what means this lowing, etc. But why
art thou so resolute in thy Challenge? does the Business so nearly concern
thee, that all the Quakers in England are summoned to appear? etc. I think the
least amongst them may make good that from Mat. 5.21,22. where Christ says to
his Disciples, whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause, shall be
culpable of Judgment, which he that kills is guilty of; and is not this to
bind the Law closer? Is it not easier to abstain from Murder, then from Anger.
And ver. 27, 28. by the Law actual Adultery was forbidden, but Christ says,
Whosoever looks upon a Woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery with
her already in his Heart; is not this a closer binding of the Moral Law to his
Disciples? let the Reader judge. And if thou had more Knowledge of thy own
Heart, and fewer Notions in thy Head, thou would not have made such a
vaunting Challenge.

Haworth, I charge thee with belying Christ, in saying, that he calls this
Principle, viz. To do to others, as we would be done by, the strait Gate, p.
43. etc.

Crook, Thy Charges and foul Language are so familiar with thee, that thou
matters not what thou say: My words are these, Christ commands doing as we
would be done by, and calls it the strait Gate, foreseeing that false Prophets
would preach another broader way and wider Gate, therefore the next words say,
beware of false Prophets, and at present thou art one of them; etc. This it
seems pinched, and made thee so angry, and hasty in thy Charge, that thou
belyest (to pay thee in thy own Coin) my words, in saying, that Christ calls
this Principle, To do, etc. the Strait Gate, when my words are, Christ commands
doing, etc. but let us hear thy proof,

Haworth, Thy only Argument that can be brought, is this, viz. That this
Sentence, Strait is the Gate, does immediately come after the other, viz. To do
as we would have others, etc. But now Luke 13.23. this passage of doing as we
would be done by, is omitted, p. 43. etc.

Crook, I perceive thou likest it not, yet for ought thou have yet said, that
Argument is good, and I see no more Cause to decline it, because Luke omits it,
then to reject it, because Matthew so joins it, Mark and John being both silent
about it, except thou can prove Luke the more infallible Penman. But this is
not my only Argument (remember that is false) for I find these words,
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, etc. relative, as appears by
the word [ Therefore] at the Beginning of the verse, and so are the like in
most of the verses before, and for this Cause it may be reasonably judged to be
relative also, considering it is Christ's continued Sermon upon the Mount; but
besides all this, the Law and the Prophets, which thou callst Morallity, is the
sum of it, and Christ came to fulfill and establish it; and thy self confesses,
The Law is preached for conviction, and so is called the School master by the
Apostle; and why not the Strait Gate by Christ. Again, if the wide Gate and
broad Way that leads to Destruction, be Liberty in licentious and wicked
courses? Why on the contrary, may not the Strait Gate and narrow Way that leads
to Life, be a close walking in all the Commandments of God; for if to love God,
above all, and my Neighbor as my self, be the chief Commandments, and there
are not greater then these, as Christ said to the good Scribe? Why may not
this, that is the Epitomy and Sum of the Law and Prophets, viz. To do as we
would be done by) be called the Strait Gate, as well as Self denial and taking
up the daily Cross, is called the Narrow Way? Luke's omitting it is but thy
poor Shuffle; for he has omitted abundance more in the same chapter; and that
which he does mention is different from Matthew, Matthew says, Enter in at the
strait Gate; Luke says, strive to enter, etc.

If by the strait Gate the Person of Christ had been intended, he should have
said, believe in the Person of Christ, and enter; but by striving to enter in
at the strait Gate, is to endeavor with all ones Might to keep the
Commandments of God, whereof this is one, viz. To do as we would be done by;
and as Christ said in answer to a Question (like that thou say was the
occasion of those Words) in Luke, Strive to enter, etc. Mat. 19 17. If thou will [ enter] into Life, etc (The Word [ enter] answers to Gate) keep the
Commandments: And Mark 10.21. adds, Take up the Cross and follow Christ. All
which is further confirmed, Mat. 25.10. And they that were ready went in with
the Bridegroom to the Wedding, and the Gate was shut (i.e.) the Opportunity was
now past, not that the Person of Christ is here the Gate; for he is here called
the Bridegroom; and Christ says to urge the Improve of Opportunities, I must
work the Works of him that sent me, while it is Day; the Night comes when no
man can work, John 9.4. So that the narrow way of Self-denial, and to follow
Christ in the Light through the daily Cross, and to keep the Commandments of
God, whereof this is one, To do in all things whatsoever, as we would be done
unto, for this is the Law and the Prophets (viz.) The entering in at the strait
Gate, according to Mat. 7.12.13. And therefore thy charging me with belying
Christ falls upon thy own pate; and also thy abusing the Law and the Prophets,
in calling [ that] which is the Sum of them (fleightingly) a Principie of
Morality.

Haworth, Now John, who is he false Prophet that makes the Way broader, thou or
I? in that thou make Morality without Christ to be the Gate, p. 44. etc.

Crook, Thou, William, art the false Prophet, in that thou deceivest by thy
Lies, and by thy Lightness, as the false Prophets did of old; thou deceives by
thy Lies, in that thou misinterprets the scripture (as has been showed) and
also in saying, that I make Morality without Christ, to be the Gate (but it is
a gr^evous thing to ^orgo a falsehood serviceable to so great a Design) and by
thy Lightness, in calling the Sum of the Law and the Prophets, and Christ's
Command also, a Principle of Morality, in Opposition to a Necessity of entering,
or walking th^reby, etc.

Haworth, Are there not more Moral Men then Christians? p. 44 etc.

Crook, It would be a better World then it is, if there were more such moral
men in it, that keep Christ's command, in doing to others as they would be done
by; and fewer of those Nominal Christians, that in their Lives and
Conversations fall short of such Morality; which, its to be feared, has caused
so many to turn Atheists, rather then to make profession of such Christian^t^,
and to oppose Christ's Command, viz. To do as we would be done unto, to True
Christianity, favors more of Fleshly Liberty then of the Ancient Christian
Religion.

Haworth, Was it not thus with the Pharisees? was not Paul Blameless, etc? p.
44, etc.

Crook, Did the Pharisees keep Christ'^ Command in doing as they would be done
by, when they Crucified Christ, and Paul when he was a Persecutor, etc? Let the
Reader judge how unhappy thou art in all thy Attempts.

Haworth, Helpings of the Spirit, that word is too narrow, p. 50, etc.

Crook, Thou may well quarrel with my words, when the words of Scripture are
called too narrow, Romans 8.26. The Spirit helps etc.

Haworth, We are for acting and doing by the Holy Ghost, yet dare not trust to
it, but to Christ, p. 52, etc.

Crook, Did ever any of the Ministers of Christ say, that they durst not trust
to the Holy Ghost? What Heathenism is this? And contrary to himself, page 66.
viz. The Historical Knowledge of Josus of Nazareth is not sufficient for
Salvation, without the Truth be inwardly taught by the Spirit; and yet how
often has this man affirmed, That whatever the Spirit works in us, is but our
own Righteousness? yet here, to the Confutation of all his former Affirmations,
says, That without the inward Teachings of the Spirit, there is no Salvation,
no, not by Jesus of Nazareth, etc. so big is this man with the prodigious
Monsters, not only of dividing the Holy Ghost from Christ, but of horrible
Confusion, Ignorance, Unbelief and Blasphemy; 1st, Confusion, in that he is so
Contradictory to himself; 2. Ignorance, because it implies a Distrusting of
Christ, even while we are acted by the Holy Ghost, which is impossible; 3.
Unbelief, because (he says) he dares not trust to the Holy Ghost, and yet
says, we cannot be saved except we be inwardly taught by the Holy Ghost; 4.
Blasphemy, because he supposes it is possible for the Holy Ghost to deceive us,
else why does he say that he dares not trust to the Holy Ghost, but to Christ,
etc? Neither will it at all help him for to say, He intends only as to
Justification, because he acknowledges, there can be no Salvation by Jesus of
Nazareth, and consequently no Justification by Christ without the inward
Teachings of the Spirit; for says he, historical Knowledge cannot do it, but
the inward Knowledge, which the Spirit gives, does do it; so that what he has
said (though against his Will) amounts to this, viz. That true experimental
Justification by Christ cannot be savingly known, without it be inwardly taught
by the Spirit; by which Grant he has renounced these two Erroneous Opinions,
viz. 1st, That what the Holy Ghost works in us, is our own Righteousness; and
2dly, That he was deceived and mistaken when he said, he durst not trust to the
Holy Ghost, but to Christ, and has confirmed the Truth to be on my side, viz.
That we are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit
of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11.

Haworth, Faith as a Habit, or Act in us, is our own Righteousness, p. 54.

Crook, He has conveyed all his right to this by his former Grant, only he
has that left, which still renders him more suspicious, viz. That his Claim is
naught, because it will not endure Scripture-Terms; but no marvel, seeing he
dares not trust to the Holy Ghost: But let his late Recantation include his
uncouth word [ Habie] amongst his other Mistakes of Unscund Expressions, etc.
for the Scripture no where calls that Faith which is wrought by the exceeding
Greatness of that Power which raised up Christ from the Dead, Ephesians. 1.19,20. our
own Righ cousness, which is as absurd an Affimation, as to say the Apostle
intended, viz. by not having on our own Righteousness, etc. not having Faith,
etc.

Haworth, That Error of the Quakers, viz. that first Risings to Evil in the
Heart, if not consented to, are not Sin; and here in a Digression I will take
Leave to propound some Arguments against that Error of the Quakers, desiring J.
C. to give a fair Answer to them, p. 56.

Arg. 1. Haworth, That which the Apostle calls Sin, we ought to call it so;
but the Apostle gives this Name to those Metions to Evil, Ergo.

Crook, The Apostle, Romans 7.5. distinguishes between Motion and Sin, Ergo
Motion in some Sense is not Sin: (2.) He distinguishes between his former
State in the Flesh, when Motions brought forth Sin unto Death; and his present
Condition, which implies unconsented to Motions do not: (3.) Though Motions in
a strict Sense may be called Sin, yet not unto Death or damning, because as it
is subjected in Vn-consenting Persons, it loses its own Natural Venom and
Relation to Guilt. Vid. Dr. Tailor upon Original Sin, Chapter. 6.

Arg. 2. Haworth, That which is a Transgression of the Law of God delivered by
Moses is a Sin; but a Motion t^ Evil though not consented to is so, Ergo.

Crook, To this thou have answered thy self, in confessing all the
Commandments, save the last, forbid consent to evil Thoughts arising in the
Heart, according to Christ's Interpretation of them, Mat. 5. so that if there
be not consent, there is no Transgression, and consequently not Sin; but thou
would have the 10th Commandment (as it were) to be different in Nature from
all the rest, and to forbid more, as if to covet my Neighbor's House were
worse then to kill my Neighbor, and to covet my Neighbor's Ox were worse then
to steal it.

Arg. 3. Haworth, That which is to be mortified and crucified must needs be
Evil, etc. I ask from wherce they arise, etc?

Crook, To deny, resist and refuse to consent to Motions to Evil, is a
mortifying and crucifying of them: And for thy further Information, they arise
( a naturae vitio) ( i. e.) from a Defection of Nature, and inclines to Sin,
etc.

Arg. 4. Haworth, If they are such as are a Burden to one that is made Partaker
of the new Nature, then they must be evil and sinful, etc.

Crook. This is as true of Outward Afflictions and Punishments as of Inward
Motions and Risings; and no man will say, that these are sinful in themselves,
and yet they are burdensome to such as are made Partakers of the New Nature,
etc.

Arg. 5. Haworth, If these Motions bring so much Guilt upon a man that there is
need of the Atonement of Christ, and if it were not for the Grace of God in
Christ we should be condemned for them, etc. then they are Evil; but, etc.

Crook, It is the Grace of God in Christ that enables a man to wrestle with,
and deny to consent unto these Motions; and therefore these Motions,
unconsented to, are not his Sin, and consequently bring neither Guilt nor
Condemnation.

Arg. 6. Haworth, That which flows from an Evil Fonntain, must needs be Evil;
but, etc.

Crook, By thy own Confession in page 59. thou say, That in Case we yield
not to Satan's Temptations, we are not guilty; so that thou have answered thy
self: For, either those Temptations, which come from Satan, come not from an
Evil Fountain, or else there is no Necessity that, that which flows from an
Evil Fountain must needs be the Evil of Unconsenting Persons.

Arg. 7. Haworth, That which is a Privation of that Righteousness and Image
that was at first in man, and should be now in man, and the Law requires it
should be in everyone of us, that must needs be Evil; but, etc.

Crook, I deny that Evil Risings or Motions to Evil have made such a Privation
of that first Image of God in man, that there is not so much of it remaining in
man as to resist or show a dislike to them; for the Heathen Poet proves the
contrary -- Video meliora proboque, tamen deteriora sequor (i.e.) I see the
best things, and approve them to be so, yet I follow the worst.

Arg. 8. Haworth, These Motions must be either Good, Evil or Indifferent; if
Good, they ought to be consented to; Evil the Quakers deny them to be, etc.

Crook, By the same Argument the Temptations of the Devil must needs be our
Sin, though not consented to (which thy self denies) for he is either Good,
Evil or Indifferent; b^t thou will not say, He is a Good Devil, nor yet an
Indifferent One; therefore he must needs be an Evil One, and so are his
Temptations. I have already acknowledged, That in a strict Sense, as in
themselves, they are Evil, yet not [my] Evil, so as to damn or condemn me,
except I consent to them; no more then Christ will save me, except he be [my]
Christ, by being received into my Heart by a Lively Faith, etc.

Thus I have Answered thy Arguments; now a few words to some Passages to the
same purpose in page 59.

Haworth, I grant, that in case we yield not to Satan, we are not guilty, p. 59.

Crook, This is to fancy that there is something worse then the Devil; for,
although we consent not to Motions to Evil, yet we are guilty, say thou; but
if we do the like to Satan, we are not guilty, according to thy Judgment.

Haworth, May I not say, its casier to resist the Devil or Tempter then these,
viz. Motions to Evil, these are so near, close and continued? p. 59.

Crook, This does not only make the Effect of Evil worse then the Cause, but
also supposes, that when Christ conquered the Devil, he did not overcome the
worst Enemy of God and Mankind. And further, as if the Devil was at a distance,
and as unconcerned, when these work strongest; but if bare Motions to Evil be
worse then the Devil, and the Sin of those that consent not, but judge and deny
them, then its no matter who consents or who denies, if he that denies sins as
well as he that consents.

But supposing thou art one of those, that regard more who speaks then what is
said, I shall conclude this in the words of a Doctor of your own, and I could
wish the Professors of our Days were of no worse Spirit and Temper, (viz.) Dr.
Priston, page 222. of Man's Vprightness, etc. says he; ^t is not the having
Impurities in the Heart, that makes the Heart imperfect; but it is the
suffering of them to be mingled even with the inward Frame of the Heart. And
again, in the same page on Mat. 5. where it is said, That which comes from
within the man, as, Adultery, Fornication, etc. they defile the man; The
Meaning (says he) is this, When Sin rises in a man from day to day, if he
cherishes Sin, and entertaineth it, and suffers Sin to dwell and abide in
his heart quietly, without Disturbance, if he suffers them to be sudden in (as
it were) now they defile the Heart; but if Sins arise in the Heart, and he
continually resist them, he continually cast them forth, he continually
cleanses and purifieth himself from them, such a man is not defiled with them,
nor is his Mind defiled, nor his Conscience defiled; but notwithstanding this
continual Ebullition of Evils (that I may so call it) says he) he is a Man of
a Pure Heart, and Perfect with God, etc.

Agreeable to this are the Words of Dr. Tailor, cap. 6. Of Original Sin (he
says) A vicious Nature, or a natural Improbity, when it is not consented to,
is not a Sin. but an ill Disposition, etc. Sin is contrary to Virtue; its Sin
to Consent, but Virtue to Resist.

I have been the larger upon this Subject, because if Motions to Evil in
Unconsenting Persons be not sinful, then Perfection is attainable in this Life:
And the contrary Doctrine, that pleads for a necessity of Sinning while we are
here (in this Life) falls to the ground, with that Opinion which damneth
Infants that dye in the Womb, or soon after they are born, both which may be
razed out of such Professors Creed, as sorraign and unknown to Christ and his
Apostles, and to the true Church some Centuries after their decease: For as one
says, God ha^h not made Necessities of Sinning; for whatever [ he] has made
necessary, is as innocent as what [ he] has commanded; it is his own Work, and
therefore he hates nothing that [ he] has made, and therefore he has not
made Sin.

John Crook.

William Haworth's Scoffs, Falsehoods and Slanders.
Haworth, FAlse Prophets, as thou and others, etc. who would not think (John)
but thou art beheaded, etc? Epistle, page 6.

Crook, I bless God, I have obtained Mercy to part with that Wisdom which is
from below, for that which is from above; and if thou, in this Sense had been
beheaded, thou would not have scoffed at my words, that were spoken only by
way of Allusion, not exclusive of the Outward Sufferings of the Martyrs: yet I
have no Ground to believe (as thou do) that by beheading is meant cutting off
that Outward Member of the Body, no more then that plucking out the Eye and
cutting off the Hand (which Christ speaks of) is meant of dis-membring the
Outward Body.

Haworth, Thou said, David was out of Covenant when under his Temptations,
etc. Ep. p. 2.

Crook, I said, While David's Murder and Adultery was unrepented of, at the
same moment of time he could not be (in the same Sense) both in a saved and
condemned Estate.

Haworth, O cease, John, cease perverting the Right Ways of God, pleading for
Nature in Opposition to the Grace of God, etc.

Crook, This is falsehood; for the Light I plead for is supernatural, and
Experience proves it, inasmuch as it checks and reproves for consenting to the
Inclinations of the corrupt Nature: I never believed or affirmed otherwise.

Haworth, This Spirit has carried you forth most especially in Reviling and
Opposing the best People in the World, the Godly in this Nation, etc. Ep. p. 4.

Crook, This is false; for it is not the Good in any that we oppose, but what
God first showed us to be Evil in our own Particulars, and then required us to
show it to others also, that were guilty of the same; and we durst not but be
plain and faithful therein.

Haworth, Turning the God man into the Reason, Conscience or Soul of Man,
making them all one, and God the Spirit the same with this, that is in every
Murderer, Robber, etc. goes with the Damned to Hell, remains with them there,
etc. Epist. page 6.

Crook, This is false; for it cannot be proved that ever [I] either said or
writ so.

Haworth, O John! how has Pride and itch to be a Teacher of Allegorical
Mysteries transported thee to be accented a profound Doctor! Ep. p. 8.

Crook, This is both false and rash Judgment.

Haworth, If thou would return, John, it would be better with thee then it is
now.

Crook, This is false; for when I was in your Way, it was worse with me; and I
am sure few either Pastors or People, are better, but many worse then those I
walked with.

Haworth, And knowing how frequently you are found in Jesuitical Equivocations
and Mental Reservations; that thou (John) have but covered Poison in gilded
words.

Crook, I am taught to bear Reviling patiently, and all manner of Evil that is
spoken against me falsely, for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ, being in
nothing terrified by our Adversaries, which is to them an Evident Token of
Perdition, but to us of Salvation, and that of God, Phil. 1.28,29.

Haworth, The Pharisees made void the Scriptures by their Traditions, thou and
thy Brethren by your Light within, while you pretend to speak of Jesus, it is
but the Light in every man you would advance, and refuse him, Book, p. 2.

Crook, Men wanting Sight make void the Sun (to themselves) by being blind;
therefore by thy Argument, those that do see make the Sun void, by affirming
Sight necessary to see its Light: is this sound Reasoning? Nay, we advance the
Light only as that inward Eye, by which the true Jesus may be known from all
the Likenesses that men make of him in their own Dark Imaginations, etc.

Haworth, Thou and thy Brethren are worse then the Pharisees, etc. Page 4.
The Saduces deny the Resurrection, so do thou (John) and thy Brethren.

Crook, This is a slanderous Falsehood, favoring of the sour Leven of the
Pharisees, Joh. 8.48. Because they understood him not, etc. ver. 48.

Haworth, The most enlightened Servants of the Lord, whose Fame is in all the
Churches of the Saints, have owned the opening of this young man's Eyes to be
an Eminent Work of the Spirit, etc.

Crook, It is hard to say whether Pride or Ignorance have the greatest Share in
this Falsehood; what a Pitch of Confidence is the man arrived at, who so lately
confessed, he was an hundred times hurryed and tossed to and fro with every
VVind of Doctrine, Epist. p. 12. And yet all of a sudden accounts himself able
to judge who are the most Enlightened Servants of Christ, etc. This makes a
great Sound, but I suppose it will awaken but a few to believe it (besides the
young man that may easily be puffed up by it) But William, the Reader may the
better understand thy Skill, when he knows by Name, who those Most Enlightened
Servants of Christ are, with the Names of the Churches to which they belong;
till then it will be concluded, the young man is still as blind as thy self.

Haworth, We have searched the Scripture, which you Quakers despise, etc. P. 6.
Thou and thy Brethren are ashamed of the Doctrine of Christ being Incarnate,
etc. P. 7.
In the last Scripture thou namedst, thou did plainly read thy self in
Hymaneus, etc. P. 8.
John, that Scripture is against thee, thou had better quote a Piece of Jacob
Behmen, etc. so that even a Drunkard is a Quaker, and I said, the young man was
an honest Quaker, because there are some knavish Quakers, John, thou know
it, etc. Some of you it is known, pretend to exact Honesty in Trade, and inder
Pretense cheat and defraud, and so enrich your selves; for Honesty without the
Faith of the Gospel is your Persuasion and Religion, etc. The Quakers go about
to make the People Moral Heathen, etc. Well said, John, thou art now got a
Degree above the Apostles, etc. p. 9, 10.

Crook, By this Heap of Slanders, Scoffs and Falsehood thou may see the Spirit
of the man, in which is fulfilled this Saying, John 3.20. Every one that does
Evil hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be
discovered.

Haworth, p. 13. Thou, John, can remove Mountains; John Crook says, the
Apostle was out in his Chronology; for both Law and Gospel was delivered at
once, and that the Spirit and Letter are all one; that which was engraven in
Stone, and that Work of God on the Heart by the Gospel; the Creation is God,
and God is nothing but Creation, etc. admitting of no Distinction of Law and
Gospel, etc.

Crook, Thus like a man bereaved of all Truth and Honesty, he cares not what he
says; for none of all this is found in my Book.

Haworth, p. 14. It Is said to execute Judgment upon all (i.e.) upon all those
false Teachers, etc. that were such as denied Christ, Jude 4,18. They were
Mockers, 19. They were such as did separate from the Saints, in Order of the
Gospel; They were such, against whom the Saints were to contend for the Faith,
in a Word, they were of your Spirit, and Principle, and Doctrines; herein is
the Difference, yours is Rantism covered with Morality, theirs was with open
Face; none of these were saved, etc.

Crook, Here is Falsehoods by Half Dozens (1) That those Jude speaks of, were of
our Spirit. (2) Of our Principle. (3) Of our Doctrine. (4) That those men were,
and we now are, both Ranters. (5) That the Difference between them and Quakers
[is] that the Quakers are covered with Morality, theirs was with open Face. (6)
That none of these were saved What man in his Wits that regards but his Repute
amongst men, would have adventured to speak so positively upon so great
Uncertainty, yea absolute Falsity? and so I charge them all upon him, either to
prove his Charge, or to bear the Judgment belonging to Liars and Slanderers,
etc.

If thou had but advised with Translators Notes on that Place of Jude thou
would have found them comparing those men to thy Brethren, the Anabaptists,
in several Respects, neither seem they to be of thy Mind, to believe that none
of those were saved, seeing the Apostle says, ver. 22. Having Compassion on
some, in putting a Difference, and others save with Fear, plucking them out of
the Fire. But surely thou do not mind what thou readst, else at the 12th
verse thou might have seen thy self to be the Tossed Man an Hundred Times (by
thy own Confession) carried about with Winds, and it is to be feared, thou also
art the man there spoken of, that is twice dead, plucked up by the Roots.

Haworth, John, thou do but juggle, etc. P. 18, 19.
Thou art of the same Mind with Quaker Penington, that the outward Blood and
Sufferings of Christ are all of no Value for the taking away of Guilt, etc. The
Quakers believe there is no Manhood of Christ now, but is vanished when Christ
ascended, and defused it self into every one: Thou will not pull off thy Monk's
Hood, etc. I know, John, thou art an Enemy to the Scripture, etc. Thou art as
bad herein as Muggleton, etc.

Crook, These are Falsehoods and Slanders, as are manifest by many Confessions
to the contrary in print, etc. My words are these, for which he compares me to
Muggleton (viz.) The Scriptures are true as God means them, not as man by his
Conceivings interprets them, Page 22.
which he says is true, but must not be believed, because I say it, such is
the Falsehood and Enmity of the man against me, etc.

Haworth, p. 23. Thus, John, thou have set up a few Prophets at Devon-shire
House, etc. G. F. said, the Man in the Male, and the Man in the Female may
speak, and so interpret Scriptures in your Meetings, etc. Thou playest the
Hypocrite, John, if thou would not juggle, and play Legerdemanin, etc.

Crook, These are invented Forgeries, Falsehood, Perversion, and Reviling. etc.

Haworth, p. 24. Are not the Scriptures and Christ mightily obliged to you,
Infallible Doctors, that will condign to own such Fragments, and a Book
patched up of so many Scraps to help a little when the Church had lost the Life
of the Spirit, etc. John Crook replied to one that charged him with it at
Hartford, that if these were his Words it was not his Judgment.

Crook, These are light scoffing Words, for which thou must come to Judgment,
notwithstanding thou would father them upon me, but I deny thy Slanders, etc.
Thou have heard me several times, with many Professors in Hartford besides
Friends; is it probable I should ever speak such Unsavory Words, and they
should escape the Press 14 or 15 Years, and that W. H. and his Followers should
after this go to hear such a man as I. Crook, that (as thou say) speaks so
scornfully of the Scriptures (as to call them Scraps) that it should never be
printed till W. H. falling out with the Quakers undertook it? I remember about
14 or 15 Yearssince, or there abouts, that I spoke something of Eusebius's
History touching the Dispersion and Gathering together of the Scriptures, and
possibly I might say to the man he speaks of, repeating my Words wrong, and yet
justifying his own Repetition (to put an End to his Contention) that these were
not my Words; for it is not my Judgment; and this is to say no more then thy
self implies by the Word [ If] they were my Words, which argues my questioning
whether they were so or no.

Now what Fault is this that it must be proclaimed in print? The worst that can
be made of it (supposing it true, as it is not) amounts but to this ( viz.)
John Crook's Meaning was better then his Words, then with the Younger Brother
in the Gospel, John Crook is to be justified, rather then those Hypocrites, who
like the Elder Brother say, I go Sir, but went not; and then such now, that
exhort their Hearers to follow Christ fully, and obey the Scriptures
constantly, but withal tell them, it is impossible to do either in this World.

Therefore I would advise every well-meaning Abimelech to take heed that at any
time his Meaning be not better then his Words; for if W. H. hear of it, as Doeg
to Saul, he will tell it to the World, if possible, to do thee a Mischief,
although it be 14 or 15 Years after.

But William, how much Esteem soever thou pretendst to have of the Scriptures,
methinks thou should not have so little for Christ, as to name and prefer
them before him, this is no Sign that thou art an Infallible Doctor, as thou
scoffingly speakst of the Quakers.

Haworth, p. 25. The Quakers never do confess Sin; there is no more worth in
the Blood of Christ, in the Quakers Account, then in other common Blood, etc. I
find W. Bailey and J. Crook Brethren in Iniquity, more Ignorant then
School-Boyes, Jesuitlike, etc. O horrid Blasphemy! etc.

Crook, The Cause of all this is from his own Words (viz.) The Heathen saw in
the Deity a Vengeance ready to punish (he says) W. B. applies this Sight in
the Deity to the Light that was in their Consciences, believing the Light to be
God, etc, Consider Reader, (1 st) Whether the Heathen could see what was in the
Deity without some Light coming from the Deity to discover it. (2 dly) It Is
called, something of God in them, Romans 1.19. or that which may be known of God
in them. (3 dly) That of God is called the Truth, ver. 18. (4 thly) The
Scripture calls the Knowledge of [ This] the Knowledge of God, ver. 21. These
things rightly considered, what cause has this man for all his Slanderous
Terms.

Haworth, p. 28. Thou do make the Faith of Pharisees as good as the Faith of
any of the Godly in the Nation, etc. Ah John! what meanst thou to turn the
Scoffer, like Julian, etc. Ah Joh. Crook! thou art levened in thy Mind with
Hellish Socinianism, etc. And whatever thou pretendest, it is but to blind the
People, etc. p. 29.
Thou discoverst thy self to be a Papist, etc. How sad is is that every Truth
must be struck at by a new Sort of Papists, etc?

Crook, Besides his Falsehoods and Slanders, take Notice, it is W. H's Faith I
have now to deal withal, who thinks himself to be as Godly a man as any in the
Nation (as himself says) etc.

Haworth, p. 30. Enough, if thou wast but real in thy Expressions, etc. What a
Knave is he? etc. There is no End of thy Dissembling, it is a professed Trade,
thou drivest as the Mountebancks, up and down the Country, etc.

Crook, When enough is said by me, then my Reality is questioned, and the
Slander of a Knave fixed upon me; and when I speak more then he would have me,
then he brands me with Papism, and Hellish Socinianism, Mountebank, etc. But
let our Hearers judge, who can best tell our Trade and yours, what Sallery and
other yearly Charges they are at to maintain such Physicians as keep them
always in Cure, and put their Texts (as Medicines) to Sale, yet tell their
Patients, it is impossible to make them whole, etc.

Haworth, p 30. Thou mistrusts God, John, etc. and hear the Old Fox bark,
Christ being within there is Justification, etc.

Crook, Contradiction is the Companion of Falsehood; for in the same page he
himself says, that by Faith Christ dwelt in our Hearts, and now scoffs at
these Words, viz. Christ being within there is Justification, etc.

Haworth, p. 32. This is John Crook 's Application of the Spirit, deny
Penington 's Divinity if thou dare, etc. When John Crook prays or
preaches, it is Christ prays and preaches, not John Crook, and that Christ
and he are both one Person; such Monsters have been amongst the Quakers, etc.
p. 33.

Crook, When he can gather nothing out of my Books to asperse me withal, then
he perverteth others words, and fathers that Perversion upon me; but let I.
Penington interpret his own words (who best knows his own Meaning) and then
they will speak as plain as mine, which W. H. cofesseth to be true. See I.
Penington's late Book entitled, The Flesh and Blood of Christ. This man
acknowledges, that such Doctrine is not now, nor never was preached among
Right Quakers, but by such as have been Monsters amongst the Quakers; but let
him hear Dr. Sibbs, Soul Conflict, p. 219. It is Sacriligious Liberty that will
acknowledge no Dependence upon God; we are wise in his Wisdom, and strong in
his Strength, who says, without me ye can do nothing, etc. Certum est nos
vellicum volumus, sed ille facit ut velimus, Aug.


Haworth, And surely there is a dreadful Curse of Hardness, Sottishness and
Pride upon the poor Quakers; and from where does it arise, but from the
Undervaluing that Righteousness that was wrought out 1600 Years since, and as
far as Jerusale^ etc? p. 34.

Crook, This Curse belongs to those that speak sleightingly of the Light of
Christ within, and call the Gifts and Virtues, that the Spirit of God works
in our Minds, our own Righteousness; that have forgotten to hold fast the
Doctrine that is according to Godliness, believing The Son of God was not
Innocent when he suffered; and that the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to
Persons while in Sin and actual Rebellion against God, which is the Cause of so
much Looseness and Wickedness amongst those called Christians.

Haworth, p. 34 and 35. Heaven where Christ lives is too far off for Christ's
Righteousness to have an Influence by any Act of God's imputing, according to
these unbelieving Quakers.

Crook, The Holy Apostle was not ashamed to affirm, that their Conversation was
in Heaven, even while their Bodies were on Earth, Phil. 3.20. And what ever
thou thoughtst, thy Words are these, p. 21. viz The Church and People of God,
who are the Heavenly Jerusalem, or Heaven it self, wherein to Christ is entered
with his Blood, etc. Had I said so much, thy Anathemaes for mystical Aligorisms
would have been poured out upon me, yet this hinders not that Influence by any
Act of God's imputing (as thou scoffingly speakst) nor the Exaltation of the
Holy Manhood of Christ in Heaven above, though thou falsely accusest the Quakers
with Unbelief in this particular.

Haworth, p. 35. When will thou, John, desist winding and turning thus like a
crooked Serpent, studying to deceive, etc? I suppose thy Invention here ran a
tilt, etc. making the gloricus Doctrine of Christ to be patronized by the
Devil, etc. when instead of bearing thy witness against this Shuttle-Cock, etc.
p. 36, 37.

Crook, This favors of Falsehood and Lightness, from the high Thoughts thou
have of thy self, and thy own Positions, which to make them the more passable
amongst thy Hearers, thou callst them the Glorious Doctrine of Christ; so thou
Slanderest thy Neighbor to gain Credit to thy self, and to prove William Penn
a Novice, thou callst him a Shuttle-Cock; this is not Bellarmine (as thou
callst his) but Billingsgate Arguments, and those that would have better, thou
referrest them to Dr. Ames and Downham; for thou have no other.

Haworth, The Quakers despise the Personal Righteousness of Christ imputed,
etc. It Is Knavery in thee, etc. I leave not the Lord Jesus Christ to follow
John with the Wisp, etc. P. 41, 42, 46, and 50.
This Truth in the Inward Parts, viz. ( that God loves) is but our own
Righteousness, etc. The Light in every man overthrows-the Work of Regeneration,
etc. Your Doctrine destroys Sanctification, etc.

Crook, Here is another Heap of Confusion, Falsehood and Slanders, etc. and
quite contrary to John 3.21. He that does Truth comes to the Light, that his
Deeds may be made manifest they are wrought in God; so that the Light does not
overthrow, but confirm the Work of Regeneration and Sanctification also, etc.

Haworth, p. 51. I have seen some Pages of your Books filled with such
Blaspemies, viz. Given forth by the Spirit, through the Trunk of the Body of
Fox, or such a one, etc. You account your Writings of equal Authority with the
Scriptures, nay, beyond them, etc.

Crook, These are charged as Slanders and malicious Inventions upon thine own
Head, etc.

Haworth, p. 52. We are for acting and doing by the Holy Ghost, yet dare not
trust to it, but to Christ, etc. Rather then thou will not manifest thy Enmity
against the Imputed Righteousness, and be a Patron of our own to justify us,
to take off from Christ's, thou will play a small low Game, etc. It renders
thee, John, most ridiculous in our Eye, when we see thee here Ape it so like a
Christian, and yet know that thou art of a different Species, etc. p. 53.

Crook, These things on another Occasion are spoken to in Title Rejoinder, etc.
But let the Reader judge, who he is like, that fears not to multiply Falsehoods
and Slanders on every Occasion, which renders William Haworth an Enemy of that
Light which is in every meer-man (as he speaks) else how durst he say, I know
my self of a different Species from a Christian, who says in his Epist. page
12. (viz) Thou art the dearer to us, John, in that thou have been once a Stone
in Christ's Building, etc.

Haworth, My Eye has been deceived sometimes by the Art of Limbing, in
thinking I have seen living Creatures, Men, Women, Lions, Bulls, etc. and yet
turn but the other side, and nothing but a thin painted Pastboard, etc. p. 54.
Thou have got the Art Captains have at Sea, thou think it lawful as they do,
thou come up to us, etc. with an English Flag, etc. whereas thou art
absolutely a Frenchman, etc. Thou, John, art but still a Thin, Dead,
Life-less, Rotten Apostate Quaker.

Crook, What now a Rotten Apostate, and once a Living Stone in Christ's
Building! am I fallen away from Grace then? By this the Reader may see what a
painted Christian this man is, that to make good his Simile dares to adventure
upon such a Falsehood so incredible, as that he should know those to be but
Pictures upon Pastboard, and yet his Eye to be so deceived, as himself thought
those Pictures to be living Men and Women, Lions, Bulls, etc. This puts me in
mind of the Cardinal's blaming the Painter for coloring the Faces of Peter and
Paul so Red, who tartly replied, He painted them so, as blushing at the Lives
of those men who styled themselves their Successors: But how the Reader will
forbear blushing, and smiling too, at such a Successor, as knows not Living Men
and Women from painted Pastboards, I know not; but no wonder that this man's
Tongue is at Liberty to speak Falsehood without Control seeing he said but two
Pages before, He dares not trust to the Justification of the Holy Ghost, and
such neither fear nor care for its Condemnation for any thing they say or do.

Haworth, I have heard lately from one that has read J. C 's Books, that he
expresses, himself to be for this (viz.) A Liberty for Quakers to admit
themselves into all Churches whatsoever, etc. He can speak any thing with his
Mouth to the People, and believe the contrary thing in his Judgment at the same
time; but I begin to be weary of playing thus at push-pin with thee and the
Quakers going three Miles on their Knees, etc.

Crook, The Reader by these invented Falsehoods and Scurrilities may take a
Measure of the 146 pages of his Book, and find little in it besides abusive
Language, and childish spending Paper, and Pastime, which himself calls playing
at push pin; and yet has the Confidence to dare it to be answered.

Haworth, The Quakers sit brooding upon this Principle in Expectation of a
Chimera, Perfection in this Life, etc. G. Fox absolving at his Knees whom he
will, sending out to the Ministry whom he will, etc. page 60, and 61.
The Light within is exalted by you above all that is called God, and
worshipped, etc. You have changed the Christ of God into a Robber's Light, that
goes down to Hell with him, etc. p. 63.

Crook, Falsehood and Slander, etc. neither do the Quakers exalt the Light above
God, etc. but as God is Light, and his Spirit is Light, and this is to be
obeyed and followed; for he that is destitute of this, is without God in the
World (and is in the Spirit of Antichrist) which the Generation of the Godly
know to be true, and thy Affirmation to the contrary to be Blasphemy, and
contradictory to thy self, p. 84. where thou callst the Light the Gift, of
Christ, and p. 109. A Spark of the Light Adam had in Innocence, and now thou
callst it a Robber's Light that goes down to Hell with him, let the Reader
judge of this Confusion Falsehood and Blasphemy, etc.

Haworth, The Quakers being faithful to the Light within they continue in
Morality, but they live not at all in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ etc.

Crook, It is well thou will afford the Quakers this Testimony, while many of
thy Opinion (who talk so much that Christ [wholely without] has satisfied for
all their Sins past, present and to come) slight Morality, and thy Words are
of like Import, as if to live up to Morality does Necessarily imply, that such
as do so, do not at all live in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ; but let all such
know, that he which exhorts People to Holiness, and yet tells them it is not
necessary to Salvation, does but tempt them to let Holiness alone.

Haworth, There are some amongst the Quakers that bewitch the poor Country
People with Sorceries, etc. every one of them endued with a Tuning, Juggling,
Jesuitieal Temper, etc. page 64.

Crook, This Language shows the man destitute of Morality thus maliciously to
pursue his Falsehoods and Slanders.

William Haworth's Answer to my Additional Postscript, p. 66.
Haworth, THis Postscript is but a mere fallacious Horangue Of Woras purposely
stitched together to d^cerve some weak ones, -- a perfect Cheat, etc. And so
gross a Heretic, that thou (John) art not worthy that a Christian skould. eat
or drink with thee.

Crook, I need not here set down the Additional Post script he speaks of,
because it is in Print already, but do desire the Reader to peruse it, and for
his Encouragement I do seriously declare, as in the Presence of God, Angels and
Men, that the Testimony there given (1 st) Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, etc.
(2 dly) Concerning his Righteousness, etc. (3 dly) Concerning the Blood of this
Jesus, etc. (4 thly) Concerning Justification by his Blood, etc. is the Real
and Very Belief of my Soul. Now if this will not satisfy W. H. but I must
still be accounted a Knave, a Mountebank, a Juggler, a Bewitcher, a Deceiver a
Dissembler, a Perfect Cheat, a Rotten Apostate, a Gross Heretic, not worthy
that a Christian should eat or drink with me; all which Scurrility and Railery,
with much more I find in his Book, though I was once a living Stone in Christ's
Building, as himself says, and yet challenges me to answer thirty
Interrogatories or Queries, as if he were conscious to himself he had wronged
me; but it would be Folly in me to swell the Volumn barely to fulfill his Humor.

But might reply in his own Words, (as he does to my Additonal Postscript) I
hay done it already, and therefore need not do it over again; but that the
Reader may be acquainted with their Weakness, and not think them to be
unanswerable, I shall as briefly as I can reply to them all.

An Answer to W. Haworth's Queries.
Haworth, Do not thou know that the Independents, etc. Query 1. are for an
Experimental Spiritual Knowledge of Christ, and that Truth must be inwardly
taught by the Spirit, etc.

Answ. Crook, These are Jacob's Words, but Esau's Hands; for he that dare not
trust to the Spirit, is not for Experimental Knowledge, etc. but W. H. says,
p. 52. He dares not trust to the Holy Ghost, therefore W. H. (wharever he
says) is not for Experimental Knowledge, by the Teachings of the Spirit.

Q. 2. Haworth, Do not thou believe that some may know the Mystery and so be
saved, without the hearing or knowing the History of Jesus of Nazareth?

An. Crook, Infants that dye in the Womb and soon after they are born, etc. I
have so much Charity as to believe they are saved, and likewise those believing
Gentiles, Romans 2.14,15,16. of whom it is said, they had not the Law, or outward
History, and yet were excusable in the Day when God shall judge the Secrets of
all men by Jesus Christ.

Q. 3. Haworth, Whether is Jesus Christ now a Person out of man, or only a
Principle, or Quality in man?

An. Crook, If by [ Paerson] thou intendest [ An Intelligent Being] as thou
confessedst at Hartford) then He is both out of man, and in man, and so more
then a bare Principle or Quality in man.

Q. 4. Haworth, Do thou believe, that man that was born of Mary the Virgin at
Bethlehem in Judea, to be the Messiah, the Christ of God?

An. Crook, Yea.

Q. 5 Haworth, Do thou believe that the man Christ is any where now in being,
besides the being that the Quakers say he hoth in them, and if so, where is he?
etc.

An. Crook, Yea, and that he is at God's Right Hand, ascended far above all
Heavens, as the Scripture says.

Q. 6. Haworth, Whether the Light that you say every man has be a Creature or
no?

An. Crook. That true Light which is called the Life of Christ, John 1.4,9. and
lights every man that comes into the World, is not a Creature.

Q. 7. Haworth, Whether the Light that every man has be of the very same
Nature with the Spirit etc. or of a different Kind, or whether it differ from
the New Creature in Specie?

An. Crook, The Life which is the Light of men is of an Increated and Divine
Nature and Being, yet the New Creature is formed in the Light, and partakes of
its Nature.

Q. 8. Haworth, Whether that which Jesus Christ of Nazareth did and suffered
above sixteen hundred Years since in Judea be not the Matter of fallen-man's
Justification in the Sight of God.

An. Crook, Fallen-man is in a State of Condemnation, yet through that one
Offering of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, both the Forbearance of God,
Reconciliation, and Remission of Sins are declared unto Mankind, and received
through Faith and Repentance.

Q. 9. Haworth, Whether any Actions or Sufferings of any besides those of his,
have any Merit, Worth, Desert in them to purchase any thing at God's hand for
any of Mankind?

An. Crook, 1 st, No man's Actions or Sufferings without Christ are of any
Merit, or Worth in God's Sight. (2 dly) Besides those that Christ did and
suffered above 1600 Years since in Judea, his continued Mediation and
Intercession have Worth and Desert in them to obtain Good at God's Hand for
man. (3 dly) Besides a being then reconciled by the Death of his Son, there is
a [MUCH MORE] put upon A being saved by his Life, Romans 5.10. (4 thly) The
Saints sincere Obedience and Perseverance in Christ have Reward from God for
his Sake.

Q. 10. Haworth, Whether Christ Jesus dyed in the Room, Place, Stead of any, or
only for their Benefit or Advantage?

An. Crook, A silly Query; for Christ dying for all men in their Room or Stead,
must needs be for their Benefit and Advantage.

Q. 11. Haworth, Whether God's imputing Righteousness to any man be any thing
else, but his putting Righteousness into the Creature by Saictifying of it?

An. Crook, Yea, it is an Accepting of him in Christ the Beloved, through Faith
and Sanctification in him, whom God has sent and given unto us, with whom the
Benefit of his Sufferings and Death is so reckoned unto us as ours.

Q. 12. Haworth, Whether Justification be not an Act of God in absolving and
acquitting a Sinner for Christ Sake, in Opposition to condemning, etc. and
accounting him Righteous, for the Personal, Righteousaess Sake of Christ that
was wholely without the Sinner?

An. Crook, To the first Part yea, ( Which proves Immediate Revelation) through
Faith and Repentance, etc. To the last, nay, while it is wholely without the
Sinner it is none of his; for if Justification be God's Act in absolving a man
in Opposition to Condemnation and all God's Actions are Real (as thou say in
thy Book) then it is not wholely without him; for those to whom there is no
Condemnation are such as walk not after the Flesh, but after the spirit, Romans
8.1.

Q. 13. Haworth, Whether God does not find every one ungodly, and in their
Sins, when he first gives Faith to them that justifies them, etc?

Answ. Crook. Yes, they are both ungodly and in their Sins, while in unbelief;
but God does not justify the ungodly therein, but through Faith, which
purifies the Heart, sanctifies, etc. But this is a most impertinent and silly
Query; for those must needs be found ungodly, who are found without Faith.

Q. 14. Haworth, Whether by the Blood of Christ thou meanest any thing that is
not in thy Heart and Soul, within thy self, whether thou meanest that material
Blood that was shed from that material Body of Jesus of Nazareth, when he did
hang upon the Tree at Mount Calvary, without the Gates at Jerusalem, with all
his material real Sufferings both of Soul and Body?

Answ. Crook, I mean, both the real and material Blood (as thou call it) of
Jesus of Nazareth, and the Virtue, Life and Mystery of it received into my
Heart by Faith, with all his real Sufferings both of Soul and Body.

Q. 15. Haworth, Whether that Blood there shed was not the Blood of God,
according to Acts 20.28. he being God as well as Man?

Answ. Crook, The Blood there shed was properly and primitively the Blood of
Christ, mentioned before, [ that] by which God did purchase his Church,
according to Acts 20.28. quoted, was properly Christ himself, he gave himself
for us a Ransom, etc. 1 Timothy 2.6. Tit. 2.14. which takes in his Blood, and all
that is most Excellent in him both as God and Man.

Q. 16. Haworth, Whether Remission of all Sins was not actually purchased by
the Death of Christ above sixteen hundred years since for all that have been or
shall be saved?

Answ. Crook, This in Substance is but the eighth Query over again, and
therefore is answered before.

Q. 17. Haworth, Is any man any farther justified then sanctified, any farther
forgiven, then according to that degree that Sin is mortified in him?

Answ. Crook, 1st, If by [ farther] thou meanest, whether a man may be
experimentally (for so thou callst it in thy first Query) both acquitted and
condemned at the same moment of time, and for the same Fact; I say, nay. 2dly,
If thou ask, whether a Defect or Failure in Sanctification causes an
Eclipse of Justification; I say, Yea. 3dly, If by [ farther] thou intendest,
whether a man that was once justified, wholely loses the Benefit of his former
Justification by every Failure in Sanctification; I answer, Nay; because while
the Sense of God's former Mercy abides in the Heart, Man is sooner humbled, and
his Faith thereby greatly strengthened for his speedy Recovery. 4thly, Or if by
this Query thou would know, whether a man that is not so fully and perfectly
mortified and sanctified, as he yet desires and endeavors to be, may
notwithstanding be justified by Faith, and have Peace with God through Jesus
Christ; I say, Yea. 5thly and lastly, If by [ farther] thou believe
(according to page 36. of thy Book) that a man without or as free from all
manner of Good, as Christ was without or free from all manner of Evil; may yet
in that state be justified, that is indeed farther then I dare go.

Q. 18. Haworth, Whether is Justification any thing else but an Act of the
Light within every man, upon Obedience to it, giving Peace?

Answ. Crook, Yea, it is more then an Act of the Light, as in every man; for
its the Act of God, and is called the Justification of Life.

Q. 19. Haworth, Whether is there any Good Work done by any man before he is
justified, and forgiven all his Sins?

Answ. Crook, If man be not justified without Faith, nor his Sins forgiven him
without Repentance, and if believing and repenting be good Works, the Querist
answers himself. Yet I do say, both Faith and Repentance do flow as Streams
from a Fountain, which Fountain is Christ.

Q 20. Haworth, Whether Faith as a Habit in, or Act of our Mind, or any Good
Work proceeding from the Spirit in us, be any part of that Righteousness that
justifies?

Answ. Crook, If by proceeding from the Spirit in us, thou intendest the Spirit
of Christ, then Christ and his Spirit, being one, what he does, in Experimental
Justification (as thou speak) that his Spirit does also, 1 Cor. 6.11.

Q 21. Haworth, Whether there is any such thing in the Nature of God as
Vindictive Justice, so that Sin must be punished upon all them that accept not
of the Atonement of Christ Jesus by the Sacrifice of himself?

Answ. Crook, Shall not the God of all the Earth do justly? yea, surely, and
Sin must be punished upon all them that accept not of the Atonement of Christ
Jesus, that one Offering, that perfects forever them that are sanctified, by
whom we have [now] received the Atonement, Romans 5.11.

Q. 22. Haworth, Whether the Light within, or the Person of Christ without, be
the Object of Justifying Faith; or whether Faith be any thing but Obedience to
the Light, that every one has?

Answ. Crook, 1st, The Light within gives the true Knowledge of God in the Face
of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. 2dly, It is not the Light within disjunctive from
Christ without, but conjunctive, as the Eye in its Object; that is the Object
of justifying Faith. 3dly, Faith is more then Obedience to the Light, in that
degree that every man has it; for it has the whole Christ for its Object.

Q. 23. Haworth, Whether have not all the Sons of Men ( Christ excepted) the
Guilt of Adam's first Transgression upon them, before they are justified, and
called, and so are by nature children of Wrath, etc?

Answ. Crook, Before Justification, is Condemnation and Wrath upon every Soul
of Man that does Evil, Romans 2.9. and in the fallen Nature all are Children of
Wrath; but that this Proverb must always be used, (viz.) The Fathers have
eaten sour Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth are s^t on edge, is contrary to
Scripture; but to this I have spoken largly in my Rejoinder, to which I refer
the Querist.

Q. 24. Haworth, Are any so perfect in this Life, as to be above the Confession
of Sin to God?

Answ. Crook, If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
Sins, and to cleanse us from All Unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9 He that is Thus
Forgiven and Cleansed is in a State above that wherein he confessed and
glorified God for his Mercy.

Q. 25. Haworth, Of what use is that Interecssion of Christ's as a High Priest
in Heaven?

Answ. Crook, Of great use to all that truly know and believe it.

Q. 26. Haworth, Whether there be a higher Prophecy then the Writings of the
Prophets and Apostles; and if so, where is it, and what is it?

Answ. Crook, The Spirit of the Son in the Hearts of God's People is greater
then the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, as the Builder of the House is
greater or more honorable then the House.

Q. 27. Haworth, Are not the holy Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles the
Rule of Faith and Life?

Answ. Crook, That which first opens man's Understanding to understand the
Scriptures aright, is his first Rule or Guide, and this is the promised Spirit
of Jesus, who said, [ It] shall take of mine, and show them unto you; so that
it is properly [ the] Rule; for, as many as are the Sons of God, are led by the
Spirit of God; yet, the holy Scriptures are [ A] Rule through the Direction of
the Spirit.

Q. 28. Haworth, Whether do thou believe that the same Body of Man, after the
Departure of the Soul from it, does rise to Life again?

Answ. Crook, This Query is contrary to Scripture, which says, A Natural Body
is sown, a Spiritual Body is raised; there is a Natural Body, there is a
Spiritual Body, 1 Cor. 15.44. which I believe.

Q. 29. Haworth, Whether are our distinct Personal Beings preserved in the
Future State, whether we lose them, being swollowed up into God at Death?

Answ. Crook, I believe that in the Future State we shall not lose our Distinct
Beings by being swollowed up into God, but shall be preserved in our Distinct
Beings forever.

Q. 30. Haworth, Whether the Light that every man has, believed in, obeyed,
trusted to, is not the Jesus, the Righteousness, the Justification, the Blood,
the Remission, the Mysiery, the Experience, the Faith, the Cleansing, the
Sanctification, the Shedding, Drinking, Sprinkling of the Blood, etc. which
words and phrases are all in this thy Testimony? answer plainly: Is there any
more in thy whole Treatise and thy Post script then this ( viz.) To the Light,
obey the Light, and whoever does not is but in the History, is but a Prodigal
in a far Country, feeding amongst the Swine, a poor, naked, starved Sinner.

Answ. Crook, My Answer plainly to the first part of this Query is, That
although the Jesus, the Righteousness, the Justification, the Blood, that I
bear Testimony unto, cannot be known but by and in the true Light; yet I never
said, neither do I believe, that the Light, that every man has believed in,
etc. [ is] the Jesus, the Righteousness, the Justification, the Blood, the
Remission, etc. yet do affirm, that God, who is Light, is All in All; and Jesus
Christ, who is the Light, is made of God unto true Believers Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, according to 1 Cor. 1.30. To the
second part, I say, There is more in my Treatise and Postscript then to the
Light, obey the Light, etc. but do also testify, that whosoever does not obey
the Light that shines in the Heart, and manifests Sin and Evil in the
Conscience, is yet in his Sins, and feeding among the Swine. Now I appeal from
W.H's Rashness and Folly, not only to those that have known my manner of Life
for nigh Forty Years past, how that from my tender years I have been seeking
after God and his Truth; but to that great Judge of Quick and Dead, that will
pass Sentence upon every man according to his Works, unto whom none dare say at
that Tribunal, God made him to sin, or made [IT] unavoidable.

I hope, what I have said will satisfy the Honest hearted, who will not easily
believe that after them any weary Steps and toylsome years of hearing, reading,
watching, fasting, believing, praying, etc. I should sacrifice all this and
much more unto a wilful Error, and to such an one as is not only destitute of
all worldly Preferments, but exposed to all the Sufferings and Hardships in it;
which I must needs do, if I am such a Person as W. H. represents me to be. But
were I guilty, such confused Arguments, Contradictions and hard Languages will
never convince me that W.H. is in the Truth; for he is but a weak Adversary
that cannot distinguish between loud Clamours and Gospel Demonstrations.

John Crook.

William Haworth's Contradictions and Confusions.
Haworth, I Do still speak respectfully of the Light; God forbid I should be an
Opposer of it, or an Enemy to it, let my Tongue first cleave to the Roof of my
Mouth, let me first be Dumb and never speak any more, page 5. etc. [ it is but
Flesh] all is called Flesh, all the new Birth, etc. Light is from Christ, and
he is the Author of it, page 6. etc. it lusts against the Spirit, and is
contrary to the Spirit, page 109. etc. they that live not up to it, shall be
inexcusably condemned, page 113. etc. it is but Nature, fallen blind Nature,
page 135. it is a Spark of that Light Adam had in Innocence in a full Flame,
page 109. etc. I scarce know one Gospel Truth but this Light contradicts, page
161. etc. I do now say, it is a rotten, corrupt and unsound Thing or Principle,
as to the leading or guiding into the Knowledge of the Gospel, page 149. etc.
this Light was in Adam after the Fall, Genesis 3.10. I heard thy Voice, etc. the
Lord God called to Adam, etc. this Light reproves, so that man has not Power
to go on in Sin, page 143. etc. it works a Change in the Life and Conversation,
page 150. etc. which shows it to be unsound and impure, page 146. he gives
Light to all, ibid. etc. it goes with the Damned to Hell, Epist. page 6.

Crook, I desire the Reader to peruse the Pages, and he will find I have not
wronged my Adversary in drawing this result, (viz.) That full Flame Adam had in
Innocence, of which there is a Spark in every man, that Voice of God that spoke
to Adam, that reproves for Sin, and keeps from going on in Sin, the Gift of
Christ by which some divine things may be known, which works a change in the
Life and Conversation, etc. That which does all this, is but Flesh, and that
which lusts against the Spirit, and is contrary to the Spirit; it is but
Nature, fallen Nature, fallen blind Nature, impure and unsound, etc. which is
in every Murderer and Robber, goes with the Damned to Hell, remains with them
there, etc. hear ye Heavens, and give ear O Earth, and be horribly ashamed of
such Tenants as these, as he says, Epist p 6. etc.

Haworth, Christ has subdued all my Enemies virtually already, and will
actually in time, which I wait for, Epist. page 6. etc. My rejoicing is in
this, that the Elect cannot be deceived, etc. My Prayer is, that whoever of you
belongs to the Elect^ of Grace, may be undeceived, Epist. page 12. etc. Thou art
the dearer to us, John, in that thou have been a stone once in Christ's
Building, ibid. etc. The Restraining Grace of God joined with the Light; for I
attribute it to that in indeed chiefly, as in the Case of Abimelech, Genesis 20.
ibid. etc. I kept thee, the Light within would not have done it, etc.

Crook, In diverse Pages of his Book he enveighs against Perfection (as is
showed anon) and yet here he faith, he waits for it; the Elect cannot be
deceived, and yet he prays, that so many as belong to Election may be
undeceived. But by his Confession I am safe enough, if either his Faith in this
matter or mine be true; for (says he) thou, John, have been a Stone once in
Christ's Building: and I am sure Christ's Building is made up of Living Stones,
if thou be but as sure, that not one that was once such shall finally perish.
But that I am so dear to you (as thou speak) does not appear by thy calling
me Knave, Rebel, Mountebank, Juggler, Impostor, False Prophet, etc. however, we
should be dearer each to other if you would cease opposing the true Light, and
walk in it, that we might have Fellowship therein. Thy Proselyte confesses,
The Light kept him from stealing Herrings; though thou say, it would not
have withheld or kept Abimelech the Heathen King, etc. but the Notes on ^he
great Bibles say, God by his Spirit kept or retained him, etc. thus thy own
Proof disproves a great part of thy Book, which denies the holy Spirit to
strive in Unregenerate Men, contrary to Genesis 6.3. on which place. Hen.
Ainsworth observes, That the Spirit of God strove by Inward Motions and Checks
of Conscience with the Old World, which his Spirit gave them for their Sins,
against which they that struggle fall into the Sin against the Holy Ghost,
despiting the Spirit of Grace, Hebr. 10.29. Take heed, William Haworth, that
this be not thy Condition.

Haworth, I will give thee a Taste of this way of Allegorizing, etc. if many
Senses of the Scripture, then no one sense is certain, etc. the Work of the
Spirit in our Hearts is not God's Son, Epist. p 7. etc.

Crook, He scoffs at Allegorizing of Scripture (as he speaks) as if he had
forgotten Sarah and Hagar were two Women, and yet were Allegories of two
Mountains, and those two Mountains of the two Dispensations of God, viz. Law
and Gospel, etc. and as if Christ's Words had no Certainty in them when he
spoke of destroying the Temple, meaning the Temple of his Body; and the like
may be said of the Apostle's treating of the Duties between Husband and Wife,
concludes that his Words had two Senses, viz. concerning the great Mystery of
Christ, and his Church, as well as that between Man and Wife, Mar. 2.18
compared with Jer. 31.15. where the Weeping of Rachel for the Benjamites or
Israelites her Children is one Sense, and for the young Children killed by
Herod in another Sense, etc. as if the literal Sense of Scripture could not be
preserved where the Mystery also was understood. Hen. Ainsworth in his Preface
to the five Books of Moses, says, In the Histories are employed Allegories, and
in the Laws are Types and Shadows, etc. Dr. Slbbs says, The Seed of the Woman
or Spirit in us bruiseth the Seed of the Serpent in us; and yet its true of
Christ's Conquest outwardly, when he spoiled Principalities and Powers etc.
Brightman on 4 cap. Revel. p. 174. Lamps of Fire burning before the Throne,
etc. because they do inlighten the Mind, do burn up the Stubble of inborn
Corruptions, and do moreover inflame the Mind with a Desire of all Godliness,
which God calls the Baptism of Fire, Mat. 3.11. Again, (says he) the seven
Spirits of God, by which words the Faithful may understand, that that Power
which they feel to be stirred up by God in their Hearts is a most undoubte
Pledge of God himself dwelling in us, etc. Thus much to stop his Scorn, etc.

Haworth, The Seed of the Woman is Christ, Gal. 4. etc. which the Apostle in
the same Epistle says, is Christ's Person according to the Flesh, page 4. etc.
The Firstborn of every Creature, The Brightness of his Father's Glory, the
Eternal Word that was made Flesh, the Alpha and Omega, All in All, etc. If
thou, John, attribute any of these Titles to any thing that is in Man, besides
the very [Person] of Jesus Christ, I charge thee with the highest Blasphemy
imaginable, p. 19. etc. Whose Goings forth have been of Old, from Everlasting;
which is certainly spoke as to Christ's Deity, p. 27. etc.

Crook, I find not the word Person but once mentioned in all that Epistle to
the Galatians, and that is Cap. 2. Verse. 6. God accepts no Man's Person,
which I hope he does not apply to Christ; so that its no wonder if [ he] abuses
the words of others, who is so bold and positive in charging the Apostle with
that which is not to be found in all that Epistle to the Galatians, befides,
its contrary to Scripture Dialect to say, the Eternal Word, the Firstborn of
every Creature, the Alpha and Omega, the All in All, was the very Person of
Christ, that was made a Person; for that Flesh he was made of [as Man] was his
real Person or Body, and not a Fantastic Body, as some conceited, and yet
says, Whose Goings have been of Old, from Everlasting, is certainly spoke of
Christ's Deity: Was not this then the Goings forth of the Eternal Word, the
Alpha and Omega, etc?

Thy high Charge of Blasphemy is like to fall upon thy self; for, to say Christ
is not at all in his People, is contrary to the whole current of Scripture, and
is contradictory to thy self in many Pages of thy Book, etc. as may be seen in
my Rejoinder.

Haworth, The Spirit conveyed it self into the Hearts of the Hearers by this
Doctrine, and wrought Faith in them to receive it, page 6, etc. the Gospel
declares Remission of Sins by the Sacrisice of Christ, and that by the
Obedience of this one we are made Righteous; his Obedience without us, p 7. etc.

Crook, One while, God is not at all in his People; another while, there is
nothing good before Faith; and now, all is done by Christ's Obedience without
us; and again, the Spirit was there before Faith, to work Faith, etc. But hear
thy own Author, Richard Baxter, in his Appeal to the Light, p. 3. The Day of
Judgment will not be to try Christ and his Righteousness, but (to honor it)
and try us and ours; and all men shall be judged according to their own Works;
and to be judged, is to be justified or condemned (says he) and Salvation or
Damnation will be adjudged us, as we are found to be personally Righteous or
Unrighteous, etc. Dr. S^bbs, Soul's Conflict, cap. 15. page 224. The Happiness
of man consists [chiefly] in a gracious Frame of Spirit, and Actions suitable
sweetly issuing therefrom. But what will become of William Haworth, who says,
He dares not trust to the holy Ghost, etc?

Haworth, We are converted from Darkness, that imbred natural Darkness that we
are in, and all men, unto Light, which Light is Christ's Person, and the Gospel
which declares of him, and so to all things the Gospel requires of us, etc. we
are not perfect, nor think we shall ever attain it in this Life, page 8. etc.

Crook, Thou seemst to allude to the Apostle's Words, Acts 26.18. who was sent
to the Gentiles to open their blind Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to
Light, and from the Power of Satan to God; but why do thou vary from
Scripture Conversion? Is it because yours is not Scripture Proof, that thou
wholely leaves out three Parts of five (viz.) (1 st) The Opening their Blind
Eyes. (2 dly) And from the Power of Satan (3 dly) unto God; so that your
Conversion is without having your Blind Eyes opened, or being turned from
Satan, or being turned to God, only you believe that there is a natural inbred
Darkness in you and all men, which you ought to turn from, but do not think to
be so perfect, as ever to attain it in this Life; and you are turned to Light
(that is) Christ's Person, and the Gospel (that is) the Scriptures, which
declare of him, and so to all things that Christ in the Gospel requires of you,
but ye do not think to be so perfect, as to do them, or everattain it in this
Life, but we are made righteous by his Obedience without us, p. 7. But for the
Holy Ghost we dare not trust to it, p. 52. If the Members of thy Church at
Hartford be no better Converts then their Pastor, no marvel thy Proselite ( The
Young Man) p. 6. of his Book) calls most of them a Loose, Wanton and Proud
People, that adorn their Bodi^s more then their Souls.

Haworth, What tends this to but Rantism indeed and Atheism (viz.) that the Law
and Gospel are one in the End and Nature, p. 13. etc. The Law is spiritual (i.
e.) requires that all the Thoughts of Man, and Desires, and Motions of the
Heart should be Holy and Spiritual continually, therefore it is a fit
Instrument for the Spirit to make use of by enlightening the Soul in the
Knowledge of it, to convince, not of outward gross Evils only, but of
Heart-Polutions, p. 14. etc.

Crook, Thou will not deny that the Gospel does require continual
Heart-Spirituality, and is also a fit In strument for the Spirit to make use of
to the same End; what Consusion is this then, to affirm, that that which
requires all the Thoughts of man, and Desires and Motions of the Heart should
be holy, and spiritual continually tends to Rantism and Atheism, and yet calls
it a fit Instrument for the Spirit to make use of, so that thy Argument runs
thus, That which tends to Rantism and Atheism is a fit Instrument for the
Spirit to make use of, or thus (take thy choice) That which is a fit Instrument
for the Spirit to make use of rends to Rantism and Atheism, but the Law which
requires that all the Thoughts of Man should be Holy, etc. and the End and
Nature of the Gospel being and requiring the same, are fit Instruments for the
Spirit to make use of, Ergo the End and Nature of the Spiritual Law and Gospel
tends to Rantism and Atheism. Who is the Ranter and Atheist now, William?

Haworth, The Spirit that convinces the Unbelieving World of Sin, John 16.8.
is neither the Law nor Gospel, p. 11. We preach the Law in Order to the Gospel
to prepare the Spirit of man by convincing of sin, etc. p. 12. The Law does but
kill, p. 14. The Law requires the Heart should be holy, and spiritual
continually, etc. The spirit makes use of the Doctrine of the Law to convince
of sin, and the Doctrine of the Gospel as an Instrument to turn the Soul to
Christ, etc.

Crook, One while the Law does convince of Sin, another while it does not; one
while it does [but] kill, another while it requires continual
Heart-Spirituallity and Holiness; one while Law and Gospel are as different as
Heaven and Earth, p. 13. and another while they are both made use of by the
Spirit to the same End, viz. Inward Holiness, and continual
Heart-Spirituallity, one while the Gospel does all, and the Law can do nothing
[but] kill, another while neither Law nor Gospel can do any thing, but as the
Spirit uses the Doctrine of both: And this is great Babel that William Haworth
has built for the Honor of his Profession, and Re establishing of his young
Convort, etc.

Haworth, The Law is here taken for all the Writings of the Scripture, viz.
Psalm. 19.7. etc. The whole Nation is called properly the Land, is therefore
every Piece of Ground in it good to bear Wheat, because Ground or Land in
general is? etc.

Crook, If the Law be taken in the Spirituallity of it, as comforting the Soul,
etc. then it is taken as I allege it; for I allege it as it is written; but
this Psalm. 19.7. cannot be taken for all the Writings of the Scriptures in
general, because the New Testament (to be sure) was not then written, and how
much of the old is hard to say, but that some of it was written after is easy
to prove; but let us see if thy Similitude will relieve thee; The whole Nation
(say thou) is properly the Land, so all the Writings of the Scriptures are
here called the Law of God, is therefore every Piece of Ground in that Land
good to bear wheat, say thou?

Answ. Here are two things to be noted, 1 st, That thou ta, kest all the
Writings of the Scriptures for the Law of God which is not Universally true,
because there is a Record of the Devils and wicked men's Words, as well as good
men's, in the Scriptures. 2 dly. That some of the Law of God is like barren and
sandy Ground, that will bear no Wheat, according to thy Similitude, and
consequently that the Law of God and the Scriptures are imperfect: Who
undervalues the Law of God and the Scriptures now, William? have thou forgotten
that the Law of the Lord is perfect, and that the Scripture cannot be broken,
and that all Scripture given by Inspiration of God is profitable, etc?

I have read that Christ compared the Unfruitful Hearers to the several
Grounds, but I never heard of any Stony, Thorny, High-way-Ground Law of God or
Scriptures before.

Haworth, I know the Spiritualluy of the Law convincing me of Evil Thoaghts,
etc. p. 14. The Spirit that convinces the Unbelieving World is neither Law nor
Gospel. The Law is a fit Instrument for the Spirit to make use of; It is the
Dectrine of the Gospel not Law [ taken stricily] that declares Non-imputation
of Trespasses; it was the Doctrine of Righteousness by the Gospel relieved me,
as it did Paul, p. 15.

Crook, What Confusion is here? Sometimes the Law convinces of secret
Thoughts, and sometimes again the Spirit makes use of the Doctrine of the Law
to convince of Sin, and sometimes it is neither Law nor Gospel that does it;
sometimes absolutely denying that wicked men have the Spirit, and here he
confesses it is the Spirit that convinces the Unbelieving World, by the
Doctrine of the Law, etc. so that it a properly the Work of the Spirit, as when
one man cuts or wounds another with a Knife, etc. we say, he man has cut him,
not the Knife or Instrument, etc. But sometimes it is the Doctrine of the
Gospel does all, and by and by the Spirit does but make use of the Doctrine of
the Gospel; sometimes he intimates, as if the Law and Gospel in a mild gentle
Sense might be taken one for the other, else what means those Words, viz. It Is
the Doctrine of the Gospel, not Law [ taken strictly] that declares
Non-imputation of Trespasses, and yet p. 14. The Law requires all the Thoughts
of the Heart to be continually spiritual and Holy, and discovers or convinces
not of Gross Sins only, but of Heart-Polutions, etc. But Heb. 4.12. the
Discovery of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart is ascribed to the Gospel,
and W. H. calls it the spirituallity of the Law; is not this to make them one?
But by this Mess or altogether the Reader may see how the poor man is tossed,
notwithstanding he talks of being relieved, and being come to a Fixedness and
Consistency; but alas, alas! how may the least Child of Light see him lie
fettered in Babylon's Dungeon?

Haworth, This cannot be; for the Law in its own Nature is spiritual, etc. and
discovers the Holy Nature of God, although the Spirit should never make use of
it, p. 16. etc.

Crook, My Words to which these are an Answer are these, viz. The spirituallity
of the Law, in the Apostle's Sense, is the Inward Convictions of the Spirit,
etc. That cannot be (says he) because the Law is Spiritual and Holy in its own
Nature, etc. As if the Spirit and what it does were not Holy and spiritual
also. Again, he says, The Law discovers the Pure Nature of God, and in p. 15.
he says, the Spirit makes use of Doctrines of different Natures, and the Law
is a fit Instrument for the Spirit to make use of. Thus he continues building
his Baocl, sometimes the Law of it self discovers the Pure Nature of God,
although the Spirit should never make use of it; and just before he says, the
Spirit does make use of it, and the Law is a fit Instrument for the Spirit to
make use of, p. 16. etc.

Haworth, That Christ which delivered Paul from the Guilt and Punishment of
Sin, while Sin dwelt in him, p. 18. etc.

Crook, What! delivered, and yet Sine dwelt in him; what! Christ and Sin dwell
both together in the same House; this is contrary to Christ's Doctrine, Mark
3.24,25. That Kingdom or House that is divided against it self cannot continue
or stand.

Haworth, But does not the spirit who is God, give us the Meaning of the
Scriptures in the Scriptures? do not they interpret themselves best? p. 22. etc.

Crook, If the Scriptures can best interpret themselves, then what need of
God's spirit to open them? or is God and the Scriptures all one? If so, then
none in the World that have the Scriptures, are without God in the World; but
the Apostle says, some were without God in the World, notwithstanding they had
the Scriptures; one while the Spirit who is God gives the meaning of them, and
another while they interpret themselves best; what Consusion is here?

Haworth, Everlasting Righteousness was not actually brought in till Jesus was
born at Nazareth, etc. then it was to be and not till then, not before; he
offered not himself before, Hebr. 9.26. p. 26. etc.

Crook, Thou callst it the Righteousness of the Eternal Word, the Righteousness
of the Deity of Christ, which thou confessest to be in his People, as before;
and thou likewise confessest it to be an Everlasting Righteousness, and of an
Eternal Virtue and Efficacy, and yet say, the working of it was [ now] as if
it was always in being, and yet did not work, or was not efficacious till
after Christ was born at Bethlehem, and yet to go round again, It was
Efficacious to Abraham, David, Daniel, Job, etc. p 26. Where Is now this man's
Consistency?

Haworth, If Salvation be only by Jesus, then not by the Light within; for that
is not Jesus that witnessed before Pontins Pilate, p. 27.

Crook, The Scripture says, we are saved by Grace, does it therefore follow,
that we are not saved by Jesus Christ? Grace is Light within, and those that
are saved, are saved by the Grace that is Light within, and yet are they saved
only by Jesus the Light of the World, and that which witnessed before Pontius
Pilate was the Spirit of God in the man Jesus, which Spirit was the Light
within him, as he says, If I bear witness of (i. e.) only of my self without
the Spirit, my witness is not true, yet if I do bear witness of my self (i. e.)
by the Spirit of my Father that dwells in me, my witness is true; and thus
does Darkness blind thee that thou can not see the Oneness between the man
Jesus, and the Spirit of the Father that was in him.

Haworth, He that works not, but believes, there is Faith only, a bare
Belief, John, what say thou to that? though that Faith that is justifying
will work, p. 29. etc.

Crook, I say thou contradictest thy self, William; for thou say it is such
a Faith as works not, and yet say it will work.

Haworth, My Surety paying such a some of Money for me at never such a
Distance, discharges me, I have Benesit by it so soon as I hear of it, and
accept it; the Sun is at a Distance in the Heavens, but we have the Heat of it
and feel it, but indeed this Righteousness is not at a Distance from us, but
put upon us by the Father's Gift, p. 34. etc.

Crook, He dreams of an absolute Discharge from all Sins past, present and to
come, by what Christ did and suffered 1600 Years since, by that Righteousness
that was wrought in Palestine, at such a Distance from him, etc. as he speaks
(within a few Lines before) yet makes the Benefit of all that Christ did and
suffered to depend upon his Hearing of it, and accepting it, as if all was
completed there absolutely and yet conditionally too (viz.) If heard and
accepted, etc. and yet hearing the debt is paid by another at such a Distance
(says W. H. discharges me, where note, he one while dates the Discharge of
all Debts from Palestine 1600 Year, since, and another while from the time of
his hearing and accepting of it; besides, it is uncertain whether by this
hearing and accepting he intends only the believing of the Report without, or
the revealing of the Arm of the Lord within, Isa. 53.1. But to perfect the
Contradiction of himself he implies, though it be at that Distance, yet we are
as really inwardly benefited by it, as we are outwardly by the Light of the Sun
that is at a Distance in the Heavens; But says he, We have the Benefit of it
and feel it, etc. But yet to manifest more plainly the Contradiction, he says,
Indeed this Righteousness is not at a Distance from us, but put upon us by the
Father's Gift, citing Gal. 3.27. Ye have put on Christ, etc. So that he has
not only contradicted himself, but also granted what I contend for (viz.) That
Christ's Righteousness is not really reckoned and imputed to the Justification,
Acquitment, and Discharge of such Persons as continue in Sin, and Actual
Rebellion against God, by wicked Works, and have no Feeling of it in their
Hearts, yet believe to be saved by a Righteousness wholely without them, etc.
which Faith I affirm to be vain, and but like a Body without a Spirit, as the
Apostle James speaks, and in Confirmation hereof W. H. says, But indeed this
Righteousness is not at a Distance from us, then not wholely without us by his
own Confession, which was the very thing in express Words that I opposed, and
he endeavors to maintain, that it was wholely without us; yea, says W. H. [
Bare] Faith without Works] which Christ wrought in his own Personal Obedience
and Suffering 1600 Years since, etc. and though this Righteousness was wrought
in Palestine, at such a Distance from me, etc. By this the judicious Reader may
see his Contradiction and Confusion.

Haworth, Christ was the Lamb of God, but not the Light within, p. 37. etc.

Crook, In page 21, he says, The Church and People of God are the Heavenly
Jerusalem; and is not Christ there the Light within? And page 35. he says,
Christ works Sanctification in the Hearts of the sanctified, etc. and is not he
there the Light-within? what Confusion and Contradiction is this!

Haworth, I am pleading that this Righteousness is imputed to Believers, it is
offered in the preaching of it to poor Sinners, and if God gives Faith it will
change their Hearts, p. 38. etc.

Crook, Now he has resolved, viz. When, and to whom Christ's Righteousness is
imputed; the time is, when God gives Faith, the Persons are Believers; so that
he has given away what he seemed to contend for, p. 20. viz. We must be
without or free from all manner of Good, as Christ was without, or free from
all manner of Evil, when we are justified by this imputed Righteousness; and
now he says, Till the Heart be changed, Righteousness is not imputed. But
enough of this; for I am weary of his Contradictions and Confusions.

Haworth, While that which is contrary to God dwells in us, yet being justified
by Faith we have Peace with God, Christ has slain the Enmity, etc. p. 38. etc.

Crook, If the Enmity be slain, how comes that which is controry to God to
dwell in us? What slain, and alive too! The Apostle says, His Servants ye are
whom ye obey, whether of Sin unto Death, or of Righteousness unto Life. And
Christ says, No man can serve two Masters. Now this Phrase, viz. That which is
contrary to God to dwell in us, is no where in Scripture applied to Believers,
that walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; but Christ is said to
dwell in them, and they in him; for its one thing to have Motions to Evil [As
in my Flesh dwells no good thing] and another thing to suffer them as an
Inhabitant, or that which is contrary to God to dwell in us; I know not what
degree of Insensibility thou art arrived at, but for my part I believe Sin to
be the great Troubler of Israel; and what Peace while that Jezabel reigns,
examine thy self, and possibly thou may sind this Saying true, viz. There is
no Peace to the Wicked, says my God, Isa. 20.

Haworth, Let me tell thee withal this, none ever did or can show forth
Christ's Virtues in their Lives, that were not first justified by imputed
Righteousness, p. 39. etc.

Crook, Thy is quite contrary to the former Page, which says, That this
Righteousness is imputed to Believers; it is offered in the preaching of it to
poor sinners, and if God gives Faith it will change their Hearts, etc. So that
till the Heart be changed Righteousness is not imputed; now he says, None can
be changed or show forth Christ's Virtues in their Lives, that were not first
justified by imputed Righteousness; how these can hang together let the Reader
judge; one while Righteousness is imputed, while that which is contrary to God
dwells in us, and another while it is offered, but not imputed to Sinners
till the Heart be first changed. But I hope W. H. henceforth will never charge
the Quakers, or any others that show forth Christ's Virtues in their Lives,
with denying Justification by Imputed Righteousness, seeing all such Holy Lives
(by his own Acknowledgment) are first justified by it, etc. But to perfect his
Confusion and Contradiction (he says) but six Lines before, viz. As if Christ
might not work Virtues in our hearts, which we express in our Lives, and yet
these be but our own Righteousness; yet he here says, none ever did, or can
show forth Christ's Virtues in their Lives, that were not first justified by
imputed Righteousness.

Haworth, The Spirit gives Wisdom in this Doctrine of Imputed Righteousness,
and hereupon comes Life and Peace (Romans 5.) so that Life and Peace arises not
by looking to this Wisdom and spirituallity; for that is imperfect, etc. p. 40.
etc.

Crook, So then that which Christ works (as thou speakst elsewhere) and the
Spirit gives [is] in thy Account imperfect, whenas the Scripture says, Every
Gift of God is perfect.

Haworth, We are treating of Righteousness imputed to them that have Faith, now
can any have Faith, and have the Gifts of the Spirit taken away, etc? May not
the Gifts and Virtues of the Spirit remain in us, and we thereby be sanctified,
and yet not justified by that Righteousness within, but by that without us,
which is the Cause of Sanctification? p. 40.

Crook, Page 35. he acknowledges Christ to be the Author of all Righteousness,
and I showed (under Title Rejoinder) how that himself proves the outward and
inward Righteousness to be one, before he said, We must be as free from all
good when this Righteousness is imputed, as Christ was from all evil, and now
he says, we must have Faith, and the Gifts and Virtues of the Spirit remain in
us, and we thereby be sanctified (he says) it is imputed to them that are
sanctified, and yet affirms it is the Cause of Sanctification; what! is Faith
the Gift of God, and a part of Sanctification, and must first be received
before this Righteousness is imputed, and yet calls it the Cause of
Sanctification? Why then do thou not say in Plainness, that this
Righteousness is imputed, and we justified thereby, before Faith or
Sanctification, while in Sin and Rebellion against God? Which is the thing thou
believe, but art afraid to tell the World so.

Haworth, God himself is the Author of them, viz. the Gifts and Virtues that
the Spirit works in our Minds, etc. I cannot say that the Righteousness which
the Spirit works in us is the same, but different from the Righteousness that
was personally wrought out by Christ, etc.

Crook, Is God himself and his Spirit the Author of our own Righteousness,
which the Scripture calls filthy Rags? I deny that, and that the Gifts and
Virtues which God himself works in our Minds, are in Scripture called ours, as
man's own Righteousness, and it is Confusion in thee to call them so; how come
they now to be so different? thou said before, they were contradistinguished,
and are they now different, being the same God and Spirit works them all (as
thy self confesses) and not the same in Nature, or is different and
distinguished all one with thee?

Haworth, Now the Righteousness of Christ is not in our Minds at all, but in
his own Person, etc. p. 6.

Crook, False Doctrine and Confusion, and quite contrary to what thou said p
34. viz. But indeed this Righteousness is not at a Distance from us, but put
upon us by the Father's Gift, as Jacob's Mother put Esau 's Garment upon him,
etc. and now it is not in our Minds at all, but in Christ's own Person; and yet
affirmest in thy Book, that Christ's Person is in Heaven afar off, as the
Tendency of thy Words are at the End of page 34. Is not this thy unhappy
Attempt to be so unsuccesful in all thy Designs?

Haworth, Paul calls them, viz. The Gifts and Virtues Christ and the Spirit
works in our Minds his own Rigteousness, Phil. 3.5. Not having my own
Righteousness which is of the Law, p. 47. etc.

Crook, Is there no Difference between the Gifts and Virtues which Christ and
the Spirit works in our Minds, and the Righteousness of the Law that Paul there
speaks of, let the Reader judge what a Preacher thou art: But let us hear
Augustine, viz. lib. de Gratia and libere arbitrio, Quid est non habens meam
justitiam quae ex lege est, cum sua non esset lex ipsa, sed Dei, nisi suam
dicit just itiam, quamvis ex lege esset, quia sua voluntate legem se posse
putabat implere sine adjutorio gratiae, quae est per fidem Christi. (i.e.) What
is it (says he not having my Righteousness which is of the Law, whereas the
Law was not his, but God's, but that he calls it his Righteousness, although it
was of the Law, because he thought that by his own will he could fulfill the Law
without the Help of Grace, which is by the Faith of Christ.

Haworth, Only they prepare the Soul for Blessedness (viz.) Purity of Heart,
Poverty of Spirit, etc. p 47.

Crook, Before he said, We must be as much without, or as free from all Good,
when Christ imputes his Righteousness to justify us, as Christ was without or
free from all Evil, and now there must be Poverty of Spirit, and Purity of
Heart, etc to prepare the Soul for Blessedness. Oh Unhappy Man! and Unstable.

Haworth, Thou still concludes that there is no Possession of Christ's
Righteousness, that none have any Enjoyments that are veal, etc. p. 48.

Crook, I may well conclude so, when in page 26. thou fayest, The Righteousness
of Christ is not in our Minds at all, but in his own Person in Heaven afar off.

Haworth, Let me add this as an Antidote still, that the reality of our
inherent Righteousness will not make it perfect, p. 48 etc.

Crook, This he calls an Antidote (as if he had given some Poison before) and
yet he confesses over and over, That its wrought by God himself, by Christ,
and by the Spirit, and is Reality in the abstract; yet now it is not perfect,
and all the Fault is, because it is so near us, if it were but far enough off,
he would like it better (as I suppose) but I never (that I remember) read of
any before that called the real Work of God himself, of Christ, and of the
Spirit imperfect: Is this thy Antidote? I dare say, the true-experienced
Christian will never drink it down, though thou say, we may be comforted by
it.

Haworth, We ought not to trust to our Repentings, Believings, etc. for they
are imperfect, p. 49. etc.

Crook, Is there no more difference between trusting [ to] our Repentings, and
trusting [ in] our Repentings? if I do not trust to it in some sense, how can I
be assured its right? If he that has true Faith must not trust to it ( viz.)
that it is true, then he must be distrustful of it, and so continue in Un
belief: What Confusion is this? Is the Gift of God imperfect? Why then does the
Apostle say, Every good and perfect Gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of Lights? James 1.17.

Haworth, The Phrase in Isa. 64.6. which thou in Scorn often repeatest, are the
Prophet's Words, etc. he does speak it of his own Righteousness, p. 49. etc.

Crook, The words of Isaiah are these, All our Righteousnesses are as filthy
Rags; this, says W. H. the Prophet speaks of his own Righteousness, not only
the Duties he and the People were found in, but of the Gifts and Virtues which
God himself, Christ and the Spirit works in our Minds, they are all our own
Righteousness; and the Prophet says, They are all as filthy Rags. I do not
wrong thee, therefore thou art a false Accuser, to speak scornfully and mock at
the Holy Scriptures: but if possible to make thee ashamed of thy Contradictions
and Confusions; for it is the Conviction in thy Conscience that tells thee, thy
own Confusion exposes thee to the Reader's Scorn and Mockery.

Haworth, John, thou pleadest for Obedience to the inward Gifts, and say,
all Prophets and Apostles were obedient to them, and this in Opposition to
Imputed Righteousness, etc. but to conclude, I believe, that the Good Men of
old were Obedient to the inward Gifts of the Spirit, and we all ought to be,
page 51. etc.

Crook, He has so fully answered himself, that I need say no more, only mind
him of his absolute falsity in these words, viz. in Opposition to imputed
Righteousness, etc. for I do not oppose the inward Gifts of the Spirit to
imputed Righteousness, but on the contrary do maintain and aver their Unity.

Haworth, The Light Within is the Light of a mere Man, page 52. etc.

Crook, This is contray to many Pages of his own Book, as pa. 109, 143, 146,
etc. where he calls the Light Christ's Gift, God's Voice, which keeps from
going on in Sins, a Spark in fallen Man of that full Flame Adam had before the
Fall in Innocence, etc. and now its the Light of a mere Man, page 52. etc.

Haworth, Any one that has but by the Holy Ghost been taught the Principles of
the Christian Religion, may encounter with the Quakers, p. 55. etc.

Crook, Observe, Reader, how sleightingly he speaks of the Teachings of the
Holy Ghost, viz. any one that has [but] etc. as if it were a light and common
thing, etc. but who would think this man to be [that] William Haworth that even
now said, He durst not trust to the Actings and Doings of the Holy Ghost? and
now he says, the Holy Ghost must teach the Principles of the Christian
Religion; but however (though against his Will) he has highly honored the
Quakers, in saying, He that will encounter them, must be taught by the Holy
Ghost; which implies the Light in them is something beyond the Light of a mere
man (as he speaks before, else he that by natural parts and acquired knowledge,
is instructed in the Principles of Christian Religion, may encounter the
Quakers: Besides, it serves to manifest the Reason of his bungling Reply, viz.
himself not being yet taught by the Spirit the Principles of Christian
Religion. But let us a little examine, whether a true Sight of sin be not oue
Principle of Christian Religion; if yea, then the spirit must show it; the like
may be said of Faith and Repentance, of the Knowledge of Christ, and the
Remission of Sins through his Blood, of Justification and Redemption, with the
right Knowledge and Interpretation of the holy Scripture, and whatever else may
be accounted Principles of the Christian Religion, that must all be taught us
by the Holy Ghost, as W. H. himself acknowledges, who in this seems to be an
absolute Quaker, or else a Jugler, and absolute French man, as himself speaks;
and indeed, it is a full granting (in few words) of the whole Matter in
Controversy between us; for in yielding to the Necessity of the Spirit's
teaching the Principles of Christian Religion, he has granted the Necessity of
Man's constant Waiting and Attendance thereupon for that End, which is the same
with the Quakers Doctrine, proved in Neh. 9.20. and that the Manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. and man ought
to wait in it, etc.

Haworth, I have talked with many, and could not find any Quakers that could
ever give any tolerable Account of the Christian Religion, p. 55. etc.

Crook, If the Quakers be such an ignorant and inconsiderate People, why must
those that encounter them be taught by the holy Ghost? and how came thou to
be so tossed by them as to be an Hundred Times hurried into their Way and
Opinions, as thou say in page 12. of thy Epistle: But what an inconsiderable
Judge art thou of their Knowledge of the True Christian Religion, but that thou
must manifest thy own Ignorance of the Spirit's Teaching, and that all the
Knowledge thou have of Christian Religion is gained some other way.

Haworth, The Quakers are to give heed to something within as to an Oracle, p.
56. etc.

Crook, Have thou so soon forgotten thy own acknowledgment, that the Principles
of the Christian Religion must be taught by the Spirit? and is not this Spirit
as an Oracle within, to be given Heed unto? For, if any man has not the spirit
of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8. How do thou contradict thy self! But
because thou dare not trust to the Holy Ghost, therefore thou mockest at the
Quakers for giving heed unto it.

Haworth, The Quakers keep people in perfect Popish Slavery; the Quakers know
no Slavery like the Bondage and Slavery of Sin, p. 56 etc.

Crook, Here thou m'xest in the same Character the first Sentence, which is thy
words, with the latter, which are mine, which is thy frequent Forgery, either
out of design to blemish me, and deceive thy Reader; or out of Ignorance, not
knowing how to distinguish, such is thy Confusion.

Haworth, These Commands, viz, the nine first Commandments, forbid not only the
Outward Actions, but the Consentin the Mind; so that if this tenth Commandment
forbid no more, it is but the same over again, Needless and Impertinent etc. p.
57. compared with p 59.

Crook, Then if the first Motions or Temptation to Adultery, Murder, etc. be
not consented to, the Law or nine Commandments in this particular is not
broken; but it seems, if a Motion or Temptation to Covet my Neighbors Servant
arise in me, though I consent not to it, but judge and deny it, yet I am guilty
of Sin against the tenth; so that by this I may be acquitted by the nine
Commandments, and condemned by the tenth in the same thing. See what a Habit of
Confusion this man is got into.

Haworth, What is wrought by the Spirit is our own Righteousness, and that Paul
calls his own, Phil. 3.9. page 61. etc. and this Righteousness does grow in us
stronger and stronger, as we hold on in Communion with Christ, ibid.

Crook, This that he calls our own Righteousness, and which Paul would not have
(he says) grows by communion with Christ: What Confusion is here! As if Man's
own Righteousness (which he calls elsewhere filthy Rags) grows by Communion
with Christ: What does Imputed Righteousness do then? it must either grow by
Communion with Christ, or stand still.

Haworth, But my confidence which I express in those words does not arise from
my own Righteousness, p. 61. etc.

Crook, Let the Reader observe his own Confession, (viz.) that his Confidence
does not arise from that Righteousness that grows stronger and stronger by
Communion with Christ, etc. this is that Fixedness and Consistency this Hundred
Times poor tossed Man boasts of in the 12th page of his Epistle.

JOHN CROOK.

William Bayly's REPLY TO William Haworth's Latter Part of his Quaker
Converted Re-established.
WIlliam Haworth, thou say, thou have given a full Reply to my Answer to
that little Book, entitled, The Quaker Converted, etc.

I must grant, it is a Reply, and very full, but its of Lies, Slanders,
Perversions, Scoffings and Reproachful Language, Contradictions and Confusion,
as the sober Reader (whose Eye is opened) may well perceive; but not at all yet
proving the Young Man to be such a Quaker as thou have affirmed, his own words
shall stand a witness against thee; for thou said, He was fully of their Way,
Faith, Spirit and Principle, and went farther then most of them toward that
they call Perfection.

His own words are these ( viz.)

Page 1. I went several times, as other Boys did.

Page 4. Now, there were some things the Quakers did, that I was not convinced
of, etc.

Page 7. Though I could not agree with them in all things, etc. and did not
like Silent Meetings, nor the Keeping on the Hat, etc.

And in page 10. I prayed earnestly, and in several Ways, as in Prayer learnt
by the Letter ( viz.) the Lord's Prayer, Mat. 6. and I prayed in or by the
Spirit, as I thought, and to Christ in me, and to Christ in the heavens, etc.
(and yet thought he was perfect, says W. H.)

Now, let all people judge if this be the Quakers Way and Manner, Faith, Spirit
and Principle, whether most of them be in such Confusion as this, besides his
saying You to a single person, and calling men Master, as was his way: And see
now, W. H. if all thy Skill will ever prove he was such a perfect Quaker. Thou
say, Thou know Two use the Salute of the Hat, etc. But I think thou will
not say two are the most of them; for thou said, he went farther then most of
them. We never questioned but he had Convictions, and was convinced of Sins
(and who is not?) But thy Assertion was, He was fully of their Way, etc. and
went farther then most of them, etc. which is very large: And if the Young Man
told thee, he was such a one, and that he was perfect, that is not the Quakers
way to speak after that manner.

Though thou believe in page 75. He was as real a Quaker as was in England; I
know no Body else will believe so, nor believe thee neither, after they have
well considered thy Reply, and see how full it is stufft with Lies and
Scandalous Revilings.

Thou challengest me or any of us to give an Instance in Scripture, Where the
People of God did professedly meet together at stated Times to sit together in
Silence, etc.

We never state any Times for Silence, nor limit the Lord's People from
speaking; but could wish, as Moses, all his People were Prophets: But can
thou prove, they never met at any time in Silence? Did thou hear of every
Meeting they had? or are they all recorded, think thou, and the Manner of
them? It were well if thou were come to know the Time to keep silence, before
the Time to speak: And may not Souls be fed in Silence?

Thou say in page 76. my Book is full of Railing, and that I deny God's
making known himself and his Salvation by preaching; and that I assert, Faith
comes without hearing.

Let the Reader see the 25th page of our Book, entitled, [ Rebellion Rebuked,
etc.] which he instanceth, or any other place, and see if ever I writ any such
things: Its but Lies of thy own making, W.H. which with the rest shall turn
upon thy own Head; for no such thing have I mentioned or written.

And so thou go on perverting the Scriptures of Truth, which I cited for
Silence, and Waiting in the Silence of all Flesh, etc. sporting and jeering
with thy airy Mind in thy own Deceivings, and making a Mock at Inspiration and
Silence. And what Mocks and Lies do thou make about the Servant of God his
words [ There was Silence in Heaven about the space of half an hour] and make
merry with it to wrong and reproach thy houest Neighbors, as one in sport,
page 78, 79. but the Lord God will recompense thee according to thy Work.

And then thou challengest me to mention one Lie that thou have either said or
writ of the Young Man.

But William, may not the Reader wonder at thy Blustering, Blind Confidence?
let him but look back and weigh what is before written here, and view your
little Book well, and there is Proof upon Proof for charging thee, not only
with one Lie, but more.

If thou say the man is perfect, as any in our Way, and the same man, and
many that know it otherwise, say, he is not, who shall be Judge? W. H. thy
after Chapter-Cover will never hide thy Nakedness; for thy Shame shall yet more
appear: He never went farther then most of them as thou have said, thou can
never get over that; and besides, thou know the Quakers at Hartford
testify, they never knew him to be called a Quaker, nor had he any Fellowship
or Society among that People; it is strange he should be such a perfect Quaker,
and yet so perfectly a Stranger to them in the same Town.

So all thy Push-Pin Play with J.C. (as thou callst thy Work, p. 54.) or any
Body else will never be able to pin thy shattered Work together, though thou
endeavourest to keep up thy Refuge of Lies with adding and multiplying Lie to
Lie, and Slander to Slander, as the Reader may see through thy work.

And in page 81. of thy Book (after many Lies, Perversions and gross Abuses of
our Faith and Principle) thou say, What we have done herein, we have done in
Truth, and for this End, to obviate the gross and damnable Errors of the
Quakers -- And that for nine Pages together (of my Book) is as strange a
Wild-Goose-Chase as thou have seen, and the same Colworts boiled over again
that turns the Reader's Stomach.

Truly William, thou do but turn the inside of thine own Stomach outward
against the Lord's People, foaming out the Enmity and Scorning that lodges in
thy Heart, to thy own Shame, against them, whose Cause the Lord will plead with
thee, and all that thus deride and abuse them. Art thou a savoury man, fit to
be a Teacher of others in the weighty matters of Eternity, who calls thy own
Work Push-Pin? but thou had better been at that Child's Play, then to have
been blaspheming God, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven.

And how thou vaunts in page 82. to prove the Light within to be a Natural
Light, etc. VV.H. thou can not (nor any man upon Earth) prove it to be any
other then of a Divine Nature, do what ye can, forasmuch as it manifests Sin,
and convinces, reproves and condemns man for Sin; and is of the true Light
that lights every man coming into the world John 1.9. which the Evildoers
hate. John 3.20. as thou do, scoffing and vilifying of it; but it will prove
a Stone too heavy for thee at last, then shall thou remember me. Thy seeming to
honor Christ's Person with thy Lips will not excuse thee for thy abusing his
pure Light in the Consciences of People, when he comes to reckon with thee
(which time is at hand) then it will be known who divides Christ, you or the
Quakers; for we deny no part of him, but are well assured, he is altogether
lovely, though envious blind men have belied us long about these things, whose
Innocence the Lord will clear in his due time, and then your Mouths will be
stopped, which now cry, Gross and Damnable Errors of the Quakers, and that they
deny the Resurrection, as thou in thy 3d page say; and in thy 4th page, that
we despise the Scripture, which are all false Accusations and Slanders. And
page 10. thou say, J. C. is got a Degree above the Apostles, and page 13.
that J. C. said, the Apostle was out in his Chronology, -- and that the Spirit
and Letter are one; and in thy 19th page say, That the Quakers believe there
is no Manhood of Christ now, which are all Slanders and false Accusations; for
we own all according to the Scriptures of Truth, the Lord is our Witness, and
dare not divide him, as I have said; and in page 25. say, They never do
confess Sin; and in page 29. say, J. C. stumbles at the Cross, and counts
the Blood of Christ no more worth then any other common Blood; and then among
other Lies and reproachful Terms say, He has discovered himself to be a
Papist; what a Contradiction is here? do not the Papists confess Sins, W. H?
what People more? but it is thy Envy that blinds thee, and will more and more
as thou go on in it. And in page 48. say, J.C. concludes that
Righteousness of Christ but a Fancy; and in page 51. That thou have seen some
Title pages of their Books filled with such Blasphemies (viz.) given forth by
the Spirit through the Trunk of the Body of Fox, or such a one, and that they
account their Writings beyond the Writings of the Apostles.

These are all thy made Lies, which the Lord will judge thee for; and for such
a Title, Through the Trunk, etc. I never heard of, nor I believe no Body else;
but thy Envy is so great, it is hard for thee to leave thy Lying and
Slandering: And as for the Scriptures of Christ and his Apostles, and Prophets,
we own and esteem above all other Writings in the World.

And in page 54. how do thou revile and belie J. Crook (as in the page
before) to render him and the Quakers odious? and say, Thou beginnest to be
weary of playing at Push-Pin with him, who never played so with thee, but wrote
to thee in tender Love to thy Immortal Soul, which is of more concern then
Push-pin-Play, as thy Scorner's Eye shall one Day see; but I leave him to
answer for himself, only touch a little on these things to manifest thy
Wickedness, that thou might be weary of that, which will be thy Load in the
End.

And in page 55. say, How many turn Quakers, whose hearts are not turned to
God! a Change in their Carriage and Garb, but not in their Souls.

How know thou, W. H. what Change is wrought in their Souls? and how dare
thou say, their hearts are not turned to God? Were not they who were turned
from Darkness to Light, turned to God, Acts 26.18. Beware of Blasphemy among
thy plentiful Lying and Slandering, thy Unrighteous Judgment shall turn upon
thy own head.

And in page 56. tells of some going three Miles on their Knees.

Surely William, thou will tell such Lies ere long, that few, but such as thy
self, given up, will believe thee; I never heard of such a thing, but this
sounds like that, through the Trunk, etc. had thou said, upon their Feet, we
might have believed thee; but thou can not stoop so low, as to speak Truth of
the Quakers, of whom thou say, They have got the Popish Knack, to tell their
People, that Concupiscence is no Sin [which is false] Evil Motions not
consented to is no Sin, whenas thou thy self grants page 59. that in Case we
yield not to Satan, we are not guilty; his Temptations not consented to, are
our Afflictions, not our Sins. These are thy very Words, and yet in the same
page cryest out again, We say, you plead for Sin, in saying the Evil Motions
in the heart not consented to, are not Sin, we see by this now your Perfection
boasted of, is no other then that which every Babe in Christ has, (viz.) not
to consent to those Evil Motions, etc.

Now let the Reader see this blind man's Confusion, and what People he is most
grossly abusing, reproaching and slandering, who confesses, our Perfection is
the same which every Babe in Christ has; what will Christ say to such a one?
who said, It were better a Mill. Stone were hanged about his Neck, and he
drowned in the Depth of the Sea, then to offend one such little one, that
believes in him: Should not thou be more tender toward us, as unto Babes in
Christ now, who are the same in Growth with every such Babe, as thou have
granted?

But let us see what pity thou have to these Babes, and let the true Mother
judge, as in p. 60. where thou say again, viz. No wonder you your selves and
your Followers prize not Christ's Sufferings and Atonement, but are proud and
Pharisaical. -- Christ's Blood is despised by you; and after several more false
Accusations cryest, O poor deceived People! And so goes on in his old rode of
Railing, Lying and Slandering, as the Reader of his Book might see.

What! our Perfection the same which every Babe in Christ has, and yet proud,
Pharisaical, despising Christ's Blood, not prizing his Sufferings, and
Atonement, and a deceived People; how can this be, W. H? surely thou have
greatly belied and abused the Babes in Christ, as thou will remember one Day;
for we do highly prize the Blood, Sufferings and Atonement of Christ Jesus,
beyond expression, though such as thou speak all manner of Evil against us
falsely as God is our Witness, who shall surely judge and condemn thee for thy
slanderous Tongue, who calls the Light of his dear Son, A Robber's Light, that
goes down to Hell with him, as in page 63. and page 64. cryest, What a sore
heavy hand is against them? comparing us to Sorcerers and Witches; and in page
65. To a Spirit of Hell and Satan, and so runst on till thou come to thy
Parallel of the Quakers and Papists, in which thou say, The Quakers own,
Works done in the Light are of value, etc. and that they are against taking an
Oath.

O W. H! are the Works done in the Light of no value with thee? so it seems by
thy Unfruitful Works of Darkness, and undervaluing the true Light, and
reproaching the Babes in Christ, who value all Works done in the Light, as the
Children of Light have done in all Ages; and is that a crime for Christ's Babes
to obey his Commands, who says, Swear not at all; art thou one of them that
break his Commands, and teach men so? then read thy Portion, Mat. 5.19. who
say, page 19. The Person of Christ was the Alpha and Omega; and page 85.
That the Person of Christ is the Tree of Life; and page 137. And his Person is
the Rock of Eternity.

Is this then thy real Description of the Person of Christ, thou so much
talkest of? Surely as the Alpha and Omega, the Tree of Lise, the Rock of
Eternity, he was before his coming in the Flesh, or the Virgin Mary was born,
of whom Christ (according to the Flesh) came; what is then become of the
Glorious Manhood, and Body of Christ? Is not that his Person? Or do thou
believe Jesus Christ consists of two Persons, one from Eternity, and another in
Time? If thou do, speak it out.

In page 84. thou call the Scripture Language, A Stone out of the Rubbish of
this Babel, where I vindicate the true Light, that lights every man that
comes into the World, in Opposition to thy dark Imaginations, who art not
worth answering; but I mention a little of thy work (which thou call push
pin) that People may see how thou pushest against the Babes in Christ, as thou
have confessed, our Perfection is no other, etc. I believe the young man dare
not speak altogether so badly, as thou have done, of that same Light which
reproved him about going to steal the Herring, see that remarkable passage of
his in page 27. of my Answer in the Book entitled Rebellion Rebuked, which
stands true against you both to this Day.

And in page 86, and 87. how do thou manifest thy Ignorance and Perversion of
the Scriptures! as if it were another thing then the Spirit of Truth (the
Saints Comforter) that convinces the World of Sin, John 16.7,8.

Thou do contradict the plain Scripture, and indeed I do not intend to bestow
much Labor about thee, thou art so bad and frothy a man, as I have not met
with the like of late Years; but I shall observe one of Solomon's Proverbs, not
to answer thee according to thy Folly, lest thou should be more wiser in thy
own Conceit (if possible thou can) for should we multiply Words, as thou have
to our Answer to thine, it would amount to near 100 Sheets of Paper; though
that Scripture, Job 11.2,3. thou mentions against me, p. 73. I cannot but take
a little Notice of, and return it back to thee again, viz. Should thy Lies make
men hold their Peace, etc. O no, W. H. for J.C. and I do intend to lay some of
them open, as thou may perceive, and that thou might take a view of them,
and repent, and do so no more, lest a worse thing come upon thee, which else
will surely be, as I told thee not long since, which some will remember.

Again, in page 87. thou say, The Light of the Sun and the Wind is of
Christ, etc.

But O vain man! does that convince the World of Sin, as the Spirit of Truth
does, of which I was speaking? See more of thy frothy windy Comparisons; art
thou a man fit to be answered, but with sharp Rebuke? let the Sober Reader
judge; or art thou fit to preach the Gospel to People, who thy self confessedst
to my Face, thou did not know God to be Light? The Apostles of Christ knew
God to be Light, and preached him so, and their Fellowship with him, and one
with another was in the Light, 1 John 1. and yet thou confessest that Christ is
the Author of all Lights, and that the Quakers Light will manifest some Sin, p.
88. but not show the Dust and Atoms of Sin and Lust in our Souls, p. 89. But
William, I think thy Dust and Dirt too has pretty well appeared to the view of
Quakers and others, who see what thou art filled withal against the Babes in
Christ, whom thou scoffs at and say, Ye be jealous for your God the Light.
We do acknowledge, that we desire no other God to be jealous for, nor to
worship, reverence and serve, then the same God who is Light, 1 John 1. the God
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, etc. but we know the Scoffer, Liar, Slanderer,
Proud and Ambitious Man, has another God he is jealous of, and afraid to
loose, and such the Prophet says, Will curse their God, when they shall behold
nothing but Darkness and Trouble. Take heed, W. H. thou art warned again in
Love to thy Soul.

In page 92. Thou counts the Quakers honest, civil Heathens.

Well then, William, for Honesty and Civility Sake and as we are Babes in
Christ too, as thousay'st, do not slander us nor revile us so any more, nor
call us such Blasphemers as thou have done, saying, This is the fifth time of
Bayly's Blasphemy, etc. calling to thy Reader to know, If his Ears do not
tingle at these Rampant Blasphemies, p. 94. And in page 95. thou have so
confounded my Words that the Reader indeed might think, I began to tell of the
Devil playing at Cards, when they were the young man's Words, and used by me in
way of Reply to your confused and false Doctrine, as the Reader may see in p.
35. of the Book beforementioned.

And in p. 98. thou cryest, O that thou had but understood this one great
Place of Scripture (after thou had perverted it) thou would never have
turned Quaker.

W. H. I must tell thee, for all thy great Outcry against the Quakers, that
Moses who was a Quaker understood more great Scriptures (and the things of God
more) then ever thou art like to do, while in thy dark envious Mind art
opposing and undervaluing, reproaching and vilifying the Light in man, which is
the true Light, John 1.9.

And how do thou rush into Lies, and Perversions of my Words and the
Scriptures also in thy 99th and 100th pages of thy Book, as if thou had
learnt of thy Brother T. H's forged Dialogues; but this Kind of Work ye shall
all find too heavy for you in the End, and then you will remember you were
warned in Love, by the despised Quakers.

And again in page 101. say, W. B. says, He will answer God in his
Perfection, and let God plunge him if he can, etc.

Whose Ears may tingle now, W. H. at these Abominable Lies and Forgeries, of
which never such a word or thought came into my Mind, much less to say or write
after that manner? surely thou art hastening to fill up thy Measure of
Wickedness: Let the Reader view my Book aforesaid, and see, if any thing like
it be there uttered; truly William, I pity thee, seeing thy End (which is near)
will be miserable, who art running headlong to Destruction, from which all thy
Strength and Refuge of Lies will not save thee, of which thy next page is also
plentiful.

And in thy page 105. thou scoffest at Attending upon God in the Depths of the
Spirit, etc. comparing of us again to Papists.

But W. H. out of what Depths, or from whose Spirit comes Lying, Forgery, Abuse
and Slandering of an honest civil People, as thou said, the Quakers are
honest, civil Heathens, and their Perfection no other but what every Babe in
Christ has, and yet still how is thy Heart and Book stuffed with Malice against
them! as again in the latter End of the same page may be seen, charging them
with Adulterating the Gospel, Perverting the Scriptures, Gross, Fulsome,
Loathsome Errors, etc. and in page 106. go on, sometimes scoffing, and
sometimes raging with high swelling words, crying out at length, that No other
is to be expected, but that this Gangreen, Leprosy, Plague will spread apace,
Errors will run like VVild-Fire, etc. And in page 107. thou cryest out again, O
what Venom, Poison, Wounding and Death to the Soul is in their Errors, etc!

Now one would think he had blowed his last deadly Breath against the Quakers,
enough to fright all Christendom from coming near them, and to cause them to
think, they may do good Service to destroy them from the Earth, as doubtless,
VV. H. thou would have it. Did not thou feel some of that wildfire James
spoke of c. 3. that set that little unruly Member of thine a running so fast,
when thou writ this? What! Gangreen, Leprosy, Plague, Venom, Poison,
Wounding and Death, here is such a Train of wildfire spit out in a Breath
against honest, civil Heathens, and Babes in Christ, the poor Quakers, as I
never thought, or heard to proceed out of the Mouth of a Christian-Minister of
the Gospel, enough to startle civil Heathens to hear it, and to make them
afraid of such wild Christians as VV. H. who cannot keep the Poison of Asps so
close under his Tongue, but must let it fly abroad to fright People.

But I have considered, that the Lord God of Heaven does permit the Dragon to
cast out his Floods after the true woman, as John sew, and that Hell has
opened, and is opening her Mouth in Blasphemies, and the Devil has great
wrath, knowing he has but a short time; but VVo be to you, ye Earthly
Inhabitants among whom the Devil is thus come down in Rage against an Innocent
People; it were better you had never been born, then to be found in this work,
opposing the Glorious Appearance of the Eternal Son of God, who will not hear
your crying Lord Lord, while Workers of Iniquity, [mark that] but must depart
to the left hand, into the Lake that burns forever and ever.

And moreover, I tell you, That our Armor of Light is so good a Defense unto
us, that all the fiery Darts of the Wicked do not enter us, but into your own
Bowels, as its written, Psalm. 37.12,13,14,15.

Page 109. thou say (of the Quakers Light) Many that live not up to this
Light, will be very inexcusably Condemned.

And in page 113. say, All the Light that every man has, as he comes into
the World, is but Flesh.

So now read thy gross Absurdity and Contradiction rightly thus, (viz.) Many
that live not up to the Flesh, will be very inexcusably condemned.

Do not thou now see how thou contradictest thy self, and the Apostle also,
who said, If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall dye, etc? How does thy Envy
against the Quakers blind thee! But this is but a touch of them, which may be
gathered and put in the rank of thy Confusion ere long. And thou call it
corrupt Nature, and contradictest again the plain Scripture, holding, Christ
dyed not for All, page 125.

And then I mentioning Prove. 26. [ By Mercy and Truth Iniquity is purged] thou
pretendest, thou art afraid I am a downright Papist. As much Ground to suspect
Solomon thou have as me, for they are his words.

And in page 127. (where I mentioned the People of God's Trembling and Quaking)
thou wishest for my own Credit sake I had forborne those Lines. I know thou
likest not Quaking and Trembling (though it shall be thy Portion ere long) But
I wish thou had forborne thy multitude of Lies and Slanders, Scoffs,
Perversions, False Accusations and Contradictions; for it would have been more
for thy Credit among men, much more as thou art a Teacher of others, and much
more to thy Soul's Peace; for they will be thy heavy Burden in the End.

And as for thy Queries, page 128. (viz.) Did you ever hear the Voice of God?
or, have you any Immediate Vision or Revelation, etc?

Answer, Yes, William, we have; and if thou have not heard his Voice, nor have
no Immediate Vision and Revelation, etc. thou art not fit to be a Teacher of
others, neither can thou be a true Minister of the Gospel, if thou declare
not what thou have seen and heard of God: But this shows thy Ignorance in those
weighty Matters, and that thou have run, and the Lord has not sent thee, like
thy Brethren of old, Jer. 23.21. and 29.8.9.

And page 129. thou feignest a Prayer for me, as if thou begannest to be weary
of downright Reviling of me; but that will not cover thy Nakedness and
Wickedness in the Sight of God or Men. What, William! is the third, fourth and
fifth time of Bayly's Blasphemies, gross and damnable Errors, Gangreen, Poison,
Plague, Venom, Leprosy, Wounding and Death (with abundance more of such like
throughout thy Book) all turned to, O Lord, let not the Gospel be hid from this
Man, etc?

Surely were thy Heart and Mind changed so suddenly, as thy deceitful Tongue
seems to be, it would be well for thee, and a Place of Repentance might yet be
found for thee. But I never read, that the Prayers of a Liar and Scoffer, an
Envious, Railing and Slandering Tongue availed with the Lord; but on the
contrary, That the effectual fervent Prayer of a Righteous Man avails much,
Jam. 5.16.

W. H. why do thou still pervert and abuse my words? Shall I never see one
Page of thy Book empty of such things, from the one end to the other: Thou
might well call it a full Reply; for I never saw a Book fuller of those
unsavory and vile things, which manifests thy Emptiness of that which is
Good, Grave and Savoury, the Ornaments of a True Christian Minister.

How dare thou say, that I called the Light the Blood of Christ, or the Blood
that cleanses, as in the 139th page of thy Book? let the Reader see that 43d
page of my Book thou quotest, where my words are these, But the precious Blood
of Jesus Christ, as of Lamb without Spot and Blemish, 1 Pet. 1.18,19 etc.

And where did I call the Light (that every man has) the New Jerusalem, the
Holy City, W. H. as thou say in the lower end of page 139. Are not my very
plain words these (p. 45.) viz.) And God is confounding this great City (
Babylon) and setting up his Holy City upon a Hill, which cannot be hid, whose
Light is like a Jasper, clear as Crystal, etc.

Is not here sufficient Distinction between the City and the Light of the City?
let the Reader judge. But what is it thou will not do to render us odious? But
thy Refuge of Lies must fall upon thy own head. Who would but have thought even
now (when thou began'st thy Prayer for me) but that thou had been almost
weary of belying me and perverting my words? but I doubt thou art so accustomed
to it, that it will be hard for thee to leave it; however, I must mind thee of
thy Portion from the Hand of the just pure God (if thou go on, and Repentest
not speedily) it will be, to be shut out of the Holy City, as thou may read
Rev. 22.15. and 21.8. among them that love and make Lies. Therefore be warned
in time, before the Trumpet sounds, He that is filthy, let him he filthy still:
and he that is holy, let him be holy still: for Time shall be no longer. This
is in Love to thy Soul, whether thou hear or forbear.

This, in short, I return thee as an Answer to thy full Reply.

William Bailey.

Now a few Words in Reply to Thee William Dimsdale.
I Beginning to view thy part of the Book, find thee soon complaining of hard
Titles given thee by us, which we desire the moderate Readers to judge of; for,
in what thou do ignorantly against the Truth and us, we can say, The Lord
forgive thee; but what thou do wilfully and perversely, its Rebellion, for
which the Lord will rebuke thee. How do you one while Commend the Light, and by
and by Revile it? as for instance, p. 109. compared with page 113. and 135.
where W. H. calls it fallen blind Nature; and page 109. says, Many that live
not up to this Light will be very inexcusably condemned; and yet condemns and
reviles them that endeavor to live up or according to it; and blasphemously
calls the true Light, that is in Man, that Christ Jesus has given (which
lights every man that comes into the World, John 1.9.) Corrupt Nature,
Flesh, and Fallen Blind Nature. These hard Speeches will come heavier upon you
then the Titles ye complain of, in the Day of your Account.

And in page 143. thou say, It checks for Sin, as in Adam after the Fall,
Genesis 3.10. which is the Voice of God to him, as the Reader may see in that
place.

And should not the Voice of God be obeyed by all the Children of men, which
causes Fear and Dread, and Sense of Shame to seize upon a man, because of
Punishment -- that he has not Power to go on in Sin, as thou acknowledgest
through the Reproof of this Light, p. 143. which in the page before thou
call, the Covenant of Works; and in page 146. thou say, Christ gives
Light to all.

So its Christ's Gift; God's Voice, which keeps from going on in Sin, by which
a man may know some Divine things; a Spark remaining in fallen man, in every
mar, of that Light that Adam had in a full Flame before his Transgression, in
his time of Innocence, etc. Mark this, Reader; this is these men's Confession of
the Light that lights every man, and say, Its true in its kind. And then
again, of the self-same say, Its but Flesh, corrupt Nature, fallen blind
Nature, Impure, an unsound Thing, etc.

So then this follows, That full Flame that was in Adam before Transgression,
in his time of Innocence, of which there is a Spark in every fallen man; that
Voice of God, that reproves for Sin, and keeps from going on in Sin, by which
some Divine Things may be known; the Gift of Christ, etc. which works a
Change in the Life and Conversation (p. 150.) is but Corrupt Nature, Impure,
Unsound Flesh, Fallen Blind Nature [Oh! gross.]

Now, putting their blind Contradictions nearer together, ye may read them
thus, (viz.)

That Light in every man is true in its Kind: NO, its an Unsound Thing. Its the
Voice of God to Adam, Genesis 3.10. NO, its but Corrupt Nature. Its that Adam had
in a full Flame in his time of Innocence, before Transgression: IT IS but
Flesh, and impure Flesh too. But it teaches the things contained in the Law,
and works a Change in the Life and Conversation: Its but Fallen Blind Nature
does all this. It shows some Divine Things, and reproves for Sin, and Christ
gives Light to all, etc. That which shows Divine Things, and reproves for
Sin, is but Blind Fallen Nature, Impure, Corrupt and Unsound Flesh, which Adam
had in a full Flame in his time of Innocence, before Transgression.

W. H. The last time I laid your Contradictions and Confusions before you, thou
calledst it, A Wild-Goose-Chase, such as thou had not seen a more strange,
etc. Truly its you two that I am now again tracing, as I did then; and if you
will call your selves Wild-Geese I cannot help that: but I never saw such a
heap of Confusion and Contradictions from any that were Tame, or well in their
Wits, which will, I believe, seem strange to some that think thee a wiser man:
The Wildness is your own, in running over, and under, and round about in the
Dark, not being able to comprehend the true Light, which lights every man,
etc. but give strange Names to it like Distracted Blind Men about Colors: What
would thou say, if a piece of White Cloth should be laid down on a Table, and
two Men should come into the House, and one should say its Black, and the other
its Green, and then change their Minds, and both say its Blue and Red; what
would thou think of these Men, seeing the Piece is as unchangeably white as
the Light? Would thou not think or believe they were either Fools, Blind, Mad
or Distracted, or given up to believe and tell Lies? Judge thee.

I have not paralleled you with Papists, as you have the Quakers; but I leave
the Reader (with the Light of Christ in his Conscience) to read you and compare
you.

Again, page 147. (after thy blind Constructions about the Light) say thou,
W. D. That Light that showed Adam that he had broke the Law of God, Genesis 3. did
not show unto him the way of Deliverance, but God showed it unto him by
Revelation.

How will thou prove that, seeing its already acknowledged, it was the Voice of
God to him, Genesis 3. when he had sinned, etc. Distinguish between the Immediate
Voice of God and Revelation here if thou can; else all thy Labor to
undervalue the true Light is in vain.

Could Adam see a Way of Deliverance without Light? And is not God (that spoke
to Adam) Light? and does not his Voice reveal? what reveals then, if not God by
his Voice? who showed Adam his Nakedness? and who shows unto man his Thoughts?
Amos 4.13.

Does not one man reveal or declare his Mind to another when he speaks to him?
if not, what does it signify? consider it, and then see thy Perversion of
John's words chapter 3.6. as if he spoke of a common Light, and called it
Flesh; and then look back into thy own Confusion about it, saying, It teaches
the Things contained in the Law, and yet counts it Impure, as I have showed
already; this is your Wild-Goose Chase ye like not to hear of; but as I told
you last time, your Folly must be made manifest, as Jannes and Jambres's was,
that withstood Moses.

In page 149. thou say, I scarce know one Gospel Truth, but this common
Light contradicts, etc.

And yet confessest, It works a Change in the Life and Conversation.

I thought that work had not been contradictory to the Gospel, which was to be
adorned with a Blameless and Holy Conversation, in the Apostles Days, who
said, God was Light and Christ, who gives Light to all, as thou say.

But why, W. Dimsdale, do thou teach People to deny the great progress they
have made by doing Good and abstaining from Evil (which is of use in its Place,
as thou have said) p. 154. And to deny all they think is of Christ in them? etc.

Is not this well-pleasing to the Devil and wicked men, think thou, Reader?
and then he says, I know thou will count it a notorious Lie.

Thou might have said, Notorious Wickedness; for it is Wickedness much to be
taken notice of, to deny all that I think is of Christ in me, as thou would
have me do in point of Justification; is it not God that justifies? and did
not Paul think he had the Spirit of God? 1 Cor. 7.40. and did not that Spirit
justify them, 1 Cor. 6.11. and bear witness with their Spirits, that they were
the Children of God? is this nothing to Justification, to have God's Spirit
witness for me? and is not God Light and his Spirit too? must I deny all this
now? let the wise in Heart judge, if this be not to deny God and Christ Jesus,
and the Spirit; and in the same page say, viz. But apply thy self to the
Glass of the Law; for by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin. So here I must deny
all that I think is of Christ in me, the Light, Life and Peace within me (as he
says) and apply my self to the Glass of the Law, etc. O strange Doctrine!
where are ye now, ye Babylonians, who have so much cried out against the
Quakers, for bringing People to the Bondage of the Law and Covenant of Works?
What! are you now come to be Teachers of the Law, not knowing what ye say, nor
whereof ye affirm? 1 Timothy 1.5,6,7. But the Quakers know what they say, and do
affirm with John, (that great Prophet) that That was the True Light that
lights every man that comes into the World, John 1.9. though you say, Its
Corrupt Nature and Fallen Blind Nature, and Impure, Flesh, and an Unsound
Thing. I never heard any Man of God call it by such Vilifying Names as ye do;
such Confused Doctrine as I have not heard of, but from you, like that again in
page 156. where thou say, Our State is sure and certain on God's part, his
Foundation is sure, yet as to us its brittle, and very uncertain, etc.

What! have you a little Fear then, that you may lose your Salvation now? if
you have, you are brittle indeed; for you seem very contrary in Judgment
sometimes, as, witness the Tenure of both your Books.

But thou say in the same page, The one Half of your selves warring against
the other, (viz.) the Flesh against the Spirit.

Where do you find the Spirit called Half a Man's Self?

You having denied the true Light, and called it Flesh, and Corrupt Nature,
etc. this must go with that Half that wars against the Spirit; so Flesh and the
Light being denied by you, ye will be left as bare and naked in the dark as
indeed your Confused Brittle Work has rendered you in the Eyes of such as fear
the Lord.

And in page 157. thou say again, (viz.) That all men are lighted by a Light
that is true in its Kind, by Jesus Christ, as he was the Creator of all things,
I deny not.

But now mark the Kind of this true Light, as these men have interpreted and
affirmed.

It is True in its Kind; then True, Corrupt Unsound Light, True, Fallen, Blind
Nature and Flesh: For these are the Kinds and Denominations you have placed on
the True Light, that lights every man that comes into the World, John 1.9.
And you shall never get from under the Guilt of Blasphemy against God, without
speedy Repentance, and Acknowledgment of your Evil herein, as publicly as you
have spread these your Errors; The Lord has spoken it.

And as for all thy Arguments for being a Quaker, and W. H's digging deep to
bring forth this Lying Wonder; its all in vain, as I have showed at the
beginning of this Treatise: for he, nor thee, nor any other, can never prove
nor manifest, that thou wast ever such a Quaker as he has affirmed; though (as
I said) I believe thou wast convinced of some Sins, as thou acknowledged, and
wast kept from stealing Herrings, and doing wrong to thy Neighbor, etc. but
not went farther then most of them, etc. nor was fully of their Way, Spirit,
Faith and Principle; and so, in striving against the Truth, you do but manifest
to the World your Ignorance, Error, Confusion, Enmity and Blindness; and so the
farther ye stretch your selves upon this Bed, the shorter it will be, and the
more your Nakedness will appear, and your Covering will be too narrow.

And though you (and all wicked men) call the Quakers Principle Rotten,
Unsound, Gross and Damnable, etc. yet we can bless the Lord for its Soundness,
and its Sound Doctrine; for it was the first, and will be the last upon the
Earth; and it will not only keep from Stealing, and Wronging of Neighbors, but
it will teach to Love Enemies, and forgive them that trespass against us, and
what else the Lord does require of us: And its so sound and durable, that it
will last, and be exalted, established and magnified, and stand, when all your
airy Smoke of Enmity, Opposition, Confusion and Darkness shall come to an end,
and be swept from off the Face of the Earth: The Lord God ( who breathed into
Man the Breath of Life) has spoken it,

Through WILLIAM BAILEY.
The 9th Month, 1674.
Postscript.
PAssing by the Multitude of Lies and False Doctrines, Perversions and Slanders
for Brevity's sake, I insert a few of your plain Contradictions and
Absurdities, that the Reader may see how you are confounded about the Light
through your Envy and dark Imaginations.

Page 113. All the Light that every man has, as he comes into the World, is
but Flesh. Page 150. Contra. But the Common Light works a Change in Life and
Conversation, etc. Page 149. I scarce know one Gospel Truth but this common
Light contradicts. Page 111. Christ, as a Creator, is the Root and Fountain
of this that every one has, etc. Page 161. I do now say, it is a Rotten,
Corrupt and Unsound Thing or Principle, as to the leading or guiding into the
Knowledge of the Gospel. Page 109. This Light is greatly helped and increased
by the Consideration of the Works of Creation, more by the reading of the
Scriptures, hearing the Word preached and Converse with Christians; and let it
be noted, that the Quakers had the Improvement of the Light this way, though
they will not acknowledge it: in India we hear but of little Improvement of it.
Many that live not up to this Light, will be very inexcusably condemned. And
those that walk according to it, doing some things contained in the Law, do
shame judge and condemn those that pretend to Christianity, and yet live not in
Righteousness and Sobriety.
Answ. I think now the Reader may see thee, W. H. sufficiently judged and
condemned out of thy own Mouth, who have so much abused this Good Light, and
them that live according to it; and therefore pretend no longer to
Christianity, but let Shame cover thee, till thou have learned Righteousness
and Sobriety, as thou have said.

Page 136. Following the Dictates of Nature is not the Yoke of Christ; for it
leads into the Covenant of Works. which is a heavy Yoke to work for Life, and
ye are under it. And in the same Page, (viz.) To the Law in my Conscience I
have been faithful, in order to drive me to Christ the Mediator. Page 46. Now,
the Righteousness of Christ is not in our Minds at all, but in his own Person.
Page 66. Do not thou know, that the Independent, Presbyterian and Anabaptist
Party, are both in their Preaching and Writings for an Experimental Spiritual
Knowledge of Christ; and that they do generally assert, that a bare Dogmatical
and Historical Knowledge of Jesus of Nizareth, is not sufficient for Salvation,
without the Truths be inwardly taught by the Spirit, etc? Page 36. I give the
Reason why the Gifts and Virtues that God's Spirit works in us are our
Righteousness, in Contradistinction to the Righteousness of Christ, whereby we
are justified, etc. Page 35. So we have Two Righteousnesses by the Second Adam,
Jesus Christ; the one, to take away the Guilt of Sin, that is the Righteousness
I am pleading for; and the other, to take away the Reigning Power of Sin,
san^ifying of us, and renewing of us into the Image of Christ in some degree,
etc. Yet page 46. Now, the Righteousness of Christ is not in our Minds at all,
but in his own Person.
Now, Reader, consider what great Confusion these poor dark men run themselves
into through their Opposing the true Light, which lights every man that
comes into the World, John 1.9. did thou ever read before, that the
Righteousness that we have by Christ, which takes away the reigning Power of
Sin, sanctifying of us, and renewing of us into the Image of Christ in some
degree, was in Contradistinction to that Righteousness which takes away the
Guilt of Sin, and that this Righteousness is not in our Minds at all, but in
his Person, which he says is the Tree of Life, the Rock of Eternity, etc. But,
W. H. did thou witness what thy airy Tongue can sometimes talk of, of
Sanctifying, and renewing into the Image of Christ, etc. thou would leave off
thy Lying, Slandering, Envying and Evil-speaking, and know a Bridle to thy
Tongue, without which thy Religion is vain, Jam. 1.26,27. For, thou bear no
Degree of the Image of Christ in these Confusions and Works of Darkness, but of
Cain, Nimrod, Esau and Ishmael, the Envious Hunter and Scoffer; and thy Reward
from the Lord Jesus Christ will be according to thy Works, notwithstanding thy
Sheeps-Clothing Cover of thy Lip-Profession, which will stand the Worker of
Inquity in no stead in that Day.

And remember ye are Warned once more, in Love to your Souls, by one that loves
the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, and cannot but exalt his pure and true
Light (and Righteousness) and not put it under a Bushel (or a Bed of fleshly
Ease) as many do, who are selling a Birthright and Blessing for a Mess of
Pottage (he that has Ears, let him hear) but I esteem the Reproaches of Christ
greater Riches then all the Treasures of Egypt; in a Measure of whose Light and
Innocent Life I remain a Friend to all People, making war in the same only,
against the common Enemy of Mankind, the Prince of Darkness, which rules in the
Hearts of the Children of Disobedience,

William Bailey.

An Answer to that Postscript of William Haworth's, at the end of that Wicked
Pamphlet, entitled, An Antidote, etc.
William Haworth,
IT is pity that men, professing to be Christ's Ministers, should be so dark
and envious, as thou art against the Truth as it is in Jesus; and also, charge
Lies on the Innocent; and in affirming that I said, The Dictrine of Election
was a devilish, damnable and Blasphemous Doctrine. It is strange men of thy
Practice and Profession should be so notoriously wicked, that ye care not what
you affirm, provided you can but possess peoples hearts with Prejudice against
the Light, and the Children of it. Nay, thou say, If I dare come to the
Trial, thou offerest at any time two substantial Witnesses to prove that I said
in these words, That the Doctrine of Election was a Devilish, Damnable and
Blasphemous Doctrine.

Oh Wickedness! how gross is this? that ever thou should dare thus to belie
thy own Conscience in this Matter: and the Witnesses thou must bring to prove
what thou say, must be Liars, like thy self, and also of the Devil, even
such Witnesses as were brought against Christ Jesus to charge him with
Blasphemy, such must thy Witnesses in this Matter be, if thou bring any; and
so they must be such, it seems, as will deny that any such thing was affirmed
by thee, viz. That God ordained Men to be Wicked before they were born. And
these Witnesses must needs, for any thing I know, be Jeremy Suaft and that
other Man, both of thy own Profession, who were only in the hearing of what was
said, as I mentioned in mine to thee, who, I affirm, were Ear-witnesses of the
Discourse, how that I owned the Doctrine of Election according to the
Scriptures; and also, how thou affirmedst, That God ordained people to be
Wicked before they were born; which I say, is a Devilish Doctrine and
Blasphemy, which is no Lie to be contradicted, but the real Truth from thine
own Mouth; and presently after I writ a Paper concerning it, and other Stuff of
the like nature to the aforesaid J. Suife, a Copy of which I have here under
written, and it shall stand a Witness against thee forever; and it was never
Answered, though writ several years since; neither did Jeremy Suift ever come
to me to contradict it in words to my Face, though at that time, and long after
I had my Being not far from his Dwelling in the same Town, and have met him in
the Streets several times: And can it be believed, that if in any thing I had
wronged thee in such a deep Charge, I should have received nothing in Answer to
this day, either in Word or Writing? This may breed a very shrewd Suspicion
even in them who are willing to believe what he says, that he is guilty; and
indeed, it had been better for him, if he had honestly confessed, his Error,
and not have added Sin to Sin, as he does, by Denying and Belying the Truth.

A Copy of the aforesaid Paper to Jeremy Suift follows.

To you that think William Haworth to be a Minister of the GOSPEL.
HOw do you relish this Doctrine? he affirms, That the through work of
Regeneration, which brings a Man into God's Kingdom of Glory, is not sufficient
for Man's Salvation; though this cannot be without True Justifying Faith in the
Son of God, by virtue whereof this Work is wrought in the heart. Yet he says,
this is not sufficient for Salvation, but call this inward Work of Christ Legal
Righteousness; therefore he denies the Perfection of the Work of Christ, what
he did for us in the Days of his Flesh, and at his Death, and the Efficacy of
that One Offering and Blood that was shed for us, and was for the perfecting of
the Sanctified Ones, that so they might be brought into the Everlasting Kingdom
of his Glory, in which is Peace, Completing and Perfection, Union and
Communion with God in Christ Jesus; and so this man speaks unadvisedly with his
Lips, and his Ignorance of the Work is the Ground of his Mistake.

Again, what do you say to this Doctrine of his? viz. That the Light within,
that discovers all manner of Sin, yea, the Secret Sins of the Heart, or
whatever Sin he commits, he says, This Light is altogether Darkness, yea,
he says, It is Flesh, and before a man be convinced, he has nothing in him
but Flesh; the Light before mentioned, he says, is altogether Darkness, and
Flesh; but some of you are of a better Judgment in this matter, and have said
to me, and before William Haworth, that it would bring a man under the Sense of
Sin, and condemn him for it; so that it seems, some of you begin to grow wiser
then your Teacher; and I pray God, that you may go on to increase in that which
is good daily, and know the Lord God and his Spirit to teach you, and not to
depend upon such an Unlearned Man as this, in the things of God; for Paul said,
the Law was Spiritual, but he was Carnal.

Again, he says, That Thousands in the World are this Day condemned by the
Lord, yet notwithstanding are not condemined for Unbelief. So, it seems there
are a People in the World whose Unbelief shall not be charged upon them, yet
must be condemned. Now, was not Unbelief the very Ground-Sin of the whole.
World, who are in the First Adam, and the Inlet into all manner of Vice and
Debauchery? and being clear from the Sin of Unbelief, he is in the Way to
obtain Freedom from all manner of Sin whatsoever, and it may not touch him at
all, neither he be condemned at all; And I have understood, that the Gospel
Sound had spread through the Earth, and it is an Everlasting Sound this Day
sounded in the Ears of all People, calling to Repentance, and Dependence upon
the Eternal God in Christ for Salvation; and the stopping the Ear from hearing
this glorious Gospel-sound, not believing in the Light of Christ Jesus the true
Light, that lights every man coming into the world, to be the Ground of
Condemnation. Now I say, I had thought, this Unbelief had been the same Ground
of all men's Condemnation, as they are in the first disobedient Adam, or Earthly
Man, but all Sinners are not in that State by William Haworth's Doctrine, shut
up in Unbelief, and therefore there is another way of Condemnation for them,
then that of not believing in Christ the Light; but he is blind indeed that
sees not this man's Ignorance and Confusion in the things of God.

Again Friends, this he told me in the hearing of Jeremiah Suift, and another
man, That God ordained People to be wicked before they were born, which I
called Blasphemy, and surely you that are sober will be ashamed of him, that is
thus full of Confusion and Ignorance; but he fell very furiously upon me in the
End, and thrust me out of his Chamber, because I would have endeavored his
Welfare, and reclaimed him from his Errors; I am sure I had no other End in my
Heart, but he has manifested the Spirit of his Master Lucifer, and may be
numbered among such as are wicked and hypocritical; though he profess Liberty of
Conscience, I believe no such thing from him, and such of his Spirit, but that
he would soon (I have good Ground to believe) follow his Brethren of
New England, in a Murderous Spirit; I pray God bless you that are sober People,
and preserve you to himself, that you may proceed in your Enquiry after that
which is Good, and the Lord of Heaven keep you is the Prayer of him that loves
you.

C. T.

Much I could write of this Man, but I spare him at present, only thus much lay
on my Conscience to present to you at this time; but if Occasion be, I could
present you with a great deal of his wicked Lying and Baseness, full of
Confusion and Darkness, far unlike a Christian or Minister of Christ, but a
Feigned Hypocrite, a Light, Vain Man, a Dreamer and Imaginer of the things of
God, having a patcht-up thing of an Imperfect form of Godliness, but ignorant
of the Power.

And if he had not so abused me in his Chamber, I had notwithstanding all this,
held my peace, but his Wickedness against Truth has been great, as may be
manifest hereafter, if occasion be.

This was writ long since, and only one Copy of it given to Jeremaih Suift, and
his Brethren to peruse, etc. And my Charge stands good against him, that he
affirmed as above said, That God ordained people to be wicked before they were
born, and I do solemnly affirm, he spoke it, let him bring what witnesses he
can to the contrary, I am sure they may be false ones in this matter; it was
not gathered up by me against him, as a Consequence of his Doctrine, or any
thing of that Nature, but he plainly affirmed the thing, viz. That God ordained
People to be wicked before they were born: And whereas he daringly says, If I
dare come to the Trial, he offers two Substantial Witnesses to prove, that I
said, The Doctrine of Election was a Devilish, Damnable and Blasphemous
Doctrine, and also to prove, that No such thing was said by him, as, that God
ordained People to be wicked before they were born; and if I please, he will
enter the Lists with me, and the like. I answer, That my God is the Living God,
above all the false Gods; whom I serve and reverence, and in his Name and Power
he has kept me hitherto, over the Heads of such Gilded Hypocrites as thou art;
and I fear not to meet thee, nor thy Master's Strength, and thy witnesses, in
the Name of my God, in any convenient Place equally agreed on, to manifest the
Truth of my Cause, and to try thy Power; and I deny thy Spirit, who denies the
Power and Heavenly Light of the true God and Christ, and callst his Blessed
Image and Saving Health, the Work of Regeneration, Legal Righteousness, and a
man's own Righteousness: I tell thee, I deny thy Spirit and Work, and stand up
for the true God, and his Christ, whom thou know not, but by Imagination,
nor where he is, but by Imagination. Thou Dreamer, have thou not lost the Sight
of the true Savior? and now thou imagines the Place of his Residence thou
know not where, nor what thou say, nor whereof thou affirmest; a Cloud
has received him out of thy Sight, and you are parted, if ever thou had any
Acquaintance with him in any Measure; and where he is thou can not see him
with thy blind Eye, nor come unto him; for indeed the Heavens have received
him, and the Heavenly Host see him, but thou shall never see him to thy
Comfort, but Condemnation, in that Dark and Wicked Mind thou live in, profess
what thou will, and babble what thou can in a vain Mind: Thou would be
disputing about the Body of Jesus, where it is, and what it is, but thou can
not find it out, no more then the Devil could, in disputing with the Angel
about the Body of Moses, and thou art sufficiently answered elsewhere, as to
that.

Surely the Apppearance and Sight of Christ will be to their Condemnation, who
believe in thy Doctrine of Antichristianism, in denying the Light within to be
Spiritual and Christian; for as the Devils saw him, and knew him, and were
tormented by him, in the Days of his Flesh, as accounting his Coming then, a
Torment, tormenting them before the time; so shall thou and those of thy
Spirit, except ye repent; for your Torments are begun already, and your
Gnashing of Teeth, because he is come to reign, and he must reign who is our
Joy, and your Sorrow must increase and have no End, who are wilful and mad in
your opposing of him, in this Day of his spiritual Appearance.

The Substance of his Answer to my Postscript is this.

First, Concerning Personal Reprobation, he affirms, That God wills to
permit Evil, by denying Grace which would prevent it. As much as to say, God
having foreordained the greatest part of the World to be Reprobated and Damned
therefore to bring about his End, he denies the Means of their Salvation, that
is, Grace, to the End that they may be damned; for they must be damned, there
is no Remedy; why? Because God has so decreed before they be born, and this
Purpose and Decree of his must stand, and it cannot be otherwise, because the
Lord denies them the Benefit of his Saving Grace.

If Ely was punished with Death, because he restrained not his Sons Wickedness,
and had not that Indignation against it as it deserved; what would they make
God to be who (as they say) restrains his Grace, because he has ordained them
to Damnation, and also Christ did not dye for them, and so it is impossible for
those, for whom Christ did not dye, that they should be saved; this is the
natural Consequence of such a Doctrine, and so it is of the Devil, and to make
the Lord the hardest of Masters, and greatest of Tyrants, to require that of
man, which he has decreed aforehand it shall be impossible for him to do, and
yet he must for not doing it be condemned, as much as if a Tyrant should first
command a man's Legs to be cut off, and then command him to go, and kill him
for not going; or put out a man's Eyes, and then command him to see, and for
disobeying such a Command, he must be slain: In like manner the Lord requires
Faith and Repentance, where aforehand he has deprived him of Power to do
either, on purpose to destroy him, because he has decreed him before he was
born to such an End, and therefore denies him Grace. Now, William Haworth,
do thou believe, we can believe this to be Christian Doctrine, which has so
much Contradiction and Confusion in it? for the Grace of God has certainly
appeared to all men, according to Scripture; and the Invitation is unto all to
believe in Christ that they may be saved, without Respect of Persons. Thus in
short I leave this, and pass on to detect the rest of thy Nonsense and
Confusion, because much has been writ in this particular by other Hands, etc.

Secondly, Concerning Original Sin I said, The Devil was the Original of Sin in
Mankind, and that I understood not how Infents could be guilty of Sin in the
Womb, etc.

To this W. H. answers thus, That the Devil is the Original of Sin in Mankind
(i. e.) The first Tempter to Sin, is a Doctrine we learned from Moses, not from
the Quakers, but what is this ad rem? Ergo there is no Original Sin, except it
be the Devil. Astrange Argument, says he.

Now Reader, mark this man's Logic, because I said, that the Devil always was
and is the Original of Sin in Mankind, who obey him, he makes this Ergo or
Conclusion, There is no Original Sin, except it be the Devil; and so the
Argument must stand thus, The Devil always was and is the Original of Sin in
Mankind, who obey him, Ergo, The Devil is Original Sin. What abusive Nonsense
and Perversion is this! But however, we say, the Devil is the Original of Sin;
and now I shall look into the Scriptures he brings to prove the Sin of Infants
in the Womb. First, Romans 5.12. Wherefore as by one man Sin entered into the
World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all men for that all have
sinned. Mark, Reader, what is this to Infants in the Womb, who have not yet
sinned? read the next verse following, the latter part of it, viz. Sin is not
imputed, where there is no Law; but where is the Law to Infants in the Womb,
before they come into the World? surely there is none, therefore no Sin nor
Condemnation, it must needs be an Innocent, Sinless State; so that the state of
sinning must needs be in the World, not before they come into it: And as in the
14th verse, Death reigning from Adam to Moses, even over them, who had not
sinned after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression, etc. This thou will needs
have to be Infants in the Womb; what gross Darkness is this! How can Death
reign over any until they come under the Dominion and Government of it, and so
be Transgressors of a known Law, either in Thought, Word or Deed? It is Non
sense and Ridiculous: But Death has reigned over many, who have not sinned
after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression; for Death reigned over Drunkards,
Swearers, Liars, Sodomites, the Old Wicked World, Whoremongers; and many who
are called by other Names, which was not all a sinning after the Similitude of
Adam's Transgression; for he was no Sodomite, Drunkard nor Swearer, Whoremonger
nor Adulterer, that we read of: And so Death reigns over all Sinners, be the
Similitude of sinning what it will; but answer me, after what Similitude is the
Child's sinning? Is it after the Similitude or Likeness of Adam's sinning, or
the Similitude of any other? And whereas thou queriest how it comes to pass
that Death is inflicted upon Infants, if they have no Sin? I answer, It cannot
be for their Sin, because they have none, and the Reason why they dye is
because they are Mortal, and must dye sooner or later, even Mankind as well as
other living things on Earth; but to the Innocent, and True Believers in Christ
Jesus, this is no Sign of God's Displeasure, but rather a Translation into a
better State, except thou reckons the State and Being in this Life, to the
Innocent and Regenerate, better then that which is to come; and many holy men
have had great Joy at their Departure: So that the Cause of the natural death
cannot be, as is foolishly imagined, because Adam sinned; for if he had not
sinned, he might have dyed, as to his natural Life, being of the Earth, made of
the Dust; and it was said to him, In the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
dye (mark in that Day) yet he lived after his Fall many Years, as to his
natural Life, but he dyed spiritually instantly upon his sinning, even in that
Day, and at that time. And as for those other Scriptures thou bring, Ephesians.
2.3. And were by Nature Children of Wrath, as well as others. Gal. 2.15. We who
are Jews by Nature, and not Sinners of the Gentiles; these Scriptures speak of
Children of Wrath, and Jews by Nature, and not Sinners of the Gentiles; what is
this to Infants in the Womb, who are no Sinners, neither can be Children of
Wrath? These Scriptures relate to a sinful state before Conversion, whether
young or old; so that herein thou wrests and abusest the Scriptures, and this
is plain for me to see with that blessed Light of Christ Jesus, thou art an
Enemy to.

As I did, so I do affirm, Jesus Christ to be the true Light and Savior, who
enlightneth every man that comes into the World, with a Measure of his own
Light; but W. H. is one that cannot endure this Light or the Reproof of it upon
his Conscience; but still would call it something otherwise then what it is,
and quotes Romans 2.15. which speaks no such thing, as that the Light within
every man is nothing but the Law of Moses written in the Heart, or another
while, No more then Nature, as he calls it, p. 17. whereas the Inward Law (or
Light within) in all its Manifestations and Appearances always came by Jesus
Christ, and contains in it, not only the Substance of Moses's Law, but
Gospel-Virtue and Power, the true Light that enlightneth every Man that comes
into the World, by Virtue of which Divine Light and Power within, the Gentiles
obeyed the Lord spiritually, and were accepted in so doing, though they had not
the Outward Law in the Letter; and set the Letter aside, What Law is that, that
is written in the hearts of People? must it not needs be the Law of Christ
inward in the Heart and Conscience, and so of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, that makes free from the Law of Sin and Death; and it was always so,
that the Doers of this Law (or Light within) in the Heart and Conscience, were
justified, Romans 2.13. and thus was Abraham justified by Works, James 2.21. when
he had faithfully offered up his Isaac upon the Altar in Obedience to God, it
was a Good Work, by which he was justified in the Sight of God, who commanded,
and he believed, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness the Word of his
Faith, by which he believed and knew the Will of God was the Light within we
bear Testimony unto, which was before Moses was or Abraham was; he that has an
Ear to hear let him hear but this Man's Understanding is shallow sure, who one
while says, This Light in Man, is nothing but the Law of Moses written in the
Heart, another while, It is no more then Nature; and what Nature? But a Guilty,
Defiled Nature, p. 17. Oh sad Confusion! And must the Work of this Inward Light
and Power of God be no more then Legal Righteousness? and Regeneration Legal
Righteousness, and a man's own Righteousness? which is as great an Error as a
man can utter: It is true, that by the bare Works of that Law of Moses never
man was justified before the Lord, or made Righteous; for if that could have
made the Comers thereunto perfect, there had been no need of Faith in Christ
the Light to have received Power, but that could not do, though great
Strictness might be used in the outward Observance of those outward things and
Shadows, and through such outward Conformity they might appear Righteous before
man, yet this was but that outward Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
in like manner as now W. H. and such as he, who seem to be very zealous for the
Gospel, and the Body of Jesus, yet deny his Light and Power of God within with
as much Violence, as ever the Pharisees denied Christ Jesu; at Jerusalem to be
the Son of God; and they are in the Steps of the Pharisees in their own self
Righteousness, and Profession of the Gospel without the true Power of
Godliness, let the Heavenly Light which they so wickedly blaspheme, be Judge in
the Case, even in their own Consciences; and yet they will Hypocritically
acknowledge Christ is All in all, and all Power and Judgment is committed to
the Son Christ Jesus, and then they cry this down again, and call it A natural
Light and Darkness, which judges men's Thoughts and Deeds of Darkness, and thus
would rob Christ, both of his Authority and Judgment, to escape Judgment for
Sin, Whilst they imagine this Light within to be a natural Light, or Ignis
fatuus, or what they please, a devilish wicked Project; for if so, then what
need they care what they do, when there is nothing to judge them, but an Ignit
fatuus, or a natural Light? and so by this means they do what in them lies to
escape Judgment altogether, by imagining themselves Christians and Believers,
in a State of Sin; but we say, that Light which you scorn, and blaspheme, and
undervalue, and set at naught, will one Day bring the Flames of God upon you,
and be as a Thousand Witnesses against you, because of your Hypoerisie and
Self-Righteousness, except ye repent.

All the Scriptures thou bringst against us are perverted by thee, and they do
not in the least prove what thou say, viz. How that the Inward Work of the
Spirit of the Lord in man, or the Work of Regeneration, is a man's own
Righteousness, and Legal Righteousness; for if the Happiness and Blessedness of
man consist not in the Work of Regeneration and the Work of the Spirit, wherein
does it consist? What will thy Ramble of Nonsense, and Perversion of
Scripture, and vain Profession of Christ avail thee? saying, Abraham 's Works
done in the Spirit were not sufficient, contrary to James 2.21. Was not Abraham
our Father justified by Works, when he had offered Isaac his Son upon the
Altar? Read also the next verse, See thou how Faith wrought with his Works,
and by Works was Faith made perfect; so that it is plain, that in the Spirit he
performed a Faithful Work, and acceptable to God: And so this blessed inward
Work was of Faith, and through Faith, as all Works performed by the Spirit of
Christ within are; then this Righteousness and Obedience so performed, is not
Legal Righteousness, or a man's own Righteousness, opposed to the Righteousness
of Christ, as that Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was, but is true
and real Righteousness and in Unity, of the same Nature with that blessed and
heavenly Obedience of Christ in his own Person, proceeding from the same Root,
viz. The Spirit and Life of Christ manifest in us; and the matter of our
Justification always was and is the same, not divided nor separated; for he is
the Head of his Body, the Church, inseparable; and his Power and Grace which
unites is the same; and his Righteousness in all and through all, is the same
Real Righteousness, and there is not another in the Head, but the same that is
in the Church his Body, which is of his Flesh and of his Bone, and whom God
has joined together, let not vain man put assunder, as W. H. does, by calling
that living Righteousness of Christ in his Church, which is in God, Legal
Righteousness, and A man's own Righteousness. Oh absurd and base! did I not say
well in mine to thee upon this Account, viz. What a Traitor i^ this man to God
and his Gospel, who has seemed in Words and Profession, thus far to love and
to hugg Christ and the Scriptures, and with his feigned Lips to betray him into
the hands of the vilest of men, and call this his most blessed work of
Regeneration, Legal Righteousness, and A man's own Righteousness, thus
betraying his most blessed Image into the Hands of Sinners to be trampled upon,
and vilified and abused under the Name of Legal Righteousness, and a man's own
Righteousness, and so, as filthy Rags, Isa. 64.6. and so consequently, Christ
to be no more a Savior upon this Account, then the Jews accounted him, who
only reckoned him the Carpenter's Son, and a Deceiver; for indeed, Man is
merely cheated of his Salvation, if this Work of Christ be no more but Legal
Righteousness, and Christ's Coming by this means made of no more sufficiency
then to bring forth Legal Righteousness; but this man bears salfe Witness by
his Lies and Blasphemies, as any who are truly Christians may easily perceive.

As for thy quoting Romans 4.6. where thou say, Even as David also discribeth
the Blessedness of the Man unto whom God imputed Righteousness without Works;
what Works? (say thou) done by the Spirit surely; for such were David 's
Works, etc.

Unto which I answer: That David's Blessedness consisted in that the Lord God
forgave him his Sins, and pardoned his Iniquities freely upon his unfeigned
Repentance, and so he was received in Mercy; so read Psalm. 32. to the 6th
verse, and there it is plain, that Forgiveness, and Remission, and
Non-imputation of Sin, was to that Man in whose Spirit there was no Guile;
which Guileless State was effected by the Spirit of the Lord, which he calls
Legal Righteousness, and a Man's Own Righteousness; and so this Perverter of
Scripture goes about to prove, that the Works of the Spirit of the Lord, even
the best of them, are sinful, and blasphemes the Gospel-Power and Spirit, and
may as well and as confidently call Christ an ^ctual Sinner in the best of his
Actions; for all his Actions were done by the very same Spirit that enables
true Believers truly now to perform their acceptable Duty to God; and this is
perfect that is done by the Spirit of the Lord, and according to his heavenly
Will; and To be spiritually-minded is Life and Peace, Romans 8.6. and so, there
is no Condemnation to such as walk after the Spirit of the Lord, Romans 8. and he
that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting, Gal 6.8.
If ye through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live, Romans
8.13. But according to this Man's Doctrine these Scriptures must be read thus,
There is Condemnation to such as walk after the Spirit of the Lord; and they
are in this Work and Exercise chargeable with Iniquity, because their best
Works, performed by the Spirit of God, are sinful, and as rotten Rags, and a
Man's own Righteousness, and Legal Righteousness. And again, He that sows to
the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Condemnation, and ^ins in his best
spiritual Works. And again, Through the Spirit ye cannot mortify the Deeds of
the Body, that you may live; for this is but Legal Righteousness, and a Man's
Own Righteousness, etc.

So, Reader, observe that he goes about to prove, that the Works of the Spirit
and Power of the Lord are Legal, and a Man's Own Righteousness, and effect
nothing but Self-righteousness, and sinful Obedience in a man's best Works,
where they are wrought and done by this Spirit of the Lord.

And again, he brings Isaiah 64.6. to prove it, where the Prophet there says,
in the Person of the Wicked Nation, for which Wickedness and Hypocrisy God had
brought and would bring his severe Judgments upon them; says he, We are all as
an unclean thing, and all our Righteousness are as Filthy Rags, and we all do
fade as a Leaf, and our Iniquities like the Wind have taken us away. Mark, W.
H. goes about from this Scripture, to prove that this Righteousness the Prophet
calls as Filthy Rags, was Spiritual Righteousness, or wrought by the Spirit of
the Lord; for he says, Did not Isaiah observe Moses 's Law in the spirit? and
yet in that place of Isaiah calls it filthy Rags, as to Justification. This Man
is wicked sure, and wilfully blind and sottish, who thus goes about to pervert
the Scriptures so manifestly; for Isaiah in that place is confessing the Sins
of those Times and People, and the Hypocritical Righteousness of such a People,
who were wicked, whose Iniquities like the Wind had taken them away: What! were
these Iniquities, which had taken them away, Isaiah's Works wrought in the
Spirit? Oh abominable! And did ever any Prophet testify against himself and
the People for observing Moses's Law in the Spirit? Nav; but he always
reproved their Wickedness and Hypocrisy. Read Isaiah 1. beginning at the 10th
Verse, and so through the whole Chapter, and there it is manifest, what
Righteousness the Prophet calls rotten Regs, and was their Own Righteousness.

Again, How wickedly he goes on, and quotes Romans 7.22. I delight in the Law of
God after the inward Man (says he) Was not this to keep it in the Spirit? he
kept it in the Letter before his Conversion, Phil. 3. touching the Law
blameless, and this he counted Loss for Christ, verse. 7. when he was converted
to him.

I answer, This man surely is foolish, and does not know what he says, nor
whereof he affirms, and is desperate in his encounter against the Truth, right
or wrong; or else could it be imagined he should be so dark, that the Apostle
should account his delighting in the Law of God after the inward Man, after his
Conversion, which was the Work of the Spirit of Christ, by which he was sealed
up to Eternal Life and Living Satisfaction; was it this he counted Loss and
Dung for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ? Then it must be read
thus, The Heavenly Delight which I have through thy Grace in thy holy Law, I
must cast away as Abominable in thy sight, as Loss and Dung for the Excellency
of Jesus Christ: What Nonsense is this? And if so, then all Inward
Righteousness is to be quite gone as lost, and parted with, and a Profession of
Christ only put on, and nothing else left; for the comfortable Fellowship of
the holy Spirit then is nautious and to be loathed, as Dung, and Christ's
Fellowship and Companionship must be parted with, as an Imagination, and a
Dream or Fancy put on instead of it. Oh! abominable Doctrine, and miserable
perverting and wresting of the Scripture; b t we confess, that Paul, after he
came to behold the Excellency of Jesus Christ, did account all his former
Excellencies whatsoever, in his unconverted state, but Dung and Loss to be
parted from for the Excellency of Christ, read Phil. 3. verse. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
etc. And surely his delighting in the Law of God after the inward Man, must
needs be a large part of his experiencing this Excellency of Christ Je us.

Again, My Charge was, That he affirmed the Work of Regeneration to be Legal
Righteousness, and a Man's Own Righteousness: Unto which he has given no
positive Answer. And as for thy saying, thy Question was, Whether the whole
Christ was within me? and that I answered affirmatively; and thou say, Thy
assumption was then the Man Christ: to which thou say I replied, The Man
Christ was; which amounts to thus much, That I affirmed the whole Christ was in
me, God and Man.

I answer, Thy Tongue runs at random without Fear, and Lies thou would make
thy Refuge; but I tell thee, the Lord will confound thee, and overtake thee
with his swift judgments, to seal thee down in the Pit of Everlasting Misery,
except thou Repent. Can thou look me in the Face with this Lie in thy Mouth,
that I affirmed, The whole Christ was within me? For Shame blush, and never
profess Truth until thou know better how to speak it: For I testify against
thee and thy Lies and false Witness bearing against the Truth, The Fullness of
the Godhead dwelt bodily in Jesus, and he is the Head of his Body the Church,
and is the Life of every Member, and the chiefest Member in this Body, which
has the chiefest Mansion in his House, has but received a Measure of that
fullness that is in Jesus: this I always affirmed; and charge thee with
profound and notable Lying and Belying the Truth; and what I answered to thy
Question, Whether the Man Christ Jesus was in me? stands good, how that he was
so in Measure spiritually; and so thou art an Enemy to the living God and his
Christ, and I have spared thee beyond thy Merits; for thou have deserved before
this time to have been made manifest more fully, because of thy Profaneness.

And whereas in one place thou biddest the Reader, Judge, if I write not too
much like an Innocent (that is in thy sense, a natural Fool, deprived of that
Wisdom and Understanding which ordinarily people are possessed withal) And the
Ground of this Jeer from thee is, because I plead for the Innocence of Infants
in the Womb, whom with thy standerous Tongue thou could never yet fasten
Guilt upon.

Thou may remember William Ellis (that cross Innocent, to use thy own Term)
how like thou wast unto him, who was frequently abused in the Streets by the
rude Boys to make them Sport and Game, provoking him to Madness and Wrath, and
so to stone them after a Wicked and Furious manner: How often when we were
Prisoners together at Hartford, did thou bait this poor Frantic Creature,
and make Sport with him for thy Pleasure, and provoke him to Rage in my sight,
so that he has furiously stoned thee? and in this thou have taken great
Pleasure. Now how like such an Innocent, a Fool and Vile Person did thou act,
to make thy self Sport with such a Creature, how much unlike a Minister of
Christ was such vain and profane Acting, to provoke such a man, and stir him
up to do Mischief? And thou and Jeremiah Suift may remember how furiously thou
ran upon me when I told thee of it, and reproved thee for it in thy Prison
Chamber, and wickedly have thou threatened me, and told me, Thou could spend
thy Heart's Blood for the Gospel, and that I deserved to be beaten and
cudgelled: and this when we meet to dispute I shall prove to thy Shame and
Disgrace, thou foul-mouthed Creature, who art so far from Christianity that
thou art void of Common Civility: but however, if thou could have ceased
abusing me in Print, I had not been thus public, but buried this and much more
that I have against thee in more silence; and thus much has not been my
Delight, but thy self has been the Cause of it.

And whereas thou tellest me of Cursing thee when in Prison, that is another of
thy Lies to fill up thy measure and number of Wickedness; but I declared the
Truth unto thee then, how that the Judgments and terrible Plagues of God would
fall upon thee, except thou did Repent: This can William Fairman of Hartford
testify to be true, and I shall stand by it; and do tell thee again, Except
thou Repent speedily thou can not escape the Sentence of Eternal Judgment and
Condemnation; and this is spoken to thee in Love to thy Soul, if thou can
receive it; but however, I am clear of thy Blood if thou perish, as sure thou will, except thou Repent speedily.

Written the 24th of the 4th Month, 1676. by a Lover of Truth, C. Tailor.

A Postscript.
Reader,
BY this time thou may be sensible, not only of the dirty Puddle of abusive
Language and ilfavoured Names, which my Adversary has cast upon me through his
whole Book, but also of his own Confusions and Contradictions to himself; so
that thou need not ask the Reason, why I answered his Book no sooner, the
Proverb being at hand to inform thee (viz.) That no man makes haste to that
Market where nothing is to be bought but Blows.

It has been said, He that will make a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, against
Errors, etc. must, first conscientiously study the Christian Art and Method of
this Warfare, otherwise they may easily build up what they go about to throw
down, and make Balaam 's haste, who was sent to curse, and yet in Conclusion,
blessed altogether. Numb. 24.10.

Like Effects have still attended such malicious and unexperienced Undertakers,
being too much of Jehu's Temper, to be good Soldiers under Christ's Conduct;
for that Spirit cannot endure to march against his Enemy with a Sober Pace, but
had rather be tossing Fireballs and Grenades, then gently persuading from
Sound Judgment, and Good Experience, in the Spirit of Meekness.

For, Few men's Errors or Mistakes (says one) find Access to their Judgments,
but by the Way of their Affections; nor will it be easy for men to come at
Errors, etc. to disthrone them, but by making their Approaches the same Way; I
mean by making Friends of their Affections, that they may not side with their
Judgments against them.

There is an Art (says the same Author) as well of Composing Differences of
Judgments, as far as Composure in this Kind may with the Honor of Truth be
admitted, as of Opposing that which is not meet to be admitted to Composition.

But my Antagonist is not like to attain this Art, while he goes about to
convince men by False Accusations, and Bad Language: I know no Reason why he
should so account me his Enemy (and such a one, as he can scarce invent Names
odious enough to call me by, but also represents me not fit to be conversed or
eat and drunk withal) except it is because I have told him the Truth without
Flattery, and then it may be true according to the Latin Proverb, Obsequium
amicos, veritas odiu on parit, (i.e.) Flattery gains Friends, Truth makes Foes.

I have not, knowingly, wronged him in any thing, and if it be thought I have
dealt too sharply, I desire the Reader to consider my Provocation.

My Inclination and Temper is (as much as may be) to live in Peace and Love
with all men, and therefore had not my Adversary's often boasting and daring
Invocations for my Answer (as I hinted to the Reader before) necessitated me to
the Publication thereof, I should have born all his Abuses (if God had given
leave) and in Silence have buried his whole Book, notwithstanding the Answer
had lain so long by me.

And whereas the man's Confidence in his own Abilities has imboldned him to
promise an Answer to whatever Questions I should propound unto him, therefore

Lest either he should think himself so perfectly instructed in all Points of
Divinity, that nothing can be added to him; or all others so much below him,
that he is able to resolve all their Questions, whatever may be proposed to
him; I have instead of his thirty Queries to me (that I have answered)
propounded half the Number to him, if he think them either worth his Answer or
Consideration; they are as follows.

Query 1. WHether thy own Author Doctor Stillingfleet says true in his 172d
page (if I mistake not) of his Discourse of the Sufferings of Christ, viz. But
above all things it is impossible to reconcile the Freeness of Remission, with
the full Payment? Qu. 2. Whether, notwithstanding Nature and Will be two things
really distinct the one from the other in the Creature, yet in God, by Reason
of the Infinite Simplicity of his Essence or Being, they are not so, but one
and the same? Qu. 3. Whether thou do not believe, that all Contingencies and
Things done, or that come to pass in this World, were not necessitated
thereunto by an unavoidable Decree or Destiny so that no man could do more
Good, or less Evil then he does? If yea, then why did not Saul come down to
Keilah, and the men of Keilah deliver David, as the Lord had told him? viz. 1 Samuel 23.11,12,13. and then, Qu. 4. Whether Christ when he wept over Jerusalem,
was not either ignorant of this Decree, or delusive in his Wishes, when he
said, O that thou had known in this thy Day the things that belong to thy
Peace, etc? Qu. 5. Whether thou do not believe that God has elected and
decreed such a determined Number of Persons, merely out of his own Prerogative,
that those, and neither more nor less, but those shall be saved? If yea, then.
Qu. 6. To what End is all preaching, with those general and frequent
Exhortations to Holiness, and Conditional Promises of Reward to the Righteous,
and Conditional Threatenings of Eternal Damnation to the Disobedient and
Rebellious? Qu. 7. Whether thou do not believe that God loved David as well,
or as much (and that his Salvation was as sure) when he was in the Act of
Adultery with the Wife of Uriah, as at any other time, either before or after
the Fact? Qu. 8. Whether thou do believe, that those Sentences and Phrases in
Holy Scripture (viz.) Christ tasting Death for every man, and Dying for all,
and his being a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, etc. intend any
more or otherwise, then the determined Number expressed in the fifth Query? If
so, then, Qu. 9. Whether thereby thou do not only make those Phrases and
Sayings delusive, but make the dear Son of God to suffer and dye, to secure
those that his Father had secured before, by an eternal and unchangeable
Decree? Qu. 10. Whether thou do not believe, that there are some Reprobates
(and those not a few) toward whom God shows no Patience, or Long suffering
at all, imagining, that many Infants of days, yea, many immediately from the
Womb, are sent to the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone for evermore? Qu.
11. Whether according to thy Belief of Personal-Election, and
Final-Reprobation, God does any more in the Procuring of Conversion and
Salvation, then in the Reprobates Impenitency and Damnation? Qu. 12. Whether in
the Conversion and Salvation of the Elect (according to thy Faith) God has not
absolutely and antecedently, without the Foresight of any Good Deeds of
theirs, resolved upon, and by irresistible means in their several Generations,
draws them to believe, repent and endure to the End, that so they might be
saved, and his absolute Decree accomplished? Qu. 13. Whether, on the other
side, it is not thy Faith, that the Damnation, the Sins, and the Final
Impenitency of Reprobates, God has of his own Will and Pleasure peremptorily
decreed; this his Decree he executes in time, drawing them on by his
unconquerable Power and Providence from sin to sin till they have made up their
Measure, and in the end have inflicted on them that eternal vengeance which he
had provided for them? If so, Qu. 14. What Difference is here in the Course
which God takes for the Conversion and Salvation of the Elect, and the
Abduration, and Damnation of Reprobates? Therefore Qu. 15. What hinders, but
God (according to such Principles and Grounds) may as truly be styled, the
prime Cause and Author of the sins of the one, as of the Conversion of the
other?
John Crook.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Ingenions Reader,
THere are a few Faults escaped the Press, which thou art desired to correct,
some whereof are as follows.

Page 10. line 35. blot out no. p. 12. l. 25. read had been. p 18. l. 17. read
Faldo and Hicks, etc. p. 44. l. 6. read [ Habit] p 67. l. 27. for Glorified
read Glorifieth. p. 69. l. 23. for them any read the many. p. 73. l. 24. read
goings forth. p. 76. l. 17. for Comforting read Converting.

The rest may be easily discerned and corrected from the Sense of the Matter.


