O blazon of the Commonwealth P
By the Protector.
A PROCLAMATION Of the PEACE made between this Commonwealth, and the Kingdom
of France.
OLIVER Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
etc.

Whereas by the blessing of God, We have, with the advice of Our Council, made
and concluded a Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Amity between this Commonwealth
on the one part, and the Kingdom of France, one the other, their Lands,
Cities, Towns, Dominions, Territories, Places, and People, by Sea, Land,
fresh-waters, and elsewhere; And whereas by the said Treaty of Peace all Acts
of Hostility are to cease on both sides immediately after publication thereof,
as well upon ye Sea, as at Land, Rivers, and Fresh-waters, and whatever shall
be taken by the one from the other after the said Publication, shall well and
truly be restored; And all Letters of Marque and Reprisal to be recalled and
made void. We have thought fit to make Publication, as We do by these presents,
of the aforesaid Treaty and Agreement; and do hereby strictly charge and
require all person and persons, of what degree, quality and condition they, or
any of them be, belonging to this Commonwealth, to take notice thereof, and
conform themselves accordingly. And in further performance of the said Treaty
on Our part, We do by these presents require and enjoin all Ships of War, and
others belonging to the State, or particular persons set forth upon private
Commissions, or otherwise, to observe the said Agreement. And to the end none
may pretend ignorance thereof, the Commissioners of the Admiralty are hereby
required to give effectual notice of the premises to all the ships of War of
this Commonwealth, either at Sea or in Port. And the Judges of the High Court
of Admiralty are also by virtue of these presents forthwith to call in, upon
their several Securities given in that Court, all such Ships as have been set
forth upon private Commissions against any of the people or Subjects of France.

Given at Whitehall this 20. day of November 1655.
Printed and Published by His Highness special Commandment.

London, Printed by Henry Hills, and John Field Printers to His Highness, MDCLV.


