THE PARLIAMENT OF GRACES; Briefly showing The banishment of Peace, the
farewell of Amity, the want of Honesty, the distraction of Religion, the flight
of Sobriety, the lamentation of Patience, the love and care of Charity.

Together With the cause of the breaking up of the House of the Parliament of
Graces; worthy the reading in these times of desolation and calamity.

By Humfrey Crouch



Printed in the Year 1643.

THE PARLIAMENT OF GRACES.
The names of them that are present in this Parliament.
Patience; Hope, Humility, Obedience, Charity.
The names of them that have absented themselves in this times of distraction,
are these:
Peace, Amity Honesty, Religion, Sobriety,
And first of all distressed Patience speak,
And unto all the rest her mind she breaks,
Patience. DIssressed Brethren, for so many I term you? Our House is divided,
as is the Kingdom: Peace is fled For where there is war, there is no room
for Peace. Amity taken her leave of us: for where there is dissension among
brethren, there can be no love nor amity abiding.

As for Honesty, she left us long ago; before these wars began, because she
could not find an honest man.

As for Religion, she has been so cuft and beaten by the Nonconformists and
Separatists of these times, that she has absented her self from us for a
time, to see what the en of these things will be; notwithstanding she has a
hope that the King and Parliament will not see her quite trodden under feet: and
when it shall please God that the King and Parliament accord together, then
will she fly unto them for succor.

Sobriety seeing swords drawn in Churches, and Religion put to flight, was
ashamed to stay among such uncivil and unnatural people. But stay, who comes
here? Our old friend Honesty: alas poor wretch, thou departedst in an ill
time, and art returned in a worse.


Honesty. Brethren, how fare you?


Patience. What? Our old friend Honesty? what, go away from us in an ill time,
and return again in a worse? alas! here is no employment for thee. I tell
thee what, since thou tookest thy leave of us last, our kingdom has been
altogether by the ears.


Honesty. I am sorry to hear it; but where are all the rest of our brethren?
Me thinks your number is very small. What Is become of our old friend Peace,
the quietest wretch that ever was known.


Patience. Alas! our poor friend Peace was beaten out of the Kingdom by a
malignant party, they call him Discord, a very Rascal, one that has set all
the Kingdom together by the ears; and there is no hope of her return till
the King and Parliament agree.


Honesty. But where is Amity?


Patience. I tell thee Honesty, Amity took her leave of England, and of us,
just about the time our Queen took her leave of the King, only she left some
of her garments behind her; which in her absence, the more is the pity, has
been so stained in blood, that all the water in the river of Thames is not ble
to cleanse the stains of so deep a Die.


Honesty. The more is the pity. But where is my kind friend Charity?


Patience. Oh Charity! although she be not here with us, yet she is one of our
Court, and one of our Counsel; and although she was very fearful to stay in
the kingdom, and was once minded to leave the Kingdom; but that she feared,
that if she went, the Kingdom could not stand, she resolved then not only to
stay, but to do the best service she could for the common good of the weal
public; and to this end got a Frock, and turned Porter, and carries in every
day whole baskets of plate and money, to maintain a war, as I hear, in
defense of the Gospel.


Honesty. Why are you in any fear, or have you a jealousy of the King?


Patience. No, but of some that are about him, as Papists, and diverse
ill-affected persons, that may perhaps divert the King from what he is, or keep
him from what he should be, so that Charity takes not this Porters pains to
maintain a war against the King, but against them that keep his Majesty from
his Parliament.


Honesty. That is one way, but fair means is another way, and a safer way to
stay the effusion of blood; for in such a war the father kills the son, the
son kills the father, one friend kills another. Ah poor England! there is
strange alterations since I was here last.


Patience. Alas brother! you say true, but it can no way be helped, but by
taking up Arms, the more is the pity, all the fair means that could
possibly be used, have been put in execution, both by petition, perswadement,
and what not: and shall the Parliament suffer the Country to be ruined, and
the City spoiled by those malignant persons of his side, and not seek to
prevent it? No, the lawfulness of the cause proves the lawfulness of war,
though of it self unlawful and unnatural.


Honesty. But all this while where is Religion the pillar of the Church then?


Patience. O poor soul! almost distracted: she runs from the Parliament to
the King, and from the King to the Parliament with these words, Have pity,
have pity upon me my fiiend, lest my glory be ecclipsed, and my honor lie in
the dust.


Honesty. Why has her old Patrons the Bishops failed her and given her three
slips for a teaster.


Patience. No honesty, but she finding them dishonest unto her did petition
unto the Honorable House of Parliament that they would be so pleased to turn
them out of her service.


Honesty. And have they done so.


Patience. Yes truly in that they did very justly, and very honorably: As for
Canterbury he wou^ud have given all Lawde to the Pope: and the Pope to the
devil, but the Parliament stopped his passage.


Honesty. But there was a little great bird there called Wren, Pray what is
become of him? I remember, I once asked a service at his door; and after he
heard my name was honesty, he gave me a kick, and bid me be packing: and then I
thought it was time to leave England, when the pillars of the Church refused me.


Patience. O that bird the Ron, thou^h the least of birds; yet the highest in
ambition. I tell thee what Honesty, Because he would have bin highest; strived
to sit upon the Roman Eagles back, but the Parliament clipped his wings.


Honesty. But has Religion any hope of being established again? to her former
dignity by consent of king and Parliament.


Patience. The King puts her in good comfort, and does protest as his Father
before him was so is he, ( Semper eadem) one and the self same, Defeador of the
self same Faith: and bids her be of good comfort: For He is fully resolved to
venture his estate, life, liberty and all, before He will see her suffer the
least injury that may be: The Parliament assures her of the same.


Honesty. Then why is not the thing done, since both parties are greed what is
the seanon on it


Patience. O Sir, to tell you the the truth; there are adverse parties of both
sides, which hinders the cause, and keeps the work unfinished: For first the
strongest and most ablest Papists in the land are of the Kings side, and keeps
him from his Parliament: secondly there are a many, who out of a blind zeal
cry out no Bishops, no this thing, no that thing, as if His Majesty and and the
Parliament understood not what they did without their directions: so the
Papists gives offense one way, and these theot her way, and what settled peace
are we like to have; till God turn these Achithophels wisdoms unto
foolishness.


Honesty. But pray how stands the City affected to Religion?


Patience. With a full resolution.


Honesty. Then I perceive this is a place of abiding for me, if they
entertain Religion, they will also entertain Honesty: with hat the whole
Courrrose, and all with one voice cried, Lord, put an end to these sinful
days; and shaking hands said, The world is at an end. And so I end.


FINIS.

