Rebellion Rebuked: IN AN ANSWER TO A Scandalous Pamphlet, ENTITLED, The Quaker
Converted to Christianity, etc. WRITTEN By one WILLIAM HAWORTH, an
Independent-Preacher in HARTFORD-SHIRE, AND WILLIAM DIMSDALE a Young Man in the
Town of HARTFORD, a Professor, and a Hearer of the said W. H.

By the Friends of Truth, who wish its Prosperity in True Love to the Souls of
all People, John Crook, William Bailey.

They are of those that Rebel against the Light, they know not the Ways
thereof, nor abide in the Path thereof,

Job 24. 13. Printed in the Year, 1673.

William Haworth,
WHen I call to mind how I have seen thee some time since exercised in thy
Spirit, I cannot but admire the Fruit now brought forth, after those weary
Travels, yet no other then what I looked for, in case thou abodest not in the
Judgment, which began to take hold of thy Fleshly Part; the Father of Spirits
then began in measure to work in thee, but his Furnace proving so hot, and
there being so much Fuel in thee, the Briars and Thorns mustering up
themselves in Battle against his Righteous Appearance, as a Consuming Fire unto
them all, here thou escapedst, fleeing for thy Selfish and Fleshly Life, and
thereby became unworthy of his Gospel, and that Life and Immortallity that
otherwise might have been brought to Light, and manifest in and unto thee how
far the Fleshly Reasonings about an outward Maintenance, for thy self and
Family, influenced thy mind to retard and hinder this Inward Work of God by his
Grace in and upon thee; let his Witness in thy Conscience speak: as also how
the deadly Wound, on thy Corruptible Part, by the Sword of his Spirit, came to
be healed; and thou that once was so low, should now be climbed up so high; and
thou that was once so broken and shattered, should now become so whole and
Righteous; and thou which once spoke so respectfully of the Light and Spirit
within, both publicly and privately, should now become such an Enemy to it,
and Opposer of it: Surely it is because thou have broken his Banes, and cast
his Cords from thee, by imagining a vain thing, That thou shall be saved
without having the King of Zion to Rule in and over thee, that came meek and
low, riding on that Wild Ass's Colt, on which Man never rods.

Oh! how is thy Goard withered, and thy Anger kindled, because thy Will is
crossed by the Lord, and thou can not accomplish thy own Ends by God's Ways
and Methods of proceeding against thee, concluding, that those Ways are not
Good, nor those Dealings of his Righteous with his People, because thy self
could not measure them, nor thy fleshly ^^ll endure to be restrained by them,
taking thy Measures from thy own Conceivings of holy Scriptures, weighing them
in the false Balance of thy natural Wisdom and Understanding, by which way the
Apostasy first entered, and does still continue in and over all that have
declined from, and entertained distrustful Thoughts of the Light of Christ
within, which thy Epistle to the Book, entitled, the Quaker Converted, is
every where fraighted withal, of which for thy own sake I am sorry, having had
Conference with thee, and true Love in my Heart springing toward thee, when
thou were little in thy own Eyes, thou may remember how tender I was toward
thee, and I know the Good and Honesty in thee in that Day answered to my Love,
until my last Discourse with thee at Hartford, where thou as well as others,
exceeded those Bounds of Coolness and Meekness, which before in measure I found
in thee, the Cause of which I would have thee search out in thy self, and
possibly thou may find Interest and Reputation, which thy Hearers had no
small share with thee in that Heat and Distemper upon thy Mind at that time;
since which thou have not only grown worse and worse toward the People of God,
called Quakers, but also in thy own inward Condition, having changed that
wonted Gravity and Solidity in thy Deportment, into a light, vain, lofty,
confident and presumptuous Carriage, which diverse have observed in thee, and
this thy Epistle abundantly proves, to which I shall now Reply more
particularly, desiring that what I have written may be taken in true Love to
thy immortal Soul, as God bears me witness I intend it: But if thou will yet
more count me thy Enemy, because I tell thee the Truth, I shall commit the open
Decision of the matter to him that judges Righteously, and remain

A Lover of the Immortal Souls of all Men, John Crook.

A REPLY TO THY EPISTLE, etc.
WHat thou meanest by the Church of Christ at Hartford, whom thou call'st,
Well-beloved in the Lord, I know not, except those the Young Man page 6. of his
Book calls most of them, A Loose, Wanton and Proud People, that Adorn their
Bodies more then their Souls.

At the very Entrance thou discover'st thy spirit to be filled with the sower
Leaven of the Pharisees, saying, In this Relation which follows, you may see
some of the Quakers Rotten Opinions, etc.

Answer, In common Understanding then their Opinions must once have been Sound,
but now are decayed. Thy following words taste of the same Leaven still, like
those Pharisees that said, Christ was a Sinner, when he had opened the Blind
Man's Eyes, let God have the Glory; so say thou, Let Christ have the Glory
for bringing the Young Man amongst you.

Again, thy words are, None of those that went out from you were properly of
you, had received the Gospel that you believe; no, it is not possible for any
to receive it truly, and forsake it.

Answ. What that Gospel is which you believe, it concerns you to search, that
it be not another Gospel (Gal. 1. 6.) then the Apostles preached; for there
were those that perverted the True Gospel, and turned it up-side down, and
wrested their Sayings to their own Destruction; and others departed from that
Faith which Paul exhorts Timothy to hold fast, 1 Timothy 1. 19. And is not the
Gospel called the Power of God, Romans 1. 16. and the being led away by Sin and
Lust, a Departure from or Denial of the Power, as 2 Pet. 3. 17. where the
Apostle exhors the Beloved, that knew the Truth of the Gospel, to beware, lest
they also should be led away with the Error of the Wicked.

The Young Man was fully of the Quakers Way, Spirit, Faith and Principle.

Answ. Thy Mistake also in this is very gross, as may appear by the Answer to
the Young-man's Book in this Particular.

Thou say, The Young Man was an Honest Quaker, true to his Persuasion, as
Luther said of himself before his Conversion, etc.

Answ. Then what are they either Converted from or to, that are not true to
their Persuasion? Examine thy self, and thy People, whether you in all things
are true to your Persuasion? If nay, then you are not yet come so far as the
Honest Quaker by thy own Confession.

Thou say, The little time he has had for Proficiency in the Knowledge of
the Gospel might discourage thee from making his Book public, etc.

Answ. I wonder at it, seeing thou said before, that it is not possible for
any to receive it truly, and forsake it, which if he has not done, thou
speak unadvisedly with thy Lips in saying, Its an Experience which the Lord
in rich Mercy gave him, whom thou also call, Dear Elect Child, and say,
Flesh and Blood has not revealed this to him, but our Father which is in
Heaven, But how can he that thus Contradicts himself, agree with the Truth in
others?

Again, Oh! that every one of you, my dear Brethren, and every one in Hartford,
had the Knowledge of Christ thus distinctly formed in you, till which thing be,
the Soul of him to whom Christ has committed you, as his Charge, shall Travel
in Birth, and be in Pain, Blessing God that his poor Labors have not
altogether been in vain, as to this matter.

Answ. What is that Travel and Labor worth that brings not to the distinct
Knowledge of Christ? And what a Church is that, and what a Pastor is he, and
how can they be Dear Brethren in Truth, in whom the dictinct Knowledge of
Christ is not yet formed.

Thou say, That thy daily Prayers to Christ is, that we all (meaning thy
Brethren in the Ministry) may be made able Ministers of the New Testament.

Answ. Then it seems you are not yet so by thy own Confession; therefore be
silent till you are made so.

Thou say, You have but Law and Gospel to preach.

Answ. Where in all the New Testament do thou find the Apostles preaching the
Law, and saying, They were sent to preach the Law? But a Dispensation of the
Gospel was committed to them; and they were made able Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the Letter or Law, but of the Spirit.

But why do thou divide between Law and Gospel, as if they were not one in
their End and Nature, saying, The Law for the Conviction of Sin, etc. and yet
thou call'st it Spiritual?

Answ. The Spirit is said to Convince or Reprove the Unbelieving World, John
16. 8. Jude 15. says, He shall Convince all that are Ungodly of all their
Ungodly Deeds, etc. Again, The Law is said to be perfect, converting the Soul,
and making Wise the Simple, Psalm. 17. 7. So that Law and Spirit are frequently
used as Terms that signify the same thing; and if thou Experimentally knew
the Spirituallity of the Law, thou would not go about to divide them, or
quarrel with us about them: But hence has risen the Mistakes of many, viz.
because they have found several Names or Terms in Scripture, therefore
concluded they must needs intend several things, while it is frequent in
Scripture to intend one and the same thing under several Names, as Father, Son
and Spirit have several Names given to them, yet one in Nature or Being;
several Ministrations, diverse Operations, etc. and yet all by one and the same
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.

We know the Spirituallity of the Law, in the Apostle's Sense, is the inward
Convictions of the Spirit, manifesting also God's holy Will and Commandments,
requiring perfect Obedience thereunto, which man finding himself unable to do,
then the Sword or Law of the Spirit slayes him, and he dies, being made willing
so to do by God's Power or Law within, though Self and Flesh cries out to
escape; here thou fledst, and savedst thy Life: But into this Death thou must
come, if ever thou enterest into God's Kingdom; the Talking of it will not
serve in this State; the Dead hear the Voice of the Son of God, and live; and
his own Arm being then revealed, raises up this Dead Man, when no Eye so much
as pitied him, his Condition being so hid, and unknown to all living in his
former Estate, then he gives Thanks from the very inward of his Soul to God,
through Jesus Christ, crying out now, as in a holy Triumph, That there is no
Condemnation now to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1, 2. where that Ransomed Captive renders
the Reason of his Joy, viz. because the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus had made him free from the Law of Sin and Death. [Mark] How he attributes
that to the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, which before he ascribed
to Jesus Christ, as having an inward Sense and Feeling both of his Savior, and
the Salvation come to his poor Soul thereby.

Thou either Ignorantly or Enviously, if not both, affirmest, That whoever has
tasted that the Lord is Gracious, never takes up with the Quakers Christ: Oh!
that the Gospel were studied by us more, and preached by us more.

Answ. The Quakers Christ is the Lord's Christ, as is showed before, the same
that delivered Paul from his wretched State: And if thou had understood what
thou said immediately before concerning the Blood of Christ, which thou
call'st, as Oil poured into the Gashes of Conscience, thou would not have
spoken thus sleightingly (if not blasphemously) of the Quakers Christ; For all
the Tasters and Feelers inwardly know him to be God's own Arm revealed, when no
Eye else pitties them. But thou with many more have the outward words
concerning these things, yet are inwardly and experimentally Strangers to the
Life and Virtue of them in your own Hearts and Consciences; which Knowledge the
Quakers account with the Apostle to be the Excellency of the Knowledge of
Christ. Oh, vain man! Do thou think by thy Fleshly Study, and preaching from
the same, to Advance the True Christ? Nay, but Man and Self instead of Christ
and his Righteousness: For the Gospel is a Mystery, and the true Preaching of
it Foolishness to all that Perish; and the Things of it are the Heavenly Things
themselves, searched out only by the Spirit of God; for they are too deep for
Man's Will, Study or Wisdom to find out: Therefore cease from thy own Study,
and wait in the Silence of all Fle^^ for the pouring forth of the Spirit, which
only can open the Mysteries of Christ, and his Righteousness, and show them
unto thee.

Thou say, We are to conceive of God according as the Scriptures set him
forth to us.

Answ. But the Scriptures contrariwise condemn all Man's Conceivings, saying,
Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of
Man to conceive, what God has laid up for them that love him. The Scriptures
are true as God means them; not as Man by his Conceivings interprets them; and
the Understanding of every True Disciple must be opened by Christ, before he
can rightly know them; as it is written* He opened their Understandings, that
they might und^rstand the Scriptures; for until then, they are a sealed Book
both to the Learned and Unlearned, Isaiah 29. 11, 12.

Thou utter'st many words about the Confession of Sin, as if the Quakers were
against the Confession of Sins to God, etc.

Answ. We own the holy Scriptures, which say, If we confess our Sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness, etc. 1 John 1. 9. But Confession of Sins ought to be performed
from the Sense of the Evil of Sin upon the Conscience; and not out of Formality
and Custom only (as most do) Yet we say, where the Heart is sprinkled with the
Blood of Christ from an Evil Conscience, at that time, and whilst remaining so,
Thanksgiving is proper to be given to God; for Praise is comely for the
Upright: And such know the Blood of Christ to be a speaking Blood (it speaks,
says the Apostle, etc.) causing that Soul that is washed with it, always to
be mindful of it, and truly to prize it: For the Ransomed shall pass with
singing, when the Hypocrites shall remain in Bondage, notwithstanding their
daily Confessions,

Thou say, Jesus Christ of Nazareth, etc. brougbt this Righteousness, etc.

Answ. If thou believe, that none were really saved, or made Righteous by the
Righteousness of Christ, till then, or after that time; thy Faith is contrary
to Scripture, which calls Christ*s Righteousness an Everlasting Righteousness,
Dan. 9. 24. Isa. 45. 17. Micah 5. Yet we believe Salvation only by that Jesus
which witnessed a good Confession before Bontius Pil^t^, etc.

For answer to the Heathens Knowledge of God's Vengeance, and Sight in the
Deity, etc. I refer the Reader to the Reply to the Young-man's Book; but for
thy own Knowledge of it, I find thee like the Pharisees of old, fleeing from
the Wrath to come, by casting all God's Vengeance upon Christ; an Easy Way, if
thou could so e^cape it, by imagining his doing and suffering God's Pleasure
to be reckoned thine, by a bare Belief of it wholely without the^.

Here we differ in our Account, I say, according to Dan. 9. 24. speaking of
Christ, to finish Transgression, and to make an E^d of Sin, and to make a
Reconciliation for Iniquity, and to bring (in) Everlasting Righteousness. etc.
I know and believe Salvation by the Imputed, Reckoned and Real Everlasting
Righteousness of Jesus Christ brought nigh, which in the Fullness of time was
manifest in and by him, and in due time really made mine by the Work and
Application of his Spirit in my Inward Parts, and that God is well*pleased or
satisfied in and with him, in whom I am accepted, and not for Works of
Righteousness that I have done, nor yet for the Works sake only (or quatenus
Works) though wrought in me by his Spirit; but in and for the sake of him that
works all our Works in us and for us, according to Isa. 26. 12.

But thou believe to be saved by a Righteousness wholely without thee,
Reckoned, but not Real; which Righteousness Christ wrought One Thousand Six
Hundred Years since (not that we undervalue that Righteousness) nay, cursed is
he that so does) really no nearer to thee then the place where he personally
lived and dyed.

Now it is the great Lord of all that must view both our Accounts, for the
Goods we have received of him, Mat. 25. 14. therefore I leave them both to him,
to determine which is Right. This may serve for Answer to much of thy Epistle
touching this Subject.

For Proof of thy Belief thou say, We are made Righteous in the same way he
was made Sin, but he was not made Sin by Inhesion (or really) as thou speak
elsewhere; for he knew no Sin, therefore by Imputation.

Answ. The same Way! when Christ knew no Sin, nor was any Sin inherent in him,
must we then be made Righteous without either knowing or enjoying any real
Righteousness in us, as this Comparison holds forth? But did not Christ Really
suffer and bear our Sins in his own Body upon the Tree? Did not he suffer under
the Burden thereof, upon whom the Iniquities of all were made to meet? But
besides, if we are made Righteous, in the same way, in all things that he was
made to be Sin (for Sin is mentioned in the Abstract) then we must be without
or free from all manner of Good, as he was without or free from all manner of
Sin or Evil, which destroys the Doctrine of Sanctification, the New Creature,
etc. where all things are of God.

In the next page save one thou affirmest, That the Gifts and Virtues that the
Spirit of God works in our Minds is our own Righteousness. 1st. Because our
Souls are the Subjects of it. And 2dly, Because it is really in our Minds,
therefore ours; and yet in this place thou say, Christ is really our
Righteousness, as thy self interprets (Jehovah (Tsidkenu.) What! one while he
is really Righteous, and another while not Real, but Reckoned? I would not
wrong thee, but thy words are plain; but more of this afterward.

Thy calling William Penn a Novice manifests only Pride in thy self, but is no
Proof against him; and the truly Considerate will account thy Charge upon him
to belong to thy self, till thou have confuted his Arguments.

Thou say, If Christ Jesus had the Guilt of Sin really charged upon him, etc.

Answ. What! do thou suppose the Innocent Lamb of God to be really guilty of
Sin? What Blasphemy is this? What! really guilty of that which thy self say,
he really neither did nor had? Yet thou bring'st Scripture to prove it, saying,
What else is to be understood by that 2 Cor. 5. ver. ult. For he has made him
to be Sin for us, who knew no Sin, etc.

Thou usest many words to prove the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to Men
while in Sin and Rebellion against God: As if Contraries (while in Contrariety)
could at the same moment of time be in perfect Unity. O vain Man! Does not the
Apostle James, Chap. 2. Verse. 20. say, That Faith without Works is dead, etc?
But I have spoken my Experimental Knowledge, and believe according to Scripture
of this Subject before, and may have Occasion to touch at it hereafter.

In the next place thou bring'st forth thy own strange Conceivings about Man's
own Righteousness; for Error is seldom alone. Thou say, Our own
Righteousness consists in those Gifts and Virtues which the Spirit of God works
in our Minds; and we express these outwardly in the Observation of the Moral
Law in our Walkings amongst Men.

Answ. This is such a Heap of Confusion, that I remember not the like. The
Scripture calls what is wrought by the Holy Spirit in us, the Virtues of
Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 3, 5. And Paul Romans 8. says, To be Spiritually-minded is
Life and Peace, Then according to thy Interpretation we must have Life and
Peace in our own Righteousness: Thus, like the Foolish Woman, do thou build a
House, and pull it down with thy Hands. For, take away the Gifts and Virtues
which the Spirit of God works in our minds, and what remains but a Body of Sin
and Death; and thoughts only Evil continually, and yet Man as bold and
confident, as if he needed nothing; for all true Sense flows from the Spirit;
and all it works in us is but our own Righteousness (say thou) and to be all
Glorious within, as is spoken of the King's Daughter, Psalm 45. 13* is to
abound in our own Righteousness, according to thy Interpretation. And 2 Pet. 1.
5, 8. speaking of the Virtue of Christ, says, He that lacks these things is
blind, and contrariwise it makes them in whom these Virtues abound, that they
are neither barren nor unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
What is this less then the calling Christ Beelzebub? And what follows, but that
he has a Devil, viz. And we express these outwardly in the Observation of the
Moral Law in our walking amongst men. So the worse people are, and the looser
they walk, the greater Right they have unto the Righteousness of Christ, and in
a better Condition to receive it, then those that from the Sense of the Evil of
Sin turn from it, because, say thou, this is properly our own Righteousness,
which consists in those Gifts and Virtues that the Spirit of God works in our
Minds, etc. Is not this Rantism in the highest Degree? And for the Moral Law,
Christ is so far from repealing of it, that in Mat. 5. he binds it closer and
faster to his Disciples: For of old it was said, Thou shall not commit
Adultery; but by him, Thou shall not Lust, etc. And of old, Thou shall not
Kill; but by him, Thou shall not Hate, etc. But remarkable is Mat. 7. 13, 14,
15. where he commands, doing as we would be done by, and calls it the Straight
Gate; foreseeing that False Prophets would preach another Broader Way, and
Wider Gate; therefore the next words say, Beware of False Prophets, etc. And at
present thou art one of them; O that thy Eyes were open to see it!

Thy Reasons are as Ridiculous as thy positions; one is, because it is called
your Faith, and our Righteousness, and your Love, etc.

Answ. By the same Reason Christ himself must be our own Righteousness; for he
shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. And their
Righteousness is of me, says the Lord, Isa. 54. 17. And 1 Cor. 1. 2. Christ
our Lord, etc. And the Scripture says, He that dwells in Love dwells in God;
and this Love is shed abroad in the Hearts of the Righteous; do they therefore
dwell in their own Righteousness? Oh thick Darkness!

Another Reason thou give is, because our Souls are the Subjects of this
Righteousness, it is really in our Minds, therefore ours.

Answ. What would thou have to be the Subjects of true Righteousness? Is it
not our Souls that are saved? Do not they and we by them reap the Benefit of
Salvation? And is not that the Subject of Righteousness which is saved by it?
And by the same Reason the Grace of God must be our own Righteousness, because
our Souls are saved by it, and the Subjects of it. It is said, God loves Truth
in the Inward Parts, and that he will write his Law in our Hearts; thou say,
All that is in our Inward Parts is our own Righteousness, though wrought, by
the Spirit of God, which is said to lead into all Truth; Therefore by thy
Conclusion God saves us by our own Righteousness: But the Ground of thy dislike
of the Gifts and Virtues that the Spirit of God works in our Minds, which thou
call our own Righteousness, is because it is really in our Minds, therefore
ours. What! a Christian, and an Enemy to Reallity? What! a Spiritual-Man, and
an Opposer of those Gifts and Virtues the Spirit of God works in our Minds?
calling them our own Righteousness. What! must the Poor in Spirit, the Meek,
the Mourner, the Hungerer and Thirster, the Merciful, the Pure in Heart, the
Peacemaker, etc. deny their Blessedness, which they must do, if these be their
own Righteousness, according as thou affirmest they are, viz. Those Gifts and
Virtues that the Spirit of God works in their Minds What! must they turn from
Reallity, and lay hold of Imagination, from real Enjoyments and Possessions to
conceived or imagined Apprehensions? Who ever besides Hypocrites were Enemies
to Reallity? Who ever besides the Vicious, Debauched, Proud and Letter-learned
Pharisees withstood and opposed the real Gifts and real Virtues that the Spirit
of God really works in our Minds? This is a Doctrine so contrary to the very
Tenure and Scope of Scripture, that it may well be called, A New-invented
Fable, which all sober People must needs abhor the very Thoughts of. It is very
strange that (...) Reality of a thing should make it nothing worth; for our own
Righteousness is said to be as Filthy Rags.

And thou say, Because the Gifts and Virtues of the Spirit of God are Really
in our Minds, therefore our own Righteousness.

The sum of the Matter seems to be this, That our Heads and not our Hearts, our
Bodies and not our Souls, our own Conceivings and not Reallity, our
Imaginations without and not the Gifts and Virtues of the Spirit within our
Minds are the Subjects of true Righteousness, according to thy Account.

Another Reason thou give to prove the Gifts and Virtues aforementioned to
be our own Righteousness, because we put forth the Actions wherein this
Righteousness consists both internal and external: is it not we that believe?
and we that repent? and that we are said to pray?

Answ. By this Argument its best neither to believe, nor repent, nor pray,
because these are but our own Righteousness; and the more we do them, the
heavier are we laden with the Filthy Rags of our own Righteousness. These
things manifest thy Estrangedness to the Work of Regeneration, and Helpings of
the Spirit of God: A Heavy Charge upon all the Prophets and Apostles of Christ,
who were obedient to these inward Gifts, Virtues and Motions of God's Holy
Spirit: For, by thy Account they did but obey their own Righteousness in what
they did, they knew and understood that their Hearts was but as the Pen of a
ready Writer, as David speaks: And must there be nothing written, spoken or
acted, because the Spirit makes use of Men and Women to do these things; but if
they do it, it must be charged upon them as their own Righteousness; does the
yielding of the Members of our Bodies Instruments to the Holy Spirit of God to
act by (according to the Exhortation) therefore make all its Performance in us
our own Righteousness, while the Scripture says, It Is not I that Live, etc.
but Christ Lives in me: Neither is it we that speak, as we are kept truly
Silent, out of all our own Thoughts, but the Holy Ghost in us, Mark 13. 11.

Thou say, Our Righteousness is but the Righteousness of mere M^n, etc. and
yet before says, It consists in the Gifts and Virtues the Spirit of God works
in our Minds. See thy Confusion from thy own words.

Thou say, One Righteousness is Perfect and Complete, the other is Faulty,
Imperfect, Incomplete as to degree.

Answ. Thou would make them two in Nature and Kind; the one from Heaven, the
other on Earth; the one Christ's, the other ours; and yet say, its
incomplete as to degree; then they must be one in Kind; for degrees varies not
Kind or Nature. So it is manifest thou know not what thou said, such is thy
Confusion: No marvel, while thou errest from the Form of sound words, calling
it, A Righteousness Contrived; Where find thou such a word in Scripture?
Sometimes calling Faith our own Righteousness: And again saying, Without Faith
it is impossible to please God; as if Man could please God by Man's
Righteousness, etc.

Thou say, The Quaker goes about to make his own Righteousness to stand, etc.

Answ. Thou art the Man that go about to make thy own Conceivings (as thou
speak) of God, and Christ, and his Righteousness, by using Unscriptural
Words to make good that Righteousness which thy self says is not real: Must
not thou needs wonder and perish for want of the True Righteousness of Christ?

Thou say, The Young Man may now engage, without any Peril, any Quaker in
England.

Answ. This is like Goliah's Boast; but let not him that puts on the Harness
boast, as he that puts it off: I suppose others, if not thy self, will be of
another mind, when you have impartially perused the Reply to the Young-man's
Book, to which I refer the Reader to judge of his great Ability, or rather his
Confused Indigested Thoughts concerning the Mysteries of God and Christ.

Thou writest to thy Brethren to be greatly Encouraged, etc. in reducing others
in the same manner.

Answ. How can any be Encouraged to Reduce others by their own Righteousness,
which thou say, the Gifts and Virtues that the Spirit of God works in our
Minds are? And if it be but in the same manner that the Young Man is reduced,
such Confusion will never turn to your Reputation among the Sober-minded.

Whereas thou say, The Quakers keep people in perfect Popish Slavery.

Answ. The Quakers knew no Bondage and Slavery like the Bondage and Slavery of
Sin, which you believe all men must continue in term of Life: But I refer the
Reader to the Reply to the Young-man's Book for a farther Answer to this
Particular.

Thou say, As high as Heaven is above the Earth, so far is that Spirit of
the Faith of Jesus in you above the spirit of Ant^christ that is in them, viz.
Quakers.

Answ. How now! Is your own Righteousness grown so mightily? Have thou
forgotten that thou calledst the Gifts and Virtues that the Spirit of God works
in your Minds, is but your own Righteousness? And what good can your own
Righteousness do you? But take heed of the Blasphemy of the Holy Ghost, lest
Francis Spira's Condition become thine, or Madness and Distraction befall thee.
My Soul could even pity thee, because if thou Repent not of these and like
Passages, as, that the Quakers Spirit is a Spirit of Delusion, and their
Doctrine Antichristian, etc. God's Displeasure will kindle as a Fire to burn
thee up amongst the Briars and Thorns, that muster up themselves in Battle
against him, and his ever-blessed Appearance in Spirit and Power in the Hearts
of that Poor Despised People. For I testify in the Amen, that God has, and
does bless the Faithful amongst them, and they shall be blessed; And in Vain do
the Heathen Rage, and such foolish Imaginary Backsliding People as thy self
Imagine a Vain Thing; For their Redeemer lives, and the Shout of a King is
amongst them, even the King of Sion, sitting upon his Holy Hill. Halelujah for
evermore.

Postscript.
William Haworth,
OH! that these Smitings may be as Balm; for they are the Words of a Friend to
thy Poor Lost Soul, as at present thou art: Oh! feel them, feel them, and be
not Wrath because of them, lest the Gate of Mercy forever be shut against thee.

I. C.

AN Additional Postscript.
THE Enemy of Man's Soul knowing how Destructive the Inward and Experimental
Knowledge of Christ is unto his Kingdom and Government, has in these late
times stirred up many Instruments, both in their Preaching and Printing, to
prejudice the Minds of the Simple-Hearted against it, as the Pharisees of old
stirred up the Devout Women against the Apostles; our Enemies suggesting
therefore, that the Quakers must needs deny the Man Christ, etc. For Prevention
of his Wiles, and Information of all that desire to know the Truth, as it is in
Jesus, I have published this short Testimony.

Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, that was born at Bethlehem, etc.
I know not any of us that ever so much as questioned the Truth of the History,
as recorded in Holy Scripture, concerning Jesus of Nazareth, etc. But (setting
aside the Envy of our Adversaries) their Mistakes about us arise from our
affirming, That the bare Historical Knowledge of this Jesus of Nazareth will
not save the Soul of any Man, without the Light of the Spirit of Christ opening
Man's Understanding, that he may know the Mystery of God the Father, and of
Christ, as the Apostle says, Col. 2. 2. and Ephesians. 3. 4. That ye may know mine
Understanding in the Mystery of Christ; and 1 Timothy 3. 16. Without controversy
great is the Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, etc. Mark 4. 11.
Christ said to his Disciples, viz. To you it is given to know the Mysteries of
the Kingdom of God; but unto them that are without, all things be done in
Parables.

Therefore we declare a Necessity for the Light to be first turned to, and
received, before this Jesus can be savingly know: Which Doctrine is also
confirmed to us by Experience, in that we had, as others now have (while in
that Nature by which all are Children of Wrath) the Historical Knowledge and
Belief of Jesus of Nazareth; yet we wanted the [Light] of the Knowledge, as the
Apostle excellently calls it, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Bare Historical Knowledge being a
dark dead Thing, until the Light give Life to that Knowledge.

Concerning the Righteousness of this Jesus of Nazareth, etc.
We believe and testify, That this Jesus of Nazareth wrought out, or fulfilled
all Righteousness in his Obedience, both in Doing and Suffering the Holy Law
and Will of God, and that this Righteousness so wrought out and fulfilled, was
not for himself, but for, or because of all such as truly seeing they have no
Covering or Righteousness of their own, flee unto, and lay hold of him and his
Everlasting Righteousness, by a True and Living Faith. And do further testify,
That this Choice Raiment of Christ's Righteousness is not brought forth and put
upon the Back of any Prodigal, while he remains in the Far Country, feeding
amongst the Swine; but at, or upon his Return to his Father's House, Luke 15.
22. And such Poor, Naked, Starved, Undone Sinners, as in themselves, seeing
their own Righteousness to be as a Menstruous and Filthy Thing, are the proper
Subjects of this Righteousness, as being now made meet to be Partakers of it,
Col. 1. 12.

And we further testify, that the Historical or bare Belief or Knowledge of
this Righteousness from the Letter, only by the assent to the Truth thereof
from the Natural Understanding, is not sufficient or enough to make this
Righteousness really or truly theirs; but as the Father of the Returned
Prodigal said to his Servants, (viz.) Bring forth the best Robe, and put it on
him: So this Righteousness must become ours by that Living Faith which purifies
the Heart, God the Father by his Spirit putting it on us, and making it ours,
according to 1 Cor. 1. 30. But ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is
made unto us Wisdom and Righteousness, etc.

Concerning the Blood of this Jesus of Nazareth, etc.
We believe and testify, That his Blood exceeds not only the Blood of Bulls
and Goats, but the Blood of the Best Man or Men that ever was, or shall be in
the World. And we do in the Sight of God really own the Blood of the Son of
Man; both according to the History, and in the Mystery (as we do his Cross)
both as shed for us, and to be drunk by us; both as bespeaking Remission of Sin
past through Faith in it, and as sprinkling the Conscience of True Believers,
and cleansing them from all Sin. Therefore it is called, The Precious Blood of
Christ, as being of an Incorruptible Nature, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. and is therefore
said to speak better Things then the Blood of Abel, being (by way of Emphasis)
called, The Blood of his Dear Son, etc. and is also called, a Price; Ye are
bought with a Price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. by all which it is manifest to be of
infinite value, both in the Account of God, and all those that know it, by
being VVitnesses of its Virtue, sprinkling their Hearts from an Evil
Conscience, Hebr. 10. 22. But because we testify, that its not the Notion, or
bare Historical and Litteral Belief of those things that justify, or make us
really free from that Wrath which comes upon every Soul of Man that does Evil,
whether Jew or Gentile, Professor or Profane, but only the Life and Virtue of
this Blood received into the Heart, by that Living Faith, which Christ alone is
the Author of.

Therefore are we branded with sleighting the Blood of the Man Christ, etc.
though we testify our Esteem thereof, both in the History and in the Mystery,
and that without the Life and Virtue of this Blood there is no Remission.

Concerning Justification by the Blood of this Jesus of Nazareth, etc.
I touched at it before, and do further testify, That as without Blood there
is no Remission, neither can any Blood or Offering besides the precious Blood
of J^su^ Christ ^emit any Man's Sins, or make an Atonement for him, although
he would offer up his bel^ved Isa^^ for it; yet God dot^ try every true Child
of Abraham inwa^dly, as he did Abraham ^^wardly, before he shows unto him this
Sacrifice of his own providing. And because we testify according to Holy
Scripture and Grounded Experience, that true experimental Justification or
Acquitment from all Sin and Unrighteousness is witnessed by believing and
walking in the Light, as God is in the Light, as it is writ^en 1 John 1. 7. If
we walk in the Light, as he ^s in the Light, we (...) F^ll^wship one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son clenses ^^ from all
Unrighteousness; and being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through
Jesus Christ. And true Justifying Faith is said to purify the Heart, by
removing Unrighteousness, and plucking up those Plants which God's Right-H^^d
^ver planted, Acts 15. 9. Mat. 17. 20. Luke 17. 6. and is called the Ev^^^nce
and Substance, Hebr. 11. 1. and Christ is said to ^^^ll in the Heart by Faith,
because the true and living Faith re^llizeth good things to the Soul, as the
Eye does by Union with its Object to the Body, Faith being the Instrument by
which the Life and Virtue of the Blood of Christ, that justifies, is received
or sucked into the Soul that is justified, and thereby perfects forever those
that are ^anctified; whose Eye being always fixed single on that which
clen^eth, their whole Body must needs be full of Light and Glory.

J. C.

Rebellion Rebuked: IN AN ANSWER TO A Scandalous Pamphlet, ENTITLED, The Quaker
Converted to Christianity, etc.
AS concerning this Young Man, whom William Haworth calls, The Quaker
Converted, and gives his Book that Title; We would have all Moderate People
to judge, (by what follows) whether he was such a one as he has styled him:
For he has affirmed (in his Epistle to that little Pamphlet) That he was fully
of their Way, Faith, Spirit and Principle; And that he went farther then most
of them toward that they call Perfection; And that he is now able to engage
any Quaker in England in Discourse: Making a very great Boast with much Joy, as
if he had taken some great Prize, or obtained a great Victory, as may be seen
in his foresaid Epistle.

Now here follows the Young-man's own words (by which ye may perceive, how
far he was a Quaker, and see if W. H. does yet understand what they and their
Perfection is; and when did he hear them call that Perfection, which this
Young Man had attained to) viz. p. 7. And when I thought of going to the
Quakers, these things which I did not like among them kept me back, having not
Ground in my self for to do them, of which Silent Meetings was the chief,
Putting off my Hat was another: For when I met with one Friend or other, if I
saluted him with my Hat, I knew not that I did offend God any more then if I
did not: Now there were some things which the Quakers did, that I was not
convinced of. And concluded, He could not agree with them in all things, page
4. And (page 1.) I went several times, as other Boys d^d; only this, I was
taken off from having D^light in Sports and Pastimes quickly after my going
[mark that] and at that tim^ I was of that ^^am of Spirit, that I was ready to
ass^nt to every thing the Quakers did, whether I had Ground for it or not, page
2.

Here ye may read and understan^ this Young Men's Perfection in the Quakers
Way, and com^are it with Will^^m Haworth's Affirmation (as aforesaid) and then
let all Sober and Rational People judge, if this Young Man was f^lly of their
Way, Spirit, Faith and Principle, and w^nt farther toward that they call
Perfection then most of them, as he has affirmed, page 1.

First, Whether it be the Quakers way, Faith, Spirit and Principle, to dislike
Silent Meetings, as this Young Man did, which kept him back [mark that.]

2dly, Whether it be the Quakers Way, Faith, Spirit and Principle to Salute
their Friends (or any other) with putting off their Hats, as this Young Man
did, not knowing he Offended God, etc.

2dly, Whether it be the Quakers Way, Faith, Spirit and Principle, to Assent to
things without Ground (or are they of that Frame of Spirit (to be ready to
assent to every thing another of them does, whether they have Ground for it or
not) as this Young Man was.

4thly, And whether it be the Quakers Way, Faith, Spirit and Principle, to say
You to a Single Person, and to call Men Master, as this Young Man did, who
confesses, He could not agree with them in all things.

So take notice, what the things are he did dislike, and could not agree with
them in, which kept him back (as he has said.)

And now see if he were fully of the Quakers Way, Faith, Spirit and Principle,
and went fa^ther then most of them toward that they call Perfection, as W. H.
has affirmed, and published to his own Shame, who is so blind (through his
Envy) that he did not see the same Young Man giving him the Lie, in several
places in the aforesaid Pamphlet, to which he wrote the Epistle.

And how may the whole Nation of England, and many in other Countries, and such
as have been their Persecutors, give this Envious Man the Lie? and rebuke him
for his Folly and Wickedness, who has made such Notorious Lies and Slanders
against an Innocent Suffering People? as will more appear in what follows.

It is well known to many yet living, what a Stir and Stumbling there was about
their Meeting in Silence, their Keeping on their Hats, and Speaking plain
Language, without Respect of Persons, according to the Scriptures of Truth,
denying their former needle^s Words and vain Complements, being come to know a
Bridle to their Tongues, Iam. 1. 26. and their Salvation wrought out with Fear
and Trembling, which was a strange Work and Wonder to Professor and Profane,
though plentifully testified of in the Scriptures (which they call their Rule)
but know them not, as is manifest.

And what Great and Cruel Sufferings did many of them sustain, because of their
Faithfulness to God in these things, which were Contemptible in the Eyes of the
Wise and Prudent Men of this World, who scornfully reproached them by the Name
Quaker, because they were such as Trembled at the Word of the Lord, Isa. 66.

Now these are the things that kept this Young Man back, which he did not like,
nor find Ground in himself to do them, as he has said: But the Quak^rs do
still find Ground in the Truth, to do what the Lord requires; and their Way,
Faith, Spirit and Principle is the same, and not changed.

Now wherein this Young Man was fully of their Way, Faith, Spirit and
Principl^, who knows? And wherein his Perfection did consist, no Body knows,
except in perfectly denying the Truth and Power of God, and fleeing the Cross
with W. H. who also did stumble at the same St^mbling Stone, which became as a
Rock of Offense unto him, as the Witne^s of God [in him] shall shortly bring to
his Remembrance, though at present his Pride and Envy has blinded him, and
has made Lies his Refuge to Oppose and Villifie the People of the Lord.

For this Young Man has sufficiently confessed his Ignorance concerning the
Work and Way of the Lord, who did dislike and stumble at Silent Meetings, which
the Quakers do not dislike, but do prize, as a Means through which they came to
know the Lord, and his Salvation, as their Brethren did in Ages past, who
waited for him in the Way of his Judgments, Isa. 26. 8. as may be plentifully
seen in the Scriptures of Truth, where the Lord commanded Silence and Stilness,
etc. of which I may mention something at present, for the sake of the Ignorant,
as Isa. 41. Keep Silence before me, O Islands, and let the People renew their
Strength; let them come near, then let them speak: But this is hid from the
vultures Eye, and from all who Disobey the Light, which they be lighted withal.
And Ezekiel. 2. 13. Be Silent, O all Flesh, before the Lord, etc. And Hab. 2. 20.
But the Lord is in his Holy Temple, let all the Earth keep Silence before him:
Hear this, ye Earthly-minded, who use your Tongues, and the Lord never sent
you. And there was Silence in Heaven, Rev. 8. But this is out of your Reach,
who cry, Revelations are Ceased. Be Still, and know that I am God, etc. Psalm.
46. Tremble, and Sin not; Examine your own Hearts, and be Still, Psalm. 4.
Therefore will I wait upon the Lord, Isa. 8. But they that wait upon the Lord
shall renew their Strength, Chap. 40. 31. And Christ Jesus the Lord bid his
Disciples wait till they were endued with Power (or Strength) from on High.
Much more might be mentioned, but this may serve to let you see your Ignorance
of the Work and Way of the Lord among his People, who did not dislike nor
stumble at such things, as you do: For, he that loves his Brother, abides in
the Light; and there is no Occasion of Stumbling in him, 1 John 2. 10.

So here ye may read and see the Cause and Ground of your disliking (and
stumbling at) these things, which the Holy Men of God were acquainted with in
all Ages. And what was the Cause, why the Name Q^^k^r was first given this
People (in Reproach) at that day? But only for witnessing the States and
Conditions of the Holy Men of God, recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, whose
Salvation was wrought out with Fear and Trembling; who would have been called
Qu^k^rs, had they been in your days, of which much mi^ht be spoken.

So this Young Man, W. H. cries up for such a Perfect Quaker, is so far from
being such a one, that he is ignorant of those things (and dislikes them) for
which that Name was given them, as he confessed the same to me, and could not
own that Refuge of Lies W. H. has made concerning him; And I do not understand
from his Master, or any in Hartford, that he was ever Ten Times at the Quakers
Meetings, but went sometimes, as other Boys did, as he has said, and may be
further seen in that Account from Hartford, here inserted.

So let the Reader observe and take notice, what a thing of naught (or rather
Scandalous Lies, which W. H. has heaped up) he re^oyces in, and makes his vain
Oration and Boast of, as in his Epistle. And see some of this poor be^^^der'd
Lad's C^ntradictions and Confusions, in speaking about the Light, wherein he
has showed his Weakness and Blindness, and not his Perfection nor Ability to
engage any Quaker ^^ ^word as W. H. has foolishly boasted, like a Foolish
Child of a Feather, or like a Distracted Man that fights with the Air.

Now here are some of the Young-man's own words, as he has set them down in
the aforesaid Pamphlet, by way of Question and Answer.

In page 15. Quest. Was that Light by which I was convinced of Sin, and by
Obedience thereunto thought I should be brought into the Image of Christ -- was
it the Light of the Spirit of Christ, yea, or nay?

Answ. Nay, if I may judge of the Tree by the Fruit.

Quest. What Light is it then?

Answ. The same with that which the Heathens had by Nature, Sixteen Hundr^d
Years since, Romans 2. 14.

Reply, Now let the Reader give Judgment concerning this Tree, according to the
Fruits thereof, which he himself has tasted, as by his own Confession.

In page 7. As I went on, I met with a Passage, Ephesians. 5 Foolish Talking and
Gesting, and Mat. 12. 36. Ye shall give an Account for every Idle Word; and the
Light in me asse^ted to it, that I ought not to do so; and when I was reproved
for it, I was obedient, and by Obedience was delivered from such Sins, from
whence I became of few words.

And in page 18. Quest. Was there not a Power, when I obeyed the Light,
Reproving me for Sin, which did deliver me from Sinning, and gave me strength
to do that which was Good, and Right, and Just before God and Man?

Answ. Yes, there was a Power, which did deliver me from sinning outwardly, or
doing any wrong to my Neighbor, or telling Lies, but chused rather to suffer
Anger then to do it. It bore me up when I was hissed at for what I did, etc.

And in page 3, 4. I will insert one Remarkable Passage, which I did when I was
about Nineteen or Twenty Years of Age, which is this, (viz.) I being s^nt to
the Shop for Herrings, and had them d^livered unto me, I did dislike some of
them; and being sent to the Barrel alone to change some of them, I being a
great Lover of them, it rose in me, What a Brave Opportunity I had to slip One
into my Pocket, for my self: This was the Temptation. On the other hand came
the Light, Reproving of me in this manner; I must not do this thing; Why? If it
should be known, it would be a Dishonor to my Name, and I should be ashamed to
look any Body in the Face: And if it were not known to Men, yet God would know
it; and he would punish me, if I sinned against him. Through which Means I did
obey that which did Reprove, and touched none but what was my due; And I went
home Rejoicing with my self in this manner, How happy was my Condition now,
beyond what it had been if I had di^obeyed the Reproof! And how Good was the
Lord to me in calling to me, when I was tempted to do that Evil! -- So was I
convinced of one Evil one day, and was delivered from it; and another day
another Evil, and had Power over it; and I had Joy and Peace in it.

Rep. And yet he compares this Blessed Light (which has done all this Good for
him) to the Egyptians (which grievously and wickedly Oppressed and Afflicted
the Children of Israel, on whom the Lord sent his Plagues, be^^^^ of their
Cruelty, which they exercised upon his People) as may be seen in page 18. and
yet confesses, he had Joy and Peace, and Comfort, and Quietness of Spirit
under these Taskmasters, which the poor Israelites had not, but cried to the
Lord, as may be read, Exodus 3. and so no fit (but a wicked and unrighteous)
Comparison, which the Lord will one day judge him for, when his Blind Eye is
opened.

And again, in page 19. Quest. Do I despise that Light, Knowledge or
Conscience, which reproves Man for Sin in him, and judge it not to be Obeyed?

Answ. No; I believe it is the Duty of every one to walk in the Commandments of
the Law of God, and to keep a Conscience void of Offense, according as it is
written, Holding Faith in a Pure Conscience; hoping to be found in the same my
self.

Quest. For what End do I desire to be found in Obedience to this Light?

Answ. Because it is my Duty to God; not for Life, but from a Principle of
Lif^, etc.

And ^ill^am Haworth calls the same Light the Deity, in his Epistle to the
aforesaid Pamphlet, And says, Its the Spirit makes known Sin when ^t comes,
which is not seen before, as the shining of the Sun through a Crack into a Dark
Room, page 6. And in the Epistle says again, Its the Light of Nature, Romans 1.

So let all People, who have any Understanding (or Skill) to judge of a Tree by
the Fruit, take good notice of the Fruits and Effects of this Tree, The Light
which convinces Man of Sin, in him; and al^o to consider the Confusions and
Contradictions of these Blind Men, who one while call it the Spirit, and the
Deity, [that is, the Godhead] and says, It makes known Sin, which is not seen
before; and says, Its my Duty to God to obey it, and desires to obey it from a
Principle of Life; and how good was the Lord in calling to me? So its the Call
of the Lord (when tempted) to forsake Evil, and delivers from it, and gives
Power and Strength to do that which is Good, Just and Right in the Sight of God
and Men; and gives Peace, and Joy and Comfort, as aforesaid.

And then again says, of the very same thing; Nay, its not the Light of the
Spirit of Christ, if I may judge of the Tree by the Fruit. But its the Light of
Nature, and the same the Heathens had by Nature, and the Egyptian-Task-masters,
and Bondage of Egypt, page 18.

So now, put all their Jumble together, and you will read their Blind Mad Work
thus, (viz.)

It is not the Light of the Spirit of Christ that Convinces of Sin, p. 15. It
is the Spirit that makes known Sin which is not seen before, p. 6. No, it is
the Light of Nature; the Heathens had it by Nature; and its the Egyptian-Tasks,
and the Bondage of Cruel Pharaoh. No, but it is the Godhead, that the barbarous
people saw by, when they apprehended Paul to be a Murderer, when the Viper
fastened on his Hand, Acts 28. 4. Do I despise this Light of Nature, this
Cruuel Pharaoh, this Light which is not of the Spirit of Christ? No; For what
End do I desire to Obey this Egyptian-Task-master, this Light of Nature, this
Spirit which is Not of Christ? Because its my Duty to God, not for Life, but
from a Principle of Life. Had not I a Power over Sin, and Deliverance out of
it, and Strength to do that which was Good, and Just, and Right in the Sight of
God and Man, and Joy, and Peace, and Comfort, and Quietness of Spirit, when I
obeyed this Pharaoh, this Light of Nature, which is not the Light of the Spirit
of Christ? Yes; I had a Joy and Peace in it; and it was the Call of the Lord to
me.

So compare this Heap of Confusion with the State of Israel in Egypt, Exodus 3.
and see what Joy, and Peace, and Comfort, and Quietness of Spirit they had
there, which this Lad compares the Pure Light of the Son of God unto, who knows
not what he says, nor whereof he affirms; of which more may be written by
another Hand, toward the End of this Book; as also a further Account from
Hartford (where he dwells) concerning him, which I would have the Reader take
good notice of.

And in that he says, The Light by which the Heathens did the things contained
in the Law, Romans 2. (which showed the Work of the Law written in their hearts)
is not the Light of the Spirit of Christ; he is found a Denyer of the
Scriptures, John 1. 9. and Tit. 2. For, if every Man that comes into the World
be lighted with the Light of Christ, then the Heathens, and all other Men, were
lighted: And if the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, has appeared to all
Men, then it appeared to the Heathens; for they were Men, and came into the
World. And herein W. D. thou contradicts thy Companion, and great Adorer of
thee, W. H. who calls it the Deity (Godhead (as aforesaid) and the Godhead is
the same Spirit, or Life and Light, which was in Christ Jesus, as it is
written, Col. 2. 9. which is Grace and Truth, John 1. 16. 17.

So then, it was the Light, Spirit, Grace and Truth, which was in Christ Jesus;
That appeared to the Barbarous (or Heathen) People, by his Confession.

And so now, let this Tree be judged of by its Fruits (according to the Young,
man's own Saying) and let us see what kind of Fruits it bears; for I have read,
That Men do not gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles; and that A Good
Tree cannot bring forth Evil Fruit, neither can a Corrupt Tree bring forth Good
Fruit, Mat. 7. Luke 6. 43, 44. So by this true Rule, let all who reads and
tastes of these Fruits, judge of this Tree (the Light.)

First, page 7. It assented to the Words of Christ and his Apostles.

2dly, It Convinced him of Sin, and Reproved him, and called to him when he was
going or thinking to Steal, and it kept him from obeying that Temptation about
the Herrings, though he loved them, and had a brave Opportunity to (steal or)
slip one into his Pocket.

3dly, It caused him to be of Few Words, and kept him from Lying, or telling of
Lies.

4thly, It delivered him from Sinning outwardly, and from doing any Wrong to
his Neighbor.

5thly, It gave him Strength (or Power) to do that which was Good, Just and
Right in the Sight of God and Man.

6thly, It convinced him of one (Sin or) Evil one day, and delivered him from
it; and another day another Evil, and he had Power over it.

7thly, He had Joy, Peace, Quietness of Spirit and Comfort in Obedience to it.

Reply, Now whence (or from what kind of Tree) comes these Blessed Fruits and
Effects, if not from the Tree of Life? Or who is the Author of (or from what
Spirit comes) this Light, if it be not the Light of Christ Jesus?

Is it not the Spirit of Truth that convinces of Sin, and keeps from Lying,
and Stealing, and wronging of Neighbors, and leads into all Truth, to do that
which is Good, and Just, and Right in the Sight of God and Man?

And was not that their Comforter, who were lead and guided by it? (Did it not
give them Joy, and Peace, and Comfort, when they were obedient to it?) Read and
understand: Or who gives Peace to his People besides him?

And is it not the same Grace of God, which Paul declared of, Tit. 2. which
taught them to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly and
Righteously? Then did it not teach them to deny Lying, and Stealing, and
Wronging their Neighbors, and to do as they would be done by, according to
Christ's Doctrine? Or is there any other Spirit or Light, which can deliver
from Sin, and give Power over it, but what is of Christ Jesus? Is it not
written of him, That there is no other Name under Heaven by which Men can be
saved (or delivered?) And is he not called the Deliverer and Counselor, who is
the true Light, that lights every man that comes into the World? Read the
Scriptures, and consider these things. Acts 4. Isa. 59. John 1. 9

Is it not the Light of Christ, that makes Sin manifest? Ephesians. 5. And does not
the Apostle say, (in that same place) verse. 8, 9. The Fruit of the Spirit is in
all Goodness, Righteousness and Truth? So judge of this Tree by its Fruits, if
it be not all Goodness, Righteousness and Truth, which it brings forth.

And does not W. H. say, It is the Spirit that makes known Sin, which is not
seen before? [Mark] Then whenever any one sees Sin, it is the Spirit that
makes it known; for it is not seen before. And that it was the Godhead, in
which the Barbarous People saw, etc. Acts 28. And yet how Enviously he Clamours
against the Quakers, in his confused dark Mind, calling their Spirit Delusion,
and their Doctrine Antichristian; like the Foolish Clamerous-tongued Woman
(Solomon speaks of) whose Feet are without, pulling down her own House?

How do you think your Babel will now stand, when ye thus throw up and pull
down your own Work, and Revile us for the same Truth you acknowledge in Words;
like the Hypocrites of old, who said, They had one Father, even God; and yet
called Christ Jesus, Deceiver and Blasphemer, and judged him worthy of Death
because he acknowledged himself to be the Son of God, (who was truly so?) John
19. 7.

So read your Spirit and Way, which is not like Christ Within nor Without,
though thou say you have both; but the contrary appears in thee: And ye are
more like the Madman, Prove. 26. who cast Firebrarnds, Arrows and Death at you
know not what; comparing the Light of Christ to Pharaoh (or Egypt) and Light of
Nature; Contemning and Undervaluing it, as if it were not of God, but what ye
know not; like the Jews, one while A Good Man, and then, Nay, but he Deceives
the people: So you, one while, its the Deity; and then, Nay, its Not the Light
of the Spirit of Christ, but the Light of Nature.

Thus are you confounded about that which delivers from Sin, and Temptations,
from Lying, Stealing and doing Wrong, and keeps out of Evil, and gives Power
over it, and convinces of Sin, and reproves for Sin, and which gives Strength
to do that which is Good, Just and Right in the Sight of God and Man, and Joy
and Peace in it.

Take heed of the Sin against the Holy Ghost; for it is near when that which
casts out Devils is called Beelzebub: Your Reproaching of us, is little to us;
but beware, how you sport your selves with a Consuming Fire; and be you Warned
in time for your own Souls sake,

And consider your Confusion and Darkness, Whether the Lord requires
Obedience, Service or Worship, to any other Light or Spirit (of Christians) but
his own; or what Tree or Plant would the Heavenly Father have to grow, but what
is of his own planting* as it is written, Every Plant, which my Heavenly Father
has not planted, must be plucked up.

Does God require Duty to him in that which he will pluck up? Is it safe to
desire to be Obedient to that? How blind are you, not to know what this Tree
is, by its Good Fruits? May I not say to you, as the Man (whose Eyes Jesus
Christ had opened) did to the Hypocrites of old; Why herein is a Marvelous
thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he has opened mine Eyes.
And yet you say, as to Light, The Spirit makes known Sin, when it comes,
which is not seen before, So then, that which gives the Sight of Sin at any
time, is the Spirit, according to your own Doctrine, page 6.

Now, how happy would it be in all Christendom, yea, in all the World, if this
Good Tree did grow and prosper in and among them all, which delivers and keeps
from Sinning outwardly, and from Temptations; from Lying and Stealing, and
Wronging their Neighbors; and which gives Strength and Power to do that which
is Good, and Just, and Right in the Sight of God and Man; and gives Peace, and
Joy, and Quietness of Spirit, and Comfort, in Obedience thereunto. Consider it
well, and see if it be at all like the Cruel Bondage of Egypt, whither this
Young Man went down for help against the True Light and Spirit of Christ, which
makes known Sin, and reproves it, and delivers from it; but it has proved a
Broken Reed to him: Woe be to them, says the Lord, that go down to Egypt for
Help, Isa. 31. 1, 2, 3.

Would not the Fruit of this Blessed Tree heal the Nations, and still the
Raging Sea of Folly and Wickedness, which swells and abounds among them? What a
Blessed, Peaceable, Quiet, Just, Righteous Life would they all live in, were
they but come to this State? Not to Wrong one another, nor Steal one from
another, nor Lie one to another; Would they not speak Truth every Man to his
Neighbor, as the Lord requires, then?

Surely that which keeps from Sin and Temptations, Lying and Stealing, and
VVronging another, would keep them from Killing and Robbing one another, and
from doing any Violence to one another, or Persecuting one another about
Religion; for here they would be of one Heart, Mind and Spirit, sitting down in
Joy, and Peace, and Comfort, and none would make them afraid: What a Blessed
Condition would this be? Let all People that have any Sense judge: And how
Aimable and Desirable is this State in the Eyes of many People?

Would not these Blessed Promises of the Lord be fulfilled? They shall beat
their Swords into Plough-Shares, and their Spheers into Pruning Hooks; and
Nation shall not lift up. Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War
any more, Isa. 2. And they shall sit every one under his own Vine, and under
his Fig Tree, and none shall make them afraid, Mic. 4. Would not this come to
pass, and be accomplished this Way, let the Wise in Heart judge.

Would not Nations Rejoice and be Glad at the Prosperity of this Blessed Tree?
And who would not be able (among them) to judge whence this Tree is, by those
blessed Fruits it brings forth?

For surely, that which will keep a Young Man (or an Old Man) from stealing the
value of a Herring, will keep such (whose Hearts have been long exercised with
Covetous Practices) from stealing a Cow, or a Horse, or any such things, or
from wronging their honest Neighbors any more, as they have done; and it will
teach them, (if they obey it) to do that which is Good, Right and Just in the
Sight of God and Man.

How would the very Root of Wickedness decay and wither Inwardly, if all were
ceased from Outwardly? Would it not speak Barrenness, if no Fruits appeared?
Would not the Devil, and his Works, and his Kingdom, and Authority soon be
destroyed, and come to an End by this Means and Way? Judge, you that have
Wisdom to count the Number of the Beast.

And who now is appointed to do this great Work, or who (or what) is able to
accomplish it, but Christ Jesus, the True Light, which lights every Man that
comes into the World, John 1. 9. as it is written of him 1 John 3. 8. For this
Purpose was the Son of God manifested, That he might destroy the Works of the
Devil [Mark that] And all Power is given to him; And there is no other Name
under Heaven, by which Men can be saved (or delivered from Sin) Acts 4. 12. For
he is the Deliverer, which comes out of Sion, to turn away Ungodliness from
Jacob, Isaiah 59. 20. Romans 11. 26. If ye have Ears, hear, and read with
Understanding.

And why now should ye thus Blame, Reproach and grievously Slander and Envy the
Quakers (so called) for vindicating and endeavoring the Prosperity of this
Blessed Tree and Plant of Righteousness, whose Fruit would Heal the Nations,
did they but sit under it? Were they but Obedient to this Light, how would it
keep their Consciences void of Offense toward God and Man? as this Young Man
speaks of it, Hoping to be found in the same himself, as his Duty to God, p. 19.

And yet in page 12. he said, The Devil had two Cards to play, which were
Objections against the Doctrine of Christ's making Satisfaction for all my
Sins, both past, present and to come.

And in page 17. The Lord opened mine Eyes, and showed me Salvation by a Person
wholely without me.

And page 18. But I found a greater Joy and Peace when I saw Salvation by the
Righteousness of Christ without me, being a more complete and surer
Righteousness then that wrought in me; being hereby delivered from Fear of
Miscarriages, to the Loss of my Salvation.

And W. H. says* That the Righteousness of Faith, by which we are justified is
wholely without us; And that the Father has poured forth all his Wrath upon
his Son Jesus Christ.

Now if this Doctrine were True and Sound Doctrine, there is no need to Fear of
Miscarriages: For there is now Wrath left to punish Sinners, if All be poured
forth upon Jesus Christ; and that Satisfaction was made Sixteen Hundred Years
ago, for All Sins past, present and to come; the Devil might play what Cards he
will now (if this be true) there is no need to Fear the Loss of Salvation
through Miscarriages. And that was a needless Doctrine of Christ, to bid his
Disciples, Watch and Pray, lest they enter into Temptation, Mat. 26. 41. and of
the Apostle Peter, who bid them give all Diligence to make their Calling and
their Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10

If these Men's Doctrine be true and sound, when will that time come, that
Wicked Men will not endure sound Doctrine, which the Apostle said they would
not, but would heap up Teachers after their own Lusts, and turn their Ears from
the Truth, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.

Who among all the Ungodly in Christendom (so called) would turn their Ears
from this kind of Doctrine? O ye Daubers with Untempored Mortar, and Sowers of
Pillows under all Arm-Holes! The Lord is against you, and he will break down
your Wall, and rent your Pillows from you, as in days past, Ezekiel. 13. who have
turned away your Ears from the Truth, Christ Jesus, the true Light, which
lights every Man that comes into the World; and cause the People to Err by
your Lies, and by your Lightness, like your Brethren, the False Prophets of old.

Was there ever such a Doctrine preached by any of the Holy Men of God, as
this, since the beginning of the World? Search the Scriptures (and see) which
you call your Rule, where ever they preached, That the Faith that justified
them, and their Salvation was wrought out by a Righteousness or Person wholly
without them, as you do?

Did they not say, Their Faith workt by Love, and purified their Hearts? Acts
15. 9. And that the Righteousness of the Law was fulfilled In them, who walked
not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit? Romans 8. 4. And that the Anointing
was In them, and was their Teacher; and that it was Truth, and no Lie? And is
not Christ the Truth, who lights every Man? And was not he their
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption? And much more might be declared
of their Testimony, how their Salvation was wrought out with Fear and
Trembling; and that it was God that workt in them to Will and to Do of his own
Good Pleasure.

And yet again thou W. H. says in thy foresaid Epistle, (viz.) Jesus Christ is
amongst us; we eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood; he dwells in us, and we in
him; we have both Christ Within and Without; we have both Word and Spirit, and
so we have the better of them that divide these.

Now if Jesus Christ dwells IN you (as you say) does not the Savior dwell in
you? And if you eat and drink his Flesh and Blood, is it not then IN you?

O William Haworth! Do thou not yet see thy Darkness, thy Confusion,
Contradictions and False Doctrine? Has thy Envy so far blinded thee, to cry
one while, wholely without you; and then again, he dwells in you? How will
this hold together in the Day of thy Account, which hastens?

And then thou say (in thy Epistle, page 9.) viz. Our own Righteousness is
within us, inhering in our Souls; it confists in those Virtues and Gifts that
the Spirit of God works in our Minds. And page 10. calls it, The Righteousness
of mere Man.

So then the Gifts and Virtues the Spirit of God works in our Minds, is but of
mere Man, by thy Account, and as Filthy Rags; for so said the Prophet
concerning their own Righteousness, Isa. 64. 6. Would not this be Blasphemy, to
call the Gifts and Virtues, that the Spirit of God works in our Minds, Filthy
Rags? Consider it.

And would not this be Madness and Folly, for Paul to say, I count all Loss and
Dung, that I may win Christ, and that I may be found in him; not having those
Gifts and Virtues which the Spirit of God's work in my Mind. Oh Heap of
Confusion? how has thy Envy and Pride blinded and befooled thee?

And then in page 11. thou say, (viz.) The Quaker goes about to make his own
Righteousness to stand.

Yes, and blame him not, if it consists in those Gifts and Virtues that the
Spirit of God works in his Mind, as thou say it does; how is any one a true
Christian without these?

O Will. Haworth, How is the wise foolish man taken in his own Envy and
Craftiness against the poor honest Quaker? The Lord has found thee out, and
rebuked thy Madness, thou backsliding treacherous Man: And thou art even
proclaiming thy Folly, like Jannes and Jambres, who withstood Moses, which is
now made manifest.

And be it known to thee and all the World, that the Quaker owns no other
Righteousness to be justified by, but the Righteousness of Jesus Christ; the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith in him, according to the Scriptures of
Truth, nor no other Name under Heaven by which Men can be saved, whatever any
of you dream of them; and yet they desire those Gifts and Virtues the Spirit of
God works in their Minds may stand and be increased, according to that good
Exhortation, 2 Pet. 1. 5. Add to your Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge,
and to Knowledge Temperance, etc. for he that lacks these things is blind,
etc.

Had not Gamaliel more Wisdom, Patience and Understanding then thee and thy
Companion (in this Work) who said, If the Work were of God it would stand, and
they could not overthrow it?

And you call the Work of God, the Righteousness of mere Man, and say, its
rotten and must fall, as in the last page of your Book.

Who is Antichrist now W. H. the Quaker or thee? Read 1 John 4. 2, 3, 4. and
consider your Babel, where God is confounding your Language, and the Language
of all the Earth, whole Weapons shall not prosper against his Truth and People;
but he will condemn every Tongue that rises up against them, as he has thine.

And why do thou call the Quakers Spirit a Spirit of Delusion, and say, their
Doctrine is Antichristian, in diametrical Opposition to the Doctrine delivered
by the Apostles of Jesus Christ, which Way will thou go about to prove this
false envious Charge against us? thou can never prove it while thou live,
but it shall turn upon thy own slandering Head: for we can prove our Doctrine
to be parrellel with the Doctrine of the Apostles, and of Christ himself by the
Scriptures of Truth; and we are made manifest in men's Consciences, as the true
Ministers of the Gospel were; and we witness that in Truth, which thou have
stole the Words of; for we do eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
Blood, etc. which did thou really witness, thou wou^dst have Fellowship with
us, and not revile and belie us, as thou do.

But whose Doctrine is yours like think you? who cry wholly without, and the
Devil had Cards to p^ay against Satisfaction (from wholly without) for all your
Sins past, present and to come, and that the Father has poured forth all his
Wrath upon his Son Jesus Christ? Oh ye Blasphemers! who blaspheme God and his
Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven; for I testify for God, ye call his
true and faithful Witness (in you) the Devil; and the Hour is coming in which
you shall feel his heavy Strokes for these things, and he will play you such
Cards (as you call them) as all your Skill Wit and Strength will not be able to
prevail against, and then your false Hope, Joy and Peace will perish: Its the
Word of the Lord God unto you all, who deny his pure Light wherewith he has
lighted you, and call his Gifts and Virtues but of mere Man.

And then you shall know there is Wrath left, enough to punish the Hypocrite,
Liar and Slanderer; and that God is angry with the wicked every Day, Psalm. 7.

And thou W. H. ^ayst, The Quakers catch many simple Hearts, and keep them in
perfect popish Slavery and Bondage, and callst them Foxes and Seduc^rs, etc.

Now consider with thy self, and see, how thou (in thy blind Envy) do rush
into lying and slandering, as a Horse into the Battle^ not fearing God nor
regarding Man: Art thou fit to be a Teacher of others who can not bridle thy
own Tongue? Who will give thee any Credit in these false Charges, but such as
love and make Lies, like thy ^elf?

Do thou know certainly what perfect popish Slavery and Bondage is? Consider
the Depth of thy Words and their Consequence, if thy Charge were true against
us. Oh W. H. what have thou done against the Innocent People of the Lord? My
Soul pitties thee, and I can truly say, my Bowels are turned for thee, that a
Place of Repentance thou might find, before it be too late.

For thou have quite mard thy Cause (in hand) and thy End the Lord has
frustrated, and will (of all his Opposers) more and more; and by the Strength
of Envy no man shall prevail.

Will not Millions of People give thee the Lie (if they should read or hear
these Words of thine) and abhor thy secret slaying the Innocent? How dare
thou so confidently assert such palpable Lies and Slanders in the Face of
Christendom? The Papists would condemn and judge thee to be an envious
Hypocrite, should these Lines come to their Hands, who are as opposite to us
(in their religious Ways of Worship) as Darkness is to Light; and are wholly
withou, twith thee in their dark ^maginations. And this shall thou one Day
know, though at present thy Envy and Pride has blinded thee.

And again say thou, If ever Satan was transformed into an Angel of Light, it
is in this People; and say, They swarm like Locusts; and that you have an
Impudent Enemy to deal withal, etc.

O William! How came the Quakers to be thus contemptible and vile in thine
Eyes, that thou can hardly find Words bad enough to reproach them with? What
Evil have they ever done thee? How came they to be thy Enemies, let God's
Witness answer, except for telling thee the Truth? If they have any Way wronged
thee, let us understand it, that thou may be righted, and never foam out thy
own Shame thus any more, like the restless troubled Sea to the View of the
Nation.

And as for Satan's being transformed into an Angel of Light in the Quakers;
thou art as much mistaken, as thy Brethren were that called Christ Jesus
Beelzebub; for it is Christ in them the Hope of Glory, which thou have
blasphemed against, who is the true Light that lights every Man that comes
into the World, to whom all the Angels must bow.

And as for their swarming, which thou envyest, its not like Locusts (that is
thy Mistake also) but as the Stars of Heaven, and the Sand by the Seashore
shall the Seed of Abraham be, who rejoiced to see Christ's Day (the true Light)
whom thou woul^st have reproached (as thou have us) had he been in thy Days.

Therefore repent of this thy Wickedness, and ^ease to perve^^ the right Way of
the Lord, and pray God the Thoughts of thy Heart and the Words of thy Mouth may
be forgiven thee; for the Burden thereof will be thy own, and not touch us (as
to hurt us) for we feel sufficient Armor (^^ the Light) against all the fiery,
raging Darts of the wicked; blessed be the Lord forever.

Now to return again to some more of the young Man's Words, page 17. where he
speaks of another Light, which every man has not, by which he saw Salvation by
a Person wholly without him, whose Righteousness being imputed to him. Is this
like Scripture Language (which you call your Rule) see more of your Confusion
and Blindness; did the Apostles of Christ preach of a Light that every Man had
not, by which they saw their Salvation? O strange, erroneous Doctrine! quite
contrary to the general Testimony of all the holy Men of God in all Ages.

Did not John (the greatest of all the Prophets) testify, That it was the true
Light that lights every Man that comes into the World, Joh. 1. 9. that all
men through him might believe: And do you not yet believe his Testimony? If ye
say you do, then tell us what that other Light is beside the true Light, that
it may beknown distinctly, according to plain Scripture; for I never read of
such a Light, by which Salvation is seen, though I have known the holy
Scriptures from a Child, yet of this kind of Light I am ignorant; but I have
read of the Grace of God that brings Salvation, that teached the Saints; but
Paul said, It has appeared to all men, Tit. 2. And he is as large as John in
his Testimony; and of this I have some true Knowledge (with many more) blessed
be the Lord forever and ever.

Now if ye are not able to give us an Account of this Light, according to plain
Scripture, which every man has not a Measure of, by which Salvation is seen by
a Person wholly without you; We shall justly judge it to be a mere dark and vain
Imagination of your own Brains, seeing the Scripture ^aith, This is the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, etc. And the wicked slothful
Servant was not condemned, because he had not a Tallent, but for not improving
it, according to his Masters requiring; but if all men are not lighted with the
true Light, then some men have no true Light, then why should such be
condemned, who are so miserably deceived (is this Equal?) But if all men are
lighted with the true Light (as I believe) Then by your Doctrine some have two
Lights, another Light beside the true Light; for thou say. Its by a Light
which every Man has not: So that thou may mean, Its a greater Measure of the
true Light then every Man has; or else its another Sort of Kind of Light; but
if it be a greater measure of the true Light thou meanest; then it alters not
the Property, Kind and Nature; and so its the same in Kind which every man has
a measure of: But if it be of an other Kind and Nature then the true Light,
then is it properly another Light; and so what shall we call this (thy) Light,
but a false Light, or a Divination of thy dark Brain, which thou may see by
the true Light in thee, thy own and W. H's. Confusion and Blindness, which is
just from the Lord upon you all that oppose his blessed Truth and People.

And after thy confused Prayer, p. 11. (to Christ in thee, and to Christ in the
Heavens, and by and in the Spirit as thou thoughtst) thou say, (viz.) Several
Weeks was I in this Trouble, making my Condition known to no one, because I
would not be persuaded to any thing, but did wholly rely upon the inward
Instructions of the Lord: Thus did my Hope perish.

How did thou wholly rely upon the Inward Instructions of the Lord, when thou
prayedst in that confused Manner, as aforesaid; consider it?

And did ever any wholly rely upon the inward Instructions of the Lord, and
their Hope perish? bring one Example for this, or else conclude, thou have
blasphemed against the Lord, and belyed him and his People in all Ages, as thou
have.

And in p. 19. thou say, Thou had Peace of Conscience by the powerful Work
of God without thee.

Is this like Scripture Language? Surely thou have got a peace, and out of thy
Trouble the wrong Way (if it be so) and into much more Trouble must thou come
then ever, before thou can have true Peace with God: The Lord has spoken it.

For thy Flight was in the Winter (as I told thee) and thou have fled the
Cross, and slipped thy Neck from under the Yoke of Christ Jesus, which W. H.
calls the Burden Yo^k^^ which is so indeed to all the Rebellious, whose
Tongues are at Liberty to lie and Slander as he has done.

But did not the Saints and People of God in all Ages witness their Salvation
and Peace of Conscience, by the powerful Work of God within them? Did not God
work in them, when their Salvation was wrought out with Fear and Trembling? And
did they not say, God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness has
shined in our Hearts, to give us the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God
in the Face of Jesus Christ: And we have this Treasure in earthen Vessels, 2
Cor. 4. 6, 7. Of which much more might be spoken.

We deny not the Work of God and Christ without (as some have imagined) but do
also know as our Brethren did) that no man knows the Things and Works of God
(which are spiritually discerned) but by the Spirit of God; and its the same
Spirit that raised up Jesus from the dead, that dwells in his People, which
quickens their mortal Bodies.

And they never cried up wholly without, as you do, but preached Christ in them
(after they had testified of his Appearance and Work without, as you may read,
Romans 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

And Christ Jesus preached the Kingdom of Heaven within People, Luke 17. 20.
And the true Worship of the Father in the Spirit and in the Truth, Joh. 4. And
said, What if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before? It is
the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh that profits nothing; when they cried, how
can this Man give us his Flesh to eat (whose Minds were wholly without, like
many of you) John 6. And said Peter, 2 Epist. Chapter 1. v. 19. We have also a more
sure Word of Prophecy, to which ye do well to take heed, as unto a Light that
shines in a dark place, until the Day dawn and the Day Star arise in your
Hearts. And Jesus is the bright and Morning Star, as ye may read, Revel. 22.
16. And Jesus Christ bid People believe in the Light, that they might become
the Children of the Light, Joh. 6. 62. (and so do we) And he said, He that has
an Ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches: And the same Jesus
said: He that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood has Eternal Life. And said
the Apostle, 1 John 1. 7. But if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light,
then have we Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all Sin.

So they were to drink his Blood; and that was it by which they (were cleansed
from Sin, and) had Eternal Life; and if they drank it, was it not then within
them? Read and understand, for People have drunk Iniquity (as an Ox drinks
Water) which has defiled them, as Christ Jesus said, Mat. 15. 18, 19. For out
of the Heart proceeds evil Thoughts, Murders Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts,
false VVitness, Blasphemies; and these Things defile a man; and Mark 7. 21, 22,
23. For from within, out of the Heart of Men proceed evil Thoughts, Adulteries,
Fornications, Thefts, Covetousness, Wickedness, Deceit, Laciviousness, an Evil
Eye, Blasphemy, Pride, Foolishness: All these evil Things come from within, and
defile the Man.

Now must not these Evil Things be purged out, according to that Saying of
Paul, 2 Timothy 2. 21. If a Man purge himself from these he shall be a Vessel unto
Honor, sanctified and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every Good
Work; Is any fit for the Master's Use, but who is purged and sanctified (as
aforesaid) or prepared to every good Work, till the Evil Works are laid aside,
purged out and forsaken? Or can People serve both these Masters? For he that
commits Sin is the Servant of Sin, as it is written, John 8. 34. 1 John 3. 8.

Now how, or by what must these Evil Things (which defiles People) be purged
out, seeing they are within them? Must not the Antidote be taken inwardly, to
expel the Poison, that works within, to the corrupting (and endangering the
Ruin) of the Body? What is it then must cleanse the Inward Man of Corruption
and Defilement, but the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, as of a Lamb without
Spot and Blemish? Did not that Redeem People formerly from their Vain
Conversations? 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Rev. 5. 9, 10. And did they not drink it, and
bless the Lord, and called it, The Cup of Blessing? But this is a Mystery hid
from the Fleshly Birth (all that are in the dark Imaginations of their own
Brains) as the Spiritual Birth was hid from Nicodemus, who came by Night.

And did not God say, I will dwell IN them, and walk IN them, etc? 2 Cor. 6.
And does not the Scripture say, By Mercy and Truth Iniquity is purged? Prove.
16. And did not the Son of God (the Truth, and the Light of the World) walk in
the midst of the Golden Candle-sticks? And did he not say, He that has an Ear
let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches? And is not God a Spirit,
and his Worship in the Spirit and in the Truth? And is not the Spirit within?
and the Truth required in the Inward Parts? And is not God Light?

Read and understand, you that cry, wholely without you, you that clamor
against the Light and Work of God within; for we confess Jesus Christ to be
come in the Flesh, as it is written, 1 John 4, etc. And so we are not of
Antichrist, as William Haworth does falsely charge us in his Epistle to that
Pamphlet aforesaid, titled, [The Quaker Converted] which is a Lie, uttered in
the very opening of his Mouth against us; for which the Lord will plead with
him: For the Young Man (whom he has thus vainly boasted of) was no Quaker, (as
I have before showed to any Unprejudiced Eye) and by his own Confession but a
poor, tossed, unstable, bewildred Lad (as may be seen) who went to prove
Religions with he knew not what, as in the 3d page of his Book may be read; and
so was not suoh a Perfect Quaker as W. H. has said; but stumbled at the very
Door and Way by which the Quakers came to know God, and Jesus Christ, whom he
has sent (which is Life Eternal, John 17. 3.) as I have before showed.

And so William Haworth's great Joy, Refreshment and Boast of the Quaker
Converted, is founded upon a Lie, (which is of the Devil, the Father of Lies)
which he has made his Refuge, and Bulwork against the Truth, and them that
walk in it; and that he might privily shoot his Arrows at the upright in Heart,
(the Children of Light) whom he calls Seducers Antichristian, and in whom
Satan is transformed into an Angel of Light, with many other envious railing
speeches for which the Lord will judge him.

But the Children of Light, are out of his reach, and of all such who (in their
dark Envy, and vain Imaginations) seek to devour them; and as they abide in the
Truth, they are in that the Devil is out of, and he has no Power over them;
and they are armed with the whole Armor of Light, against all the fiery Darts
of the Wicked; Everlasting Praises be to him that sits upon the Throne, and to
the Lamb forever, who is getting the Victory over the Beast and his Image, the
Dragon and his Floods, Whore and False Prophet.

And Great Babylon is sinking like a Mlll-stone, whose Harpers Voice shall be
heard no more at all; and the Voice of her (grinding) Mill shall be heard no
more at all: Glory in the Highest.

The Day is come, in which no Man will buy her Ware any more; her Merchants are
Howling, and Gnawing their Tongues for Pain; for strong is the Lord that
judges Her.

And God is Confounding this Great City, and setting up his Holy City upon a
Hill, which cannot be hid; whose Light is like a Jasper, clear as Crystal: And
without are Dogs, and all Liars, and whatsoever worke^h Abomi^ation and makes
a Lie. And her True Light is shining, and the Glory of God is arising more and
more, which shall shake terribly the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof,
amongst whom the Devil is come down in great Rage, knowing he has but a short
time.

Rejoice ye Children of the Lord, and lift up your Heads all ye Upright in
Heart; Rejoice, ye Heavens, and ye that dwell in the Heavenly Places in Christ
Jesus, and Praise your God forever, whose Power is come, whose Glory shines,
whose Dominion is witnessed over Death and Hell, and the Gates of it; whose
Dreadful Presence is now again known, which the Worker of Iniquity cannot
endure; The Eyelids of the Morning are unto them as the Shadow of Death: Every
one that does Evil hates the Light, neither comes to it, lest their Deeds
should be reproved.

This is the Ground of their Vexation and Rage against the Pure Appearance of
the Lord: But Arise, O God, more and more, and let the Sea Roar, and the Waters
be Troubled; bring forth thy Glorious Work (already begun in the Earth) and
rent thou the Vail of thick Darkness from Top to Bottom (which is yet spread
over People and Nations) that the Graves may be opened, and the Dead may here
thy Voice; and arise and come forth to Judgment: let thy Dread fall upon the
Heathen round about, to awaken them; and Exalt thy Everlasting Truth and Name
over all the Powers of Darkness, that many may be gathered into thy Heavenly
Kingdom of Righteousness and Peace, that the Poor among Men may Rejoice, and
the Meek increase their Joy in t^ee, who art the Strength of thy People in all
Ages, who never failed them that put their whole trust in thee.

To whom be Everlasting Praises, Glory and Thanksgiving, from all that know thy
Name, God over all Heaven and Earth, blessed forever and ever. Halelujah.

And now Will. Haworth, I would put thee in Remembrance once more, to consider
this thy Work, and the Ground of thy Rage against the Lord and his innocent
People; and what the Effects and End thereof will be; and recollect in thy
mind, and ponder thy false Charges and things, which thou have written against
them in that Pamphlet, (and see if thou can stand by them, when examined to
thy face,) which thou have published to the view of many People, and let the
Witness of God arise in thee, and answer; for its of the Deity by which thou
say the Barbarous People saw that Vengeance was due on Murderers; and see if
it will not be thy own Portion, who art found a Hater of thy Brother, (as Cain
did Abel) without just Cause; For he that hates his Brother is a Murderer, and
we know that no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him, 1 John 3. 15. Chap.
2. verse. 11.

Therefore consider it, and see if thy Fruits do agree with thy Profess^on (for
the Tree is known and judged by the Fruits it brings forth) who say, You eat
Christ's Flesh, and drink his Blood, and that he dwells IN you, and you IN
him; too high words for a Liar, and Slanderer, and Murderer; for such as eats
his Flesh and drinks his Blood has Eternal Life, John 6. 54. which the Hater
of his Brother has not; nor the Liar and Railer has not any Inheritance in
the Kingdom of God and of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. which thou art manifested to
be both, as by thy Fruits has Appeared.

And so thy saying, Christ dwells IN you, and you IN him, will not save thee
from the Liars Portion, which is the Lake of Torment, which is already begun in
thee, and the Smoke thereof ascends in this thy foaming out thy own Shame
against an Innocent People, for which the Lord does judge thee; and it will
ascend forever, if thou repent not speedily. Who art so Hardened, to say, Thou
Testifiest in the Lord, that the Quakers Spirit is a Spirit of Delusion, and
that their Doctrine is Antichristian; And call them Seducers, and other
Reproachful Names; and that thou have many Ten Thousands are ready to Testify
the same with thee: But Thy Lord thou have manifested (whose Name thou art in)
to be the Liar and Murderer from the beginning, which rules in thee, as by thy
Fruits is evident: And we do judge of a Tree by its Fruits, as the Young Man
also said, whom thou say is a Quaker Converted to Christianity; as if the
Quakers are no Christians; showing thy Envy against them, and thy Ignorance (or
Wilful Blindness concerning the Scriptures of Truth, in which may be seen
plentifully, that God's People, whom he has had regard unto above all People
(in all Ages) were such as Trembled at his Word, as in Isa. 66. and Moses was a
Leading-Quaker, Hebr. 12. and Ezekiel was a Quaker, see Chap. 12. 18. and
Daniel (a Man greatly beloved) was a Trembler, Chap. 10. 11, 12. and Paul
preached in much Trembling, and in the Demonstration of the Spirit and of
Power, 1 Cor. 2. 3. and the same Apostle bid the (true obedient) Christians, to
work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling, Phil. 2. 12. and Exhorted
Servants to obey their Masters with Fear and Trembling, Ephesians. 6. 5. and the
true Christians received Titus with Fear and Trembling, 2 Cor. 7. 15. and much
more might be mentioned of them.

Therefore let not thy Envy blind thee any longer, nor go not about to shut up
the Way to the Kingdom of Heaven against People, as thou have done, though the
Entrance thereof thou know not, who art found without, among the Biters at
the Heels of the True Woman, the King's Daughter, whose Glory is within, Psalm.
45. 13.

And as for thy many Ten Thousands, thou boastest of, we know them; For, Every
one that does Evil hates the Light, etc. which are very many; and so, every
Evil-doer is on thy side, and is (one) with thee, as thou have said: And so the
Unclean Spirits may now cry, (as formerly) Our Name is Legion, for we are many.

But remember thou that true Saying of old, viz. That though the Wicked join
Hand in Hand, yet shall they not go unpunished; but the Seed of the Righteous
shall be delivered, Prove. 11. 21.

And now try thy own Spirit and thy Fruits by the Scriptures, (which many of
you call the Touchstone) who says, Christ dwells In you, and you In him; and
that you eat his Flesh and drink his Blood.

For it is written, If Christ be in you, the Body is Dead because of ^in, Romans
8. And if any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature; old things are passed
away, all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17.

Is thy Body dead? Is not Lying, and Slandering, and Envy, and False-Accusing,
Sin? Are not these Sins alive in thee (in thy Body?) Let all that know thee
judge: Art thou (...) Creature? Let them judge, if all old things be (...) i^
thee? And did not the Blood of Christ cleanse them ((...) it) from all Sin?
Do thou witness the same ^^^^ct thereof (...) they did who walked in the
Light? 1 John 1. 7. Do thou w^^ness it to cleanse thee from all Sin? who art
in thy dark Con^usion, Blasphemy and false Doctrine, Belying and Reviling God
and hi^ People, saying, He has poured forth all his Wrath upon his Son Jesus
Christ.

What kind of Christianity is it, that thou art endeavoring to Convert People
to? Where is one Scripture will bear thee out in this Saying of thine? Though
thou have quoted Isa. 50. that will not do it, nor all the Coverings thou can
make will not hide thee from the Wrath to come, which will overtake thee
speedily; and then thou shall know, that there is some left for thee and all
Liars and Evil-Speakers; and that the Quakers are no Seducers (as thou have
belyed them) But such are Seducers, as draw People from the Anointing in them
(which is the Truth) as may by read, 1 John 2. 26, 27. And not them that turn
People from Darkness to the Light, Acts 26. 18. the Anointing in them -- whom
thou have wickedly reproached, as the Righteous God is Witness for us (and
against thee) whose Innocent Cause he will assuredly plead with thee, and all
that oppose them. And no Weapon formed against his blessed Truth and People,
shall ever prosper; The Lord of Heaven and Earth has spoken it.

This is written by a Labourer in the Lord's Harvest, in true Love to his
Blessed Truth and People; and to the Souls of all People I am a Frie^^ bearing
Testimony against the Works of the World, that are Evil: And I have ^^^^ed to
forgive Enemies; and yet can truly say (in this Concern) in the behalf of the
Lord and his Holy Name, The Reproaches of them that Reproached thee, fell on me,

WilliamBayly.
South^ark, the 17th of the 11th Month, 1673.
Postscript.
I Having seen a Book, called, The Quaker Converted, have considered diverse
things therein mentioned; but I find the main Scope of that Book is, concerning
a Young Man that had been sometimes at the Quakers Meetings, and is now gone
again to William Haworth's Meeting; and declares of a State of Bondage he has
been in, and how he is now come to Liberty. The Book is sufficiently answered,
with the Epistle thereunto; My Purpose is only to Animadvert briefly upon one
Passage, mentioned in the 18th page of the said Book, where this William
Dimsdale has summed up the whole Discourse in a Metaphor, or Comparison of the
Children of Israel's being in Egypt, and in Canaan; the one was the House of
Bondage, the other the House of Freedom; to which he compares his being engaged
in Faith and Judgment, to obey the Light in his Conscience, as his Bondage; and
his being delivered from that Faith and Judgment, and from that Obedience, to
be his being delivered from Pharaoh, and his grievous Tasks and Burdens, and
his being brought into the Land of Canaan, where no such Burden is laid upon
him, as before was said.

Behold here a Cloud of Gross Darkness and Ignorance, which would amaze any man
that is not steady in his right Senses, that ever any one should become so
Blind as thus to manifest his own Shame, and the great Corruption and
Wickedness of his Principles and Way he professes.

Mark what his Tasks were, that were laid upon him, when he was under this
Pharaoh, in this Egypt; viz. First, Not to Lie. 2dly, Not to speak Idle Words.
3dly, Not to be among other Boys in their Sports and Pastimes, though he had
Opportunity thereunto. 4thly, Not to Wrong his Neighbor. 5thly, Not to Steal
H^rrings, though he loved them well, and was tempted to them, and was also sent
to the Barrel alone. 6thly, not to sink under Hissings and Reproaches, which
happened to him for doing well; and diverse more such like Burdens, which, when
he did observe, he had Peace, he says: But now he has greater Peace in his
Canaan, where none of these Burdens are laid on him. Oh horrible Canaan! Such a
Canaan sure God never led his People into, nor never will, where these Tasks
are not laid upon them: This is a Canaan for the Sons of Belial, who are
without a Yoke, and not for Christians, who must be yoaked from Lying, from
Idle-speaking, from Stealing Herrings, or any thing else, and all things
beforementioned: But now he is free from that Pharaoh (as he calls the Pure
Light of Christ) had not Men need take heed how they Believe him in his Words,
how they Trust him in his Actions, or how they have to do with him, seeing the
Latitude of his Canaan is to have none of these Burdens laid upon him; and the
Latitude of his Judgment and Faith is, to believe, that if he does Lie, Steal,
Speak Idly, or any other such things, there is no Wrath left in God to be
poured out upon him for it; Nay, that it was forgiven before it was done, and
Himself not a whit the less approved of God for doing it: Nay, that there is no
Danger of his Salvation to Miscarry, how great soever his Miscarriages may be.

Here is a CANAAN, so called; Woe from the Lord God to every one that settles
therein: For, I testify in the Name of Jehovah, that made the Heavens and the
Earth, and all that is in them, That the True Name of this CANAAN is SODOM and
EGYPT, and that our Lord is daily Crucified therein.

And now William Dimsdale, if there be a Day for thee to Repent in, Repent of
this thy great Wickedness, in calling Christ Pharaoh, and his holy Burdens the
Egyptian-Tasks; and those Tastes of Comfort, which thou have felt to Encourage
thee in thy Obedience, to be like the Peace with the Egyptians, when the Tale
of Brick was delivered Oh Miserable Man! if thou Perish, thy Blood is upon
thine own Head.

God never Required any thing of thee by his Light, that was Unreasonable,
never to make Brick and find Straw; but he gave thee a Measure of his Grace, in
which thou foundst Power to deliver thee; and had thou kept Faithful to it,
thou had known Salvation by it: But now thou have cast off Christ's Yoke and
Burden, and endeavourest to betray him into the Hands of the Priests and
Pharisees.

Oh, Repent! and Pray, if it be possible, that this thy Wickedness may be
forgiven thee; for, if not, the Weightof it will sink thee into Everlasting
Misery.

S. Crisp.

AN ACCOUNT FROM HARTFORD.
HAving taken notice of a late Pamphlet, set forth, one part by William
Haworth, and the other part by W. D. the Title thereof, A Quaker Converted to
Christianity, and that it was in Hartford; We, whose Names are under written,
being Inhabitants of the said Place, could not but admire that such a thing
should be in that Place, and we wholely Strangers to it; And One so Eminent, as
W. H. does describe him, that he need not fear to Encounter any Quaker in
England in Discourse: This set some of us on Enquiring who it should be, upon
which Enquiry it was found to be One who had been Apprentice (and now is
Servant) to one Thomas Grigson of Hartford, who by Trade is a Weaver, and with
his Wife has belonged to our Meeting these many years. They being asked
concerning their Man, Whether he was in any wise accounted a Quaker, say, They
know nothing that be was ever so much as Convinced of that Blessed Truth owned
by the Quakers, so as to be in Society with them, or Conformable to their
Testimony. And further, They know not that he was ever looked upon, by any
Person whatsoever, to be a Quaker in the least; but only that he behaved
himself soberly toward them. And further, his Master and Dame, with whom he
lived, says, He might come to the Meetings many years ago, among the Boys
sometimes; but so, that they never understood that he had any Convincement upon
his Mind. And so they with us do think strange, that any Man or Men dare be so
Impudent as to set forth in Print a thing so notoriously False; and in it
further to affirm, That He (to wit, the said W. D.) was fully of their Way,
Spirit, Faith and Principle (meaning the Quakers) Now do but mind what the Lad
says of himself, in his Part of the Pamphlet, p. 7. First, As to Silent
Meetings he was not satisfied: 2dly, That he used to salute his Friends and
others with Pulling off his Hat. How now, William Haworth! Was this to be Fully
of our Way, Spirit, Faith and Principle, one with us? Let them that know us
judge. For he that comes not to know a Benefit in Silent Meeting, knows little
of the Quakers Faith or Principle; although we appoint none, with the
Limitation beforehand, as to be Silent Meetings, but if any have any thing to
speak from the Lord, is as much at Liberty as at other times: But however, a
Benefit we know by them, though no Words be spoken; we whose Minds are gathered
Inwards Hab. 2. 1, 2, 3. James 5. 7. Acts 3. 19.
to wait upon the Lord in the Silence of all Flesh or Fleshly Thoughts, and to
have an inward Ear open, to hear what the Spirit says; and have and do,
blessed be the Lord often at such Meetings feel the Times of Refreshing, which
come from his Presence: And here is the True Worship known, which is in Spirit
and in Truth, and such the Lord seeks to worship him. And so the Intent of the
True Ministry Acts 26. 17, 18.
is to direct the Minds of Men and Women to God's Spirit manifest in their
Hearts, and there to worship; and not as W. H. says, That those Gifts and
Virtues wrought by the Spirit of God in our Minds, are a Man's own
Righteousness, to wit, that which Paul calls his own, Phil. 3. 9. but the
Righteousness of mere man; which is as Gross a Contradiction and Corrupt
Doctrine, as if he should tell us, That Paul, in his desiring to be found in
Christ, not having his own Righteousness, which was of the Law, desired to be
found in Christ, not having those Gifts and Virtues that the Spirit of God
works in our Minds; Oh, wonderful Darkness! but this is answered elsewhere.
And then as to the World, They can know a Quaker by his not pulling off his
Hat, which this Lad by his own Confession used to do.

Now William Haworth, where is this Great Goliath Quaker that was thus
Converted, and yet was never known by us, nor by the World to be a Quaker? But
rather then W. H. will want a Prodigy, or a Wonder to the World, he will call
him a Quaker; No doubt, William, thou deservest the Right Hand of Fellowship of
Tho. Hicks; for he only forges a silly Quaker, and then makes him speak what he
pleases; but thou have Converted a Quaker; O Wonder! if this had been true.

William, the next time thou writest things of this kind, lay them a little
closer together; and remember the old Proverb, That it is Old Men and far
Travelers that Lie without Control.

So far we were willing to let the World know the Truth of the Matter;
believing that at times something of God has been stirring both in William
Haworth and the Young Man, which we desire they may Return to, and Repent,
before it be too late.

We have subscribed our Names as follows, William Faireman, Thoman Grigson,
Thomas Chalkley, Henry Sweeting, Nathaniel Gerrard, Abraham Rutt, Richard
Martin, Richard Thomas, Edward Plumsted, Henry Stout, Nicholas Lucas.


AH William Haworth! what is become of that Tenderness that once was upon thy
Heart? Then wast thou little in thy own Eyes; then did thou confess to the
Truth, and the Quakers were Honest People in thy Account: How well had it been
for thee, if thou had grown in that Tenderness? But it is just with the Lord,
that all who Rebel against the Light of his Son, should be Hardened. It would be
well for thee to consider where thou art, and what thou art doing; for
doubtless thou art now found fighting against the Lord, and his Glorious Work,
which he has begun in the Earth; but it is all in vain, and to no purpose; for
it will Prosper: And if thou can stop the Sun in its Course, and set Bounds
and Limits to the Sea, then may thou accomplish thy Desire; For the Lord has
Blessed us, yea, and we shall be Blessed, and there is no Enchantment against
us: And thy Printing Books, and spreading them, and Preaching so much against
the Quakers, and Villifying them, as thou do, does but manifest that Spirit
of Envy and Bitterness which is not of God, and so is a Di^advantage to thy
self, and will be turned unto Advantage to us; and all sober People, and such
as are of an Honest Upright Heart, will soon discover thee: For what is the
Chaff to the Wheat? And although thy Understanding be so darkened, that thou
can not see the Dawning of the Day of God, yet it is not in thy Power to shut
the Eyes of others from seeing the Glory of it, nor to stop their Ears from
hearing and knowing the True Shepherd's Voice, from the Voice of the Stranger:
It is too late for thee to begin thy Work at this time of the Day; for the Son
of God is come, and has given us an Understanding to know him that is True,
and many are in him, and do know the Elect Seed born that cannot be Deceived.
And thy terming the Quakers Spirit to be Delusion, and their Doctrine
Antichristian; these words, if ever thy Eyes come to be opened, will be a
Burden too heavy for thee to bear: For it is no less then Reviling the Light of
the Son of God, which he has given for a Leader to his People, to lead out of
all Evil, into all Truth; and those who have followed the Lord fully and
faithfully therein, have found Life and Salvation, according to that Promise,
He shall save his People from their Sins (not in their Sins) and of this there
are Thousands of Living VVitnesses. And therefore come down out of that high
and lofty spirit, and bow unto that which convinces thee of Sin; for all that
will not bow thereunto will be broken thereby: There is not an easier way unto
Life for thee, then there was for us; and yet we have no Cause to complain of a
Burdensome Yoke, or that the Lord is a Hard Master; for the Yoke of Christ is
easy, and his Burden is light: And do not flatter thy self with vain Hopes of
our Fall; for the Eyes that look for that will perish in their Holes; for we
are built upon the Rock of Ages; and though the Storms of Affliction beat on
the one hand, and the Raging Sea (which casts up Mire and Dirt) on the other,
yet shall we stand, for our Foundation is unmovable, and the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against us. And this is my Testimony for the Lord to thee,
and all who join with thee in this Work; Cease striving against the Lord in
his People, and Repent of your Evil, else you and your Work will fall
together; For, no Weapon that is formed against them shall prosper.

Mary Stout.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 22. for banes read ^ands. Page 4. line 13. for which read with.
P. 31. L. 38. for ontrary r. contrary. P. 37. L. 31. for Babe r. Babel. P. 39.
L. 14. for withou twith r. without with. P. 41. L. 36. for Burden r.
Burthensom. And where any other Faults or Defects are escaped the Press the
Unbyassed Reader is desired to Correct them according to the Sense of the
Matter, and none to impute them to the Authors.

THE END.

