PHILOTHEAS PILGRIMAGE TO PERFECTION. DESCRIBED IN A PRACTICE OF TEN DAYS
SOLITUDE, By Brother John of the Holy Cross, Friar Minour.

IHS
Emblem of the Society of Jesus (IHS with cross above and anchor below,
surrounded by rays of the sun)

BRUGES, Printed by Luke Kerchove. 1668.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST VIRTUOUS LADY, The Countess Dowager of Sussex.
MADAM
Divine things become Generous and Noble Spirits, who being the more refined
Images of God, above the Vulgar, have by their noble descent a larger Capacity
to great Matters, and by their most careful Education, a cleerer Aptness to
sublime thoughts and actions.

Your Honor has by the Excellent Conduct of your Life, give^ the world so
ample a proof of your Eminent Perfections, befitting the Greatness of your
Name, that None may reflect thereon, but must admire, both the fortunate
disposition of your original Inclinations to piety, and the free blessings of
a Gracious Providence, religiously managed by your own Virtuous care and
Industry.

For besides the Rare gifts of Nature and Fortune, which welcomed you into
this Light, wherein few of our Nation exceed your Excelling Happiness. Your
Honors laborious discovery of truth in our Holy Church, from which your first
years and growing Honor were extremely averse; and your zealous Love toward
comfortable Solitude, and compliance with Christian Duties, since your being
engrafted on the sacred stock of our ever-flourishing Christianity, wherein You
are become Imitable by few of your Noble Birth and Qualities, discovers that
swift penetration of your Judgment, that solidness of Virtue in your heart,
which truly speak you Noble and Religious.

Although this small handful of advises and helps to solitary Perfection,
gleaned up by many years serious Meditation, in sweet Retirement, may already
find a plenteous harvest in your own bosom, yet will I presume through your
Honors Encouragement, to lay the^ at the feet of your Excellent Virtues, that
under the protection of your Honors Favorable acceptance, and strengthened by
the greatness of your Name and perfections, My Philothea may become conspicuous
to he world, and do that great work abroad, which is therein designed, by

MADAM YOUR HONORS Most devoted Servant BRO. JOHN CROSS.

TO THE READER.
CHRISTIAN READER,
It is no new thing, to measure a friends Kindness by our own profits, and
value that most, by which we reap greatest fruit. I could wish this principle,
as well observed in the ordring our Spirits toward God and Virtue, as in using
the good things of this Life, in order to worldly conversation; I might then
hope, this small Treatise would find as kind a welcome from all well-willers to
piety, as the worth of the subject may deserve.

That whereof it treats, is Divine; and my whole aims are, to render the lover
of solitude, Divine; bringing her home to God, whence she strayed by sin; that
moderating passions, and planting Virtues, she may be cordially United to her
Divine Espous, The Author of all perfection, and finisher of our best hopes, by
obedience to his will now, and after by an endless communion with him in Heaven.

As the state of Holy Religion: so its design is, to render its Professors,
Lovers of Solitude; therefore all duties there, by reason of those Divine
thoughts, first conceived, and still conserved in those Divine Souls, aim to
fix on God, by conferring with him of Heaven their home, and Virtue the way
thither. Spiritual Retreats therefore are not intended for them, whose whole
life is a solitude; But for such, whose conversation with creatures, exposes to
manifold distractions, apt to slacken Christian Zeal, since nature is too
prone to cleave to the perishing things of this life; These therefore should often
renew their Vows of Christianity, and endeavor to repair their tired out
spirits, by stronger purposes of piety, which are best made in a retreat from
their Usual Employments.

How ever, even Religious persons, particularly, whose Obedience partakes more
of the Solicitudes of Martha, then Mary's Solitude, should sometimes observe a
more then ordinary Retirement; that reflecting on the Holiness of their
Vocation, and the duties thereof, they may repair what is decayed of their
first fervor, and secure their claym to heaven, aimed at by their Divine
Choice. And indeed this great work is to all of that high concernment, that
what ever account some loose spirits may make of it, it will one day, extremely
justify the Children of Light and crown their Hopes.

In My Preface to PHILOTHEA (an heaven-aspiring Soul whose conduct in her
Pilgrimage to God, is here intended) I have at large discoursed on the
Dignity, Profit, Aims and Use of spiritual Retreats; wherefor I need not
further dilate my self on that subject; My Wishes are, it is practice may make
Thee and all truly happy.

Farewell.
APPROBATIONS.
LIbrum hunc Anglice conscriptu^ a V. Adm. P. Fr. Joanne a S. Cruce, S. Th.
Lect. ac Conventus Fr: Minor. Anglo-Duacen: Vicario: cui titulus, Philothea's
Pilgrimage to Perfection, etc. diligenter perlegi, nihilque in eo deprehendi
fidei vel bonis moribus contrarium, sed omnia devotionem spirantia, and quae
perigrinantes ad Beatitudinem Animas, in Itinere promovere poterunt.

In cujus rei fidem subscripsi, Kalend: Septembr. Anno 1664. GEORGIUS
LEYBURNUS, Sacr. Theol. Doct. and Coll. Anglo-Duacen. Praeses.

MANDATUM ORDINIS.
COmmendetur praelo, Tractatus V. Adm. F. Ioannis a S. Cruce, Confessarii
Monialium nostrarum Brugensium etc. De Recessu Spirituali.

Actum Londini in Congregatione Intermedia 15. Nov. 1666. Erat subscriptum Fr.
THOMAS a S. ANNA, Secret. Prove. and Notar. Ap. Locus Sigilli.

I Underwritten have diligently read over Philothea's Pilgrimage to Perfection
etc. composed by the Rev. Father Bro: John of the Holy Cross, Reader of
Divinity etc. wherein holy Solitude is highly commended; the prerogatives,
motives and effects thereof are declared; Instructions and means for attaining
it, with the duties of a solitary Soul, are prescribed; by which at length he
co^ducts her to the highest Pitch of Solitude, contemplation and Union with
God, possible in this life; in whom he leaves her firmly fixed by a perfect
Resignation, Humility and Abnegation, and consequently perfect in a Solitary
way. Seeing therefore, that this Treatise tends to the instruction and
consolation of such Souls, and to the advancement of that happy End, and more
over contains nothing contrary to the Canons of the Church, I judge that it
may happily see light.

Given in our English Convent of Friar Minours in Doway this 3. of May 1668.
BRO. BERNARD ELSTON, Ord. FF. Min. S. Th. Doctor.

APPROBATIO ORDINARII.
LIber hic Anglice conscriptus, and a Patribus Ordinis examinatus, de licentia
ordinarii poterit imprimi.

Actum hac 8. Maii 1668. N. GERSEKEN, Archid. Brug. and Libr. Censor.

THE TABLE of CONTENTS.
THe Preface to Philothea, containing Instructions for Solitude.
. 1. Excellency of Holy Solitude. Page 1.. 2. Preparation for Solitude. p. 6..
3. Abstraction from usual Cares. p. 9.. 4. Choice of Place. p. 12.. 5. Due
time of Solitude. p. 14.. 6. Posture of body. p. 24.. 7 Subject of Solitary
thoughts. p. 25.. 8. A Method of Meditation. p. 28.. 9. Choice of a Guide. p.
34.. 10. Exercises in Solitude. p. 39.. 11. Distribution of time. p. 42.
A Practice of ten Days Solitude.
J. Days Voyage. Inducements to Solitude.
The Morning Exercise.
1. Point. Dignity of Solitude. p. 49. 2. point. Innocence of Solitude. p. 53.
3. point. Necessity of Solitude. p. 56.
The Evening Exercise.
1. Discourse. Gods Favors to us. p. 60. 2. Discourse. Our Returns to God. p.
64.
II. Days Voyage. Entertaynments in Solitude.
The Morning Exercise.
1. Point. Humility and Austerity. p. 68. 2. point. Patience and Obedience. p.
72. 3. point. Charity and Perfection. p. 76.
The Evening Exercise.
1. Discourse. Love of Solitary places. p. 80. 2. Discourse. Exercises in
Solitude. p. 84.
III. Days Voyage. Man in his sinful State.
The Morning Exercise.
1. Point. Vileness of the body by Nature. p. 90. 2. point. Wretchedness of the
Soul by sin. p. 94. 3. point. Ignorance of our future state. p. 98.
The Evening Exercise.
1. Discourse. Our weakness to Good. p. 102. 2. Discourse. Our proneness to
Evil. p. 106.
IV. Days Voyage. Man repaired by Jesus Christ.
The Morning Exercise.
1. Point. Institution of the Holy Sacrament. p. 111. 2. point. Fruits of the
H. Sacrament. p. 116. 3. point. Intention in Communion. p. 119. An Oblation
before Communion. p. 122.
The Evening Exercise.
1. Discourse. Preparation to the Holy Sacrament. p. 122. Advises for a
general Confession. p. 124. Philotheas Covenant with God. p. 125. 2.
Discourse. Behavior in receiving the Holy Sacrament. p. 126.
V. Days Voyage. Mortification of Sensuality.
The Morning Exercise.
1. Point. Mortification of the Senses. p. 130. 2. point. Mortificatio^ of the
Passions. p. 134. 3. point. Mortification, the property of a Christian. p. 136.
The Evening Exercise.
1. Discourse. Damages incurred by Immortification. p. 140. 2. Discourse.
Necessity and Use of Mortification. p. 144.
VI. Days Voyage. Flight of the Soul to God.
The Morning Exercise.
1. Point. Flight from Creatures. p. 150. 2. point. Flight from our selves. p.
153. 3. point. Flight from spiritual Comforts. p. 156.
The Evening Exercise.
1. Discourse. Vanity of Creatures. p. 158. 2. Discourse. Spiritual
Indifferency. p. 161.
VII. Days Voyage. Tranquillity of Spirit.
The Morning Exercise.
1. Point. Life of the Spirit. p. 165. 2. point. Mental Recollection. p. 168.
3. point. Union of the Spirit with God. p. 172
The Evening Exercise.
1. Discourse. Loves Trial. p. 176. 2. Discourse. Loves Entertainments. p.
179.
VIII. Days Voyage. God Speaking to the Soul.
The Morning Exercise.
1. Point. Harken to God. p. 184. 2. point. God speaks by Visible Creatures. p.
188. 3. point. God speaks by Man. p. 192.
The Evening Exercise.
1. Discourse. God speaks by his Son Incarnate. p. 197. 2. Discourse. God
reveals himself. p. 201.
IX. Days Voyage. Repose of the Soul in God.
The Morning Exercise.
1. Point. The Soul hidden in God. p. 204. 2. point. Search of God in God. p.
208. 3. point. The Souls repose in God. p. 212.
The Evening Exercise.
1. Discourse. Loves Ascents. p. 216. 2. Discourse. Loves Descents. p. 219.
X. Days Voyage. Highest Christian Perfection.
The Morning Exercise.
1. Point. Union with Christ suffering. p. 226. 2. point. Expropriation of
Friends. p. 233. 3. point. Selfe-Denyall. p. 239.
The Evening Exercise.
1. Discourse. Spiritual Desolation. p. 244. 2. Discourse. Philotheas Choice.
p. 248. Meditations upon the Passion, for every day of the week. p. 252.
PHILOTHEA INVITED TO BEGIN HER PILGRIMAGE.
TAke Leave Philothea, bid thy Friends depart,
Let nothing earthly now come near thy heart:
Whilst thou retyrest, sighing all alone,
Recounting all the ills which thou have done:
This is Gods way, to hear his Voice in Thee,
And search thy heart in inward privacie;
Which filled with thoughts of heav'n-aspiring joys,
And lodged in shades exempt from vulgar noise,
Winged with chaste desires and sacred vows,
Upwards does mount to meet her heavenly Spous;
And hear Loves whispers, charming up above,
To fix her self in the center of her Love:
From whose Embraces, may she not depart,
But grasp that heavenly armefull near her heart.
No Gemme, no hidden treasure like to this,
It Is Heavens delight, alone, Man's Crown and Bliss.
O blessed days! O purely sweet content!
Whilst thus in Paradise thy time is spent.
Oh may such thoughts thy spirit always move!
Thus may thou ever live to be in love.
It Is Heaven on Earth, thus sweetly to discover
Heavn'ns joys on Earth, and have thy God thy Lover.
RICH: BVLSTRODE, Interior: Templ. Land: Armig.

PHILOTHEA'S PILGRIMAGE TO PERFECTION.
The Preface to PHILOTHEA, Containing Instructions for Solitude.
. 1. Excellency of Holy Solitude.
SInce thou art in good earnest resolved, MY PHILOTHEA, to begin thy Pilgrimage
to Perfection by entering holy Solitude, therein for a while, to conferr with
the beloved of thy soul, touching the present and future state thereof, how
thou stand affected to Piety, and how thou may better thy self in thy
progress toward heaven, by cleansing thy heart entirely from those stains and
blemishes which are incident to corrupt and frail Nature, and by strengthening
it with pious considerations, enflamed affections, and efficacious resolutions,
to the redeeming of lost time and reforming such errors and evil
inclinations, as are insensibly crept into thy soul; I cannot more fittly
address my self to thee, then with the hearty well-wishes of holy Tobie to
his Son: Walk well, God be in thy way, and his holy Angel accompany Thee.

Nor may we doubt, but that the same Divine Clemency which has inspired Thee,
with a will to undertake this Holy Voyage, will enable Thee with his blessings,
and make Thee so to prosper and profitt thy self in the pursuance of this
blessed design, that it will be unto the eternal honor of the Divine
Majesty, and an ample increase of Piety, and spiritual comfort in thy own
soul.

If any employment be heavenly upon Earth, and does consequently belong to the
duty of a good and upright Christian, it is the serious practice of retired
solitude; by which the soul does unspeakably promote her self toward the end
of her creation; which is, to know God, and to love him above all things
created.

In Solitude we ransack our hearts, we discover our secret enemies there
lurking in our breasts, and strongly armed grapple with them, expel them, and
prevent their reentrance into our souls. By it, we dissable ill customs,
settle our selves to an eager use of means to do well, and fit our minds to
all good duties, and against all cross events. By it we descry our natural
weakness to virtue, obtain redress, prevent temptations, cheer up our hearts,
feeble and tired out with temptations and adversities, temper our use of
creatures, gain more light to our knowledge, more heat to our affections,
more life to our devotions, more vigor and courage in our callings, and thereby
we become strangers to the earth, by a just estimate of earthly things, which
are transitory and vain, and enter into a sweet fruition of invisible comforts.

We therein contemplate JESUS CHRIST, at the right hand of the Father, with
Saint Steven; we discourse with Almighty God in his glory, with Holy Moses; and
with the Great Saint Paul, ravished into the heavenly Paradise, we hear and
see, what we are loath to leave, and cannot utter.

Lastly, holy Solitude is the securest Remedy against wordly desires; it is the
pastime of Saints, the ladder of heaven, and the best means to perfect a good
Christian soul, without which it cannot experience true joy and rest, during
her abode in this smoaky Cottage of her Mortality.

Although all virtuous Exercises, which occurr in the course of our tedious
lives, do aim at the profit of our souls, in order to the purchasing of life
eternal; yet none comes nearer to this happy purpose, then the diligent use of
holy Solitude, whereby our spirit is strongly weaned from the love of perishing
and transitory things, and soareth up to the contemplatio^ and love of her
Almighty Creator, before whom, in silence and hope, she humbly discovers her
wants and earnest desires, embraces him with the arms of an innocent and
reverentiall love, and in a manner enters into the possession of the sweets of
a never ending felicity, amidst the heavy press of worldy trialls.

If therefore my Philothea, thou do earnestly thirst after the delights of a
spiritual Retreat, thou must seriously apply thy self to the use of it. For
howsoever strong thou find thy self in resisting temptations, and in the
practice of virtues without a retyrement of thy spirit, yet will the greatest
fervor soon slacken, and become faint, without the supply of Recollection, by
reason that our enemies are many, powerful and restless; and virtue, how ever
pleasant in the possession, is hard in the purchase, and our strongest
resolutions, not supported, both by frequent reflection upon our souls, and
those impediments that do often occur in our pursuit of Piety, and by
renovation of purposes unto that our happy end, will by insensible degrees,
become weak and tepid.

But before thou undertakest this work of ten days Solitude, unto which I
advise, and study to direct Thee; read attentively these few Rules, which I
here insert, collected out of several great Contemplatives; whose experience in
the schole of holy Solitude, may give them authority for thy instruction.

And indeed, without them a soul may miscarry, which would be great pity,
even in this holy and excelling work; and suffer illusions, where it
endeavors, to shun and decline them.

. 2. Preparation for Solitude.
WHerefore in the first place, be sure that entering into this holy Exercise,
Gods honor be thy chief Aim; the next, a reformation of thy own life, by a
serious and deliberate reflection on thy past and present state, and what may
happen for the future; that thou may thereby prepare thy self to live well
and dye happily, and that Death, when it comes, may not find Thee unprovided.

Nor do thou much heed what the world may think of thy retyrement, Thou
undertakest the employment of an Angel, and desire to have a foretast of
that blessedness, which JESUS CHRIST has purchased for us, by the effusion of
his precious blood; Blush not then, that thou beginnest now to be, what thou
should be always, but rather that thou have hitherto neglected a work,
wherein much of thy life ought to be employed.

And because this Mountain of Solitude ought not to be climed with a profane
and ungodly foot, but as in the delivery of the Law, so here, no beast may
touch Gods Hill, least he dies, the sight of God being only promised to the
pure of heart; the soul must therefore be well cleansed by humble Confession,
from the dreggs of sin, before she may profitably approach to this exercise,
which beholds only objects that are pure and spiritual.

Thus the Royal Prophet would first wash his hands in innocence, and then
compass the Altar.

Make then a strickt examine of thy conscience, what sin may have been
committed by thee? what grace forfeited? what punishment deserved? and after
this, in the evening before thou entrest thy Solitude, make an humble and
cordial Confession, of what thou find thy self faulty, since thy last
examine. For since thy understanding is not yet enough cleared, nor thy
affections sufficiently enflamed, for a General Confession, I should advise
Thee to deferr it till the Fourth Day, where I shall say more of the profit
thereof, and how it is to be performed.

This done, trouble not thy self, if thou finds't in thy soul some ill
inclinations yet liveing there; this exercise requires not absolute
perfection, but is a means to attain to it; Were we all Saints, there would
be no need to use the Solitude I speak of; Content thy self, that thou art not
conscious of any mortal offense which thou have not disclosed, with an humble
repentance for what is past, and a firm purpose to amend, endeavoring still
an honest sincerity and uprightnes of heart toward God.

Who finds him self in this disposition, let him not think, that either
weakness to Virtue, or pronesse to vice, may be a lawful bar to Recollection,
whereby our viciousness is weakened, and Virtue revived in us; no man will
starve him self with hunger, because he eats not with a strong appetite.

. 3. Abstraction from usual cares.
IN the next place, Philothea thou must disintangle thy self from worldly
affairs; If thou will approach to Gods flaming bush, upon the Mountain of
Visions, thou must putt of thy shoes; where our thoughts are glued to the
world, the soul will be unable to soar up with wings so limed and entangled,
unto a contemplation of heavenly things. For this, Elizeus left his oxen, S.
Peter his boat, netts, and friends too. The hill of Divine Meditation is high
and steep, and not to be ascended with a heart laden with worldly cares and
sollicitudes. Nor yet need thou, what ever thy charge be, public or
private, secular or religious, cast it wholly off; lay it by a while, during
thy spiritual retreat* in some other hand, whilst thou drawest there, more
force and strength, for the mannagement thereof.

If thou let those cares enter in with thee, they will become troublesome
companions, ever and anon distracting thy mind from her chief buisnesse. And
in this point, solitude admitts no smalnesse of matter, if thou give place to
one thought, which is not to thy purpose, hundreds will throng in with it, each
will prove an impediment to the other, and all of them will trouble and divert
the soul, which entertaines them, in this her Divine work. Wherefore be
scrupulous in the observance of this advice; Experience will teach Thee, that
distractions go not single; admit one, and in a moment, thou will forget where
thou art, and what thou art about.

And as thou must discharge thy self of thy ordinary employme^ts, when thou
attemptest this great work, withdrawing, not thy hands only, but even thy
thoughts from them: so also must thou observe a more strickt and profound
silence, not entering into a conference (more then the Rules of obedience and
well grounded charity will permit) with any one, but, with thy sprirituall
Directour; nor with him, of any thing which has not a straight reference to
the work in hand.

Say rather with young Samuel, Speak thou o Lord for thy Servant hears Thee;
By opening, the sweetest balsoms loose their odor, and by too much noys, we
deprive our selves of hearing what the Holy Spirit would speak in our soul. If
therefore thou desire heartyly to hear the speeches of peace, which God
speaks to the soul, which he has led into Solitude, stop thy Ears to all
discourses of others, and putt a bar to thy own lips. For much speech is not
void of sin, and where sin is, Gods holy wisdom can make no abode. No noise
was heard, whilst Salomons Temple was building, and a greater then Solomon is
here.

. 4. Choice of Place.
Solitariness of place helps much to the observa^ce of silence requisite.
Retire from all others, if thou will discourse profitably with thy self. Our
Blessed Savior meditates alone on the Mountain, holy Isaac in the field, and
Saint John Baptist in the desert. Though God be in all places, as good to us,
and as near in one as in the other, yet is a Cell or Closet the most convenient
for this great work, where our meditatio^s confined by kown walls, keep the
mind from wandering abroad; wherefore a great Contemplative was wont to say, The
Spouse of the soul is bashful, and comes not willingly to the Bride, in the
presence of a multitude.

Abandon therefore, my Philothea, all worldly society, and change it happily
into the company of God, and his blessed Angels. Abandon I say, all
conversatio^ with the world, not outwardly only, but also inwardly, least
sequestring from the world in outward show, we carry it within us in our own
bosoms. I know this counsel is of great perfection, not easily attained, for
these thin species of things, insinuated into our minds from outward objects,
will appear some times to us in our uery Cells, and private Closets, even
against our best endeavors, S. Hierome in the deserts, had not his thoughts
always free, from the maskes, and da^ces, of the Roman Matrons.

And truly, this inward society, is worse then the other. For it is more
possible for a free Co^templative, to have a retired mind in the midst of a
markett, then pestred thus with inward company, to be alone in the midst of a
wilderness. Make choice therefore of that place, which admits fewest
occasions, of withdrawing thy heart from her own good thoughts. In my opinion,
we cannot expect to find God nearer to us, then in that place where we have bin
accustomed, more familiarly to meet him; because our thoughts are by custom
more easily recollected, where we have used our selves, in our former
Recollections, to converse with him.

. 5. Due time for Solitude.
THe heart, now free from noise and distractions, must be constant in
continuing this holy work, once begun, according to the course prescribed for
it. Those who meditate by uncertain fits and snatches, only when other
employments forsake them, or when good motions are thrust upon them, by
necessity of example, or duty to Constitutions, cannot hope, in that their
state of coldness, to climb high upon this ladder of perfection. For although
they may have some feeble beginnings of spiritual notions, and gracious
Affections in the will, yet being the Issue of one fit of Meditation, at
random and unsettled, they are displaced and weakened at the first occurrence of
a new employme^t. Wherefore having chosen a fit time for the practice of
solitude, be serious in keeping it; yield to no occasion, withdrawing Thee from
it. The beginning will be hard, but use will render it easy and delightful.

The same constancy, which requires Thee, to make choice of a proper time for
Recollection, requires also, that thou dwell upon the matter, chosen or
appointed Thee, without change or tediousness, till it has attained some
joyful issue of spiritual profitt. Otherwise, my Philothea, thou will attempt
much, and effect little, through thy own fickleness and inconstancy; He
deceives himself who thinks Grace to be easily won. We must use much suit
and importunity, before Christ will bestow his bread upon us; which is of that
worth, that it may not be bestowed on any fickle petitioner. Even we our
selves, generally speaking, set little by that which is easily gained, without
labor, perils, importunity or resolution.

Thus much, for choice of time, and dwelling upon the matter, in general;
whereof though both of them, require an unbroken constancy, yet not any
perpetuity of either, through the whole course of our life. Our frail nature,
and ordinary Duties, would not bear with such a fixed stability. It is for
glorified spirits above, to be ever fixed on God, issueing flames of Love,
toward so sovereign a beauty. These poor things under the Moon, must have a
change and variety; our vital spirits, which the immortal mind uses, for her
instruments, are of a strange kind of metal; if not used at all, they rust;
if too much, break, or at least grow dull and stupid; Truth is, the chief
object of our Solitude is so excellent, so glorious, that like the Sun, look
upon it we may, but not gaze thereon. We have known sad experience of some, who
venturing too far and hastily, have failed and weakened the^ selves, to little
fruit. Holy thoughts and affections are the food of the eternal Mind, yet
since it works not in this our present state, without the fancy, her handmaid,
she must needs flag, when fancy, her support, is tired out, with too permanent
and intense speculation, without variety of object. Let it suffice thee
Philothea, to persever in thy Meditation, so long as Gods grace shall enable
thee, without affectation of perpetuity, which is not granted us. And when thy
spirits begin to blunt, leave off, without fear of fickleness; one half
hour at a time, is a competent measure for a weak beginner. As God increases
thy devotion, he will inspire force, for longer continuance. But by no means
pass thy prescribed time, without special advice, otherwise thou may chance
to spoil a good enterprise, and A moderate undertaking, with an anguishing
conclusion, and hurt thy self.

Wherefore let me advise Thee, not to be too eager in this good work; Conserve
always a calm peace in thy spirit, for since this work depends more on the
help of heaven, then our natural industry, should thou turmoyle thy
Imagination, with too earnest disquisitio^ in the beginning, unresigned to the
time of heavenly assistance, thou will unhappily disable thy felfe, for further
aspirations. Man is not always, in a like disposition; sometimes he is longer
in settling, through some unquietness of fancy, or more obstinate distraction;
sometimes heavier in the perseverance, then in the first entry, sometimes more
nimble and active to dispatch. How ever thou find thy self, in the beginning
or continuance, persist gently, and thou will have victory. Other combats are
on doubtful hopes, this on assurance; for the success depends on Gods
promise, which cannot disapoint thee, if thou fail not in thy pursuance;
persist then, and thou will prevail; that which was begun with la^guishing
remisseness and difficulty, shall end in joy and comfort.

One days meal, however large and liberal, strengthens not for to morrow.
The body languisheth, if there be not a supply of food; Thou must therefore
feed thy soul, by daily Meditation. The most serious affections are
extinguished, by intermission, and by disuse do perish. Let not therefore any
one day pass, without a competent time, spent therein; break through all
letts, except those of obedience and Charity; and when these shall have hindered
thee, repay thy self afterward, the time borrowed, and recompense thy loss
with a doubled labor; for be assured, that too much neglect breeds unaptnesse
to good. Thus much for thy daily Recollection, and for the time chosen or
appointed thee; of which, hereafter I shall prescribe a fit Method.

But as for the Ten days exercise, which I intend specially to recommend unto
Thee; I advise the use of it, only once a year; no less, no more. Our Nature
is so feeble to good, so propense to evil, that unless we once a year, set
a special time a part, wherein to look into our selves, after a more serious
manner, and prune ill Customs and inclinations budding in us, these will grow
so strong, that they will in time choke and kill our little plants of piety.
The best clock will be out of order, unless taken in pieces, and cleansed once
a year. There is not any so good a Nature but may be corrupted by irregular
affections, insensibly creeping upon us, which if not timely rectifyed, by a
careful industry, will gain the upper hand, and become a second Nature.

Yet however necessary, a yearly more serious inspection and survay of our
lives, and conversations may be, to do it too often in one year would render a
Mind perplexed and anxiously scrupulous; which are distempers, incopatible with
comfortable Solitude, that requires a generous freedom of the soul.

Wherefore let thy daily Meditation suffice the rest of the year, for the
correction of errors and misdemeanors, that creep upon us, in this frail
course of mortal life.

As for the time of the year, when this special Exercice is to be performed;
it is hard to prescribe one general Rule for all. Neither can a whole family or
community, together, lay aside, at any one prescribed season, all their other
duties, but while Mary meditates, Martha must look to household affairs. Could
it be had, there is no time fitter then Lent and Easter, when the weather is
temperate, the body refreshed anew, by the Suns approach, and Mysteries then
represented, do strongly call upon us, for amendment of life; if we do intend
the^ to partake in the benefitts of Christ's Passion, and Resurrection. It is a
sign, of a dead and frozen soul, not to have an impulse to Virtue, and a
horror of sin, when God him self becomes a Propitiation for us, by shedding
his most precious Blood upon the Altar of the Cross, for our Redemption.

That is generally speaking, the best time, when we desire to be best disposed
to piety; for thus have all Christians ever had some particular devotio^, on
one or other particular solemnity, which suited best with their mind. And some
are very devout on the day of their Patron, another on that day which had been
blessed with some special good accide^t to themselves or others, as their
Regeneration to Christ by holy Baptism, their Initiation in Orders, their
Profession in Religion, or Delivery by Gods providence, from some great evil.
The memory of former good sentiments, are apt, at the recours of the season, to
renew them; and reiteration, breeds stronger Inclinatio^s, to the like again.
Choose then Ten days before that select time, therein to entertain thy self
in thy happy solitude; and so behave thy selse therein, that that day may be a
day of peace and Jubily of spirit to thee, that thou may issue thence, as a
sun forth a Cloud, with a cheerful alacrity and livelynesse, witnessing the
inward harmony of thy soul. It will then appear, that thy retreat was through
a religious zeal of Perfection, not of a pensive scruple or dull custom; such
a good Day will be a forceing motive to thy self, to bless thy sovereign
Creator, for that foretast of the joys of Paradise, amidst the cumbersome
cares which are incident to Mortality, and to which every one more or less
stands subject; and edify others also, to the like felicity.

Yet neither are these Ten Days of special solitude, so to be spent, that the
spirit should unchangably be bent upon Contemplation, even for that space; Our
soul must be refreshed with some variety, it will otherwise grow weary, and our
thoughts remiss, and affections feeble, the time thereby seeming long to us,
and the object tedious; but these divertisements must be short, and tending, at
least a far of, to the great design of piety in hand.

One time of the day cannot be prescribed to all, no more then one time of the
year; for neither is Gods grace showred down at particular times, nor do the
various and contrary dispositions of all persons, agree in the choice of
opportunities. The Royal Prophet says, that In the evening, morning, and
midday, he spoake to God, to redeem his soul, in peace; in my judgment, six,
ten and five, would be fit hours for secular persons; Religious, who rise at
midnight, must observe an other Distribution, whereof in its due place; so
David says, that He meditated upon God at the time of Mattins; all things
being then still, the soul by the obscurity of night being recollected from
the fancy of other objects, and the body some what released from the weariness
of the past days cares, the mind will then easilyer grow into a likeing and
love of heavenly things. Neither is the morning less fit for this heavenly
service, for then the body newly raised, is fully calmed with its late rest;
nor has the soul, as yet, had any motives of distractio^s from outward
Creatures; wherefore the holy Prophet said, that his soul thirsted after God,
from the morning watch. Neither is Isaacs time unfitt for this work, in the
Evening he went forth to meditate in the field, when the fumes of the middayes
refection being dispersed, the soul might easily fasten upon divine objects;
if thou intendest to reap a grounded and permanent benefitt from thy holy
retreat, be sure that, first thou make choice of the fittest hours for that
purpose, then carefully set those hours a part, from all other employments;
for change breeds unsetlednesse, and this an unreasonable doubt, what time
should be aptest; when thy thoughts should be fixed on higher objects.

6. Posture of Body.
THou must also Philothea, observe a due Gesture of thy body; for although God
be a spirit, and therefore needs not so much the posture of the body, as of the
soul, so it be reverent and respectfull; yet does the due composition of the
body much advantage the mind, in the practice of holy Meditation. In this,
Experience will be every ones best Counselor.

If place permits no other, Isaacs posture, to meditate walking, is very good;
But kneeling, with hands crossed on the breast, the eyes shutt, and face
toward heaven, and sometimes prostrate on the ground, is a posture more
genuine and natural. How ever it be, be sure the frame of thy body testify
profound reverence toward God, and help to raise thy thoughts and affections
thitherward. Our devotions will be most kindly, when the composure of the body,
which is the souls instrument, is most humble and respectfull; and this also
must needs be sometimes varied, according to the subject of thy Contemplation.

. 7. Subject of Solitary thoughts.
Now for the subject and matter whereon thou art to feed, during this holy
Solitude, thou must use great circumspectio^, I doubt not, Philothea, there be
many Contemplatiues, but not all good ones; One meditates how to do his
Neighbor a mischeife, another how to sin unseene; and these are those, who (as
David says) Do meditate Iniquity in their beds. Others are buisy, in the
search of the hidden causes of visible effects; and so, seeking to be
acquainted with the whole world, become strangers to their own home; and
whilst they seek to know others, are quite unknown to them selves.

Do you therefore choose to meditate, on that may do thee good; The God that
made us, the vileness of our body by Nature, the wretchedness of our soul by
sin; the abundance of temptations, the danger of sudden death, the beauty of
Virtue, JESUS CHRIST who bought us, the joys of Heaven he purchased for us;
the mysteries of his life, Death and Resurrection, the benefitt of the
Sacraments, our vocation to Christianity, the payns of Hell, the glorious
estate of the Blessed, and such like, are fit objects, I should think, to
entertayne thy felfe there in.

Earthly things proffer themselves, on their own accord, with importunity, but
if they were any thing worth, they would not be so forward. Heavenly things
must be sued unto, with eagerness; their hardness to be obtained, argues
their worth, and the necessity of serious meditation, thereby to solicit
them. The harder they are to prosecute, the more precious they are being
obtained, and therefore the more worthy our Endeavor. While the soul is taken
up with the thought of God and Godliness, it cannot miscarry. Yet I advise
thee to be cautious in matters of faith, where more of belief and admiration
is to be used, then of reason and discourse. And that matter without exception
is best herein, which works compunctio^ in the heart, most stirrs up to
devotion, and incites strongly to the love of God, as the End, and to Virtue as
the means to him, wherein experience will be a great mistress.

. 8. A Method of Meditation.
IT remains now, that I say something of the form and Method, which thou art
to observe in dividing thy Meditation, and in handling the parts and points
thereof. But this has much variety amongst Contemplatives, and each way is
useful and laudable, as it is fitted to persons that use it; For since there
be different mansions in Gods glory, no wonder there should be different means
to purchase them, according to the variety of each ones disposition; All are
not equally, either worldly, or Contemplative; so neither equally disposed for
the like Illuminations, nor capable of pursueing the same heads or points of
Meditation. S. Bonaventures Method, usually practiced amongst us, and liked of
by the best, is breife, easy, well ordered, and much helps the Memory, a faculty
which has great influe^ce in this blessed work.

According to this, Meditation or mental prayer is divided into three parts,
which are, Preparation, Meditation (which being the chief part, retains the
general name) and Conclusion.

Preparation makes way for Meditation; Meditation ruminates upon the matter,
and gives strength and life to our Recollection; Conclusion closes up the
whole Exercise.

Preparation first places us in the presence of God, with whom we are to make
our special conference, to our advancement and comfort, with all fear and
reverence.

Then secondly it chooses the Mystery or subject, whereon we intend as
present to settle our thoughts.

Thirdly it implores help from Heaven, whereby our weakness may be sustained
in this heavenly work, and enabled resolutely to go through with it. And
truly, since the ancient Heathens never attempted any notable business, without
a solemn apprecation of good success, a Christian or Religious soul should
not presume to undertake a spiritual work, of such importance as this is,
without first craving aid from heaven, wherein we are unable to do well,
without Gods assistance. We must therefore beg earnestly that the progress of
our Meditation may be guided and blessed by him, and that he would banish all
distractions, enlighten our understanding, quicken our judgment, rectify our
will, whett our affections to heavenly things, kindle our devotion, and so
enlarge our hearts toward himself, that we may find our Imperfections
abated, virtue strengthened, and our soul every way bettered, by our Solitude.

Meditation has also three parts; Consideration ponders seriously the subject
we have chosen, thereby to stir up our Affections to God and goodness, and
thereon to ground our ensueing Resolutio^s. But care must be taken, that the
mind be not wracked, by a too vehement inquiry; for this will tire out the
phansy, and interrupt the chief work. It will suffice, to take the most
pregnant and obvious. Let these Considerations be but three at the most; And
if thy soul finds sufficient satisfaction, light and fruit in the first of
them, dwell there without going further, and give way to the Holy Ghost, to
work his will in thee. But if thou find not there the expected success,
pass quietly on to another; but besure to go on sweetly and easily, in thy
search, without tiring thy self too much; thou will find little pleasure in
the Kernel, if thou breakest thy teeth with the shell.

Affection succeeds, where to if our Consideratio^s reach not, they will prove
vain, or to little purpose. For this is the soul of Meditation, to which the
former parts serve only as instruments. As we are reasonable Creatures by our
reason and discourse, so are we Christians and Religious, by our good will and
affections, toward heavenly things. Wherefore the former labor of the mind,
being undertake^ to move the Affective part of the soul, after the
understa^ding has traverst the point proposed, the will must endeavor, by
applying herself thereto with all earnestness, to find some feeling relish in
it; which fruit, through Gods blessing, will follow a deliberate Consideration
of some moveing object. And in these Affections, we must permit our soul to
spread and dilate, as much as possible; if thou find thy heart, to pant and
swell, with abundant sweetness, ease it by some gentle Aspirations, and
amorous sighs, as God shall then inspire Thee.

The last is Resolution, wherein, the soul bewayling her poverty, dullness and
imperfections, which may happily appear then in her, humbles her self, in
regard of her wants and backwardness to Virtue, and desce^ds to particular
good purposes, for her correction and amendment, according to the special
defects, which she has discovered in her self. By this means, Philothea, thou will soon correct errors and evil customs, which by general Affections and
barren desires, are seldom, or very slowly reformed.

Conclusion must be performed leisurely, and with profound humility, least by
an overmuch complacence in our good feelings and motions, which it pleased God
to work in our souls, we loose the benefit and continuatio^ of them, and by
too sudden breaking off, we may show our selves careless of the fruit, which
we have sought with so great labor.

First then, we must give thanks for those Illuminations, Affections and
Resolutions, which God has through his goodness bestowed upon us, during our
Meditation. For since a Man naturally cannot be miserable and in poverty, but
he must complain and crave succor: so neither can a good heart and grateful
soul, find it self in a happy and peaceful condition without thankfulness
for it. And this thankfulness gayns an increase of tranquillity.

Next follows Oblation, wherein the soul recommends her self, and all her
Affections and Resolutions, to the Protection of Gods holy grace; cheerfully
giving up her self to him, submitting to him, and wholly reposing upon the
goodness and mercyes of JESUS CHRIST; desiring in all things to glorify him,
and to walk worthy of his gracious calling.

The last is Petition, by which we earnestly beg, that Almighty God would
furnish us, with his grace and heavenly blessings, whereby we may be enabled,
faithfully to put in execution the good purposes made by us.

And here we must take heed, we co^pliment not with God, begging help, without
an efficacious will to make use of it. For God knows our hearts, and will not
be mocked with fashionable suits, but requires holy and feeling requests,
which will appear in the execution of what we have resolved.

This form of Meditation, being heartyly used, will prove (I hope) uery
beneficial; so that the soul which at the entrance of her Solitude, did but
creep upon the Earth, will in the end, soar aloft in Heaven, and find herself
near that glorious God, before almost out of sight, transforming her into him
self.

. 9. Choice of a Guide.
BUt because every one is apt to flatter him self, and judge partially in what
concerns his own state and condition, and consequently is unfitt to judge of
his own advancement and faylings, in his Pilgrimage to Perfection; it is uery
expedient, Philothea, that besides the Instructions already given Thee, thou
do make choice of a Directour, or Spiritual Guide, who may safely lead thee
through thy Solitude. For although the way be plain and easy, yet is it not
void of bypath, which without the advice of a sufficient Guide, thou will not
be able to discern; and consequently thou art in great danger to go astray,
and fall into ambushes of temptations and perplexities of mind, which may
expose thee to danger.

One reason, why many, even good persons, make not that progress in Virtue
which their calling aims at, or which themselves have proposed, is an
overmuch confidence in their own judgment, whereby their Eyes employed in
others imperfections, are dimsighted in their own; by this conceit they make
themselves, as unfitt to be guided by others, as unsufficie^t to guide
themselves. Wherefore, my Philothea, if thou desire in earnest to enter holy
Solitude, and learn to tread the paths of perfection, thou must have some kind
of suspicion of thy own Wisdom, which has so frequently mis-ledd Thee; and
with a prompt and humble Obedience, submit thy self to be governed, and
directed by an other. For A faithful friend is a strong protection, says the
Wise man, He is a Medecin of life and Immortality, if thou fear God, thou
shall find him. This has bee^ the general practice of all the Saints, who had
never so happyly discovered their own Errors or the will of God for the
reforming them, had they not attended to a spiritual Guide; Woe be to him that
is alone, says Solomon, because, when he falls he has none to raise him up.
True it is, such a faith full Guide is hard to be found. Wherefor choose one,
says Avila, amongst a thousand, nay one amongst ten thousand says S. Francis
of Sales: for few are capable of this sublime charge.

Such an one, must be full of Knowledge, who is to discern the hidden paths,
through which the Holy Ghost leads a Child of God, from the wiles and Paths of
Satan, transformed sometimes into an Angel of Light. He must be also full of
Charity, that he may bear with the imperfections of the Soul, whom he
undertakes to guide. And lastly he must be full of Discretion, that according
to the various tempers of his spiritual Children, he may know when, and what
remedies to apply, whereby to provoke the^, to a more eager pursuit of
Perfection, and to a flight from the many Impedime^ts, which disable, in a
solitary and virtuous life; and which is above all, he must not so much desire
to gayn upon their good esteem, as to make a faithful use of good Counsels,
whereby he may advantage them in the fear and love of their Sovereign
Creator; If any of these three Qualities be wanting, his conduct may be
unsafe: Wherefore earnestly beg him of God, and doubt not, but he will rather
send thee an Angel from Heaven, to direct thee, then let thee fail.

Having now obtained such a Guide, bless God for his mercies toward thee,
remain constant, and seek no other. But go forward with him, humbly,
innocently, and with confidence, esteeming him, as if he were an Angel of God
indeed; and during thy holy retreat, have conference with him, at least once a
day; disclose to him those lights, those affections and resolutions, which God
has raised in Thee, with the spiritual feelings, thou have either of thy own
infirmities, or Gods presence. Let him have a full insight of thy inclinations
and passions, and conceal not any notable motion of thy soul from him, but
lay thy whole heart open before him, as freely and cheerfully, as if thou were
the^ to give an account to God, at the great day. So doing, be assured, that he
who has promised, to resist the proud, and give his graces to the meek and
humble of heart, will by his means more abundantly enlighten thy
understanding, inflame thy will, and securely lead thee through all
difficulties, to rest and peace. If we do not become as little ones by a
sincere simplicity, humility and obedience, to him who is to give an account
for our souls, where can these virtues appear?

. 10. Exercises in Solitude.
HAving spoken of the duty of a Solitary soul, to her spiritual Guide, and of
her dependence on his lips, for such counsels and directions, as may be
expedient, during her retreat, I need not add much concerning the use of Vocal
Prayer, Reading of spiritual books, corporal Mortifications, and manual
Labors; of all which, the Prudence so the Directour can best judge, according
to the different qualities and humors of the Persons he deals with; wherein,
one general rule cannot be fitted for all; However, thus in breife.

Since variety facilitates the use of that, which would otherwise prove
irksome, it were not amiss, every day (besides thy Usual Recollection) to
recite such Vocal Prayers, as (besides the Office of obligation) we are
accustomed to say. But let them be few, and said atte^tively; and at such
times, as thou find thy spirit unfitt, to work on thy prescribed
Considerations.

Aspirations are as flames darted forth the furnace of a burning soul. If thou
find thy heart forcibly inclined to them, keep them not in. If these offer
not themselves, let thy spirit speak with God silently, by heaving its self up
toward heavenly things; And if these fail too, be contented to say such
Vocal prayers, as the Church uses, till it pleases God, that the Mist falls,
and thy Understanding receives new strength and cleerenesse.

Reading helps invention, and administers matter to the affective part, it
matters not how little it be, so it be well digested, and rightly applied, to
raise up affections. I should advise thee to be sparing herein, least diversity
of matters distract thee, from attending to the points of that days Exercise,
which thou must carefully peruse, before the time of Recollectio^, that the
mind may not want a fit subject to discourse on. Thou may, before or after
dinner, read the life of the Saint of that Day, or any other, as thy Directour
shall judge expedient; but if thou will follow my advice, content thy self
with reading thy daily Meditations, frequently over; Experience will teach,
that to be more profitable, to thy design in hand.

As for corporal Austeriti^s, if moderate, they strengthen the spirit, by
weakening the flesh; and are a means to raise the soul, to the thought of
heavenly things. One meal a day, is abundantly enough: If thou be
Religious, eat in Gods name, what is set before thee, without scruple; and
bless God, that for thy humiliation, he makes thee descend, from Contemplation
of his Glory, to the use of corporal sustena^ce. The more sparing thy evening
meal is, thy sleep will be the sweeter, and thyselfe apter for thy night
watch; Yet herein stand scrupulously to the advice of thy Superiors and
spiritual Guide; as also, for the use of Haire-cloath, Disciplines, and sueh
like humiliations.

Manual labors must not be assumed indifferently, but with advice and
direction; By all means fly such, as require conference with others, or tire
out the body, and distract the mind.

Moderate walking after meals, helps to a more intense recollection, yet let
it be, as much out of sight of others, as may be, that the soul may have her
full freedom, to launch herself forth, by holy aspirations, upon occurring
objects, as God shall inspire thee.

. 11. Distribution of Time.
I Will conclude with a distribution of time, which ought carefully, to be
observed, during our spiritual retyrement, after the manner here prescribed,
unless thy Directour appoint another, more conformable to thy calling and
abilities, or as he shall find thee disposed for this great work.

Wherefor, Philothea, the happy evening being now come, when thou inte^dest to
bid adieu to worldly thoughts, and confine thy self, for the following Te^
days, to thy private Cell or Closett, to ruminate upon the days of Eternity,
in a holy and peaceable Solitude, quitt thy self of thy ordinary Employments,
that thou may the more freely attend to this thy great affair; purge thy
soul by an entyre confession, of what thou find offensive in thee; and
having attentively read over the first point of the next days Meditation, take
thy self to thy rest.

At the first sign of the Caller, to Midnight Office, signing thy self,
arise, and in thy clothing, say Miserere: or De profundis: for living or dead
friends. Then go silently to the quire, and prepare thy heart, cheerfully to
say, or hear the Divine Office. That ended, keep thy Meditation upon the first
point of that mornings Exercise, according to the rules above prescribed. (For
Preparation and Conclusion, may serve for Meditation, upon any subject
whatsoever.) Then having ended thy Meditations, say thy Crosses, and stay some
what longer then ordinary. For during this time of thy Solitude, thou must
endeavor to be the first and last in the quire. After Crosses thou may take
a Discipline for some space of time, if thy Directour thinks it expedient;
Otherwise it is upon no terms to be done. Then return to thy bed.

Those who rise not to Mattins, may rise after their first sleep, and perform
that point of Meditation, Crosses and Discipline, as aforesaid; otherwise let
them not fail to rise at Five in the morning.

The fourteen hours distribution begins with the morning watch.

Endeavor to rise some what before Six in the morning, that thou may stread
the Second point of thy morning exercise, before thou go to Prime, unto
which, as also unto other hours, assist devoutly. After this, hear Mass
attentively, joining thy intention and good desires, with the Priest; then
spend a good half hour, either in the quire or thy Cell, in discussio^ of the
second point; Observe always the usual time of Communion, according to the
place where thou art. But this must be performed, the days thou entrest and
come forth thy Solitude, the better to enable and confirm thee in this great
work of thy spiritual Retreat, and the effects thereof.

Between Eight and Nine, confer with thy Directour, touching, either the
imperfections, or graces, thou have felt in thy soul. If thou can not then
have his presence, read a Saints Life, and the rest of that hour, give some
release to thy thoughts, by some Vocal Aspirations, toward Eternity, for time
lost, thy drowsinesse to Virtue, and pronesse to vice.

From Nine to Ten, meditate upon the third point of that days Exercise; But
always endeavor to be moderate toward the end of thy Recollection, least too
much intensenesse breed faintnes and render Thee unfitt to persever in this
holy work.

From Ten, say the Penitential Psalms, and Littanies; Then make a reveiw of
thy infirmities discovered, and means propounded for amendment of Life.

At Eleven, take thy Noons repast, rather to satisfy Nature, them to please thy
sense; And use such temperance therein, that neither by Excess thou burden,
nor by overmuch niceness, weaken thy frail body, which is to serve the soul
in her Contemplations.

After dinner, some time being employed, in giving thanks to God, for the
benefit of thy conservation, and praying for benefactours, living and dead,
take some easy divertisement for one hour.

At One, read over the First point of thy Evening Exercise, and raise as many
good thoughts and affections, as thou can, whereby efficaciously to move
thee, to a constant practice of what thou shall then resolve.

Spend the hour twixt Two and Three, as between Eight and Nine in the morning.

At Three read over attentively the Second part of thy Evening Exercise,
reflecting seriously on every Instruction, how thou may reduce the^ to
practice.

The other hours till Seven, admit of no set rules for distribution of them,
by reason of the different times of evening prayers and refection, according to
the customs of several families; However, one hour is to be spent in praying
vocally, making Aspirations, and review of that days task, for confirmation of
good purposes; another in saying Evensong; the last in taking thy evening
repast, thanksgiving for benefits, and praying for benefactours, living and
dead.

From Seven take some easy divertisement whereby to release thy thoughts, by
walking, or using some moderate corporal Exercice, for the space of half an
hour; then seriously examine thy Conscience, how thou have employed that day,
beg pardon for defects, make thy Crosses, read over the First point of thy next
days Exercise, and going to bed, say with the Royal Prophet, In peace, I will
sleep and rest, because thou O Lord have singularly settled me in hope.

This is all, Philothea, I have to advise thee, Complayn not of my
over-longnesse; The labor is mine, and my aim thy benefit. I have according
to my ability prescribed thee a Method of practicing holy Solitude, according
to the knowledge gaind from skillful Masters in that Art, and what use and
experience has taught me to be most profitable; when custom and experience
shall show thee a better form, fear not to use it in Gods name, for diverse
paths lead to the same place; and though the spirit of God be but One, yet there
is diversity of graces. Use this way, till thou meet with a better, and pray
for thy well willer. Farewell.

Philothea's Pilgrimage to Perfection. Described in a Practice of Ten days
Solitude.
FIRST DAYS VOYAGE.
Inducements to Solitude.
THE MORNING EXERCISE.
FIRST POINT. Dignity of Solitude.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That no other earthly condition, can equal the happiness, which
may be attained by means of retyrement; It Is a Heaven upon earth, seperating us
from the rest of the world, and contented with it is own tranquillity and
delights; such it will be to us, if we can alienate our hearts, from worldly
cares and creatures, and walk innocently with our blessed God, in the
observance of his commandments, and the performance of solitary duties.

It Is the Schole of all Christian knowledge and virtues, wherein we may learn,
that our body is composed of disagreeing elements, ever tending to a
dissolution; that our dearest friends may be taken from us by untimely death,
and therefore no lasting hopes to be placed in them; That our nature is easly
ledd away, with the allurements of visible objects, whereas God only can fill
the longings of our soul; In a word, that all those things, wherein poor man
is so miserably turmoild, are a mere Vexation and Vanity, and hinder us from
listening to those delicious whispers, which our Beloved desires to impart to
our affectionate souls.

It is also a Sanctuary of the ever blessed Deity; for although our Immense
God fills all places by an infinite diffusion of his Essence; yet he is
specially in those, which are segregated to his contemplation and worship,
where he opens the rich treasuries of his love and bounty, and reveals his
will to his servants, in silent and secret conferences with them.

Since therefore Philothea, thy Beloved has drawn Thee hither, here to parlie
with thy heart, to disclose the hidden paths of his ayding and comforting
graces, and to take up his lodging in thy soul; see that nothing remain
therein, offensive to his will, which may blu^t the edg of thy conceived
affections to piety, or darken thy spiritual Eye from beholding his
all-sufficing beauty. For only the clean of heart may see God, and rejoice in
the plenty of his holy house.

AFFECTION.
Oh how beloved are the Tabernacles of my God! better is one day there, then
thousands in the Courts of Sinners, who love not to think on their Creator; O
Jerusalem, O sweet vision of Peace! O happy desert, O sacred Mansion of heaven
aspiring Souls! be thou ever the beginning of my joys; I know, and acknowledge,
O my God, My only refuge and comfort, that there is no pleasant peace, no
saving knowledge, no true Repose but in Thee; that all things are Vanity,
beneath Thee; but even that Vanity cannot I despise, without Thee; therefore,
Thou O God, how long?

RESOLUTION.
Hence forth My Solitude shall be my Beatitude, My Eden, my Heaven, and the
world shall keep what ever it calls its own, with all the perils, discontents
and miseries that belong to it; and if my soul be at any time in distress, I
will stay my sorrows with the hopes of those true consolations, which my Divine
Lord has promised to those, whom he leads thither; And since I may there
understand all divine truth, and obtain all helping Virtues and Graces, I will
turn my heart from creatures, that I may under the conduct of Gods divine
Spirit learn the ways of Perfection; And I will carefully cleanse my soul from
all sins and affections to forbidden contents, whereby it has hitherto been
hindered, to walk to and with God, and to discover the depth of his greatness
and goodness to me; Nor will I loos the precious time, which God has allowed
me, wherein to work my Salvation, and converse with him in holy Solitude. To
Thee O Lord will I reveal the secrets of my heart, in Thee will I trust, and I
shall not be ashamed, because Thou art A strong helper.

SECOND POINT. Innocence of Solitude.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That Solitude is more Innocent and Holy, then that course of life,
that spends it is self in conversing with creatures; Being exempt from manyfold
occasions of offending, or being offended by others; from snares, scandals and
irksome turmoiles, which are apt to shake our strongest Resolutions to piety,
and destroy the evennesse of our hearts in the performance of our usual
Christian duties.

Again, our conversation with worldly persons, often engages our hearts in
irregular affections and solicitudes, we being naturally over-prone to adheare
to sensible satisfactions, and too feeble and weak in resisting their
flattering alurements, and therefore are thereby putt in hazard of loosing our
best hopes; whereas Solitude, withdrawing our thoughts from such occasions of
sin, give us means of purchasing that blessedness here, which abroad we
endanger; wherefore the now glorious Saints, whose lives should be our paterns,
arrived to the joys they are possessed of, by withdrawing from worldly
conversation, and confining themselves to Innocent Solitude.

And hence it is, that abandoning superfluous conversation with earthly
Creatures, we begin to be conversant with God, and in some degree approach to,
and imitate the Innocent and peaceful life of the already glorified Angels in
heaven; Their life and conversation must needs be heavenly, who disdayning
earthly blessings, thirst after those of the Saints, by knowing, loving and
enjoying him, who alone can make them happy.

What greater happiness, My Philothea, then being sequestered from vain, and
tyresome Creatures, even amidst the toyls of our unhappy Mortality, to enjoy a
sweet tranquillity in our spirits, a readiness to Christian Duties, and to
lead for a time the life of an Angel?

AFFECTION.
Oh Innocent Solitude, how happens it, that I have been so long a stranger to
Thee? Alas, by conversing with worldly Creatures, I have too long wearyed my
self in vain, sullied the bright garment of my baptismall purity, and
ocntracted a multitude of evil inclinations, which now press heavelie upon my
conscience; O how deplorable is the condition of wretched worldlings, who
busyed on creatures, are exposed to infinite dangers of sin, and scarce ever
think of coming forth of them, even for a season, to promote their happiness
for ever? I bless Thee my bountiful Lord that thou have inspired me to
abandon them now, and to consider and love Innocent Solitude; Oh Innocent
Solitude, My soul has thristed after Thee, as a Heart after the fountain of
living waters: I will not rest, night or day, till I enter into the joys of my
Lord.

RESOLUTION.
I will hereafter embrace all occasions of Retireme^t from amongst Creatures,
preferring the Innocent entertaynme^ts of Solitude, to all other earthly
conditions, that I may thereby purchase a pure and quiet spirit; and being out
of the reach of the allurements of sensible and transitory things, may with
the greater freedom, study the will of my divine Master, and become nearer to
him, by Innocence of heart, tranquillity of passions, and a readiness to all
heavenly and divine actions.

THIRD POINT. Necessity of Solitude.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, that a Voluntary withdrawing thy self from thy usual co^merce
with Creatures for a time, is highly necessary; In order to that duty thou
owe to God; He being the supreme End of our whole selves and actions, and
this our mortal Pilgrimage being exposed to manifold distractions, some time
must needs be set a part, for a more serious reflection on that our blessed
End, and the usefullest means whereby to attain to it; that thereby we may renew
in us the knowledge of our Christian and special Duties to God, and increase in
us a willingness to comply with them; This cannot be done more substantially,
then in our Retyrement, where our Minds freed from the tumults of ourward
cares, are aptest to receive more clear lights from heaven, and stronger
flames of love to spiritual and eternal good things.

Also in order to that state of life, wherein we already are, or by Gods
providence may one day be; for by means of that state, God intends to bring
Thee home to himself; in our Retyrement we may learn what love we owe to that
our state of life, as the only way by which God means to lead us to the
possession of life everlasting; and that therefore we must bear with the
frailties of those weak mortals, with whom we therein live, and labor jointly
to gain heaven; the Imperfections of some few, not at all derogating, from the
sanctity of that state in its self; and if we love it, that will ever appear
in our Obedience to the Laws and Customs, therein required, and in the
execution of their commands, whom God has placed over us, and must be
accountable for us.

Likewise in regard of our selus; That by help of this our Solitude, we may
understand, how our hearts stand affected to good and evil? in what dangers of
sin we now are, or by ill habits or conversation, may be? what rules of piety
may best help to settle us in the constant practice of Virtue? That discovering
our faults and wants, we may the more readily give ear to the inward Calls of
our heavenly Espouse, suspect all motions of our own wills, and strengthen
decayed fervor by stronger Resolutio^s; that nothing may stop us in our
Pilgrimage to that comfortable Perfection, which Crowns all.

What are thy intentions Philothea, have thou a real desire to learn the art
of well-living, to follow Gods call, to honor thy present state of life, to
make a discovery of thy faylings, and work with those lights and graces, God
bestows on thee, for that end?

AFFECTION.
O how vile is Earth, when I lift up my Eyes to Heaven! O Ancient, O Eternal
Beauty, why am I so long ignorant of Thee? Thou have mercifully drawn me forth
the tabernacles of sinners, inspired me to follow Thee in the company of those
who seek thy face always, and walk the way that leads to Thee; O true light, O
only life of my soul, say thou unto me, I am thy Salvation and strong helper;
and I shall be able to keep my Covenant made with thee, reforming all disorders
of my life past, and in all things seeking a conformity to thy will.

RESOLUTION.
Farewell all ye vain and seducing Creatures: since my God has made me for him
self, my heart shall be restless till it rests in him; I will therefore
henceforth place all my happiness, in studying to know and obey my spiritual
Lord and Master, in loving and complying with the duties of my present state,
as he has commanded me, and in having a strickt guard over all my thoughts,
words and actions, at all times, in all places and with all persons, that they
may be agreeable to his holy will; Make me Thou O my God to know my End, that
I may also know what is wanting to me.

THE EVENING EXERCISE.
FIRST DISCOURSE. Gods Favors to us.
There Is none but loves what is good, and therefore should love that most, which
is best; when a Prince opens his Treasury, and proclaims a largess, every one
is ready to run, and reach forth his hand, and open his bosom to receive part
of his bounty, and covets what he values most; Philothea, we should be ever
like our selus; Our divine Espouse inviting us to a spiritual conference in
holy Solitude with him, offers many rich presents to us, lights of revealed
truths to show the secret paths that lead to him, helps of grace to support and
encourage us that we may walk steadilie in them, and not faint before we come
to our journeys end; harken then to his divine call, lay all things else aside,
run to him, streach forth thy hand, open thy heart to entertain those precious
gifts, he is so desirous to bestow on thee.

Every gift grows according to the proportion of misery, from which it frees
us, and the hapiness that it brings with it; the greater our crimes, the
heavier our chains, the more noisome the dungeon wherein we lay, the greater
also would be our pardon, freedom and ransom thence; but if we be moreover
raised to the highest friendship, tranquillity of spirit, and liberty of mind
desirable, no gift can be greater then that; Thus it is with thee My Philothea,
in thy holy Retyrement; Worldly Conversation is full of dangers of sin,
admitts of few helps to piety, and causes great tepiditie and remissness in
Christian Duties, being either without God, or working contrary to his
Commandments; but in our heavenly solitude, there be ever great calms of
passions, strong helps of piety, and an earnest zeal of Gods honor, and our
own duties to him; our abode being there with God, and our employme^ts in what
belo^gs to him.

Although nothing be more ours then we our selus, titles of honor, most
co^forting delights and our dearest friends (as leaves and blossoms from the
tree) being easily blown off from us; yet having our Being, with what ever
appertains to it, from God, whatsoever we are in our selus, can do, or may
have, belongs to God, as the Sovereign Lord and Master of all; so that to him
we owe all, and we should be guilty of a most grievous disloyalty, should we
venture to dispose of our selus according to our own liking.

Gods inward Excellency whereby he contains in himself all perfections
dispersed amongst Creatures; those sacred influences, whereby he preserus us,
from falling into our Original Ashes; his precept of loving him above all
things, which includes the actions of all other moral and divine Virtues; the
price of Christ's precious Blood, wherewith he bought us; and those unspeakable
rewards of holiness of life, prepared above with his Angels for us, are strong
ties of Duty to him, and challeng all homage and fidelity from us; Wherefore
Philothea, should we spend our whole lives, every thought, all our actions on
him; we pay but the least part of what we owe to him; Now therefore at least
show thy readiness to follow, love and obey him, since he specially invites Thee
to a more familiar conference and freedom with him, during thy Solitude.

COLLOQUIE.
Even so it is, My Dearest Lord; I am thine; O that I might for ever abide with
thee! The world is a sea, full of tempests and confusion; holy Solitude is a
safe harbor, where there are great calms and security; O that thou would
fill the sails of my heart with a gracious gale, which may sweetly carry me
forth of these turbulent depths, free me from the dangers of a spiritual
shipwreck, and give me a sure shelter under thy comforting protection! then
should my spirit have liberty to pant, after the escaped dangers; s^e the
perils wherein she has been hitherto tossed, and pay those duti^s which on so
many titles are due unto Thee. Save me thou O Lord, and I shall be saved, and
thou shall be my praise for ever.

SECOND DISCOURSE. Our Returns to God.
HAving now persuaded thy self to embrace Solitude, through reflection on the
Dignity, Innocence and Necessity thereof, in order to thy freedom from
worldly cares and solicitudes; as also that thou may thereby pay to God, part
of that great Duty, which on so many titles thou owe to him; fit thy self
for the due practice thereof by Acknowledgment of Gods special favors to thee,
in inspiring thee with so holy and just a design.

The same God that sanctified thee a Member of his holy Church, has by hidden
means drawn thee now nigher to himself, and will that thou break in pieces
those fetters of sensuality, which have hitherto kept thee tied to Creatures,
without which thou had still wallowed in thy old vices, never looked into thy
corrupted manners, or thought on beginning this thy holy Pilgrimage. Wherefore
acknowledge thy nakedness, poverty and weakness, to walk these sublime ways
of perfection; and that this divine Call, and all other favors thou shall there
by reap, are pure effects of Gods mercies and bounty to thee.

O Philothea could we duly value the greatness of this favor of being thus
called to walk and converse with God, (whereas many others, who perhaps would
make better use thereof, are passed by, and left to work out their salvation
amidst the tumults of worldly cares) we would esteem, no labors, no
sufferings, enough to express our Gratitude to him. Resolve therefore to employ
thy Memory in thinking on God, and on the general and special means (best
known to thy own spirit) whereby he has drawn thee thus far from Creatures
toward himself; thy Understanding in searching forth means, whereby readily to
execute his commandments and inspired counsels; and thy Will, and other
inferior powers of thy soul, in loving him, refrayning from what he has
forbidden, and performing whatsoever he has or shall require of thee.

And because the aim of Solitude is, to lead thee to a private conference with
God, wherein the Immortal Angels, and now glorified Saints will be
spectatours, before whom none may appear without his wedding Garment, or with
feet sullied by sinful affections; Thou must Philothea endeavor to Rectify
thy intentions in undertaking this Retyrement; for if thy motives be but
customarie, the fruicts thereof will soon fade.

Then Purge thy mind of worldly and vain affections, by a deep act of
repentance, least they ever and anon call upon thee, and disturb the repose of
the spirit.

And lastly, Offer up thy heart to God, united with that of thy crucified
Savior, for whose sake thou art resolved to walk the hard ways of thy
Pilgrimage to Perfection; so that henceforth, whether JESUS feasts thee with
his disciples in Cana, or fasteth in the wilderness; be glorious on Mount
Thabor, or prays in the Garden, or hangs on the Cross, thou must never
forsake him; Thus will thou happyly walk through the varieties and dangers of
this unconstant life, and make a fruitful progress in this thy holy Retyrement.

COLLOQUIE.
Welcome then O most delicious paradise of my God, O Sacred Solitude, wherein
is again revived the decayed Image of our Original Innocence, by conformity of
will to God, Obedience of sensuality to the precepts of reason, and sweet
tra^quillitie of all passions and powers in the Kingdom of the soul; I
acknowledge O my God, thy great bounty in inviting me hither, and will endeavor
to prun my spirit of all irregular Motions, that Imay be Afitt Offering to my
heavenly Lord and Master; Sanctify O God these my earnest desires, and from thy
holy Temple of Jerusalem, confirm the good things thou have wrought in me.
Amen.

SECOND DAYS VOYAGE. Entertainments in Solitude.
THE MORNING EXERCISE.
FIRST POINT. Humility and Austeritie.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, that there is a great difference between Solitude and Idleness; A
wise and holy Soul will choose therefore to be alone, that she may be better
employed; whither it be, that the Retyrement be for the whole life, under some
Religious Vows, or for some certain days; wherefore entering into Solitude, thou
must Philothea make use of such Entertainments of spirit and body, as may
consist with retyredness, and advance thee in the practice of Virtue.

Wherefore we must be well grounded in the use of Humility, which is the
foundation of all other Virtues, and a fair disposition, both to acknowledge,
and amend what is amiss. For Solitude is a state, wherein the soul is raised to
a private conference with God, and unless we have a perfect Humility, we are
in danger of a precipice. Nay what ever other progress we make in our
Pilgrimage to Perfection, without a profound humility, we are never secure, as
appears in Lucifer, and our first Parents; Therefore Our Lord JESUS by doctrine
and exemple, exhorts to the practice thereof, as the chief work of
Christianity, the prefervative of inward peace, and fortifyer against all
contradictions.

This ought to stir us up to humility in thoughts, by esteeming our selves full
of imperfections and wants, and to stand in need of great helps of Grace; in
word, not discoursing on those perfections, which it pleases God to work in,
and by us; and in Action, while we bend our selves willingly to the performance
of any Duty, our Calling may require of us, though it may seem to others
contemptible and vile; And to seek no preferment, either in dignity or esteem
of others, but with a true indifferency of spirit, with all persons, at all
times, contentedly to abide in, or chang what ever condition falls to thy lot,
or is appointed Thee.

And because Austeritie, which co^sists in fasting, watching, wearing course
garments, and suck like mortifications of our sensual appetite, much conduce
to the gayning this inward humility of spirit, That also must be willingly
embraced by a solitary soul, whose aims are to be truly perfect; for what
society is there, between a Compliance with our inordinate concupiscences, and
a separation from worldly conversation and cares?

What is the disposition of thy heart Philothea toward these Eminent virtues?
Do thou find a sweetness and quietness of spirit, when humiliations befall
thee? Art thou willing to undergo such Mortifications, as thy state requires
of thee, without tediousness, and repining thoughts?

AFFECTION.
I abhor ye, O fatal Enemies of Perfection, Pride, that cast the Angels
down from heaven and made them Devils; and Self-love, which expelled our first
parents forth of Paradise, and made the^ Vesfels of Gods wrath. Will thou My
Soul, defile thy self with those black crimes, so abominable to God? Oh,
rather let me be trampled on as a worm of the Earth, and undergo whatsoever
Crosses and Mortifications, then hazard the loss of my friendship with God,
and the joys he has prepared for those that love him, with an humble and
mortifyed spirit, For blessed be the poor in spirit, because there is is the
Kingdom of Heaven.

RESOLUTION.
I will henceforth humble my self, under the powerful hand of God; neither in
thought, word or deed preferring my self to any Creature, or desiring any
value or esteem from them; for I Know that God resists the proud of heart, and
gives Grace to the humble; And I will accustom my self to those austerities,
which my Vocation requires of me, conte^ting my self, with such diet, clothes
and rest, as may suffice to the support of Nature; for if we mortify our
earthly Members, we shall be children of our heavenly Father.

SECOND POINT. Patience and Obedience.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That Patience being useful to all Christians, is singularly
necessary to the solitary Soul, especially if the Solitude be religious and
permanent; It is an easy matter out of a bravery of spirit, to undergo some
notable tribulation, and abandon worldly satisfactions for a while; but to
remain constant in that Resolution, this is the special work of the Holy
Ghost, and can never be fully accomplished without a singular and profound
Patience. It is necessary also for the practice of other Virtues, which are
confederates and companions in our pilgrimage to Solitary perfection; for
Patience keeps our spirits in peace, what ever befalls us; bends it to bear or
forbear, what the hand of providence appoints to us; and assembles all
Virtues, whereby to preserve in us the hopes of heavenly blessings amidst the
toyls of this wretched life; Therefore JESUS CHRIST tells us, that by Patience
we shall possess our Souls.

Wherefore Philothea, make a breife Reflection on the present state of this
Virtue in Thee; wherein it is defective, and by what motives it may be advanced
to a greater height? Can thou with a patient and meek heart, converse with
every one, temper others anger with a mild Answer, suffer injuries in words,
and rapin of goods and honor without disturba^ce; with bounty and good deeds
overcome thy Enemies unjust persecutions, and endeavor to reconcile them to
thee, even with loss of thy own right? Then may thou lay some claym to the
perfection of Patience, and reap some fruit from thy Solitary Entertainments.

The practice also of a prompt Obedience, is very expedient, even in our
Retyrement for a few days; but especially, if thy calling be to live
permanently in a Communion of Religious persons, under the conduct of one, whom
God has placed as his Vicegerent over the rest, by commands and counsels to
direct them to their best happyness. In such a Communion, all good things may
not be well done, either by all of them, or at all times. Austeritie (for
exemple) is good, yet not to be practiced against the express will of our
spiritual Guide or Superior, to the ruin of our own health, and the burden of
others. Fast with bread and water (says a holy Man) wear a hair shirt,
sleep on the ground, discipline the flesh to the bone, undergo the most
contemptible offices, communicate every day; stand from morning till night in
Contemplation of God and his attributes; I make no account of all this, if it
goes against Obedience, and be done in a time, and place, and measure
unseasonable.

Endeavor Philothea, to purchase in thy self this safe guide of holy
Obedience. Be tractable in thy will; go, come; ascend, descend, at the first
call of thy Superior; and that, not for fear, but love; Captivate thy
judgment, quitt all Interests of body and mind, when Obedience commands; for
the Superior being in possession of his authority, our conscience cannot be
secure, with an oppositio^ to his will, who watches only our good; Submitt thy
body also, either to undergo readily such austerities, or to take freely such
recreation and corporal comforts, as the Superior shall judge reasonable for
thee, although contrary to thy judgment and inclination, And here make a
reflection on thy readiness to comply with Obedience, if it be firm and fixed
as it ought, how far defective, and which way to be repaired?

AFFECTION.
It is true My dearest Lord, I have through Impatience often torturd my heart
with revengfull thoughts; lavisht away much of my precious time, in disquieting
and vexing my own spirit; and violently following my own judgment and
passions, incurred many a deep remorse of conscience, and greived those who
Thou did place over me; I confess my errors, I acknowledge and repent my
follies; O that I had a sea of tears wherewith to bath my heart, and wash it
from the stains contracted through want of Patience and Obedience! Come O ye
sacred Virtues, accompany me in my Pilgrimage, that amidst all Adversities,
under all commands, I may secure my Vocation to this holy Retreat, and
confirm my Soul in the hopes of a Communion with the Saints in the blessed
glory of My God.

RESOLUTION.
I will hence forth seal up my lips to all angry words, purge my mind from
passionate thoughts, prevent each one with Courtosies, and promptly comply with
the Commands of my Superiors, however painful their Execution be, considering
God to speak by their lips; and assuring my self, that He proportions helps
to our wants, and what he requires of us, My Soul is prepared O God, My Soul is
prepared, to sing and praise thee, and Imitate the Patience and Obedience of my
Savior JESUS.

THIRD POINT. Charity and Perfection.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That as without Charity, there is no true Virtue, or meritorious
action; so no hopes to advance in Solitary perfection, it being the aim and
accomplishment of Gods Law; and therefore must be one of our chief
Entertainments in our spiritual retreat; first in order to God, whom we ought
to love above all things created, as infinitely lovely in himself, and our
supreme Good; then in oder to others, as Images of God, and companions in our
claim to heaven; but especially if our Solitude be claustrall or Religious, and
consequently permanent, in the society of many persons, joined in the same
intention and profession, who are to be all united one with the other, in doing
and suffering. Such a Society represents that blessed Communion of the Saints
in heaven, as well in God the Center of their Loves; as between themselves, by a
mutual congratulation at each others Combatts with sensuality, Victories over
sin and Satan, and special favors from their blessed Redeemer. And indeed
without Charity, the highest state of Perfection is imperfect and ruinous, by
reason of our natural frailties, and cross accidents, which through Gods
permission, often try our constancy in good purposes.

Have a care then Philothea, that a sweet compliance with the Inclinatio^s of
others, a pleasant bearing with their Imperfections, an inviolable tie of love,
be so deep rooted in thy Soul, that it never fade or fail, whatever difference
of dispositions, qualities, or other Motive of dislike may arise. And of this
be sure to make a strickt Examine, Where? How? With whom? and how often thou have
herein bee^ defective? And whether thou be able to complie with the duties
of this Queen of Virtues? Without which no socretie, no place, no employment,
can be pleasant; propounding likewise efficacious Motives and means, when, and
how to practice it.

And that nothing may be wanting to complete the happiness of our solitary
Entertainments, we must practice Perfection, that is, all virtuous and holy
actions, which may give a perfect Integrity to the whole Christian Man. This
is not gained by mere solitariness, but by living in Solitude with the train
of all good Virtues; for want whereof, the Angels were banished the heavenly,
and Adam the earthly Paradise, though both, places of exceeding Perfection. So
that, it is not the place wherein thou live, nor the attire thou wearest, nor
the purposes or Vows thou may make, will make thee perfectly virtuous, but an
entire Integrity of thy life, in that thou do now profess. Wherefore if it be
a sin to live ill, it is a sacriledg to be wicked in holy solitude.

Make here Philothea, a general survay of all thy Imperfections and faults,
together with a generous resolution of fullfilling all Justice in Perfection.

AFFECTION.
Oh deep fountain of divine Love, flow sweetly into my Soul, wash thence the
blotts of my Iniquities, and cool the heats of my inordinate passions! Oh
heavenly fire, consume the dross of my sinful actions, and warm my heart
with holy desires; That I may serve Thee My glorious God with a clean heart,
and love all Creatures in Thee and for Thee, compassionating their frailties,
comforting them in their Combats; and treating with all as fellow servants of
the great Lord of the world, and my future partners in his heavenly joys and
blessings.

RESOLUTION.
I will enter Covenant with my God, to acknowledge him the fapream Lord of my
life and actions, to sacrifice to him the first fruits of my heart, and to love
him in himself, and all his Creatures; to bear with them, compassionate and
relieve them, and to prevent each one in the spirit of lenity and mildness;
and always to study an integrity and uprightness of of life and conversation,
before God and Man, that I may resist the evil Day, and stand perfect in all
things.

THE EVENING EXERCISE.
FIRST DISCOURSE. Love of solitary places.
THe world being full of sin, and afflictions of spirit, it is expedient we
should fly to the Mountains of holy Solitude, there to secure our selves from
its dangers, to bewail the perilous condition of worldlings, and rejoice in
the Sanctuary of our Blessed God. To this we must dispose our selves, by the
love of solitary and retired places, wherein our heavenly Espouse delights to
dwell. It Is there O Philothea, that the beloved of thy soul will give Thee the
sweet caresses of inward joy and tranquillity, which the world may promise,
but can never bestow. Beware then, that whilst here retired, thou suffrest not
to be in Thee any desire of conversing with Creatures, howsoever dear unto
Thee, for that will disorder the sweet serenitie of thy retreat. Say therefore
with the Royal Prophet, Dilate my heart O Lord, and I will run the way of thy
Commandments; and for the words of thy lips I will keep hard ways.

We must also wish well, even to a permanent state of solitude, and a constant
perseverance therein, if God should call us to it; for thus have many happy
Religious Souls been in all Ages of the Church enclosed in Monasteries, so that
no access may be had to them, or so much as discourse with them, but by
special license, on some urgent occasion, and that breifely, at their Grates.
And in that their Retreat they enjoyed a content with God, not to be expressed,
even by them that feel it. It is hard indeed at first, to abandon Parents, and
all our ancient friends and acquaintance, and heartily to renounce the charms
of worldly pleasures: yet no sooner is the foot set into holy Solitude, but
there follows some feeling content, even at the first entrance, which makes
them say with Saint Peter, Oh how delightful is it to abide here? And with
holy David; This shall be my rest for ever and ever, here will I dwell,
because I have chosen it. They discern perfectly that their Solitude is a
Sanctuary and a Tower of defense, against the assaults of spiritual Enemies.
O unspeakable Happiness! to have not only a safeguard against the temptations
of the world, but the very invisible attempts of the devil? The feet O
Philothea, of a Solitary Soul, are already standing in the immortal Courts of
the heavenly Jerusalem.

As soon therefore as thou art crept into thy private Cell or Closett, check
presently all inclinations to outward things, and resolve henceforth to
withdraw thy self, by degrees, from all such divertisements; which will prove
at last to be empty and vain comforts,

COLLOQUIE.
Oh how heavy and tyresome are the chains of mortal cares and compliances,
and yet how unwilling are we to shake them off? as if we loved and liked well
our own miseries and dangers; far better O my God, far better is one hour with
Thee in holy Contemplation, then Millions of years in the fading delights of
this world; and yet with a heavy heart we abandon them, even for true joys that
abide for ever. Welcome then dearest Solitude, earthly Paradise, Temple of
God, haven of Eternal Bliss; I have propounded Thee in the begin^ing of my
Joys, thither will I retreat, there will I take up my rest, and offer up the
desires of my heart, a morning and evening Sacrifice, in the odor of divine
sweetness.

SECOND DISCOURSE. Exercises in Solitude.
IDleness is the mother of sin, our spiritual enemies taking that time, to
suggest evil desires. Therefore we must at all times be well employed, but
especially in our Solitude, whither it be permanent, or for some selected
days. This employment consists not only in Meditation, whereby the Soul is
elevated to the bosom of the Divinity, by the workings of Love; but in a due
performance also of such Exercises, as shall be enjoined for our profit,
especially for the Exaltation of our Unitive life with God. Mental
Contemplations being awhile intermitted by corporal labors, return upon the
spirit, with a greater force and feeling of delight.

One great Exercise in our Solitude is, Mass and Divine Office, The work of
the Angels of God, who cease not night or day, to sing forth the praises of
the Almighty. O heavenly and divine Exercise, wherein the glorious Angels
accompany us, and offer up for us our prayers to our great God! How much
better is it, to be employed in the praises of our Creator, then with the
wicked of the world, to be buisyed in da^cing, diceing, riotting, and perhaps
blaspheming our Redeemer? Here examine thy readiness to frequent the Church at
due times, and whether thou abidest there as present in mind as body? and
resolve henceforth, to assist with more attention, and greater diligence, in
this heavenly Work.

Another Exercise of the solitary Soul, is Mental Prayer, whereby the heart
raised above earthly things, confers with God, and is as it were transformed
into a Divine Being. To this, Thou must Philothea apply thy self with
special diligence, according to the Rules prescribed Thee in Thy Preface.

For it is the Dew of Heaven, whereby the spirit is cherished in the knowledge
and love of heavenly things; It is the celestial Man^a, to sustayn us during
our earthly abode in the wilderness of this world; It is the holy Mountain of
divine Visions, where we enter into familiar conference with God, Who there
shows us all good.

A third Duty is Reading spiritual Books, by which I understand holy
Ghospells, and such other devout books as treat of Virtue, and the Reformation
of our Manners. This is to be performed duly thrice a day; at our uprising,
down-laying, and once between both; and that not at ra^dom or hap-hazard,
sometimes in one, another time in another book, for that is an effect of
curiosity, and rather breeds confusion then devotion. Let thy daily Lecture
therefore be constantly in one good book, reco^mended to Thee by thy own
Experience, or some Judicious person, and therein read till thou have not left
one line unpractised; for till then, thou can not say, thou have been a
Reader, but rather an Overseer of the points therein handled.

Truly of all books I have read, I know none more universally profitable for
all persons, of whatsoever condition, then the divine work called An
Introduction to a Devout Life, composed by that Illuminated Man and great
serva^t of God Saint Francis of Sales; One who even from his Cradle, was
singularly devoted to Seraphicall Saint Francis, as being born in a Chamber
dedicated to his name and devotion. And that thou may see, I recommend not
this Book to Thee upon slight grounds; take the advice of Alexander the
seventh, the late Pape and Sovereign Head of the Catholic Church on Earth, in
a letter dated 1642. to his Nephew; where He says, That he had already used
that work for the space of twenty years, and read it over a hundred times, and
that he could never read it, without discovering some excellent document, not
before marked; which thy own Experience will assuredly confirm.

Vocal Prayer and Aspirations, being also joined with spiritual reading, much
conduce to a greater thirst and benefit therein; for our reading must be ever
intermixed with Consideration, Jaculatorie Prayers and Application to use; and
therefore it matters not, how much we read, but how well, in order to our
spiritual advancement.

The last is Manual labor, which commonly should be only such as may
divertise, rather then weaken our spirit of devotion, Care being taken with all
heed, that the Soul tyres not herself by too Intense and permanent Applying
its self unto Contemplation. And these works are to be persorm'd with as great
pro^ptitude and eagerness, as any other Christian or Solitary Observance,
being strong Fortifyers against Idleness, the bane of the spiritual and devout
life, which are chiefly aimed at in our Retreat from worldly cares.

COLLOQUIE.
Thou O My God and supreme Lord of my life and strength, have bestowd many
gracious talents on me, wherewith to traffic for the Kingdom of heaven, till
Thou come to take the general Accounts of the world, and to render each one
according to their deserts; Alas, I have vainly employed the powers of my Soul
and the senses and members of my body, contrary to thy holy Decrees, idelly
lavishing away thy gifts of Grace, and the precious time allowed me for thy
service, and my own everlasting profitt, not reflecting on the shortness of my
life, thy severity that day, and the length of happiness that crowns good
works; It greives me for my neglects, henceforth I will employ all my forces in
loving and serving Thee, doing good things whilst time is; Give Thou O God what
Thou command, and command what Thou will; Perfect my steps in the paths of
thy Commandments, and they shall not be moved for ever. Amen.

THIRD DAYS VOYAGE. Man in his Sinful State.
THE MORNING EXERCISE.
FIRST POINT. Vileness of the body by Nature.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, that now being entered holy Solitude, and there fitted with due
Entertainme^ts, for thy happy Advance in thy designed Pilgrimage to Perfection,
Thou must Philothea descend into thy self, and discover What thou art, that
pretendest to so high and happy a state? That laying a strong foundation in the
acknowledgment of thy own Nothing, thy spiritual Edifice may the more
prosperously go forward, with the blessings of peace and mercy.

JESUS CHRIST is the true Model of all Sanctity, therefore we must in this our
Retyrement, especially study his Imitation: If he for our sake, hides the glory
of his Godhead, under the weakness of our Mortality, our highest
contemplations of God, and aims to perfection, should begin from the
consideration of our own Vileness, that re-ascending to God, with the greater
eagerness, we may drown our Weakness in the Vastness of his Divine Being.

What then art Thou Philothea, according to the Body, from the Womb to the
Tomb? From all Eternity, Thou were a mere Nothing, and so had for ever
remained, had not Gods Wisdom and Power drawn Thee thence, giving Thee that
Being thou now have. In thy Origin, thou art but a little matter of
corruption; The Greatest, the Wisest, the Beautifullest amongst us, is of no
better mould. In our birth, we enter the world with many grievous gripings and
groans of our Parents, naked, blind, poor, unable to help our-selves, and
ignorant how we come hither, and how, and whither to depart. In our lives, we
are exposed to innumerable calamities, of sickness, poverty, wars, calumnies;
with much pain must conserve our lives and health with fruits of the Earth and
flesh of beasts; And at last, in our Deaths, dissolved into la^guors, sighs and
tears, are hurried forth from the eyes and thoughts of our dearest friends,
and laid under ground, there to rott into our Original dust and ashes.

This is the pedigree of the best of us, as to our out-ward Man; so that we may
justly cry out, What is Man O God, that thou art mindful of him? If God be
mindful of our Nothing, surely we should have a continual remembrance of it,
least the sweetness of Divine Solitude, and the pleasing Entertainments we may
therein experience, between our Souls and God, puff us up with affections of
Vain Glory.

AFFECTION.
Unhappy Man that I am, who will deliver me from this body of Death? I am born
poor and miserable, live amidst crosses and sorrows, must dye with groans and
gasps, and shall rott into my mother Earth! Ah, my Soul, since the one half of
Man is so vile, be thou still humble. Lucifers pride had some plea; if he were
proud, he was immortal also; but Man can find nothing in himself, but filth,
weakness and corruption. Shall I then presume to speak to God, who am but dust
and ashes? Alas should I say I am better, the graves and carcasses of the
Monarchs and beauties of the World, would bear witness against me.

RESOLUTION.
In what ever degree of comtemplation, or condition of life I am, I will ever
be mindful of my Original Nothing, and the miserable progress I must make,
through wants, diseases and tribulations, of all sorts, from the Womb to the
To^b, and I will with holy Job, say to Rottenness thou art my Father; my
Mother and Sister to the Worms; This is my kindred; and my Companions are, a
multitude of too well known Infirmities. Therefore Gods Greatness, and my own
Vileness, shall be the balances of my thoughts; and I will hope, that the
Mercy of God will one day raise the needy from the dust of the Earth, and lift
the poor from the dung, and place them amongst the Princes of his people.

SECOND POINT. Wretchnesse of the Soul by Sin.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That, if thou be nothing but corruption and rottenness in thy
body, thy Soul defiled by Sin renders thee worse then nothing; for by sin we
become the unhappy vessels of Gods heavy wrath; he spared not the Angels in
their sins, but deprived them of all their original endowments of nature and
grace, banishes them for ever from his blissfull presence, and confines them to
the dreadful prison and torments of Hell; nor will he spare us, but if we be
partners in their crimes, he will also make us Companions in their bitter
sufferings; Evident in our first Parents, whom for one sin, he deprives of the
innocent state of their original Creation, expells them the Earthly Paradise;
and condemns them and us, to mourn out this wretched life, amidst labors,
sweats and innumerable miseries, as chastisers of our guilt.

We also through Sin incurr an insufferable servitude under the Tyranny of
Satan; He covets not, either honors, wealth or pleasures, but as to our Lord
JESUS in the wilderness, so to us still, offers all these; if we will do
homage and adore him; which we no sooner do, but we become Slaves to him, he
continually assaulting us with manifold grievous temptations, using all
Creatures, even our own flesh and blood, and passions of sensuality, to work
our overthrow; still plying us with seducing suggestio^s, giving no respit from
his snares and deceipts, and filling our hearts, with distrust of Mercy for
past sins, despair of delayed helps from heaven, and doubts of a final
perseverance in our duties, under so heavy a weight of tribulations, he raises
against us.

Likewise thereby, we loose Gods gracious presence, and fatherly providence
over us; our right and part in the merits of CHRIST'S bitter and saving Passion,
the frie^dship and familiarity of Gods comforting spirit; All graces, gifts,
fruits and blessings of the holy Ghost; the peace and security of our
Consciences; our Communion in the Sacrifices, prayers and good deeds of the
faithful, and our claym to our heavenly inheritance; And more over we defile
in our Souls the beautiful Image of God, are razed forth the book of life, are
deprived of the protection and safeguard of the blessed Angels, contract
grievous remorses of conscience, pronesse to greater sins, and a guilt of hell
fire, unless with a repentant heart we by Confession confusibly discover our
sins, known to God and our Souls only, and by corporal afflictions endeavor
to appease Gods just indignation against us, for them; This is enough to humble
the best of us, if we have any feeling of our sinful State.

AFFECTION.
Ah my God, who can hide from thy all-seeing Eye, the abyss of wretchedness,
wherein my Sins have already sunck me? Alas, I am become the unhappy object of
thy just wrath, the woeful servant of rebellious Satan, deprived of thy
healing graces, and exposed to innumerable Miseries! Hold thy hand O my
Almighty Lord, and rebuke me not in thy fury, for should thou observe
iniquities, who could sustain the heaviness of thy displeasure? I will
therefore confess unto Thee, my unworthiness to appear before thee, and to
enjoy even the common blessings of heaven and earth, which I have so often vainly
abused to satisfy my sinful passions; and that I ought not to hope for any
part in thy blessings of glory; But thou O God, have mercy on thousands, and
wilt comfort the weak and afflicted; and if thou do humble us, it is that we
may thereby learn, that from thee are our Justifications.

RESOLUTION.
I purpose henceforth to have ever before my Eyes, my sinful condition,
whereby I have rendered my self thus vile and abominable in the sight of God
and his holy Angels, subject to the insolences of Satan and my disorderly
passions, and branded with the infamous mark of one banished from the face of
God; I will also acknowledge my self guilty of the innocent death of my Savior
JESUS, and not to deserve from him, the least favor, either of his justifying
grace, or all-comforting Glory; but that I have rather incurd a just debt of
everlasting ignominy and confusion; And therefore however it shall please God to
reveal himself to me in this my Solitude, I will accept of it, as his most
gracious gift; And the more he exalts me, the more will I humble my self,
through the consideration of my sinful State, whereby I have provoked his
wrath against Me.

THIRD POINT. Ignorance of our future State.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That although perhaps thou often feel in thy Soul, during thy holy
Retyrement, or at other time, some delicious whispers of thy beloved Espouse,
yet art thou wholly ignorant what will befall thee the next moment, how long or
short thy life will be, when, where, by what disease or misfortune, Death will
seize upon Thee; and in what condition, of grace or sin, it will summon Thee
before Gods bar, thereto hear the sentence then to pass over Thee; and
consequently, that as long as thou art in this life, thou art never certainly
assured of thy Eternal Salvation; This ought to be a strong motive of
humiliation unto Thee.

Almighty God has from all Eternity, chosen some to be heirs of his glory,
permitting others; yet does not any one know, to what rank he belongs, when,
or by what means he shall come thither, till it pleases God to cite us forth
this world, and assume us to his heavenly Paradise; which evidently lays open
our great Ignorance, and proves our unchangable dependence on the hidden
disposition of the Divine Will; Is not this enough, to humble the haughtiest
spirit in the world? Wherefor in whatsoever degree of contemplation, virtue or
spiritual greatness thou art, thou must humbly acknowledge thy universal
dependence on Gods gracious inspirations and help; And that therefore thou
ought not to judge any one, whom through Gods permission, thou may see
fall into some abominable sin, being thou art not thy self assured, how long
thou shall stand in thy duty to God; or how soon that person may arise again,
through Gods Grace, aiding to a timely and profitable Repentance. Have a care
therefore Philothea thou stand fast in the ways of God, working thy
Salvation with a filial and humble fear, reflecting continually on thy own
Nothing, and the straight dependence thou have on the grace and Mercies of
JESUS CHRIST; who having redeemed Thee from the tyranny of Satan, and made Thee
capable of life everlasting with himself, will not be wanting to the
completing that great work of thy Eternal Salvation, if thou do humbly
trust in him; say then with a lively faith, In Thee O Lord have I hoped, and I
am not confounded; I have put my trust in Thee, and have found help.

AFFECTION.
Ah my Soul, wherein can thou now glory? Art thou placed in the family of
Gods servants? Have many good Notions and Divine Motions in thy breast? Do
thou through some strong helps of heavenly Grace, delightfully perform hard
and painful duties? All this is very good; but alas! thou know not how long
this will endure, whether for a year, or a day, or even the next Moment?
Whether thou be confirmed in grace, listed amongst the number of the Elect;
or worthy of Love or hatred? Thou know nothing of all this; Even so it is;
for thou O my God, art a most glorious and pure Father of spirits, and wilt
still be worshipped in fear and trembling; However, although thou should
persecute me till Death, I will trust in Thee; even at the gates of Hell, I
will not abandon my hopes in thy Mercy.

RESOLUTION.
I will cast my self into the sea of Gods abundant Mercies, and therein fix
the Auchor of my hopes, relying firmly on his undeceiving promises, and saving
helps of Grace; and therefore I will annihilate my self in the consideration of
his holy decrees, living in perpetual fear of his judgments concerning me.
Nor will I only become humble in the sight of God, who knows the vileness of
my body, and wretchedness of my Soul, with whatever shall befall either, for
time and Eternity; but I will also willingly become contemptible in the Eyes of
all Creatures, contenting my self with the lowest place, meanest fare, and
vilest Employments; accounting my self the unworthyest of all; and will ever
say with the Holy Prophet, I am a worm and not a Man; the Outcast of Men, and
the Offcast of the Vulgar.

THE EVENING EXERCISE.
FIRST DISCOURSE. Our Weakness to good.
IF thou desire Philothea, to enter the depth of thy own Nothing, thou must
make yet a further search into the motives of humbling thy self before God;
Wherefor having now waded through the vast Seas of thy vileness in body,
wretchedness in Soul, and wonderful ignorance of thy future state of life and
happiness; discourse further on thy Natural weakness to perform good and
upright actions.

Ever since, through our disobedience to Gods holy Commandments, we departed
from his Temple and sanctified City of Jerusalem, and fell into the hands of
spiritual murderers, we have had many deep wounds, and deadly soars in our
Souls; whereof though some have bee^ often cured by CHRIST'S healing Sacraments,
yet do they often break out and fester, through the disorders of our Sinful
lives; others remaining for ever uncurable during this mortal life; whereby we
are wholly unable, without the perpetual help of our charitable Samaritan
JESUS CHRIST, either to discern the way that leads back to God, or securely to
walk toward him, in this our Pilgrimage to heavenly Perfection.

Our manifold doubts, mistakes and errors, in the knowledge of Divine, and
even Moral truths and Actions; our passionate affections to present and
sensible delights, the variety and distractions of our fading and slippery
life; and the Excellency of Gods ways, and those thoughts and works, whereby
we walk in them, and purchase a blessedness, which he alone can bestow on us;
show evidently that God lives in an Unaccessible Light, not to be viewed with
an Eye, not yet cleansed by divine Faith; nor to be aspired unto, without that
Hope, which He only can inspire into us; nor in the least degree to be
purchased, or pretended to, without the special gifts of inherent sanctity,
and other supernatural helps of clearing Lights and cooperating Graces,
bestowed bountifully on us; so that we can neither do any thing worthy his
acceptance, or think on him according to his Majesty, or even say one word of
him, as we ought, in order to our Everlasting happiness, without his special
inspirations, conduct and assistance.

Wherefore, as thou art by Nature a mere Nothing, and by sin worse then
Nothing: so without the liberal gift of Gods aiding Grace thou can do
nothing; If then thou perhaps art sometimes raised up in the Contemplation of
God, his glory, and those allureing traces, whereby he leads his servants to
the love of eternal good things; yet may thou not take complacence therein,
without an humble submission to Gods unknown will toward thee; or esteem thy
self by them, to be in a settled condition of Holiness; for if thou were (as
easily thou may be) deprived of those Lights of Graces, thou now have, thy
Soul would become as dark, and thy actions as imperfect, as any others.

These Divine helps, so necessary to us, and so much above our reach, ought
profoundly to humble us in the presence of God, whom we must ever worship as a
liberal and free Giver, as often as we receive any favor from him; still
remembering, that the Apostate Angels, and our First Parents, lost themselves,
by a Complacence in their own natural perfections and Gods Gifts, without due
reference to him.

COLLOQUIE.
I know and acknowledge My Dearest Lord, that of our selves, we cannot, either
think, or say, or do any thing worthy of thee; and therefore I will confess to
Thee (the only Light and strength of my Soul) that without Thee I am nothing
but Vanity, blindness and Misery; and unless thou do prevent me with thy
blessings, and moisten my heart with the dew of thy heavenly Graces, I shall be
unto Thee like a barren Earth, which is without water, and produce nothing but
sin, death and confusion. Alas my Soul, flatter not thy self, for even so it
is; and yet how often have thou relied on thy own judgment, force and
abilities, for which God has permitted thee to fall? It were much better to
acknowledge thy inward weakness to Virtue and extol Gods power, and Mercies,
in thy poverty, that his greatness may be exalted in the vileness of thy
Nothing. Grant me, O ever blessed Redeemer, thy holy Grace, but give me also
true humility of heart, that I may ever think on my own Nothing without Thee,
so shall the poor and needy praise thy Name.

SECOND DICOURSSE. Our Pronenesse to Evil.
SInce by help only of Gods grace we do good, it is by our own bad Nature we
incline to Evil; Had man stood in his original Innocence, his Soul had ever
been breathing forth the delicious odours of Moral and Divine Virtues,
wherewith he was then full; no sooner does he withdraw himself from his due
Obedience to God, but all those Virtues forsake him, his Soul and all her
powers are smutted with sin; We loose our right to our heavenly inheritance;
and as a raging Sea, having broken its banks, we swell with evil inclinations,
break down all letts of Gods precepts and prohibitions, and run over to all
sorts of evil actions, however contrary to our Allegiance unto God.

Our Reason adorned with Prudence, could discern the Excellency of Virtue, and
dictate all due circumstances of good and laudable actions; but now by sin it
is become dull and blind, nor can it without new helps, above our reach,
persuade from evil, or direct in good. Our Will formerly hedgd in with holy
Laws, beautifyed with inclinations to Justice, and stre^gthned by heavenly
lights and graces, was prompt to hearken to, and obey Gods Call, but having
lost the safeguard of Justice, is weak in resisting sensual allurements, and
ready to comply with every disorderly suggestion of lawless passions. Our
Concupiscence, which guarded with Temperance, stirrd up our inward Man, to
follow the prescripts of Reason, and seek sweetness in laudable and virtuous
actions, rebels against the spirit, draws toward earthly delights, and leads
us captive in the bonds of unlawful desires. And the Irascible power of our
Soul; which armed with Fortitude, helped us to trample down all obstacles of
piety, runs now stiffe-neckt against God, casts of the yoke of Obedience, and
contemns all threts of his Justice, against Violaters of their Divine Covenant.

These be those heavy shackles Philothea, which keep us in the servitude of
sin, and still press our hearts down to the crimes we loath, and yet shun not;
Ah! How often have thou felt in thy self the weight of thy corrupted Nature? How
often plunged in some grievous sin? How dull thy spirit then? How black thy
thoughts? What remorses in thy mind? and (as one hanging at a small string,
over a deep lake, full of toads and serpents) how full of terrors and fears?
and yet not in the least sort able to help thy self? How often thus, through
pronenesse to sin? Alas! neither Rich by their treasures, nor the Mighty by
their power, not the Beautiful by their loving charms, can free themselves
from this load of sin and sinful desires; Nay even all Creatures are become so
many snares, whereby to entrapp and enthrall our hearts; whilst Satan by inward
temptations presses us forward to covet them, and outwardly masketh them with
apparent sweenesse, to seduce us and work our ruin; plunging us in sin after
sin, till we forget there is a God, that sees all, That marks all our stepps,
and who will one day call us to an account for all.

COLLOQUIE.
O bitter servitude of sin, which tyrannizeth in my fleshly members, resisting
the laws of the immortal Mind, and holding me captive in the fetters of my
concupiscences! Ah, who will free me from the woeful slavery of my corrupted
passions, which heavely press me down to sensual and sinful Desires? Only
Thou, My bountiful Savior: should Thou leave me to my self, there is not
any sin so enormous, into which I might not fall. It is thy Mercy, O Abyss of
Mercies, which prevents my stubborn will, quells the rage of temptations, and
graciously diverts those occasions which might entice me to offend Thee. Oh
that thou would break the chains which fetter my spirit, and would fasten
my footsteps, that I slip not in the way of thy holy Commandments! Then will I
sacrifize to thee a Sacrifice of praise, and rejoice and exult in God my
Savior, because he who is powerful has done great things for me. Amen.

FOVRTH DAYS VOYAGE. Man Repaired by Jesus Christ.
MORNING EXERCISE.
FIRST POINT. Institution of the Holy Sacrement.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That having descended into thy self, and there discovered What thou
art, in thy sinful state; thy Body how Vile? thy soul how wretched? thy
ignorance how great? how weak thou art to good? and how prone to Evil? and
that now Thou find thy self Philothea, fallen into the deep lake, (mentio^ed
last night) full of filth and Venom; where thou neither see the light of
heaven, nor enjoyest comfort from any friend, or quiet in thy mind, nor can
hope for releife from any Creature; and that therein thou art like to sink
deeper, stick faster, and abide for ever, if Almighty God harkens not clemently
to thy woeful cries, and take pity on thy weakness, poverty and miserable
state.

God could send an Angel to free thee thence, or by his only word set thee at
liberty, but his love and bounty is so great to thee, that he sends his own,
only Son, equal to himself in Majesty, Wisdom and Power, clothed in thy
Mortality, to release thee from that loathsome Dungeo^, to wash Thee in his
precious blood; to give thee an easy and gracious Law to walk by, to encourage
thee to piety by doctrine and Examples, to establish Sacraments for healing thy
spiritual soars and ulcers, and at length that he may bestow his whole self
on Thee in the Holy Eucharist, as a Pledge of love whereby to sanctify, and bind
thy heart to him; as a Light to guide thee, as a Staff to support thee, and as
a Viaticum to strengthen and comfort thee, in thy holy Pilgrimage to
Perfection.

In this divine Sacrament is really and substantially contained JESUS CHRIST,
God and Man; his Divinity which is the fountain of grace, good works and
glory; his Soul, full of Wisdom and Holiness; his Body, conceived of the
Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Immaculate Virgin; and his Blood, shed in his
Passion to redeem Man from the tyranny of sin and satan. What greater argument
of Love, could God give to Miserable Man, then this? then when the Jews sought
to destroy him, and all mankind had abandond him, even then to bestow on us
(not fading honors, riches or pleasures, but) himself, who is the Maker of
the whole world, and that, as a Ransom to discharge us from our Captivity, as a
Physician to cure our Spiritual diseases, as a Father to protect us, as an
Espouse to comfort us, and as the Earnest of his eternal glory? what greater
bounty then this?

If the Jews with so great Reverence, assisted at, and offered up their
Sacrifices of beasts; surely, We should with far greater Veneration and piety
approach to our Altars, whereon the living God in our Nature is offered up a
Propitiatio^ for the sins of the World, a Reconciliation between God and Man,
and a Source of all blessings of grace and glory. No sooner does the Priest
pronounce those words, whereby that Mystery is wrought, but the substance of
the bread and wine is changed into the body and blood of JESUS CHRIST, the
sensible elements thereof only remaining; there he is whole in every part, and
in all places where he is consecrated, without division or multiplication in
him self, or departing from the right hand of the Father. Certainly Philothea,
This gift, that bounty, these wonders, wrought for our reparation from our
sinful state, should strongly engage our hearts in Love and Duty to God.

AFFECTION.
I adore Thee my sovereign Lord hidden in this Divine Mystery, and acknowledge
Thee to be there really present, God and Man, my Redeemer, Sanctifyer and
Glorifyer: Alas, My God and all my Good! how little have I hitherto thought on
this thy inestimable love and bounty to me, whereby, to releive me from the
slavery of sensuality and satan, to heal the deep wounds of my sinful soul,
and fill it with enlivning and sanctifying graces; and what have I returned to
God for all these favors bestowed upon me? I will approach to Gods Altar with
a repentant heart, and eat there the bread of salvation, and will call on the
Name of God.

RESOLUTION.
I will ever have a lively faith toward this Mystery of the Holy Eucharist,
confirmed to me, by CHRIST'S own words, the authority of Apostles and Fathers,
and the consent of all ancient and modern Christians, united under one supreme
head, CHRIST'S Vicar on Earth; and I will lay open all my wants and weaknessesse
before my Sovereign Lord, here really present; confiding in his comforting
helps, for the freeing my Mind from distractions, and Will from sinful
affections, that I may profitably approach to him, and eat of that living
bread, and sacrifize my soul to him by abnegation of my will, and my body by
Obedience to Christian Duties.

SECOND POINT. Fruits of the Holy Sacrament.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That approaching to Gods holy Altar, and there eating of that
repayring fruit of the Tree of life, We become like the Sacred Virgin
conceiving him in her womb, therefore should study to imitate her Humility,
Obedience, Faith and Charity; whereby she was fitted to that great work, and
raised to familiar conferences with JESUS CHRIST, which we specially aim at,
in our holy Retyrement.

We become also Temples of God, and therefore our hearts should be Altars
whereon to offer up our enflamed thoughts and desires, admitting no negotiation
there, but what may tend to the cleansing our souls from evil affections, and
adorning them with divine virtues, whereby it may be fitted to entertayn this
heavenly Guest. Had JESUS CHRIST when on Earth, vouchsafed to make his aboade
with us, as in Bethania with Mary and Martha, with what solicitude would we
have prepared all things befitting his sacred presence, that nothing might
appear in us undecent, or wanting, where with to give him a joyful welcome?
The like care should now be had My Philothea, especially since he comes here to
us in his glorified body environed with Angels invisibly present, and with
hands full of blessings to bestow upon us.

In JESUS CHRIST abides the fullness of the Divinity, therefore He giving him
self to us, in this heavenly Manna, containing all sweetness, he gives
withal the whole treasury of his heavenly gifts and graces, whereby the soul
is cleansed from venial sins, and mortal inculpably forgotten in confession,
Reason receives cleerer lights of spiritual truths, the Will is enflamed to
Christian Duties, the Conscience eased, Inclinations to evil are weakened, and
our Love to heavenly things strengthened and increased. O living food of Angels
be thou my Daily bread, and fill my soul with thy divine sweetness, that my
conversation may be in heaven, by the Imitation of the life of those blessed
spirits, and by hopes of feeding for ever, on that bread, in the kingdom of thy
Father.

AFFECTION.
Oh that I might conceive JESUS in my heart by Love, and bring him forth by
performance of his Will! then should I truly feed on this bread of Angels. But
alas, too often have I approached Gods Altar, with a Spirit full of earthly
desires, too frequently have I entertaind the great Lord of the world in a soul
defiled with sinful affections, tepid in divine Exercises and distracted with
worldly sollicitudes, and therefore I still remain dry and barren to good
actions, and insensible to the comforting presence of JESUS within me; Oh that
Gods holy Spirit would overshadow my soul, cleanse it from all imperfections,
inflame it with heavenly love, and replenish it with his gracious blessings,
that it may be a fit Sanctuary for the Savior of Men and Angels.

RESOLUTION.
I will banish forth of my heart, whatever may displease my Divine Espouse,
adorning it with Virtues and holy desires, whereby it may be prepared to
entertain him, and experience the sweetness of his comforting presence. And I
will endeavor that my outward decency in behavior and conversation, may
testify the inward tranquillity and alacrity of my spirit, and an earnest
longing to be One with him; Live Thou O JESUS in my soul, that I may live by
the heat of thy divine flames, and walk by the light of thy inspirations, from
Virtue to Virtue, till I see Thee my God in thy holy Sion.

THE THIRD POINT. Intention in Communion.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That if in all actions of this life, we study to have a due and
upright intention, this ought then especially to be, when we approach to the
Holy Sacrament, that great proof of Gods Love to mankind, that efficacious
means of confirming us in our spiritual life, and a most assured pledge of our
future blessed life above.

We may not then venture hither, of mere custom or for company sake; nor to
purchase a vain esteem of holiness, or an increase of temporal blessings; or
some spiritual gust or sweetness, in that great Act of Christian worship; No
Philothea, we must go to God, for God himself; that our love to him may be
greater, our devotions quicker, and our Spirits stronger in performing the will
of our Sovereign Lord and Master.

JESUS CHRIST offers him self on the Altar of his Cross to his heavenly
Father, a Sacrifice of Praise, Impetration and Suffrage: with the same
intention ought we to entertain JESUS in our hearts, by thankfulness for his
manifold favors, imploring grace and mercy for our selves, and Spiritual
releife for all distressed souls; ever mindful of his bitter Passion, that the
fruits thereof may be liberally applied to us, and we may become suffering
members with our Divine Head, increasing in all perfection and freedom with God
in our Contemplations, and being entirely transformed into Him, on whom our
Spirits here feed, that we may have no life, knowledge, affection or motion in
us, but what proceeds from, and ends in him.

AFFECTION.
Alas my Dearest Lord, I have been too careless in my adresses to Thee; How
often have I frequented thy holy Altars with vain and weak desires, not loving
Thee there for Thy self, but receiving Thee of dull custom, or for some
present gust in Thee? Not solicitous to cherish the good desires conceived by
thee, or a willingness to bear Crosses for thee; and thus am I become
unworthy, that thou entrest the house of my soul and live there, but if thou
Say the word, my Spirit shall be healed.

RESOLUTION.
I will hence forth set some special time a part, wherein to discuss and
rectifye my intention, before I approach to, and eat of this living bread,
that God may be glorified, and all Christian souls may reap spiritual profit,
by the use of this great Mystery; and will say.

AN OBLATION BEFORE COMMUNION.
O Blessed JESUS, in union of that love, wherewith thou did offer thy self
a Sacrifice to thy Father, on the Altar of the Cross, and in conformity to
that intention thou then had, I this day offer up to thee my Communion, as a
Sacrifice of Praise, Impetration and Suffrage; for my self, and all others to
whom I am obleiged, by Obedience, Justice or Charity: and in that degree I am
obleiged; which I beseech thee, through the merits of thy bitter Passion, may
be acceptable to Thee. Amen.

THE EVENING EXERCISE
FIRST DISCOURSE. Preparation to the Holy Sacrament.
NOne will undertake any great work, without careful preparation of all
things, necessary for its due performance. If we use a cautious providence in
all our humane actions, and ordinary conversation, this should rather be
observed, when we intend to enter the Holy of Holies, and there feed on the
Bread of Angels, our powerful Creator, merciful Redeemer, and Just Judge.

The Paschall Lamb, was but a dark and barren figure of this gracious
Sacrifice, yet the Jews eat not thereof, without much cleanesse, circumspection
and alacrity of Spirit; Saint John Baptist esteems not himself worthy to
unloose CHRIST'S shoes, Saint Peter to fail in the same Boat with him, and the
devout Centurion to entertain him under his roof; nor should we presume to
appear before him in the Holy Eucharist, or there receive him within our
breast, without great feeling of Love and Veneration. If JESUS CHRIST be a
Mirror without spot, no stain of sin should then be seen in our soul within,
or undecency in the outward habit of our body: and if he be there, a God of
Love and Peace to us, we may not touch, or feed on him, unless reconciled to
Heaven and Earth, in Imitation of the Primitive Christians, who meeting at this
great Mystery, were of one heart and one spirit.

ADVISES FOR A GENERAL CONFESSION.
Now therefore My Philothea, thy heavenly Espouse having led thee some steps
down toward his Cellar of rich and Gracious wines, and there disclosed to Thee
part of his spiritual treasures, and hidden paths of divine Love, to the end
thou may duly prepare thy self to eat also of this Bread of life, and find
no impediment in thy progress to perfection, I advise thee to dispose thy
self toward a General Confession, in case Thy spiritual Guide, judge that
expedient and profitable for Thee. Although perhaps thou art not conscious of
any grevious sin, not formerly discovered, yet since, even of a forgiven sin,
we may not be without fear, we cannot be too solicitous in cleansing our
hearts, and removing all obstacles of divine Lights and Graces.

Wherefor Philothea, do this now, once for ever, but do it simply and
plainly, without fear or anxiousness; and unto a person, chosen amongst a
thousand; by whose advice thou may be wholly directed, for the manner of it,
and how thou art afterward to behave thy self, should scruples arise. Which
ended, bless God for his mercies toward Thee, and prostrate in spirit, before
thy Crucifix, pronounce the following Covenant.

PHILOTHEA'S COVENANT WITH GOD.
I N. Placed in the presence of Almighty God, and the whole Court of heaven,
having considered the abundant Love wherewith God has created me, sanctified
me in holy Baptism, sustained me in my manifold sins and transgressions, and
at length called me to this state of life, wherein I now am, preserving me
there, from many dangers of offending him, inspiring sorrow for my failings,
and a desire to love and obey him; Do, with my whole soul, abhor all the sins
of my life past; renew my promises, to be his loyal and obedient servant: and
do firmly purpose, all the days of my life, to shun all dangers of sin, and
to apply my self to the observance of his holy Commandments, and my own
Resolutions.

And if at any time I break this my Covenant, I will, as soon as I perceive my
error return again to God, by a hearty repentance, and confession of all my
sins and ingratitude.

Accept O my God, this my Protestation made before Thee, and grant me grace to
observe it, to the end of my life, that I may always abide in thy holy fear,
die in thy sweet peace, and with joy at the last day arise, to a blessed
Communion of the Saints, in thy never ending glory. Amen.

SECOND DISCOURSE. Behavior in receiving the Holy Sacrament.
BEing thus prepared to entertain JESUS CHRIST in thy heart, our endeavors
must be, by amorous sighs, and aspirations full of joy for the approach of our
blessed Lord, to express the longing desire we have of his coming into us.

The happy Issue of an Important affair, or purchase of some special
temporal blessings, usually takes up the best thoughts and most serious wishes
of earthly minds: But if our minds be heavenly, we will ever think on, and
thirst after, this delicious visit of our Divine Espouse.

Anciently, Christians frequented often this heavenly banquet, and thence
gained that Sanctity and fervor, we admire in the Martyrs, Hermits and holy
Virgins of that Age; Though worldly ties, and the manifold distractions whereto
our mortality is subject, permits not daily Communion, yet could we daily eat
this divine Bread, our hearts would be accustomed to pious affections,
strengthened against occurring temptations, and weaned from those sensual
liberties, we now so unwillingly abandon.

That morning thou intendest Philothea to receive the holy Eucharist, think
how earnestly JESUS CHRIST longs to take up his lodging within thee;
therefore he sends his Heralds to proclaim the coming of the Espouse, and to
invite thee to this gracious Supper; being the^ decently prepared, and
accompanied with thy choicest friends of heaven, approach humbly and devoutly
to Gods Altar, saying in thy spirit, Whence is it, that my Dearest Lord
vouchsafes to come to me, and abide within me? O Philothea, if thy soul be not
quite frozen, thou will here feel the heat of this heavenly fire, and return
hence full of enflamed affections, panting and swelling, through an abundance
of divine Love.

If ever there be hopes of a spiritual advancement, any zeal of Christian
duties, or constant resignation amidst temptations, it will now appear, while
this great Giver of all good things, lodges in thy bosom, as the soul of thy
spirit; Manifest then to him thy wants and wishes, and say, Thou thalt not
depart hence, unless thou do bless me, with the blessings of Peace and
Mercy.

COLLOQUIE.
Ah, my soul, can thou be hungry, having eaten of the bread of Angels? Or a
thirst, having tasted of the fountain of living water? Or cold, having been at
this divine fire? Alas, my Sovereign Lord, my carelessness in attending to thy
presence in this sacred banquet, my frequent relapses into my old vices, and
ungratitude for thy many wonderful favors, has even deaded my heart, and
rendered it insensible to the gracious influences of this heavenly food! Enliven
my spirit, O my God, with thy grace, and fortify it with this bread of Angels;
and in the strength thereof I will walk to thy holy Mountain, the Mountain
where God delights to abide, where he lives for ever. Amen.

FIFTH DAYS VOYAGE. Mortification of Sensuality.
THE MORNING EXERCISE.
FIRST POINT. Mortification of the Senses.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, that the soul being now cleansed from all stayns of sin by
Repentance, and strengthened in its Spiritual life, by that divine bread, which
is JESSUS CHRIST, we must use all endeavors, to reform such evil habits and
inclinations, as may slacken our pious resolutions; and purchase those helps of
Virtue, which may most efficaciouslie advance us in our Pilgrimage to
perfection.

We must therefore Philothea withdraw our outward senses from all those objects,
which are apt to seduce our hearts from Gods Law, and engage them in sinful
affections, so contrary to the perfection of our design. This is done, both by
a careful custody of our senses, from viewing and feeding on such sensible
objects, as may allure us to take complacence in them; and by a moderate
castigation of the body, by acts of penance, that it rebels not against the
dictates of reason and grace.

All Christians have a strickt obligation to endeavor this custody and
castigation of the senses; For being Children of the earthly Adam, through
whose sin all are borne enemies to God, and Rebels against his holy Law, we
all find, both body and soul alienated from their due Obedience to reason and
Gospel, which cannot be repaired, but by withdrawing our senses, even from
lawful objects, and undergoing hard and painful duties. Being also in holy
Baptism, happily spoused to JESUS CHRIST, by a solemn Vow then made in our
Name, to renounce Satan and all his works, and to apply our selves to the
observance of all CHRIST'S Precepts, we ought seriously to study the imitation
of the life of Our Sovereign Lord, and fulfill our promises made to him, by
mortifying our concupiscences, and performance of his Will.

But this must be especially done, during our spiritual retreat, that
crucifying our sensuality, by prayer, fasts watchings, and such like
austerities, we may the more freely harke^ to the whisperings of the Spirit,
and thereby become wholly spiritual, according to our design; And therefore
those great Examples of solitary perfection, whose lives fill us with
admiration, no sooner withdrew themselves from the noise of worldly
solicitudes, but they applied themselves to corporal austerities, thereby to
quell the inordinate suggestions of corrupted sensuality, and raise up their
hearts in the contemplation of heavenly and permanent comforts.

AFFECTION.
O painful pilgrimage of this mortal Life! how miserable, how frail, how
bitter art thou? And yet have I thus long loved thee, feeding my senses on
perishing objects, and filling my heart with vain and empty desires of
sensual pleasures, thereby forgetting that great ransom, my Savior paid to
redeem me from the tyranny of Satan, which the disorders of sensuality brought
upon me; and neglecting that glorious inheritance, he by his bitter Passion
purchased for me! Oh, I will rather suffer a thousand deaths, then abandon my
self to these unclean and deceitful delights! I renounce you for ever, O
Impure suggestions; and do defy any concupiscence, which may bring the wrath
of God upon the children of distrust.

RESOLUTION.
I will make a covenant with my senses, not to admit of any unlawful or vain
object; and will place a guard over them, that they seek not after what may be
pleasing to flesh and blood; and I will mortify them by a prudent and descreet
use of corporal austerities, denying to my self all superfluities which may
delight my sensual inclinations, in conformity to the counsels of holy
Gospel; and by assuming particular acts of Mortification, suitable to my
calling, and as far as Obedience will permit; And I will say with the Royal
Prophet, For thy love O Lord, I have mortifyed my self, all the day long.

SECOND POINT. Mortification of the Passions.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That it suffices not, to mortify the outward senses, unless we
reform also the inward Man, by ordering and deading our inward passions. What
availes it, to wear a hair cloth on the back, and in the bosom to bear a
rancorous and proud heart? or what profit will it be to our spirit, to fast
much, to pray often, to watch long and speak seldom; if Envy, Impatience,
Pride or some other hidden affections poison the soul within, and destroy that
delicious harmony, which should be, between the Will of God, and our own?

It is a great mistake, Philothea, of some souls, otherwise wel-willing, and
devout, that heeding the mortification of the outward man, they neglect to
prune their hearts of vicious affections, so contrary to the spirit of JESUS
CHRIST, and thereby miss of that tranquillity and perfection, they seek after
in their Retyrement.

Wherefor My Philothoa, make a careful survay of all thy sensual
inclinations, what passions lay lurking in thy heart, how ready thou art to
bear Crosses and forbear carnal satisfactions; and set a watch over every
one, that they stir not, but by the order of Reason, and direction of Grace.

AFFECTION.
Alas my Soul, it is the Way, but not the end of perfection, to mortify thy
poor body, if thou be thy self the cause of all disorders there! Be thou
humble, and thy body will not be proud; be thou chaste, and thy body will not be
lascivious; be thou temperate, and thy body will not be gluttonous. Oh that the
powerful hand of my God, would quell the tumults of my inordinate passions,
and putt bounds to the rowlings of my affections! I have strayed from Thee O my
God, as a sheep that is lost; seek thou thy servant, and I will not be
unmindfull of thy commandments.

RESOLUTION.
I will not only henceforth mortify the senses of my body, but the passions of
my mind also, that with my heart, as well as lips, I may honor and glorify my
Savior. And I will stricktly examine every motion of my sensual appetite,
that I may discover its maladies, order its affections, and prevent those
disquiets, which my Passions have hitherto raised in Me; That My beloved may
say to Me, Thou art a Garden of delights enclosed, a spring shut up, and a
fountain sealed.

THIRD POINT. Mortification, the property of a Christian.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That by means of this Mortification of our senses and passions, we
are placed in a degree of perfection above beasts, who being void of reason,
seek their content and happiness in sensual delights; and therefore those
carnal hearts, which still wallow in the puddle of earthly pleasures,
following the allurements of sensible objects, and the disorders of their own
passions, degenerate into beasts; Whereas Mortification is the special badg and
property of a true Christian Man, who living according to reason and grace,
crucifies the flesh with its concupiscences, and thereby belongs to Christ.

But especially, this perfect mortification of our sensual appetites, is the
proper Companion and true signet of the solitary soul, who retyring from
worldly conversation obliges her self, to imitate JESUS CHRIST in his
sufferings; and to follow the stepps of the most zealous Christians of all
Ages, by resisting the irregular desires of sensuality, that the flesh may
obey the spirit, and our spirit the Will of God, for the Sanctification of the
whole Man.

If therefore Philothea, Thy senses and passions have hitherto been loosly kept,
and strayed after inordinate satisfactions, now thou must have a watchful care
over them, and fasten them to the Cross of Mortification, promptly, joyfully,
frequently, perseverently, and universally; that as all have been Ministers of
uncleanness, they may also be promoters of pyety; thy Eyes, in contemplating
thy Crucified Redeemer, and reading holy books; thy Ears, in harkning to
devout sermons; thy Tongue, in prayer and pious discourses; thy Hands, in
performing good works; thy Feet, in visiting holy places; and thy whole body,
in bearing patie^tly the miseries of this mortal Life; and undergoing acts of
penance, for satisfaction of past, and prevention of new sins, so contrary to
thy Christian profession, and the great design now in hand.

AFFECTION.
I acknowledge my Dearest Lord, that through thy precious blood, I am
regenerated from my sinful state, sanctified to Christian and holy duties, and
strongly fortifyed against the corrupted inclinations of my own sensuality,
and outward charms of earthly delights; and yet, Alas! how often, how vilely,
have I transgressed thy commands and my own promises to be one of thy flock, to
become a mortified Christian, to abandon all worldly contents, and suffer
whatever austerities and tribulations, rather then to loose any part in Thee,
and thy blessed Kingdom prepared for Me? But thou O Lord, art sweet, and mild,
and aboundest with Mercies; Have Mercy upon me O God, have mercy upon me, for
my soul has trusted in Thee.

RESOLUTION.
I will take a special View, of all abuses committed through immortification
of my senses and passions, and consider all my evil Inclinations, where, at
what time, toward what Objects, I am aptest to comply with them; and I will
waryly watch over all my ways, prevent dangers, and undertake such
Mortifications, as may keep my heart closse to my God, and steadfast in the
observance of his Holy Commandments; strengthen me O Lord with thy grace, and
My Appetite shall be subject to Me, and I shall have power over it.

THE EVENING EXERCISE.
FIRST DISCOURSE. Damages incurrd by Immortification.
AS the Love of God joined with self Contempt, builds up the City of God in
us: so self Love, reaching to the contempt of Gods holy Commandments, that of
Satan; This Self-love is the First Mover, in the sphere of the unmortifyed
soul, of all the passions of our sensuality, whence proceed all those
calamities of sinful desires, and the following disorders, which restlesly
war against Gods spirit in Us, and heavyly press Us down, even against our
Wills, to those Miseries we now groan under, and long to be freed from.

Our first Parents complying with an Immoderate Appetite of the fruit of one
forbidden Tree (amongst so many thousand excellent Ones, allowed by Almighty
God, for their Use and pleasure, notwithstanding Gods severe prohibition, under
pain of his high dispeasure, a tedious life, forrowfull death, and all those
penalties, which daily draw so many tears from our Eyes, and sighs from our
hearts) has brought Gods heavy wrath upon themselves and us, and all those
Rebellions of sensuality, Errors in understanding, difficulties in obeying,
and that torrent of cares and sorrows, which continually afflict our spirits;
and yet We still add to our Miseries, by an over-ready sideing with these our
unruly passions and Appetites.

What grater mishapp can befall a Sovereign Prince, then to be deposed his
Throne, spoiled of his royal Prerogatives and dignity, and to be banished forth
his own Dominions? Thus it is with us now: Each one of us had a peaceful
kingdom within himself, and was Supreme Lord therein in his Original state;
No sooner did self Love creep in to our hearts, and seduce the powers of the
soul, to prefer sensuality to reason and Justice, but God permits our Passions
to overrun us, and tyrannize within us; whence arise those varieties of
Concupiscences, boylings and roulings of our affections, Love and Hatred, Hopes
and Fears, and those numberless disquiets which torture our unmortifyed
spirits; He takes from us the safeguard of Justice and Innocence, whereby we
are become unable to govern our hearts in the flight of evil and pursuance of
approved Good; And we are banished forth that Paradise, which was the seat of
our Earthly happiness, and the Image of the heavenly, and are here condemned,
through sweats and sighs, and Innumerable sorrows, to wear out an anxious and
painful Life.

These be the Miseries we have incurred Philothea, through Immortification of
our senses and passions, and are still increased in us, by giving reins to our
heady and disorderly se^sualitie, as we daily experience in the misgovernment
of our lives and actions, which certainly none can seriously consider, without
an extreme horror and confusion.

Thou must therefore earnestly endeavor to suppress all inordinate suggestions
and desires of flesh and blood; through consideration, of the great
humiliation, and bitter sorrows, the eating one forbidden Aple, cost the Son of
God; The severe prohibitions God has made against unlawfall concupiscences, and
his commands, that we mortify our carnal appetites, crucify our flesh,
chastise our bodies, hate and deny our selves; The Examples of all the Saints
and Lovers of solitude; and the great damages we have already, and still may
incurr, by consenting to our vicious affections; Then, by examining, what
passions abound most in Thee? how thou may timely prevent dangers of raising
them? And by what means thou can best moderate thy affections, in the
presence of sensual allurements, or when violently transported with them
toward some beloved Object, most dear to Thee.

COLLOQUIE.
Oh! who will give Me water to my head, and a fountain of tears to my Eyes;
and I will night and day bewail the disorders of my corrupted sensuality; the
tumults of my unbridled passions and the follies of my youth! Ah! my God, thou
have commanded it, and I find it by woeful experience to be true, That my
inordinate mind is become a punishment to its self, and those Vanities,
wherein I have endeavored to glutt my heart, and power forth my spirit, has
rendered me burdensome to my self. But thou art just O God, and have met with
me in my own ways, and paid me in my own coin, punishing me in that, wherein
I sought my sollace, content and happiness. Oh! that thou would streach
forth thy hand and touch my heart, and my wicked ways shall become straight
and even; command O God these tempests and storms of my Passions to cease, and
there shall be a calm in my spirit, and my flesh shall hope to see my God, my
Salvation.

SECOND DISCOURSE. Necessity, and use of Mortification.
AS the Apostate Angels lost their glorious seats in Heaven, through an
inordinate complacence in their own perfections; and our first Parents theirs
in the Earthly Paradise, by complying with their immoderate concupiscence: so
we must repair the ruins of the One, and recover the happiness of the other
by chastising our sensuality, and moderating its irregular and sinful
desires; which we shall easily experience to be the surest means of attaining
to perfection, if we consider, that no true Virtue can be practiced or
preserved without this Mortification; and that by it, we purchase what ever
happiness a Christian may experience in this life, or hope for hereafter.

Holy Gospel tells us, That we cannot be CHRIST'S Disciples, worthy of his love
here, or his blessed society in heaven, unless we take up his Cross, despise
all motions of sensuality, and crucify our flesh, with its vices and
concupiscences; and therefore if any danger arise of prevaricating Gods Law, or
our own Vows, we are oblidged under the heavy penalty of incurring Gods wrath,
and loosing our right to his Glory, to suppress the rebellious desires of our
passions; As being the fomenters and roots of all sin and disorders in us;
wherefor the Holy Apostle, Whence do wars and strifes arise in us; but from
the concupiscences, which war in our fleshly members?

These therefore must necessarily, My Philothea, be well guarded and ordered in
thee if thou desire that Gods Spirit abide in thee, speak the language of peace
to thy heart, and lead thee through the easy and even paths of his Love, to the
Perfection thou aimest at.

This Mortification of senfes and passions, brings also with it a sweet repose
and quiet of conscience; For being freed from inward commotions of sensual
affections, and not moved by outward allurements, there will be a pleasant
harmony between sense, Reason and Grace, under the supreme government of a
blessed God; a resignation to all Varieties of this life, a willingness to
accept of what ever condition may befall us; and a promptness to all actions
of piety, selfe-contempt and mortification.

By this means Philothea, thou will enjoy a perfect tranquillity of spirit, in
order to God, to whose will thou will promptly submitt, without repining at
those adversities, which through his sweet providence are permitted to befall
thee; In order to Thy self, being freed from the disquietts of a troubled
Mind; whereas they who give themselves over to the satisfying their unmortifyed
appetites, returning to themselves, by reflection on their folly, find their
hearts overcharged with remorse and terrors of their own guilt, whereby they
become unsupportable to themselves; and lastly, thou will enjoy a most entire
content in order to thy Neighbor, whose passions or malice will not be able to
shake thy Resolutions, or disturb thy inward tranquillity of spirit, now
arrived to a high pitch of Insensibilitie, to all things of this life.

Moreover, by This Mortification is purchased an assurance of future
happiness; The joys of heaven Philothea, have many great Excellencies, and
prerogatives; they abound with peace and plenty, which must be purchased by
poverty of spirit; they afford a perfect rest, to be gained by great Labor;
they bring with them a solid and permanent Comfort, to be obtained with much
sorrow and patience; and they abide for an endless Eternity, which must be
procured by an entire Mortification of our senses and passions, and a killing
of those that would work Iniquity in Gods Holy City.

This is the way Philothea, which all the Saints have walked before us, and it
is the advice of Our heavenly Lord, that we take up our Cross and follow him;
For what proportion can there be, between a Member flowing with sensual
delights, and a Head crowned with Thorns? Call thy self therefore to a strict
account, and consider, what progress thou have made in this way to Paradise,
and purpose seriously to practice this retyrednesse of thy senses and passions,
from the disorders of sensual pleasures and vanities of this World, unto the
blessed content of the Inward Man.

COLLOQUIE.
Ah my God! I have been sick and sorely wounded, with the arrows of my carnal
desires, and the manifold charms of creatures; and still I lay fettred in the
chains of my inordinate affections; and yet am unwilling to be healed of my
distempers, or freed from my beloved captivity. How often have I said to my soul,
arise from thy drowsinesse, shake of thy shackles, and make have to thy healing
and saving Samaritan? And yet I have still lingered, loath to break off with my
ancient passions, to abandon my accustomed follies. Oh! that Thou my God
would break in pieces these chains of my passionate desires, heal my wounds,
and deliver me from the prison of my sensual affections! then shall I with joy
abide amidst the temptations and allurements of this wretched Mortality, and
taste how sweet it is, to adhere to God, and shall hope to be filled with the
torrent of heavenly pleasure, and the plenty of his Holy House. Amen.

SIXTH DAYS VOYAGE. Flight of the heart to God.
THE MORNING EXERCISE.
FIRST POINT. Flight from Creatures.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That having now allayed the heats of inward passions, by a
voluntary restraint of the senses from outward objects, and readiness to
embrace mortifications; The solitary soul must withdraw herself from all
Creatures whatsoever, that the wings of the heart be not entangled by them, and
we hindered in our Flight to God.

We must then have a simple Aversion from Creatures, and a quiet Conversion of
the Heart into its self, in which God abides, teaches, and governs; since
nothing beneath God can satisfy the languishing of the soul, no wonder she
turns her self from Creatures, enters into her self, and there seeks what may
be met with unto her more cordial satisfaction.

See therefore Philothea, what beloved Creatures lay lurking within thee in thy
bosom, with what chains thy heart is linked to them, and by what means they
may be slackned, by what degrees broken a sunder? Are they Riches, Beauty,
Clothes, some dear Friend? all must be cast forth thy heart, that the God of
purity and peace may enter therein, and abide with Thee; No profane Altar may
stand in Gods temple, nor can we together serve God and Mammon? If God be able
to fill thy heart, and make it happy, let not any creature presume to challenge
any corner thereof.

AFFECTION.
Oh that my God would break asunder all those chains, which so strongly bind me
to creatures! then will I fly to him with the wings of an ardent Love,
abandonning all for him. My heart has been too long filled and possessed of
Vanity; O that I had a new, a disinterested, an unspotted heart! that would be
a fit Temple, wherein to entertayn so glorious a Guest. Give me then a clean
heart, a heart of Love, O Sovereign Lord of Hearts, and thou shall for ever
command therein, and I will ever abide with Thee, by contemplation of thy
self.

RESOLUTION.
I will no longer delay my flight from Creatures to God, or only stand to file
off the fetters that fasten me to them; but will presently break them in pieces
and cast them from Me, that I may freely and entirely possess my God. Nothing
that is against him, nothing without him, nothing as my felicity besides him,
shall enjoy any part in Me. Adieu therefore all ye Creatures that may hinder my
society with God; Honors, wealth, pleasures, parents, friends, I abandon all
that may possess my heart unjustly, and hinder it from being the pure Temple
of my eternal God. My heart O God I give to Thee, both because Thou look
for it and love it, saying, My Child, give me thy heart; and because Thou
only do deserve it, and without thee it is never at rest.

SECOND POINT. Flight from our selves.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That as our first Flight toward God, is made by a withdrawing our
affections from creatures forth of our selves, that we may the more freely
unite our selves to God: so the second Flight must be, by abstracting our
affections, even from the outward man that is part of our selves, and by reason
of its great neernesse and intimacy with us, may the more easily do us harm.

This is a dangerous Enemy indeed, because most near, most dear, and most
importune; and evermore works against our spiritual progress; however
Philothea, if thou do trust in God and use strong endeavors, thou will soo^
make a considerable advance in this Victory over thy self.

When therefore self Love prompts thee, to seek after any sensual
satisfaction, take no notice at all of it; If it grows more petulant and
importune, reproach it with its own corruption and blindness; But if it
persevers, and becomes insolent, then Kill and slay it by the sword of
Austeritie and rigorous Mortification; so will thou Philothea by degrees
triumph over thy self, and be able to do, bear or forbear, what ever thy
spirit will, with little repugnance or repining of thy sensual appetite.

Thus thou feast how strict a guard, our Solitary pilgrim must have over her
self, in her advance to Perfection; since to purchase true happiness, it is
not enough to quitt affections to outward Creatures, unless we also by a
perfect abrenunciation of self Love and private interest, overcome that which
is part of our very selves.

AFFECTION.
Oh that I could truly say, My heart now ^^^th, but it is not my heart which
lives, but CHRIST who lives in Me! Live then sweet JESU in my heart, as the
heart, the life, the soul of my heart; possess it wholly, and permit no love
to harbor therein, which has not its beginning from thee, or at least is not
consistent with Thee; then will I sing, My God is a strong warrier, and has
overthrown my enemies.

RESOLUTION.
I renounce and defy Thee, O treacherous self Love, which have so often
sought, and still intendest the ruin of my better self; I will henceforth only
esteem that self Love, which will preserve my spirit safe in the last day, and
will therefore warily watch over all the motions of my heart, examining all its
designs and projects, and ordering it according to the Will of my Sovereign
Lord and Master.

THIRD POINT. Flight from Spiritall Comforts.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That to accomplish our Flight to God in himself, we must be
willing even, to be abandoned of God himself when he so wills it; that is to
say: Out of our sincere love to him, willingly to want those graces and
comforts, whereby he uses to sustain his servants, in their combatts and
advances in the way of Perfection.

This is that sublime state of perfection, whereunto the holy Espouse was
arrived, when she cried out, Fly from me, O my Beloved; A state wherein the
soul seeks not after any sensible feeling of the sweetness of divine
Inspirations, but is contented to be wholly abandoned of all inward
consolations of the spirit, and the savory gusts of the gracious presence of
Almighty God, and to be exposed to inward anxieties and spiritual conflicts,
as if she were actually in the state of sin, and really deprived of Gods Love
and his Sanctifying graces.

This is an admirable Flight indeed, Philothea, yet very necessary, if we aim
at the height of solitary Perfection, whereby the heart must be prepared to
whatever condition God alots it; Examine then, whither thou have a sincere
Resolution to quitt all things beneath God, and to love him, although thou
should not reap thence any sensible fruit or consolation, during this
present life.

AFFECTION.
Oh infinite beauty of my wholly amiable Creator! who would not love Thee,
even for thy own sake, since thou art nothing but Goodness? O you Citizens of
the heavenly Jerusalem, I adjure you, when you meet my Beloved, that you tell
him, I languish with Love, because he is wholly desirable, and chosen of
thousands.

RESOLUTION.
I will Love my God, for his own sake, because he is wholly lovely, and not for
any spiritual gust or comfort, which may arise from the presence of his
graces, and those good thoughts and affections it pleases him to work in me. I
will so love Thee, My only Sovereign Lord, that if I were God, and not Thou, I
would cease to be God, that Thou alone might be the God of my soul; My God
and all.

THE EVENING EXERCISE.
FIRST DISCOURSE. Vanity of Creatures.
ALl creatures are, either things abroad, or we our selves; both are full of
Vanity, and hinder the solitary soul from flying unto God; We must therefore
speedily go forth the Sodom of this world, and separate our selves from
outward creatures; For how can The heart enjoy the sweetness of solitary
perfection, if it wanders abroad after sensible contentments, and feeds upon
the trash of earthly pleasures? Say then Philothea: Vanity of Vanities and all
is Vanity, empty and unconstant, which is not my God; Why then shall I permit
my affections to be chained to these transitory things, since with them I
cannot enjoy God, my only comforter?

Wherefor Consider, what creature in the whole world, of what ever Excellency
or worth, can be a fit object of thy Love? Is it the world in general, with
all its beauty and delights? Or is it some select piece thereof? Some high
dignity, abundance of wealth, honorable friends, variety of pleasures, or some
especially amiable Creature? Alas! Philothea, see thou not, that all these
things are subject to change, unconstant and empty goods? which once possessed
soon vanish, leaving nothing behind them, but a restlessenesse of new desires,
and disquiets of conscience, and are consequently unable to appease the thirst
of our languishing and fainting spirit. Make then a generous and strong
Purpose, to abandon all Creatures for thy Creator, since he alone can fill thy
soul; and say to God, Oh! that I could die to all Creatures, that I may live
only to Thee, and thou in Me!

Having thus stripped thy self of all outward Creatures, Enter into thy self,
make a diligent survay of thy heart, and search every corner thereof, till thou
have discovered, what passions of self Love and private interest, lay lurking
therein; what difficulty thou have to submit thy judgment, to quitt self
esteem, to abandon old freindships and familiarities, to leave inbred customs,
to wave thy affection to proper interest? What time has been lost in giving
way to inward heats of passions, what neglect in curbing and ordring thy
appetites? and say with the holy Prophet, I will begin from the morningh watch
to kill the sinners of the Earth, and chase them forth of the City of my God.
This City of God Philothea, is thy own heart; thence must thou banish all
inordinate desires, which are as the little foxes in the Cantiques, that
destroy the Vineyard of our beloved.

COLLOQUIE.
I will go to my God, and declare to him, the wanderings and rowlings of my
disorderly spirit, whereby deserting him, I have followed the footsteps of
those, who seeking content from Creatures, have gone astray from the holy folds
of their Creator: I see my error, O my God; My heart has too long sweated and
fainted in searching happiness from things beneath Thee, whereby I find my
hands still empty, and my days to have faded away in Vanity, because I sought
not my comfort from Thee, who alone art All Good, and able to fill the longings
of my thirsty soul. Oh that thou would free me from the disorders of my
concupiscences, and knock off those many strong chains which bind me to the
Vanities of this Life! Then will I soar up as an Eagle in Contemplation of thy
glory, and fly with the wings of Love, and feed on Thee.

SECOND DISCOURSE. Spiritual Indifferency.
BEsides this abstraction of our spirit from all Creatures, abroad and at home
in our own bosom, we must endeavor Philothea, to be wholly resigned to Gods
Will concerning us, and willingly to be deprived of all savor and sweetness of
his Love toward us, so long as He pleases, as if he had abandoned us, leaving
us to combat alone, with an army of desolatio^s and sorrows.

To this end we must study, to Love God simply and purely, in and for himself,
without any mixture of self love therein; Having a perfect Indifferency to all
his counsels and decrees touching us; that, whither he leads us up Mount
Thabor, to contemplate the glorious Transfiguration of JESUS CHRIST; or to
Mount Calvarie, there to behold the Ignominy of his Passion, we may have a
preparation of heart to either, and may confidently say, My heart is prepared O
God, my heart is prepared, to run the way of thy Commandments.

Thou must also Philothea, have a readiness, to be deprived of the sensible
delights of Gods gracious presence in Thee, and a willingness to be excluded
thence, till the soul quitting this Mortality arrives happily to the Haven of
everlasting bliss. O happy indifferency! wherein the solitary soul, for the
pure Love of her heavenly Espous, can be contented to want those amorous and
delightful embracements, where with he uses to entertain his best servants.

And since thou art thus resigned to be deprived of these savoury feelings of
Gods Love to Thee, thou must be further willing, to suffer all calamities with
thy crucified Savior. But alas! Philothea, this is a heavy trial; nor may all
the torments imaginable, of the body, be compared to this desolatio^ of the
spirit. Desire not therefore to experience it, but endeavor to bid even this
tribulation welcome, when ever it pleases God, that it befalls Thee. And even
at that time, be thou as ready to perform all good actions, to suffer all
contradictions, and to stick close to thy accustomed Duties, during that
aridity of thy spirit, with as great courage and alacrity, as if thy soul did
then swim with excess of spiritual comforts. This is an Eminent degree of
Perfection, and a mark of inhabiting Grace in Thee, although perhaps thou
feel not then the sensible sweetness thereof. Nor should thou at all
complain of Gods hardness to Thee in that thy desolate state, but rather with
affectionate sighs should bewayl the absence of thy Beloved; yet caring not
to be compassionated or comforted therein, but rather desiring so to continue
till thy dying day, without the least sense of love of thy heavenly Espous in
Thee, if it so please him.

COLLOQUIE.
O happy Indifferency of heart to all earthly and heavenly consolations! thou
alone can free me from all anxious hopes and fears of this Miserable Life,
and leave me wholly fixed in the will of God, to be ordered according to his
holy pleasure. Oh that I could love the, My glorious Lord, purely for thy own
sake; not seeking any comfort thence; but rather contenting my self, to be for
ever banished from the feeling of all spiritual sweetness, and exposed to any
desolation; even then readily complying with the duties, belonging to my
present calling, without bewayling my self, either for Gods severity toward
me, or for my own misfortune. Then should I voluntarily Sacrifize to Thee, and
confess to thy Name O God, because it is good; for thereby I shall be
delivered from all tribulation, and my Eye shall look down upon my Enemies.
Amen.

SEVENTH DAYS VOYAGE. Tranquillity of Spirit.
THE MORNING EXERCISE.
FIRST POINT. Life of the Spirit.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That having taken A Flight from all things of this world, and raised
our hearts above the sphere of all earthly Creatures and present comforts,
through a desire to rest in God, as the only Center and scope of all our hopes;
We must carefully study, to establish in our selves a perfect Tranquillity of
our Spirit, that whatever befall us, or whatsoever our obligations be,
according to our present calling, nothing may be able to disturb its inward
peace, or shake our divine Resolutions.

Endeavor therefore Philothea, that thy spirit live her own life, and not
according to the flesh, wherein she abides, or the world that encompasses both;
but wholly spiritually, as the blessed spirits of God now live in Heaven, by
contemplating, loveing and delighting in God, and what appertains to his and
their own blessed Life.

Although our soul, confined now to this corruptible body depends thereon for
action and motion, in this our sinful state; and has ever a natural
inclination to abide with it, and therefore with pain departs from it; yet being
she receives not her own life from the body, but is Life its self, and gives
life, and action to the body, she may live within her self, having no regard
to the inclinations and motions of the body. This she may soon perceive in her
self, if she treads not the paths of sensuality, which lead to earthly
contents; but those of the spirit, which tend to holy and divine actions, in
Imitation of the Angelical spirits, whose workings are, to be ever fixed in
the Contemplation of God, and the execution of his commands.

Imagine therefore, That thou kneelest upon some high Mountain, before thy
Crucifix, and thence do behold all earthly Creatures, in their several
degrees and employments, each one busied in the search of happiness, in that
they love most; and that all these things suddenly fade away, and thy self
fallest also into a trance and dyest, and so do abide till JESUS descending
from his Cross, enters into thee, and now again thou live, and yet not
thou, but JESUS CHRIST in Thee. Being thus dead to the World, and only living
by the spirit of JESUS, how spiritual and divine should thy life and actions
be?

AFFECTION.
How happy, woulds't thou be, My soul, if wholly dead to flesh and blood, and
independent on all earthly creatures, thou could live the life of an Angel,
wholly drowned in God, and relying upon the lights, Graces and comforts, which
proceed from him! Oh, what joy, what happiness, to be dead to this World, and
all the Vanities thereof; and to live and work only by the enlivening Spirit
of JESUS! How holy would thy thoughts, how heavenly thy desires, how enflamed
would thy affections then be, toward spiritual and divine things?

RESOLUTION.
I will hence forth lead a spiritual life, having my mind still bent upon God,
and his holy Will, even in all my ordinary duties; endeavoring to lead an
Angellical life as if already separated from this heavy burden of Mortality,
and without need of earthly supportations. And I will be so watchful over my
actions, as if I only lived by the Spirit of JESUS, and had no life or motion
but what proceeded from him; Then, freed from the law of death which abounded
in Me, through my sinful passions, I shall serve God in the newness of my
spirit, and hear what Gods Spirit speaks to the Church.

SECOND POINT. Mental Recollection.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That to improve the soul, in her inward Tranquillity, she must
endeavor to be Recollected within her self, in all places, at all times, with
all persons, and amidst whatsoever employments, we are by our present state of
Life obleiged unto.

This inward Recollection of the Spirit, is easy and very delightful; for
although the soul be now lodged in the body as her prison, and the varieties of
occasions which run through the course of this mortal life, much solicit her
abroad, to seek means how to make her prison more tolerable; and thereby
hinders her in the free use of her spiritual faculties, and distract her
thoughts from God and heavenly things; yet is she not a slave to any passion of
the body, especially being now healed and repaired by JESUS CHRIST; and
therefore she may, by means of a mental retreat into her self, purchase a
continual Recollection, amidst the greatest tumults and distractions which may
befall her.

Build up therefore Philothea, an Hermitage within thy heart, erect an Altar,
and place thereon JESUS CHRIST, in the most amiable posture Imaginable; and
whatsoever employment, distraction or spiritual distress presses it self
upon Thee, depart not thence, but there lay open thy wants and weakness,
confer with him of thy progress and impediments to Perfection, harkening
carefully what he says to Thee; and if some violent disquiet compells thy
thoughts abroad, endeavor to re-enter speedily into this thy Hermitage,
bewail thy inconstancy, and renew thy purposes of Mental Recollection-

AFFECTION.
Ah my soul, upon how slight occasions has thy thoughts been distracted, and
thy mind lost its frequently resolved Tranquillity, in the performance of thy
usual duties! How O my God, am I so suddenly carried away with these outward
objects and employments? Surely were I truly Spiritual, I should without pain
or distraction, even in the midst of the Varieties of this life, convers with
God. Oh that thou would build up the ruins of Israel, and sanctify my heart
a tabernacle to thy name! then may I seek my beloved within Me, and receive
from him A Kiss of peace.

RESOLUTION.
I will not only love the solitude of the body, but of the Mind also; and will
build up in my heart a holy Hermitage, befitting the presence of my JESUS, and
thither will I still retire my self, ever conferring with him, of his loves to
me, and my slownesse of returning love to him; discovering all my wants, and
his helps to become perfect in a spiritual Way; that I may thereby enjoy the
tranquillity of my spirit, what ever occasions of Obedience, Charity or
compliance with my own necessities, call me forth this corporal Retirement; O
Who will give me, that I may ever set by this fountain of living waters in the
solitude of my own heart! there will I sigh and mourn, while I think of the
heavenly Sion.

THIRD POINT. Union of the Spirit with God.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That as God only, is the supreme Good and happiness of the
Immortal soul, so cannot she experience any true and complete Tranquillity
within herself, unless being inwardly united to him, she becomes One spirit
with him, and be as it were transformed into a supernatural and Divine BEING,
by a reciprocation of Love, conformity of Will, and communication in all those
gifts, graces and spiritual blessings, whereby in this her Pilgrimage, she
may be clothed with a likeness to God; and enjoy that cleerenesse of
Understanding, alacrity of Will, calmnesse of passions and universal purity,
sweetness and joy, in the whole spirit, which God usually imparts, only to his
most special favorites.

This Deifying Union Philothea, of the soul with God, will wonderfully work in
Thee, a clear knowledge of the emptiness, vanity and nakedness of all
Creatures, breed in Thee a Loathing toward the best of them, and cause in thy
heart a restless Desire to see, possess and embrace God, in the simplicity
and purity of his own Essence, without mixture of any thing beneath himself;
and for his sake, thou will Stripp thy self willingly of all Creatures, and in
ward inclinations of Will and Passions; and welcome whatever calamities and
miseries may befall Thee. For what is there in the whole World, which that soul
will not readily want, do, or suffer, to whom God is All-inall? surely in this
delicious Union, Espousall and Transformation by Love, the soul must needs
experience God, a rich, bountiful and most comfortable Giver!

If therefore, either the delighfull or profitable things of this life, has yet
any power over thy affections; or the tribulations thereof do still press
down thy spirit, to any grief or disquiet; Thou art not as yet strongly united
to God, enamored on his ravishing Beauty, or arrived to the delicious harbor
of spiritual peace and Tranquillity.

Wherefor, Thou may imagine thy self, to be a Reed floating to and fro in the
Sea of the Divinity, now tossed above, now under water; hither and thither, as
thou art driven by the force of those Divine Waves; so that, in what ever
condition thou art, and whatsoever happens to Thee, thou may attribute all to
Gods Spirit moving upon these divine Waters, in and by which, thou now live
and movest; Thus no comforts will puff up, or humiliation beat down thy spirit,
but thou will ever have a generous courage and pleasant evennesse of thy whole
self, amidst all the chances of this thy mortal state, how ever violent they
be.

AFFECTION.
Ah my soul, why have thou not hitherto aspired after this Divine BEING, to
live, and love, and move to God only, in the fulness of his own Essence! O
Abyss of all comfont swallow up my heart in thy delicious depths, let me
perish to all things but Thee, and never repine at any thing, being so nigh to
Thee. O my JESU! O fathomlesse fountain of Love! Oh, who will give Thee unto
me, My Brother, sucking the breasts of my Mother, that I may find Thee, and
embrace Thee, and then none shall despise me.

RESOLUTION.
I will for ever fix my heart and earnest desires, only on my God, thirsting to
be united wholly to him; and for his sake I will abandon, whatsoever is not
consistent with him, or may separate my heart from him; and therefore, My whole
study henceforth shall be, to discover the poverty of Creatures, to loath all
earthly comforts, to empty my heart of all affections to them, and amidst all
accidents of this life, to carry an even and calm heart; Then shall I taste and
see, how sweet God is, to those who love the Peace of his holy City.

THE EVENING EXERCISE.
FIRST DISCOURSE. Loves Trial.
GOds Spirit settles not, but upon an humble and meek heart, which having had a
relish how sweet God is, earnestly sues to be admitted into the joys of her
heavenly Lord, and enjoy a perfect Tranquillity and peace in her whole self;
and yet willingly resignes her self to his Will, for the manner thereof,
contentedly expecting the happy time of his delicious Visitation, and the
fruits theirof.

To this Visitation she must prepare her self, by an Inward Retirement of her
self within her self, whereby weaned wholly from all love toward creatures,
she feels such a passionate and languishing desire to be One with God, that she
has an extreme pain and irksomeness, when forced to use outward helps of meat,
sleep, divertisements, and such like necessary supports of decaying nature;
desirous rather (if so it may please God) to be ever employed in mental
Elevations, and to entertain her self in contemplating, conferring and
caressing her beloved Espous, then to enjoy any earthly satisfaction, however
necessary to her.

Neither may this heaven-thirsting foul, only content her self with this
inward Retreat of the spirit into its self, by loathing all Creatures abroad;
but she must also aspire to a Nakedness of her self in her self; whereby
raised, even to the highest degree of Contemplation, Love and Union with God,
she is willing to be deprived of all sweetness which usually flows thence.

And although, in this state, she looks on God as her only treasure, having
right to Him, grounded on his own promises, To spouse himself to her, in
Justice, kindness and mercies for ever, yet is she contented still to lay at
the Gate of happiness, there patiently and humbly begging some few crumms from
Gods heavenly table, and to be admitted to taste of his delicious Wines;
nevertheless resigning her self, to be denied that favor, as long as it so
pleases him, ever esteeming, either her self unworthy thereof, or Gods time
not to be as yet come.

COLLOQUIE.
How happy were thou, My soul, had thou no other employment on Earth then to
contemplate the beauty of God, love him, and glorify his Name? O my God that I
were wholly exempt from the use of perishing Creatures, needing no other food
then Thee, the only true Life of my Spirit! but yet far happier should I be, if
loathing all Creatures, and drowned in the Sea of the Divinity, I could be
resigned to the loss of all sweetness which may arise from the greatest
Illuminations and Ecstasies of Love in Thee, patiently expecting my gracious
admittance unto thy comfortable presence; Then shall I be my Beloveds, and he
will turn his face toward Me.

SECOND DISCOURSE. Loves Entertainments.
THe soul being thus resigned to the want of all Eartly comforts, sweetness of
divine Love, and Gods delicious presence with her, may humby soar up to
heaven, and endeavor an Union with God, and a fruition of him in Himself, by
such helps, as he shall graciously inspire; which we must readily entertain,
and carefully comply with, for our spiritual advance toward Perfection.

Wherefor Philothea, thou must accustom thy self to spiritual Introversions
of the Mind into its self, therein quietly contemplating God in thy own Being,
and often sallying forth by Jaculatory Aspirations and amorous sighs toward
heavenly things; as, What art thou, O my God, and what am I? My God, my All! Oh
that I could love Thee, as I ought! which must be leisurely made, and
attentively considered, that they may work a feeling love in thy heart, whereby
it may by degrees be enflamed, and melt into affections of hope, desire, joy,
or such like, whence thou will find an admirable sweetness and calm to arise
in thy spirit.

Thou must also endeavor to have a strong apprehension of Gods presence with
Thee; which may be had, either by an efficacious belief, that God is
substatially present in all places of the World, as our soul is in all parts of
the body, without any separation from its self; or by Imagining him to be
especially in the Center of thy heart, as the soul, heart and life thereof,
animating, and quickening it, by his presence. Whence we shall find our spirits
stird up, to a cordial reverence toward the Majesty of God, so nigh unto us;
and a readiness to referr all our thoughts, words and actions, to God seated
in the Center of the heart, as the Judge of their Worth, and last happy End of
all its Motions. And by this means without recourse to Creatures, only by a
simple apprehension of Gods presence in Thee, and a reference of thy whole life
to Him, as thy Mystical life, thou will have an easiness in abandoning
creatures, and a great quietness in thy whole soul.

Having gained these Lights whereby to discern Gods greatness in himself, and
presence to thee; Cast thy self into the immense Sea of his Essence, admitting
no other motion in Thee, but of Admiration, Adoration, Thanksgiving to God, and
Annihilation of thy self, now so wholly swallowed up in God, and become one
spirit with him; whereby thou may say, Possess Me O Lord, for I am thine;
and hence forth Nothing shall separate me from the Charity of JESUS CHRIST. And
from hence will flow such an abundant sweetness of peace and tranquillity
into all the powers of the soul, that she will feel her self to be in a
manner transformed into a Divine Being.

For having a lively Apprehension, Philothea that God is in Thee as the Life of
thy heart, and has so united thy heart to himself, that thou live, breathest
and movest only by influences received from him; Thou will soon Imagine, that
He is as much in Thee, and as careful of thy Being and actions, as if He
where no where but in Thee, nor cared for any creature besides Thee; Whence
will arise so delightful a serenity in thy Conscience, so admirable a
Tranquillity in thy whole spirit, that Thou will think thy self beginning,
actually to Possess God gloriously: And wilt therefore fly from all creatures
least they disturb thy conferences with thy heavenly Espous, and the chaste
Embracements he then gives Thee; Abandoning thy self wholly to his Providence,
as if Nothing were in the world, but only God and Thy self.

COLLOQUIE.
Alas My God! how far am I from feeling these delicious Motions of thy
all-comforting Spirit within Me? Thou fillest all Creatures, giving life and
motion to all, and do wonderfully lead them all to their proper Ends; and yet
have I not yielded my self up to Thee, to be guided by Thee the fountain of
all Goodness, unto thy self My only Happiness. O that thou woulds't power
into my heart a torre^t of Love, whereby I may be violently carried toward
Thee, and drowned in Thee, O Infinite Sea, ever overflowing with sweetness and
Mercy; Then shall I abandon all things for Thee, then nothing shall relish to
me but Thee, nor will I then care how thou disposest of me. Draw Me, O Lord,
and I will run after Thee in the odor of thy ointments, and I will rejoice,
and be glad in Thee, mindful of thy breasts above Wine; and the righteous
shall then Love Thee. Amen.

EIGTH DAYS VOYAGE: God Speaking to the Soul.
THE MORNING EXERCISE.
FIRST POINT. Hearken to God.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That although, by our Flight from Creatures, and the frequent
Sallies our heart makes toward God, we may arrive to some degree of spiritual
Tranquillity: yet this will not be complete or permanent, unless we grow dumb
to all Creatures, often enter into conference with God, and have our Ears open
only to harken what the Holy Ghost speaks in us, whereby to confirm our hearts
in the search of rest and joy in Him, as our substantial happiness.

We must therefore Philothea, observe a strict Silence as a most necessary
preparation of our hearts to appear in Gods presence, and conferr with him;
for he reveals not himself to a soul, busied in harkning to, and conferring
with Creatures; Nor can we profitably apply our minds to the practice of a
recollected and spiritual Life, if our Ears be open to wordly tumults, or
tongues loosened to discourse on the varieties thereof. No noise was heard, in
the building of Salomons Temple, nor may any disturbance be found in Us, while
Gods Holy Spirit builds up our Heart into a Temple of grace and Holiness. If
thy heart be not warmed, and burn within thee, with the vehemence of divine
Love, while JESUS confers with thee in thy way to perfection, it is because thou
have not been attentive to his Inspirations.

Be thou silent therefore Philothea at all times, but particularly when and where
it is required by the constitutions of that state thou have chosen; least thy
heart being opened, the balsom of Gods Grace evaporate and loose its Virtue, or
be poisoned with the stenches which may proceed from sinful conversation. Be
silent too, when injured or reprehended, in conformity to JESUS CHRIST, when
arraigned for his life; a sharp word provokes wrath, and excuses deprive
patience of its due merit. But especially thou must be silent, during this thy
spiritual Retirement; for the Holy Ghost will not make thy heart its
Sanctuary, or deliver his Oracles therein, unless thou banish thence all danger
of casting forth baits of sin to others by thy tongue, or sucking in the Venom
of evil thoughts into thy own heart by thy Ears; and unles thou do
seriously apply thy self to harken unto what he reveals of himself to Thee,
for thy encouragement to persever in thy blessed choice, and the increase of
spitual comfort in thee.

AFFECTION.
Ah my soul, will thou abandon thy Creator, for Creatures? or deprive thy self
of the delicious conferences and embracements of thy Heavenly Espous, for the
vain and sinful conversation of Worldlings? O my God, I perceive I am yet far
off from the perfection of holy solitude, having hitherto lavisht away so much
precious time in unprofitable and sinful discourses! O that I could recall
those many hours, days, years of my life, now past and gone, whereof I must
one day render a severe account! Alas my God, did st observe all moments of
Time, allowed us to serve Thee, to sue for pardon of sins, increase of Virtue,
and freedom in holy conferences with Thee, who could sustain the bittern^sse of
thy just wrath! Speak now O Lord, and thy servant will give ear unto thee.

RESOLUTION.
I will hence forth place a strict guard upon my lips and ears, observing a
religious silence, at all times and places conformably to my calling, and the
example of my Savior JESUS amidst his false accusers; but particularly during
my Retirement; to the end I may hear the Voice of my Beloved speaking the
language of peace and comfort within me; that I may improve my spirit by his
heavenly Colloquies, and increase my Love and duty to him; And therefore I will
make a daily Examine of my self, how I spend my time, that no moment of my life
may pass without some advance in piety, nor any of Gods Inspirations be
uncomplyed with. Call therefore upon me now O Lord, and I will give ear unto
Thee, and thou thalt bless the works of my hands.

SECOND POINT. Gods Speaks by Visible Creatures.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That Our Glorious God created all the Visible Things in this Great
World, not only to preserve us by their use in this mortal Life, but
especially that in them he might shadow out unto us his own Majesty, and the
good things prepared for us in Heaven with Himself.

Their perfection, order and usefullnesse declare the greatness of his Glory,
Wisdom and Bounty; they are stepps, whereby we may clime up to God, and in them
discover, how admirable, how amiable, how adorable, he is in Himself; and they
are so many Tongues, without cease speaking to us the Infinite Excellencies of
their Creator, and inviting us to admire, love and adore that Divine Essence,
wherein all are contained, and from whence they all had, and still continue
their Being.

Clime therefore up to this Great and glorious God, speaking to Thee by simple
or unmixt bodies, such as are the Elements and heavens; behold, how the Earth
hangs balanced in the midst of the World by its own weight, enriched within
with mines of Gold, precious stones, and seeds of all sorts; without, garnished
with flowers, fruits and many kinds of living creatures; how the Water cleaves
sphearally to the Earth, and runs through and about it, in Seas, Rivers and
Springs of different Virtues; How the Air is perspicuous, dissolves into
showers to moisten the Earth, and abounds with all sorts of birds, for our
profit and pleasure; How Fire has its light, heat and flames; how Heaven is
adorned with stars, moves without cease, and by its influences conserves things
beneath in their Being and due temper. Then ascend to Mixed Bodies void of life,
and contemplate the Variety and Virtues of sulphurs, metals, stones and
gummes; consider then the perfection and multitude of Vegitable creatures, as
seeds, plants, herbs, leaves, blossoms, flowers and fruits; Lastly take a View
of Sensible Creatures void of Reason, such as be the several sorts of Beasts
of the Earth, fish in the sea, and fowls of the Air.

God speaks to us Philothea, by all these Visible creatures; their Being,
growth and properties declare his Power, whereby they are created; their Order,
Variety and number discovers his Wisdom; and their usefulness, both to
preserve our bodies, and raise up our souls, speaks his admirable Love and
Bounty to us.

AFFECTION.
How full is the World of the Majesty and Glory of God! and how careless have
thou been my soul, in these Visible things to admire the Invisible Power,
Wisdom and Bounty of the Maker, Governor and Lord of All? Thy own kingdom
above, O God, where all obey thy Will, is surely very glorious, since Thou have
furnished this our earthly habitation, for sinners, and those who rebel
against thy holy Commandments, with such Excellent and admirable Creatures.
Who would not in all these, love and adore the God of all! Let the Heavens
speak forth thy Glory, and the firmament thy wonders, for thou art Great and
Wonderful, and thy Wisdom is without End.

RESOLUTION.
I will attentively read over the Book of Creatures, that I may therein learn,
how full of Majesty, Wisdom and Goodness, God is, who has communicated such
Perfection, Order and profitablenesse to Visible Creatures; and I will admire
Him in All, using them as steps whereby to clime up to him; and therefore I will
be careful not to abuse them contrary to the End God has ordained, placing my
felicity in his helps to it, least hereafter they become my chastisers, when
all Creatures shall fight Gods war against Sinners. How wonderful are thy
works, O Lord? Thou have created all things in Wisdom; Thou have rejoiced me in
them, and I will delight in the works of thy hands.

THIRD POINT. God speaks by Man.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That all Creatures beneath Man, are only the Footsteps of God,
representing some one or other perfection of that infinite Abyss; but Man
himself is the true Image and Likeness of God. As a Little world he
contains within himself the Excellencies dispersed through the Greater, and
expresses in some degree those in God, the Fountain and Author of both; and
therefore in the beginning of the Creation he is established Sovereign and Lord
of all; the earth with its ornaments is his pavement, meadows and garden;
Waters his baths and fishponds; Valleys his cellars and storehouses; Hills his
Walls and pillars, Heaven the roof that covers all, and the stars are the
windows whereby he has a glimpse of Gods glory, which shines upon him,
enlightens the world, and discovers the beauty of this our earthly habitation.

Look over the whole fabrik of Man; behold Philothea how the Immortal mind is
linked to mortal flesh? In the body, what comeliness of limbs, proportion of
Members; variety, order and use of senses without, and Entrails within; what
aptness of organs for life, action and motion; and what capacity of the
spiritualizing Endowments, of Agility, Clarity, Impassibility, and Subtility;
whereby it putts on the very likeness of the glorified Angels? In the Soul,
how Excellent the prerogatives of being an Immortal and Invisible spirit? The
memory how vast, for objects, time and circumstances of both? the Understanding
how active and boundless, reaching as high as God above, and diving into the
Abyss of Nothing? The Will how free to good and evil? What variety of
subordinate powers, passions and operations? What capacity of sciences, Arts,
Virtues Moral and Divine, and also of the Sight and eternal Possession of God
in himself? All which with a loud voice speak, how glorious God is in his own
Being and happiness, and how wonderful his providence is in our creation and
conduct to our supreme End; and should stir us up to a serious attention,
admiration and love of him; and strongly engage us to apply all these outward
and inward Gifts, according to the intent of our Wise Creator.

And although Man's disobedience to God wrought sin and darkness in his soul,
whereby she became unable to contemplate or move toward him; yet being repaired
by the Mercies of JESUS CHRIST, the Light of our spiritual World, we are again
established in a spiritual Life and capacity to supernatural and gracious
actions. By divine Faith we see and hear what God reveals of himself, and
the way that leads toward him; by Hope we Savor the sweetness of Heaven and
Virtue; by Charity we have a foretast of the joys of the Saints, and already
touch and embrace God with the arms of an Extaticall love; and begin to sing
Salomons Song of Songs, which by the sensible pleasantness of creatures
abroad, leads the now Purged, Illuminated and Perfect soul, to an intellectual
Light, Harmony, Odor, Savor and Embracement of her heavenly Espous, Who
seated in the midst of the heart, as on an Imperial Throne (environed with a
Mystical Quire of Angelical Spirits, Seraphins by Love, Cherubins by
knowledge, Throns by Justice and Mercy, Dominations by Majesty, Principalities
by Government, Powers by Salvation, Virtues by helping Graces, Archangels by
special revelations, and Angels by continual presence to us) by himself
inspires a divine life, directs the powers and passions of the soul, and
inclines to heavenly thoughts and actions; and by his Holy Spirit, sent into
all parts of this our lesser World, produces those wonderful workings of Love,
feelings of Gods Intimacy to us, and tranquillity of the whole Man, We
experience in our Pilgrimage to perfection, and performance of the duties
thereof; and whereby we become Images of the heavenly Jerusalem, where God
lives eternally in his glorious Saints.

AFFECTION.
Thou were within Me O most amiable God, and I have sought Thee abroad; and
defiled my heart by Cleaving to these outward Beauties, whilst Thou O Sovereign
Beauty of all Creatures, abidest in the sanctified soul, as in thy proper
kingdom! What hopes may I have to contemplate thy glorious face, who live in
an unaccessible light; or to approach unto thy presence, who art an ever
flaming fire; since I am ignorant of thy wonders wrought in my own Spirit, so
nigh and intimate to Me? I have too late considered thee, O Ancient beauty
shining in all creatures; I have too slowly given Ear to Thee, who speak to
me by all creatures; and by thy Gifts do incessantly call upon Me, to admire
and love Thee, the Giver of all! Thou have engraven the light of thy face upon
Me O Lord, and thereby given gladness in my heart,

RESOLUTION.
I will hence forth preserve Gods sacred Image, by him self Imprinted in my
soul, from being soyled or blasted by sinful affections; that therein as in a
clear Myrrour, I may contemplate his Majesty, beauty and amiablenesse; admire
him in all the perfections of my body and mind, order all the powers and
endowments of both to the execution of his Will, and aspire to an endless
conjunction with that divine Exemplar, whereby so many rich and beautiful
Coppies have been drawn; Therefore all thy Works in me shall confess unto thee,
they shall tell the glory of thy kingdom, and shall speak the greatness of thy
power.

THE EVENING EXERCISE.
FIRST DISCOURSE. God speaks by his Son Incarnate.
GOd formerly spoke to Man by his Prophets, in figures and riddles; now in his
own Son, by whom, as God, he in the beginning made all things; and now, as
Visible in our Mortal flesh, discovers the breadth and length, height and
depth of all divine Mysteries of grace and glory, that we may comprehend with
all the Saints, his exceeding great Love toward us, and may be replenished
with the fullness thereof.

If God descends to us, taking our Nature, we should by contemplation of the
Incarnate Word ascend to God, and drown our selves in the Sea of his Essence;
therefore JESUS CHRIST by his gracious Doctrine, and efficacious examples, is
the Way we must walk in our Pilgrimage to heavenly Perfection; his sacred life
and Cross was the book of all the Saints, and unless we bath our hearts in
the bleeding wounds of this Lamb, slain for our sins, we may have no part in
the Tree of Life, planted in the paradise of God.

This Union of God and Man in One Person, shows gods Infinite Power; Man's
Redemption through CHRIST'S sorrows and sufferings, speak him an Abyss of
Wisdom; and the Gift of his only Son in our Weak nature, to dignify, save and
sanctify it, declares his Wonderful Bounty; Thus Philothea we have access to
the Divinity of God by the Humanity of JESUS CHRIST, in whom he has revealed
the treasures of all divine knowledge and Love.

Now therefore clime up Mount Calvary, and there contemplate this Man of sorrows
fastened to the Tree of shame; See, who it is that suffers? The Creator of all
things, the Savior of Men and Angels, and the Rewarder of all good and evil
deeds. What his condition? Gods only Son, an Innocent Man, one that loves us
dearly. To what end? to free us from the tyranny of satan, to sanctify our
sinful hearts, and to restore us to our lost seats in Gods glorious kingdom.
What were his torments? Much sorrow in the Garden, many stripes in Jerusalem,
and a shameful death upon the Cross. And what profit thence? Thereby is
declared, the detestablenesse of sin, expiated by this bloody sacrifice; the
dreadfulnesse of hell fire, extinguished by that precious blood; the obstinacy
of sinners, still crucifying in them selves the son of God by their
ungratitude; the Amiablenesse of Virtue, recommended to us with so many sighs,
tears and drops of blood; the Joys of Heaven, recovered at so deer a rate;
and our Duty to God, through Mercy giving his only Son to us, through Justice
sacrifyzing that Son for us, and through Wisdom exalting him from the Cross to
an equallity of glory at his Right hand, where we shall hereafter find him if
we now follow him.

COLLOQUIE.
Thy words are living and full of force O Lord, and more peircing then a two
edged sword; Oh that thou would awake my slumbring soul, and deep wound my
spirit with admiration of thy boundless Love in the humble Incarnation,
gracious Doctrine, moving Examples, and bitter passion of thy beloved Son! My
habitation and rest shall henceforth be in thy sacred Wounds, O Savior of the
World; by them I will find entrance to thy bowels of Mercy, and there discover
the overflowings of thy Love-swelling heart toward sinners, and thy hidden
Divinity; for by these we have plentiful redemption, strong helps, and
fullness of hopes. Oh stretch forth thy arms, once streached on the Cross for
me, and embrace my soul, languishing to be with Thee, Then will I live and die
in thy wounded heart, and by that Gate enter into the city of my God, and find
whom my soul loves.

SECOND DISCOURSE. God reveals himself.
HAving now passed by all Creatures, who are the Guards of our Earthly City,
in the search of thy Beloved, clime up Philothea the mountain of Visions,
approach Gods Flaming Bush of revealed Mysteries, and harken what he there
speaks to Thee, of the Majesty of his own Essence, the Beauty of his heavenly
Kingdom, and the Glory of his blessed Attendants, whereby to inflame thy amorous
heart with new desires of Communion in happiness, with the already glorified
Saints and Angels.

Divine Scripture as Gods book, discovers those Excellencies of God, which
reason reaches not; he only inspires, who invites the humble to ascend higher.
Hence as from the fountain of Paradise, stream forth four sacred and delicious
Rivers, not to be waded through without Divine Helps. History describes Gods
Wonders to his chose^ people, whereby to draw their hearts sweetly from things
of this world; Allegories teach what we must believe of God; Tropes inform us
of what must be done or omitted, in order to the joys of Heaven; but the
pleasant streams of Anagogies, which are greatest and deepest, do wonderful
enlighten, heat and raise our spirits up toward God, and there fix our
thoughts and loves, where our hopes are already placed.

This Mystical river empties it self in the vast Sea of the Divinity, where
God One in Essence and Three in Persons, within himself Infinite in Being,
Happiness and all perfections, receives no addition of Good from our best
Endeavors, nor any detriment by overflowing to us, and communicating his
greatest Gifts amongst us. He without change or labor knows, produces and
governs all things, in all times and places, leading each by their special
ways, to their last Ends. In his glorious Kingdom he is environed with many
millions of immortal and blessed Spirits, who divided into nine Quires, make
up the Heavenly Hierarchy of Saints and Angels, happy in the Vision and
possession of God, and are distinguished by their proper Excellencies of
nature, grace and glory; wherein there is no temptation, sin or misery feared;
nor fullness of happiness, joy or peace wanting to them; all enjoying God, and
in him possessing, what soever may complete the delightfulness of that
glorious and blessed state, which Neither Eye has seen, nor tongue can
rehearse, nor can the heart of Man conceive.

COLLOQUIE.
Oh how glorious, how pleasant, how delightful is the Kingdom of the Saints!
where Thou O God, happy in thy self, art the happiness of thy glorified
servants? No grief, all content is there where thou do abide, through a
fulness of their Love, ever flowing toward thee. Oh that thou would
transport me forth of this kingdom of darkness and misery, that I may with a
fixed Eye ever behold Thee, the Light which no darkness comprehends; and
possess Thee, the Peace that surpasses all Imagination! then will the rowlings
and longings of my faynting heart have an End, and it will appear in me, that I
have been in a Region of Light and Peace, and am full of both; and I, in
Justice shall appear in thy sight, and shall be satiated, when thy Glory
appears. Amen.

NINTH DAYS VOYAGE, Repose of the soul in God.
THE MORNING EXERCISE.
FIRST POINT. The soul hidden in God.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That Beginners in the Contemplative life go from Creatures to God,
admiring and loving Him, by the beauty and lovelynesse discoverd in them;
Proficients look on God, as he is revealed by divine faith, and by that dim
light make pleasant sallies toward him, by acts of admiration and love, and
restless desires to live and move in, by and to God; But they who are now
happily arrived to the state of Perfection (which thou aymest at Philothea in
this thy solitary Pilgrimage) do contemplate Gods Majesty, Beauty and Glory,
as if clearly revealed and seen in Himself, by an Illapse of God into the
sanctified soul, and of the soul into God; in whom she hides herself, reposeth
without disturbance, and enjoyes a fullness of content without wandering abroad.

Thus S. Paul, even in this life, could say, that his life was hidden with
CHRIST in God, and that his conversation was even then in heaven; having placed
his happiness in spiritual and divine actions, whereby his soul ever moved
toward God and emptyed its self into him; and concealing himself from the
World, by bearing with joy the Miseries and mortifications thereof, contrary to
the custom of those who living in the World, live wordly; And thus the lives
of the Saints have been ever accounted folly, and their deaths dishonorable,
whereas they live with, and in God, a divine life, contented to know, love and
move in him, according to the lights and helps received from him.

It is in our power Philothea, through divine helps, to lead this hidden life
in God, and have our conversation in heaven, even abiding or Earth in our
mortal flesh; but thou must then be very pure and holy, having thy Soul
cleansed from all sin, and sinful inclinations pressing toward earthly
satisfactions; for no spot or stain enters that beautiful and clear region of
the Saints; Thou must also be clothed with the garment of Charity toward all,
and co^ply with divine Inspirations, putting on JESUS Christ, by imitatio^ of
his mortifications, and pro^ptnesse in obeying his counsels. Thus abiding in
the world, thou will not be of the World, or be known by it; having not its
livery on, nor performing its actions; But God will acknowledge thee to be his,
in whom thou now live, and have a Divine Being in Him, and therefore may
say, I live now, not in my self, but in God, my life, my sweet repose, and my
final happiness.

AFFECTION.
O admirable sweetness of this Divine Being, of the Soul hidden from the World
in God! even in this life thou may ascend thither, my Soul, quitting earthly
conversation and comforts, passing the Stars, transported above the Quires of
glorious Angels, and drowning thy self in the Abyss of Gods infinite Essence.
O who will give me the wings of a Dove, and I will fly and repose in God? My
heart has desired his face, my Soul covets his presence: O beautiful Face! O
delicious presence! O rich abode! in God, and in the fullness of the Saints;
only the clean of heart may abide there.

RESOLUTION.
I will hide my self from the world, casting off its livery, which are worldly
and vain actions; and abandoning all earthly conversation, which may soil my
heart. And I will henceforth live in God, by conte^plating his Glory,
performing heavenly actions, and ordring my whole life according to his holy
Will; not regarding what passes here on earth, as if not at all belonging to
Me, or the life of One hidden and living in God. Oh that my Soul were swallowed
up in that Divine Sea! God in Me, I in God; and besides, Nothing! As I began
from Thee, so will I end in Thee, O End without End!

SECOND POINT. Search of God in God.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider; That being now entered into God, and there, as Moses on Gods Holy
Mountain, hidden in a Divine Mist, we must search into him, and endeavor to
discover plainly what he is, and how amiable is his hidden beauty, we so thirst
to behold and enjoy.

This must be performed by an act of pure Contemplation, without depending on
created Images, or discourse of reason; but as if the Eye of the Soul were
dazzled, with the beams of Gods Divine and unaccessible Light, diffused through
that Mist, She must simply consider God to be so full of Majesty, so Good, so
Glorious, that he can never be seen, loved or admired, as he is, or we ought;
so that, what ever we conceive of him, is far beneath the Excellencies of his
Being; what ever we admire in him, he is incomparably more admirable; how ever
we love him, he is infinitely more amiable, lovely and desirable; although each
one should love him, as much as all the Saints and Angels together can for a
whole Eternity love him.

Wherefor the amorous soul will be ever busied in searching into God, and
discovering his hidden perfections, in that divine Mist, being unable to
discern clearly, even what she there already sees and therefore cries out to
God, Show me thy face. And although she therein feels a most excessive
sweetness and joy, yet she is ignorant, both what it is, and whence it comes;
and therefore acknowledges him to be infinitely more excellent and delightful,
then she is able to express or imagine; as it happened to S. Paul, in his divine
rapture.

If thou were extrem hungry Philothea, and did stand betwixt two tables,,
loathing the meat of the one, and not permitted to taste of the other, what
conflicts would thou then feel? Thus it will be, if the soul be hidden in
this divine Mist; for being wearied with the search of her beloved in created
Likeness, and not permitted to contemplate the naked Essence of God in its
self clearly, though present with her; she still inquires after him, loathes
the obscurity wherein she is through her own weakness, thirsts to be filled
with a clear Vision and full Fruition of God in himself, often looks forth to
make a better discovery of him, entertains all his inspirations as so many
Whisperings of her Espous, sighs amorously for his delaying the comfortable
Revelation of himself to her, and as one drunk with love, sends messages to
him, by all she meets, that She lanquishes with Love.

AFFECTION.
Oh! how happy are they O Lord who eat and drink at thy divine table, where
they see Thee clearly, love Thee ardently, praise Thee incessantly and possess
Thee with a fullness of joy and Exultation, whilst I here perish with hunger
and thirst in this sacred Mist of thy Divine Essence, and am not permitted to
behold the clear Light of thy glorious face? My soul O God thirsts to behold
Thee as thou art, and enjoy Thee fully, and yet thou hidest thy self from Me.
Reveal thy face to Me, O my most amiable God, for my soul has languished
after my Beloved; Oh when shall I come and appear in the presence of my God?

RESOLUTION.
I will night and day mourn for the absence of my Beloved, often send missivs of
Love and holy desires unto him, earnestly requesting Him to show his face to
Me; and therefore I will ever study to render my soul amiable to Him, that
Nothing may be found in me displeasing to him, or which may make him hide his
face from Me; and I will seek out all means whereby I may allure him to
exhibit his gracious and glorious presence to Me in his own pure Essence, and
thereby alleviate the painfulnesse of this my earthly pilgrimage; for Thou O
Lord have promised, If we ask we shall receive, if we seek we shall find, and
if we knock it shall be opened unto us, and our Joy shall be full and none
shall take it from us.

THIRD POINT. The souls repose in God.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That the sweet Repose of the soul in God, is attained sometimes by
the natural Industry of the Affective part thereof, aided by certain passing
flashes of divine Lights and graces, whereby making Inquiry through Creatures,
or contemplating God by what he has revealed of himself, she discovers him to
be very Glorious and Amiable, and then by Anagogicall Motions, she sweetly
powers herself into God by Acts of Admiration, Love, Adoration and
Thanksgiving; and thus takes her Repose in him.

But this delicious Repose is more efficaciously and permanently obtained, by
means of divine Irradiations, whereby our bountiful Espous compassionating the
languors of the soul fainting in the search of him, dissipates the Mist wherein
we hitherto sought Him, opens the treasures of his Majesty and shows his
amiable face more plainly to her, infusing into her an attractive sweetness by
his more clear and gracious presence; whence still arise new Illustrations of
the soul, and discoveries without end of Gods Intensive and extensive
Perfections, and most delicious streamings of the heart toward her Beloved, by
sublime acts of Love and Adoration; Whence proceed a hearty compunction for the
sins committed by the World against so gracious and glorious a Father of pure
Lights; restless strivings to be inseparably united with God, and transformed
into him by likeness in the powers and operations of the spirit, and at length
has a most amorous slumber in God. For although the heart still watches in
contemplation of the Beauty of her Beloved, yet she sweetly sleeps in his
Embracements, whereby she is often so abstracted from herself, and all feeling of
sensible Creatures, that she seems wholly out of herself, through excess of
admiration and Love, causing an unexpressible sweetness, Tranquillity and Joy
in all the Regions of the Soul.

This is a most sublime degree of Happiness Philothea, nor may it be attained,
but by a permanent Contemplation and most ardent Love of God in himself, and
by extraordinary Illustrations and heats of divine Grace. Wherefor let it not
suffice Thee, to have sued often to be admitted unto a taste of these delicious
Wines of thy Beloved, no Philothea Thou must be importune with God for it,
closing up thy heart to all earthly co^forts imaginable, and pouring it forth
night and day by sighs and earnest Entreaties, ere God will come to Thee by an
open discovery of his amiablenesse, make his abode with Thee by stronger
friendshipps, lead thee forth to the pleasant Orchards of his divine Love, and
admit thee to a sweet Repose in himself.

AFFECTION.
How happy would thou be My soul, were there an universal silence in all the
Regions of the soul, no Clouds of distractions, a cleernesse and freedom in
contemplating and embracing our Most Glorious God! O that this Orient Sun would
arise in my heart, and dissipate the Mist wherein I now labor and sigh after
my Beloved! then may I discover, how beautiful, how amiable, how desirable he
is; Nor shall I then care for any earthly comforts, but shall ever rejoice in
the fullness of content and joy of my heavenly Espous, and be filled with his
sweetness: O Incomprehensible, O Ineffable Sweetness! above Honey and
honeycomb, and the odor of sweetest spices.

RESOLUTION.
I will for ever abandon all desires of earthly consolations, only thirsting
after comforts from God, the Fountain and Abyss of all sweetness. And
therefore I will ever keep my Mind fixed on God, earnestly craving to be admitted
unto his amiable presence and delicious Embracements; opening my heart to
entertain, and work with all his Irradiations of himself into Me, and
Attraction of Me unto himself, to take my Repose in him. For Thy lips O most
Lovely above Men and Angels, are as a Honey comb distilling, honey and milk
are under thy tongue, and the odor of thy garments as the odor of
Frankincense.

THE EVENING EXERCISE.
FIRST DISCOURSE. Loves Ascents.
NO sooner is the Soul entered the Paradise of her God, and there admitted to
the delicious Embracements of her heavenly Espous, but he opens the spring of
his special graces, and powers into her heart, pure and plentiful streams of
Divine Love, gentlely flowing in her with an excess of sweetness and
consolation. On the pleasant banks of this sacred River God plants two living
Trees, one of Light to clear the Understanding, the other of fire to inflame
the Will; each bearing twelve most delicious Fruits, which are the Effects of
the Unitive Life, of the soul transformed in to God by Love. Oh Philothea, how
happy will thou be, may be admitted to set by these Crystal streams, repose
under the shade of this Tree of Life, and taste its fruit!

First God Awakes the soul, fainting through long Inquiry and frequent sighs
after her Beloved, during her abode and search of Him in the divine Mist; then
he powers into her a most delicious Savor and feeling of his more immediate
and clear presence, which so seizes on the heart, that it presently fills it
with an Over-swelling Joy, which makes the Eyes overflow with Tears of love,
and the tongue by Spiritual Cantiques witness the inward Jubily of the
spirit; Whence often proceeds a Spiritual inebriation, which renders the soul
unable to discern where she is or what she does, and sometimes causes
faintings and swoundings of the body; in which state the heart feels a
wonderful Opening or dilatation, to welcome the caresses of her divine Espous,
whereby she is Wounded deep with Love, and Languishes with new desires, of she
knows not what it is, or how to express it, and thus she falls into a most
heavenly Slumber, whereby freed from all noise of Creatures, even in her
Imaginative part, she enjoyes a perfect tranquillity of spirit and peace in her
whole soul; Which is sometimes accompanied with Ecstasy, whereby the lower
Regio^ of the soul becomes Inse^sible to what passes through the outward
senses, being wholly absorpt by the intense workings of the superior portion
thereof; which fixed on God through Vehemence of Admiration, love and
sweetness, becomes Familiar with him, views all the treasures of his Glory,
receives plenty of gifts and blessings, and converses with him face to face.

These are the delicious fruits Philothea, growing on the Tree of Life, which
is planted by the River of Divine Grace, ever flowing in the Soul, which God
admitts to his amiable presence and Embracements; That Soul needs no other
Light to walk by, God himself being the Sun that gives light to her; nor any
other fire to heat her, the Holy Ghost being diffused through all her powers,
purging whatever is frail and mortal, and transforming her into a
supernatural Being, whereby she is raised to the highest Happiness Imaginable,
and the Experience of whatever God has promised unto her.

COLLOQUIE.
O Divine Tree! how pleasant is it to repose under thy delicious shades, whence
such fragrant smells, and sweet tranquillity are diffused through the amorous
soul? O crystal streams of overflowing Grace! how delightful is it, to walk
upon thy fruitful banks, and in thee to contemplate the overflowings of Love
in our breasts? O heavenly fruit! how sweet and confortable art thou, to the
thirsty and languishing soul? since, what ever knowledge, love, joy,
tranquillity, pleasantness or Repose may be imagined, proceed thence. Oh! who
will give Me, that I may for ever rest under the shade of this Living Tree! to
walk upon those pleasant banks, to eat my fill of that heavenly fruit? Let the
Spirit say, Come; and my soul shall melt within Me, because my Beloved bath
spoken unto Me.

SECOND DISCOURSE. Loves Descents.
GOds unsearcheable Counsels and Decrees are, that Perfection ever move on two
poles, extremly opposite; which S. Paul calls Height and Depth; S. Francis,
What is God, and What am I? Although God invites Us Philothea, to clime the
Tree of Life, taste its fruits, and repose under the shadow thereof, in his
Contemplation and Love; yet must we still descend into our selves, by
Consideration of our present state, and the Obligations thereof, which must
ever be complied with.

Descend then Philothea, in regard of thy self; For the Exercise of Divine
Contemplation raising us to an eminent knowledge, love and Union with God,
unless we descend by humble acts, and seat our selves with holy Magdalene at
the feet of our Beloved Espous, there may be danger of falling into presumption
of our own perfection, and loosing his favor; trust then in the Mercies of
God, yet fear his Justice and Power; and amidst the delights of thy
Illuminations and spiritual Caresses, have ever a filial Fear, and say, Not
to Me, but to Thee O Lord, be all honor and glory. Then see, how often thou have
had a complacence in thy sweet contemplations, and the amorous Embracements of
thy Beloved? and assure thy self, if thou have at any time fallen into dryness
of spirit, that proceeded, from thy not humbling thy self, while exalted to
those singular favors.

By these humble acts, thy inward Virtue will also become conspicuous in thy
outward Conversation, to the Example and Edification of others; For our earthly
conversation is sociable, and our actions are subject to many Censures; if then
our outward lives express not that piety we harbor in our bosoms, we may be
accounted singular, or guilty of hypocrisy; Wherefor let not any contemplation,
or familiarity with God, withdraw thee from a friendly conversation with those
thou live, cause an affectation of thy own opinion and ways, or breed a
harshnesse toward thy less (yet possibly more) perfect Neighbor; but toward
all be humble, modest, cheerful and courteous.

But especially the Conte^plative Soul must often apply her self to the
exercises of the Active Life, thereby to shun Idleness, the Nurse of all sin,
and source of Temptations; For seeing, it is hardly possible in this Life, to be
permanent in our heavenly Contemplations, and affections toward God, we must
accustom our selves to some bodily exercises; Especially if we have some
singular Talent, whereby we may benefit others; At least, if Obedience requires
that service from us; And the work be of that nature, that it rather adds, then
diminishes of our Zeal to Perfection; But be thou ever careful Philothea,
that thou perform it with an upright Intention, promptly, in due time and
place, fervently, cheerfully, and humbly; Thus thy labors, undertaken for God,
will be grateful to him, and cherish our Love toward heavenly things.

Thou must also descend in regard of thy Neighbor, whither Superior, Subject
or Equal; for although nothing can be more pleasant to us, then sweetly to
repose in the bosom of our heavenly Espous, and to dive into the Abyss of his
Goodness, yet must we quitt all these overflowings of Love, when our Neighbor
needs our help; so that, whither thou bewaylest thy sins Philothea, with
Magdalene at the foot of the Cross; or with S. Paul art rapt to the third
heaven; or in thy private closett, conversest familiarly with thy Beloved, as
S. Anthony of Padua; without delay, abandon all, and descend to comfort those
who expect that duty of thee.

Art thou a Prince, or Governor, of a family? by thy office and duty, thou art
bound to have as much care of thy subjects, as of thy self; especially, if by
their own free choice, guided by divine Inspirations, they be under thy custody
and direction, not as slaves, but as tender Children; for whom, thou art to
render an account, unto the Great Just Judge, who expects of every one, to his
own extrem peril, that he be faithful in his charge; Wherefor, if thou be
called to any such trust, with fear and trembling accept of it, and comply with
its duties; but if thou art not called thither, have a care, thou never covet a
place of so much danger.

Art thou a subject? The Vow of Obedience, under which thou art born, or by
which thou have freely sacrifized thy Will to God and his Vicegerents, does
then oblige thee to leave God for God, that is, to quitt thy highest
contemplations, and comply with the Will of God, revealed to thee by the lips
of thy Overseer and Governor. Since the Word of the Eternal Father, equal to
himself, in some manner quitts the bosom of his Father in heaven, to obey his
Will, even to a most painful and shameful death; we may for his Love, submit
our Judgments and Wills, to that of our Superior, ruling in his stead;
promptly, entirely and perseverantly to our dying day.

Art thou equal to him? Thou must then endeavor, when Charity requires it, to
relieve his wants, unto thy power, either corporally or spiritually; by
Visiting (for example) and helping the needy, weak and sick; and by counselling
and comforting them in their desolations; for by these things, we do homage to
our Lord JESUS, in his distressed Little Ones; and deserve our selves, to be
releived in the like case; according to the promises of our Lord, that, What
ever we do to One of his Little ones, we do to him, nor shall a cup of cold
water be unrewarded in the Kingdom of Heaven.

COLLOQUIE.
Alas My God! how barren has my Soul hitherto been, in complying with the
precepts of true and solid Virtue? How many precious hours of my life have
idly passed, without care of advancing my self, as well in humble and
charitable deeds, as in searching into thy hidden Excellencies? Whereas thy Law
is, That each one shall reap, according as he sowes; My solitude shall not be
henceforth idle, but sometimes I will soar up as an Eagle, by the wings of
Contemplation and love; and sometimes will I with the laborious Be, exercise
my self in outward works of charity and humility; as well to please God, the
supreme End and crown of all good works, as to relieve my distressed neighbor,
and to edify all by my outward Conversation; for, That which is momentany in
this life works exceedingly in us an eternal weight of Glory. Amen.

TENTH DAYS VOYAGE. Highest Christian Perfection.
THE MORNING EXERCISE.
FIRST POINT. Union with Christ suffering.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, that how ever high and happy we be in our Divine Contemplation, and
Unitive Life with God; or Low, by a prompt performance of the humble and
charitable Duties of our present State, we cannot hope, succesfully to finish
our holy Pilgrimage to the sublime State of Perfection, we aim at in our
Retyrement, unless we be united to JESUS CHRIST in his fuffrings. As each one
by cordial friendshipp is transformed into his Friend, and by an excess of
heavenly Love into our glorious God: so by our joy and alacrity, amidst the
tribulations and crosses of this life, we are transformed into, and become One,
with our Crucified Savior; whom we then put on, when his Spirit, Counsels,
Grace and Mortifications shine in our Soul and actions.

The title of a good Christian Philothea should, besides the name, import a
conformity in Life with CHRIST; and that Character of the Cross, whereby in
the laver of our Spiritual Regeneration, we are registered soldiers under the
conduct of our Crucified Captain, should ever mind us of our profession then
made, often since renewed, and now so eagerly pursued; that as our Divine Lord
and Master, with joy marched up toward Jerusalem the place of his Passion,
encounters his raging persecutours, and voluntarily offers his body to be
beaten on as an anvill, his blood to be powered forth, and himself to become a
saving Sacrifice on the Altar of the Cross: so also we should with joy
entertain, and patiently bear all losses, crosses and desolations, which may
befall us in our Christian Warfar. This was S. Paul's Glory, the Perfect joy of
S. Francis, and the Delight of the renowned Martyrs, who kissing their chains
and scourges, embracing their. Racks, and singing amidst swords, whips and
flames. purchased a coheritance with their glorified JESUS, whose partners they
were in his bitter sorrows and sufferings.

It is the dignity of a Christian, to be thus United to CHRIST; nor does any
condition of this life render us more unhappy, then want of tribulation; Much
Felicity makes us forget we are pilgrims to an endless, and endangers our
falling into presumption, while relying on present comforts, we arm not our
selves for ensuing combats, and by long peace leave our hearts unguarded
against assaults of watchful Enemies; whereas the blood of Martyrs has ever
been the increase of the Church, and Crosses the preservation and strength of
Christian Virtues; though Summer be the sweetest season, yet without cold
winters, earth would become unhabitable; nor can our Souls long savor the
sweetness of piety, unless seasoned with contradictio^s; which we neither may
nor can escape, only can sweeten, while with joy and courage we welcome them,
when sent by Heaven, to try our Virtues, and unite us unto CHRIST.

Though Expectation diverts not, yet it diminishes the sharpness of
tribulation, which when sudden, finds the mind unprovided, and unable to bear
its weight, for want of Resolution, and Lenitive Medicines. What if a disease
should bereave thee of health and rest? What if Poverty as an armed Enemy
should rush upon Thee? What if calumnies should defame, degrade, or cast thee
into prison or banishment? thou should Philothea now prepare to welcome and
encounter these crosses with joy, that their violence may not overwhelme Thee,
and make thee loose thy Virtue, in what thou may not avoid.

As Gods wise providence in governing us, leads us to, and fastens us unto the
Cross: so his fatherly Love will ever temper its severity, and render it easy
and delightful; Savage beasts will be smitten by their keepers, it is God that
strikes thee; it were rebellion, to murmur, or fly; he has appointed their
weight to the last dram, for ends known to himfelfe, none ca^ add, or take
thence; only our constancy and love can make them light and pleasant; Although
God be in himself immutable, yet for our trial, he does not always visit us
after the same manner; if He comes as a Judge, and condemns us to suffer, it is
much less then our sins deserve, that a moments sorrow may expiate the enormous
sins of an Age, that thou may become like him upon his Cross, and nigh him in
his glory; if as a tender Father, it is to chastise us now, that we perish not
for ever; if as an Espous of Blood, with a Cross in one hand, and the other
pointing to his wounded heart, it is to show, thy heart must be peirced too,
with the sword of tribulation; and if as a Friend, suspending the influences of
his comforting graces, it is to try if thy heart be sound, not loveing his crowns
more then his crosses, or his comforts more then himself.

Tribulations too are the cures of our sick minds; though the body be sound,
the Soul may be distempred with pride, incontinency, envy, idleness or the
like; it is a rare spirit that has no disease; no physic like an adversity; If
thy heavenly Physician sends this, to humble thy heart, to make the continent,
meek, or diligent in thy duty, make him welcome; and be cheerful in that sad
state, having thy Eye fixed on thy Exemplar, and the great weight of merit and
glory which it will work in the patient and resigned heart. Every bird can sing
in a clear heaven, but that is most commendable which is merryest in a shower;
to stand silent before Herod, or be joyful in desolation, is the property of a
true Christian; Study therefore Philothea ever to have a clear spirit amidst
tribulations, thy righteousness will comfort Thee, Gods glory will attend thee,
and after this minute of pain, an eternity of joy will crown thee.

AFFECTION.
O God, how high, and yet how low is the State of Christian Perfection! as Thou
My Crucified Lord, art God and Man: so must my contemplation and Union be with
Thee, a Glorious God and a suffering Man, by partaking the joys of One and
sorrows of the other; I will therefore ever aspire to be with Thee in the glory
of thy Father; yet will joyfully cast my self into the Sea of Love, thy
bleeding heart, that through it I may swim to the haven of thy hidden Divinity.
Come then all torments of heaven and Earth, press heavy upon Me; I shall never
sink as long as supported by the saving Grace of my Victorious Redeemer. Oh
that I were grown'd by the teeth of wild beasts, torn by racks, scorched with
burning flames, so I may enjoy CHRIST! Rather here, O Lord, rather here, then
where thy wrath never ceases; for thou will lead me forth this prison, and show
me all thy Glory, and I shall confess unto thy Name.

RESOLUTION.
I will for ever make my habitation in the wounded heart of my Crucified Lord,
and therein read over the vast book of Love Suffering, that by it I may govern
my life and actions, not contenting my self with an empty Name, void of the
substance and perfection of a Christian. Therefore I will joyfully welcome all
tribulations, as special Gifts of God and tokens of his love, given to cure
the soars of my sinful Soul, exercise Virtue, and preserve to life
everlasting; for who ever lives holyly shall suffer persecution, nor may the
Crown of endless Glory be purchased at an easy rate. I will therefore cheerfully
take up my Cross, rank my self amongst thy zealous servants, and follow thee
my suffering Lord; for Blessed is he who suffers for thee, because when he is
tried, he shall receive a Crown of life and Immortality.

SECOND POINT. Expropriation of Friends.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, that to attain to this high state of Christian Perfection, and Union
with CHRIST suffering, we must willingly abandon all earthly contents, and
embrace all tribulations with joy, in Imitation of JESUS CHRIST, it being much
harder, and consequently a greater perfection, to bear great crosses with
patience, then perform heroic acts of Virtue without difficulty; for our
Virtue is not then firm, when not shaken; but when not shaken, though most
assailed by adversity; therefore our perfection grows with proportion to our
sufferings, in the society of our suffering Savior, whose Pilgrimage from the
cribb to the Cross, began in tears and ended in blood; since therefore
Philothea, thou art by profession a Christian, and by special Resolution a
seeker of highest Perfection, CHRIST'S sorrows, sufferings and cross, must be
unto thee a Rule of life, and the Center of all thy motions; the more
conformable thou art to him in these, the greater will thy perfection now be,
and happiness hereafter.

Behold then with a steadfast Eye the Savior of the World, hanging on the
Cross, and as in his Passion, so in his death abandoned by his Apostles,
Disciples and al his usual train of applauding attenda^ts. He who in his glory
was guarded with millions of Angels, to whom all knees bow, and who is the
Image and Splendor of the glory of his eternal Father, is now forsaken by All.
Love made him our Brother, by assuming our Nature; compassion our Physician, by
his healing doctrine and sacraments; Mercy our Ransom, by his own bitter death
discharging our debts; and now alas he is abandoned of all. He descended from
the noblest Princes, Priests and Prophets of Israel, by his temporal birth; he
healed lame, blind, dumb, lepers, all diseases, by his Divine power; All men
and Angels, for ever glorious with God, are happy through the Efficacy of his
peace-speaking blood; and they have now alas all deserted him.

This is the pattern which we must Imitate Philothea, e're we can attain the
perfection we aim at; We must be entirely resigned to abandon, and be
abandoned by all, even our dearest, and most obliged friends; This may seem
hard, and indeed it is so; For Friendship is a Virtue, and Charity is yet a
greater; it is hard therefore to persuade from actions arising from so sublime a
cause, yet is it mainly necessary, if we will become perfect; when the pruning
time is come, superfluous shoots must be cut off, else few and small fruit;
All earthly friendships are superfluous, in order to inward perfection,
therefore should be lopt off, that the sap of grace may quietly fructify in us
to life everlasting, under the conduct of our Divine Guide and Example.

Tell me, Philothea, can thou like well a treason in thy bosom friend? Surely
thou can not: If David had been cursed by his enemies, he could have borne
it, but to be hurt by a friend, by one that had prayed with him in Gods holy
House; that was an unsupportable Cross. And what is more frequent, even with
those, who abandoning the world, should abandon its weakness and mutability,
and yet through variety of opinions and dispositions, often break and betray a
friends confidence? If then for the love of thy heavenly Espous, thou have
forsaken parents, kindred and all worldly friends, for the same love, enter not
now, or at least break off any singularity of affection, even toward thy
companions in the study of perfection; not only because singularity is ever
prejudicial in professors of a Common Life, whence propriety of affections,
as well as of temporal goods must be banished, as nurses of suspicions,
jealousies and many private feudes; but especially because they hazard the loss
of our inward tranquillity, in case our friend, to whom we have imprudently
disclosed the secrets of our heart, betrays his trust, using our freedom to our
confusion. Wherefor be cautious in trusting thy heart strings to any, but as
the Wise Heathen said, Ever converse with thy friend, as one who may prove thy
Enemy. For as it is the nature of fire to burn, so of sinners to be weak and
self interested; take a View of they past life, and experience will teach
Thee, most friendships of thy bosomfriends to have been grounded on selfprofit,
and therefore have ended in discontents and enmities.

Besides the superfluity and treachery of friendships, they are great
impediments of Virtue, while many thoughts are spent in them, to the breach of
in ward peace, loss of precious time and neglect of heavenly conferences with
our Divine Espous. I doubt not Philothea but thou have had many special and
dear friends, and much delighted to abide and conferr with them; and what
profit thence? Alas, much Vanity, time lost languishings of heart, or sin. Even
now then knock off these troublesome slackles, whereby thou art fettred to
Creatures, however dear to Thee, least thou present God with a broken and
divided heart, whereas he gave and demands A whole and sound; and that thou
owe to him, had thou many thousands.

AFFECTION.
Ah! how hard is it, to be abandoned by all friends who may comfort us in our
desolations? But I know and will adore the power that works this happy
separation; perhaps thou had for ever perished O my Soul, had not not thus
lost thy friend, or abandond him for God. Alas, how superfluous, how
treacherous, how dangerous has singularity of frienships hitherto proved unto
Me? Adieu all friends, henceforth my only trust shall be in God, who has loved
me with a perpetual charity, and has engraven me in his hands, that he may be
ever mindful of me; forsake me not O Lord, and I will be always with Thee, and
become as a Pilgrim to the children of my Mother.

RESOLUTION.
I will courageously quitt all ties, even to my dearest friends, when my
spiritual concernment requires it; whither they love me therefore or hate me,
wish me well or persecute me; and I will equally prepare my heart, to be loved
or persecuted, praised or condemned by them, behaving my self as a Pilgrim to
all earthly Creatures, and a Citizen of Heaven. I have chosen my solitude
with my aba^doned Lord and Master, nor shall any false allurements, or harsh
dealings change my Resolutions; He has given me a glorious example, as he has
done, I will endeavor to do also.

THIRD POINT. Selfe-Denyall.
CONSIDERATION.
COnsider, That JESUS CHRIST hanging on the Cross, is the true pattern of
selfe-Denyall; this was his Doctrine while he lived, and this his practice in
his Passion and Death; therefore his prayer to his eternal Father was, Not
mine, but thy will, be done. Behold then, how he loses his blood in his
Agony, his Esteem by revilings and blasphemies, his strength by whipps and
thorns, his comeliness by stripes and wounds, the joy of the lower Region of
his Soul by excess of sorrows, and his life by a most bitter and ignominious
Death. Thus the most beautiful amongst the children of Men, is become as One
stricken of God, covered with leprosy, and a man of sorrows.

If thou desire Philothea to become perfect, thou must also endeavor this
selfe-Denyall, and separation of thy self from thy self, by abandoning thy
own will, and a readiness to sacrifize unto God, thy tears, blood, body, soul
and all the calamities and afflictions, Gods providence may inflict on thee;
willingly suffering what ever crosses may befall Thee, in conformity to his holy
Will, and the cou^sells and practice of thy suffering Lord and Master.

There is none, of what condition soever, but must more or less, take up
CHRIST'S Cross and follow him, by Self-denial, and bearing some tribulation for
his sake, and their own profit. Through sin, the flesh and spirit are at odds,
and sensuality rebels against God; no wonder then, if we feel contradictions
within our own heart, and sufferings from the inordinate passions, desires or
malice of others; neither Saint nor Sinner, nor any mortal creature is exempt
from the Law of the Cross, of what Majesty, Wisdom, Power or Holiness soever he
be; nor is any of these happy, unless resigned to bear all.

Thou suffer not alone Philothea, All must, willingly, or against their
will, suffer with thee; which should encourage Thee to an unbroken patience,
amidst the heaviest press of tribulations, which may happen to Thee; especially
since thy JESUS, thy Espous, the Giver of all good, suffers so many, so long,
so grievous torments, with Thee.

Nor may we hope, to enjoy the consolations of this, and the other Life; we
must forgo one, or the other; either suffer here, or else where; which will thou choose? Is it not much better, to undergo a momentany tribulation, then
an eternal? Only worldly pleasures can destroy thee, therefore fly from Them;
The Cross only, whereby the whole world was saved, can save Thee, Seek it then,
and with it thou shall find life and salvation; thy crown of thorns shall be
changed into a Crown of never fading Glory; and if thou have drunk of the
torrent of tribulation, with thy crucified Redeemer, thou shall also taste the
delicacies of his heavenly Happiness, in his Glorious Kingdom.

AFFECTION.
If JESUS must suffer, ere he enters his glory, can thou O my Soul, hope to
purchase heaven at an easyer rate? No my Dearest Lord! since love moved Thee to
transfigure thy self into a Man of sorrows for my sake, love also shall
compel me, to be conformable to Thee, my Holy Espous. Let me but enjoy Thee,
and then let what ever tribulations thou please, fall upon Me! Here cut,
here burn, so thou sparest me for eternity; O Eternity! who can live with thy
everlasting torments? Come therefore O delicious crosses, O amiable tribulations,
by which I may purchase an Eternity of joys.

RESOLUTION.
I will prepare my self to this spiritual Combat, and not only endure the
tribulations which my sensuality and disorderly passions may raise against Me,
but what ever Crosses the malice of Satan, or the sweet providence of my
heavenly Father shall inflict upon Me; and humbly casting my self at the foot
of the Cross, I will say, Behold here O Divine Lord, behold here, My whole
self, my Body, my Soul, my All, ready to abandon all contents and to suffer all
sorrows for Thee; Thy will be done; Pleasures or pains, thorns or diadems, life
or death; all shall be indifferently welcome; Only, be thou with Me, O strong
helper, and none shall prevail against Me.

EVENING EXERCISE.
FIRST DISCOURSE. Spiritual Desolation.
ALthough our Lord JESUS were the Beloved of the Eternal Father, equal to him
in Essence, Wisdom and Power, yet for Us he would become an Outcast, deserted
by Him. Harken Philothea to that lamentable Complaint he makes to his Father
upon the Cross; My God! My God! why have thou forsaken Me? Though his humane
Nature lost not its Union with the Godhead, nor the Grace or friendship of God,
yet the Influence of his Divinity on the inferior Portion of his Soul was then
suspended, and he left to struggle with the bitterest torments, and pangs of a
most cruel and ignominious Death.

Our Solitary Pilgrim to Perfection, must be prepared to welcome this sublime
state of Spiritual Desolation, if she aspires to an Union and Conformity with
her heavenly Espous; she must not only contentedly abandon all friends, and
bear what ever Crosses, but must also willingly be deprived of all those
delights, which usually accompany a devout Life, undergo Aridities of the
spirit, and loose the savory influences of Gods gracious favors; and instead
of pleasant Illustrations of the Understanding, Enflamings of the will, and
flowings of Joy in the heart, to have the spirit laden with dullness,
barrenness, and insensibility to heavenly thoughts and actions.

If God thus tryes thy Constancy, assure thy self Philothea, he is even then
present with Thee, watching in the Center of thy heart over Thee, causing
aversions from Sin, desires to perform the duties of thy state, and longings to
be with God, though in that distress, a darkness be spredd over thy Soul, and
thou be deprived of thy usual cheerfulness and alacrity.

The cause of this our desolation often is in our selves; either a too eager
desire of, or delight in, spiritual consolations; or a neglect of timely
entertaini^g offered inspirations; or else too much proneness to seek and accept
of sensual satisfactions; But the chief Cause thereof is God only, whose
property it is, to create Light and Darkness, and separate the One from the
Other. As God caused the brightness of Christ's tranfigur'd body on Mount
Thabor, which signifies the cleerness and cheerfulness of our Spirit in holy
actions: so also he caused that darkness which o'respred the earth, whilst
CHRIST'S body was disfigured on Mount Calvarie, whereby is represented the
droughts of a Soul in this state of spiritual desolation; Wherefor behave thy
felfe very cautiously in the pursuance of Christian perfection, so that whither
thou have a feeling of piety, or whither God (for reasons known to himself)
deprives Thee thereof, keep the same Evenness of heart, and constancy in thy
duties, during both States; still multiplying acts of Love, renewing thy
purposes, resigning thy self to Gods decrees concerning Thee, and following
the direction of his Holy Spirit, under whose conduct, thou art now become
conformable to thy sufferring Espous.

Imagine therefore, that JESUS CHRIST has nailed Thee to this Cross, through the
great Love he has toward Thee, to the end thou flyest not from him, abandon
the charge he has taken of thee, or quitt thy customary duties; and that he may
behold thy conflicts, harken to thy mournful sights and supplications, and may
more readily infuse spiritual helps; wherefor humbly open thy heart to him,
disclosing all thy wants and weakness; advise also with some prudent person,
whom thou have chosen for thy Guide, and follow his counsels punctually; ever
closeing with an entire Resignation to his sacred Will, who thus Visits Thee.

COLLOQUIE.
What have thou done, My Innocent Lord, that thou art thus severely treated?
Thy body is covered with wounds, thy blood streams forth from every part, thy
hands and feet are nailed to the Cross, thy head is crowned with thorns, thy
heart is peirced with a spear, and thy Soul filled to the brim with desolation,
when thou cryedst: My God, My God, why have thou forsaken Me? Oh, what Love,
what Mercy is here? I have sinned, and the Son of God is smitten! Oh, rather
let me fuffer, who have provoked thy wrath! Whither I feel the sweetness of thy
comfortable presence, or thou do permit Anxieties to oppress my spirit, I
will equally love Thee, and obey thy will. And I will bless God at all times,
his praises shall ever be in my lips, because he will be my Salvation, in the
day of sorrow.

SECOND DISCOURSE. Philotheas Choice.
HAving thus prosperously Philothea, (though with much difficulty, in thy ten
days Voyage to Perfection) passed through thy holy Solitude, and arrived to
Mount Calvarie, and there found thy Crucified Lord, the Author, Exemplar and
Finisher of all Perfection, repose thy self with joy under the shade of the
Cross offering up thy heart to him, to be united with his by Love, and made
conformable to his Will in all thy affections and actions; saying, Behold, I
have gone far flying from the World and its Vanities, and made my habitation in
the Wilderness; Under his shadow, whom my Soul desires, will I set; This is
my Resting place, for ever and ever; here will I dwell, because I have chosen
it. O blessed Flight! O pleasant Repose! O Divine Choice! whereby thy Soul will
become a stranger to the Earth where she lives, and freely converse with God
whom she loves.

Then make a breife review of thy ten days Retirement; See, whither thou have
that value of Solitude; and its Entertainments, which the perfection thereof
deserves; And what inclinations thou have to persever therein? whither thou
have a cordial apprehension of thy Sinful State; and the Means God has
established for thy salvation? Whither thy Passions be any thing abated, and
thy heart unchayned from Creatures; that it may joyfully Fly to God? Whither
thou have a perfect Calm in thy Soul; can Give ear to the whisperings of
thy heavenly Espous; and be every way fitted to take thy Repose in God? And
lastly, whither thou have a hearty resentement of the sufferings of thy
Crucified Lord, a willingness to Imitate him in his bitter seperations, and a
desire to be wholly united to him in that sad and ignominious state? for unless
thy heart be now united unto that of JESUS suffering, thou may not hope
hereafter to be united unto thy JESUS triumphing.

Fix thy Eye therefore steadily upon thy sovereign Lord, bleeding and dying upon
the Cross, and thereby draw a Copy in thy own heart; by his wounded feet order
thy affections, by his peirced hands rectify thy actions, by his crowned head
purify thy thoughts, by his opened side regulate thy Love, and by his
sorrowful Soul draw in thine the picture of Compassion and imitation, That for
ever after, the life of JESUS may be made manifest in Thee.

COLLOQUIE.
Behold here, O Victorious Savior of Men and Angels, my languishing and
sighing heart, earnestly sueing to become One with Thee, transformed into the
likeness of thy love-wounded heart, and dying to all things, but Thee, that
henceforth Thou only may live in me, and I for ever in Thee, without being
separated from Thee. O Amiable Union! O delicious Transformation! O Divine
Life! Oh that thou would deep engrave in my heart the Image of thy Cross,
and all thy sufferings thereon; that as a bundle of myrrh they may ever lay in
my bosom, by a perpetual Memory of thy Love therein toward Me. To Thee
therefore do I now, for ever, sacrifize my whole heart, to be wounded with the
darts of thy ever flaming love; that all my Affections, Actions, Thoughts,
Desires and Joys may be ordered by Thee; begin from Thee, and end in Thee; O
Endless End, and Abyss of all Happiness! Amen.

FINIS.
MEDITATIONS UPON THE PASSION, For every day of the week.
SUNDAY. Washing of the Feet.
CONS. 1. Who washes? God, thy Creator, Redeemer and giver of all good things.

2. Whose feet he washes? of ignoble persons, great sinners, and his own
betrayer.

3. Why he washes? to give example of meekness, and teach us to cleanse our
Soul, ere we approach his Altar.

Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could love thee and all creatures, as I ought, and
thou desire!

Resolve, To practice the Virtue of Charity, and shun Envy, in occasions best
known to thy self.

MONDAY. Prayer in the garden.
CONS: 1. How CHRIST prays? kneeling, prostrate, and with instancy: and thou
how tipid?

2. What Is his prayer? That his Chalice may pass, yet with resignation to obey
his Fathers will: do thou pray thus.

3. How he sweats, blood, in great drops, in great sorrows; will thou rely on
thy own strength.

Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could humble my self to Thee, and all creatures for
thee.

Resolve, To practice Humility and shun Pride, etc.

TWESDAY. Mocking before Herod.
CONS: 1. How JESUS betrayed, apprehended, and manicled, is led to Annas,
Caiphas, Pilate and Herod: Follow him in this sorrowful Pilgrimage.

2. How He is every where falsely accused, and yet is silent; be silent too when
injured.

3. How before Herod, he is clothed and mocked as a Fool; if thou be a
Christian, imitate CHRIST'S self-denial.

Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could contemn my own will for thy sake.

Resolve, To practice Self-denial, and shun self-love, etc.

WEDNESDAY. Whipping at the Pillar.
CONS: 1. How JESUS led back to Pilate, is there accused as a Blasphemer,
Seducer and Traitor; Barabbas though a Murderer, is perfer'd before him; can
repine, when vilifyed?

2. How that Innocent Body unclothed, and bound to the Pillar, is whipped for thy
sins: I sin, and Thou suffrest!

3. How barbarously those Soldiers treat thy JESUS; Oh cruelly! this he suffers
for the: Bath thy heart in his saving blood.

Affect. Oh my JESU, that I could bear all Crosses, from all persons, for the
love of Thee!

Resolve, To practice Patience and shun Anger, etc.

THVRSDAY. Crowning with Thorns.
CONS: 1. How JESUS thus bleeding, is crowned with sharp Thorns; this Crown is
instead of a Crown of Glory!

2. How they cloth him in scarlet, put a reed in his hand for a Scepter, and
then kneeling deride Him; Thou art a King indeed; reign for ever in my heart.

3. How JESUS, thus adorned is led forth by Pilate, and shown to the Jews,
with, Behold a Man: O sad Spectacle! Yet still, they cry, Crucify Him: Oh the
heavy weight of my sins.

Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could obey Thee, even to loss of life.

Resolve, To practice Obedience and shun Sloth, etc.

FRIDAY. Carrying the Cross.
CONS: 1. How JESUS thus derided, whipped and crowned, goes forth carrying the
Cross, whereon he is to be sacrifized for thy Sins.

2. What shouts of joy the Jews make after Him, through the streets of
Jerusalem: thus is Innocence despised!

3. How the devout women meet and bewail Him: thy hard heart sheds not one
Tear amidst these sorrows, or for thy sins.

Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could abandon all sensual satisfactions for the
Love of Thee!

Resolve, To practice Temperance, and shu^ Gluttony, etc.

SATVRDAY. Crucifying of Jesus.
CONS: 1. How JESUS with much pain and shame, arrived to Mount Calvary is again
unclothed, and thus all his soars are renewed: My Sins not blotted out by
Repentance, shall one day be disclosed to the whole World.

2. How they streatch thy JESUS upon the Cross, fastni^g him with nails
thereunto, and the^ raise him up, where he hangs betwee^ two thieves: Oh what
ignominy!

3. How He there hangs for the space of three hours, reviled by Jews and
Gentiles, forsaken by his Disciples, drenched with gall and vinegar, peirced to
the heart with a spear, and yet He prays for his Enemies: Enter, and make thy
aboade in that love-wounded-Heart.

Affect: Oh my JESU that I could imitate Thee in the purity of thy Life and
Doctrine.

Resolve, To practice Modesty and shun All contrary Thereunto, etc.

FINIS.

