Cromwels Complaint of Injustice: OR, HIS DISPUTE WITH Pope Alexander the
Sixth, FOR Precedence in HELL.
Oliver. WHat pretense have thou to take place of me? What vast Gygantick
Crimes have thou Committed, that thou should dare to think, thou deservest to
be Greater than I? Have not I Transgrest all the Laws of God and Man? Did not I
Subveret a State? Change its Religion and Government, Murder its Prince, and
set whole Rivers of His best Subjects Blood a Flowing? Did not I do all this,
and have thou the Impudence to pretend to Merit more, and have a greater Share
in the Infernal Empire, than I?


Pope. All this thou did, I do Confess it; But if thou would have but the
Patience to hear me, I do not Question but to make appear, that I and my
Predecessors have done much more Meritorious Things, for our Great Lord and
Master the Devil, than ever thou did, or could do.


Oliver. Hell and Furies! What did thou ever do more, than Whore thy own
Daughter, and help thy Son Caesar Borgia to Poison, and make away all the
Opposrs and Obstacles to his Greatness?


Pope. Well, that is something; it showed how willing, and ready, I was to
Tread in the Footsteps of my Predecessors, and give a good Example to all my
Flock; but be Patient, and I will tell thee the Right, I and my Brother Popes
have to be Vice-Royes here below. Thou Alas! Valuest thy self for having been
the Ruin of one Prince and State: But, How many Emperors have we forced to
come, and Lay their Necks under our Feet? How many Kings have we caused to be
Assassinated? How many Princes to be Murdered? How many Kingdoms and States to
be Ruined by Civil Wars and Dissentions? Have not we caused Princes to Rebel
against, and Murder the Kings their Fathers? Subjects to Depose their Lawful
Sovereigns, and set up Tyrants in their Rooms? And in Fine, Did we not bring
Anarchy and Confusion into all Nations, when our Interest required it; or when
those at the Helm did not Regulate themselves as we would have had them? All
this thou know we did, and must Confess it, there being Millions of
Instruments here, whom we Employed to those ends, to Confirm and Testify it.


Oliver. I Grant all you Popes together have been Fruitfully and Bravely
Wicked; But has any one of you, Attempted, Performed, and Completed, such
Great, Noble, and Numerous Crimes as I have done? Did not I, and my Companions
under the Pretext of Religion, Subvert both it and the Government, and crying
out against the ill Management of the State, the Treachery, and want of Conduct
in Ministers, and by pretending to reform the Helm, bring the Nation into such
a Combustion, that we Gained our Point; which was, That we might have the
Liberty to Act those Wickednesses, that the others who were there before us
were Accused of, but which indeed never came into their Thoughts, not having
the Sense or Courage to Perform, or at least were Restrained by their
Consciences; the Liberty of which, we Cried out mightily for, because we knew
ours would allow us all we could desire.


Pope. All this I know, and how Successful you were in it, but you were only
the Executioners of the Roman Contrivances; We drew the Model, and set you at
Work, Your King's Death that you brag so much of, was first Resolved on at
Rome, before it came into your Noddles, and so far, you were only the blind
Ministers of our Resolutions.


Oliver. I am sure that is false; For none of us all, but Aimed chiefly at him,
though we seemed to Look, and Squinted another way. You might perhaps have the
same Design, but you ought not therefore to Arrogate to your self all the
Honor, being we thought on it, and designed it as soon as there was any
Probability of doing it; and even performed it as soon as it lay in our Power.
Indeed we found it a difficult Task, and without your Help, perhaps we should
not have been able to have Compassed it. We were forced to raise Fears and
Jealousies of an Arbitrary Government; and in that I must Confess, we found
your Party extremely useful to us, and very skilful to Infuse the Poison into
Peoples Minds; and by these Means, we Arrived at what we so much had Railed
against, amd seemed to Abhor; that is to say, an Unlimited Power. We Trampled
all Laws down under our Feet, and made such New Ones, as were fit for our
Purpose, and Interests. The Truth is (to bring this to pass) we made it Cost
the Nations whole Seas of Blood: Trade was Destroyed, Maidens were Ravished,
Mothers had their Infants Ripped out of their Wombs; the Father Stab his Son, and
the Son his Father; and nothing was more common, than to see Brother Drink his
Brother's Blood to the Health of our Cause, when he called him an Enemy, and
Traitor to his Country.


Pope. I Laugh at all these Flourishes, they are but the common, and usual
Effects of our Conspiracies: Had but our late Plot Succeeded in England, you
would have seen them bravely Acted, and Repeated even to a Degree above
Admiration; they would have Surpassed your Envy, and even have caused in you
your self, a Dread and Terror.


Oliver. But must you not Confess, that your Instruments were but pitiful base
Creatures, and ashamed of their Task, since they Denied it at their Executions,
whereas you see my Brood in Scotland, not only begun bravely by their
Rebellion, and Murdering the Archbishop of Saint Andrews, but Acknowledged
the Fact at their Trials and Deaths; and not only Maintained the Lawfulness of
it, but also Dyed Martyrs for the Doctrine of King-killing; whereas your
Chicken-hearted Heroes, were both ashamed of what they would have done, and
disowned what the brave Doctors of your Church has Taught.


Pope. Come, don't Reproach us, they had been Fools if they had Owned it; nay,
and we had taken Care to persuade them they should have been Damned too;
besides Peoples Opinion of an Action, is generally Regulated by its Success,
which we being Disappointed of, all our Interests and Reputation in the World,
would have been Lost and Ruined, had they not stiffly Denied it. Therefore, I
say, do not Reproach us; for can you, or your Brood, as you call them, ever
pretend to Match our Treacheries, Treasons, Plots, Conspiracies, Massacres,
etc. Do you think you ever can?


Oliver. Perhaps we may; but of that, I Will tell you more hereafter.


FINIS.
London, Printed for T. Davis, 1681.


