Several Letters and Passages between his Excellency the Lord General
CROMWELL, and William Dundas Governor of Edinburgh Castle, And the Ministers
therein, Since his Excellencies Entrance into Edinburgh.

Whereunto are annexed some Quaries, that were then sent to the said Governor
and Ministers.

Printed and sold in York by T. Broad, at his Shopp near Common-Halls-Gate.
Septem. 27. 1650.

For the Honorable the Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh.
SIR, I received Command from my Lord General, to desire you, to let the
Ministers of Edinburgh, now in the Castle with you, know, that they have free
liberty granted them, if they please to take the pains, to preach in their
several Churches; and that my Lord has given special Command both to
Officers and Soldiers, that they shall not in the least be molested.

Sir, I am your most humble servant Edw: Whalley.
Edinburgh Septem. 9. 1650.
From the Governor of Edinburgh Castle to Colonel Whalley, with my Lord
Generals answer.
SSR, I have communicated the desire of your Letter to such of the Ministers of
Edinburgh as are with me, who have desired me to return this for answer, that
though they are ready to be spent in their Masters service, and to refuse no
^^ffering so they may fulfill their Ministry with joy; yet perceiving the
persecution to be personal, by the practice of your Party upon the Ministers
of Christ in England and Ireland and in the Kingdom of Scotland, since your
unjust invasion thereof: And finding nothing expressed in yours whereupon to build
any security for their Persons while they are there, and for their return
hither, they are resolved to reserve themselves for better times, and to wait
upon Him, who has hidden his face for a while from the Sons of Jacob. This
is all I have to say, but that I am,

Sir, Your most humble servant W: Dundas.
9. Septem. 1650.
For the Honorable the Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh.
SIR, the kindness offered to the Ministers with you, was done with
ingenuitie, thinking it might have met with the like; but I am satisfied to
tell those with you, That if their Masters service (as they call it) were
chiefly in their eye, imagination of suffering would not have caused such a
return, much less the practice by our Party (as they are pleased to say) upon
the Ministers of Christ in England, have been an argument of Personal
persecution. The Ministers in England are supported, and have liberty to preach
the Gospel, though not to rail, nor under pretense thereof to overtop the
Civil Power, or debase it as they please. No man has been troubled in England
or Ireland for preaching the Gospel, nor has any Minister been molested in
Scotland since the coming of the Army hither: the speaking the Truth becomes
the Ministers of Christ, when Ministers pretend to a glorious Reformation, and
lay the foundation thereof in getting to themselves worldly Power, and can make
worldly mixtures to accomplish the same, such as their late agreement with
their King, and hopes by him to carry on their Design, may know, that the Sion
promised and hoped for, will not be built with such untempered Mortar; As for
the unjust Invasion they mention, time was when an Army of Scotland came into
England, not called by the Supreme Authority. We have said in our Papers with
what hearts, and upon what account we came, and the Lord has heard us, though
you would not, upon as solemn an Appeal as any experience can parallel. And
although they seem to comfort themselves with being the sons of Jacob, from
whom (they say) God has hid his face for a time, yet its no wonder when the
Lord has lifted up his hand so eminently against a Family, as he has done so
often against this, and men will not see his hand: if the Lord hide his face
from such, putting them to shame, both for it, and their hatred at his People,
as it is this day. When they purely trust to the Sword of the Spirit, which is
the Word of God, which is powerful to bring down strong Holds, and every
imagination that exalts it self, which alone is able to square and fit the
stones for the new Jerusalem: then, and not before, and by that means, and no
other, shall Jerusalem (which is to be the praise of the whole earth)* the City
of the Lord be built, the Sion of the Holy one of Israel, I have nothing to say
to you but that I am

Sir, Your humble servant O. CROMWELL.
Septem. 9. 1650
A Letter from the Governor of Edinburgh Castle, for the Right Honorable the
Lord Cromwell, Commander in chief of the English Army.
MY Lord yours I have communicated to these with me whom it concerned, who
desire me to return this answer, That their ingenuity in prosecuting the ends
of the Covenant, according to their vocation and place, and adhering to their
first Principles, is well known; and one of their greatest regreats is, that
they have not been met with the like: when Ministers of the Gospel have been
imprisoned, deprived of their Benefices, sequestrate, forced to flee from their
dwellings, and bitterly threatened for their faithful declaring the Will of God
against the godless, and wicked proceedings of men, that it cannot be
accounted an imaginary fear of suffering in such as are resolved to follow the
like freedom and faithfulness, in discharge of their Masters Message: That it
savours not of ingenuitie to promise liberty of preaching the Gospel, and to
limit the Preachers thereof, that they must not speak against the sins and
enormities of Civil Powers, since their Commission carries them to speak the
Word of the Lord unto, and to reprove the sins of Persons of all ranks, from
the highest to the lowest: That to impose the name of railing upon such
faithful freedom, was the old practice of Malignants against the Ministers of
the Gospel, who laid open to people the wickedness of their ways, that they
should not be ensnared thereby: That their consciences bear them record, and
all their hearers do know, that they meddle not with Civil affairs further
then to hold forth the rule of Gods Word, by which the straightnes and
crookednes of men's actions are made evident. But they are sorry that they have
just cause to regreat, that men of mere Civil place and employment, should
usurp the Calling and Employment of the Ministry, to the scandal of the
Reformed Kirks, and particularly in Scotland, contrary to the Government and
Discipline therein established; to the maintenance whereof you are bound by the
Solemn League and Covenant. Thus far they have thought fit to vindicate the
return to the offer in Col. Whalleys latter letter. The other part of yours
which concerns the Public as well as them, they conceive that all has been
answered sufficiently in the Public Papers of the State and Kirk: only to
that of the success upon your solemn Appeal they say again what was said to
it before, That they have not so learned Christ, as to hang the equity of their
Cause upon events, but desire to have their hearts established in the love of
the Truth in all the tribulations that befall them. I only do add that I am

My Lord, Your most humble servant W. Dundas.
9. Septem 1650.
For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle.
SIR, Because I am at reasonable good leisure, I cannot let such a gross
mistake and inconsequentiall reasonings pass, without some notice taken of
them. And first their Ingenuity in relation to the Covenant, for which they
commend themselves, does no more justify their want of ingenuitie in answer to
Col. Whaleys Christian offer, concerning which my letter charged them with
guiltiness, deficiencie, then their bearing witness to themselves of their
adhering to their first Principles and ingenuity in prosecuting the ends of the
Covenant, justifies them so to have done, merely because they say so. They must
give more leave henceforwards, for Christ will have it so, will they nill they,
and they must have patience to have the truth of their doctrines and sayings
tried by the sure touchstone of the word of Gods and if there be a liberty and
duty of trial, there is a liberty of judgment also, for them that may and
ought to try* which if so, they must give others leave to say and think, that
they can appeal to equal judges, who have been the truest fulfillers of the
most real and equitable ends of the Covenant; but if these Gentlemen which do
assume to themselves to be the infallible expositors of the Covenant, as they
do too much to their Auditories of the Scriptures, counting a different sense
and judgment from theirs breach of Covenant and Heresy; no marvel they judge
of others so authoritatively and severely: but we have not so learned Christ.
We look at Ministers as helper of, not Lords over the faith of Gods people. I
appeal to their consciences, whether any trying their doctrines and dissenting,
shall not incur the censure of Sectary, and what is this but to deny
Christians their liberty, and assume the infallible Chair? What does he, whom
we would not be likened unto, do more then this? In the second place it is
affirmed that the ministers of the Gospel have been imprisoned, deprived of
their Benefices, sequestered, forced to fly from their dwellings, and bitterly
threatened for their faithful declaring the will of God, etc. And that they
have been limited that they might not speak against the sins and enormities of
the Civil powers, that to impose the name of railing upon such faithful
freedom, was the old practice of malignants against the Preachers of the
Gospel, etc.

If the Civil authority, or that part of it, which continued faithful to
their trust, true to the ends of the Covenant, did in answer to their
consciences turn out a Tyrant in a way which the Christians in after times
will mention with honor, and all Tyrants in the world look at with fear, and
many thousands of Saints in England rejoice to think of it, and have received
from the hand of God a liberty from the fear of like usurpations, and have cast
off him, who trod in his Fathers steps, doing mischief as far as he was
able, whom you have received like fire into your bosom, of which God will I
trust in time make you sensible; if Ministers railing at the Civil Power,
calling them murderers, and the like, for* doing this, have been dealt with as
you mention; will this be found a personal persecution? or is sin so because
they say so? They that acted this great business, have given a reason of their
faith in this action, and some here are further ready to do it against all
gainsayers. But it will be found that these reprovers do not only make
themselves the Judges and Determiners of sin, that so they may reprove; but
they also took liberty to stir up the people to blood and arms, and would
have brought a War upon England, as has been upon Scotland, had not God
prevented it; and if such severity as has been expressed toward them be
worthy the name of personal persecution, let all uninterested men judge,
whether the calling of this practice, railing, be to be paralleld with the
Malignants imputation upon the Ministers, for speaking against the Popish
Innovations in the Prelates times, and the Tyrannical and wicked practice then
on foot, let your own consciences mind you. The Roman Emperors in Christ's and
his Apostles times were usurpers and intruders upon the Jewish State, yet what
foot-step have ye either of our blessed Saviors so much as willingness to the
dividing of an inheritance, or their meddling in that kind; This was not
practiced by the Church since our Saviors time, till Antichrist assuming the
infallible Chair, and all that he called the Church to be under him, practiced
this authoritatively over civil Governors.

The way to fulfill your Ministry with joy, is to preach the Gospel, which I
wish some who take pleasure in reproves at adventure, do not forget too much
to do. 3. You say you have just cause to regreat, that men of civil
employments should usurp the calling and employment of the Ministry, to the
scandal of the reformed Kirks, etc.

Are you troubled that Christ is preached? Is preaching so inclusive in your
function? Does it scandalize the reformed Kirks, and Scotland in particular? Is
it against the Covenant? Away with the Covenant if this be so; I thought the
Covenant and these could have been willing that any should speak good of the
name of Christ; if not it is no Covenant of Gods approving, nor the Kirks you
mention, in so much the spouse of Christ. Where do you find in the Scripture a
ground to warrant such an assertion, That preaching is included in your
function, though an approbation from men has order in it, and may do well, yet
he that has not a better warrant then that, has none at all. I hope he that
ascended up on high may give his gifts to whom he please, and if those gifts be
the Seal of mission, be not envious though Eldad and Medad prophecy, you know
who bids us cover earnestly the best gifts, but chiefly that we may prophecy,
which the Apostle explains there to be a speaking to instruction, and
edification and comfort, which the instructed, edified, and comsorted, can best
tell the Energie and effect of; if such evidence be, I say again ta^^ he^d you
envy not for your own sakes, least you be guilty of a greater fault, then
^^^ses reproved in Joshua, for envying for his sake. Indeed you err through
the mistake of the Scriptures; approbation is an act of convenience in (...) of
order, not of necessity to give faculty to preach the Gospel. Your pretended
fear least error should step in, is like the man that would keep all the wine
out of the Country, least men should be drunk. It will be found an unjust and
unwise jealousy: to deny a man the liberty he has by nature, upon a
supposition he may abuse it, when he does abuse it judge. It a man speak
foolishly, ye suffer him gladly because ye are wise, if erroneously, the truth
more appears, by your conviction, stop such a man's mouth with sound words that
cannot be gain^aid; if blasphemously, or to the disturbance of the public
Peace, let the Civil Magistrate punish them; if truly, rejoice in the truth,
and if you will call our speakings together since we came into Scotland, to
provoke one another to love and to good works, to faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ; and repentance from dead works, to charity and love toward you, to
pray and mourn for you, and for the bitter returns to, and incredulity of our
professions of love to you of the truth, of which we have made our solemn and
humble Appeals to the Lord our God, which he has heard; and then witness to,
if these things be scandalous to the Kirk, and against the Covenant, because
done by men of civil callings, we rejoice in them, notwithstanding what you
say.

For a Conclusion in answer to the witness of God upon our solemn Appeal, you
say, you have not so learned Christ to hang the equity of your Cause upon
events; We could wish blindness bath not been upon your eyes to all those
mavelous dispensations which God has wrought lately in England. But did not
you solemnly Appeal and Pray? did not we do so too? and ought not you and we to
think with fear and trembling, of the Hand of the great God in these mighty and
strange appearances of his? but can steightly call it an Event; Were not both
yours and our expectations renewed from time to time, whilst we waited upon
God, to see which way he would manifest himself upon our Appeals? And shall we
after all these our Prayers, Fastings, Tears, expectations, and solemn Appeals,
call these bare Events? The Lord pity you, surely we fear, because it has
been a merciful and gracious deliverance to us: I beseech yo^ in the Bowels of
Christ, search after the mind of the Lord in it toward you, and we shall help
you by our prayers, that you may find it out; for ye^ (if we know our hearts
at all) our Bowels do in Christ Jesus earn after the godly in Scotland. We know
there are stumbling blocks which hinder you; The Personal prejudices you have
taken up against us and our ways, wherein we cannot but think some occasion
has been given, and for which we mourn; the apprehension you have, that we have
hindered the glorious Reformation, you think you were upon: I am persuaded
these and such like bind you up, from an understanding, and yielding to the
mind of God, in this great day of his Power and Visitation; and (if I be
rightly informed) the late blow you received, is attributed to profane
Councels, and Conduct, and mixtures in your Army, and such like. The natural
man will not find out the cause; look up to the Lord that he may tell it you,
which that he would do, shall be the fervent prayers of

Your loving friend and servant O: CROMWELL.
Edinburgh, 12. Septem. 1670.
For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle, these.
TH^se Queries are sent not to reproach you, but in the love of Christ laying
the before you; we being persuaded in the Lord, that there is a Truth in them,
which we earnestly desire may not be laid aside unsought after, by any
prejudice either against the things themselves, or the unworthenesse or
weakness of the person that offers them. If you turn at the Lords reproofs, he
will power out his Spirit upon you, and you shall understand his words, and
they will guide you to a blessed Reformation indeed, even to one according to
the Word, and such as the People of God wait for; wherein you will find us and
all Saints ready to rejoice, and serve you to the utmost in our places and
Callings.

1. Whether the Lords Controverse be not both against the Ministers in Scotland
and England, for wre^^ing, straining, and improving the Covenant against the
Godly and Saints in England, of the same Faith with then in every Fundamental,
even to bitter perfection, and so making that which in the main intention was
Spiritual, to serve politics and carnal ends, even in that part especially
which was Spiritual, and did look to the glory of God, and the comfort of his
people.

2. Whether the Lords Controversy may not be for your and the Ministers in
England sullenness at, and darkning and not beholding the glory of Gods
wonderful dispensations in this Series of his Providence in England, Ireland
and Scotland, both now and formerly, through envy at Instruments, and because
the things did not work forth your Platform, and the great God did not come
down to your minds and thoughts.

3 Whether you carrying on a Reformation, so much by you spoken of, have not
probably been subject to some mistakes in your own judgments about some parts
of the same, laying so much stresse thereupon, as has been a temptation to
you, even to break the law of Love toward your Brethren, and those Christ has
regenerated, even to the reviling and persecuting of them, or to stir up wicked
men to do the same, for your Forms sake, or but some parts of it.

4 Whether if your Reformation be so perfect and so spiritual, be indeed the
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, it will need such carnal policies, such fleshly
mixtures, such unsincere actings, as to pretend to cry down all Malignants,
and yet receive and set up the Head of them, and so act for the Kingdom of
Christ in his Name, and upon advantage there of, and to publish so false a
Paper, so full of specious pretenses to piety, as the fruit and effect of his
repentance, to deceive the minds of all the godly in England, Ireland, and
Scotland; you in your own consciences knowing with what regreat he did it, and
with what importunities and threats he was brought to do it, and how much to
this very day he is against it: and whether this be not a high provocation of
the Lord in so grossly dissembling with him and his People.

For the right Honorable the Commander in Chief of the English Army.
My Lord, Your Papers I have communicated to these with me whom they concerned,
who have desired me to return this answer. The Contents of these Papers do
concern the public differences betwixt you and those of the three Kingdoms,
who have faithfully adhered to the Solemn League and Covenant, and are awed by
the oath of God from accession to the guiltiness of clear and evident breaches
of Covenant, and have been so often and fully answered in the public Papers of
this Kirk and Kingdom, In the resolutions of the Assembly of Divines in
England, and in the published Writings of the soundest Divines there; yea and
of all the reformed Kirks, That they conceive it needless (though a matter of
no great difficulty) to give a particular answer; especially since the late
General Assembly have authorized their Commissioners to take into
consideration matters of public concernment to this Kirk, unto whom if you
please you may hereafter direct Papers of that kind. In the mean time they rest
fully persuaded in their minds, that the event of a battle (though ordered by a
just and wise providence) is no infallible proof of the equity or iniquity of a
Cause, seeing there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to him
that swears and to him that fears an oath, as it is clear in the cause of
Israel against Benjamin, about the men of Gibeah. I am

My Lord, Your most humble servant, W. Dundas.
12. Septem. 1650.
Finis.

