GLAD-TYDINGS PROCLAIMED TO THE Upright in Heart, Who walk in the Light of
Life: AND Judgment pronounced AGAINST BABYLON, AND HER MERCHANTS: Whose REWARD
must be according to her DESERTS.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

GLAD-TYDINGS proclaimed to the Upright in Heart, who walk in the Light of
Life, etc.
DEar Flocks of my heavenly Father, whom he has visited and chosen out of the
world to be his peculiar treasure, whose tears he has botled up, and whose
groans are in remembrance before him, that he cannot withhold from doing you
good. Oh ye Faithful and Valiant Ones for his Truth upon Earth! He has seen,
he has seen your Afflictions, Sufferings and Trials, and has weighed them in
the balance, and tempered your Cups, that you may say of the bitterest of
them, My God is the Portion of this also. Has he smitten thy valiant men, and
removed them hence? What is it for? because of distaste that he has taken
against thee, or, to bring thee (O Sion) to live in his Life that never dies.
The former is to be searched into, and according to the discovery from God
therein, the deep sense is to be impressed upon thy spirit; that his Will may
be done, and his End answered. Shall I take up a Lamentation and say, How are
thy mighty men fallen? and how have thou been tried (O daughter of Sion) even
since thy coming forth from amongst the pots, and since thou have appeared out
of the holes? Though thy days be but young, and thy beauty scarce discovered,
yet how have thou been hunted? not only when thou wast in the Wilderness and
desert Land; but since thou art on thy way to Canaan, how has Amalek vexed
thee, and the Nations every where been troubled at thee? Art thou born unto it?
and must it always be so? Must War still follow War, and new Tempests arise so
soon as the Calms appear? What, no time given thee to put on thy beautiful
Attire, and to show thy self forth to the alluring of the Nations? Yes surely,
thou shall have a Day, and thy Glory shall shine, and thy Beauty and Comeliness
be made manifest, as well as thy Blackness and Deformity. He is but emptying
thee from Vessel to Vessel, that thou may not taste of thy lees, but that
thy words may be as new Wine, to refresh the hearts of the mourners, and as
Apples of Gold set in pictures of Silver, to take the eyes of the beholders,
that it may be known that thy food is not that which will corrupt, but upon the
Tree of Life, whose Leaves shall heal the Nations, and whose Fruit shall not
fail, but in every month and change be green. Oh then, why should thou not
be content and thoroughly satisfied with all the dealings of thy God toward
thee, and say, It is the Lord, let him do what seems good in his sight; he
will bring me forth after he has thoroughly purged me, and I shall shine as the
Sun in luster, and triumph after the darkest day and thickest clouds: and then
shall thou see clearly, and understand the end of the Lord, as well in taking
away thy mighty men, as all the rest of his dealings toward thee; how that it
is not only from the evil to come, but that their blood might cry (now their
bodies are dead) louder, and more powerful than when they were living: For know
(O Sion) to thy comfort, and (O Babylon) unto thy sorrow, that though their
Bodies be dead, their Blood speaks, and the spillers thereof shall not escape
in the day of the Inquisition of the mighty God: for from this hand thou shall
have Justice, and the Nations shall know it, and be ashamed and confounded for
ever. For the Spirit of the Lord is upon me to proclaim Glad-Tydings in thine
ears, in the Authority of his Life, and Dominion of his Name, and to tell them
that thy Warfare is nigh to be accomplished, and thy Redemption out of the
hands of all thine Enemies hastens, that thou shall worship and serve thy God
in the beauty of Holiness and Land of the Living, when Babylon, with all her
Upholders and Adherents, shall not have whereon to lay their heads, or set
their feet; but, as she has dealt to Jerusalem, so shall it be measured to her
again, (The Word of the Lord has spoken it) Only wait ye, wait ye in the
Shepherds Tents with the Flocks of the Companions, and these things you shall
see assuredly brought to pass; And the time hastens that he that has Wisdom
shall read, and he that has Understanding, shall understand the number 666,
and the Name, and the number of the Beast, and of his Name: for it is the
number of a man; he that can reckon, let him. The Key to open this Mystery, and
to unlock this Secret, is the Brightness of the coming of the Son of
Righteousness, shining unto the soul, to give the discovery of every motion of
the spirit of man, in the things of God, that it may pass no longer for the
Spirit of God, but may be ceased from for ever, in praying, in speaking, with
all the rest of God's Worship and Service; that all may be done by the Spirit
of his mouth, who has the Keys of David; and opens, and none shuts, and
shuts, and none opens: Then shall be read and distinguished the
Ministration from the Ministrator, that when he removes, the Ministration may
not be adored, but the Lamb followed wherever he goes: so shall there be no
more Sea, but the former things shall be passed away, and a Sea of glass
mingled with fire, appear in the room thereof, and the followers of the Lamb
standing by it, as with Harps in their hands, and Praise in their mouths, unto
the Most High, that lives for ever.

Oh my dear Friends, Brethren and Companions, whom my soul greeteth with these
Salutations of Love and good Tidings; what shall I say to you all that may be
as Oil to make your faces shine, and Wine to make your hearts glad in the midst
of all your besettings, huntings, and temptations: Your God sees and beholds,
and ponders all your trials: Leave them all with him, and cast your care wholly
upon him; for by all yours not one cubit can be added to the stature. He will
bring to pass his Purpose, and your desires. O ye upright in heart, be faithful
unto him, and follow those things that make for Peace; and take heed of this
present world, that neither its riches, its frowns, its fears, its sufferings,
nor its pleasures may move you out of your Tents; but that the signs of the
coming of the Son of man may be always in your eye, lest either the marrying,
or giving in marriage (spoken of) or the beating of the fellow servants, do
overtake any of you; and then the Kingdom of Heaven be indeed like unto ten
Virgins, five wise, and five foolish.

These things are written, not to upbraid any, but to forewarn all, that they
stir not out of their Tents, but dwell continually in the lowly mind,
preferring one another before themselves; cherishing the good in all, and
strengthening the weak hands; dwelling as Saviors upon Mount Sion: For it is
easy to judge and condemn, but hard to save; So shall ye be known to be the
Children of the most High, and, as Epistles written upon one another hearts,
seen and read of all men; and the blessed Presence of your Father will be with
you, and his Glory will not cease to rest upon you: which is the desire of my
traveling soul for you all, who am

Your Brother and Companion in the Faith and Patience of JESUS. JOHN CROOK.
From visiting my Fathers Children, the 17th of the 12th Month. 1662.
THE END.

