AN APOLOGY FOR THE QUAKERS: Wherein is showed, How they Answer the Chief
Principles of the LAW, and Main Ends of GOVERNMENT. With SEVERAL REASONS Why
they deserve the LIBERTY of their CONSCIENCES in the WORSHIP of GOD. For all
Magistrates and Rulers to consider of, lest they pervert Justice, and provoke
the Lord to displeasure. By a Lover of Mercy and Truth, J. Crook.

Those whom Lust, Fear, and Wrath control,
Scarce know their Body from their Soul.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

An APOLOGY for the QUAKERS.
THis People has been every where spoken against, as those that turn the World
up-side down, and are different in life and manners from the people of the
Nations: but time and experience has made many to know them better, for they
begin to be understood, and only to be hardly thought of in those places, and
by those persons that know them not; it being always incident to man, to speak
evil of things he knows not, because he cannot endure to have any to outshine
or go beyond his knowledge; and therefore what he wants in Worth and Virtue, he
strives to make up by Force and Wrath, though thereby he can never work the
Righteousness of God. But as Cain thought to get up by removing Abel out of the
way, and to establish his Form, by taking away his life that was in the Power;
so have all done ever since that have gone in the way of Cain. And yet, though
Abel was killed, Cain could not enter into God's savor, while sin lay at his
door: for, Form without Power will never be accepted with God, however it may
be cried up by men.

This Peoples Principles are now well known; and the more, because they have
been so much opposed and often tried, even from the Miter-cap unto the
Curats-coat, besides the lashes by the way from bystanders and lookers-on, as
well as from those that esteem themselves unquestionably Orthodox in their
Judgments and Practices. Yet have this People stood when many have fallen, and
by their trials both their Principles and Practices come to shine the more, and
the better to be approved; as if to them to dye were gain, and to live were
Christ.

That this People deserve to have the Liberty of their Consciences, to worship
God according to his persuasion in their hearts, may appear by what hereafter
follows.

First, Because of their Principle, which is Light, and that leads them to do
unto all men as they would be done unto. And this Principle and Grace, they
affirm, appears unto all men, though few follow it; yet is it every man's duty
to be subject unto its requirings: and those that are faithful unto it, it
keeps them in all trials, whereby they are upheld when others fall.

2dly, Because of their Practices, being such as become the Gospel; not
vain-talkers like many others, but holy livers; not hearers only, but doers,
their words being Laws unto them, proceeding not from a vain customary form,
but from a considerate and pondrous spirit, first weighed and then spoken
forth: and such words never become a burden to the speakers of them, though
hard to be digested by an unsavory mind in the hearers. But their Practices
are so well known, that Fairs and Markets proclaim them, as well as Shops and
Trades, besides the experiences of Landlords from their Tenants, as well as
Relations both near and more remote, with their demeanor both in sickness and
health, poverty and riches, liberty and restraint, without murmuring at the
hand which strikes. I need say no more to manifest their Practices, they being
known from the hoary head unto the youthful days, and from the chiefest Ruler
unto the meanest Subject, it being all one to them, with whom they have to do,
either child or experienced age, Righteousness being the girdle of their loins,
and Truth and Uprightness the square and line of all their actions.

3dly, They deserve Liberty, because of their faithful Testimony against the
Wickedness, Injustice, Oppressions and Cruelties of the persons, places and
times in and among whom they have lived, even ever since they have been a
People unto this day; though hitherto they have suffered deeply for the same,
as the Righteous have always done, who, by departing from iniquity, and
bearing witness against it in whomsoever it appeared, made themselves a prey.

4thly, If Liberty should be denied them, experience teaches that they will
meet to worship God, (which argues that both their Faith and Constancy comes
from him) unless hindered by Banishment, Death, or Imprisonment: and experience
shows, by what of this kind has already been exercised toward them, how
their number is increased, and a spirit of pity and compassion is raised up in
the hearts of people toward them, Besides, their usefulness in the
Commonwealth, they being known to be both laborious themselves, and
encouragers of others thereunto, may be another reason why they deserve
Liberty. For may it not well be supposed, that the denying of Liberty of
Conscience unto Quakers and others, is one cause why Trade is so decayed, and
Discontents increased? and can that place or Country be long-lived where Trade
decays, Trade being unto a Kingdom or Country, as meat is unto the stomach?
And what danger England is in upon this account, it concerns the Rulers to look
unto, before the disease be incurable.

5thly, They deserve Liberty, because they both answer the Principles of the
Law, and the Ends of Government.

The main Principles of the Law are these three; Honest vivere; Tribuere suum
cuique; Neminem laedere: i. e. To live well; To pay every man his own; And to
hurt no man.

For their living well, it is manifest unto all that know them, and have to do
with them, of which I have spoken before: And therefore the Law is abused, when
Liberty is given to Crows, and Doves punished.

Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censura Columbas. Juven. And this practice does make
Laws like Spiders webs,

That catch the Flies, but let the Wasps go free;
Favors the Ill, when Just imprisoned be.
For their paying to every man his own, let Landlords speak for their Tenants,
and Masters and Servants each for other, with all others with whom they deal or
have to do.

For their hurting no man, it is as manifest, in that they are hurt by all; and
the more, because they follow Christ's example, When they are reviled, not to
revile again: and therefore can they not be justly charged unto this day with
hurting any, either in their Persons, Estates, or Liberties, though many have
watched for their halting.

The chief Ends of Government are these four:

First, To prevent Oppressions, To limit and restrain the excessive Power and
Violence of Great-men, To open the passages of Justice, with indifferency
toward all.

2dly, To preserve men in their Estates, and secure them in their lives and
liberties: for if it were not for just Government, no man would have more
certainly in his own, than power will allow.

3ly, That virtue should be cherished, and vice suppressed.

4thly, That all accidents and events, all counsels and designs should be
improved to the public good.

All these ends are manifestly answered by the Lives and Practices of the
Quakers; for they do not Oppress, nor Defraud, nor cherish Vice, but do good to
all, their Principle leading them to do to all as they would be done unto. And
therefore they do the Magistrates work for them, in giving good Example, both
in Life and Doctrine, unto all People with whom they converse; whereby the
Magistrates work is done to their hands: And therefore in Justice they ought to
have Liberty of Conscience, the Ends of Government being answered by them, both
in Doctrine and Practice; while the generality of People are either Oppressors,
or by their Greatness and Violence do stop the Passages of Justice, or do
wrongfully take away the Estates and Liberties, and sometimes the Lives of
others, or that do cherish Vice and suppress Virtue; and it is the end and
design of many to improve all Accidents and Events, Counsels and Contrivances,
to a selfish Interest, and not to the public Good: all which increase the
Magistrate's Work that rules for God, and lays more burdens upon his back, as
well as they employ his hand to draw the Sword, if he bear it not in vain: All
which is spared by the Quakers, and those that walk by their Principle and
Example; but contrariwise, vertus (as well as veritas) odium parit; virtuous
Lives often gain Prisons, when Vice has liberty. And this is made good in our
day, Probitas laudatur, et alget; Honesty is praised by most, but practiced by
few.

By what has been said, it may be seen, how the Quakers answer the Ends of
Government, and therefore may justly challenge the Liberty of their
Consciences, to worship God according to his persuasions in their Hearts.

Therefore all Magistrates and Rulers are to consider, with whom Prisons are or
have lately been filled: Is it with those that live dishonestly contrary to
Law, or honest Livers that answer the Law? Are hurters of men in Prison, or at
Liberty in Taverns, Alehouses and Play Houses? let Equity speak. Have you been
as willing to turn honest Livers, and those that Answer the Ends of Government,
out of Prison upon the Kings late Declaration, as you were to put them in upon
his Proclamation before? Are you as indifferent in the Quakers Cases, when they
come before you, and willing to do them Justice, and Release them, as
Drunkards, Swearers and others that come before you at your Courts and
Sessions? if so, What means the lowing of the Oxen, and bleating of the Sheep,
whom, as appointed for the slaughter, many of you Fine and Imprison at
pleasure, without any legal Trial by Juries of the Neighborhood, which by
your Oaths (according to Law) you ought to do. Nay do not many Magistrates now,
as Israel did in those days, when there was no King in Israel, Every man what
is right in his own eyes, as to this People? If he will be moderate he may, and
if he will not, he may choose; as if the time were come, that He who is filthy
may be filthy still, but he who is holy must be holy no longer. O Examine,
Examine whether it be not so or no; if true, How will you account for these
things? or have you a belief that God sees not, and therefore say in your
hearts, No evil shall come unto us? What, does God take care for Oxen, and you,
who ought to be his Ministers (to encourage them that do well, and to punish
evil Doers) take no care of his People? Is it not true in this our day, that
Lazarus finds more favor from the Dogs, than from Dives that is clad with
Scarlet, and clothed with Purple? What, are Men become Beasts, and Beasts Men?
Does the common People every where cry for Liberty, and are their bowels opened
with Compassions unto the suffering innocent People of God; and are your bowels
locked and closed, who should be as nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers to the
true Children? but instead thereof, beat them as Vagrants, and commit them to
Prison as the chiefest Offenders, only for exercising their Consciences toward
their Father, who fees in secret, and will reward them openly, though others
(that should be as Fathers) are without natural affection unto them. Can these
things go unpunished, or pass without control before God's Judgment. seat!
nay sure: though -- Crimina raris
Librat in Antithetis, doctas posuisse figuras
Laudatur -- (as Juvenal complained of his Day)
yet Rethorique will not cover Vice when God sits Judge.

Therefore, O ye Rulers and Magistrates, take heed what ye do, for God's People
are as the apple of his eye, and he that hurts them, God feels the stroke:
And if he punished them that waged the head, and cried Aha in the days past;
how shall you escape, that give them up to be killed all the day long, and make
them as the Butts for the Arrows of your displeasure to be shot against,
although they are such as both answer the Principles of the Law, and ends of
just Government, as before is showed? O let them have Liberty therefore, and
lay the Sword upon the Evildoers, that Justice may flourish, and the King's
Throne be established in Righteousness, before he comes, that shall come and
will not tarry, from whose Presence no Rock nor Mountain, Cave nor Den shall be
able to hide you; but then they, whom you now Oppress and Persecute, shall have
their Cause pleaded by him, and receive Justice from him, and they shall ascend
in Triumph, Power and great Glory, in the fight and veiw of their Enemies; Even
so come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen.

Four Queries concerning Government.
FIrst, Whether the Magistrates in all Nations, do not hold their Authority and
Power over their Subjects, under God, the Supreme Lord of all?

2dly, Whether God has not Authority over every man; and whether his Authority
and Power be not greater, than the Power and Authority of men one over another?

3ly, Whether the Magistrates, commanding any thing contrary to what God
commands in the Heart, keep the true bounds of Government, and Exercise their
Authority in true Understanding and Righteousness; or whether in so doing they
do not err in Judgment, and misguide the reigns of Government?

4thly, Whether the Governments of this present world, are so managed, as that
God may also govern the Hearts of men according to his Will and Pleasure; or
whether they are so managed, as to interrupt the Laws and Power of God's
Spirit in the Conscience?

Surely man was made by God, and the Place of the Highest is under God, and
their Government should be in his Wisdom and Righteousness, that God might have
respect and authority in the Hearts of Men, and exercise the Government of his
Spirit therein, with the encouragement, and not with the contradiction of the
outward Authority; which might easily be in all Governments, were the Principle
of Reason subordinate and subjected to the Principle of Life, and did not take
upon it to govern without or against it. This would set all straight, both in
the Governors and in the Governed. And this is my Prayer to God, that God
would spare men, but strike through Principles and Spirits; that Righteousness
might be brought forth, and the Image of God exalted in man, and
Unrighteousness subdued and subjected: for alas, Unrighteousness and Cruelty is
uncomely in man, and makes even those miserable, who seem most to thrive and
prosper by it. O that these things might be considered and weighed in an equal
Balance: For why should man strive against the Will of his Maker, who is too
strong for him, as all that have contended with him, have afterward been
forced to acknowledge.

THE END,

