AN Humble Plea FOR THE QUIET REST OF GOD'S ARK. IN A SERMON Preached before
the Right Honorable Sr. John Moore, LORD MAYOR of the CITY of LONDON, At St
Mildred's Church, Feb. 5. 1681/2.

By Samuel Crossman, B. D. Prebend of BRISTOLL.

Discidia nostra amicorum dispendia, hostium compendia, and publica irae
divinae incendia sunt. Hieronymus.

London, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard,
and White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1682.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
THE ensuing Discourse being in part a difficult expostulation with the
renitencies of our present Age, I intend not to involve any man's name in the
Patronage of it.

Let it stand or fall, as the worth of the Subject (how weakly soever
prosecuted) shall plead for its due Patronage in the hearts of all that wish
well to the Peace of Church and State amongst us.

May any who yet wander, be recovered from the error of their way, and the end
of this exposure is fully attained. I have chosen for their sakes, to mention
several persons and passages (highly and deservedly) honored by themselves:
Hoping they will please to give a kind audience (if not to us yet) at least to
them.

In the search of former times, both they and we may soon meet with the
mournful complaints of History; while eminent Reformers in other Countries have
taken all faithful care to redress whatever was truly evil: The giddy
multitude, Erant (apud nos) quibus nihil in reformando satis purum videbatur,
unde and ab Ecclesia sese segregabant, and conventicula peculiaria
constituebant. Quae mox Schismata and variae sectae consequebantur. Jucundum
Papisticis Spectaculum. Epist. Hen. Bullingeri Episcopo Winton.
Some to whom no Reformation seems pure enough, would notwithstanding separate
from them, set up private Conventicles of their own, and run into endless
Schisms. Such sport was made for Rome.

This has been the Epidemick distemper of England. Sad it is; but so it
proves: We fastidiously refuse our own mercies, and are impetuously fond of
inconsistent vanities.

So great an evil must be seriously withstood. And it may be a real kindness,
though unkindly taken. 'Twas the just observation of a most worthy person;
calculated indeed for another Meridian, but may as truly serve our own: Had
none (faith he) been willing Archbishop Whitgift's Answer to the Admon. In the
Epistle.
to bear the envy and censures of the common people, in withstanding the
enterprises and proceedings of the Anabaptists when they began in Germany:
Anabaptism had overrun those Churches, and utterly destroyed them.

What was their danger then, has been ours since. Si suo quisque feratur
impetu, non plane unit as erit, sed confusio. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 49. Exodus
32. 32, 33.
And there needs no more to make us miserable, than that Anarchy and Confusion
which some men's excentrical opinions, and ways of Separation would introduce.

This necessitateth a Moses-like standing in the gap; and happy are they that
can do it with his zeal, and yet with his compassion. And he said, this people
have sinned agreat sin; yet now I beseech thee, O Lord! forgive their iniquity.

We owe (and that justly) the utmost tenderness toward the persons of all;
even those who dissent furthest from us. There is no good Christian but wishes
we might live at circumstances of ease and comfort one by another. Every man
sitting under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree. May the Patient be thus happily
cured, and the disease only destroyed.

It Is observed of Meteors, though they both blaze and frighten for a time; yet
in conclusion, they spend themselves, and go out.

We will also modestly hope, that these fiery exhalations, these passionate
divisions of ours (the Achans that have so long troubled Gods Israel) may now
at length expire and die. And the desired Shechinah of a Divine Presence rest
upon the land.

This seems the Princely aim of our Gracious Sovereign, in the most admired
conduct of his Government over us. This, the very sum of those Royal
expressions of his heart so condescensively vouchsafed to his people. As once
the Eastern Constantine in his time, so our Western Constantine at this day to
us. (...). Constantini Orat. ad Council. Nic. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 18.
My Subjects, I have one thing to ask of you, in the name of the Great God, our
common Master. It Is that which is acceptable to him, it is that which is proper
for me to demand, it is that which is bounden duty for you to yield; Lay down
all your quarrelsome controversies, and live henceforth in Love and Peace.

O how undeniably must our reverence to God, and his Vicegerent; the
sacredness of the authority, and the justness of the charge, even adjure us to
the most cheerful immediate comportment with our duty?

In order whereto, I cannot forbear mentioning the affectionate language of
that reverend aged Bohemian, particularly directed by him (upon his Majesty's
happy Restoration) to the Church of England; as the last token of his love to
us, and his own Swan-like Song before his death.

Ecclesiae Anglicanae variis hactenus procellis jactatae, jam tranquillitatis
suae portum prospectanti -- (nempe reditu Regis) -- Fratres, vos Spiritui
gratiae commendo and Apostolico concilio, Omnia decenter and ordine fiant. Ut
sicut Britannia nuper triste Discidiorum theatrum orbi visa fuit: Ita jam vivum
concordiae fiat exemplar. Jo. Am. Commen. Ratio Discipl. Dedicator. Alloq.
Brethren, (says he) you have been tossed hitherto with various storms: but are
now come in prospect of a quiet Harbor (upon your Sovereigns safe return) I
commend you to the Spirit of Grace, and that Apostolical counsel, Let all
things be done decently, and in order. That as Britain appeared lately a sad
spectacle to the whole World for strife and variance, so it may now shine forth
as a bright lively example of Peace and Concord.

'Twas his Desire; it is our Concern: The God of Heaven grant it may be our
happy lot. Amen.

S. C.
Febr. 8. 1681/2.
PSALM CXXXII. viii. Arise O Lord! into thy rest: thou and the Ark of thy
strength.
CHristian Religion, as it is our highest Glory; so the true repose, the quiet
settlement, and administration of it, must needs be the fairest Heaven we have
to expect here on Earth.

How unhappily soever we differ in these divided times upon other accounts (as
we cannot conceal how far the * great Enemy of our Salvation has (...).
Constantin. ad Council. Nic. Sozomen. lib. 1. cap. 18.
wrested many of our dearest comforts out of our hands) yet in this, I hope, we
may all unanimously agree; to wish we could love one another better, and that
we might together see the Ark of God at rest amongst us.

This Psalm, whether made by David or Solomon, was certainly intended as part
of the Jews Divine Service. Ut assidue a piis decantando repeteretur. As a kind
of Consecration-Anthem Mollerus.
for the Temple.

Gods Public Worship was not then left loose or arbitrary, as every wind of
extemporaneous fancy should happen to blow. 'Twas more deliberately settled,
being first indicted by the Holy Ghost in Heaven, and after that established by
Sovereign Authority for the use of Gods Church here on Earth.

We all know how greatly David had set his affection upon the house of God: Nor
does he more signally express it in those generous preparations which he made
for the structure of the Temple, than he did in his Pious Zeal for the Liturgy
of it.

Herein he furnished it (as Josephus attests) with those choice (...), the
Treasures of Heaven (...). Joseph. Ant. Jud. l. 7. c. 10.
, Psalms and Composures which he set in order, both for the Sabbath, and their
other Festivals. That the solemness of their Service might be the more suitable
to the Majesty of that Great God, to whom 'twas offered up.

This religious care succeeding Princes were still as zealous to preserve. It Is
expressly said, Hezekiah the King, and the Princes commanded 2 Chronicles. 29. 30.
the Levites to sing praise unto the Lord, with the words of David and Asaph
the Seer. And they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their Heads, and
worshipped.

We read not here of any Dissenters, we meet with none complaining of the
Mischief of this Imposition: We hear of none refusing their presence or
reverend comportment with these solemn assemblies. The King commands, and all
Israel obeys. They praised God with the words of David and Asaph the Seer. And
the people bowed their heads and worshipped. Liturgy and Decency were then no
crimes.

The Text, with the two following Verses, contains an humble address tendered
to the King of Kings Omnis religio quae sincere ab hominibus colitur, Imperii
conservatrix est. Blacuod. Apol. pro Regib.
for the support of Church and State. Arise O Lord! into thy rest; thou and the
Ark of thy strength. Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness; and let
thy Saints shout for joy. For thy Servant David's sake turn not away the face of
thine anointed.

He that loves Gods Church truly, is likewise most highly concerned for Gods
anointed. He prays not for the one, without the most affectionate remembrances
of the other. For thy Servant David's sake, turn not away the face of thine
anointed. That is, remember O Lord! the rare pieties of the Father, and be thou
pleased to be for ever propitious to the Son.

Such an Orator at the Throne of Grace says not as some in our late wretched
Wars, who insolently boasted, That God had cast the King out of the Hearts and
Prayers of his Saints.

So blasphemously would some men force Almighty God to patronize their highest
affronts to his Vicegerent. So easily can they canonize their own Partisans.
And by a new kind of Popery play over the old game, of treading upon the necks
of Princes, and deposing Majesty at their pleasure. We will choose rather to
sigh and mourn, than further aggravate what so openly proclaims its own shame.

It Is too much that the whole Land saw, what our Dread Sovereign at so dear a
rate personally felt, and with a bleeding Pen too truly recorded to all future
ages; that The Devil of Rebellion does commonly transform himself (...).
into an Angel of Reformation.

But we will pass by, and go on. The Address of the Text is now safely
presented, and soon after as graciously answered. The piousness of the matter
had made it dearly welcome. It pleased the Lord that they had asked this thing:
And he replies,

Vultu quo coelum tempestate sque serenat, as once to Solomon; Be of good
comfort, I have heard the Prayer and Supplication which you have made unto me
for the welfare of Church and State. Mine eyes and my heart shall be on both
for good. The Lord has chosen Sion: Ver. 13, 14, etc.
He has desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever; here will I
dwell, for I have desired it. I will cloth her Priests with Salvation, and her
Saints shall shout aloud for joy. There will I make the horn of David to bud: I
have ordained a Lamp for mine anointed. His Enemies will I cloth with shame,
but upon himself shall the Crown flourish. Amen. Should our Lips be silent, our
very hearts would become vocal, and readily Echo Amen, Amen.

Such Prayers on Earth, such Answers from Heaven; such Zeal in Christians
toward Gods House, such Loyalty in Subjects toward their Prince; and all this
crowned with such a benign aspect; such sacred influences of tenderest love and
mercy from Almighty God upon the whole: Lo here enough to render both Throne
and Ark for ever happy. Lo here a salve sufficient for all our sores. Heal us O
Lord! and we shall be healed.

The affairs of Israel from their first coming up out of Egypt had been both in
Religion and Civil Government much unsettled. Long had they desired some quieter
state of life; but in part, their continual travels in the Wilderness, in part,
their frequent oppressions under Eglon, Jabin, and others, (as the Annals of
those times attest) obstructed their arrival at so comfortable a condition of
Repose and Peace.

In David's, and far more in Solomon's time, God gives them rest from all their
Enemies round about. And now Solomon having these noble advantages before him,
successfully effects what his Royal Father so earnestly desired, the fuller
settlement of Religion*. A work (...). Socrates Schol. Pro^m lib. 5. Serviunt
reges terrae Christo, etiam leges ferendo pro Christo. Aug. Epist. 48. ad Vin^.
meet for the care of Princes; a Province reserved for their peculiar honor.

In pursuance hereof he fixes the Officers and Offices; the Rites and
Ordinances of Divine Service. He raises that holy and beautiful house (as the
Prophet delighted to call it) wherein the Fathers praised God. Thither he Isa.
64. 11.
brings up the Ark, with as high solemnities of joy and devotion, as any
History has ever yet related. And having humbly tendered his Dedication
Prayer, closes with these very words, Arise O Lord! into thy rest: thou 2 Chronicles. 6. 41.
and the Ark of thy strength.

As if he had said, Thou O Lord! have given us thy holy Ark; the pledge of thy
favor, the sign of thy presence with us. Long has it wandered to and fro in the
Wilderness; long has it dwelt between Curtains, in a mean obscure condition,
such as our present circumstances were then able to bear. I have now by thy
express order built this house, hither have I brought up thy Ark as to its
resting place: And now I do most humbly beseech thee that this Sacred Ark may
be tossed up and down no more. O let Church and State, Religion and Government
remain at rest in that happy fixation to which thou have in so rare a conduct
of Divine Providence, at length brought them.

Such was Solomon's Prayer then, and such should be every good man's Prayer now.
In the sequel of our discourse I shall take leave to remove the scene from
Jerusalem to England; and so come nearer home.

Wherein we shall consider, 1. How far the 1.
Ark has already advanced toward its resting place amongst us.

2. I shall entreat that we would suffer it 2.
now to rest.

As to the former. It Is sufficiently known how early the Gospel arrived here in
England. Scarce was our Savior arisen from the dead, but presently all the
glad tidings of this great Salvation were brought hither.

'Twas with a most amazing success that the Apostolical Fishers became Fishers
of men in this Island. Then was it (...). Theodoret.
Britannia Felix, and the whole Land, as the Prophets Beulah, a people married
to the Lord.

But this Golden Age too soon decayed, our Silver by degrees became dross; and
the whole face of these Western Churches (as the Field of the sluggard)
overgrown with weeds and corruptions.

So far, that an eminent Writer amongst the Papists freely acknowledges Vix
ullum peccatum (sola hae resi excepta) excogitari potest, quo seeds illa non
fuerit turpiter maculata. Stapleton.
, There was scarce any sin that could be devised or thought on, wherewith the Sea of Rome was not filthily defiled.

These pollutions were now so open, they could be no longer concealed; so
odious, that they could not with any face of modesty be further excused.
Whereupon Pope Adrian the Sixth instructed his Legate to the Diet at Noremberg,
to make Promise in his name Polliceberis nos omnem operam adhibitur^s, ut
primum curia haec, unde forte omne hoc malum processit, reformetur, etc. Ex
instructionib. Papae Adr. sexti Franc. Cheregato. Vid. Spec. Eccl. Pontif.
, That as this whole evil had arisen from his Court, so he would use the utmost
endeavors, that from whence this corruption had originally sprung, from thence
likewise Reformation might for the future stream forth.

But these fair Promises being more speciously made, than Religiously kept; the
disease increasing, and the Patient still languishing, the concern great, and
he that would needs impose himself upon us as sole Physician, being beyond Sea,
and very far off; we did, as Quis enim membro vitio vertat, ss reliquo corpore
laborante, and sui curam negligente, ipsum sui curam suscipiat? Non ut reliquo
corpori insultet, sed ut curandi exemptum pr^beat, and ad sui imitationem
invitet. Geor. Cassand. de officio pii viri, etc.
we justly might, make use of lawful help nearer hand.

Our Church (without any indecent reflections upon others) proceeded to its own
due Reformation; rather than incur more guilt and danger under that common
infection.

The whole conduct of this good work were a voluminous History. The sum is
this:

The exorbitancies of Rome were grown our heavy burdens: Our Physician little
better than our Disease: And the casting off his usurpations and evil practices
upon the Patient, our only way of cure.

Hereupon the Popes Titular (I might say Chimerical) Supremacy became thrown
down. His Tables of Money Changers, those sordid pecuniary Indulgences, and
other the like dehonestations of Christian Religion, turned out of the Temple;
The inherent hereditary Prerogatives re-assum'd into the Crown; and the Ancient
Faith, and way of Worship so unanimously observed in the purer ages of the
Church, freely restored.

Thus the Waters formerly bitter, were now healed. The Naaman before leprous,
became now cleansed. And the Ark, after many high indignities put upon it,
restored once more with much joy and comfort to a state of better rest amongst
us.

I might now justly say, as once Jonathan to his Father Saul concerning David,
with very little alteration; This great Salvation God wrought 1 Samuel 19. 5.
in Israel: Our pious forefathers saw it, and highly rejoiced in it. Wherefore
then should we sin against such riches of Divine Goodness, and ungratefully
turn our backs upon so happy a Reformation?

1. So happy, that the whole Kingdom in Parliament assembled, resented our
Liturgy as a work done by the aid of the Holy Ghost; Giving 2, 3 Edw. 6 cap. 1.
their most hearty and lowly thanks to King Edward for his godly travel therein.

Nor did they less publicly lament the want of it, (when it had been for some
time interrupted) They thought fit to declare again in Parliament, that the
taking of it away had proved to the great decay of the due honor of God, and a
discomfort to the Professors of the truth of Christ's Primo Eliz.
Religion. So highly have our sage Governors reverenced, what our common
people can now as rashly despise.

2. So happy, that experience has been able to set a fair Seal to the good
fruits of it. As a person of great Honor and Piety (upon undeniable
observation), assured Queen Elizabeth's Council: Certifying them, That in King
Edward 's Arch Bishop Whitg. in a Letter to the Council. Fullers Church-Hist.
Book 9. 146.
time, and in the beginning of her Reign, while this Book of Public Prayers
was uniformly used, the Gospel mightily prevailed; but since this Schism and
Division, the contrary effect has fallen out. Whoever are gainers, we see
Religion is a sufficient loser by our divisions.

3. So happy, that Foreign Divines have highly congratulated our Church herein
Vehementer laudo ut mature apud se religionenem Angli constituant. Ne diutius
rebus incertis, suspensi haereant plebis animi. Calv. Cranmero Epistola 127.
, Greatly commending that timely care which Archbishop Cranmer, and others
took for the good settlement of Religion amongst us, before it grew too late.
And (soon after) when we became thus settled, then as heartily Fruatur sane ista
singulari Dei beneficentia. Quae utinam sit illi perpetua. Beza.
wishing, We might long enjoy this singular benefit of God, and that it might
be continued to us for ever. God forbid we should count that a burden now,
which was thought so great a blessing then.

4. So happy, that our Neighbors of Scotland (as their own Historians attest)
could then take hold of our skirt, and cheerfully resolve to go with us Scoti
Anglorum auxiliis e servitute Gallic a liberati, religionis cultui and ritibus
cum Anglis communibus subscripserunt. Buchanan. Hist. Scot. lib. 19.
. They subscribed and promised to use the same way of worship and rites there,
which our Church uses here. A harmony not more comfortable, than needful in
both Kingdoms. Oh how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity!

5. So happy, that our reverend and rare Jewel has been able in words of truth
and soberness to tell the whole world Accessimus (quantum maxim potuimus) ad
Ecclesiam Apostolorum, and veterum Catholicorum Episcoporum, and Patrum, quam
scimus adhuc fuisse integram, (utque Tertullianus) incorruptam Virginem. -- Nec
tantum doctrinam nostram, sed etiam Sacramenta, precumque publicarum formam ad
illorum ritus and instituta direximus. Jewelli Apol. Eccl. Angl.
, We are in this Reformation come (so far as through frailty we could attain)
to the Church of the Apostles, the Church of the ancient Catholic Bishops and
Fathers, which we know to have been a pure and incorrupt Virgin; and that not
only in our Doctrine, but in our administration of Sacraments, and Public
Prayers. In the bosom of such a Church let us live; in the bosom of such a
Church, O Lord! let us die.

Lastly, (Which will be yet more Sacred with us, as a Divine Sentence from the
lips of a King)

6. So happy, that our late Sovereign, under the greatest violence from his
Rebellious Subjects, when he apprehended he might never see his dear Childrens
faces any more (as indeed he did not, but became buried in that barbarous
obscurity) yet then, even then, he leaves this Royal Legacy of Divine Counsel
to our present Sovereign, I require and entreat (...).
you, as your Father and King, that you never suffer your heart to receive the
least disaffection from the true Religion established in the Church of England.
I have tried it, and after much search, and many disputes, have concluded it to
be the best in the World; not only in its Community, as Christian; but in its
special notion, as Reformed.

Such is the state of the Church of God amongst us. Encompassed with so great
(I might still have added a far greater) cloud of Witnesses, all of them
bearing their several testimonies of honor to it.

And now let the whole World judge from what Spirit those men speak, who can
take upon them before all Israel, and before the Sun, temerariously to revile
this good order, as a mere Antichristian incroachment upon the inheritance of
Christ: Our Liturgy and Episcopacy, as The two great So in Print from several
persons of note, though not named here.
Plague-sores of the Land: The Reverend guides of the Church, as The Military
Instruments of the Devil: The Inferior Clergy, as Hogs, Dogs, Wolves, Foxes,
Forlorn Atheists: And the whole body of our Divine Worship, as A stinking heap
of Atheistical Roman rubbish, full of all abominations.

But these calumnies (though very lewd) were thrown out generally amongst the
inferior common people. Our accusers have appeared yet higher, threatening
(even to astonishment) so august an Assembly as that of Parliament Admonition
to the Parliament, in the beginning of it.
, If they learn not to detest this our English Church with a perfect hatred,
they shall be left without excuse before the Majesty of God.

Nor have they feared to arraign both Governors and Government with this
odious charge Ut supra, Soon after the former.
, We are so far from having a Church rightly reformed, that as yet we are not
come to the outward face of it.

So heavy were their censures of us; and yet the actions wherewith those
censures were to be seconded, much heavier. They have elsewhere expressly
menaced Second Admonition.
, That they would set themselves against us as the professed Enemies of the
Church of Christ.

Lord! what strange language is here? Who can forbear trembling, to think what
dangerous issues such venomous expressions seem to drive at? Yet these are the
reproaches our Church bears in its bosom. These are the Wounds she (almost
daily) receives in the house of her Friends. She has nourished, and brought up
Children, and they have rebelled against her.

Such amazing virulences (we must confess) may serve to trouble the Waters, to
inflame the poor unstable multitude; but alas, all sober persons will sigh and
say, Railing is not Religion.

O that men would commune a little better with their own hearts, before they
speak or write such rash things. O that they could be persuaded in cool blood
to reflect upon those ponderous words of our Savior, Ye know not what manner
of Spirit ye are of. It may be, the Luke 9. 55.
meditation might work kindly, as in Peter's case, And when he thought thereon
he wept. Mark 14. 72.


However our best answer to whole Volumes of this intemperate Dialect, will be
calmly to reply as once the Angel, The Lord rebuke thee. Or as that mild
reverend man Bishop Usher, Little (says he) do these men consider Arch Bishop
Ushers Sermon besore the H. of Com. Febr. 18. 1620.
how precious the Peace of the Church ought to be in our eyes, and of what
dangerous consequence the matter of Schism is to all our Souls.

And so we proceed to the Second: To entreat, that the Ark thus settled, might
be suffered 2.
now to rest.

We read of the Philistims, how rudely they carted Gods Ark in their time. From
Ashdod to Gath, from Gath to Ekron; any way whither fancy and humor had a mind
to drive it. Truly, we have had too much of such carting of Religion up and
down amongst us. From this Opinion to that Opinion, from this Conventicle to
that Conventicle, whithersoever giddiness inclined to go; till we have almost
carted the Glory of Israel out of our Land.

Most men will industriously strive to excuse themselves. But to be plain with
you, our posture (in this very particular) may be just matter of astonishment
to all: And I presume, there are few, but sit at this day (as once Eli) our
hearts trembling within us for the Ark of God. O let it rest.

1. I entreat you by all the Religious care that has been shown in the good
settlement of it amongst us.

It began (as we all know) with that pious charge of King Edward to Arch Bishop
Cranmer, and others, as the Act of Parliament still openly records, That having
as well an eye and respect 2, 3 Edw. 6. cap. 1.
to the most sincere and pure Religion taught by the Scripture, as to the usage
of the Primitive Church, they should draw up one meet form of Common Prayer and
administration of the Sacraments to be used amongst us.

As it began with God, so it proceeded, so it ended still with God. We can
scarce read words of more solemness than what we find extant from those
reverend persons, whose lot it was to close this honorable work. We have
endeavored (say they) to discharge our duties in this Preface to the Liturgy.
weighty affair as in the sight of God; And to approve our sincerity therein
(as far as in us lay) to the Consciences of all men.

And now for which of these good deeds do we so fiercely stone the memory of
these worthy persons? O that men would be modest and sober-minded! The search
of truth is deep, and the lapse of time now very great; above sixteen hundred
years since the first planting of Christian Religion.

What a prodigious piece of Confidence must it needs be, for every illiterate
Mechanic, for every private or discontented person scornfully to tread under
foot the most deliberate Constitutions of their lawful Governors; and
audaciously to set up another Altar besides the Altar of the Lord!

It will become us to conclude and act far otherwise. Lo! here the Authority,
the Wisdom, the Learning, the Piety of the whole Kingdom, saying to us (as
that voice in the Prophet) This is the way, walk ye in it.

2. I entreat you by the manifest clearness, so apparent through the body of
our Reformation thus established.

It Is not possible to enumerate every particular. Let it suffice to say, We
have here no administration of Gods Worship in an unknown Tongue, we have here
no mutilated Sacraments obtruded upon us, no Key of Knowledge taken from us;
but all things so fairly ordered (as Accessimus adillam Ecclesiam, in qua ne
ipsi quidem, si vere, and ex animo loqui volunt, negare possunt, omnia cast,
and reverenter ( and quantum maxim affequi potuimus) proxime ad priscorum
temporum rationem administrari. Jewelli Apol.
our learned Apologist avouches) that our Adversaries themselves being Judges,
it must be acknowledged, Our Church is very far restored to the chaste and
reverend administrations of the Apostolical and Primitive times.

Lo here the words of eternal life. In Gods name what would we have, or whither
would we go? It Is true, men's mouths are full of objections. But Manna is Manna
still, though we through length of time may grow weary of it. The fault is not
in the Bed, it is the inward indisposition in the sick person himself, that
makes him so restless upon it.

1. Is it objected that we have here set forms of Prayer? Calvin Quod ad
formulam precum and rituum Ecclesiasticorum, valde probo, ut certailla extet; a
qua pastoribus discedero in functione sua non liceat. Calvin. Epist. 87.
will readily answer for us, and acknowledge, That he approves greatly of it,
and would by all means have it so.

2. Is it urged, O but we retain the sign of the Cross in Baptism, and still
receive the Holy Communion in that offensive gesture of kneeling, both of them
gross superstitions? To this we answer; That learned man Bucer will be our
sufficient Advocate in the one, and the Brethren of Bohemia in the other.

The former, says he Signum hoc (nempe Crucis) usus in Ecclesiis antiquissimi,
cum sit admodum simplex, and presens orucis Christi admonitio; nec indecens,
nec inutile existimo. Bucer. de signo Crucis.
, Being so very ancient, and a plain harmless memorial of Christ's passion, and
our bounden mortification; I conceive it neither uncomely, nor unprofitable.

The latter, say they Procumbimus in genua Sacram sumendo coenam. Ipse in genua
procumbendi ritus, pic a piis usurpatus devotionem ipsam and in conspectu Dei
humilitatem, adeoque gaudium cum tremore augeat. Ratio Discipl. Ord. Eccl.
Fratr. Bohem.
, We our selves practice it: And this rite of Kneeling (being piously used) may
increase our devotion, and teach us how to rejoice even with trembling in the
sight of God.

3. Is it further alleged, Ay, but we have Festivals and Holy Days for Christ
and his Apostles? Melancthon, that modest man, will both justify and commend
us in it Se adesse velut spectatorem illorum eventuum cogitabit; quibus Deus
illa tempora insignivit. Imo! cogitemus hos pulcherrimos congressus imaginem
esse aeternae consuetudinis cum Deo, Christo, Patribus, Prophetis, Apostolis,
aliisque Sanctis. Melanct. Loc. Com. de Ceremon.
. At these Anniversary Solemnities (says he) every good man will reckon himself
an auditor of the Doctrine then taught, a Spectator of the Miracles then
wrought; a contemporary, as one who lived in those illustrious Gospel times,
and still discerns these Festival Assemblies a fair adumbration of our future
blessed communion with God, with Christ, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
and Saints for ever.

4. It were needless to take any notice of that weak clamor against the use of
the Surplice, or such vulgar murmurs: Our ancient Reformers have done it to our
hand. Say they Ejusmodi vestuum usus ante Papam Romans fuerit pie a sanctissimis
patribus usurpatus -- Oportet ministros vestibus uti, quae aliquid significent,
and alicujus admoneant. -- Populus debet ex harum vestium conspectu de nulla
alia re cogitare, quam de coelesti puritate, at que candore. Bucer. dear
Vestiaria.
, These innocent Vestments were piously used by the Holy Fathers long before
any such thing as Popery ever was. Aaron 's garments may and ought to be
significant of good things to Gods Israel.

Instead of that angry captiousness (which so much disquiets the present age)
we may freely say of this point, as the same Reformers have also said before
us, From the consideration of these White Garments, the peoples minds should be
devoutly raised to aspire after that spotless purity in which we ought all to
appear before the Holy God.

O what restless endeavors have been used to bring up an evil report upon a
good Land! But the accusations have been observed unhappily to recoil upon the
Accusers.

When our Dissenting Brethren had made their bitter complaints (to some beyond
Sea) against us; expecting thanks and countenance from Reformers there: Instead
thereof Nos certe istorum narratio vehementer perturbavit. -- Non multo post,
evidentius apparuit, quid molirentur sub disciplinae Ecclesiasticae praetextu.
-- Ab eo tempore cum vanis istis rixatoribus nobis nihil rel fuit, Gualtheri
Epist. Episcopo Eleensi. 1572.
, several eminent persons, upon a fuller knowledge of the whole matter, openly
disclaimed their case, and as deeply condol'd with ours. Dolet nobis non
mediocriter, quod tot vobis se objiciunt obstacula, atque remorae, ab illis
quoque exortae, qui maxim Evangelici videri volunt. Hen. Bullingeri Epistola
Episcopo Winton. 1572.
Expressing a great sorrow of mind, that persons professing so much for
Reformation, (as these zealous accusers did) should notwithstanding so
apparently dishonor and obstruct it.

And now if the sense of so many famous persons must be perfectly set at
naught, if all those old objections (long since answered) must needs be raked
out of their graves, and revived as fresh matter of endless quarrel amongst us;
God forgive them that do it. Our condition may become hereby joyless enough to
all of us. But however the real merits of the controversy are still the same.
The Church will be yet found (as Joseph in that case of his) falsely slandered,
and the present Schism not at all justified.

Our severest pleaders for this uncomfortable Separation, we might fairly refer
them to that grave censure of Holy Clement; a person so venerable that St. Paul
was pleased to call him his Fellow Labourer; (...). Clem. Epistola ad Corin.
Brethren (says he) I perceive ye Phil. 4. 3.
strive about things not at all conducing to your Salvation. The truth is, men
might (if they would) employ themselves and their time far better.

3. I entreat you by all the sad History, and experience of our divisions: So
sad, that it is now high time to recollect our selves, and say as Luther Satis
jam altercatum, si quid modo altercando profici potuit. Luther. ad Helvet.
, We have had enough and enough of these wranglings, for any good we ever got
by them.

The subject is here too joyless to be long insisted on. Such miscarriages may
serve as Sea marks to warn us: (and would to God they could.) But we must by no
means look upon them as pleasant Prospects to delight us.

What work and havoc the old Donatists made, is not yet forgotten: Nor have
the fruits of our new Donatism been much better. Here has the world sometimes
heard and seen the bitterest (I might say childish) Thus between Brown and
Harrison, Johnson and Ainsworth, Melvil and Buchanan, etc.
quarrelings amongst themselves; Sometimes the most execrable Blasphemies
against God, at other times As in the cases of Hackett, Coppinger, Penry,
Barrow, Wightman, Thacker, Copping, etc. Stows Annals.
Treasons, and crimes of an unsufferable nature against all quiet civil Society
amongst men.

What Alarms the Government received in Queen Elizabeth's Reign from seditious
Sectaries, appears not only by their own daring Pamphlets, and the Sword of
Public Justice drawn upon diverse of them, but by the Act 35 Eliz. cap. 1.
of Parliament then made, and so much at this day discoursed of. Doubtless had
not the danger been real, so strict an Act, at such a juncture, had not been
made.

And how far our late horrid Rebellion was animated (if no more) from the
increase of this ill humor, may not be so meet for me here to determine. The
wound still bleeds: And the arguments (if but named) would be too demonstrative
and upbraiding. The good Lord forgive us all.

'Twere little better than the abandoning of In tranquillo tempestatem ad
versam optare dementis est: Subvenire tempestati quavis ratione, sapientis.
Cicero de Offic.
Reason as well as Religion, to run upon those dangerous Rocks again: God has
been pleased in much mercy to speak peace to us; O let not us return to those
follies any more. May the issue of such woeful obliquities for the future, be
like those last words of Mr. Cartwright; who having been so long the Chieftain
to the dividing party, when he came to die (as our Author relates) He seriously
lamented the unnecessary troubles which he had Sir Henry Yelverton's Preface to
Episcopacy justified.
caused in the Church, by the Schism he had been the great somenter of; and
wished he were to begin his life again; that he might testify to the world the
dislike he had of his former ways: In which good frame of mind (says our
Author) he died. May none (who have been unhappily drawn aside) die worse.

4. I entreat you by all the critical difficulties and distresses of our
present times. So great, that we are a grief to our Friends, a scorn to our
Foes, and an object of deep amazement to all.

It Is hard using a due freedom in so tender a point: But pray bear a little
with me. The veneration and dread of Majesty is strangely fallen amongst us,
the Reverence of Government almost lost, the mutual good offices of
true-hearted Christian Charity generally suspended, the rights of civil
conversation openly failing in the streets, the sweetness of life perished, and
the whole land (as once Israel) at the waters of strife, where all flesh is too
prone to speak unadvisedly with our lips.

The hard question will now be, Where Is the fault? Truly every where. We have
all sinned together, pray God we may all mend together.

But still where is the fault? Our Savior will tell us, An Enemy has done
this. History Mat. 13. 28.
will inform us, one of Samaria can scarce afford so much as a cup of Water to
one of Judea, without some cursed Sarcasm or other to imbitter it. How is it
that thou being a Jew, John 4. 9.
ask Water of me, who am a woman of Samaria? They were (it seems) as the
Panther and Dragon, the fiercest opposites: No meeting without snarling. Summus
utrinque inde furor vulgo Juvenal.
Such indecent violations of humanity are various opinions, and modes of
Worship, prone to breed.

And if I may have leave to repeat the words after him, Mr. Fox Magis me
commovet publicae Ecclesiae ratio. Video enim suboriri quoddam hominum genus,
qui si invalescant, viresque in hoc regno colligant; piget hic refer quid
futurae perturbaetionis praesagit mihi animus. -- In istis, nescia quod, novum
monachorum genus reviviscere videtur, etc. Vide Fullers Church-Hist. Book 9.
106.
(that painful Writer of the Book of Martyrs) has further told us, He saw a
new generation of Monks springing up (for fo he calls the Puritans of those
times) who if they gathered strength; it sorely grieved him to express how much
trouble and distraction he foresaw, would ensue by them to this Church and
State.

Come my Brethren, let not any of us trouble Gods Israel. Dissension and
Religion are two different things; We may be Christians, we need not be
Dissenters. The Jews (that poor unhappy people) were contrary enough 2 Thessalonians.
2. 15.
to all men, and yet they pleased not God neither.

We will choose rather to weep in one another bosoms, and strive who shall
exceed in love. If our Divisions have had an unhappy hand in raising the Storm;
it is but just, our better Consistency should now promote a Calm.

5. I entreat you by all the tender Sympathy between Church and State. So
tender, that if one be wounded, both bleed. We have not yet forgotten those
days wherein that mournful Elegy was heard in our Land,

Duo nunc moriuntur in uno. Two Funerals in one. Church and State both buried
together in the same grave.

These high concerns of Religion and Empire, were anciently vested in one and
the same person.

Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum Phoebique Sacerdos. Holy Scripture confirms it to
us, both in the Type and Antitype. The same Melchizedec that was Priest of the
most high God, was also King of Salem. So that we must now fear and tremble,
lest our striving with the Priest, should run into Rebellion against the Prince.

Sure we are, Corah's invading the Priesthood is arraigned as an insurrection
against Deuteronomy. 33. 5.
him that was King in Jesurun. The conspiracy was as truly against the
Magistrate as against the Minister. The Text tells us, They gathered themselves
together against Moses, and Numb. 16. 3.
against Aaron.

God resents the Treason, grants a particular Commission of Oyer and Terminer,
finds the Bill, and passes as severe a judgment upon it: The Earth opened her
mouth, and swallowed them up, and they went down alive into the Numb. 16. 32,
33.
pit. God is not mocked.

It Is a remark well worthy all men's serious thoughts, which a considerable
Writer has made on this account. Uno eodemque momento numinis, and principis
jugum excusserunt. Nec justum magistratum agnoverunt, ex quo Sacris and
Sacerdotibus bellum indixerunt. Blacuod. Apol. pro Regibus.
The giddy people (says he) in one and the same moment cast off both God and
their Prince: Nor would they ever bear any just Government, after they had
bidden defiance to the holy things of God, and of his Priests.

This says Zuinglius, have our Anabaptists sadly exemplified Horum factionem
and dogmataEcclesiarum unitatem scindere, rerum or dinem interturbare, and
omnes Magistratus Sanctiones annihilare constat. Zuingl. Respons. ad Libell.
Baltaz. in fine.
Rending the Church, disquieting the State, and making mere Ciphers of all the
Sanctions of Magistracy amongst us.

And thus far their Principles seem to lead them; If they own what some of the
greatest Writers (in this Separation-controversie) expressly assert. Say they,
As the Hangings are made fit to the house, so the Commonwealth must be
Cartwrights Reply, Chapter 2. Divis. 17.
made to agree with the Church, and the Government thereof with her Government.
It seems then, it must be a Commonwealth; or at best such a Government, as
must be made to agree with their Church.

From which bold Premises, he that runs may plainly read, what a dismal
conclusion is like to follow. The whole Systeme of our present Monarchy must
then lie at the mercy of those who now separate from us; what they and their
Church will please to have done with it.

The truth is, the Schismatics Loyalty is a deep riddle: He must be an Oedipus
indeed that understands it. 'Twas but an odd method which was sometimes taken,
To reform the Church by ruining the State, to inthrone Christ by dethroning
Caesar.

And yet such procedures from evil to evil are plainly natural, if God does not
almost miraculously restrain us. The same evil Spirit which thus easily
seduceth us from the Ark, can with the like facility absolve us from our
Allegiance to the Crown.

Their eager zeal for the Holy Discipline in Queen Elizabeth's time satisfied
them not. There were high words of some special service they had to do. They
boasted much of a hundred thousand already of their mind.

The great distaste which stuck with them was, Spretae injuria formae; That the
Queen was not for their Geneva platform: But steady in maintaining the present
Government of the Church. This they were pleased to call the defense of
abomination, and a bearing the mark of the Beast.

Disappointment in their hopes, bred rage Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta
movebo.
in their Councils. The next measures are plainly desperate: Because the Queen
could not be persuaded, she must be compelled. And accordingly (as appears by
several Confessions of themselves and others) the black design was now very far
laid, To remove the Lords of the Council, to secure the Queens person, as
Dangerous Positions, p. 133, 166 167, etc.
one whom they esteemed worthy to be deprived, for giving credit and
countenance to the Bishops, and such other wicked persons. To such poisonous
bitterness do some adust opinions of course, ferment.

The History proceeds still further; but I forbear. It Is well there is a God in
Heaven, to defeat the Hellish Machinations of evil and unquiet men on Earth.

That poor wretch in the same Queens Hackett. Stows Annals. 761. And the
History by it self.
Reign, who could by no means come to our assemblies, for fear of being
defiled, staid not long there; but soon after stabbed the Queens Picture, as an
argument of his Treasonable intentions against her person; for which he justly
suffered. Nor were Parliaments much better handled by them, being displeased at
some proceedings of Parliament in that Queens Reign; what thundering Anathema's
did they presently send forth? It shall Second Admonit. p. 3.
be more tolerable (say they) for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment
than for such a Court. Not a man of their seed shall prosper to be a Parliament
man, or bear rule in England any more. Suppl. p. 43.


A John of Leiden does but half his work in pulling down the Economy of
Religion; his next business was (as that lamentable story relates) to set up
himself (according to his goodly revelation Rex factus deligit sibi proceres,
coronas, torquem, sceptrum, and alia id genus ornamenta. Sleidan. Comment. lib.
10.
) as King of Sion.

When the disease is thus flown up into the head: When it is once come to the
Prophets censure, That the Spiritual man is mad; Lord! what Hosea 9. 7.
popular phrenzies must needs ensue? What firebrands and arrows are then thrown
up and down; with all manner of mischief throughout the Land?

But let men take heed, If he that troubles his own house shall inherit the
Wind; that is, (as some Pro. 11. 29.
read it) he shall leave his blasted family an inheritance of sighs Familiam
suam calamitate percellit. Rab. Sol. Isac.
, the stones of emptiness, and the line of confusion stretched upon it; of how
much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who troubles both the Ark of
God, and the Throne of his anointed?

Here (if ever) it becomes us to stand in fear lest that severe Thunderbolt
which fell so heavy upon the head of the offender of old, should light on us
likewise now. And Joshua said, why have thou troubled us? The Lord shall
trouble Josh. 7. 25.
thee this day. And the malefactor died.

It Is true, such is the levity of humane nature, that every novel mode of
Religion is prone to please our fancy, and carry us captive after it. But when
it comes to trial, it is usually found impracticable; like Saul's Armor to
David, very uneasy; The Government cannot go in it.

The case is not, we want a better Government: God Almighty give us better
Hearts and Lives to adorn and practice what we already have, and we may be
happy.

The Close.
And now Men, Brethren, and Fathers! Are we in earnest? Do we sincerely desire
this Holy Ark of God might be at rest amongst us? O then let us turn every one
from the evil of our ways. Let there be all due exemplariness in the Clergy,
all religious conformableness in the Laity; all true Piety and Loyalty in both.

Let not Eli's Sons cause the Sacrifices of God to be abhorred through their
profaneness, lest it proves Shilo's fall, as well as their ruin. Let not Uzzah
dare to touch the Ark pragmatically with his Lay-hands; lest it pulls down
another Peretz uzzah, Gods displeasure, and some fatal breach upon us.

We have no less than Life and Death this day set before us. On the left hand
all the woeful miseries of our Divisions, if we will needs wilfully persist in
them. Then must it be Non mihi si linguae certum sint orague centum, Schismatis
infandos valeam memorare dolores. Parei Iren. de discidiis Evangelicorum
componend. 74.
, Ichabod, Ichabod. Farewell thou dear Ark of God. The staves of Beauty and
Bands are broken. And poor England left bleeding in its own Dissentions, biting
and devouring one another, till we are consumed one of another. At so dear a
rate do we buy our joyless differences.

On the right hand we have the comfortable fruits of Concord and Union. Our
present dangerous Collisions, our sore Convulsisions might then be fairly
cured. The inveterate envy (of so long standing) between Ephraim and Judah
would then cease for ever. A perfect Amnesty of all former Animosities. Our
Gracious Sovereign highly pleased, and truly great in the good harmony of his
people. The Church even overjoyed in the re-imbracement of her children. The
ancient honor of our English Nation safely retrieved. And (which is yet far
more) that worthy name of God, by which we are all called, would then be but
one, and his praise one throughout the Land.

I must be bold to say, we have here mercies Quis non vita etiam sua redimeret
submotum istud infinitum discidii scandalum? Bucer.
more worth than our very lives. Our bowels cannot but secretly yern within us.
O that we might see such good days, and peace upon Israel.

You will give me leave to call to you as that man of Macedonia; Come over (O
let all good men) come over, and help us. That the great things of Religion,
the practick part of Piety and Virtue, so much impaired, so manifestly
obstructed by our unkind breaches, may be henceforth as effectually carried on
by our better accord.

And thou London, the Imperial City of our Great King, whose Merchants are as
Princes, and whose Traffickers as the honorable of the Earth; let no man take
thy Crown from thee: but be thou a leading example to all England herein. O let
us never be, as that infamous Babel, a byword of confusion: Where we may (with
so much thanks and ease, with so much honor and comfort) be as Gods Jerusalem,
a people of unity and decent order.

I beseech you bear with my iterated importunity. The extreme importance of the
matter exacts it from us. Your selves right well see, how far the Honor of
God, and of our holy Religion; the welfare of our native Country, and all our
comforts lie at stake. Metuendum ne diuturnis hisce ac funestis contentionibus
(quod Deus avertat) suum omnes accelerent interitum. Davenant. adhort. ad pacem.

Quid nobis felicius, si positis discidiis concorditer versemur in domo Domini?
Erasm. de Eccles. Concord.


Our gainsaying as Core (if not given over) will most certainly undo us. A
Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. Pray let a generous united zeal
for our happy Government in Church and State preserve us.

If others could heretofore think the Pulpit a fit place, from whence to tell
their hearers, They desired to be looked upon as those who came to beat a Drum
in their ears, though that Drum The persons name is forborne.
was little less than a Drum of downright Rebellion: I hope it cannot be
offensive to any, if all modest earnestness be used in the discharge of our
Sacred Ministry, to recommend (what better becomes the Gospel) the things which
belong to our Peace.

That it might be no longer so wildly said, Lo here, and lo there: but rather a
sober unanimous practice of that indisputable Scripture Uniformity: Come let us
go to the house of the Lord, for thither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the
Lord; Psalm. 122. 4.
to the testimony of Israel, to give thanks to the name of the Lord.

To which I hope no good man will scruple saying, Amen.

Now to him that loves the Gates of Sion more than all the dwelling places of
Jacob; to him be Glory in the Church through all ages. Psalm. 87. 2.
AMEN.
FINIS.

