Caleb's Spirit Paralleled, IN A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of the Late
Mrs. CONSTANCY WARD Of East-Smithfield, London; At the Meeting House in
Devonshire Square, April 7. 1697.

By Walter Cross M.A.

Vitam aeternam non possidebunt qui resurrectionem a morte Legem a Coelo negant.
Vitam Deo non degunt.
(...). LONDON; Printed by J. D. for Andrew Bell at the Cross-keys and Bible in
Cornhil, near Stocks-market. 1697.

Numb. XIV. 24. But my Servant Caleb, because he had another Spirit with him,
and has followed me fully, him will I bring into the Land, whereinto he went,
and his Seed shall possess it.
IN Ver. 21. the Subject of this Chap. is proposed, viz. the 10th Provocation
or Temptation of God: one was for doubling their Tasks in Egypt; a 2d for the
Danger at Pi-habiroth, Exodus 14. the door of Liberty; the 3d, which some count
pregnant of 3, was about the Manna; a 4th for Water, and a 5th for Flesh; a 6th
for the Idolatrous Calf, Apis; a 7th for the Labor of their Journey; an 8th
for Miriam and Aaron's murmuring at Kibroth hatavae, the Graves of the Lusters;
and the 9th their Violation of the Sabbath. This 10th is a Twin-temptation too,
they will not go up when God commands to go in and possess the Land, and they
will go when he forbids: and all these in one Year and four Months, ver. 33.
with chap. 1.1. This 10th Rebellion is eloquently described, Psalm. 106.21. They
forgot God their Savior, who had done great things in Egypt, wonderful things
in the Land of Ham, terrible things by the Red Sea: they despised the pleasant
Land, they believed not his Word, etc.

This Sedition is the most directly opposite of any to God's Design as well as
Command: Let us return to Egypt. 2ly. The most provoking, and aggravated after
so many Miracles, so many Provocations, and so many Pardons [Surely it is a
false Notion in Divinity, that a Believer never backslides twice in the same
Sin] it is too narrow Charity to send all to Hell that fell in the Wilderness.
3ly. The most universal Apostasy, 4 only excepted, Moses, Aaron, Caleb and
Joshua. 4ly. The most furious, and yet most deliberative, Head and Heart are as
much united in every Man as they were to one another: they reasoned the Case,
and heard the Arguments of the Spies on both Sides; they weep, from a
Persuasion there was most Truth on the Ten's side, they consult to choose a
Captain, they speak of stoning the few Dissenters.

Ver. 24. Yet Caleb is here excepted: But why alone? why not Moses? or rather
Joshua? or both? I answer; 1st. Caleb's Zeal appears most in opposing the
Rebels. 2ly. His Courage appears most in forwardness as a Spy, especially,
Josh. 14. in viewing the Anakims Country; he there ( Joshua being Judge) assumes
the Work wholly to himself. 3ly. He was then Representative to the chief Tribe
Juda, the first in Honor, the most numerous in Multitude, 186400, Ephraim
about 40000, and Manasseh about 30000. 4ly. Each of them have their Rewards
apart; Moses was chief Ruler, Joshua was his Successor, and was made a Knight
or a Baron on this very Envoy by Moses; of Hosea (chapter 13.) made Joshua, as
Abraham of Abram. But Caleb continues a private Person, in a plebeian
Condition, all his Days, tho he died the oldest and ablest Man; the most
numerous, honorable, and richest Family of all Israel was his at last. This
Difficulty about the Text being removed, the next thing in order is to divide,
or rather to observe its Parts as divided already by the same Authority that
indicted it There is as much (and more, that being granted) to be said for the
Syntactical Use of the Points, than for their Antiquity: the Use is great, for
they leave not one Verse in all the Old Testament doubtful in Construction, or
arbitrary in Division. So the Use of the 34 Accents, is next to that of the
Letters and Vowels, ex. gr. Genesis 10.21. The Brother of Japhet the Elder -- --
joins Japhet and Elder: so older than Shem, viz. 2 Years, for Noah begot one of
them at 500, but Shem at 502, Genesis 11.10. Judge. 1.13. the Son of Kenaz, Brother
of Caleb, the Younger; Caleb and Younger stand just as Japhet and Elder; but
there is -- -- dividing them; so Kenaz is younger. Observe further, that Kenaz
and Caleb are joined, else Oth^^^l marries his Brother's Daughter.
. 1st. It is divided from the Context foregoing and following by way of
Parenthesis; for they cohere, ver. 23, and 25. thus, None of the Rebels shall
see it: My Presence shall not protect nor conduct them as before. Now since the
Amalekites and a Colony of the Canaanites dwell in the Valley, just by you, to
morrow be gone, for they will fall upon you and destroy you The Hebrew has no
Marks for a Parenthesis, that fills up a whole Verse; neither in Sense is there
need of it: but for 4 or 5 words it has, tho observed in no Grammar I know.
. 2ly. The greatest division of the Contents within this Parenthesis is between
the Work and Reward, the Duty performed, and Blessing promised. 3ly. The
Subdivision is thus; the first Member has three Parts, the Person, Caleb, his
Spirit, Singular, his Practice, Full: the 2d Member has two Parts; the Blessing
promised, the individual Land he courageously spied out, whose Inhabitants so
cowed the Spirits of the rest; and 2ly. the Entail of that Blessing to his
Seed. So these with the Particles of Connection afford 6 several Subjects of
Discourse, which I shall explain and apply as briefly as possible.

The first occurring Part is the Person: But as to my Servant Caleb, he is
proposed, and by a -- -- distinguished from the following Words, as one who
abstractly from what follows deserves Consideration; and thorough pausing on it
by Direction, I find this visible Observation, That it is not Publickness of
Persons by Office, their Honourableness by many and great Titles, their Riches,
or the Greatness of their Actions, tho good too, that monopolizes the Honor of
standing lasting Monuments of Praise, or the Precedence of being singl'd out
for Patterns of a Life acceptable to God. Naasson, to whom Caleb was grand
Uncle, 1 Chronicles. 2.10. Mat. 1.4. was the Duke of Judah, Numb. 1.7. and Reason
good: for though Caleb was the older Man, yet of the younger Family, being 3d
Son of Hezron, 1 Chronicles. 2.9. Joshua's Name is changed, though it signified
honorably before, to wit, Salvation: but Caleb signifies a Dog, or one led in
a String, from Cabal, yet must have no better all his Days: and the Epithet
added, my Servant, except what is hid in the Relation my, is of no better note;
a Slave, one bought with Money, whose Life is in his Master's Power, one liable
to beating or Ignominy; pone Crueem servo. (...) and (...) differ as (...) and
(...), a Slave and a Minister. On which the great Gerard has this Note: Paul,
says he, calls himself the Servant of Jesus Christ, or Slave, from the Calling
to his Office, not from the Work; for he calls himself, Minister, Steward,
Ambassador, in that respect; but from the Title Christ had to him, and his
Work: Christ had the Title of Conquest; he was a Slave of War, he came sub
Gladio, going to Damascus. 2ly. the Title of Purchase; he was not his own, nor
any thing could he call his Property: Christ paid the Price of precious Blood
for him, he cost him more than Silver and Gold could be any Standard to, or
Measure in Value of. Such a Slave was Caleb, a Son of Abraham, brought to the
Foot of God, following him like a Dog; Name and Temper agreeing, following him
fully. This is one Reason why I have chosen this Parallel of Caleb and the
Deceased Mrs. Ward: as Plutarch illustrates Princes by Parallels, I by Divine
Warrant may set forth a Person mean in the Heraldry of the World, yet precious,
honorable in the Sight of God: and it is to encourage you mean Persons, poor
in the World, rich in Faith, not to be discouraged from serving God, his Church
or People, with the scanty Talents and small things that lie within the Compass
of your Power or Station; it will bring in as rich a Reward, and as illustrious
Honor, as if it were of 10000 times more Value: it is not the Greatness, but
Goodness, not the Sumptuousness, but Sincerity of Actions, renders them
acceptable to God: he has a Diary for Dorcas's Coats she used to make for the
Poor, for Nathaniel's secret Prayers under the Tree: a Cup of cold Water given
to one under the Name of a Disciple, shall not lose its Reward; nor the Widow's
Mite cast into the sacred Treasury escape the watchful Eye of our Lord Jesus
Christ. He will bottle up every Tear that drops from a penitent Eye; the
Widow's Cake and Cruise, the Shunamite's Table, Stool, Bed, and Candlestick
must have Monumental Room in sacred Records for ever; as Christ said of the
Woman who poured the Ointment on his Head, Mat. 26. Wheresoever this Gospel
shall be preached in the whole World, there shall also this, that this Woman
has done, be told for a Memorial of her. And not only Actions immediately
terminating on Christ shall be recorded, but also a Servant Elizer's Fidelity
to his Master Abraham; and old Deborah Rebecca's Nurse for her Faithfulness and
tender Care in the Family, shall not only have her Dust mingled with the Tears
of the Family, but her Funerals recorded by the Spirit of God, Allon Baccuth,
the Oak of weeping; and yet a Matter (apparently) of lesser Moment than that,
viz. of the Children that accompanied Christ to Jerusalem with their Boughs and
Hosannas. Psalm. 8. the Praise from the Mouths of Babes, and Sucklings shall not
only be historically reported, but prophetically foreseen and foretold; it was
in his Thoughts from all Eternity. Surely there is no less reason to think the
good Deeds of this Woman, her Pains and Travel Night and Day for many Years
together, sheltring the Exiled, relieving the Distressed, hiding them in
Danger, supplying them in want, venturing her Neck as Priscilla and Aquila, not
only for a Paul, but them that were not worthy to carry his Books with Timothy
2 Timothy 4.13. Bring (not the Cloak, as our English has it, but) the Desk, says
Chrysostom. Homil. 10. on this Ep. Others say the Bark used in the East for Paper,
the proper Signification of (...). A 3d say the Coverings, either by Syn. for
Books, or because of loose Papers tied up in them. 4ly. In great Probability
they who turned it Cloak, read (...) Penula, for (...).
. She was a true Phoebe, a Succourer of many, and my self also, Romans 16.2. She
has had a Hand at many such a Basket as that which helped Paul over the Walls
of Damascus. She has often hid David's Spies with the good Woman of Baburim,
and Joshua's with Rahab: she will never want an Interest in the Scarlet Thread
of Salvation from the Window, or Passover-Blood over the Door. And why may not
the Mercy be of as spreading a nature as Rahab's, to all within the House, to
all her Father's and Brethrens Household, if they will come under the same
Protecting Roof? I do not at all doubt that she is now a canonized Saint,
without the least Influence, against the most powerful Anathema's, from Popish
Authority. I shall end this Cloud of Witnesses, as Paul, Heb. 11.34. with
Rahab; for time would fail to heap together all the Instances of this kind,
Job's Perfection, Obedmelech's visiting Jeremiah in the Dungeon, and bringing
him up with old cast Clouts under his Armpits, or Obadiah's hiding the
Prophets by fifties in Caves, and feeding them.

Let us then suppose it sufficiently proved or granted, that when Godliness is
so powerful as to break forth in Acts of Charity, Courage, or public
Usefulness, though in mean Persons, it deserves to be praised, to be solemnized
with Memorials, to be imitated as a Pattern. And 2ly. let us suppose that this
Person was so endued: what can be done for her? the Canon is now completed,
there is no more an Authentic Account from Heaven what Persons are enfranchiz'd
above: all Scripture, as it was wrote, was put in a Chest by the Side of the
Ark, Deuteronomy. 31.24. First the five Books of Moses, called the Law, Luke 24.44.
2ly. What added by Samuel, 1 Samuel 10.25. and Joshua 24.26. 3ly. It Is likely
Daniel came by Jeremiah's Prophecy thus; that Chest being carried to Babylon,
thither he sent his MSS. as he had his Deeds of Anathoth, in Faith of a safe
Return. Romans 3.2. unto them were those Records committed, called by the Name of
Scripture by way of Eminency in the New Testament; in their room now, the
Gentile Churches being engrafted, are become the Pillars and Ground of all
inspired Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. which was concluded by the Apostles: All Writings
since are Apocryphal, not put in that sacred Place. Epiphan. de pond. Lib. 4.
speaking of Wisdom and Siracides, says, they are not in the Number of read
Books, viz. every day some part; neither were they put in the Ark. (...). Joh.
Damas. Panar. Dorsh. Huet. say (...) is understood, and the Author had reason
to know the Truth, his Father being a Samaritan.
.

A second Honor due, that she was deprived of, was Martyrdom; two, may be, out
of one Congregation was too much. It is well known her Guilt and her Sister
Gaunt's were of the same kind [Guilt shall I call it, or Glory?] I am confident
just Thoughts of that Affair would fright few that believe in Christ, and have
a solid and clear Conscience about the Cause they suffer for; a natural Death
(as it is called, for all Death is violent) generally having more Pain and
Tediousness attending it, and often wanting that Exercise of Thought and Grace
that is a grand Support to the tearing and rending, the Bruises and Breaches
suffered under the parting of a Soul from a Body.

These Negatives may help us to conclude this Positive; That keeping within
Bounds of Decency becoming her Station in the World, we cannot be easily guilty
of transgressing in the Excess, especially if we again consider it was not a
virtuous Action, but a Life of Actions. 2. The Actions were not mean, but
great; by Exercise she attained a Capacity of doing more for a Saint in
Distress, and for more in number than it lay in the Power of Persons having
twenty times her Estate to do. We should come short of the Hypocrites, who
build Tombs for dead Prophets when they persecuted the Living, if we should
leave her without a Record in our Apocrypha's: we should wrong our selves, if
we keep not a living Idea of that Knowledge, Faith, Loving Temper, delighting in
doing Good, Sweetness in Conversation, a living Idea of that living Root of
Grace and Virtue, daily fructifying and flourishing in her, and deeply
radicated through Humility, soon seen by all but her self.

In sacred things the Church her Verdict is next to Christ's, a Priest's Lips
is the Church's Tongue; this she ought to have. 2. It Is an Honor to have a
great Train, many Followers; this she deserves. It would be the Happiness of
many selfish, covetous, narrow Spirits, to set her as a Pattern; her Public
Spirit has done more Good than they who have left 30000 l. at their Death to
build Hospitals and Almshouses: besides, she had always in her Eye the
especially of the Household of Faith, Love to Christ was the Spring; really it
blows up a Flame in me to think of the Loyalty to Jesus Christ they She and
Mrs. Gaunt.
gloried in; the Longing for the Glory of his Kingdom, that rent their Breasts;
the Sagacity they searched the Scriptures with about it, allayed with the
Patience and Prudence they moderated it with, and the Arms of spiritual Love
they embraced his poor and distressed Members. I hope the Reader will pardon
this: I cannot but say what I have seen, heard, felt, and am able to answer
for. Excepting one yet alive, (long may it be before she meet with her due
Honor) I think few Names have a more radicated Esteem among Nobillity, Gentry,
Ministers, Christians of all kind in Scotland. Nor is the Savor of her
Ointment contained within, or confined to these 3 Kingdoms; Holland, Germany,
Sweedland, Denmark, Poland, have heard of her. But if we be wanting and
deficient in our Duty below, all is now made up to her above: those Angels that
rejoice at a Soul's Conversion, how will they welcome her Entrance into Glory?
All the Earth below is but a Point to the Country where her Fame will sound,
and her Glory shine. But I Am sure she will be so much entranced in admiring and
adoring that King of Glory, that she will be a self-denied Person amidst all
her Enjoyments. I was blamed for not speaking more to her Praise; indeed 'twas
not for want of Matter, Thought or Words on this Subject; I had always a Heart
to indite enough on this and like Subjects. But I shall proceed to the next
Subject, lest the next Person say my Pen wants a Bridle, if my Tongue had one.

The second thing in the Words is the greatest Particle of Connection in the
Text, (...) it is the Word from whence Jacob comes, the Word that signifies
Heel, Genesis 3.15. He shall bruise thy Heel. The Subject it affords to be
discoursed on, is the relation between a Believer's Work and Reward; it is
translated, because he was of another Spirit. Indeed I find our Translation
favoring a Conditionality often without just Ground; Deuteronomy. 30.9, 10. The Lord
will again rejoice over thee for good -- If thou shall hearken to the Voice of
the Lord thy God: the Original is (...) because thou shall hearken to the
Voice: it is a Chain of Promises one upon another, not the Relation between
Duty and Promise. And again in the same Verse, If thou turn unto the Lord; it is
because thou shall turn unto the Lord: and the grand Reason follows, Ver. 11,
12. from the preventing Grace of God, bringing the Commandment nigh to them,
which is Old-Testament-Language for being mixed with Faith in the Heart. Romans
10. Paul calls it the Word of Faith, and a Word about Gospel-Righteousness, i.
e. the Word revealing Christ's going to Hell for us, or bearing equivalent
Sufferings, the Curse of the Law; the Word revealing Christ's going to Heaven
for us, satisfying Divine Justice, and appeasing Divine Anger, as God is the
Rector of the World by the first Adamical Constitution. This Word being
engrafted in the Heart by Faith, becomes a Spring of obeying the Commands of
God; and both together renders the Soul an harmonious tuned Instrument for Joy,
and amiable for Delight. There is a double Cover in the Text: I might in
prudence hide my Opinion in this Affair, in a Day, or rather Night of
Controversy, which is more prosecuted by Passion than Pains to understand that
necessary Question. One is the Word that is as often a Noun as a Particle, and
signifies either the consequential End of Means, Psalm. 119.33, 112. Keep thy
Statutes even unto the end: so this will be the Sense, The end of his being of
another Spirit, and following me fully, shall be my bringing him into the Land,
etc. Or, 2ly. It signifies the Course and Walk of a Person; Cant. 1.8. the
Footsteps of the Flock; Psalm. 56.6. they mark my Steps: so this will be the
Sense, The Course and Walk of my Servant Caleb was from another Spirit that was
with him, for he followed after me. A 2d might be the Matter; it was not pardon
of Sin, or Inheritance among the Saints in Heaven, but a Part of, or Portion in
the Land of Canaan. But the Difficulty in point of Merit, consists not merely
in what Proportion there may be between Work and Reward, but also in the
Relation and Proportion between the Persons; Caleb could not merit one Furrow
of Land from his God. I shall therefore out of Choice give my Opinion in the
Affair: and 1st, That there is a near Connection between Holiness and
Happiness, is without all Controversy; and the Agreement in that one Point
(that without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord; whosoever names Jesus, as
pretending to an Interest in him, must depart from Iniquity) would and should
allay disturbing and dividing Passions about the Point. But that intolerable
Extremity of counting Sin a Disease of mere natural Infirmity, and having God
for its Author, as much as he is the Author of judicial Punishment, or fatherly
Chastisement, deserves Exilement from Human Society, as well as Excommunication
from Sacred, it having the same absurd Consequences with Atheism attending it:
for the Belief, or Unbelief rather, of the Nonexistence of a God, and of his
not being offended with Sin, or morally swaying no Scepter, distributing no
Rewards or Punishments by the Measures of moral Laws, are of the like Tendency,
and render a Man liable to all Temptations: Robbery, Murder, or Adultery, under
the probable prospect of Advantage and Pleasure, with Secrecy or Impunity, must
be his common Trade; therefore the Discovery of his Sentiments is a just Ground
of driving him from all Civil Society.

But both by Scripture and Reason, we are not only convinced of the Necessity
of the Connection, but the several Joints and Links of that Chain or Relation
are revealed to us: (1.) Negatively; there is not, nor cannot be the Relation
of a moral Proportion, not in Sinners, not in Adam when innocent, not in
Angels. Mr. Baxter most Orthodoxly says, the Doctrine is blasphemous to think
that mere Nothing formed into a Being, and thereby indebted for working or
serving Faculties or Capacities, that its putting them in exercise, or that the
Fruits and Effects of their Growth, should as much oblige God, as the Subject
of them is obliged to God. (2.) There is not the Relation that is purely
federal by virtue of a Promise; If thou live holily without Spot, thou shall be
happy; that was Man's Condition before Sin in the Covenant of Works: There is
not, nor cannot be any such thing in the Covenant of Grace, God having to do
therein with guilty Rebels, who have neither Power nor Will to change the
Temper of their Minds. Nor (3.) Is there the Relation of Merit, by reason of
our Works having an Interest in Christ, as the Papists phrase it, tinct a
sanguine Christi; tho we, and all we do, are acceptable to God on that Score:
for meriting on that Bottom supposes this, that though we cannot merit at the
Hand of God without him, yet we can merit at his Hand; and that is of equal
Absurdity with the former, for there is no Proportion between our Service to
him, and his for us; he needs not such Service at our Hands, nor requires it,
nor could we perform it if he did. The Dignity of his doing and suffering was
from his Deity: We have nothing in us proportioned to his Humanity; we are as
much his by the Title of Redemption, as God's by Creation, so all we can do is
due.

But though these are justly laid aside, the Connection is stronger than a
threefold Cord that is not easily broken: for there is, first, a natural
Connection, Heaven grows upon Love to God, Hell upon Hatred, Happiness upon
Holiness, as sutably and naturally as the Fruit, Leaves, and Branches of a Tree
grow from the Root or Seed of its kind: Be not deceived, God is not mocked; for
what a Man sows, that shall he also reap. A Man by sowing the Seed of Darnel,
Thistles, or Nettles, may as soon and as truly expect a brave Harvest of Wheat
or Barley, as a Man with an habitual wicked Life may expect Heaven for the sake
of Jesus Christ. (2.) There is the Relation between Means and End, Preparation
and Possession, a Journey homeward, and Rest at home, to him that is abroad.
Suppose one should freely ransom a Slave from Algiers, he can never enjoy his
Privileges, Possessions, and Relations in his own Country, without the Pains
and Fatigue of a Sea-Voyage, the Danger of the Waves and Billows of the Bay of
Biscay. Suppose one freely give an Estate, or a Place of Honor at Court to a
Beggar or Stranger, he can never reap the Fruit of it without Pains, he must
fit and prepare himself for it. (3.) The Phrases of Connection are of a legal
Tenor, by reason of the Remunerableness of the Matter from the Tenor of the
old Covenant; as we see the New Testament delights in Old-Testament-Phrase: for
instance, buried with him in Baptism, the Jewish Way of baptizing being
burying-like. So what is now rewarded of Grace, retains the old Phrase it had
when it was by a Covenant of Works. (4.) There is a Relation with respect to
the Subject: to such and such Works are promised rich and everlasting Rewards,
because he who only can do them, has a Right and Title to the Reward by the
Promise and Grace of God. (5.) There is a Relation in respect of Christ, and
our being in him. There was a Proportion between Works and Reward in the
Mediatorial Covenant, and therein he is considered as our Head. So when one is
in Christ, the Promises are made to him in a legal Form by reason of Christ, on
whose Account he has a legal Right and Title to them, tho abstractly considered
none at all. Thus we may see there are Motives sufficient to drive from
Sinfulness, or draw to Holiness, without the Doctrine of Merit, or Legal
Conditions; therefore we are to keep that fundamental Doctrine at the Bottom of
our Hearts, whenever we go about comparing our Works with the Reward we expect;
as we find Caleb did, Josh. 14. he begins to plead for Hebron, as if it were on
Merit, I spied out the Land, I brought word again as it was in my Heart, I
followed the Lord fully; but bottoms that on Moses's Oath, and that Oath on the
Lord's speaking that Word to Moses: but Foundations lie deep, and are not
discovered on all Occasions. If the Lord will, lies latent in the Thoughts of
every Believer in all his Enterprises, yet one would not lightly and
customarily express it, lest it turn into a form of profaning that Sacred
Name, and Sacred Assistance, except on solemn Occasions, when the Mind attends
it with adoring Thoughts; as David, 1 Chronicles. 29. when he and his Princes had
offered for the Temple 13005000 lb. of Gold, and 2537530 lb. of Silver, they
offered it willingly, but with solemn Acknowledgments that both it, and the
Heart and Willingness to offer it, was of God, and humble themselves under the
sense of so great a Mercy as that Temper of Mind. I have only these two things
to make Application of in this Affair: 1st, That the Woman was very sound in
this Faith: 2ly, That she was very holy in her Life.

The 3d Head is the Temper of Caleb's Mind, which is only described from its
Diversity, and being alien from the Spirit of the Day; not only another from
the Canaanites or Egyptians, but another from the Israelites. Ephesians. 2. it is the
Character of one yet in the Gall of Bitterness, and under the Power of Satan,
that he follows the Course of the World: he was none of that Spirit and Temper,
his was contrary, and opposite to the Course of the World: they were blind and
ignorant, he of great Sagacity and Judgment: they Unbelievers, Tempters,
Provokers, and Rebels; he a Believer, and an obedient one: they were proud,
carnal, selfish; he not.

1st. A Spirit of Discerning, a Spirit of Judgment and sound Mind was with him:
indeed there was little Opportunity for discovering this, until the Wars and
Wilderness were at an End; yet his Judgment and Reason (the grand Foundations
of Learning) outshin'd no less than 603550 Persons, and all the Spies selected
for Wisdom and Discretion: but afterward he and his most illustriously shine
as the grand Patriots of Learning in the World. Sancontathon the Phenician,
about the Time of Judge Gideon, is reckoned the most ancient of Human Writers.
Philo Byblius, who lived in Adrian's Time, about the time of concluding the
New-Testament-Canon, turned it into Greek: this Man lived 5 or 6 Generations
after Caleb. Berosus is another famed Author for Antiquity in the Chaldean
Story, yet lived not before Ptolomy Philadelphus in the time of the Grecian
Monarchy. At the same time Manetho an Egyptian flourished, who is epitomized by
Africanus, that lived about 200 Years after Christ. We have nothing but
Fragments of the former in Josephus and Eusebius. Annius Viterbiensis about the
time of the Reformation, wrote 27 Books of Antiquity, and pretends (but without
Credit) to give Compendiums of these Authors. But Caleb is more ancient than
they, or Thales the Philosopher, or Homer the Poet in the time of King Jotham.
The Pillars of Seth, from whence it is said these Men derived their greatest
Antiquities, stood within this Man's Manors. Debir was the City of Pagan
Learning, the most ancient Treasure of their Hieroglyphics, and the Mysteries
of their Religion were treasured up there. Caleb gave Ptolomy (who got the Old
Testament to be first turned into Greek, and sanctified his great Library with
that Oracle) a Pattern, for he turned Kirjath Sepher, the City of the Book,
into Debir, the Sacred Word, or Oracle, from a Copy of the Law he kept there,
as may appear from the Scribes of Jabez, a very near Branch of Caleb, and the
first we find of that Office, 1 Chronicles. 2.55. and 4.10. he was the Inventer of
it, and on that Account more honorable than his Brethren, and left us a Form
of Prayer, a Monument of his Devotion, O that thou would bless me indeed,
that thou would keep me from Evil, that it may not grieve me; at once a
Pattern of Piety, and Propagater of Writing next to Moses, who received the Art
with the Law from God. The Work of a Scribe was to copy out holy Scripture from
the Originals; tho since printing a Bible is an easy Purchase, yet 400 Years
after Christ, a Bible was a Gift not unworthy of an Emperor; and 100 Years
before Christ, Ptolomy of Egypt was the only King had one in his Power. And yet
above 1000 Years before that Caleb has got one in his City, and has there set
up a School of Scribes for propagating Copies of it through the Land of Israel
2 Chronicles. 2.55. The Scribes of Jabez are by some counted Levites, and by others
Kenit, Proselites, but against the Letter of the Text, which says they were
Sons of Salma, the Son of Caleb junior, Grandchild to Caleb the Great. From
which I observe, first, that tho their Critical Office began with Ezra, yet as
Transcribers and Copiers, they began with Moses and Caleb. 2ly. According to
Saili in the Art, not only Egypt (as F. Simon says) but Babylon (Esth. 3.) and
every other State had them, yet none like Israel, who received the Art in a
more excellent manner with the Law; Eusebius. Nierem. 3ly. That (against F. Simon
and others subtily enervating the Prophetical Authority of the Scriptures)
Scribe and Prophet are not to be confounded; there is no Man a Prophet but by
Accommodation (as Ambr. or Hilar. An. 380. in Ephesians. 4.11. Interpretes nunc
Prophetae dicuntur; Tertul. Thesaurus sacer Corban, eleemosynae sacrificium,
mensa altar, pastor Sacerdos, vet Archisynagogus, diaconus Levita) except
Persons inspired of God, Deuteronomy. 18.22. 1 Samuel 3.20. vide Dr. Pocock de porta
Mosis. 4ly. The Notion of secondary Prophets, viz. Interpreters by acquired
Skill, is of small Probability, and of most dangerous Consequence, Act. 2.27.
and 13.1. and 15.32. and 19.6. and 21.9. 1 Cor. 12. and 14. Just. Mart. Ap.
2da, (...). Clem. Alex. Lib. 3. cap. 11. in the Epist. to the Corinth. Paul
speaks of Prophetic Gifts, for he knew they had that Gift. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor.
12.28. he that prophesies, speaks all from the Spirit, etc. the Subjection of
the Spirits to the Prophets was to try if of God or not, if a real Inspiration
or false Pretense. Vide Anton. Van Dale; If we admit of Prophets by Pains and
ordinary Gifts, we endanger that infallible Foundation of Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20.
on which we are built, and which is more sure than any Human Testimony, Joh.
5.36, 39. 2 Pet. 1.19.
, and together with it in Hebron a more ancient City than the most ancient Zoan
or Tanais in Egypt, whither the Old Philosophers traveled to gather the
Traditions and Dictates of the Ancients. Heaps of the greatest Antiquities in
the World were to be found in Hebron; so that in this he seems preferable to
Moses, who was instructed in all the Learning of Egypt; for he was instructed
in all the Learning of Hebron or Kirjath-arba, where the Pillars of Seth stood,
on which the History of Affairs before the Flood were wrote, Adam and Eve,
Abraham and Sarab buried, from thence called Kirjath-arba, or the City of the 4
famous Persons. Although there is as much Disparity between the Lines of my
proposed Parallels, as between the Years of Life in that Age and this; yet if
we throw in the Advantage of Gospel Light, there was not a Scribe at Jabez,
that knew more, or as much as She; tho Joseph was called a Zophna Paaneah, an
Inspecter into the hid things of God, and Daniel, a Belteshazzar, one who had
the Treasures of Bell revealed to him: for we with open Face, behold as in a
Glass greater things than they. What Daniel obtained by Prayer and
Supplication, with Fasting, Sackcloth and Ashes, as one greatly beloved, to
wit, a crucified Christ, an everlasting Righteousness brought in by him, Dan.
9. and what Discovery he obtained of the Churches Vicissitudes, and the World's
Revolutions until the standing up of Michael the Prince, we have all in clear
History, excepting 2 Turns that begin almost to look upon us through the
Dispensations of Providence: and in both of these I may safely affirm, that she
had Knowledge beyond the common Seize of her Sex; and I have often thought
it was through the defect of her Library, that her Judgment and Sagacity did
not render her very conspicuous in the World. This Knowledge is so necessary a
Step to all Goodness, that it is both Sin and Shame, a present Loss, and Danger
of eternal, not to imitate, or endeavor to outrun her in it: for a Man may
have a kind of Knowledge without being good or gracious; but without Knowledge
the Scripture asserts the Heart is not Good. A blind Eye is as good as an
ignorant Spirit; it is this kind of Darkness makes up a spiritual Hell. The
Lord says, his People were destroyed for lack of Knowledge: and as a Soul cannot
be good, so neither can it do good; we cannot worship God: the Athenian Worship
of an unknown God, and a blind Sacrifice, are both alike unacceptable to him.
What a Nullity does Christ put upon the Samaritan Worship, when he told them,
they worshipped they knew not what? And as it cannot do good, it cannot receive
Good. Faith is the Soul's Hand; but a Hand without the Conduct of an Eye, may
lay hold on that which never will support it. It Is by Knowledge many are
justified; it is by Knowledge eternal Life is begun. It is necessary in our Days,
if we would be able to defend the Truth, or withstand the Gainsayers, to be not
only acquainted with the Fundamentals of Religion, and the way of a Sinner's
Salvation, but to extend our Pains to the uttermost Compass of things contained
within Sacred Writ: for surely what God thought fit to reveal, and record in a
peculiar manner for our use, it becomes us to study: we cannot count it misspent
time to learn, when Omniscience condescends to be Teacher. But besides, there
is this peculiar Reason for it, because the Deists, and they who deny the
Divinity of the Scriptures, derogate so far from them, as to leave uncertain
what is Divine, what not; of this kind are Eben Esra, Hobs, Spinosa, Father
Simon, the Author of the Five Letters, etc. for the Grounds of their Unbelief
are generally built upon the Circumstances in F. Simon finds three Authors to
the five Books of Moses; 1. Himself, Author of the Law and Ceremonies. 2. The
Public Scribes, Authors of the History. 3. Of many Additions, which he falsely
concludes to be since added or altered, the later Scribes, who compendized the
public Records. From whence he concludes; we know not what is his, what not.
Or, as Du Verse divides the Scripture; 1. Some Divine, i. e. where it says so.
2. Some Humane. 3. Some Profane, as David's Curses.
Scripture least minded by Translators or Interpreters, as being of little
Moment, some apparent Contradictions in Time, Place, Genealogies, or Titles;
for Instance, Genesis 12.6. And the Canaanite was then in the Land: hence would
they infer that Moses was not the Author of all wrote in these Books that bear
his Name, and what is superadded by we know not whom, is not to be received as
infallible. But there is no Foundation in the Text for their Conclusion; for
what Absurdity is it for Moses to tell us the Canaanite was in the Land, when
Abraham passed through it? neither is Reason wanting for it, viz. to give
account of God's Fidelity to him in protecting of him when he passed even
through it to take Seizin of it, though the Canaanite was there, whom he came
to disinherit.

A 2d Ingredient in this singular Temper of Mind was Faith, ver. 11. How long
will it be ere they believe? Heb. 3.18. To whom swear he, that they should not
enter into his Rest, but to them that believed not? But Caleb was not of that
Spirit. V. 9. Their Defense is departed from them, and the Lord is with us;
fear them not. Heb. 3.16. Howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses did
provoke and disbelieve. And Heb. 4.3. They which believed did enter into Rest.
He could not follow the Lord fully without Faith, nor was his Courage against
so powerful an Enemy founded on any other Bottom: by human Eyes they were like
a David before Goliath; nay in their own Esteem, and in the Esteem of the
Anakims their Enemies, they were like Grashopers, Chap. 13.33. But by the Eye
of Faith he saw God as a sufficient Confederate and Assistant against all the
Strength of Canaan; the Anakims were like Grashopers in comparison of God, and
the meanest Worm he assists. Caleb's Knowledge was qualified or specified by
Faith: It is a common Axiom, that Knowledge may be without Faith, but not Faith
without Knowledge; they are related as a living Creature and a rational
Creature; ^^e may live without Reason, but not exert Reason without Life. This
was a Grace in my Parallel, not only well rooted, but well fruited; the Service
she delighted in, could only receive its Reward in the other Life. Jesus Christ
was at once the Object of her Love and Trust; her Lot, with the most of
Believers, had its wildersome Circumstances, and through it she traveled,
leaning on her Beloved. The sacred Oracles, which are the Directors and Grounds
of Faith, were the Objects of her daily Study. Peace with God, as the
Mediator's Purchase, was the great Expectation of her Hope, together with the
seeing King Solomon, with the Crown upon his Head, glorified in his Saints, and
admired of all that believe: through whom her Faith was finally and ultimately
terminated on God as a faithful Creator, from whom originally all Fullness
flowed on the Head and Members of the Church, which she longed to see presented
without Spot or Wrinkle. This is what of necessity we must imitate our Caleb
in; without Faith there is no pleasing of God: they that believe not, are
condemned already. Heb. 12.1. not only this, but all the Elders from Abel are
proposed as the Cloud in the Wilderness to follow; nor is Adam and Eve to be
excluded from being Drops of that dewy Cloud; for though on Marriage he called
his Wife Ishah, of Man, or Woeman, yet after the Promise of the Redeeming Seed
of the Woman, he calls her Eve, the Mother of him that quickens or enlivens
all; and the like Faith she professes and writes on her eldest Son Cain, I have
gotten that Seed, the Man the Lord, I have born Immanuel, Genesis 4.1. as the most
Critical do interpret the Words. The only Exception about this universal
Necessity, at least among whom I have now to do, is Infants; it is supposed
many of them are saved, but questioned if Faith have any Instrumentality in
their Salvation, since Faith supposes Knowledge: nay the Apostle, Romans 10. says,
it comes by Hearing, which supposes not only the Exercise of a Spirit, but of
bodily Organs. I shall say the more to it, having just now received a Letter
about it, and two days ago another, beside Visits. I do profess it to be my
Opinion, but not a necessary Foundation, no not to any Doctrine I then
proposed; for Charity for their Salvation through the Righteousness of Christ,
which the Letter grants, is sufficient for all the Intents I mentioned it for:
however I shall show my Opinion is neither singular, nor wants Probability. As
to the first, it is the common Opinion of the Papists, as we may see from
Bellarmine and Gregorius de Valentia on Baptism; so Suarez on Thomas; and the
Conference at Ratisbon, they deny that Infants have actual Faith, but grant
habitual, which is sufficient for my Intent: but if we go to the Lutheran
Churches, they universally ascribe an actual Faith to Infants; their Arguments
are, that the Spirit of God which asserts that they that have not Faith are in
a State of Condemnation, Mark 16.16. John 3.18. does assert that little ones
have Faith, Mat. 18.6. Whosoever shall offend one of those little ones that believe
on me; the like in Mark 9.42. Ver. 36. we find that it was such a Child that
Christ took in his Arms, such an one that has Angels for its Guardians, such an
one as the Scripture calls (...), Luke 18.15. such as were brought to Christ in
the Arms of others, not on their own Feet; the Bringers whereof the Disciples
rebuked, not themselves, being incapable of Converse: Jesus says, the Kingdom
of God consists of such. And if there were no actual Sin in them, I should be
apt to have Charity for all of them: for the much more on the second Adam's
Side will scarce suffer any to be condemned where that is alone, without the
least Fruit or Effect. The greatest Objection lying against these Texts is,
that the Infants spoken of, seem to be capable of Offense: to which, if we take
the Interpretation of Chrysostom, with other Fathers, for an answer; to offend
here is not barely to give an evil Example, but to reject, which was a Fault
Christ reproves his Disciples for: the Interpretation is the more receptible,
because Offending and Receiving are put in opposition to one another. The
common Opinion of Calvinists is, that they have the Seeds of Faith, or some
Gift like Faith, or a certain Inclination to Faith: so that there is scarce any
Party left but Socinians to join with in denying Infants to have any Faith
Indeed Mr. Lock denies Ideas innate, but determines not how early they may be
conveyed by Senses, neither does he ever pretend to bar Heaven's. Influence
from creating Ideas in a Soul where its Case is not a span long, nor its bodily
Tools fit for Work.
. Indeed Socinus says about the State of Adam, that it is ridiculous to
attribute Faith in God to Infants, and is like to the Dream of a feverish Man:
but I cannot dream of any particular Persons interested in the Righteousness of
Christ without an Union to Christ; and how one can be in Christ without Faith,
or the Spirit which works Faith, is more than I can conceive of, or than the
Scripture informs me of, which as generally attributes the Applicatory Work of
Grace to the Spirit as the Redemptory to the Son. (2) I find some sanctified
from the Womb, and even that sanctifying Grace in such Exercise, as to move the
very Organs of an Embryo in the Womb. Luke 1.44. The Babe leaped in my Womb for
Joy. Jer. 1.5. Before thou came out of the Womb, I sanctified thee. How
Sanctification can be without Faith is inconceivable, that being it the Heart
is purified by, that the Soul lives by, that we are clothed with Righteousness
by: there can no Assertion be more without Exception than that John 3.5. Except
a Man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Flesh and Blood cannot enter there; and whatsoever is born of the Flesh
is Flesh: so that one must be born of the Spirit before he can enter thither.
But it is observable, that the Spirit blows where he lists; neither the
Indisposition of the Body, nor the Corruption of the Soul can impede his
Creative Influence: and it seems to me very unreasonable to deny a Spirit's
Converse with the Father of Spirits, without a Capacity of conversing with Man:
in order to the one, the Soul must learn how the Glass of the Senses represents
such Objects to it; nay there is need of Learning and Observation to know the
right Hand from the Left, it is a Relation few of 40 Years understand: a Hand is
a necessary Organ to the Body, but a very foreign extrinsical thing to the
Soul. If we come from Scripture to Experience and Observation, we find it
essential and necessary to the Soul to think; it is as natural for a Spirit to
think, as for a Body to be long, broad, and thick. 2ly. Wherever Thoughts are,
they are good or bad: Genesis 6. The Imagination of the Thoughts of their Heart
are evil continually: All that proceeds from a Spirit, is moral. Christ says,
that defiles not a Man which goes in at his Mouth, but what comes out of his
Heart. 1 Cor. 15. As the Father of Spirits is a quickening Spirit, the Soul is a
living Spirit, the Image of him who is a pure Act. How can it live without
Thought? (our Body cannot without Motion) or be sanctified without good
Thoughts? If that sleep, what can awake it? 3ly. We find it was a common
Opinion in Christ's Time, that an Infant was capable of sinning before it was
born, which he never thought worthy Refutation or Denial; Did this Man sin, or
his Parents, that he was born blind? If being born blind, was the Punishment of
foregoing Sin, then the Infant could act Sin; why not Faith too? 4ly. Can they
inform us of the Difference between a Soul newly formed by the Hand of God, and
after ten or twenty Years of Age, that a Creative Operation of God should be
needful to work Faith in the one, but not able enough to create it in the
other? One should not make Exceptions to the Scriptures general Assertions,
without some clear and solid Reason; this the Socinians grant. His common way
of saving is by Faith, and common way of working Faith is by Creation; and what
Impediment can resist or render the Subject incapable of that Influence?
Original Sin is more powerful by Habits radicated in the Adult than in Infants;
the part of this now under Consideration is the Want of that most like Image of
God (the Sense of Likeness and Image, an Hebraism;) God cures that Privation by
planting it in the Soul: the Scripture informs us it consists in Knowledge,
Righteousness and Holiness. Are the Infants sanctified without being
transformed into the Likeness of God? that is a Contradiction; and it is as
great a one to imagine the Image of God without Knowledge. Psalm. 8.3. Out of the
Mouths of Babes and Sucklings thou have ordained Praise. This is not
objectively only, as the Heavens declare God's Glory, but actively with their
Mouths; which ( Mat. 21.15.) was fulfilled by the little Children that went
with their Mothers to the Temple: though ( Luke 18.) the Disciples began (it is
like) the Hosannas, yet even Sucklings of two or three Years old filled up the
Chorus: And could their Tongues praise him, and not their Souls think of him? I
cannot imagine, that the Difference between a Suckling's Soul and a newborn or
unborn Babe's is much. 5ly. Can all the Pains of an unregenerate Man study
himself into a Spiritual discerning? 1 Cor. 2.12. The natural Man knows not,
etc. And can the want of that Pains hinder the Holy Ghost from induing the Soul
with that holy Unction? Suppose the Child die, and be carried in the Arms of
its Angels to Glory, will it want Knowledge there? or do the unprepared Organs,
while in the Body, prevent the Holy Spirit's Influence? 6ly. Take the
Experiment of a pregnant longing Woman, and we may find Willings and Nillings,
Inclinations and Aversions as powerful in an Infant unborn, as in the most
adult Age. Is the Soul already able by its Maker's ordinary Influence to reach,
and govern the Imagination of Child and Mother both so early If from the
Mother, the Creator's Influence is more still; but that the Longing is from the
Child, not the Mother, we may conclude, first from this, there are not such
powerful Appetites in her when not pregnant. 2ly. Suppose immediately bringing
forth by it, the Mother longs no more, the Child continues to crave, refuses
all things else, most greedily eats that, (tho Food that needs a most strong
digestive Disposition) and is easy and satisfied with it.
, and his regenerating Influence not create as powerful spiritual Inclinations
toward himself? May not the Object be as particularly distinguished and
determined, and as closely apprehended in Spirituals? and shall not that be
called Faith? 7ly. It is a common Dictate, that many Probabilities make a
Demonstration, or sure Argument; and I shall give as many more when these are
answered: but I am afraid I have given too many for such an end.

I shall conclude with Romans 9.11. from which I make these Remarks: 1. He denies
not thinking, but doing. 2. He denies not that Infants may do Good or Evil in
the Womb, for he makes two Negations, neither. 3. He asserts that God had both
elected and called the one; 1st, Before Birth: 2ly, Yet more early, before
doing Good or Evil (says Jac. Alt.) before the struggling in the Womb, Genesis 25.
God having called the one in the Womb. The Enmity between the two Seeds made
Rebecca's Belly the Stage of the begun War; the Lord tells her, there were two
manner of People in her Womb; this Text tells us that God's Calling made the
Difference For, viz. The Elder shall serve the Younger, is by Paul said, ver.
13. to arise from God's Love, and ver. 11. to break forth first in Calling. Or
the 11th ver. is the Sense of two Scriptures, Genesis 25.23. and Mal. 1.2. Love is
explained by Purpose, and Mastery explained by Calling. The Spirit of God in
Hosea 12.3. applies as little a Story as this Struggling to the Spirit of God as
Author, Genesis 25.26. his Hand took hold on Esau's Heel. Hosea from this most
sharply reproves Jacob's Posterity as degenerating from their Father; You (says
he) confederate with the Assyrians, and carry Oil to Egypt for assistance, but
Jacob took his Brother by the Heel in the Womb; how entirely did he depend on
God's Assistance, how early did he long for the Inheritance, how highly did he
esteem the Promises? And he adds another Instance of the same, ver. 4. from
Genesis 32.24. from which we may further conclude, if his Victory over the Angel
was by Faith, so was his Wrestling with Esau in Faith. Joh. Schmidt draws this
Doctrine from it, Infants are capable of the Spirit's Illumination and
Operations; for by this Grace he wrestled with Esau.
. Faith is always esteemed the immediate Effect of Calling. Now here were Works
and War in the Womb: Works and Victory are through Faith, for the Children
being not yet born, neither having done Good or Evil, that the Purpose of God
according to Election might stand, not of Works, but of him that calls. I
have treated this as an Opinion all along for Faith as it is God's Gift; the
Father's drawing to the Son, by persuading and alluring, and the Son's
apprehending the Soul immediately, is all that I think necessary to plead for,
since Faith justifies as it unites to Christ; and I am sure if the Father's
drawing, and the Son's apprehending unite not our coming, our believing which
is the Fruit of it, will not: his Calling unites as much as our answering; and
the Denial of this in Infants seems very strange: it is safe enough to assert
Salvation in some without Means, or under other Means than we enjoy; but to
assert Salvation without Grace, either redeeming Grace in the Son, or applying
Grace in the Spirit, is trampling on Christ's Blood, and doing despite to the
Spirit, setting up another Gospel; and to think the Spirit works different
Effects in different Souls, is as absurd: there is one Faith, as there is one
Spirit; what are contrary to the Effects of the Spirit in the Gospel are Fruits
of the Flesh, and Faith is the first Fruit of the Spirit: or to think that the
Spirit of God is in a Soul, dwells there, works there without Effects, is as
strange. I have always, as Hen. Alt. put this among my Problems, i. e. abstruse
Questions, yet do think it of greater moment, than that about Infant Baptism;
for the one is about the manner of a Gospel-Ordinance, the great Virtue whereof
lies in doing it with a good Conscience, there is nothing in the Ceremony of
moment, abstractly considered: the other is about Gospel Grace; if one kind of
Grace for the Old, another for the Young; one kind for the Dumb, Deaf,
Distracted, and who had no Opportunity of exercising their Senses about
external Means of Grace, another for them who have; if God, who has not limited
Means by Grace, has limited Grace by Means; if the Spirit cannot sanctify my
Soul, and fill it with Faith, Love and Patience, because when an Infant I lost
my hearing; if one Man can be justified by another's Faith, viz. the Parents,
or Christ's, as Antin. say, as well as another's Righteousness, viz. his; 1
Kings 14. there was some good thing, a real, spiritual, acceptable Good in
Jeroboam's young Child; there is little reason to think it was conveyed by
means of Grace, the Education of a Pagan Idolatrous Family did not afford it,
tho under some Places of Popery it may; the Child may be was not yet capable of
any.

But I shall return to the Adult. If Faith be necessary in Infants, surely it is
necessary in the Adult: if without Hope, we are without God; if without Faith,
we are without Christ, the Word preached has never profited us, the Gospel is
in vain, and its Grace too to us, if not mixed with Faith: but where it is, all
things are changed from a State of Death to Life, the Soul lives by Faith; it is
worse than a dead stinking Carcass, until Faith dawn in it. 2ly. It brings
Light into the Soul, that was like a Dungeon before; it is the Evidence of
things not seen. 3ly. It Is an humbling Grace, for by it the Soul is convinced
of its Sin and Guilt: a Man will never own that he was conceived in Sin, born
in Iniquity, by nature a Child of Wrath, until the Light of Faith shine; that
will make the Soul say with Job, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the
Ear, but now having seen thee, I abhor my self in Dust and Ashes. 4ly. By Faith
the Soul glorifies God, Romans 4.20. as Abraham did, it will honor him in his
Precepts, Promises, Providence; it will bring every Imagination, every Thought
and carnal Reasoning into subjection to Christ. 5ly. By it the Soul is
preserved in danger, 1 Pet. 1.5. it is the Soul's Shield of Defense, and Sword
of Defiance. 6ly. By this we have Access to God, and approach the Throne of
Grace with Boldness. 7ly. By this we are patient in Tribulation; we can suffer
Reproaches, while we trust in the Living God, and have hop'd-for things
realiz'd and presented to the Soul. 8ly. It Is a Rarity, and yet a very
seasonable Grace. Egypt was a Type of Popery, and the Wilderness a Type of the
Brinks of the Church's Deliverance: Faith was then rare, but 2 of 700000 entered
Canaan for want of it, Heb. 4. So Christ says, When he comes, scarce shall
Faith be found upon the Earth. Would we know the Reason of our turning thus
into the Wilderness again, when we thought we were on Mount Pisga? we want
Faith. It Is the very time for the Faith and Patience of the Saints, and they
want it; like the foolish Virgins, some want Oil, all are asleep when the
Bridegroom calls. 9ly. As it is rare, it is difficult: it is as easy for God to
produce it in the youngest Infant as in the oldest Man; it is a Fruit of the
Spirit of God, not of our Spirits: all things in Man are against it, nothing
for it; the stronger his carnal Reasonings grow, the more difficult is the Work
of Faith: The Philosophers were the Gospel's greatest Enemies. To suppose it in
Adam before the Fall, had been to suppose what was repugnant to, and would have
overthrown his State. Fallen Man needs the Spirit to convince him that he is in
Unbelief, needs Christ being given for him, needs a being given and drawn to
Christ by the Powerful Arm of the Lord. Let not us be among the common sort of
Israelites, that despised the pleasant Land, and believed not his Word, Psalm.
106.24. who could not enter in because of Unbelief, Heb. 3. last. Zachariah,
who walked in all the Ordinances blameless, was struck dumb 9 Months for an Act
of Unbelief, Luke 1.20. Christ upbraids his Disciples for defect in another
Act, Mark 16.14. We have great and precious Promises of a better Canaan, a more
glorious Theocracy; let us strive to enter by Faith. The Emperor's Victory over
the Turks, his planting his Ephodical Tent between the Seas in the glorious
Land, would open a Pisga Sight of it to us, Dan. 11.45. Shall not we believe
God's Word? or can we deny his giving of it? His Word, his Promise, his
Covenant, his Oath we have, his Seal we have, the Experience of our Fathers we
have. Was not God always faithful?

Obj. But we cannot believe of our selves.

Answ. 1st. We can forbear many things which may hinder the Exercise of it, as
a Woman may prevent Miscarriage. 2ly. We can be humbled for gross Sins, and let
Convictions take place. 3ly. We can use Means, and be diligent in the practice
of all Ordinances. 4ly. We can be watchful in the use of them, waiting with
Fear and Trembling, if the Angel will move in these Waters. 5ly. We can try it,
endeavor, go about it, seek out the Promises, meditate on them, propose them.
6ly. We can do this in subordination to God, waiting if he will bless the
Loaves in the eating. 7ly. Exercise Acts of Self-renouncing in the
Performances, Gal. 2.16. even the very Act it self: That we might be justified
not by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ.

3. A great Esteem of Divine Blessings and Favors: They despised the pleasant
Land, Psalm. 106.24. Deuteronomy. 8.7. Hos. 2.8. This Caleb did not, he greatly
esteemed the Land: there is yet a better Country and City ( Heb. 11.) in our
Promises. My Parallel was a great Admirer of this New Jerusalem, and no
unthankful Undervaluer of our Day of small things; she was not of his Temper,
who preferred a part of Paris to a Portion in Paradise. All come short of this
Pattern, who love Egypt. If any Man love the World, the Love of God is not in
him. 2. If any are lazy, and strive not to enter by the strait Gate into this
Rest. 3. When Heaven is not counted worthy the Dangers and Difficulties we
incur by the way, when the Anakims conquer our Faith. Let us think on singing
the Song of Moses and the Lamb, of the 5th Kingdom in Succession.

4. A Public Spirit: Her Pains were not so much for building her own Family as
the Church of God; a great and pious Zeal of this kind was like the Sacred Fire
on the Altar that never went out: I may say, she went about continually doing
good; to the Rich, minding them of their Duty with that Prudence, that I never
heard her complained of as a busy Body or the like; to the Poor, relieving
them: the Decay of this is of a mighty threatening Aspect. Many counted Patriots
of their Country, have discovered Self too much, a powerful End and Principle,
and the Effect of it is among the Body of the People; they think there is no
such thing as Tribuni Plebis: If any Man seem to show a Zeal for his Country,
the Vulgar Verdict is, Does he want a Place? never was a Nation less liable to
idolize the Princes of their Tribes, yet no doubt there are Calebs among them;
without some remarkable Revolution, none or one is like to be our Lot. The Heat
of Contention between Non and Con never did appear more abated: this Government
seems like the Tree that sweetened the Waters of Mara; yet where is the Man of
so public a Spirit, as to reform the Abuses both Sides complain of? One is
that the Curses of the Law should stand in place of the Discipline of the
Gospel: public Prayers are constantly according to form said in Lent for
mending this; hence is a public Acknowledgment that the Church wants the
primitive Discipline. 2ly. That there should be no Partition between the World
and Church of Christ, no Door of Entrance into the sacred Society of Saints:
this has made the Church the World, the vilest and most abominable of Men (like
the Abomination that makes desolate) sitting where they ought not, profaning
the Lord's Table, confirming their own Damnation: it were a Season to
perpetuate the Honor of some Public Spirit; but most mind their own things,
few Christ's.

5. Of a Peaceable Spirit. Caleb was none of the seditious Rebels that were for
casting off Moses, and making another Captain, under whom they might return to
Egypt. My Parallel imitating our unerring Pattern, has often rebuked such hasty
Disciples, that were immediately for bringing Fire from Heaven on Samaria; she
was no Despiser of Authority, though a Longer for that fifth kind of
Government, that all the Kings of the World shall never prevent: happy they who
kiss the Son, and put their Trust in him. It is nigh and necessary: Let us
follow Caleb's Example, not a Corah's or an Absalom's, filling our own Place,
doing our own Business, and with Faith, Prayer, and Patience wait for Christ's
second Coming.

6. A Spirit of Courage and Charity: he would have ventured against the Sons of
Anak; he run the Risk of the turbulent Rabble, when nothing but God's immediate
appearing could have saved his Life. He would fain have saved Israel, and have
persuaded them not to rebel against God, whatever was the Consequence. Moses
showed yet more of this Spirit, who preferred the saving of the People to the
monopolizing all the Promises, and the whole fruitful Land for his own Family.

7. Of an healing uniting Spirit. If she found any to be of the Household of
Faith, it was not in her Power to shut up Bowels of Compassion; though she was
settled in particular Fellowship with them whose Customs her own Judgment most
harmonized with, yet she was for a Bond of Peace wherever there was Union
through the Cement of the Holy Spirit: she was not for rejecting whom Christ
had received, a great Rule for Communion. Romans 15.7. Though their Faith be
weak, yet ( Romans 14.1.) they are to be received, and not tormented and vexed
with doubtful Disputations about Meats, or keeping Days, or some one particular
Ordinance, as that of Circumcision. At first the believing Jews rejected the
Fellowship of the Gentiles for want of it, they unjustly compelled them to it:
But afterward, when the Roman Governors began to distinguish between the Jews
and Christians through Pliny's Information, and that the Jews were hated of the
Romans, and cut off for their cruel Murders and Slaughter, but the Christians
more favored for their peaceful Tempers; some of the Gentile Believers, though
unjustly too, rejected the Communion of the Jews, this was Diotrephes's Fault,
3 John ver. 10. Ecclesiastic Vide Ittig. de haeres. and Stockmannum.
Authors inform us, that his Pride in doing by himself what was only in the
Power of the whole Church to do, was his great Sin. There is in our Day the
like Fault among some about Infant Baptism; the less the Difference is, the
greater the Sin is in making that Difference a Partition Wall of Division. The
Difference is not about the total neglect of the Ordinance [though I do hear
some are run to that Extremity] both Sides grant its Necessity and Use as an
initiating Ordinance, the first visible Mark of a Disciple or Christian; he
that utterly omits it, is by Profession a Pagan, though it may be a Believer:
indeed he deals basely by the Savior he believes in. 2ly. The Difference is
not about the Subject (I confess some run to the Extremity here too, baptizing
all presented to them) viz. Believers; for if we did not think that some
Infants had Faith, we should baptize none of them: The Question is then about
the Objects or Grounds of Charity. Now let the Error be on which Side soever;
the Question is whether it be a sufficient Ground of Separation, or refusing
Communion, because my Charity is more extensive than yours. I (may be) think,
since God has revealed it, and we see it fulfilled, (though not without many
Exceptions of bad Children) that God's common Road and Method of bringing his
Elect upon the Stage of being, is through the Loins and Bowels of them that are
Elect and Believers, though he has not tied himself to it, (then indeed it
would be more than a Ground of Charity) there being many Proselytes in all
Ages, even out of Cham's Line; yet this is the King's high Road: and indeed the
Stop that was put to it (in cutting off this Entail among the Jews, and
beginning afresh with the Gentiles, engrafting these formerly wild Branches to
suck fully as much Spirit and Oil from the Root as the native Branches) was
such a Deviation from this wonted way of Divine Influence, that it has been but
once in the World, will never be again, was not without repeated Prophecies to
prevent stumbling about it; and that once was not a total Deviation from the
common Road, many being continued. 2ly. Because it was for a time only:
touching the Election, they are beloved for the Fathers; there is a Life and
Resurrection to come to their Dead I desire in this to be understood as
observing the Difference between the Jewish Church, and God's Method of
propagating Churches among the Gentiles,
. 3ly. They have no gross Iniquities, no visible Outbreakings, no apparent
Blains or Boils from the bitter Root of Original Sin; they have only against
them what is conveyed through the first Adam, and what secret Emanations from
it are contained within the Compass and Sphere of pure Thought or Imagination.
But then we have the much more of abundant Grace, the much more of the second
Adam for them. I do assert that this Extent of Charity in any Man, though
professed and put in practice, ought not to be a Bar for which any Christian
Church should refuse him Fellowship and Communion.

The second Difference is about the Manner or Quantity of Water this initiating
Ceremony is to be performed with, if Dipped or Sprinkled. Let us now take a like
Case we can think on without Prejudice, viz. the Cup in the Lord's Supper:
Suppose then some scrutinous Mind, and scrupling Conscience should question
whether any receive the Lord's Supper, who drink not a whole Cup; it is said,
Drink this Cup: Is sipping drinking? or is a Sip a Cup? Would it not be
unreasonable to refuse a Man Communion that would only take a Sip, when the
Body of the Church were for each drinking a Cup? It would be of this
Importance; Sir, you shall not be of our Church, if you take not off your Cup.
Some Controversy like this was between the Gentile Christians and Jewish,
notwithstanding which Paul ( Ephesians. 4.) informs them the Baptism was one, One
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. From Mount Sinai until Christ's Resurrection,
that is, during the Jewish Church-Constitution, Dipping was the manner; after
Christ's Resurrection ( Mat. 28.) he gives a new Institution more suitable to
the Constitution wherein he intended to make light Burdens and easy Yokes;
after which we hear not of their going to the Water, but the Water coming to
them, Acts 10.47. Some other differences ( Acts. 19.) there were between John's
Baptism and Christ's, but that is not my Business; it is Union, Love, Peace,
notwithstanding that Difference, that is my Business, and shall conclude it
with a Saying of a Friend and Brother, If a Seal should be set to a Blank
sometimes, and God afterward condescend to fill up the Bond, however valid such
an Act might be among Men, no doubt it is good in the Sight of God.

The 4th Branch is the Practice that flowed from this Temper of Mind: He
followed the Lord fully, wholly, constantly, uprightly; there was a Fullness in
what Good he did. This Fullness Josias turned unto God according to all
contained in the Law. David had respect unto all God's Precepts, and refrained
his Feet from every evil Way, Psalm. 119.128. I esteem all thy Precepts
concerning all things to be right. Eustathius says, the Law is copulative in
the Precept, Love God and thy Neighbor, but disjunctive in the Threat, Do all
or die: Mat. 23.32, This ought you to have done, and not left the other undone.
respects the Rule of our Practice and Profession; he was not for half-work,
almost a Christian, he was for all the Parts of our Duty to God and Man, a
sound Faith, a holy Life, pure Worship, and appointed Government. Search most
of Professors, and you will find them lame in some of these. But I must say of
this good Woman, she was good at this too; though she was of large Charity to
others, she laid strict Bonds on her own Neck, and was faithful to the Light
God gave her. And this is a singular thing in our Day: many think Doctrine and
Practice are to be minded, but the other two, especially Church Government, is
a Matter of Indifferency; and yet it is visibly from a Defect in that, that this
Nation is so full of Unholiness, the sacred Privileges proper to Believers
being thrown to worse than Dogs, before whom such Pearls are not to be cast. I
shall propose to every conscientious Christian the Method of Turetin's
defending the Reformation from Popery: It pleased God (says he) to open the
Eyes of some, who saw themselves instead of being in a Church of Christ, to be
in a Society that had Error in its Doctrine, Idolatry in its Worship, Tyranny
in its Government; it was unlawful to live in that, and unlawful to live
without public Worship: to prevent Sin in either Extreme, we did confederate
into Societies for public Worship, and called whom God had enabled and sent to
public and sacred Office, for administering Ordinances and Discipline among us.
The like says Mr. Claud on the same Subject. Strauchus adds, that the Civil
Comitia of Spire had no Power over them in Matters of Faith or Worship, and
therefore the Protestants, tho fewer in Number, acted nothing repugnant to the
Constitution of the Empire. Nor has a Synod to do with any thing but the
Churches they represent in the Affairs that are sacred. The Clergy's
intermedling with the National Affairs, has provoked nursing Fathers to be
cruel Step-fathers. The Church's grand Apostasy began together with her Inroads
upon the Civil Power: and indeed where two Powers are of equal Extent, that
which governs the Mind most, is like to command most; if the one promise
Heaven, and threaten Hell, and render it credible to the ignorant; the other
only promise Protection from a foreign Power, who will let him be Cobbler still
if he live peaceably, and threatens only a temporal Death that sometime shortly
he must suffer; we may easily guess, and hundreds of Years Experience has
evinced who shall be Slave, who Governor, Pope or Emperor, King or Synod.
It is true, this Affair is but a Hedge, but we have a most doleful Prospect of
the Flock's Condition by its Removal, or never being built. See you that design
the Good of your own Souls or Posterities, who value Loyalty to Christ as King,
who would do as much as you can to reform a Nation, get into, or build up
Church-Societies with Walls of Government, Doors, or Ways of Entrance to the
Good, all the really Good, and thundering Exits to profane Hypocrites, when
their Vileness discovers them. It is neither the Interest nor the Duty of a
Magistrate to meddle in this: they sweam on the Peoples Inclination, the Sin
lies at the Door of Well-wishers to Reformation; the hunting out of bad Houses
is a good thing, but it will never do the 10th part of Service, tho it should
succeed, that this will. This may be my last Sermon too, and I leave it as my
Advice; nay, the Counsel of Jesus is rejected in the neglect of it. You have
here a double Pattern, a Caleb in the old Church, in the Egyptian Wilderness,
contending for Obedience to the Theocracy they were under; and a Parallel of
exact Conscientiousness to our Gospel-Christocracy. Civil Government is but
human, in comparison of its Divinity. The Church at first had her Customs, 1
Cor. 11.16. and these were copied from Paul's, 1 Cor. 4.17. that were uniform
in every Church, and Paul's from Christ, 1 Cor. 11.23. The Form of the one is
Arbitrary, for the Good of the People: the Form of the other settled by him
that is the Wisdom of God, and cannot err in what Means conduce most to Souls
Good; his is the only way of correcting abounding Offenses: the Magistrate's
Sword is the Medicine for Injuries. Let us leave Sin to God's alone immediate
Government; Against thee, thee only have I sinned The Popish Abuse of
pretending to pardon arose from the primitive Practice of absolving from
Offenses, the Church thereby signifying her Satisfaction; but it is Blasphemy
for Man to pretend the other, and Folly for the Sinner to multiply Offenses by
Confession, when he only violates God's Law, and offends his Holy Eye.
. Let us be like Zachariahs and Elizabeth's, walking in all the Ordinances of
God blamelesly; this is our Lord Jesus Christ's great Ordinance, Mat. 18. at
large. If I be off of my Subject, I am in in my Duty, as is every one that
loves our Lord Jesus Christ. And though the Person I speak of was a Woman, I
may say I know not whether her Skill, her Zeal or Conscience did most outshine
in this very thing. And when I again consider, I stand amazed to see Men of
gray Hairs, good Men, serious Men, that excepting hearing a Sermon, or going to
Prayer, never make Conscience of any other Ordinance, as if the rest had been
appointed by some other Authority; they pray, and cry for the Seal of the
Spirit, but will want it before they subject to a sealing Ordinance: they are
grieved for abounding Scandals; while their Slight and Contempt of Ordinances
is as influencive an Offense as Whoring or Drinking. Surely, says a young
Convert, there is little Religion, or Acceptableness with God in such Duties,
else such and such a good Man would not contemn them so. Such Professors in
neighboring Nations would be counted Atheists, however we esteem them here. He
that dare to pick and choose, may on the same bottom throw off all. My Judgment
leaves a great Bulk of the Nation's Profanity at such Men's Doors, whatever they
think of it.

2ly. A fullness in following the Lord comprehends true Principles and Ends in
our Profession and Practice. Israel was an empty Vine, bringing forth Fruit to
her self. A selfish End makes an empty Action. This is chiefly to be regarded
in our Profession, for a Man's own Soul is not edified by that; it is to glorify
God in the Edification of others. A good Man is satisfied from within himself.
A Soul is strengthened, increased in Knowledge, Holiness, Heavenliness,
comforted, assured in Faith by the Ideas and Thoughts God raises up within the
Soul: but the public Show or Appearance a Believer makes by his professed
Subjection to every Ordinance of Christ's Appointment, is to edify others. God
makes Men Lights, to be set in Candlesticks for others. Churches are set up out
of Loyalty to Christ; but what is the End, but the Growth of one another, and
the Conversion of Strangers? I should say more than would be believed by
Srangers, if I should give account of this Woman's Charity to Souls; and as
there was a Fullness with respect to the End, so to the Principle; tho harmless
as a Dove, yet not like Ephraim, a silly Dove without Heart. Her Comfort under
her Crosses, her Constancy under Discouragements, her conscientious Subjection
to Ordinances, in the World's Esteem, and bulk of Professors, too vile and
contemptible, her Courage under Persecutions, her Contentment under
Circumstances that would have filled hundreds with anxious Care, her Charity
never abating upon Temptations from straitning Difficulties at home, which at
last her Faith may be said to conquer more than her Pains, no Hypocrite could
ever paint the Fruits of the Spirit, to such a Life, Heat and Motion, never yet
were drawn by any Pencil: Her Pulse and Zeal, Warmth and Works, left no may
be's in any Soul that had the Spirit of discerning. One of her Christian
Sisters had assurance without Clouds (tho with a most painful torturing
Distemper) 40 years together. Her own Life of Faith wanted neither Joy nor
Peace. I wish that some poor Earth-worm, some covetous Miser might lay to Heart
the Ease and Pleasure that consists in being a faithful Steward; that the
rampant Prodigal would consider, that tho he may rebel, the Godly only does
rejoice. Theirs is like the crackling of Thorns under a Pot, a Noise not very
harmonious nor delightful; and the end is Ashes: but the Joy of the Believer is
all his Life, is in his Death; Death's Ghostly looks, his severe Blows, his
tormenting Wracks, cannot imbitter this Cup of Joy: as I am informed it was
with her; my Joy in the end, is Joy without end. This is another Ingredient of
Fullness, a Fullness in degree, a Fullness of Joy, when all our Sorrow flows only
from want of more Holiness, when with Lot it is only from the Sins of the
Sodomites we live among; our Tears with David are either because the Wicked
transgress the Law of God, or our own Infirmities prevail into Deformities.
Consider, O secure Sinner, that every converted one is a Child of Light,
begotten of the Father of Lights; and the Seed of Grace is a Seed of Light. Now
the meanest Light in the World will dispel Darkness from it self, and in some
measure communicate it to others: the Stars will sparkle in the darkest Night,
a Candle will conquer a large Room of Darkness; nay, the faintest Light of a
dried or scaly Fish, or rotten Wood, will remain invincible against all the
Power of Darkness: there is no Faith without some Assurance, nor no Grace
without some secret Joy. If our Joy and our Hopes be in the serene Air of
Heaven, the Tempests below cannot extinguish it.

3ly. A following the Lord uniformly, and proportionably, is a following the
Lord fully. 1 Timothy 5.21. That thou observe all these things, without preferring
one before another; and that thou do nothing partially. The new Creature is
neither maimed nor monstrous; there is a comely Symmetry in a Christian's
Growth; all his Zeal and Devotion is not terminated on one Ordinance; according
to the Weight and Moment of the Matters of the Law, they are of Value with him:
he is no Pharisee to neglect the weightier Matters: he values an Interest in
Christ above all: next an holy Life, he esteems a Profession under all Marks of
Christianity, and is jealous of every other Mark, lest it be the Beast's and
Dragon's: he prefers a whole Set and Species of Precepts and Ordinances to the
Mode of one, that may be debatable too. The Churches Hedge has many Stakes in
it: the neglect of that is not the neglect of one Command, but of a whole
Series, and the Means of quickening and giving Life to all.

4ly. A following the Lord fully, is to follow him in all Places and Times;
whether the Company be for Truth or against it, they are for it, not
imprudently casting Pearls before Swine. But Truth is then like a Fire in the
Breast, and a Flame shut up in the Bones, when derided and opposed; and when
Season requires, is defended and vindicated. Religion rules the Conversation in
the Shop or Market, Court or Kitchen, as well as in Church, (...), says
Aristotle in his Ethics. A Caleb is a true Cube; throw him where you will, he
falls on a Square. True Gold wastes not in the Fire, rusts not in the Water. He
is not a Pharisee, good in open view, naught in secret; nor of the vain
Religion James speaks of, that lies all in the Tongue, and yet not able to
govern or steer that aright. He always minds an over-looking and overhearing
God; he fears continually, and his Faith and Love keep pace with his Fear.

5ly. A following the Lord fully consists in a constant Desire and Endeavor
after a Fullness; fully and following after will consist (without repugnancy) in
no other sense. We find the Angels following after Knowledge, prying and
searching into Divine Mysteries; and we read of them rejoicing in their
(...)'s, I have found him, I have found him, 4000 Years after their Creations
at least, Ephesians. 3. And shall the Angels in the triumphing Church above run to
and fro for the Increase of Knowledge, and the Angels below stand at a stay, and
say, it is enough? Did the Prophets in the Old Testament, search into Brim and
Bottom, Time and Place, Manner and Matter of their own Prophecies, and shall
not we? A thriving Ministry would make a thriving People, and a thriving People
would make a diligent Ministry. Do not cry to your Ministers, Pray preach easy
things, and smooth things: do not satisfy your selves only with old repeated
things, when it is the Command of Christ that the Scribe be Learned, and able to
bring forth New and Old. Make your Pastors live without Care, in caring for
them in worldly things, that their Care may be alone spent in providing Food
for your Souls. It is not to be told in Gath what Grashopers we are in
comparison of our Fathers, by this very thing. Heb. 6.1. how pathetically does
Paul exhort the converted Hebrews to leave the Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, and go on to Perfection? Is there not some Truth in the false Calumnies
of the Profane, who spend their Sabbaths in the Fields, Beds, or Taverns; who
say, We can tell all that we shall hear at Church, we know more than we can do?
But new Arguments might make them believe that more firmly; and if they
believed what they pretend to know, their Faith would make a new Life. Did they
believe that the Lord is good to those that wait on him, and to the Soul that
seeks him, they would not slight such a gainful Trade. Let us then through
Hearing, Reading, Praying, and Meditating, follow on to know more fully, to
believe more fully: Let our Faith grow more stable and fixed at the Root, by
clear Evidence and powerful Arguments, watered with the Dew of Heaven, until it
come to a Demonstration of the Spirit, and full Assurance of Faith: Let it be
like the spreading Vine, stretching it self, and by its tendrel Fingers laying
hold of every Promise: Let it flourish in Comforts, and fructify like the
Clusters of Eshcol, that were planted by the upper and nether Springs: To have
a more full and perfect Patience, until we are capable to possess our Souls,
and our Souls possess us in Want and Weariness, in Reproach and Flattery, that
the things of the World, and Persons too, may still be an Obiter in Comparison:
To have a more full Practice, do not say like Balaam, Let me die the Death of
the Righteous; come, let us live their Life, a holy Life, a penitential Life, a
self-deny'd Life, a Life not like others: The World's Custom and Course is the
high way to Hell; If we do his Will, then shall we know the Doctrine. But let
us look to the Earth's excellent Ones, its few Names who forget all that is
past, and counted the Victories over Temptations already attained nothing, the
Knowledge nothing, Diligence nothing, and therefore they pressed on to what was
before; never, with Laodicea, crying, I am rich, and full, and need nothing:
no, the Blessing is to them that hunger and thirst. This is to follow the Lord
fully, to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
pierce the Sun with Eagles Eyes, and soar toward him with Eagles Wings.

Lastly, A feeling Sense of our Defectiveness; this necessarily flows from the
former. Who will ever follow hard after what he feels no want of? Will ever the
Man that thinks he knows all the Scriptures, cry out at a new Discovery, I
rejoice at thy Word as one that finds great Spoil? Psalm. 119. or under
Darkness and Difficulties, Lord, teach thou me thy Statutes, make me understand
thy Law? No, he flattereth himself in his own Eyes, and refuses to understand.
He that sees not his own Sin as odious and troublesome as the Burden of a
Twin-Carcase already dead, will never cry out, Who will deliver me from this
Body of Death? It is a true Saying of a Blush, that it is malae Causae bonum
Signum; or, as Homer phrases it, an honest Heart has a weak Forehead. He that
is acquainted with the Deceitfulness of his own Heart, is jealous he may be
guilty, he is conscious of so much Guilt; Is it I, Lord? is it I? says every
honest Disciple. O let my Heart be upright in thy Statutes! says an upright
David; and elsewhere, When thou take away the wicked like Dross, my Flesh
trembles for fear of thee, and I am horribly afraid of thy Judgments. When Men
can look back on their Sins, as Lombard's Mother on her three Bastards, with
Pleasure (she could not repent of the Act which had such brave Effects and
Fruits) it is very sad; and forward on their Duties like Dreamers, who find
flying as easy as walking; it is very dangerous. Heal me, for I have sinned, my
Bones are broken with it; help me, for I am weak, is the Language of him who
follows the Lord fully.

I come now to the second Part of the Text, the Reward, and 5th Member in the
Subdivision proposed for a General Head: Him will I bring into the Land
whereinto he went. Here is a poor indigent Jacob traveling with his Staff in
his Hand, and a Stone for his Pillow, made two, nay twenty Troops. Here is a
mean Caleb, (not all Heart, as Fuller says, for then it would be Calleb) mean
in Name, mean in Birth, the youngest of three, mean in Possession, mean in
Place, a Spy: he has first gotten his Portion carved out to him, and a large
one too, several Cities, several Kingdoms, Hebron one, Debir one, Bethlehem
one; the very Possessions of old Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the Oaks of Mamre,
and the Wells of the South, viz. Isaac's, are all his, and the Title the best
in the World, he holds of none but God: but in Gratitude, or by way of
quit-rent, he gives the Priests a large Share with him. Here is a great Lesson
for Men advanced from Poverty to Riches, a low Estate to Honor, a private
Caleb to be the greatest Prince of Judah, nay the greatest Part of Judah I find
the Body of the Tribe of Judah came of him by this Calculation, Judah had but
two Sons, Pharez and Zerah, who had any Posterity. 2ly. Pharez had but two
Sons, Hezron and Hamul; and Hamul had no Posterity. 3ly. Hezron had but three
Sons, the third was Caleb: in short, by Birth he was the tenth Part, or at
least the twelfth Part, as Judah was of Israel. But then half of these were cut
off, when all above twenty Years of Age were cut off. 2ly. A 10th part were cut
off, when Achor the Troubler of Israel was destroyed: and this may be further
confirmed from the Genealogies of his Offspring, containing more Families than
all the Tribe of Judah beside.
; for it was his Inheritance, 1 Samuel 30.14. We made an Invasion upon the South
of the Cherethites (i. e. Philistines) upon that of it which belonged to Judah,
or which is the South of Caleb. Indeed his elder Brother Ram, or Aram, got the
Honor of the Crown, David's Line came from that Root; yet Caleb wanted not the
Honor to have Judges of Israel of his Posterity, even in his own Day, Othniel
his Son-in-law. It was not the first time the younger Brother became the better
Man for Time, and Eternity too: but the Lesson we are taught, is not to forget
our Original, and to remember it came through the gracious Promises, not
meritorious Purchase or Birthright; to remember, Psalm. 113.7. that he raises
up the Poor out of the Dust, and lifts the Needy out of the Dunghill, that he
may set him with Princes: To remember the Pit out of which we were dug, and
the Rock from whence hewn. This might be a great Remedy to some Peoples
haughty Spirits, their insolent Looks toward their own Flesh and Blood, their
imperious scornful Carriage toward others, not long ago their Fellows, if not
Superiors or Supporters, lest they hear of God as Saul, When thou wast mean I
advanced thee: he had better have kept Asses all his Days, than to have been a
King: his End was lower than before; so will be thine, pitiful, not pitied, the
Subject of Misery, and Object of Mockery, miserable without Commiseration,
envied now, and odious then, if Humility of Mind attend not the Advancement of
thy Condition, and a faithful Improvement of thy Stewardship. If I had Room for
Enlargement, there are here two Rivulets (like the Brook Bezors, that encompass
the most fertile Land of Caleb) or Subjects that meet in my Text: one is the
Pregnancy of the Promise, the Bountifulness of the Blessing: The 2d is the
Proportion or Sutableness to the Work and Actions to which they were promised;
there was an Identity and Sameness in it, Into the Land whereinto he went.

As to the first, the South of Judah was a rich Inheritance; Judah and Benjamin
possessed the Royalties and Dominions of fifteen Kings; there were but 31
Royolets of all, his Share was largest; and as Sandys says in his Travels, the
most fruitful still of all Canaan, if not of all the World, are the Valleys and
Banks of Bezor. Now when God has made a fruitful Land barren for the Wickedness
of them that dwell therein, Caleb's Country remains the Monument of what it
was before the Curse. It is said, Number. 13.23. That it was a Land that eats up
its Inhabitants; but so fertile it was they could not eat it up, the Goodness of
the Land engaged them to fight for it. The Deserts of Judea were like English
Parks, and the Hills like big Bellies, pregnant with Minerals, Saltpeter,
Brass, Iron, etc. and the Surface covered with the straight Cedars, strong
Oaks, shady Palms, and sweet Firs, or more fruitful Trees; and their Valleys
enriched with all things useful. The greatest Question is about Water, since
the Jews Wells were in the Tops of their Houses; on which account some deny it
possible to have dipped the Eunuch between Jerusalem and Gaza Acts 8.36, 26. As
they went on their way, viz. in the Road between Jerusalem and Gaza, they came
unto (...), aliquid Aquae, some Water: The Journey was 24 Miles. The Question
is, whether there was in that Road sufficient Water for the Purpose? They
confirm the Objection with this, that Mat. 3. John Baptist, who needed much
Water to the legal way, went to Jordan to baptize, when he preached in this
Country. I answer, 1st. That the Land, Deuteronomy. 8.7. was a Land of Brooks and
Fountains: and though no Land is more narrowly searched into by Chorographers
than it, yet there might be a Place in 24 Miles fit for the Purpose, that is
neither in our Maps nor Histories. 2ly. They do mention many not far out of his
Road: it is true Isaac's Wells were further South beyond Gaza, and some Miles
out of the Road; and the Well of Siriah, fatal to brave Abner, was too much
westward, nor had they been proper: as far West were the Brook of Jeruel, and
the Fish-Pools of Hebron. But the Eunuch kept the straight Road, he drove not
out of the Way. 3ly. I will then find you three Brooks in this little Journey;
first the River of the Philistines, that rose about 2 or 3 Miles from Jerusalem
about the Rock Bethzur, or Valley of Rephaim, where the Angel was heard on the
Top of the Mulberry Trees; this River was so big, that it made a considerable
Stop between the Armies of the Pagans and Israelites in the time of the
Maccabees: Now though his Road was by the Head of it, yet there were many Pools
in that Place, from thence called Baca, Psalm. 84.6. mentioned in no History,
who passing through the Valley of Baca, etc. But it may be thought here was too
little Space from Jerusalem for a Chariot and Six, to preach a Sermon in; and
2ly, may be Bezor was too far off, being the River that Gaza stood on. We will
then fix on Sorek, or Esheol, that came into it, or some Spring about the Head
of it, which was in Caleb's Territories too, which would render it both
possible and probable. But the Matter of Fact is struck down by two Witnesses,
holy, good, honest Men, who lived next to that Age, of any Testimony we have,
who could not be imposed on as to the Circumstances of the Water, the one
living at Bethlehem, the other at Caesarea, both on the Confines of the Place.
The Persons are Eusebius and Jerome: their Testimony is this; their Design is
the Chorography of the Land; their Words in effect agree, and are thus in
English: Bethsoron is a Village as we go from Aelia (i. e. Jerusalem) to Hebron
in the 20th Stone ( i. e. two Miles from Hebron) just by which there is a
Spring at the Roots of the Mountain, that is sipped up by the same Ground out
of which it bubbles, or boils forth: here was the Eunuch (the great Minister of
State to Queen Candace) baptized by Philip. She was blind of an Eye; it were
well for some they were blind of both, to have such Spectacles: She was another
Elizabeth for Love to and from her Subjects, and Esteem from others even a
Tiberius. The best Conjecture I can make is, that it was Enhakkore, Judge.
15.19. where Sampson was refreshed with Water: Circumstances agree, for they
were very nigh, if not the same. 2ly. Philip was carried to Ashdod down the
River, as Sampson came up from it to that Place.
. But if it had been 10 times better, nay all Canaan his, it had not contained
Fullness enough to make up Caleb's Inheritance; the Typicalness of the Land, the
Temper of his Mind, the Fullness of his following God, bespeaks God to be his
God, and Heaven to be his home; all Canaan, all Adam's Paradise just by, on
Jordan or Euphrates, was but a Picture, a Map of this: nay, all the World, and
all the World in its Spring split, new drawn by infinite Art, is but a Shadow
of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Saints in Love, Saints in Rest: How
else could Abraham and his Seed by Faith be Heirs of the World? Romans 4.13. The
Promise that he should be Heir of the World -- was to him and his Seed, through
the Righteousness of Faith? I. R. thus. The World was Adam's and his Seed, but
was forefaulted by Rebellion; this Forfeiture is taken off through Faith in
Christ, which Redemption cost him so dear, that it is called a new Purchase,
Ephesians. 1.14. World then must either be taken for all the Earth as a Type of
Heaven, or rather comprehending all its several Globes: our Bodies, after
glorified, may as easily pass from one Globe to another as now from one House
to another to make a Visit. Caleb had Right to Abraham's Promise, that is, the
World; he was a Son of Abraham, and my Parallel a Daughter of Abraham. For
Application, I shall only set Caleb's best Privileges in this Life and yours
together, not only his Land but Israelitish State, to whom belonged the
Oracles, the Ordinances, the Promises and Covenant, or Church-Privileges, all
which highly advance the Price of Caleb's Portion: as to the other Life, it is
one to Believers in both Old and New-Testament-State (except the Progress they
have made by being in Heaven so long before us, sets them in a higher Form)
they looked for another City than Jerusalem, one that had better Foundations,
tho all true living Rock, Heb. 13.14. and another Country than Canaan: they
were Pilgrims even in Canaan, they desired a better Country, that is an
Heavenly, Heb. 11.16. To press to Caleb's Spirit and Practice from this, is so
big, I cannot speak what becomes it; Faith is so weak, it appears at a great
Distance, and therefore little. In short, my Use is this, We are more obliged
to be full in our following God, than Caleb was from his temporal Portion,
Estate, Church State, Politic State. 1st. It Is the Substance that is in our
Expectation, the Shadow and Type was immediately in his. 2ly. Forty Years was
he to wander in the Wilderness before he set one Foot upon the Land: I could
never see from the true Canons of Chronology, Scripture or Providence, any
Ground to countenance the Prophecy of 1697; indeed this is truly 1699, but yet
I cannot think we shall continue 40 Years in the Wilderness. 3ly. Our present
Circumstances are full of Straits, Want of Trade, Money, full of Fears,
assaulted with a powerful Enemy, no Appearance of Victory, Distress in our
Naon, abounding Sin and Judgments. but I. R. was it worse than theirs in the
Wilderness? All second Causes against them, and their Pilgrimage, under the
Commination of God to destroy them all, before these Years were at an End, or
they see the Land of Promise. 4ly. Compare their Means of Salvation with ours,
their Light and Hope of Salvation with ours, and our Condition is not only
better than their Wilderness-Condition, but better than their State under a
triumphant David, or a peaceful Solomon: for (1.) We have the Exhibition, and
the History of that Perfect Righteousness, that Everlasting Righteousness, that
Eternal and Plentiful Redemption that they could only look at in a Prophecy,
and it may be understand as little as we do of his glorious Reign, when he
shall appear the second Time without Sin. (2.) We have a full Remission of Sin;
their Remission was a kind of Pretermission, or Preterition of Sin, which (
Romans 3.25.) is called the Forbearance of God. The Difference seems to lie in
these things: 1st. The Price was not yet paid. 2ly. The same Sins for which
they had offered Sacrifice were brought to their Remembrance again by new
Sacrifices, implying their not being in a constant State of Favor with God:
hence their Consciences did perpetually accuse them, Heb. 10.2. and their Fears
torment them. 3ly. They were under a Typical Curse for non-observance of some
Ceremonial Law, which was almost impossible to observe: but under the New
Testament there is no kind of Condemnation to them that are in Christ, there is
no more Sacrifice for Sin; which imports Divine Justice to be fully satisfied,
Divine Wrath fully appeased; all things are ready, and we are invited to the
Marriage Feast. Remission in this full Emphatick Sense, is promised as the Due
of the New Testament, Jer. 31.34. and historised as its Privilege, Col. 1.14.
Heb. 9.22. Christ to us is a full Surety, an (...), Fidejussor, and
Expromissor: hence Believers under the New Testament, who grow in Grace and
Knowledge, enjoy a more perfected, tranquil, secure and peaceable Conscience;
though through Backslidings they sometimes doubt if they be the Men, but doubt not
about the Validity and Acceptableness of the Sacrifice. 4ly. Our Light is much
more clear, our Vail is thinner, and our Style more familiar: the Contrivance
of Divine Wisdom in the Salvation of Man is more perspicuously declared, since
he who was from Eternity in the Bosom of the Father, is become a Preacher of
it, I will declare thy Name unto my Brethren, I have made known thy Name unto
them. A 5th Advantage is the Manner of teaching, by Effusion of the Holy Spirit
on the Hearts of Men, to convince of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment: this is
the Gospel's Glory, this makes Believers Christ's Epistles, this makes our
Subjection to all his Ordinances a willing Obedience. We see a Reason for it,
as well as Authority for it, which renders all our Service a reasonable
Service, even the severest bearing of the Cross. The Difference is so great,
that our State eminently is called the State of Faith, Gal. 3.23. After that
Faith is come, and before that Faith was. Their State is a State of Hope, By
Hope we are saved: for Christ who was the Hope of Israel, and whom they looked
at as future and to come, is present to our Faith: we hope for eternal Life
through him, but we believe in him as already having given Satisfaction, and
now sitting at the right Hand of God, our Intercessor: It may be on this
account we are called perfect, they Children in Christ. A 6th Advantage is the
Difference between their Church State and ours. I do humbly conceive that in
many places where two Covenants are mentioned, the difference is not between
the Covenant of Works under the first Adam and the Covenant of Grace, but
between the Church Covenant under the Law, and under the Gospel: by the former
all that were of Israel, were of the Church, they came in by Generation and
Birth; the second Covenant-Constitution requires Regeneration: the former
filled the Church with profane Persons, and therefore required a rigid Yoke,
severe Discipline, frequent Ejections; the other is more holy and Heaven-like.
Church Members are more like Sons having a Spirit and Air of Liberty; they had
Fathers of their Flesh, who chastised them at pleasure; we own no Pastor to
have paternal Authority, that is, to chastise at Pleasure: Call no Man your
Father upon Earth, for one is your Father which is in Heaven, and one your
Master even Christ; hence frequently Christ forbids to imitate the Gentile
Lordship in his Kingdom, and the Apostles to exercise Lordship over God's
Inheritance.

How powerful should these Motives be to undertake his light Burden and easy
Yoke, to follow him fully in every Ordinance of his Institution, to follow the
Lamb whithersoever he leads us, to bear whatever Cross his Providence imposes?

But yet the 2d thing is the more native Subject of this part of the Text, the
Correspondency, Proportion, or Identity, between the Work and Reward; what he
ventured for, he shall enjoy. Solomon makes the true Moral of it, The
Backslider in Heart shall be filled with his own ways, and a good Man shall be
satisfied from himself. If there be not a heavenliness in a Man's Temper before
he die, his Hope may deceive him in expecting it then. They that plough
Iniquity, and sow Wickedness, reap the same: but the Righteous shall eat the
Fruit of his Doings. Sin and Hell, Holiness and Heaven, agree like Conception
and Birth; When Lust has conceived, it brings forth Sin, and Sin when it is
finished brings forth Death: as hatred to God unfits for obedience to God, so
it incapacitates to enjoy God. Can he that has Enmity of God in his Heart, take
pleasure in the Fruition of his Company? Is not the Place of Darkness most
suitable to them that love Darkness rather than Light? Is it a cruel Sentence
for God to say, Depart from me, to them whose Souls say to God, Depart from us?
When Christ has long importuned us to use him as our Advocate and Reconciler,
is it harsh to say, I will not speak a word for you? If the Spirit of God has
striven with us, 20, 30 Years in our Consciences, and under Ordinances, Will
his leaving of us be unjust? Or is it unmerciful to leave us, when we have so
long grieved him, vexed him and provoked him? When a Man's natural Temper is
being dead to God, and alive to the World, is it not natural for that native
Temper to grow more complete and perfect? and what is Hell but the Perfection?
Poiret reckons it to be the easiest Rule of Government, and the first Rule of
Justice, to let every Man have what he will. O Sinner! consider, Hell is thy
choice; the worst Sentence at the Day of Judgment is to let thee have thy
Liking: thou likest not Believers Company, nor Church Communion; thou shall
have the Company of them thou did like: thou preferrest the Tyranny of Satan
to the Government of God; the Law of Sin is writ in thy Heart, not the Law of
God; thou shall have thy Choice. Consider, Sinner, it is thy own Doings that
dries thee, and renders thee combustible to the Flames of Divine Wrath; thy
Hell is begun already, thou woundest thy Conscience now, it only smarts more by
a never-dying Worm there; now thy Passions master thee, their Dominion only
will be more tyrannical: thou art uneasy now with a never-satisfied Desire, it
will then only crave more cruelly, like a Vulture eating out thy Heart: thou
enviest the Prosperity of the Godly now, it shall be only then in Maturity;
thou will not hope now, thou shall but then despair.

The same Relation lies between Grace and Glory, that lies between Sin and
Hell. Love is fully as much the Principle of Obedience and Fruition, as Hatred
is of Rebellion and spiritual Distance. Light is sown for the Righteous, and
Joy for the Upright in Heart. Faith and Vision differ only as the Seed and
Shock of Corn: Grace is the Father's drawing of the Heart to himself; There is
none in Heaven and Earth (says the Soul) that I desire but thee; Thou shall
have me, says the Sentence of the Judge. I shall leave the rest to thy
Meditation; only consider, that in all the typicalness of the Land of Canaan,
there is nothing seems so suitable to typify the Identity between Work and
Reward, the Temper of Mind in time, and the Consummation of it in Eternity, as
Caleb's having the very same Land he spied out, and contended for.

The 6th and last Head is the Entail of the Promise: His Seed shall possess it.
This, if we take without an Emphasis, is no more than what is promised to the
rest, that their Seed should possess the Land: indeed if we, take it in
Conjunction, that both he and they should, then the Emphasis is spoken to
before, for it lies in his possession of it. But Promises are usually from a
God very pregnant things; and I am under Apprehensions that there will be
discovered Mountains of Divine Goodness, both as to Extent and Intenseness in
Promises, that we look on as Mole-hills: it is like then a distinguishing and
singular length of Time and Number of Generations is implied in it; which we
may thus confirm, the Families of Jabez Vatablus thinks that Jabez and Othniel
were the same, and (may be Hezron and Jephunne the same, 1 Chronicles. 2.9, 18, 24,
42, 50. and 4.15. Number. 13.6. and 14.6, etc.) others a very near Relation (I
confess these Genealogies are yet too difficult for me to be positive in, and
so this Subject of Entail: Romans 11. the Apostle says, there are Mysteries in
it, Depths of Wisdom and Knowledge) from Jabez come the Rechabites, 1 Chronicles.
2.55. It is true, some count the Rechabites, Kenites; I find no convincing
Reason for it, nor for this, that all called Kenites should be from Jethro,
Moses's Father in Law, for 1 Samuel 27.10. one Family of that Name was in Caleb's
Portion, and he ( Josh. 14.6.) is called a Kenezite, more of kindred surely
with the Kenites than with the cursed Kenezites, Genesis 15. (sooner ripe for Ruin
than his Neighbors) or Kenezites of Edom. The Kenites of Hobab dwelt
elsewhere, Judge. 4.17. and 1.16. viz. in Naphtali and Jericho, and 1 Samuel 15.6.
among the Amalekites.
came of Caleb, and the Rechabites came of Jabez, 1 Chronicles. 2.55. We find them
of great Note in Jehu's Reign for Interest and Piety, 2 King. 10.15. he was
Jehu's Minister of State, as far as his Reformation went; these were the Men he
flattered with that Saying, Come, see my Zeal for the Lord. We find them in
Nebuchadnezzar's time constant and zealous in their Piety, Jer. 35.11. and then
this Promise of Entail, when it had lasted about 1000 Years, is repeated with a
more powerful Emphasis than before, Jer. 35.19. Jonadab, the Son of Rechab,
shall not want a Man to stand before me for ever. The Fruits of former entailed
Grace have begotten Promises of greater Grace: it is not a Promise of Office in
the Priesthood, that was not to stand for ever, but a Place within the Church
of God. How it is this Day fulfilled, when neither Jew nor Gentile can give
account of their Families for any considerable time (a few being excepted) the
God who can distinguish the Dust of every Individual at the Resurrection, only
knows; no doubt these Springs that run under ground invisible to Man, will then
be set forth in harmonious Lines and lively Colors. There is an Entail of a
Curse from the first Adam, and an Entail of a Blessing from the Second, Romans 5.
Among all the Entails by Promise or Covenant, that of Abraham's seems to have
the most Variety of Branches, some Spiritual, some Ecclesiastic, some Earthly,
some by natural Generation, some by Ingrafture, and the most Turnings and
Windings, the most Interruptions and Breaches apparently, and yet the Tenor and
Title the most fixed and persevering. Romans 11.28. As concerning the Gospel they
are Enemies, but as touching Election, they are beloved for the Fathers. It Is
no wonder that the 70 Years Captivity, which made the People of Israel a
Loammi, not my People in respect of the National Covenant at Sinai, could not
violate the Family-Covenant of Abraham, Gal. 3. since this sad Desolation for
1500 Years upon that People has not drawn the Spirit and Fatness of that Root
dry. Romans 11.16. If the Root (that one Abraham, says Jac. Alt. in Loc.) be
holy, so the Branches, ver. 17, 26, 29. Genesis 17.7. A thousand Generations are
not yet come; there were but about 54 from Abraham to Christ, not above 200 to
this Day, Lev. 26.42, 44. That Covenant will bring them out of this Distress.
It is the common Opinion of Men under the Name Christian, that one part of that
Promise's Fatness is, that this Root's Boughs bear Twigs or smaller Branches,
Act. 2.39. 1 Cor. 7.14. but that I shall forbear, for the sincere Love (in the
Sight of God) I bear to them of another Opinion, of whom this pious Matron and
Mother of Israel was. I confess I have heard many of them blamed for idolizing
this Ordinance of Professors Baptism only, and placing all their Religion in
it; but I must profess, to the Honor of this good Woman, and all them of my
acquaintance (excepting some very few whose spiritual Baptism my Charity can
scarce reach, as I may say the like of some of every Denomination) I never did
observe any such Infirmity, but on the contrary a most facile and easy bearing
their The Story is no Secret: When the Ship of exiled Scots came into this
River, she with others carried them Provision, and showed to them other
Kindnesses, even to their Redemption: When she asked if they knew of whom they
received this Brotherly Love? their Answer was, No doubt true Brethren and
Sisters, as they had reason to judge from what they experienced. Her reply, or
another's with her, was, We are all Anabaptists. The rest of the Story I leave
to Tradition, which did show how easily she could bear being contemned and
despised for her Profession, even by them she relieved, and relieved when a
long Sufferer her self, her Husband being a Sufferer, and driven from his
Employ and Vocation, which was the Staff of (...) Family: Sed haec meminisse
juvabit. Patitur, patietur, qui pari c^egit.
Infirmity, whose Zeal on the contrary exceeded Knowledge.

But I have exceeded the Bulk of Discourses usual of this kind, and wasted my
Strength through Shortness of Time, and Smalness of Health. But I should glory
in all, if I could raise up, or awaken one Caleb, one to be first ( Numb.
13.30.) in stopping our running back toward Egypt, disbelieving and despising
the precious Promises and pleasant Land, to be a Lot in our Sodom, a Noah in
our Day, a Nicodemus outed of his worldly Policy, or a Joseph of Arimathea
showing himself for a crucified Christ: and where there is any such Temper, I
would beg Caleb's Perseverance, that they would not take in evil part the
Temper of their Brethren, that would rather stone them than reward them. Caleb
met with no better, nor Luther in Saxony, nor Zuinglius in Helvetia, nor Huss
in Bohemia. Consider, a Primacy and Perpetuity in Reward, requires a Primacy
and Constancy in acting for God. O to be first, and to be full too in following
God, is a great Reward in it self! We can chalk out many Men first in such and
such a Sin, one in Knavery, another in Idolatry, a 3d in Hypocrisy, and a 4th
with the Daughters of Zion in Vanity, a 5th in Treachery; Joh. 19.11. He that
delivered me unto thee, has the greater Sin. The Spies first in Sin shall die
first of the Plague, Number. 14.37. but whom God will make the first Instrument in
Israel's Redemption, is yet in the dark. As we would make up a part of the two
Witnesses in the Wilderness, Rev. 11. we should follow Caleb and Joshua, who
followed the Lord fully; they were the Witnesses in their Day. When the
Witnesses Obedience is come to a Fullness, the Sins of the Amorites will be full
too; 2 Cor. 10.6. Having in a Readiness to revenge all Disobedience, when your
Obedience is fulfilled.

FINIS.
In Remembrance of Mrs. CONSTANCY WARD.
IF mournful Wishes of ten thousand Hearts,
Could have prevented or delayed this Stroke:
If Zeal and Virtue could WARD off the Darts
Of Death, or could its dire Decrees revoke;
Then constantly CONSTANTIA should have lived,
Of being dead, should forthwith have revived.
But the Almighty by a stated Law,
Has otherwise ordained, and every one
Must to the House of Silence once withdraw,
There to attend a Resurrection:
And then CONSTANTIA's blessed Soul shall be
Rejoined to its Body.
WARD eternally.
Now though her Death unto her self be gain,
The Loss is great to poor surviving Saints,
Who when distressed did unto her complain,
And were hid by her, and relieved in Wants:
She with unwearied Pains did others move
In Acts of Charity to show their Love.
She sound Advice did give in terms most fit,
Gentle Reproofs she wisely did convey,
To solid Reasons she did still submit,
Yielding always to Truth the Victory:
And if in something she could not agree,
She still maintained a Christian Charity.
She labored much for Knowledge, and attained
Degrees therein beyond her Sex, yet still
A deep Humility in her remained,
A modest Carriage and complying Will:
Her Faith and Hope were sound, strong, and sincere,
Her other Virtues all admired were.
Her Troubles they were great, her Husband's Life
To Tyrants Malice was designed a Prey,
And also she the charitable Wife,
From Popish Flames at last was forced to flee:
All this Distress she bore with Constancy,
With Silence and profound Humility.
She has obtained the Prize, her well-run Race
Has purchased to her on Earth Renown:
Her Tears are now wiped from her glorious Face,
Her Temples circled with Salvation's Crown:
Her Honor is with Jesus Christ to reign,
Her Work is still to love, and ever sing.
J. K.

An Acrostick.
Can those who have survived the bloody Rage
Of Charles and James, acted on Britain's Stage,
Neglect to drop their Tears upon this Stone,
Since underneath does lie the Dust of one,
That while alive took pleasure to supply,
And hide such as escaped their Cruelty?
No Difference in Judgment from her own,
Could ever lessen her Compassion:
It flowed to all alike; Scots Exiles were
Equal with English, Objects of her Care.
Wisdom and Knowledge, Zeal and Charity,
Adorned her Life; now let her Memory
Remain to future Ages, let her Praise
Determine thee to imitate her Ways.
J. K.


