SEVERAL LETTERS FROM SCOTLAND Relating The Proceedings of the ARMY there Read
in Parliament the sixth day of September, One thousand six hundred and fifty.

Imprimatur,

Hen. Scobell Cleric. Parliamenti.



Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane,
1650

A Letter from the Lord General to a Member of the Council of State.
SIR,
SInce my last, we seeing the Enemy not willing to engage, and yet very apt to
take exceptions against speeches of that kind, spoken in our Army, which
occasioned some of them to come to parley with our Officers to let them know
that they would fight us, they lying still in, or near their fastness, on the
West side of Edinburgh. We resolved (the Lord assisting) to draw near to them
once more, to try if we could fight them, and indeed, one hours advantage
gained, might probably (we think) have given us an opportunity, to which
purpose, upon Tuesday the 27 instant, we marched Westward of Edinburgh toward
Sterling, which the Enemy perceiving, marched with as great expedition as was
possible to prevent us, and the Vantguards of both the Armies came to skirmish
upon a place, where Bogges and passes made the access of each Army to the
other difficult. We being ignorant of the place drew up, hoping to have
engaged, but found no way feazeable by reason of the bogs and other
difficulties.

We drew up our Cannon, and did that day discharge two or three hundred great
shot upon them, a considerable number they likewise returned to us, and this
was all that passed from each to other, wherein we had near twenty killed and
wounded, but not one Commissioned Officer, the Enemy as we are informed had
about four-score killed and some considerable Officers. Seeing they would keep
their ground, from which we could not remove them, and our bread being spent,
we were necessitated to go for a new supply, and so marched off about ten or
eleven a clock on Wednesday morning. The Enemy perceiving it, and as we
conceive, fearing we might interpose between them and Edinburgh, though it was
not our intention, albeit it seemed so by our march, Retreated back again with
all haste, having a Bogge and passes between them and us. There being no
considerable action, saving the skirmishing of the Van of our Horse with
theirs, near to Edinburgh, without any loss to either part considerable,
saving that we got two or three of their Horses.

That night we quartered within a mile of Edinburgh, and of the Enemy. It was a
most tempestuous night and wet morning, the Enemy marched in the night between
Leith and Edinburgh, to interpose between us and our Victual, they knowing
that it was spent (but the Lord in mercy prevented it) which we perceiving in
the morning, got time enough, through the goodness of the Lord, to the Sea
side to revictuall; the Enemy being drawn up upon the Hill near Arthurs Seat,
looking upon us, but not attempting any thing. And thus you have an account of
the present Occurrences.

Muscleborough 31. August 1650. Your most humble servant, O. CROMWELL.

A Letter from a Collonell of the Army, to a Member of the Council of State.
Dear Sir,
SInce my last, we have again twice attempted to engage the Scots Army. Upon
Tuesday last, we marched with an endeavor to interpose betwixt Edinburgh and
Sterling, and by that necessitate the Enemy to fight, and accordingly we
advanced, with our whole Army, but they being in view of us, (only a river
parting) discerned by our march what we designed, and so hastened their march,
until they came to a Pass near us; and drew up in Ba^talia, we did the like,
all being confident we should within a quarter of an hour have an engagement,
and as we judged could not be prevented, the ground appearing equally good on
both sides. The Word given out was [RISE LORD] the body of Foot advancing
within less then twice Musket shot, and then was discovered such a Bog on both
our wings of Horse that it was impossible to pass over. Thus by this very
unexpected hand of Providence were we prevented, and only had liberty to play
with our Cannon that evening and part of the next morning which did good
execution, as we believe, upon them, we had very strange and remarkable
deliverances from theirs, though they played very hard upon us, and that with
much art, but the Lord suffered them not to do us much hurt, we had not slain
and wounded above five and twenty men. We finding it not possible to engage
them, and far from our Provisions, diverse of our men having cast away their
Biscuit, with their Tents out of a considence they should then fight: We
therefore resolved upon our march back to the Sea side, The Enemy likewise
hastened toward Edinburgh, we did believe their design was to gain a Pass or
two, and so interpose betwixt us and our Provisions, which they might easily
have done being before us, but the Lord gave them not courage to do it, we
found them drawn up near Edinburgh by Arthurs hill, and not at ^ll interrupted
our march, but not long after we got over ^he Pass. They instead of offering
to advance upon us, retreated behind one of their Garrisons, and so marched on
that side of the Pass, we came over up toward those hills we left.

So we finding an impossibility in our forcing them to fight, the Passes being
so many and great, that as soon as we get on one side, they go over on the
other, that the Council yesterday was very unanimous on this, that it was to no
purpose further to march after them, but inclined generally to fall upon
Garisoning of Dunbarre, and other considerable places nearer Tweed, and after
one Garrison completed (if we have no better compliance) proceed to some more
severe course then has bin yet taken. I know many among you will think it
strange we have done no more against them: I wish they may eye the Lord, and
not man. We have this satisfaction, there is no means left unattempted by us:
We have done our utmost, and the Lord therein gives us comfort, besides many
remarkable testimonies of his presence.

Of late we have understood those who have the name of honesty among them,
begin to be better satisfied, and more desirous of an Agreement. They are not
so of a piece as they were, but their disaffection about the King, and other
divisions increase: They see themselves in a snare, and would gladly many of
them get out, we are assured their honest men will not long hold in with them.
The Lord I doubt not but one way or other will very eminently appear with us,
is the prayer of your affectionate humble Servant.

Muscleborough 31 Aug. 1650. C. F,

Another Letter from the Army.
SIR,
HAving taken Redhall Monday the 26 instant, we advanced from Penckland hills,
about two miles to the water of Leith, and the next day we marched on,
resolving (if possible) to engage the Enemy, who were drawn up that morning in
Battalia, as if they intended to have stood us; but as they observed us
wheeling to the Westward, to come upon them, they remooved from their ground,
and gained a pass, where there was a boggy ground of each side. Our men were
drawn on with all possible speed, not knowing the ground to be such, and were
in a short time set in order. Never more resolution and willingness known to
have engaged an Enemy then was in our men at that time; but when we should have
fallen on, neither wing was able to come at them, and then we perceived that,
notwithstanding all their bravadoes the day before by Sir Jo. Brown, by whom
they sent us word they were resolved to give us a fair meeting; Yet their
haste toward us was not to engage us, but to stop us from coming at them. We
stood in Battalia that afternoon, and next morning: the Cannons playing hotly
on both sides, and though we were much the fairer mark, standing upon the pitch
of a rising ground, yet it pleased God our loss was much the less, we had
only about four that dyed upon the place, and about 18. or 19. wounded; and
of the Enemy about 100. wounded and killed, one Col. Men's and a Captain, and
a Lieutenant of Horse, and an Ensign killed of theirs. We have lost since our
coming into Scotland, by the Enemy, only one Commission Officer, viz. Col.
Lilburnes Cornet, who was killed at the charge at Muscleborough. There was
several strange shot, one was at Major Hobsons Troops, which was drawn close
together to prayer, and just as the Amen was said, there came in a great shot
among them, and touched neither Horse nor man. The next morning having but two
days provision left, and seeing we could not in that place engage them, we
drew back to our old quarters on Penckland hills, and the Enemy drew between
Edinburgh and Leith, as if they would that night have attempted our Garrisons on
the East side of Edinburgh, and have interposed between us and our bread and
cheese. The 29 instant we marched to the Eastward of Edinburgh, and seeing the
Enemy drawn up from Arthurs Hill to the Sea side, we possessed our selves of
the next ground to them, within Canon shot, resolving there to have endeavored
to engage them, but they very gallantly drew away between Arthurs Hill and
Cragmiller a Garrison of theirs. Our Canons some of them reaching them, and
doing as we understand, notable execution upon them. Thus from time to time
they avoided fighting, neither is it possible, as long as they are thus minded,
to engage them; so that to follow them up and down is but to loose time and
weaken our selves, methinks this people deal with my Lord, as did the Irish
Army; so that as his work was to take in garrisons, Ours, its humbly conceived,
will be to make a considerable Garrison or two, and spoiling what of their
Country we cannot get under our power. I suppose you will have a full account
hereof. This day we march. I think if ever there was an unworthy juggling, which
the Lord will witness against, its among those, with whom we have to do.
Straughan at a conference since my last, being asked seriously by one what he
thought of their King, and whether he conceived him any whit the better, since
his signing the late Declaration, replied, that he thought him as wicked as
ever, and designing both their and our destruction, and that of the two, he
thought his hatred toward them was the more implacable.

Your Honors humble Servant. G. D.
Muscleborough 31 Aug. 1650.
FINIS.

