THE HEROIC HISTORY OF Guy Earl of Warwick. Written by HUMPHREY CROUCH.



LONDON, Printed for Edward Brewster, and are to be sold by John Williamson at
the Sun and Bible on London-Bridg. 1673.

THE Heroic History OF Guy Earl of Warwick.
OF Noble Guy, I here will speak,
A Champion bold and stout,
Who evermore would help the weak,
And beat the strongest out;
Distressed Ladies, help would he
And Captives bound in Chains,
And wronged Knights from Tyrants free,
True love was all his gains;
And all was for fair Phelice sake,
He ventured life and limb;
Who made the stoutest Champion quake
That durst encounter him.
The Earl of Warwick's Daughter hight,
Was Phelice tall and trim;
The Flower of England for delight;
Too high of Birth for him.
For he was but, as I may say,
Her fathers Steward's son;
Yet Venus Laws he must obey,
When Guy had honor won.
Why then, quoth she, go forth brave Youth,
And make thy self more known;
And when my father hears the truth,
Take Phelice for thine own.
Win honor by thy Martial hand,
And by a warlike life;
When this I come to understand,
Take Phelice for thy wife.
Phelice I ask no more; said he,
Call Guy a Coward-Swain,
If he refuse to fight for thee
Thy love for to obtain.
O woe to him that counts it good,
That does procure his care;
Who wins a wife with loss of blood,
Does buy his bargain dear.
Yet whilst he has a drop to bleed,
Guy will not idle lie;
Performing many a worthy deed,
And Acts of Chivalry.
In France he proved himself a man,
Unhors'd them one by one;
He there cast down both horse and man,
And fame and honor won;
He then to England comes amain;
To see his hearts-delight;
But Phelice sends him forth again,
Since he so well could fight;
To fight for her he would not grutch,
Whom he esteemed dear;
Because he loved her so much,
No danger did he fear.
No danger may he fear that strives
To win a Ladies Love;
And howsoever the business thrives
Obedient he must prove.
He takes his leave once more, and goes,
Her pleasure to fulfill:
He longs to be a dealing blows
To win more honor still:
And through a Forest as he rides,
He meets a mighty Giant,
Two yards at every step he strides,
Far stronger than a Lion;
Friend, quoth the Giant, have thou heard
Of one, they call him Guy,
Who all the power of France has feared
With acts of Chivalry?
And what of him, Sir Guy then said?
Perhaps I am the man;
Of Giants he was never afraid,
Do all the best they can.
Oh! quoth the Giant, art thou he
With whom I long to fight?
Thy honor does belong to me,
I claim it as my right.
Then pulled a tree up by the roots,
And heaved it up on high;
In Iron Coat, and Brazen Boots,
He marched toward Guy.
Quoth Guy, thou art a simple Clown,
I Will quickly make thee mine:
I Will pull thy lofty courage down,
My honor still shall shine.
With that he hit him a strong blow,
From a well-guided hand,
And cut off mighty Rumbo's toe,
That he could hardly stand
Then Rumbo heaved his Tree on high,
Thinking his bones to break,
And struck at Guy most furiously,
Which made the ground to shake.
Before he heaved his Tree again,
Guy hit him on the head,
Thinking the Giant had been slain,
He falling down for dead.
Hold, hold, (quoth he) I Will be thy slave,
So thou will save my life.
Quoth Guy, such mercy thou shall have,
To end this dreadful strife.
He made him swear he would be true,
And serve him as his Boy,
His Enemies for to subdue,
And all his Foes destroy.
He swore he would, and then did rise,
To lend Sir Guy his aid;
Whose *ugly looks, and saucer-eyes
Might make a man afraid.
They walked over Mountains high,
Through Valleys wide and long,
The Giant Rumbo* with Sir Guy,
And none could do them wrong.
At length they heard a mighty cry,
Which scared the Giant so;
What cry is that, (quoth he) Sir Guy?
No farther will I go.
Rumbo (quoth Guy) ^ush, do not faint;
I Will go what ere betide;
No fortune surely can he want
That has courage on his side.
Close underneath a hill he found
A Lion with a Dragon met,
But Rumbo fell down in a swound,
And in a cold moist sweat.
Brave sport, (quoth Guy) fight on, quoth he,
And when you make an end,
Unto the weakest I will be
A true and trusty friend.
At length the Lion turned aside.
As if he would be gone;
Nay then (quoth Guy) have at your hide,
Dragon, I Will lay it on.
With that he draws his massy blade,
Unto the Dragon goes,
Like one that was no whit afraid,
But deals him manly blows.
Valiant Guy bestirs his hands,
The Dragon back did shrink,
The Giant Rumbo quaking stands,
And knew not what to think.
Guy gets the Victory at last,
Which made great Rumbo glad;
He was full glad the fight was past,
For he before was sad.
The dreadful Lion Guy did greet,
When he to him did go,
And thankfully did lick his feet,
Because he killed his foe
He follow*d him by his Horse side
It was his chief desire;
Till he no longer could abide,
Hunger forced him to retire.
Rumbo (quoth Guy) I see thou art
A Coward at the last,
Thou have great strength, but little heart,
I know by what is past.
Master (quoth Rumbo) shall I speak,
And yet I now am loath:
Compared to me you are but weak,
Yet heart enough for both.
But you shall see my valor shown
Before that it be long;
I will not see you overthrown
Or suffer any wrong.
Why then, quoth Guy, Rumbo, I Will quickly try what mettle thou art made of;
thou wast afraid of the Dragon, but art thou afraid of a man? No, quoth Rumbo,
you know I was not afraid of you, who was too hard for all the Champions in
France; I purposed to win honor, thought to try my manhood with you, though I
had the worst, and should think my life well spent in the service of such a
noble Champion. Rumbo (quoth Guy) I hear the Emperor of Almain has besieged
the Duke of Lovain, thither I purpose to go to lend the Duke my aid; for I am
resolved to help the weak against the mighty: yet in no unjust quarrel shall my
sword be drawn: no sooner were they arrived at Lovain, but the Duke
understands thereof, and entertained Guy with great joy and gladness. Now,
quoth the Duke, my friend, my heart is right glad, that so honorable a man is
come to take our parts. Brave English man, quoth the Duke, advise me what to do
in this case, the City being besieged by a powerful enemy, and small resistance
to be made against them. My Lord, quoth Guy, there is freedom enough, to be won
by a course which my self means to take and to encourage your men the better,
my M^n Rumbo and I will issue out upon them, so after the breach is made, your
Army may the better fall upon them, and put them to the rout: No danger may
they fear, who valiant minds do bear. Then suddenly they opened the Gates,
where Guy and Rumbo behaved themselves so valiantly, that they broke their
Enemies Ranks, beat the Almains from the walls, and made such a terrible
slaughter among them, that with the help of the Duk^s Army, they quite
vanquished the Almains, and put them quite to the rout. Rumbo beat a whole lane
of men before him, but following them* too far, was unfortunately slain. Guy
bewailed the death of his trusty servant Rumbo, and said, he would be revenged
of the Almains for his death. Shortly after, the Emperor sent another Army
greater than the first, but they were overthrown as the former were; and the
Duke, with Guy, returned victoriously into the City, where after many thanks
given to Guy, Guy answered the Duke in this manner; My Lord it joys me not half
so much that we have got the victory of our Enemies, as it would glad my heart
to make a Peace between the Emperor and you. The Duke was willing, and sent a
Guard of Soldiers with him, till he came to the Emperors Court, where he spoke
to the Emperor in this sort, High Emperor, all health unto thy Grace, and
Peace to thee, if thou say peace to us; and love to thee, if love thou will
embrace: Why should the Christians war against each other, but rather against
mis-believing Jews, Turks and Pagans? we sue not after thee in a servile way,
as fearing thy power and might: for victory has crowned our heads with honor;
but that we might agree together to pull the Pagans down. Brave Englishman,
quoth the Emperor, had thou spoke sooner, it had not only been granted, but
had saved many hundred men's lives: Why then, quoth Guy, let us to Duke Segwin
go, and renew the League betwixt you. With all my heart quoth the Emperor. So
away they go to the Duke, and renew their League, and sends Guy with a thousand
chosen men against the Jews, Turks, Pagans, and Sarazens, altogether by the
ears. Brave sport, quoth Guy, so lays about him on every side, favoring none,
insomuch that they said one to the other, What mad fellow is this, that hews us
down on every side? sure had he a thousand lives, he could not escape. At
length a mighty Pagan steps to Guy, and desired a Combat at his hands, to see
which of their swords could cut the best. Methinks quoth Colbron, thou have a
sword that is like to a reed, I am persuaded it will not cut. Not cut, quoth
Guy! Pagan, I like thy humor well. I Will whet it on thy bones before we part;
such Lubbards it has often hewn asunder; then did they lend each other such
lusty knocks, that sparks of fire flew from their helmets: the gazing people
knew not what to think, but expected the end of Guy, for Colbron was wondrous
strong, and one of the chiefest Champions that the Turks had. But Guy at last
gave him such a speedy blow, that down came Colbron and his strength withal.
Pagan, quoth Guy, is my sword sharp or no? with that he cut of his head, and
send it to the Emperor presently. Guy to another goes, called Marmadore, and
after a hot dispute, overcomes him, and lays him dead upon the ground. The
Pagans ^eeing their Champions go down so fast, forsook the field, and went to
the Town, where a most bloody Tyrant bore the sway, who hearing what was done,
went armed to the Tent where Guy was, and challenged him to come forth, telling
him that he had promised his head to a Lady, and was come to fetch it. And have
thou so, quoth Guy? an honest man will be his words master: come then and take
it off quickly, or else the Lady will suppose you scoff. But Guy did so
be-labour him, that instead of taking off his head, he set spurs to horse, and
fled to save his own, then not a man durst stir. But Guy hearing they had a
General in Town, they called him mighty Souldan, goes and challenges him, and
dares him to his face. The Souldan with a staring look replied, thou Christian
slave who like a dog I scorn, I Will chastise thee with steel; with that at each
other they ran, their Lances broke, and each forsook his horse; they betook
them to their swords: Guy struck such forcible blows, that he cut through the
Souldans Armor, and by loss of blood the Souldan fell to ground, casting
handfuls of his blood at Guy: then not a man durst stir. So Guy set spurs to
his horse, and departed with victory and great honor. Guy now intended to go
see his loving friend the Duke of Lovain, but ere he came to his journys end,
he freed a woeful Lady from distress; thus it befell; Earl Terry a valiant man,
with his Lady, walking through a Forest to take the Air, was surprised on a
sudden by sixteen villains, who were hired to take his Lady, away from him, and
make her another wife, leaving the Earl sore wounded: Guy comforts the Earl,
and understanding where these villains were, by the cry of the Lady, comes to
them in this manner, cursed slaves (quoth he) what do you mean to do with this
Lady? her husband you have wounded, and taken her by force from him: this act
of yours I Will make you now repent, you shall pay dear for what you have done:
with that they laughed him to scorn, saying, what fool is this, or rather mad
man, who thinks to get himself a name by a desperate attempt? like so, quoth
he, the fit that is on me now is a raging one, so draws his sword, and bids the
Lady hold her peace, for he would quickly release her from the hands of these
Villains: ^o with admirable courage he lays upon them, at every blow* one or
other dies: some he slew* and the rest fled, being not able to withstand him at
that time; so he conducts her to the Earl her husband with much joy and
gladness on both sides. Now Guy, with the Earl and his beloved Lady, wandering
through the desert without a guide, hearing the noise of wild beasts, did not a
little trouble them. At length two armed men they spied with their swords
drawn, who stood on their guard, lest the wild beasts should devour them on a
sudden: Guy demanded of them what they were, they replied, they came to bring
Earl Tery bad news; the Earl demanded what it was? They replied, his Royal
Father was besieged in his strong Castle by Duke Ottons power, who has vowed
to pull the Castle down about his ears. The Earl on a sudden was much
discontented. Guy cheers him up, and tells him that he will assist him. My very
name, quoth Guy, will make him fli^; he felt my sword in France, but liked it
not; I will go with thee, thy wronged Father to defend, for I have vowed the
wronged for to right. Noble friend, quoth Terry, my joys abound and have
overcome my grief, to think my aged Father has so brave a man to take his
part. The Enemies no sooner heard of Guys approach, but all their Commanders
took their heels and ran away, leaving the Duke their Master to order his men
himself. The Duke s^eing himself in so bad a condition, in a desperate humor
calls for Guy, vowing to be revenged of him, or lose his life and honor in the
field. Where is, quoth he, this Englishman that haunts my Ghost? I challenge
him to meet me in the field, equal envy shall quickly end the quarrel that is
betwixt us. Agreed, quoth Guy, proud foe, repent thy wrong, and make thy
conscience clear, thou shall quickly see an end of thy honor, which worthy men
do hold most dear; thou have now lived to s^e an end of thy good name. Together
then they rushed most furiously, like two incensed Lions, breaking their
Lances as they were reeds, and betaking them to their swords they fought both
with admirable courage, till at length through loss of blood the Duke fell, who
lamented his ill fortune, and died very penitently, confessing that ambition
was the cause of his overthrow. When Guy heard this, he sheathed his sword, and
said, remain thou there, for I mean to bleed no more for Phelice at this time,
I have been too long away from her, and will fight no more till I see her. But
passing through a for^st, he met with the hugest Boar that ever eye b^held, the
beast came at him most furiously, which he perceiving, stands upon his guard,
and lay so hard upon his Swinish he^d, that he left him d^ad in the place. And
so takes his journey for England, where being arrived, he was entertained with
great joy and triumph by King Athelstone, who had heard of all his noble
achievements done in other Countries, to the honor of England and English men:
Renowned Englishman, said King Athelstone, who art the pride of our Nation, I
have heard all thy noble actions done in other Countries, to the wonder of the
whole Christian world. Thou have laid a heavy hand upon the necks of Pagans,
Infidels and Jews, hewing monsters in twain, who spoiled and devoured many
Christians: But honorable man, I think thou never did destroy the like
Monster that is now in England, a dreadful Dragon in Northumberland, who
devours man, woman, and child; many worthy Knights have gone to encounter with
him, yet never any came home alive again. I speak not this to animate thee on
to venture thy life to encounter with him, whose life I prise as dear as mine
own; but that thou may understand how our Country is annoyed by him. My
Liege, quoth Guy, let me have a Conduct, that I may understand where to find
him, and I promise as I am an English Knight, and true to my King and Country,
I will bring this Monsters head to your Majesty. The King gave order that a
dozen Knights should conduct him to the place where the Dragon was, which was
done accordingly. The King and the Court took their leave of Guy in solemn
wise, never expecting to see him again. When they were come ne^r to the place
where the Dragon was, Guy says thus unto them, Gentlemen, go no farther for
fear of danger, but sit on your Horses, and behold the sport. So coming toward
the Cave, where the Dragon was, Guy prepared for the encounter, and beholding
the dreadful Dragon coming toward him with ireful countenance, with eyes like
burning fire, and lofty speckled breast; His Lance in his Rest, and spurs his
Horse, running against the Dragon with such violence, that he overthrew him.
The Dragon bit his Lance in twain as if it had been a Reed. Nay then quoth
Guy, if you fall to such bites, I have a tool to pick your teeth withal, then
draws his trusty blade, and lays upon the Dragon in such manful wise that he
made wide and deep wounds in his body, which caused him to roar so exceedingly,
that he scared the Knights which sat on their Horses to behold the fray. The
Dragon perceiving Guy too hard for him, endeavored to fly away from him, but
Guy brought him down again with a vengeance, cut off his head and brought it to
the King upon a piece of the Spear that the Dragon bit in twain, The King
admired at this monsters head; God shield, quoth he, and save us from all evil,
here is a face would outface the devil. Victorious Knight, said the King, we
admire thy valor, thy courage, and brave adventure, one thing I must needs
crave; and that is this, that you will go no more beyond the Seas, but stay
here with me. My Sovereign, quoth Guy, what I have done, was for love of a
woman, whom I have not seen these many years; may your Majesty be pleased to
give me but so much leave, I shall be your servant. Thrice honored Knight, I
know it, the Earl of Warwick's daughter; go honored man, unto her, she has
heard of all thy valiant actions, thou art a second Hector, or more than he,
for Hector never did so much as thee.

Phelice hearing Guy was at Lincoln, went to him, and being over-joyed that she
had found him, clipped him in her arms, and said, Why, how now, Love, have you
forgot to love? what, seek a dragon ere you come to me? Phelice, said Guy, the
King himself complained of a most dreadful Dragon in Northumberland, that
annoyed all the Country, killing men, women, and children, and he which will
not obey his Sovereigns command, especially in a thing of so high concernment,
is both a coward and an ill affected member to the Commonwealth, Phelice I am
thine, I bought thee with this price of blood. Dear Love, said Phelice, thou
shall never bleed more for me. So both agreed, they went to their royal fathers
house, Earl Roband, who entertained him most nobly, and after a few days they
were married together with great joy, banqueting, and hearts-delight. The noble
Earl Roband in the space of three weeks died, and left the Earldom to his son
Guy, who was after made Earl of Warwick, he enjoyed his Earldom but a small
time. And now growing in years bethinks himself, and often would say. How many
men have I made lifeless for the love of a woman, and spent my time in war and
bloood, and not one tear shed for my sins; for Beauty have I run through the
world in a Sea of blood; good God forgive me for it. Vain world, farewell, I go
to mortify a sinful man; and now I mean to take my journey, like a Pilgrim, to
the holy Land, to see the place where my Savior died for my sins, and the sins
of the whole world. Phelice finding him discontented, begins to question him
how he came into those melancholy fits; if I (quoth she) be the cause of it, I
am not only sorry, but will endeavor to mend what is in me amiss. No, dear
Love (quoth Guy) nothing but my sins, my numberless sins, that is the cause of
all my grief and sorrow. Ah Phelice, said he, for thy love I have made many a
man bleed, and now, dear Love, do intend to take my journey to the Holy Land,
and live and dye a Pilgrim: Here, take this Ring, and keep it as a pledge of my
love to thee, and give me thine; and if ever I come again to England, I will
send thee this Ring, that thou may come and close up my dying eyes: Phelice,
farewell, weep not, I now must go, thy heart is full of love, mine full of woe.
So with abundance of tears betwixt them, he takes his journey, only with a
staff in his hand, to the holy Land, and she as a pensive widow, remains at
home, giving alms at her door to all Pilgrims for his sake, enquiring of them
evermore, if they could tell her any news of him; but he not making himself
known to any of them in all his travels, they could relate nothing of him to
her. Many times when he returned from the holy Land, he has received alms from
her own hands; and she not knowing of him, he has departed with tears in his
eyes to his Cave, where he lived and dyed, as you shall understand hereafter.



Now Guy takes his journey toward the holy Land, passing through deserts and
unfrequented places, full of danger; meets at last with a woeful Wight, that
unto sorrow was no stranger: An aged man having fifteen sons in bondage under
the cruel Tyrant, or a barbarous Giant, called Amarant, who retained them in
his strong Castle, with many Knights, Gentlemen, and Ladies, besides. Guy
questioning where, the old man directs him to the Castle. Lend me thy sword,
quoth Guy, I Will lend my manhood all thy sons to free. So away he goes, and lays
upon the gates, as one that says, He must and will come in. The Giant was never
so rouzed before, for no such knocking at, his gates had been: so he takes his
Club and Keys, and comes forth; Sirrah (quoth the Giant) what business have
thou here? art thou come to feast the Crows about these walls, because thou
have molested me in this manner, with this Club will I beat out thy brains and
dress thy flesh for the Crows to feed upon. You are very quarrelsom, Giant,
quoth Guy, and dangerous at the Club it seems you be: I have been better armed,
though now I go thin; but do thy worst, here is a Weapon that must do me right.
So draws his sword, salutes him with the same about his shoulders, head, and
sides, in such manner, that the Giant did not like the sport; but heaving his
Club aloft in the air, said, now villain will I crush thee. But Guy was nimble
to avoid the same, so on the ground he spent his stroke in vain. At length
Amarant the Giant grew thirsty and faint for want of drink, and asked leave of
Guy to quench his thirst at the River. Guy gives him leave; then to work they
fall again. At length Guy grew thirsty, and crayed leave to drink; but the
churlish Giant said, it was a mad-mans part to relieve his enemy. Well, said
Guy, since thou art so hard-hearted in that wherein I used thee so kindly, thou
shall understand that it does but whet my anger the more against thee, and so
shorten thy life sooner, I now disdain to drink. Bold Tyrant, take a taste of
my good will, for now I b^gin my bloody bout, it is not that same Club will
bear you out; with that he hit him on the head such a powerful stroke, that
brought him with a vengeance down; then Guy set foot upon the Monsters breast,
and hewed off his head, and takes his Keys, ands enters the Castle, where a
most woeful spectacle he beheld, tender Ladies in dark Dungeons fed with the
flesh of their own husbands; them he released, and set at liberty; unbinds many
Knights and Gentlemen, who for many years had been kept in bondage by this
bloody Tyrant; at length he came to an Iron gate, which he unlocks, where he
found the old man's sons, being fifteen in number, who looked like the Picture
of death; some of them he found hanged up by the middle, some by the thumbs,
some hanged up by the heels, with their heads downward; these he took down with
great care, and delivered them to the old man their father, who with great joy
and thankfulness would have kissed Guy's feet: but Guy took him up in his arms,
delivered the keys to him, made him Master of the Castle, and so departed. Many
a weary step traveled he ere he came to the holy land, whilst his beloved wife
spent her days in great sorrow, often wishing her self with him, to be partner
with him in all his sufferings. Many years continued he in the holy land,
insomuch that all his friends thought him to be dead. At length desiring to see
his own native Country, where he intended to lay his bones, he took his journey
homewards. No sooner was he arrived on the English shore, but he found his
Country in great distress, the King of Denmark with a mighty Army was landed,
threatening to destroy all with fire and sword; the King of Denmark had a mighty
Giant to his Campion, so terrible to behold, that the English were afraid of
his very looks, slinging his Gantlet down with such pride and contempt, that
worthy Guy could ill endure to hear said, The English were a cowardly Nation,
that never a man durst answer him. Guy could contain himself no longer, but
goes to the King, and tells him, that he will accept of the challenge, and
desired his Majesty not to despair, for he would quickly make an end of Colbron
that mighty Giant. The King said unto him, Honest Palmer go, and God bless thee
in this mighty work thou have undertaken, and grant thee victory over thine
enemy. Amen, quoth Guy, and so goes from Winchester's North-gate, to Hidemead,
where he found this Monster of men, treading each step two yards of ground. Art
thou the man, quoth Colbron, on whom the King has ventured England's Crown,
whereas all his Lords and Nobles I defy, and scorn to fight with such a slave
as thee. Giant, quoth Guy, manhood should never rail, a Soldiers Weapon best
can tell his mind. Thus I begin, and therefore look about thee, if thou be
beaten the Danes will flout thee. Then began a sharp and bloody fight between
them, so that the people knew not what to think, at length Colbron through loss
of blood began to faint, and say to Guy, Yield thee brave Englishman, and
fight no longer. Villain, quoth Guy, I scorn thy cowardly fear, the King has
ventured England on my head; with that he lent him such a powerful blow, that
brought the Giant with a vengeance down. Great joy was there among the English.



But Guy passed away unknown to his Cave; within a while after he fell sick,
and sent his Ring to his Wife, the Countess of Warwick, by a poor Palmer; who
came and closed up his dying eyes, her self living but fifteen days after.

FINIS.
Books newly Printed for Edward Brewster, at the Crane in St. Paul's Church
yard, 1673.
Mr. Ball's Catechism, large and small. The Famous History of Guy Earl of
Warwick. The delectable History of Reynard the Fox, both parts. The Book of
Graces. The Gardiners Labyrinth. The History of the Friar and the ^oy, both
parts. Robbin Hood and Little John. The Doctrine of the Bible. 120 A Useful
Table of Expenses. Moses revived: A Treatise proving, That it is not lawful*
(and therefore sinful) for any man or woman to eat blood, viz. the lifeblood
of any Creature. 80 Natural and Artificial Conclusions. 80 Rogers Righteous
man's Evidence for Heaven. 120 Christian Advice to young and old, rich and
poor; which may serve as a Directory at hand ready to direct all persons almost
in every condition, under 27 general useful heads; by Tho. Mocket. Mr. Tho
Ford's Sinner condemned of himself. Scripture self evidence. 120 The last Will
and Testament of Basil Valentine, Monk of the Order of St Bennet, etc. A
Prospect of Divine Providence. by T. C. 80 The Apostolical History, containing
the Acts, Labors, Travels, Sermons, Discourses, Miracles, Successes and
Sufferings of the Holy Apostles from Christ's Assention, to the destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus. Fol.



