The Way to a Lasting PEACE, AND TRUE RECONCILIATION.
IT may be said, by way of Allusion to the Prophets Words, Isaiah 9.5, etc.
That after the outward War of Confused Noise, and Garments Rolled in Blood, is
at an end, there must be another War or Battle, of which the Prophet says,
This shall be with Burning and Fuel of Fire, etc. That as the former War
Killed Men's Bodies, this latter may Destroy Men's Corruptions and Lusts, from
whence all outward Wars and Fightings commonly proceed.

That this may be Effected in all, from the Highest to the Lowest, there must
be a diligent Watch kept, by every one, over their own Hearts and Ways, unto
the Convictions, Motions and Strivings of the Holy Spirit within; through the
neglect and want of which, the Flood came upon the Old World, and 'twas said,
God's Spirit shall not always Strive with Man; but after his long Suffering and
Patience, he swept them all away, except those few in the Ark.

And Christ says, Mat. 24.37, 38, 39. viz. As the Days of Noah were, so shall
also the coming of the Son of Man be: For as in the Days that were before the
Flood, they were Eating and Drinking, etc. until the Day that Noah entered into
the Ark and knew not until the Flood came, etc.

There was these two things in the Days of Noah observable, viz. An Ark and a
Flood; an Ark to Preserve the Faithful, and a Flood to Destroy the Careless and
Ungodly.

Therefore those that expect a Perpetual and Lasting Peace, must leave their
Wantonness and Mocking, as those Atheists did, the Apostle speaks on, 2 Peter
3.3, 4, 9. Because all things seemed to them to continue as they were from the
Creation, etc. But the Lord (says the Apostle) is not slack concerning his
Promise, as some Men count slackness, but is long Suffering to usward, not
willing that any should Perish, but that all should come to Repentance: But the
Day of the Lord, says he, will come as a Thief in the Night. Therefore let all
Fear the Great God, and forsake the Evil of their doings, and be like that good
Man Noah, who being moved with Fear, Built an Ark for the Preservation of
himself and his Family.

Are not the Coffers of Princes Emptyed, and the Riches of the People much
Exhausted? But is not Pride, Covetousness, Luxury and Wantonness increased and
abounding? Which the Prophets Burning and Fire, spoken of before, must Consume,
and they be forsaken, before a perpetual and lasting Peace be Established: And
that Government that makes the Nations happy must be upon his Shoulders, that
the same Prophet mentions to be borne and given, in his very next words, after
the War and Battle with Burning and Fuel of Fire, saying, For unto us a Child
is born, unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his Shoulders.

Come therefore unto him, who is the Prince of Peace, and Lord of Glory, whose
right it is to Reign Spiritually in all Crowned Heads, and over all their
Subjects: If you would, in good earnest, enjoy a firm and lasting Peace; For
there is no Peace, says my God, to the Wicked, Isa. 57.21.

Come to him all you that call your selves Catholics, and Learn of him
Universal Love and Good Will toward all those you count your Enemies, and
cease Persecuting of them for their Consciences to God, over which he only
ought to Rule, if you would enjoy a firm and lasting Peace. And come all you
called Protestants and Non-Conformists of all sorts, and Protest by your
Practice, against all Ungodlikeness and Nonconformity to the Divine Will and
Commandments of the Almighty; rest not in the Name, but manifest your selves to
be Transformed in the Renewedness of your Hearts, by bringing forth the Fruits
of a Real Protestation against all manner of Wickedness which abounds amongst
you, to the Contempt of True Religion and Holy Conversation, if you expect a
firm and lasting Peace.

For the end of the Bloody or Lion's War must be the beginning of the Lambs,
who shall have the Victory, not by Garments Rolled in Blood, for he Wars not to
Destroy Men's Lives, but their Corruptions and Lusts, and to save their Souls;
his beginning is said to be, With one Crown upon his Head, and a Bow in his
Hand, but the Work of the Lord shall so Prosper in his Hand, that the
Revelation of Jesus Christ to his Servant John tells us, That on his Head were
many Crowns, at last, Rev. 19.12.

For when his Name comes to be universally Known, by Reading it Written upon
his Vesture and upon his Thigh, viz. That Great and Glorious Name of King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords; then all Crowns shall be laid down as it were at his
Feet, And of the Increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no end;
for the Stability of his Times shall be Righteousness and Peace.

When this comes to be fulfilled, Times will be Settled in good earnest, and
there will be no doubt of a firm, lasting and perpetual Peace. For the Lion and
the Lamb shall lie down together, etc. And there will be no Destroyer upon all
God's Holy Mountain, etc.

And although my Gray Hairs may not be Privileged from the Grave until these
things be accomplished, yet I shall lay down my Head in hopes, that some may be
now alive, who may more fully see the fulfilling of them.

For who knows but the King of Kings may send forth his Ambassadors of Peace to
the Nations yet a far off? And that such may be prevalent, in the Spirit and
Power of Jesus Christ, to awaken the Nations to a True Reconciliation with God,
that they also may be partakers of a saving and lasting Peace through Jesus
Christ.

And who knows but these Overturnings of Governors and Governments, and the
Bowing of Great Potentates (in making them willing to yield up their late
Conquests, and some to confess to that which formerly they would not
acknowledge) may make way for Christ's Peaceable Government?

And who knows but the same God, in the Day of his Power, may Bow many
Strong-willed and Stout-hearted Ones of the World to give and yield up the Old
Conquest or Power? That Wickedness of all sorts has so long had over them,
unto him that is called, The Desire of all Nations, and is foretold to come as
the Effect of all those Shakings and Overturnings that shall be in the World,
that God and his Christ alone, whose Kingdom cannot be shaken, may remain; the
Firm Peace and Everlasting Rest for the People of God.

But know this, that now there is no whole and entire Nation that is the People
of God, but they only that Fear God and Work Righteousness, in every Nation,
are accepted of him.

Come therefore all you Princes of this World, and Purge your Selves and Courts
from all Unrighteousness, and follow the Example of that Holy King David, who
promised, That when he was Restored to his Kingdom, he would not suffer a Liar
to be in his House. Come also all you Nobles, and Purge your Families from the
Workers of Iniquity; and all you People that Profess Christianity, by the Power
of Christ, Purge your Consciences from all Dead Works, and Learn truly to serve
the Living God.

And come all you that Rejoice in the Glad-tidings of Peace in your Native
Countries, and Learn Sobriety and Moderation in all things, that there may be
Rejoicing in Heaven also at your Conversion from the Evil of your Doings, that
you may offer to God, by Jesus Christ, the Sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving, by Killing your Lusts and Corruptions; for as in the outward
Sacrifices there was something to be Killed, so must Wickedness be Slain,
before you can truly keep a Day of Thanksgiving unto God: When this is
Practiced, then may we all expect a Ratification from Heaven of a True and
Perpetual Peace.

But if Unfeigned Repentance be wanting, your Joy will be turned into Mourning;
and instead of Days of Rejoicing, The Great Day of the Lord will come upon you,
that shall Burn as an Oven, and all that are Proud, and all that do Wickedly
shall be as Stubble, and he will leave them neither Root nor Branch.

Therefore be Serious, and Repent of your former Mispent-time, and Reform from
the Highest to the Lowest, both Great and Small, then may you expect a Firm and
Lasting Peace, That every one may sit under his own Vine, and under his own
Fig Tree, Praising the God of Peace, and Loving one another, even your
Neighbors as your Selves.

Hertford, the 1 st of the 8 th Month, 1697. John Crook.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street, 1697.


