A CATALOGUE OF SUCH BOOKS That ate printed for, and sold by WILLIAM CROOK, at
the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, next to Devereux Court.

Where is to be Sold Bibles, Common Prayers, and all other sorts of Books.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1683.

Books Printed for William Crook, Bookseller, at the Sign of the Green Dragon
without Temple Bar, nigh the Passage into the Temple, by Devereux Court, 1683.
DIVINITY.
1. SIxty one Sermons, preached mostly upon public occasions, by Adam
Littleton, D. D. Folio, Price 16 s. 2. Brevis Demonstratio, being the truth of
the Christian Religion, proved by Reason, 120. price bound 10 d 3. The
Primitive Institution, showing the antiquity and usefulness of Catechizing,
together with its suitableness to heal the distempers of the Church, by L.
Addison, D. D. price 1 s. 6 d. 4. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of a sober
relious man, found drowned in a Pit, in 80. price bound 1 s. 5. Mr. Howel's
Visitation Sermon before the Bishop of Chichester, 40. price 6 d. 6. Dr.
Hascard's 2 Sermons on the 5th. of November, and before the L. Mayor of London,
in 40. 7. Mr. Manningham's 2 Sermons before the L. Mayor at St, Mary's in
Oxford. in 40. 8. A Sermon preached at the Savoy in French, and since printed
in French and Engl. 120. price bound 8 d. 9. A Modest Plea for the Clergy,
wherein is considered the reasons why why the Clergy are so contemned and
neglected, by L. A. D. D. price 1 s. 6 d. 10. Hugo Grotius, his Catechism,
Greek, Latin, and English, with a Praxis of all the Greek words therein
contained, in 80, price bound 2 s. 11. The Spirit of Prophecy, proving, that
Christ and his Apostles were Prophets: written by the directions of, and
recommended to the Press, by the right reverend Father in God, Peter, Lord
Bishop of Ely, in 80. price 3 s. 12. The King-killing Doctrine of the Jesuits,
in a sincere discourse to the French King: written by a Roman Catholic, in 40.
price 1 s. 13. Justifying Faith; or the Faith by which the Just do live,
together with the excellency of the Common Prayer Book, in 80. price bound 1 s.
14. Mercy Triumphant, or the Kingdom of Christ enlarged beyond the narrow
bounds which have been wont to be set to it, by Ed. Lane. 15. Du Moulin's
Reflections reverberated, being a full Answer to the damning Doctrine of Dr.
Lewis Du Mowlin: also, a Confutation of Edmond Hickeringill's railing against
the Ecclesiastical Courts, by E. Lane, in 40. 1 s. 6 d. 16. Responsio
Valedictoria ad secundam Sandii Epistolam, etc. per Sam. Gardener, S. T. D. in
80. pri. 1 s. 6 d. 17. The Book of Psalms paraphrased, with Arguments to each
Psalm, in 2 Vol. by S. Patrick, D. D. and Dean of Peterburgh, in 80. price 10
s. 18. The Book of the Proverbs of Solomon Paraphrased with Arguments, by S.
Patrick, D. D. etc. 19. The Christian Sacrifice, a Treatise, showing the
necessity, end and manner of receiving the Holy Communion, together with
Prayers and Meditations, etc. by S. Patrick, etc. 20. The Devout Christian,
instructing how to pray and give thanks to God; or a Book of Devotions for
Families, and for particular persons, etc. by S. Patrick. 21. The penitent
Christian, fitted with Meditations and Prayers for the devout receiving of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, by Lewis Southcomb, 120. pr. 1 s. 22. The Truth
of the Christian Religon; written in Latin, in 6 Books, by the Learned Hu.
Grotius, now translated into English, with a Seventh Book added to it, by S.
Patrick, D. D. in 80. 23. The Works of the pious, and profoundly learned Joseph
Mede, B. D. some time Fellow of Christ's Church, Cambridge, corrected and
enlarged according to the Authors own Manuscripts, in Folio. 24. A
Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature, and of the
Christian Religion, in two parts, by Sam. Parker, D. D. in 40. 25. The Rules
and Exercises of Holy living and Holy dying, by Jer. Tailor D. D. the 13th.
Edition in 80. 26. The Penitent pardoned, or a Discourse of the Nature of Sin,
and the Efficacy of Repentance, under the Parable of the Prodigal Son, by J.
Goodman, D. D. 40. 27. The Practice of Christianity, in two Parts, by Dr.
Sherlock, in 80. price 5 s. 28. A Collection of private Devotions in the
practice of the ancient Church, called the hours of Prayer; taken out of the
Scriptures, Fathers, etc. by Dr. Cozens late Bishop of Durham, 120. price 2 s.
29. The Holy Court complete, by Nic. Causin. in folio. 30. Bishop Sanderson's
Sermons complete. fol. 31. Perkin's Works in 3 Volumes, folio. 32. Robinson's
Annalium Mundi Vniversalium, in folio.
With most sorts of other Divinity Books.

LAW.
1. THE Jurisdiction of the Authority of Court-Leets, Court Barons, Court
Marshalsea, etc. together with the most necessary learning of Tenures, and all
their Incidents of Essoyns, etc. with the Return and Forms of several Original
and Judicial Writs, now in use, relating to Writs of Error, Writs of false
Judgment, and other Proceedings of frequent use in the Courts of Westminster,
by J. Kitchen of Grays Inn Esquire To which is added Brevia selecta, being a Choice
Collection of special Writs; the Fifth Edition, in octa. price 6 s. 2. Praxis
Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae, Author Francis Clarke, in 120. price 1 s. 3. Sir
Simon Deig's Parson's Counselor, the last Edition in octa. 4. The Reports of
Sir Henry Hobart, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, folio. price 10 s. 5.
Formulae been placitandi, a Book of Entries containing Variety of Choice
Precedents, by W. Brown, in two parts, folio. 6. The second Part of the
Institutes of the Laws of England, containing the Exposition of the Statutes,
by Sir Ed Coke. folio. price 15 s. 7. The third part of the Institute of the
Law of England, concerning the Pleas of the Crown, by Sir Edw. Coke. folio.
price 6 s. 8. The fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England,
concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts, by Sir Edward Coke, in folio. price 10
s. 9. The Law of charitable Uses revised, and much enlarged, with many Cases in
Law, both ancient and modern; with the Readings of Sir Francis Moor upon the
Statute of the 43. of Eliz. digested by G. Duty Esquire folio. 10. Officina
Brevium, select and approved Forms of Judicial Writs, and other Process, with
their Returns and Entries in the Court of Common Pleas: as also special
pleadings to Writs, fol. 11. Fitz Herbert's Natura Brevium, the last Edition,
in 80. 12. Wingate's Abridgment, the last Edition in 80. 13. Young Clerk's
Guide, in four Parts, or an exact Collection of choice English Presidents,
octavo. 14. Reports of diverse Cases in Law, taken by R. Brownlow and J.
Goldsbrough Esquires, both Prothonotarys; with directions how to proceed in any
intricate Actions, both real and personal, with an exact Table, the 3d.
Edition, in 40. 15. The Touchstone of Presidents, relating to Judicial
Proceedings at Common Law, in oct. 16. Actions on the Case for Deeds, viz.
Contracts, Assumpsits, Deceipts, Nusances, Trover, and Conversion, etc. with 2
Tables, by W. Sheppard Esquire octavo. 17. The Practick part of the Law, showing
office of an Attorney, and guide for Sollicitors, in oct. 18. Reports, or new
Cases, taken in the 15, 16, 17, and 18th years of King Charles 1st. by J. March
Esquire in 40. 19. A Dialogue betwixt a Student and a Philosopher about the Common
Law of England, by Thomas Hobbs of Malmsberry, in oct. 20. The Complete
Solicitor, entering Clerk and Attorney, etc. in oct. printing. 21. Several
Statutes of Bankrupt, with the Judges Resolution thereon, in oct. price 1 s. 6
d.
With all sorts of other Law Books.

HISTORY.
1. AN Institution of general History, or the History of the World; being a
complete body thereof, in 2 Volumes, by W. Howel, now Chancellor of Lincoln, in
folio. 2. Historical Collections, being an account of the Proceedings of the 4
last Parliaments of Qu. Elizab. by H. Townsend Esquire in folio. 3. A Chronicle of
the late Intestine Wars, of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, from the year 1639. to the year 1660, by Mr. Heath, since continued to
the year 1674, in folio. 4. Some years Travels into diverse parts of Asia, and
Africa the Great, by Sir Tho. Herbert lately deceased, the 4th Edition, in
folio. 5. The History of Parthemissa, composed in 6 books by the Earl of
Orrerg, in folio. 6. Clelia, the whole Work, in five parts; written in French,
now put into English, in folio. 7. Scarron 's Comical Romance, being an
Historical account of a company of Stage Players, full of variety of Novels,
rare Adventures, amorous Intreagues, etc. being both witty and pleasant, in
folio. 8. Popish Cruelties, being an account of the Treasons of Dr. Parry
against Qu. Eliz. with his Confession of it at his Trial, and his denial at his
Execution, folio price 1 s. 9. The Life of Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury, written
by himself in Latin, since translated into English, to folio, price 6 d. 10. An
Historical Narration of Heresy, with an account of the Punishments thereof, by
Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, in folio, priced 6 d. 11. Megalopsichy, being a
particular and exact account of the last 17 years of Qu. Elizabeth's Reign, both
Military and Civil, the first written by Sir W. Monson one of the said Queens
Admirals; the second written by H. Townsend Esquire a Member of her last
Parliament. Wherein is a true and faithful Relation of all the expeditious
attempts, designs, successes, and errors, both of the English and Spanish, in
the Wars from the year 1585, to the said Queens Death. With a full account of
the eminent Speeches and Debates, etc. in the said time. To which is added, Dr.
Parry's Trial in the year 1584, all written at the time of the Actions by
persons that were eminently acting therein, folio, price bound 10 s. 12. A
Voyage into the Levant, being a Relation of a Journey lately performed from
England to Grand Cairo, by Sir Hen. Blunt, 120. price 1 s. 13. A Description of
Candia, with an exact account of the last Siege and Surrender of it to the
Turks, of oct. price bound 1 s. 14. Calliope 's Cabinet opened, wherein
Gentlemen may be informed how to order themselves for Feasts, Funerals, etc.
price bound 8 d. 15. A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena, containing the
original Antiquity etc. of that Dukdome, in 40, price 6 d. 16. The Travels of
Ulysses, how he went to Hell and came back again, etc, by Tho. Hobbs, price 1
s. 17. The present state of London, containing the Antiquity, Fame, Walls,
Rivers Gates, Churches, Bridge, with the Customs and Infranchizements, by J.
Bridal Esquire price 1 s. 18. The Wonders of the Peak in Darbyshire, commonly
called the Devils Arse of Peak, by Tho. Hobbs, 80, price 1 s. 19. The Life and
Death of Mahomet, being the first estate of Mahometism, showing all the designs
that that Impostor Mahomet had to carry on and settle the Turkish Religion,
written by L. Addison D. D. price 1 s. 6 d. 20. The Historians Guide, or
Brittain's Remembrancer, being a summary account of all the Actions, Exploits,
Sieges, Battles, Designs, Attempts, etc. taking notice of the Year, Month, and
day of the Month, all eminent Passages have been for 80 years last past, price
1 s. A portable Book. 21. The Connection, being Collections of some principal
Matters in the Reign of King James, being the time that nothing of this nature
is printed, being betwixt the end of Megalapsichy, or the last 17 years of Qu.
Eliz. And the beginnings of Mr. Rushworth, Heath, Nalson, Whitlock, and others,
price 1 s. 6 d. 22. The Moors bafled, being a discourse of the Government of
Tangier, under the Earl of Tiviot, showing the subtilty and policies of both
Parties, written by Dr. Addison, who lived there many years, price 6 d. 40. 23.
All the Works of Homer, both Illiads and Oddyses, translated out of Greek into
English, by Tho. Hobhs of Malmsbury, price 5 s. 6 d. 24. Considerations on the
Loyalty, Religion, Manners, and Reputation of Tho. Hobbs 80, price bound 1 s.
25. The Memoires, and rare Adventures of Henrietta Sylvia Moliere, a great Lady
in France, now living, written by her self, in six parts in French, and now
translated into English, price 4 s. 26. Tho. Hobb's Angli Malmsb. Vita, being
an account of Mr. Hobbs, of the Books he wrote of the times, when and the
occasion thereof, of the Books and Authors against him, of his Conversation,
Acquaintance, etc. part wrote by himself, the rest by Dr. B. in 80, printed
1681. 27. Behemoth, being the History of the Civil Wars of England, and the
Councels and Artifices, by which they were carried on, from 1640 to 1660,
printed now from his own perfect Copy, in which is many pages more then was in
the former Counterfeit Editions, none of which Editions before this, had less
then a thousand faults in them, whole Lines left out in a hundred places, which
did extremely pervert the sense of the Author. Tho. Hobbs. 28. The Tracts of
Mr. Tho. Hobbs of Malmsb. in 2 Vol. in oct. gathering Nine of his Treatises
together, which are also to be had single, viz. 1. His Life, in Latin. 2. His
Considerations on his Loyalty, Religion, etc. 3. His Art of Rhetoric in
English. 4. His Dialogue about the Common Law of England. 5. His ten Dialogues
of Natural Philosophy. 6. His Civil Wars of England, the perfect Edition. 7.
His Historical Narration of Heresy. 8. His Answer to Bishop Bramhal in defense
of his Leviathan. 9. His seven Problems, with an Apology for his writings to
the King, price bound 9 s. 29. A New Survey of the Present State of the World,
newly written in French, and now translated, and printing in English, in oct.
With most sorts of other Curious History.

PLAYS and POETRY.
1. HOmer's Works in English, by Tho. Hobbs, in 120. 2. A Poem on the Life of
Mr. Hobbs, written by himself. 3. Melpomene, or the Muses delight, being a
Collection of new Songs and Poems, by several of the present Wits, in oct. 4. A
Poem Latin and English, on the Devils Arse of Peak, by Tho. Hobbs. 5. Hug.
Grotius Catechism in Greek, Latin, and English, in a Poem. 6. The Confinement,
a Poem, with Annotions on it, in oct. 7. Vittoria Corombona, or the White
Devil, a Tragedy 40. 8. Catalines Conspiracy, a Tragedy 40. 9. Rival Kings, or
the Loves of Oroondates, a Tragedy, in 40. 10. The Old Troop, or Monsieur
Raggou, a Comedy. 40. 11. The Amarous Gallant, or Love in Fashion, a Comedy.
40. 12. The Mock-Duellist, a Comedy, 40. 13. Wrangling Lovers, a Comedy, 40.
14. Tom Essence, a Comedy, 40. 15. The Wits led by the Nose, a Comedy, 40. 16.
The French Conjurer, a Comedy, 40. 17. Counterfeit Bridegroom, a Comedy, 40.
18. Tunbridge Wells, a Comedy, 40. 19. The Man of New market, a Comedy, 40. 20.
The Constant Nymph, a Pastoral, 40.
With other Plays and Poetry.

MISCELLANIES.
1. THE deaf and dumb man's discourse; being a discourse to show how the deaf
and dumb do understand one another, with a Tract of inanimate Creatures, 80.
price bound 1 s. 2. The Complete Measurer; or a new and exact way of
Mensuration, by Tho. Hammand, 80. price. 1 s. 3. The American Physician,
treating of all the Roots, Trees, Herbs, Shrubs, Fruits, etc. in His Majesty's
Plantations in the West Indies, by William Hughes. in 120. price bound 1 s. 4.
Lord Bacon's Apothegms, or witty Sayings, in 120. bound, price 6 d. 5. A Letter
about Liberty and Necessity, written by Tho. Hobbs to the Duke of Newcastle,
with Bishop Lany's Answer to it. in 120. price bound 10 d. 6. Reflections on
the Philosophy and Philosophers of the ancient and the modern Times, by M.
Rapine, in 80. price bound 2 s. 7. Ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy, by Tho.
Hobbs, in 80. price bound 2 s. 8. Quinquina; a discourse of curing Agues and
Fevers by the Quinquina Bark, commonly called the Jesuits Powder, in 120.
price bound 1 s. 9. A Sermon preached at S. P. T. by the late Usurper Oliver
Cromwell, 40. price 3 d. 10. A Treatise of Usury, by Sir Rob. Filmer. 11.
Saunders his Astrological Physic. in 80. 12. The Court of Curiosity, being the
most curious Eortune-Book that ever was extant, answering double the Questions,
and with more exactness than any Fortune-Book extant, with the learned, and
best Interpretation of Dreams that was ever out: This third Edition made exact
to what it was before, price 1 s. 6 d. 13. Tho. Hobbs his Defense of his
Leviathan, against Bishop Bramhall, in 80. price 2 s. 14. Hobbs his 7 Problems,
in 80. 15. The True Englishman, being a Vindication of those many Loyal
Addresses to the King, by Dr. J. Harrison in 40.
By the said William Crook is sold all sorts of English Books, School Books,
and most sorts of other Books.

FINIS.

