(...) A COMPEND OF THE Covenant of Grace, AS The most Solid SUPPORT under the
most Terrible CONFLICTS OF DEATH, THOUGH Armed with Desertion, Decay of Grace,
and Sense of Guilt.

By Walter Cross, M. A.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Barnard, at the Bible in the Poultrey. 1693.

(...)fluence of Example and Praise, to make them good and virtuous. 3. The
Mouths of those are stopped whose Duty it is to take all such Opportunities to
recover a degenerate Age from Hopes of Glory or Honor at Death, who glory in
their Shame when they Live. But the Abuse of a Natural and Necessary Duty,
ought not to remove totally its use; it is engraven on the very Nature of Man to
speak well of the Dead. By the Jewish Custom a Bride takes place of a King, but
a Corpse takes place of both. Lev. 10.18. The Mourning for the Dead takes place
of positive External Worship: Moses was satisfied when Aaron told him the
Reason of not Eating the Sacrifice in the Holy Place, was because of his Grief
for the Death of his Sons: And what is the Language of Morning for the Dead but
Praising of them? Sorrow is a Passion raised from the Apprehension of the Loss
of a great good; and not to Lament the Dead is next to leave them without
Burial, as Dung upon the Earth, Jer. 16.14. The Dead have not their Justa duly
paid them, when no Tears are mingled with their Dust; the Gospel that wipes
away all Tears from all Eyes, only mitigates this, 1 These. 4.13. Sorrow not as
those who have no hope of ever meeting again. Christ himself wept over a
Lazarus that he could and did raise again presently; but as to more remote
Relatives or Friends, it enjoins Sympathy, Romans 12.15. Weep with them that
weep. Though the Egyptians hated Israel, they mourned over a dead Jacob, Genesis
15.10. so that the Canaanites called the Place Abel Mizraim, the Weeping of the
Egyptians. How unnatural are the Affections of those Children and other
Relatives, that the Possession that they succeed to, drowns the Sorrow and
prevents the due Performance of Honor to the Deceased, who have spent their
Lives, if not Sold their Souls for an Estate to them. Whatever others do, they
ought to be zealous of keeping their Names savoury and fresh. Foreigners,
Aliens, will Commend the Names of their Founders. But

These four Rules seem to be drawn from the most pure Fountains of Nature,
guided by the most powerful Conduct of Reason. Confutius.

1. To shun all Ostentation and Magnificence in Funerals, that savours of Pride
and Vanity.

2. Not to bewail the Dead with Excess, or be overcome with Grief; that
bespeaks want of Reason, and more the want of Piety, and submission to our
Sovereign Lord.

3. Not to extinguish Grief totally, or hide the Profession or Expressions of
it; for the want of Natural Affection is a desperate Condition, and no Person
can expect faithful Friendship from that Man, that can bury his Love and Duty
to his Friend or Relative, and his Memory and Esteem of him with his Corpse.

4. That Applauses or Encomiums are the proper Duty of Friends, Neighbors, or
more distant Relations: Modesty should suppress it in Husband, Wife or
Children, except to intimate Acquaintance, for that is but Praising themselves:
Others ought not to be silent: The Law of God allowed an Office for it once. In
this Case the Modesty of Relatives has suppressed a Name that deserves to be
wrote in Letters of Gold; but it suited the Person's Temper, that rather would
have a Name in Heaven than Fame on Earth, and would have it rest with the Dust,
and be silent as the Grave until that glorious Resurrection.

A Second Restraint is, that it is Ministers Duty to Preach a dead and a risen
Christ; his Will and Testament is the Gospel we ought to Preach; our Office is
making of his Funeral Sermons. R. 1. Christ is willing that his Saints share of
his glory, while it is an exalting of his own also. The manifestation of
Christ's Care of his Saints, is much for his Glory. Consider the Patience of
Job, and the End of the Lord. When a Man has been an envied, persecuted Man for
the profession of Truth, and dies in peace, leaving his Family in Plenty and
Prosperity, it is a clear demonstration of Christ's Care of his faithful
Servants, and his just Resentment of the Indignation done to them; when we may
observe an invisible Moth consuming the Estates of their Enemies, and an
invisible Worm gnawing their Consciences.

1. Destruction is threatened to them who observe not the Dispensations of
Divine Providence, Psalm. 78.3. And,

2. Rods have as observable a Nature as any, they have a significant Voice,
that every wise Man should understand, Mic. 6. Zeph. 1.14.

3. Death is as great a Judgment as can be: When Plague, Sword, Famine, come on
a Nation or City, it is but Death still; but though the Death of the Wicked be the
greatest Judgment, a frequent Death of the Righteous is the greatest Prodigy,
Isa. 57.1. The Righteous perish and no Man lays it to Heart -- Not knowing
they are taken away from the evil to come.

4. The Death of the Righteous at this Day is as determined in its Language as
ever, and more, Rev. 14.13. Blessed, etc. from henceforth: I shall give this
Paraphrase of it, according to my imperfect Scheme of that Book. We are now
about the time of the Death of the Witnesses, which though it be a severe stroke
to the Militant Church, a time of Faith and Patience for the Saints, (the
repeating of that Index, Rev. 11.13. a great Earthquake in Sicily, is such an
Argument for it, that I know not how we can disbelieve it, without saying God
designs to deceive us in his Providence, which is the best Comment (by
fulfillment) of these Prophecies, for a greater never was: The Destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah, though it has some Likeness, yet no Equality nor Proportion
to it, whether we compare the number of Cities, People, or sulphurous Lakes,
the Largeness of the place, or the Dreadfulness of the Manner; beside another
Vulcan new erected, or a mouth of Hell opened) yet it is an Harvest for the
Triumphant, Rev. 14.15. God is now gathering all the Righteous out of the
Earth, that he may set the Earth on flames. Rev. 14.18. The Angel that has
power over fire: This Fire is the Wine Press of Divine Wrath, wherein the
Wicked are to be trod down. Lot must be removed from Sodom, before the
sulphurous Flames be kindled. The Harvest of the Righteous must precede the
Vintage of the Wicked; the Salt of the Earth must be gone, before its
Corruption come. There was a Springtime of the Gospel in the Apostles time,
the Summer of Persecution followed: Now is the Harvest, and the Winter to the
Wicked is at the Door.

But it is more than time to return to my Text, the first Verse whereof affords
this Doctrine: That the Spirit of God does often immediately pen the Praises of
the Righteous at their Death, and write their Elegies.

The man who was raised ap on high, the Anointed of the God of Jacob, the sweet
Psalmist of Israel. Some Commentators expound all the fourth Verse to be of
this nature, and to have David for the subject. It is very observable, that not
only the great men that are wicked, are often buried in Oblivion, as the most
of the Monarchs of the first and greatest Empire, but some good men too: God
industriously ( Deuteronomy. 34.6.) hides the Sepulcher and obscures the Tomb of a
great Moses, while he erects Monuments of Praise and Records of Memorial for
the mean and Low, who have been Faithful in their Generation; Genesis 35.8. Debora
an aged Woman, and but a Nurse, must have an Allon Bachuth, an Oak of Weeping
erected for her, and the Epitaph must have a room made for it in Sacred Writ:
So must Eliezers Fidelity, and Dorcas's Coats of Charity, the Bed, Table, Stool
and Candlestick for the Prophet, the Barley gleanings, the parched Corn and
Vinegar, Ebedmelech's Clouts, Rahabs stalks of Flax, the Widows Mite, and the
Woman's Alabaster box of Ointment. Should not we be followers of God in this
also?

The second Observation from the Text, is, Gods great Mercy toward David in
the Circumstances of his Death; not only that such a Man of War should dye in
Peace, but should enjoy the use of his Understanding and Tongue to the last,
yea the conduct of the Holy Spirit for the Guidance and Direction of both.
These are the last Words of David. The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his
Word was in my Tongue; the whole of Psalm. 72. witnesses further, wherein is
contained his last Prayer.

These last words of David may be divided into these three heads: 1. His last
Will and Advice to his Family. 2. His Acknowledgment of his Infirmities,
setting them up as Sea-marks or Buoys to prevent their Shipwreck. 3. His
Profession of a secured and assured Salvation, notwithstanding these dangers,
that he might engage them never to forsake their Fathers God, and their Fathers
Covenant, that could suit and comfort a man tossed among the Storms of
Temptations, the Sands or Shelves of Sin, and Rocks of Death and Judgment.

First, His Advice to his Family, especially his Sons, consists in these three
things, 1. Justice, v. 3. He that rules over men must be just. Honesty is far
before Honor; the latter is but an abuse of the word without the former: The
Lord forbids seeking for great things in this World, but commands the providing
of things honest in the sight of all men. Injustice in such a Posterity would
have the aggravation of vile degeneracy, it would be a disowning of their
Father, and preferring the Name of a Moral Bastard before the Son of an Upright
David. 2d. Is Piety, ruling in the fear of God; this David enlarges his
Commands about: 1 King. 2.3. Keep the charge of the Lord, etc. 1 Chr. 28.8.
Keep and seek for all the Commandments of the Lord your God: Seek for them,
what is of his appointment, and what not; and keep them, sin not against
Knowledge: Paul obtained Pardon, because he did it ignorantly. Seek and keep
all of them, thou obeyest none because God has commanded if knowingly thou omit
any: This is the too common sin of Parents, to separate Justice from Piety in
the Education of their Children: If they be good Husbands, and Moral or Civil,
they care for no more; but they will more and more find that a vain attempt to
have their Children honest without Religion, both in the Root and Profession of
it, it is as impossible as to have a Picture without the Canvase it is drawn on,
or a Shadow without the Substance, or a Blossom preserved without the Root. 1.
It is Worship and Religion that God has annexed his Promises to. Psalm. 1. 1
King. 2.3. 1 Chr. 28.8. 2. It is to attempt the keeping of a part of an
Indivisible thing without the other, as if a Spiritual Being could be parted.
3. It is to attempt to preserve the Duties of the Law without Motives, the Awe
of God, Fear of his Wrath, or Love of his Goodness: We may see the
succeslesness of it in the Debauchery of the Age; since Religion and Profession
of it came in so much contempt, on that ground can we think God will take care
of our Children, when we take no care of our Childrens fearing God? Do we think
Children a fit subject for Liberty of Conscience? If they are, Baptismal Bonds
are a most grievous Yoke imposed on Parents, to train up Children in the
Knowledge of God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and to bring them within the Bond
of the Covenant with the blessed Trinity. A third Advice is about their
Company, which is comprehended verse. 6, 7. in shunning the Society of
Belialites, such men as Joab and Shimei it is like, for these are named, 1 King.
3. Two things are remarkable about them. 1. Who they are. 2. Why their Company
so dangerous. (1.) The Belialites are men without Yoke, men of no Conscience,
no Profession, Atheists; they could be of any Profession, that which was most
for their Profit, or their Humor, but were really of no Principles, under no
Law; if they took up any, it was as they do the Fashion and Custom of the Place
they live in, for Company: A man had better be a Quaker, Papist, etc. of any
Sect, rather than a Belialite, of no Religion; an atheistical profane Crew,
that can give no other Answer to any Question of Religion, about the Governor
and Judge of the World, or their Souls Condition, than to grin like an Ape, as
if their Reasonable Souls by Debauchery were degenerate into Risible ones. The
Spaniards say, that Don Quixot has ruined the Courage of Spain; and Sir William
Temple who records it, observes, That we are like to exchange the Riches, the
Religion, the Wssdom of the Nation, for this Ridiculing Humor by Fools called
Wit. Never did these Vermin swarm thicker than at this day, (which makes with
the former two Marks, viz. the Death of the Righteous, and Earthquakes in
diverse places, a Triple proof that the day of Judgment is at hand. 2 Pet. 3.
These are the Scoffers of the last days, saying, Where is the Promise of his
coming?) (2.) Why their Company is so dangerous. 1. The Text says, because of
their Untractableness; they are as apt to hurt a man if he come in their
Company, as Thorns to prick a man if he touch them; there is need of being
fenced with Iron if he come nigh them, they wound so mortally; for a man must
either comply with their Company, then his very Soul and Conscience is wounded;
or he must resolutely oppose them, and then there must be War, Opposition,
Quarrelling, Disputing: If the former, he is a Proselyte to the Brutal Herd,
and an initiated Member of the Congregation of Evildoers; if the latter, there
is both need of Arms and Armor; and what man will frequent that Company where
he must always be uneasy, always contend, and be in danger of his Life? A
Second Reason is, Because their End is Destruction, They shall be utterly burnt
with Fire. Who would walk with men that are going strait to Hell? Who would
live with men that have Ulcers of uncurable Plagues running upon them, when
their Company is so infectious? May be it has prevailed already so far on thee,
that when out of their Company thou choofest not the ways of Life and Peace,
and returns again to the same without the least Antidote, what can thou look
for but the Death of the Wicked that liv'st their Life? For as the Tree falls,
so it will lie. O that Children who have disobeyed the Commands of Parents when
alive, would at least let their last Will be sacred with them: This Solomon
observed long, though at last too much forgot it. How highly does God commend
the Rechabites, Jer. 35. for obeying their Fathers severe Commands, to drink no
Wine, and to live in Tents? So highly displeased must he be with them, who
disobey most necessary and easy Precepts. The Text and the Time both, though
not the Occasion, where so much Love and Duty dwells, obliges me to this.

The second thing is, the Acknowledgment of his Infirmities, Although my House,
-- although he make it not to grow: For the Matter of it, tho it is not an
Auricular or particular Confession, or in order to a Priestly Absolution, yet
from the Knowledge of his Life we may guess at the ground of his Grief. 1.
David had much Guilt on his Conscience; tho he was a man according to Gods
Heart, yet his Perfection was not sinlesness; he was not of the Quakers
Principles, to boast of his Perfection; but did mourn over his Iniquities,
though committed some Twenty, as his Murder of Vriah, some Forty years before
this. 2. David had many Designs to fulfill, he wanted to reap the Comfort of
his Labors, as to his own House or the House of God; he had conquered all his
Enemies round about, and now he wanted to enjoy a triumphant Peace, and
plentiful possession: He had Moses-like brought the People to the borders of
the Land of Rest, but he must not go over to possess that beautiful Mountain of
Lebanon, though he begged hard for it. He had with most industrious Pains, and
incomparable Expenses, prepared all Materials for the House of God, 1 Chronicles.
28. and God will not let him lay one Stone of the House for all that. Psalm.
146.4. In that very day his thoughts perish: All a man's Purposes, were they
never so good or useful, perish when the appointed Hour comes. 3. David's
Children were not so with God as he would have had them; there had been Incest,
Murder and Rebellion among them; and these who survived, tho some of them
lovely Children, and wiser than their Father, and the root of the Matter in
them too, Solomon the most wise, was beloved of the Lord, and the Lord heard
his Prayers again and again, yet that Zeal that the Old Man had for God was not
in him. 4. David's Grace did not grow, or bud and flourish, as the Original has
it; he had Faith, but it did not flourish in the pleasant Blossoms of Joy and
Assurance, Psalm. 51.8, 12. The Joy of thy Salvation, that he wanted. The
temporal Afflictions that the Godly meet with for their Backsidings, might be
sufficient Warnings and Motives to others, to walk more circumspectly and
Watchfully all their days. Here is an Intimation of twenty years Desertion, and
the Hour of Death filled up with the dreadful aspect of Guilt. The Counsel of
dying Persons, about Religion, about Conscience, about Duty and Sin, ought to
be highly esteemed; then they feel how evil and bitter a thing it is to sin
against God: If we see our righteous Fathers groaning over and smarting for
their Infirmities on their Deathbed, what may we expect if we get our Souls
for a Prey?

The third Thing is, what was David's Comfort under the sense of approaching
Death, thus armed with the Terrors of his own Guilt, and the Frowns of Heaven?
It is certain no mean Cordials, no Temporary thing can support his fainting
Spirits then: Rooms full of Gold, the Company of all our Friends and Relations,
the sweetest Harmonies of Music, the daintiest Dishes, the strongest Cordials,
and most skilled Physicians; the only Helps a Man must betake himself to, are
Spiritual, for the Carcass perishes. If a Man be not skilled in Divinity, and
have some Spiritual Experiences, there is nothing that can bring any shadow of
relief to him, but it is not every Divine either that can administer to himself
or others support against Death, though that is the only Science that affords
relief. Some expound the 3, 4, 5, Verses, as so many different Topics of
relief to his Condition: 1. Experience, The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me:
Shall God let me perish, to whom he has given his Holy Spirit in such a
measure? But this might be baffled, God has taken his Spirit from thee, thou
have sinned away that Grace; a deserted and tempted Soul is full of Error, and
either may not believe the Doctrine of Perseverance, or may mistake the Graces
of the Spirit for Gifts, such as Balaam had. 2. The Nature of the Blessed
Trinity, The God of Israel, the Rock of Israel, the Spirit of the Lord; the
Attributes of God, the Mediatorial Offices of the Son, and sweet Influences of
the Spirit: But these may all become Thoughts of Terror and Dread to a Soul,
without some sight of an Interest in them; as Peter, Depart from me, for I am a
sinful Man, and Adam when he heard God's Voice hid himself in the Garden:
Therefore David, 3. Finally concludes on the Covenant of Grace, as that
thorough which the spiritual Experiences were conveyed, and as that which
contained the Terms of his Interest in God, its Properties and Articles, did
obviate all Objections, the Disease could never be too strong for its Balsams,
nor the poisoned Arrows of Death could never drink up its comforting spirits:
This affords the Doctrine I intend for the subject of the following Discourse.

Doct. The Covenant of Grace is able to comfort all the Covenantees in it,
against the Assaults of Death, armed with the most dreadful Stings that the
Law, Sin, Satan, or Desertion can afford to it.

This is the Honey we may eat out of the Carcass of this Lion of the Tribe of
Juda; this is the rich Legacy left by his Will to all that are in Covenant with
God; this is his advice to all poor Sinners, as ever they would be safe at
death, be sure to be in Covenant with God. We have not this on his Experience
only, he found it so at Death, nor on his Testimony only; the word of a King is
too weak a Pillar to build the Salvation of our Immortal Souls upon; nor on the
Testimony alone of the Spirit of God speaking by him: But the same Spirit shows
us the reason of the thing also, by setting down a Copy of this well-ordered
Covenant, which I shall Analyze in these seven several Heads, that are so many
Arguments to prove the Truth of this Doctrine: Its (1.) Divinity. (2.)
Personality. (3.) Graciousness. (4.) Everlastingness. (5.) Order. (6.)
Sureness. (7.) Its Perfection, as to Salvation or Satisfaction. Having shown
from each of these apart, and much more from all put together, with how much
satisfaction every Covenanted Soul may dye, whatever be the Imperfections or
blasts upon the growth of their Grace, or whatever be the disorder of the
Affairs of their House, whatever terrible use Satan may make of them, or sorrow
we may have from them, yet we may safely lay down our Corpse in the Dust, and
bid Farewell to Sun, Moon and Stars, to the Creatures below us, and our Friends
about us, and say, Welcome Fellowship of Angels, Hail ever blessed Creator,
Redeemer and Sanctifier; I come, I come, help me thorough this pain, guide me
thorough this dark Valley of Death, dispell this only remaining Cloud between
me and that Sun of Righteousness. I shall conclude with some useful
Application, having proved and explained this Truth.

(1.) There is the Divinity of the Covenant, the more of God that there is in
any thing, the more of Goodness there must be in it; for there is none good but
God: God is 1. The Author of this Covenant, he has made. The like expression
we find Isa. 55.3. Jer. 3.31. Man that was but of Yesterday, could never make
an Everlasting Covenant; Angels that are charged with folly, and are yet
Students of its Mysteries, 1 Pet. 1.12. could never bring things confounded by
Sin into Order again; this Politic Union is founded on the Personal Union of
Immanuel. Who could have contrived that? Who could have contrived a
Righteousness to answer the broken Law of the first Covenant? There are two
most comforting Thoughts arises from Gods being Author of the Covenant, the
Goodness of the end, and wise contrivance of the Means: 1. The Goodness of the
End; Persons that have any Grains of Honesty left, when they enter a
Confederacy with others, design a mutual Advantage. It is a mere Cheat to draw
Persons into a Commerce, or Policy they can get no good, but hurt by. But God
can receive no Good, Ps. 16. Our goodness extends not to him; and his Glory
consists in giving, that we may see there is such an inexhaustible Fountain of
Goodness and Blessedness in him, that when Sinners have received a full
Salvation, Guilt a complete Pardon, and all empty desire a full satisfaction
measured out by Wisdom, so that it may not satiate, but still preserve so far
the Desire, as to delight in receiving; all the advantage must be ours: If any
part of this Design should fail of making us completely happy, it would reflect
on Divine Alsufficiency, it would eclipse his Glory. We are made Sons by
Covenant, and will a Father see his Children starve while he possesses any
thing? 2. The wise Contrivance of the Means; there is not one Article of the
Covenant that we would desire left out, or one Article we could desire added to
it, if our Understandings were come to a mature perfection to judge of such a
Concern, 1 Cor. 3.22. Death is ours, we would rather want it; but how shall we
get to Heaven without Death, for Flesh and Blood cannot enterit? Or how shall
this Earth be changed into a glorious Condition without Death? There are many
more Reasons we know not; all things present are ours: We would rather want
many of our present. Conditions and Circumstances, Sickness, Poverty, etc. but
( Romans 8.) all these work together for our good: If this Covenant should any
way fail or prove deficient, we may bless God we had no hand in it; or rather
that all in it was Contrived by him, all its Clauses, Terms and Articles, were
settled and Authoritatively published before we knew one Word of it; if it come
short of its End, it will not be thorough our Default, he knew what we were
when he Contrived the Covenant for our Happiness, he entered into Covenant with
us as Sinners, it will reflect on his Wisdom and Circumspection, his Foresight
or Prudence. Obj. The first Covenant failed of its End, and that was made by
God. Resp. It Is positively false, for it was Contrived, and that Primitive
Constitution of Man too, as a Means to bring in the Covenant of Grace and the
Happiness of Man thorough it. Man's Blessedness was not the immediate End of
that Covenant. To say God is come short of his End, frustrated and
disappointed, is to make him not God. The learned Strangius says, though Sin is
no means of God's Glory, Permission of sin was, for that made way for Creatures
being brought from a lower Condition, and greater distance from God than mere
nothing was; by it the steps of nigh infinite successions and degrees of
Happiness are increased; Goodness blossoms into Grace and Mercy, by making an
Inhabitant of Hell, whether by Act or Desert, an Heir and Possessor of Heaven;
but it had remained a mere Goodness that it had made a Clod of Clay an Angel:
What a Manifestation of Infiniteness, for Creatures to be always increasing,
but ever short of God's fullness!

Secondly, The Divinity of the Covenant appears in God's being the Party as
well as the Author, Zach. 13 chapter last Ver. I will say it is my People, and they
shall say the Lord is my God, and that distinctly in all the Relatives of the
Blessed Trinity. We enter into Covenant with God as Father; Christ says, I go
to your Father and my Father: We enter Covenant with God as Son in all his
Mediatorial Offices: We enter into Covenant with the Holy Ghost in all his
sanctifying and glorifying Influences: We see David here set all the Blessed
Trinity, the God of Israel, the Rock of Israel, and the Spirit of the Lord,
before the Covenant, as the Persons he did indent with. And it is yet more
distinctly set down in the Baptismal Form of the Covenant, in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: This helps to remove some Difficulties about the
Covenants Conditionality; for the whole Law being in its Nature as unchangeable
as the Relations between the Creator and Creature, it stands still the Measure
and Standard of Duties and Conditions of the Covenant of Grace; but what
Conditions the Father as Fountain of Authority requires, the Son as Mediator,
Surety, and Cautioner performs, and what this Mediator as God's Vicegerent and
Deputy requires, the Spirit enables us to do, whose Operations are both
preventive and effectual; so this Covenant of Grace is an absolute Disposition
of Grace notwithstanding all the Laws and Duties of it; for there are no
preparative Duties required in order to the Spirits Influences, nor may be no
Persons in this World without some of his Beams and Rays; for as it is
Christ's Merits that preserves this Earth from being a Hell, so it is the
Spirits Influences that keeps the Temper of Man in any better Condition than
that of Devils. There is a vast difference between what Man actually is, and
what he is De jure, by Nature: We are Children of Wrath by Nature, our
Understanding is mere Darkness, and our Wills a mere Enmity: We would sin
designedly against God, and designedly Dishonor him; We would intend Rebellion
in every act, and this seems to be the Apostles Intention, 1 Cor. 10.13. There
has no Temptation taken you but such as is common to Man; to sin at this rate
is not common to Man, Man's Design is not higher than his own Profit or his
Pleasure, the Prosecution of which though he knows it is a Sin, yet he wishes
it were not.

Thirdly, The Divinity of this Covenant appears in God himself, his Attributes,
Personalities and Providential Operations, being all the Promised Blessings of
the Covenant; for the Covenant is a Marriage Covenant, wherein not as in other
Covenants of Peace or War, Trade or Commerce, the Obligation is limited to some
particular thing, here the Party and all he has comes under Obligation: Hence
is that Argument good, Because he lives we shall live also; and Christ's Proof
for the Resurrection of the Body and Immortality of the Soul, that Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob are alive, because God is the God of the Living. Nothing can
utterly dye that is in this Covenant, because God's Life is engaged to keep
them alive. Indeed this exceeds Marriage Contracts, because the Husband has
not a Life to communicate, nor a Power to preserve his own. God's Omnipotency
is ours; I am the Almighty, walk before me and be thou perfect. We need not
fear the Power of Enemies, his Immutabillity, I Change not, therefore ye shall
not be be consumed: And all his Creatures, 1 Cor. 3.22. The World, Life, Death,
things present, or things to come, all are yours: Providential Operations, Romans
8.28. For we know that all things work together for good to them that love God:
Psalm. 25.10. All his ways are mercy and truth to such as keep his Covenant.

(2.) There is the Personality of the Covenant, Thou have made with me: Though
God entered into Covenant with Abraham for himself and his Seed, yet as soon as
his Seed did exist in the World, he did personally enter into Covenant with
them, first with Isaac and then with Jacob; and the more Pious we find any
Persons in Scripture, the more frequent we find them in this Exercise: David's
first Michtam or Golden Psalm, begins thus, O my Soul, thou have said unto the
Lord, Thou art my Lord, with his Expectation of the like Answer from God, Psalm
35.3. Say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation: God's Language is Providential, so
that it is to the same purpose, when he says, Preserve me O God, for in thee do
I put my trust. Our Faith is our Personal Covenanting, and God's preserving is
his Virtual Saying, He will be Our Savior, this is Prophesied to be more
frequent and more formal under the New Testament State than it was under the
Old, Isaiah 44.5. One shall say I am the Lords, and another shall call himself
by the Name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord:
Isaiah 45.24. Surely shall men say, in the Lord have I righteousness and
strength: The Apostle does most pathetically press this Personal Dedication,
Romans 12.1. I beseech you therefore Brethren, by the mercies of God, ye present
your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable service: And the Practice of the Primitive Church answered their
Apostolical Advice, 1 Cor. 8.5. They first gave themselves to the Lord, and to
us by the Will of the Lord: The different Constitution of the Visible Church
under the New Testament, from that under the Old, and the different
Administration of the Covenant, have a considerable Influence to make the
formal performance of this more our Duty; for it is in part upon this Account
that the Church is called ( Mat. 16.) a Church de futuro, I will build my
Church, as Camero observes: It was a Building to be begun, whereof the
Foundations were not yet laid, and the Covenant a new Covenant. First, For the
Constitution of the Church, we have a fair Account of it in the 18th. of
Matthew, in Christ's Answer to the Disciples Question about the Kingdom of
Heaven: First, There is the Qualifications of the Members, Verse 3. Converted
ones, become as little Children. Secondly, Their formal Entrance into the
Kingdom of Christ, and their Reception in the Name of Christ by them that are
in it, Verse 5. Thirdly, There is an account of the great Evil that does any
ways hinder or hurt this Constitution, or these little Ones now received into
it, and therefore becomes the only Object of Church Discipline that is Offense.
Sin is only against God's immediate Government, Psalm. 51. Against thee, thee
only, have I sinned: He only can Forgive it, he only can Punish it: It is a
Breach of his Law only, Offense is against the Church, as being that which
occasions any Member thereof to sin, or by which its Members may offend others;
but scarce any can Offend but them that are in the Church. Injuries which hurt
a Man's Body or Estate, are the Objects of the Civil Government: One Act may
have all the three Evils in it, and may be Punished by all the three
Governments. Fourthly, There are the remedying Rules or Methods of Discipline
about this Evil, set down Verse 15, 16, 17. Fifthly, There is the supreme
Court, where the last Appeal lies in Trial of this Affair, with the last and
most severe Punishment this Court can Inflict: The former is the Church, the
latter is an Exclusion from that Society, for then he can Offend no more; as a
Dead Man in the State can injure no more. The last thing is, the way of the
Constitution of this Court, and the Reason why we ought to acquiesce in its
Judgment about such Affairs: The former is the stated and agreed Meeting of
such Converts in the Name of Christ, the latter is from Christ's being among
them, his Promise to hear them, his Institution of them, and Conserring
Authority to the Ordinance; now this Agreement to continue steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine, in mutual Fellowship, in breaking of Bread and in Prayer,
Acts 2.42. does formally Constitute a Covenant; it is a Fulfillment of that
Prophecy, Jer. 50.5. Come, and let us join our selves unto the Lord; and it
does suppose their Personal Covenanting with God, for they who come into it are
to be received as little Children, and as Converted ones; and though Persons
cannot give account when they were first Converted, more than when they were
first Conceived or Born, without their Parents Information, yet they may give
Account of their Personal Covenanting with God, and when it was, though with
great difference in Explicitness or Implicitness, in the bare Exercise of Faith
and Prayer, and the secret Thoughts of the Hearts, or in external Words or
Writing Vide Mr. Baxter, on Confirmation the way to Reformation.
. Secondly, In the New Administration of the Covenant, which receives its
Alteration very much from the New Constitution of the Church; for in the former
all Circumcised were in the Church, here it is only those that are Converted; so
all Abraham's Natural Seed through Isaac and Jacob were within the Covenant, as
to all its visible Privileges, but in this New Administration they are brought
under the Covenant, by the Lord's pouring out his Spirit on them, by his
putting his Laws in their Minds, and writing them on their Hearts, Heb. 8. The
very Import of having a Law in the Mind, is a willing and ready Compliance with
them known, a being made willing in the day of his Power, a hearty undertaking
to perform them, followed with some suitable Endeavors, and what is this else
but personal Covenanting?

Our satisfying our selves with a Virtual Performance of this is too common and
too gross a defect to be indulged, that is, a compliance with the Duties of the
Covenant in some measure, without a serious setting about this Duty first, and
entering into it; this is doing Violence to the Beauty and Order of this well
ordered Covenant, which requires our In-being before our Doing, or our
Receiving. Secondly, It is an Omission of a positive enjoined Duty. Thirdly, It
is very unbecoming God's transacting with us, who has formerly drawn up the
Covenant in all its Articles, and has set his Name to it, and has recorded it
in his Word, and has appointed a vast Number of Men under the Office of the
Ministry to Publish it, and has furnished them with the Spirit to Interpret and
Inculcate it, and their great Message is, Be ye reconciled to God, be at Peace
with him, enter into Covenant with him, and faithfully keep and observe it: Is
this a suitable Correspondence to God's Transaction, that we will not come under
Obligation, but we will do as we find Opportunity and have Occasion or
Convenience, as it may consist with our other Interests and Concerns? This is
in effect to say, we will not at all; for the Covenant requires that we be
wholly God's, utterly denying our selves and all our Interests, as he has
given himself wholly to us. Fourthly, The Manner of Persons entering into
Covenant with Satan, who is God's Ape, and who has set up a Kingdom and a
Covenant in direct Opposition to our Lord Jesus Christ, may have some Influence
both for Illustrating and Inculcating this Duty, which the Learned Weems thus
explains: Satan does all he can to persuade his Subjects formally to Covenant
with him, to put one Hand under their Foot, and another above their Head, and
give all between them to Satan, or to write a Bond of Resignation of
themselves, and Seal it with their Blood; and if they be Baptized Christians,
that they formally Renounce their Baptism; but if he cannot attain these
things, he has a set of Ordinances made up of Charms and unreasonable Arts, as
Astrology, Chiromancy, etc. which he in his way Blesses with Success as far as
he can, those who follow the Practice of them. This is a Virtual Covenanting
with him. Now as we would not Judge all such Witches or Wizards who do too
frequently Practice Charms, either in Cures, Prognostics or Injuries, so we
ought not to think all true Christians who perform Christian Ordinances: And if
Covenanting with Satan has such a Power to make us his, that but very few are
recovered from Hell who go to such a height in sinning, what an Influence must
Personal Covenanting with God have to make us his, when there is so great
difference in Contracting, for we are gulled and deceived in the one: It is in
great Ignorance we Covenant with Satan. Secondly, Satan deceives us, and
never fulfills the half of what he Promises. Thirdly, God has an antecedent
Right, and therefore our Covenanting with Satan is Unlawful. Fourthly, God has
a greater Power, and he has sent Christ on that very Office, to destroy the
Works of the Devil, therefore there is a Possibility of Recovery out of that
State, but no final Relapse from the other; for No man can pluck the Sheep out
of the Father's hand.

Fifthly, The Discouragements that hinder Persons from such a sacred
Engagement, are more from Ignorance of them, than reality in the things
themselves. As first, Some are frighted by the greatness of the Obligation, and
their Inability to perform: To which I answer, We are under all that Obligation
already, it rather relieves than oppresses. Christ says his Burden is light,
and his Yoke easy; it is no more Burden than Wings to a Bird; for the Apostle
says, He that is not under the Law is under Grace; and what things the Law
says, it is to them that are under the Law. There is no Duty thou engagest to
perform, but thou wast obliged as a Creature to perform before, and by this
Covenanting thou getst a Right and Interest in Christ, by which all thy past
Disobedience is pardoned, the burden of Guilt taken off, and thou receivest
strength to obey better for the future: For the Providential Language of God in
Covenanting with a Soul, is the giving of his Spirit; hence this is the
Language of one that understandingly enters into Covenant with God, Isa. 45.24.
Surely to him shall men come, saying, In the Lord have I righteousness and
strength. A second Discouragement is, from the sense of Desertion, and want of
the Spirit; from persons own unfitness and unholiness, they say with Peter,
Depart from me, for I am a sinful man. Resp. This is from a Mistake about the
end of the Law; the Lord blesses the Law, or sends his Spirit to empower it,
Joh. 16. when the Spirit convinces of Sin; so the end of this is to drive us to
Christ, to make us seek a shelter under Grace, when we are scorched with the
heat of the fiery Law: Hence Christ calls, Come unto me all ye that are weary
and heavy laden. Secondly, How disorderly would we have God to act toward us,
to say, If he will fill us with Comfort and Joy, and give us Assurance, the
very top Blessings of the Covenant in this Life, or rather the Earnest and
Beginnings of the other Life, if he will fulfill all the Covenant to me, then
will I enter Covenant with him. A third is from the fear of Hypocritical acting
with God, and so rather sin and provoke him to destroy me, than to receive me
into this State of Salvation. Resp. I know no better Cure of Hypocrisy, than
to bring and keep the Heart in the View of God, and under the Awe of his
Presence: In the 18th of Luke, we see this wrought a considerable Cure upon a
Pharisee, though the greatest Hypocrites in the World. Verse. 11. God I thank thee
that I am not as other men: He did not speak suitably to his own Principles, to
own God the Author of that difference that was between him and any other Man in
Matter of Religion: It was the Awe of God upon Conscience that extorted the
Truth out of it; and I have heard Free-willers pray as inconsistently with
their own Profession, which made me have far more Charity to their Persons than
their Principles. But (2.) Thy Condition is like the Lepers at the gate of
Samaria, thou art sure to starve if out of Covenant, and art sure to sin
against God out of Covenant in every thing thou do; but thou have a May-be
for it, if thou fly to this Refuge, and lay hold of the Covenant; and do not
thou think that if God spoke immediately from Heaven to thee, in a time of
Plague, Famine, Sword or Sickness, and say, May be thou shall be safe in such a
Place, that thou would speedily fly to such an Asylum? But we have more
encouragement, the King already holding out the Scepter, and declaring his
readiness to accept Imperfect Performance, that we may approach with greater
Courage than an Esther before her Ahasuerus.

Sixthly, It is such an Encouragement at Death, when all other Comforts prove
as broken Cisterns without Water, Thou have made with me a Covenant, is a
Shete-Anchor of Hope; and so much the more when they have had the Verdict of a
Society of grave, serious and experienced Christians, that their Covenanting
was not formal and hypocritical, but sincere and accepted of God; that the
temper of Mind it was performed with, could be the Effect of no less Author
than the Spirit of God, the Birth bespoke its Father to be Heavenly, when each
of that Company of sagacious Saints witnessed that it was on the same Bottom
their Hopes were built, and that their Souls were all in a like Condition, in
the same Bundle of Life; and this not without a Minister of the Word holding
that Glass before their Face, wherein they might see their Language to be a
Copy of that Original, and that this Harvest was from the Seed of the Word.
This has proved to many the sweetest and strongest Cordial they had at Death,
and there is ground to judge the Consolation solid, since Mat. 18. Christ has
declared what they loose on Earth, he would in Heaven; what they agreed about
to ask, he would grant; and such a Verdict is not passed without serious Prayer
to God in the Name of Christ, for a Judgment of Discerning in that present
affair. Is this the thing that discourages People from Joining unto Churches of
such a Constitution, that becomes so much matter of Comfort and Encouragement
at the hour of Death? Who that are seriously concerned about their own
Salvation, would want such an Ordinance of Trial? I think it is the Reverend
Mr. Ba. who advises Persons to write the Condition of their Soul, and desire
some Ministers or understanding Christians Verdict of it: But I think this
Verdict is preferable on several Accounts. 1. As much as the Verdict of many is
before the Judgment of one, or a Church before a single person's. 2. As much as
a Divine Ordinance that has such Promises of the Spirits Conduct, Mat. 18.
before a humane Help and Expedient. That which indeed first recommended it to
me, was a Gentlewoman on her Deathbed, who bewailed David-like her want of
growth much, and had this complex Evidence alone left, which she improved much
more pathetically than I have here expressed it: I have found it the Experience
of three more since in the like condition, tho not under such backsliding or
desertion.

The Third Property is, the Graciousness of the Covenant: The word gracious is
not in the Text, nor is it any where in Scripture verbally the Epithet of this
Covenant, tho most usual among Divines; and there is reason enough for it, for
a Covenant cannot be made between the Creator and Creature without a gracious
condescendency; and therefore some will not allow the Law of Works to bear the
Name of a Covenant, because there cannot be a Covenant and not of Grace.
Persons that have a Despotick Power, as a Master over a Slave, or a Father over
a Child, will not enter into Terms with them: The end of a Covenant is to bring
Persons under Obligation that are free; and therefore Kings love not to hear of
Covenant terms between them and their People. Now Gods antecedent Right being
Sovereign, and absolutely founded on Creation, it is rather a giving away his
Right than getting one: Thy Maker is thy Husband, contains a Miracle of Grace
in it. 2. Its being a Testament, this famous Name gives Title to all the Bible,
the Old and New Testament. This is the Nature of a Testament, it can Convey
nothing but what is good, Privileges but no Punishments: All things that are
Conveyed are Tokens, Legacies, Estate or Inheritance; if any hard Condition be
annexed, the Person is not Obliged to accept; so must be gracious by its being
a Testament, but how much more if we consider it as summed up by Christ, from
John 12. to 18. chapter He leaves the Father our Tutor and Guardian, the Holy Ghost
Executor, Heaven as an Inheritance, Measures of Grace as Legacies, Joy and
Peace as Love Tokens; he leaves us under the Notion of Babes, that cannot
Forfeit their Estate without their Executor and Guardians consent, which is
impossible; therefore in this sense true, He that is born of God cannot sin. 3.
It Is gracious, because so full of Promises; Gal. 3.6.17. it is called a Command
and a Law too, Ps. 111.10. who has commanded his Covenant for ever; because
all the Law, that is holy, just and good, is still required in it, being
unchangeable in their Nature; but now Grace shines in their being put in this
Covenant, where Grace is promised to enable and strengthen us to obey: We are
under all the Law, Mat. 5. Christ came not to destroy it; and our Condition
enlarges the Duties of the Law, mixes Humility with Sorrow, Obedience with
Repentance; and so the new Discoveries of God by the Gospel enlarges the
Objects of Faith. Ye believe in God, belive also in me: And our Obligation is
greater, as a Married Woman is more obliged to Chastity than a Virgin, and
Moses's Nurse more obliged than another Nurse, because also a Mother. But there
is so much Grace in the Promises that overballances all this. 1. The mixing or
joining of Christ's Works with ours, the Covenant of Grace and Redemption
together, supply the Place of the broken Covenant of Works: Hence our Imperfect
Obedience if in Faith is accepted for perfect, the Will for the Deed. Nathan
says to David, Because it was in thine Heart to build to me a House, I will
build to thee a sure House; it admits of Repentance to supply the Place of
Obedience, it gives strength to Obey, this Uniting of the Command and the
Promise makes it appear Conditional, but the Certainty and Ability to perform
the Conditions, both depending upon the Promises, takes away the proper Nature
of a Condition, (whose Properties are, 1. Potestative, in the Person's Power to
perform them. 2. Casualis, the other Party being uncertain whether we would
Perform them or not. 3. Causalis, in respect of Right, being of some Valuable
Considerations) and leaves a bare Necessary Connection or Ordered Covenant,
instead of a Conditional Covenant; and the many Ifs used in Scripture to be the
Ifs of Demonstration used by Civilians in Testaments, or Logicians in Arguing;
not the If of a proper Condition, though it is usual among Divines and Protestants
to use it for Priority of Order, and that is not inconsistent with Graciousness.

But I need not squeeze this Covenant so to bring Graciousness out of it by
such Inferences, when Romans 4.14. the Inheritance is said to be of Grace, the
Covenant called a Covenant of Peace, and its Blessings sure Mercies; when all
the Covenantees are Sinners, Rebels, when the greatest of them are often
Chosen, and that like Manasse, in the Height of their Iniquity, and when all
their Sins are forgiven at once, when the first Condition or Duty of the
Covenant is mere Faith, a Receiving, and when to do that is the Work of the
Spirit, both as to first and last of it, Heb. 12. The Author and Finisher of
our Faith: Ephesians. 2.8. It is the Gift of God: And so long as one Spark of Life
remains in that Appetite fixed or determined on God, our right in the Covenant
stands: I believe, Lord help my Unbelief: Faith as a Grain of Mustard Seed: And
though it should lose sight of many of its Objects, it ought to be receiving and
trusting God for, the Unbelief of Man will not render the Faith of God of none
effect. We may sing, Grace, Grace, to every Article of this Covenant, and what
can support a Man in sight of Death if Grace will not? A Man cannot discern
himself in a Covenant of Grace and not see God on a Throne of Grace, and when a
Soul apprehends God as gracious, it apprehends him as 1. Good, for that is the
groundwork. 2. As Love, for that is the Spring. 3. As Merciful, for the
Object's miserable. 4. As Sovereign, Free and Absolute, in dispensing of
Blessings and Benefits, for to show Grace is absolute Monarchy: Hence all the
Acts of Government are for Exalting this Throne, to the Praise of the Glory of
his Grace, Ephesians. 1. I see my Guilt, but I see Pardoning Grace; I feel sin, but I
feel restraining and renewing Grace; I see Death, but I see over-ordering
Grace: This supports the Soul.

The Fourth Property is the Everlastingness of the Covenant: Thou have made
with me an Everlasting Covenant, Psalm. 103.17. The Mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting, Isa. 55.3. The sure Mercies of David are called an
Everlasting Covenant. The Covenant of Works was before the Covenant of Grace in
Time, and in Order of Execution, as all Means are before their End, but the
Covenant of Grace was before it in Divine Intention. Grace could not have been
so branched forth in Mercy and Forgiveness, if the former had not been both
made and broken: On this Account this Covenant of Grace was from Everlasting,
being founded on Everlasting Love; With an Everlasting Love have I loved thee,
therefore with Loving Kindness will I draw thee: It is founded on the
everlasting Thoughts that did emanate from that Love, Psalm. 40.5. The thoughts
that were ever of Old, they are more than can be numbered, and on the
everlasting Purposes that those Thoughts did result in, 2 Timothy 1.9. According
to his Grace and Purpose which was given us in Christ before the World began:
And as it was from Everlasting, so it is unto Everlasting: A Person once
brought into it, shall always remain in it, Psalm. 89.33. If they break my
Statutes, etc. then will I visit their Transgressions with the Rod, etc.
nevertheless my Loving Kindness will I not utterly take from them. There is a
threefold ground of this Perseverance. 1. Because of God's engaging his own
Fidelity, he will not suffer his faithfulness to fail; the Unbelief of Men will
not render the Faith of God of none effect. 2. His Promise unto Christ: Once
have I sworn to David, that his Seed should endure for ever. 3. The Promise of
persevering and securing Grace; he will put his Fear in their Hearts, that they
shall not depart from him. The Confederating Parties, the Ever-living God and
Immortal Souls are Everlasting, and this Relation between them shall never be
altered; this is the Reason of Christ's proving of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob's
being yet alive, Matthew. 22.32. from God's being their Covenanted God, I am the
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; God is not the God of
the dead, but of the living. Psalm. 24.7. The Faculties of our Soul under the
Figure of Doors or Gates are called everlasting, for they are so many
Capacities or Desires for seeking after, receiving and enjoying of that King of
Glory: Hence is that explicatory Verse 5, 6. This is the Generation of them
that seek him, that receive the Blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from
the God of his Salvation: There is an everlasting God, and an everlasting Soul,
an everlasting Appetite, and an everlasting Satisfying that the Commerce among
the Inhabitants of the holy Hill of the Lord consists in, and this Covenant of
Grace contains the Municipal Laws of that Traffic. This is another Pillar that
renders the Covenant of such a supporting Nature, especially at Death, for that
cannot break an everlasting Tie; tho we dye to this World, and all the
Relations founded by other Covenants, whether Marriage, Peace, War, Friendship,
Death is the Death of all of them, but it makes not the least breach upon this.
Romans 8.38. I am persuaded that neither Death, nor Life, shall be able to
separate us from the Love of God. We are still alive to God, and must receive
the Promises suitable to that separate State between Soul and Body, and must
perform the Duties proper to it, whereof we know nothing so much as the God in
that Covenant Relation we go to, which contains Comfort enough against the loss
of all the Relatives we part with.

The Fifth Property is its Harmonious Order, and the greatest Controversies
among Protestants are about this; the different Methods and Systems of
Divinity, are so many different Orders they conceive divine Wisdom to have
framed the Covenant in: And no wonder we mistake in attempting to fathom the
depth of divine Mysteries, until the Eyes of our Understanding be enlightened
with Vision, and we admitted to read the Divine Records in their Original in
Heaven. We but know in part, and no man that knows but a part of a Book only,
can give a true Analysis of it; for every new Notion that we attain, alters
somewhat of our former Method: This Order is called the Form of sound Words,
the Form of Godliness. Order is a Disposition of things according to their
natural or useful Priority or Posteriority; the former holds in Speculatives,
the latter in Practicals.

There are three things in the Covenant, whose Order is principally to be
observed: The Subjects, the Matter, the Ends.

(1.) As to the Subjects, I shall but name them. First, God is concerned about
the Covenant before us, he made it. Secondly, That the Order of the Trinity is
observable in it. 1. It flows from the Love of the Father, and is contrived by
his Wisdom. 2. The Blessings of it purchased, or way for the Execution of the
Contrivance, that it might consist with the Justice of Divine Government, made
by the Son. 3. The Execution of it is by the Spirit. Thirdly, That Christ as
our Mediator and Head was in Covenant for us before us; as the first Adam was
in the first Covenant before us, so the second Adam was; hence we receive all
thorough him. Ephesians. 1. He has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in Christ
Jesus. He shall take of mine, and give it unto you. We eat his Flesh, and drink
his Blood; we receive our Measures from that Immense fullness treasured up in
him: There was no new Covenant to intervene between the first Adam and his
Seed, in order to their partaking of the Privileges promised to him, or
possessed by him. Fourthly, Persons must first be in Covenant before they
partake of its Privileges; Subjects must precede their Properties; all the
Promises of the Bible, blotting out Sins and Iniquities, cannot solidly comfort
thee who art not in Covenant; only thus far, I may be in Covenant, and then
they are mine: The Man must be first taken, before any Right to what he has;
this is the one thing necessary to poor Sinners, that they be in Covenant once.
Fifthly, There is a great difference, tho not in Right, yet in Priority of
Order, as to Possession among the Subjects of this Covenant. 1 Cor. 15.23.
Every one in their own Order. Isa. 9. Of the Increase of his Government there
will be no end; and that Increase by Order: There are Variety of Forms and
Classes in Christ's School, the Lowest is in this World, which is but a mere
Initiation into it. The greatest Blessings here bear the Nature of Titles or
Earnests of the Future, Ephesians. 1.17. tho so big as to enable us to live, to
maintain and propare us. By virtue of this Order Sinlesness is as necessary a
Condition of our entering Heaven, as Faith is of our Pardon or Justification.

(2.) There is the Order of the Matter of the Covenant, which consists in the
Promises and Precepts of it, abstractly or in their mutual Aspect. 1.
Abstractly, with respect to the Promises of the Covenant, there is an Order
among them; there are some Promises whose fulfillment we may expect and do
enjoy in this Life, some not; as that no Temptation shall befall us that shall
totally conquer us in this Life; but a perfection in Knowledge and Holiness, a
doing away of what is in part, a being without Spot or wrinkle, are Blessings
proper to the future Life; a being freed from all Suffering, is proper to the
other Life, 1 Pet. 5.9. There is no Promise but what beiongs to the Covenant,
nor no Blessing but what comes through the Promises. 2. There are some Promises
absolute, others conditional. God gives a Stock before he requires any
Improvement; God required no Duty until he had made a Creature, and ^^tted it
with Faculties for performing of the Duties he required, nor does now the
Covenant of Grace, although the Law still keep up its Right, and claim the
exercise of Faith, one of the first duties of the Covenant, but the Gift of
Faith is before it: The Promise of the Redeeming Seed, Genesis 3. was preventive
of all Duties; there was need of believing it, in order to all saving Blessings
by it, Heb. 11. but the Nature of that Faith was such, as no external
Revelation or Motives could alone bring forth. A clear Discovery, ver. 1. of
invisible things realized to the Mind, the Idea of them formed in the Soul; for
Joh. 1. darkness could not comprehend the Light, and the natural Man knows
not the things of God. 3. Legal Promises are before Evangelical; Joh. 16. the
Spirit convinces of Sin before it convince of Righteousness, though there be
great difference between the degrees of Conviction and Humiliation some are
under; yet no man will ever fly to a Refuge, that is not sensible of need; no
man will trust to another Righteousness, that does not despair of his own: --
when the Law came, sin revived and I dyed. 4. The Promises about the Being and
exercise of Grace, are before the Knowledge of them: An Act presupposes an
Object; there are many things in our Souls we are ignorant of, or doubtful
about: Whether Freedom be an Attribute of the Will, or rather of the Man? How
far it is active or passive? Whether it can form an Idea never impressed?
Whether it be capable of Traduction, or another Soul may be propagated from it,
or created out of it? And how long may we be ignorant of the Accesses and
Recesses of the Spirit of God, with which is his Language to it, and what
Influences speak a State past the danger of final Relapsing. 5. The Promises
that give a Capacity, before them that fill and satisfy it: It is not orderly
acting, to put an Estate in a Minors power, one under Age. Our Lord took two of
the most ripe and early Children that ever this World afforded, and gave the
World an Experiment of their Unfitness for enjoying the Comforts and ravishing
Enjoyments of the other World; Peter and Paul, they were both confounded, they
knew not what they said, nor what they heard. 6. The Promises suited to our
Need rather than Desire: Our Desire is corrupted and feverish; we often long
for what would injure us, but our Savior minds our Salvation first; this is
all my Salvation, and all my Desire. 7. The Lord reserves to himself some
Monuments of his former despotical Right, a Sovereignty in the disposal of some
Blessings in the Covenant; as about all outward Blessings, Plenty, Peace,
Prosperity; about the Time of effectual Calling into the Covenant; about the
continuance under Legal Frames, or a spirit of Bondage; there is a May be as to
many Mercies; in the Fifth Command, Honor thy Father, etc. that thy days may
be long. God may give another Mercy for long Life: If a man give a pound of
Gold for Lead, he breaks not Promise, especially where more need of it.

The Second Part of the Matter of the Covenant is its Precepts and Commands:
There is a beautiful Order also observable among them. 1. In a suitableness to
our Condition: He lays not heavy Burdens and galling Yoaks on the Necks of
Children, but the most easy and facile; the Work and Employ of Angels, who
perpetually praise God, is not charged on us, or such Personal War with Devils,
the chaining and restraining of them: We are not fit to be God's Instruments in
the great Revolutions and Messages they are, nor are the same things required
of Infants and adult Persons, Pagans and Christians. 2. Precepts about our Life
precede them about our Work; Faith that is the Appetite we live by, is first
Commanded; Christ is the true Bread of Life, and Faith the fixed and determined
Desire on him. Parents have as much Care about feeding their Children as
afterward when Men about their Calling and Trade. The subject of Faith is
Man's Appetite, and Desire that is the faculty it resides in, the Gift of Faith
is the Presentation of Objects or forming Idea's of God in Christ, that
determines this desire alone upon him, Psalm. 4. Who will show us any good?
there is the Faculty, the Soul of Man as passive and recipient, Lord lift on me
the Light of thy Countenance; there it is determined by Faith, that is the
Exercise of Faith, Heb. 11.1. Faith is the evidence of things not seen; there
the Object determining it the Gift of Faith, the way it is wrought is by
presenting the Objects immediately to the Mind, the kindly entertaining these
Objects is our Duty, and our first Duty, and the Duty of Self-preservation or
Maintenance: We quench the Spirit who works them, we provoke him if we do not.
3. Precepts about External Ordinances precede Internal and Spiritual Exercise,
Phil. Work in and about your own Salvation; as Camero well translates it, to
which Ability of Spiritual Performance is annexed, I will work in you to will
and to do. 1. Ordinances keep the mind from Distraction with worldly business;
then our minds are retired to contemplate spiritual Objects only, they are
helps to keep us from quenching the Spirit. 2. Hence Ordinances are the Means
of working Faith, Before they call I will answer, while they are yet speaking I
will hear. The Spirit presents the Idea's, of which the Words are signs to the
Mind, Faith comes by hearing; therefore People ought to be Careful of their
Choice of a Ministry, Understanding, Sound, and whom the Lord has sent, to whom
he has given a Commission; thus the Word becomes the Seed of Regeneration, for
beholding in this Glass the Glory of the Lord, we are changed into the same
Image, 2 Cor. 3. It Is Satan's Conclusion for deserted Souls to forsake
Ordinances, or to abstain for want of Grace, and yet to continue in them
without obtaining Grace is to lose their end. 4. Precepts about forbearing sin,
Mortification, are before Practice of Godliness, Cease to do evil, learn to do
well.

3. An harmonious Order is seen in the Relation of these two to one another. 1.
In the strictness of the Relation: The relation between God and the Creature is
as soon broken and dissolved as this, they are inseparably, perpetually and
universally united; no man has a right to the Promises that is not under
Obligation to the Precepts: If a Man lives holily, never question his right to
the Promises; if a Man has a Right to one Promise, he has a Right to all. 2. In
the Sweetness and Comeliness of the Relation. (1.) There are more Promises than
Commands; the Duty is but an Acknowledgment, a Quit-rent, there are Promises
for Ability, Exercise, Perseverance, Rewards to every Command. (2.) There is a
Priority in the Promises, a Stock, some Talents, before we Trade. (3.) An
Usefulness: We have Ability to Obey from the Promise, we have Knowledge what to
do from the Precept: We have the Motive of Reward from the Promise, we have the
Light and Conduct about the way from the Precept: We are kept from Despair by
the Promise, and preserved from Presumption by the Command: We were undone if
the Covenant wanted its Precepts.

(3.) The Third thing the Order of the Covenant is discernable in, is about its
Ends. 1. God's Glory. 2. Christ's Honor. 3. Sinners Salvation. For the first,
God has his Sovereignty Exalted in the Obedience of his Son, for he and we, his
Obedience and ours are both enjoined in this Covenant; it is more Glory to have
such a Subject than ten Thousands of Angels; his Wisdom in its Contriv^nce how
to save his own Justice and Truth, and yet save the Rebel; to be Just and
Justifier of the Ungodly, is a Wonder of Wisdom: His Justice in his Son's
Sufferings, his Mercy in Sinners Salvation. 2. Christ's Honor is highly
Exalted: It Is a Question among Divines, whether any Creature should ever have
been so nighly United to God as that Humane Nature is, if Man had not fallen;
if not, what an Honor to all the Humane Nature, especially the Man Jesus!
suppose there should have been, what an Honor for a Man to be in such an
Office, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, one Mediator, the Angels Sovereign
and Sinners Savior, to have a Fullness not only for himself but all Creatures!
How wonderful is his Condescending Love, who by Union and Birth thus high, and
yet became as a Worm and no Man, and his Exalted Glory, who was as a Root out
of a dry ground, the Scorn and Contempt of the People, and became higher than
the Heavens and Holyer than the Angels, the Visible Image of the Invisible God,
in his Incommunicable Attributes, to have Life in himself, an Independent Life
when once given, the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God, all the Works of God
being managed by him. 3. Sinners Salvation: It is wonderfully ordered to render
their Salvation 1. Possible. 2. Easy. 3. Certain. 4. Suitable. The apparent
Repugnancies were either from the Law, Lawgiver, Surety or Sinner. 1. The Law
threatened present Death, but not Eternal, In the day thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely dye: He did Dye, the Eternity was founded on the Perpetuity of
sinning and Heinousness of the Crime, not on the Letter of the Law; it spoke
nothing against an Intervening Surety after the Sinner was once dead, to
relieve him from that Death; It is appointed for all Men once to dye; but the
Law spoke nothing against a Resurrection. 2. The Lawgiver was satisfied, since
his Truth in the Law was saved, since the Obedience and Sufferings of the
Mediator did sufficiently evince the Holiness and Justice of the the Governor.
3. As to the Surety, having his Life wholly in his own Power, it was lawful for
him to dye; and since it was in his Power to Redeem his Brethren, to
re-establish the Order of Divine Government, to glorify his Maker more than
any thing done by Creatures yet could, there was a becomingness that he should;
Decency makes a thing in some respect a Duty: It was in the Power of his Hand
to relieve his Brethren. We cannot thoroughly Love our Brethren without doing
what we can for Relief to their Misery: His Incarnation was an act of Choice,
but once Man, and made under the Law, the Love of his Brethren was a Duty. 4.
As to the Sinner, it is not only made possible but easy, for tho Justification
and Sanctification were both impossible to Man, the satisfying for past Guilt,
or the ceasing from sin, yet Christ having done both, no more remains but our
accepting of him for our Mediator, and suffering his Spirit to do in us what he
will; a Self-denial, a doing nothing is our principal Duty. The Sureness of our
Salvation is to be next spoken to, and the Suitableness of it consists in the
strict Union between the Commands and Promises, Holiness and Happiness must go
together.

The Sixth Property is the Sureness of it, so ordered and so guarded nothing
can break it: 1. The clear Assertions of the Spirit of Truth confirms this:
Isa. 55.3. The sure Mercies of David. Jer. 33.20. If my Covenant with Day and
Night can be broken, so that they should cease, then may also my Covenant with
David be broken. 2. The Nature of the Covenant confirms this; for there is
nothing in the Matter impossible or unlawful: Not the former, for the Promises
are so ordered that they render the Commands easy; not the latter, for the
Will of God is the Measure of Duty to us; and though its Duties are inconsistent
with our praeingagements in a Covenant with Hell and Death, yet that Covenant
being unlawful, and its works contrary to what is our Duty antecedently to this,
it no way renders this Covenant unsure. 3. The Party of the Covenant, GOD, the
whole of it depending on Him, not us; if we consider his Mindfulness, Psalm.
111.5. He will ever be mindful of his Covenant, etc. his Power, Righteousness,
Wisdom, nothing can fail that he has undertaken: And if we consider the Form of
the Covenant, he has undertaken all; Faith bears the room or place of a
Condition in the Covenant of Grace; but this very thing makes it lose the
proper Nature of one, that, It is Gods Gift, Ephesians. 2.8. 1. The Beginning and
Perfection of it, Heb. 12.1. 2. The Growth of it; Lord increase our Faith. 3.
The Exercise of it; I believe, Lord help my unbelief: But if Faith should fail,
the Unbelief of Man will not render the Faith of God of none effect; though we
believe not, yet he abides faithful, he will not deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13.
but that he secures that it shall not, Jer. 32.40. They shall not depart from
me. Hos. 14.5. He shall grow as the Lilly. I have prayed for thee that thy
Faith shall not fail. 4. The Foundations of this Covenant demonstrates its
sureness. The Decrees of God: The Love of God: The Death of Christ. (1.) The
Decrees of God: Our duty is founded on his Legislative Will; the Commands
contain what we should do, but the Promises are Results of his Purposes, what
God will do: Psalm. 2. This is Gods decree, That the Heathen should be Christ's
Inheritance, and the Ends of the Earth his Possession. And since Promises and
Purposes are of so nigh a Kindred, it is not so improper to say Purposes give a
Right that needs to be stigmatized with the Brand of Error and Heresy. (2.)
The Love of God. I have loved thee with an everlasting Love: Nothing can hinder
the impetuous Endeavors of Love among Creatures: Love is strong as Death, the
Coals thereof have a most vehement flame. If these shadows of divine Love have
such an Influence and Power to remove all Impediments that obstruct its desire,
what can resist divine Love? (3.) The Death of Christ; this was the Fruit of
the former: God so loved the World as to give Him to Redeem it, and what then
will he not do for it? Ephesians. 1.13. Will ever he withhold the Inheritance, or any
part of the Purchase, since he gave his Son to dye a Sacrifice, that Love might
communicate it self in a consistence with the Measures of Wisdom and Rules of
Justice. 5. The Sealing of the Covenant renders it sure: The Death of Christ,
Heb. 9. the Oath of God, Heb. 6. the Earnest of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. the
external sealing Ordinances, are all confirming Seals to render their
Consolation solid and strong, that have fled to this Covenant as a Refuge. 6.
The Covenant its having both Date and day of Payment annexed. Sacred Chronology
contains the one, and the Prophetical Aera's contain the other, Psalm. 102.13.
Hab. 2.2. 1 Pet. 5.6. Rev. 22.12. There is a due Time, a fit Time, an appointed
Time for every Person, Measure of Grace and Condition of the Church, and the
Lord will never be slack concerning his Coming, 2 Pet. 3. he will not let any
time be lost. The Knowledge of the time as to particular Persons he reserves as
a Secret to himself, but the Time of Deliverances and Fulfillments of the
Promises to the Church, he has more communicated, and the Neglect of studying
them must flow from an unconcernedness about her Affairs: There are two things
certain about them. (1.) That there is a set time for great Promises to the
Church. (2.) That many of them have their set times revealed; the Four hundred
thirty years from the Covenant made with Abraham to the Coming out of Egypt;
the Seventy Years from the beginning of the Babylonish Captivity to the end of
it; the Four hundred and Ninety to the Coming of Christ in the Flesh: So the
One thousand two hundred Sixty days, Forty two Months, the Time, Times, and
half Time. But such is our Infirmity and weakness, that we may doubt of the
time when it is on the very brink of fulfillment, as our Fathers did. 7. It is
as sure as the Covenant of Redemption, which was made between Infallible
Persons: For tho they may be considered as distinct Covenants, yet the one is
Foundation and Security for the other, it is like a subsequent Surety entering a
Covenant with the Creditor, to pay for past Debt, and engage as Surety for
future Credit; so that the Suretiship in the Covenants between God and Man, is
what he undertakes in his own personal Covenant with God. He has given him for
a Covenant to the People. It is more sure than the Covenant of Nature, with Day
and Night, etc. for by Miracles the one be disordered, but all Miracles are to
confirm the Covenant of Grace, and assure us of its Truth.

The Seventh Property is its perfection or Allness as to Salvation and Desire.
There are two things to be premised to the proof of it. (1.) The difference
between these two Alls. (2.) In what respects the Covenant contains them. 1.
The All of Salvation is less than the All of Desire; Pardon and Sinlesness will
completely save us, but not satisfy us. Adam needed not Salvation before he
perished, but his Desire was not completely satisfied. 2. They differ as Food
and Physic, as the Religion of sinless Angels and sinful Men, the one is
Vital, and becoming a perfect Healthful State; the other is Medicinal, a
remedial Religion, to restore us to Life and Health; the Desires of the one are
often to be corrected, mortified; the other to be nourished, and still
strengthened, the Desire or Appetite still increasing with the Reception. (2.)
In what respects the Covenant contains them. 1. The Revelation and Discovery of
them. 2. It Is the Instrument of Conveyance, and gives a Right to them: And
hence 3. It ^^^^s the Soul with assured Hope of them, Romans 8.23. We are saved
by Hope. For the third thing, the proof of this; the proof of the latter
contains the former, as the greater Blessing does the lesser. Man can never
have his desire satisfied until he be fav'd: And indeed the Disease of Hunger
and uneasy craving will also be removed when we are saved: For such a desire
is a great piece of Misery. But a plenteous Redemption will bring a plentiful
Salvation; the fullness of Grace and Truth that is in Christ will remove the
Emptiness of the Creature, and all is contained in the Covenant. 1. All that is
in the Earth is promised, Gold, Silver, fine Linen, Feasts of fat things,
Honey, 2 Cor. 3. All things are yours. God thinks not this Old World good
enough, therefore he will make it New for them, 2 Pet. 3. Romans 8. 2. Heaven
also, and all that is in it; and this is more than we desire; we would never
have dreamed of it, if the Promises had not contained it, and given some
preventive discovery. For Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it entered
into the Heart of Man to consider what, etc. Isa. 64.4. 3. All in God. I am thy
God, contains more than any man can infer from it: Who would have dreamed of
concluding a Resurrection out of it? Mat. 22.32. Christ being ours, contains
all our Salvation; and God being ours contains all our Desire; they are both
ours by virtue of this Covenant that contains a Covenant of Peace and War, they
are offensive and defensive with us, all our Enemies theirs, Omnipotency is on
our side. In a Covenant of Traffic and Commerce all they have in their
All Sufficiency, by sending of our Prayers the Ships of Desire, may be obtained
freely. In a Marriage Covenant, There will I give thee my Loves; that is beyond
all. It is on this account Genesis 33.9.11. that Jacob retorts on Esau's Enough, I
have All, because God was his God, tho Esau more Riches: The English wrong the
word, translating it Enough.

I shall conclude this with these Motives. 1. We may do it. 2. We must do it,
as a Duty and a Mean. 3. Whenever we do, God accepts, Heb. 8. Deuteronomy. 26.17. It
would never enter into our Hearts without his Spirit: Our saying, I am thine,
is but the Echo of his Voice. 4. God delights in it, Jer. 30.24. 5. We can do
it: (1.) From Ability already received. It is a true Article of the Synod of
Dort, That every Man may do more good than he does; though we have no spiritual
Power by Nature, and I doubt much whether any Moral Power either. For there is
a great difference between what Man actually is by Heavens common Gifts, and
what Man is by Nature. All the External Ordinances of Religion lie under our
Power, abstaining from External Vices, Lying, Swearing, Murder, Adultery; else
the Magistrate could not justly punish Criminals. We may, as Job, make a
Covenant with our Eyes, and so with all our Senses and Organs, that lie under
the power of our Will; when restraint is removed from Conscience, often they
lie under our Power to employ them about things that tend to our Souls good: We
can covenant to do what is within our Power, to God as well as we do to Men;
and would we have God to work Miracies where there is no need? to exercise a
Supernatural Power, where Natural Powers can do? Which were to disorder the
Harmonious Method of his beautiful Providence, to work Extraordinary in us what
Ordinary assistance can do: He has promised Special Grace on our engaging in
this, Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your own Salvation, etc. and I will work in you,
etc. He commands that we should try him in this very point, Mal. 3.10. Prove me
now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts. All Believers have set their Probatum to
it, that God was always faithful to his Promise. (2.) Because we engage not in
our Own strength, Isa. 45.24. Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I
Righteousness and Strength: Christ is Man as well as God, and in his Office as
Mediator he stands on our side as well as Gods: Behold I and the Children which
God has given me: He is called the whole Covenant Himself, Isa. 42.6. Gillespy
on the Covenant, p. 467.
In Practicals we commonly fall short in giving Christ his own room in the
Covenant. 1. He is the Root and Original of it: We ought not to deal with God
as if it had its first rise when it first entered into our Heart. 2. He is the
principal Party; we should not drudge him after us as an Assistant, and we the
principal Creditors of the Promises, and the principal Debtors of Duty, Isa.
59.21. If we give Christ his own place, we will find Covenanting with God an
easy and comfortable thing. The Lord grant we may find it so. Amen.

FINIS.

