A New and Pleasant HISTORY OF unfortunate Hodg OF THE SOVTH: Very pleasant and
delightful to be read.

Full of honest Mirth and Wit,
The merriest book that e're was writ.
BY H. Crouch.

LONDON, Printed for T. Leeke, dwelling in Secole lane, 1655.


CHAP. 1. The unfortunate Hodge of the SOUTH.
HOdge being born in the South, in a dull Clymate, had bad fortune, little wit,
crump shoulderd, crook backed, goggle eyed, splayefooted, crooked legs, and so
deformed, that he was hated of man woman, and child, insomuch, that he was
constrained to travel from the South the place of his abode to the North, to
seek his fortune; and coming to a Gentleman's house, knocked at the door, and
the Gentlemen of the house opened the door himself, but when he saw such a
deformed creature, he was amazed, and thought it had beed the devil, but Hodge
cried out, sir, be not afraid, I am a poor young man that wants a service;
thou lie quoth the gentleman, thou art the devil no (quoth Hodg) I am Hodge,
let me feel thee quoth the Gentleman, whether thou art flesh and blood or no;
when he found how it was, the Gentleman entertained him into his service only
to make him sport.

CHAP. 2. How Hodge was sent of an Errand by his Master, and what happened.
NOw it was so that the servants of the house could not endure Hodge being such
a deformed creature, that the like was never seen in any Country before,
insomuch that they plotted all that they could against him, and complained much
of him to their Master, although he behaved himself never so well amongst them.
Upon a time the Gentleman had occasion to send one of an Errand seven mlies
mlies from that place, and calling to his household servants, asked them who
was at most leisure to go of an Errand for him, they all replied that rog^ Hodg.
for he has nothing else to do, so the Gentleman sent Hodge with a letter seven
miles from that place, but when Hodge came to the house where he was to deliver
the letter, the servants of the house were all so afraid, that they ran in and
told their Master, that of a certain the devil was (...) the door, and for
ought they knew, had brought ^ letter to him from hell, the master in a maze ran
to the door, and asked Hodge what he was, and what business he had there, Hodge
replied I am poor^ Hodge, the devil thou art quoth the Gentleman, ^ am quoth
Hodge, and have brought you a lette^ from my master, so when the Gentleman had
received. the letter, he bid him remember his love to hi^ master, but send the
devil no more to him but Hodg was no sooner gone, but the servants of the house
see the dogs at pore Hodge, and beat him sorely with staves, and afterward
reported abroad that they had beat the devil

CHAP. 3. How Hodge return^d home to his Master, and wha^ happened him by the way.
NOW poor hodge being so pi^ifully beaten by these Gentleman's servants, as
also very ho^ ^weary and s^epy* and lazy withal, laid himself ^n under a great
oak in the middle of a field, no ^ure near him but a stray Ox grazing close by
him: now it happened that Hodge fell fast a sleep, and a company of Thieves
coming by, having no money to buy them victuals, nor no victuals to eat,
serched Hodges pockets, but finding nothing, resolved to kill the Ox that grazed
by him, thinking the Ox to be his in way of revenge, so having killed the ox
cut him with their swords in the middle, took half the ox with them to roast in
the wood, and the other half they left behind, they were no sooner gone but
the owner of the ox came to seek for his ox, and finding his ox to be killed
and half of him taken away, and seeing such an ugly Creature ly a sleep, did
conclude that Hodge was some devil or some monster that had not only killed his
ox, but eaten him half up, and so filled his belly so full, that he was fallen
fast a sleep, so when he had awaked him, he examined him what he was, and whose
servant he was, Hodge staring upon him with his great goggle eyes, made the
man afraid, told him whose servant he was, the man told him that for his part
he took him to be some monster, and would apprehend him upon suspicion of
eating up half his ox* Hodge denied it, and* told the man when he fell asl^ep,
he left the ox alive, but how he came to be so mangled he could not tell*
nevertheless* the man had him home to his master and accused poor Hodge for
eating up half his ox; his master said it was impossible, but the household
servants which could not endure Hodg, came all out with one accord, and told
their Master there was not such a great eater in all country as he was,
especially at raw meat, and therefore they did not think it impossible for him
to eat up half the man's ox, when the Gentleman heard this, he without any more
ex^mination of the matter* delivered him ^p to the man, the man to the Justice,
and the Justice to the horse or Co^rection, where poor Hodge was severly
punished for no offense.

CHAP. 5. How Hodge was delivered out of Prison and sent of another Errand, and
what happened.
AFter Hodge had been sufficiently punished upon suspicion of eating half the
Country man's ox, his master did intend to put him away, in regard the household
servants could not endere him, but considering within himself that if he should
put him away, he would have no^ne left to make him merry, therefore upon that
consideration he^ resolved to keep him and send him of an other Errand with a
Letter to the same Gentleman he wene to before when he was taken upon suspicion
of eating half the ox and of him to demand forty pounds, giving him charge to
bring it home safe, which he promised to do, but when Hodge came ^er the
Gentleman's house, the servants of the house perceiving him, ^an in to their
master and told him the devil was come again to bring him a Letter from hell,
when the Gentleman came forth to Hodge, he asked him if his master had none to
send but ^ch a^ ilfavoured rogue as he was, how soever he took the Letter of
him, read it over, and delivered the forty pound in a bag to him, and Hodge
gave him an acquittance and departed* but the household servants had a plot
against him, and got him down into the Wine seller, purposely to make him
drunck so that he might lose his money by the way as he went home, that if it
were possible his master might hang him for the same, so they made poor Hodge
so drunck, that he could hardly go out of doors with his bag of money, but he
reeled along til he came to the same tree where he lay when he was accused for
eating half the ox and the^e he fell fast a sleep with the bag of money by him.
Now there was a Peddler being heavy laden, intended to rest himself under that
tree, and finding hodge a sleep with a bag of money lying by him, made bold
with the money that was in the bag, and put in his pack, and filled the bag
with stones and oken leaves, and when he had done so, he writ some few (...),
and put it into Hodges pocket and went his way as fast as he could, now when
Hodge awaked and found the bag of money (as he though) lying by him, he was
right glad, and said to himself, Lord* what honest people live in this
Country, for I believe there has been some that have passed by since I fell
asleep, yet my bag is here, and my money safe, but when he came to his Master,
and delivered the bag to him, behold there was nothing but stones and Oken
leaves, which when his Master saw, he called to his servants, and charged them
to that rogue Hodge and hang him, for he had conveyed hi^ money away to some of
hi^ companions and filled the bag with stones and oken leaves; when the servants
heard their Masters charge, they rejoyed great ly, and said he should not lack
a hangman, so one of them took him and hanged him before their Master, no
sooner was he turned off the Ladder, but he that hanged him put his hand in
his pocket to feel for money, as it is the usual course for hangmen so to do,
but instead of money he fonnd nothing but a piece of paper, wherein was written
these lines following, which were writ by the Pedlar.

A bag of money here I found
If any will it claim.
I left it full upon the ground,
Then how am I too blame.
B^t I suppose it is not thine
That on the ground does sleep*
The B^g is thine, the money is mine,
A fool can nothing keep.
When the Gentleman read these lines, he perceived that he was cozened of his
money as he laid a sleep, and commanded his servants to cut him down before he
was dead; but the servants ran all away, and said they would see him hanged
before they would cut him down, so the Gentleman was feign ^o c^t him down
himself, and thinking with himself (...) Hodg had punishment enough for his
fault, dismissed him.

CHAP. 5* How Hodge was made Scullion under the Master Cook and what happened.
NOw the Gentleman called Hodge unto him, and said, Tho^ whoreson villan I will
never hereafter trust thee to go of any Errand for me, I am now forty pounds
the worse for thee, nevertheless I will put thee into office, and if thou will
behave thy self well, thou shall be scullion under the master Cook, so he called
the Cook, and bid him take Hodge into the Kitchen to him, to help him in his
affairs, which he did, but Hodge had better been under the great Turk, for the
Cook used him so cruelly that he would not allow him so much as bread to make
sops in the pan, so that he was almost starved; upon a time Hodge had stolen
some pieces of bread, and made so many sops in the pan, that he made himself so
sick that he spued all over the kitchen, the gentleman coming in, asked what
beast that was, the Cook said it was that rogue Hodge, who had been abroad
among his companion and they had made him drunck, with that the gentleman took
the baisting* ladle and instead of basting the meat, he basted poor Hodge s^
sorely, ^at h^e had almost broke his bones.

Chap: 6. How Hodge dressed dinner in the Cooks absence and what happened.
UPon a time, a certain young Gentlemen, called the master cook forth to be
merry with them and left the dinner to be dressed by Hodge, who gave very good
content to his Master and all the guess, insomuch, that the gentleman said
Hodge was capable to Learn, flow of speech, and willing to suffer, in the mean
time the Master Cook did drinck so much among the young gentlemen that he took
a (...), came home sick and dyed, and it was told the gentleman that the Cook
was dead, and that Hodge had poisoned him, the Gentleman said ^e would have
hin, opened, and if there was any poison in his body, be would have Hodge
hanged without Mercy, if not Hodge should have the Cooks place to make him
amends, a Cherurgion was sent for, but no poison was found in the b^dy of the
Cook, but the Cherurgion concluded he dyed of a surfer, and so Hodge was made
Master Cook.

Chap. 7. How the* Cook was buried* and how the servants cast Hodge into the
grave.
WIthin a while after the Gentleman buried the Cook, and invited a great number
of Gentlemen to the b^rial, and it was so that there was none stood n^er the
grave but the honshould servants, and one of the (...) had a winding sheet
under his Cloak, add when he saw Hodge he tied the sheet about him and cast
him into the grave, and the other Men laid the dead Man upon him unknown to
their Master, but Hodge with much striving up, and ra^ amongst the people in
(...) winding sheet, in such sort, that they though it had been the dead Man
that had broke out of the Coffin, and happy was he that coulp get out of the
Church first, but hodge cryep out be not afraid, I am poor Hodge, I pray
loosen me, that I may not be smothered, when the people heard him say so, they
unbound him, and his Master beat him for scaring them.

Chap. 8. How hodge was cast in the fire by one of the servants.
NOw the indignation of the servants was so great against Hodge, because he was
made Master Cook, that one of them came in and cast Hodge into the midst of the
si^e, hodge cried ou^ for help, and not his Master come quickly into the
Kitchen he had been burned, but when he had pulled him out by the heels, he
that cast him in told his Master that the rogue had been in the wine ^eller*
and had made himself drunck, and so fell into the fi^e, when the Naster heard
this, he told Hodge if ever he found him (...) again, he would turn ^im out of
his place.

Chap. 9* How one of (...) maids s^rved Hodge.
WIthin a while (...), it chauced that one of the Maids of the house sell down a
pair of stairs with her Coats abo^t her cars, so that her bare butucks was
seen, which when Hodge saw, he cast his Cap at it in good will to hide it, but
she took the Cap and said, we^ Hodge i^ regard thy cap has horoured my
breech, my breech shall honor thy cap* and so squerting into it, (she being
loosly given) clapped it upon his head, and so dep^ed, but when Hodge ran among
the servants, they cried foh, this rogue has berayed his breeches, the
Gentleman hearing a noise, came running in, and asked what was the matter,
Hodge went to put of his Cap to his Master and it all ran down his face and
about his shoulders, so that they ran all away, crying out, pox take this rogue
he will choke us all, but when Hodge had washed himself and made himself sweet,
he was sent for by his Master, to whom he related how he came in that pickle,
whereupon they all fell a laughing at him, which tormented him more than his
former punishment.

Chap 10. How Hodge traveled to heaven.
HOdge being generally hated both at home and abroad, was weary of his life,
and wished himself in heaven, which when one of the men heard, he said unto
him, if thou will go to heaven* hodge, I will conduct thee thither, but thou
must endure some punishment for thy sins marry quoth hodge I think I have
endured punishment enough already, nevertheless I should be content to endure
more so I might go to heaven, why then quoth the man strip thee stark naked,
and I will put a cloth before thy eyes, because you must not see which way you
go, then will I take thee by the hand and lead thee to heaven after thou have
had thy punishment: in the mean time he provided six* Cart whips for six men,
and they were to stand in a long room three on each side to whip poor hodge,
which done accordingly, hodge asked the man who they were that whipped him so
cruelly, the man told him they were Friars; Friars quoth hodge, I pray is there
any Friars in heaven, yea quoth the Man, them that do well* why then quoth hodge
I will not go to heaven, and so ran back again as fast as he could run, and was
punished as bad coming back as he was before.

Chap. 11. How hodge was turned out of his place and was made Falconer.
NOw the Gentleman by the persuasions of some of his friends, married with a
gallant Da^e, b^t s^e could not endur^ hodge, but told her husband, that as
long as hodge was Cook, she would not eat a bit of his dressing, the Gentleman
to please his wife, tur^d hodge out of his place and made him Falconer, so hodg
looked to his Master hawks* having six hawks to feed; but on a time when hodge
was absent, one of the servants carried the hawks out of the house and hid the^
and set ^ix Kites in their places; now when Hodge ca^e again he fed the Kites
as he use to do the hawks, and thought nothing, until such time as his master
had an intent to rid^ a hawking, and then hodge brought a Kite upon his fist
like any man: which when (...) master saw he said O thou rogue* what have thou
brought ^e here? a hawk quoth hodge, a hawk quoth the Gentleman, it is a Kite,
and fell a beating of hodge, good (...) quoth* hodge* it is such a hawk as you
gave m^ to keep unless some witch has transformed them from hawl^es into
Kites, but after his Master had beaten him su^iciently, the man that took the
hawks away brought them again privately, and then the tempest, was over.

Chap. 12. How the Gentleman and his wife were invited to a Feast, and how she
went from her husband, because he would not turn away hodge.
THis Gentleman and his wife heing invited to a Feast, and having a very fair
orchard and but one Cherry Tree, commanded all the Servants that they should
not meddle with that Tree; but as soon a^ ^hey were gone, the servants pulled
all the fruit off the Tree, and when the master of the house and his wife came
home and found all the Cherries (...), they examined the servants, the servants
said that rogue hodge had played the rogue and had done all the mischief: the
master beat hodge, but that was not all* because he did not turn him away, his
wife would not live any longer with him but went from him and lived in a wood
saying that she had better live there upon roots and herbs, and haws, than to
live in a house where such a Rogue as hodge was, whereupon when the master
beard of it, he called hodge and said unto him, O the rogue, how long have I
kept thee to torment me in this manner, thy ^istris is gone to live in a Wood,
and all long of thee, and before I will lose her I will turn thee away, when
^odge had heard him say so, he said unto him, master if that be all, I will
warrant you I will fetch her again, well ^oth the ^aster use thy *skill and go thy
way* hodge goes ^o a Farmers wife, whom his mistress did not know, and ^esired
her to go along with him upon such an account as you heard before, the woman
being better temperd than the household servants, went along with him, and
coming through the wood his mistress called to him and said hodge, what woman
is that with thee? my new mistress quoth hodge, your new mistress quoth she, am
not I your mistress, I quoth hodge, but you will not live with my master, cox
bobby qoth she, if any other be there but I, I will pull out their eyes, and so
away she runs home to her husband, and so hodge by his wit brought his mistress
home again, and she by her wit turned him out of doors, as you shall hear in
the next Chapter.

Chap. 23. How the Mistress made a rogue of hodge* and transported him to
Lubberland.
NOw the servants told their Mistress that it was hodges roguery to fetch her
home again upon that score, which when she heard, she vowed to be revenged of
him to the full, and to that purpose, she rose next morning very early, and
called hodge to go along with her, and being near the Sea, she gave a ship
master ten shillings to transport him to Lubberland, where as it is reported,
he has egtheen-pence a day for sleeping, and the next news we hea^ from
Lubberland you shall hear more of him.

FINIS.

