LABYRINTHVS CANTVARIENSIS: OR DOCTOR LAWD'S LABYRINTH.

BEING AN ANSWER TO THE LATE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRIES RELATION OF A
CONFERENCE BETWEEN HIMSELF AND Mr. FISHER, ETC. WHEREIN The true grounds of
the ROMAN CATHOLIQVE Religion are asserted, the principal Controversies
betwixt Catholics and Protestants thoroughly examined, and the Bishops
MEANDRICK vvindings throughout his whole work laid open to public veivv.

By T. C.

Prepare ye the way of our Lord: make straight the paths of our God.

Crooked things shall become straight; and rough ways plain.

Isa. 40. 3. 4. PARIS Printed by JOHN BILLAINE 1658.

THE AVTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE READER.
AS I know my self to baue been moved with noe other impulse then that of
Charity in composing this book, so do I conjure the Reader to carry the same
mind along with him in the perusing of it. It is a great mistake to think,
that heat of disputation, for the finding out of truth, is a cooling of
Charity. Debates of this kind are not so much breaches of freindship, as a
means to unite understandings in the belief of truth. If contentions in
Schools, for interest of ones private opinion only, or some worldly glory, be
esteemed no violation of amity among disputants, surely to contend merely out
of zeal to save souls, cannot be thought inconsistent with Charity. In this
contest, our war is not against the person, but the errors of our
neighbor:in which to be silent would in some degree make us criminal, and
responsable to God for our neighbors ruin.

If any man wonder, why an answer came forth no sooner, let him consider, that
my Lord Bishops book was published not long before the time of our public
distractions, in which it concerned us rather to prepare for the next world,
then answer books, that defended the Church of England; which was then in so
bleeding a condition, that it might have been thought as unhandsome to impugn
it, as to fight with a dying Adversary. But the heat of the war being
over, and many of the Prelatique party (who, together with our selves, did
daily entertain a confidence of the happy return and restoration of our
gracious Souereign King Charles the second) seeming to conclude, that my Lord
of Canterburies book was an impregnable piece, in regard we had not attempted
to assault it, I thought, I should perform a work acceptable to God, and very
satisfactory to the wishes of Catholics, if I framed an answer, so often
called for, by our Adversaries.

In perusal of the Bishops book I found so many affected Windings, and
artificial meanders, especially in that important controversy of resolving
our Faith, (where he ought chiefly to have aimed at perspicuity) that I could
not choose, but look upon it as a Labyrinth; and have therefore so styled it in
my answer.

I intend not to make my Reader spend time in unnecessary Preambles; which I
wish him rather to employ in seeking satisfaction within my book. I shall
therefore in this preface, only take notice of some few things, which the Bishop
vrges against us in his dedicatory Epistle to his late Majesty of glorious and
dear memory.

The Bishop charges Mr. Fisher with downright disloyalty, for publishing,
contrary to the Kings express command, the Relations of the Conferences which
he had with the Bishop and Doctor White; because (says he) Mr. Fisher was
charged upon his allegiance, not to set out, or publish what passed in some of
the conferences, till his Majesty gave further license. To which I answer, his
Majesty's command (even as here set down by the Bishop) does only forbid the
publishing of what passed in some of these conferences: so that, for ought
appears, what passed in other some might be published without further license.
Secondly, it is auerr'd by A. C. that not Mr. Fisher, but his Adversaries, first
transgress't this precept of his Majesty by diuulging false reports to the
prejudice of Mr. Fisher's person and cause: by reason whereof Mr. Fisher was
forced, for the just and necessary vindication of himself and the Catholic
cause, to deliver some copies to his friends. Thirdly, who made most have in
publishing what had passed in these Conferences, appears likewise out of W. I.
from whom the Bishop frames all this charge against Mr. Fisher. Some may
(perhaps) marvel (says W.I.) why these Relations came out so late; it being
now long, since the Adversaries have given out false reports both in speeches
and print. So that it seems by this, not Mr. Fisher, but his Adversaries were
the first prouokers both in speeches and print; and by consequence, the only
transgressors of his Majesty's command.

Neither are those of Mr. Fishers profession so apt to complayn, and cry out
Persecution, without cause; there being then persons of great Authority about
the King, inciting his Majesty to put the penal and sanguinary Laws against
us, in rigorous execution: to say nothing of those, who were then actually
persecuted. Nor does the Bishop so much clear, as contradict himself in this
particular, while he first says (page 11. of his Epistle) God forbid I should
ever offer to persuade a persecution, in any kind, or practice it in the
least: and yet, in the very next lines, adds; God forbid too, that your
Majesty should let the laws (viz. against Catholics and Catholic
Religion) sleep, forfeare of the name of persecution.

If Mr. Fisher and his fellows do angle for his Majesty's subjects, as the
Relatour pretends, it is only to bring them the safe to Heaven, and by which
only they themselves hope to arrive thither: it is not to draw them into the
belief of any assertions repugnant to loyalty and Christian virtue, but such
as their Teachers will be ever ready to maintayn, both with their pens and
lives. To fish, in this manner, deserves neither hanging, drawing, nor
quartering; but is conformable to the ancient commission, which in the person
of the Apostles, these anglers (as he calls them) received from Christ. Matthew.
4. 18. follow me, and I will make you Fishers of men.

Neither does Mr. Fisher, or any of his profession, allow, or use any such
netts, as the Relatour mentions ( page 11. Epist.) that is, they neither
practice, nor hold it lawful to dissolve oaths of Allegiance, to depose or
kill Kings, to blow up states for the establishing of QUOD VOLUMUS etc. All
which, out of his Charity, and professed forbearance toward us, the Bishop
does very kindly infinuate both to his Majesty and the Reader. But our answer
is, we yield to none in all Christian and true allegiance to our Souereign
Lord the King; which we have in times of trial so manifested to the world,
that we hope there are not many, even among our Adversaries, but are
convinced of our real fidelity: and though some perhaps will talk more, and
swear more, yet none upon all just occasions will do more, in defense of his
Majesty's sacred Person, rights, and dignity, then those of our profession.
This is certain, Roman-Catholiques alone can glory in this, that whereas in
these late unhappy times, some of all other Religions in England, opposed
either his sacred Majesty that now is, or his Royal Father, they only have
been, all and ever Faithful to them both: thereby showing, that the doctrine of
Allegiance to their lawful Soureigns is a necessary point of their belief,
and a part of that duty, which not only interest and ends, but Religion and
conscience obliges them to pay.

The Relatour would have us observe, that the Church of England is between two
factions, as between two millstones, like to be grown'd to powder. (page 15.
Epist.) meaning by one of these, Catholics; for whom alone, I have
undertaken to plead. The Bishop here seems to complain of persecution
himself, as well as we; but with far less reason, as is evident: seeing we
Catholics, (if we were so ill minded) have no other instruments to persecute
withal, but our tongues and our pens; which draw noe blood, and in the use
whereof, I presume no indifferent man, well confidering what has passed both
from the pulpitts and presses of our Adversaries, will think, that in any
thing, they fall short of us, either for lowdness, or passion.

It Is no such idle Querie, as the Relatour would have it thought, ( page 16
Epist.) but a very pertinent one to demand where the Protestant, or this
pretended Church of England, was before Luther. For have any Protestants as
yet, been able to show a visible Church in the world, before Luthers time,
professing the doctrine, which distinguishes them from us? It Is true, they have
been often called upon to this purpose; but have ever any of them done it? was
the question ever answered categorically? or otherwise then by tergiuersation,
and shifting it off with ambiguioyes of their own fiction? as the Relatour
himself (for example) here does, by telling us, their Church was there where
ours is now; one and the same Church still; noe doubt of that; one in
substance, but not one in condition of state, etc. Is this to answer
categorically? we do not enquire whether or not, or in what feigned sense,
theirs and ours may be said to be one and the same Church: the following
treatise does sufficiently confute that pretense: But our inquiry is, whether
there were a Ptotestant Church before Luthers time, there where our Church now
is; I say a Protestant Church, be it in name, or thing; that is, a visible
Society of Christians openly Protesting against the pretended errors and
superstitions of our Church, and believing the doctrine, which Protestants now
believe and hold in opposition to our Church. This, neither the Bishop nor any
body else, was ever able to prove. We Catholics, therefore do not only
doubt, but absolutely deny, that there was any Protestant Church, (or any
Church, which the Bishop can properly and truly call his Church, or their
Church, speaking of Protestants) before Luthers time, not only there where ours
now is, but in any other part, or corner of the world.

Neither is their Church and ours one and the same Church, in any other sense,
then what is merely fictitious and arbitrary, and whereby, all Heretics
whatsoever may, if they will, pretend to be one and the same Church with the
Catholic. Nor is it possible for Protestants to confute them; seeing they can
bring no conuincing argument to prove, that such errors are more destructive
of the Foundation, then those which they account damnable and to shake the very
Foundation of Christian Religion. Who knows not that we Catholics, differ
from Protestants in the Sacraments; which certainly are of the substance of
Religion, if any thing be; and by our Adversaries own principles, and
definition of a Church pertain to the Churches essence? We differ from them
in the matter of Sacrifice; which they reject, but we hold and believe to be
the most principal and solemn action of all that pertaines to Religious
worship. We differ from them also in many other points of maine concernment to
the honor of God and Salvation of souls. They charge us, and we them errors
directly derogatory to Gods honor, directly contrary to divine Revelation,
directly contrary to the institution and ordinance of Christ and repugnant to
Salvation. How then are we one and the same Church? or how can Protestants
pretend to become members of the Catholic Church, (...) s they maintain
principles, or articles of doctrine of such high concernment in Religion,
contrary to the belief of the whole Catholic Church, in so many ages before
Luther?

What he lays to our charge ( Epist. page 17.) of crying up the Church above
Scripture, and that so farrae, as to endanger the belief of it with a great
part of men, will be abundantly shown in the following discourse, to be a
calumny of the greatest magnitude. At present we only protest against it as
such, and auerre with himself, that the Scripture, where it is plain, should
guide the Church; and the Church, where there is doubt, or difficulty, should
expound Scripture. Only to that Prouiso which he adds, touching the Churches
exposition of Scripture, viz. that she may reuise what in any case has slipped
from her, we cannot allow it, till we certainly know his meaning. For if by
reuising what has shipped from her he meant to intimate (as it is most probable
he did) that the Church should err in any thing she defines to be believed,
it is his own error to affirm it, as we shall prove hereafter: if any thing
else, we meddle not with it.

Whereas he observes (Epist. page 18.) that many rigid Professo urs have turned
Roman Catholics, and in that turn, have been more Iesuited then any other:
and that such Romanists as have changed from them, have for the most part,
quite leap't over the mean, and been as rigid the other way; to the first part
of his observation I assent; reason it self teaching it to be true. For the
streams of that zeal, which formerly wrought extrauagantly in them, by reason
of their ignorance and error, being now cleared and turned the right way,
make the Professors of it still feruorous for that, which is good, and no less
vehemently auerted from what they know to be ill. But of the second part I
cannot approve; it being so contrary to all experience; which shows, that the
desertours of our Religion seldom become so zealous in the contrary way, as
the Relatour pretends: nay reason it self is against it. For, commonly
speaking, the motives of their turn are either the preservation of their
estates, the obtaining of some other wordly and temporal ends, or lastly some
voluptuous pleasure, of which in the way of Catholic Religion they find
themselves debarred. And hereof this is an assured Argument, that when these
motives cease, (as at the hour death they all do) many of them, through the
mercy of God, return from whence they had departed. Whereas on the other side,
I never yet heard of the man, who professing the Catholic Faith in time of
health, desired in sickness to dye a Protestant.

The Relatour observes again (Epist. page 19.) that noe one thing has made
conscientious men (of his party) more wavering in their minds, and more apt to
be draw'n beside from the Religion professed in the Church of England, then
want of of uniform and decent order etc. thereupon taking occasion to enlarge
himself on the subject of ceremonies, showing their usefulness and necessity
in the public exercise of Religion; wherein I have noe reason to contradict
him. Only this I must note by the way, that whereas (out of indulgence to his
ordinary humor) he taxes the Roman Church with thrusting in many, that are
unnecessary and superstitious, he might have known, that the Council of Trent
it self not only inables, but inioynes all particular Bishops in their
respective Dioceses, and all Archbishops and Metropolitans in their respective
Provinces, to reform what ever they may find amiss in this kind. And this
his crimination is no more, then was objected to himself by his own people.

We shall in due place show, in what sense it is, we maintain, that out of
Rome, that is, out of the communion of the Roman-Catholique Church, there is no
salvation. At present it may suffize to say, that we do not shut up salvation
in such a narrow conclaue as the Bishop would have his Reader believe, when he
parallels us with the Donatists. We teach no other doctrine concerning the
attainement of salvation, then what has been held in all ages, in all times
and in all places, and is now visibly taught and professed throughout the
Christian world; viz. that out of the true Catholic Church, salvation is not
to be expected. Nor do we shut Heauen-gates, as the Relatour insinuates, to
any that are willing to enter; provided, they be willing to enter, and go that
way, which Christ has appointed. But it is the Bishop and his party, that do
really shutt Heauen-gates to those who otherwise might enter, even whilst they
pretend to open them. For by teaching the way to Heaven to be wider then it is,
and that Salvation may be attained by such means, and in such ways, as
according to Gods ordinary Providence it cannot, what do they but putt men
into a false way, and in stead of leading them in that strait path to eternal
happiness, which the Gospel prescribes, trace out that broad way to them,
which leads to death?

I shall close my Preface with an Advertisement to such, as are apt to quarrel
at words, beyond the meaning of those that use them. The infallible (which in
treating of the Church and General Councils I have had frequent occasion to
make use of) is cunningly raised by our Adversaries to so high a pitch of
signification, as though it could import no less, then the ascribing of an
intrinsecall unerring power in all things, to those we account infallible;
which is clearly to pervert our meaning: we intending to signify noe more,
when we say the Church, or General Councils are infallible, then that by
virtue of Christ's promise they have never erred, nor ever shall in definitions
of Faith.

In fine, Good Reader, that thou may see and embrace the truth, is the hearty
wish of him, that bids thee noe less heartily.

Farewell.

Labyrinthus Cantuariensis. OR, Dr. LAWD'S LABYRINTH. BEING An Answer to his
Lordships Relation of a Conference between Himself and Mr. Fisher, etc.
CHAP. I. Stating the Conference between the Bishop and Mr. Fisher, for
Satisfaction of a Person of Honor.
ARGUMENT.
1. The Introduction. 2. The Bishops Artifice in waving a direct Answer to the
Question. 3. His pretended Solutions to certain Authorities referred to a
fitter place for Answer. 4. His maintaining the Greeks not to have lost the
Holy Ghost; and that they are a true Church. 5. The Modern Greeks in Error,
not the Ancient. 6. why FILIOQUE inserted into the Nicene Creed.

1. THough Dedalus, that ingenious Artificer, might possibly show no less skill
in contriving his Cretan Labyrinth, then did the principal Architect, employed
by Solomon in building that Magnisicent Temple at Jerusalem; yet their Labors
were of a different nature. For whereas the latter exercised his Art in raising
a noble, elevated, lightsome Structure; the former ( Dedalus) used all his
Inventive industry in framing a Subterraneous, darksome Prison, with such
redoubled Turnings, perplexed Windings, and tortuous Meanders, that who ever
entered into it, might indeed wander up and down within its involved and
recurring paths, but never be able to get either back, or through it.

Now alluding to these different Works, we may not unfitly compare the learned
Labors of the Fathers, Doctors, and worthy Divines of Gods Church, to this
stately Temple of Solomon, being the rich and illustrious Monuments of their
Piety, Zeal, and Erudition. Whereas by the Cretan Labyrinth are fitly
Symboliz'd the Artificial, but Pestiferous Works of all Heretical Authors,
who (forsaking the ever-visible and conspicuous Church of Christ, and known
Consent of Christendom) induce themselves and Followers to believe the novel
Fancies of their own Phanatick Brains. These men's Labors are so far from
being lightsome Monuments, that they are rather Labyrinths, or intricate
Dungeons for poor seduced Souls; who being once engaged in the perplexities of
their entangled flexures, see not the radiant light of Gods Church; some few
only excepted, whom of his great mercy he is pleased to show the way out, and
reduce into his Fold.

Now it has already been shown by others, that the Works of many late
Protestant Writers of this Nation are of the aforesaid intangling Nature; and I
doubt not, by Gods help, but to evidence, that this their Grand Authors Book I
am now about to answer, is very liable to the same Reproach. For, to describe
it rightly, it is a Labyrinth most artificially composed, with as many abstruse
Turnings, ambiguous Windings, and intricate Meanders, as that of Dedalus, and
therefore equally inextricable.

But a more sure and stronger Clew then Ariadne's, the Line of the Catholic
Churches Authority and Tradition, joined with Holy Scripture, has not only
carried me through it, but by Gods good assistance, enabled me to render it
pervious to all, by the Discoveries and Directive Marks I have set on the
Leaves, that compose this present Volume.

Yet before I descend to particulars, I must advertise the Reader, that I
design not the Defense either of Mr. Fisher or any other Author, further then
they deliver the generally received Doctrine of the Catholic Church; which is
that I undertake to maintain.

The three leading pages of the Bishops Book contain the occasion of the
Conference between himself and Mr. Fisher, viz. for the satisfaction 1, 2.
of an Honorable Lady, who having heard it granted (on the Protestant part) in
a former Conference, that there must be a continual, visible Company, ever
since Christ, teaching unchanged Doctrine, in all points necessary to
Salvation, and finding (it seems) in her own Reason, that such a Company, or
Church, must not be fallible in its Teaching, was in Quest of a Continual,
Visible, and Infallible Church, as not thinking it fit for unlearned persons to
judge of particular Doctrinals, but to depend on the judgment of the true
Church: which point of Infallibility the Bishop sought to evade, saying, That
neither the Jesuit, nor the Lady her self spoke very advisedly, if she said,
she desired to rely 3. number. 2. page 3.
upon an Infallible Church, because an Infallible Church denotes a particular
Church, in opposition to some other Particular Church not Infallible.

2. Here already you may observe the Bishop falling to work on his projected
Labyrinth, by making its first Crook; which is apparent to any man that has
eyes, even without the help of a Perspective. For though he could not be
ignorant, that the Lady sought not any one Particular Infallible Church, in
opposition to another Particular Church not Infallible, but some Church, such
as might without danger of Error direct her in all Doctrinall Points of Faith,
call it an or the Infallible Church as you please, (for she had no such Quirks
in her head) yet the Bishop will by no means understand her sincere meaning,
but instead of using a charitable endeavor to satisfy her perplexed
Conscience, vainly pursues that mere Quibble, on purpose to decline the
difficulty of giving her a satisfactory Answer in his own Principles. Neither
indeed does that expression ( an Infallible Church) denote a Particular Church,
in opposition to some other Particular Church not Infallible, but positively
signifies a Church that never has, shall, or can err in Doctrine of Faith,
without connotating, or implying any other Church that might err. Nor can it
be pretended, that the Particle a or an is only appliable to Particulars,
seeing the Bishop himself applies it to the whole Church. For, omitting other
places, see page 141. where speaking of the whole 18. number. 5
Militant Church, he says, And if she err in the Foundation, that is, in some
one or more Fundamental Points of Faith, then she may be a Church of Christ
still. Here sure he cannot mean a Particular Church by this expression A true
Church, but the whole Catholic or Universal Church, unless he intended to
speak nonsense, viz. That the whole Militant Church is a Particular Church.
And what Learned Interpreter ever understood those words of Saint Paul, Ephesians.
5. 27. That he might exhibit to himself A glorious Church, etc. of any other,
save the Universal Church of Christ? And seeing the Lady made enquiry after
that Church IN WHICH one may, and OUT OF WHICH one cannot attain Salvation, (as
the Bishop sets down the words of Mr. Fisher, page 3.) it is evident, that
really and in effect she sought no other, save the Universal Visible Church of
Christ: which A. C. (to take away all doubt of her meaning) expresses page 1.
by saying, that she desired to depend upon the judgment of THE TRUE Church.
Why then might not the Lady express her self, as the Bishop himself does in the
place above cited, by the Particle a, or an, and yet not speak so improperly,
that he must needs mistake her meaning? The truth is, it was an affected
mistake in his Lordship, as any man may easily perceive, that has not lost his
discerning faculty.

But the Bishop having now entered his hand, and willing to show his dexterity
betimes, immediately redoubles the Crook he had made, while (to countenance his
former trisling with the Lady touching an Infallible Church) he craftily
attacks Bellarmin for maintaining an 3. number. 3. page 4.
Infallibility in the Particular Church, or Diocese of Rome, as hoping to make
that opinion pass for an Article of Faith among Catholics (which it is not)
and by confuting it, to seem to have overthrown the Infallibility of the whole
Catholic Church. Now though Bellarmins opinion is, indeed, That the whole
Clergy and People of Rome cannot err in Faith, and desert the Pope, so long as
his Chair remains in that City; yet the Bishop knew very well, that the
Catholic Church does not restrain the Doctrine of her Infallibility to that
opinion of Bellarmin: it being sufficient for a Catholic to believe, that
there is an Infallibility in the Church, without further obligation to examine,
whether the Particular Church of Rome be Infallible, or not.

By what has been hitherto faid, a man may easily perceive the candor of the
Bishops proceeding, and what he is to expect from him throughout his whole
Work; which will (I assure you) for the greater part, be found to correspond
with that you have already seen.

3. From the fourth page to the twentieth he goes on disputing against 3. number.
3. 4, 5, 6, 7, etc.
several Opinions of Bellarmin, (as whether the Popes Chair may be removed
from Rome; and in case of such Removal, whether that Particular Church may
then err) which seeing they are but Particular Opinions, I shall not
expostulate them with the Bishop, as being no part of the Province I have
undertaken. And as to the Authorities here quoted by Bellarmin, out of St.
Cyprian, St. Jerome, St. Gregory Nazianzen, etc. in proof of his opinions
touching the Particular Church of Rome, seeing they are neither cited by the
Cardinal to prove any Articles held de Fide among Catholics, nor impugned by
the Bishop but as insufficient to make good those particular Opinions, (though
he hoped the Reader would make neither of these reflections) I cannot hold my
self obliged to take notice of his pretended Solutions, till I find them
brought to evacuate the Infallibility of the Catholic, or Roman Church in its
full Latitude, as Catholics ever mean it, save when they say expressly the
Particular Church, or Diocese, of Rome, as here Bellarmin does. However, I
intend to examine them, when I come to treat the Question of the Infallibility
of the Universal Church.

Where I make no doubt, but I shall clearly evince against his Lordship and the
whole party, these particulars following. First, that to draw the word perfidia
(which St. Cyprian uses) to his own sense, the Bishop leaves out two parts of
the Sentence, which he ought necessarily to have expressed. Secondly, that by
glossing almost every word of the Text imperfectly alleged, he makes that
Father give no more Privilege to Rome, then what was due to every particular
Church, yea to every Orthodox Christian of those times, quite contrary to St.
Cyprians intent. Thirdly, how he presses St. Cyprians not being taxed by the
Ancients, for holding a possibility of the Popes teaching Error in matter of
Faith, but never reflects, that he was as little taxed by them for affixing
possibility of Erring to the Universal and Immemorial Tradition of
Non-rebaptization, embraced and practiced against him by the whole Church.
Fourthly, I shall show, that his Lordships Answer to St. Hieromes Authority is
merely Nugatory, making him advertize Ruffinus, that the Apostolical Faith,
first preached at Rome, could not in it self be any other, then what it
essentially is; that is, it could not be changed, so long as it remained
unchanged. Fifthly, that he trifles as much in the allegation of St. Gregory
Nazianzen. For though that Father uses the word Semper retinet, (as the Bishop
translates him) and does not expressly say Semper retinebit (it ever holds, and
not it shall ever hold the true Faith) speaking of the Roman Church; yet
certainly in this place the word retinet, coming after these other ab antiquis
temporibus habet, and having Semper annexed to it, must in all reason be
understood to relate to the several Differences of Time, past, present, and to
come. Sixthly, that he wrongfully imposes upon Bellarmin the alleging of St.
Cyril and Ruffinus, as holding his opinion about the particular Church of Rome:
whereas Bellarmin has not so much as St. Cyrils name in that whole Chapter;
nor Ruffinus's, but only when he cites St. Hieromes Apology against him: and
when he alleges those two Authors in his third Chapter, he expresses both the
places and their words; but it is to prove another Proposition: and that of St.
Cyril is a quite different Text, from what the Relatour thrusts into his
Margent. Thus eagerly fights he by Moonlight with his own shadows. Seventhly,
that his Lordship confounds two Questions that are distinct, and distinctly
treated by Bellarmin, viz. Whether the Pope, when he teaches the whole Church,
can err in matters of Faith (which is the Proposition Bellarmin defends in the
third Chapter, and belongs to the Pope as he is chief Pastor of the Church)
with this, whether the particular Roman Church, that is, the Roman Clergy and
People, cannot err in Faith; which question Bellarmin treats in the 4th.
Chapter. Lastly, that the Text of Matthew. 16. 18. Tu es Petrus; etc. ( Thou art
Peter, etc.) cannot in the Grammatical and proper sense be applied to the
confession of St. Peter, as abstracted from his Person, but only to his
Person, as made, in that occasion, for and in virtue of that Confession,
perpetually to endure in him and his Successors, THE ROCK of Christ's Church.
But of these hereafter.

The Bishop having long wandered from the Ladies Question concerning
Infallibility, whether to be admitted in any Church or not? at length in the
20th. page, removing St. Peter's Chair out of his way and 3. number. 17.
from the City of Rome, and disporting himself a while in that particular City,
or Diocese, in a kind of Raillery upon its Infallibility, his Lordship comes
to the Greek Church, on occasion of some words spoken by a friend of the
Ladies, in defense of that Church. I believe that Friend did a friendly office
to the Bishop, in giving him a rise for a new Dispute, and diverting the Lady
from pressing him further for a satisfactory answer to her Querie.

4. The question started by this friend was (as I have already hinted) about
the Faith of the Greek Church, which Mr. Fisher told him, had plainly made a
change and taught false Doctrine concerning the Holy Ghost; and that he had
heard his Majesty should say, That the Greek Church, having erred against the
Holy Ghost, had lost the Holy Ghost. This latter part of Mr. Fishers assertion
the Bishop will needs interpret as a disrespect in him toward his King;
whereas in truth he highly honored his Majesty, and showed the Kings great
Learning and Judgment in that point, touching the Holy Ghost. But the Bishop
with all his respect and present flattery, is resolved to contradict his
Majesty: yet that he might seem to do it but in part, he introduces this
distinction, 5. page 21.
viz. That a particular Church may lose the Holy Ghost two ways. 1. The one
when it loses such special Assistance of that Blessed Spirit, as preserves it
from all dangerous errors and sins, and the punishment that is due unto them.
2. The other is, when it loses not only this Assistance, but all Assistance,
to remain any longer a true Church.

Now the Bishop denies the Greek Church to have lost the Assistance of the Holy
Ghost in this latter Acception, viz. totally, which would render it no true
Church; but grants it to have lost that special Assistance specified in the
first branch of the distinction. But this (he says) is rather to be called an
error, CIRCA SPIRITVM SANCTVM (about the Doctrine concerning the Holy Ghost)
then an error CONTRA SPIRITVM SANCTVM (against the Holy Ghost.) Thus he minces
what he had said before, That the Greek Church did perhaps lose the Ibid;
Holy Ghost, and that they erred against him.

But let us see what Arguments his Lordship brings in proof of his Assertion,
that the Greek Church continues a true Church, and that their error is not
properly against the Holy Ghost. Here the Bishop makes no great haste, but
breathing himself a while, does very prudently prepare his Reader to expect no
great matter from him in this kind. For, dilating very speciously on his own
modesty he adds, There is no reason 6. page 23.
the weight of this whole Cause should rest upon one particular man; or that
the personal defects of any man should press any more then himself. Also that
he entered not upon this service, but by command of Supreme Authority; there
being, as he says, an hundred abler then himself to maintain the Protestant
Cause. This his acknowledgement as I have no reason to blame him for it, so I
cannot see, what just cause his Lordship had to censure Mr. Fisher, for
thinking so humbly of himself as to confess, there were a thousand better
Scholars, then he, to maintain the Catholic Cause.

Before we come to the Bishops proofs, I must in the first place entreat the
Reader to lend attention to his words, which are these; I was not 9. page 24.
so peremptory, viz. as to affirm the Greeks error was not in a Fundamental.
Diverse learned men, and some of your own, were of opinion, that ( as the Greeks
expressed themselves) it was a question not simply Fundamental. I know and
acknowledge, that error of denying the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the
Son, to be a grievous error in Divinity. After this he adds as a Theological
proof of his own, Since their form of speech is, that the Holy Ghost proceeds
from the Father BY THE SON, and is the Spirit of the Son, without making any
difference in the Consubstantiality of the Persons, I dare not deny them to be
a TRVE CHVRCH; though I confess them AN ERRONEOVS Church in this particular.
Are not these very specious expressions? I was not so peremptory. Diverse
learned men were of opinion. I know and acknowledge that error to be a
grievous error in Divinity. I dare not deny them to be a true Church. They
seem to agree with us. They think a diverse thing from us. But I pass by his
trifling, and make way for truth. It is to be considered, that now for many
hundred years the whole Latin Church has decreed and believed it to be a flat
Heresy in the Greeks, and they decreed the contrary to be an Heresy in the
Latin Church; and both together condemned the opinion of the Grecians as
Heretical in a general Council: In Florentino.
how then bears it any show of probability, what some few of yesterday (forced
to it by an impossibility of otherwise avoiding the strength of Catholic
Arguments against them) affirm, that the matter of this Controversy is so
small and inconsiderable, that it is not sufficient to produce an Heresy on
either side? Is not this to make all the Churches of Christendom, for many
hundred years, quite blind, and themselves only clear and sharp-sighted?
which swelling presumption, what spirit it argues, and whence it proceeds, all
those, who have learned from St. Augustine, that pride is the mother of
Heresy, will easily collect.

But though this persuasion had not been attested by such clouds of witnesses,
Theological Reason is so strong a Foundation to confirm it, that I wonder how
rational men could ever be induced to question the truth of it. Is it (think
you) enough to assert the Divinity, and Consubstantiality, and Personal
Distinction of the Holy Ghost (as the Bishop says) to save from Heresy the
denial of his Procession from the Father and the Son as from one Principle?
would not he, that should affirm the Son to be a distinct Person from, and
Consubstantial to the Father, but denied his eternal Generation from him, be an
Heretic? or he, who held the Holy Ghost, distinct from, and Consubstantial to
them both, but affirmed his Procession to be from the Son only, and not from
the Father, would he not be highly guilty of Heresy? It is then most evident,
that not only an error against the Consubstantiality and Distinction, but
against the Origination, Generation, and Procession of the Divine Persons is
sufficient mattter of Heresy: which being here most manifestly found, either
in the Affirmative maintained by the Latins, or in the Negative embraced by the
Greeks, about the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, there must also be
found sufficient matter to constitute the erroneous Tenet Heretical. And seeing
Protestants acknowledge with the Bishop here, that the Greeks in this are the
erring party, how can they possibly excuse them from Heresy?

5. But before I fall upon a particular examen of his proofs, we must
distinguish between Greeks. Some are Ancient; other Modern. The Ancient Greeks,
though they did indeed, in this question of the Holy Ghosts procession, express
themselves sometimes by the word per Filium (by the Son) yet the sense they
gave them was Confignificative with a Filio (from the Son.) Whereas the Modern
Greeks, since they raised this Dispute against the Latin Church, will not admit
that expression a Filio, but per Filium only, and that too in a sense
Dissignificative to a Filio. For they so affert the Holy Ghost to proceed from
the Father by the Son, that he proceeds from the Father alone, and not from the
Son at all: thereby making the words perrFilium to signify the Medium only,
not the Principle, from which he is Originiz'd as truly as from the Father. And
that this is the erroneous persuasion of the Modern Greeks is manifest, not
only by those long Discourses between the Greeks and Latins, set down at large
in the Council. Florentin, Sess. 18. page 686. 690. Sess. 22. page 741. Sess. 23.
page 749. (...) propter additionem verbi Filioque eos reputant. Sess. 25. page
778.
Council of Florence, but by the free acknowledgement of Hieremias late
Patriarch of Constantinople, in his Book entitled Censura Orientalis
Ecclesiae, cap. 2. where expounding the Belief of the Modern Greek Church, he
has these express words, Spiritum vero Sanctum, Dominum vivificantem, and EX
PATRE SOLO procedentem.

Now after this distinction of Ancient and Modern Greeks, and their different
meanings even under the same expression, it will be seasonable to give
solutions to all the Bishops proofs. To the first therefore, however the Bishop
labors to excuse the Modern Greeks from a Fundamental Ibid. number. 2. page 2. 5.
error, he takes a wrong course to effect it, and in stead of excusing them,
directly overthrows and condemns them; nay renders those, whom he endeavors to
excuse, incapable of that favorable exposition, which the Authors he alleges
in their behalf, have made for some of the Greek Church. For page 24. 9. number.
1. he acknowledges that error, of denying the Holy Ghost to proceed from the
Son, to be a grievous error in Divinity, and page 26. 9. number. 3. that the
Greeks think a diverse thing from the Latins in this point, as I have noted
above. Now to prove that these who err thus grievously, and differ from the
Latin Church in re, not in the words only, but in the thing, do yet not err
Fundamentally, he brings Testimonies from our Authors, who speak of such
Grecians, (even as he cites them) which err not at all in the opinion of those
alleged Authors, and which differ from the Latin Church only voce, in words,
and not in the thing, or matter of their Doctrine.

Thus he cites Durandus. Pluralitas IN VOCE, salvata unitate IN RE, non
repugnat unitati Fidei. Magist. Sentent. Did. 11. Sane sciendum est, quod
licet in presenti Articulo a nobis Graeci VERBO difcordent, tamen SENSU non
differunt: and the like sayings are in all the following Authors there cited by
the Bishop. But what a strange Medium is this to prove his intent? He was to
prove, that such as were in grievous error in Divinity, erred not
Fundamentally; and for proof of this he alleges such as have no real error at
all in Divinity. He was to prove, that such as differ in re, in the thing it
self, from the Latin Church, about the Procession of the Holy Ghost, err not
Fundamentally: and for proof of this he alleges such as differ only from us
voce, in words, but not in the thing controverted. Is not this strong Logic?
Let his Lordships Defender then prove, from the said Authorities, his
Assertion, viz. That those Greeks, who err grievously in Divinity, and differ
in re from the Latin Church, err not Fundamentally, and he will have done more
then my Lord himself has done, or any other (I presume) can do. In the mean
time every half eye will discover, how inappositely the Relatour has reasoned
hitherto, and brought no Authority at all to make good his Assertion.

For the Master of Sentences, he speaks only of such Ancient Authors, as
differed only in voce, in words, and not in Substance from the Latin Church;
or at least who spoke not so clearly against it, but that their words might
admit some tolerable interpretation. But how proves this, that those of the
Greek party say now no more, nor otherwise, then the others did in those
Ancienter times? seeing it is manifest from the Council of Florence, and from
Hieremias Patriarch of Constantinople, that their Doctrine cannot admit of that
Exposition, which those Authors give to the Doctrine of the Ancient Grecians.
For they flatly and in express terms deny, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from
the Son, and understand per Filium (by the Son) in that sense which excludes a
Filio (from the Son.)

This difference of times was long since observed by St. Bonaventure in that
very place, wherein his Lordship cites him, to wit, in 1. Sentent. did. 11.
quest. 1. art. 1. ad 3um. and 4um. His words are these. Ad illud quod objicitur
de Damasceno dicendum, quod non est in ista part ei assentiendum. Sicut enim
intellexi, ipse fuit in tempore, quando orta est contentio. Vnde non est in hoc
sustinendus, quia simpliciter fuit Graecus: tamen ipse caute loquitur. Unde non
dicit, quod Spiritus non est a Filio, sed dicit, NON DICIMVS A FILIO; quia
Graeci non confitebantur, nec tamen negabant. Sed modo eorum maledicta
progenies addidit ad paternam Dementiam, and dicit, quod non procedit a Filio,
nisi temporaliter: and ideo tanquam Haereticos and Schismaticos Romana eos
damnat Ecclesia. To that (says he) which is objected from Damascen it is to be
answered, that we are not to assent to him in this particular. For, as I
understand, he lived in the time, when this Controversy was sprung up.
Wherefore we are not bound to maintain him in this point; because, absolutely
speaking, he was a Grecian: yet himself speaks warily. For, he does not say,
the Holy Ghost is not from the Son, but he says, we say not from the Son. For
the Grecians, as they did not confess, so neither did they deny (to wit, the
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son.) But now their accursed offspring
has added to the madness of their Forefathers, and professes, that the Holy
Ghost does not at all proceed from the Son, otherwise then Temporally: and
therefore the Roman Church condemns them both as Heretics and Schismatiques.

But let us add a word or two more in particular to his Authorities cited.
Durandus his words give only a general Doctrine, which is most true, viz. That
difference IN WORDS is not repugnant to the unity of Faith. The Master of
Sentences (we said but even now) speaks of those Ancienter Greeks, who spoke
moderately and warily in this point. Bandinus is cited, but no words of his
alleged. St. Bonaventure is quite against his Lordship. For in that very place
which he cites, St. Bonaventure brands the Greeks of his time, who had deserted
the Roman Church, with the note of Suam Sententiam defendere ausi sunt, and
Auctoritati Ecclesiae Romanoe obviare; and ideo facti sunt Heretici quia negant
Fidei veritatem; and Schismatici quia recesserunt ab Ecclesiae unitate. D.
Bonavent. ibidem.
Heretics and Schismatiques, Now the Bishop uses some cunning, in not giving
notice of those precedent words, and thereby persuading his Reader, that St.
Bonaventure, by not answering to the Objection pressed by the Greeks, viz. That
Salvation might be had without that Article, A PATRE FILIO QUE PROCEDIT; but
only saying, that such a determination was opportune by reason of the danger,
tacitly grants that Salvation may be had without it. And consequently was of
opinion, that the Greeks who separated from the Church of Rome in his time,
were capable of Salvation, even in that Separation. Whereas it is most manifest
in that very Paragraph, that St. Bonaventure (as is said) holding them
Heretics and Schismatiques, excluded them from Salvation. And this would have
appeared, had not St. Bonaventures former words been concealed by the Bishop.

But this is not all the Art he uses in this Citation. He was to prove, that
according to St. Bonaventure the Grecians opposite to the Roman Church,
notwithstanding their Error and Separation, were capable of Salvation, even
supposing the Declarations and Decrees of the Roman Church in his time against
them: and to prove this he alleges an Answer of St. Bonaventure to an
Objection about the addition of the word Filioque to the Creed. Now this
addition was made before the succeeding Declarations of the Church against the
Grecians; and consequently seeing for many hundred years the Creed was without
this addition, it was most evident, that Salvation might be had, and was had
without it: nay, even after the addition was made, till the necessity of it was
sufficiently declared by the Church, and the point fully defined against the
Grecians who opposed it, it was not happily so necessary, but some might be
saved without it. But by what reach of Logic will the Bishop be able to prove
this Consequence; St. Bonaventure tacitly grants, that Salvation might be had
without that Article, before it was added and decreed by the Church to contain
a Point of Christian Faith necessary to Salvation: Ergo St. Bonaventure holds,
that even after such decrees were made, Salvation might be had without it; and
even by those who obstinately contradicted the Truth contained in it? For
before it was added, and at the first addition, before the said Declarations,
Christians might be excused by ignorance: but after such Declarations were
made, those who knew them, as the Greek Church did, could by no ignorance be
excused.

Jodocus Clictoveus is cited to small purpose. For the question is not, whether
quidam ex Graecis (some of the Grecians) hold that the Holy Ghost proceeds from
the Sou; for that is true even at this day: but whether those, who violently
oppose the Church of Rome, that is to say, the Patriarchs, Bishops, Clergy, and
people who take part with them (which we now term the Greek Church) hold, that
the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son.

Scotus is of as little force as Clictoveus. For the Bishop was to prove from
this Author (as he undertakes) that the present Greek Church errs not
Fundamentally. And to prove this he alleges him saying, That the Ancient
Greeks differed rather in Words, then in Substance from the Latin Church; which
was not at all touched in the Controversy between them. For all of ours grant,
that the Ancient Grecians were guilty of no real error at all, land so of no
Fundamental error. But how does that excuse the present Greeks from
Fundamental error? His Lordship should have shown this. And Bellarmin is as
far from proving the present Greek Church not to err, as his words point from
the time of it. For he speaks of St. John Damascen, who flourished six hundred
years before Bellarmin was born, and who spoke so warily and moderately in the
point, that (as St. Bonaventure observes) his words may be taken in a
favorable sense, to wit, as not denying, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the
Son, as the latter Grecians now do, but only saying non dicimus, we use not to
say ex Filio, but rather per Filium, neque affirmando nec negando, formalizing,
as it is evident, at the manner of expression, but not at the thing. Lastly,
when the words of Tolet, and of the Lutherans to Hieremias the Patriarch shall
be cited, they shall receive answer. Only this is most certain, that Tolet
holds, with all Catholic Doctors, that the Modern Grecians are Heretics, and
so do err Fundamentally: and the Lutherans oppose Hieremias, who denies in
express terms the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, as we have already
shown.

His second and Theological Argument is, that since their form of speech is,
that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father by the Son, and is the Spirit of
the Son, without making any difference in the Consubstantiality of the Persons,
they must be a True Church, though an erroneous one in this particular. Here
the Bishop thinks to blind all the Churches of Christendom with a trifle. He
grants, that whoever makes an Inequality between the Holy Ghost and the Son, or
denies the Consubstantiality of the Holy Ghost with the Son, is an Heretic.
But he goes not about to show in Divinity (though he talks much of it) how all
this can be, viz. That the Holy Ghost should be in all respects Equal and
Consubstantial with the Son, unless he proceeded from the Son. This (it seems)
was matter too deep for his Lordship to wade into, and therefore very
dexterously he puts it off as a business of no great moment. And to hide his
face from an open profession (with the Greeks) against the Holy Ghosts
Proceeding from the Son, he first casts a vail over the Readers eyes, giving
him a dark expression, that the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of the Son, and then
boldly tells him non est aliud, it is the same to say the Holy Ghost is the
Spirit of the Son, as to say the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son. But I ask
his Lordship whether the Modern Greeks say, the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of the
Son; for he cites none, but St. John Damascen, for it, who is none of the
Moderns? Secondly, whether the Spirit he here sets forth, do truly proceed from
the Son? if not; then he trades with some other Spirit, and not with the Holy
Ghost.

What I have hitherto said is, I doubt not, sufficient to undeceive any
indifferent Reader, touching the Question in Dispute. Yet to press the point a
little harder, I thus argue in form against his Lordship, and that out of his
own Concessions.

If the Greeks error be not only concerning, but against the Holy Ghost, then
(according to the Bishops own Distinction) they have lost all Assistance of
that Blessed Spirit, and are become no True Church.

But their error is not only concerning, but against the Holy Ghost.

Therefore they have lost all the Assistance of that Blessed Spirit, and are
become no True Church.

The Major, or First Proposition, contains the Bishops own Doctrine: The Minor,
or Second Proposition, viz. That the Greeks error is not only concerning, but
against the Holy Ghost, I thus prove.

All errors specially opposite to the particular and personal Procession of
the Holy Ghost are (according to all Divines) not only errors concerning, but
errors against the Holy Ghost.

But the Greeks error is opposite to the particular and personal Procession of
the Holy Ghost, as is already proved.

Ergo their error is not only concerning, but against the Holy Ghost: whose
Assistance therefore they have lost, not only according to the first, but even
latter Branch of the Bishops Distinction; and consequently remain no True
Church.

But here the Bishop may seem to have provided against the force of this
Argument, by hinting a difference between errors Fundamental and not
Fundamental; which point I shall purposely examine in the following Chapter. In
the interim I observe, that his Lordship having been for a while serious,
begins now to quibble upon the word Filioque, on occasion of the Popes
inserting it into the Creed. And first he grumbles, that the Pope should Add
and Anathematize too. I hope, 9. number. 2. page 25.
he will give the Holy Ghost leave to Assist the Church, in adding expressions
for the better explication of any Article of Faith: and then the Pope has
leave and command too, to Anathematize all such, as shall not allow the use of
such expressions.

6. Now to come to the debate of Filioque, it is true, that many hundred of
years had passed from the time of the Apostles, before Filioque was added to
the Nicene Creed, and more since the Declarations and Decrees were sufficiently
published: and in all these years Salvation was had in the Church without
mention of Filioque. But it is also true, that the Addition of Filioque to the
Creed was made many years before the Difference brake out between the Latins
and Greeks. So that the inserting this word Filioque into the Creed was not the
first occasion of Schism. But grudges arising among the Greeks, who had been a
large flourishing Church with a number of most learned and zealous Prelates,
and held the Articles still, though upon emptier heads: such, quickly filled
with wind, thinking their swelling places, and great City of Constantinople
might hold up against Rome, they began to quarrel, not for places (that was too
mean a Motive for such as looked so big) but first they would make it appear
they could teach Rome, nay they spyed out Heresies in it, (the old way of all
Heretics) and so fell to question the Procession of the Holy Ghost, and must
needs have Filioque out of the Creed.

To return unto which, after the meaning of the Latin Church was understood,
and that the word Filioque lay in the Creed to confess that the Holy Ghost
proceeded from the Son as truly as from the Father; and that whoever denied the
Filioque must be supposed to deny the Procession, then it became an Heresy to
deny it, and the Church did rightly Anathematize all such denyers. None can be
so ignorant as to think the Church, in composing the Creed, intended to thrust
in all points of Faith concerning the Trinity ('it is clear, more may be added
yet:) but when the Church understood that some of her Truant Children began to
stumble at a particular point, (the Holy Ghosts Proceeding from the Son) then
she thought it high time to speak a loud word, that might keep her good
Children from falling.

Neither is the Roman Catholic Church justly accusable of Cruelty (though the
Bishop taxes her of it) because she is quick and sharp against those that fall
into Heresy. It Is not the Libertine Heretic the Church looks so eagerly
after, to have him punished; as a Motherly compassion of her other Children
(yet good) lest they should come to be infected. If sinners could be bad
themselves only, and not infuse their venom into others, nor give scandal,
the Church might possibly have reason to mitigate her severity. But seeing the
Bishop brings in St. Peter, with the Keys at his girdle, to show his mildness,
may not I represent to his Lordship St. Peter's proceeding with Ananias and
Sapphira, Acts 5. 5, 10. striking them dead at his Feet for retaining some part
of their goods, though they had delivered the far greater part of them to St.
Peter? Yea, why may I not join St. Paul to him, chastising most severely such
untoward children, 1 Cor. 5. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 20? Certainly the Church punishes not
her Delinquents, to increase the suffering of such as are to dye, but to strike
a terror into the living, whom fear many times, more then the love of God,
keeps from sinning.

CHAP. 2. Of Fundamentals, or Necessaries to Salvation.
ARGUMENT.
1. The Catholic Tenet concerning Fundamentals, no step to the Roman
Greatness. 2. His Lordships different Acceptions of the Term Fundamental, all
strangers to the Question. 3. What must be understood by Fundamental Points of
Faith, in this Debate. 4. His flying from the Formal to the Material Object
of Faith. 5. The distinction of Points of Faith into Fundamental and
not-Fundamentall, according to Protestan Principles, destroys it self. 6. No
Infallibility in Church Authority, no Faith. 7. How Fundamentals are said to be
an Immovable Rock. 8. How the Churches Authority renders us certain of Divine
Revelations. 9. How Superstructures may become Fundamental; and how
Fundamentals must be known to all. 10. Scotus vindicated from one foul
corruption; and St. Augustine from another.

THe Bishop in the end of the ninth. parting friendly with the Greeks, before
he enters into war again with the Roman Church, in the tenth. he scoureth up
his best Defensive weapon, the Point of Fundamentals; having hitherto given us
but a glimpse of it. He tells of Mr. Fisher, that he read a large discourse out
of a Printed 10. number. 1 page 26.
Book, saying 'twas his own (his Lordship would seem to mistrust it) written
against Dr. white, concerning Fundamentals. The Bishop says not what he
answered to this Discourse, but puts all off with an I do not remember: might
he not have called to his Chaplain for Mr. Fishers Book, if he had minded an
Answer? But I see him now drawing up his great Artillery of Fundamentals, to
attack his Adversary for saying All Points Defined by the Church are
Fundamental; yet this proves but a Squib: for he presently goes out of the
question, to disport himself with a fancy of his own (a piece of Policy,
forsooth, which he has spied in the Roman Church.)

1. Rome, says he, to shrivel the credit of its Opposers, blasts them all Number.
2. page 27.
with the name of Heretic and Schismatique, and so by that means grew into
Greatness. To make good which proceeding this course was taken. The School
must maintain, that all Points defined by the Church are thereby Fundamental,
necessary to be believed, of the Substance of Faith: and then, says he, leave
active Heads to determine, not what is truest, but what is fittest for them.

Now what a weak discourse have we here from a grave Primate of England! Thinks
he all the world is turned mad, or Heathen? No truth left upon earth, but all
become Juglers? Is the whole business of Religion but a Legerdemain to serve
the Popes Ambition, a puff of wind? Is it credible so many learned and
Venerable Prelates, and other Holy men, whose eminent Sanctity it has pleased
God to illustrate by the Testimony of glorious Miracles, so many famous
Doctors, and Heads of Schools, so many Austere and Religious Persons, as have
secluded themselves from all Temporal Concernments, to attend wholly to the
Service of God and Salvation of their Souls; is it credible, I say, that all
these were such egregious dissemblers as to prostitute their own Salvation to
the Popes Greatness, by determining not what they conceived Truest, but what
they esteemed fittest for his Temporal ends? Such stuff as this might serve
sometimes for Pulpit-babble, to deceive the giddy multitude, and to cast a mist
before their eyes, that they might not see the Impurity of their own
English-Protestant Church, even in its first rise under Henry the eighth, and
the People-cheating Policies it was beholding to for its restoration under
Queen Elizabeth, as may be seen in History. But who could have imagined his
Lordship would betray so great a weakness of Judgment, nay so much want of
Charity, as to affirm so groundless, so impossible a slander? But let it pass
for one of the Bishops Railleries. Yet I must confess it becomes not one, that
would be esteemed a grave Doctor of the English Church, an alterius orbis
Patriarcha, as the Ancient Primates of England have been called.

2. After his Lordship has sported thus a while with all that can be serious
upon earth, (Man's Salvation) he returns again to the question, Whether all
Points Defined by the Church be Fundamental; and like one that provides for a
Retreat, or Subter-fuge, he cuts out a number of ambiguous Distinctions, as so
many Turnings and Windings to fly away by, when he shall be put to it. He
blames Mr. Fisher for not distinguishing between a Church in general, (which he
supposes cannot err) Ibidem number. 3.
and a general Council, (which he says, he grants not, that it cannot err.)
Would he have Women and Children come to determine Doctrines? you will find,
he always perplexes the Question; he staggers in the delivery of his own
judgment: he says, he is slow in opposing what is concluded by a Lawful,
General, and consenting Authority (this must needs be a Church in General.) It
seems then sometimes he opposes it, or staggers at it, as those sometimes do,
that go slowly. One while he will take Fundamental for a point necessary to be
believed explicit, as distinguished from a point that is necessary to be
believed only implicit. Another while he takes it for a Prime and Native
Principle of Faith, as contradistinguish't from what he calls a Superstructure,
or Deducible from it. Now he takes Fundamental for a point common to all, and
contained expressly in the Creed; then for a point necessary to be known of all
in order to Salvation, as distinguished from a point necessary only to some
particular men's Salvation: and thus by shifting from one acception to another,
he carries on the design of his Labyrinth with so much Art, that the Reader is
in great danger to be lost in following him.

3. Having therefore seen the word Fundamental used in so many different
senses, we will first deduce, even from the Bishops own Discourse, the right
sense, in which for the present we ought to take the word Fundamental. His
Lordship and Mr. Fisher fell upon this Dispute about points Fundamental, or
Necessary to Salvation, occasionally from what was touched in their Debate
concerning the Greek Church: where the Bishop affirmed, that though they had
grievously erred in Divinity, yet not in a point Fundamental sufficient to
un-church them: which must needs have happened; had they erred in a point
necessary to Salvation. Wherefore the Bishop in his 25th. page takes it for the
same, to put the Greeks out of the Church, and to deny to them Salvation. We
have also seen, how in the words lately cited he calls Fundamental what ever is
necessarily to be believed. Nor can the Lady be thought to have required
satisfaction concerning Fundamentals, in the Bishops sense. For she is to be
supposed to have understood, what both Catholics and Protestants usually mean
in this Dispute: and Mr. Fisher, page 42. (even as the Bishop, 2. page 2, cites
his words) gives an express Advertisement, that by points Fundamental neither
he, nor the Lady understood any other, then Points necessary to Salvation, when
he says thus, in all Fundamental Points, that is, in all Points necessary to
Salvation. The question then in Controversy between the Bishop and Mr. Fisher
was, Whether all Points defined by the Church were Fundamental, or Necessary to
Salvation; that is, whether all those Truths, which are sufficiently proposed
to any Christian as Defined by the Church for matter of Faith, can be
disbelieved by such a Christian without Mortal and Damnable Sin, which
unrepented destroys Salvation?

Now Points may be necessary to Salvation two ways. The one absolutely, by
reason of the matter they contain, which is so Fundamentally necessary in it
self, that not only the disbelief of it, when it is sufficiently propounded by
the Church, but the mere want of an express Knowledge, and Belief of it, will
hinder Salvation: and those are such Points without the express belief whereof
no man can be saved which Divines call necessary necessitate medij: others of
this kind they call necessary necessitate praecepti, which all men are
commanded to seek after, and expressly believe; so that a Culpable Ignorance of
them hinders Salvation, although some may be saved with Invincible ignorance of
them. And all these are absolutely necessary to be expressly believed, either
necessitate medij, or necessitate praecepti, in regard of the matter which they
contain. But the rest of the Points of Faith are necessarily to be believed
necessitate praecepti, only conditionally, that is, by all such to whom they
are sufficiently propounded as defined by the Church: which necessity proceeds
not precisely from the material object, or matter contained in them, but from
the formal object, or Divine Authority declared to Christians by the Churches
definition. Whether therefore the points in question be necessary in the first
manner or no, by reason of their precise matter; yet if they be necessary by
reason of the Divine Authority, or formal object of Divine Revelation
sufficiently declared and propounded to us, they will be Points Fundamental,
that is necessary to Salvation to be believed; as we have showed Fundamental
must here be taken.

4. The truth of the question then taken in this sense, is a thing so manifest,
that his Lordship not knowing how to deny it with any show of probability,
thought it his only course to divert it (according to his ordinary custom) by
turning the Difficulty, which only proceeded upon a Fundamentality, or
necessity, derived from the formal Object, that is, from the Divine Authority
revealing that point, to the material Object, that is, to the importance of
the matter contained in the point revealed; which is a plain Fallacy, in
passing a sensu formali ad materialem.

Now I show, (the difficulty being understood as it ought to be, of the formal
object, whereby points of Faith are manifested to Christians) That all points
defined by the Church as matter of Faith are Fundamental, that is, necessary
to Salvation to be believed by all those to whom they are sufficiently
propounded to be so defined, by this Argument.

Whosoever refuses to believe any thing sufficiently propounded to him for a
Truth revealed from God, commits a sin damnable and destructive of Salvation:

But whosoever refuses to believe any point sufficiently propounded to him for
defined by the Church, as matter of Faith, refuses to believe a thing
sufficiently propounded to him for a Truth revealed from God.

Ergo, Whosoever refuses to believe any point sufficiently propounded to him
for defined by the Church as matter of Faith, commits a sin damnable and
destructive of Salvation.

The Major is evident. For to refuse to believe Gods revelation, is either to
give God the lie, or to doubt whether he speak Truth or no. The Minor I prove
from this supposition. For, though his Lordship say, he grants it not; yet for
the present he says, that though it were supposed he should grant, that the
Church, or a lawful General Council, cannot err, yet this cannot down with
him, that all Points even so defined were Fundamental, that is, (as we have
proved) necessary to Salvation. Supposing therefore, that the Church, and a
lawful General Council, be taken in this occasion for the same thing, as he
affirms they are, saying in the beginning of number. 3. page 27. We distinguish
not betwixt the Church in general, and a General Council, which is her
representative; and admitting this he proceeds in his argument. Supposing then
that the Church in a General Council cannot err, I prove the Minor thus.

Whosoever refuses to believe that, which is testified to be revealed from God
by an Authority which cannot err, refuses to believe that which is revealed
from God:

But whosoever refuses to believe that which is defined by the Church as matter
of Faith, refuses to believe that which is testified to be revealed from God
by an Authority which cannot err.

Ergo, Whosoever refuses to believe that which is defined by the Church as
matter of Faith, refuses to believe that which is revealed from God.

The Major is evident ex terminis. For, if the Authority, which testifies it is
revealed from God, cannot err, that which it testifies to be so revealed, is
so revealed. The Minor is the Bishops supposition, viz. That the Church in a
General Council cannot err, as is proved. Ergo, etc.

And this, I hope, will satisfy any ingenuous Reader, that the forementioned
Proposition is fully proved, taking Fundamental for necessary to Salvation, as
Mr. Fisher took it. Yet to deal freely with the Bishop, even taking Fundamental
in a general way, as he in this present Conference mistakes it, for a thing
belonging to the Foundation of Religion, it is also manifest, that all Points
defined by the Church are Fundamental, by reason of that formal object, or
Infallible Authority, propounding them, though not always by reason of the
matter which they contain.

Whoever deliberately denies, or doubts of any one Point proposed and declared
as a Divine Infallible Truth by the Authority of the Catholic Church, cannot
for that time give Infallible credit to any other Point, delivered as a Divine,
Infallible Truth by the Authority of the same Church. For, whoever gives not
Infallible credit to the Authority of the Church in any one Point, cannot give
Infallible credit to it in any other; because it being one and the same
authority in all points deferveth one and the same credit in all: And therefore
if it deferve not Infallible credit in any one, it deserves not Infallible
credit in any other. Now I subsume. But he that believes no Point at all with a
Divine, Infallible Faith for the Authority of the Catholic Church, erres
Fundamentally: Ergo, etc. This Subsumptum is evident. For, if he believe none
at all, he neither believes God, nor Christ, nor Heaven, nor Hell, etc. with an
Infallible, Divine, Christian Faith; and thereby quite destroys the whole
foundation of Religion. And seeing there is no means left to believe any thing
with a Divine, Infallible Faith, if the Authority of the Catholic Church be
rejected as erroneous, or fallible, (for who can believe either Creed, or
Scripture, or unwritten Tradition, but upon her Authority?) It is manifest,
that if the Church be disbelieved in any one point, there can be no Infallible
Faith of any thing. Where I desire all men seriously to ponder, that the
reason, which moves a man to give Infallible credit to any point declared by
the Authority of the Catholic Church, is not the greatness or smallness of
the matter, nor the more or less evidence of the Truth, but the promise of
Christ, which assures us, that himself and his holy Spirit will always be with
the Church to teach it all Truth.

So that when the Church declares any thing as matter of Faith, it is not she
(considered only as a company of men subject to errors) but God himself to
whom we do, and must give Infallible credit, in all matters whatsoever, great
and little, evident or most obscure. For, the Infallibility of the credit given
to any one Article, proposed as a Divine Truth by the Catholic Church, does
wholly depend upon the Authority of God, speaking in and by the Church.
Wherefore he that will deliberately deny, or doubt of any one Article of Faith,
may as well do the same of all, yea of the whole Canon of Scripture: Because if
you take away the Authority of the Church, we should not admit of that,
according to the words of St. Augustine: Ego vero Evangelio Libr. contr. Epist.
Manich. quam vocant Fundament.
non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae commoveret Authoritas. I would not (says he)
believe the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Church moved me thereunto. So
that he, who obstinately denies any one thing sufficiently declared to him by
the Church, can have no supernatural and infallible Faith at all, but opinions
of his own, grounded upon some other reason, different from the Divine
revelation proposed and applied to him by the Church.

Wherefore St. Augustine in his Book De Haeresibus recounteth many Heresies;
some of which seem not to be about any matter of great moment: yet he
pronounces, that whosoever does obstinately hold any one of these against the
known Faith of the Church, is no Catholic Christian. Moreover, St. Gregory
Nazianzen tells us, that nihil periculosius Tractat. (...) Fide.
his Haereticis esse potest, etc. There can be nothing more perilous then
these Heretics, who with a drop of poison do infect our Lords sincere Faith.
Hence it is, that Christ our Savior says, ( Matthew. 18. 17.) If he will not
hear the Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen and a Publican: As if he
should say, let him not be accounted a Child of the Church, nor consequently
of God.

Add to this, that to deny or doubt of any thing made known by the Church to
be a Truth revealed by God, is in effect to contradict God and the Church,
which Divines in other terms say, is to give God and the Church the lie, and
to oppose and prefer a private man's judgment and will before and against the
judgment and will of God and his true Church; which cannot stand with
supernatural Faith in any point whatsoever. Wherefore it is said in St.
Athanasius his Creed (which is approved in the nine and thirty Articles of the
pretended English Church) that whosoever will be saved, it is necessary that he
hold the Catholic Faith, -- which unless every one hold WHOLE and inviolate,
without doubt he shall perish for ever. Neither can the Bishop reply, Ibidem
number. 6, 7. page 30, 31.
that all points expressed in St. Athanasius his Creed, are Fundamental in his
sense, that is according to the importance of the matter they contain; for,
(to omit the Article of our Saviors descent into hell, which can be no
Fundamental Point in his acception, for Christ's Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension, etc. may consist without it) he mentions exprefly the Procession of
the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, which his Lordship has denied to
be a Fundamental Point, as we saw in the former Chapter.

The foresaid distinction of material and formal object satisfies his Number. 8.
page 31, 32. For, not so much as quoad nos does any point become Fundamental,
that is, a prime principle in Faith according to the matter attested, or the
material object, which before the definition was only a Superstructure, or
secondary Article. But all the change made by virtue of the Definition is in
the Attestation it self, which induces a new obligation of holding it to be a
point of Faith; and the refusing to hold it so both de stroyes Salvation, and
overthrows the whole Foundation of our Faith, as is already declared. Let
therefore the Reader carry along with him this distinction of objectum
materiale and formale, materia attestata and Authoritas attestantis, ( the
Matter attested and the Authority attesting it) and he will easily both
discover the fallacies of his Lordships discourse in this main point of
controversy, and solve all his difficulties supported by them.

And that it may be more apparently perceived, how inapposite his reply is in
this whole controversy about Fundamentals, we affirming, that all things
defined for Points of Faith by the Church, are made Fundamental only by reason
of the Infallible Attestation of the Church, and he instead of disproving this,
laboring only to prove, that such as were not Fundamental before the
Definition, become not Fundamental after in the matter attested, which we hold
as much as he can do: replying, I say, in this manner, he proceeds just as if
A. C. should assert, that a Crown, an Angel, and a Piece, cut out of the same
wedge, are as fine and pure gold one as another, and W. L. should reply and
labor much to prove, that the one is of more weight then the other, which was
not at all questioned: or as if A. C. should demonstrate, that a Thread, a Gord,
and a Cable of twenty else long a piece, were all three of the same length, and
W. L. should reply and demonstrate, that they were not all of the same
thickness; which no man ever affirmed them to be.

Some Modern Protestants object, that the Infalliblity of the Church is limited
to Fundamental points only, and not to Superstructures: so that they may
reply, this Argument proceeds upon a false supposition, by extending that
Infallibity as well to Superstructures as to Fundamentals. To this I answer,
that if by Fundamental Points be meant only such Points as are the prime
Articles of Faith, and the first principles of Religion according to the
precise matter contained in them, from which all the rest are deduced, and have
necessary dependence upon them; and by super structures only such Points of
Faith as are less principal, and deducible from the other; if, I say, only
this be understood by Fundamentals and Superstructures, the distinction
destroys it self. For on the one side it supposes that those Superstructures
are Points of Faith, as it were of secondary or less principal importance; and
yet supposes, that the Church is not infallible in her Definitions concerning
them; and by that makes it impossible that they should be Points of Faith.

This I evidence by this Argument, grounded in my former discourse. Every Point
of Faith must be believed by an Infallible Assent; but if the Church be not
Infallible in her Definitions of Superstructures, no Superstructure can be
believed with an In fallible Assent. Ergo if the Church be fallible in her
Definition of Superstructures, no Superstructure can be a Point of Faith. The
Major is granted both by his Lordship and those Protestants, who coin this
objection. The Minor is already proved in the former Argument, For there is no
means left to believe any point with an Infallible Assent, if the Authority of
the Church defining those points to be believed, be fallible.

Neither can he avoid the force of this Argument, by replying that Scripture
believed to be the word of God by the introducing authority of the Church, and
its own light, may be a formal object, and reason of an infallible Assent, to
such superstructures as are expressed in it, though the authority of the Church
be fallible in defining them. For, first we will show hereafter, that we can
have no infallible certainty that any canon of Scripture is the word of God,
but only by the authority of the Catholic Church, declaring it infallibly to
us. Secondly, there will be no infallible means to know what Superstructures
are contained sufficiently in Scripture, what not, if the Church can err in
that declaration. Thirdly, seeing (as we shall prove hereafter) many
superstructures, are not expressly, and some not at all contained in Scripture,
how can we believe them with an infallible assent, if the Church can err in
the definition of them? And this shall serve for the present to remove this
objection, as Implicatory and Chymerical in it self; when we meet with it
hereafter, it shall be further satisfied.

As concerning those things which the Church either does, or can define, (which
the Relatour hints at page 27.) whether they must be in Scripture, at least
implicitly, or whether they may be out of Scripture (though not so entirely,
as perchance he would infer them to be) but deduced from thence, or making
for the clearer explication of that which is contained in Scripture; concerning
this, I say, Catholic Divines agree not; and it concerns not our present
purpose to dispute. Neither will I discourse much of the Difference between the
Church in general, and a General Council. The first containing the Head and all
the Members of the Church; the latter only the Head and principal Members
thereof; although the latter represent the former: I say, I will not discourse
much about this Difference; because without a further distinction (which the
Bishop would have) it is as well known what we mean, when we say, The Church
cannot err in defining matters of Faith, as when we say, A General Council
cannot err in defining them. For no man will conceive, that we put this power
of Defining in the common people; which were nothing else, but to bring all
things to confusion; but we place it in the Prelates and Pastors of the Church
assembled together, when they may write in Capital Letters, what was written by
the Primitive Church, as we read in Holy Writ, IT HAS SEEMED GOOD UNTO THE
HOLY GHOST AND TO US, Acts 15. 28.

Now to come a little closer to the point, we find his Lordship to say, (page
28.) That although he should grant, that a General Council cannot err, yet
this cannot down with him, that all points even so defined are Fundamental.
For, Deductions are not prime and native Principles; nor are Superstructures,
Foundations. But this Difficulty of his would not have risen, had he considered
the distinction of Fundamental and not-Fundamental, which Catholic Divines
admit, in the material objects of Faith. For, in the manner before declared, we
grant some are prime and Native Principles, others Deductions and
Superstructures. But this we stand to, that all points defined by the Church
are Fundamental reductive, that is, points whereto (when we know them to be
defined) we cannot deny our Assent, by denying or doubting of them, without
destroying the formal object of Faith, by taking away all Authority from the
Church, whereby we may be Infallibly assured, what God has revealed to be
believed by Christians.

7. For answer to the rest in that page, you will find enough in my discourse
a little before of Fundamentals and not-Fundamentals: let us now examine those
words of his (page 29.) That which is FUNDAMENTAL in the Faith of Christ is a
Rock immovable, and can never be varied. Never. Therefore if it be Fundamental
after the Church has Defined it, it was Fundamental before the Definition. All
this may be granted, if rightly understood. For, whatsoever is to be believed
as a matter of Faith by the Definition of the Church, was believed before,
though not expressly. Wherefore Implicit Faith of all may be said to be
Fundamental; but Explicit Faith of that which is only now defined is not
required before the Definition. Therefore the Christian (to use the Bishops
phrase) has whereon to rest, as not being bound to believe more expressly, then
is declared by the Church to be revealed from God. Therefore the Church makes
not the Implicit Faith Fundamental, but the Explicit Faith it makes
Fundamental. When I say Implicit, I mean not a point so implicitly believed,
that none before might have Explicit belief of it; but such points as were not
generally known to be certainly revealed, (though they might be known to some
of greater learning and knowledge) which by the Churches Definition are
Authentically attested to have been revealed from God: after which Declaration
there arises an obligation to all, who know they are defined as such by the
Church, to believe them Explicitly.

Now what we have here said may be granted to the Church, without giving her
power to make new Articles of Faith.

8. For to this it is sufficient, that she declares those, which were so before
in themselves, though not so well known to be such as always to oblige them to
believe them explicitly, who are bound to it, when they know them to be
revealed from God by the Churches Definition. And by this time I hope, you
find that Bellarmin speaks truth, and wrongs not the Catholic Church.

For in those places he only says, that the Definitions of the Church give no
strength, or greater certainty, to the revelation of God, that being wholly
impossible to be done; for nothing can be more certain then is the revelation
of God, who is Truth it self. But withal he teaches, even in the places cited,
that the Definitions of the Church make it known to us, that such and such a
point is an object of Divine Faith, and that so certainly that she cannot err
in it: which is all we either say, or need to say. For though the Church makes
the Divine revelation no certainer then it is in it self, yet she makes us more
certain, that such a point is a Divine revelation. As a faithful and honest
Servant, telling one that his Master, being a man of great and entire credit,
said such a thing, gives no strength to his Masters veracity and authority; but
yet it gives assurance to me that his Master said so: neither believe I, that
the thing spoken is morally true, because the Servant tells me his Master said
so, but because his Master said it, whom I know to be a man of that credit,
that he would not say a thing that were not true; though I am not certain that
his Master said it, save only because the servant tells me so, whom I know
also to be an honest man.

9. But the Bishops difficulty about points Fundamental, when he says, that
the Churches Definition cannot make Superstructures to become Principles, or
Foundations, is easily solved according to my former distinction. The Churches
Definition cannot make a Superstructure to become a Foundation quoad materiam,
or rem attestatam, (according to the Thing, or matter attested) I grant it: for
in this sense, neither the Church, nor the Aposties, no nor Christ's Definition
can make a Superstructure a Foundation: for what they are in themselves they
must always be. The Churches Definition cannot make a Superstructure a
Foundation, quoad formam, or Authoritatem attestantis (according to the form,
or Authority of the persons attesting, or witnessing that it is a Divine
Revelation) I deny it. For such a Testimony, or Authentical Declaration, makes
it both necessary to Salvation (in which sense only Fundamental is to be taken
in this present Dispute, as I have proved) and also reductively, or
consequently belonging to the Foundation of Religion, according to the
Authority of Christ testified to reveal it; which will be dissolved by the
disbelief of it, as is already showed.

When he says that every Fundamental point must be known to all, I distinguish
in the same manner. Every Fundamental point according to the material object
must be known to all, I grant it: every Fundamental point, that is, every point
necessary to Salvation to be believed, when it is sufficiently propounded,
according to the attestation made by the Church of it, must be known to all, I
deny it: and this distinction solves all his other difficulties propounded in
this page.

10. Scotus cited by his Lordship, Number. 6. page 30. delivers nothing in behalf
of his party, but affirms the same thing, which we have already asserted
namely, that St. Basil, St. Gregory Nazianzen, and other learned Greeks;
differed not from the Latins, viz. St. Hierome, Augustine, St. Ambrose, etc. but
only in manner of speech; because otherwise either the Greeks, or the Latins,
had been Heretics. Yet hence it follows not, that Scotus thought they could
be Heretics, unless they denied, or doubted of that, which they had reason to
believe was revealed by God. But it only follows, that if they knew this (as
those learned Greeks had sufficient reason to know it) they might well be
esteemed Heretics, before any special Declaration of the Church: although it
be more clear, that he is an Heretic, who denies to believe that Doctrine,
after he confesses that it is defined by the Church. Wherefore Scotus does well
add, that however it was before, yet ex quo, etc. from the time that the
Catholic Church declared it, it is to be held of Faith.

Wherefore we deny not, but that a learned man, who oppugnes the Doctrine
clearly contained in Scripture, or generally received by the Church, may be
accounted an Heretic, before he be AS SUCH condemned by a General Council.
But we say, that there are many things, which in themsolves are matters of
Faith, yet so obscure, in relation especially to unlearned, and particular
persons, that before the Decree of the Church, we are not Heretics, though we
should either doubt of them or deny them: because as yet there appears no
sufficient reason, that can oblige us to believe them; although after the
Definition of the Church we ought as well to believe them as any other.

Whence it appears likewise that Scotus is much wronged by his Lordship. For
first, he would persuade his Reader, that this Author supposed a real
difference between the Ancient Greek and Latin Fathers about the Procession of
the Holy Ghost: whereas Scotus, because neither the one nor the other of them
can be esteemed Heretics, declares, that there was no real difference in this
point between them: which the Bishop very handsomely leaves out. Verisimile
igitur est (says Scotus) quod non subest dictis verbis contrariis contrariorum
Sanctorum Sententia Discors; It is therefore likely, that there is no
disagreeing opinion contained in the contrary words of those contrary Saints:
and then proves by a very probable Argument, that it is so. Secondly, as he
left out the said words in the midst of the sentence, so (to induce his Reader
to think, that Scotus, (as he would have him understood in the matter of
belief) should say, that what was not of the substance of Faith before, was
made to be of the substance of the Faith by the Churches Definition, and
thereby inferres a contradiction in this Authors assertions) he adds words,
and fathers them upon Scotus in another part of the sentence, saying first,
that Scotus says howsoever it was before: referring his words to the thing
controverted, that is to say in his position, whether the point in question
were of the substance of Faith, or Fundamental before the Churches Definition,
or no; whereas Scotus speaks not of the Thing, but of the Persons, viz. the
Greek and Latin Fathers, as appears by his words, quicquid sit de eis,
(whatsoever may be said of them.) Now I think he will have much ado to find
any Dictionary, or Grammar, wherien eis signifies it.

This done he makes Scotus say (by adding to his Text) thus, yet ex quo, from
the time that the Catholic Church declared it, it is to be held as of the
substance of Faith. Now Scotus has not one word of the substance of Faith, much
less of Fundamental, which he imposes presently upon him; but says only thus,
Ex quo Ecclesia declaravit hoc esse tenendum, etc. tenendum est, quod Spiritus
Sanctus procedat ab utroque; (since the Church has so declared, so it must be
held.) Thus he winds his Authors through as many Meanders as he finds
subservient to his own turn.

Now to clear the difficulty, the former distinction is here also to be used;
that That which was not Fundamental in it self before, becomes not Fundamental
in the matter, or thing attested, but only by reason of the attestation of the
Church, obliging to the acceptance of it, and to be embraced as Fundamental,
that is necessary to Salvation to be believed as a Divine Truth: and therefore
Scotus does not say, that ex quo, after it was declared by the Church it
becomes to be of the substance of Faith, which it was not before, but that it
is necessarily to be held, or believed, which necessity was not before.

By this Doctrine it is manifest, that there is no contradiction in Scotus his
Discourse; which his Lordship endeavors to put upon him.

Now as for that expression of Scotus ( Declaravit) the Church has declared,
etc. out of which the Bishop would infer, that Scotus makes for his party,
Because every thing which belongs to the exposition, or Declaration 10. number. 7
page 31,
of another, INTUS EST, is not another contrary thing, but is contained within
the Bewels, or Nature, of that which is interpreted; from which if the
Declaration depart, it is faulty and erroneous; because in stead of Dealaring
it, it gives another and contrary sense. Therefore when the Church declares any
thing in a Council, either that which she declares was INTV'S or EXTRA, viz. In
the nature and verity of the thing, or out of it. If it were EXTRA, without the
nature of the Thing Declared, then the Declaration of the Thing is false; and
so far from being Fundamental in the Faith. If it were INTVS, within the
compass and nature of the thing (though not open and apparent to every eye)
then the Declaration is true, but not otherwise Fundamental, then the thing is
which is Declared. For that which is INTVS cannot be larger and deeper, then
that in which it is. If it were, it could not be INTVS. Therefore nothing is
simply Fundamental, because the Church declares it, but because it is so in the
nature of the thing, which the Church Declares. Thus far his Lordship.

I answer therefore to this Argument, That his expression is learnedly solid
and good, and that the Declaration of the Church gives not the thing Declared
this extra, viz. that is altered from intus, or its internal being which it had
before it was declared. Wherefore in this sense, Those which were not intus, of
themselves prime Articles of our Faith before the Declaration, change not their
nature, nor do they become prime Articles by their Declaration: and in this
manner, even afterward, they have no extraneous mutation to become
Fundamental. But this does not hinder them from becoming Fundamental in that
sense, in which we dispute; that is, such as cannot be denied or doubted of
under pain of damnation; although they were not thus Fundamental before the
Declaration, as not being so clearly proposed to us, as that we were bound to
believe them. Neither does this take away any thing from their intus, or that
being which they had of themselves, but only gives a certainty of their being
so, and declares that they ought to be so quoad nos as well as quoad se and
internally. And it is no evasion, but a solid distinction, That the Declaration
of the Church varies not the thing in it self, but quoad nos in its respect to
us. For though he says true in this sense, that no respect to us can vary the
Foundation, quoad rem attestatam, that is, make those to be prime Articles
which are not such in themselves; yet it can bind us, not only to peace and
external obedience (as he would have it) but also oblige us not so much as
internally to doubt, or deny, any Articles, after they are declared by the
Church to be of Faith; which is to be Fundamental in the sense we now Dispute,
that is, necessary to Salvation to be believed.

Neither can the Bishop infer, that if the Church can make any thing to be in
this sense Fundamental in the Faith, that was not, then it can take away
something from the Foundation, and make it to be declared not to be
Fundamental. This, I say, he cannot infer: because to do this were to define
a Thing not to be of Faith, which was before defined to be of Faith; which were
to make the Church subject to error. For as the Church cannot Define any thing
to be of Faith, which she had Defined before not to be of Faith; so can she not
Define any thing not to be of Faith, which she had defined before to be of
Faith. But yet she can define something to be of Faith, which she had not
Defined before to be so, because she never before had defined any thing about
it. For in this Third case, (which is ours) there is no contradicting of her
self, as in the Two former. Wherefore Vincentius Lirinensis says very well,
(as the Relator cites him, page 32.) The power of adding any thing contrary, or
detracting any thing necessary, are alike, forbidden. Now to all this discourse
A. C. said nothing; because perchance it was not in that Disputation urged
against him. But I, having found it in his Lordships Book, have said something:
and that which, I hope, will abundantly satisfy any judicious Reader. Ibid.
number. 9. page 32.


It remains now, that we return to Mr. Fisher; who (as his Lordship says)
endeavored to prove the Doctrine we have delivered, out of Aug. Sermon. 14. De
verb. Apostoli. in fine.
St. Augustine; who speaks thus. Fundata res est. In aliis questionibus non
diligenter digestis, nondum plena Ecclesiae Authoritate firmatis ferendus est
Disputator errans: ibi ferendus error; non tamen progredi debet, ut etiam
Fundamentum ipsum Eclesiae quatere moliatur. In english thus. This is a thing
founded. An erring Disputant is to be born with in other questions not
diligently digested, nor yet made firm by full Authority of the Church. There
error is to be born with. But it ought not to proceed so far, that it should
labor to shake the very Foundation of the Church. By these words of St.
Augustine it appears, that though a man may be admitted to dispute freely in
other things, yet he is not to be born with, when he goes so far as to question
Doctrine digested and confirmed by the full Authority of the Church; for this
is to shake the foundation. Now all things that are defined by the Church, are
both digested and confirmed by the Churches full Authority: Therefore to
dispute against such points is to shake the very foundation of the Church, and
by consequence all such things are Fundamental according to St. Augustine.

Let us now consider what his Lordship brings to weaken this Argument. Ibidem.
First, he says, this Doctor (St. Augustine) speaks of a Foundation of
Doctrine in Scripture, not of a Definition of the Church. But here the Relatour
commits the same offense against St. Augustine for which he blamed Mr. Fisher,
that is, he wrongs both the Saint and the Place. For I appeal to any
indifferent judge, whether St. Augustine speaks any thing here of a Foundation
of Doctrine in Scripture, and not rather against those, who impugn the
Doctrine of the Church, whether it be expressly in Scripture, or not. His words
are these in the same Sermon. Detrahunt nobis: ferimus. Canoni Detrahunt:
veritati non detrahant. Ecclesiae Sanctae pro remissione peccati originalis
parvulorum quotidie labor anti non contradicant. They detract from us (says
he) we suffer it. They detract from the Canon too; let them not detract from
the Truth: Let them not contradict Holy Church, daily laboring for the
remission of the original sin of little Children. Where you see, that he will
endure any thing spoken against his Person, or Authority; but nothing against
the Truth practiced in the Church.

The Bishop goes on, and endeavors to show, that St. Augustine Ibid. Number. 10.
page 33.
speaks of a Foundation of Doctrine in Scripture, because (immediately before)
he says, There was a question moved to St. Cyprian, whether Baptism was tied
to the eighth day as well as Circumcision; and no doubt was made then of the
beginning of sin: and that out of this thing, about which no question was
moved, that question that was made, was answered. And again, That St. Cyprian
took that which he gave in answer, from the Foundation of the Church, to
confirm a stone that was shaking. But all this proves nothing against us, but
for us: because St. Cyprian might answer the question that was made, by that
which was granted by all, and questioned by none, although the thing granted
and not questioned, were the Doctrine of the Church. For this Doctrine of the
Church, or Foundation (as the Bishop calls it) might be given in answer to
confirm a Stone that was shaking, that is, some particular matter in question:
Although whatsoever is taught by the Church may be granted (without
contradicting Catholic Principles) to be some way or other infolded or
contained in Scripture. Wherefore all the Definitions of the Church may be said
to be Foundations of Doctrine in Scripture, although many times they be so
involved there, that without the Definition of the Church, we could not be
bound expressly to believe them: nay, without the Authority of the Church we
should not be obliged to believe the Scripture it self, as St. Augustine tells
us in the words formerly cited. Ego vero Evangelio non crederem, nisi me
Catholicae Ecclesiae commoveret Authoritas. So that it cannot be doubted, but
that St. Augustins judgment was, that all our Faith depended upon the
Authority of the Church: and therefore, that he who opposes himself against
this, endeavors to shake and destroy the very groundwork and Foundation of
all Divine and Supernatural Faith.

Now whether the Bishop, or Mr. Fisher has wronged the Text of St. Augustine we
shall presently see. For, first the Bishop says, that St. Augustine speaks of a
doctrine founded in Scripture, not a Church-Definition. How untrue this is,
viz. that St. Augustine speaks, not of the Churches Definition, let St. Augustine
himself determine in the very place cited, where speaking of Christ's profiting
of Children Baptized, he uses these words. Hoc habet Authoritas Matris
Ecclesiae, Hoc fundatus veritatis obtinet Canon; contra hoc robur, contra hunc
inexpugnabilem murum quisquis arietat, ipse confringitur. This (says he) has
the Authority of our Mother the Church; this has the well founded Canon, or
Rule of Truth; against this invincible Rampart whoever runs himself, is sure
to be broken in pieces. And again, speaking of St. Cyprian he tells us that he
will show, quid senserit de Baptismo parvulorum; imo quia semper Ecclesiam
sensisse monstraverit. What that Holy Martyr thought of the Baptism of
Infants; or rather what he demonstrated the Church had always taught
concerning it: and many such like places are in this very Sermon.

It is therefore manifest, that St. Augustine here speaks of the Churches
Definition; nay and that so fully, that he acknowledges in another place, that
the Baptism of Infants was not to be believed, but because it is an
Apostolical Tradition. His words are these. Tom. 3. De Genes. ad literam. lib.
10. cap. 13. Consuetudo Matris Ecclesiae in Baptizandis Parvulis nequaquam
spernenda est, neque ullo modo (...) deputanda: NEC O M NINO CREDENDA, nisi
Apostolica esset Traditio. The custom of our Mother the Church to Baptize
Infants is by no means to be despised, or counted in any sort superfluous; nor
yet at all to be believed, if it were not a Tradition of the Apostles. Though
therefore St. Cyprian in those few lines, which St. Augustine referres to, does
not expressly mention the Definition of the Church, (as the Bishop objects) yet
a man would think St. Augustins Authority should be sufficient to assure us,
that in those very words, St. Cyprian shows what was the sense and Doctrine of
the Church: in the same manner, as when the Bishop himself proposes any
Doctrine contained in Scripture it is true to say, he delivers a Doctrine
contained in Scripture, though himself does not expressly say, at the
propounding of it, it is in Scripture. Seeing therefore St. Augustine speaks
here of a point, which he says was not to be believed, if it were not an
Apostolical Tradition, (which is in effect to say, that it cannot be proved by
sole Scripture) how can he be understood to say, that Scripture is the
Foundation of the Church?

But that he may, one way or other, draw St. Augustine to speak, in appearance,
for him, he gives a most false Translation of his words. For he translates
these words of St. Augustine, ut fundamentum ipsum Ecclesiae, quatere moliatur,
thus; He shall endeavor to shake the Foundation it self, upon which the whole
Church is grounded, all in a different letter. Whereas in the Latin Text of St.
Augustine there is nothing that answers to any of those words, which the Bishop
thrusts into his English, upon which, or whole Church, or is grounded: so that
all this latter part is merely an Addition of his own, and no part of St.
Augustins sentence. But such fraudulent dealing was necessary, to give a gloss
to his interpretation. For he would make St. Augustine speak of a foundation
different from the Churches Authority, no wit the Scriptures, whereupon, says
he, the Authority of the Church is grounded; which is far from St. Augustins
meaning. For by Fundamentum ipsum Ecclefea (the very foundation of the Church)
he means nothing else, but the Church it self, or her Authority; which is the
foundation of Christianity: as when St. Paul says, superadificati super
fundamentum Apostolorum and Prophetarum, etc. (being built upon the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets) he means nothing else, but that we are built upon
the Apostles and Prophets as upon a foundation: or as if one should say of a
destroyer of the Fundamental Laws of a Nation, Fundamentum ipsum begum quatere
molitur; he endeavors to shake the very foundation of our Laws; or of one that
rejected the Authority of Scripture, fundamentum ipsum Scripturarum quatere
molitur, he labors to shake the very Foundation of holy Scripture; no man
would understand him to mean any other Foundation, then what the Laws and the
Scriptures themselves are.

Now that nothing but this can be the meaning of St. Augustine is evident. For
in this very sentence he allows of Disputes held in such things, as are not yet
established by the full Authority of the Church, ( nondum plena Ecclesiae
Authoritate firmatis.) Wherefore all consequence, and coherence of discourse
requires, that when he disallows of those disputes, which go so far as to shake
the foundation of the Church, he must mean those disputes, which properly and
directly question matters fully established by the Authority of the Church.

His Lordship therefore finding his first solution to fail him, recurrs to a
second, much weaker then the first. For granting the Church to be the
foundation whereof St. Augustine spoke, he denies it to follow thence, that all
points defined by the Church are Fundamental in Faith. But against this I thus
argue out of St. Augustine.

All those points, the disbelief whereof shakes the Foundation are Fundamental
in Faith.

But all the points established by full Authority of the Church, (that is,
defined by the Church) are such, as the disbelief of them shakes the foundation.

Ergo, all points established by full Authority of the Church, that is, Defined
by the Church, are Fundamental in Faith.

If he distinguish the Major, that they shake some foundation of our Religion,
but not every foundation, I disprove him thus. Whoever shakes the foundation,
St. Augustine speaks of, (which is, the Church) shakes consequentially every
foundation of our Religion. This I have above proved; because nothing can be
infallibly believed, when the Churches foundation is shaken.

But the denial of points defined by the Church shakes the Foundation St.
Augustine speaks of, that is, the Church, as the Bishop now supposes foundation
to be taken.

Ergo, the disbelief of points defined by the Church shakes every foundation of
Religion.

His proving that some things are founded, which are not Fundamental in Faith,
is very true, (for St. Paul's Steeple is well founded, yet is no Fundamental
point in Faith) but as little to the present purpose as can be: for, who ever
asfirmed, that all things founded, even upon the Authority of the Church, are
Fundamental in Faith? and as little concludes that, which follows about Church
Authority. For I have already proved, that the Authority of the Catholic
Church in defining matters of Faith, (whereof only we now treat) as it is
infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost, is either Divine in it felf, to wit, as
informed with that Assistance, or so necessary for the giving infallible assent
to Divine Revelation, that no man rejecting it, can give an infallible assent
to any point of Christian Faith. For seeing upon that Authority only we are
infallibly certified, that the Articles of our Faith, are revealed from God; if
in any thing we oppugn the firmness of that Authority, we cannot believe
infallibly, that any one of them is revealed from God. Though therefore it were
granted, that Church-Definitive Authority were not simply Divine, yet is it so
necessary to salvation, that if it be rejected, it destroys salvation; which
is to be Fundamental in our present debate.

CHAP. 3. A Continuation of Fundamentals, or Necessaries to Salvation.
ARGUMENT.
1. All Definitions of the Catholic Church concerning Doctrine, Infallible,
and by many of the learned held Divine. 2. One Text of St. Augustine shamefully
abused three several ways. 3. NO MAN'S opinion confuted by his Lordship.
Bellarmin miscited. 4. The Pope always included in the Church and Councils. 5.
A. C's. words cited by halves. 6. How the Churches Definition is said to be her
Foundation. 7. A. C. corrupted the second time. 8. Vincentius Lirinensis
falsified thrice at least. 9. Stapleton and Bellarmin good Friends,
notwithstanding the Bishops endeavor to make them jarre.

IN the first place we grant what is here set down, viz. that Things may be
founded upon humane Authority, and be very certain, yet not 10. number. 11. page
34.
Fundamental in the Faith: for we say nothing that has any shadow of
contradicting this. But our Assertion is, that those Things are not to be
opposed, which are made firm by full Authority of the Church; because this is
(according to St. Augustine) to shake the Foundation. D. Aug. loc. cit.
Therefore all things made firm by the full Authority, Definition, Declaration,
or Determination (use what term you please) of the Church, are Fundamental, to
wit, in respect of the formal object of Gods revelation contained in them, as
we have often said.

1. Now concerning what is added, that full Church Authority, -- when Ibidem.
it is at full Sea, is not simply Divine, I will not dispute with his Lordship
whether it be or no; because it is sufficient that such Authority be
infallible. For if it be infallible, it cannot propose to us any thing as
revealed by God, but what is so revealed. So that to dispute against this
Authority is in effect to take away all Authority from Gods Revelation; we
having no other absolute certainty, that This or That is revealed by God, but
only the Infallibility of the Church proposing, or attesting it unto us as
revealed. Whence also it follows that to doubt, dispute against, or deny any
thing that is proposed by the infallible Authority of the Church, is to doubt,
dispute against, and deny that, which is Fundamental in Faith. This Discourse
may be granted, (I say) and yet the Church be denied to be of Divine Authority;
notwithstanding that Infallible and Divine seem (to many great Divines) to be
terms Convertible. And Stapleton (whom the Bishop cites in the Margin) is
far from denying it: as would have better appeared, if his words had been
fairly cited. For I find him thus to write. Si quaeratur, quare Ecclesia est
veritatis tam certa testis respondemus, Relect. Con. trovers. 4. q. 1. A. 1.
quia DEUS PER ILLAM loquitur. If it be asked, why the Church is so certain a
witness of Truth, we answer, because God speaks by her. Thus he. Now if God
speaks by the Church, certainly she is of Divine Authority. The same doctrine
we find elsewhere taught by him. Deum per Ecclesiam loqui, non ex solo
Ecclesiae Triplicat. cont. Whitak. page 1230.
testimonio, sed ex ipsis maxim Scripturis, and Fidei Symbolo, ex communi
omnium Christianorum conceptione certo constat. That God speaks by the Church
is most certain, not only by the Testimony of the Church, but by the
Scriptures themselves, the Greed, and the common persuasion of Christians.

The Bishop indeed grants thus much to the Church, that no erring Ibidem.
Disputant may be endured to shake the Foundation, which the Church in general
Councils lays; yet he adds, that plain Scripture, with evident sense or a full
demonstrative Argument, must have room, where a wrangling and erring disputant
may not be allowed it. Must have room, that is, must be allowed to shake the
Foundation, which the Church in General Councils lays. For that is the
necessary sense of his words. An Assertion, truly, worthy of a Protestant
Primate. But I shall not here insist upon the manifold inconveniences of it: I
only tell his Lordship at present, that it begs the question, and supposes
what never was, nor ever will be proved, viz. that there can be plain Scripture
(in the true sense thereof) or a full Demonstrative Argument brought against
the Definition of a lawful General Council. We deny that any such case can
happen, or that the Definitions of a General Council, in points of Faith, can
ever be so ill founded.

2. Here therefore (if we observe it) the Bishop frames a notable Turn in his
Labyrinth, winding in the words of St. Augustine, quite contrary to St.
Augustins meaning, to make them speak for himself. For, having affirmed in his
own Text (as we heard but now) that plain Scripture, with evident sense, or a
full Demonstrative Argument must have room, where a wrangling Disputant may not
be allowed, just over against these words, in his own Margent at Litera F. he
puts these Latin words of St. Augustine, Quae quidem, si tam manifesta
monstratur, ut in dubium venire non possit, praeponenda est omnibus illis
rebus, quibus in Catholica teneor. In English thus. Which truly if it be showed
so clear, that there can be no doubt of it, is to be preferred before all those
things, by which I am held in the Catholic Church. Now by citing these words
and no more, but leaving out those immediately precedent, he leaves it also
doubtful, to what the word quae ( which) in St. Augustins Text is to be
referred: but yet by putting plain Scripture, etc. in his own Text right over
against it, he supposed doubtless his Reader would not judge, that Quae could
be referred to any thing else, save Scripture and that which follows it in his
Text: and consequently would conclude that St. Augustine and he were of the same
opinion, viz. that plain Scripture, evident sense, or a full Demonstrative
Argument, is to be preferred before all the Definitions of the Church. Whereas
St. Augustine in the place cited has nothing at all, either of plain Scripture,
or evident sense, or a full Demonstrative Argument, but addressing his speech
to the Manichaeans, he writes th us, Apud vos autem, ubi nihil horum est quod
me invitet ac teneat, sola personat VERITATIS POLLICITATIO, (and then follow
the words cited by the Bishop) quae quidem si tam manifesta monstratur, ut in
dubium venire non possit, etc. But with you (says St. Augustine to the
abovesaid Heretics) who have nothing at all of those Things, which may invite
and hold me, only a promise of Truth makes a noise: WHICH ( Truth) if it be
Demonstrated to be so clear, as it cannot be called in doubt, is to be
preserred, etc. where it is plain, Quae, ( which) is relative only to Truth,
and not to Scripture, or any thing else. Nay it is Relative only to that Truth
(in this place) which the Manichees bragged of and promised: which was so far
from being plain Scripture, etc. that it was no other, then what was contained
in that Epistle of Manichaeus, entitled Fundamentum, which St. Augustine at
that present confuted, as appears by the following words.

Neither indeed could St. Augustine be understood to speak of plain Scripture in
this place, as though that were to be preferred before the Definition of the
Catholic Church, or a General Council, and that it were a possible case for
the Definitions of the Catholic Church, or of General Councils to be contrary
to plain Scripture, understanding by plain Scripture Scripture truly sensed and
interpreted; for he Disputes ex professo against that supposition or
persuasion, and proves, that no clear place of Scripture can be produced
against the common received Doctrine of the Church, from this grand
inconvenience necessarily following upon it, viz. That if such a Thing could
happen, (that the Doctrine of the Catholic Church could be contrary to
Scripture, or the Gospel) he should not be able to believe, rationally and
infallibly, either the one or the other. Si ad Evan-gelium me tenes, ego ad eos
me teneam, quibus praecipientibus Evangelio credidi; and his jubentibus tibi
omnino non credam. Quod si forte in Evangelio aliquid apertissimum de
Maenichaei Apostolatu invenire potueris, infirmabis mibi Catholicorum
Authoritatem, qui jubent ut tibi non credam: qua infirmata jam nec Evangelio
credere potero; quia per eos illicredideram: ita nihil apud me valebit,
quicquid inde protulerk. Quapropter si nihil manifestum De Manichaei Apostulatu
in Evangelio reperitur, Cathocis potius credam quam tibi: si autem inde aliquid
manifestum pro Manichaeo (...); nec illis nec libi. Illis, quia de te mihi
mentiti sunt: Tibi autem, qui came Scripturam mihi profers, cui per illos
credideram, qui mihi mentiti, sunt. Aug. contra Epist. Fundament. cap. 4.
Not the Scriptures; because he receives them only upon the Authority of the
Church: nor the Church; whose Authority is infringed by the Plain Scripture,
which is supposed to be brought against her. Though therefore St. Augustine had
said in express terms (as it is manifest he does not) that clear Scripture is to
be preferred before all things which he had named before, yet he is so far from
supposing (as the Bishop here supposes) that evident Scripture can be contrary
to the Churches received Doctrines, that he professedly teaches and proves the
contrary, and uses the alleged words, ( quae quidem si tam manifesta
monstratur, etc.) only ex suppositione impossibili, in the same manner as St.
Paul speaks, Gal. 1. Si Angelus de caelo, etc. If an Angel from heaven teach
otherwise, then we have taught you, let him be accursed. Saint Paul well knew
it was impossible, that an Angel from Heaven should teach contrary to the
Gospel: yet so he speaks. And the same may be said in answer to the evident
Reason, or full Demonstrative Argument, which the Bishop talks of: for neither
can that (truly and properly speaking) be any more brought against the Churches
Authority and Doctrine, then plain Scripture.

The Relatours supposition then has no more ground in St. Augustine, then if one
should prove, that an Angel from Heaven can preach against the doctrine of the
Apostles, because St. Paul says, Though an Angel from Heaven should denounce
unto you, otherwise then we have preached, let him be accursed. Now if the
Church may be an erring Definer, I would gladly know, why an erring Disputer
may not oppugn it; so long at least, as he is so far from seeing his error,
that he is fully persuaded he erres not, and that the Church erres in Defining
against him; as those Heretics were persuaded, against whom St. Augustine
disputes in this place.

His second winding is, that he labors to prove from the forecited words of
St. Augustine, that plain Scripture is to be preferred before the Definitions of
the Church, and may convince the Definition of the Council, if it be ill
founded. Now St. Augustine speaks as little of the Definitions of the Church, in
matters not Fundamental according to the matter they contain, in this sentence,
as he does of Scripture. For, by those words, Praeponenda est omnibus illis
rebus quibus in Catholica teneor, there is not once named the Definitions of
the Church in matters not Fundamental; or any comparison or contrariety
mentioned betwixt them. For, the question was not, whether St. Augustine might
reject some of the Churches Definitions, which by plain Scripture he found to
be erroneous, in matters of small moment, and yet remain still a member of the
Church, submitting to her in all Fundamental points: but the question was this,
whether St. Augustine were to forsake the Catholic Church, and become a
professed enemy of her (as he once had been) in adhering to Manichaeus his
Doctrine, if plain and undeniable Truth should be brought against the Church,
and for Manichaeus. So that the Truth mentioned by him in this place, was to
have been so Fundamental, that it had been able utterly to overthrow the
Church, and establish Manichaeisme, if any such Truth could have been
undoubtedly demonstrated. If therefore this Text could prove any thing, it must
prove, that the whole visible Church can err Fundamentally, and so become no
Church; which is clearly against his Lordship, page 65.

But why joins he a wrangling to an erring Disputer? are these (think you)
Synonyma's? I esteem his Lordship an erring Disputer; yet he had reason to
think me uncivil, if I should call him a wrangling Disputer. If they be not of
the same signification, why has he added, in the exposition of St. Augustins
words, the word wrangling, seeing in the sentence here debated, there is
neither wrangler, not any thing like it: Oh! I see now; it is done to
distinguish him from such a Disputer, as proceeds solidly and demonstratively
against the Definitions of the Catholic Church, when they are ill founded.
But where finds he any such Disputer in St. Augustins words, upon whose
Authority he grounds his Position? Seeing that most holy and learned Doctor is
so far from judging, that any one can proceed solidly and demonstratively
against the Definitions and Tenets of the Catholic Church and Occumenicall
Councils, that he judges him a mad man, who disputes against any Nulla (...)
jam remansit: nimium (...), nimium (...) sunt hominum corda, quae adhuc (...)
manifestationi veritatis resistunt. Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 153.
thing; quod Universa Ecclesia senti: (which is held by the whole Church;) and
that they have hearts not only of stone, but even of Devils, who resist so
great a manifestation of Truth, as is made by an Oecumenicall Council; for of
that he speaks.

3. After this the Bishop makes mention of one, who should say, That things are
Fundamentul in Faith two ways: one in the matter; such as are all things in
themselves: The other in the manner; such as are all things, which the Church
has defined and declared to be of Faith. It Is not set down who it was, that
spoke thus. But whoever he was I am not bound to defend him; neither was his
speech so proper. He might have said some thing like it, and have hit the mark:
viz. That Things are Fundamental in Faith two ways one in regard of the
material object; such as are the prime Articles of our Faith, which are
expressly to be believed by all. The other in regard of the formal object; such
as are all Things that the Church has defined to be of Faith: because he that
denies his assent to any one of these, when they are sufficiently proposed,
does, in effect, deny his assent to the authority and word of God declared to
him by the Church; and this being to take away, or deny, the very formal object
of Divine Supernatural Faith, by consequence it destroys the Foundation of all
such Faith in any other point whatsoever.

Wherefore let any man, with the Bishop, view as long as he pleases, Ibid. number.
13 page 35.
the Mortar wherewith this Foundation is laid, and (if he consider it rightly)
he will find it well tempered. Our assertion is, That all points defined by
the Church are Fundamental; because ( according to St. Augustine) to dispute
against any thing settled by full Authority of the Church (and such are all
things defined by her) is to shake the Foundation. Hence the Relator would
infer, we intend to maintain, that the point there spoken of ( the remission
of original sin in the Baptizing of Infants) was defined (when St. Augustine
wrote this) by full sentence of a General Council. But I deny, that from urging
that place of St. Augustine, we can be concluded to have any such meaning. For
by Authority of the Church we mean, (and not unproperly) the Church generally
practicing this Doctrine, and defining it in a National Council confirmed by
the Pope. For, this was plena Authoritas Ecclesiae, though not plenissima; (
full, though not the fullest) and to dispute against what was so practiced and
defined, is (in St. Augustins sense) to shake the Foundation of the Church, if
not wholly to destroy it. Wherefore although one grant what Bellarmin says,
That the Pelagian Heresy was never condemned in an Ecumenical Lib. de
Authorit. Council. cap. 5.
Council, but only by a National; yet doubtless whoever should go about to
revive that Heresy, would be justly condemned without calling a General
Council, as one that opposed himself against the full Authority of the Church,
and did shake its foundation. But the Bishop says, Bellarmin was deceived in
this business, and that the Pelagian Ibidem.
Heresy was condemned in the first Ephesine Council, which was Ecumenical. I
answer first, 'cis not credible that Bellarmin, who writ so much of
Controversy, should not have read that Council: nor can there be any suspicion
of his concealing the matter, had he found it there, because it would make
nothing against the Catholic Church, but rather for it. However, till the
Councils words be brought, I desire to be pardoned, if I suspend my Assent to
what the Bishop says. Truly I have my self viewed that Council upon this
occasion, but cannot find it there. I fear therefore his Lordship has been
misinformed.

But suppose all were there which he pretends, yet would it conclude nothing
against Bellarmin; who only says, that the Pelagian Heresy was never
condemned in any General Council; and the Bishop to disprove him, shows that
some, who were infected both with the Pelagian Heresy and Nestorianisme also,
were condemned in the Ephesine Council. But how does this contradict Bellarmin?
Certain Pelagians were indeed condemned in the Ephesine Council; but it was not
for Pelagianisme, but Nestorianisme, that they were condemned. Had they been
condemned for Pelagianisme, his Lordship had hit the mark, but now he shoots
wide. He should have observed, that Bellarmin denied only the condemnation of
the Heresy, and not of the persons, for holding another Heresy wholly
distinct from that of Pelagianisme.

4. As for St. Augustins not mentioning the Pope, when he speaks, in the place
before cited, of the full Authority of the Church, (which the Bishop terms an
inexpiable omisson, if our Doctrine concerning the Ibid. page 36.
Popes Authority were true,) It is easy to answer, there was no need of any
special mention of the Pope, in speaking of the Authority of the Church;
because his Authority is always chiefly supposed, as being Head of the whole
Church. His Lordships followers might as well quarrel with me, because I many
times speak of the Authority of the Church without naming the Pope; though I do
ever, both with that great Doctor and all other Catholics, acknowledge and
understand the Popes Authority comprised in that of the Church. When my Lord of
Canterbury finds in ancient Lawyers and Historians, that such and such things
were decreed by Act of Parliament, without any mention of the King, by whose
Authority and consent they were decreed, would he not (think you) condemn those
Authors also of an inexpiable omission; and thence conclude, that the King in
those days, had not the prime Authority in Parliament? and that whatsoever was
said to be decreed by Act of Parliament, was not eo ipso understood to be done
by Authority of the King.

5. We grant what is urged that it is one thing in nature, and Religion Ibid.
number. 14
too, to be firm; and another to be Fundamental. For every thing that is
Fundamental is firm; but every thing that is firm is not Fundamental.
Wherefore we distinguished before in the material object of Faith Fundamentals
from not Fundamentals. In this sense a Superstructure may be said to be
exceeding firm, and close joined to a sure foundation, but not Fundamental.
But here his Lordship misconceives, or rather misalledges A. C's. Argument. For
it is not, as he frames it, All points defined are made firm, ergo all points
defined are Fundamental: but thus. All points defined are made firm by the
full Authority of the Church, ergo all points defined are Fundamental. And his
reason is, because when any thing is made firm by the full Authority of the
Church, it is so firm, that it cannot be denied without shaking the whole
foundation of Religion, and consequently is Fundamental.

6. But the Bishop proceeds further, and makes this Argument. Whatsoever is
Fundamental in the Faith is Fundamental to the Church, which is one by the
unity of Faith. Therefore if every thing defined by the Church be Fundamental
in the Faith, then the Churches Definition is the Churches foundation; and so
upon the matter, the Church can lay her own foundation: and then the Church
must be in her absolute and perfect being before so much as her foundation is
laid This Argument will lose all its force by putting the Reader in mind of
the Distinction between Fundamentals and not Fundamentals, which we admitted in
the material object of Faith: for if this be reflected on, there will be a
foundation for the Church without supposing her to be in perfect being, before
her foundation be laid.

We have often declared what we understood by Fundamental, viz. That to which
we cannot refuse our assent by denying, or doubting of it, (when it is proposed
to us by the Church, as a matter of Faith) without damnation, and without
destroying the formal object of Faith, and without making our selves, (during
that deliberate doubting or denying) incapable of believing any thing with
Divine and Supernatural Faith. For surely whatever is of this nature, must
needs be Fundamental in Religion. So that we admit the distinction of
Fundamentals and not Fundamentals in respect of the material object of Faith,
but not in respect of the formal; that is, (as we have often said) some matters
of Faith are more universally necessary to be expressly known and believed by
all, then others; and yet the Authority revealing, that is God, and declaring
them infallibly to be revealed, that is, the Church is truly Fundamental in
both. As in the Scripture it self this Text, John 1. And God was the word,
according to the matter it contains, viz. the Divinity of our Savior, is a
Fundamental point, universally to be known and believed expressly to Salvation;
and that St. Paul left his Cloak at Troas, according to the matter it contains,
is no Fundamental point, nor of any necessity to Salvation to be universally
known and believed expressly: yet the formal object revealing both these truths,
being the Authority of the Holy Ghost, is equally Fundamental in both; and
doubtless, if any one, to whom it is as clearly propounded to be affirmed in
Scripture, that St. Paul left his Cloak at Troas, as that it is affirmed in
Scripture, that the word was God, should yet deny, or doubt of the first, he
could neither be saved so long as he remained in that misbelief, nor believe
the second with divine infallible Faith; as all Christians, both Catholics
and Protestants must grant. Had this been well considered by his Lordship, we
should not have been forced to so frequent repetitions of the same Doctrine.

The Bishop thinks, he has got a great advantage by pressing A. C. Ibidem.
to this, That the Churches Definition is the Churches Foundation. But what
absurdity is it to grant, that the Definition of the Church teaching is the
foundation of the Church taught? or the Definition of the Church representative
is the foundation of the Church diffusive? who can doubt, but the Pastors in
all ages preserving Christian people from being carried away with every wind
of Doctrine ( Ephesians. 4.) are a foundation to them of constancy in Doctrine?
were not the Apostles in their times (who were Ecclesia docens) by their
Doctrine and Decrees a foundation to the Church, which was taught by them? Does
not St. Paul expressly affirm it? Superaedificati supra fundamentum Apostolorum,
etc. Did not the Bishop just now ( page 34.) except the Apostles, as having in
their Definitions more Authority then the Church had after their times? yea,
even so much, as was sufficient to make their Definitions Fundamental, and the
opposing of them destructive of the Foundation of Religion; their Authority
being truly Divine; which he says, that of the Church after them was not.

Now this doctrine of the Bishop supposed, I urge his own Argument against
himself thus. Whatever is Fundamental in the Faith, is Fundamental to the
Church; which is one by the unity of Faith. Therefore if every thing Defined by
the Church (in the time of the Apostles) be Fundamental in the Faith, then the
Churches Definition (in the Apostles time) is the Churches foundation; and so
upon the matter the Church (in their time) could lay her own foundation; and
then the Church must have been in absolute and perfect being, before so much as
her foundation was laid. Who sees not here how the Bishop fights against
himself with his own weapons, and destroys his own Positions by his own
Arguments? And whatever may be answered for him, will satisfy his Argument, in
defense of us. Now the answer is plain to any one who has his eyes open: for
the Prime foundation of the Church are the Doctrines delivered by our Savior,
and inspired by the Holy Ghost to the Apostles; whereby it took the first being
of a Church: and the Prime foundation to the ensuing Church after the Apostles,
is the most certain Assistance of the Holy Ghost promised by our Savior to his
Church. By these two Prime foundations the Church is in being, and so
continues; the Definitions of the Church grounded in these, are a secondary
foundation; whereby Ecclesia docens, (the Church teaching established upon that
promised assistance of the Holy Ghost) fundat Ecclesiam doctam, founds and
establishes, in every age, the Church taught, in the true Faith.

7. But what shall we say in defense of A. C? whom we find blamed Ibid. page
37.
for these words, That not only the PRIMA CREDIBILIA, (or prime Articles of
Faith) but all that which so pertains to Supernatural, Divine, and Infallible
Faith, as that thereby, Christ does dwell in our hearts, etc. is the foundation
of the Church? The answer is, these are not the precise words of A. C. and
therefore no wonder if the Bishop easily confute him, whom he either mistakes,
or makes to speak as himself pleases. A. C's. words are these. By the word
FUMDAMENTAL is understood, not only the PRIMA CREDIBILIA, or Prime Principles
which do not depend upon any former grounds; for then all the Articles of the
Creed were not (as the Bishop and Dr. White say they are) FUNDAMENTAL points;
but all, which do so pertain to Supernatural, Divine, Infallible, Christian
Faith (by which Faith Christ, the only PRIME FOUNDATION of the Church, does
dwell in our hearts; and which Faith is so to the Church the Substance, Basis,
and Foundation of all good things, which are to be hoped for,) as that (being
thus confirmed, or made firm, by the Authority of the Church,) if they are
wittingly, willingly, and especicially obstinately denied, or questioned, all
the whole frame, and in a sort the foundation it self of all Supernatural,
Divine, Christian Faith is shaken. Thus he.

But who sees not, that there is a main difference betwixt these words of A. C.
and those which he is made to speak by the Bishop? for he joins the words as
that to these thereby Christ does dwell in our hearts: whereas in A. C's.
discourse they are joined to these, if they are wittingly, willingly, and
especially obstinately questioned, etc. that of Faith, whereby Christ dwells
in our hearts, etc. being only a Parenthesis, added for greater explication,
and not belonging to the substance of his discourse, as the Relatour no less
corruptly, then cunningly, makes it belong: which is an other Dedalian Turn in
this his Labyrinth.

Now let us hear the Accusation. First, says the Bishop, A C. is mistaken;
because all that pertains to Supernatural, Divine, and Infallible Christian
Faith, is not by and by Fundamental in the Faith to all men. But A. C. does not
say it is: he speaks only of those, to whom such points are proposed, and who
deny, or question them, when so proposed. Although in some sense they may be
said Fundamental to all, because all are to believe them implicitly; and
explicitly, all such as have sufficient reason to know, they are declared by
the Church. Secondly, A. C. is accused for confounding the Object with the Act
of Faith. But if his words be rightly penetrated, there will appear no
confusion. For A. C. having first named Prime Principles, and then going on
with others, which pertained to Supernatural, Infallible, Divine, Christian
Faith, it is apparent, he understood by those points, which so appertain, not
the Act of Faith it self, but the Object. Wherefore A. C. does here no more but
explicate the nature of the Object by the Act, (and that only upon the By, and
in a Parenthesis, as appears by his words) in which there is no Confusion but
Clarity: for as the Act of Faith is the Foundation of Hope, Charity, and all
other Supernatural Acts; so is the Object on which Faith is grounded, the
Foundation of Faith: and in such a manner as whoever denies, or questions one
point of Faith, does in effect question all.

Now I wonder the Bishop should urge as an Argument the Definition Ibidem.
of the Council of Trent, That Orders Collated by the Bishop are not void,
though they be given without the consent of the people, or any secular power;
and yet says, we can produce no Author, that ever acknowledged this Definition
to be Fundamental in the Faith. I wonder, I say, he should urge this; when all
Catholic Authors, who maintain, that whatsoever is defined by the Church is
Fundamental, do in effect hold, that this Decree is Fundamental. For they all
affirm, that this is a lawful General Council confirmed by the Pope; and
therefore of the same Authority to command our Belief, that any other ever was.
Wherefore this Argument of the Bishop is not Argumentum ad hominem, as he
pretends, but petitio principii. Now if he mean, that this Decree of the
Council is no Fundamental point of Faith, according to the precise material
Object, it is true, but nothing against us, who have often granted it; the
question being only about Fundamental points in the formal Object of Faith, as
we perpetually inculeate.

A. C. further urges, That if any one may deny, or doubtfully Ibidem. number. 15.
page 38.
dispute against any one Determination of the Church, then he may do it against
another, and another, and so against all; since all are made firm to us by one
and the same Divine Revelation, sufficiently applied by one and the same full
Authority of the Church: which being weakened in one, cannot be firm in any
other. Thus far A. C. And here the Bishop will needs have A. C. to have
horrowed this doctrine out of Vincentius Lirinensis, and that he might have
acknowledged it. I hope it is no error against Faith, if he did borrow it, and
not acknowledge it; although two wits may sometimes hit on the same thing, or
at least come near it, (which is all he here allows to A. C.) without taking it
one from another. However, the Doctrine both of A. C. and Vincentius Lirinensis
is true. For the same reason that permits not our questioning, or denying, the
prime Maxims of Faith, permits not our questioning, or denying any other
Doctrine declared by the Church: because (as I said) it is not the greatness,
or smallness of the matter, that moves us to give firm Assent in points of
Faith; but the Authority of God speaking by the Church. Wherefore all points of
Faith whatsoever may be said to be deposited with the Church. For all that the
Church does, even in things of least seeming concernment, is but ut haec (...)
quae antea -- that the same things may be believed which were before delivered,
but now with more light and clearness; that is to say, now explicitly, before
implicitly. So that in either sense, if we give way to every cavilling
disputant to deny, or quarrel them, the whole foundation of Faith is shaken.
Moreover the Church being Infallible, 'twere merely vain to examine her Decrees
(which the Relatour requires to be done) to see, if she have not added Novitia
veteribus, new Doctrines to the old. For the Holy Ghost (as hereafter shall be
proved) when we speak of this point) having promised so to direct her as she
cannot err, will never permit her to declare any thing as matter of Faith,
which was not before either expressed, or infolded and employed in the word of
God.

8. But why does the Relator print Catholici dogmatis in great Letters, in this
sentence of Lirinensis? is there any such great mystery in these words? yes,
surely. For (says he) Vincentius speaks there De Catholico Dogmate, of
Catholic Maxims. Well. But though Dogma signified a Maxim, yet surely it
cannot signify Maxims, unless he will here have the singular number signify
the plural, as before he made the plural signify the singular; eis, it: But it
was for his Lordships purpose to translate it in the plural number; and that
was sufficient: for had he put it in the singular thus, the Catholic Maxim,
that is, as he expounds it, the properly Fundamental, and prime Truth deposited
in the Church, there would have seemed to be but one Fundamental point: which
would have marred his whole design. Now because he holds, there are many
Fundamental points of Faith, Catholicum Dogma, in his Grammar, could signify
nothing less, then Catholic Maxims, that is, properly Prime and Fundamental
Points. But in what Author learned he, that Dogma fignifies only Maxims, were
it in the plural number? Dogma, according to our common English Lexicons, Rider
and others, signifies a Decree, or common received opinion, whether in prime,
or less principal matters: But as the Grammatical, so the Ecclesiastical
signification of this word extends it self to all things established in the
Church as matters of Faith, whether in Fundamentals, or Superstructures. Thus
Scotus calls Transubstantiation Dogma Fidei; and I would gladly know one
Author, who ever took the word Dogma for only Fundamental points. And as for
Vincentius Lirinensis, first he declares, (in other places) that he means by it
such Things, as in general belong to Christian Faith without distinction. cap.
23. Vocum (inquit) id est, DOGMATUM, rerum, sententiarum novitates. And cap.
28. Crescat (says he speaking of the Church) sed in suo duntaxat genere, in
eodem scilicet DOGMATE, eodem sensu, eademque sententia. The like he has, cap.
24. where he affirms, that the Pelagians erred in dogmate Fidei; who
notwithstanding erred not in a Prime Maxim, but in a Superstructure.

And for this place cited by the Bishop, it is evident that by Catholicum dogma
he must understand the whole Complex of all the points of Catholic Faith,
whether Fundamental in their matter or not; whereof if an Heretic deny any one
part whatsoever, (says this Author) he may by the same rule deny all the
rest. Nay, it is evident that Lirinensis could not understand only such points
as are Fundamental in respect of their matter. For, seeing this Catholicum
dogma contains the whole Systeme of the Catholic Faith, and in that Systeme
some are Fundamentals, some Superstructures, (even according to Protestants) it
must necessarily contain both: and Vincentius makes it clear in the instances
he gives, that he also understood points not Fundamental in the Protestant
sense. For, in the Systeme of Catholic points, which he there enumerates, is
contained the observation of Easter, decreed by Pope Victor, and afterward
defined in the Council of Nice; and the not-Rebaptizing of those, who had been
Baptized by Heretics, maintained by Pope Stephen against St. Cyprian and
Firmilian, and likewise afterward confirmed in the same Council. Now what I
say of Catholicum Dogma in the first sentence cited out of Lirinensis, I say
the same of Depositorum Dogmatum custos in the second.

For what rational man can imagine, that no other Christian verities or
revealed Doctrines were deposited by our Savior and the Holy Ghost with the
Apostles, and by them with the Church, save only the Articles of the Creed,
wherein are expressly contained all points of Faith, that are Fundamental in
respect of their matter, as the Bishop presently affirms? was not the whole
Canon of Holy Scripture, with every chapter, verse, and sentence contained in
it, the matter and form of Sacraments, the Hierarchy of the Church, the
Baptism of Infants, the not-Rebaptizing of Heretics, the perpetual Virginity
of the ever Blessed Mother of God, and many other such like points Deposited
with the Church by Christ and his Apostles, whereof no one is expressly
contained in the Creed, nor esteemed Fundamental by Protestants? Did not (think
you) the Church perform the Office of a faithful Keeper of all these, as well
as of the Articles of our Creed? and were not those, who pertinaciously erred
in these particulars, esteemed throughout all Christendom as Heretics, above
1200. years ago? Here then, in his wresting and winding Catholico Dogmate, he
gives us no less then a Turn and half in his Canterburian Labyrinth.

The Church then ever did, and ever will so keep those sacred Depositums, be
they, or be they not, Prime and Fundamental in their matter, as that hoc idem
quod antea, what she receives she delivers to all succeeding ages, the very
same in Substance, it ever was; only unfolding what was before wrapped up, when
any thing comes to be called in question by Novellists, whom she judges to
impugn, either directly, or indirectly and covertly, the Faith (that
Catholicum Dogma) which she has received. Upon which occasions she sometimes
declares certain Truths, as necessary to be expressly believed by all, to whom
that Declaration is sufficiently propounded; and commands certain errors to be
expressly rejected: both which were before believed or rejected only
implicitly, to wit, by the Belief of those Known and Received Divine Truths,
in which these other were contained, tanquam in radice or in semine, as
Vincentius speaks.

For the Church is so tenderly careful of every Iota, and Tittle of these
Sacred Doctrines (in whatever matter they consist, great or small,) which were
delivered to her by the Divine Authority of Christ and his Apostles, that she
uses all possible industries, not only to keep unblemished what was clearly
and plainly expressed in the Doctrine delivered to her, but whatever else she
finds necessary for conserving them in their Primitive integrity and purity.
Thus has she used all possible diligence to preserve the Scriptures pure and
entire, not only in the prime Articles of Faith, but in every the least truth
delivered in them. Thus from what she had received concerning Christ's being
both God and Man, yet but one Christ; she declared against Nestorius that he
had but one person; against Eutyches, that he consisted of two distinct
Natures, the Divine and the Humane; and against the Monothelites, that he had
Two Wills: all which particulars, though they were not so fully expressed and
reflected on, before those Heresies arose, yet were they virtually and
implicitly included in the Doctrine first received, and afterward became
necessary to be expressly believed, by the Declaration of General Councils.

I take no notice of the Relatours Translating Disputator errans (...) 10. number.
10. page 38.
Disputer, and Dogmata Deposita the principles of Faith. Such errata as these,
as they may seem (perhaps) too minute, so are they too frequent to be reflected
on. But when he would have either the Church her self, or some appointed by
her, to examine her Decrees, to wit, in matters of Faith (for of those only is
the controversy) lest for want of it, she be changed in Lupanar errorum, (a
thing so foul he dares not English it) though I wonder not much that it is said
by him, yet can I not but wonder, that he ventures to father it on Lirinensis,
citing a lame sentence of his in the Margin for proof of it: whereas this
Author, in that very place, is so far from entertaining the least thought, or
letting fall the least word, importing that the Church should add Novitia
veteribus (Novelties to Ancient truths) and consequently alter and corrupt her
own Doctrine, that, (as if he had foreseen such a perversion of his meaning) at
the end of the chapter cited, he seems purposely to explicate his own meaning,
and to point out the persons guilty of such practices, in these words. Sed
avertat hoc a suorum mentibus Divina pietas, sisque hoc potius IMPIORUM FUROR:
(But God avert (says he) this evil from the minds of his, and be it rather
the fury of the impious to do so) whoever therefore are so audacious, as to
add Novelties to the Ancient Doctrine of the Church, are judged by Vincentius
to be impious persons, raging in a fury of madness; which how justly or truly
it can be affirmed of Christ's true Church, let any discreet man be judge.

But if this be not sufficient to demonstrate, what this Authors opinion was
of Christ's Church in this particular, take a further Description which he gives
of her, cap. 22. Christi vero Ecclesia sedula and cauta Depositorum apud se
Dogmatum custos, nihil in iis unquam permutat, NIHIL MINVIT, NIHIL ADDIT: non
amputat necessaria, non apponit superflua, non amittit sua, non usurpat aliena:
Where we see, in opposition to those impious and furious Adders of Novelties,
mentioned in the last words of the precedent chapter, how effectually and fully
in the very beginning of this, he clears the Church from that foul aspersion,
which the Bishop would cast upon her. But the Church of Christ (says he) as a
careful and wise Depositary, or keeper of the Truths committed to her, NEVER
CHANGES any thing at all in them, lessens nothing, ADDS NOTHING; neither cuts
away things necessary, nor adjoyns things superfluous; neither loses what is
hers, nor usurps what belongs to others, etc. Words as Diametrically contrary
to what the Relatour pretends unto in this passage, viz. suspicion and
possibility of the Churches adding NOVITIA VETERIBVS, and of making a change in
the Doctrine which she first received from Christ and his Apostles, as any
thing can be imagined.

But to return to that lame sentence which he cites out of Lirinensis, the very
same does clearly show, that Lirinensis never taught, or imputed to the Church,
that she added New Doctrines to the Old. For if she be a Keeper of the Old, and
never labored in her Councils to do more then preserve id quod antea (that
which was before) and that Vincentius expressly averres this, how can he in
reason be supposed to teach, that this very Keeper of old Doctrines, and
Rejecter of Novelties, should either corrupt the one, or introduce the other?
nay, the very words the Bishop cites, demonstrate evidently, that the Church
cannot (in this Authors opinion) be understood to make these Additions. For
those who make them, may at length by such Additions come to change the Church
in errorum Lupanar. But it is impossible, the Church should change her self, or
do any thing, whereby to be changed in errorum Lupanar; for so she should be no
more the Church of Christ: unless he would have Christ's Church, while it
remains his Church, to be errorum Lupanar; which (...) as Vincentius abhors, so
I presume the Bishop himself, would never in terms and directly have admitted.

Lastly, the Bishops own exposition of Vincentius his words destroys this
unworthy imputation cast upon the Church. He interprets Dogmata (as we have
seen) to be the Maxims, or Prime Principles, of Christian Doctrine; whereof no
one part can be rejected, without opening a way to reject another, till the
whole be destroyed. Therefore (to make Lirinensis his discourse uniforme and
coherent; who still goes on in the former matter, and gives not the least hint,
that he speaks only of Fundamentals in the former part of his discourse, when
he mentions changes in dogmatibus fidei, and of not Fundamentals, in those
Additions of Novelties) I say, to make this Discourse of Vincentius uniforme
and coherent, he must understand the Novitia (which Vincentius says are added
Veteribus) to be added as new principal Maxims to the other principal Maxims
of Faith, no less then the Ancient Maxims were. Now such an Addition would be
a Fundamental error, destructive of the Church, as he also grants. Wherefore
it is impossible, that the true Church, remaining still the true Church should
make any such addition, even according to the Relatours exposition of
Vincentius. Whence it appears to what straits this place of Lirinensis put him;
seeing that whilst he labors to avoid one inconvenience, he falls into
another, like him, of whom the Poet sings,

Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charybdim, while he endeavors to avoid the
Charybdis (as he accounts it) of acknowledging (from thewords and Testimony of
Lirinensis) the Churches Infallibility in not Fundamentals, he runs and splits
himself upon the Scylla of making the whole Church err in points Fundamental.

But he is resolved to make all seem as fair for himself as he can; to which
end, observe a little how he uses the Text. Ecclesia depositorum apud se
Dogmatum Custos. That's well. His Lordship could neither deny, nor dissemble,
but that the Church (in the judgment of Vincentius) is a Guardian, or Keeper
of the Truths deposited with her. But yet, that it might not appear what kind
of Keeper she is, whether Faithful and Diligent, or Unfaithful and Negligent;
whether apt to admit the Addition of other New and Strange Doctrines, which she
received not, or to lose and corrupt any of those which she did receive, he
unfairly leaves out the first words of the sentence, which would have cleared
the doubt. Sedula and cauta. The Church is a diligent, and wary Keeper of the
Truths committed to her charge. She suffers nothing to be lost or embezzel'd
either through neglect of duty, or unskilfulness to perform it. In brief, that
it might not appear, in how exact a manner the Church executes this office of
Depositary and Guardian of Divine Truth, he wraps up all the following words,
Nihil in iis unquam permutat, nihil minuit, nihil addit, and the rest which
follow, (in which the Churches singular Care and Faithfulness in this affair is
most Emphatically and truly avouched,) with an etc. a Fatal, but Faithless etc.
Whereas Vincentius (as we heard above out of the words themselves) directly and
positively asserts, that the Church never changes any part of the Doctrine
committed to her, adds nothing, diminishes nothing, to wit by any corruptive
Addition or Diminution, or by any change, that perverts or destroys the Truth
formerly Deposited with her.

The like By-turn he makes in the third Text, cap. 31. where citing it thus
abruptly and unintelligibily, Impiorum and turpium errorum Lupanar; that it
might be thought the Church her self makes this Addition of Novelties, he
leaves out the word adiiciunt, (they add) that is, Heretics and Novelists do
add; for so Vincentius speaks: he says not adiicit, ( she, or the Church
adds:) For they are Heretics, and not the Catholic Pastors of the Church,
who by their Novel Additions labor to pervert and overthrow the True Doctrine
of the Church.

We grant not unwillingly what the Relatour here asserts, That a 10. number. 15.
page 39.
whole frame of Building may be shaken, and the Foundation, whereon it is laid,
remain firm. So may Hope, Charity, and other virtues be shaken, and yet Faith,
which is the Foundation of all our Supernatural Building remain firm. But if
one part of the Foundation be shaken, the whole groundwork will be but in a
tottering condition, and (as A. C. says) in a certain manner shaken. By which
kind of speech, I conceive he only means, that by questioning, or denying,
one point of Faith, though we do not eo ipso deny all others directly, yet
indirectly we do, to wit, by taking away, or denying all Authority to Gods
Revelation, and for that reason, rendering our selves, at the same time,
incapable of believing any thing else with Supernatural and Divine Faith.

9. His Lordship must be pardoned, if he dissent from A.C's. Assertion, Ibidem.
number. 16.
that all Determinations of the Church are made some to us by one and the same
Divine Revelation; which in the sense we have declared, his Lordship does not
disprove: but in the pursuance of his Discourse he brings in Doctor Stapleton
as contradicting Bellarmin, because Bellarmin says, that nothing can be
certain by the certainty of Faith, unless it be contained immediately in the
word of God, or deduced out of it by evident consequence, whereas Stapleton is
vouched to affirm, that some Decisions of the Church are made without an
evident; nay, without so much as a probable Testimony of Holy Scripture. I have
sought this place in Stapleton, and find his words to be only these, We ought
not to deny our Assent in matters of Faith, though we have them only by
Tradition, or the Decisions of the Church against Heretics, and not consirmed
with evident, or probable Testimony of Holy Scripture. His meaning is, we must
submit to the Determinations of the Church, and the Traditions she approves,
though they be not expressly contained in Scripture: which questionless may very
well stand with Bellarmins Doctrine, that nothing can be believed with Divine
Faith, unless it be either contained in the word of God, or drawn from thence
by evident consequence. For, that Bellarmin by the word of God understands, not
only Gods written, but his not-written word also, or Tradition, is manifest;
because he makes all our Faith, even of Scripture it self, to be grounded upon
it, as is clear, by his very words. Itaque hoc Dogma (...) necessarium, Libr.
De verbo Dei non Scripto. cap. 4.
quod scilicit sit aliqua Scriptura Divina, non potest sufficienter haberi ex
Scriptura: proinde cum Fides nitatur verbo Dei, nisi habeamus verbum Dei non
scriptum, nulla nobis erit Fides. (Therefore this so necessary Maxim, viz.
that there is any Divine Scripture at all, cannot sufficiently be had by
Scripture alone: Wherefore, seeing Faith relyes upon the word of God, unless we
have a word of God not-written, we shall have no Faith at all.) Many like
instances he gives in the same Chapter of other matters pertaining to Christian
Faith, which can only be believed for the word of God not-written. Now in the
place cited by the Bishop he teaches, that we cannot be certain of our
Salvation with certainty of Faith; because this is not revealed by the word of
God either written or unwritten, nor is evidently deduced from either of these;
which is a good Argument, but no way contradicted by Stapleton. Besides, a
Proposition may be not so much as probably expressed in Scripture, and yet be
inferred by necessary consequence from something contained in Scripture; I mean
inferred, at least from such general Principles and Rules as the Scriptures
recommend to us, and command us to follow. But the reason the Bishop brings to
prove that Bellarmin speaks only of the written word, is very strange. For
Bellarmin (says he) treats there of the knowledge a man can have of the
certainty of his own Salvation: and I hope, that A. C. will not tell us, that
there is any Tradition extant unwritten, by which particular men may have
assurance of their several Salvations. Thus he. Now first we say not, that
Bellarmin speaks of the word unwritten, and Stapleton of the word written, but
that Stapleton speaks of the unwritten word only, and Bellarmin of both the
written and unwritten word; which he calls the complete word of God. Secondly,
Bellarmin was not to affirm, there was any unwritten Tradition, by which
particular men may have assurance of their several Salvations; but the
contrary, That there was no such unwriten Tradition to be found. For had he
intended to prove any such unwritten Tradition, he should have consequently
proved the foresaid assurance to be Infallible, and equal to the Certainty of
Faith; which he there professedly labors to prove fallible and not of the
Certainty of Faith: which had been a Turn like one of his Lordships, the quite
contrary way. And for Stapleton, he purposely proves that the Church has not
power to make new Articles of Faith; but only to declare and explain those
already delivered.

His Lordship cannot believe, that all Determinations of the Church Ibidem.
page 40.
are sufficiently applied by one and the same full Authority of the Church. For
the Authority of the Church, (says he) though it be of the same fullness in
regard of it self, and of the power it commits to General Councills lawfully
called; yet it is not always of the same fullness of knowledge and sufficiency,
nor of the same fullness of Conscience and Integrity, etc. To this I answer,
that these Ornaments of Knowledge, Sufficiency, Conscience, and Integrity are
not the Causes of Infallibility, either in the Church or Councils; for that
proceeds only from the promised Assistance of the Holy Ghost; which is of the
same power in weaker and stronger Instruments, as it appeared by the Apostles;
who being of themselves persons altogether ignorant of Divine matters, yet by
the Assistance of the Holy Ghost became not only able to Teach them, but also
Infallible in their Teaching. Neither does the want of Conscience or Integrity
in some particular persons deprive either the Church, or a General Council of
this promised Infallibility, any more then the same want deprived the Scribes
and Pharisees in old time, of their Authority: concerning whom, notwithstanding
their manifest and great defects in point of Conscience and Integrity, etc. our
Savior himself pronounces, Matthew. 23. 2. Upon the Chair of Moses have sitten
the Scribes and Pharisees: all things therefore they shall say to you, observe
you and do.

The Relatour again repeats, that all Propositions of Canonical 10. number. 17.
page 41.
Scripture are not alike Fundamental in the Faith. But this is answered by the
Doctrine we have so often delivered (to clear his often mistaking) touching
Fundamentals; that some are in this sense Fundamental, to wit, of necessity to
be believed by all, and known expressly of all: others not Fundamental, that is,
not of necessity to be known and believed expressly by all. In this sense (I
say) we agree with his Lordship and his party, touching the Distinction of
Fundamentals and not-Fundamentals. Our only controversy is, whether there be
in the Catholic Church any points of Faith not-Fundamental in this sense,
that is, such as being declared by the Church to us as points of Faith, may
lawfully, that is, without peril of sin and damnation, be denied or doubted of.
For in this they hold the Affirmative; we the Negative.

The reason why we have no occasion in this Controversy, to treat this
distinction in any sense, save this, is, because it relates only to our
Adversaries, who maintain they are not obliged under pain of damnation to
believe some Definitions of the Church made in lawful General Councils, even
whilst they expressly know them to be so defined; because, say they, those
Councils may err in such Definitions, by reason the matter they contain is
not-Fundamental. Wherefore we neither say, nor intend to show it Sub Anulo
Piscator is (which are his Lordships terms) that it is as necessary to believe
St. Peter and St. Andrew were made Fishers of men, as that Christ dyed and rose
again the Third Day. We hold the contrary; the one being a Prime Article and
Fundamental in the first explicated sense, the other neither Prime nor
Fundamental, But we stand to this, That whoever shall find in Scripture, That
St. Peter and St. Andrew were made Fishers of men, and yet question, or deny,
the truth of it, cannot, for that time, believe any thing with Divine Faith.
Therefore in the second sense it is Fundamental, to believe that St. Peter and
St. Andrew were made Fishers of men: and though the contrary should be showed
under the Great Seal of England, I would not believe it. Now if the belief of
every point of Faith decreed by the Church be as necessary to Salvation, when
sufficiently propounded to us for a point decreed by the Church, as it is
necessary to believe, that St. Peter and St. Andrew were made by our Savior
Fishers of men, when it is sufficiently propounded to us as clearly delivered
in Scripture, then it will be as necessary to Salvation (that is, as much a
Fundamental point, by reason of the Authority which delivers it) as the other.

CHAP. 4. The Conclusion of Fundamentals, or Necessaries to Salvation.
ARGUMENT.
1. What points Fundamental, what not, a Necessary question. 2. The Apostles
Creed (confessedly) contains not all Fundamentals in particular. 3. Albertus
Magnus cited to small purpose. 4. A. C's. words wrested in defense of Mr.
Rogers. 5. Catharinus might err, but was no Heretic. 6. How Protestants
agree. 7. A. C. mutilated the second time, in favor of the English Canons. 8.
English Protestants excommunicate Catholics, as much as Catholics them. 9.
Some Things contained in Scripture expressly, not evidently: Some Truths deduced
from Scripture directly, not demonstratively. 10. Baptism of Infants not
demonstratively proved by the Bishop from Sole Scripture. 11. What St. Augustine
thought of that matter. 12. The Bishop proved to contradict himself.

1. 'TWas a very pertinent question, which Mr. Fisher afterward 11. number. 1.
page 42.
moved, requiring to know, what points the Bishop would account Fundamental.
For if he will have some Fundamental, which we are bound to believe under pain
of Damnation, and others not Fundamental, which we may without sin question, or
deny; it behooves us much to know which they are. I have ever desired a
fatisfactory answer from Protestants to this question, but could never yet have
it in the sense demanded.

2. What if the Council of Trent call the Creed the only Foundation, Sess. 3.
it containing the Prime points of our Faith, which all are obliged to know,
and expressly believe? yet I hope his Lordships followers will not grant, that
we may question, or deny, every thing that is not expressed in the Creed: and yet
this must be done, if the Creed only be held for Fundamental in the sense the
question was propounded in.

If they should reply, that not only those points are Fundamental which are
expressed in the Creed, but those also which are there infolded, by this means
they may (as the Bishop speaks) lap up in the Creed all Ibidem. page 43, 44.
particular points of Faith whatever. And truly, seeing his Lordship goes so
far as to include all the Scripture in the Creed, there appears no great reason
of Scruple, why the same should not be said of Traditions and other points;
especially of that Tradition, for which we admit Scripture it self. For this
would not make the fold much larger then it was before; and if it did, yet I
see no hurt in it.

But let us briefly reflect, how well the Bishops Answer satisfies the question
propounded by Mr. Fisher. The matter proceeded thus. The 11. number. 1. 2.
Jesuit had said, that the Greek Church was not right, because it held an
error concerning the Holy Ghost. The Bishop confessed, that what the Greeks
held in that point was an error, and a grievous one in Divinity, but not
Fundamental; and so hindered them not from being a True Church. Whereupon, that
it might appear whether the error of the Greek Church were Fundamental, or
not, Mr. Fisher demanded of the Bishop, what points he would account
Fundamental. To this question the Bishop (after diverse artificial flourishes,
serving to little or no purpose, but to draw the Readers attention from the
Obligation he had to give a perfect list of his Fundamentals) answered, All
points in the Creed, as they are there expressed are Fundamental: but soon
after affirms, that he never either said or meant, that they only are
Fundamental. By which it evidently appears, his Lordship neither gave, nor
meant to give a Categorical Answer to the question, but did industriously
decline it; while granting there were other points Fundamental beside those
contained in the Apostles Creed, he would not assign them in particular.
Wherefore, though the Greeks error were not contrary to any point expressed in
the Creed, yet seeing it might be contrary to some other Fundamental point not
contained therein, Mr. Fisher must needs remain as unsatisfied, as before,
whether the Greeks erred in a Fundamental point or not. Is not this fine
shuffling?

3. Before I leave this, I shall note by the way, that to prove this
Proposition, that the Belief of Scripture to be the word of God and Infallible,
is an equal, or rather preceding Principle of Faith, with or to the whole Body
of the Creed, he cites Albertus Magnus in these words, Regula (...) Concors
(...) Articulis Fidei, etc. (the Rule of Faith is the Concordant sense of
Scripture with Articles of Faith.) Now first, here is nothing of believing the
Scripture to be the word of God and Infallible, (for that is presupposed) but
only what sense the Scripture must have to be the Rule of Faith. Secondly,
here is no mention of the Creed, but of Articles of Faith, which Albertus held
to be many more, then those specified in the Creed. Thirdly, this sentence of
Albertus makes the Scripture no further a Rule of Faith, then as it accords
with the Articles of Faith first delivered by Tradition.

4. By what has been said, is confuted whatever the Bishop has to page 44.
where Mr. Rogers is brought in by Mr. Fisher, as acknowledging, that the
English Church is not yet resolved, what is the right sense of the Article of
Christ's Descending into Hell. But the Bishop will needs have the English Church
resolved in this point. I will not much trouble my self about it, as being not
Fundamental, either in his Lordships sense, or ours. But Mr. Fisher grounded
his speech upon those words of Mr. Rogers, viz. In the interpretation of this
Article there is not that consent that were to be wished. Thus he. Whereupon
the Relatour also confeffeth, That some have been too busy in Crucifying this
Article.

As for Catholics (upon whom the Bishop would lay the same 12. number. 1. page
44.
charge) they all believe it as it lies in the Creed, and is proposed by the
Church. But it being not defined by the Church, whether we have this Article
from Tradition only, or also from Scripture, I hope, Divines may be permitted
to hold different opinions about it, without prejudice to the Unity or
Integrity of Faith. Durand may also be suffered to teach, (though somewhat
contrary to the common opinion) that the Soul of Christ, in the time of his
death, did not go down into Hell really, but virtually and by effects only.
The like may be said of that other question, whether the Soul of Christ did
descend really and in its Essence into the Lower Pit, and place of the Damned;
or really only into that place, or Region of Hell, which is called Limbus
Patrum, but Virtually from thence into the Lower Hell: Our Adversaries may
know, that all Catholic Divines agree, Durand excepted, that Christ our
Savior, in his Blessed Soul, did really descend into Hell, our School Disputes
and Differences being into what part of Hell he really descended: as likewise
touching the manner of exhibiting his Divine Presence amongst the Dead, and of
the measure of its effects, to wit, of Consolation and Deliverance toward the
Good, or of Terror, Confusion, and Punishment toward the Bad. And though they
should differ in their opinions more then they do, in this or any other
question concerning Religion, yet they all submitting their judgments (as they
do) to the Censure and Determination of the Church, when ever she thinks fit to
interpose her Authority and define the matter, all these seeming Tempests of
Controversy amongst us will end in a quiet calm. I could wish his Lordship
had been, in his time, and that his Followers would now be of the same Temper:
for then all Disputes and Differences in matters of Faith would cease; yet
School Divinity remain entire.

Wherefore to what the Bishop asserts, That the Church of England 12. number. 3.
page 45.
takes the words as they are in the Creed, and believes them without further
Dispute, and in that sense, which the Primitive Fathers of the Church agreed
in, I answer, all Catholics profess to do the same: so that the question can
only be touching the sense of the words as they lie in the Creed, and the
sense of the Primitive Church concerning them.

Now as for Stapletons affirming, That the Scripture is silent in the 13. number.
1. page 47.
point of Christ's descending into Hell, and in mentioning that there is a
Catholic and Apostolic Church, suppose we should grant, that Christ's
Descent into Hell were not expressed in Scripture, yet his Lordships party will
not deny it to be sufficient, that it is in the Creed. And for the other point,
Stapleton was not so ignorant as to think, there was no mention of the Church
of Christ in Scripture; for every ordinary Scholar knows that place of Matthew.
16. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church. Nor that she
was to be (even by the testimony of Scripture) both Catholic and Apostolical:
for how often and invincibly does this most worthy Doctor prove both these
points from Scripture, in several parts of his works? wherefore, in the place
alleged, it is evident his meaning was only to deny, that the words Catholic
and Apostolic were expressly in Scripture, though they be there in sense and
effect, as (I presume) our Opponents themselves will not be so hardy as to
deny. So that his Lordships facetious discourse here, upon Stapleton and some
Texts of Scripture, may rather be taken for a jest to please his own humor,
then for an Argument against us.

This Incidental quarrel with Stapleton being over, the Bishop fiercely Ibid.
number. 3. page 48.
again falls to expostulate both with Mr. Fisher and A. C. for citing Mr.
Rogers Authority for the Doctrine of the Church of England. But with how little
reason, it appears by the very Title of Mr. Rogers's Book; which, as the Bishop
himself acknowledges, runs thus, The Catholic Doctrine of the Church of
England; and for this gives him a jerk, that possibly he might think a little
too well of his own pains, and gave his Book too high a Title. Truly I conceive
it of small importance to bestow much time upon this Subject, either in
relation to the Bishops Disagreement with Master Rogers, or the pretended
variance between Vega and Soto touching men's certain assurance of Justification
or Salvation: which jarre is denied by Bellarmin, who cites both of them for
the Common opinion, that a man cannot be certain of his Justification, or
Salvation, by certainty of Faith, without an especial Revelation.

5. However I cannot but observe, that though Catharinus disagrees from
Bellarmin and the Common opinion concerning the foresaid point (as the Bishop
objects) yet he dissents not formally from the Decree and Doctrine of the
Church; whose sense he professes to follow, submitting himself in that, and
all other his opinions, to her Censure. So that though I grant him to have
fallen into an error, yet he is not accusable of Heresy, as not being
obstinate in his mistake.

6. The Bishop is our good friend in saying, that all Protestants (he 14. number.
1. page 50.
might have added, all other professed enemies of the Catholic Church) do agree
with the Church of. England in the main exceptions, which they jointly take
against the Roman Church, as appears by their several Confessions. For by their
agreeing in this, but in little or nothing else, they sufficiently show
themselves enemies to the true Church; which is one, (and only one) by unity
of Doctrine; from whence they must needs be judged to depart, by reason of
their Divisions. Now that our Authors disagree not in Faith, we have showed a
little before. The Relatour does much perplex himself about the Catholic
Ibidem.
Churches pronouncing Anathema: But this is not done so easily as he imagined.
For this Anathema falls only upon such as obstinately oppose the Catholic
Church. And if in such cases it should not be pronounced, we should be so far
from being in peace and quietness, that all would be brought to confusion, as
appears by the concord we find in our own Church; and those sad Dissentions
and Disorders most apparent in theirs. Wherefore I believe, that reason will
rather ascribe the troubles of Christendom, to the freedom, which others take
and give in matters of Faith, by permitting every one to believe what he
pleases, then to any severity in the Church of Rome: which is known to be a
pious Mother, and never proceeds to Excommunication, but when obstinacy and
perverseness enforce her. As to what the Bishop Ibid. page 51.
objects, that the Roman Church makes many points to be of necessary belief,
which had for many hundred of years passed only for pious opinions, if his
Lordship had assigned any such points in particular, they should have received
an answer.

The Relatour dislikes Mr. Fisher for saying, The Church of England Ibid. number.
2.
in her Book of Canons Excommunicates every man, who shall hold any thing
contrary to any part of the said Articles, viz, the 39. Articles. But although
these were not the precise words of their Canon, yet the Church of England,
excommunicating all such, as affirm they cannot with a good Conscience submit
unto them (as it is manifest she does, by the very Canon which the Bishop cites)
she does in effect excommunicate all that hold any thing contrary to the said
Articles. As for the pretended severity of the Roman Church, we have answered
it already, and showed, that the Freedom and Liberty granted by her enemies,
would afford no more prosperity to her, then it has done to them. It Is true,
the Church of Rome (as his Lordship takes notice) imposes her Doctrine, Ibid.
page 52.
upon the whole world, under pain of Damnation: but it is not in her power to
do otherwise: because Christ himself has commanded her so to do, in these
words, Matthew. 18. 17. If he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as a
Heathen and Publican.

7. His exceptions here against A. C. are but as so many Meanders. For, first
he says that the words objected by A. C. are not the words of the Canon. I
answer, nor did A. C. affirm they were. Secondly, he adds and perhaps not the
sense; because, privately holding within himself, and boldly and publicly
affirming are different things. True. But where does A. C. mention those, words
privately holding within himself? or where does the Canon say boldly, and
publicly affirming, as the Bishop would impose on the Reader? And as to the
sense of the Article, the Bishop himself durst not boldly and publicly
affirm, that A. C. missed it; but says only perhaps he did: and then perhaps
he did not. But without all perhaps and peradventure, he gave the genuine sense
of the Canon; seeing it is against all reason to imagine, that a man should be
held punishable with Excommunication for a mere internal Act. He must mean
therefore by the word holding an external Act, which cannot amount to less then
Affirming.

8. The question is not, whether the English Congregation, or the Roman Church,
be more Severe; but whether the English Protestants Severity, in
Excommunicating those, that affirm any part of the thirty nine Articles to be
(...), be not unreasonable; supposing, she be subject to error in defining
those Articles. For what is it less then unreasonable Tyranny, to cast men out
of their Church (which they esteem a True one) deliver them up to Satan, and
lay Gods and their Churches curse upon them, for affirming that to be
erroneous, which (for ought they know) may possibly be such indeed? especially
when the Impugner fully persuades himself, that what he affirms to be erroneous
in them, is really so. For Excommunication being the most grievous punishment
the Church can inflict, must require a Crime proportionable to it. But can any
man persuade himself, that to oppose a Doctrine, against which the opposer
verily persuades himself, he has either an evidence from Scripture, or a
Demonstrative reason (in which cases the Bishop grants, that one may, yea ought
to oppugn the Churches errors) can any man, I say, persuade himself that this
is a Crime proportionable, or a sufficient cause of Excommunication? Every just
Excommunication therefore, inflicted for the opposing of Doctrine, must
necessarily suppose the Doctrine opposed to be infallibly true and absolutely
exempt from error, otherwise the sentence it self would be unreasonable and
unjust, as wanting sufficient ground. Whence likewise it follows, that
Protestants, while they confess on the one side, that all their thirty nine
Articles are not Fundamental points of Faith, (and by consequence, in their
sense and according to their principles, not infallibly true, but subject to
error) yet on the other side proceed to Excommunication against any, that
affirm them, or any part of them, to be superstitious or erroneous, do
themselves exercise a greater Tyranny and injustice toward their people, then
they can, with any color or pretense of reason, charge upon the Roman Church:
which (as they well know) excommunicates no man, but for denying such Doctrine,
as is both Infallibly true, and also Fundamental, at least according to the
formal Object.

As little is it the question, whether the Roman Churches Excommunications be
of a much larger extent, then those of the English Protestants; (for this
argues no more, then that one is the Universal Church, the other not) but the
question is (as has been said) whether Protestants Excommunications be not
unreasonable, nay, most enormious, as inflicted by those, who acknowledge
themselves fallible, and subject to error in that very point for which they
Excommunicate. Again, as to the larger extent of our excommunications, might
not the same have been objected against the excommunications of the Apostles
themselves, by any particular Heretical Conventicles in those times, to wit,
that their (pretended) Excommunications reached no further then the bounds of
their own private Congregations, whereas the Apostolical Excommunications
extended to the utmost limits of the whole Christian World.

What follows has been often answered: For we grant, the Scripture 15. number. 1.
page 52.
is sufficient for some men's Salvation, if we regard the material Object only,
or the chief points of Faith; because all the Prime Articles of our Faith are
expressed in Scripture: which Prime Articles are Fundamental only in the first
sense, so often declared. But hence it follows not that some things not expressed
in Scripture, are not Fundamental in the second sense formerly delivered.
Amongst these, Tradition must be numbered; for which we admit Scripture it
self. In this truly (to use his Lordships Rhetorique) the Fathers are plain,
the Schoolmen are not strangeis, and Stapleton (whom he styles an angry
opposite) confesses as much. Moreover, where there is any difficulty about the
sense of Scripture, or the point to be believed, we are not so to stand to
Scripture, as that we refuse to hear the Church appointed by Christ to
interpret it, and to declare what ought to be believed. For otherwise there
would be no end of Controversies; every Heretic pretending Scripture, and
crying it up as much, as the Bishop or any other of his party can do.

Nor can the Church obtrude any thing as Fundamental in the Faith, Ibid. number.
2. page 53.
which is not so in it self; she being Infallible as shall hereafter be proved;
the Bishop here wrongfully supposing the contrary. Mr. Fisher says, It Is true,
That the Church of England grounds her POSITIVE Articles upon Scripture, that
is, it is true, if themselves may be competent judges in their own cause. But
his Lordship (not liking that Qualification of his speech) professes for
himself and his party, that they are willing to be judged by the joint consent
and constant belief of the Fathers, which lived within the first Four or Five
hundred years after Christ, when the Church was (as he says) at the best; and
by the Councils held within those times; and that they will submit to them in
all those points of Doctrine. This offer is very fair, and we do (for our
selves) as Solemnly promise the same, and will make it good upon all occasions.

9. But to show the Bishop cannot perform what he has undertaken, Mr. Fisher
endeavors to confute him in the point of Infant Baptism; which (says he) is
not expressly (at least not evidently) affirmed in Scripture, nor directly (at
least not demonstratively) concluded out of it: words not vainly and cunningly
(as the Relatour pretends) but soberly and discreetly spoken. For a point may
be expressed, and yet not evidently expressed. Otherwise there could never be any
doubt concerning what were expressed in Scripture: since men never question
things that are evident. Now the Baptism of Infants must not only be expressed,
but evidently expressed, to prove it sufficiently (that is undenyably) by
Scripture alone. For, if it be there expressed only probably, it may be probably
denied to be expressed: and so Disputations can never have an end out of the
Scriptures expression alone. For the same reason he adds, that Infant Baptism
is not (at least demonstratively) concluded out of Scripture: because if it be
proved directly yet only probably (as was said) it may probably be denied: and
so we shall find no more end here then in the former Dispute. Wherefore our
Adversaries cannot in reason mislike this addition of evidently expressed and
demonstratively concluded; because without this we shall never have an end of
Disputations. This was it, made Mr. Fisher add those words; though the Bishop
knew full well, that there are many things in good Logic concluded directly,
which are not concluded Demonstratively, as he well shows: But he is much out,
nay contradicts himself in what he urges, That whatsoever is by direct
consequence proved out of Scripture, is Demonstratively Ibid. page 55.
and Scientifically proved. For, first he supposes Scripture to be a prime
principle in Christian Religion, that is, such a principles as has no
dependence on any other to declare it such infallibly to Christian people;
which he knows all Catholics deny. Secondly, though I should grant
Scripture, and every Text of it, to be a principle amongst all Christians,
whereof no man should desire any further proof; yet unless both Propositions,
the Major and Minor) were evidently in Scripture, the Conclusion might directly
be inferred, but not evidently, out of Scripture. For, in case one Proposition
only be evidently expressed, and the other inevidently, or but probably, the
Conclusion indeed will follow directly, but not demonstratively. This is much
more clear, if but one Proposition be evidently expressed in Scripture, and the
other neither in Scripture, nor evident to natural reason, but only probable:
For, (as Logicians speaks) Conclusio sequitur debiliorem partem, The Conclusion
always follows the nature of the weaker Proposition. This will appear to be so
in Infant Baptism. For, though no man ought to deny, but that many things are
Demonstrable in Divinity; yet all are not. For, in this respect, as Canus here
cited affirms, Divinity is like Ibidem.
other Sciences; which prove not all things Demonstratively, but many things
only Topically, or probably.

To illustrate this doctrine a little further by instances. First, that a Thing
may be expressly in Scripture, and yet not evidently expressed, even according to
some Protestants. Our Savior says, ( Mat. 26. etc.) This is my Body: where he
affirms expressly that what he had then in his hands was his Body; and yet
(according to the Zuinglians) this is no evident expression to signify his
real Body: for if that were evidently expressed by these words, no man, that
believes Scripture, could deny it, as those Heretics do. For, it is impossible
to deny an evidence. Thus again, Mark 16. 16. it is expressed, Qui crediderit and
Baptizatus fuerit, Salvus erit: yet is it not evidently expressed, that every
one, who believes and is Baptized, shall be saved; because many are Baptized
and Believe, who are afterward damned.

Secondly, that a thing may be directly deduced from Scripture; and yet (...)
demonstratively, I give these instances. All Scripture Divinely inspired, etc.
is profitable, etc. (2 Timothy 3. 16.) But St. James his Epistle is Scripture
Divinely inspired: Ergo it is profitable, etc. This consequence is directly
deduced, in perfect form, from Scripture; yet is it not evidently deduced from
it: for if it were, the Lutherans could not deny the consequence; as they do,
because the Minor is not evident in Scripture. Or thus. Unless one be born
again of water and the Holy Ghost he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John
3. 5. But children unbaptized are not born again of water and the Holy Ghost:
Ergo they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, This is directly deduced from
Scripture; yet all Calvinists must say, it is not evidently deduced. Or lastly
thus. That which our Savior Consecrated in his last Supper was the usual Bread
of that place and time: but no Bread, save what was made of Wheat was the usual
Bread of that place and time: Ergo that which our Savior Consecrated was no
other, save that which was made of Wheat. The Major is clear in Scripture; but
the Minor is only historically certain: so that the consequence is deduced
directly, but not Demonstratively.

10. His Lordships first Demonstration therefore, of the necessity of Ibid page
56.
Baptism to the salvation of Infants, is much defective, if we stick to sole
Scripture, as now he is to do. For a Pelagian Anabaptist will most easily
answer, that the Text of John 3. Except a man be born again by water and the
Holy Ghost; he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, speaks only of such as
can be born again. Now none can be born again, save those who were dead in
sin: wherefore Infants having no sin at all, (as Pelagians hold) cannot be
born again, and consequently must not be Baptized: insomuch that this Text is
so far from proving against such Anabaptists, that Infants must be Baptized,
that it rather proves the contrary.

His second, That Infants ought to be baptized, (which he says is very Ibidem.
near an expression in Scripture it self,) has nothing in it at all either of
an expression, or demonstration. For to omit, that the word children signifies
Acts 2. 38, 39.
not Infants, but filios, or liberos (children grown up to years;) and that by
promise is not meant the particular promise there mentioned, but the promise of
the new Law in Christ; the very Text it self confutes him. For, if the promise
be made to their Children, (which is, that they amend their lives, and be
Baptized, and they shall receive the Holy Ghost,) it cannot appertain to their
Children, till they be capable of mending their lives; which Infants, (as all
know) are not. And therefore by a new Turn he tells us, the means to receive
the Holy Ghost was Baptism; as if nothing but Baptism had been exacted by the
Apostle in that place, when he expressly requires amendment of life, as well as
Baptism.

11. Notwithstanding all this, I would not have it thought, I intend to weaken
the Argument out of John 3. for proving the Baptism of Infants: for I have
only endeavored to show, that it cannot be demonstratively proved out of that
Text of Scripture alone against a perverse Heretic. We must therefore embrace
St. Augustins counsel number. 5. page 57.
(cited by his Lordship) who fayes, The custom of our Mother the Church in
Baptizing Infants is by no means to be contemned, or thought superfluous; nor
yet at all to be believed unless it were an Apostolical Tradition. In which
words St. Augustine expressly asfirmeth, that the point of Baptizing Infants were
not at all to be believed, but for Tradition. Therefore it is not demonstrable
out of Scripture alone; for if it were, we should be bound to believe it,
though we had it not from Tradition; which is contrary to St. Augustins words.
It Is true, this Father having first learned the abovesaid Doctrine from
Tradition, proves it, or rather confirms it, out of Scripture; and so do other
Catholic Authors. But all these proofs would be far from Demonstrations,
were it not for Tradition. Writing against Pelagius, he applies that saying of
our Savior Ibid. page 58.
( Matthew. 10. 14.) Suffer little ones to come unto me, to the Baptizing of
Infants; yet no man ever brought this place for a Demonstration, or a Text
evidently proving of it self without Tradition, that Infants ought to be
Baptized. For, those our Savior spoke of came not unto him to be Baptized, but
to receive his Benediction. And it is clear, that he spoke of the Children of
the Jews, who were either circumcized or otherwise justified: and if we stick
to the sole words they may be understood of such as were capable to understand
what was commanded or forbidden them, and consequently had some use of reason,
which the Text it self intimates, nolite prohibere eos (forbid them not.)

For, as I have said, we grant that Tradition being supposed, this point is
proveable out of Scripture. Wherefore it is true, that it has a root, and
foundation in Scripture; yet so obscurely, that it could not be sufficiently
discovered without Tradition; because an Anabaptist might give a probable
solution to all our Arguments, had we only Scripture, and not Tradition, for
this point of Faith. Wherefore though Scripture may in some general sense, be
said to contain in it all things necessary, yet it cannot be said to contain
expressly and evidently all things necessary in particular.

12. I prove my Assertion, that Infant Baptism must be believed by Divine
Faith, as it is an Apostolical Tradition, that is, considered purely as
delivered orally by the Apostles, whether it can be proved by Scripture, or no.
My Argument is ad hominem, against the Bishop thus. He grants expressly ( page
66. and 67.) that unwritten Apostolical Traditions, if any such can be
produced, are as properly and formally the word of God, and to be believed with
Divine Faith, as Scripture it self. Ergo, Baptism of Infants, considered only
as an unwritten Apostolical Tradition, (as he considers it) precedently to its
being drawn from Scripture, is to be believed with Divine Faith; being in that
precise consideration the proper and formal object of Faith, to wit, the true
word of God. So that according to this his doctrine, not only such Traditions
as are not at all written, are Gods word; but such as are both delivered by
word of mouth and also by writing, are the word of God, as well by reason they
were delivered by word of mouth, as by writing; because God has equally
revealed them by both these means. When therefore he says, ( page 52.) that
the Scriptures only are the Foundation of Faith, it must be acknowledged, that
he speaks contrary to what he says, page 57. That Baptism of Infants is an
Apostolical Tradition (which he there takes as contradistinguisht from
Scripture) and therefore to be believed. For, if it be therefore, that is,
because it is an Apostolical Tradition, even precedently to Scripture proofs,
to be believed, not only the Scriptures, but Apostolical Tradition also, as
contradistinguisht from Scripture, will be a foundation of Faith. If he should
reply that when he says therefore to be believed, he means not as the formal
object and foundation of Faith, but as a disposition, preparing us to found the
belief of it in Scripture, (as he seems to insinuate, though something
obscurely, page 57) he contradicts himself, page 66, 67. where he grants, that
assured unwritten Tradition is the true word of God, and by consequence
properly to be believed, as having in it the formal object of Faith, to wit,
Gods Revelation.

CHAP. 5. Of the Resolution of Faith.
ARGUMENT.
1. No vicious Circle incurred by Catholics in their Resolution of Faith. 2.
The Church proved Infallible by the same way, that Moses, Christ and his
Apostles were proved to be so. 3. The Difference between Principles of Science
and Faith. 4. No Necessity, that the Churches Definitions should be held the
formal object of Faith; but only an Infallible Application of the Formal
Object to us. 5. His Lordships Argument disproved by Instances.

HAving ended our large discourse of Fundamentals, drawn out 16. number 6. page 59.
to so great a length by necessity of following our Adversary through all his
Doubles and ambiguous Windings, (wherein yet, I hope we have given Satisfaction
to the judicious Reader) we are come at last to that main Question, How
Scriptures may be known to be the word of God, and in particular, Genesis,
Exodus, Leviticus, etc. These are believed to be the word of God, though not
proved so out of any place of Scripture, but only by Gods unwritten word,
Tradition. His Lordship thinks this too curious a question: but it is not so
much a question of curiosity, as of necessity; that so we may know how to
resolve our Faith, and give an account thereofto others, But the plain truth
is, that though this question has no difficulty at all in our principles, (who
say, we believe them to be the true and undoubted word of God, because the
Catholic Church delivers them as such to us) yet was it so insuperably hard
to be solved in Protestant principles, that I fear, the Relatour had rather
have given it a put off by a Turn in his Labyrinth, then engaged himself
therein, could the business have been conveniently avoided. Now if some do
prove Scripture by Tradition, and Tradition by Scripture, falling into that
faulty kind of Argumentation, which the Schools call Circulus vitiosus, the
blame lies not in him that asks the question, but in them who answer it ill.
And truly the question has done this good, that it has made the weakness of
their cause appear, who have deserted the Catholic Church. Wherefore we will
give our Adversary leave to say, that we draw him to it, rather then omit so
necessary a Disputation.

The Bishop therefore proposes diverse ways of proving Scripture Ibid. number.
20 page 60.
to be the word of God, and in the first place falls to attaque our way; who
prove it by the Tradition and Authority of the Church. For he urges, that it
may be further asked, why he should believe the Churches Tradition. And if it
be answered, that we believe it, because the Church is Infallibly governed by
the Holy Ghost, he proceeds and demands, how that may appear? where he thinks,
we are brought to those straits, that we must either say, we believe it by
special Revelation, which is the private Spirit we object to others, or else
must attempt to prove it by Scripture; which were a vicious Circle: and yet he
affirms we all do so. But with his Lordships favor, he conceives amiss; and I
desire his Followers to give us leave hereafter to answer for our selves, and
that they would not do it for us.

1. Wherefore to this last demand, (in which only there is difficulty,) viz.
How we know the Church to be infallibly governed by the Holy Ghost, we answer,
that we prove it first in general, not by the Scripture, but by the Motives of
credibility, which belong to the Church: in the same manner as the
Infallibility of Moses and other Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles, was
proved; which was by the Miracles they wrought, and by other Signs of an
Infallible Spirit, Direction and Guidance from God, which appeared in them.
Whence it is clear, that we incur no Circle. It Is true, after we have proved
the Churches Infallibility by these Signs and Motives, namely by Sanctity of
Life, Miracles, Efficacy, Purity, and Excellency of Doctrine, Fulfilling of
Prophesies, Succession of lawfully-sent Pastors, Unity, Antiquity, and the
very Name of Catholic, etc. I say, after we have proved in geneneral her
Infallibility by these and the like Motives; then, having received the
Scripture by this Infallible Authority, (proved, as we see, another way and
independently of Scripture) we may (and Authors commonly do) without any
shadow of a vicious circle, confirm the same by Scripture: which
Scripture-proofs are only secondary and ex suppositione, not Prime and
absolute; and most usually contain a proof ad hominem, or ex principles
concessis against Sectaries, who denying the Infallibility of the Church, and
questioning many times, or cavilling about our Motives of Credibility, yet
admitting the Divine Authority of Scripture, are more easily convinced by clear
Texts of Scripture, then by the other proofs. And in this we do no otherwise,
then St. Augustine has done before us, writing against Heretics.

2. But because we have often promised to prove the Infallibility of the
Church, it will be necessary to insist some what longer upon this point, and
declare the matter at large. We say then, that the Church is proved in general
to be Infallible, the same way that Moses with other Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles, were first proved to be Infallible. For, the Israelites seeing Moses
to be a person very Devout, Mild, Charitable, Chaste, and endowed with the
gift of working Miracles, were upon that ground obliged to receive him for a
true Prophet, and to believe him Infallible, by acknowledging as true and
certain whatever he proposed to them from God. They believed our Lord and
Moses, says Exodus 14. 31.
the Scripture.

Moreover for the Testimony of Moses the Israelites believed the Scripture,
and other things more clearly; and in particular concerning Moses himself,
that in the House of God he was most faithful, and that God spoke to him mouth
to mouth, and the like. The same we may say of Number. 12. 7.
Christ our Savior. For, there appeared in him so great Sanctity of life, such
Grace of speech, and Glory of Miracles, that all, to whom he preached, were
bound to acknowledge him for the great Prophet and Messiah; as St. Andrew with
the rest of Christ's Disciples did, when they said, we have found the Messiah.
Thus they were bound at first to receive John 1. 41.
him as Infallible, and afterward to believe whatsoever he taught them; as
that he was true God and Man, that he was to redeem the world with his blood
upon the Cross, etc.

Neither can any man justly here reply, that the Disciples and first Christians
were obliged thus to receive our Blessed Savior for the Scripture, which gives
Testimony of him. Thus I say, no man can justly reply. For the Gentiles
received not that Scripture; and yet they were bound to acknowledge Christ, and
believe him Infallible. And though some learned Jews might perhaps gather this
out of Scripture, yet even without the Scripture the works of Christ were of
themselves abundantly sufficient to prove who he was, both to the learned and
unlearned. Wherefore our Savior always referred them to his works, as giving
abundant Testimony of him. I have (said he) greater Testimony John 5. 36.
then John; for the works which the Father has given me to perfect them, the
very works (which I do) give Testimony of me, that the Father sent me. The like
we find him saying elsewhere. The works that I do in Joh. 10. 25, 38.
the Name of my Father give Testimony of me. And, if you will not believe me,
believe my works. By these places it appears, that the works of John 14. 11.
Christ, without Scripture, proved him to be the true Messiah and Infallible.

This Doctrine is also verified in the Apostles, who received Commission from
Christ to preach every where, and TO CONFIRM THEIR WORDS with Signs that
followed: by which signs all their Hearers were Mark. 14. 19.
bound to submit themselves unto them, and to acknowledge their words for
Infallible Oracles of Truth; as the Apostles themselves testified, Acts 5. 28.
Where we find, that a Controversy arising in those Primitive times among the
Christians, the Apostles and Ancients assembled together; and having first
concluded by themselves what was to be held for Truth in the matters
controverted, imposed their Decree as Infallible Doctrine, upon all others, in
these words, It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and Us, etc.

As therefore Moses, our Blessed Savior and his Apostles, were proved
Infallible by their works, signs, and miracles, without Scripture, so is the
Church, without help of the same, sufficiently proved to be Infallible, by the
Motives of Credibility: which being the effects and properties of the Church,
do Declare, (...), and Demonstrate her immediately, and the Scriptures only as
they are found in her and acknowledged by her. Wherefore though Heretics have
the Scripture, yet being out of the true Church, they do wholly want these
signs of Infallibility: of which see Bellarmin and other Catholic Authors
discoursing more at large, De notis Ecclesiae. It Is sufficient for the present
to have declared how Catholics fall not into a Circle, as Ibid. number. (...)
page 61.
his Lordship here pretends they do. For they, primarily and absolutely, prove
the Infallibility of the Church by the Motives of (...), and not by Scripture:
though afterward, and as it were secondarily (as we said before) they prove it
also (especially to those who admit Scripture, as Protestants do) by the
Scripture it self; which we acknowledge, with the Relatour, to be a higher
proof, (especially against them) then the Churches Tradition. Yet we deny, that
those other proofs from the Motives of Credibility, can be in reason
questionable, (as he says they are) until we come to Scripture. Neither do any
Catholic Authors disagree in this; because they unanimously teach, that the
Motives of Credibility make our Church EVIDENTLY CREDIBLE; and by consequence
she is sufficiently proved to be True by them alone.

Now as concerning that Assertion, which the Bishop urges, that Ibidem.
the principles of any Conclusion must be of more credit, then the Conclusion
it self; and his inference thereupon, viz. that the Articles of Faith, the
Trinity, the Resurrection, and the rest being Conclusions, and the Principles
by which they are concluded, being only Ecclesiastical Tradition, it must
needs follow, that the Tradition is more Infallible, then the Articles of
Faith, if the Faith, which we have of the Articles, should be finally resolved
into the veracity of the Churches Testimony. I answer, the ground of all this
Discourse Ibidem.
is the Authority of Aristotle, whose words the Bishop thus cites in the
Margent. 1. Poster. c. 2. T. 16. Quocirca si (...) (propter prima) scimus and
credimus, illa quoque scimus and credimus (...) (magis) quia PER ILLA scimus
and credimus etiam posteriora. Wherefore (says he) if we know and believe all
other things for or by virtue of the First Principles, we know and believe them
(to wit the First Principles themselves) much more; because by them we know and
believe all other things. In which words we confess, the Philosopher does very
well declare the proceeding of the Understanding, (or Mind of Man) when it
works naturally and necessarily; by and from the evidence, or clearness of its
Object: but not when it works supernaturally, and produces supernatural and
Free Acts, (...), or at least principally from the Impulse and Inclination of
the will; for in such cases the Maxim holds not, viz. That the Principles of a
Conclusion must be of more Credit, then the Conclusion it self. Now the Act of
Believing is such an Act; that is, which the Understanding Elicites, rather by
a Voluntary and Free inclination and Consent of the will, then from any Evident
Certainty in the Object, whereto it assents.

3. That this may further appear, I distinguish a double proceeding in
Probations; the one is per principia intrinseca, (by intrinsecal principles)
that is, such as have a necessary, natural connection with the things proved,
and do manifest and lay open the objects themselves. The other is per principia
extrinseca (by extrinsecal Principles) that is, such as have no natural or
necessary connection with, nor do produce any such evident manifestation of the
Thing proved; but their efficacy, viz. whereby they determine the Understanding
to Assent, does wholly depend on the worth and virtue of that external
Principle whereby such Probations are made. And this kind of proof is called
Probatio ab Authoritate (an Argument from Authority:) which Authority is
nothing, but the veracity, knowledge, and virtue of him, to whom we give
assent, when we receive such or such an affirmation from him. Now (as I said
above,) we our selves either hear immediately what he affirms, and then we
assent immediately, and solely for his Authority; or we hear it mediately from
the report of others: who, if of unquestionable credit, we assent that he did
affirm it, upon the Authority of the Reporters: yet so as we should not give an
undoubted assent to the thing it self, but for the undeniable Authority of the
First Deliverer.

To apply this doctrine: when we believe any thing with Divine Faith, it
proceeds not from any probation per principia intrinseca, from any thing that
has natural connection, dependence, or inference of, or with the thing
believed; but is purely propter principia extrinseca, for and from extrinsecal
principles, to wit, the Authority, Veracity, Goodness, and Knowledge of God
affirming it. Now the Prophets and Apostles, assented to what God spoke
immediately unto them. And the like is Affirmable, in some proportion, of their
immediate Hearers. But succeeding Ages had it, ( viz. Gods Revelation) both
from Christ and his Apostles only mediately, and immediately from their
respective Pastors. Now that we may be assured hereof Infallibly, we must have
some infallible Testimony to ascertain it unto us; which can be no other then
the Church.

4. Neither will it be necessary, precisely for this reason, to affirm in the
Resolution of our Faith, That the Churches Declaration in matters of Faith is
absolutely and simply Divine, or that God speaks immediately by her
Definitions; or that our Faith is Resolved into the voice of the Church, as
into its formal object: but it is enough to say our Faith is Resolved into Gods
Revelations (whether written or unwritten) as its formal object: and our
Infallible Assurance, that the Things we believe as Gods Revelations, are
revealed from him, is Resolved into the Infallibility of the Churches
Definitions, teaching us, that they are his Revelations. Seeing therefore our
Faith (in this way of proceeding) is not resolved into the Churches Authority,
as the formal Motive of our Assent, but only as an assured Testimony, that
such and such Articles, as the Church defines to be matters of Faith, are truly
revealed from God, (as she assures us they are,) it is not necessary, the
Churches Testimony should be a new immediate Revelation from God, but only
Supernaturally Infallible, by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost preserving her
from all error, in defining any thing as a point of Christian Faith, that is,
as a Truth revealed from God, which is not truly and really so revealed.

If then it be demanded, why we believe such Books as are contained in the
Bible to be the word of God, we answer, because it is a Divine Unwritten
Tradition, that they are his word; and this Divine Tradition is the formal
object, whereon our Faith relyes: But if it be further demanded, how we are
certain that it is a Divine Tradition, we answer, the certainty we have thereof
is from the Infallible Testimony of the Church, teaching us it is such a
Tradition. Thus the Articles of our Faith are delivered from God, but kept by
the Church; they spring from God as the Fountain, but run down in a full Stream
through the Channel, and within the Banks of the Church: they are sowed by the
hand of God, but grow up in the field of the Church: They are spoken by the
mouth of God, but we hear them by the voice of the Church, assuring us that God
spoke them; which we could never elevate our hearts to believe with Divine
Faith, but by the Testimony of Gods Church, which gives us a full assurance of
his Revelation.

Thus then the Church being supernaturally Infallible in all her Definitions of
Faith, will be a sufficient ground to ascertain us of those Holy writings,
which God by unwritten Tradition revealed to the Church, in time of the
Apostles, to be his written word. For if her Definition herein be absolutely
infallible, then what she defines as revealed from God to be his written word,
is undoubtedly such: insomuch that Christians being irrefregably assured
thereof by the Churches Infallible declaration, believe this Article with
Divine Faith, because revealed from God, who cannot deceive them; that
Revelation being the only formal object into which they resolve their Faith;
and the Churches Assurance the ground to persuade them that it is infallibly a
Divine Revelation, or Tradition. The Churches Definition therefore is like
Approximation in the working of natural causes; to wit, a necessary condition,
prerequired to their working by their own natural force; yet is it self no
cause, but an application only of the efficient cause to the subject, on which
it works; seeing nothing can work immediately on what is distant from it.

Thus Gods Revelations delivered to the Church without writing were, and are,
the only formal cause of our assent in Divine Faith; but because they are as
it were distant from us, having been delivered (that is revealed) so many ages
past, they are approximated, or immediately applied to us, by the Infallible
Declaration of the present Church; which still confirming by her doctrine and
practice what was first revealed, makes it as firmly believed by us, as it was
by the Primitive Christians, to whom it was first revealed. So a Commonwealth,
by still maintaining, practicing, and approving the Laws enacted in its first
Institution, makes them as much observed and esteemed by the people, in all
succeeding Ages, for their Primitive Laws, as they were by those who lived in
the time of their first Institution.

Hence it appears our Faith rests only upon Gods immediate Revelation as its
formal object; though the Churches voice be a condition so necessary for its
resting thereon, that it can never attain that formal object without it. By
which Discourse the Bishops Argument is solved, as also his Text out of
Aristotle. For, seeing here is no Scientifical proof per principia intrinseca,
there can be no necessary and natural Connection of Principles, evidencing the
Thing proved, as is required in Demonstrative Knowledge: the thing it self,
which is believed, remaining still obscure, and all the Assurance we have of
it, depending on the Authority of Him that testifies it unto us.

Lastly, hence are solved the Authorities of Canus, (cited also by his
Lordship) who only affirms, what I have here confessed, viz. That our Faith is
not resolved into the Authority of the Church, as the formal object of it; and
that of page 65. where he contends, that the Church gives not the Truth and
Authority to the Scriptures, but only teaches them, with Infallible Certainty,
to be Canonical, or the undoubted Word of God, etc. the very same thing, with
what I here maintain.

The Churches Authority then being more known unto us, then the Scriptures, may
well be some reason of our admitting them, yet the Scriptures still retain
their Prerogative above the Church. For, being Gods Immediate Revelation, they
require a greater respect and reverence, then the mere Tradition of the Church.
Whence it is likewise, that our Authors do here commonly distinguish Two Sorts
of Certainty; the one (...); the other ex part subjecti. The first proceeds
from the Clearness of the Object; the other from the Adhesion (as Philosophers
call it) of the Will, which makes the Understanding stick so close to the
Object, that it cannot be separated from it. This latter kind of Certainty
has chiefly place in Faith; a thing unknown to Aristotle. Whence it is, that
when we believe, we do adhere more firmly to the Articles of Faith, then to any
Principle whatsoever, though evident to natural reason: which firm Adhesion of
ours is grounded partly on the Greatness and Nobleness of the Object, and
partly on the importance of the matter; which is such, that our Salvation
depends upon it. For that Immediate Revelation, namely the Scripture, being in
it self of so much greater Worth and Dignity then the Churches mere Tradition,
does worthily more draw our affection, then the other; notwithstanding the
other be more known to us, and the Cause of our admitting his.

Thus we have shown, that we hold not the Churches Definition for the formal
object of Faith, (as the Relatour by disputing so much against it, would seem
to impose on us) though our present Faith ('it is true) relyes upon it, as an
Infallible Witness both of the written and unwritten word of God, which is the
Formal Object. Wherefore, when we say we believe the Catholic Church, we
profess to believe not only the Things which she teaches, but the Church her
self so teaching, as an Infallible witness: and the contrary we shall never
believe, till it be proved otherwise; then by saying (as the Bishop here does)
it were no hard thing to prove.

By what has been said it appears, that there is no Devise, or Cunning at all
(as the Relatour would have it thought of us) either in taking away any thing
due to the Fathers, Councils, or Scripture, or in giving too much to the
Tradition of the present Church. For we acknowledge all due respect to the
Fathers, and as much (to speak modestly) as any of our Adversaries party. But
they must pardon us, if we prefer the general Interpretation of the present
Church before the result of any man's particular Fancy. As for Scripture, we
ever extol it above the Definitions of the Church; yet affirm it to be in many
places so obscure, that we cannot be certain of its true sense, without the
help of a living, Infallible Judge, to determine and declare it: which can be
no other then the Present Church. And what we say of Scripture, may with
proportion be applied to Ancient General Councils. For, though we willingly
submit to them all; yet where they happen to be obscure in matters requiring
Determination, we seek the Assistance and Direction of the same living
Infallible Rule, viz. The Tradition, or the Sentence of the present Church.

This being the Substance of our Doctrine, concerning the Resolution of Faith,
as we have osten intimated, it is evident, the cunning of the Device the Bishop
speaks of, is none of ours, but his own, while he falsely charge us, that we
finally resolve all Authorities of the Fathers, Councils, and Scriptures into
the Authority of the present Roman Church: whereas in points of Faith we ever
resolve them finally into Gods word, ^
or Divine Revelation; though we must of necessity repair to the Catholic
Church to have them Infallibly testified unto us.

But the Bishop thought this injury not great enough, unless he redoubled it by
any additional false Imputation of other two absurdities, which he avers to
follow evidently from our doctrine. To the first, viz. That we ascribe as great
Authority (if not greater) to a part of the Catholic Church as we do to the
whole, I answer, there follows no such thing from any Doctrine of ours, but
from his Lordships wilfully-mistaken Notion of the Catholic Church; which he
most desperately extends to all that bear the name of Christians, without
exception of either Schismatiques or Heretics, that so he might be sure to
include himself within her Pale, and make the Reader absurdly believe, that the
Roman Church, taken in her full latitude, is but a (...), or Parcel of the
Catholic Church believed in the Creed. This indeed, (to use his Lordships
phrase) is full of Absurdity in Nature, in Reason, in all things. For, it is to
pretend an Addition of Integral parts to a Body already entire in all its
Integrals: seeing the Roman Church, taken in the sense it ought to be, as
comprising all Christians that are in her Communion, is the sole and whole
Catholic Church; as is evident in Ecclesiastical History, which clearly shows
throughout all Ages, that none condemned of Heresy or Schism, by the Roman
Church, were ever accounted any part of the Catholic Church. And this I would
have proved at large, had his Lordship done any more then barely supposed the
contrary.

If any man shall object, that the Bishop charges the absurdity upon us in
respect of the Roman Church, that we ascribe as great Authority, (if not
greater) to a part of it, as we do to the whole, viz. In our General Councils,
I answer, that is so far from being an absurdity, that it were absurd to
suppose it can be otherwise: which the Objecter himself will clearly fee, when
he considers, that the like must needs be granted even in Civil Governments.
For instance, the Parliament of England is but a handful of men compared with
the whole Nation, yet have they greater Authority, in order to the making, or
repealing of Laws, then the whole Nation, were they met together in a Body,
Men, Women, and Children: which would produce nothing but an absolute
confusion. The Application is so easy, I leave it to the Objecter himself to
make.

The second accusation which the Bishop lays to our charge, is this; That in
our Doctrine concerning the Infallibility of our Church, our proceeding is most
unreasonable, in regard we will not have recourse to Texts of Scripture,
exposition of Fathers, Propriety of Language, Conference of Places, etc. but
argue that the Doctrine of the present Church of Rome is true and Catholic,
because she professes it to be such: which, says he, is to prove Idem per
Idem. Whereas truly we most willingly embrace, and have frequent recourse to
all the Bishops mentioned helps; and that with much more Candor, then
Protestants can with any ground of reason pretend to, considering their
manifold wrestings both of Scripture and Fathers, when they either urge them
against us, or endeavor to evade their clear Testimonies for us.

Neither are we in any danger of committing a Circle, or proving Ibidem. page
63. 64.
Idem per Idem, because his Lordship sees not how we can possibly wind our
selves out. The business is not so insuperably difficult in our Doctrine. For
if we be asked, how we know the Church to be Infallible, our last answer is not
(as he feigns) because she professes her self to be such; but we know her to be
Infallible by the Motives of Credibility, which sufficiently prove her to be
such. So the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles were, in their time, known to be
Infallible Oracles and Teachers of Truth, by the like signs and Motives: only
this difference there is: that these ( viz. Christ and his Apostles, etc.)
confirming their Doctrine, gave Infallible Testimony, that what they taught,
was the Immediate Revelation and Word of God, whereas the Motives, which
confirm the Declarations and Authority of the Church, do only show, that she
Infallibly delivers to us the same Revelations (I mean the same for sense and
substance of Doctrine) which the other received immediately from God. And that
to rest in this manner upon the Authority of the present Church, in the
Resolution of our Faith, is not to prove Idem per Idem, (as the Bishop falsely
imputes to us) I clearly show by two several Instances, which even those of his
party must of necessity allow.

5. The first Instance is of the Church in time of the Apostles. For who sees
not, that a Sectary might in those days have argued against the Apostolical
Church by the very same Method his Lordship here uses against the present
Catholic Church? might he not have taxed those Christians of unreasonable
proceeding in their belief, and have set it forth (as the Bishop does) thus?
For, if you ask them why they believe the whole Doctrine of the Apostles to be
the sole True Catholic Faith, their answer is, because it is agreeable to the
Doctrine of Christ. If you ask them how they know it to be so, they will
produce the Words, Sentences, and Works of Christ, who taught it. But if you
ask a third time, by what means they are assured, that those Testimonies do
indeed make for them and their cause, or are really the Testimonies and
Doctrine of Christ, they will not then have recourse to those Testimonies (or
doctrine) but their final answer is, they know it to be so, because the present
Apostolic Church does witness it. And so by consequence prove Idem per Idem.
Thus the Sectary.

By which it is clear, that the Bishops objection against the present Roman
Church (wherein he would seem to make a discovery of her Corruptions and
Politic Interests) is equally applyable to the Primitive Apostolic Church
in its undeniable purity. But at once to answer both the Bishops and Sectaries
objection, I affirm, that the prime and precise reason to be given, why we
believe the voice of the present Church, witnessing, or giving Assurance of
Divine Revelation to us, is neither Scripture, Councils, nor Fathers, no, nor
the Oral Doctrine of Christ himself, but the pregnant and convincing Motives of
Credibility, which moved both the Primitive Christians and us, in our
respective times, to believe the Church. Not that we are necessitated to
resolve our Faith into the Motives, as its Formal Object, or ultimate Reason of
Assent, (for that can be no other, then the Divine Authority Revealing) but as
into most certain Inducements, powerfully and prudently inclining our will, to
accept the present Church as the Infallible Organ ordained by Divine Authority
to teach us the sure way of salvation.

The second Instance is ad hominem, against the Bishop, in relation to those
Fundamental Truths, wherein he confesses the whole Church neither does nor can
err. For, suppose a Separatist should thus argue with his Lordship, your
Doctrine concerning the Infallibility of the Church in Fundamentals is most
unreasonable. For, if a man ask you, why you believe all those points, which
you hold for Fundamental (for example the Resurrection of the Dead, and life
everlasting) your answer will be, because they are agreeable to the Doctrine
and Tradition of Christ. And if you be asked, how you know them to be so, you
will (no doubt) produce the Words, Sentences, and Works of Christ, who taught
the said Fundamental points. But if he ask you a third time, by what means you
are assured, that those Testimonies do make for you, or are indeed the Words,
Sentences, and Works of Christ, you will not then have recourse to the
Testimonies and Words themselves (that is, to the Bible) but your final Answer
will be, you know them to be so, and that they do make for you, because the
present Church does Infallibly witness so much to you from Tradition, and
according to Tradition: which is to prove Idem per Idem, as much as we.

And if the said Separatist, further enquiring about the precedent Authorities
of Scriptures, Councils, Fathers, Apostles, and Christ himself (while he lived
on Earth) shall ask, why such Fundamentals are believed upon the sole Authority
of the Present Church, as the last Testimony Infallibly assuring, that those
Fundamental Points, and all the precedent Confirmations of them, are from God,
it is evident, the Bishops party has no other way to avoid a Circle, but by
answering, they believe the Scriptures, Councils, etc. by reason of the
Convincing Motives of Credibility, powerfully inducing and inclining the will
to accept the Present Church, as the Infallible Organ, Ordained by Divine
Authority to teach us. Which Infallibity must come from the Holy Ghost, and be
more then Humane or Moral; and therefore must be truly (...) and proceed from
Gods most absolute and Divine Veracity, (in fulfilling his Promises) as from
its Radical Principle, and from the Operation of the Holy Ghost, as the
immediate Cause, preserving the Church from error in all such points.

Thus we are easily got out of the Circle, leaving the Bishop still tumbling
himself in it. For we do not finally rest on the Present Church, as consisting
of men subject to error, as his Lordship vainly suggests: Nor do we rest upon
the Motives of Credibility as the Formal Object of our Faith, but as inducing
us to rely on the said Church, ordained by Divine Authority to teach us; and is
consequently Infallible. Whereas the Bishop does but dance in a Round, while
enquiring for some Infallible warrant of the Word of God, he thus concludes,
page 66. It Is agreed on by me, it can be nothing but the Word of God; which
must needs end in an apparent Circle, as proving Idem per Idem. And whereas
immediately after he runs on prolixly, in Distinguishing between Gods written
and unwritten Word, as though he would make the latter serve for Infallible
proof of the former, he never reflects, that the said latter, viz. Gods
unwritten Word, does necessarily stand in as much need of proof as the former.

Now as concerning the Authority of the Church, of which the Motives of
Credibility do ascertain us, it is not necessary, that it be esteemed or styled
absolutely Divine, as the Bishop would have it: yet as Ibid. number. 6.
to this purpose, and so far as concerns precise Infallibility, or certain
Connection with Truth, it is so truly supernatural and certain, that in this
respect it yields nothing to the Scripture it self; I mean in respect of the
precise Infallibility and absolute veracity of whatsoever it Declares and
Testifies to be matter of Divine Faith: though in many other respects we do not
deny, but the Authority of the Church is much inferior to that of Scripture.
For first, the Holy Scripture has a larger extent of Truth; because there not
only every reason, but every word and tittle is matter of Faith, at least
implicitly, and necessarily to be believed by all that know it to be a part of
Scripture: but in the Definitions of the Church neither the Arguments, Reasons,
nor Words are, absolutely speaking, matters of Faith, but only the Thing
Declared to be such. Besides, the Church has certain limits, and can Define
nothing, but what was either Revealed before, or has such connection with it,
as it may be Rationally and Logically deduced from it, as appertaining to the
Declaration and Defense of that which was before Revealed. Moreover the Church
has the Receiving and Interpreting of Scripture for its End, and consequently
is in that respect inferior to it. Hence it is, that Holy Scripture is per
Excellentiam called the Word of God and Divine: whereas the Testimony of the
Church is only said by Catholic Divines (and in particular by A. C.) IN SOME
SORT, or IN A MANNER Divine. By which manner of speaking, their intention is
not to deny it to be equal even to Scripture it self in point of Certainty and
Infallibility, but only to show the Prerogatives of Scripture above the
Definitions of the Church.

Add, that although we hold it necessary (and therein agree with our
Adversary) that we are to believe the Scriptures to be the word of God, upon
DIVINE Authority; yet standnig precisely in what was propounded by Mr. Fisher,
page 59. ( How the Bishop knew Scripture to be Scripture) there will be no
necessity of Defending the Churches Authority to be simply Divine. For if it be
but Infallible by the promised Assistance of the Holy Ghost, it must give such
Assurance that whatever is Defined by it to be Scripture is most certainly
Scripture, that no Christian can doubt of it without Mortal Sin, and shaking
the Foundation of Christian Faith, as has been often Declared.

And the immediate reason, why the Authority teaching Scripture to be the Word
of God, must be absolutely Infallible, is because it is an Article of Christian
Faith, that all those Books, which the Church has Defined for Canonical
Scripture, are the Word of God; and seeing every Article of Faith must be
Revealed, or taught by Divine Authority, this also must be so revealed; and
consequently no Authority less then Divine, is sufficient to move us to believe
it as an Article of Faith. Now it is to be remembered, (and A. C. notes it page
49, 50.) that the Prime Authority, for which we believe Scripture to be the
Word of God, is Apostolical Tradition, or the unwritten Word of God; which
moves us (as the formal Object of our Faith) to believe that Scripture is the
Written Word of God; and the Definition of the Present Church, assuring us
Infallibly that there is such a Tradition, applies this Article of our Faith
unto us, as it does all the rest, whether the Voice, or Definition of the
Present Church in it self be absolutely Divine, or no. Neither can there be
shown any more difficulty in believing this as an Apostolical Tradition, upon
the Infallible Declaration of the Church, then in believing any other
Apostolical Tradition whatsoever, upon the like Declaration.

His Lordships Argument, ( that the whole may err, because every part may
err) is disproved by himself; because in Fundamentals he grants the whole
Church cannot err, and yet that any particular man may err, even in those
points. Wherefore he must needs agree with us in this, that the perfection of
Infallibility may be applied to the whole Church, though not to every
particular Member thereof.

Now further concerning the Churches Infallibility, though she be so tied to
means, as that she is bound to use them, yet in her Definitions she receives
not her Infallibility from the Means, (as the Bishop must also affirm of his
Fundamentals) but from the assistance of the Holy Ghost, promised to the
Church: which makes her Definitions truly Infallible, though they be not New
Revelations, but only Declarations of what was formerly Revealed. For, as the
immediate Revelation it self is for no other reason Infallible, but because it
proceeds from God; and in case it should happen to be not true and Certain, the
Error would be ascribed to God: So in the Definitions of the Church, if she
should fall into Error, it would likewise be ascribed to God himself.

Neither is it necessary for us to affirm, that the Definition of the Church is
Gods immediate Revelation; as, if the Definition were false, Gods Revelation
must be also such: It is enough for us to aver, that Gods promise would be
infringed; as truly it would in that Supposition. For did he not so preserve
his Church in her Definitions of Faith (by Assistance of the Holy Ghost) as
that she should never Define any thing for a point of Catholic Faith, which
were not Revealed from God, it would imply a destruction of Gods veracity, and
make him deny himself. All which Doctrine is so well grounded on Christ's
Promise, assuring us he will always assist his Church, that the Bishop has
little reason to accuse us of rather maintaining a party, then seeking Truth:
as though we set Doctrines on foot to foment Division, and were rather lead by
Animosity, then Reason.

CHAP. 6. No unquestionable Assurance of Apostolical Tradition, but for the
Infallible Authority of the Present Church.
ARGUMENT.
1. Apostolical Traditions are the unwritten word of God: and eight Instances
concerning them witnessed by St. Augustine. 2. Many things spoken by our
Savior, not delivered by way of Tradition to the Church; and many
Church-Traditions not the word of God. 3. Tradition not known by its own light,
( any more then Scripture) to be the word of God. 4. The Private Spirit, held
by Calvin and Whitaker for the sole Motive of Believing Scripture to be the
word of God. 5. A Dialogue between the Bishop and a Heathen Philosopher. 6. The
case of a Christian dying without sight of Scripture. 7. Occham, Saint
Augustine, Canus, Almain and Gerson, either miscited, or their sense perverted
by the Bishop.

1. THe Bishop having been hardly put to it in the precedent Chapter, to find
some way, whereby to prove Scripture to be the Word of God, he continually
treading on the brink of a Circle, at length falls on the unwritten Word. It
seems he is afraid, he shall be forced to come stooping to the Church to show
it him, and finally depend on her Authority. But being loath to trust her, he
grows so wary, that he will admit no unwritten word, but what is shown him
delivered by the Prophets and Apostles. Would he read it in their Books? Now if
you hearken to his Discourse, he presently cries out, he cannot swallow into
his belief that every thing which his Adversary says is the unwritten word of
God, is so indeed. Nor is it our desire he should. But we crave the indifferent
Readers Patience to hear reason.

According to which it is apparent, that there must be some Authority to assure
us of this main Principle of Faith, that Scripture is the Word of God. This our
Ensurancer is Apostolical Tradition: and well may it be so: for such Tradition
Declared by the Church, is the unwritten Word of God. We do not pretend (as the
Bishop objects) that every Doctrine, which any particular Person, as A. C.
Bellarmin, or other private Doctor, may please to call Tradition, is therefore
to be received as Gods unwritten Word; but such Doctrinal Traditions only, as
are warranted to us by the Church for truly Apostolical; which are consequently
Gods unwritten word. Of which kind are those, which not I, but St. Augustine
judged to be such in his time, and have ever since been conserved and esteemed
such in the whole Church of Christ.

The first Apostolical Tradition named by Saint Augustine, is that we now treat,
that Scripture is the Word of God. Ego vero Evangelio non crederem, (...) me
Catholicae Ecclesiae commoveret Auctoritas. D. Aug. Tom. 6. cont. Epist.
Fundament. cap. 5.
He affirms, he would not believe the Gospel, but for the Authority of the
Church moving him thereto; and sticks so close to her Authority, that he says,
Quod si forte in Evangelio aliquid apertissimum de Manichxi Apostolatu invenire
potueris, infirmabis mihi Catholicorum Auctoritatem qui jubent, ut tibi non
credam: qua infirmata jam nec Evangelio credere potero, quia per cos illi
credideram. Ibid.
If any clear Testimony were brought out of Scripture against the Church, he
would neither believe the Scripture, nor the Church. Actibus Apostolorum
necesse est me credere, si credo Evangelio: quoniam utramque Scripturam
similiter mihi Catholica commendat Auctoritas. Ibidem.
Nay, that he as much believed the Acts of the Apostles, as the Gospel it self,
because the same Authority of the Church assured him both of the one and the
other.

A second Tradition is, Sicut Patrem in illis libris nusquam Ingenitum legimus,
and tamen dicendum esse defenditur. D. Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 174.
That the Father is not begotten of any other Person.

A third, Integra fide credendum est, Beatam Mariam, Dci Christi matrem, and
Virginem concepisse, and Virginem genuisse, and post partum Virginem
permansisse: nec est Blasphemiae (...) acquiescendum, qui dixit, Fuit Virgo
ante partum, non Virgo post partum. D. Aug. Tom. 3. lib. de Dogmat. Ecclesiast.
cap. 69. lib. de Haeresib. Haer. 84.
that the blessed Virgin Mary was, and remained always a Virgin, both, before,
in, and after the Birth of Christ: St. Augustine terming Helvidius his opinion
(who denied it) a Blasphemy, and for that reason inserting him in his Catalogue
of Heretics.

The fourth, Quam Consuetudinem, (scil. non (...) Baptismum, etc.) credo ex
Apostolica Traditione venientem: Sicut multa non inveniuntur in literis eorum,
neque in Conciliis posterorum; and tamen quia custodiuntur per universam
Ecclesiam, non nisi ab ipsis tradita and commendata creduntur. D. Aug. Tom. 7.
de Baptism. contr. Donatist. lib. 2. cap. 7. Et iterum. Sed Consuetudo illa,
quae opponebatur Cypriano ab little (scil. Apostolorum) Traditione exordium
sumpsisse credenda est: Sicut sunt multa, quae universa tenet Ecclesia, and ob
hoc ab Apostolis praecepta been creduntur, qnamvis scripta non inveniantur. Id.
Ibidem. lib. 5. cap. 23.
That those, who are Baptized by Heretics, are not to be Rebaptized.

The fifth, Consuetudo Matris Ecclesiae in Baptizandis Parvulis nequaqnam
spernenda est, neque ullo modo superflua deputanda; nec omnino credenda, (...)
Apostolica esset Traditio. D. Aug. Tom. 3. de Genef. ad liter. lib. 10. cap. 23.
That Infants are to be baptized.

The Sixth, Ubi ponis Parvulos Baptizatos? Profecto in numero Credentium. Nam
ideo and consuetudine Ecclesiae Antiqua, Canonica, Fundatissima, Parvuli
Baptizati Fideles vocantur. Et si de his quaerimus, iste Infans Christianus
est? Respondetur, Christianus. Catechumenus an Fidelis? Fidelis, utique a Fide:
Fides a Credendo. Inter Credentes igitur Baptizatos Parvulos numerabis; nec
judicare ullo modo aliter audebis, si non vis esse apertus Haereticus. D. Aug.
Tom. 10. Sermon. 14. de verb. Apostoli. Et iterum. Credunt and Infantes. Unde
Credunt? Quomodo Credunt? Fide Parentum. Si Fide Parentum purgantur, peccato
Parentum polluti (...). Corpus mortis in primis Parentibus generavit eos
peccatores: Spiritus vitae in posterioribus Parentibus Regeneravit eos Fideles.
Tu das Fidem non respondeuti: and ego peccatum nihil agenti. Id. Ibid. Sermon.
eodem prope finem.
that Children Baptized are to be numbered amongst the faithful.

The seventh, Et liquido apparet, quando primum acceperunt Discipuli Corpus and
Sanguinem Domini, non cos accepisse jcjunos. Nunquid tamen propterea
calumniandum est universae Ecclesiae, quod a jejunis semper accipitur. Ex hoc
enim placuit Spiritui Sancto, ut in honorem tanti Sacramenti, in os Christiani
prius Dominicum Corpus intraret, quam caeteri cibi. Nam ideo per universum
orbem mos iste servatur. D. Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 118. ad Januar.
that the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist is to be received fasting.

The eighth, Dominicum Diem Apostoli and Apostolici viri ideo religiosa (...)
habendum sanxerunt, quia in codem Redemptor noster a mortuis resurrexit. D.
Aug. Tom. 10. Sermon. 215. de Temp.
that Sunday (the first Day of the Week) is to be kept holy by Christians.

It is so natural to Protestants to build upon false grounds, that they cannot
enter into a question without supposing a Falsehood; so his Lordship here feeds
his humor, and obtrudes many. He makes Bellarmin, and all Catholic Doctors
maintain, that whatever they please to call Tradition, must presently be
received by all as Gods unwritten Word. After, he keeps a fluttering between
Tradition, and the unwritten Word, asking, if they be Convertible Terms; and
then whether any Word of God be unwritten, etc. Which digressive Discourse is
nothing, but a new Turn in his Labyrinth, to avoid the foil he foresaw himself
in danger of, in case he did here grapple with Bellarmin; who clearly delivers
his Doctrine in the place cited by the Bishop, cap. 2. viz. That the word
Tradition is general, and signifies any Doctrine communicated from one to
another, whether it be written or unwritten. By which it is evident, he makes
not Tradition and the unwritten Word of God Convertible. Afterward he divides
Traditions into Divine, Apostolical, and Ecclesiastical: and again into
Traditions belonging to Faith, and Traditions belonging to Manners. So that
according to Bellarmin it is clear, there are some Traditions, which are not
Gods unwritten word. Nevertheless Bellarmin, A. C. and all Catholics agree
against the Bishop, that we believe by Divine Faith that Scripture is Gods
Word, and that there is no other Word of God to assure us of this point, but
the Tradition delivered to us by the Church; and that such Tradition so
delivered must be the unwritten Word of God. I say such Tradition; for that we
admit in practice diverse Ecclesiastical Traditions, but neither in quality of
Gods Word, or Divine Traditions: nor are any of them contrary to the Word of
God, whether written or unwritten.

2. Now to return to his Lordship we grant, there are many unwritten Words of
God, never delivered over to the Church, for ought appears; and that there are
many Traditions of the Church, which are not the unwritten word of God; yet not
contrary to it. Wherefore his Lordship might herein have spared his labor,
since he proves but what we grant. And if the Church has received by Tradition
some Words of Christ not written, as well as written, and has delivered them
by Tradition to her Children, such written and unwritten Word of God cannot be
contrary to one another. For as the Church was Infallible in Defining what was
written, so is she also Infallible in Defining what was not written. And so she
can neither tradere non traditum, (as the Bishop urges) that is, make
Tradition of that, which was not delivered to her; nor can she be unfaithful to
God in not faithfully keeping the Depositum committed to her Trust. Neither can
her Sons ever justly accuse her of the contrary, (as he insinuates, they may)
but are bound to believe her Tradition, because she being Infallible, the
Tradition she delivers, can never be against the Word of their Father.

Now whereas the Bishop so confidently averrs, that wherever Christ held his
peace, and that his words are not registered, no man may dare without rashness
to say they were THESE or THESE, his Lordship must give me leave to tell him, I
must bind up his whole Assertion with this Proviso, But according as the
Church shall declare: for it is her Authority whereon we depend to know, when
and in what Christ held his peace, or whether his words, some or none, were
registered; as much, as we depend on her to know, whether Scripture be the Word
of God, or not. This our proceeding does unqestionably free us from all shadow
of rashness. Neither does St. Augustine say any thing in contradiction hereof.
For he only speaks against determining of a man's own head, what was spoken by
Christ, without ground or warrant from the Church. In like manner we grant,
there were many unwritten Words of God, which were never delivered over to the
Church, and therefore never esteemed Tradition: As there are many Traditions,
according to Bellarmin, which we cannot own for Gods unwritten Word; yet all
such as the Church receives, are conformable, at least not contrary to his Word
written or unwritten.

Such are the Ceremonies used in Baptism, of which the Relatour here speaks.
For the party to be baptized is Anointed, to signify, that like a Wrestler he
is to enter the list. So St. Chrysostom, D. Chrysostom. Hom 6. in cap. 2. ad
Coloss.
Inungitur baptizandus more Athletarum, qui stadium jam ingressuri sunt.
Spittle is applied to their Ears and Nostrils, as St. Ambrose D. Ambros. lib.
1. de Sacram. cap. 1.
says in Imitation of that our Savior did, Mark 7. who spitting touched the
tongue, and put his Fingers into the ears of the deaf and dumb man, before he
cured him. The like he did ( John 9. 3.) to the blind man: Wherefore these
Ceremonies are conformable to Scripture. Three Dippings were used in Baptism
to signify the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity; or our Saviors remaining
for three days in the Sepulcher, as St. Gregory D. Gregor. lib. 1. Epist. 41.
ad Leandr.
teaches. But this Ceremony is not used at all times, nor in all places, as
being not absolutely commanded by the Church. Wherefore Bellarm. de verb. Dei
non script. cap. 9.
Bellarmin (who proves the Ceremonies used in Baptism to be Apostolical
Traditions) says not, that every Tradition is Gods unwritten Word, but that we
must necessarily believe Scripture to be the Word of God: which seeing we
cannot believe for any written Word of his, we must either admit some Word of
God not written, to ground this our Belief on, (which can be no other then
Apostolical Tradition applied to us by the voice of the Church) or we shall
have no Divine Faith at all of this point; because all Divine Faith must rely
upon some Word of God. The Bishop therefore has no reason to go on with his
Enquiry; but must either fix here, or he will find no firm ground whereon to
rest his foot: as will appear both by the other ways of Resolving Faith by him
confuted; and by his own, which is every whit as confutable.

3. For the second way of proving Scripture to be the Word of God, to wit, that
it should be fully and sufficiently known, as by Divine and Infallible Ibidem.
number. 10. p. 69.
Testimony, lumine proprio, by the sole resplendency of the light it has in it
self, and by the witness it can so give to it self; this the Relatour himself
sufficiently confutes, and we agree with him in the confutation. However though
the Bishop knew full well, that we deny this Doctrine of knowing Scripture for
Gods Word by its own light, as much as himself or any of his party can do, yet,
as it were to justify the more my late accusation of his obtruding Falsehoods
to asperse us, he will needs suppose another here, viz. that the said Doctrine
may well agree with our grounds, in regard we hold (if you will believe him)
That Tradition may be known for Gods Word by its own Light; and consequently
the like may be said of Scripture. Which Inference indeed would be true, were
it not drawn from a false supposition; as most certainly it is. For all
Catholics hold it ridiculous, to believe, that either Scripture or Tradition
is discernable for Gods Word by its own Luster.

Nor is A. C. justly accusable in this point, as the Bishop would make him, by
misconstruing his words to signify, that Tradition is discernable by its own
Light to be the Word of God. For A. C's words, even as they are lamely cited by
the Bishop, do sufficiently vindicate him Ibidem. page 71.
from having any such meaning, as his Lordship would impose on him. The cited
words are these, Tradition of the Church is of a company which by its own light
shows it self to be Infallibly assisted, etc. where any man may easily see,
that the word which must properly relate to the immediate preceding word
company, even to make sense, and not to the more remote word Tradition. It Is
therefore clear, that A. C's Intention is only to affirm, that the Church is
known by her Motives of Credibility, which ever accompany her, and may very
properly be called her own Light.

As concerning the Question propounded by Mr. Fisher to be answered by Dr. W. I
find not one word, of Tradition being known by its own light, in it. If
therefore this Proposition, That a Tradition may be known to be such, (that is,
to be Gods unwritten Word) by the light it has in it self, be a matter to be
made sport with, (as the Bishop says it is) we shall not grudge him the mirth
he may have found in his own fiction. But before I leave this point, I desire
the Reader to consider what the Relatour grants, viz. that the Church now
admits of St. James and St. Ibidem. page 70.page 16. number. 12.
Jude's Epistles, and the Apocalypse, which were not received for diverse years,
after the rest of the New Testament: Yet would he elsewhere conclude against
the Church of Rome, that it had (...) in receiving more Books into the Canon,
then were received in Ruffinus his time. But if according to him, some Books
are now to be admitted without error for Canonical, which were not always
acknowledged to be such, certainly without error also, and upon the same
Authority, some Books may now be received into the Canon, which were not so in
Ruffinus his time. But this only by way of Digression.

As for the third way of proving Scripture to be Gods word, to wit, by the
Private Spirit, it is true, the Bishop professes to reject the Frenzy, as he
calls it, of Private Revelation, (except in some extraordinary Circumstances)
both as a thing that would render a man obnoxious to all the whisperings of a
seducing Private Spirit, and from whence can be number. 12. page 74.
drawn no proof to others, being (as he says) neither seen, nor felt of any,
but him that has it: Yet concerning this point he delivers himself in such a
roving way of discourse, as signifies nothing in effect, to what he would seem
to drive at; and so leaves the Reader wholly unsatisfied, how to prove
Scripture to be the Word of God Infallibly, without recourse, at last, to the
Private Spirit.

Nor was it possible for him to free himself from that Imputation, of recurring
to the Private Spirit, against any that should press the business home,
notwithstanding his Brags to the contrary, and his Thanks to A. C. whose
imperfectly-cited words he would fain improve to a freeing Ibid.
himself from necessity of recurring to the Private Spirit: which is opposite
to A. C's meaning, who thus urges against him by name of the Chaplain. The
Chaplain therefore, who, as it seems, will not admit Tradition to be in any
sort Divine and Infallible, while it introduces the Belief of Scripture to be
Divine Books, cannot sufficiently defend the Faith introduced of that point to
be Infallible, unless he admit an Infallible Impulsion of the Private Spirit EX
PART SUBJECTI, without any Infallible sufficiently applied Reason EX PART
OBJECTI, which he seems not, nor has reason to do, etc. Now I leave it to
any Indifferent man's judgment, whether the sense of those words be not this,
viz. That the Chaplain, or Bishop, seems indeed to reject the Private Spirit,
and has reason so to do: yet since he admits not Tradition to be in any sort
Divine and Infallible, he cannot sufficiently defend the Faith of Scriptures
being the Word of God to be Infallible, unless he admit an Infallible Impulsion
of the Private Spirit. But this part of A. C.'s Speech his Lordship very
prudently suppressed, to make way for a perversion of the other part: which taken
both together signify no less then what I have said, That the Bishop
professes to reject the Doctrine of the Private Spirit, yet neither did, nor
could prove Scripture to be the Word of God Infallibly, without recourse to
Private Revelation.

4. However, the Bishop was so far from avowedly countenancing this opinion,
that he chose rather to seem ignorant, then freely confess, that any Protestant
did hold it. For he grants no more, then that either some do think, there is no
other sufficient Warrant for this, then number. 11. page 72.
special Revelations, or the Private Spirit; or else, that we impose it upon
them: and that if they do mean by Faith, Objectum Fidei, (the object of Faith
that is to be believed) then they are out of the ordinary way. Here you see,
how doubtfully the Bishop speaks, either there are some such, or you (says he
to us) would have them think so: And if they do mean, etc. As if there could be
any doubt in either of these two particulars: Seeing Calvin, that great Doctor
of Protestancy, is so positive therein, and delivers that Doctrine so expressly
in his Institutions, lib. 1. cap. 7. 4. Jam si conscientiis optime consultum
volumus, etc. (...) est haec (...), ab arcano Spiritus testimonio. Calvin.
(...). lib. 1. cap. 7. 4. Et iterum. Scripturas (...) apud nos merentur
certitudinem, Spiritus testimonio consequi. Ibid. 5.
Where he clearly resolves, that to satisfy men's Consciences in this point,
viz. in the Belief that Scripture is the Word of God, and to keep them from
doubting, we must recurre to the Secret (or if you will the Private) Testimony
of the Spirit. And 5. where he professes, that Holy Scripture gains the
credit, (or certainty) which it has with us, from the Testimony of the Spirit.

But to come yet closer to the Bishop, Dr. Whitaker, a man that sucked the
Church of Englands Milk, as well as his Lordship, writes expressly thus, Esse
enim dicimus certius and illustrius Testimonium, quo nobis persuadcatur hos
libros esse sacros, Testimonium nempe internum Spiritus Sancti. Whitak.
Controv. de Script. (...). quaest. 3. cap. 1. Et iterum. Qui enim Spiritum
Sanctum habent, and sunt (...), ii possunt Dci (...), ut quis amicum, quicum
familiarissime and diutissime vixerit, ex voce (...) agnoscere. Idem cap. 3.
(...) 3.
Esse enim dicimus, etc. For we affirm (says he) there is a more certain and
clear Testimony, by which we are persuaded, that these Books are sacred, to
wit, the Internal Testimony of the Holy Ghost. The like he has cap. 3. ad 3um.
in these words, Qui enim Spiritum Sanctum habent, etc. For they who have the
Holy Ghost, and are taught of God, are able to know the voice of God, as one
knows his Friend, with whom he has long and most familiarly conversed, by his
voice.

Whence it evidently appears, that diverse eminent Protestants do in this point,
(to say nothing of the rest) resolve their Faith into the Private Spirit,
notwithstanding the Bishops unwillingness to confess it. To what else he
inserts, in treating this point, I say nothing; because it is not against
Catholic Doctrine.

I wonder not much to see Natural Reason introduced by the Bishop, ( tanquam
Saulem inter Prophetas) as a means sufficient to ground an Infallible page 74.
number. 13
Belief, that Scripture is the Word of God: because after a more narrow search
I perceeive he was enforced to take this fourth way, viz. Natural Reason: which
he elsewhere, ( number. 2. page 60.) says, must be admitted, though it be but for
Pagans and Infidels, who either (as he affirms) consider not, or value not any
one of the other three, yet must some way or other be Converted, or left
without excuse, Romans 1. Now therefore let us see, how his Lordship goes about
either to Convert a Heathen, or leave him without excuse, in case he believe
not Scripture, (as it is now in their Protestant English Canon) by the light of
Natural Reason. And for greater clearness of proceeding let us imagine, that
some learned Heathen (who had read the Bshops Book) comes to his Lordship to be
satisfied in point of Religion; whose Discourse you have in this ensuing
Dialogue.

5. Heathen. My Lord, having been sufficiently informed of your eminent
Authority and great Learning, I desire to receive some satisfaction from you in
matter of Religion: but being not verst in your Christian Principles, I am
incapable of accepting of any, save what can be evidenced to me by the light of
Natural Reason.

Bishop. I willingly condescend to your request; and doubt not to render you
fully satisfied by the means you require.

Heath. I understand by your learned Relation of a Conference, etc. that the
sole Foundation of your Faith is a Certain Book, called by you the BIBLE, which
contains many different Tracts and Histories written in very distant times, by
several Authors, and bound up together in one volume. And this you say must be
believed Infallibly, with every part and parcel in it, to be the undoubted Word
of the true God, before I can believe any other point of your Religion, as it
ought to be believed. Now I have employed sometime in perusing this your Bible,
and am no way inclined, by the light of Reason, to assent that it is Gods word,
in such manner as you believe it.

Bish. Surely, you have not employed the Talent of Reason, as reason required
you should have done: otherwise you would have discerned this Book to be the
very Word of God. For our Faith contains nothing against Reason; neither is
Grace placed, but in a Reasonable page 56. number. 15.
Soul.

Heath. But yet your Faith is above Reason, and your Grace above a Reasonable
Creature; so that by Reasons light I can reach neither of them: nor can my
reason without Grace (say you) see my page 74, 75. number. 13.
way to heaven, nor believe this Book.

Bish. I confess it is so: yet Natural Reason is cleared by Grace, to see what
by Nature alone it cannot. Heath. Tell not me of Page 75. lin. 5
Grace. I understand nothing of that; and believe as little. Unless therefore
you satisfy me, that your Bible can justly challenge an infallible belief of
its being Gods word, by conviction of natural Reason, my search is at a stand.

Bish. Though you will have Grace utterly excluded from the. 16. n. 15.
Question, yet I must tell you, you may not think that this Principle of
Religion, That Scriptures are the Word of God, is so indifferent to a natural
eye, that it may as justly lean to one part of the Contradiction, as to the
other: for it is strengthened abundantly with Probable Arguments, even from the
light of Nature it self.

Heath. A man cannot be infallibly certain of what is strengthened with but
probable Arguments: since that which is but probably true, may be also said to
be but probably false. Wherefore I fear Natural Reason goes not very far in
the decision of this question.

Bish. Say not so. For Reason can go so high, as it can prove, Ibid. n. 14.
that Christian Religion, which rests upon the Authority of this Book, stands
on surer grounds of Nature and Reason, then any thing in the world, which any
Infidel, or mere Naturalist, can adhere unto against it.

Heath. This your assertive Answer is doubly defective, as I conceive. First,
because it is not enough for one to prove his Religion to stand upon surer
grounds, then another man's; since it is possible there may be a third Religion,
resting on surer grounds then either of the other two. Secondly, because in
your own Principles you are not to prove your Bible by your Religion (as you
here seem to endeavor) but your Religion by your Bible: which must therefore
be first proved; and that by Natural Reason too: for otherwise it will never
work me into an infallible belief of it.

Bish. This Canon of Scripture, the Container of Christ's Law, is, Ibid. n. 17.
or has been, received and believed for infallible Verity, in almost all
Nations under Heaven: which could never have been wrought in men of all sorts,
but by working upon their Reason.

Heath. Did the Nations you speak of receive the Scriptures on the sole Account
of Reason, and thereupon, by diligent reading and conferring of Texts, became
Christians? or were they first made Christians, and after upon the Churches
Authority, received them for Gods undoubted word? The Authors by you cited in
your Book, aver not their reception of them for Gods word, before they were
made Christians. What wonder then, if I, who am yet no Christian, see not
sufficient reason to receive them for such? Truly to me, by what has hitherto
been said, it seems impossible to prove by Reason, that your Bible is Gods
Infallible Truth.

Bish. Nay, it is not impossible to prove it, even by Reason, a Ibid. n. 16.
Truth Infallible, or make you deny some apparent Principle of your own.

Heath. Evidence me that, and your Lordship will accomplish a great work. Bish.
It Is an apparent Principle with those of your persuasion, that God, or the
absolute prime Agent, cannot be forced out of possession; since if he could, he
were neither Absolute, nor God, in your own Theology. But your Gods have been
forced out of possession, viz. out of the Bodies they possessed, by the name of
the true God and Christ, whom the Scriptures teach, and we believe to be the
only true God: Therefore.

Heath. Therefore what? By what kind of Logic can you infer, even out of
your own premises (which yet I might well question) that therefore the
Scripture is Gods word?

Bish. Does it not follow, that you must either deny your own Gods, or your own
Principle in Nature? And if it be reasonable to deny him for God who is under
command, why is it not also reasonable to believe that the Scripture is Gods
word, since there you find Christ doing that, viz. dispossessing Bodies, and
giving power to do it after?

Heath. My Lord, I cannot a little wonder to see you swerve so grossly from the
known Rules of Logic, as to beg the Question: which here you do most palpably,
while you rest on the sole Authority of Scripture, for proving the same
Scripture to be the word of God. If this be not a mere petitio principii, I
know not what is.

Bish. I perceive you are wilful and self-conceited: for otherwise you would
have been wrought upon by what you have heard. However I shall add this more,
that if in all Sciences there be some Ibid. n. 18.
Principles, which cannot be proved; if even in the Mathematiques, where are
the exactest Demonstrations, there be quaedam postulata, some things to be
first demanded and granted, before the Demonstration can proceed, who can
justly deny that to Divinity, ( a Science of the highest object) which he
easily (...) to inferior Sciences, which are more within his reach? There must
therefore, in Reason, some principle be supposed in Divinity, viz. the Text of
Scripture, as a Rule which Novices and weaklings may be taught first to
believe, that so they may come to the knowledge of the Deducibles out of this
rich Principle. I see not how right Reason can deny this ground.

Heath. I did not think to find your Lordship so disingenuous, as not only to
contradict your self, by unsaying all that you had said before by way of proof
upon the Account of Natural Reason, but to put so gross a fallacy upon me:
That because Natural Sciences admit some Principles without proof, as being so
clear in themselves, that there needs no more then the bare apprehension of
their terms; therefore in Reason the Bible must be supposed for Gods word, and
admitted, without probation, for an unquestionable Principle. May not any
Religion pretend the like? The Turks for example; may they not say their
Alcoran is the Rule and Principle of their Religion, and consequently
unquestionable? You know very well, and confess it too elsewhere, That the
Principles of Natural Ibid. n. 10.
Knowledge appear manifest by intuitive light of understanding. And you know as
well, that there is an infinite disparity in the case, between such Principles
and your Bible. The later having exercised the wit and learning of a world of
Expositors, in regard of its obscurity; and the former being incapable of
proof, by reason of their evident clearness. I may therefore rationally
conclude, that your Bible cannot justly challenge an infallible Belief of being
Gods word, by conviction of Nature all Reason. This was my opinion of your Bible
before I met you; and I am now more confirmed in it by your Lordships
discourse: of whom I take my leave.

By this Interlocutory Discourse of the Bishop with the Heathen, (wherein I
have not wronged him, by either falsely imposing on him, or dissembling the
force of his Arguments) a man may easily discern, how irrational it is to take
the Bible for the sole Rule and Guide in matters of Faith. A Doctrine, which
had it been held in the Primitive Church, would have laid the World under an
impossibility of ever being converted to Christianity. But now it is high time
to return to our Church-Tradition; which I press a little further in this
manner.

6. A Child is brought up, and instructed in the Roman Church, till he arrives
to some ripeness of years. Amongst other things, he is commanded to believe the
Bible is the True word of God, that he must neither doubt of this, nor of any
other Article of Faith, received universally amongst Christians. He gives
therefore the same Infallible assent to the Scriptures being the word of God,
that he gives to the other Articles of Faith; and so, without once looking into
the Scripture, departs this life. I demand, had this Christian saving Faith, or
not? if he had, then upon the Churches Authority he sufficiently believed the
Scriptures to be the word of God. Ergo, the Churches Authority was sufficient
to ground an Infallible Faith in this point. If he had not saving Faith in this
Article, he could not have it in any of the rest; for he had them all from the
very same Authority of the Church. Therefore he had no saving Faith at all:
Ergo, such a Christian could not be saved. Would his Lordship have ventured to
affirm this?

But let us suppose now, that this young Christian yet lives, and applies
himself to study, makes progress in learning, becomes a profound Philosopher, a
learned Divine, an expert Historian: then betakes himself (upon the Churches
recommendation) to the reading of Scriptures; discovers a new light in them;
and by force of that light, discerns also, that the Faith he had before was
only a humane persuasion, and that he had no divine Faith at all, before he
found by that light in Scripture, that they were the undoubted word of God, and
sole foundation of Faith: and consequently, that not having that foundation, he
had no saving Faith of any Article of Christian Belief, and for want thereof
was out of the state of Salvation. What gripes and torture of spirit would
spring out of such a Doctrine amongst Christians.

Moreover, either the Church, whereof he is supposed a member, taught that he
was to believe Scripture infallibly to be the word of God, upon her sole
Tradition as an infallible Testimony thereof, (as we before supposed) or not.
If the first, then he reflects, that this Church has plainly deceived him: and
if she have deceived him in assuming that Infallibility to her self, and
teaching him that by resting upon her Authority he had saving Faith, when he
had nothing but humane and uncertain persuasion, she had deceived all her other
Subjects as well as himself, and consequently exposed them all to the hazard of
eternal damnation by following her Doctrine; and therefore was no true Church,
but a seducer and deceiver. Hence he gathers, that her recommendation of
Scripture is as much as nothing; and so at last is left to the sole letter of
Scripture without any credible voice of the Church; and then must either gather
the Divine Authority of Scripture from sole Scripture, (which the Bishop
denies) or there will he no means left him to believe (even according to the
Bishops principles) infallibly that Scripture is Divine and the true word of
God.

If the Church teach him only, that her testimony of Scripture is no more then
Humane and Fallible, but that the Belief it self that Scripture is Gods word
rests upon sole Scripture, as his Lordship speaks,. 16. n. 21. page 84.
he begins presently to consider, what then becomes of so many millions of
Souls, who both in former and present times, either were incapable to read and
examine Scripture, by reason of their want of learning, or made little use of
that means, as assuring themselves to have infallible Faith without it? Had
such Christians a moral and fallible persuasion only, and no divine Faith?
then they were all incapable of salvation. This consequence seems very severe
to our supposed Christian. Wherefore he begins to make a further reflection,
and discourses in this manner; Is the Tradition and Definition of the Church,
touching the Divine Authority and Canon of Scripture, only Humane and
Fallible, how then can I rationally believe, that my single persuasion of its
being the word of God, is Divine and Infallible? The Bishops, Pastors, and
Doctors of the Church have both (...) and understood it upon the Testimony of
former Tradition, and thereby discovered its Divine Authority much more fully
and exactly, then I alone am able to do. If therefore notwithstanding all their
labor and exactness, their persuasion concerning Scriptures being Gods word,
was only Humane and Fallible, what reason have I to think, I am Divinely and
Infallibly certain, by my reading of Scripture, that it is Divine Truth?

He goes on. If the light of Scripture (on the other side) be so weak and dim,
that it is not able to show it self, unless first introduced by the
recommendation of the Church, how came Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Huss,
Wickless, etc. to be so sharp-sighted, as to discover this light of Scripture,
seeing they rejected the Authority of all visible Churches in the world,
coexistent with them, or existent immediately before them, and consequently of
the true Church?

Hence he proceeds to a higher enquiry. Had not (says he) the Ancient
Primitive Fathers in the first three hundred years after Christ, as much reason
and ability to find this light in Scripture, as I can pretend to? Yet many
Books, which seem to me to discover themselves to be the word of God by that
divine light which shines in them, sent no such light to their eyes, but were
under question amongst them, whether they were the word of God or not, till
they were declared such by the Catholic Church. And I wonder much, how
Protestants receive the Books of the Old Tement upon the Authority of St.
Hierome and the Jewish Synagogue, and press no other reason, notwithstanding
they hold the Church may deceive us in the whole Canon of Scripture.

Further, says this discoursing Christian, If one, who has not yet examined
the light of Scripture it self, but only taken it upon the account of
Church-Tradition, should deny (for example) St. Matthew's Gospel to be the
written word of God, he could not, in this opinion, be counted an Heretic,
because it was not sufficiently propounded to him to be Gods word. Nay hence it
follows, that even our Blessed Savior, who is Wisdom it self, would have been
esteemed by all the world, not a wise Lawgiver, but a mere Ignoramus and
Impostour. For had he not framed (think you) a strange and chimericall
Commonwealth, were it alone destitute of a full and absolute power, (which all
other well-ordered Republiques enjoy) to give an Authentical and unquestionable
Declaration, which is the genuine and true Law.

Now he comes closer to the matter it self, and examines, how this pretended
light should be Infallible and Divine, supposing the Churches Testimony of the
Scriptures being Gods word was Humane only and Fallible. When I came
(discourses he with himself) first to settle my thoughts to a serious reading
of Scripture, I had no more then a fallible Authority recommending Scripture to
me. That fallible Authority could be no Foundation, much less a Formal object
for a Divine and Infallible assent to rest upon. Therefore before I thus began
to read Scripture, I had no Infallible and Divine Faith, that it was the
written word of God. The Tradition therefore of the Church to me was no more
then a Tradition of wise, prudent, and honest men, who had no such assistance
from God, as was sufficient to preserve them from Error. Suppose therefore,
that as the Church might, so she had erred in testifying some Books of
Scripture to be Gods word, which really are not such; in this supposition I
should have them all equally recommended to me as Gods word, by the very same
Authority of the Church. Then I fall to reading seriously, and peruse all those
which are called Canonical Books in the Bible: shall I ever think, by my
diligence in reading to discover, that the light of Gods word shines not in
those Books wherein the Church erred, as it shines in the rest? Shall I discern
Canonical Books wherein she erred not, from the not-Canonicall, by the light I
find in them, when the whole Church, and so many thousand learned Bishops, who
had read them more studiously and knowingly then I can do, never discerned any
such different light more in the one then in the other? But put case I were
able to discern this difference in Scripture by the sole light of Scripture,
what follows? seeing the Church has as universally recommended also very many
unwritten Traditions for Apostolical and Divine, whereof some at least (as the
not-rebaptizing of those who were Baptized by Heretics, etc.) are most
certainly true, and as properly the word of God in their first delivery from
Christ and his Apostles (which the Bishop confesses) as Scripture it self; why
can I not, by that light, which shines in a true Apostolical Tradition, as
well distinguish it from a false one, as by the light that shines in a true
Book of Canonical Scripture, distinguish that from a false one: Since God
speaks equally in both, why should there not be an equal light shining in both?
Nay, seeing the Church, in the Definition of Superstructures (wherein his
Lordship makes her fallible) very often defines aright, why may not I find, by
the light which shines in such a definition, that it is a Divine Truth, and
distinguish it from that which is not the true voice of God? and so take no
other guide, or judge, to my self in Divine matters, then only my own
knowledge of God speaking to me?

After this he examines a while, of what persuasion the Holy Fathers were in
this matter; and finds, that Quid autem, (...) Apostoli quidem Scripturas
reliquissent nobis, nonne oportebat ordinem sequi Traditionis, quam tradiderunt
iis, quibus committebant Ecclesias. Cui ordinationi assentiunt multae Gentes
Barbarorum, qui in Christum credunt, sine charta and atramento scriptam
habentes salutem, and veterem Traditionem custodientes, Iren. lib. 3. cap. 4.
St. Irenaeus, and D. Aug. lib. 1. De Doctrine. Christian. cap. 39. lib. 5. De
Baptism. contra Donatist. cap. 24.
St. Augustine in many places, held that the Tradition of the Church is
sufficient to found Christian Faith, even without Scripture, and that for some
hundreds of years after the Canon of Scripture was written. At length he
returns again to your hidden light in Scriptures, and discourses thus; If the
Church be fallible in the Tradition of Scripture, how can I ever be infallibly
certain, that she has not erred de facto, and defined some Book to be the word
of God, which really is not his word? These you may imagine, were the thoughts
of our perplexed Christian: who wearied out with speculations and reflections,
fell in the close upon this result, That either the Church must be Infallible
in the Tradition of Scripture, or there is no possible means to be infallibly
certain which is Scripture; nay (which is more) whether there be any true
Scripture at all, Now we return to his Lordship.

Here his Dedalian windings are disintricated, and his Reasons. 16. n. 19.
easily solved. For first, Church-Tradition appears far from being too weak, by
advancing the Proposition I did before, viz. that to give an Infallible
Testimony of the Scriptures being the true word of God, it is not necessary,
that Church-Tradition should be absolutely Divine. Secondly, I agree with our
Antagonist, in the Authority of the Prime Christian Church, that it was
absolutely Divine, and yet aver, it is not necessary to the solving of his
Arguments, to assert the like Divine Authority in the present Church.

7. When he says, that some of our own will not endure, that the Ibidem.
often mentioned words of St. Augustine, Ego vero Evangello non crederem, etc.
should be understood save of the Church in the time of the Apostles only, and
in proof of this cites Occham in the margent, I ask the Relatour, how can one
single Author be aliqui, some of our own in the plural number? Had he said
only some one of our own, it might have passed; but to say some of ours, and
then cite but one, was to make an extreme narrow passage in his Labyrinth.
Should Julian, the Apostata, to lay an aspersion upon the whole College of the
Apostles, have said that some of them betrayed their Master, and then have
named Judas only; and that some others denied him, and in proof thereof had
cited only St. Peter: or should a Catholic, to disgrace the Protestant
Primacy of Canterbury, say that some of them carried a holy Sister of the
Reformed Gospel locked up in a chest, as a precious Jewel in a Cabinet, about
with them, and name Cranmer only in the Margent; or should any other Author,
to discredit Protestants, affirm that some of them turned Turks, and were burnt
for such, and cite only in the margent Bernardinus Ochinus, would not this be
esteemed a Rhetorical Hyperbole, or rather a most unjust way of writing?

But what if this Singular-Plural says no such thing, as the words alleged by
the Bishop signify? would not this be a notable Turn? Intelligitur (so are
Occhams words cited by the Bishop in his margent) SOLUM de Ecclesia quae fuit
tempore Apostolorum. It, viz. the sentence of St. Augustine, I would not believe
the Gospel, etc. is understood (says he) ONLY of the Church which was in the
Apostles time. Now in that whole place, which I have perused very diligently,
there are neither those cited words, nor any thing like them. What is there
then? marry, the quite contrary. For he says expressly, that the Church,
whereof St. Augustine speaks in that Sentence, contains not only the Apostles,
and those of their times, but also the Church successively from the times of
the Apostles to that very time wherein St. Augustine wrote those words, as
Occham himself shows out of another Text of St. Augustine, and affirms, that he
understood the Church in the very same sense in this sentence, that he expressed
in the other, and so concludes, that Ubi Ecclesia Catholica Episcopos and
populos a (...) Apostolorum usque in hodiernum diem sibimet succedentes
importat. Et sic accipit nomen Ecclesiae Augustinus, cum asserit, quod non
crederet Evangelio, nisi cum Auihoritas Ecclesiae compelleret. Ista enim
Ecclesia Scriptores Evangelii and omnes Apostolos comprehendit, sicut probatum
est. Occham. Dial. part 1. lib. 1. cap. 4.
St. Augustins words there are not to be understood of the times of the
Apostles only, quite contradictorily to what his Lordship makes him speak.

Is this fair dealing, think you, to juggle in this manner? what is this but to
go about to persuade us, it is not day, though the Sun shines. That St.
Augustins meaning jumps right with Occhams interpretation, it is evident. For he
must speak here of the Church in his time, and not of the Primitive, or
Apostolical Church only, because he speaks of that Church which said to him,
Noli credere Manichaeo (do not believe Manichaeus) which if he had affirmed of
the Primitive, or Apostolical Church, had neither been true, nor to the
purpose: the Primitive and Apostolical Church having said no more against
Manichaeus, then the Scripture it self said. Moreover, he speaks of that
Church, wherein (as he taught in the former Chapter) the succession of Bishops
from St. Peter to the present time had kept him, etc. but that must needs be
the present Church, succeeding the Primitive, and not the Primitive only. Nay
further he says, that if any evident place could be alleged out of the Gospel
in confirmation of Manichaeus his Doctrine, he would neither believe the
Church, nor the Gospel, because both of them should in that case have deceived
him: which must necessarily be meant of the present Church, because the Church
in the Apostles time had not deceived him in forbidding him to follow
Manichaeus. Now though it be a point of Faith, that the Church is Infallible in
delivering the Scripture unto us, yet is it not a point of Faith, that her
Infallibility is proved out of the cited place of Saint Augustine. It Is
sufficient, that it be clear and manifest out of the Text it self.

His Lordships objection, That the Tradition of the present Church. 16. n. 21.
must be as Infallible, as that of the Primitive, I distinguish. If he means,
the one must be as truly and really Infallible quoad substantiam, as the other,
I grant it: but if he mean, the one must be as highly and as perfectly
Infallible, as the other, quoad modum, I deny it. For the voice of the Church
need not be supposed simply Divine, to give an Infallible Chap. 5. number. 4.
Testimony of this Tradition, as we have showed; because we need not assert it
to be any more then an Authentical Testimony, preserved by the Holy Ghost from
Error.

Those two ends alone mentioned by the Relatour, fall short of Ibidem.
the end of Tradition; which not only induces Infidels, and instructs Novices
and weaklings, but founds and establishes Believers, even the greatest Doctors
in the Church. St. Augustine was neither Infidel, Novice, Weakling, nor Doubter
in the Faith, but the very learned of Bishops and Doctors: yet it served him
so much, that he would not have believed, no nor could believe Scripture
without it, as he himself testifies of himself in the place above cited, contr.
Epist. Fundament. cap. 5.

As concerning Jacobus Almaynus his opinion cited by the Relatour, Ibidem.
viz. that we are first and more bound to believe the Church, then the Gospel,
it is not altogether true. For though we are first bound to believe the Church
non prioritate temporis, sed naturae (to use Philosophical terms) because the
Authority of the Church is the means, by which we are infallibly assured that
Scripture is the word of God, yet the Authority of the Church being ordained to
the Scripture as the end and more noble object, it cannot be properly said,
that we are more bound to believe the Church, then the Scripture.

Touching his and Gersons reading the forecited place of St. Augustine, Ego
vero Evangelio non crederem, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae commoveret Authoritas
(where for commoveret they read compelleret) concerning this, I say, I had
rather charitably think they had found it so in some copies, then judge with
his Lordship, that they did most notoriously falsify the Text. And I am
persuaded, he had the like charitable opinion for Mr. Perkins, who puts
credidissem for crederem, and In Epist. ad Galat. cap. 1. verse. 1.
movisset for commoveret. Neither is this Apology of mine for Almaynus and
Gerson without ground. For both Occham and Biel, quoted by his Lordship serve
themselves of the very same word, compelleret: so that it seems, the Schoolmen
of those days cited St. Augustine in this manner. And though for my part I
prefer commoveret before compelleret, yet in St. Augustins persuasion
expressed in that place, it signifies as much as compelleret. For he confesses,
that the Authority of the Church not only moved him to believe the Gospel, but
commanded him, and so strongly, that it necessitated him to acknowledge the
Scriptures for the Divine word of God; which is as much as compelleret.

To the Authors cited in his Margent, I answer, Canus libr. 2. de Ibidem.
Locis. cap. 8. treats (as St. Augustine did) how one comes to believe, who has
no belief in the Scripture, and resolves, that this must be done by the
Authority of the Church; and that such as reject the Churches Authority, can
never believe the Scripture. Hence he consequently asserts sive Infideles, sive
in fide Novicii, etc. that Infidels and Novices in the Faith are brought to the
belief of Scripture by this means. But here is the Turn. He cites sive
Infideles, sive in fide Novicii lamely, without a Verb, or any full sense,
thinking thereby to persuade his Reader, that the Church induces only such to
read Scriptures, by a fallible authority, and that all their Infallible Faith
of Scripture streams from the pretended light that is in Scripture. Whereas if
he had cited the whole Sentence, it would have appeared most clearly, that
Canus makes Infidels and Novices in Faith so convinced to believe Scripture for
the Infallible word of God, by the authority of the Church, that the said
authority is not a fallible, but a certain and sure way to make them believe
it. For he asserts, that an Infidel is victus (convinced) by that Authority;
that it is via certa (a sure and certain way) and that we take argumentum
certum (a certain and assured argument of this) from the Churches Authority.

Again, by this citing of Nominatives without Verbs, he puts off, by a nimble
Turn, the esteem that Infideles and Novicii make of the Churches Authority in
regard of Scripture: sive Infideles, sive in fide Novicii, ad sacras literas
ingrediantur, the Churches Authority is a sure way, and none but that. Observe
I pray you, those words, None but that; whereby he excludes all others, and
consequenly this pretended Light of Scripture it self, from being a sure and
infallible way of entering into the Scriptures, that is, of beginning to believe
them expressly to be the word of God. This Verb therefore ( ingrediantur) which
was omitted, would have given light to (...) his full meaning? For though the
greatest Doctors of the Church believe Scriptures upon this sole Authority, as
a certain and infallible foundation, yet only Infideles and Novicii (Infidels
and Novices in Faith) enter into Scriptures, that is, make their first
beginning to believe them, by the same authority. As for Stapleton, he never so
much as mentions, in the cited place, this Text of St. Augustine, but Relect.
Contr. 4. q. 1. art. 3.
only averres, that nothing can be proved from Scripture against such an one,
as is either ignorant of Scripture, or denies it.

St. Augustine therefore in this place, speaking (according to those cited
Authors) of a sure way for believing Scripture to be the word of God, cannot
possibly favor the Bishops assertion, who makes the Authority of the Church in
this case to be but fallible and unsure. Neither does this great Doctor any
where affirm, that this way of Church authority is only for Infidels, (as the
Bishops explication of him seems to insinuate) but both affirms and proves,
that neither Infidels nor Believers can be any other way convinced. When
therefore his Lordship cites St. Augustins Text, Quibus ergo obtemper avi
dicentibus CREDIT EVANGELIO, etc. ( Whom therefore I have obeyed, saying,
BELIEVE THE GOSPEL, etc.) and thence gathers, that St. Augustine speaks of
himself when he did not believe, I see very little consequence in this his
Illation, unless he suppose, that Saint Augustine never obeyed this command of
Gods Church, but only at his first Conversion from Infidelity. For certainly
his meaning was, that he had, and did always, even till that instant from his
first Conversion, obey that command of the Church.

One thing (I am sure) may be far better inferred from those words, against the
Relatour, then this was against us. For St. Augustine says not, Quibus
obtemperavi dicentibus, LEGITE EVANGELIUM, vel INSPICITE EVANGELIUM, etc. whom
I obeyed saying, Read the Gospel, or pursue the Gospel) but Credit Evangelio,
(believe the Gospel.) The Church commanded St. Augustine to believe the Gospel.
Ergo, The Church in St. Augustins time esteemed her self most undoubtedly
certain that the Gospel (and by consequence all other Scriptures, which she
recommended to her children to believe) were the Infallible word of God. For
otherwise to impose a command of so high a nature in that wherein she might be
deceived her self, and deceive them, had been to expose her Authority to the
hazard of commanding Christians to do that, which had been a grievous injury to
God; namely to believe that to be his Divine Word; which was only the word of
man.

CHAP. 7. The prosecution of the former Question.
ARGUMENT.
1. No means sufficient, in the Bishops Principles, to be assured what
Tradition is Apostolical, or what Scripture Divine. 2. St. Augustins Text
concerning Church Authority, examined. 3. That the Bishop yields at last to the
Private Spirit, masked under the title of Grace. 4. His way of Resolving Faith,
demonstrated to fail. 5. That no man (with him) can be a true Christian,
unless he be a good Grammarian, and Logician too. 6. How the Scripture is said
to be a Light. 7. His falling again upon the Private Spirit. 8. Bellarmine
vindicated. 9. Brierley defended. Hooker shamefully mangled, miscited, and
misconstrued by the Bishop.

1. HItherto our Antagonist has endeavored with all the engines of his wit, to
shake the Infallible Authority of the present Catholic Church; but in vain.
Let Us now see, whether he can build better then he destroys. The ground on
which he builds our Faith is Primitive Apostolical Tradition. I demand, how
comes Apostolical. 16. n. 20.
Primitive Tradition to work upon us, if the present Church be fallible? or why
cannot we as well, being induced and prepared by the voice of the Church (if
fallible) believe with Divine Faith, and rest upon Apostolical Tradition as a
Formal Object, for it self, as believe the Scriptures for themselves? If it be
answered, we have no other certainty, that the Church now delivers that
Primitive Tradition which the Apostles delivered but the voice of the Church; I
reply, We have also no other certainty, that the Scripture we now have is the
very same, which was recommended by Apostolical Tradition, but the Voice and
perpetual Testimony of the Church. Yes (says our Adversary) we have the more
ancient Copies, which confirm ours. But the same Difficulty returns upon those
ancienter Copies. What infallible certainty have we of them, beside
Church-Tradition? They may (replies his Lordship) be examined and approved by
the Authentical Autographa's of the very Apostles. But, first, how many of
those are now extant? Secondly, how few will be able to come to the sight of
them? Thirdly, what certainty have we that they are the Authentical
Autographa's, but by Tradition? Fourthly, may not every Universal Tradition be
carried up, as clearly at east, to the Apostles times, as the Scriptures, by
most credible Authors, who wrote in their respective succeeding ages?

If therefore, when he says there is a double Authority, etc. he mean Ibid.
number. 21.
only, that in the Apostles time Christians had a double Authority to believe
Scripture, viz. Tradition and Scripture it self, he brings nothing to the
present purpose: for our dispute is not of that, but of Our present time. If he
say we have now that double Authority, he contradicts himself, and puts a
foundation of our Faith beside Scripture, and so denies that Scripture alone is
the foundation of our Faith. Yet it seems by speaking in the present Tense,
Here Is a double Authority, Ibidem.
that confirms Scripture to be the word of God, he means that we have now both
Apostolical Tradition and Scripture it self, as two Authorities, and each
containing, the Formal Object of Faith, to believe Scripture to be the word of
God: which is also suitable to his words. 16. number. 22. We resolve, (says he,
meaning Faith) into Prime Tradition Apostolical and Scriptures it self; and
yet confesses we have no means to be infallibly certain that Scripture is the
word of God, but by the Testimony of Church-Tradition. He would fain have the
difference betwixt us to consist only in this, that we affirm
Church-Traditions to be the Formal Object, Prime Motive, and last Resolution of
Faith, and that they deny it to be so. But the difference (as it appears in the
Resolution we have already given) is not in that. For Chap. 5. number. 1, 2.
we are now both agreed, that it is not necessary to say, the Faith of
Scripture is resolved into the Tradition of the present Church as its Formal
Object, or Prime Motive, etc. but the only substantial Difference is this: We
say the Tradition of the present Church is Infallible and that necessarily, to
the end it may infallibly apply the Formal Object to us; you say, it is
Fallible. Grant us once, that the Tradition of the Church is Infallible, and
the controversy in this is ended.

How our Antagonist can resolve his Faith (as here he speaks) into Ibid. n. 23.
the Prime Apostostolical Tradition Infallibly, without the Infallibility of
the present Church, I see not, unless he could tell how to be infallibly
certain of that Tradition, without it; which he knows not well how to compass,
as appears in the next number. So that now he abandons his Fort again, by not
showing how we can know infallibly that Apostolical Tradition is Divine,
otherwise then by the Tradition of the present Church. For as to what he
asserted number. 21. that there is a double Authority, and both Divine, viz.
Apostolical Tradition and Scripture, even in respect of us, it does not
satisfy the difficulty, as I have proved, but serves only to make one
contrary Turn upon another in his Labyrinth, so that you know not where to
follow him. For if Church-Tradition fail to ascertain us infallibly of that
Divine Apostolical Tradition, we are left without all Divine certainty whether
Scripture it self be the Infallible word of God, or no.

That the Authority then of the present Church is Infallible, may be thus
sufficiently proved. We cannot be infallibly certain that Scripture is the
word of God, unless the Authority of the present Church be Infallible. For we
acknowledge many Books for Canonical Scripture, which Protestants admit not;
and they now hold some for such, which have not been always approved for such.
And those Books of Scripture which Protestants have, are said by Catholics to
be corrupted. Others also cry up some Books for Canonical Scripture, which
both Catholics and Protestants disallow. If therefore the Church can err in
this point, with what shadow of truth can Protestants pretend to bring an
Infallible ground, that Scripture is the word of God? The Tradition therefore
of the Church serves to assure us infallibly, that Scripture is the word of
God, and not only (as his Lordship would have it) to work upon the minds of.
16. n. 21.
unbelievers, to move them to read and consider the Scripture, or among
Novices, Weaklings, and Doubters of Faith, to instruct and confirm them, till
they may acquaint themselves with, and understand the Scriptures.

2. Neither can the often cited place of St. Austin, I would not believe the
Gospel, etc. be rationally understood of the foresaid Novices, Weaklings, and
Doubters in the Faith. For it is clear, that St. Austin, by those words, gives
a reason, why he, then a Bishop, would not follow the Doctrine of Manichaeus,
and why no Christian ought to follow it. As if a man should say, he that
believes the Gospel, believes it only for the Authority of the Church; which
condemning Manichaeus, it is impossible (rationally proceeding) to admit the
Gospel and follow Manichaeus. Neither is the contrary any ways deducible out
of those words cited by the Bishop. 16. number. 21. If thou should find one,
who did not yet believe the Gospel, what would thou do to make him believe?
For the holy Doctor there speaks to Manichaeus, and shows, how neither
Infidels, nor Christians had reason to believe the Apostleship of Manicheus:
Not Infidels; because Manichaeus proves this only out of Scriptures, which
they not admitting, might rationally enough slight his proof: Not Christians,
because they receiving the Scripture upon the sole Authority of the Church,
could no more approve of the Apostleship of Manicheus condemned by the Church,
then if they admitted not of Scripture at all. Wherefore A. C. had no reason to
pass by this place of St. Austin, which his Lordship says (page 82.) he urged
at the Conference, unless it were, because he did not then remember it.

As for the Catholic Authors cited by the Relatour, certainly they all hold,
that the Authority of the present Church is an Infallible proof, that Scripture
is the word of God. And though they teach, that the forementioned place of St.
Austin is of force for Infidels, Novices, and those who deny, or doubt of
Scripture, yet they aver not, that it is of less force for all others. But
their meaning is, that the Authority of the Church appears more clearly
necessary against Infidels, and those who doubt of the Faith. For suppose a
learned man be an Infidel, or doubt of Scripture, he will say, if the Church
may err, he can have no infallible certainty that Scripture is Gods word. If
you tell him, the Church, though subject to error, is yet of authority enough
to make him esteem the Scripture, and read it diligently, and that then he will
find such an inbred light in it, as will assure him infallibly that it is the
word of God; he will reply, he has done what you require, and yet finds no
more inbred light in those Books, which Protestants receive for Canonical, then
he does in others which Catholics admit, but Protestants reject as
Apocryphal; no, no more then he does in other counterfeit pieces, disapproved
both by Catholics and Protestants.

3. Who does not here most clearly see, that we cannot deal with such a man
without the unerring, or Infallible Authority of the Church? unless we will
have recourse to the Private Spirit; from which though the Bishop would seem so
free, that he excludes it from the very state of the Question, yet he falls
into it, and palliates it under the specious title of Grace: and where others
used to say they were infallibly resolved that Scripture was the word of God,
by the testimony of the Spirit within them, his Lordship page 83, 84. averres,
that he has the same assurance by Grace: so holding the same thing with the
Calvinists in this particular, he only changes their words.

4. The Relatour is very much out, when he maintains on the one side, that the
Church is fallible in her Tradition of Scriptures, and yet still supposes
throughout his whole discourse, that whoever comes to read Scriptures delivered
by the Church, finds them still to correspond with the Churches recommendation
(that is, to be the word of God) by the inbred light that is in them; which is
a very Artificial Turn, and needs an Ariadne's clew to pass through it. For by
this means he never enters into, nay, never comes near the main difficulty:
which is, how one shall discover true Scripture, and discern it clearly from
false, when the Church through error delivers as well false as true to be the
word of God, as she may do, if she be fallible. Yea, how shall it be certainly
known, whether de facto she now erres not in her delivery of it? And seeing
either Theirs, or Ours must err, who is such a Lynceus, that by the sole light
of Scripture, upon the recommendation of our respective Churches, can discover
which erres in the number and designation of Canonical Books, and which does
not?

Neither can it be gathered by his discourse, what they are to do, who are
unresolved which is the true Church, and go about, as most of our late
Sectaries do, to find out the true Church by the Scriptures. For seeing such
have not the ushering and in-leading direction of the Church (whereof the
Bishop speaks) they must either find out the true Scriptures by their sole
light, or by the private Spirit, or lastly by the light of natural Reason;
which are all equally against our Adversary.

Should he say, they are first to find out the Church by the Motives of
Credibility, as we hold, and then take Scripture from her inducing, though
fallible, Authority, I demand, whether by those Motives, in his opinion, one
may become sufficiently certain, that the Congregation of Christians which is
invested with the same, is the true Church? If one can; then antecedently to
Scripture one may infallibly believe this main Article of our Creed, the Holy
Catholic Church; and consequently may have divine and saving Faith: which
being supposed, sole Scripture will not be the foundation of our Faith, as the
Bishop every where contends. If one cannot be sufficiently certain which is the
true Church, by those Motives (as he must say) then one may still doubt,
notwithstanding those Motives, whether that be the true Church, or no; and
consequently shall not have undoubtedly the Tradition of the true Church to
induce him into the esteem and reading of Scripture: and in this case Scripture
must be known by its own light, independently of the recommendation thereof
from the Church.

The Instance he brings of Logic evinces not the truth of that, for Ibid. n.
21.
which it is brought; since there is not any such Analogy between Logic and
Church-Tradition, as he labors to persuade his Reader. For though Logic ('it is
true) does help, as he says, to open a man's understanding, and prepares him to
be able to demonstrate a Truth, viz. in Natural Sciences, wherewith it has a
kind of connection; they all depending on Natural Reason: yet Church-Tradition
cannot so qualify the understanding, as to enable it to see the Scripture to
be Gods word; but either makes a man believe, and receive it for such upon its
sole Authority, or leaves him as much in the dark, touching this point, as it
did find him. And for the Scriptures themselves they appear no more to be the
word of God, then the Stars to be of a certain determinate number, or the
distinction of colors to a blind man. Wherefore if the Church may err in
this point, yea and has erred according to the Doctrine of Protestants,
(because we hold many Books for Canonical Scripture, which they reject as
Apocryphal) we shall be so far from having Infallible Certainty, that
Scripture is the word of God, that we shall have no certainty at all; no, nor
so much light, as to make a rational man lean more to one part of the
Contradiction, then to the other, neither at the first reading of Scripture,
nor afterward.

The same may be urged in the interpretation of Scripture. For Protestants
hold, that the Church may err, yea and has erred in this, and not only in
small matters, but in such, which (as they say) have made us guilty of
Superstition and Idolatry. How then can one, that doubts in any point of Faith,
resolve what he ought to believe? For (to speak modestly) he finds as many and
as learned men, defending our Canon of Scripture against theirs, as there are,
that defend their Canon against ours; and as many standing for our
Interpretation, as for theirs. Its impossible therefore to satisfy such a man
without the Infallible Authority of the Church; unless you will betake your
self to the Private Spirit, which in other respects would bring you into as
great straits, and make way for all Heretics to allow, or disallow what
Scripture they please, and interpret each place according to their own fancy,
pretending still, and with as much reason as you can do, the private Spirit.

5. The Bishop here requires so many conditions, viz. Grammar, Ibidem.
Logic, Study, Comparison of Scripture with it self and other writings,
Ordinary Grace, a mind morally induced and reasonably persuaded by the voice
of the Church, etc. that he scarce makes any one capable to perceive this
Scripture Light, and consequently attain the formal object of Faith, (without
which no true Faith can subsist, or be found in any person) save only men of
extraordinary parts and learning; which is a very obscure passage indeed in
this his Labyrinth, much darker, then our Savior ever made the way to heaven:
for that is a way so Haec crit vobis directa via, ita ut stulti non (...) per
came.
plain and open, that even fools cannot err in it, Isa. 35. 8.

But how comes he now to require Grace, which himself before rejected under the
title of private Spirit, as not pertinent to the present question; Grace
belonging only to the subject that believes, not to the object believed; nor
to the manner of proposing it, to fit it for belief? If the Scripture has that
light he speaks of, it will be able to show it self so clearly, that every one
may see it, who will but seriously look upon it and consider it: for if it be
not so clear, it is a manifest sign, that it is not the light of certainty, and
consequently needs some other light to certify us that Scripture is the word
of God. For seeing this certainty is not such, as makes the thing revealed
evident, but only certifies it self to be a Divine Revelation, or the word of
God, if our Faith can rest hereupon, it must make it self so certain, that to
whomsoever it is sufficiently propounded, it is no less sin to dissent from it,
then it was to dissent from the voice of Christ, or his Apostles, in those to
whom their Authority was sufficiently propounded.

Scripture therefore must either show its Divine Authority as clearly by it
self (in his opinion) as either Christ or his Apostles did theirs, by their
miracles and other signs of Credibility; or it will not sufficiently manifest
it self to be the word of God, so far as to induce an obligation of not
dissenting from it. Again, as Christ and his Apostles showed they had Divine
Authority, to all who had the Grace to believe them, and none, to whom their
preaching was sufficiently propounded, could disbelieve them without damnable
sin; so also if the Scripture has light enough, after the recommendation of
the Church, to be seen by all that have Grace, whoever dissents from that
light, commits a damnable sin in not believing it to be the word of God. Now to
affirm, that all who dissent from that light, commit damnable sin, were to
condemn not only all the Luther an Protestants, but many of the holy Ancient
Fathers, of damnable sin, who read some of those Books, which other Protestants
account Scripture, even upon the recommendation of the Church, and yet
dissented from their being the word of God, at least accounted it not
infallibly certain that they were.

6. Thus we have seen (quite contrary to the Bishops Doctrine) that Scripture
gives not so great and high Reasons of Credibility to it self, that the
Believer may rest his last and full assent that Scripture is of Divine
Authority, upon that Divine light which Scripture has in self. For there
appears no such light to any, but to the Bishop and those who pretend to the
private Spirit. It Is true, the Scripture is said by the Royal Prophet to be a
Light; because after we have once received it from the Infallible Authority of
the Church, it teaches what we are to do and believe. Therefore David says
not Verba scripta in Bibliis, lumen pedibus meis, but Verbum tuum, THY WORD is
a Psalm 118. 105.
light to my feet: so that he first believed the Scripture to be the word of
God, and then said it was a light, etc. But without this Authority it is neither
lumen manifestativum sui, nec alterius (neither a light that evidences it self,
nor any thing else) because without this we may with just reason doubt as well
of Scripture, as of the true sense thereof.

Wherefore though Origin prove by the Scriptures themselves that they were
inspired from God, yet he does never avow, that this could be proved out of
them, unless they were received by the Infallible Authority of the Church. And
Henricus a Gandavo quoted by his Lordship, for affirming, that Christians in
the Primitive Church did Ibid. n. 21.
principally believe for the Authority of God, and not of the Apostles, means
only, that Christians were not moved to believe for any humane Authority of
the Apostles, but for the Authority of God speaking by them. So that this
argument must be solved as well by the Bishop, as by us; for he has already
granted, that the Authority of the Apostles was Divine, as well as we. And
Origin whom he cites 16. n. 20.
in the Margent, speaks to such as believed that Scriptures were the word of
God: whom by those proofs out of Scripture he endeavored to confirm and settle
in their Faith, by showing how Scripture it self testified as much. We may
therefore assert, that it is not any humane, or fallible Authority of the
Church, that moves us to embrace the Scripture as the Infallible word of God,
but the voice of God speaking by the Church, or the Authority of God declared
to us infallibly by the present Church. And this Infallible Authority is no
less requisite to the knowledge of the first Apostolical Tradition of the
Scriptures, then it is to know the Scripture it self.

But I find another handsome Turn or two, in this discourse of the Bishop. He
undertook to evince, that the Scripture has such light in it self, that being
introduced by the Tradition of the Church, it can show it self to be the most
undoubted Divine word of God: which to perform, he assumes this medium. The
Scripture is a light; Therefore it can manifest not only other things, but
also it self, by it self, to be a light. Ergo, it can manifest it self to be
the word of God. This must be his consequence, if he will conclude his intent.
But what windings are here? The Scripture is a light I grant it. Ergo, it is
able to manifest it self to be a light. I grant that too. Ergo, it can manifest
it self to be an infallible light, or the undoubted word of God: That I deny;
and this (which was the only thing to be proved) he never so much as goes
about to prove. For unless he could show, that there are no other lights save
the word of God, and such as are Infallible, he can never make good his
consequence.

In Seneca, in Plutarch, in Aristotle, I read many lights, and those lights
manifest themselves to be lights: Ergo, they manifest themselves to be
Infallible lights, or the very Divine word of God, what consequence is this?
The Scripture teaches that there is one God; this is a light, and manifests it
self to be a light: Ergo, it manifests it self to be the word of God, how
follows that? May not the same light be found in hundreds of Books, even in the
Talmud of the Jews, and Alcoran of the Turks, as well as in Scripture? The same
may be said of a thousand Moral Instructions, which (either the very same, or
much like to them) may be sound in other Moral Writers, as well Christians, as
Jews and Heathens; which all manifest themselves to be lights: but follows it
thence, that they manifest themselves to be Divine lights, or lights
undoubtedly proceeding from the mouth of God?

The intricacy therefore of this Meander consists in making a sly Transition
from the light to the person, who is cause of this light. I find (for example)
a candle lighted in a room; it is a light, and enlightens all the room, and
shows it self to be a light by its own light: but it shows not by that light,
who lighted it. I see some good sentence written on a wall; it manifests it
self by it self to be good; but it manifests not whether it were written by
Man, Angel, or God himself; this must be evinced some other way. Thus the
words, and sentences in Scripture are lights, and show themselves by themselves
to be lights; yet because the very same, or such as are perfectly like (and so
the same in substance and sense) may have been conceived and expressed, not
only by God, but by good Men, or Angels, it follows not (as he would have it)
they show themselves to be lights by their own light; Ergo, they show
themselves to be Gods-lights, or Infallible lights produced by none but God
himself.

We have made, I hope, a pretty good progress through this Meander. But no
looner is one past over, but we fall into another. He was to prove that
Scripture has light enough in it self to give Divine Infallible proof that it is
the word of God, so as our Faith may rest upon that light as on its proper
formal object: and to evince this he cites (here and there) Authorities of the
Fathers, where they took some proofs out of Scripture to conclude Scripture to
be the word of God. We grant they did so; but what follows thence? Ergo,
Scripture gives sufficient Divine proof to it self, before it be believed
infallibly to be Gods word. This he was to infer from it: but how proves he
this consequence, which is the only difficulty? He does it thus, or no way at
all. The Fathers, who precedently to the reading of Scripture believed
infallibly that Scripture was the word of God, proved by Scripture that it was
such; Ergo, those; who believe not infallibly that Scripture is Gods word, may
evince by Scripture that it is the word of God. Is not this a strong inference?

The difficulties occurring in this his Lordships Doctrine (though Ibid. n. 22.
slighted by him) are as many, as in that of the private Spirit; the odium of
which opinion he will never be able to avoid by desiring not to have it so much
as named in the state of the question. For if the Church may err, yea and has
erred (according to Protestants) in this point, how can we have Infallible
assurance, either of the Prime Apostolical Tradition, or of the Scripture it
self? We read, esteem, nay very highly reverence the Scripture, yet see we not
such convincing and infallible arguments, as can give us assurance, that those
Books are infallibly the word of God, which Protestants admit, and no other.
Now when he says they resolve their Faith into Prime Tradition Apostolical,
and in the next number knows not how to be certain of that Tradition, he
dissolves what he resolved before, and makes one part of his Resolution
impossible. Yet could he derive infallibly the Resolution of his Faith into
Prime Apostolical Tradition, he would quite undo what he said before, that
Scripture is the only foundation of our Faith, and not Tradition. Thus he
turns quite opposite ways in his Labyrinth.

7. Here therefore to aver, without any further proof, that there appears
such light to Protestants, and no others, is in effect to challenge the Private
Spirit to himself and his party; which is something more then only to allow it
in general. For if there be sufficient light in Scripture to show it self, why
do not we see it as well as they? seeing we read it as diligently, and esteem
it as highly as they do. To say that all are blind besides themselves, or that
all, beside themselves, have such perverse eyes, such unsanctified
understandings, that they cannot see, nor reach that light, which Protestants
most easily discern, is very great presumption; and the same may with as much
reason be challenged by every Heretic, for the admitting of what Books he
pleases into the Canon, and for giving whatsoever Glosses and Interpretations
upon them, as shall occur to his fancy.

Nor can he, upon any just ground, make the Scripture to be like those
Principles, which are known of themselves, so soon as the Terms are understood.
For such Principles are either evidently, or probably known of themselves. Of
the former sort are these, and others of like nature, The whole is greater then
a part thereof. The same thing cannot be, and not be at the sametime. Of the
latter sort is this, and such others, Every mother loves her child; from which
it is probably concluded, that Katharine (for example) loves her child; by this
argument. Every mother loves her child: But Katharine is a mother; Therefore
Katharine loves her child. Now if we speak of principles of the first kind,
the Relatour grants, that Scripture is no such principle; and it is manifest in
it self that it is not; otherwise all men would agree which is the word of God,
as all agree in those Metaphysicall Principles abovenamed. Neither is the
Scripture a Principle of the second sort; for of it self it appears not so much
as probably to be more the word of God, then some other Book which is not truly
such. And though it had some probability that it were such, yet were it not
sufficient; for we must have certainty, and infallible certainty too, as his
Lordship grants. But how that can be had without the infallible Authority of
the Church, I am confident, neither he, nor any of his party, will ever be able
to show.

But if we betake our selves to the infallible Authority of the Church, we may
be as certainly and infallibly assured, that Scripture is the word of God, as
those, who heard the Apostles say that Scripture was Gods word. For as the
Signs and Motives, which accompanied the Apostles, proved them to be
Infallible; so the Motives of Credibility prove the True Church to be
Infallible: insomuch that we can no more err in taking the Scripture from the
Church, then the Christians of the Primitive Church could err in taking it
from the Apostles. And yet as their Faith was of things not seen, both in
regard of the Object, which is not seen, and of the Subject, that sees only in
aenigmate, enigmatically and darkly; so is ours.

Will the Bishop then account the greatest part, or rather all the Fathers,
Ibid.. 16. number. 24.
either blind, or sensual men, who saw no such light for some hundreds of
years after Christ, as Protestants, with his Lordship here, pretend they see in
some Books of Scripture? Were all those of the Roman Church, for so many ages
before, blind, when you of the newfound Church first began, who discovered no
such Infallible and Divine light in Scripture, as could evince it self to be
the word of God, to such as before believed it not to be so, with Divine
certainty? Or will Protestants be content, that we, upon this their own
principle, account them all blind, and sensual men, because they see not the
light of many other Books, which our Church recommends to them and us, and
which we believe to be Divine Scripture, as a great part of the Ancient Fathers
did before us? What do any Sectaries in the world more then this, either
against us or them, or one against another, in asserting the Private Spirit?
For the Bishop and his party affirm themselves to be so enlightened, that they
can see and discover that in Scriptures which no other Christians beside
themselves ever did, or could, even before, they believe it infallibly to be
Scripture.

8. As for Bellarmin, whom the Bishop will needs have to be (...), Ibid. n. 24.
and unable to stand upon his own ground, for teaching ( lib. 3. De Ecclesia,
cap. 14.) that it is not altogether necessary to salvation to believe any Divine
Scriptures; I wonder he should make such Sallies and Skirmishes against that,
which in it self has no shadow of difficulty; it being, as Bellarmin asserts
it, a truth so evident, that the Bishop himself could not have denied it. And
if his Lordship had not too hastily run over Bellarmin, he would have found,
that he distinguishes times, as well as Gandavo cited in the same page. For he
says, that to believe there are any Divine Scriptures, it is not absolutely
necessary to salvation, (for his omnino signifies no more) because many were
saved, who lived before Divine Scriptures were written: and since they were
written, some may, and it is not unlikely have been saved without any knowledge
of Divine Scripture. Such they are, as have always lived among Barbarous
Nations, where they have never heard of Divine Scripture: for having invincible
ignorance of this, and believing other necessary points sufficiently propounded
to them, if they offend not God mortally in other things, they will undoubtedly
be saved. Had some ignorant Calvinist cavill'd against this, it had been no
great marvel: but I wonder so great a Scholar, and so wise a man, as the
Bishop is presumed to be, should pick so deep a quarrel with nothing And
questionless had it been so necessary a point, the Apostles would have inserted
the Belief thereof into their Creed. Nay St. Irenaeus and St. Austin (whom
Bellarmin cites) would have been in as deep an error, as he. Seeing therefore
Bellarmin, and all Catholics with him, hold that Christians may sufficiently
arrive to a Divine Belief of all the Fundamental Mysteries of Faith, without an
explicit Belief of Scripture, what error could he commit in his Assertion?
But it was some secret Project, or other, which made the Bishop here inveigh
and argue so hotly against Bellarmin; and by conjecture, most likely this.
Scripture, in his principles, is the Sole soundation of Faith. Therefore none
can be saved without express belief of Scripture. I think, I have hit the nail
on the head. Let them first convince Bellarmin of this, and then I Will confess,
he delivered a great error.

What he adds asterwards, that being granted, which is among all Christians,
that there is a Scripture, is a mere cavil; the question being not understood
only of Christians. For I urge, is it also granted amongst all Heathens, that
there is a Scripture? What if a Heathen should be brought to believe all that
is contained in the Apostles Creed, and being Baptized should dye, before he
hear there is any Scripture; cannot he be saved? Questionless he may. Bellarmin
therefore speaks only in such rare cases as these. When his Lordship subjoyns,
God would never have given a supernatural unnecessary thing, who says he
would? May not many supernatural things be necessary for the whole Church, or
for many states therein, which are not necessary to salvation for every
particular person? What thinks he of Holy Orders, Vows, Virginity, etc? Again,
are there not hundreds of Histories, and thousands of Sentences in Scripture,
which for every one in the Church to believe expressly is not necessary to
salvation? Who denies the Scripture to be very necessary in all ages? The
question is, whether it be absolutely and simply necessary for every one to
Salvation, to believe expressly, that there is Scripture.

The Bishop here imagines, he has given a great defeat to Bellarmin, and that
(as he says) upon Roman grounds, in this his Marginall Syllogism.

That which the Tradition of the present Church delivers as necessary to
believe, is omnino necessary to salvation.

But that there are Divine Scriptures, the Tradition of the present Church
delivers as necessary to believe.

Therefore, to believe there are Divine Scriptures, is omnino necessary to
Salvation.

The fallacy of this Argument lies in the words necessary to believe: there
being some Articles of Faith so absolutely necessary to be believed, that a man
cannot be saved without an express belief of them; which therefore
School-Divines call necessary necessitate medii: whereas there are other
Articles of Faith, which in some cases it is enough to believe implicitly,
though all men are bound to an explicit belief of them, when they are
sufficiently propounded to them by the Church; and these Divines term
necessary necessitate praecepti. This distinction supposed, I answer thus in
form.

That which the Tradition of the present Church delivers as necessary
necessitate medii, is omnino necessary to salvation, I grant the Major. That
which the Tradition of the present Church delivers as necessary to believe
necessitate praecepti only, is omnino, or absolutely necessary to salvation, I
deny the Major. To the Minor I apply the very same distinction, and deny the
consequence. By which you may easily perceive, that Bellarmin stands firm upon
his feet, and with a wet finger wipes off all that the Bishop here lays to his
charge.

9. In his number 25. there is much ado about Hooker and Brierley; Ibid. n.
(...)
the latter of which the Relatour is pleased to call the Storehouse for all
Priests, that will be idle and seem well read. Truly persecution has deprived
them of that plenty of Books, which Protestants have; so that in this respect
they have more need of a Storehouse; yet I believe Catholic Priests are as
industrious and learned, as Protestant Ministers for the most part; and daily
experience testifies as much.

Now concerning Mr. Hookers Authority, which the Bishop affirms to be cited
with want of fidelity and integrity by Brierley, I answer, it is not Brierley,
but his Lordship, who wants both these in quoting Hookers words. For first,
Brierley cites Mr. Hookers words most faithfully, as they stand in the places
mentioned by him. Secondly, what he affirms Hooker to acknowledge, viz. that
the motive, which assures us that Scripture is the word of God, is the
Authority of Gods Church, is likewise true. For that Author first speaks thus,
Finally we all believe the Scriptures of God are sacred, and that they
proceeded from God: our selves we assure, that we do right well in so
believing. We have for this point a demonstration SOUND AND INFALLIBLE. But it
is not the word God, etc. as it follows in his words cited by Brierley. Now
seeing Hooker affirms, that this sound and infallible Demonstration that
Scripture proceeds from God, is not the word of God, or Scripture it self, he
must either settle no infallible ground at all (even in his Lordships
principles) or must say, that the Tradition of the Church is that ground. For
seeing he assigns no other save the Authority of man (which, as the Bishop here
acknowledges, is the name he gives to Tradition) it must necessarily follow,
that either we have no infallible ground at all to believe Scripture to be the
word of God, or it is Tradition. Now that it is Tradition only, which is all
the ground he puts of believing Scripture to be the word of God, Hooker
delivers clearly enough in that place, where he adds these words, Yea (that
which is more) utterly to infringe the force of MAN'S AUTHORITY (that is
Tradition) were to shake the very Fortress of Gods Truth: by which Fortress he
means the Scriptures, as the following words declare. Now how can this Fortress
be shaken by infringing Man's Authority, were not that Authority esteemed by him
the ground of that Fortress? And presently after he inferres, Some way
therefore, notwithstanding man's infirmity, his Authority may enforce assent. If
man's Authority may enforce assent, it must necessarily be the ground of our
assent, to assure us (as Hooker afterward affirms it does) that Scripture is
the word of God.

But now let us see the dextrous Windings the Bishop makes, to turn Hookers
words another way. He first would infer from these words of Hooker, So that
unless beside Scripture there were some thing, that might assure, etc. that
therefore he excludes not Scripture, though he call for another proof to lead
it in, and help in assurance, namely Tradition, supposing that Hooker spoke of
proving Scripture to be the word of God. But I wonder by what Daedalian art his
Lordship discourses thus. Mr. Hookers adversaries (the Puritans) had affirmed,
that Scripture proved it self to be the word of God by its own light and
authority. Mr. Hooker asserts it impossible for Scripture to be its own proof.
After he had demonstrated this, he tells his Adversaries, that unless besides
Scripture there be another proof, etc. Scripture can never be sufficiently
evinced to be the word of God. Ergo, says the Bishop, he himself (against
himself) holds Scripture to prove it self; when every one, that has his eyes
open; may see, that Hookers meaning is, there must be some other thing,
different from Scripture, to prove the Scriptures to be Gods word; and that
this manner of expressing himself unless beside Scripture, etc. was occasioned
by his adversaries opinion. As if he had said, unless beside Scripture (which
you, Puritans, have ungroundedly put for its own proof) there be some other, it
can never be proved sufficiently to be Scripture, because I have demonstrated,
that Scripture (which you falsely suppose to be that proof) is no such proof at
all.

But let us hear Mr. Hooker make his Apology for himself in his own words. It
is not the word of God, which does, or possibly can assure us, that we do well
to think it is his word. For if any one Book of Scripture did give testimony to
all, yet still that Scripture, which gives credit to the rest, would require
another to give credit unto it. Nor could we ever come to any pause, to rest
our assurance this way. So that unless beside Scripture there were something,
that might assure us that we do well, we could not think we do well, no not in
being assured, that Scripture is a sacred and holy Rule of doing well. Hooker.
lib. 2.. 4. Is there any thing here, which proves Scripture to be a ground to
it self, that it is the word of God? Nay, is not the impossibility hereof
clearly asserted? Is not Hooker in search after an assuring ground, upon which
Scripture must stand?

But the Bishop will have this ground (whether Mr. Hooker will or no) only
concomitant with Scripture, that is, Church-Tradition only to lead in and help
in assurance, which assurance we get by the sole light of Scripture; whereas
Mr. Hooker will have that assurance, both that Scripture is a rule of living
well, and that we do well in holding it to be so, and also that it is the word
of God (as his words now cited declare) to be precedent to Scripture, and no
other then Church-Tradition. If therefore Mr. Hooker be understood to speak of
the Scriptures-being proof to it self, that it is the word of God, in his own
opinion, he maintains the very same in effect that we say, and the quite
contrary to the Bishop, viz. that supposing we are assured by a proof precedent
to Scripture, that Scripture is the word of God, this (I say) presupposed)
Scripture as by a secondary proof, can confirm its own Authority, viz. either
where it teaches that we are to believe the Church (which so assures us
primarily) or that it self is the word of God.

This Turn being ended he begins another, and that a double one; and endeavors
to show, that Brierley has shamefully falsified Hooker, in saying that the main
proof which Hooker brings to show that Scripture is the word of God, is the
Tradition of the Church. For that Author (says he) states the question in
these words, The Scripture is the ground of our Belief; the Authority of man, (
that is the name Hooker gives to Tradition) is the key, which opens the door of
entrance into the knowledge of the Scripture. Now see his Meanders. Hooker
(says the Bishop) affirms, that Scripture is the ground of our Belief. But are
those all Hookers words in that Sentence? No; for I find amongst them a
therein, which is neatly hidden in a dark corner. Although (says Hooker the
Scripture THEREIN be the ground of our Belief. This one concealed word relates
to something, which would have quite spoiled the Bishops market, had it been
fairly expressed. What means he by Therein? The words immediately going before
tell us. Whatsoever (says Hooker) we believe concerning Salvation by Christ,
although the Scripture THEREIN be the ground of our Belief.

Whence it appears, that Hooker rather excludes Scripture from being a ground
of our Belief, concerning that which the Bishop here pretends, viz. that
Scripture is the word of God. For the word therein (which Hooker uses) is in
this place clearly relative and restrictive, and ties his speech to the
particular matter precedent, viz. to all things concerning Salvation by Christ.
As if Hooker should say, Good assurance being presupposed, by some antecedent
proof, that Scripture is the word of God, Scripture it self may then be a
ground of our Belief touching all other things, which concern our Salvation by
Christ. How does this place of Hooker, now fully and faithfully cited, favor
his Lordship? There is no man, that has his brains about Ibidem.
him, (to use his own words) but sees, how little it makes to his purpose.

But let us go on. The Authority of man (says Hooker cited by the Bishop) is
the Key, which opens the Door of entrance into the knowledge of Ibidem.
the Scripture. What knowledge of Scripture speaks he of? Let Mr. Hooker be his
own Interpreter, and show what he means by opening the knowledge of Scripture.
He speaks thus. The Scriptures do not teach us the things that are of God,
unless we did credit men, who have taught us, that the words of Scripture do
signify those things. Stay a while. By this Key therefore, which opens the
entrance into the knowledge of Scriptures, is not meant in this place, that
Church-Tradition fallibly assures us, that Scripture is the word of God, (as
the Bishop would fain interpret Hooker) but that it teaches us the meaning of
the words of Scripture, and thereby opens to us the knowledge of Scripture.

By what has been said, it is evident, his Lordship had very little reason to
fall so hotly upon Brierley, as to tax him of falsification, as he does number.
25. For Hooker clearly teaching, that besides Scripture we must have the
Authority, or Tradition, of the Church, to assure us, that Scripture is Gods
word; and Brierley affirming no more of him then this, I wonder, that for
speaking truth he should be thought to deserve so sharp a censure from his
Lordship.

CHAP. 8. A further discovery of our Adversaries indirect proceedings in the
Question.
ARGUMENT.
1. The Question declined by the Bishop. 2. Scriptures (morally speaking) more
obnoxious to alteration, then Universal Tradition. 3. He mistakes his
Adversaries words, contradicts his Brethren and himself, falsifies A. C. and
most unhandsomely traduces the whole Order of the Jesuits. 4. Texts of
Scripture for the Churches Infallibility, maintained. 5. Why each Apostle,
Infallible; and not each Bishop. 6. Christ's promises to his Apostles, when to
be extended to their Successors. 7. Not the Apostles only, but their
Successors also, settled in all Truths. 8. The Scripture, the Church, and her
Motives of Credibility, not unfitly compared to a Kings Word, his Ambassadors,
and his Credentials. 9. Vincentius Lirinensis, and Henricus a Gandavo
misconstrued, and the Fathers misalledged.

1. THe Bishop, number. 26. of this Paragraph, to withdraw his Reader. 16. n. 26.
from the Thesis, or main matter in question, viz. the Church, descends (very
dexterously indeed, but yet without any necessity) to the Hypothesis, or Church
of Rome. For though A. C. believes, that the Roman, in a true sense, is the
Catholic Church, yet here he abstracts from that question, and means no more
then he plainly asserts, viz. that the Tradition of the Catholic Church is
Infallible, etc. But whether theirs, or ours, or some other Congregation of
Christians be the Catholic Church, that is another question; of which A. C.
affirms nothing in this place: yet the Relatour (as if he were somewhat
nettled) is pleased to say, that after a long Ibidem.
silence he thrusts himself in again, and desires the Bishop to consider the
Tradition of the Church, not only as it is the Tradition of a company of
fallible men, but as a Tradition of a company of men assisted by Christ and his
holy Spirit; in which sense he might easily find it to be Infallible.

Truly, in my opinion, A. C. deserved no rough language for his respects to the
Bishop, in being so long and silently attentive to his discourse; though at
length, through zeal he became something earnest in the business, out of a
desire to bring his Adversary into the right way: and to this end urged him to
consider the Tradition of the Church, not only as it is a Tradition of a
company of fallible men, but as a Tradition of a company of men assisted by
Christ and his holy Spirit; and not assisted by them in any common way, but in
such a manner as reaches to Infallibility. For such assistance is necessary as
well to have sufficient assurance of the true Canon of holy Scripture, as to
come to the true meaning and interpretation thereof. Such assistance the
Relatour confesses the Prophets to have had under Ibidem.
the Old Testament, and the Apostles under the New. The like (we say) the High
Priest with his Clergy had in the Old Testament, as we gather out of the 17. of
Deuteronomy, verse 8. etc. where, in doubts, the people were bound, not only
to have recourse to the High Priest, and his Clergy, but to submit and stand to
their judgment. Much more then ought we to think, that there is such an
obligation in the New Testament; which could not stand without Infallibility.
Witness the infinite dissentions and divisions in points of Faith amongst all
the different Sects of Christians, that deny it. Neither had he any reason to
break forth into those exclamations, Good God, Ibidem.
whither will these men go? For they go no further then Christ himself leads
them, by promises made unto them in the places of holy Scripture, which shall
be set down (...). And the Pastors of the Catholic Church may very well
acknowledge this Infallibility, yet make it no occasion to Lord it over others,
unless he will also accuse the Apostles upon the same account. Neither do they
equal the Tradition of the present Church (as the Relatour urges) to the
written word of God; and this has been showed before.

Touching what he writes of Divine Infallibility, we have already declared,
that it is sufficient to our present purpose to assert Church-Tradition to be
Infallible; whether it be simply Divine, or no, is another question, to be
determined when time and place requires. Whence it follows, that there is no
necessity of equalizing Church-Tradition to the Word of God. For we have
already acknowledged, that it is not in all respects equal to Scripture. Again
he falls from the Thesis to the Hypothesis. We have nothing now to do with this
question, whether the Roman Bishop and his Clergy be the Head of the Catholic
Church, or no; but whether that, which is the Catholic Church, be able to
breed in us Divine Faith, or no, whatsoever Congregation of Christians it be.
So that his impeaching the Roman Church of errors here, whilst we are in
dispute about another question, is wholly out of season.

His answer to St. Basils Text, Lib. de Spirit. sanct. cap. 17.
Parem vim habent ad pietatem, Ibidem.
(that unwritten Traditions have equal force to stir up piety, with the written
word) is very deficient. First, it is true he speaks of Apostolical Traditions;
yet of such as were come down from their times to St. Basils: For otherwise how
should they have had in his time any force at all to move to piety, as he said
they then had? Parem vim habent ad pietatem. Secondly, his exception taken
against that Work of St. Basil, from Bishop Andrews, and that borrowed from
Erasmus, and he collecting it only from the style, (which yet others far more
ancient, and better acquainted with St. Basils style, then Erasmus, acknowledge
to be his) this exception, I say, we esteem of no great force. Thirdly, St.
Basils making the unwritten Traditions whereof he speaks, to be such as are not
contrary to Scripture, proves not Scripture it self so to be the Touchstone of
Apostolical Tradition, as that Scripture must therefore needs be of greater
force, and superior dignity, then that of Tradition. For the Bishop himself
grants Prime Apostolical Tradition to be equally divine with Scripture: and yet
it is true to say, that those Prime Traditions are such, as are not contrary to
scripture.

But the sense of Stapletons words is quite perverted by the Bishop. For he
speaks (as his words clearly intimate) of later and fresher Traditions, then
are the Prime Apostolical, viz. such as were begun by General Councils, or
perhaps in some particular Church. His words are recentiorem and posteriorem,
sicut and particularem, etc. which do not signify such Traditions, as we now
treat of, viz. Traditions primely Apostolical, delivered from hand to hand, in
all succeeding ages, by the universal and constant Tradition of the Church, and
conveyed as such unto us by the Tradition of the present Church.

2. A. C. urging the present Copies of Scripture, etc. presses the Relatour
very hard, as I have already showed. Now I add, what if the Ancienter Copies
disagree. How shall we know which is the true Word of God? His saying that true
Scripture may be more easily Ibidem. number. 27.
known, then true Tradition, because the one is written, and not the other, is
not consequent. For Universal Traditions are recorded in Authors of every
succeeding age: and it seems much more incident to have errors slip into
writings of so great bulk as is the Bible, which in their Editions pass only
through the hands of particular men, then that there should be errors in
public, Universal, and Immemorial Traditions, which are openly practiced
throughout all Christendom, and taken notice of by every one in all ages.

To show the difference therefore betwixt Scripture and Tradition, not only in
their Originals, but in their successive deliverers from hand to hand, let us
compare them together. St. John (for example) writes one of his Epistles, and
St. Luke his Gospel, to particular persons. These, upon the credit of the
persons to whom they were written, were delivered as Authentical Apostolical
writings to other Christians, and so by degrees came to be publicly delivered,
that is, made known to the whole Primitive Church, and received by it: And
thence in like manner the Church received and delivered them in succeeding
ages. On the other side the Apostles (to descend to some particulars) observed
the first day of the week as sacred, in place of the Sabbath, Baptized Infants,
used Altars, etc. This in the very prime Institution and practice of it, was
not done privately, only by some one Apostle, or in the presence of one single
person only, but publicly by all the Apostles, and universally practiced by
all Christians. It was therefore incomparably harder (morally speaking) to
doubt (in the beginning) of these Traditions, then whether Saint John's
Epistle, or St. Luke's Gospel were really theirs, or no. Wherefore we see, that
many Books of the New Testament were doubted of, for many years, in some
particular Churches: whereas all, in all places, accounted these said
Traditions, and their like, to be most undoubtedly Apostolical, by the
universal uncontradicted practice of them, being delivered from age to age
under this Notion, as truly and really descending from the Apostles.

Here his Lordship supposes A. C's. pen to be troubled and forsake Ibidem.
him, insinuating thereby to his Reader, that this trouble proceeds out of some
check of Conscience. But under favor, it is not so much A. C's pen, as his
own, that is here troubled. For he sets down in a different letter above eight
lines, as written by A. C. which notwithstanding were none of his. This indeed
has something of a troubled pen, and peradventure of a troubled conscience
also: unless we may rather take it for a piece of art, to make A. C. seem to
say, that the Copies of Scripture may be considered as printed by men assisted
with Gods Spirit, whereas he only says they may be considered as printed, and
by authority of men assisted by Gods Spirit, approved to be true Copies. Was
not this a pretty slight, to blast the credit of his Adversary?

3. Again, is it not strange to see, how he restrains the Infallible Assistance
of the Holy Ghost only to the Apostles times? How come Christians then to
infer, from the places cited by A. C. that the Church shall never fall away
and perish? For if the assistance be not to preserve the succeeding Church, at
least from some kind of errors infallibly, it may, notwithstanding all the
assistance he allows it here, fall into all kind of errors one after another;
and so by degrees the whole Church might fall into a general Apostasy, and
thereby perish. There must therefore be some kind of Infallible Assistance in
the Apostles Successors, by virtue of these promises. For otherwise how would
this Doctrine of his agree with that of other Modern Protestant Authors, who
grant, that our Savior by those Texts promised an Infallible Assistance to his
visible Church, and her Pastors lawfully assembled in a General Council, in
all points belonging to the foundation of Religion? Nay, how comes he here to
take away all Infallible Assistance of the Holy Ghost from the Apostles
Successors, and yet grant above, that the present Church is Infallible in all
Fundamentals? Comes not this Infallibility from the Holy Ghost? and proceeds it
not from the said promise of our Savior?

But what shall we say to an Adversary, that forges what Chimerical Doctrine he
pleases, and then fights against it? He would fain impose upon his Reader, that
A. C. in the words cited by him ( number. 28.) contends, that not only the
Pastors met together in a full Representative of the Church, but severally and
apart are each of them Infallible; which he inveighs against, and presses so
far that he would persuade the ignorant, that the Jesuits also have a months
mind to this Infallibility. Whence draws he, I pray, this consequence?
Forsooth, because A. C. averres, that the Holy Ghost through Christ's promise,
is to assist infallibly the Successors of the Apostles, the lawfully-sent
Pastors and Doctors of the Church in all ages. But what if A. C's words
cannot be understood of every Pastor, or Doctor apart? but rather of Pastors
and Doctors lawfully assembled in an Ecumenical Council? as indeed he does;
which thus I show.

Every Author is to be understood to mean by his words, what they will
properly bear, and is consonant with the meaning of his other words. Now the
whole dispute wherein the Bishop and A. C. were then engaged, was whether the
whole Church might err in her Tradition of Scripture. So that it was necessary
for him to apply the promises of our Savior to the Pastors of the Church,
only so far, as those Pastors were the Representative Church, and their
Tradition the Churches-Tradition. This A. C. signifies expressly by his words
immediately before these here cited by his Lordship, which the Relatour
handsomely conceals, to make his windings the less perceptible. For A. C.
speaks thus. I see no reason, why the like twofold consideration of the
Tradition of the present Church may not be admitted; especially when as the
promise of Christ, and his holy Spirits, continual presence, is not only to
the Apostles, but to their Successors also, the lawfully-sent Pastors and
Doctors of the Church in all ages. Where it is evident he took those words as
a Medium to prove the Infallibility of the Tradition of the present Church,
thereby tying those promises to the Pastors and Doctors of the Church, as
they may be said to be the Church, not as they are separate and apart, but as
assembled in a full Representative of the Church, that is, a General Council.

All therefore that follows, either of the Pope as a private Pastor, or of the
Jesuits, etc. is to no purpose, as proceeding merely from a misunderstanding
(or rather perverting) of A. C's words. Yet I cannot omit a consequence, which
the Bishop will needs extort from the Jesuits meaning, as though he had been in
his heart, when he wrote those words. And though A. C. out of his bounty (says
he) is content Ibid. n. 28.
to extend it to all the lawfully-sent Pastors of the Church, (where all is
handsomely juggled into A. C's Text) yet his own Society questionless he means
chiefly. Is it not fine sport, the Bishop here makes, that A. C. by Pastors of
the Church must chiefly mean (and that without all question, or dispute) those
of his own Society? When it is well known, there are scarce two Pastors of the
Church amongst all the Jesuits in Europe. And then (to mend the matter) that he
will have Mr. Fisher and A. C. to be those two Pastors, when they neither were
Pastors, nor could be, unless he will suppose likewise they would break their
vow made to Almighty God (for by Pastors, the Apostles Successors, are meant
Bishops) never to admit any such dignity without express command of the Pope.
But how proves the Bishop the Jesuits persuade themselves they are Infallible?
Rabbi Casaubon, (...), must help him out. An Apologist (says Casaubon)
averres, it is impossible for a Jesuit to err. Who is this Anonymus Apologist?
A Jesuit, or a Minister? For an Apologist and a Jesuit are no more convertible
terms, then a Jesuit and a Minister. How shall we know then, whether this
nameless Apologist was a Jesuit or a Minister personating a Jesuit? The Gospel
will tell us; Ex fructibus little cognoscetis eos. Is it possible Matthew. 7. 20.
his Lordship should think himself everable to move wise men with such
non-proofs as these?

The Relatour having been so positive in denying the Infallibility of the
Church, it is strange he should think it needless for A. C. to urge passages of
Scripture in proof of it: which though they be well known in this Controversy;
yet are they not therefore of less force.

The first is in St. Luke; where Christ says, He that hears you, Luke 10. 16.
hears me; and he that despises you, despises me, etc.

The second in St. Matthew; where Christ tells us, I am with you always Matthew.
28. 20.
unto the end of the world.

The third is in St. John; where it is written, The Comforter, the Joan. 14. 16.
Holy Ghost, shall abide with you for ever.

To the first of these passages, viz, Luke 10. 16. alleged by A. C. the Bishop
answers, that those who hear the Successors of the Apostles Ibid. n. 29.
hear Christ, viz. when they speak the words of Christ, but not when they speak
their own words. But that this is rather to pervert our Saviors words, then to
interpret them, is manifest. For can the Bishop bring any ground from the Text,
that this restraint may not, by some other Sectary, who denies the Apostles
Infallibility no less then the Churches, be applied to the Apostles themselves,
as well as he now applies it to their Successors? But his Lordship has happily
ground for what he says, if not here, yet in St. Matthew, chap. 28. ver. 20.
where they are commanded to teach all things which Christ commanded them. Ergo,
say I, (and with more reason; for the command was given expressly and
immediately to the Apostles themselves) the Apostles were neither to be heard,
when they preached other things, then what Christ had commanded them: and so
both these Texts will either include an Infallibility in the Successors of the
Apostles, or exclude it from the Apostles themselves.

If he reply, we our selves must acknowledge a difference in applying this Text
to the Apostles and their Successors, (for it was true in every one of the
Apostles apart, but it is not so, as we confess, in every one of the succeeding
Pastors) I answer first, the difference alleged by us is so clear and
unquestionable, that our very Adversaries agree with us in it. Secondly, it is
manifest by experience it self, that many Pastors, even of very eminent
authority in the Church, have not only erred, but invented and maintained
Heresies. Thirdly, we have the universal Tradition and consent in all ages,
that all Pastors apart are not Infallible. Fourthly, we have plain Scripture
for it; Acts 20. 30. where the Apostle says, that even from amongst
themselves, that is, from amongst the Pastors and Bishops of the Church, (to
whom he there speaks, ver. 17, 28.) there should arise some, in future ages;
that should speak perverse things. Fifthly, we so interpret the words for
future ages, that what is necessary for preserving the Church in the purity of
Christ's doctrine, is still subsistent in all ages, in the Infallibility of
lawful General Councils; whereby we make the words of Christ (in both Texts)
absolutely true, without all ifs and conditions; which our Adversaries
exposition does utterly frustrate in relation to the Church. Sixthly, we
(according to the most received persuasion amongst us) preserve that
Infallibility in one Supreme Pastor of the Church, the Bishop of Rome,
successively, which they continue neither in one, nor in all the Pastors of
the Church assembled together. Let those therefore of his Lordships party bring
as strong reasons for the Bishops exposition of this Text of St. Luke 10. 16.
as we do for ours, and we shall not be unwilling to yield to it: but we (and
they too) know that to be impossible.

His answer to the second place (Matthew. 28. 20. I am with you always, even
unto the end of the world) runs in the same strain, with his answer to the
former Text; and so requires not our further refutation. We extend those words,
I am with you always, etc. to the whole Church Representative, not to every
Pastor apart: whereby St. In illis donis quibus salus aliorum (...) (qualia
sunt Prophetiae and Interpretationes Sermonum) Spiritus Sanctus nequaquam
semper in praedicatoribus (...). S. Gregor. lib. 2. moral. cap. 29.
Gregory's Text is no ways against us; for he speaks of Preachers taken
severally and apart. We say also, with Rhabanus Maurus, that Christ in his holy
Spirit is always present with his Church diffusive, in communicating his
Graces unto it: But that supposes, at least denies not a conjunctive
Infallibility of the Pastors, as a necessary Foundation and support of the
Church diffusive. Whence it appears how vain the Bishops challenge is, whereby
he urges us to show any one Father Ibid. n. 29.
of the Church, that extends the sense of this place of Scripture to Divine and
Infallible Assistance, granted thereby to all the Aposties Successors. For as
to Divine Assistance, we have all along proved it not to be necessary: but as
to Infallible Assistance, in regard of the whole Church, it is clear, that the
Fathers, in effect, do attribute such a Prerogative to the Church, viz. that
Christ does assist and preserve her from error; in as much as they teach,
Cyprian de unit. Ecclesiae.
That the Church cannot be adulterated with Heresy. (...) Epist. ad Cornel.
Cyril. Catech. Mystag. 18.
That what she once has received from Christ, she ever holds. Ambros. libr. 4.
Hexamer. cap 2. Hieronym. in cap. 2. Isa. in cap. 9. Amos. in cap. 48. Ezech.
Aug. in Psalm. 47. and 101. lib. de agon, Chrislian. cap. 29.
That she can never fail. Euscb. Caerasiens. de praeparat. Evangel. lib. 1.
cap. 3. Cyrill. Alexandrin. Dial. 4. de Trinitat.
That her Faith is invincible, even to the very Powers of Hell. Cyrill.
Alexandrin. lib. 5. in Isa. cap. 54.
That she is founded by Christ in the Truth for ever. Chrysostom. in cap. 2.
Isa.
That all the Heretics in the world cannot pervert the Tradition of her
Doctrine, and the like: which seeing also they limit not to any determinate
age, or ages, but extend indefinitely to all, it is likewise clear that in the
judgment of the Fathers, this Assistance was granted and intended by Christ to
all the Apostles Successors, in the sense above declared. But whether the
Fathers ground their Doctrine in this point, upon this particular Text or no,
is little material. It Is sufficient they acknowledge the thing we contend for,
viz. the Prerogative of Infallibility and Immunity from error, in the Church,
and that they generally derive it from our Saviors special Promises unto the
Church, and his Presence with it; which Presence and Promises this Text (with
others of like nature) do clearly contain, as the Bishop himself acknowledges.
Wherefore with far greater reason we return the challenge upon himself, and
press the Relatours party to produce any one Father, that ever denied the sense
of this place to reach to infallible assistance, granted thereby to all the
Apostles Successors, in such manner as we maintain it.

The like answer of our satisfies his exposition of the third place, ( John 14.
16.) For what was promised there for ever must, in some absolute sense (so far
as is necessary to the preservation of the Church from error) be verified in
future ages.

He frames also an answer to a fourth place, viz. John 16. 13. which speaks of
leading the Apostles into all truth. This he restrains to the persons of the
Apostles only. And he needs not tells us so often of simply all: For surely
none is so simple as not to know that, without his telling it. But we contend,
that in whatsoever sense all truth is to be understood in respect of each
Apostle apart, it is also to be understood in relation to their Successors,
assembled in a full Representative of the whole Church.

5. Now one main reason of this difference between the Apostles, and succeeding
Pastors of the Church, I take to be this, that every Apostle apart had
received an immediate Power from our Savior over the whole Church; so that
whatever any one of them taught as Christian Faith, all the Church was obliged
to believe: and consequently had he erred in any thing, the whole Church would
have been obliged to follow and believe that error. Whereas on the other side,
the succeeding Bishops (generally speaking) were not to be Pastors of the
whole Church, but each of his own respective Diocese; so that if particular
Pastors preached any error in Faith, the whole Church was unconcerned in it,
having no obligation to believe them.

But in regard those respective Pastors, when they are assembled in a lawful
Representative, or General Council, are in quality of the Pastors of the whole
Church, if they should err, in such a body, the whole Church would be obliged
to err with them; which is against the promises of our Savior. Hence also it
follows in proportion, that the Bishop of Rome, being Pastor of the whole
Church, when he teaches any thing in that quality, viz. as Pastor of the
whole Church, and intending to oblige the whole Church by his Definition,
cannot (in the common opinion) err, for the same reason.

6. To give also the Fundamental Reason for this Exposition; one, and that a
certain way to know, when our Saviors words spoken immediately to the
Apostles, are to be extended to their Successors in all ages, is this; that
when the necessary good and preservation of the Church requires the performance
of Christ's words in future ages, no less then it required it in the Apostles
times, then we are to understand that his words extend themselves to those
ages, unless there be some express limitation added to his words, tying them to
the Apostles only. Thus, when our Savior commanded his Apostles to Preach,
Baptize, Remit sins, Feed their Flocks, etc. Seeing these actions are as
necessary for all future ages, as they were in the Apostles time, it is
manifest, they were to reach to all succeedinga ges. Again, in regard he also
promised ( John 16. 13.) to lead the Apostles, by his Holy Spirit, into all
truth: and seeing it is as necessary now, for those who act as Pastors of the
whole Church (as all succeeding Bishops do, when they meet in a lawful
Oecumenicall Council) to be led into all those truths, into which he promised
to lead the Apostles, for the reason but now alleged, it evidently follows by
virtue of our Saviors promise, that they are always and effectually so led.
And though it would be boldness (as the Relatour terms it) to enlarge that
promise, in the fullness of it, beyond the persons of the Apostles, so far as to
give to every single succeeding Bishop as Infallible a leading into all truth,
as each of the Apostles had; yet may it without any boldness at all be
affirmed, that the succeeding Bishops, assembled as abovesaid, have an
infallible leading into all truth, as being then Representative Pastors of the
whole Church, to teach and instruct her what she is to believe.

St. Austins Omnes autem insipientissimi Haeretici, qui se Christianos vocari
volunt, etc.
words therefore, which the Bishop cites, calling them in a manner Prophetical,
are not with the least shadow of reason applyable to us, but to a world of
Phanaticks sprung from the stock of Protestancy, and who still pass under the
general notion of Protestants. And this I may boldly assert, in regard it is
clear, that the said great Saint and Doctor held the self-same Doctrine we here
maintain: while (for instance) he accounts our obligation to communicate
Fasting, to have proceeded from the Holy Ghost; of which Will of the Holy Ghost
we are not ascertained, by any Text of Scripture, but by the Church alone.
Liquido apparet, (...) primum acceperunt Discipuli corpus and sanguinem Domini,
non eos accepisse jejunos. Nunquid tamen propterea (...) est universae
Ecclesiae, quod a jejunis semper accipitur. Hoc enim placuit Spiritui sancto,
ut in honorem tanti Sacramenti, in os Christiani prius (...) corpus intraret,
quam caeteri cibi. Nam ideo per universum orbem mos iste servatur. Epist. 118.
ad Jannar.
It Is manifest (says he) that when the Disciples first received the Body and
Blood of our Lord, they did not receive Fasting. Must we therefore calumniate
the Universal Church for always receiving Fasting? Since the Holy Ghost was
pleased herewith, that in honor of so great a Sacrament, the Body of our Lord
should enter into a Christians mouth before any other meat. For this cause this
Custom is observed throughout the world. I might easily produce several other
instances to the same effect, if this one were not sufficient, as I presume it
is.

7. Neither has the Bishop any ground to aver, that this promise of settling
the Apostles in all truth, was for the persons of the Apostles only; because
the Truths, in which the Apostles were settled, were to continue inviolably in
the Church. What wise man would go about to raise a stately Building to
continue for many ages, and satisfy himself with laying a Foundation to last
but for few years? Our Savior, the wisest of Architects, is not to be thought
to have founded this incomparable Building of the Church upon sand; which must
infallibly have happened, had he not intended to afford his continual
Assistance also to the succeeding Pastors of the Church, to lead them, when
assembled in a General Council, into all those Truths, wherein he first settled
the Apostles, as Vincentius Lirinensis above attests. Christi vero Ecclesia,
sedula and cauta depositorum apud se Dogmatum custos, nihil in iis unquam
permutat, nihil minuit, nihil addit; non amputat necessaria, non apponit
superflua; non amittit sua, non usurpat aliena; sed omni industria hoc unum
studet, ut vetera fideliter sapienterque tradendo, etc.
The Church never changes, nor diminishes, nor adds any thing at all, ( nihil
unquam) no she changes nothing: She neither cuts off any thing necessary, nor
adjoyns any thing superfluous; she loses not what is her own, she usurps not
what belongs to another, etc. but only polishes and perfects what was begun
before.

He tells us next, he will grant to A. C. that Tradition and Scripture, Number. 31.
without any vicious Circle do mutually confirm the Authority either of other,
provided that A. C. will grant his Lordship, that they do it not equally. This
is kindly done. But what if A. C. will not be so good natured as to grant so
much? What would the Relatour do in that case? Call you this answering, or
rather making Meanders? He Will grant to A. C. what he cannot deny by reason of
its evidence, if in return thereof A. C. will acquiesce to that which is so
apparently false, that he had already refused to grant it: and in the mean time
his Lordship gives no absolute answer to the difficulty.

8. To A. C's similitude of the Words and Letters Credential of an Ibid. n. 31.
Ambassador, he says, that the Kings Letters confirm the Ambassadors Authority
infallibly, and the Ambassadors word probably only. But to whom do those
Letters confirm it infallibly? To all that know the Seal and hand, says the
Bishop. That Is pretty. Suppose then he go to a Foreign King, who neither knows
Seal nor Hand; how will those Letters confirm infallibly the Ambassadors
authority? To this here is not a word of answer: yet this is the question. For
we now dispute, how we come to know infallibly, that the Scripture is Gods
Word; and this is neatly put off by a dexterous Turn. It Is true, the Kings
Letters may give some moral Testimony to purchase credit to the Ambassador,
supposing, that he who gives himself out for an Ambassador, do either by
private Letters, Informations, or other Motives, gain so much credit, as to
merit the repute of a person of worth and honor, and therefore not likely to
wrong his King and himself in a matter of so high concern.

Wherefore standing in this similitude, the Kings Letters are Letters of
Credence, because they are written in the usual form of such Letters, and
delivered from the hand of such a person, as for other reasons deserves the
repute of an honest man, so as (according to the style of all Royal Courts) he
is not to be received as Ambassador without those Letters. Where we see (to
fit this instance to our present purpose) that the first Motive, inducing the
Foreign King to receive either the Person, or the Letters, are those reasons,
whereby the King is persuaded the Ambassador is a person of credit, to which
correspond our Motives of Credibility, for receiving the Church as most
deserving all credit with us; who afterward affirming her self in her Prelates
to be Christ's Ambassador, we receive her as such, and give credit to what she
says or does; next she producing also Christ's Letters of Credence, the holy
Scriptures, which affirm that her Prelates are his Ambassadors, we are yet
further confirmed in the whole affair. But in case we should so far give way to
the Relatours answer in this particular, as to yield that the Letters
infallibly give credit to all that know the Seal and Hand; sure he must say,
that if this make them infallibly certain, they must also know infallibly that
Seal and Hand: for by knowing them only probably, they can never be infallibly
certain of the Letters. Now if they know that Seal and Hand infallibly, they
will also infallibly know that they are true Letters of Credence, even
independently of the Ambassadors assertion. Whence it follows, that if we can
be infallibly certain of any thing corresponding to the Seal and Hand of God in
the Scriptures, we likewise shall be infallibly certain, that they are his
Letters, whether the Church, as Gods Ambassador, attest them or not. So that
this way reduces all to the sole light of Scripture, which is against his
Lordship, and already rejected by him.

But after all how can one be infallibly certain of that Seal and Hand, unless
he be as certain of the Ambassadors sincerity, who brought them? otherwise
there can be no Infallibity of his Embassy. How many ways are there of
counterfeiting both Seal and Hand? Nay, how many ways of obtaining them
surreptitiously? May not the Ambassador himself, or some other interessed
person, procure them by some artificial practice? May they not combine with the
Secretary of State to impose upon his Majesty, by drawing him to sign one thing
for another. But enough of this, it being a matter so obvious to the
understanding.

Let us now follow the Bishop page by page; who stomachs very much at this
Assertion of A. C. That these Letters (the Scriptures) do warrant, that the
people may hear and give credit to those Legates of Christ, as to Christ
himself. Soft, (says the Bishop) this is too high a Ibidem.
great deal; no Legate was ever of so great credit, as the King himself. Durst I
be so bold, I might soft it to his Lordship too, and tell him he says too much
a great deal. Where, I beseech him, does A. C. say in the forecited words, that
a Legate is of as great credit, as the King himself. I Am sure in his words there
is no such sentence. He averres indeed, that we may give credit to those
Legates, as to Christ the King himself; but he says not that we may give as
much, or as high credit to the one as to the other. This was the Bishops Turn
only. There is therefore a more eminent degree of credit to be given to a King
then to his Legate, and yet we give credit to the Legate as to the King
himself, that is, we doubt no more of the one then of the other. And I would
gladly know, if his Lordship had heard our Savior speak in his life time, and
his Apostles preach after our Saviors death, whether he would have doubted of
the truth of the Apostles doctrine, any more then of the doctrine of Christ
himself, whose Legates they were. To give credit therefore to them as to Christ
himself, is as undoubtedly to believe them as Christ himself, though with a
higher degree of respect and regard to Christ, then to them. And our Savior
affirmed as much, when he said, He that hears you, hears me, Luke 10. 16.

Next he tells us, that A. C. says, that company of men, which delivers Ibidem.
the present Churches Tradition, has in them Divine and Infallible Authority,
and consequently are worthy of Divine and Infallible Credit, sufficient to
breed in us Divine and Infallible Faith. Has he not here played the Divine and
Rhetorician both at once? What means this Rhetorical repetition thrice
together? But the worst is, A. C's words are misapplied, and miscited by an
artificial Turn in the Labyrinth. He accuses A. C. of attributing Divine
Authority twice over, and that absolutely, without any restriction or
modification, to that company of men, which delivers the present Churches
Tradition: and then says, their Divine Authority and credit is so great, that
it is sufficient to breed in us Divine and Infallible Faith. Now, Reader, judge,
whether A. C. applies this Divine Authority to that company of men, or to the
Holy Scriptures. A. C. there discoursing of one, who considers Church-Tradition
as it is delivered from a company of men assisted by the Holy Ghost, speaks
thus, He would find no difficulty in that respect to account the Authority of
Church-Tradition to be Infallible, and consequently not only able to be an
Introduction, but also an Infallible motive, or reason, or at least a condition
EX PART OBJECTI, to make both it self and the Books of Scripture appear
infallibly (though obscurely) to have in them Divine and Infallible Authority,
and to be worthy of Divine and Infallible credit, sufficient to breed in us
Divine and Infallible Faith. These words in them are clearly referred to Books
of Scripture, not to any company of men; and those words sufficient to breed in
us divine Faith have relation to the Authority of the Books of Scripture, and
not to those men.

For though he put before two Antecedents, it self, (that is, Church Tradition)
and Books of Scripture, to both which in them may seem to have relation, yet it
is one thing to affirm that Church-Tradition has in it Divine and Infallible
Authority, and another to affirm, that those men so assisted have in them
Divine and Infallible Authority, as he accuses A. C. to have said. For seeing
that in Church-Tradition is included Apostolical Tradition, in A. C's
principles, and that, even according to our Adversary, Apostolical Tradition is
of Divine Authority, it will be true to assert, that Church-Tradition has in
it Divine Authority, even though those men delivering it had not in them any
absolute Divine, but only Infallible Authority.

Our Apology for A. C. being ended, let us see how his Lordship goes about to
prove Scripture to be Gods Word. For the better understanding whereof, it is
necessary to know what he is to prove. He tells us, that this his Method and
manner of proving Scripture to be the Ibid. n. 32.
Word of God, is the same, which the Ancient Church ever held, etc. Now his
Lordships Method and manner of proving this includes two particulars. The first
that Church-Tradition is only a humane, moral, and fallible inducement, able
only to found a moral persuasion that Scripture is the Word of God; but
insufficient to conveigh infallibly to us the Apostolical Tradition of the
Scriptures-being. Gods word: whence he concludes, that before the reading of
Scripture we cannot, in virtue of that Apostolical Tradition thus conveyed to
us, believe with Divine Faith that Scripture is the Word of God. This is the
first part of his Position. The second is, that Scripture, by the internal
light which is in it, founds a Divine Faith that it is the Word of God, when we
frame a high Moral esteem of it, and are induced to read it as a thing most
likely to be Gods Word, by the fallible Testimony of the Church. While
therefore he here undertakes to prove, that his Method and Manner of proving
Scripture to be the Word of God, is according to the use of the ancient Church,
let us have an eye to these two points, and see whether his Authorities prove
them, or no. First then his Authorities must prove, that before we read
Scripture it self, we have not Divine Faith, but only a Moral persuasion, by
Church-Tradition, that it is the Word of God.

He cites first Vincentius Quod si ego, sive alius quis vellet exurgentium
Haeresum frauds deprehendere, laqueosque vitare, and in fide sana sanus atque
integer permanere, duplici modo munire fidem suam Domino adjuvante, deberet.
Primo scilicet Divinae legis Authoritate, deinde Ecclesiae Catholicae
Traditione. Lirinens. advers. Haeres. lib. 1. cap 1.
Lirinensis, (lib. 1. cap. 1.) who makes our Faith to be confirmed both by
Scripture and Tradition of the Catholic Church. The Faith he here speaks of
is not any humane, fallible persuasion, but true, Christian, and Divine Faith;
for he opposes it to Heresy, and calls it Sound Faith, and his Faith, (Fidem
suam, the Faith of a Christian) nay, he says the Tradition of the Catholic
Church must needs as truly munire fidem, (confirm Divine Faith) as Scripture,
though Scripture does it in a more high and noble manner, as being the
immediate, prime Revelation of God. This then proves not his intent, but the
quite contrary. Secondly, Henricus a Gandavo says expressly, Credunt per istam
famam, (they believe by this Relation of Church-Tradition) and this is such a
Belief, that Christ is said to enter their hearts by means of the Church.
Christus intrat per mulierem, id est, Ecclesiam. But Christ cannot enter into a
Soul by a mere humane fallible persuasion, but by Divine Faith only. A Gandavo
goes on. Plus verbis Christi in Scripturis credit, quam Ecclesiae testificanti;
ergo credit Ecclesiae. He believes the Church; but how can he believe without
Faith? A little after a Gandavo says, Primam fidem tribuamus Scripturis
Canonicis, secundam subista Definitionibus and Consuetudinibus Ecclesiae
Catholicae. Here Is prima and secunda fides: But yet both of them are properly
and truly Faith. And to the end all may understand he means no other, but
Supernatural and Divine Faith, as to be given both to the Scriptures and the
Church, he adds a third manner of giving credit to others, Post istas
studiosis viris, non sub poena Ibidem.
perfidiae, sed proterviae. After these two, viz. Scriptures and
Church-Definitions, he says we believe also learned men, but in a far other
degree of assent, from that which was given to the Scriptures, and to the
Church; non sub poena perfidiae, sed proterviae: For the credit we give to them
obliges not under pain of Infidelity, or error in Faith, (if we dissent from
them) but under pain of pertinacious pride, in preferring our selves before
them.

Seeing therefore he adds this limitation to the third kind of belief only,
he tacitly grants, that if we contradict either Scripture, or Church, it is
sub poena perfidiae, under pain of Infidelity, and not of Proterviousness
only. Ergo, he accounts the Definitions of the Church sufficient to assure us
infallibly of Divine Truths; otherwise it would not be Infidelity, Error in
Faith, or Heresy, to contradict them. Lastly, a Gandavo is cited in these
words, Quod autem credimus Ibidem.
posterioribus, etc. Here is credimus again, and that with a Divine Faith, in
regard of the Church: for he asserts presently, that it is clear, ( constat)
that the writings of the Scripture, and other Articles of Faith, preached by
the former Pastors, are not changed by their Successors; and this does
constare ex consensione concordi in (...) omnium Succedentium (...) ad tempor a
nostra, by the unanimous consent of all Succeeders, even to our present times.
But sure a thing that is fallible, uncertain, and questionable, cannot be said
constare (to be clear and unquestionable) as he affirms the unanimous consent
of succeeding ages to be. Now the Bishop minces it in his Translation of the
word constat, turning it now it appears. For a thing may be said to appear
either clearly, or obscurely. He should therefore have rather translated it,
now it evidently appears, had he not intended to make some pretty Turn by his
Translation. Hence is evinced, that every one of his Authorities, brought to
prove, that Church-Tradition founds only a probable humane persuasion that
Scripture is Gods Word, rather evince the quite contrary.

The second point to be concluded is, that Scripture, thus led in by the
Church, proves it self Infallibly and Divinely, by its internal light to such
as had no supernatural Faith precedently. This he labors to evince from some
expressions of the Fathers, who use sometimes the like proofs, to show that
Scripture is the Word of God. But first, do they always bring these proofs to
such as had no Divine Faith before of Scriptures-being Gods Word? Do they not
use them, both for themselves and others, who precedently had a Divine Faith of
that point? Secondly, do the Fathers say, that those proofs of theirs are the
Primary, Infallible, and Divine proofs of Scripturesbeing the word of God?
(...) do they not rather use them as Secondary arguments, persuasive only to
such as believed Scripture to be Gods Word precedently to them? Thirdly, do
they use only such proofs, as are wholly internal to Scripture it self? All
these conditions must be made good, to make a full proof for his purpose, out
of them.

Now touching the two first conditions, it is evident these proofs were made by
Christians, namely the Holy Fathers, and commonly to Christians, who lived in
their times. And as clear is it, that they never pronounced them to be the
Primary, Infallible, and Divine Motives of their belief in that point, not used
they them as such. And for the third condition, viz. of the proofs being
internal to Scripture, they are not all such. For first that of Miracles is
external. The Scriptures themselves work none; neither were ever any Miracles
wrought, to confirm; that all the Books now in the Canon (and no more) are the
word of God. Secondly, the Conversion of so many people and Nations, by the
doctrine contained in Scripture, is also external to Scripture, unless happily it
came by reading the Scripture, and not by the declaration and preaching of the
Church; which he proves not, and the contrary is rather manifest. Again, many
other Books beside Scripture contain the same doctrine, yet are not thereby
proved to be Gods Word. Were not many thousands converted to that humble
doctrine of Christ, before diverse of the Canonical Books were written? Nay,
many whole Nations (as St. Irenaeus, already alleged, witnesses, some hundreds
of years after the said Books were written) who knew nothing at all of
Scripture.

But suppose these four proofs mentioned by the Bishop, viz. first Miracles;
secondly Doctrine nothing carnal; thirdly performance of it; Fourthly, The
Conversion almost of the whole world by this Doctrine, had been, all of them,
internal to Scripture, yet how prove they Infallibly and Divinely that
Scripture is the Word of God. Persuade truly they may, but convince they
cannot. Touching the first, how will it appear, that Miracles were ever wrought
in immediate proof of the whole Bible, as it is received in the Canon? As for
the second, how many Books are there, beside Scripture, which have nothing of
Carnal Doctrine at all in them? Concerning the third and fourth, how can it
ever be proved, that either the performance of this Doctrine, or the Conversion
of Nations is internal to Scripture?

But who can sufficiently wonder, that his Lordship for these four Motives
should so easily make the Scripture give Divine Testimony to it self, upon
which our Faith must rest, and yet deny the same privilege to the Church?
Seeing it cannot be denied, but that every one of these Motives are much more
immediately and clearly applyable to the Church, then to Scripture. For first,
Miracles have most copiously and familiarly confirmed the Authority and lawful
Mission of the Pastors. Secondly, the Doctrine of Gods true Church has
nothing of Carnal in it. The Performance, or verifying of this Doctrine, is
only found in the Members of the Church. Lastly, it is the Church that has
preached this humble Doctrine of Christ, and that has converted, and still
does convert Nations to the belief of it, and submission to it. Who sees not by
this, that while he disputes most eagerly against the present Churches
Infallibility, he argues mainly for it?

CHAP. 9. An End of the Controversy touching the Resolution of Faith.
ARGUMENT.
1. St. Austins words explicated. 2. The Bishop cannot avoid the Circle,
without mis-stating the Question. 3. He waves the difficulty. 4. St. Cyril, and
St. Austins words examined. 5. The Bishops eight Points of Consideration
weighed, and found too light. 6. According to his Principles no man can
lawfully say his Creed, till he have learnt the Articles thereof out of
Scripture. 7. His Synthetical way, one of the darkest passages in his
Labyrinth. 8. Scripture, when and by whom to be supposed for Gods Word. 9. His
Lordship argues a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter. 10. Brings
non-cognita for praecognita; and proves what he affirms ought not to be proved.
11. The Jews Resolved their Faith into Tradition, as the Church of Rome now
does. 12. Moral Certainty, not absolutely Infallible.

1. It Is now high time to put a Period to this Controversy touching the
Churches Infallibility, and Resolution of Faith; which I should have done long
since, had not our Antagonist led us so long, and so intricate a Dance, through
the redoubled Meanders of his Labyrinth. St. Austins proving Scripture, by an
internal Argument 16. n. 32.
( lib. 13. cap. 5. contr. Faust.) makes little for the Bishops purpose, unless
St. Austin either affirm that Argument to be such, as Faith may fully rest
upon, as its primary, formal Motive and Object for proof of Scripture, or that
he himself prove it to be so. For St. Austin often urges Arguments, which are
only Secondary and probable, yea sometimes purely conjectural, in this kind.
See an example of this in the Sicut ergo ego credo illum librum esse Manichaei,
quoniam ex ipso tempore, que Manichaeus vivebat in carne, per Discipulos (...)
certa successione Praepositorum vestrorum ad vestra usque tempora custoditus
atque perductus est: sic and istum librum creed esse Matthaei, quem ex illo
tempore, quo Matthaeus ipse in carne vixit, non interrupta serie temporum
Ecclesia certa connexionis successione usque ad tempora ista perduxit. Aug.
lib. 28. contr. Faustum, cap. 2.
margin. What the Bishop quotes out of Thomas Waldensis, Doct. Fid. Tom. 1.
lib. 2. Art. 2. cap. 23. number. 9. ( that if the Church should speak anything
contrary to Scripture, he would not believe her) is most true; but it is
likewise as true, (what St. Austin said above, contr. Epist. Fundament. cap.
5.) that if the Scripture should speak any thing contrary to the Church, we
could not believe that neither. The truth is, both the one and the other, that
is, both Waldensis and St. Austins expressions proceed ex suppositione
impossibili; and are wholly like that of St. Paul, ( Gal. 1.) If an Angel from
heaven preach any thing, otherwise then we have preached, let him be accursed.

2. But for all these Turns and Windings it will be hard to free the Bishop
from a vicious Circle. For if he allow not Scripture to be believed with Divine
Faith by virtue of the Churches Testimony and Tradition, what answer can be
made to this Question, Why believe you infallibly that Scripture is Gods Word?
If he say, for the Tradition of the Church, it will not serve: seeing he is
supposed to have no Divine Faith, that Scripture is Gods Word, from the sole
Testimony of the Church. Yet when both partles press this Circle against each
other, they always suppose, that Scripture is Infallibly and Divinely believed
for Gods Word, in some true sense, by means of the Churches Testimony.
Otherwise it were as impertinent to press this Question to a Christian, ( why
believe you the Scripture to be the Word of God) that has no further certainty
of it, then what is drawn from a probable and humane Testimony of the Church,
as if it were propounded to a Heathen, who had only heard Scripture
recommended for Gods Word, by persons very worthy of credit. For both of these
were equally to answer, that they denied the supposition of an Infallible
Belief, since they did not believe (as Christians take the word Belief) that it
is Gods Word. And then no marvel if there be no Circle committed, when there is
no Christian Belief, which both sides presuppose as a ground of this Circle,
where ever it is found.

When therefore the Relatour speaks of proving Scripture by the Church, unless
he mean proving it by a Medium sufficient to assure us infallibly that it is
the Word of God, (which he constantly refuses to grant) though he fall not into
a Circle, yet he falls into a Semicircle, that is, a Crooked Turn in his
Labyrinth, by mis-stating the question, and bowing it another way, then it
ought to be, and always is propounded in this Controversy, as I said above.
Wherefore if the Church give only a humane Testimony to induce (...) a
fallible assent that Scripture is the Word of God; and Scripture afterward by
its own light gives me an infallible Certainty, that the Testimony of the
Church was true, there could never have been the least ground for wise and
learned men to move this difficulty of a vicious Circle one against another; no
more, then when I believe it probable, that to morrow will be a fair day,
because Peter tells me so, and after I know certainly that Peter told me true,
because I see the next day to be fair, by its own light.

His Lordship therefore was either to suppose, that those Beginners and
Weaklings he speaks of, have some degree of Divine Faith, that Scripture is the
Word of God, by means of the Churches Tradition, antecedently to the reading of
Scripture, or he commits the fallacy termed ex falso supposito, (of making a
false supposition) and so by avoiding one error falls into another. For unless
he believe infallibly that Scripture is Gods word, upon the Testimony of the
Church, as a true Cause and Motive of his Infallible Belief, he does not answer
the question, seeing all that affirm they believe this for the Churches
Testimony, understand it so: and if he do, he forsakes his own principles,
falls to us, and consequently into that pretended Circle he objects against us,
if his objections be of force.

His Lordships Resolution of Faith into Prime Apostolical Tradition, we have
Chap. 6. number. 1, 2.
above evinced to be impossible, supposing the immediate, or present
Church-Tradition to be fallible: but were it possible, we have also evidenced,
that it destroys his own grounds, viz. of sole Scriptures-being the Foundation
of our belief. When therefore he averres, that we may resolve our Faith into
Prime Tradition when it is Ibid. n. 33.
known to be such, if he means by known (as he must) such a knowledge as may
suffice to make that Prime Tradition an object of Faith, he wheels quite about
to amuse his Reader, and says in effect, we may then resolve our Faith into
Tradition, when that comes to pass, which himself holds impossible ever to
happen. For if Prime Tradition can be only gathered by the perpetual
succeeding Tradition of the Church, (as it is certain it can only be) and that
Tradition be fallible, (as the Bishop perpetually contends) how shall any Prime
Tradition be known sufficiently to make it self an object of Faith, since
nothing can do that, but an Authority Infallible, (...) us Infallibly certain
of that Tradition?

Hence he runs two contrary ways at once; desirous on the one side to resolve
Faith into Prime Tradition, that he may not seem repugnant to the Ancient
Fathers; and yet on the other so willing to be repugnant to us, that by his
grounds he makes that Resolution wholly impossible: and to blind these
contrarieties, pretends that Church-Tradition, being not simply Divine, cannot
be such as may suffice for a formal object of Faith, whereinto it is to be
resolved; when yet he knew full well the difficulty lay not there, and that his
Adversaries never affirmed it was simply Divine, or the formal object of Faith,
but spoke always warily and reservedly, abstracting from that question as not
necessary for the solving of his arguments, or defense of the Catholic Faith
against him. Let the Bishops Adherents but confess, that the Testimony and
Tradition of the Church is truly infallible, and we for the present shall
require no more of them. For that Infallibility supposed, we have made it
manifest, that Prime Tradition is sufficiently derived to us in quality of the
formal object of our Faith, whereon to rest: which in his Lordships principles
is impossible to be done.

4. Concerning the Relators endeavor to reconcile the Fathers, whom he
conceives to speak sometimes contrary to one another, touching Scripture and
Tradition, though he does not much oblige us in the number of those he brings
in favor of our assertion, (for he names only two, and one of them somewhat
lamely cited with an etc.) yet surely we are to thank him for his fair and
candid exposition of those, he quotes against us. For he professes, that when
ever the Fathers speak of relying upon Scripture only, they are never to be
understood with exclusion of Tradition; wherein doubtless his Lordship delivers
a great truth, and nothing contrary to us. But as for his challenge which
follows, we cannot but say that is loud indeed; but the sound betrays its
emptiness. He will oblige us to show that the holy Fathers maintain that, which
we need not affirm to be held by them. For we never yet said, that our Faith of
the Scriptures-being Gods Word is resolved into the Tradition of the present
Church, but into Prime Apostolical Tradition; of which we are infallibly
certified by the Tradition of the present Church: it being a condition, or
application of Prime Tradition to us. And by this manner of defending our
Tenets, we have both gone along with A. C. and those Divines, who affirm the
voice of the Church not to be so simply and absolutely Divine, as is the holy
Scripture; and given a full solution to all the Relatours arguments: the most
of which suppose us, upon a false ground, necessitated to acknowledge the voice
of the Church, to be so absolutely and simply Divine, that our Faith is to rest
upon it, as its ultimate Motive and formal Object, which must be no less then
absolute Divine Authority.

But supposing we held our Faith to be so resolved, would his Lordship press us
to show those very terms, resolving of Faith, etc. in the Ancient Fathers; it
being a School-term, not used in their times? It seems he would, by his false
citation of St. Austin in these words, Fidei ultima resolutio est in Deum
illuminantem. S. Aug. contr. Fund. Ibidem.
cap. 14. where there is no such Text to be found; nor any where else (I am
confident) in all St. Austin. For us it is sufficient, that the Fathers
frequently say, We believe Scripture for Tradition, we would not believe
Scripture, unless the Authority of the Church moved us, that Traditions move to
piety, no less then Scripture, etc. But since he urges to have our Resolution
of Faith showed him in those terms, in the Fathers, we challenge his Defenders
to show any Father, who says, that we cannot believe Scripture to be the Word
of God, infallibly, for the Churches authority, but must resolve it into the
light of Scripture.

5. I come now to his Considerations, and begin with the first point, touching
his proving Scripture to be a Principle in Theology, that must be pre-suppos'd
without proof, because in all Sciences there are Ibidem. Number. 34. Punct. 1.
ever some Principles presupposed. I answer first, he confounds Theology, a
Discursive Science, with Faith, which is an act of the understanding produced
by an Impulse of the will, for Gods Authority revealing, and not deduced by
discursive Principles; and consequently holds no parallel with any Science
whatsoever, in this particular. Secondly, I say, I have already answered this
matter to the full, chap. 7. number. 7. and chap. 6. number. 5. in the Dialogue: to
which places I refer the Reader for further satisfaction. Must we make that a
Prime principle in the Resolution of our Faith, which has further principles,
and clearer quoad nos to move our assent to them? He himself acknowledges, that
Scripture was ascertained for Gods Word to those of the Apostles times, by the
Authority of Prime Apostolical Tradition: how was it then a Principle? which
cannot, ought not to be proved, but must be presupposed by all Christians.

Concerning his second point, the difference betwixt Faith and Punct. 2.
other Sciences we acknowledge. For there the thing assented to remains
obscure; which in Sciences is made clear: and all the difficulty is, to be
certifi'd of the Divine Authority, assuring us that Scripture is Gods Word; of
which we cannot be ascertained without sufficient Motives, inducing us to give
an Infallible Assent to it. But no fallible Motives can produce Certainty.
There must be therefore some Infallible Motive to assure us; and seeing he
denies the Church to be it, and we have proved that it cannot be the sole light
of Scripture, we must have some further light, clearer quoad nos, then God has
revealed to us in Scripture: which is plainly contradictory to his Proposition.

His third point contains no more in sum, then what I have said Punct. 3.
above in my first Answer to his first point of Consideration. I shall not
therefore quarrel with it.

As to his fourth point we grant, that the Incarnation of our Savior, Punct. 4.
the Resurrection of the dead, and the like Mysteries cannot finally be
resolved into the sole Testimony of the Church, (nor did we ever do it) but
into the Infallible Authority of God, as we have often confessed.

In his fifth point recommended to Consideration, there are also diverse Punct.
5.
things, which the Relatour himself should have better considered, before they
fell from his pen. For first, he asserts on the one side, that Faith was never
held a matter of Evidence; and that had it been clear, in its own light, to the
Hearers of the Apostles, that they were inspired in what they preached and writ,
they had apprehended all the Mysteries of Divinity by Knowledge, and not by
Faith. Yet on the other side, almost with the same breath, avoucheth, that it
appeared clear to the Prophets, and Apostles, that what ever they taught, was
Divine and Infallible Truth, and that they had clear Revelation. What is this
in effect, (supposing the Truth of his first Proposition) but to exclude the
Prophets and Apostles from the number of the Faithful, and make them, in that
respect, like the Blessed in Heaven, Comprehensores, while they were yet in the
way? Which is manifestly contrary to their own frequent professions, that they
walked by Faith, 2 Cor. 5. 7. 1 Cor. 13. 12.
not by Sight, and that they saw only per speculum, in aenigmate.

Secondly, in point of Miracles he avers, that they are not convincing proofs
alone and of themselves. Sure the Bishop thought no proof convincing, but what
is actually converting: which is a great mistake. For true Miracles are in
themselves convincing proofs, since in themselves they deserve belief, whether
they actually convert, or not, and leave the Hearers inexcusable in Gods sight
for not believing. Otherwise why should our Blessed Savior have said, Had I
not done among them Joan. 15. 24.
the works, which no other man did, they had not sinned; and again, Woe be to
thee Corozain, woe be to thee Bethsaida; for had the Miracles, Matthew. 11. 21.
done amongst you, been wrought in Tyrus and Sidon, they had long since done
Penance in sackcloth and ashes. Likewise, The works, which I do in my Fathers
name, bear witness of me: and, though you believe not me, Joan. 10. 26, 38.
believe my works.

Thirdly, the Bishops reasons, brought in disparagement of Miracles, seem as
strange as his Doctrine. First (says he) the Apostles Miracles were no
convincing proofs alone of the Truth they attested, because (forsooth) there
may be Counterfeit Miracles; just as if a man should say, Simon Peter's Miracles
did not convincingly oblige men to believe, because (...) Magus's did not.
Secondly, they are not convincing proofs, because even true Miracles may be
marks of false Doctrine in the highest degree. Is not this a strange Paradox?
Do not all Divines, even Protestants themselves, confess, that true Miracles
are not feasible, but by the special and extraordinary power of God? That they
are Divine Testimonies? and that by them God sets, as it were, his Hand and
Seal to the truth of the Doctrine attested by them? Say they not it is Blasphemy
to affirm, that God bears witness to a Lie? Nam quis vel cogitet absque
Blaspbemia, Deum commodaturum suam (...) vim vit tutemque mendacio? Chamier.
Tom. 2. Controv. lib. 16. cap. 14. page 677. Sigilla sunt verae doctrinae.
Calvin. Harm. in Marc. cap. 13. p. 302. Nihil aliud sunt, quam Doctrinae suae
(...). (...). Harm. in Mat. cap. 10. page 124. True Miracles we shall hold as
Gods Scals of Divine Truth. Bishop Morton, on the Sacrament, lib. 4 cap. 2.. 2.
See the Margin. It may well suffice therefore to leave our Adversary to the
reproof of his own Party. Neither need we take notice of his Scripture-Texts,
since they cannot without impiety be understood of any other, then false and
feigned Miracles.

The sixth Point, concerning the light of Scripture, has nothing Punct. 6.
but what is already answered, chap. 7. number. 5, 6, and 7. Were Scripture, by
its own light, capable of being the Prime, Infallible Motive of our Belief that
it is Gods Word, though it need not be so evident as the Motives of Knowledge,
yet at least it must have something in it, to make that Infallible Belief not
imprudent: Which in the Relatours Principles is not found.

The Flourishes of his seventh Consideration are very handsome; Punct. 7.
but the Dilemma in his Consequence flows not immediately from his Premises,
viz. that either there is no revelation, or Scripture is it. For if he would
prove, that Scripture must be it if there be any, by the sole light of
Scripture, (as he has hitherto pretended) I have evidenced it to be
inconsequent. Would he prove Scripture to be that Revelation (supposing there
be any) by the intervention of Church-Tradition, assuring us that it is such,
it is true, but Diametrically opposite to his Principles. Again he wheels a
little about. For no man ever denied that Scripture is Gods Revelation,
supposing he has made Revelations, so that in proving this he hurts not his
Adversary: but his Province was to prove that Scripture only was Gods
Revelation. Why then omits he here the word only, which caused the whole
Controversy?

His last Consideration is a dark Meander. For the Motives of Credibility
Punct. 8.
he there musters up, preceding the light of Scripture, are indeed of force to
justify ones Belief that Scripture is Gods Word, when it is received, as the
Ancients did receive it, upon the Infallible Authority of Church-Tradition; but
never otherwise. And our present Question is not, whether his Lordship does
well in believing Scripture to be the Word of God, as all those Motives of
Credibility, here mentioned by him, persuade; but whether he does well in
teaching, that Scripture ought to be believed with Divine Faith, for its only
inbred light, as the formal Object. And in this opinion I would gladly know,
how the recounted Motives can justify his proceeding. For though no man can
doubt, but most of those Motives may be applied to our Belief in the Articles
of our Creed, yet (in his opinion) they will not justify the Believing those
Articles with Divine Faith, independently of Scripture, which he makes the
whole Foundation of believing them with Divine Faith.

6. Its worth noting, what we hear him now at last acknowledge, Punct. 9.
(for all the rest in this page is a mere repetition of what has been already
answered) viz. that being arrived to the Light of the Text it self, and meeting
with the Spirit of God, etc. then and not before, we are certain that Scripture
is the word of God, both by Divine and Infallible proof. So that here he
manifestly acknowledges, that those, who are not arrived to the light of
Scripture in it self, have no divine nor infallible proof of its being Gods
Word; and consequently have no Divine Faith of the mysteries of Christian
Religion; and so are neither truly Christians, nor capable of salvation: which
consequences how horridly they will sound in the ears of the unlearned, I leave
to the Reader.

And to make them more sensible of the foulness of this error, let them
consider, that when young and unlearned Christians are taught to say their
Creed, and profess their belief of the Articles contained in it, before they
read Scripture, they are taught to lie, and prosess to do that, which they
neither do, nor can do in his Tenet: and consequently, since it is unlawful to
lie, (and much more in matters of Religion, then in others) it will also
follow, that it is unlawful for any one to teach unlearned persons their
Creed, and as unlawful for them either to learn it, or rehearse it, before
they have seen those Articles proved by Scripture. For by this word Believe
there must be meant (as all agree) a formal, Christian, and Divine Faith of
those Articles.

7. Finally we are told of his Lordships good intention in having proceeded in
a Synthetical way, to build up the Truth for the Benefit of the Ibidem.
Church, and the satisfaction of all Christianly disposed. But he had done much
better, had he proceeded in an Analytical way; for in that was the difficulty,
namely to assign the first Principle, on which our Faith is grounded, in the
Resolution of Faith; which we are far from apprehending by this Synthetical
way; which confounds the Reader with Multiplicity of Arguments, and weakens the
Authority of the Church: without which he might tire himself and others, but
never be able to make a clear Resolutionof Faith.

Well therefore might A. C. without note of Captiousness, require the
Analytical way, yet give all all due respect to Scripture.; though the Relatour
(it seems) would willingly insinuate the contrary. For the Question being
started, whether the Scriptures only, or besides them, unwritten Traditions,
were the Foundation of our Faith; the Bishop maintained the first, and A. C.
the second. Now A. C. could not more directly, nor efficaciously overthrow his
Lordships Tenet, then by proving, that the Assurance we have even of Scriptures
themselves relyes upon Tradition, or the unwritten Word of God: which therefore
must necessarily be the Foundation of our Faith.

His endeavor to bring A. C. and us into a Labyrinth (like his own) of a
vicious Circle, by retorting the Question (which he calls captious, it may be,
because himself was taken in it) I have already proved ineffectual; because
both A. C. and our other Authors, give the motives of Credibility, as a
preceding and uncircular ground for the Infallibility of Church-Tradition. So
that the Relator cannot retort the Question so easily as he imagines, nor rid
his hands so soon of the Jesuit, by demanding, How he knows the Testimony of
the Church to be Divine and Infallible? falsely supposing us to say, that the
Churches Infallibility is founded upon the Testimony of Scripture, and the
Scriptures Infallibility upon the Testimony of the Church: the contrary whereof
I have sufficiently delivered and declared, chap. 5. When therefore he demands,
how we know the Testimony of the Church to be infallible, we answer, that we
prove it independently of Scripture, by the Motives of Credibility, immediately
showing it to be evidently credible in it self; as the like motives made this
point evidently credible to the Faithful heretofore, that the Prophets and
Apostles were Infallible. And it is evident to any judicious man, that herein is
not the least shadow of a Circle.

8. The Relatour will not yet permit us to put a period to this Question; but
wrangles with A. C. for telling him, what he thought his Lordship said. But I
had rather dispute, what he does, or can say in this matter. He expounds his
own mind thus, That the Books of. 17.
Scripture are Principles to be supposed, and need no proof in regard of those
men, who are born in the Church, and in their very Christian Education, suck it
in, and are taught, so soon as they are apt to learn it, that the Books,
commonly called the Bible, or Scripture, are the Word of God. But here he ought
to have reflected, that to make good this supposition, so far as to the
breeding in us a Supernatural Act of Faith, it must also of necessity be
supposed, at least tacitly, that the Scriptures are delivered to us by the
Infallible Authority of the Church. Wherefore in this assertion that Scripture
only is the Foundation of Faith, he contradicts what he ought to have
presupposed, viz. that Scripture was held to be Gods Word for the Authority of
the Church. So that though it be against Art and Reason to question the
Subject, or put our Adversary to prove Scripture to be the Word of God, when we
dispute whether Transubstantiation, Purgatory, or the like Predicates, be
contained in Scripture; yet against one that denies the necessity of Tradition,
we require a proof of Scripture it self, as knowing he could not have any other
good ground of supposing Scripture to be Gods Word, besides the Tradition of
the Church: which he now denying, does either contradict himself, or deprive
the Scripture of all Authority.

Wherefore I make no difference at all in this point between a natural man, and
a man newly entering, or doubting in Faith, and those who pretend to be grown up
in Faith, and yet impugn the Tradition of the Church. For all these are after
one and the same Method to be dealt with, that so they may be brought to admit
the true grounds of proving Scripture to be the Word of God. It was therefore
no familiarity with impiety, nor desire to catch advantage, that moved
Bellarmin and A. C. to demand, how Scripture could be proved the Word of God:
for they were forced to it by their Adversaries denying the Necessity of
Tradition. And the advantage is to your selves; that by this Medium (which
Protestants ever decline) you may discern the weakness of your own Foundation.

In the very Porch of this Paragraph the Bishop (as if he had untied. 18. n. 1.
the Gordian knot of Mr. Fishers Arguments) brags he set him to his Book again.
But I am confident, it was rather the not untying this knot, that moved him to
repeat what he had writ before. For this repetition showed clearly, the Bishop
said no more then what Dr. White had said before him; and consequently that Mr.
Fishers words spoken to the Doctor, were sufficient to solve all the Bishop
had said. Wherefore as the Bishop did actum agere, (do only what was done by
the Doctor before) so he made Mr. Fisher dictum dicere, (to say again what was
said before) since there needs no new Solution, where no new difficulty is
propounded. And when we hear him talking of Metaphysical Principles, it seems
they are too clear to be answered; and therefore he waves them, as too quaint
niceties to be reflected upon by the Reader.

Neither does Bellarmin, artificially cited in his Margin, any way favor his
Lordship. For when he gives an Advertisement, that all Heretics suppose with
Catholics, as a general Principle, that the Word of God is a rule of Faith, he
speaks not of the sole written Word, (as the Bishop will needs misinterpret
him) but of the Word of God abstractively, or as it embraces both the written
and unwritten Word. His omnibus Quaestionibus (says he) praemittenda est
Controversia de VERBO DEI, etc. even as our Adversary cites him; he says not
de VERBO DEI SCRIPTO, but de VERBO DEI.

The Bishop and Hooker avoid not the difficulty by calling it a supposed
Principle amongst Christians. For if they suppose this with any Ibidem.
ground, they must suppose it founded upon Tradition. And therefore A. C's
Argument has still the same force, even in this supposition of a Praecognitum,
as before. For when a thing is admitted as a Principle by both parties, in any
particular Debate touching Religion, it is presupposed only as a Praecognitum
to that difficulty, not as an absolute Prime Principle in Religion; and is left
in that Order of Priority or Posteriority of Principles, which its proper
nature requires. Wherefore though both the Relatour and Mr. Fisher had supposed
Scripture as a Principle agreed on by both parties, in order to some further
Question, depending of Scripture, (which notwithstanding could not be done in
this present Controversy, where the Question was about the Priority of
Tradition, in order of Principles before Scripture) yet Scripture is then to be
presupposed only as a Principle to that particular Dispute, and cannot be
thereby made a Prime Principle, absolutely and universally in Faith. Suppose
(for example) the Dispute were whether Extreme Unction were a Sacrament, in
this Dispute it is to be supposed as a Principle granted by both parties, that
there are some Sacraments. But hence follows not, that it is supposed as an
absolute prime Principle in Religion, which neither can nor ought to be proved
by other precedent Principles, (to wit, Scripture or Tradition) that there are
some Sacraments.

His Lordship confesses again, that Tradition must lead the way, like a
preparing Morning-light to Sunshine; but then we settle not for our direction
upon the first opening of the Morning-light, but upon the Sun it self. His
meaning is, that although Tradition must go before, yet we ought not to rely
upon it as the ground for which we admit Scripture, but we are to fix our eyes
only upon the brightness of Scripture it self. But I demand, how knows the
Relatour, this Light is rather a Beam then a Dream, by which he is deceived by
the watchful Enemy of Mankind, who transforms himself into an Angel of Light?
It Is true, the Scripture is called a Light; but it is like a Candle in a dark
Lanthorn; or the Sun under a Cloud, in regard of all those, who deny the
Infallibility of the Church, and appears in full light only to them who
acknowledge it.

After some flourishes the Bishop minds us, that there is less light in
Principles of Faith, then those of Knowledge. But A. C. urges thus. Though a
Praecognitum in Faith need not be so clearly known, as a Praecognitum in
Science, yet there must be this proportion, that as primum praecognitum, the
first thing foreknown in a Science, must be primo cognitum, needing not another
thing, pertaining to that Science, prius cognitum, (known before it:) so if in
Faith Scripture be the first and only Foundation, and consequently the first
thing foreknown, ( primum praecognitum) it must be in Faith primo cognitum,
needing not any other thing pertaining to Faith, prius cognitum, (known before
it.) This supposed Church-Tradition, which is one thing pertaining to Faith,
could not (as the Bishop says it is, and as indeed it is) be known first, and
be an Introduction to the Knowledge of Scripture. These are A. C's words, page
51. not those set down by his Lordship, and therefore he had no reason to say
he is sorry to see, in a man very learned, such wilful mistakes; but had
rather cause to employ his sorrow for himself, since he could not otherwise
avoid the difficulty, then by corrupting his words, whom he pretends to answer.
For by omitting the Parenthesis, and changing the words he makes A. C. teach,
not his own, but in part the Bishops Doctrine.

A. C. therefore mistook not at all, but pressed home his Argument in this
manner: which the Bishop solves not by saying, he consesseth every where
Tradition to be the Introducer to the knowledge of Scripture. For the primum
praecognitum we seek for, is not such a one as the Relatour makes Tradition,
viz. an Introducer only, but such a one, as we may rely upon for an Infallible
Testimony in the Resolution of Faith. Nay I add, Scripture is not a primum
praecognitum even to this Question, Whether the Scriptures contain in them all
things necessary to salvation. For if in this Proposition it be supposed that
Scripture is the Word of God, it must also, at least implicitly, be supposed
as proved by Tradition: and consequently both in this and all other Questions,
Tradition must be the praecognitum, and primo cognitum.

9. But put case, the Bishop held the Scriptures-being the Word of God, as a
supposed Principle, merely in materia subjecta; yet should he not have said
absolutely, (as he does) That the Books of Scripture are Principles to be
supposed, and need not to be proved; but should have said, We are now to
suppose Scripture to be the Word of God in order to this Question, and are not
to prove it. But the truth is, in this Question of Mr. Fisher, viz. How the
Bishop knew Scripture to be Scripture, even as it related to the present
Controversy betwixt them, Scripture was not to be supposed, as a Principle, to
be Gods Word. For the Question then agitated was not, Whether Scriptures
contain in them all things necessary to Salvation, there being no mention of
that, but only whether the Creed contained all Fundamental Points? And the
immediate occasion of Mr. Fishers demanding this Question, was this answer of
the Bishop, viz. That the Scriptures only, not any unwritten Tradition, was
the Foundation of their Faith. Whereupon Mr. Fisher demanded, how he knew
Scripture to be Scripture, and in particular, Genesis, Exodus, etc. These are
believed (says Mr. Fisher) to be Scripture, yet not proved out of any place of
Scripture. Now it is manifest, that in this Debate Mr. Fisher had Logically
right to demand this Question, it being a direct Medium and Argument to
infringe the Bishops Tenet. For by this means his Doctrine was evinced to be
false; because if there be some point of Protestant Faith not founded in
Scripture, Scriptures only are not the Foundation of their Faith. Whence it
follows, that even though the Question had been whether Scriptures contain in
them all things necessary to Salvation, yet Scriptures in order to that were
not to be supposed to be the Word of God, since the very believing them to be
so (at least in his principles) is a point necessary to salvation; which gives
right to his Antagonist to disprove his assertion, by instancing that
Scriptures-being the word of God is not contained in Scripture.

10. His Lordship here undertakes a hard task, and pretends to make it appear
to A. C. how Scripture is a praecognitum even in the Ibid. number. 4.
strictest sense. But behold his reason. Scripture is a praecognitum, because
it is known in clear light by God, and the Blessed in heaven. Is not this an
invincible argument? I am sorry to see him so much mistake the Question. For we
are not in search after a praecognitum in order to God and the Saints in
heaven, but in relation to us upon earth; to whom it is as much unknown,
whether God and the Saints see Scriptures to be his Divine Oracles, as it is,
whether the same Scriptures be Gods word, or not, abstracting from Tradition.
Is not this (in respect of us) to bring non-cognita for praecognita? Besides,
what avails it me for the Resolution of my Faith, that the Revelation is clear
to God and his Saints, unless I know it be so? who have no other light for its
admittance, then the Tradition of the Church.

Having labored to prove, that Scriptures are the Oracles of God, from the
clear science God and the Saints have of them (which clear Science of theirs is
derived by Apostolical Tradition to the Church) the Relatour draws a
conclusion quite contrary to his Premises, namely, that Scripture is to be
supposed Gods word, and needs no precedent proof. If it needs no proof, why
does his Lordship endeavor to prove it by such a strange kind of Argument?
Had he indeed said, Scriptures being proved by another principle to be the word
of God, must be supposed to be so by all that admit that proof, he had said a
manifest truth. But on the one side to hold it must be proved by a further
principle, and on the other to maintain, that it needs not be proved at all,
cannot but seem a strange Vertigo to any Logical head. As to his conclusion in
these words, And therefore now to be supposed (at least by all Christians) that
the Scripture is the word of God, I answer, if he means by now to be supposed
for Gods word as proved such by Apostolical Tradition it is most true: but if he
mean it is to be supposed the word of God, without any precedent proof in order
to us, its all out of joint, and his answer contrary to his own principles.

11. Touching the Jews, they had the like proof for the Old Testaments-being
the word of God, that we have for the New. For Ibid. number. 5.
theirs was delivered by Moses and the Prophets, and ours by the Apostles; who
were Prophets too. And as they that came after, received the Old Testament from
the Tradition of the Church; so do we now. And this is it that St. Chysostome
affirms. We know why. By Homil. 57. in Joan. c. 9.
whose Testimony do we know? By the Testimony of our Ancestors. Which words,
being spoken without restriction, and in answer to the question proposed, must
of necessity be understood as well of the immediate, as prime Ancestors;
however the Bishop labors by his Gloss to exclude the immediate ones; which is
incompatible with Reason; since the witness that is able to make me know any
thing, must attest it immediately to me, that so I may hear his testimony my
self.

Now the Jews, who lived many hundred years after Moses and the Prophets, did
not, could not hear them immediately, therefore Moses and the Prophets could
not give them an immediate testimony. And since they had none, that witnessed
this immediately to them, but those of the present Jewish Church (who with a
most full consent delivered what they had received from those who flourished in
the next age before them) they could not know that their Ancestors taught it,
but by those of their present age: and consequently it was not their prime
Ancestors only, that made them know it, as the Relatour would insinuate. This
is most clearly signified, Psalm. Quanta audivimus and cognovimus ea: and
patres nostri narraverunt (...) Non sunt occultata a filiis eorum, in
generatione altera. Psalm. 77. 3, 4. etc.
77. ver. 3. etc. where the Children of Israel were to receive the Law and
Works of God successively by Generations, one immediately from another. And the
same is also commanded them Eruntque, verba haec, quae (...) praecipio (...)
hodie in cord tuo; and (...) ca filiis tuis. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. Cumque
interrogaverit te filius tuus (...), (...), Quid (...) volunt Testimonia baeo
and (...) atque Judicia, quae praecepit `Dominus Deus noster nobis? Dices ei,
servi cramus Pharaoni in AEgypto, etc. Deuteronomy. 6. 20, 21.
Deuteronomy. 6. ver. 6, 7, 20. viz. that fathers should instruct their children
concerning the great Works and Mercies of God, etc.

As to what the Bishop observes touching the word Knowledge, which is
attributed to the Jews by holy Scripture, as also by St. Chrysostom in the
place above cited, it imports not evident, or Scientificall Knowledge properly
so called, but a firm and perfect assurance only; otherwise our Faith would
neither be free, nor meritorious. His distinction therefore betwixt hearing and
knowing is but a slender one, both because the Royal Prophet intimates, that
the succeeding ages know the prodigious works of God by hearing them from their
immediate Ancestors ( Psalm 77. 6.) and because they that heard Moses, the
Prophets, our Savior, and the Apostles speak, knew as perfectly by that
hearing, as could be known in matters of Faith; and likewise because St. Paul
says ( Romans 10. 17.) Fides ex auditu, (Faith comes by hearing) and lastly,
because his Lordship himself asserts, that Scripture is known (in this sense)
to be the word of God, by hearing from the mouths of the Apostles.

Now to aver, that they resolved their Faith higher and into a more inward
principle, then an ear to their immediate Ancestors and their Tradition, is a
truth delivered by me all along this debate. For I have always held the voice
of the present Church to be only an Infallible Application to us of the Prime
Divine Tradition concerning Scriptures, for which prime Tradition only we
believe Scripture to be the word of God, as for the formal motive of our
Belief. To his Quere therefore touching the Jews proceeding in the like
controversy, I answer, when it shall be shown, that any of the Jews held the
Old Testament for their sole rule of Faith, to the exclusion of Tradition, I
shall then be ready to show what the Bishop here demands, viz, that in
controversies of Religion one Jew put another to prove, that the Old Testament
was Gods word.

But to return to their resolution of Faith, certain it is, they had always,
at least very often, Prophets amongst them: insomuch that Calvin himself
confesses, that God promised to provide, there should Calvin. lib. 4. Instit.
c. 1.. 5.
never be wanting a Prophet in Israel. Moreover besides these, it is well known,
there was in the Jewish Church a permanent infallible Authority, consisting of
the High Priest and his Clergy, to which all were bound to have (...) in doubts
and difficulties of Religigion, (...). 17. 18. etc.
as is expressed in Holy Writ. Wherefore we have not the least reason to doubt,
but the Jews would have proceeded the same way in all difficulties concerning
Scripture and Tradition, that we do, though his Lordship would persuade us the
contrary.

12. Mr. Fisher is here brought in (as he was once before) for averring,. 19.
n. 1.
that no other answer could be made of the Scriptures-being Gods word, but by
admitting some word of God unwritten to assure us of this point: to which the
Relatour replies, that the Argument would have been stronger, had he said, to
assure us of this point by Divine Faith. But certainly Mr. Fisher meant such an
assurance, and no other, as appears by the expression he uses, viz. to assure
us in this point. What point? That Scriptures are the Word of God: which being
a point of Faith, he could not be thought in reason, but to require an
assurance proportionable to a point of Faith, that is, infallible assurance,
sufficient to breed in us Divine Faith; though it be also true, that no certain
assurance at all, touching this matter, could be had, without admitting the
infallible Authority of the Church. For, (as it has been urged heretofore)
many Books of Holy Writ have been doubted of upon very good grounds, and the
rest questioned as corrupted: So that without the infallible assistance of the
Holy Ghost it were impossible in this case to come to any certain determination
at all: much less could we arrive to an infallible certainty.

Sure I am, the School does not maintain, with his Lordship here, that Moral
certainty is infallible. Philosophers are so far from this, as to admit, that
even Physical certainty falls short of infallibility, as being liable to
deception. As for example, when I have my eyes open, and look upon the wall, I
have Physical certainty, that it is the wall which I see; but I have no
infallible certainty of it: for by the power of God it may be otherwise.

Now the reason, why a moral and humane authority, so long as it is fallible,
can never produce an infallible assurance is, because all certainty grounded
upon sole Authority, can be no greater, then the Authority that grounds it.
Since therefore (according to the Relator) all humane Authority is absolutely
fallible, it is impossible it should ground in us an infallible certainty. This
Doctrine is expressly delivered by the Bishop,. 16. number. 6. where speaking of
the Scriptures he says, If they be warranted unto us by any Authority LESS
THEN DIVINE, then all things contained in them (which have no greater assurance
then the Scripture, in which they are contained) are not objects of Divine
Belief, which once granted, will enforce us to yield, that all the Articles of
Christian Belief have no greater assurance, then humane and moral Faith, or
Credulity, can afford. An Authority then SIMPLY DIVINE must make good the
Scriptures infallibity, at least in the last resolution of our Faith in that
point. This authority cannot be any testimony, or voice of the Church alone:
for the Church consists of men subject to error. Thus he. No humane testimony
therefore (in the Bishops opinion) can make good the Scriptures infallibility,
that is, give us an infallible assurance of that, or any other point of Faith.
But how this can stand, with what he delivers. 19. number. 1. (when speaking of
the very same question, viz. of Scriptures-being Gods Word, he positively
affirms, we may be even infallibly assured thereof by Ecclesiastical and Humane
proof) I see not, let the Reader judge. This is not the first contradiction we
have observed in his Lordships discourses.

Nor will it serve his turn to say (as he does) that by infallible assurance
Ibidem.
may be understood no more, then that the thing believed is true, and truth,
QUA TALIS, cannot be false. For however he plays with the word infallible, yet
that cannot touch assurance. For the infallibity he there talks of is only in
the object, and that in sensu composito too, viz. only so long as the object
remains so. But assurance relates to the subject, or person believing, and his
act; which is the thing we chiefly mean, when we teach that Faith is of divine
and infallible certainty. For otherwise in the Bishops sense of infallibility,
there is no true proposition (how contingent and uncertain soever in it self)
of which we might not be said to be infallibly certain. So (for example) should
I say merely by guess, The Pope is now at Rome, or in the Conclave, and it were
so de facto, I might be said to be infallibly certain of it; which is extremely
absurd, as confounding verity with infallibility, which no true Philosophy will
admit. Wherefore it is ridiculous to distinguish (as the Bishop does here) one
infallibility cui non subest falsum, (viz. which is not de facto false, yet may
be false) and another cui non potest subesse falsum, (which neither is false,
nor can be false) since all Infallibility is such, cui non potest subesse
falsum.

To obtain therefore an infallible assurance of Scriptures-being the Word of
God, we must of necessity rely upon the never-erring Tradition of Gods Church:
all other grounds assignable are uncertain, and consequently insufficient to
breed in us supernatural and divine Faith. But enough of this. Yet before I go
further, I cannot omit to observe the Bishops earnest endeavor to possess the
Reader, that the Scriptures (both the old and new) are come down to us so
unquestionably by mere humane Authority, that a man may thereby be Ibidem.
infallibly assured that they are the word of God, by an acquired Habit of
Faith: when he could not be ignorant, that there is hardly any Book of
Scripture, which has not been rejected by some Sect, or other, of Christians,
and that several parts, even of the new Testament (which most concerns us) were
long doubted of by diverse of the Fathers and ancient Orthodox Writers, till the
Church decided the Controversy. Nay, that their great reformer, Luther
himself, admits not for Canonical Scripture the Epistle to the Hebrews, the
Epistle of Saint James, the Epistle of Saint Jude, nor any part of the
Apocalypse, or Revelation. Call you this candid dealing? is it not rather to
say and unsay? or indeed to say any thing, in defense of a ruinous Cause? Ibid.
number. 2.


After this the Relatour, pretending to come close to the particular, says,
The time was, before this miserable rent in the Church of Christ, that you and
we were all of one belief. I wonder whom he means by that WE of his before
the Rent, seeing the said WE began with and by that Rent, not made by us, but
by those that went out from us, and deserted the Catholic Church and Faith,
in which they were bred up; and so became a WE by themselves: which before the
Rent so made, had no other then a mere Utopian, or Chimerical Being. Yet (as it
seems by his Lordships discourse) they are pleased in fancying themselves
Reformers of our Corruptions, while they themselves are the Corrupters. They
think themselves safe in holding the Creed, and other common Principles of
Belief; but so did many of the ancient Heretics, who yet were condemned for
such by lawful ecumenical Councills. They glory in ascribing (as he says)
more sufficiency to the Scripture, then is done by us, in that they affirm it
to contain all things necessary to Salvation: while by so doing (in the sense
they mean it) they contradict the Scriptures themselves; which often sends them
to Traditions. Call you this giving honor to the Scritures? This indeed is not
only enough; but more then enough, as the Ibidem.
Bishop expresses it himself.

He tells us, that for begetting and settling a Belief of this Principle, viz.
that the Scripture is the Word of God, they go the same way with us, and a
better too. He means they go some part of the way with us, and the rest by
themselves. But certainly he ought rather to have continued in our way to the
end, then for want of a good reason why he left it, to pin this falsehood upon
us, That we make the present Tradition always an Infallible Word of God
unwritten. Apostolical Traditions we hold for such indeed, since to be written
or not-written are conditions merely accidental to Gods Word: but the Tradition
of the present Church, by which we are infallibly ascertained of the truth of
those Apostolical Traditions as much as of the Scriptures themselves, we oblige
not any man to receive it for Gods unwritten Word, as the Bishop would make you
believe.

Their way (says the Bishop) is better then ours, because they resolve Ibid.
number. 2.
their Faith (touching this Principle) into the written Word: which is, in
plain English, that they resolve their Faith of the Scriptures-being Gods Word
into no Word of God at all: since there is not any written Word of God to tell
them, that this or that Book, or indeed any Book of their whole Bible is the
Word of God. They therefore ultimately resolve their Faith of this point into
little more then their own fancies; and consequently have no Divine or
Supernatural Faith of this Article at all: which nevertheless is by them laid
for the Basis, or groundwork of their Belief of all other points of Christian
Religion. Behold the excellency of their better way then ours: who ultimately
resolve our Faith hereof into Gods unwritten Word, viz. the Testimony of the
Apostles orally teaching it to the Christians of their own days. And of this
Apostolical Testimony, Tradition, or unwritten Word of God, all the succeeding
Christians of Gods Church, even to this day, have been rendered certain by the
Infallible (I say not Divine) Testimony, or Tradition of the said Church of
Christ.

Lastly, the Bishop to close this Dispute, speaks again to that well known
place of St. Austin, Contr. Epist. Fund. cap 5.
Ego vero Evangelio non crederem, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae commoveret
authoritas: which he attempts to solve by telling us, that the Verb commovere
is not applyable to one Motive alone, but must signify to move together with
other Motives. To this I answer, that he must be a mean Grammarian, who knows
not this to be a great mistake, when no plurality of Motives is expressed.
Secondly, that in case St. Austins word commoveret were to be taken in the
sense the Bishop gives it, viz. to move together with Scripture, yet his
Lordship would gain little by it: since his Faith were consequently to be
resolved into it, as being a Partial Motive of his Faith. Now it cannot be
denied in true Philosophy, that if one partial Motive be fallible, the Act
produced by that Motive must of necessity have a mixture of Fallibility in it;
every effect participating the nature of its cause. So even in Logic should a
Syllogism have for one of its Premises a Sentence of Scripture, and for the
other but a probable Proposition, the Conclusion could be no more then
probable. And this Doctrine is according to what St. Austin delivers in the
place above cited, when speaking of the Churches Authority he says, Qua
infirmata, jam nec Evangelio oredere potero, which being weakened, (or called
in question) I shall no longer be able to believe the Gospel it self.

Thus, by Gods favor, we are come to the end of this grand Controversy,
touching the Resolution of Faith: wherein I have not only shown the
insufficiency of the several ways and methods propounded by the Bishop; but
cleared and established our own Catholic way of Resolving Faith.

The Infallible Tradition of the present Church is the sole Clew, that guides
us through the dark and intricate Meanders of our Adversaries Labyrinth. It Is
the only expedient, by which we can Infallibly resolve our Faith into its
Prime and Formal Object, Gods Revelation. This thread is fastened to the
undeniable Motives of Credibility, accompanying and pointing out the true
Church: which Motives are the ground, or reason, why we believe the Church to
be Infallible independently of Scripture: whereby we avoid even the shadow of a
Circle.

Now our Adversary, on the other side, though he grants true Christian Faith to
be essentially Divine and Infallible, and that Divine Revelation, or Gods Word,
is the ultimate Foundation, or Formal Object, of Faith; as also that we cannot
believe with true Divine Faith, unless we have some infallible ground and
Authority to assure us of the said Divine Revelation, or Word of God: yet does
he not ('it is therefore to be supposed he could not) show any such infallible
Authority, or ground for his believing Scripture, or any other point of Faith,
to be Divine Revelation, or the Word of God. The private Spirit, however masked
under the title of Grace, has been found to come far short in that respect:
the inbred Light of Scripture it self has been evidenced to be too weak and
dim for that purpose. Neither can these defective means, viz. of private
Spirit and inbred Light of Scripture, be ever heightened, or improved to that
Prerogative, to wit, of giving Infallible assurance, by the Tradition of the
present Church, unless that Tradition be granted to be Infallible: which the
Bishop absolutely refuses to admit; and thereby leaves both himself and his own
Party, destitute of such an Infallible ground for believing Scripture to be
Gods Word, as himself confesses necessary for attaining Supernatural and Divine
Faith. The consequence I leave to the serious consideration of the judicious
Reader. I beseech God he may make benefit of it to his Eternal Felicity.

CHAP. X. Of the Universal Church.
ARGUMENT.
1. The Ladies Question, what it was, and how diverted by the Bishop. 2. In
what sense the Roman Church is styled THE Church. 3. Every True Church, a
right, or Orthodox Church, and why. 4. The Ladies Question, and A. C's
miscited. 5. How THE Church, and how Particular Churches, are called
Catholic. 6. Why, and in what sense it is not only true, but proper, to say
the Romane-Catholique Church. 7. The Bishops pretended Solutions of Bellarmins
Authorities, referred Chap. 1. to a fitter place, here more particularly
answered.

1. THe Lady at length cuts off the the thread of his Lordships long Discourse,
and by a Quere gives a rise to a new one. Her demand (according to Mr. Fishers
relation) was, Whether the Bishop. 20. n. 1.
would grant the Roman Church to be the right Church? What was the Bishops
answer to this? He granted that it was. But since (it seems) he repented
himself for granting so much. For afterward in his Book he denied, that either
the Question was asked in this form, or that the Answer was such.

Had we the Ladies Question in some Authentical Autography of her own hand, it
would decide this verbal Controversy. However it is very likely the Lady asked
not this Question out of curiosity, since she desired only to know that which
might settle her in point of Religion, being at that time so deeply perplexed
as she was. Now what satisfaction would it have given her to know, that the
Church of Rome was a particular and true Church, in the precise Essence of a
Church, in which she might possibly be saved, if it were neither THE true
Church, that is the Catholic Church, out of which she could not be saved; nor
the right Church, in which she might certainly be saved. This only was her
doubt, as appears by the whole Dispute; this having been inculcated to her by
those of the Roman Church: and it is likely, she framed her question according
to her doubt. But whatever her words were, she was to be understood to demand
this alone, viz. Whether the Roman were not the True, Visible, Infallible
Church, out of which none could be saved: for herein she had from the beginning
of the Conference desired satisfaction. See Mr. Fishers Relation, page 42.
wherein it is said, The Lady desired -- to have proof brought to show, which
was that Continual, Infallible, Visible Church, in which one may, and out of
which one cannot attain Salvation.

2. To our present purpose it is all one, in which of these terms the Question
was demanded. For in the present subject the Roman Church could not be any
Church at all, unless it were THE Church, and a right Church. The reason is,
because St. Peter's Successor being the Bishop of Rome, and Head of the whole
Church, (as I shall fully prove anon) that must needs be THE Church (...), if
it be any Church at all. In like manner if it were not a right Church, it might
be a Synagogue, or Conventicle, but not a True Church of Christ. For that
implies a company of men agreeing in the profession of the same Christian
Faith, and Communion of the same Sacraments, under the Government of lawful
Pastors; and chiefly of one Vicar of Christ upon Earth. It Is evident, this
Church can be but One; and therefore if it be a True Church, it is a Right
Church.

This notwithstanding hinders not the Universal Church from being divided into
many Diocesses; all which agreeing in the same Faith and Communion of the same
Sacraments, and in the acknowledgement of the same Vicar of Christ, make up One
and the same Universal Church. But where there is difference in any of these,
the Congregation that departs from the abovesaid One Faith, Communion, and
Obedience, of necessity ceases to be a Church any longer. Why so? Because Bonum
ex integra causa, malum ex quolibet defectu.

It Is true, THE Church signifies most properly either the whole Catholic
Church; or if it be applied to a particular Church, the Chief Church, and by
consequence the Church of Rome; St. Peter having fixed his Chair to that place,
and by that means made his Successor Bishop of Rome. But had St. Peter placed
his Chair elsewhere, that Church, where ever it had been, would have been
called THE Church, as the Roman Church now is. The Roman Church therefore is
styled THE Church, because it is the Seat of the Vicar of Christ, and chief
Pastor of the Church Universal: yet all other Churches are true, right, and
Orthodox Churches of Christ, otherwise they would be no Churches at all. In a
word, I would fain see some grave Ancient Father, who ever maintained a
Congregation of Christians to be a true Church, and yet held it not to be
Orthodox.

3. This being so, all his Lordships subtleties fall to the ground: which
suppose, that some Congregation of Christians may remain a True Church, and yet
teach false Doctrine in matters of Faith. For how can you call that a True
Church, in which men are not taught the way to Heaven, but to eternal
perdition? Such needs must be all false Doctrine in matters of Faith; because
it either teaches something to be the Word of God, which is not; or denies
that to be his Word, which is: to err in this sort is certainly to commit high
and mortal offense against the honor and veracity of God; and consequently the
direct way to eternal perdition: yea, whatever Congregation of Christians
teaches in this manner, if it be done through malice, they are Seducers; if
through ignorance, they are seduced, and blind Guides, and so lead the blind
into the same destruction with themselves: to neither of which inconveniences
can the whole Church be liable, if there be Truth in the Promises of Christ.

The example then of a man, who may be termed a man, though Ibid. number. 2.
he be not honest, comes not home to our case. Had the Bishop in lieu of the
word Man put Saint, (which essentially includes both Man and Holiness) the
Parallel would have held better. For the word Church, in our present debate,
implies not a simple, or uncompounded term, as that of man, but is a compound
of Substance and Accidents together: which Accidents signify Perfection and
Integrity of Condition, and exclude the contrary Defects, viz. Heresy,
Schism, and Error in Faith.

Wherefore, if the Church of Rome be (as the Relatour feigns it) so corrupt, as
to misuse the Sacraments of Christ, and to make Scripture an imperfect Rule of
Faith, when Christ had made it a perfect one, it would be unchurched. This a
man may learn even out of the Apostles Creed, by which he professes to believe
the Holy Catholic Church. Moreover, St. Athanasius in his Creed teaches, that
unless a man keep the whole Catholic Faith entire and inviolate, he shall
without all doubt perish. Its undeniable then, no Salvation is to be had, where
such false doctrine is taught; and by consequence no true Church. Again, the
Church is the Spouse of Christ, and a pure Virgin; who loses her Honor by
prostituting her self to error; much more by forcing all under pain of
damnation to believe those very errors for Gods word. To say then, that a
Congregation so grossly erroneous and seducing is a true Church, is in effect to
say, that Christ has a Harlot to his Spouse.

4. There is yet much skirmishing about the form of words, in which the Lady
asked the question. A. C. averres he is certain, that she desired to know of
the Bishop, whether he would grant the Roman Church to be a right Church,
because he had particularly spoken with her before, and wished her to insist
upon that point: whereupon his Lordship makes a special reflection with what
cunning Adversaries the Clergy Ibid. number. 4.
of England has to deal, who prepare their Disciples, and instruct them before
hand, upon what points to insist. But this was no cunning, but necessary
Prudence and Charity, to wish the Lady to require satisfaction in those points,
wherein she had the greatest difficulty, and which it most imported her to
understand. Certainly, had any of the Roman Church addressed themselves to the
Bishop for satisfaction in matters of Religion, he would never, for fear of
being accounted a cunning Disputant, have scrupled to instruct them to make the
strongest objections he could against the Roman Tenets.

But the Bishop goes on, and acquaints the Reader with a perfect Ibid. number. 4.
Jesuitisme, (if you believe him) viz. which measures the Catholic Church by
that which is in the City, or Diocese of Rome, and not Rome by the Catholic,
as it was in the Primitive times. But this is no Jesuitisme, but rather a
Soloecisme against Truth, and a falsifying of the Text. For I find not those
words in A. C. which are cited, viz. The Lady would know, not whether that were
the Catholic Church, to which Rome agreed, but whether that were not the Holy
Catholic Church, which agreed with Rome. No such Quere as this, was
propounded by the Lady, as appears in the former words of A. C. It was all one
to her, whether Rome must always agree with the Catholic Church, or the
Catholic Church always agree with Rome. Such Punctilio's as these the Lady
never dreamt of; nor were they so much as hinted at by A. C. It was enough for
the Ladies satisfaction, to know, whether Rome, and all particular Churches
agreeing with her in Doctrine and Communion, or Constantinople, (if you please)
and those which communicate with her, or the English-Protestant Church, and
they who consent with it, be the Catholic Church. Thus that the Jesuits may
be thought to have singularities and novelties in their doctrine, finding none
of their own, he has endeavored to coin one for them; which he esteems a
strange Paradox, though indeed it be none. For put case A. C. had affirmed,
that the Church is styled Catholic by agreeing with Rome, yet had it been no
Jesuitism, but a received and known Truth in the Ancient Church.

5. For the better understanding of this we are to note, the word Catholic may
be used in three different acceptions, viz. either formally, causally, or by
way of participation. Formally the Universal Church, that is the Society of all
true particular Churches, united together in one Body, in one Communion, and
under one Head, is called Catholic. Causally the Church of Rome is styled
Catholic, because it has an influence and force to cause Universality in the
whole Body of the Catholic Church: to which Universality two things are
necessary. One is Multitude, which serves as an Analogical Matter, whereof it
consists: for where there is no Multitude, there can be no Universality. The
other is in place of Form, viz. Unity: For Multitude without Unity will never
make Universality. Take away (says St. Austin) D. Aug. de verb Dom. sec.
Lucam. cap. 26.
Unity from Multitude, and it is TURBA, (a Rout) but join to it Unity, an it
becomes POPULUS (a Community,) The Roman Church therefore, which as a Center of
Ecclesiastical Communion, infuses this Unity, which is the Form of
Universality, into the Catholic Church, and thereby causes in her
Universality, may be called Catholic causally, though she be but a particular
Church. So he that commands in chief over an whole Army, and makes an unity in
that Military Body, is styled General, though he be but a particular person.
Thirdly, every particular Orthodox Church is termed Catholic participative, by
way of participation, because they agree in and participate of the Doctrine and
Communion of the Catholic Church. In this sense the Church of Smyrna
addresses her Epistle thus. To the Catholic Church of Philomilion, and to all
the Catholic Churches, which are Eusebius. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 5.
spread through the whole world.

Thus we see both how properly the Roman Church is called Catholic, and how
the Catholic Church it self takes causally the denomination of Universal, or
Catholic, from the Roman, considered as the chief particular Church, infusing
Unity to all the rest, as having dependence of her, and relation to her. Nay,
it was an ordinary practice, in Primitive times, to account those Catholics,
who agreed with the Sea Apostolic; and this is manifest by many examples. St.
(...) relates, that his brother Satyrus, going on shore in a certain City of
Sardinia, (where he desired to be baptized) demanded of the Bishop of that
City, Advocavit ad se Episcopum loci, (...) est, utrumuam cum Episcopis
Catholicis, hoc est, cum Romana Ecclesia, conveniret. D. Ambros. (...). in
obit. fratr.
Whether he consented with the Catholic Bishops, that is, (says he) with the
Roman Church. And in this sense the Church of Alexandria, Sed in scito, etc.
Romanam fidem (...) esse participem (...) Ecclesia gloriatur. D. Hicronym.
cpist. 68. ad Theophil.
according to St. Hierome, made it her glory to participate of the Roman
Faith. And John, Patriarch of Constantinople, wrote thus to Pope Hermisda,
Joan. Patriarch. Constant. Epist. ad Hormisdam. (...). 2. Conc.
We promise (says he) not to recite in the sacred Mysteries the names of
those, who are severed from the Communion of the Catholic Church, that is to
say, who consent not in all things with the Sea Apostolic.

Thus Saint Austin addresses himself to the Donatists, telling them, that the
(...) Sacerdotes vel ab ipsa Sede Petri, and in ordine illo Patrum quis cui
successit, videte. Ipsa est Petra, quam non vincunt Superbae Iuferorum (...).
D. Aug. in Psalm. contr. (...). Donat. Tom. 7. col. 9.
Succession of the Roman Bishops is the Rock, which the proud Gates of Hell
overcome not; thereby (...), that the very Succession of those Bishops is, in
some true sense, the Catholic Church So Optatus Milevitanus, after he had
said, Igitur negare non (...) scire te, in urbe (...) Petro primo Cathedram
Episcopalem esse collatam; in qua sederit omnium Apostolorum Caput, Petrus,
etc. in qua una Cathedia unitas ab omnibus servaretur, ne (...) Apostoli
singulas sibi quisque defendercnt: ut jam Schismaticus and peccator esset, qui
contra singularem Cathedram alteram collocaret. Ergo Cathedra (...), quae est
prima dc dotibus, sedit prior Petrus. etc. Optat. contr. Parmen. lib. 2.
St Peter was head of all the Apostles; and that he would have been a
Sohismatick, who should have erected another Chair against that singular one of
St. Peter; as also, that in that Chair of St. Peter, being but one, unity was
to be kept by all, he adds, that with Syricius, then Pope, he himself was
united in communion; Damaso (successit) Syricius, qui noster est Socius; cum
quo nobis totus orbis commercio (...), in una Communionis Societate, concordat.
Optat. ibidem.
with whom the whole world (says he, meaning the whole Catholic Church)
agrees by COMMUNICATORY LETTERS in one Society of Communion. See here, how
clearly he makes the union with the Bishop of Rome the measure of the Catholic
Church, which the Bishop calls a Jesuitisme: and further proves himself to be
in the Catholic Church, Cum probatum est, (...) esse in Ecclesia Catholica,
apud quos and Symbolum Trinitatis est, and per Cathedram Petri, quae nostra
est. Optat. ibid.
because he was in Communion with the Sea of Peter.

St. Herome Ego (...) primum (PRAEMIUM fortasse rectius) nisi Christum sequens,
Beatitudini tuae, id est, Cathedrae Petri Communione consocior. Super illam
Petram (...) Ecclesiam scio. Quiounque extra hanc domum Agnum comederit,
profanus est -- Quiounque tecum non colligit, spargit; hoc est qui Christi non
est, Antichristi est. D. (...). Epist. 57. ad Damasum. Tom. 2. fol, 47.
professes, the Church is built upon St. Peter's Sea, and that whoever eats the
Lamb, that is, pretends to believe in Christ, and (...) of the Sacraments, out
of that House, that is, out of the Communion of that Church, is profane, and an
alien; yea, that he belongs to Antichrist, and not to Christ, whoever consents
not with the Successor of St. Peter. St. Fulgentius Romana (quae mundi cacumen
est) tenot and (...) Ecolosia. Fulgent de (...). cap. 11.
styles the Roman Church, The top of the world; and Eulalius, Bishop of
Syracusa, tells the same Fulgentius, that it would avail him nothing to go into
those Countries, which he desired to visit, because Terras, ad quas per gere
concupiscis, a Communione beati Petri perfida dissentio separavit. Omnes illi
Monachi, quorum praedicatur mirabilis abstinentia non habebunt secum Altaris
Sacramenta communia. Quid ergo proderit, etc. Author vit. B. Fulgent. Tom. 6.
Biblioth. Patr. fol. 15.
(says he) the Inhabitants thereof (certain Religious men) were severed by a
faithless Dissension from the Sea of Peter.

Lastly, Gratian the Emperor made a Decree, (...). Theodoret. Hist. Eccles.
lib. 5. cap. 2.
that the Churches, formerly possessed by Heretics, should be restored to
those Bishops, who were of Pope Damasus his Communion, understanding thereby
the Communion of the Catholic Church. The Communion therefore with the Bishop
of Rome, in his days, was the measure, and distinctive badge, whereby to know
who were, and who were not of the Catholic Church.

6. Hence it appears, that what his Lordship is pleased to term a perfect
Jesuitisme in A. C. is a perfect mistake of the Bishop, and a losing himself in
his own Labyrinth. Neither is that vulgar exception against Roman Catholic
any better. For as all Countries, how distant soever from one another, under
the Command and Obedience of the Roman Emperor, were called the Roman Empire,
taken collectively, because the chief Seat of their Emperor was at Rome: So
all the Churches subject to the Roman Bishop, are called the Roman Church,
because their Supreme Head and Pastor, under Christ, sits at Rome. And seeing
in the Law of Moses the whole Church of the Israelites was properly called the
Jewish Church, (which name strictly taken belonged only to the Tribe of Juda)
because the chief City of it appertained to that Tribe, where the High Priest
resided and officiated, why may not also the whole Orthodox Christian Church be
named the Roman Church, because its Supreme Bishop keeps his Residence in the
Roman City.

The truth is, in all doubts concerning matter of Doctrine, recourse is to be
had to St. Peter's Successor, who (at least with a General Council) can
infallibly resolve all difficulties. This Infallibility is independent of all
places; insomuch, that as St. Peter had been infallible, though he had never
been at Rome; so though his Successor should leave to reside in that City, yet
should he not leave to be Infallible in the manner specified; and should as
well then, as now, judge both the Roman Faith, and the Faith of all other
Churches. This I have said to show, how the Faith of every particular Church is
to be examined, and proved to be Catholic, to wit, by its conformity to the
Faith of the Roman Church: concluding nothing, whither the Pope can transfer
his Chair from Rome, or not; and whether the Clergy of Rome can desert him, and
the true Faith, or not: for these Questions make nothing to our present purpose.

7. By way of Appendix to this Chapter (since so fair an occasion is presented
us) it will not be amiss to perform what we promised, chap. 1. viz. to examine
a little more fully his Lordships pretended Solutions of Bellarmins
Authorities; which the Bishop brings. 3. number. 3. But my intention is to
maintain them so far only, as they make for the Infallible Authority of the
Church, or of the Pope Defining Articles of Faith in a General Council: for we
are obliged to no more.

The first Authority is out of St. Cyprian, who shall here speak a little
fuller, then either the Bishop or Bellarmin cites him; to the end the force of
his words may the better appear: This holy Martyr writes thus to Cornelius
Bish (...) of Rome. Cyprian. Epist. ad Cornel. Edit. Paris. 1648.
Post ista adhuc insuper, Pseudo-episcopo sibi ab Haereticis constituto,
navigare audent ad Petri Cathedram, atque ad Ecclesiam principalem, unde unitas
Sacerdotalis exorta est; a Schismaticis and (...) literas far, nec cogitare
eos esse Romanos (quorum fides, Apostolo praedicante, laudata est) ad quos
perfidia habere non (...) accessum. Why calls he St. Peter's Chair Ecclesiam
principalem, (the chief Church) but because it is the Head, to which all other
Churches must be subordinate in matter of Doctrine? The words following
signify as much, Unde unitas Sacerdotalis exorta est, from which Chair of St.
Peter, as it were from its fountain, unity in Priesthood, and consequently
unity in Faith is derived. Why brings he the Apostle himself as Panegyrist of
the Roman Faith? Quorum fides, Apostolo praedicante, laudataest. Is it
(forsooth) because no malicious (...) in matter of Trust, or Error in Fact
against the Discipline and Government of the Church, can have access unto them,
as the Bishop will needs misinterpret the place? or rather because no error in
Faith can approach the Sea Apostolic? Certain it is Perfidia, in this
sentence, is Diametrically opposed to the Faith of the Romans immediately
before commended by the Apostle, (which was true Christian Faith) and
consequently it must of necessity be taken for the quite contrary, viz.
Misbelief, or Error in Faith.

Hence his other Explication also vanishes into smoke, viz. when he asserts,
that (...) non potest may be taken Hyperbolically, for non facile potest;
because this interpretation suits not with those high Elogium's, given by St.
Cyprian to the Roman Church, as being the Principal Church, the Church whence
Unity of Faith and Discipline is derived to all other Christian Churches. Nay
this interpretation gives no more Prerogative to the Church of Rome, then to
that of Alexandria, or (...), etc. to none of which in those Primitive times
Error in Faith could have easy access.

At length, after much ado, he grants perfidia may be taken for Error in
Faith, or for perfidious Misbelievers and Schismatics, who had 3. number. 5.
betrayed their Faith; but then he cavils with the word Romanos. This must be
limited only to those Christians, who then lived in Rome; to whom quatales, as
long as they continued such, Error in Faith could have no access. Is not this
a great praise? As if St. Cyprian should say, St. Peter's Sea could not err, so
long as it continued constant in the Truth. What National Church, nay what
faithful Christian then living, might not have challenged as much privilege
as this?

Finally he concludes, St. Cyprian meant no Infallibility in the Roman Church
by the sentence alleged, because he himself had some Contrast afterward with
Pope Stephen, touching the Rebaptization of those, that were Baptized by
Heretics. But his Lordship should have remembered that common distinction of
Divines, whereby they consider the Pope sometimes as a Private Doctor, and
sometimes as the Doctor, or Pastor, universal of all Christians: and that
St. Cyprian might very well be supposed to think the Pope erred only in the
first sense. For Pope Stephen did not properly define any Doctrine in that
contestation, which was between them, but only commanded that those in Africa
should alter nothing that was observed in the ancient practice, about receiving
such into the Church as had been Baptized by Heretics. Nihil innovetur; nisi
quod Traditum est: neither had the Council of Carthage any just cause to
mention it as an error in St Cypirian, for thinking the Pope might err in
quality of a Private Doctor.

Again, if this be a good Argument against the Infallibility of Popes, viz. St.
Cyprian held Pope Stephen erred, therefore the Pope may err in matters of
Faith, it will be good consequence also to say, St. Cyprian held Pope Stephen
erred, even whilst he maintained an universal immemorial Tradition, received
and practiced as such by the whole Catholic Church ever since the Apostles;
ergo the Pope may err, even whilst he follows such an Universal, Immemorial
Tradition. By this manner of arguing, not only the Popes infallible Authority,
but the infallible Authority of the most Universal, Immemorial Traditions in
the Church will be infringed, through St. Cyprians erroneous judgment: and if
it be plain enough to prove St. Cyprian had no great opinion of the Roman
infallibility (as the Relatour here says it is) it will be also plain enough
to prove, St. Cyprian had no great opinion of the infallibility of such an
Universal Tradition; which is altogether absurd.

The Bishops exceptions therefore to this Text of St. Cyprian, being of no
force, it remains, that his meaning must be this, and no other, viz. that the
Sea of St. Peter, which is the principal of all Churches, was so infallibly
directed by the Holy Ghost, that no error in Faith could have access to it, or
be admitted by it; if not as a particular Church (which is a School-question,
and as such disputed here by Bellarmin) yet at least, as the Head of the
Universal Church of Christ, and as the Fountain of Priestly Unity: which St.
Cyprian here plainly affirms that Church and Sea to be.

The second Authority is out of St Jerome, who speaks in this manner to
Ruffinus, Scito Romanam fidem, Apostolica voce laudatam, Hieronym. lib. 3.
Apol. contr. Ruffin.
cjusmodi praestigias non admittere: etiamsi Angelus aliter annunciet, quam
semel praedicatum est, Pauli auctoritate munitam non posse mutari. I will not
here dispute, whether Bellarmin by Romanam Fidem means Romanos Fideles, or no:
yea I most willingly agree with his Lordship in this, that by Romanam Fidem St.
Jerome understands the Catholic Faith of Christ. But by the way it is worth
noting how inconsequently our Adversaries speak; who usually condemn us for
joining as Synonyma's, Roman and Catholic together, viz. when we say the
Roman Catholic Faith, or the Roman Catholic Church; and yet the Bishop has no
other way to avoid the force of St. Jeromes words, but by acknowledging, in
this place, that the Roman and Catholic is all one.

Well then; be it granted, that in St. Jeromes time the Roman was accounted the
Catholic Faith: what will this advantage the Bishop? Very much, as he imagins
at least. For thus he discourses. The Roman being here taken for the Catholic
Faith, and the Catholic Faith being incapable of any change, or of admitting
any praestigias, that is, Illusions or Alterations, it will of necessity
follow, that Saint Hieromes words evince not the perpetual unchangeableness of
the Faith, as taught and professed in the Church of Rome. Excellent! But did
not his Lordship see, how easily this exposition of his might be blown away?
Can it be thought a thing any way suitable to Saint Hieromes wisdom, to tell
Ruffinus (so great a Scholar as he was known to be) that the Catholic Faith
in abstracto (in its own precise nature) can never be any other, then what it
is? knew not Ruffinus, as well as St. Hierome himself, that neither Faith nor
any thing else, can change its essence? would he make St. Hierome so simple, as
to persuade Ruffinus, not to go about to undermine the people of Rome, for such
a reason as this, because the Catholic Faith, abstracted from those who teach
and maintain it, can never be but what it is essentially? Seeing that
notwithstanding any such Immutability, it might easily enough be extirpated out
of the hearts of the people of Rome, and the contrary errors admitted, how
unalterable soever the Faith in it self be. The unchangeableness therefore of
the Catholic Faith in this sense could no way hinder Ruffinus from spreading
such Books among the Romans, as might endanger their perversion; but rather the
Immutable Faith of the Sea Apostolic, so highly commended both by the Apostle
and St. Hierome; which is founded upon such a Rock, that even an Angel himself
is not able to shake it.

The third Authority is taken out of St. Gregory Nazianzen, whose Elogium in
behalf of the Roman Church is very Emphatical. Vetus Greg. Naziauz in carmin.
de vita sua.
Roma (says he) ab antiquis temporibus habet rectam fidem, and semper eam
retinet, sicut decet urbem, quae toti orbi praesidet, semper de Deo integram
(...) habere. For the clearing of which passage I say first, the Bishop is not
faithful in his Translation of him; for he leaves out the word Ever in the
latter part of the sentence: whereas St. Gregory, speaking of the sound and
entire Faith of the Roman Church, says that Rome always holds it, as becomes
that City, which is Governess over the whole world, to have EVER an entire
Faith in and concerning God. Secondly, in his Gloss upon the Sentence he omits
the same word again, saying only it became that City very well to keep the
Faith sound and entire. Well; but how long? for some years only, or an age, or
two? does St. Gregory limit any time? No: he says semper, it becomes that city
always to hold the true Faith, not only till St. Gregory's time, but for
ever, to all posterity.

The Bishop indeed sufficiently intimates what he drives at, in those words of
his, In St. Gregory Nazianzens time Rome did certainly. 3. number. 10
hold both RECTAM ET INTEGRAM FIDEM (the right and the entire Faith of Christ;)
but there is no promise, nor prophecy in St. Gregory, that Rome shall ever do
so. I answer, though there be no prophecy, yet there is a sufficient
acknowledgement, in those words of St. Gregory, that Rome shall ever do so. For
are not these his very words? Rome (says he) of old has the right Faith, and
always holds it, as becomes the City, which rules over the whole world, to
have EVER the entire Faith concerning God. Does he not expressly affirm, Rome
had the right Faith of old, and that she always holds it, as becomes such a
City to hold the right Faith of God. I put my Argument into form thus.

It always becomes that great City to have, and likewise to hold, INTEGRAM
FIDEM, the entire Faith of Christ.

But St. Gregory here affirms, that Rome always holds the entire Faith, as
becomes that great City to have and hold it.

Ergo, he affirms, that Rome holds always the entire Faith of Christ, and not
for some ages only, or to St. Gregory's time.

The Major is his Lordships own words. The Minor is proved from St. Gregory's
express words, which are, even according to that Translation of them, which the
Bishop cites, semper eam retinet, sicut decet urbem, etc. semper de Deo
integram fidem habere. He says not only Rome ever holds the true Faith, but
that it ever holds it as becomes that City EVER to hold it, which presides over
the whole world, that is, with full Authority teaching it, and by continual
profession maintaining it in all future ages.

The Bishop at length acknowledges a double semper in St. Gregory's words, but
misplaceth the latter; with what pure intention let any indifferent man judge.
His words are plain (says the Bishop) semper Ibidem.
decet, etc. it always becomes that City to have and hold the entire Faith,
etc. Whereas St. Gregory says not semper decet (it always becomes) but decet,
it becomes that City which governs the whole world, always to have the entire
Faith of God. Now who sees not a manifest difference betwixt these two
Propositions, It always becomes that City to have, and it becomes that City to
have always? even as it is one thing to say, It always becomes a man to keep
honest company, and another thing to say, It becomes a man to keep honest
company always; seeing this last implies, that a man must never cease from
keeping such company, or never be out of such company. In like manner, it is one
thing to affirm it always becomes Rome to hold the entire Faith; for this
only signifies, the keeping of the Faith entire, whenever it is done, is a
thing well-becoming the City of Rome: and another thing to say, It becomes that
City to keep the entire Faith always; for that signifies, it must never fail,
or cease, to keep it.

His Criticizing upon the present Tense of the Verb retinet ( holds, says he,
not shall hold) is a mere impertinency, derected sufficiently by what we said
in the first Chapter. For, to speak nothing of the Tautology he fastens upon
St. Gregory, if the Verbs habet and retinet relate to the present, or past,
time only, it is to be observed, St. Gregory says not barely it holds ever the
true Faith, but it holds it sicut decet, etc. in such manner as becomes that
Capital City to hold it, viz. for ever; which of necessity relates to all
future times, and therefore is as much as semper retinebit.

From St. Gregory the Bishop passes to, (or rather, by) St. Cyrill and
Ruffinus, pretending that Bellarmin names indeed these Authors, but neither
tells us where, nor cites their words. Truly no small fault (if not untruly
objected) especially in a man so learned, to amuse his Reader with empty names
only. But surely his Lordship read Bellarmin but superficially, and perhaps
with other men's eyes more then his own, when he wrote this. For otherwise how
was it possible he should oversee both himself and his Author so much, as not
Bellarm. (...) Romans Pont lib. 4. cap. 3.
to perceive, that Bellarmin refers his Reader to the Authorities of St. Cyril
and Ruffinus abovementioned? St. Cyrils words are clear enough to be seen in
Bellarmin, cap. 3.. (...) and the Authority of Ruffinus in the same Chapter,.
Quinto probatur. St. Cyril is quoted apud D. Thomam. in Catena. Ruffinus, in
exposit. Symbol. But peradventure our Adversary had no great mind to encounter
with such pregnant Authorities; and therefore by a figure, which is called
Omissio Rhetorica, passed them over in silence. St. Cyrill averres, that
Secundum (...) promissionem Ecclesia Apostolica Petri ab omni seductione and
Haeretica circumventione manet immaculata, etc. Cyril. apud D. Thom. in Catena.
according to the promise of our Savior, (which is not limited to any time)
the Aposlolical Church of St. Peter remains free from all spot of seducing, and
Heretical circumvention, etc. Ruffinus also affirms, In Ecclesia urbis Romae,
(...) Haeresis ulla sumpsit exordium; and Mos ibi servatur Antiquus. (...). in
expos. Symb.
That in the Church of Rome never any (...) took its beginning; and that the
ancient Custom (which where it is well observed, excludes all Innovation in
matter of Faith) is there kept.

But the Relatour seems willing to make us amends; and seeing change is no
robbery, he restores Bellarmin another Text of St. Cyril, in lieu of that he
took from him, yea (if we believe his Lordship) the most pregnant place in all
St. Cyril. But it is not his part to find Authorities for us, but fairly and
ingenuously to satisfy those we urge against him. It was not for Bellarmins
purpose (as it seems) to press that so pregnant place; nor is it for mine to
maintain it. Valeat quantum valere potest. I make no doubt, but they who urge
it, will be found able to defend it against all his evasions. The place in
Ruffinus he himself finds at last; but it likes him no better then the other,
and much discourse he uses to invalidate the force of it. But our Answer is,
Bellarmin brings it only in favor of his own private opinion, touching the
Infallibility of the particular Church of Rome: which being only matter of
probable and disputable opinion, not of Catholic and necessary Belief, as I
resolved in the beginning not to undertake the defense of any such points, so I
hold not my self obliged to maintain the proofs of them.

I return therefore to his Lordship, who taking his best advantage from St.
Cyrils pregnant place, builds the Catholic Church upon D. Cyril. Alex. Dial.
de Trinit. lib. 4.
the Faith only, and not upon the Person of St. Peter professing that Faith.
But first, this assertion of the Bishop is refuted by the words of St. Cyril
himself, who calls the Faith (upon which he says the Church is founded. etc)
inconcussam and firmissimam Discipuli Fidem, (the invincible and most firm
Faith of Christ's Disciple) which words clearly include St. Peter's Person with
his Faith. For in what sense can the Faith be said to be invincible and most
sirm, but only in relation to the person invincibly and most firmly confessing
it? We our selves do not say the Church is built upon St. Peter's Shoulders, but
upon his Faith, viz. as it is constantly and inviolably taught and confessed by
his Person, and the person of his Successors, as occasion requires. Secondly,
it is no less contrary to the words of Holy Scripture, Matthew. 16. 18. I say unto
thee (Peter) Thou art A ROCK, and upon THIS ROCK I will build my Church, etc.
where it is plain that by these words This Rock Christ meant no other Rock, then
that whereof he made mention in the preceding words Thou art a Rock. For our
Savior spoke in the Hebrew (or Syriack) Language, Thou art CEPHAS, (which
signifies a Rock) and upon this CEPHAS, that is, upon this Rock, will I build
my Church. The same is in the Greek Translation. For even there (...) signisies
a Rock, as well as (...). And though the Catholic Translators of the New
Testament (who follow the vulgar Latin Translation) render it thus, Thou art
PETER, and upon THIS ROCK will I build my Church; yet have they noted, that the
word Peter signifies a Rock, and that our Blessed Savior used not two, but one
and the same word, to wit, Cephas (which signifies a Rock) when he made that
promise to Saint Peter.

To make this plain by an instance drawn from our own affairs. Suppose Matthew
Parker, presently after he was consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury,
accompanied with John Scory, Miles Coverdale, William Barlow, Jobn Hodgskins,
etc. his Associates and Consecrators (as Mr. Mason will have have it) should
have addressed themselves to the Queens Presence Chamber to kiss her hand, and
the Queen should have asked them, Quid dicitis vos de Filia Henrici octavi,
(what say you of the Daughter of Henry the Eighth?) and Matthew Parker, as
chief among them, answering according to the then-newly-enacted Belief, Tu es
Elizabetha, Supremum Caput Ecclesiae, etc. (Thou art Elizabeth, Supreme Head of
the Church of England) if the Queen thereupon should have returned him this
gracious Answer, Et ego dico tibi, TU ES PRIMAS, and super HUNC PRIMATEM
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, (And I say to thee Thou art Primate, and upon this
Primate I will build my English Church) had this I say happened, would any one
have been so simple, as to doubt whether by hunc Primatem (this Primate) she
meant any other then Matthew Parker, to whom only she then spoke?

Neither indeed can the words This Rock in Grammatical rigor be referred to
the Confession of St. Peter. For, that being a remote Antecedent, mentioned
only in the verse before, and Peter (or Rock) the immediate, mentioned in one
and the same verse with hanc Petram, the words in question, had our Savior
understood by hanc Petram (This Rock) not St. Peter himself, but the Confession
he made of Christ's Divinity, he should not have said super HANC Petram, but
super ILLAM Petram, not upon THIS Rock will I build my Church, but upon THAT
Rock, viz, thy Confession; because, I say, that was the remote Antecedent
mentioned in the former verse, and was not immediately precedent to those words
of our Savior, Super hanc Petram, etc. Seeing therefore our Savior says not
That, but This Rock, he must be understood, according to strict rules of
Grammar, by the Demonstrative hanc (or This) to mean the immediate, or next
Antecedent, viz. St. Peter himself, not that which was further off, viz. his
Confession of Christ's Divinity.

I add, that if our Savior had meant St. Peter's Confession only without his
Person, he should have used not the Conjunction Copulative And, saying Thou art
Peter, AND upon this Rock, etc. but he should have used the Conjunction
Discretive, or Exceptive, But, saying, Thou art Peter, (that is a Rock, in
name) BUT upon that Rock of thy Confession will I build my Church. Wherefore
seeing our Savior does not so speak, but uses the Conjunction Copulative And,
he plainly ties his speech to the Person of St. Peter, to whom only he spoke
in the words immediately precedent: and this as necessarily, as the subsequent
And in the next following sentence ( AND to thee will I give the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, etc.) does show the said words, or sentence, to belong to
St. Peter only. Beside, what coherence do you think our Saviors discourse
will have, if the beginning and end of it shall be understood of St. Peter's
person only, and the middle of a quite different thing?

Touching Ruffinus his Lordship is of opinion, that he neither did, Ibid. n. 12.
nor could account the Roman Church Infallible, because he reckons up the
Canonical Books of Scripture in a different manner, from that which the Church
of Rome does now adays. And therefore (says he) either Ruffinus did not think
the Church of Rome Infallible; or else the Church of Rome this day reckons up
more Books in the Canon, then heretofore she did. If she do so, then she is
changed in a main point of Faith, viz. the Canon of Scripture, and is
absolutely convinced not to be Infallible. But this Argument of the Bishop is
far from being convincing. For though it should be granted, that the Catholic
Church at present declares more Books to be contained in the Canon, then she
did in Ruffinus his time, yet this could prove no error in her; unless it
could be likewise showed, (which I am sure cannot be) that she condemned those
Books then, as not Divine Scripture, or not Canonical, which now she declares
to be Divine and Canonical. For as now she defines some Truths, which in former
times were left under dispute, without the least shadow of error: so without
error may she now admit some Books for Canonical and Divine Scripture, which
before she left under dispute, that is, so undeclared by her for Canonical,
that Christians were not obliged to receive them for such Books; which now
after her Declaration they are obliged to do.

What he says here of the Church of Rome will not, I conceive, be Ibidem.
found very pressing, viz. that she is driven to a hard strait, for using the
Authority of her Adversary (meaning Ruffinus) to prove her Infallibility. For,
though it should be granted, that Ruffinus was an Adversary of the Roman
Church, yea a condemned Adversary, rejected and branded by her, as the Bishop
speaks, yet certainly this is so far from driving the Church of Rome to a hard
strait, that it evidently argues the truth and uncorruptedness of that Church:
which is so clear, that even her Adversaries cannot but confess it. Neither did
the Roman Church reject all that Ruffinus writ, even in that Book, wherein he
expressed his Heresy; but only such parts of it, as were dissonant to the
received Doctrine of the Catholic Church. And if one condemned of error by
another, may not be cited in any thing, wherein he favors the party that
condemned him, why does the Relatour so often cite our Authors (whom he
condemns of errors in Faith, when they seem to favor him.

The Bishop, having examined Bellarmins Authorities in the manner you see,
returns again to A.C. and the Jesuit, telling us in very positive Ibid. n. 14.
terms, that no Jesuit, nor any other, is able to prove any particular Church
Infallible. But to this I have often answered, that it was neither to the
Ladies purpose, nor ours, to dispute concerning a particular Infallible Church:
it suffices, that the Pope is infallible, at least with a General Council:
which question, as I have often observed, the Relatour wisely declines, and
diverts another way, namely to an unnecessary dispute with Bellarmin about the
Infallibility of the particular Church, or Diocese of Rome, viz. whether the
Roman Clergy can at any time forsake the Pope and his Doctrine, or not: or
whether the Chair of St. Peter can be transferred to another place, and the
Roman Church upon that account be left subject to error, as being no longer
the Sea Apostolic: both which are matters of that nature, that they do no way
engage me to contend with his Lordship about them; further, then to tell him,
that they are nothing at all to his purpose, nor to the satisfaction of the
Lady; and seem to have been thrust into his book only to fill up some vacant
pages, and to avoid the question which he was obliged, but not able, directly
to answer.

In the same page I observe the Bishop charges the Roman Church with erring in
the Worship of Images, in altering Christ's Institution in the number. 15.
Blessed Sacrament, by taking away the Cup from the people, and diverse other
particulars: but because he endeavors not in any sort to prove his charge, I
presume I may take liberty to answer in a more convenient place, to wit, where
the Bishop disputes formally against them.

But his Lordship will not part without another fling at Bellarmin: he thinks
he has spied a great inconsistency in some words of the Cardinal: The matter
thus. Bellarmin, ( lib. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 4.. 2. as the Bishop cites him)
of this Proposition The particular Church of Rome cannot err in Faith, so long
as St. Peter's Chair is at Rome, says it is A MOST TRUE Proposition: but
presenty after speaking of it, says only PERADVENTURE IT IS AS TRUE AS THIS,
viz. the Pope, when he teaches the whole Church in matters of Faith, cannot
err. At this the Bishop exclaims, as at a great absurdity of speech. What
(says he) A Proposition MOST TRUE, and yet Ibid. n. 15.
but PERADVENTURE as true as another? That Is not possible with him. But soft
and fair. What needs so much noise? Let Us see what grounds the Relatour has for
this Criticisme. First, he should have reflected, that in such expressions as
this, there is always a latitude of moral sense and meaning to be allowed,
even by common right and custom of speaking. When I say (for example) such a
man is vir prudentissimus, or vir optimus, (a most wise, and most honest man) I
am not presently thought to prefer him in those respects before all the men in
the world: nor shall I be counted (I hope) a liar, though some other men be
found as wise and honest as he. Bellarmin therefore might have been excused,
with indifferent Judges, for saying what he did, upon no other ground but this.

But I shall not here use this plea: let the word Verissima be taken in the
strictest rigor of Scholastical sense that can be; yet may not a Proposition
be rightly said most true, viz. in its proper Rank and order of such
Propositions, and yet be but peradventure as true, as a Proposition of another
and higher rank for certainty, or infallibility of Truth? It Is manifest,
Bellarmin held his first Proposition, touching the Popes Infallibility when he
teaches the whole Church, to be true Veritate fidei, for he holds it to be a
proposition of Faith: but this other, touching the Roman Clergies not erring,
or not departing from the Popes Doctrine so long as the Sea Apostolic
continued there, to be true only Veritate Theologiae, as other Theological
Propositions are True; which are not Divinely revealed, but merely by humane
Discourse and way of Argument deduced from other Theological Propositions and
Principles: whose Truth consequently is never so absolutely infallible, as that
of matters of Faith; but only more or less certain, according as the
Principles, or Propositions, whence we deduce them, are more or less
Infallible; and the Deduction of them from such Principles more or less evident
and necessary.

What absurdity then was it for Bellarmin to say, this Proposition, viz. of the
Roman Clergies never forsaking the Popes Doctrine, etc. is most true, meaning
in the quality of a Theological Conclusion, and yet but peradventure as true as
that other, viz. of the Popes not erring when he teaches the whole Church;
which latter Proposition Bellarmin undoubtedly held to be a Proposition of
Divine Faith, but did not hold the other to be such? Truly just as much
absurdity, as it is to say of a little man, that in comparison of a Pygmie he is
a tall Fellow, but in comparison of some Yeoman of the Guard he is but a Dwarf.

Thus having acquitted my self of what I stood obliged by promise, at the
beginning of this Treatise, I return again to the Bishop in pursuit of his
present Discourse.

CHAP. II. Protestants, Schismatiques.
ARGUMENT.
1. No pure Church in the world, since the Apostles time, if the Roman Church,
corrupt. 2. Petrus de Alliaco favors not the Bishop. Card. Bellarmin most
falsely quoted by him; Almainus, Cassander, etc. not for him. 3. Schisms and
Heresies in Rome, but not in the Roman Church. 4. who made the present Schism;
Roman-Catholiques, or Protestants. 5. St. Bernards and St. Austins words
rightly urged by A. C. and Bellarmins as wrongfully by the Bishop. 6.
Protestants, though they will have the Church unerrable in Fundamentals only,
yet can never be brought to give a list of them. 7. Christ's Church, by
inseparable property, both Caththolique and Holy.

THe Relatour is still making personal reflections upon A. C. Here he will have
him troubled again about the form of the Ladies question:. 20. n. 5.
but I see no reason he had to be troubled, whether the Lady asked her question
by Be, or Was; because, if the Roman was the right Church, it still is so,
seeing no change can be shown in her Doctrine. If there have been a change,
let it appear, when and in what the change was made. For the same reason also,
if it be now the true Church, it was ever so, having always adhered to St.
Peter's Successor, and the Doctrine by him delivered.

1. But the Relatour asserts, that the Church of Rome was, and Ibidem.
was not, a right and Orthodox Church, before Luther made a breach from it. For
in the prime times of it, it was a most right and Orthodox Church: but if we
look upon the immediate times before Luther, then it was a corrupt and tainted
Church. In this, I say, the Relatour begs the question: for the Roman Church
remained always the same it was from the beginning; because, in this dispute,
the Roman signifies the Catholic Church, according to that of Dr. Stapleton,
Apud veteres Relect. Controv. 1. q. 5. ar. 3.
pro eodem habita fuit Ecclesia Romana, and Ecclesia Catholica, (amongst the
Ancients, (says he, the Roman Church and the Catholic Church were taken for
the same.) We add, they are now also to be held for the same: and the reason
given by Stapleton (whatever the Bishop thinks) does not at all destroy the
said Identity. His reason is, quia ejus communio erat evidenter and certissime
cum tota Catholica, because the Communion of the Roman Church was most
certainly and evidently with the whole Catholic, and by consequence the whole
Catholic with it. Wherefore as the Catholic Church continued ever the same
and incorrupt, so did the Roman, which is the same with the Catholic.

This A. C. sufficiently expressed, when he mentioned the Roman Church, not
only as it contained the City and Diocese of Rome, but all that agreed with it
in Doctrine and Communion. For it is clear, by Roman Church in that sense, he
could understand no other but the Catholic. We deny then, that any abuses, or
errors, did at any time more corrupt or taint, the Roman Church, then they did
the Catholic. Wherefore it seems very strange to hear his Lordship say, that
the Roman Church never was, nor ever can be, THE RIGHT, or the HOLY CATHOLIC
Church. For when it was a right Church (as he himself grants it once was) if we
take it in A. C's. sense, viz. not only for that Church, which is within the
City, or Diocese of Rome, but for all that agree with it, what difference will
he find betwixt the Holy Catholic Church, and all others agreeing with the
Church of Rome?

What he asserts of the immediate times before Luther, or some ages before,
that then the Roman Church was a corrupt and tainted Church, and far from being
a right Church, sounds very harshly in a Christians ears. For if in all those
ages the Roman Church, (that is, the Church of Rome, and all other Churches
agreeing with her) were wrong, corrupted, and tainted; and all those likewise
that disagreed from her, viz. Hussites, Albigenses, Waldenses, Wickleffists,
Greeks, Abyssins, Armenians, etc. had in them corrupt Doctrine, during those
ages (as it is certain they had, neither could the Relatour deny it) I say, if
the Roman Church was thus corrupt, it follows, that not only for some time,
but for many ages before Luther, yea even up to the Apostles times, there was
no one visible Church untainted, incorrupt, right, Orthodox, throughout the
whole world. And consequently that during the said ages, every good Christian
was in conscience obliged, in some point of Christian belief or other, to
contradict the Doctrine, and desert the Communion of all visible Churches in
the world: since no Church, not confessedly Heretical, can be shown, that did
not communicate both in Doctrine and Discipline with the Roman, during all that
time. Whence, it would further follow, that Schism, or Separation from the
external Communion of the whole Church might be not only lawful, (which is
contrary to all the Holy Fathers, as Dr. Hammond well proves in his Book of
Treatise of Schism. cap. 1, 2.
Schism) but even necessary; which is impossible, as being contrary to the
very essential Predicates of Schism, which is defined to be a voluntary, or
wilful Departure (such, as no just cause, or reason, can be given of it) from
the Communion of the whole Church.

2. His great Marginal Note out of Petrus de Alliaco signifies but little. For
as it mentions not any false Doctrines taught by the Roman Church, so neither
does it threaten, that any shall be taught by it after his time: but clearly
speaks of Schisms and Heresies raised against the Church (not fostered by her)
in all parts of Christendom. Otherwise we must esteem that learned Cardinal, a
man either very ignorant, or very impious, to make the Church it self (
Ecclesiam Dei, as he speaks) guilty of Schisms and Heresies; which even in our
Adversaries opinion are held to be incompatible with the Church of God, and
destructive of it.

It Is certain, Bellarmin acknowledges no errors in Popes, but only as they
were private Doctors: he admits not any errors to have been defined by them
by Authority properly Papal, or ex Cathedra, for Christ's Doctrine, or to be
believed by the whole Church. And indeed, he even clears them of Errors in the
first kind, so far as to show, that they did never so much as personally, or
in quality of private Doctors, err, or teach any error in matter of Faith
publicly defined and admitted for such by the whole Church: which though it
be a very pious opinion, yet no man is obliged to embrace it as a point of
Faith. For Catholic Faith (in this particular) only obliges us to maintain,
that the Pope is Infallible, when he defines with a General Council. To what
good purpose then does the Relatour (in his Margin) pin this following
assertion upon Bellarmin, Et Papas quosdam graves errores seminasse in Ecclesia
Christi, luce clarius est; there being nothing, like such a Proposition, in the
whole Chapter cited by the Bishop?

Almainus speaks not of Errors in Faith at all, (much less does he Ibidem.
say the Popes taught the whole Church such errors) but only of errors, or
rather abuses in point of Manners; which might happen by the bad examples of
Popes, or their remissness in the execution of their Pastoral office. But what
if some of them should be proved to have taught errors in Doctrine, as private
men? that destroys not the Infallibility of the Church, nor of the Pope, as we
maintain it? no more, then his permitting, or suffering others, through his
negligence, to teach such errors.

Hence also his Simile of Tares sow'n among Wheat is nothing to the purpose.
For if he means by Tares sow'n, false Doctrine publicly and definitively
taught by the Pope, or received by the Church, in this sense we absolutely
deny, that ever any Tares were sow'n, or ever shall be sow'n in the field of
Gods Church. But if he mean sow'n only by private persons, and growing up but
for some time, through negligence of particular Pastors, until the Supreme
Pastor, either by himself, or assisted with his Council, take due notice of
them, and weed them up, it is a thing we confess, and the Bishop gains nothing
by it. No more does he gain by alleging Cassander, whose credit among
Catholics is so little, that his testimony would be of no great weight, were
it positive and home to the purpose; whereas it is manifest he speaks
doubtfully, and dares not absolutely aver, the Bishops had taught any
Superstitions: all he ventures to say is, Utinam illi, a quibus, etc. non ipsi
harum superstitionum auctores essent, vel certe eas in animis (...) minum
simpli cium aliquando quaestus (...) nutrirent. Cassand Consult. ar. 21.
that through their covetousness, he was afraid such Superstitions were
continued: and even this he ascribes rather to particular and inferior
Bishops, then to the Pope.

3. It Is true, there have been Schisms at Rome, as it happened in the time of
St. Cyprian, when Novatus leaving Africa went to Rome, and there raisd
troubles. Yea after him Novatianus proceeded so far, as to cause himself to be
made Antipope against Cornelius, and Cyprian. epist. 42, 52.
had many followers, by which means a Schism sprung up: but still a great part
stuck to Cornelius, the true Pope. Wherefore, even during the Schism, as well
as before, the Roman Church rightly and truly so called, continued the
Catholic, and as incorrupt as ever. And why? because they that left the
Communion of the true Pope, and made the Schism, corrupted themselves, but not
the Roman and Catholic Church, which adhered to him; and were for the time of
their separation, of no Church at all, but of the Synagogue of Satan. Whence it
appears, that St. Cyprian could not employ Caldonius Cyprian, ubi supra.
and Fortunatus to bring the Roman Church to the Communion of the Catholic
(as the Bishop pretends) but only to reclaim the Ibid. in margin. n. 4.
Schismatiques, and bring those divided Members, which followed Novatian, to
their due Obedience to Cornelius their lawful Bishop, and thereby to the unity
and communion of the Roman Catholic Church. Still therefore the Roman, or
Catholic Church, remained free and exempt from error, either of Schism or
Heresy; and so shall ever continue, maugre the malice of Hell, and whatever
vain objections to the contrary.

4. A. C. further charges the Relatour to have confes'd, that Protestants 21.
n. 1.
had made a Rent, and Division, from the Roman, or Catholic Church; here the
Bishop is not a little nettled, and flatly denies that ever he affirmed, or
thought, that Protestants made it. For my part I think it an unprofitable
dispute to question much what was said: it more concerns us to see what could,
or can be said in this point. Our Assertion is, That Protestants made this
Rent, or Schism, by their obstinate and pertinacious maintaining erroneous
Doctrines, contrary to the Faith of the Roman, or Catholic Church; by their
rejecting the Authority of their lawful Ecclesiastical Superiors, both
immediate and mediate; by aggregating themselves into a Separate body, or
company of pretended Christians, independent of any Pastors at all, that were
in lawful and quiet possession of Jurisdiction over them; by making themselves
Pastors and Teachers of others, and administering Sacraments without Authority
given them by any, that were lawfully empowered to give it; by instituting new
Rites and Ceremonies of their own, in matter of Religion, contrary to those
anciently received throughout all Christendom; by violently excluding and
dispossessing other Prelates and Pastors of and from their respective Seas,
Cures, and Benefices, and intruding themselves into their places, in every
Nation where they could get footing, the said Prelates and Pastors for the
most part yet living.

These, and the like practices (not the calling for truth, and redress of
abuses, as the Bishop vainly pretends) we aver to have been the True and Real
Causes of Protestants-being thrust out of the Church. For as Almighty God
leaves no man, who leaves not him first: so neither does the Church separate
her self from any man, or thrust him from her Communion, who does not first
depart, and separate himself from her, by obstinate adhering to novel opinions
contrary to the true Faith, or by his wicked and enormous demeanor, contrary
to true Charity, or by both together. The Orthodox Ibidem.
therefore did very well in departing from the Arrians, (as the Relatour notes
in the Margin) because the Arrians were already departed from the Church by
their false Doctrine: and we are so far from denying that the sin of Schism is
theirs who depart first, that we charge it upon our Adversaries; for as the
Arrians then departed first from the Church, not the Church from them; so did
the Protestants now of late: and the Faithful did well in both cases to avoid
all Communion in matters of Religion, both with the one and the other.

Nor does the Bishop vindicate the Protestant party, by saying the cause of
Schism was ours, and that we (Catholics) thrust Protestants from us, because
they called for truth and redress of abuses. For, first, there can be no just
cause of Schism; this has been granted already, even by See Dr. Hammond
above cited.
Protestants: and to his calling for Truth, etc. I answer, what Heretics ever
yet forsook the Church of God, but pretended truth, and complained they were
thrust out and hardly dealt with, merely because they called for Truth and
redress of Abuses? But he should have reflected, that the Church of God is
styled a City of Truth Zach. 8. 3.
, by the Prophet, and a Pillar and Foundation of Truth 1 Timothy 3. 15.
by the Apostle; and by the Fathers (...). advers. Haeres. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Cyrill. Hierosol. Catech. 18. Lactant. lib. 4. cap. 30.
a rich Depository, or Treasury of all Divine and Heavenly Doctrines, or (...):
so that to charge her either with the want of Truth, or opposition to the
preaching of it, and upon that ground to forsake her Communion (as Protestants
did) is an inexcusable impiety and presumption. That Woe therefore of Scandal,
mentioned by the Bishop, whether Active or Passive, falls most heavily upon his
own party, who first took effence without just Cause, and afterward gave just
cause of offense by departing from the Church and making a Schism. A thing so
clear and undeniable, that (to use the Relatours own expression) our
Adversaries may better defend their cause before a Judge and a Jury, then
before an Assembly of learned Divines.

After this the Bishop quarrels with A. C. for vindicating the Jesuit. But
what is the subject of their quarrel? The Jesuit averred the Bishop to have
said, That Protestants did make the Rent, or Division, from the Roman Church.
The Bishop denies he said any such thing. A. C. proves he said it either (...),
or aequipollentibus verbis, because the Jesuit writ down his words in fresh
memory, and upon special notice taken of the passage. Hereupon the Bishop falls
into exclamations and admirations, as if A. C. stood upon the brink of a
Contradiction. But I answer, there is not here the least show of a
contradiction. For though his Lordships words were very few, though writ down
by the Jesuit in fresh memory, and upon special notice taken, yet might the
Jesuit well enough be said to quote them either iisdem, or aequipollentibus
verbis. For timorous and tender Consciences think they can never speak with
caution enough, for fear of telling a lie. But whether the Bishop said the
Protestants did make the Schism, or the Rent, or a Division, or Breach, it is
not a straw's matter. The words ('it is true) are different; but the sense is the
same. Well therefore might the Jesuit be said to relate at least in sense what
the Bishop uttered, without either enterfeiring, or shuffling.

His Lordship therefore ought not to have boggled at this, but clearly have
granted, That Protestants did depart from the Roman Church, and gat the name of
Protestants by Protesting against her; for this is so apparent, that the whole
world acknowledges it: and the Relatour himself cannot deny it without
retracting his own words 20. number. 5. page 131. where speaking of Luther he
grants he made a breach from it. And it is a very poor shift to say, Protestants
gat not that name by protesting against the Church of Rome, but against her
Errors and Superstitions: for who sees not, that this is the common pretext of
all Heretics, when they sever themselves from the Roman Catholic Church?
There is nothing more ordinary with Protestants then to reproach the Roman
Church, and belch out virulent execrations against her; yet all must be
understood (forsooth) not against the Church, but against her Errors. As if
Mr. Fisher and A. C. could be ignorant of this, or stood in need of such a
needless Comment, to understand what Protestants mean, when they protest, or
use uncivil language against the Church. But (says the Bishop) if Ibid. n. 3.
you take the whole Body and Cause of Protestants together, you cannot so
easily charge them with departing from the Church. I know not well, what this
passage means: but desire to have any either whole Body, or part, of
Protestants shown, who, by their Professions and practices, did not
effectively make a true and real departure from the Roman Church, and in so
doing, remained separate from the whole Church.

Nor does it much mend the matter to say (as he does in the Margent) Ibidem.
that the Protestation made by his party in the Year 1529. (from whence they
took their name of Protestants) was not simply against the Roman Church, but
against an Edict ( viz. that of Worms) which commanded the restoring of all
things to their former Estate, without any Reformation. For to stand (as they
did) for Innovation in matters of Religion, and to protest against restoring of
things to their former estate, which had been unwarrantably and wickedly
altered by certain lawless people, without any color of Authority, was surely
in effect to protest against the Roman Church: and seeing the things protested
against were points of Faith and Christian piety, wherein the Roman and all
other true visible Churches in the world agreed, to protest against them was,
with the same breath, to protest against all the particular true visible
Churches in the Christian world; which none but notorious Heretics, or
Schismatiques, use to do. It is not then the word (Protestation) that we
dislike so much, but the Thing, that is, the Protesting and standing for novel
and corrupt Tenets, against the ancient and undefiled Doctrine of the Roman
Catholic Church. Besides, it is worth the noting, that the Relatour here adds
a little to his Author, when he says, the Edict of Worms was for the restoring
of all things to their former estatc without any Reformation at all: as if the
Edict had cut off all hopes of Reformation, even in those things which needed
it, viz. Abuses in Manners and Discipline: which is most false, and confuted by
evidence of fact. For even the Popes themselves always professed reformation
in such things to be necessary, and intended by them; according as it was not
long after effectually ordained by the Council of Trent.

5. But A. C. (says the Bishop) goes on and tells us, that though the Ibid. n.
4.
Church of Rome did thrust Protestants from her by Excommunication, yet they
had first divided themselves by obstinate holding and teaching Opinions
contrary to the Roman Faith and practice of the Church: which to do, St.
Bernard thinks is pride, and St. Austin madness. At this his Lordship takes
several exceptions; and first begins with the supposition of Errors and
Superstitions in the Roman Church; which in my opinion (says he) were the
prime cause of the Division, and forced many men to hold and teach contrary to
the Roman Faith. To which we answer, that the Bishop of Rome, being St. Peter's
Successor in the Government of the Church, and Infallible (at least with a
General Council) it is impossible, that Protestants, or other Sectaries, should
ever find such Errors or Corruptions definitively taught by him, or received
by the Church, as should either warrant them to preach against her Doctrine, or
(in case she refuses to conform to their preaching) lawfully to forsake her
Communion.

Secondly, he quarrels with A. C. for styling it the Roman Faith, when he
speaks of the general Faith of all Christians. It was wont (says the Bishop)
to be the Christian Faith; but now all is Roman with A. C. and the Jesuit. But
first, it is no incongruity of speech to style the Christian, or Catholic
Faith, sometimes the Roman. For the Bishop of Rome being Head of the whole
Christian, or Catholic Church, the Faith approved and taught by him as Head
thereof, though it be de facto the general Faith and profession of all
Christians, may yet very well be called the Roman Faith: why? because the Root,
Origin, and chief Foundation under Christ, of its beingpreach't and believed by
Christians, is at Rome. And there is nothing more frequent then Denominations
taken a part digniori.

Again, here is a manifest robbery of part of A. C's. words, for which his
Lordship is bound to restitution. A. C. as it were foreseeing this cavil,
warily adds to Roman Faith these words, and practice of the Church, which the
Relatour, for reasons best known to himself, craftily leaves out, and makes him
speak, as if the opinions, by which the Protestants stand divided from the
Roman Church, and for which they are excommunicated by her, were only contrary
to the Roman Faith, as Protestants usually understand the word Roman, viz. as
contradistinguisht from Catholic, or the Church in general: whereas A. C. to
prevent any such mistake, as expressly as he could, said, they were contrary
both to the Roman Faith and practice of the Church. But we must excuse our
Adversary for this slip, though it be an unhandsome one. For the truth is, he
had no other way to hide the guiltiness of his own pen, in styling the
Doctrines and practices of the Church, Corruptions and Superstitions. For to
have charged the whole Church with Superstitions and Corruptions, had been
(perhaps) a little too bold a check, especially for a person of his Lordships
temper, and would have brought him too apparently under the lash of St.
Bernards and St. Austins Censures, intimated by A. C. whereas to charge only
the Church of Rome with them, is a thing the modestest man in all that party
finds no difficulty to do.

Thirdly, his Lordship excepts against the Application of the places brought by
A. C. out of St. Bernard and St. Austin. But we answer, his Exceptions do not
weaken the force of the said places. For first, concerning that of St. Bernard,
let us suppose (as the Relatour contends) that St. Bernard by those words, Quae
major superbia, etc. Sermon. 3. de Resurrect.
What greater pride can there be, then for one man to prefer his judgment
before the whole Congregation, as if he alone had the Spirit of God? meant
only that particular Congregation, to which he was then preaching; yet is his
saying not unaptly applied by A. C. to our present purpose, by an Argument a
minore ad majus, to show the more exorbitant pride of those, who prefer their
private fanatic opinions, before the judgment of the whole Catholic Church.
This certainly Protestants did by their Solemn Protestation, and obstinate
maintaining their private opinions. What the Relatour adds, That it is one
thing for a private man to prefer his judgment before the whole
Congregation, and another thing for an intelligent man, in some things
unsatisfied, modestly to propose his doubts even to the Catholic Church, is
of no advantage to him. For first, though we should grant his Lordship, that
Martin Luther, Ulrick (...), John Calvin, Theodore Beza, John Knox, and the
rest of that crew, were to be accounted Intelligent Persons, yet will he, or
can he say they proposed their Doubts modestly to the Church? surely not: and
whoever says so, will easily be convinced of ignorance in their opinions, or
practices. But put case a more modest propounding of Doubts had been used, (as
the Bishop seems to wish) yet unless the Doubts were in points undecided by the
Church, the modest proposal of them could not at all help the Protestant
cause, in regard their Doubts were in points of Faith already determined for
such by authority of the Catholic Church; to question any of which, with what
seeming modesty soever, is sinful, Heretical, and damnable.

His exceptions against A. C's. interpretation of St. Austin are no less weak.
The Holy Doctor affirms, that it is a most insolent madness for a man to
dispute, whether that ought to be to be done, which is Epist. ad Januar. 118.
c. 5.
usually held and done by the whole Church. The Bishop first excepts, that
there is not a word of the Roman Church, but only of the Catholic: yet
having often shown, that the Roman Church, and the Catholic are all one, and
seeing A. C. adds to Roman Faith, the practice of the Church, this Authority
remains still entire against him. Next he says, A. C. applies this Text of St.
Austin to the Roman Faith, whereas it is spoken of the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church. But first I answer, A. C. applies the place both to the Roman
Faith, and practice of the Church; of which practice the place is most properly
understood, even in that sense, which the Bishop himself gives to the words:
Secondly, if it were madness to dispute against the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church, much greater would it be to dispute against any point of Faith held by
the Church: so that the Application of the place is still good by the Rule a
minore ad majus, and reaches to every person, that in any matter whatever
obstinately opposes himself against the Church of God. The reason may be,
because there is always some point, or matter of faith involved in every
universally-practis'd Rite and Ceremony of the Church. Wherefore a pertinacious
defending of any point whatsoever contrary to what the Catholic Church
teaches, is by St. Austin termed a most insolent madness. We deny not, but a
right-sober man, modestly proceeding, may in some case, dispute a point with
the Roman either Church, or Prelate, as Irenaeus did with Pope Victor, in the
Controversy, which arose toward the end of the second Century; provided it be
done with Submission and profession of Due Obedience to that Church and
Prelate; which can never be, unless the dispute be about matters as yet
undecided by the Church.

6. Touching A. C's illation, I answer, since it is certain, the whole
Catholic or Roman Church, in the sense often explicated, cannot err, A. C.
does well infer, that there can be no just cause to make a divorce, or
Schism, from it. The Relatour grants, that the whole Church Ibid. n. 5.
cannot universally err in absolute fundamental Doctrine; and blames Bellarmin
for needlessly busying himself to prove, that the visible Church can never fall
into Heresy. But I answer, Bellarmins labor was not needless, since
Protestants grant not the Church exempt from all Errors, save only in
Fundamentals, as they call them: whereas Bellarmin proves it equally of all,
Fundamentals or not-Fundamentals. Moreover Bellarmin well observes, that
Protestants generally grant this only to the Invisible Church; whereas he
proves (...) of the Visible: and though the Bishop in the Margent endeavors to
show, they hold the same also of the Visible Church, yet this only proves,
that Protestants contradict one another, which we deny not; and Bellarmin
likewise observes it Bellar. lib. 3. de (...). (...). cap. 1.
elsewhere: yea Calvin himself here cited by the Bishop, when he says, the
Church cannot err, adds this restriction, if she do not propose Doctrine
besides the Scripture: So that if she do, it seems according to him, she may
err.

But I must confess I have often desired, and do yet much long to know, which
are Doctrines absolutely Fundamental and necessary to all men's salvation,
according to the opinion of Protestants. I believe scarce any man will be able
to set them down. Our Tenet is, that the Catholic Church is Infallible in all
points of Faith, and that whatever is sufficiently proposed to us by the
Catholic Church, cannot be denied under pain of damnation, and consequently
is Fundamental to us, and to all true Christians. So that these following words
of the Bishop, viz. That she may err in Superstructures, and Deductions, and
other by, and unnecessary Truths, if her curiosity, or other weakness, carry
her beyond, or cause her to fall short of her Rule, are injurious to the
Church, and inconsistent with that Prerogative of Holiness, which (as he
himself in this very place confesses) always accompanies the true Church.

7. This Holiness consists chiefly in the verity of Faith. So the Relatour
himself professes in these words, The Holiness of the Church Ibidem.
consists as much, if not more, in the Verity of the Faith, as in the Integrity
of Manners, etc. Insomuch that if the Church failed in the verity of Faith, she
could be no longer Holy; nay it would follow, that the Gates of Hell had
prevailed much against her, contrary to the promse of Christ. I assert
therefore, that the present Church is Mat. 16. 18.
no more liable to error, through curiosity or weakness, then was the
Primitive; nor the Vicar of Christ (with a General Council) more subject to
err, upon that account, then were the Apostles of Christ.

In the following words the Relatour (to use his own language) enterfeires
shrewdly. For, speaking of the whole Church Militant, he tells us, if she can
err, either FROM the Foundation, or IN it, she can be no longer Holy, and that
Article of the Creed is gone, I BELIEVE THE HOLY CATHOLIC CHURCH: yet
presently after, speaking of the same Church, he says, If she err IN the
Foundation, that is, in some one or more Fundamental points of Faith, then she
may be a Church of Christ still, but not Holy, but becomes Heretical. These
words I say, hang not well together; for an Heretical Congregation cannot be a
Church of Christ, because by pertinacious and obstinate erring, especially
against the Fundamental and prime Articles of the Creed, it becomes neither
Holy, nor Church of Christ, believing no more any part of Christian Doctrine
with Divine and Supernatural Faith, then if it had fallen into a general Apostasy
from the whole Foundation. It Is therefore very strange, to hear him say, that
if the Church err in one or more Fundamental points, then she may be a Church
of Christ still, though not Holy, but Heretical. Are there two sorts of
Christs-Churches upon earth; one Holy, the other unholy; one Catholic, the
other Heretical? Is a Church erring in the very Foundation it self, and that in
more then one point of it, a Church of Christ still? what calls he then (I
pray) the Synagogue of Satan? Had he so quite forgot, that by the unanimous
consent of all Christians, both Ancient and Modern, all Heretical Congregations
whatever are esteemed severed from the Catholic Church.

I add therefore, and confidently aver, that any error in Faith whatever,
(much more in and against the Foundation) pertinaciously defended against the
Church, renders the Congregation that maintains it, no Church of Christ. No
errors thus defended are to be accounted of mean alloy, or weak tincture; they
are all dyed in grain; they all remove Holiness from the Assembly, that so
erres, and wholly un-Church it. The reason hereof has been given above, viz.
because all such error, implicitly and virtually at least, either affirms
something to be Gods word, which is not; or denies that to be his word, which
is; it either asserts error to be Gods word, or Gods word to be an error:
both which, being in so high a degree injurious and derogatory to the Veracity
of God, can be no less then Mortal Sins against the virtue of Divine Faith, and
by consequence destructive of it: which is also in effect warranted by that
saying of our Savior in the Gofpel, Si Ecclesiam non audierit, etc. Mat. 18.
17.
If he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen, or a
Publican; that is, account him no Christian, whatever he seems to profess.

Hence it appears that A. C's. inference was very reasonable, when Ibidem.
he told the Bishop, he might safely grant not only that Protestants did make
the Division, but further, that it was ill done of them, who first made the
Separation. I may justly add, it is likewise ill done of those, who continue
in it. For (as all the Fathers teach, and the most learned See Dr. Hammond
Treatise of Schism, cap. 1, 2.
of English Protestants acknowledge) there neither was, nor ever can be just
cause given, for any man, or number of men, particular Church, or Churches, to
separate themselves, or continue in Schism, out of the Communion of the Holy
Catholic Church.

CHAP. 12. Of keeping Faith with Heretics.
ARGUMENT.
1. That Faith ought to be kept with Heretics, is the constant Tenet of all
Catholic Divines. 2. What kind of Safe Conduct John Huss had from the
Emperor; and Hierome of Prague from the Council of Constance. 3. The Councils
Decree in this business, insincerely cited by the Bishop; and Simancha
egregiously Sophisticated. 4. Neither the Council, nor the Emperor, justly
blameable in their proceedings. 5. The absurd partiality of Protestants;
imposing most unequal conditions upon the Church, while they admit not any to
be imposed on themselves.

1. MR. Fisher having in the precedent discourse briefly, yet very justly and
truly, charged Protestants with the Crime of Schism, A. C. prosecutes the
matter, and undertakes to justify and clear the Church's proceedings toward
them, from such imputatitions as they usually cast upon her. To this purpose he
thinks fit to mind his Adversary, that after this Breach was made, the Church.
21. number. 7
of Rome did invite the Protestants publicly with Safe Conduct to Rome to a
General Council, freely to speak what they could for themselves. This passage
of A. C. gives the Bishop a new Theme, viz. concerning keeping Faith with
Heretics: a Theme, which (for the most part) our Adversaries love to dwell
upon, as thinking they have some great advantage against us therein. The
Relatour glosses upon A. C's. words, and tells us, this kind Invitation was
only to bring them within our Net; that the Conduct granted was Safe for going
thither, ( viz. to Rome) but not for coming thence; that the Jesuits write and
maintain, That Faith given is not to be kept with Heretics; that John Huss
and Hierome of Prague were burnt for all their Safe Conduct. Thus the Bishop.
Beoanus, treating this matter, Becan. Tract. de Fide Haeretic. servand. praefat.
very well observes, that our Adversaries in this are like the Pharisees of
old, who, though they heard from our Saviors own mouth, that they should give
to Caesar the things which belong to Caesar, yet had the face, openly before
Pilate to accuse him of forbidding Tribute to be given to Caesar. In like
manner, we do both privately and publicly, in word and writing, teach and
profess that Faith is to be kept as well with Heretics as Catholics, yet
our Adversaries, by their clamorous accusations, seem as if they would force us
to hold the contrary, whether we will or no.

But before I prove that Faith has been kept with Heretics, even in those
examples which the Bishop alleges, I observe that he himself keeps not Faith
with Catholics, (at least in his Citations) otherwise he would not have
miscited his Adversaries words: for thus he makes him speak. But A. C. goes on
(says he) and tells us, that after this Breach was made, yet the Church of
Rome was so kind and careful to seek Protestants, that she invited them
publicly with Safe Conduct to Rome, to a General Council, freely to speak
what they could for themselves. Whereas the words of A. C. speaking of the
Church of Rome's proceeding with Protestants in this case, are only these;
Which did AT FIRST seek to recall them from their novel Opinions, and AFTER
THEIR BREACH did permit, yea invited them publicly to Rome, to a General
Council, etc. In A. C's. words rightly cited the Church of Rome is only said
to seek to recall Protestants from their novel opinions, or errors; a thing no
way liable to cavil: whereas in the Bishops allegation of the words they are so
placed, and such words of his own added to them, as if the Church of Rome by
her seeking had aimed at nothing else, but how to entrap Protestants: when A.
C. not only meant, but said as plainly as he could, that the Church of Rome
did first seek, that is, labor by all the fair means she could, to recall
Protestants from their errors, even before there was any public, or
notorious breach made: and then afterward only (that is, when she saw private
endeavors would take no effect, but that a public and formal Schism was made
by Protestants) invited them to a General Council. It Is true, the Churches
inviting of Protestants to a Free and Public Disputation in a General
Council, was (in the nature of the thing) a justifiable and lawful seeking of
them; but we say it was not the seeking of them, which A. C. both meant and
expressed in this place; and the Bishop did not well to pervert and misreport his
Adversaries words, only to find himself matter for an injurious quibble.

2. But to the end the true Doctrine may be fully understood in this point,
viz. of Keeping faith with Heretics, and of punishing after Safe Conduct
given, it is necessary to know, that a Safe Conduct may be granted two ways.
First jure communi, when it is given only against unjust violence, falva semper
justitia, provided always that Becanus ubi supra q. 6.. 2.
Justice be not impeached. Secondly, jure speciali, when it secures a man
against all violence whatsoever, whether just or unjust, and chiefly in that
cause for which it is given. In the former manner a Safe Conduct was granted by
(...) the Emperor to John Huss, and by the Council of Constance to Hierome of
Prague. In the latter sort the Council of Trent offered Safe Conduct to the
Protestants in Germany: and A. C. tells us, the like was offered by the Roman
Church to all Heretics. No Faith therefore was broken with John Huss; for a
Safe Conduct was only given him jure communi, by which Justice was to remain
unimpeachable; since he was only promised to be defended against unjust
violence: which was performed. Nay he was justly burnt for two reasons. The
first is, for being obstinate in his Heresy. The second, for having fled;
which the Emperor had prohibited in his Safe Conduct under pain of death.
Wherefore the Emperor, if we rightly consider the matter, did not break faith
with John Huss, but John Huss broke faith with the Emperor, by flying against
his engagement: and seeing by his Safe Conduct he could expect no more then to
be secured against unjust violence, that so he might be brought to a legal
Trial, this being made good to him, and he legally convicted of Heresy, he
might (questionless) be punished according to Law, without any breach of faith
given by his Safe Conduct.

Hierome of Prague indeed at first abjured his Heresy, but falling afterward
into a Relapse, and flying (as John Huss had done) was taken and burnt: by
which it appears, that faith was also kept with him. For the Safe Conduct
granted him by the Council had this express Clause in it, Salva semper
justitia, which sufficiently intimated, that the course of Justice was to
proceed against him, notwithstanding his Safe Conduct. But had the Protestants
gone to the Council of Trent, upon the Safe Conduct granted them by that
Council jure speciali, in the second manner, they could not at all have been
punished under any pretense of Heresy, without manifest breach of Faith; which
all Catholics hold to be unlawful. The like may be said of the Safe Conduct
offered them for going to Rome. So that his Lordships party may well be
esteemed Crasty Foxes (to use his own Simile) but never Wise men, to refuse so
fair an offer: which (I repeat it again, and for proof refer my Reader to the
Copy of the Safe It Is extant in the Acts of the Council of Trent. Sess. 16. sub
Pio 4.
Conduct it self) was to defend them against all violence whatsoever, and to
give them as full and free liberty of coming to and going from the Council, as
could be devised, and with an express Proviso, That none of them should be
punished for any matter, or crime, concerning Religion; nor any kind of
Authority, or Jurisdiction, used toward them by the Council, or by any other
persons with the Councils allowance, or permission, by color of any Law,
Canon, Constitution of Council, Precedent of former times, particularly not of
those of the Councils of Constance and Siena. Wherefore (to say no more) it is
most unjustly urged by the Relatour, that the Conduct offered was not as secure
for their return, as for their going thither.

3. Touching the Decree of the Council of Constance, it is evident, the Bishop
does either ignorantly, or maliciously wrong the Council. The words of the
Decree are these. Praesens Sancta Synodus Council. Constant. (...) 19.
-- ex quovis SALVQ-CONDUCTU per Imperatorem, Reges, and alios Saeculi
Principes Haereticis, vel de Haeresi diffamatis concesso, nullum Fidei
Catholicae, vel Jurisdictioni Ecclesiasticae praejudicium generari, vel (...)
praestari posse, seu debere, declarat, quo minus dicto. SALVO CONDUCTU non
obstante, liceat (...) competenti and Ecclesiastico de hujusmodi personarum
erroribus inquirere, and alias contra eos debite procedere, eosdemque punire,
quantum justitia suadebit, si suos errores revocare pertinaciter recusaverint,
etiamsi de SALVOCONDUCTU confisi ad locum venerint judicii, alias non venturi:
nec sic promittentem, cum fecerit quod in ipso est, ex hoc in aliquo remansisse
obligatum. In English thus. This present Sacred Synod declares, that by
whatsoever Safe Conduct granted by the Emperor, Kings, or other Secular
Princes to Heretics, or such as are defamed for Heresy, no prejudice can
arise, no impediment can, or ought to be put to the Catholic Faith, or
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; but that (notwithstanding the said Safe Conduct)
it may be lawful for any competent and Ecclesiastical Judge to enquire into the
errors of such persons, and duly other-wayes proceed against them, and punish
them so far as Justice shall require, if they shall pertinaciously refuse to
revoke their errors; yea though they come to the place of judgment, relying
upon such Safe Conduct, and would not otherwise come thither: nor does he, who
so promises, remain obliged in any thing, having done what lies in him.

By this Decree indeed the Council declares, that no Secular Power (how
Sovereign soever) can hinder the Proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Tribunal in
causes of Heresy; for which there is great reason: and consequently, if the
Emperor, or any other Secular Prince, grants a Safe Conduct, or makes promise
of any thing to the prejudice of that Jurisdiction, it shall not hold. The
reason is, because it is a promise made of a thing not pertaining to the
Jurisdiction of that Prince, nor wholly in his power to see performed. But the
Council no where teaches, that Faith, or Safe Conduct given in Temporal causes
properly pertaining to the Princes Jurisdiction, is not to be kept by all, and
to all persons of what condition soever, so far as it is possible: but rather
most clearly insinuates the contrary, in the last clause of this Decree; where
it is said, That he who so promises, shall not remain obliged in any thing,
having done what lies in him. What, I pray, does this signify? Nothing else,
but that even in the sense and intention of the Council it self, the person
that promises or grants Safe Conduct in cases not proper for him, is yet in
conscience bound to do what lies in him, that his said promise, or
Safe Conduct, may take effect, and that otherwise manet in aliquo obligatus, he
is not altogether free of the Breach of Faith.

Had the Relatour therefore not mangled the words of this Council, (to deceive
the Reader) but set down the Decree fairly and fully as it is, the business had
been so clear, that it would scarce have admitted any dispute. Neither could
John Huss, being a learned man, a Doctor of Divinity, and writer of some
Volumes, be ignorant what the force of a Safe Conduct was, granted by a Secular
Prince in a matter so clearly appertaining to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; or
not know the difference between a Safe Conduct given jure communi only, with
the clause salva justitia, and one granted jure speciali. Wherefore the Bishop
has little ground to aver, that he was deceived by the Emperor in this. But
put case John Huss were ignorant both of the one and the other, it was his own
fault, and could be no impediment to the proceedings of Ecclesiastical
Discipline and Justice against him.

His Lordship has no better success in the allegation of Simancha, whom he
wrongfully cites, as holding absolutely and universally, that Faith is not to
be kept with Heretics; whereas he teaches it only in cases, wherein that
which is promised cannot be lawfully performed: And this were as well true, if
the promise were made to Catholics. For as it was unlawful first so to
promise, so it is more unlawful to perform such a promise. Hence it is that
Simancha has these words, Veruntamen (ut Marius Solomonius ait) promissa
contra Christum fides, De poenis Art. 46. 52.
si praestetur, utique perfidia est. If faith be given against Christ, that is,
to the dishonor of God, or contrary to the precepts of true Religion, it were
perfidiousness to observe it. Wherefore Simancha's meaning is clearly this,
that no private man can be obliged, by virtue of any promise, more to
countenance and protect an Heretic, contrary to the law, then he can be
obliged to do the same to Highway men, or Pirates; because such a promise being
against the public good, and forbidden by the law, (as it is in Spain, where
Simancha wrote, and where the Law strictly obliges all persons to detect
Heretics, as much as it does Felons and Murderers) cannot be observed
without sin. Which meaning of his is also further confirmed, by what he writes
afterward, Si tamen fides Haereticis data est a Principe, vel publica
Potestate, Ibid.. 54.
exact servanda est, etc. But (says he) if Faith be given to Heretics by
the Prince, or by those that have Public Authority, it must be exactly
observed, save only, when the thing promised is against the Law of God or of
Nature. By which it appears, how insincere, or unadvised, the Bishop was in
quoting this Author. Nor deals he any better with the Jesuits; they are
likewise accused (in general) to teach, that Faith given is not to be kept with
Heretics, whereas neither himself, nor all his gang, are able to name one of
them for that opinion.

4. But (if you please) let us take yet a Turn or two with his Lordship in this
part of his Labyrinth. First, John Huss (says he) and Hierome of Prague were
burnt for all their Safe Conduct; by which manner of speaking he seems to
insinuate, that both their Safe-Conducts were granted jure speciali, viz. to
preserve them not only from unjust violence, but even from process and
execution of Justice: which, in that of Hierome of Prague is apparently false;
for the clause Salva tamen justitia is expressly inserted in it: and till our
Adversaries have proved the contrary, we must suppose that the like, and no
other, was granted to Huss. Secondly, he takes for granted that public Faith
was violated in the persons of those two Delinquents; which, in relation to
Hierome of Prague is notoriously false; the Council observing most punctually
toward him whatever it promised: and for Huss, it promised him no security at
all. If what the Emperor promised him, were jure speciali, (which our
Adversaries cannot prove) yet being granted by a Secular Prince in a cause so
clearly Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, we have said above, it could not impede
the proceeding of that Supreme Ecclesiastical Tribunal: If it were jure communi
only; to an obstinate Heretic (as he was) it signified nothing.

But, all men know (says he) that the Emperor was used by the Fathers of the
Council to bring Huss thither: which he pretends to prove by a Latin Authority
of I know not whom; for he cites only Edit. in 16o. and afterward, ibid.
leaving us to guess who his Author should be: But we will show his Lordship
all the respect we can, and suppose he meant to cite some Author of Credit.
What does he say? only this. Sigismundus Hussum Constantiam vocat, and missis
literis, publica side cavet. Which no way intimates whether it were done by the
Councils instigation, or merely of his own motion. How then can his Lordship
hence prove, any secret Compact between the Emperor and the Council, or any
underhand dealing of the Council, by the Emperors means, to bring Huss within
their power, by his relying upon an unsufficient caution? The Bishops Dilemma
therefore is easily solved, who argues thus. If the Fathers did it in cunning,
that the Emperor should give Safe Conduct, which themselves meant not to keep,
then they broke Faith. If the Emperor knew they would not keep it, then he
himself broke Faith, in giving a Safe Conduct, which he knew to be invalid.
This is his Argument. But I answer. Neither did the Council use any such
deceitful practice with the Emperor: nor did the Emperor give Huss any
Security, but what he thought might be good and effectual; yea, he did make the
Security good, at least to the utmost of his power, that is, so far as in
such a case it either beseem'd or concerned him to do.

We have already told his Lordship, that the Council only declared, that when
promise is made by Secular Power to the prejudice of Ecclesiastical Proceedings
in causes of Heresy, it is not of force. This is the whole intent of the
Council; and the Relatour is much to blame, for imperfectly citing the Decree,
with so many etc's. to dazzle the eyes of his Reader, and make him believe what
he pleases. Whereas that which the Council ordains, is not only of most
undeniable right in regard of the Church, but also of evident necessity. For if
Temporal Princes may claim a Power, by their Safe-Conducts, or other promises
made to Heretics, to impede and frustrate the Churches lawful and Canonical
proceedings in such causes, what will become of Ecclesiastical Authority,
Immunity, Liberty, etc. Every Heretic or Sectary, how turbulent and seditious
soever, if he can but procure a Safe Conduct, or the word of some Temporal
Prince for his Security, shall be exempt from Censure, may preach, write,
spread Heresy without check, or control. Wherefore the Council says no more
in effect, then is in it self evident, viz. that an inseriour Tribunal cannot
hinder the proceedings of a superior. But enough of this matter.

To his Lordships Question, why they should go to Rome to a General Council,
and have their freedom of speech, since the Church of Rome is resolved to alter
nothing, I answer, Protestants were never invited to a General Council at Rome,
to reform the Church, (that is a work, to which they can pretend no competent
Authoriy) but they were invited thither to be better instructed, and reclaimed
from their errors. The Roman Church is sufficiently authorized by Saint Paul,
viz. that Galat. 1.
though an Angel from heaven should teach otherwise then she had taught, he
ought not to be believed. In like manner the Fathers in the Council of Trent
might with good reason be resolved firmly to stick to the Doctrine, they had
formerly been taught by the Catholic Church, notwithstanding any pretended
difficulties, or objections, brought against it, either by Bishops or any other
person.

5. His Lordship goes on, and blames both A. C. and F. Campian Ibid. number. 9.
too, for their boldness, in saying, that no good answer can be given by
English Protestants, why they refuse to grant a public Disputation to
Catholics. The Bishop thinks it a very good Answer, to say, that the Church of
England has no reason to admit of a public Dispute with us, till we be able
to show it under the Seal, and Powers of Rome, that the Roman Church will
submit to a Third, who may be an indifferent Judge between Catholics and
Protestants, or to such a General Council, as is after mentioned. But I would
fain know, who this Third, indifferent Judge, should be. If he prove an
Heretic, or Schismatique, he will hardly be found indifferent: it is to be
feared, he will be partial in the cause. Perchance, he shall be some Atheist,
Turk, or Jew: Judges fitly chosen, (indeed) to sit upon the Church of God. But
would his Lordship (think you) have taken it for a satisfactory Answer, if some
Brownist, or other Sectary in his time (upon his Lordships vouchsafing to
dispute with them, in hope to reduce them to union and obedience) should have
answered, we will admit a Dispute, provided your Lordship, and the rest of your
Prelatical Church of England, will accept of a Third, to be Judge between you
and us? might not the Arrians, (or any other Ancient Heretics) have as well
required a Third, to judge between them and Catholics in Controversies,
wherein they differed? Yea, may not every known Rebel, upon the like pretense,
demand a Third, to be Judge between him and the King his Sovereign, and in case
of refusal, remain obstinate in his rebellion, even as well as the Protestants
do persist in their spiritual Disloyalty to the Vicar of Christ, because a
Third person is not accepted to be Judge between him and them? To what he
intimates of a General Council, we say, if it be a lawful one, viz. called and
approved, by the Pope as Head of the Church (as all lawful General Councils
hitherto have been) we shall never refuse to submit to it, but heartily wish,
that all the Relatours party would do the same.

CHAP. 13. Protestants, no part of the Church.
ARGUMENT.
1. How the Separation of Protestants from the Church was made. 2. Whether the
Roman-Catholiques, or They, do imitate the Ten Tribes. 3. The Roman Doctrine
concerning the Holy Ghosts Proceeding, etc. more ancient then the Bishop
pretends. 4. In what cases, Particular Churches may declare Articles of Faith.
5. The word Filioque when added to the Creed; and why. 6. No Particular Church
has power to reform, what is universally taught and received. 7. The
Protestants Synod at London 1562. neither General, nor Free. 8. Gerson, and all
his other proofs, fail the Bishop. 9. Protestants never yet had either true
Church, or Council.

1. WE are again told, that Protestants did not depart from the Church of Rome,
but were thrust out by her without cause. What the cause of their expulsion was
we have already declared, and shall not refuse here again briefly to repeat. It
was, because by their Heretical doctrine and Schismatical proceedings they had
first separated themselves from the Church, and became both unworthy and
incapable (any longer) of her Communion. They had raised a new, Separate, and
mutinous Faction of pretended Christians, distinct from the one, Catholic, or
general, Body of the Church; They had chosen to themselves new Pastors,
independent of any ordinary and lawful Pastors of Christ's Church, that were
before them. They had instituted new Rites and Ceremonies of religion, framed
new Liturgies, or Forms of Divine Service; They had schismatically convened in
several Synods, or Conventicles, and there broacht new Heretical Confessions of
Faith, contrary, not only to the true Catholic Faith, but to the Faith of all
particular Churches what ever, existent in the world immediately before they
began. Thus, Protestants of themselves first departed from the Churches
Doctrine and Communion; and persisting obstinate in their evil opinions and
practices, the Church was forced to proceed against them according to the
Canons, and by just censure cast them out of her bosom; lest otherwise by their
scandalons division, high disobedience, and pestilent doctrine they might
further infect the Flock of Christ, which was committed to her charge.

The Bishop denies he ever granted, that Protestants did first depart,
otherwise than he had before expressed,. 21. number. 6. But that is enough: he
there acknowledges that an actual separation (at least) was made by
Protestants: and A. C. here asserts no more. Whether this actual separation
were upon a just cause preceding (as the Relatour pretends) is a thing to be
disputed between A. C. and him: although indeed it be of it self clear enough
to any who duly considers it, that Protestants neither had, nor could have, any
just cause for such a Separation, as A. C. page 55, 56. and all Catholics do
charge them with. For it was a Separation not only from the Church of Rome,
but (as Calvin himself, Epist. 14. confesses) a toto mundo, from the whole
Christian world: and such a Separation necessarily involves separation from the
True Catholic Church; from which, as it has been often urged already, even
by the confession of Protestants themselves, it is impossible there should ever
be just cause to separate.

The Bishop grants, that Corruption in manners only is no just cause to Ibidem.
make a separation from the Church of God, yet cannot forbear to have a fling
at the corrupt manners of the Church of Rome, quoting for that purpose Dr.
Stapleton. But I wonder our Adversaries take notice of such things. Are they
themselves without blame? Is there no corruption of manners amongst them?
Surely yes; but passion blindes them, and they are like those who being brought
into a most pleasant garden, richly beautified with variety of useful herbs
and odoriferous flowers, should pass over all this, and only entertain
themselves with looking upon some few weeds, which their curious or rather
malicious eyes had there spied. For they take no notice of the Sanctity and
Good life, perspicuous in very many both of the Clergy and Laiety, in the Roman
Church. They will not see the great variety of Religious Orders, wherewith the
garment of the Church is, as it were, embroidered, ( Astitit Regina a dextris
tuis in vestitu deaurato, circumdata varietate, Psalm. 44. ver. 10.) in which so
many thousands of both Sexes tie themselves to the Service of God by perpetual
Vows, never to be dissolved by their own seeking; praying, and singing divine
Hymns day and night; which is a strange unheard of thing amongst Protestants.
They tell us of many Popes that have been wicked; but they never mention, how
many of them have been (undeniably) men of most holy life and Saint-like
conversation; I mean, not only those of the Primitive and golden ages,
(wherein no less then thirty (or more) successively one after another, for
three hundred years together and upwards, were either Martyrs, or glorious
Confessors, for the Christian Faith) but even of late, and in this our Iron Age.

The discovery of some few motes darkens not the brightness of the Sunshine.
What if some few Catholic Authors are of opinion, that some of the Popes, as
private Doctors, have fallen into Heresy; though Bellarmin and others deny
it, and rather show the contrary? What if some others have fallen into other
foul Crimes? was there not, even in the College of the Apostles, one that
denied, and another that betrayed his Master? Besides, it may be worth the
noting, that amongst Catholics, though Sins be committed, yet they are
seldom maintained; they are not defended, nor justified as Good Works: whereas
among Protestants Darkness it self is called Light, and the greatest of all
Sins, viz. Heresy, Scisme, Sacrilege, Rebellion, etc. together with all the
bad spawn they leave behind them, are cried up for perfect virtue, zeal, godly
Reformation, and what not? Let our Adversaries therefore still bark, they shall
never hinder Sanctity of life from being a mark of the True, that is, of the
Roman Church: though our chief quarrel with them for the present, be for
endeavoring to brand her with Doctrinal errors; upon which account they
Ibid.. 23.
both separate from her Communion, and attempt that horrid work of their
deformed Reformation. But in vain do they attempt to reform the Church, of what
she can never be guilty. They ought rather to reform themselves, and disclaim
those errors, which with Heretical and Schismatical obstinacy they have so
long maintained against her.

2. But I return to his Lordship, who grounding himself upon the Separation of
the ten Tribes, averres, that a particular Church may reform it self. But
whether or no, or how this may be done, I refer my Reader to what shall be
said hereafter. For the present I only note, that his Lordship goes upon false
grounds. Thus he discourses. Was it not lawful (says he) for Juda to reform
her self, when Israel 24. number. 1.
would not join? Sure it was. First, by this Rhetorical Interrogation and
answer he supposes that Juda reformed her self; which is false. For Juda being
the Orthodox Church, united with her Head, the High Priest, and not tainted
with any Doctrinal errors, what need, I pray, was there of her reformation?
His Text out of Osee Si fornicaris tu Israel, non delinquat saltem Juda, Oseae
4. 15.
, Though Israel transgress, yet let not Juda sin, by which he endeavors to
prove that Juda reformed her self, is rather against, then for him; because in
any indifferent man's judgment these words, Though Israel trangress, yet at
least let not Juda sin, have rather this sense, Let not Juda at least fall into
Schism, though Israel does, then the sense following, Let Juda reform her
self. Secondly, he supposes that Juda is the Protestant party; which is also
false. For if you be Juda, who, I pray, are the revolted Ten Tribes? who are of
Jeroboams Cabal? But let us see what a pretty Parallel there is between Juda
and you. Juda remained in Jerusalem: you left the Catholic Jerusalem, that is
Rome, the City of peace, in whose bosom you were brought up. Juda never went to
Dan nor Bethel, never made Priests of Baal, never adored golden Calves. You
made new Synagogues, to which you resorted; new and unheard of Sacerdotes de
extremis populi, qui non (...) de (...) Levi. 3 (...). 12. 13.
Priests, without Altar, or Sacrifice; and all this by your own authority. Juda
was still united with her Spiritual Head, the High Priest of Jerusalem; nay
with her Temporal Head also, King Roboam: you revolted first from your
Spiritual Head, the Pope of Rome, and afterward cast off also your Loyalty due
to Temporal Princes; as appears in the lamentable Rebellions heretofore in
Germany, the Low Countries, and France. Is not his Lordships Parallel then
between Juda and the Protestant party very pat, and much to the purpose?

He would have had far better success, had he compared his Schismatical party
with the ten revolted Tribes of Israel: for this Parallel comes very home, not
only in respect of the people misled, but also in regard of the misleaders,
even in England. Jeroboam had no title at all to the Crown of Israel. Queen
Elizabeth was declared Illegitimate and incapable to inherit her Fathers Crown
by Act of Parliament. 28. Hen. 8. cap. 7.
Jeroboam out of ungodly Policy, the better to secure his usurped Crown, caused
the ten Tribes to desert the old and true religion of Juda, which they had ever
since their being Gods people, most constantly and universally professed. Queen
Elizabeth more out of Policy and Reason of State, then of Conscience, to fasten
the Crown of England upon her head, made a Schism from the Roman Church,
abolished the Catholic and True Religion (which had been professed in England
for so many hundred years before) purposely to ingratiate her self with the
common people, which easily inclines to all licentiousness, and utterly disable
that party from ever prevailing afterward in Parliament, which formerly had
voted against her. Jeroboam, to the end his rebellious party might never return
to Jerusalem, and be united with the High Priest in the true religion, set up a
new Synagogue, new Priests, new Sacrifices and new Ceremonies. Queen Elizabeth,
to the end her Schismatical party might never piece again with their Spiritual
Head, the Pope of Rome, set on foot a new Church, new Bishops, new Pastors,
new Liturgies, and new Ceremonies. In fine, Jeroboam stretched forth his hand
against the true 3. Reg. 13. 1.
Prophet of Juda, and commanded him to be apprehended. Queen Elizabeth stretched
forth her hand not against one only, but all Priests and all Catholics;
witness the bloody persecution raised against them in her days; when it was
made Treason for Priests to come into England, to exercise any Priestly
Function, to have any commerce with Rome; and a capital crime even to hear
Mass, or but harbor a Priest. And what I pray, is true piety in Gods sight, if
all these be capital offenses? But enough of this Parallel.

His Lordship, even during the Schism of Jeroboam, will yet needs have Israel
a True Church. But I answer, They were no true Church, because they rejected
the Authority of the High Priest, refused to communicate in the Sacrifices and
Worship of God at Jerusalem, and adored the golden Calves of Jeroboam. It Is
true, there were many holy persons, inhabitants of the same Country with the
rest, who kept themselves undefiled from those Idolatries and Divisions; who
though they were not (perhaps) suffered to go up to Jerusalem to worship, yet
never consented to go to Dan or Bethel. These we acknowledge, remained parts of
the True Church, notwithstanding the Schism; as many Catholics do now
continue true members of the Roman Church, though living dispersedly in
Heretical Countries. And the Prophets who were amongst them, were also a part
of the True Church at Jerusalem; for which reason, for the most part the Kings
of Israel persecuted them, as Catholics also now are commonly persecuted by
Heathen, Mahumetan, and Heretical Princes. The having-Prophets therefore among
them argues the Ten Tribes no more to be parts of the true Church, then it
would argue the Protestants in Holland to be parts of the Roman Church, if some
Roman Catholic should be found among them having the spirit of Prophecy.

But his Lordship will prove by some Texts of Scripture, that the ten Tribes
continued a Church, notwithstanding their Schism and Idolatry. But to that of
(...) 9. 17. I answer first, this Prophet prophesied both against Juda and
Israel; and the word Israel being an Appellative, common to all the seed of
Jacob, it is not certain, he always means by it the ten Schismatical Tribes
only, and not sometimes the Tribe of Juda also. Secondly I say, the Relatours
Gloss adds to the Text. God does not there threaten to cast Israel away in non
Ecclesiam, as the Bishop speaks, that is, to un-church them, as if (forsooth)
before that threatening they had been a true Church: this is the Relatours own
voluntary addition, or fiction rather; but he threatens, simply to deprive them
of his wonted protection, to deliver them into their enemies hands, and (as the
very next words show) to make them wanderers among the Nations, that should
take them captive.

To that of 4. Reg. 9. 6. where they are called the people of the Lord, I
answer, in a general sense all Abraham's seed according to the flesh are styled
the people of God, by reason of that promise of God made to Abraham, Genesis 18. I
will be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee; but Abraham's seed only
according to the spirit, that is, the faithful, make the True Church.

To his last Argument, (which he advances as ad hominem) that Multitude is a
note of the Church. I answer, we do not contend that of Christians the greater
multitude is an infallible mark of the true Church. There was a time when the
Arrians were reported to be more numerous then the Orthodox.

3. The Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son as well as from the Father,
was a Truth always acknowledged in the Church of God, and received in General
Councils, long before the Controversy touching that point arose between the
Latins and the Greeks. Witness that Epistle of St. Cyril, Patriarch of
Alexandria, which he wrote (as Bellarmin tells us) from the Council of
Alexandria to that a Bellarm. lib. 2. de Christo, cap. 23.. His ergo omissis.
of Ephesus, wherein are these words, Spiritus appellatus est veritatis; and
veritas Christus est: unde and ab isto similiter, sicut and ex Patre procedit.
The Holy Ghost (says he) is called the Spirit of Truth, and Christ is the
Truth; whence follows that he proceeds as well from him, as from the Father.
Thus he. Now this Epistle of St. Cyril and the Council of Alexandria, as
Bellarmin likewise shows, was received not only by the Council of Ephesus,
which was about the year of our Lord 434. but also by four other General
Councils held in Greece it self: and consequently the Doctrine of the Holy
Ghosts Procession, was a Truth so anciently known in the Church, that it could
not well seem a novelty to any, when the express confession of it came to be
more frequent and public in the Latin Church. It matters not much, in what
capacity it was promulgated by the Church of Rome, whether as a particular
Church, as the Bishop contends, or as Head Ibid. number. 2.
of the Church Universal, as we think. For either way, it could not but be very
lawful for that Church to do it: nor can it help his Lordships cause, which way
foever it was done. For supppose a particular Church may (in some case)
promulgate an Orthodox Truth, not as yet Catholiquely received or defined by
the whole Church; does it thence follow that a particular Church (or Churches)
may repeal and reverse any thing that the whole Church has already Catholickly
and Definitively received? Surely no. Yet this is his Lordships, and the
Protestants case.

4. Hence the Relatours egregious Fallacy is manifest, while from the adding of
a Word only, by some particular Church for Explication of a known, ancient,
and generally received See Bellarmin, ubi supra.
Truth, (such as was the Procession of the Holy Ghost both from the Father and
Son) he pretends to infer both these Propositions, viz. That a particular
Church may publish any thing that is Catholic, where the whole Church is
silent; and that a particular Church may reform any thing that is not
Catholic, where the whole Church is negligent, or will not. For though the
former of these Propositions be not so enormious as the latter, because it
supposes not any actual error, contrary to Catholic Doctrine, to be
maintained by the whole Church, but only a Non declaration, or, at most, some
negligence to promulgate a Catholic Truth, whereas the other supposes error,
of something uncatholick, to be taught or admitted by the whole Church; yet are
they both utterly Paradoxical and False, and no way to be inferred from the
example, or practice of the Roman Church in declaring the Holy Ghosts
Proceeding from the Son: for that was of a point anciently and generally
received in the Church. Much (...) can it justify the Protestants proceedings;
whose Declarations, Promulgations, Confessions, or what ever you will call
them, made upon their several pretended reformations, were only of new and
unheard of Doctrines, directly contrary to what the Catholic Church
universally held and taught before them for Catholic Truths.

For about the year of our Lord 1517. when their pretended Reformations began,
was not the Real Presence of our Saviors Body and Blood in the Eucharist, by a
true substantial change of Bread and Wine, generally held by the whole Church?
Was not the Real Sacrifice of the Mass then generally believed? Was not
Veneration of Holy Images, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, Praying for the
Dead that they might be eased of their pains, and receive the full remission of
their sins, generally used and practiced by all Christians? Was not Freewill,
(...) of good Works, and Justification by Charity, or Inherent Grace, and not
by Faith only, universally taught and believed in all Churches of Christendom?
Yea even among those who in some few other points dissented from the Pope and
the Latin Church? To what purpose then does the Bishop urge, that a particular
Church may publish any thing, that is Catholic? this does not justify at all
his reformation: he should prove, that it may not only add, but take away
something that is Catholic from the doctrine of the Church: for this the
pretended Reformers did, as well in England, as elsewhere.

5. It is not a thing so evident in Antiquity, when or where the word Filioque
was added to the Creed, that his Lordship should so so easily take it for
granted (without proof) that the Roman Church added it, in quality of a
particular Church. All that can be gathered from Authors (so far as I can yet
learn) concerning this point is, that in the Councils of Toledo and Luca
assembled against the Heretics called Priscillianists, the word is found
inserted in the Creed; which is supposed to have been done upon the Authority
of an Epistle they had received from Pope Leo the first, wherein he affirms the
Procession of the Holy Ghost to be both from the Father and Son. I confess Lib.
3. de Process. S. S. cap. 16.
Hugo Eterianus, in his Book written upon this Subject about the year 1100,
affirms that it was added by the Pope in a full Council at Rome: but he names
not the Pope. Whether it were, because in his time 'twas generally known what
Pope it was, I cannot certainly say: but of this I am sure, that by reason of
his silence, we now know not with any certainty whom he meant. La Repliq. au
Roy de la grand. Bretagu. page 818. cap. Des Traditioons.
Card. Perron directly affirms, that it was first added by an Assembly of
French Bishops. But perhaps that may be more probable which Stanislaus
Socolovius tells us, in his Latin Translation of the Answer of Hieremias
Patriarch of Constantinople to the Lutherans, page 8. viz. that the Fathers of
the first Council at Constantinople; (which is the second General) sending the
Confession of their Faith to Pope Damasus and his Council at Rome, the Pope and
Council at Rome approved of their said Confession, but yet added, by way of
explication, the word Filioque to the Article which concerned the Holy Ghost;
and this they did, to signify that the Holy Ghost, as True God proceeded from
the Son, and was not made or created by him, as some Heretics in those times
began to teach. Neither does he affirm this without citation of some credible
Authority: adding withal, that this Definition, or Declaration of the Pope,
was for some hundreds of years generally admitted and embraced by the whole
Church, neither Greeks nor Latins dissenting, or taking any exception at the
word Filioque, till about the time of the Eighth Synod; where the Greeks first
began publicly to cavil against it, more out of pride and peevish emulation
against the Latins, then for any urgent Reasons, they had to contest it more
then their predecessors before them. But of this I need not contend further
with his Lordship.

6. To return therefore to our business of Reformation, we grant in effect as
great power, as the Bishop himself does, to particular Churches, to National
and Provincial Councils, in reforming errors and abuses either of doctrine or
practice only we require, that they proceed with due respect to the chief
Pastor of the Church, and have recourse to him in all matters and decrees of
Faith, especially when they define, or declare, points not generally known and
acknowledged to be Catholic Truths. For this even Capellus himself, by the
Relatour here cited, requires: and the practice of the Church is evident for
it, in the examples of the Milevitan and Carthaginian Councils, which as St.
Austin D. Aug. Epist. 90, 91, 92, 93.
witnesses, sent their decrees touching Grace, Original Sin in Infants, and
other matters against Pelagius, to be confirmed by the Pope: who was not
esteemed by St. Austin and those Fathers, the Disease of the Church, (a term
very Ibidem n. 3.
unhandsome from an inferior) but rather the Physician of it, to whose Care
and Government it was committed.

Neither do I think it convenient, to stay for a General Council, when the
errors and abuses to be redressed are such, as call for speedy remedy, and
threaten greater mischief, if they be not timely prevented. When the Gangrene
endangers life, we do well to betake our selves to the next Chyrurgeon, that
is, a Provincial Council: This in such a case, with the Popes assistance, is
acknowledged a Physician competent, and able to apply all due remedy to the
Churches infirmities: although I confess the most proper Expedient, specially
for all matters that concern the Church in general, is an Ecumenical Council.
Such as the Council of Trent was; whatever the Bishop (without Ibidem n. 4.
any reason given) says to the contrary: nor can any thing be objected against
it, which upon due examination will not be found as easily applyable to all
other approved Councils, which the Church has yet had: so that by disowning
this, we should in effect disown all others. But suppose it had not been
General; yet sure it was for Number, Learning, and Authority, far surpassing
any National Council, or Synod, which the Protestants, either of England or any
other Nation ever had. Wherefore, if their Assemblies, or Synods, so
inconsiderable as they were, are yet esteemed of sufficient Authority to make
reformation in matters of Faith, and correct what doctrine they imagined
erroneous in the Catholic Church, shall not the Council of Trent be as
sufficient to assure us, that the said pretended errors are indeed no errors
at all, but Divine Truths, and the perpetual universally received Traditions of
Christ's Church.

7. But it is yet more strange, that our Adversary should also object want of
Freedom to this Council; seeing that even by the relation of their own partial
and malevolent Paulus Suavius (the Venetian Friar) his history of the Council
of Trent, twice printed here at London by public Authority.
Historian, it sufficiently appears, that neither the Prelates wanted full
liberty of Suffrage, nor the Divines of Disputation, and maintaining their
several assertions in the best manner they could. His Lordship had done well to
have looked nearer home, and considered how matters were carried in England,
much about that time. If the Council of Trent were not a free Council, what was
that Protestant Synod of London, Anno 1562. in which the thirty nine Articles,
that is, the sum of the Protestant Faith and Religion in England, were
framed? Was that a Free Synod? First, at Trent all the Prelates in
Christendom, that could be invited and were concerned in the Resolutions of
that Council, being solemnly called, did come, and assist (either in their
persons or proxies) both at the Deliberations, and Determinations of the
Assembly. I add, that the Protestants themselves were likewise invited, with
full security to come and go, if they had pleased; but of this we have spoken
already. Whereas at London, to that Synod of English Protestants, not one of
the lawful English Prelates were called, or permitted to come; who yet of all
others were most concerned and ought to have been there present, as well by
reason of their Authority and Function, as of their just interest. What speak I
of the Prelates? not so much as one of the English Catholics (how numerous
soever they were at that time) were called to that Assembly, but all (both
Pastors and people) were condemned together, without being heard, or allowed
to speak one word for themselves.

At Trent there were no Bishops illegally deprived of their Bishoprics,
purposely to cashier their Votes in Council, nor any others included into their
places, contrary to the Canons of the Church, purposely to vote down the said
Churches established Doctrine and Canons. In England it is notorious, that all
the lawful Prelates of that Nation were most illegally and arbitrarily deprived
of their Bishoprics, for no other end, but to evacuate their Authority in the
Nation; and Lay-Bishops thrust into their places, purposely to vote down and
abolish Catholic Religion by some color of Authority, and seigned show of a
pretended Ecclesiastical Synod. At Trent nothing had been done, or was done, in
matter of Religion, by the Pope or any other person, in way of Determination,
or New Decree, but by and upon the most unanimous and general resolutions of
that Council. In England ('it is too notorious to be denied) Religion was already
changed by the Queen and a few meer-lay-persons in Parliament, (scarce enough
to make a legal vote, had the matter been proper for them) and this Synod of
London called apparently not to debate matters of Religion, as they ought to be
debated in a Free Ecclesiastical Synod, but to serve designs, and to boulster
up by their pretended, titular, and usurped Authority, what beforehand had
most Uncanonically been resolved upon by the State. This his Lordship should
have a little reflected on, when he objected want of Freedom to the Council of
Trent. But it seems, he could more easily see a Mote in another man's eye, then
a Beam in his own.

8. Our desire is not, that any man should rather be blind, then open Ibidem
n. 5.
his owneyes: God forbid! we would have him only clear them, to see that
Catholics approve of National, Provincial, and also Diocesan Synods, and
only disapprove of such Assemblies, as Convene and Act contrary to the Canons,
in opposition to the chief Pastor of the Church, universally received
Doctrines, and General Councils. The Bishop therefore might very well have
spared his pains of proving so industriously, that many Reformations have been
made by particular Councils: for who denies it? Bellarmin `Bellarm. lib. 2. de
Christo, cap. 28.
had sufficiently showed it already; who also observes out of St. Austin, that
for the Defining of easy things it is not convenient to trouble all Christian
Provinces. D. Aug. epist. 4. ad Bonifac. cap. 12.
Non omnis Haeresis est talis, ut propter eam debeant vexari omnes provinciae.
We deny not, but matters of less moment such as concern Rites and Ceremonies
only, or Abuses in Manners and Discipline, may be reformed by particular
Councils, and that without asking express leave of the Pope: for who knows not,
that the Discipline of the Church allows this? Who knows not, that the Pope is
so far from being a hinderance to such Assemblies, that it is no small part of
his Apostolical vigilance for the good of the Church, to encourage and stir up
the Bishops of other Nations and Provinces to the frequent holding of them? But
we affirm that in matters of greater moment, which concern the Faith and
public Doctrine of the Church, Sacraments, and whatever else is of Divine
Institution, or universal obligation, particular Councils (if they duly
proceed) attempt nothing without recourse to the Sea Apostolic, and the Popes
consent either expressly granted, or justly presumed.

The Bishop indeed all along pretends the contrary, viz. that National and
Provincial Councils did reform in matters of Faith and Doctrine, both without
and against the Popes consent: and it concerns him so to do; for without this
granted, his Lordship knew well enough, it would be impossible for him to
justify the pretended Reformation of his English Church. But let us examine
his proofs. Ibid. number. 5.
First, Gerson Omnes Ecclesiae status aut in Generali Concilio reformetis, aut
in Concillis Provincialibus reformari mandetis. Gerson. (...). Defectuum
virorum Ecclesiasticorum par. 1. page 209 B.
speaks nothing expressly touching matters of Faith, but only, that he would
have all the States (or Degrees) of the Church reformed; which may be
understood as well of personal abuses or corruption in Manners and Discipline,
as in matters of Faith: Besides writing his first-alledg'd Treatise upon this
subject de Concilio unius obedientiae, and pleading hard for such a General
Council, as should acknowledge one Head, it is manifest he allowed of no
Schismatical Reformations, nor any thing to be done in that kind, contrary to
the Authority and good liking of the Churches Head. Secondly, the Bishop cites
Concilium Romanum sub Sylvestro; but here the very title confutes his pretense:
for the Council was held sub Sylvestro, under the Pope; therefore not without,
or against him. And at the Council of Gangres, Osius was Popes Sylvesters
Legate, and the Canons of this Council, as Pope Baron. ad Annum 319.
Symmachus, related by Baronius, affirms, were enacted by the Authority of the
Sea Apostolic.

His third proof is Concilium Carthiginense primum, which was indeed assembled
by Gratus Bishop of Carthage, but no new Article Defined in it; only the
perpetual Tradition of the Church, touching Non-rebaptization, was confirmed
therein, having been defined long before by sundry Popes, and also by the
Council of Nice. For this Council therefore of Carthage no man can be so hardy
as to deny, but that the Popes consent, if it were not expressly had, yet might
be justly presumed. In the Synod of Aquileia (which is his fourth proof) the
Bishop himself finds nothing, but only that Palladius and Secundinus were
therein condemned for embracing the Arian Heresy: which having been already
condemned by the Council of Nice, and St. Ambrose with other Bishops of Italy
being present at Aquileia, who can doubt, but every thing was there done by the
Popes Authority and consent? His fifth proof is the second, otherwise called
the third, Council of Carthage; which was so far from being held against the
Popes consent, that in the forty eighth Canon it is expressly resolved by the
Council, to consult Pope Syricius concerning the matter of that Decree. His
sixth proof is the Council of Milevis in Africa, condemning the Heresy of
Pelagius. But was not (I pray) the Sea Apostolic consulted in that grand
affair? Sure it was. St. Austin above cited will avouch as much. His seventh
proof, is the second Council of Aurange which was assembled by means of Felix
Bishop Geunad. de Scrip. Eccl. cap. 86.
of Rome: so far was it from being held without the Popes consent. After this
comes the third Council of Toledo; which was so devoted to the Authority of the
Sea of Rome, that in Recognition thereof it decreed, that all Constitutions of
Councils, and all the Synodical Epistles of the Roman Bishops should remain in
their ancient force and vigor.

But what says his Reserve, his Master-Allegation, the Fourth Council of
Toledo? just as much as the rest. It added (says the Bishop) some things to
the Creed, which were not expressly delivered in former Creeds. So they might
well do, for fuller explication of what was implicitly delivered before, and
in opposition to Heresies already condemned by the whole Church. Did it add
any thing contrary to to the common Faith of the Church, or of the Sea
Apostolic? which is the question in hand, and which Protestants did in all
their pretended National Pseudo-Synods? Neither needed the Prelates to ask
express leave of the Sea of Rome to convene and determine matters concerning
the whole Church, provided it were done with due Subordination to the Sea
Apostolic. For that thus a National Synod may proceed, the Council of Milevis
a little above cited does sufficiently declare; which with the Authority of the
Sea Apostolic concurring, condemned the Heresy of Pelagius. By such examples
as these does our Adversary labor to justify his Reformed English Church:
Thus does he prove, that Provincial and Particular Councils may sometimes make
Reformation in matters of Faith and Doctrine, without, yea against the
Authority of the Apostolic Sea. Has he not worthily acquitted himself of his
Province think you? when in all the instances he brings, there is not the least
glance, or intimation of any thing done contrary to the Popes Authority, but
express mention of it, and of due regard toward it. He urges again, that the
Church of Rome added the word Filioque to the Creed: But can any man in his
wits think it was done without and against the Popes consent? Surely the
Relatour cannot be thought here to have well minded his matter, or peradventure
he persuaded himself, the multitude of his Allegations would serve to hide the
impertinency of them.

9. Yet, after so many lost proofs, with a confidence as great, as if they had
been all Demonstrations, he asks us the question, And if this Ibid. number. 5.
was practiced so often, and in so many places, why may not a National Council
of the Church of England do the like? Truly I know no reason why it may not,
provided it be a True National Council, and a True Church of England, (as those
recited were true Churches and Councils) and provided also that it do no more.
But seeing (as his following words declare) by the Church of England, he menas
the present Protestant Church there, and by National Council either that
Pseudo-Synod abovementioned in the year 1562. or some other like it, I must
crave leave of his Lordship to deny his supposition, and tell him the Church of
England in that sense, signifies no true Church, neither is such a National
Council to be accounted a lawful Synod, duly representative of the true English
Church. For is it not notorious, that the persons constituting that pretended
Synod in the year 1562. were all manifest usurpers? Is it not manifest, that
they all by force intruded themselves both into the Seas of other lawful
Bishops, and into the Cures of other lawful Pastors, quietly and Canonically
possessed of them before their said Intrusion? Can those be accounted a lawful
National Council of England, or lawfully to represent the English Church, who
never had any lawful, that is, Canonical and Just Vocation, Mission, or
Jurisdiction given them to and over the English Nation?

But suppose they had been True Bishops and Pastors of the English Church, and
their Assembly a lawful National Council, yet were they so far from doing the
like to what the forementioned particular Churches and Councils did, that they
acted directly contrary to them. Not one of those Councils condemned any point
of Faith, that had been generally believed and practiced in the Church before
them, as this Synod of London did: Not one of them contradicted the doctrine of
the Roman Church, as this did: None of them convened against the express will
of the Bishop of Rome, as this Conventicle did. None of them denied the Popes
Authority, or attempted to deprive him of it, as these did, so far as 'twas in
their power. What Parallel then is there between the proceedings of the
abovesaid National Synods, or Councils, of Rome, Gangres, Carthage, Aquileia,
etc. and the Bishops pretended Synod of Protestants at London in the year 1562.

What the Bishops in King Henry the eighths time did, is known Ibidem.
and confessed, not only by Bishop Gardener afterward in Queen Mary's reign,
(who was the learned Prelat then in England) but even by Protestant Authors,
to have been extorted from them rather by threats and force, then otherwise,
and consequently can be of no great advantage to the Bishop. And yet what they
subscribed was far outdone by the Synod of 62. For though the Henry-Bishops
(as we may call them for distinction) seemingly at least renounced the Popes
Canonical and acquired Jurisdiction here in England, I mean, that Authority and
Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical matters, which the Pope exercised here by virtue
of the Canons, Prescription, and other title of humane Right, and gave it to
the King, yet they never renounced, or deprived him of that part of his
Authority, which is far more intrinsecal to his office and absolutely of Divine
Right; they never denied the Popes Sovereign Power to teach the universal
Church, and determine all Controversies of Faith whatsoever with a General
Council: nor did they dissent from him in any of those points of Faith, which
that Synod of London condemned in the year 1562. That which the King aimed at,
was to get the Power into his hands, and to have those Authorities,
Prerogatives, Immunities annexed to his Crown, which the Pope enjoyed, and had
exercised here in England time out mind, in Ecclesiastical Causes, that is, in
the Government and Discipline of the English Church; and to this the Bishops
yielded: but what concerned the Popes Authority in relation to the whole
Catholic Church, for ought appears clearly to the contrary, both the Bishops
and the King too, left the Pope in possession of all that he could rightly
challenge.

I have no more to say to this part of his Paragraph; only I observe, that
though his Lordship will not acknowledge Heresy or (...) to have had place in
his pretended Reformation, yet he does not deny but Sacrilege too often
reforms Superstition; which yet he is Ibidem.
ready to excuse, telling us it was the Crime of the Reformers, not of the
Reformation. But we ask, What induced those Reformers to commit Sacrilege, but
the novel and impious Maxims of their Reformation? Was it for any thing else,
that they sacked and demolisht so many Monasteries and Religious Houses,
alienating their Lands and Revenues, but because by the principles of
Reformation they held it Superstition to be a Religious Person, or to live a
Monastical life? Was it for any thing else, that they plucked down Altars, burnt
Images, defaced the Monuments of the Dead, brake the Church-windows, threw down
Crosses, tore the Holy Vestments in pieces, etc. but because they thought them
all Instruments of Idolatry and false Worship, as they term it? was it for any
thing else, that they possessed themselves of Ecclesiastical Benefices, took upon
them Spiritual Jurisdictions and Pastoral Charges, by force of Secular Power
and Authority, from those that were in lawful and quiet possession of them
according to the Canons of the Church, but because according to the Maxims of
their new Belief, they held the old Pastors of the Church to be False
Teachers, and their Function neither lawful nor of use among Christians? It Is
clear then, that the Sacrilegious works of the Reformers, and the wicked Tenets
of the Reformation, differ only as the Tree and its Fruit: they are not
altogether the same, but yet the one springs connaturally from the other; the
one begets and bears the other, as naturally, as a corrupt Tree bears bad fruit.

Nor can his Lordship so easily wash his hands of the guilt, as he seems
willing to do, by saying, they are long since gone to God to answer it, as if
none could be involved in this crime, but only the first Actors. Are the
Successors then Free? No such matter. Both the sin and the guilt too will be
found entailed upon all that succeed them in the Fruits of their Sacrilegious
actings, since they have no better ground, nor title to enjoy them, then those
who first acted. But I shall not prosecute this Theme any further.

Neither shall I say much to his Memorandum in the end of this Paragraph, where
he pretends to mind us of the General Church forced for Ibidem n. 6.
the most part under the Government of the Roman Sea. By what force I pray? Is
it possible? or can it enter into the judgment of any reasonable man, in good
earnest to believe, that a single Bishop, of no very large Diocese (if it
reached no further then most Protestants will have it) should be able, by force
to bring into subjection so many large Provinces of Christendom, as confessedly
did acknowledge the Popes power, when the pretended Reformation began? Force
implies resistance of the contrary part, and something done against the will
and good liking of the party forced. But can his Lordship show any resistance
made by any particular Church or Churches, against that Authority which the
Bishop of Rome claimed and exercised confessedly over all the Western Provinces
of Christendom, when the Reformers first began their resistances? Does any
Classick Author of present, or precedent times mention, or complain, of any
such force (...) Rather does not experience teach us, that, whenever any
Novellist started up and preached any thing contrary to the Popes Authority, the
Bishops of other Provinces were as ready to censure and forbid him, as the Pope
himself? Are not all Eeclesiastical Monuments full of examples in this kind?
This therefore is as false a calumny, as any, and serves only to lengthen the
list of our Adversaries (...), but false Pasquils.

CHAP. 14. Protestants, further convinced of Schism.
ARGUMENT.
1. A. C's. Parallel defended. 2. Protestants proceedings against their own
eperatists justify the Churches proceeding against them. 3. No danger in
acknowledging the Church Infallible. 4. Points Fundamental, necessary to be
determinately known, and why? 5. The four places of Scripture, for the Churches
Infallibility, weighed the second time and maintained. 6. Why the Church cannot
teach error in matter of Faith. 7. How she becomes Infallible, by virtue of
Christ's prayer for St. Peter, Luc. 22. 31. 8. The Relatours various Trippings
and Windings observed.

MR. Fisher asked his Lordship, QUO JUDICE does it appear, that the Church of
Rome has erred in matters of Faith? as not thinking it equity, that
Protestants in their own cause should be Accusers, Witnesses, and Judges of the
Roman Church. The Relatour. 25. number. 1.
in answer to this confesses, that no man in common equity ought to be
suffered to be Accuser, Witness, and Judge in his own cause. But yet adds,
there is as little reason, or equity, that any man who is to be accused, should
be the accused, and yet Witness and Judge in his own cause. If the first may
hold, (says he) no man shall be innocent: and if the last, (...) will be
nocent. To this I answer. We have already proved the (...) Church (in the sense
we understand Roman) Infallible; and therefore she ought not to be accused for
teaching errors. Neither can she submit her self to any Third to be judged in
this point, both, because there is no such competent Third to be found, as also
because it were in effect to give away her own right, yea indeed to destroy her
self, by suffering her Authority to be questioned in that, whereon all
Certainty of Faith depends: for such is the Catholic Churches Infallibility.

1. Again, I make this demand. Suppose that Nicolas the Deacon, or some other
Heretic of the Apostles times, separating themselves from the Apostles, and
Christians that adhered to them, should have accused them of false doctrine;
and being for such presumption excommunicated by the Apostles, would it have
been a just plea, think you, for the said condemned Heretics, to have
pretended, that the Apostles were the party accused, and that they could not be
Witnesses and Judges too in their own cause; but that the trial of their
doctrine ought to be resert'd to a Third person? I suppose no man will be so
absurd. I say then, Whatever shall be answered in defense of the Apostles
proceeding, will be found both proper and sufficient to defend the Church
against her Adversaries. For if the Apostles might judge those Heretics in
the Controversies abovesaid, then the persons accused may sometimes, and in
some causes, be Judges of those that accuse them: and if the Infallibility of
the Apostles judgment, together with the Fullness of their Authority, were a
sufficient ground and reason for them to exercise the part and office of Judges
in their own cause, seeing both these do still remain in the Church, (viz.
Infallibility of Judgment, and Fullness of Authority) doubtless the lawful
Pastors thereof duly assembled and united with their Head, may lawfully, nay
of duty ought to judge the Accusers of their doctrine, whoever they be;
according to that acknowledged Prophecy concerning Christ's Church, ( Isa. 54.
17.) after our Adversaries own Translation, Every tongue that arises against
thee in judgment (or that accuses thee of error) thou shall condemn.

Protestants indeed, having neither competent Authority, nor so much as
pretending to Infallibility in their doctrine, cannot rationally be permitted
to be Accusers and Witnesses against the Roman Church (much less Judges) in
their own cause. Wherefore A.C. adds, that the Church of Rome is the Principal
and Mother Church; and that therefore, though it be against common equity, that
Subjects and Children should be Accusers, Witnesses, Judges, and Executioners
against their Prince and Mother in any case, yet it is not absurd, that in some
cases the Prince or Mother may accuse, witness, judge, and if need be, execute
Justice against unjust and rebellious Subjects, or evil Children. To this the
Bishop replies, that for the present he will suppose the Roman Church to be
both a Prince and a Mother, that he may not seem to avoid the shock of A. C.'s
Argument: but adds withal, that no moderate Prince ever Ibidem n. 2.
thought it just, or took upon him, to be Accuser, Witness, and Judge, in any
case of moment, against his Subjects. I answer, that a Prince, being liable
many ways to errors, and mistakes in judgment, ought in equity to submit to
some indifferent Judge, in all matters of personal and private interest,
between him and his Subjects; though in matters of public concern, as of
Treason or the like, where the business is evident, and admits not the delays
of legal Formality, I think it would not be accounted unjust, for the Prince to
be Accuser, Witness, and Judge too, againct a Traitorous Subject. However, the
Church may lawfully judge her Accusers, because she is Infallible in her
decisions of Faith, and has full Authority finally and absolutely to determine
all controversies of that nature.

As for Parents the Bishop grants, that while Children are young, they may
chastise them without other Accusers or Witnesses then themselves, and the
Children are, not withstanding such correction, to give them reverence. But
(says he) when Childen are grown up, and come to some full use of reason,
there ought to be remedy for them against their Mother, if she forget all good
nature, and turn stepdame unto them: which I willingly grant, and leave such
injured Children, for remedy, to the Magistrate and the Law; to both which the
Children may lawfully appeal, and the Mother ought to submit, as to her
Superiors. But the Catholic Church, duly and completely represented in a
General Council, has no superior on earth; neither is it lawful for any
private Christian or Christians, upon any pretense, to appeal from her to any
Third Person, in causes of Faith: the case therefore is not alike. Secondly, I
deny the Bishops supposition, viz. that the Roman Church (taken in the sense we
take it) is or ever can be such a Stepdame to her Children, or so far forget
her duty both to God and them, as justly to deserve the Accusations which
Protestants (her undutiful and rebellious sons) bring against her: and
therefore toward them (as well as toward the rest of her children) she still
retains the rights of a Mother; and they must not take it ill, if (as occasion
serves) she exercise toward them some part of her Motherly Authority; but
rather bethink themselves of returning to their Due Obedience, and conforming
themselves to that holy Exhortation of St. Peter, which 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2.
(for their better content) I shall give them out of their own Bible, viz. that
laying aside all malice, and all guile and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil
speakings, as Newborn Babes they desire the sincere Milk of the Word, (that
is, the pure uncorrupted Christian Catholic Doctrine) that they may grow
thereby to salvation.

2. But even abstracting from the Churches Infallibility in matters of Faith,
her proceedings toward Protestants will be found, upon due examination, most
just. For though a Prince, or Parents, may not in all cases be Accusers,
witnesses and Judges of their Subjects or Children, because it may possibly be
evident, that they tyrannize over them, or treat them injuriously, yet when
matter of fact is so evident, that it cannot be denied by their respective
Children, or Subjects, when laws and custom of the whole Nation do also
evidently declare the things criminal, for which they are punished, what need
is there (absolutely speaking) of any further Witness, or Judge, to punish
them? Now this is our case. The things, for which the Roman Church condemns and
punishes Protestants, are clearly matter of Fact, viz. preaching and teaching
such Doctrine as the Church forbids to be taught, actual disobedience to her
Canons, separating themselves from the communion of other Catholic
Christians, opposing and contradicting their lawful Pastors in matters
concerning Religion, etc. all which are criminal actions, and clearly
punishable, not only by the Canons of the Church, but by the Laws and
Constitutions of every Catholic Country. No need (surely) of Accusers and
Witnesses, where the Offense is notorious: Well therefore might the Pastors of
the Church (who were their proper Judges) proceed to Canonical Sentence against
them, seeing (as I said) it was notoriously evident, (and by themselves not
denied) that they opposed and contradicted, not only the public doctrine and
belief of all Christians generally throughout the world, but also the Laws,
(both Ecclesiastical and Temporal) Statutes, Decrees, Customs, and Practices,
universally in force in all Nations, where they began their pretended
Reformations.

When the Separatists of England in Queen Elizabeth's or King James his time,
pretended to reform the Protestant Church-Decrees and Customs in England, and
called for a Judge between the Prelates and them, did the
then-Church-Governours scruple to condemn and punish them, though they neither
esteemed themselves Infallible, nor to act by any Infallible Rule? for their
Commission to do this was only from the King and State; and their Rule, not
the Scripture, (which the Separatists pretended to as much as themselves) but
either the Book of Common Prayer, or the thirty nine Articles, or the Queens
Injunctions, and Book of Canons. Do not their Canons excommunicate all that
deliberately oppose any of their said thirty nine Articles? Did they not, for
this reason, ordinarily summon Anabaptists, Brownists, Familists, and other
Separatists, to appear at their Spiritual Courts, as they call them? did they
not proceed to sentence of Excommunication, and other Censutes, as the case
requit'd, and the Laws of their Church enabled them to do? Nay, did they not
upon this ground oftentimes Excommunicate us Roman Catholics for refusing to
frequent their Churches? did they not bring us into Sequestrations,
Imprisonments, and a thousand other troubles? Would they hear us, when we
appealed either to Scripture, Fathers, Church, Councils, or any other third
person to be Judge between them and us? Behold a very just proceeding! When
they fall foul either upon us, or their own Separatists, they are content to be
Accusers, Witnesses and Judges; but when they are called to justify their
actings against the Roman Church, then (forsooth) it is an unjust and
unreasonable thing: then they call for a Third Person to judge; not because
they are indeed willing to be judged, or regulated, by any authority under
heaven, except themselves, but because they know, that a competent Judge
between the Roman Church and them, distinct from the Roman Church, is
impossible to be found.

A. C. therefore had reason to tell the Bishop, that never any competent judge
had so censured the Church, as he had done; and that indeed no power on Earth
or in Hell it self, could so far prevail against the General Church, as to make
it err generally in any one point of Divine Truth; and much less to teach any
thing by its full Authority to be matter of Faith, Ibidem. n. 4.
which is contrary to divine Truth, expressed or involved in Scriptures rightly
understood. And that therefore no Reformation of Faith could be needful in the
General Church, but only in particular Churches; citing to this purpose Matthew.
16. 18. Luc. 22. 32. John 14. 16. In answer to which the Bishop only tells us,
how unwilling he is, in this troublesome and quarrelling age, to meddle with
the erring of the Church in geveral: he adds, though the Church of England
professes, that the Roman Church has erred even in matters of Faith, yet of
the erring of the Church in general she is modestly silent. It matters not what
she says, or says not, in this; but our question is, what she must say, if
she speak consequently either to her principles or practice. For this is
certain, that many of those particular points of Faith, which are rejected as
errors by the English Protestant Church, were held and taught for points of
Faith by all the visible Churches in Christendom, when this pretended
Reformation began. If therefore they be dangerous errors (as the Bishop with
his English Church professes Supra number. 3.
they are) by good consequence it must follow, that the English Protestant
Church holds, that the whole Catholic Church has erred dangerously.

But how unwillingly soever his Lordship seems to meddle with the (...) of the
Church in general, yet at last he meddles with it, and that very freely too:
for in effect he professes she may err in any point of Faith whatsoever, that
is not simply necessary to all men's salvation. Hear his own words in answer to
A. C.'s assertion that the General Church could not err in point of Faith If
(says the Bishop) he means no more then this, viz. that the whole universal
Church of Christ cannot universally err in any point of Faith, simply
necessary to all men's Salvation, he fights against no Adversary, but his (...)
fiction. What is this but tacitly to grant, that the whole Church of Christ
may universally err in any point of Faith not simply necessary to all men's
Salvation? Is not this great modesty toward the Church? Nay a great
satisfaction to all Christians, who by this opinion must needs be left in a
wood, touching the knowledge of Points absolutely necessary to their salvation?

3. But the Bishop suspects a dangerous consequence would be grounded upon
this, if it should be granted, that the Church could not Ibidem.
err in any point of Divine Truth in general, though by sundry consequences
deduced from principles of Faith; especially if she presume to determine
without her proper Guide, the Scripture, as he affirms Bellarmin to say, she
may. I answer, When God himself (whose Wisdom is such that he cannot be
deceived, and Verasity such that he cannot deceive) speaks by his Organ the
Holy Church, that is, by a General Council united with its Head, the Vicar of
Christ, what danger is there of Error?

As concerning Bellarmin, who is falsely accused, I wonder the Relatour should
not observe a main difference between defining matters, absolutely without
Scripture, and defining without express Scripture; which is all that Nostra
sententia est Ecclesiam absosolute non posse errare, (...) in rebus absolute
(...), uec in aliis, quae credenda vel facienda nobis proponit, sive habeantur
express in (...), five non. Bellar. l. 3. (...) Eccl. Mil. c. 14.. 5.
Bellarmin affirms. For though the points defined be not expressly in
Scriptures, yet they may be there implicitly, and rightly deduced from
Scripture. As for example, no man reads the Doctrine of Christ's Divinity (as
it is declared by the Council of Nice, and received for Catholic Faith even by
Protestants themselves) expressly in Scripture: it is not there said in express
terms, that he is of the same substance with the Father, or that he is God of
God, Light of Light, and True God of True God, etc. and yet who doubts, but the
sense of this Doctrine is contained in Scripture? and consequently that the
Defining of this, and other points of like nature, by the Church, was not done
(absolutely speaking) without Scripture. Besides, who knows not that the
Scriptures do expressly commend Traditions? Wherefore, if the Doctrine defined
for matter of Faith, be according to Tradition, though it be not expressed in
Scripture, yet the Church does not define it without Scripture, but according
to Scripture, following therein the Rule, which is given her in Scripture.

But it is further urged by the Bishop that A. C. grants the Church Ibidem.
may be ignorant of some Divine Truths, which afterward it may learn by study
of Scripture, or otherwise: Therefore in that state of Ignorance she may both
err, and teach her error; yea and teach that to be Divine Truth, which is
not: nay, perhaps teach that as matter of Divine Truth, which is contrary to
Divine Truth. He adds to this, that we have as large a promise for the
Churches knowing all points of Divine Truth, as A. C. Joan. 16. 13.
or any Jesuit, can produce for her not erring in any. Thus the Bishop. To
which I answer, The Argument, were there any force in it, would conclude as
well against the Infallibility of the Apostles, as of the present Catholic
Church. For doubtless the Apostles themselves were ignorant of many Divine
Truths; though the promise intimated by the Bishop of being taught all truth,
John 16. 13. was immediately directed to them: and yet it is granted by
Protestants, that the Apostles could not teach that to be Divine Truth, which
was not; much less could they teach that as matter of Divine Truth, which was
contrary to it. Ignorance therefore of some Divine Truths, and for some time
only, when they are not necessary to be known, does not infer error, or
possibility of erring in those Truths, when they are necessary to be known. The
Apostles ( Matthew. 10. 19.) were charged not to be Sollicitous beforehand, what
they should answer to Kings and Presidents, being brought before them, because
it should be given them in that hour what to speak. In like manner (with due
proportion) is it now given to their Successors what to answer, that is, what
to define in matters of Faith, when ever emergent occasions require it.
Secondly, I say, that an ignorant man is of himself subject to error; but
taught and informed by a master that is infallible, he may become infallible.
So that his Lordships Argument, from bare ignorance concluding error, or an
absolute possibility of erring, is it self as erroneous, as this: A young
Scholar, of himself alone is ignorant, and apt to mistake the signification of
words; Ergo, he can do no otherwise then mistake, while his Master stands by
him, and teaches him.

4. But the Bishop at last bethinks himself, and puts in a Proviso: Provided
always (says he) that this erring of the Church be not in any Ibid. number. 4.
point simply Fundamental: for of such points, even in his own judgment, the
whole Church cannot be ignorant, nor err in them. To which proposition of his
Lordship at present we shall return no other answer but this; We desire to
know, what those points are, which he calls simply fundamental, or simply
necessary to all men's salvation. Bellarmin, from very good Authority, tells us,
that some barbarous and Bellar. lib. 3. de Eccl. Milit. cap. 14.
ignorant people have been saved without believing Scripture at all: and if
trial were made, I believe it would be found the more common opinion even
amongst Protestants themselves, that the Explicit Belief of the Trinity, or
Incarnation it self, as the Catholic Faith, and Ecumenical Councils declare
it, is not simply necessary to all men's salvation. So that if the Church be
exempt from error only in such points, the promises of Christ will be brought
to little more then nothing; and the Churches Infallible Authority be shrunk
into so narrow a compass, that most of the Heretics she ever yet condemned,
will be found to have been out of her reach, and may require her, if not to
reverse, yet at least to review her sentence against them, (since his Lordship
will have it Fallible) lest (perhaps) she might err in pronouncing it.

Neither indeed can any rational man be ever satisfied by hearing only in
general, that the Church cannot err in matters simply necessary to all men's
Salvation, if he be not withal determinately informed which are those points.
For so long as he knows not what is, or is not, so universally necessary, how
can he be assured whether the Church may not err, or has not erred in
Defining such and such a particular matter? Let it therefore be first
established, either by a determinate Catalogue of such simply necessary and
Fundamental points, or by some certain and determinate Rule, whereby we may
undoubtedly know them; otherwise we speak at random.

5. The strength of the places, formerly alleged by A. C for the Churches
Infallibility in all points of Faith whatever, his Lordship here again
endeavors to enervate; telling us first, that they are known. 25. n. 5.
places, and cited by A. C. three several times, and to three several purposes.
What matters this? They lose nothing of their force for being thrice cited by
A. C. and more then thrice by Stapleton, Bellarmin, and other Champions of the
Catholic Faith, circumstances so requiring it. And does it seem strange to
his Lordship, that A. C. should apply them to several purposes? he should have
remembered, how often Scripture it is styled by the Fathers gladius, (...), a
twoedged sword, which surely cuts-several ways. Bellarmin, Stapleton, and A.
C. following the received assertion of most Catholics, viz. that the Pope is
Infallible, even without a General Council, when he defines any thing ex
Cathedra, and with intention to oblige the whole Church, urge the places to
that purpose; as with very great probability they may: yet because some
Catholic Divines deny it, the matter it self being not yet clearly De Fide, I
shall be content that the said places prove (at least) the Infallibility of the
Church in general, or of the Pope and a General Council: which in this question
are to be accounted all one. For if the Pope and a General Council may err,
the whole Church might err; as being obliged to follow the Doctrine, and
Definitions of such a Council: and if the whole Church be fallible, what
infallible certainty can we have of any Tradition? Wherefore seeing the
Infallibility of the Church, Councils, and Tradition, depend so necessarily
upon each other, whatever Authorities prove the Infallibility of any one, do in
effect and by good consequence prove the same of all the rest.

6. But let us come to the places in particular. The first assures us, that
Hell. gates shall never prevail against the Church. Here the Bishop speaks
loud, and sends us a challenge. There is no one Father of the Church (says he)
for twelve hundred years after Christ, that ever concluded the Infallibility of
the Church out of this place. And here I challenge A. C. and all that party to
show the contrary if they can.

St. Austin, had he been more fully cited by the Bishop, would alone have been
able to answer this challenge. Let us hear him speak. Ipsa est Ecclesia sancta
(says he) Ecclesia una, Ecclesia vera, Ecclesia Catholica, S. Aug. lib. de
Symbol. ad (...). cap. 6.
contra omnes haereses pugnans. Pugnare potest, expugnari tamen non potest. She
is the Holy Church, the only Church, the true Church, the Gatholick Church,
WHICH FIGHTS AGAINST ALL HERESIES, (therefore yields to none, complyes with
none) Fight she may, but she cannot be overcome. All Heresies depart from her,
as unprofitable branches cut off from the Vine: But she remains still in her
root, in her Vine, in her Charity; the Gates of Hell shall not overcome her.
Thus Saint Austin. Can any man doubt but this holy Doctor in the precedent
words, does in effect teach the Church to be infallible, when he says she
perpetually fights against all Heresies, or Errors in Faith, and that she can
never be over. come by them? Does he not clearly prove this truth, by the
allegation of this Text in the close of them? But I shall add one or two
Authorities more, to this purpose. First St. Cyrils; Secundum hanc promissionem
Ecclesia Apostolica Petri, etc. According to this promise apud. D. Thom. in
Catena hujus loci.
(says he) the Church Apostolic of St. Peter abides always immaculate, or
free from all spots, of Heretical Circumvention and Error. The Text has been
cited already. You may observe the like sense in Cap. 10. in (...).
St. Epiphanius. Ipse autem Dominus constituit eum Primum Apostolorum, In
Anchorat. Tom. 2. page 14.
PETRAM FIRMAM, supra quam, etc. Our Lord (says he, speaking of St. Peter)
ordained him chief of the Apostles, A FIRM ROCK, upon which the Church is
built, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her, which Gates of Hell
are Heresies and Arch-heretiques.

6. For the better understanding of which Texts it is necessary to know, that
every error contrary to Divine Faith is Heresy, as St. Austin, and all
Divines, generally teach: Wherefore if the Church should teach any thing
contrary to what God has revealed, she should teach Heresy; and contradict
these Fathers, who all clear the Church from that aspersion, by virtue of this
promise of Christ, Matthew. 16. 18. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
her, and withal, tacitly at least, acknowledge, that if she did teach Heresy
at any time, the Gates of Hell, in that case, would be found to have prevailed
against her. Seeing therefore, every error in Faith, or against Divine
Revelation, is Heresy, and since the Church, in the judgment of these
Fathers, grounded upon this promise, cannot teach Heresy, it follows evidently
that in the judgment of the same Fathers, she cannot err in any point of
Faith whatever, by virtue of the same promise.

How the Infallibility of the Church is gathered out of the second place has
been showed already, and is here confirmed even by his Matthew. 28. 20. Ibidem.
Lordships own discourse out of St. Leo epist. 91. which is, that Christ in
that place, promised to be present with his Ministers in all those things,
which he committed to their execution. But surely one, and a chief one of those
ALL, was to teach Infallibly, the whole doctrine of Christ's Gospel. Wherefore
Christ is still present with his Ministers inabling them to perform this so
important a work, when it is necessary to be executed; that is, when the
necessities of the Church require some point in controversy among Christians
to be determined.

Nor will that conclusion hence follow, which his Lordship fears viz. that all
the Sermons of every Pastor of the Church would be Infallible: Ibidem.
for it is no ways necessary that every particular Pastor should be
Infallible; but it is absolutely necessary, that the Church in general, or a
General Council should be Infallible, because otherwise, there would no means
be left in the Church, sufficient to determine Controversies of Faith, or
prevent the spreading of Schisms and Heresies.

To the end my Reader may the better conceive this, he is to understand there
are diverse degrees of Christ's presence and assistance in reference to the
Ministers of his Church. All of them cannot challenge all privileges, but must
be content with those, that properly belong to their respective state and
condition in the sacred Hierarchy. And yet, as all the said degrees are
grounded upon this and the like promises of our Savior; so it is necessary,
they be all verified, according to the respective necessities of the Church.
The Supreme Degree we affirm to be that of Infallible Assistance; and therefore
assign it only to those who have Supreme Authority in the Church, and in cases
only of most urgent necessity, for preventing of Heresies and Schisms. In all
other cases, and in reference to all other Ministers of the Church, we profess
that so long as the Teaching and Governing part of them is continually so
assisted by Christ, that it generally leads not his Flock into error in Faith,
nor neglects to teach them the observation of all things Christ commanded, the
promise is sufficiently performed on Christ's part, and St. Leo's words, In
omnibus S. Lco. Epist. 91.
quae Ministris suis commisit exequenda, rightly enough explicated, though
every private Pastor become not a Prophet, and every Pulpit an Oracle, as the
Relatour vainly surmizes.

The third place urged by A. C. is out of St. Luke 22. 32. where Christ's prayer
for St. Peter is as efficacious as his promise; both of them implying an
Infallibility in the Church, against all errors in Faith whatsoever. The words
are these: Simon, Simon, Behold Satan has required to have you, to sift as
wheat. But I have prayed for Thee, that thy Faith fail not: and thou once
converted, confirm thy Brethren. It Is clear, that Christ here prayed, that
Faith in the Church might not fail; either by praying for St. Peter as he was a
Figure of the whole Church, (which is the exposition of the Parisians) or by
praying immediately for St. Peter's person, and mediately for the whole Church,
which he represented. And thus at least, that our Savior, in that Taxt, prayed
for the whole Church, Bellarmin expressly grants in the very beginning of the
Chapter cited by the Quae expositio si ita intelligeretur, ut diceret immediate
oratum esse pro Capite Ecclesiae, and (...) pro toto corpore, quod per caput
representatur, vera esset. Bellarm. l. 4. de Romans Pont, cap. 3. iuitio.
Bishop. It seems strange therefore, that his Authority should be brought for
denial of our Saviors praying here for the Church. The prayer then of Christ
extended it self to St. Peter and his Successors; and by them to the whole
Church, according to those words of St. Bernard, Dignum namque arbitror ibi
potissimum resarciri damna Fidei, D. Bern. Epist. 190. ad Innocent.
ubi non possit Fides sentire defectum. Cui enim alteri Sedi dictum est
aliquando, Ego rogavi pro Te, ut non deficiat fides tua, etc. I think it
fitting (says he) that the damages in Faith should be there chiefly repaired,
where Faith can suffer no defect. For to what other Chair was it ever said, I
have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not?

Take therefore which of these Expositions you please, if an Infallible
Assistance of Christ be once granted, whereby his Church is sufficiently
preserved from all error in Faith, whether that Assistance be immediately
intended in this prayer to St. Peter and his Successors, as Supreme Teachers of
the Church, or to the Church immediately as represented in St. Peter, yet still
the Church will be Infallible, by virtue of this prayer of our Savior.

8. The fourth place named by A. C. is that of St. John, chap. 14. 16. to which
he adds a consequent place, John 16. 13. both of them containing another
promise of Christ to his Apostles, and in them to his Church, viz. that the
Comforter (the Holy Ghost) shall come and abide with them for ever, teaching
them all things, etc. and guiding them into all Truth. We have already
sufficiently explicated these places in proof of the Churches Infallibility: So
that our chief labor at present shall be to observe the Bishops various
Trippings and Windings in his review of them. First he says, these promises,
if you apply them to the Church consisting of all Believers, and including the
Apostles, are absolute and without any restriction: which certainly is but a
loose assertion, taking it in the Bishops sense, which is, that the Apostles
were free not only from all error, but from all Dr. Field lib. 4. de
Ecclesia, cap. 2.
ignorance in Divine Things; for so his Author ( a) Dr. Field speaks whom he
cites in the Margin. Were the Apostles not ignorant of any Divine matters? why
then does St. Paul tell us, 1 Cor. 13. 9. We know in part? Did the Apostles
understand the whole counsel of God concerning mankind; why then does the same
Apostle cry out, Romans 11. 33, 35. O the depth of the -- Wisdom and knowledge of
God! how unsearchable are his judgments, etc. and who has known the mind of
our Lord! Secondly, if these promises of Christ be so absolute and without any
restriction in regard of the Apostles, to what purpose is that Text of Neque
Divini Prophetae, neque Miralliles Apostoli Omnia praesciverunt. Quaecunque
enim expediebant, (...) illis significavit gratia Spiritus. Theod. in 1 Timothy c.
3. v. 14, 15.
Theodoret cited in his Margin, which says expressly they ought to be limited
in regard of them, and that they did not signify the Apostles should be led
simply into all Truth, but into all Truth necessary, or expedient, to
Salvation. Thirdly, the Bishop having limited the promises of being taught and
led into all Truth, as they relate to the present Church, only to Truths
necessary to Salvation, he is not yet satisfied, but adds another limitation
to that, viz. Direction of Scripture. Against this Truth (says he, meaning
Truth necessary to Salvation) the whole Ibidem. n. 5.
Catholic Church cannot err, keeping her self to the Direction of Scripture,
as Christ has appointed her. But I ask what Privilege then has the Catholic
Church in these promises of Christ, more then every private Christian? Surely
with this condition of following the direction of Scripture, there is none of
the faithful, but may pretend to be as Infallible as the Church. Fourthly, they
must be limited (says he) to all such Truths, as our Savior had told them.
But the Apostles were taught diverse things, of principal concernment in order
to Salvation, by the Holy Ghost, even after our Saviors Ascension: had they no
promise of Divine Assistance, in the delivery of those Truths?

Thus the promises of Christ come to nothing. But if one should ask some of
this Bishops Disciples, how their Master proves, that the promises of Christ
are to be limited to Truths necessary to Salvation, they must answer (...), (
Ipse dixit) just as Pythagoras his Pupils did of old, when they were urged to
give a Reason of their Masters Philosophy. For where (I pray) has Christ so
limited his promises? where do the Apostles teach us to understand them with
such limitation? Neither do we extend them to Truths wholly unnecessary, or to
curious Truths, as the Bishop seems willing to insinuate: No, We tell him,
there is a medium, a middle sort of Truths between those which are absolutely
necessary for all men's Salvation, and those which are simply unnecessary, or
curious. We extend these promises to all Truths of this middle sort, that is,
to all such Truths, as the Church finds consonant to Catholic Faith and
Piety, and necessary to be defined for the preventing of Heresies, Schisms,
and Dissentions among Christians. But I pray observe our Adversaries
unparalled Subtlety in the close of all. Christ (says he) has promised,
that the Spirit should lead his Church into all Truth, but he has no where
promised, that the Church should follow her leader. What a rare Acumen is here!
Then belike, to lead and to follow are not Relatives in Protestant Logic. But
let them take heed; it is to be feared they will be found Relatives: and that if
the Devil chance to lead any of them to Hell for their Heresy and other sins,
nothing will help, but they must infallibly follow him. And I wish that all his
Lordships party would duly consider this, as often as they interpret Scripture
after this manner.

CHAP. 15. Of the Roman Churches Authority.
ARGUMENT.
1. Whether Protestants, beside reforming themselves, did not condemn the
Church of error in Faith. 2. That St. Peter had a larger and higher Power over
the Church of Christ, then the rest of the Apostles. 3. The History, or matter
of Fact, touching the Donatists appealing to the Emperor, related; and how
little it advantages the Bishop or his party. 4. St. Gregory's Authority
concerning the question of Appeals, and the Civil Law, notably wrested by the
Bishop. 5. St. Wilfrid, Archbishop of York, twice appealed to Rome, and was
twice restored to his Bishopric, by virtue of the Popes Authority. 6. The
African Church always in Communion with the Roman 7. St. Peter's placing his
Sea at Rome, no ground of his Successors Supremacy. 8. Why the Emperors for
some time ratified the Popes Election. 9. Inferior Clerks only forbidden by
the Canons to appeal to Rome. 10. The Pope never accused by the Ancients of
falsifying the Canons; and that he might justly cite the Canons of Sardica, as
Canons of the Council of Nice.

BY the precedent Discourse it appears, that the Bishops main task, for a long
time, has been to prove, that the General Church may err, and stand in need
of Reformation in matters of Faith: this being 25. n. 7.
the thing, which A. C. most constantly denies. But his Lordship finding the
proof of this not so easy, by little and little was fain to slide into another
question, concernig the Power particular Churches have to reform themselves,
thinking by this to Authorize the pretended Reformation of his particular
English Church. To this purpose were his many Allegations of the Councils of
Carthage, Rome, Gangres, Toledo, etc. 24. number. 5. which how they succeeded, the
Reader may easily have perceived by our Answers in the precedent Chapter.

1. He goes on with his wonted Art: which is, to allege his Adversary with not
overmuch sincerity. A. C. treating the abovesaid question touching the Power
particular Churches have to reform themselves, and not denying, but in some
cases particular Churches may reform what is amiss even in matter of Faith, for
greater caution, adds these express words, ( page 58.) WHEN THE NEED (of
Reformation) IS ONLY QUESTIONABLE, particular Pastors and Churches may not
condemn others of Error in Faith. But these words, when the need is only
questionable, the Bishop thinks fit to leave out: to what end, but to have some
color to contradict his Adversary, and abuse his Reader?

Let us now see whether his Lordships party be far from judging and condemning
other Churches, as he seems to make them by his simile. A man that lives
religiously (says he) does not by and by sit in judgment, and condemn with
his mouth all profane livers. But yet while he is silent, his very life
condemns them. First of all, Who are these men that live so religiously? They,
who to propagate the Gospel the better marry Wives, contrary to the Canons, and
bring (forsooth) Scripture for it Genesis 2. 18.
Non est bonum esse hominem solum; and again, 1 Cor. 9. 5.
Numquid non habemus potestatem mulierem sororem circumducendi? Who are these
men (I say) that live so religiously? They, who pull down Monasteries both of
Religious men and women; They, who cast Altars to the ground; They, who partly
banish Priests, partly put them to death; They, who deface the very Tombs of
Saints, and will not permit them to rest even after they are dead. These are
the men who live so religiously. But who are (according to his Lordship)
profane Livers? They, who stick close to St. Peter and his Successors; They,
who for the Catholic Faith endure most willingly Sequestrations,
Imprisonments, Banishments, Death it self; They, in a word, who suffer
Persecution for Righteousness. These, in his Lordships opinion, are Profane
Livers.

I return now to the Relatours men, that live so religiously. Do these men
never condemn the Catholic Church, but by their virtuous lives, which you
have seen? Surely they condemn her not only by quite dissonant lives, but also
by word of mouth, by their pens, nay by public and solemn Censures. Witness
(to go no further) the Protestant Church of England, Artic. 19. where she
condemns of error not only the Churches of Antioch and Alexandria, but even
of Rome it self. Again Rogers in his allowed Analyze and See Rogers on the
thirty nine Articles.
Comment upon the said Article, pronounces that the Church of Rome has not
only shamefully erred in matters of Faith, but that the whole visible Church
may likewise err from time to time, and has erred in doctrine, as well as
conversation. Do they not say, Artic. 21. that General Councils may err, and
have erred, even in things pertaining to God? Do they not pronounce of
Purgatory, Praying to Saints, Worship of Images and Relics etc. Artic. 22. of
Transubstantiation, Artic. 28. and of the Sacrifice of the Mass, Artic. 31.
respectively, that they are fond things, vainly invented by men, contrary to
Gods Word, Blasphemous Fables, and dangerous Deceits? Though it be as clear as
the sun at noonday, that both these and many other points, denied and rejected
by Protestants, were the doctrine and practice, not only of the Roman, but of
the whole Church near upon a thousand years together, even by the confession of
Protestants. Is this only to reform themselves, and not to condemn other
Churches: otherwise then by silence and example? Do not all other Protestant
See the Book called Corpus Consessionum, in every Controverted Article.
Confessions of Faith speak the same language? Do they not all take upon them,
with a more then censorious presumption, to condemn the Doctrine and practice
of the Roman Catholic, that is, of the whole true Church of Christ, in the
same and diverse other contested points?

2. A. C. therefore well minds us, that in all matters of difficulty Ibidem.
n. 8.
belonging to Faith, particular Churches should have recourse to the Church of
Rome, (as Irenaeus intimates) which has a more powerful Principality; Iren.
lib. 3. cap. 3.
and to her Bishop, who is chief Pastor of the whole Church, as being St.
Peter's Successor, to whom Christ promised the Keys, Math. 16. for whom he
prayed that his Faith might not fail, Luke 22. and whom he charged to Feed and
Govern his Flock, John 21. which (says A. C.) he shall never refuse to do in
such sort, as that his neglect shall be a just cause for any particular man, or
Church, under pretense of Reformation in Manners or Faith, to make a Schism,
or Separation, from the whole General Church. In answer to this the Bishop
tells us, the Roman Church has indeed a more powerful Principality, then any
other particular Church, but not from Christ: which is contrary to St.
Arbitramur -- adjuvante (...) Domini nostri Jesu Christi -- Authoritati
Sanctitatis tuae de sanctarum Scripturarum Authoritate depromptae, facilius
eos, qui (...) perversa and (...) sentiuns, esse cessuros. D. Aug. epist. 92.
Austin, or rather to the whole Council of Milevis, who in their Epistle to
Innocent the first profess, that the Popes Authority is grounded upon
Scripture, and consequently proceeds from Christ. Secondly, he says the
Patriarchs were all as even, and equal for any Principality of Power, as the
Apostles were. But this is first Equivocal, the Apostles themselves were not in
all respects equal, or of even Authority. They had a Superior among them, viz.
Saint Peter. It Is true indeed, except St. Peter, they were are all equal among
themselves; every one of them had equal mission unto, and Jurisdiction over the
whole Church, and none of them any Authority preceptive or coercive over
another: whereas St. Peter, together with his Authority Apostolical over the
whole Church, (which was common to him with the rest of the Apostles) had also
Jurisdiction and Authority, over the Apostles themselves, as being, in the
number of Christ's sheep, committed to his charge by our Savior, John 21. as is
clear in all Antiquity.

Secondly, it is contrary to the Council of Nice. In the third Canon Edit. Binii
Arabic.
whereof, which concerns the Jurisdiction of Patriarchs, the Authority (or
Principality, if you will) of the Bishop of Rome is made the pattern, or model
of that Authority and Jurisdiction, which the Patriarchs were to exercise over
the Provincial Bishops. The words of the Canon are these. Sicque praeest
Patriarcha iis omnibus, qui sub potestate ejus sunt, sicut ille, qui tenet
Sedem Romae, CAPUT ESTET PRINCEPS OMNIUM PATRIARCHARUM. The Patriarch (say
they) is in the same manner over all those, that are under his Authority, as
He, who holds the Sea of Rome, is Head and Prince of all the Patriarchs. And in
the same Canon the Pope is afterward styled, Petro similis and Autoritate par,
(resembling Saint Peter, and, his equal in Authority.) This also the practice
of the Church shows; which is always the best Expositour and Assertour of the
Canons. For not only the Popes Confirmation was required to all new-elected
Patriarchs, but it belonged likewise to him to depose unworthy ones, and
restore the unjustly deposed by others. We read of no less then Nicol. Pap.
cpist. ad Michael. Imperat.
eight several Patriarchs of Constantinople deposed by the Bishop of Rome.
Sixtus the third deposed also Polychronius Bishop of Jerusalem, as his Acts set
down in the first Tome of the Councils testify. On the contrary Zozomen lib.
3. cap. 7.
Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, and Paulus Bishop of Constantinople were
by Julius the first restored to their respective Seas, having been unjustly
expelled by Heretics. The same might be said of diverse others; over whom the
Pope did exercise the like authority: which he could never have done, upon any
other ground, then that of divine Right, and as being generally acknowledged
St. Peter's Successor in the Government of the whole Church.

St. Austin therefore said well, Aug. epist. 162.
in Romana Ecclesia semper Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit Principatus, (in the
Roman Church the Principality of the Apostolic Chair has always flourisht.)
Here the Bishop will have some other Apostolic Chairs, like this of Rome,
viz. equal Ibid. n. 10.
to it in Authority. But this he does, partly to level the Dignity of the Roman
Sea, contrary to St. Austin, and all Antiquity, and partly to make way to some
other pretty perversions of the same Father. For we must know, he is now
entering upon that main question concerning the Donatists of Africa; of whose
proceedings the whole forecited Epistle of St. Austin treats: and therefore
(to make our answer to his objections more compendious and clear) it will not
be amiss, in the first place, to state that business by way of Narrative, and
matter of Fact only; which I shall briefly do out of St. Austin, and Optatus
Milevitanus. Thus then it was.

3. The Donatists of Africa finding themselves sharply opposed by Caecilianus,
Archbishop of Carthage and Primate of Africa, by way of revenge D. Aug. epist.
162.
accuse him of having in time of Persecution delivered up the Holy Scriptures,
with other Sacred Utensils of the Church, into the possession of the Heathens;
which was accounted a most capital crime amongst Christians. They added to
their accusation, that he was made Bishop by one guilty of the same crime, viz.
by Felix Bishop of Aptung; and they prosecuted the business so hotly, that by a
Synod of seventy African Bishops Caecilian was condemned, and outed of his
Bishopric. But he, making no great reckoning of the sentence, as being
condemned absent and unheard, and knowing himself to be in Communion with the
Roman Church, the Donatists are forced to prosecute their charge against him in
other Churches beyond Sea. But not daring to appear at Rome, or at least
knowing it would be to little purpose, they address themselves to the Emperor
Optat. Milev. lib 1. cont. Parmen.
Constantin, and desire him to command their cause to be heard by some Bishops
of the Gauls in France, where the Emperor then resided. But the Emperor was
so far from favoring them D. Aug. cont. lit. Petil. lib. 2. cap 92.
, that he showed a great dislike of their proceedings, telling them Aug. epist.
166.
exprefly, that it belonged not to him, neither durst he act the part of a
Judge in a cause of Bishops. Nevertheless knowing very well the turbulent
disposition of Schismatiques, and perceiving they meant not to acquiesce in the
sentence of any Ecclesiastical Tribunal, to which they were immediately
subject, he thought good to take a middle way: which was to send them to Rome,
there to be heard and judged by the Pope, to whom the cause did most properly
belong; Eusebius. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 5.
but yet to comply a little with the Donatists, he sent along with them some
Bishops of the Gauls, in whom they more confided, and whom they had already
demanded to be their Judges; intending that these French Bishops should hear
the Donatists cause together with the Pope, and determine therein what they
should find to be right. Neither did Melchiades (the Pope) refuse them; but
for the greater solemnity of the judgment and satisfaction of the parties,
adjoined to them D. Aug. epist. 166. Optat. Milev. lib. 1. contr. Parmen.
fifteen other Italian Bishops, and so proceeded to the hearing of the Cause.
But behold the issue! After a full hearing of all parties the Donatists were D.
Aug. de unic. Baptism. contr. Petil. cap. 16. D. Aug. in Brevic. collat: Carth.
part. 3.
condemned; Caecilianus, Felix, and some other African Bishops of their party
were justified and acquitted.

The Schismatiques being thus condemned at Rome, and even by those Bishops of
the Gauls, whom they had chosen for Judges, by way of Appeal address
themselves again to the Emperor; which the pious Prince took so hainously,
that (as Optatus Milevitanus reports) he cried out against them to this
purpose, Optat. Milevit. lib. 1.
O the audacious folly and madness of these men! See; They have here exhibited
an Appeal (being themselves Bishops, and in a cause of Bishops) just as
Infidels use to do in their own causes. Nevertheless being at length as it were
forced by their D. Aug. epist. 162.
obstinate importunity, he condescends they should be heard once again, not as
admitting their appeal, or deporting himself in the business as their competent
Judge; but chiefly for their further conviction Epist. Constantin. ad Episc.
Cathol. in fine Gestor. in purgat. Caecil. and Felicis.
and to inform himself of the cause of Felix Bishop of Aptung, which the
Donatists pretended had not been duly heard at Rome. Whereupon a Council of two
hundred Bishops was assembled at D. Aug. epist. 60 and 162. and lib. de unic.
Baptism. cap. 16.
Arles, where the Popes Legates were present, as also the three Bishops of the
Gauls, and some of the Italian Bishops, who had already pronounced sentence in
the cause at Rome. To be short, the Donatists are in this Council likewise
Epist. Council. Arelatens. 1.
condemned, but not quieted; for with an impudence proper to such people, and
to be paralleled only with their fellow Schismatiques, they run the third time
to the Emperor, and will not be satisfied, unless he condescend to hear them
in person. What should the Emperor do? He had already protested against this,
as of it self unlawful, but there was no remedy; the Schismatiques will not let
him rest until he hear them. Wherefore having first D. Aug. epist. 162.
promised to ask the Bishops pardon, he consents to this also; hears them, and
D. Aug. in Brevic. Collat. Carthag. part 3. col. 589, 590, 591.
condemns them with his own mouth.

This is the true and real story of the Donatists proceedings; from whence his
Lordship brings several objections against the Popes Supremacy, which we are
now to examine. First he would have us observe, that the Roman Prelate came not
in, till the Donatists had leave given them by the African Prelates, to be
heard by foreign Bishops. But this proves rather the justice and moderation of
the Roman Prelate, that he came not in before it was due time, and the matter
orderly brought before him. For though the cause did most properly belong to
the Popes Cognizance, yet was it first to be heard and decided by the Bishops
of the Province, where the cause first sprang up. The Pope was not to meddle
with it, otherwise then by way of regular Appeal, unless (perchance) he had
seen the Provincial Bishops to have neglected it, or been unable effectually to
determine it. Secondly, he abuses St. Austin in making him say, that the
African Bishops gave the 25. n. 10.
Donatists leave to be heard by foreign Bishops. Whereas there is no such
leave mentioned, or insinuated by St. Austin in all that Epistle. What he says
is only his own private advise, viz. that if any of them had convincing proofs
of ought that was criminal in the Catholic Bishops of Africa, for which they
feared to communicate with them, they should apply themselves to the
Transmarine Bishops, and especially to the Bishop of Rome, and there make their
complaints: which is not a dispensing with them to do something, which
otherwise they might not do, (as the Bishop would have it thought) much less is
it a license, or dispensation, given them by the African Bishops sitting in
Council; but only a private exhortation, and counsel of Si aliqui in vobis
sunt, qui certa ipsorum crimina ita noverint ut ea facile valiant convincere,
and talibus communicare formidant, PERGANT ad fratres nostros Transmarinarum
Ecclesiarum Episcopos, and ibi prius de ipsorum factis and contumacia
conquerantur, quod ad judicium (...) Africanorum male sibi conscii venire
noluerunt; ut ibi illis denuncietur ut veniant, ibique objectis respondeant. D.
Aug. epist. 162.
St. Austin himself, requiring them to do what according to the Canons was to
be done in such a case.

His second objection is, that if the Pope had come in without this leave, to
judge the Donatists cause, it had been an usurpation in him. But this is
grounded partly upon his own false supposition, that such leave was given, and
partly upon an affected mistake, or mis-translation of the words usurpare and
usurpavit. For it is evident, in the first part of the sentence St. Austin
speaks not in his own person, but in the person of the Donatists, as making an
objection to himself in their behalf. An forte non debuit Romanae Ecclesiae
Melciades Episcopus cum Collegis Transmarinis illud sibi usurpare judicium,
quod ab Afris Scptuaginta, ubi primas Tigisitanus praesedit, fuerit terminatum?
Quid quod nec ipse usurpavit: rogatus quippe Imperator Judices misit Episcopos,
quicum eo sederent, and de (...) illa causa quod justum videretur, statuerent.
D. Aug. ibidem.
An forte non debuit, etc. (the words you have in the margin at large) Ought
not, perchance, Melchiades, Bishop of the Roman Church, with his Colleagues the
Transmarine Bishops, to challenge to himself that judgment? etc. Whereas, the
Bishop by his englishing the words makes St. Austin positively say,
peradventure Melchiades ought not (of right) to have challenged ( or usurped)
to himself that judgment: which surely was a notorious winding in his
Labyrinth. For it makes that to be a Negative in St. Austins sense, which
doubtless in his true meaning was an Affirmative; and by asking, will you
Donatists say he ought not to do this, he by consequence and in effect said,
that he ought to do it. For the second part of the Speech, where St. Austin
answers the objection, it is no less clear, that he speaks per (...), by way of
condescendence to his Adversaries manner of speaking, the better to mollify
them, which is oftentimes practiced in Rhetoric; and not as acknowledging,
that it could be any real usurpation in the Pope, to take cognizance of such a
cause without leave given. And if our Adversaries think not this true, let them
tell us, who, but our Savior Christ and the Canons of the Universal Church,
gave the Pope leave to hear and judge the causes of St. Athanasius, and those
many other Patriarchs and Bishops of the Church, which most certainly he did
both hear and judge effectually, no man (no not the persons themselves who were
interessed and suffered by his judgment) complaining, or accusing him of
usurpation.

Thirdly, he alleges, that other Bishops were made Judges with the Pope, and
that by the Emperors power, which the Pope will now least of all endure. I
answer first, the Bishops sent by the Emperor were only three; an
inconsiderable number to sway the sentence: and the Pope to show his Authority,
that he was not to be prescribed by any in this cause, added to these three,
fifteen other Bishops of Italy, to be his Colleagues and Assistants in the
business. Secondly I answer, the Emperor in sending those Bishops together
with the Donatists to Rome, did nothing by way of Authority, or Command, but of
Mediation, as using his Interest with the Pope; which he might do without
breach of the Canons. What he did afterward, he openly protested to be in it
self unlawful, and not belonging to him; he did it therefore only in
condescendence to the Donatists importunity, and would have asked the Bishops
pardon for it, as V. Aug. epist. 162. and 166. ubi supra.
S. Austin witnesses: whose sentence Ad cujus curam, de qua^ rationem (...)
redditurus est, res illa maxim (...), D. Aug. epist. 162.
here lamely cited by the Bishop, is far from proving his intent, viz. that the
judgment of this cause was a thing properly belonging to the Emperors
Authority. Nor does it concern us at all, that the Emperor gave sentence in
the business; since being wrought to it by the importunity of the Donatists, he
was bound in conscience, to act the part of a just Judge, and pronounce a right
sentence: which as he finally did, in condemning these Schismatics, as we said
above, so no doubt it is all St. Austin means by the words alleged.

4. His Deductions from the Civil Law are no better. For first, suppose that an
inferior Prelate could not appeal from the sentence of his Patriarch; yet when
the Patriarchs themselves have differences one with another, must there not
according to the rules of good Government, be some higher ordinary Tribunal,
where such causes may be heard and determined? I say Ordinary. For it would be
a manifest defect, if that which is the extraordinary High Court of
Ecclesiastical Justice, viz. a General Council, should be of necessity
assembled for every particular difference between Patriarchs. Secondly, what
the Law says, is rightly understood, and must be explicated of Inferior
Clerks only; who were not (of ordinary course) to appeal further then the
Patriarch, or the Primate of their Province; for so the Council. African. Can.
101.
Council of Africa determines. But it is even Vt Roman liceat Epscopis
provocare; and ut Clericorum causae apud suarum Provinciarum Episcopos
finiantur, jam priore anno, etiam literis uostris ad eundem venerabilis
memoriae Zozymum Episcopum datis, infinuari curavimus, etc. Council. African.
epist. ad Bonifac. Pap. to which St. Austin subscribed.
there acknowledged that Bishops had power in their own causes to appeal to
Rome. The same explication is to be given to the Text of St. Gregory, viz. that
he speaks of Inferior Clerks, since Bishops were ever accustomed to appeal to
the Pope. But I wonder his Lordship would expose to view the following words of
St. Si dictum fuerit, quod nec Metropolitanum nec Patriarcham habeat, dicendum
est, quod a Sede Apostoloca, quae omnium Ecclesiarum Caput est, causa audienda
est. D. Greg. lib. 11. Indict. 6. epist. 54.
Gregory; Where there is neither Metropolitan nor Patriarch, even Inferior
Clerks, when they appeal, must have their recourse to the Sea Apostolic. Then
surely it follows, the Bishop of Romes Jurisdiction is not only over the
Western or Southern Provinces, (as the Relatour limits it, page 168.) but over
the whole Church, whither the Jurisdiction of Metropolitans and Patriarchs
never extended. Neither could such Appeals be just, if the Bishop of Rome were
not the Lawful Superior and Judge of all the Bishops of Christendom; it being
confessed, that no Juridical Appeal can be made, but from an inferior to a
superior Judge.

To those words of St. Gregory, quae omnium Ecclesiarum Caput est, wherein he
intimates the reason, why Appeals should be brought, from all parts of
Christendom, to the Sea Apostolic, his Lordship thinks it best to use this
evasion. I have said enough to that (says he) in diverse parts of this
discourse. But in what parts hitherto I cannot find, though I have used some
diligence in the search. I could therefore wish he had spoken something to it
here, where he had so fair an occasion. I only say this. If the Roman Sea be
the Head of all Churches, (as St. Gregory says it is) surely it has Authority
over all Churches.

His Lordship, as long as he stands upon the Roman ground, stands upon thorns,
and therefore makes a step, or rather a leap, from the Church of Rome, to the
Church of England; with whose Encomiums given heretofore by Antiquity, he is
much pleased. But what those Ancient times of Church Government were, wherein
Britain was never subject to the Sea of Rome, we desire should be proved, and
not merely said.

I should not have envied his Lordships happiness (much less the honor of his
Sea) had he and all his worthy Predecessors (as he calls them) since St.
Austin, been enobled with the Eminence of Patriarks: yet I see no reason, why a
velut Patriarcha, pronounced by the Pope by way of Encomium only, upon a
particular occasion, should be of force to make Canterbury a Patriarchal Sea.
Similies fall always short of the thing it self. Again it imports little, that
there was a Primate in Britain; for that only proves, that inferior Clerks
might not ordinarily appeal from him to Rome: but that Britain was not subject
to the Roman Sea, or that the British Bishops did not (as ocsion required)
freely and continually appeal to Rome, it does not prove; yea the contrary is
manifest by all the monuments of the British Church. What ever is meant by the
words in Barbarico, cited by his Lordship out of the Codex Canonum Ecclesiae
Universae, certain it is, that whoever were under the government of the
Patriarch of Constantinople, were not exempted from the Authority of the Bishop
of Rome; neither ought the Relatour to suppose it, unless he had first proved,
that the said Patriarch had been himself legally exempt, or not subject to the
Pope: which he neither offers to do, nor can it be done; nay the contrary is
evident.

5. To me truly it seems very strange, his Lordship should be so little
acquainted with the Ecclesiastical History of England, as to affirm so
confidently, that in ancient times Britain was never subject to Rome; meaning
in Ecclesiastical matters. For (to instance in the very business of Appeals)
does not Bed. lib 5. Eccles. Hist. cap. 20.
Venerable Bede tell us, that in King Egfrids time (which was about the Year of
our Lord 673.) St. Wilfrid, Archbishop of York, being unjustly deprived of his
Bishopric, appealed to the Sea Apostolic, was heard by Pope Agatho in the
presence of many other Bishops, and by their unanimous Sentence was pronounced
innocent? Was he not restored again to his Bishopric by virtue of that
sentence? Does not the same Author affirm, that being the second time expelled
his Sea, he did the second time also appeal to Rome, and was likewise
acquitted, upon a full hearing of his cause, in the presence of his
adversaries? Was there not, upon his second return into England, a Synod of
Bishops called in obedience to the Popes order; in which, by the general vote
of all the good Bishop was again restored? Is this no Evidence of Romes
Authority over England in ancient times? It Is now almost a thousand years
since Bid wrote, and doubtless his History is one of the most Authentic we
have: he being a most holy and learned man.

Again, is it not manifest out of him, that even the Primitive Original
Institution of our English Bishoprics was from Rome? See the Letter of Pope
Gregory the first to St. Austin our English Apostle, which Bid reports in
these words; Bed lib. (...) Eecl. Hist. cap. 19.
-- Quia nova Anglorum Ecclesia ad omnipotentis Dei gratiam, codem Domino
largiente, et Te labor ante, perducta est, etc. Seeing by the goodness of God
(says he) and your industry, the new English Church is brought unto the Faith
of Christ, we grant to you the use of the PALL (the proper Badge, or Sign, of
Archiepiscopal Dignity) to wear it when you say MASS: and we condescend, that
you ordain twelve Bishops under your Jurisdiction; yet so, that the Bishop of
London be consecrated hereafter by a Synod of his own Bishops, and receive the
PALL from this Holy Apostolical Sea, wherein (...), by the Authority of God, do
now serve. Our will likewise is, that you send a Bishop to York; to whom we
intend also to give the PALL (that is, to make him an Archbishop:) But TO YOU
shall be subject, not only the Bishops you make, and he of York, but all the
Bishops of Britain. Behold here the Original Charter (as I may say) of the
Primacy of Canterbury; in this Letter and Mandate of the Pope it is founded:
Nor can it with any color of reason be drawn from other Origin. By virtue of
this Grant, have all the succeeding Bishops of that Sea, enjoyed the Dignity
and Authority of Primates in this Nation: which is a thing so out of question,
that truly I see not how it is possible either to excuse the Relatours gross
ignorance, if he knew it not; or his great ingratitude, if knowing it, he would
be so unworthy as to belie his own knowledge, and dissemble his obligations to
that Pope, who had done so much for the Sea of Canterbury.

6. In the following pages his Lordship spends not a few lines in. 25. n. 11.
vain, laboring to prove a Separation of the African Church from that of Rome;
chiefly out of two Instruments, found in several Editions of the Councils,
which seem to testify as much. One is an Epistle, or Supplication rather,
which Eulalius Bishop of (...) is supposed to have written to Pope Boniface the
second, in the name of the African Church, desiring a Reconciliation with the
Roman, and disclaiming the Separation made between them for many years before.
The other is an Epistle of the same Pope Boniface the second to Eulalius
Patriarch of Alexandria, wherein he imparts the good news of the African
Churches Submission, and Reconciliation with the Roman, and rejoices with him
upon the occasion. But I answer, As the Bishop himself stands not to maintain
the Credit of these Epistles (which he knows to be generally questioned by
Catholics) nor answer the exceptions, which Baronius and Bellarmin bring
against them; so the Baron. ad Ann. 419. n. 92, 93. Bellar. lib. 2. de Romans
Pout. cap. 25. in fin.
use he makes of them is to very little purpose.

To the first part of his Dilemma, viz. If the said Instruments be false, then
Pope Boniface the second, and his Accomplices at Rome, or some for them, are
notorious forgers etc. We deny the consequence; there is no necessity to
affirm, that either Boniface the second, or his Accomplices, were forgers of
these pretended Instruments; but rather the contrary: In regard such a forgery
would presently have been discovered and exclaimed against; seeing in that
Popes time no such man as Eulalius was Bishop of Alexandria, but one Timotheus,
an Heretic, Baron. ubi supra.
and great opposer of the Roman Church. Neither could the other Eulalius he
speaks of, be then a Catholic Bishop of Carthage; it being a time when there
was not one Catholic Bishop in all Africa.

As to his closing words or some for them, if he mean they did it by the Popes
consent, it is answered under the word Accomplices: but if he intend no more,
but that they were forged by some body, it is very true; but what will it
concern the Roman Sea, if some other feign an Epistle in the Popes name? Were
there not some that feigned Epistles, and other writings in the Apostles names?
was that the Apostles fault? or did it bring any just prejudice either to the
Authority, or Integrity of their writings?

To the second part, viz. If these Instruments be true, then the Church of
Africa did separate from the Roman, and the Separation continued for above a
hundred years. I answer, Till it be evinced, that these Instruments are true,
we cannot suffer by them: but his Lordship is so far from offering at this,
that he does not so much as positively affirm it. He shows us indeed, several
Editions of the Councils, wherein these Instruments are inserted. But it is
well known, that the Editions of Councils cited by the Bishop, have many other
Apocryphal and unauthentique writings inserted in them besides these. The
reason of this may be, because the Compilers of those times did not take upon
them to be Censurers of what they found upon ancient Record, but only to be
faithful Publishers of the Records. Whence it is, that as they did not except
against these Instruments, (no more then against others of like nature) so
neither did they expressly approve them; but merely published what they found
upon Record, leaving the further scrutiny to the learned. But as for the
Schismatical Separation of the African Church from the Roman, argued out of the
said Instruments, it is inconsistent with the truth of Story, and confuted by
many pregnant and undeniable instances, which prove, that the Africans,
notwithstanding the contest in the sixth Council of Carthage touching matter of
Appeals, were always in true Catholic Communion with the Roman Church, even
during the term of this pretended Separation.

Witness, in the first place, St. Austin himself, who though he were present,
and subscribed (as it is most probable) to that Epistle of the Council of
Carthage, which gave all the offense, yet after his death Pope Celestin in his
Epistle to the Bishops of France, using many expressions of high commendation,
professes Celestin. Epist. ad Epise. Gal.
that he both lived and dyid in the Communion of the Roman church Witness
likewise (...) Epist. 87. ad Episcop. Mauritan.
Pope Leo the first, who for some time of the said pretended Separation, had
his Legates in. Africa, ordering Ecclesiastical matters there; and received
Lupicinus an African Bishop appealing unto him. Witness also Eugenius, a
Catholic Bishop of Carthage, who in his answer to the (...), requiring a
Disputation with him, touching matters of Faith, Victor. Vticens lib. 2. de
persecut. Vandal.
(...) the Roman Church to be the Head of all Churches, and that he ought not
to enter into dispute with any concerning such matters, without first
consulting that Church. Witness Fulgentius, another of the most eminent Bishops
of the African Church, living also within the said term; whose testimony is
already cited, Chap. 10.. 5. page 131, 132. Witness the two African Bishops,
Restitutus and Octavius, who were present at the Council of Rome, under Binius
Tom. 3. Conc. Edit. Colon.
Pope Hilarious about the Year 467. and subscribed the Canons: one whereof was,
That none ought to violate the Constitutions of the Nicen Council, nor the
Deorees of the Apostolic Sea. Witness further Pope Gregory himself, D. Greg.
lib. 1. epist. 72, 75. lib. 7. epist. 32. etc.
who in several of his Epistles acknowledges the Bishop of Carthage, and other
African Bishops, to have been at that time in Communion with him; yea
particularly praises them for their respects to the Sea Apostolic; and
asserts his own right of receiving Appeals from all parts of Christendom, as
necessity requires. Witness finally no less then two hundred African Bishops at
once, who being banished into Sicily for the Catholic Faith, by the Arrian
King Gelimer, Paul., Diac. lib. 17. de Gest. Roman.
Symmachus Papa, (says Paulus Diaconus) UT SUA MEMBRA, suis sumptibus aluit ac
fovit liberalissime; Pope Symmachus maintained them most liberally at his own
charge, as members of his own body: which is a convincing argument, that he
held them not for Schismatiques.

7. In the next Paragraph, the Bishop by a long discourse founded more upon his
own conjectural presumptions, then any thing else, undertakes to show, how the
Popes rose by degrees to that height of Authority, Ibid. n. 12.
which Protestants cannot endure to see; in which discourse having first
asper'st St. Hierome as being no great friend to Bishops, (which is both false
and injurious to the reputation of so holy a Doctor) at last he delivers his
own assertion, which is, That the very Fountain of Papal Greatness was the
Popes residence in the great Imperial City. But we have often showed a far
different Fountain thereof, viz. the Ordinance of Christ, making St. Peter Head
of his Universal Church, in that Text of the Gospel, Tu es Petrus, and super
hanc Petram, etc. according to the common Exposition of Fathers; is it reason
then, we should take the Relatours bare word for it without proof? Well, but
Precedence (says he) is one thing, and Authority another; thereby insinuating
that under the reign of Constantin the Bishop of Rome had only Precedence, or
Priority of place in public Assemblies before other Prelates, by reason of his
residence in the Imperial City, without any proper Authority, or Jurisdiction
over them. But we have often evidenced the contrary.

8. After a slight glance at the Levity of the Eastern, and Arrogance of the
Western Bishops, (wherein the Pope is no more concerned then all other Prelates
of the West) he tells us of the Obedience Popes did anciently show toward the
Emperors; enduring (says he) their Censures and Judgments; and accepting the
ratification of their Election to the Popedom, at the Emperors hands. We
confess all this. They endured the Emperors Censures, just in the same manner,
as all other oppressed persons are forced to endure the judgment of their
oppressors. But let all his Lordships party show us one just judgment, that an
Emperor ever pronounced against the Pope. They accepted the ratification of
their Election at the Emperors hands: but surely that (except in some few
cases; where wicked Emperors apparently tyrannized over them, and by force
compelled them to do what they pleased, contrary to Law and Custom) was no more
then this. The Emperor being duly informed, that such or such a person was
Canonically chosen Pope, there issued forth of course some Declaration, or
other Authentic Act from the Emperor, whereby he gave notice thereof to the
principal Judicatures and Prefect ships of the Empire, requiring them, upon all
occasions, to acknowledge the said Elected person for Pope. A thing very proper
for the Emperor to do, as the state of the Empire then stood, as was also
observed in the Election of most of the chief Prelates and Officers of the
Empire. But his Lordship was much mistaken, if under the notion of ratifying
the Popes Election he thought the Emperors had ever any just power to make
whom they pleased Pope: never any good Emperor pretended to more, then to see
that the Election were Canonical: which, in a matter so highly concerning the
peace of the Empire, could not with equity be denied them. But had any
Emperors refused to ratify the Election of a Pope Canonically chosen, no man
but a stranger in Ecclesiastical History, can doubt, but all good Christians
would in such case, have adhered to the said Pope, and not to him the Emperor
should have obtruded upon them. We also grant, that so long as the Pope
remained a Subject of the Empire, this custom continued: but being afterward
declared free from that subjection, the reason ceased, and the custom with it.
See Gratian. Decret. Can. Ego Ludovicus. Did. 63. and Can. Constitutio, Did.
eadem where the Emperors themselves renounce it.

After this, to prove that the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria were grown so
ambitious, that they could hardly contain themselves within the ordinary bounds
of their own Jurisdictions, the Relatour cites us three Greek words out of
Socrates, (...), which signify beyond their Priestly Power, or Office: to
which I might well supersede the answer; since he quotes not the place of his
Author; which, it is more then probable he industriously omitted. Yet the place
(after some search) we have found, Lib. 7. Hist. Cap. 11. and must needs say,
it is such a place as clearly shows, not only that Socrates was an enemy of the
Roman Church, and a favourer of Heretics, (as diverse good Authors charge
him) but that even the Bishop himself was not so great a friend to Truth and
Ingenuity as he ought. For certainly the Historian utters the alleged words
(...) merely out of spleen against the said Patriarchs of Rome and Alexandria,
(...) Socrat. lib. 7. Hist. Cap. 11.
for not suffering the Novatian Heretics to exercise publicly the
profession of their Heresy in Catholic Churches: for which how little it
became his Lordship first to tax them of pride; and then to palliate his
injurious censure with the testimony of such an Author, let any man judge. But
all is lawful with some men, that is done, or spoken against the Roman Church.
Billius his observation of the Western Bishops objecting Levity to the Eastern;
and of these retorting Arrogance to those of the West, proves just as much, as
the Testimony of one Adversary against another; and whether the world by this
took notice of the Popes ambition, or not, sure I am, there is no unbyassed
Judgment, but will take notice our Adversary is very destitute of solid
proofs, who fills his pages only with such impertinencies as these.

9. His main design is to overthrow the Popes Supremacy, by showing it was not
lawful to appeal to Rome. But Catholic Authors frame an unanswerable Argument
for his Supremacy even from the contrary, thus; It was ever held lawful to
appeal to Rome in Ecclesiastical affairs from all the parts of Christendom:
therefore (say they) the Pope must needs be Supreme Judge in Ecclesiastical
matters.

This is evidenced out of the fourth and seventh Canons of the Council of
Sardica, accounted anciently an Appendix of the Council of Nice, and often
cited as the same with it. I deny not but some ancient Authors may speak
against too frequent appealing to Rome, and declining ordinary Jurisdiction,
especially where the crimes were manifest, and all just proceedings toward
delinquent parties observed: as who doubts, but in Civil causes there may be
just ground of complaint against the like appeals, especially, if the Courts,
to which the Cause is removed by Appeal, be very remote? but withal, who sees
not that such accidental complaints do rather confirm, then weaken, the
confessed Authority and Right of such Superior Courts, to receive and
determine Causes of Appeal?

To prevent, as much as might be, all occasion of Complaints in this kind, the
Council of Sardica provided this expedient, that no Ecclesiastics under the
degree of Bishops should usually be allowed to appeal to Rome: which may easily
serve to reconcile all seeming contradiction in Authors touching this matter.
And it must be observed, that though the Canons prohibit Priests, and inferior
Clergymen to appeal out of their own Province, yet they forbid not the Pope to
call what causes of theirs he sees necessary, before him: although indeed in
the business of Apiarius the Pope, properly speaking, did neither call him out
of his own Province to be heard by himself, nor yet admitted his appeal, but
remanded him back to his proper Judges, with command they should hear his cause
once again, and do him right, in case it were found, that any injustice had
been used toward him in the former Sentence. However Bishops were never
prohibited the liberty of appealing to Rome, by any Ecclesiastical Canon
whatever. It Is true indeed, the Africans, in their Epistle abovementioned,
thought good, by way of Argument and Deduction, to extend the Canon prohibiting
Appeals, even unto Bishops causes: but the general custom of the Church was
ever against them, as is manifest by what has been said.

10. The Fathers in the sixth Council of Carthage petitioned (I confess) the
Pope not easily to give ear to those, who appealed to Rome from Africa,
especially where the crimes were manifest. They except also against the manner
of proceeding in the case of Apiarius, and some others: in which the Popes
Legates, sent into Africa, carried not themselves as Judges, but rather as
Patrons and Advocates of the appealers. Wherefore the Prelates at that Council
request his Holiness, he would rather please to give power to some in Africa to
end such causes, then send from Rome such as should give encouragement to
Delinquents, ne fumosum Typhum Saeculi in Ecclesiam Christi videretur inducere;
Lest otherwise (say they) his Holiness should seem to introduce the swelling
pride, or haughtiness, of the world into the Church of Christ, which ought to
be the School and Mistress of Humility.

We confess also, that in the times of Pope Zosimus, Boniface the first, and
Pope Celestin, there was much searching into the Records of the Nicen Council,
to find the matter of Appeals therein decided. The occasion was this, Pope
Zosimus to show his proceedings in that affair to be not only just, but
Canonical, had, by a little mistake (the error, probably, being rather his
Secretaries, then his own) cited the Council of Nice for his Right touching
Appeals; whereas it should have been the Council of Sardica; in the Canons
whereof that Power is clearly allowed the Pope. Now this Council of Sardica,
being rather an Appendix of the Council of Nice then otherwise, and called
presently after it; consisting likewise for the most part of the same Prelates,
and assembled for no other end, but to confirm the Faith of the Nicen Council,
and supply some Canons necessary for the Discipline of the Church, what matters
it, that such a mis-citation, of one Council for another, happened? or how does
it prejudice the Popes right? Did the African Fathers, or any other Catholic
Author of succeeding ages, ever charge the Pope with falsifying the Canons,
upon this account, as Protestants now do? let them show this, if they can.

CHAP. 16. Of the Title of Universal Bishop.
ARGUMENT.
1. The Title of Universal Bishop often given by Antiquity to the Bishops of
Rome, but never used by them. 2. Though the Bishops of Constantinople assumed
the Title, yet they never conceived it did exempt them from the Jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Rome. 3. A double signification of the Term Universal Bishop: the
one Grammatical; the other Metaphorical: and how they differ. 4. St. Gregory
condemned it only in the first sense: asserting the second expressly to
himself. 5. Phocas gave no new title to Boniface, but only declared, that the
Title of Universal Bishop did of right belong to the Pope, and not to the
Bishop of Constantinople. 6. St. Irenaeus not rightly translated by the Bishop.
7. Ruffinus corrupts the Nicen Canons, and the Bishop mistakes Ruffinus. 8. The
Bishop (even with Calvin's help) cannot clear himself of the Authority of St.
Irenaeus. 9. St. Epiphanius miscited and mistaken by the Bishop. 10. Primacy
and Supremacy in the Ecclesiastical sense, all one: and as necessary in the
Church of Christ now, as in the Apostles times.

AFter many windings, the Bishop leads us at last into a Trite and beaten way,
falling upon the Question of John Patriarch of Constantinople, so much censured
by St. Gregory for assuming the title of Universal Bishop: an objection
satisfied a hundred times over; yet 25. n. 12.
though never so clear in it self, the Bishop still endeavors to overshadow it
with difficulties, and amuse his Reader. To the end therefore all obscurity may
be taken away, and the truth clearly appear, I think it not amiss, in the first
place, to set down the whole matter Historically, as I find it registered in
the Monuments of the Church.

1. Know then that the Title of Universal, or Ecumenical, Bishop in
Ecclesiastical History, was anciently attributed to the Bishop of Rome. This no
man can deny, that reads the Acts of that famous General Council of Chalcedon,
where, in a Letter approved by the whole Council, and afterward, by order of
the Bishops there assembled, inserted into the Acts thereof, the Priests and
Deacons of Alexandria, style Pope (...), etc. Council. Chalced. Act. 3.
Leo, The most Holy, and most Blessed Ecumenical (or Universal) Patriarch of
great Rome, etc. The National Council of Constantinople did the same to Pope
Agapet, calling him their (...), etc. Council. Constantinop sub Mena Act. 5.
most holy Lord, the Archbishop of old Rome, and Ecumenical Patriarch, Agapet,
etc. John Bishop of Nicopolis, with others, styles Pope Hormisda, ap. Baron.
Tom 8. ad ann. 595. page 90. edit. Romans
Universi orbis terrarum Patriarcha; which is, in full sense, the same with
Ecumenical. Constantinus Pogonatus the Emperor, in the third Council of
Constantinople, (which is the sixth General) calls Leo the Second, Ecumenical
Pope; as witness both Baron. ad Ann. Cbristi 681. page 558. edit. Romans
Baronius and Binius Tom. 5. in Conc. 6. Act. 18. edit. 1636.
Binius. So likewise did Basil the younger, Emperor, with Eustathius Bishop of
Constantinople, as appears by the Acts of their Glaber. Rodolph. Hist. lib. 4.
cap. 1.
Reconciliation. Yea Balsamon himself, notwithstanding his known rancour
against the Roman Sea, is forced to acknowledge, that the Greeks had an Theod.
Balsam. lib. 7.
ancient custom to style the Bishop of Rome, Ecumenical, or Universal, POPE:
nevertheless it cannot be shown they ever made use of this honorable Title;
but rather contented themselves with that of Servus Servorum Dei, as relishing
more of Humility and Apostolical meekness. Whereas on the contrary, the Bishops
of Constantinople have for many hundreds of years, usurped it in all their
Briefs, Letters, etc. as appears by the Greek See Jus Canonicum Oriental. lib. 3
Canon Law it self, viz. in the Titles of Sisinnius, German, Constantin,
Alexius, and several other Patriarchs.

2. It is further observable, that the ancient Bishops of Constantinople never
intended by this usurped Title to deny the Popes Universal Authority, even over
themselves: They never pretended to be either Superior, or Equal to the Roman
Bishop, in regard of Spiritual Jurisdiction; but only to be next after, or
under him, and above all other Patriarchs. For touching that matter the
Emperor Justinian had long since, by an express Law decreed, Cod. Justinian.
Impress. Paris. Antverp. etc. Tit. 1. l. 7.
that the Bishop of Rome was to be held supreme Judge of all Ecclesiastical
causes, and Head of all the Prelates of God. And Anthimus, Conc. Constantinop.
sub Mena. Act. 4.
even while he usurped the Sea of Constantinople, protested obedience to the
Bishop of Rome, and wrote to all the other Patriarchs, that he followed in all
things the Sea Apostolic; Conc. Constantinop, ubi supra.
Menas also, his Competitour, made public profession in the same Council to
do the like, and to obey in every thing the Sea Apostolic. Yea John himself
Bishop of Constantinople, even whilst he contended so eagerly for the title of
Universal Bishop, neither could, nor durst hinder the Appeal of a certain
Priest of Chalcedon, (a City under the Patriarchal Jurisdiction of
Constantinople) to Pope Gregory: by whom it D. Greg. lib. 5. epist 24. lib. 4.
epist. 39.
was admitted, the Priest righted, and the judgment of that Patriarch,
formerly given against him, reversed by the Popes Sentence: which was also
accepted as valid by the said Patriarch of Constantinople.

I add, that St. Gregory himself, even whilst he inveighed most sharply
against the title of Universal Bishop, expressly D. Greg. lib. 7. epist. 63.
avoucheth, that both the Emperor and Bishop of Constantinople professed
continually, that the Church of Constantinople was subject to the Sea
Apostolic. And whereas some carp at this Epistle of St. Gregory, because it
names the Bishop of Constantinople Eusebius, there being (as they say) no
Bishop of Constantinople of that name in St. Gregory's time; it is answered,
that Amular. de Divin. Offic. lib. 4. cap. 26.
Amularius Fortunatus, an approved Author, that wrote but two hundred years
after St. Gregory's time, cites the whole Epistle as Authentic, without the
name Eusebius: So that (the subjection of the Sea of Constantinople to that of
Rome, being a thing so confessed in all antiquity) this will seem but a weak
objection. Lastly it may be observed, that although the Patriarchs of
Constantinople challenged the title of Ecumenical, or Universal, yet when
either the Pope, or his Legates were with them, at Constantinople or any other
City, they usually forebore it, and remitted it wholly to the Pope. This
appears by the Subscriptions in the third General Council of Constantinople,
under Constantinus Pogonatus, in the next age after St. Gregory: where Pope
Agatho is styled Universal; and the Bishop of Constantinople subscribes himself
only, George, by the mercy of God Bishop of Constantinople.

3. Thus we see in brief, how matters have passed de facto concerning the title
of Universal Bishop. Now to answer the Relatours Objection we are to take
notice, that the term Universal Bishop is capable of two senses; the one
Grammatical, the other Metaphorical. In the Grammatical sense it signifies
Bishop of the Universal Church, and of all Churches in particular, even to the
exclusion of all others from being properly Bishops; and consequently
displaceable at his pleasure, as being only his, not Christ's Officers, and
receiving Authority from him, and not from Christ. In the Metaphorical sense it
signifies only so high and eminent a Dignity above all other Bishops
throughout the whole Church, that though he, who is styled Universal Bishop,
has a real and true Superintendency, Jurisdiction, and Authority over all
other Bishops, yet that they be as truly and properly Bishops in their
respective Provinces and Diocesses, as he himself. For who doubts, but a mere
Diocesan Bishop is as truly a Bishop, and chief Officer of Christ in his
Diocese, as an Archbishop, Metropolitan, Primate, or Patriarch, in their
several Districts; though it cannot be denied, but every one of these have
respectively true Ecclesiastical Authority over him? The like is visible in the
Subordination of different Tribunals in the Commonwealth: where the Inferior
Judge is as truly an Officer of the State, and a Magistrate, as the Superior;
and yet the Inferior is subject to the Superior, and must be content, in case
of Appeals, to have both the Causes of his Court, and himself too, judged by
the Superior, when Justice shall require it.

4. This being cleared, it is evident, that St. Gregory, when he inveighs
against the title of Universal Bishop, takes it in the Literal and Grammatical
sense; in which we confess it contains a capital Error and grand Heresy,
destructive of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and Christ's Institution; and
therefore not undeservedly censured by the Holy Zeal of St. Gregory, as
Monstrous, Blasphemous, and in some sort Antichristian. I say, it is evident out
of St. Gregory himself, even in those Epistles cited by the Bishop, that he
takes the word in the literal and worst sense, when he declaims so vehemently
against it. For he says expressly, If there be one who is UNIVERSAL Bishop D.
Greg. lib 4. (...). 36. lib 7. epist. 69.
all the rest are no more Bishops. So that in St. Gregory's meaning, whoever
assumes to himself the title of Universal, does not content himself, as all the
Stewards of Christ's Family ought to do, viz. in being a Servant over his Fellow
Servants, but pretends in effect to be himself their Master, and to make them
all his own Servants, receiving and holding their respective Charges, not from
their true Master, Jesus Christ, but from him.

But some perhaps will object. The Bishop of Constantinople did not actually
aspire to such a height of pride; nay it is scarce credible he either did, or
could pretend to make himself the only Bishop in Christendom, degrading as it
were all others from the degree of Bishops. I answer, admit he did not pretend
to this; yet seeing he did so unwarrantably usurp a Title, which in the best
sense could not possibly belong to him, but being construed in the other, to
which it is very liable, it must needs contain so poisonous and prodigious an
Arrogance, that (what ever his actual pretensions might be) St. Gregory had
just reason both to suspect and smartly rebuke him as aiming thereat. Just as
if a Subject of the King of Spain (for instance) should contrary to the Kings
consent, take upon him the Title of Viceroy of Naples, or Sicily, though
perhaps he really intended no more, yet doubtless he would be soon suspected,
nay charged with a traiterous design of making himself absolute King. But as
for the Metaphorical signification of the word, which allows all other
inferious Bishops to be true Bishops, and to have true Episcopal Jurisdiction,
as Officers ordained by Christ, though subordinate to the Popes Supreme
Authority, St. Gregory was so far from thinking it Blasphemous, or
Antichristian pride, that though indeed he did not claim the Title even in this
sense, yet was it the constant practice both of his Predecessors and himself to
exercise the substance of it, that is, Universal Jurisdiction and Authority
over all other Bishops and Patriarchs throughout the whole Church, when
necessity required: and particularly over the Bishops of Constantinople, who
were then risen to the Highest Patriarchall Dignity in the Church next the
Pope. In those very Epistles, where Saint Gregory so much inveighs against the
Title of Universal Bishop, and him that arrogantly assumed it, it is manifest,
that Pope (...), St. Gregory's Predecessor, annulled the Decree of the Council
of Constantinople, wherein this Title had been given to the Bishop of that
City. And did not St Gregory himself repeal it again, and threaten to
excommunicate John Bishop of Constantinople, in case he desisted not from the
usurpation of it? Ecclesiam (...), (says St. Gregory) D. Greg. lib. 4. epist.
76.
I will use the Churches Authority against him.

Another Argument, that St. Gregory takes not the word Universal in the
Metaphorical sense, when he calls it Antichristian and Blasphemous, is, that
even in the Epistle here cited by the Bishop, he teaches, that the Care and
Principality over the whole Church was committed to St. Peter, (which is all
that the Metaphorical sense of Oecumenicus or Universal contains) and yet
denies he was ever called Universal Apostle. He grants likewise, that the High
Priest was supreme Ecclesiastical Governor of the whole Jewish Church, yet
was not called Universal Priest: all which evidently shows, that St. Gregory
quarrels not the word in that signification: Why? because he acknowledges the
lawfulness of the thing signified by it.

This premised, it will not be hard to answer all the Bishop objects against us
in this particular. To his first objection we grant, that Ibid. n. 12.
according to the Literal sense of the word, (in which St. Gregory took it) the
assuming such a Title argued so great a pride in the Assumer, as might portend
the nearness of Antichrists time. To his second, taking the word Universal in
the sense disclaimed by St. Gregory, and the word Monarch in its rigorous
propriety, whereby it answers to the literal sense of Oecumenicus, or
universalis Episcopus, I deny that there was ever any Universal Bishop, or
Monarch, over the whole Militaut Church, either for the first 600. years before
St. Gregory, or at any time since. For to be a Monarch over the Church in
propriety of speech, or such an Universal Bishop, is in effect to un-bishop all
other Prelates of the Church, and make them only Officers ad placitum, and
Delegates of the said Universal Bishop, or Monarch, placeable and displaceable
at his sole pleasure, like the Officers of Temporal Monarchs.

To what he alleges out of Baronius, of Gregory the seventh his giving the
Title of Universal to the Bishop of Rome in a Council about the year 1076. I
answer, it signifies no more then this, that anciently the said Title (still
understood in the Metaphorical and lawful sense) was due to the Bishop of Rome,
and to no other: which is undeniably true. Neither are we to think, that those
seven and twenty Dictatus Papae, (as they are called) recounted by Baronius,
and objected here by the Bishop, are all matters of Faith, but (as it were) a
Catalogue, or Abridgement of such Privileges, as partly by Divine Institution,
partly by long Custom and Prescription, partly by Canon, and partly by probable
consequences drawn from Principles of Faith, were found agreeable to the
Supreme Authority of the Roman Bishop.

5. What he says of Phocas the Emperor's conferring the Title of Universal
Bishop upon Boniface the Third, thereby intimating, that it was never given to
Popes before, is most false. For all that Phocas did was but to declare, that
the Title in contest did of right belong to the Bishop of Rome only: which is
a sufficient evidence, that before the said Declaration it had been given to
the Bishop of Rome. Neither was there of this any question; all the Dispute
was, whether it might not be also extended to the Bishop of Constantinople: and
this indeed was declared in the Negative by Phocas. Now who sees not, that
it is a far different thing to declare a Title, or Dignity to be of right due,
and another to confer it de Novo upon any one. If his late Majesty of
glorious memory had been pleased (when time was) to have declared W. L.
Patriarch of England, we may well suppose, his Lordship would not have granted
the Title had been de Novo conferred on him; seeing he has already contended,
that long before, viz in Urban the second's time, it was given to the
Archbishop of Canterbury.

But put case Phocas had indeed conferred the Title of Universal Bishop upon
Pope Boniface, as a new Dignity, not formerly belonging to him, yet would it
make but little to his Lordships purpose. For we say again, it is not all one to
have a Title conferred by another, and to assume, or use it ones self. The
Bishop should have proved, that Pope Boniface used the Title of Universal
Bishop, in his ordinary style, as the Bishops of Constantinople are proved to
have done of late times, and as anciently the said John, and Cyriacus his
Successor, attempted to do: which was the thing St. Gregory inveighed against.
The Bishop therefore makes here a fallacious Turn, when he shifts the question
from taking to giving, and passes from ones self to another person. Let it be
shown that Boniface the Third, or any other Popes his Successourss, assumed
this Title, as the Bishops of Constantinople did: for till this be proved, it
will not follow, that either Pelagius and St. Gregory erred in reproving, and
condemning the Bishop of Constantinoples undue assuming that Title to himself,
or that Pope Boniface and his Successors did err, by having it declared due
to them by another. Why may not the same person be very unwilling to take an
extravagant Title upon himself, and yet for good reasons be well content that
another give it him? Who knows not, that anciently the Bishop of Rome was
styled Caput Ecclesiae, Custos Vineae, and Vicarius Christi, they being Titles
due to his place and Office; and though the Popes gainsay'd them not, yet
Christian Humility ever taught them to forbear the use of such titles
themselves.

The Relatour here professes to give an Historical account, how the Ibidem.
Popes grew under the Emperors, and by degrees attained the height they are
now at. To which I answer. We deny not, but that in Temporal Power and
Authority the Popes grew great by the Patronage of Christian Emperors. But
what is this to the purpose? If he would have said any thing material, he
should have proved that the Popes rose by the Emperors means to their
Spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction over all other Bishops throughout the
whole Catholic Church: which is the only thing they claim jure divino; and
which is so annexed to the Dignity of their Office by Christ's Institution,
without the least dependence of any Emperors or Secular Powers, that were the
Pope deprived of all his Temporalties, (which can never be done by any Secular
Power, without committing a most enormous Sacrilege) and reduced to the
poverty of St. Peter himself, the first of them; yet could not his Spiritual
Authority suffer the least Diminution by it. Wherefore (to make short) it
concerns us not to take further notice of his many Historical Criticismes and
mere Conjectures upon this subject, unto number. 13. And whereas he again en
passant touches upon the Popes Election approved and (...) by the Emperor, it
has received a full answer above.

6. His next endeavor is to infringe A. C.'s proof of the Popes Supreme. 25.
n. 13.
Pastoral Authority out of St. Irenaeus. To which purpose, we are told by way
of Caveat, how unlikely a man St. Irenaeus was (being a Gallican Bishop) to
captivate the Liberty of that Church under the Principality of Rome. As if
(forsooth) the so much talked of liberties of the Gallican Church, had been
things known, or heard of in St. Irenaeus's time. But Irenaeus (says the
Bishop) reprehended Pope Victor for excommunicating the Asian Churches: citing
for this in the margin Eusebius. l. 5. c. 25. it should be c. 24. We answer,
Eusebius has not a word importing reprehension, but rather a friendly and
seasonable persuasion: his words are (...), etc. he exhorts him after a
handsome manner, as reflecting on the Popes Dignity, and clearly shows, that
the Pope had of right some authority over the Asian Bishops: and by consequence
over the whole Church. For otherwise it had been very absurd in St. Irenaeus to
persuade Pope Victor not to cut off from the Church so many Christian
Provinces, had he believed (as Protestants contend he did) that the Pope had no
power at all to cut them off. Just as if a man should entreat the Bishop of
Rochester (for example) not to excommunicate the Archbishop of York, and all
the Bishops of his Province; over whom he has not any the least pretense of
Jurisdiction.

But admit St. Irenaeus had indeed reproved Pope Victor for what he did in the
case of the Asian Bishops, it being a matter of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
only, in the exercise whereof it is not denied, but the Pope, through
misinformation incident to humane frailty, may sometimes go too far, what does
it prove more then that (possibly) the Pope proceeded a little too severely, or
hastily with those Christians, whose fault did not, in the judgment of St.
Irenaeus and some others, deserve so heavy a censure? But who sees not, that
all this rather confirms the Popes power? Does St. Irenaeus, or any other
beside him, complain of the Popes usurpation in this case? Do they charge him
with taking more upon him, then he had authority to do? Do they tell him, he
had no authority to excommunicate those Asian Bishops, or use any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over them, as Protestants tell him in reference to
themselves? And yet who can doubt but this they would have told him, and with
great bitterness too, considering the provocation, had they had just ground to
do so, or could have done it without proclaiming themselves ipso facto
Schismatiques, and shaking the very Foundation of the Churches Discipline and
Unity?

But these are only his Lordships light Skirmishes: he ventures at last to
grapple with the Authority it self, alleged by A. C. out of S. Irenaeus; Ad
hanc Ecclesiam, propter potentiorem Principalitatem, necesse est omnem
convenire Ecclesiam, id cst, eos qui sunt undique fideles: in qua semper ab his
qui sunt undique, conservata est ea quae est ab Apostolis Traditio. Iren. lib.
3. cap. 3.
whose words, though faithfully cited by him in the Latin, yet in rendering
them English, he cunningly winds about in his Labyrinth. For first he
translates UNDIQUE round about, as if St. Irenaeus spoke only of those
neighboring Churches round about Rome, and not the Churches throughout the
World; whereas undique as naturally signifies every where and from all parts:
witness Thomas Thomasius, where the word undique is thus Englished, from all
places, parts, and corners, every where; which is also seconded by the Greek
Lexicons, where these Adverbs (...), (which undeniably signify from all parts
universally) are rendered by the word undique. And that here it must needs
signify every where, or from all parts, is clear from the very scope of St.
Irenaeus's discourse; which was to prove, that the Tradition of the Roman
Church was a full Evidence ( plenissima ostensio) of the Doctrine preached by
the Apostles all over the world ( in toto mundo.) And this he evinces from the
necessary recourse, which in all doubts of Faith all Churches, or all the
Faithful were to have from all parts to the Church of Rome ( propter
potentiorem Principalitatem, for her more powerful Principality) as to their
constant Guide therein; and by virtue of which recourse all the Faithful every
where had always conserved the Integrity of Apostolical Tradition. In qua
semper ab his qui sunt undique conservata est ea, quae est ab Apostolis
Traditio.

This Argument did Irenaeas use in confutation of the Hevetiques he disputed
against in France; which, taking his words in the True and Genuine sense, was a
very pregnant one, and given as a Rule to teach, not only Heretics, but all
Christians, that the Doctrine or Tradition, of the Roman Church was, as it
were, the Touchstone of all Apostolical Doctrine; If now we turn the Medal,
and look upon this Holy Doctors argument in the sense the Bishop takes his
words, we shall find it speak little more then nonsense. His Lordship, to
avoid the Prerogative ascribed by St. Irenaeus and all Catholics to the Roman
Church, will needs, (as I have said) make undique to signify no more then
round about; thereby restraining that more powerful Principality St. Irenaeus
speaks of, to the Provinces of Italy and Islands about it, as the Patriarchate
of the Bishop of Rome, beyond which the power of that Church extended not. In
which supposition (...) will be found to argue thus against the Heretics of
his time.

It Is necessary that all the Churches, or the Faithful round about Rome, viz.
those only of Italy and the Islands adjacent, which make up the Roman
Patriarchate, should have recourse to the Church of Rome, propter potentiorem
Principalitatem, that is, for its Bishops precedence of place, or in regard of
his Patriarchal Power within the aforesaid Precincts.

Therefore the Gnostics, and other Heretics in France or any other part of
the world, are convinced of Heresy for not having recourse to the Church of
Rome. Is not this fine Meandrick Logic, well beseeming so noble a Labyrinth?

But let us observe, how the Relatour deals with the latter part of this
Fathers Text, In qua semper ab his qui sunt undique, conservata est ea, quae
est ab Apostolis Traditio; which he thus translates: In which (Church) is
conserved that Tradition, which was delivered by the Apostles; and not
according to his Author, who says always conserved. The word always was not
to appear in English, for fear it might induce some impartial Readers to
entertain too worthy an opinion of the Roman Church. Neither did he think it
fit to give his Reader the English of these words, ab his qui sunt undique,
though inserted among the former, which would too much have opened the Fathers
meaning, viz. that not only the Church of Rome (as it is a particular Church)
kept entirely the Apostolical Tradition, but that in it all the Faithful every
where did keep the same Apostolical Tradition, by being in unity and Communion
with her. Thus you may see to what shifts, and upon what shelves even learned
men are often driven by maintaining error.

From the Premises I argue thus.

All the Faithful every where must of necessity have recourse to the Church of
Rome propter potentiorem Principalitatem, by reason of her more powerful
Principality. This is St. Irenaeus his Proposition.

But there could be no necessity they all should have recourse to that Church
by reason of her more powerful Principality, if her said power exended not to
them all. This is evident to reason.

Ergo, this more powerful Principality of the Roman Church, must needs extend
to all the Faithful every where, and not only to those of the Suburbicary
Churches, or Patriarchal Diocese of Rome, as the Bishop pleads.

7. Little therefore is it to his advantage, what he pretends to show out of
Ruffinus, viz that the extent of the Roman Patriarchate was contained within
the Islands and Precincts of Italy: since it is inconsistent with the Vote of
all Antiquity, and gives St. Irenaeus the lie. Nay it makes her Jurisdiction
incomparably less, then any of the other Patriarchal Churches; yea, of much
less extent, then many Metropolitan Churches. To which I add, it is contrary
even to the common compute of Protestants themselves, who often grant the
Bishop of Rome to have been Patriarch of the West; which undeniably contains
many vaste Provinces and Nations, beside Italy and the Islands about it.
Wherefore, as the Bishop could not altogether deny, but the word Suburbicary
was unduly added by Ruffinus in the Translation of the Nicene Canon, so I say
it is necessary to understand it (unless we will contradict all the world) not
in the Bishops sense, as signifying only the Churches of Italy, and the
Islands thereto belonging, but as generally signifying all Churches and Cities,
any way suburdinate to the City of Rome; which was at that time known, (as also
to this day) by the name of Urbs, or City, (...), by way of excellency; not as
it related to the Prefect, or Governor of Rome, in regard of whose ordinary
Jurisdiction, we confess, it commanded only those few places about it in
Italy; but as it related to the Emperor himself: in which sense the word
Suburbicary rightly signifies all Cities, or Churches whatsoever within the
Roman Empire; as the word Romania also anciently signified the whole Imperial
Territory, as Card. Perron clearly proves upon this Subject.

This exposition of Ruffinus his term Suburbicary wants not ground even in his
own Text, who makes, as it were, a contradistinction between Egypt, and the
Suburbicary Churches. Now under Egypt he comprehends Lybia, Pentapolis and
Ethiopia; which being without the Precincts of the Empire, were committed to
the power and care of the Patriarch of Alexandria: but all Suburbicary Cities,
that is, such as were under the City of Rome as it was Imperial, were left
under the Bishop of Rome, and he (by reason of his Seat at Rome) was still to
be their chief Prelat, and to have a more immediate and ordinary care over
them, then he had over those other Cities, which were out of the Empire: though
as St. Peter's Successor he had the universal care of the whole Church, and
that full Potentiorem Principalitatem, which St. Irenaeus ascribes unto him.

8. Touching Calvin's conjecture that recourse was therefore had to Rome,
because at that time the Roman Church was more constant to the Truth, and less
distracted with dangerous opinions, it is wholly inept. For it is false, that
before St. Irenaeus's time, Rome was more constant in the Faith, then the other
Churches of Greece and Africa had been, seeing the African Churches were then
as free from Heresy as Rome.

9. The Bishop here gives himself a great deal of trouble to wrest. 25. n. 14.
from us a Text or two of Epiphanius, touching the Authority of St. Peter and
his Successors: wherein though he grants somewhat beyond his wonted
reservedness, that St. Peter's person is understood in that Text of the Gospel,
Super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam, etc. Matthew. 16. 18. yet will he by no
means be persuaded to extend it any further then his person. But we affirm it is
clear even by the Texts of St. Epiphanius, that this promise made by Christ to
St. Peter, is derived to his Successors. For first, after the words Ipse autem
Dominus constituit cum Primum Apostolorum, Petram firmam super quam Ecclesia
Dei aedificata (...); and Portae Inferorum non praevalebunt adversus illam:
Quarum Portarum nomine, etc. D. Epiphan. in Anchorat. Tom. 2. Edit. Petav. page
14. 1622.
Et Portae inferorum, etc. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, this
Father immediately adds, Quarum Portarum nomine, Hereses and Haeresewn
conditores intelliguntur, by the Gates of Hell Heresies and the Authors of
Heresies are understood, that is to say, All Heresies and all Authors of
Heresies whatever shall arise: Such indefinite Propositions being equivalent to
Universal. True it is, the Bishop omits these last words by his wonted Et
caetera. However, since he acknowledges that by the Firm Rock whereon our
Savior, according to Epiphanius, promised to build his Church, St. Peter is
personally understood, we shall easily make good our Argument from it, and
solve his objections. For he must consequently acknowledge, the Church so
founded on St. Peter, as by virtue of that foundation it was to prevail against
all Heresies, and Inventors of Heresy that should at any time impugn the
Churches Faith; which could not possibly be verified in case Christ's promise
were to be limited to St. Peter's person alone. For else why might not Heresies
and Heretics after St. Peter's death, prevail against the Church; yea so far
prevail, as utterly to extinguish the true Faith?

Wherefore the Bishops long discourse, by way of Gloss on this and some other
Texts of the same Father, concerns us not at all. For it being once granted,
that St. Peter was personally to uphold the Church in the profession of the
true Faith, (as its principal Foundation under Christ) we have our desire.
Nevertheless we deny that he has any ground to limit to St. Peter only those
Elogiums given him by St. Epiphanius, and not allow them extendible to his
Successors, so far as they are necessary for their upholding the Church also
in the profession of true Faith. Wherefore as St. Peter's Authority is (by the
Bishops own confession) rightly urged by Epiphanius to prove the Godhead of the
Holy Ghost against the Heretics that denied it, so doubtless by virtue of the
same promise and institution of Christ, may and ought the Authority of his
Successors be urged in time to come, in proof of any other contested Article,
or point of Faith. Though therefore we affirm not (as the Relatour is
frequently imposing upon us) that St. Peter and his Successors are (by virtue
of this Text) to govern the Church as Princes and Monarchs, yet we say, that
by virtue thereof they so govern the Church, as we may securely rely on them
in matters of Faith, at least in such as they definitively teach and promulgate
to the whole Church.

But in the close the Bishop undertakes a strange task. He will prove that
Epiphanius, in most express terms, and that twice repeated, Ibidem.
makes not St. Peter, but St. James Successor to our Lord in the Principality
of his Church. But he every way mistakes. For first in the places he alleges,
there is not a word of the Churches Principality. Secondly he merely equivocates
in the words ante caeteros omnes, which signify only priority of time,
because St. James was the first of the Apostles, that was ordained Bishop of
any particular place; viz. at Jerusalem, (as both Eusebius. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 22.
Eusebius and St. D. Hieron-De Script. Eccl. in Jacobo.
Hierome witness) which is called Christ's Throne, because our Savior himself
had there preached the Gospel, and was principally and immediately sent
thither. Nor is it unusual in ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, to give the title
of Christ's Throne to any Episcopal Chair, or Seat whatsoever.

To the Relatours assertion that we all say, but no man proves, that Ibid. n.
15.
the Bishop of Rome succeeded in all St. Peter's Prerogatives, which are
ordinary, and belonged to him as a Bishop, though not in the extraordinary
which belonged to him as an Apostle. I answer, Bellarmin (beside many
Catholic Divines) does not only say, but prove, that the Pope succeeds St.
Peter, not only in the Prerogatives that belonged to him as a Bishop, but in
all Prerogatives Apostolical; which were of Ordinary necessity to continue in
the Church for its Government, and preservation of the True Faith; as his
Disputations upon this Subject sufficiently show, to any man that reads him
with an unbyassed judgment.. Respondco Pontificatum.
For can any thing be more express then these words, lib. 1. De Rom, Pont. cap.
9. Mortuis autem Apostolis, Apostolica Authoritas in solo Petri Successore
permansit. When the Apostles were dead, the Authority Apostolical resided only
in St. Peter's Successor. Is this to say, the Pope succeeded St. Peter only in
his Episcopal Prerogatives? I add, that Bellarmin in the same chapter goes on,
showing the difference between St. Peter's Successor, and the Successors of
the rest of the Apostles, viz. that they were Bishops only, and that their
Authority reached not to a Jurisdiction over the whole Church, as that of St.
Peter's Successors did: who were therefore styled (...) the Nullus enim
Episcopus, praeter (...), Sollicitudinem (...) unquam omnium Ecclesiarum: Et
solus ipse vocatus est (...) Pontifex; and Seeds (...) Apostolica simpliciter
and per (...); and munus ejus, (...). Bellarm. ubi. (...).
Apostolical Bishops, and their Sea, the Sea Apostolic, and their Office, The
Apostolate. See his words in the Margin: all which he there proves by the
Authority of the Ancient Fathers. Wherefore the Bishop (...) very largely upon
his Readers Credulity, while he quotes Bellarmin for this Assertion, that the
Pope succeeds not St. Peter in any Prerogative that belonged to him as an
Apostle.

10. However the Relatour is so kind to St. Peter, as to allow him a Primacy
of Order: but that is not so much as the Fathers allow him. For by his own
Confession, Doctor Reinolds against Heart, chap. 5. proves at large, that the
Fathers allow St. Peter, and that in the way of Prerogative above the rest of
the Apostles, not only Primacy of Order, but Authority and Principality too;
which surely imply Power: and I would have any man show us some good Author of
ancient times, in whom either the Latin word Primatus, or the Greek (...)
answering to it, are attributed to any Ecclesiastical person, as signifying
only Precedence in order and place, and not a true Superior Authority and
Jurisdiction over those, in relation to whom such a person is said to have
Primacy, or to be Primate. Is not the contrary most evident, viz. that (...)
always signifies Pre-eminence in Authority? and Primatus more especially
Pre-eminence, or Superiority, in Ecclesiastical Government? Is the Primate of
any Christian Nation no more then one that has Precedence in place? Does that
Title signify no more in England, then that the Archbishop of Canterbury
ought to have the chief place in the Convocation-House? Have not all Catholic
Authors (yea and many Protestants too) ever thought they signified the Supreme
Authority of the Bishop of Rome both sufficiently and properly by the word
Primatus? Are there not many Volumes extant on both sides De Primatu Romani
Pontificis? Were their Authors ever taxed for speaking ambiguously in using
that term? wherefore if St. Peter had Primacy, he had also Supremacy; and if
his Primacy were Universal over all, his Supremacy was so too: Since they both
signify the same thing; viz. an eminency of Authority and Power in one above
the rest.

Again, St. Hierome, speaking of this very subject, says D. Hieron. lib. 10.
cont. Jovinian.
Primatus Petro datur, ut Capite constituto' Schismatis tollatur occasio. Can
any man in his wits think, that by Primatus he meant only Precedence of
Order? was that sufficient to prevent Schism? If therefore a True and Proper
Primacy be granted by Protestants to St. Peter's Successor also, before and
above all other Bishops and Patriarchs of the whole Church, (as diverse of them
grant the Fathers did) it must be also granted, that Supremacy of Power over
all Bishops and Patriarchs of the Church is due unto him. Now that Primacy, or
Supremacy, of right belongs to St. Peter's Successor, no less then to himself,
I evince by this following Argument.

Whatsoever Power or Jurisdiction was necessary in the Apostles time, for the
due Government of the Church in order to prevention of Schisms and procurement
of Unity, must a fortiori be necessary in all succeeding ages.

But the Power and Jurisdiction of One (viz. St. Peter, or his Successor) over
all Christians whatsoever (not excepting even the Apostles themselves) was
necessary in the Apostles time for the due Government of the Church, in order
to prevention of Schisms and procurement of Unity.

Ergo the Power and Jurisdiction of One (viz. St. Peter or his Successor) is a
fortiori necessary in all succeeding Ages.

The Major, viz. that whatsoever Power and Jurisdiction was necessary in the
Apostles time for the due Government of the Church, etc. must needs be
necessary in all succeeding Ages, is clear from mere Inspection into those
succeeding Ages to this present: where it is visible, by what degrees the great
zeal of the Primitive Christians has decayed and cooled even to this day, to
the production of infinite Schisms and Heresies: which must needs, ere this,
have overwhelmed and utterly confounded the Church, had not our Blessed Savior
(that Divine Lawgiver) laid that original Platform of Church Government, which
was to serve us as a pattern to the end of the world: our Savior Christ not so
much regarding the need of it during the Apostles lives, as the necessity his
all-seeing wisdom foresaw would be of it in all future Ages.

The Minor is proved effectively by the precedent Discourse, where St. Peter's
Primacy (that is, as we there show, his Supremacy over all) is confessed by his
Lordship and other Protestants.

The Conclusion therefore is undeniable; viz. that it is necessary for the Due
Government of the Church, that one should be endowed with Power and
Jurisdiction over all Christians in all succeeding ages.

Add hereunto, that so long as the End is but in Acquisition, and not
completely gained, the Necessary Means to obtain it is always necessary. But
the End, in our present case, viz. the Due Government of the Church, the
preserving it in the Unity of True Catholic Faith and Christian Charity, is,
and ever has been since the Apostles time, but in Acquisition, and shall not
be completely gained till the end of the world.

Ergo, the Necessary Means, viz. the Supreme Authority of One over All in the
Government of the Church, is, has been, and ever will be necessary to the
Worlds End.

CHAP. 17. The Popes Authority, asserted and vindicated.
ARGUMENT.
1. Our Saviors prayer for St. Peter, extended to his Successors. 2. What it
effected for St. Peter, and what for them. 3. PASCE OVES and AGNOS, John 21.
15. 17. a Special charge to St. Peter; and not common, in all respects, to the
rest of the Apostles. 4. A.C. begs not the question, but proves it. 5. The
Bishop willingly mistakes him, about the Notion of a General Council. 6.
Optatus and St. Austins words, cited nothing to the purpose. 7. The Popes
Ancient and undoubted right, to confirm General Councils. 8. The Bishops
Lesbian Rule for deciding Controversies, examined and shown to be vain. 9. The
Popes Authority duly acknowledged, sufficient to prevent Schisms and Heresies.
10. The Government of the Church, not purely Monarchical, but Mixed. 11. How the
Literae Communicatoriae of the Pope, and other Catholic Bishops, differed.

1. THe Bishop himself, in his Answers to the Argument drawn. 25. n. 16.
from our Saviors Prayer for St. Peter, Luke 22. 32. ( Ego rogavi pro Te, etc.
I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not) shows the insufficiency of his
Evasions Bellarm. lib. 4. De Romans Pont. cap. 3.
Card. Bellarmin, by the Testimony of seven Popes, (most of them very Ancient)
proves, that our Savior by that Prayer obtained, both for St. Peter and his
Successors, this privilege, namely, that they should never teach the Church
any thing contrary to True Faith. What says the Bishop to this? As for St.
Peter himself he tells us, it will be easily granted, that such a privilege
was obtained for him: but that it should be obtained, or intended for his
Successors also, that never came within the compass of ROGAVI PROTE, Petre.
Yea, Bellarmin's proof (according to the Relatour) is its own Confutation. And
why? because (forsooth) all his proofs are from witnesses in their own Cause,
and from Interessed persons. I answer first, that all his proofs are not from
Popes; fot he gives several pregnant reasons for his Assertion, drawn from the
Text it self, had the Bishop been pleased to answer them. Secondly I ask, How
interressed? so far as to assert a manifest untruth, in a matter of so great
importance, to the whole Church? Surely no. Can our Adversaries have the
Confidence (Temerity rather) to affirm, that Felix the first (a most Holy
Martyr, about the year 273.) that Lucius the first (another most Holy Martyr,
as some think, or as others say, a Confessor, about the year 337.) and Leo the
first, (a most Holy Pope, as all Antiquity acknowledged, about the year 440.)
would dare pervert and mis-alledge Scripture, only for Interest, and to
advance their own Authority, had they not known it to be the just Authority of
their Sea, and rightly grounded on this Text?

Truly I could never yet understand this proceeding of Protestants, who make so
many public professions to stand to the Fathers Authority, of the first Five
or Six hundred years; yet when such Fathers are alleged, fly presently back,
and reject their Authority upon such weak pretenses as these. And though Pope
Agatho were something after those ages, viz. about the year 678. yet I see not
how they can refuse his Testimony in this matter, unless they be resolved to
contemn not only him, but all the Fathers in the sixth General Council, (where
the Epistle of this Pope was read and approved) who could much better judge,
whether his words were written out of proper Interest, then the Relatour, or
any of his party. The other Three, it is confessed, are of somewhat a later
standing; yet the latest of them flourisht above four hundred years since: and
we desire to know, what Author of good repute ever taxed any of them as by
assed with proper interest, when they published, that St Peter does in his
Successors still teach the Church, and confirm his Brethren in the True Faith,
by virtue of this prayer of our Savior.

His assertion, that Bellarmin upon the matter confesses, there is not one
Father in the Church, before Theophylacts time, that understands this Text as
Bellarmin does, is wholly groundless. Must he needs confess, there are no more
Authors citable in any subject, but what he cites himself? Certainly though
Bellarmins Learning was great, and his Reading much, yet was he known to be a
person of too great modesty and humility to pretend to this. But suppose he had
confessed as much, as the Bishop desired, what follows? only this, that till
Theophylacts time, none had given so full an Exposition of those words, Ego
rogavi pro Te, etc. as those seven Popes: which is no wonder at all,
considering how few of the Fathers have purposely commented upon the place, and
how many of them do in effect deliver the same Doctrine, drawn from other Texts
of Scripture, as Bellarmin also shows in other Chapters.

The force therefore of Bellarmins proof out of Theophylact is this: If our
Saviors prayer was to have a special effect in St. Peter, because he was to be
the Churches Foundation under Christ, it must also have the like effect in
those who were to be such Foundations in succeeding ages, that is, in all his
lawful Successors. Neither does this privilege of the Indeficiency of St.
Peter's Faith, belong to him precisely as an Apostle (which the Relatour
insinuates) but rather as he was Prince of the Apostles, and appointed to be
Christ's Vicar on earth after him.

2. To what he adds touching the two Effects, or Privileges, our Saviors
prayer obtained for St. Peter, and their descending to his Successors, I
answer, Whatever our Savior intended should descend by virtue of that prayer
of his, did effectively so descend. But I confess it is a disputable question,
whether every thing, which Christ by this prayer intended and obtained for St.
Peter, was likewise intended by him to descend to St. Peter's Successors. That
some special privilege (both intended and obtained (by this prayer) was to
descend to them is manifest, both by the Authorities and Reasons brought
Bellarm. lib. 4. de Romans Pout. cap. 3.
by Bellarmin in proof thereof; and this Privilege was, that none of St.
Peter's Successors should ever so far fall from the Faith, as to teach Heresy,
or any thing contrary to Faith tanquam Pontifex (as the Cardinals words are)
that is, in virtue of that Authority which they were to have in the Church as
his Successors.

His Lordship quarrels this Privilege, and says, it is not out of all doubt,
though Bellarmin affirms it is. And why so? Because many learned men have
affirmed the contrary, and challenged many Popes for teaching Heresy. I ask,
what learned men does he mean? his own, or ours? If his own, it is no marvel
they challenge those of teaching Heresy, from whose subjection they have
revolted, and whose persons (to justify their unjust revolt) they daily load
with bitter invectives and opprobrious appellations. If ours, What Teaching
does he mean? Is it teaching only in quality of a private Doctor? This is not
the question here; this belongs to the first Privilege Bellarmin says, our
Savior obtained for St. Peter by his prayer, viz. of not personally erring
against Faith. If he mean Public Teaching, as Doctor and Pastor of the
whole Church, what Catholic Divines ever taught, that the Pope can in this
quality teach Heresy? Some happily will reply, Many Catholic Divines hold,
that the Pope without a General Council may err, though he teach ex Cathedra,
or as Doctor of the Universal Church. Let them name those Authors, and let
their words be exactly cited; which will soon undeceive them: seeing they that
hold the Pope may err, when he defines without a General Conncil, do
consequently to their principles deny, that without a General Council he either
does, or can define any matter as Doctor of the whole Church; constantly
averring, that he never acts in that quality, but when he presides in a General
Council. If our Adversaries please to yield so far to the Popes
Infallibility, as to grant him exempt from erring in matters of Faith, when
ever he defines with a General Council, I shall not desire to have further
Controversy with them touching that point.

But by the By, I cannot dissemble a slye Turn the Relatour here makes to
disguise Bellarmins words. Bellarmin, speaking of the second (...), ubi supra.
Privilege, obtained by this Prayer of Christ for St. Peter and his
Successors, expressly says, it was ut ipse TANQUAM PONTIFEX non posset, etc.
that he should never as Supreme Bishop, or Pastor, teach any thing contrary to
the Faith. But the Bishop leaves out the principal words tanquam Pontifex,
which should give light to those that follow; citing in his English Text only
the latter part of the words thus, That neither St. Peter himself, nor any
other that should sit in his Seat, should ever teach any thing contrary to true
Faith: whereby he makes the Cardinal speak absolutely of all manner of
Teaching, when he clearly limits his words to teaching only as Pastor, or
Doctor of the whole Church: which was much to his Lordships advantage indeed,
but little to his credit.

Neither is it any absurdity, much less a contradiction, in Bellarmin, to
affirm in one place, that the Gift (not the whole Gift, that is an addition of
the Bishops pure liberality) obtained by this prayer for St. Peter, did belong
to his Successors, and afterward say, perhaps some part of it did not belong
to them. For what does this signify more, then that the one was not so
absolutely certain as the other; though he really believed that both parts of
the Gift did belong to them, and strongly disputes for that his opinion. May
not a learned Author positively affirm a thing to be true, though it be not
infallibly certain? If he cannot, who can affirm any thing, but what is either
Demonstratively certain in Science, or Infallibly certain in Faith? So rigorous
a restraint as this, would surely cause a deep silence in the Schools of Oxford
and Cambridge. Nor is the Relators reason of greater force, viz. that either
both, or neither part of the Privilege must belong to St. Peter's Successors,
because they both stand upon the same foot, the validity of our Saviors
prayer. For I answer, the validity of our Saviors prayer depends on his
intention. What therefore can be certainly proved to have been intended by our
Savior to St. Peter's Successors, we may be certain shall be extended to them:
but what can be shown only probably intended to them, we can be only probably
persuaded does belong to them, and may therefore (as Bellarmin does) say,
perhaps it does not belong to them. What absurdity is there in this?

3. The Text Pasce Oves and Agnos, John 21. 15, 16, 17. comes Ibid. n. 17.
next to be examined: wherein our Daedalus winds to and fro to find a
plausible evasion: but all will not do. Feed my Sheep -- and my Lambs, that is,
says A. C. Christ's whole Flock. But at this the Bishop bids soft and fair. It
is only his Sheep and his Lambs. As if Sheep and Lambs were not Christ's whole
Fock. What means this nice distinction between Sheep and Lambs, and the whole
Flock? the Bishop tells us, because (forsooth) every Apostle, and every
Apostles Successor has charge to feed both Sheep and Lambs, no less then St.
Peter. I ask where? The Bishop replies, in Matthew. 28. 29. (he would say happily
19. for there is no 29th. verse in all this Chapter) and Matthew. 10. 17. Nay
soft there, say I. I find no mention, Matthew. 28. or Matthew. 10. either of Sheep
or Lambs. Those mentioned Matthew. 28. ( Euntes ergo docete omnes gentes,
baptizantes eos in nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus sancti) were not yet
brought to Christ's fold, they were as yet unbaptized and uninstructed in the
Faith: and therefore not pertaining to this Text of St. John, nor to the
present question. For as the Text speaks only of such as were actually Christ's
Sheep or Lambs, that is, actually his Flock, so the question is only, whether
all such were nor by our Savior in this Text committed to St. Peter's charge
and government, and collectively speaking, to him only. We say, the words
themselves being so absolutely and indefinitely pronounced, without restriction
or limitation to any part of Christ's Sheep, must according to the rules of
right Interpretation, be understood generally and indefinitely of all that were
Christ's Sheep and Lambs, that is, of all Christians whatsoever. Till therefore
it be evidenced from some other place of Scripture, as clear as this of St.
John, that the other Apostles had the feeding of all Christ's Sheep as
universally and unlimitedly committed to them, as here they were to St. Peter,
or that they themselves (who are as properly comprehended under the notion of
Christ's sheep as any others) were excepted out of St. Peter's charge, it must of
necessity be granted, both that all Christ's Sheep, even the Apostles themselves
were in some sort, to be fed, that is, governed as Christ's Sheep ought to be,
by St. Peter, and also that A. C's Gloss, expounding Sheep and Lambs to be
Christ's whole Flock, stands unshaken by any thing the Bishop replies.

Nay he replies nothing at all, by way of Argument to disprove it; but knowing
it to be the sense of all Antiquity, winds about, and falls upon that odious
question of Killing and deposing Kings; wherein, he presumed, it would be more
easy for him to choke his adversary. But it shall not serve his turn. For we
say first, he commits a gross fallacy, arguing a negatione speciei ad
negationem generis; which is a new kind of Logic. For what is it else to
infer the Pope has no Universal Power, or Supremacy at all, over the whole
Church, because he has not such or such a particular power over Christian
Kings and Princes? His Lordship should have remembered, that we were yet upon
the question An sit, whether or no the Pope has an universal Power and
Authority over the whole Church; which till it be fairly determined, it is but
to make too much haste, and pervert due order, to fall upon the Question Quid
sit, and dispute wherein it consists, and how far it extends? Secondly we
answer, the point of killing Kings is a most false and scandalous Imputation.
For what Pope ever killed, or gave Command, Warrant, or Authority for the
killing of any King? or what Catholic Author ever taught, that he had power
from Christ so to do? And as for deposing them, I answer, it is no point of our
Faith, that the Pope has power to do it: and therefore it is no part of my
task to dispute it. But what Protestants have both done and justified in the
worst of these kinds, is but too fresh in memory.

4. A. C. does not beg the question, when he says, The Bishop of Ibid. n. 18.
Rome shall never refuse to feed and govern the whole Flock of Christ, in such
sort, as no particular man, or Church, shall have just cause to make a
separation from it; seeing it is the clear inference of his precedent
discourse: it is rather a begging the question in his Lordship to tell us
only, while he ought to prove it, that Protestants have made no Separation
from the General Church, but only from the Church of Rome, and such other
Churches, as by adhering to her have hazarded themselves, and do now mis-call
themselves THE WHOLE CATHOLIC CHURCH. It is also in this case a begging the
question, to affirm the Roman-Catholique Church to be in error: since no man
did ever grant his Lordship that she was so? or has he any where convinced her
of error? He has often said it and supposed it, I know; but where he has
proved it I know not. It Is therefore yet to be proved that the Roman-Catholique
Church has erred in any Doctrine, publicly defined by her. Again we deny,
there is any hazard in adhering to the Roman Church, she being the unshaken
Rock of Truth, and solely able to show a continual Succession of lawfully-Sent
Pastors and Teachers, from Christ to our present times, who have hitherto
taught the same unchanged Doctrine, and shall infallibly, according to Christ's
promise, continue so teaching it unto the worlds end.

From this only Catholic Church Protestants have unhappily severed
themselves, as I have already proved, Chap. 13, 14.
and are through their own fault so absolutely deprived of all Communion with
her, that they can no more be esteemed members of this Church, in the condition
they now stand, then a withered branch can be accounted a part of the Tree from
which it was broken. In vain therefore does the Relatour pretend, that
Protestants have not left the Church in her Essence, but in her Errors. The
Essence of the Church consists in her Faith, Sacraments, Discipline: In all
these ('it is too manifest to be denied) Protestants have forsaken the Church,
yea and perpetually fight against her; wherefore they have left her in things
essential, or pertaining to the life and being of the Church. And yet they have
the confidence to call these Essentials, Errors; which is a bold and erroneous
presumption: wherein they imitate no less the old Heretics in the Primitive
times of the Church, viz. the Novatians, Arians, Nestorians, etc. then the
Swarms of new Sectaries among themselves. For which of all these did not, or
would not, upon occasion plead, they forsook not the Essence of the Church, but
her Errors; they separated not from her Communion, but Corruption?

5. Well. But after all disputes a man would imagine, that our learned
Antagonist would at length submit to a General Council. For first he thus
professes, speaking to A. C. What greater, or surer 26. number. 1.
judgment you can have, where sense of Scripture is doubted, then a General
Council, I do not see. And immediately after he cites a long Text of A. C's.
which speaks to this purpose; That if all the Pastors of the Church be
gathered together in the Name of Christ, and pray unanimously for the promised
Assistance of the Holy Ghost, making great and diligent search and examination
of the Scriptures and other grounds of Faith, and hearing each Pastor declare
what has been the Ancient Tradition of this Church, shall thereupon Decree
some particular point, or matter, to be held for Divine Truth, if the Pastors
of the Church (or General Council) may err in such a Decree, what can be firm
or certain upon Earth? In answer to this he both professes, that it seems fair,
and also freely grants, that a General Council is the best Judge on Earth for
Controversies of Faith, where the sense of Scripture is doubted. This would
make a man think the Bishop intended to conform himself to such a Decree. But
to the end all the world may see how unwillingly he yields to reason,
especially when it comes from an Adversary, he presently again begins to
quarrel with A. C. telling us, there was never any such General Council called,
nor indeed possible to be called, as A. C. speaks of, viz. in which all
Pastors were gathered together. As if A. C. were so simple, as by all Pastors
to understand Numerically and Individually ALL, that is, every one of them,
without exception; and that a Council could not be thought sufficiently
General, nor an Obligatory Decree of Faith be made by it, unless all the
Pastors of the Church in this sense were gathered together: especially he
having so clearly declared his meaning to the contrary, in defending the
Council of Trent to have been a true General Council: where it is manifest all
Pastors whatsoever did not convene; though there were as many, as had met in
some other General Councils, esteemed even by Protestants for such. And strange
it is to see, how long the Relatour skirmishes with mere shadows, and what
inferences he makes merely upon this most salsly-suppos'd, and
wholly-improbable sense of A. C's. words. All Pastors then, in that Text of A.
C. signify no more, then all that are requisite, or so many of all as are, in
the judgment of Reason and Christian Prudence, duly sufficient to constitute a
True and Lawful General Council. If so many, lawfully called, be gathered
together, it is the ALL that A. C. intends: and if these lawfully assembled,
pray for the promised Assistance of the Holy Ghost, they questionless shall
obtain it, seeing our Savior cannot fail of his word.

Another Exception against that cited passage of A. C. is, that he speaking of
Points decreed by a General Council, makes Firm, and Infallible to be
Synonyma's: But here again the Bishop fails in his observation. A. C. only
tells us, that the Decree of such a General Council was Firm, and Infallible,
that is, not only Firm, but also Infallible. Is this to make them signify the
same thing? Neither does he speak so much of what is Infallible in it self, as
what is Infallible in order to us. So that, this and the Premises considered,
there must needs be some other visible and Infallible Judge, ( viz. a General
Council) beside Scripture, for settling Controversies in the Church, and making
all points of Faith not only Firm, but Infallible.

6. What the Relatour brings in his swelling Margent, out of Optatus and St.
Austin, serves only to amuse his Reader. We grant that Christ did not dye
Intestate, but left behind him a Will; which was afterward written. So that
in rigor of speech he left only a Nuncupative Will, which was after delivered
to the Church, partly by Writing, partly by Tradition. However, we stand not
upon the terms, but the thing it self; and have recourse with St. Austin and
Optatus to the Written Word (or Will) in matters of Faith. We urge and plead it
in almost all matters controverted in Religion between us and them. But we
demand, what was to be done by those first Christians, who lived before this
Will was written, or at least before it was generally received or known for
such? Again, what are we now to do, when either this written Word is called in
question, or the matter in Controversy not so clearly set down therein, as to
put a period to contention? Do the forecited Authors deny, that in such case
we must have recourse to Tradition? Nothing less.

Certainly St. Austin believed the necessity of Infant Baptism, the
unlawfulness of rebaptizing the duly-Baptiz'd by Heretics, with many other
points, which no man can evidently prove out of the written Word alone: nay the
Scripture it self he believed for no other reason, then the Authority of the
Church and Tradition. Wherefore I cannot sufficiently wonder at those words of
his Lordship to A. C. in the Margent, where by way of defiance he tells him, he
could show no Father of the Church, who taught, that Christ ever lest behind
him a NUNCUPATIVE OBLIGATORY WILL. First, what means he by that restrictive
expression, a Nuncupative Obligatory Will? Could any Will, left by our Savior,
whether Nuncupative, or by Writing not be Obligatory? Secondly, how was it
possible, the Bishop should challenge us to prove by the Fathers, that our
Savior left behind him a Nuncupative Will, since it is in it self most
evident, and undeniable? Did he leave (I pray) any other then a Nuncupative
Will? Was any part of the Gospel written either by himself, or by any other at
his command in his life time? Did he not make his whole Will by word of mouth
to his Disciples?

But we shall not insist wholly upon the self-evidence of the thing. Is it not
to be shown out of the Fathers, that Christ left a Nuncupative Obligatory Will?
First, touching the word ( Nuncupative Will) we hope it will be held
sufficient, if we prove the thing, ( viz. an unwritten, yet Obligatory,
Declaration of Christ's Doctrine) which is equivalent to a Nuncupative Will. And
as to this we say that Bellarmin, and all Catholic Divines, who write of the
word of God written and unwritten, do effectually prove it, not only by the
Authority of St. Austin, and the unanimous consent of the Fathers, but even by
the very Text of Scripture it self. Does not Saint Paul command us (2 Thessalonians. 2.
14.) TO HOLD FAST THE TRADITIONS we have been taught whether by Word, or
Epistle? Does not this in effect signify a Nuncupative Will, and Obligatory?
Does not Saint Irenaeus teach us the same? Oportet ordinem sequi Traditionis,
etc. We Iren. lib. 3. adver. Haeres. cap. 4.
must (says he) follow the order of Tradition, which they have delivered to
us, to whom the Apostles committed the Government of the Churches. Does he not
tell us in the same Multae Gentes Barbarorum in Christum credunt, sine Charta
and Atramento, Scriptam habentes per Spiritum in cordibus salutem, and veterem
Traditionem diligenter custodientes. And a little after. Hanc Fidem, qui sine
literis, etc. Iren. ubi supra.
Chapter of whole Nations of Christians, even in his time (which was somewhat
above two hundred years after Christ) who most perfectly believed the Christian
Faith, though they had not any part of the Scripture to direct them? Does not
Tertullian. de Coron. Milit. cap. 3. and 4.
Tertullian teach the same, together with D. Cyprian. Epist. 63.
Saint Cyprian, D. Basil. lib. 3. de Spirit. Sanct. cap. 27. and 29.
St. Basil, D. Epiphan. Haeres. 61. and 75. Item in Anchorat.
Epiphanius, D. Hieron. Dial. contr. Lucif.
St. Hierome, and diverse others? But we have spoken too much in a matter so
evident: let us pass on to that which follows.

7. His next Marginal Exception against A. C. is for requiring the Popes
Confirmation to a General Council; telling us, it is one of the Roman Novelties,
to account that necessary for the validity of a General Council. But surely he
is not a little mistaken. For in the first (...) Councils, do we not find the
Confirmations of the several Popes, who then sat, clearly acknowledged? See
the Acts and Synodical Epistles of the six first Councils, and Gelasius, epist.
13. ad Episcop. Dardan. Tom. 3. (...).

Neither can it rationally be thought, that the Decrees of a Council should be
taken for the Decrees of the whole Church Representative, if the consent of the
acknowledged chief Pastor and Head of the Church were wanting. And whereas the
Relatour brings St. Austin's Authority, to prove, that the Sentence of a
General Council is confirmed by the consent of the whole Church yielding to it,
we answer, his Allegation might well have been spared; for we say so too. We
acknowledge, the Acceptance of the Universal Church to be an Acoessory and
Secondary Confirmation of the Decrees of a General Council; and as the whole
Church Representative (or a General Council) cannot err in defining, so
neither can the whole Church Diffusive and Formal err in accepting and
believing whatever is defined. So that ordinarily speaking, we acknowledge a
Double Confirmation of the Decrees made by a General Council; the one, of the
Pope, as Head of the Church; the other, of the Church it self extended
throughout the several Provinces of Christendom. But the Popes Confirmation is
Primary, Essential, and absolutely necessary; because without it, what the
Council declares neither is, nor can be esteemed the Act, or Judgment of the
whole Church Representative; the Pope being the chief Member both of Church and
Council. The Churches Acceptance is, as I have said, a Confirmation also; but
this is only Accessory, for the further satisfaction of particular persons,
that may happily doubt, either of the Authority, or Proceedings of this or that
Council in particular. And there is no other ordinary means to assure private
persons throughout the Church, that such or such a Council was lawfully
assembled, proceeded duly, voted freely, and was Authentically confirmed by the
chief Bishop, but this, viz. that its Decrees are universally received as
obligatory by all particular Churches, or the whole Church Diffusive. Neither
is this Confirmation so simply and absolutely necessary, but that the Decrees
of a General Council, lawfully assembled and duly confirmed by the Pope, are
obligatory without it, and antecedently to it.

But what if St. Austin say no such thing as the Bishop cites him for, viz. to
prove that it is the consent of the whole Church Diffusive, that confirms the
Decrees of General Councils, and not the Popes Authority. His words are these.
D. Aug. lib. 1. De Baptism. cap. 18.
Illis temporibus, antequam Plenarij Concilij Sententia, quid in hac re
sequendum esset, totius Ecclesiae consensio confirmasset, visum est ei, etc.
where it is evident, the Father speaking of St. Cyprians error, the whole drift
of his speech is to tell us, it was the more excusable in him, because he
defended it only before the consent of the whole Church had, by the sentence
of a General Council, established what was to be held in that point. Is this to
say, that the Decrees, of a General Council are to be confirmed by the consent
of the whole Church yielding to it, and not otherwise, as the Bishop will needs
persuade us? Surely no. To conclude therefore, we think, the Bishop could not
well have more effectually justified our assertion, concerning the Authority
both of the Church, and a General Council, then by citing this Text of St.
Austin: Since it clearly signifies, that the Church does settle and determine
matters of Controversy by the sentence of a General Council; in which the
whole Churches consent is both virtually included, and effectually declared.

8. The Bishop is not yet well pleased with A. C. but goes on in his Ibid. n. 2.
angry exceptions against him, for interposing (as he tells us) new matter,
quite out of the Conference. But how can it be called new matter, as not
pertinent to the question debated in the Conference, if A. C. urged and proved,
by what reasons he could, the necessity of the Popes Authority for ending
Controversies in Faith; that being the point his Adversary most especially
denied? A. C. desires to know what is to be done for reuniting the Church in
case of Heresies and Divisions, when a general Council cannot be held by reason
of manifold impediments; or being called, will not be of one mind. Has Christ
our Lord (says he) in this case provided no Rule, no Judge Infallible to
determine Controversies, and procure unity and certainty of Belief? Yes, (says
the Bishop) He has, left an Infallible Rule, the Scripture. But this Answer A.
C. foreseeing, prevented by his following words, Indeed the Protestants admit
no infallible Means, Rule, or Judge, but only Scripture, which every man may
interpret, as he pleases, and so all shall be uncertain. A. C. page 60
(had the Relatour pleased to set them down) which show the inconvenience of
admitting that Rule, as Protestants admit it; since it renders all matters of
Faith uncertain. What says the Bishop to that? First, he cunningly dissembles
the objection, takes no notice of A. C.s discourse to that purpose; and yet,
finding it necessary to apply some salve to the sore, he adds in the second
place, as it were by way of Tacit prevention, In necessaries to Salvation the
Scripture by the manifest places of it, (which admit no dispute, nor need any
external Judge to interpret them) is able to settle Unity and Certainty of
Belief Ibidem. n. 3.
amongst Christians; and about things not necessary there ought not to be
contention to a Separation; and therefore no matter how uncertain and
undetermined they be.

But surely here the Bishop went too far, and lost himself in his own
Labyrinth. For if by matters necessary to Salvation he understands only such
as are of absolute necessity to be expressly known and believed by all
Christians, ( necessitate medii as Divines speak) though we should grant they
were so clear in Scripture, as not to fall under dispute among Christians, yet
to affirm (as he does) that there ought to be no contention to a separation
about any other points, is to condemn the perpetual practice of the Catholic
Church, which has ever obliged her Children, under pain of Anathema, to
separate themselves from thousands of Sectaries and Heretics, (as namely from
the Montanists, the Quarto-Decimani, the Rebaptizers, Monothelites, Pelagians,
Semi-Pelagians, Vigilantians, Iconoclasts, and the like) who held all those
foresaid necessary matters, and erred only in such, as were not absolutely and
universally necessary to be expressly known, and believed by all Christians
whatsoever.

But if by necessaries to salvation, he mean any of those, which Divines term
necessary, necessitate praecepti, he should have assigned them in particular:
for till that be done, such General Answers as the Bishop here gives, signify
nothing, either to the just satisfaction of us, or security of their own
proceedings; since they cannot possibly know in what points they ought to hold
contention to a separation, and in what not. Moreover we having already proved
at large ( Chap. 2. and in other places) that it is necessary to salvation to
believe whatever is sufficiently proposed to us by the Church, whether clearly
contained in Scripture or not, it follows, there must be some other Infallible
Rule, beside Scripture, whereon to ground our Faith of such Things, as are not
clearly delivered in Scripture.

The Holy Scripture alone is not qualified for such a Rule of Faith as the
Bishop would make us believe it is. For though it may be granted Ibidem. n. 4.
to be certain and Infallible in it self, yet is it not so in order to us, nor
so much as known to us for Gods Word, without the Authority of the Church,
assuring us of that truth: and he is very much mistaken when he supposes, the
Ancient Church had no other Additional Infallible Rule, (viz. Tradition) by
which to direct their Councels. Nor is there any thing alledgeable out of
Bellarmin contrary to this sense, if his words be heartily interpreted.
Tertullian indeed calls Scripture the principal rule; and we, if we have not
sufficiently acknowledged it already upon sundry occasions, will now say so
too: it is the principal, not the only Rule. He adores the fullness of
Scripture; so do we, as to that particular point, about which he then disputed.
We confess, the Scriptures do most fully prove against Hermogenes the
Heretic, that the world, or matter whereof this world consists, was not
eternal, but created by God in time. Again it is no way probable that Tertullian
here extends the Fullness of Seripture so far as to exclude all unwritten
Tradition, which in other parts of his Tertull. lib. De (...). Milit. lib. 1.
cont. Marcion. lib. 2. ad uxor. lib. (...) Veland, Virgin.
works, he maintains more expressly, then many other of the Fathers. What Is the
Subject of his whole Book De praescriptionibus, but to show that Heretics
cannot be confuted by Scripture alone, without Tradition? Now we say, both with
him, St. Hierome, and St. Basil, that to superinduce any thing contrary to what
is written, is a manifest error in Faith, and that it has a woe annexed to
it; but to superinduce what is no way dissonant, but rather consonant and
agreeable to Scripture, has no such curse laid upon it. For St Basil himself
(even as the Bishop quotes him) professes Contra insurgentes Haereses saepe
pugnavi Agraphis, verum non alienis a pia secundum Scripturam sententia. D.
Basil. Sermon. De Fide. Tom. 2. page 153.
to fight against Heresies by unwritten Doctrine, or Tradition, yet such, as
was not contrary, but according to Scripture. Lastly we say with Biel, that
Scripture is a Rule, which applied by the Church (and that is Biels express
caution, though it might not appear in English) measures all things, yea and
contains all things necessary to salvation, either mediately or immediately.

Wherefore to take notice by the way of the Bishops conceit upon Ibidem. n. 5.
Gedeon's Fleece, we aver, that Scripture has not only Dew upon it, but
water in it, and that enough, not only for a Lamb to wade through, but for an
Elephant to swim: but whosoever shall presume to wade, or swim there, without
help of Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Tradition, will surely perish by his
presumption. He asks, what warrant we have to seek another Rule, beside
Scripture; but considers not how groundless his own assertion is, that God has
left us Scripture as the only Infallible Rule: which is contrary to the common
belief of all true Christians, contrary to express Scripture, and the constant
judgment and practice of the Church in all ages; and according to the example
of none but confessed and condemned Heretics.

9. But the Bishop tells us, that though the Pope should be granted Ibidem. n.
6.
a living Infallible Judge, yet would it not suffice, against the malice of the
Devil and impious men, to keep the Church at all times from renting even in
Doctrine of Faith, or to soder the rents which are made. His 1 Cor. 11. 19.
reason is, because oportet Haereses esse, etc. Heresies there will be, and
Heresies properly there cannot be, but in Doctrine of the Faith. I answer, the
Church is at all times sufficiently and effectually secured from such Rents by
the Authority of its chief Pastor, where it is duly acknowledged. The malice of
the Devil and impious men, by inventing Heresies, hurt not the Church, but
themselves and their Adherents, who by their Heresy and Schism make a divorce
from the Church, that is, either sever themselves, or are justly cut off from
her for their errors; the Church (to speak properly) remaining still as pure
and incorrupt as she was before. Heresies are not within, but without the
Church; and the Rents, (or Schismatical party) which stand in need of Sodering,
are not found amongst the true Members of the Church, who continue still united
in Faith, and due obedience with their Head, and in all necessary Communion
with one another; but in those who have deserted the true Church, and either
made, or adhered to Schismatical and Heretical Congregations.

And herein truly, if passion did not too much blind us, experience would tell
us, that had not the Pope received from God the power he challenges, of
Governing the Church as Supreme Head thereof under Christ, he could never have
been able to preserve that Peace and Unity in matters of Religion, that is
found in the Roman Church; (there being, upon other Accounts, so many Feuds and
Animosities among the Professors of that Religion) or to have subsisted thus
long, had his pretension to it been grounded on mere Policy and Interest; as
Protestant Ministers continually suggest to their Disciples: especially in
these latter ages, wherein the wit and malice of his enemies have been
sharpened to the utmost; and every thing objected (even with notorious calumny)
that might possibly serve to render his Authority suspected and contemptible,
even with those who acknowledged it. But leaving him to the execution of his
Pastoral Charge, let us see, how matters go between the Bishop and his
Adversary.

10. A. C. tells us, there is no earthly Kingdom, that (when matters cannot
opportunely be composed by Parliament, which upon all occasions and at all
times cannot be summoned) has not, beside the Law Books, some living
Magistrates and Judges, and above all one visible King (the Supreme Magistrate
and Judge) to determine emergent Controversies, and preserve peace in Temporal
affairs: and thence a paritate rationis, or rather a fortiori inferrs, that
Christ, the wisest of Kings, has in like manner provided in his Kingdom (the
Church) beside the Law Books of Holy Scripture, some visible Magistrates and
Judges, and above all one chief Magistrate and Judge, sufficiently empowered
and assisted by his Spirit, as to put an end to all Controversies concerning
Ecclesiastical affairs, and preserve his Church in the Unity and Certainty of
Faith. To which the Relatour thinks it sufficient to say, all this is but a
Simile: and if the Similitude hold not in the main, the Argument's nothing. The
Similitude upon which A. C. grounds his discourse, is, that the whole Militant
Church is a Kingdom; which the Bishop denies, telling us, they are no mean
ones, who think our Savior Christ left the Church Militant in the Hands of the
Apostles and their Successors, in an Aristocratical, or mixed Government. But I
answer, though A. C. urges the Argument in the Similitude of a Kingdom only,
yet is it of force in any other kind of settled Government. In a
Commonwealth, beside the Law Books, it is requisite, there be a living Judge,
or Judges, invested with Supreme Authority to determine all matters in
difference amongst the people.

What the Relatour brings against the Monarchy of the Militant Church, shows
only, that it is not a pure, but a mixed Monarchy, participating somewhat both
of Aristocracy and Democracy. I call that a Pure Monarchy, in which all the
Sovereign Power is so in one alone, as that no other person, or persons in the
Kingdom, govern, but in virtue of the Monarchs Authority, and merely as his
Substitutes. A mixed Monarchy is that, in which one indeed is Supreme, and in
some cases commands all; yet so, as others within the Monarchy are Princes, and
do govern both Towns and Provinces as their own, and with rights of
Sovereignty, though not absolute, but holding and depending on the Monarch in
chief. Now the Supreme Government of the Church is clearly Monarchical. Seeing
the Pope, as Vicar of Christ, and St. Peter's Successor, has a Supreme
Authority over the whole Church: yet is not his Monarchy pure, but mixed;
because Bishops, within their respective Diocesses and Jurisdictions, are
Spiritual Princes also, that is, Chief Pastors and Governors of such a part
of the Church, in their own right, and not merely his Vicars and Substitutes,
placeable and displaceable at his pleasure. In this respect therefore the
Government of the Church has something of the Aristocratical in it. And
because any man, if sufficiently qualified for it, may be promoted to a
Bishopric, it has something also of Democratical.

11. But since the Government of one in chief is by all Philosophers
acknowledged for the most perfect, what wonder is it, that Christ our Savior
thought it fitter to govern his Church by one Viceroy (as the Bishop is pleased
to term him) then Aristocratically, or by many, as he would have it? And as
for the Literae Communicatoriae, Ibid. n. 8.
(which himself alleges against this Monarchical Government) they rather prove
our Assertion, being ordained by Sixtus the first, in favor of such Bishops,
as were called to Rome, or otherwise forced to repair thither; to the end they
might without scruple be received into their own Diocese at their return:
having also decreed, that without such Letters Communicatory none, in such
case, should be admitted. Now what can more clearly prove, that the Pope had
power over all Bishops, and all Diocesses in the Church, then the making of
such a Decree? We deny not; but the like Literae Communicatoriae were mutually
sent from one Patriarch to another. But as for that even, equal, and Brotherly
way, whereby the Bishop pretends, that these Letters were sent reciprocally
from other Patriarchs and Bishops to the Bishop of Rome, for admitting any into
Episcopal, or Priestly Office, that went from them to him; as I find nothing
of it in Baronius (who yet handles the matter at large) so I doubt not, but it
is a mere Chimaera. And had the Bishop pleased, with all his professed
diligence in the search, to have afforded us any instance, in a business of
such importance, there would doubtless have appeared a manifest difference and
inequality between them, viz. that those sent to the Pope from other Prelates,
were merely Testimonial, to assure him that the person bringing them, was
capable of his Communion: whereas those from the Pope to other Bishops were not
only Testimonial, but Mandatory, or such as enjoined the reception, and
restitution of the Bringer, to such place and office in the Church as he
pretended to. Witness (beside many other examples in Ecclesiastical Story) the
case of St. Athanasius, and those other Catholic Bishops, persecuted and
expelled their Seas by the Arrians, and restored by virtue of the Popes Letters
Communicatory. But, should the Pope voluntarily submit to the Equity of his own
Law, that is, not only allow such Letters to be written from others to him, as
he writes to them, but also permit them to be so far of force as equity
requires, what would this prejudice his just Authority? It might argue indeed
the Humility of his Spirit; but could surely be no Argument against his Right,
and Power to do otherwise, if he saw cause.

CHAP. 18. A Continuation of the Defense of the Popes Authority.
ARGUMENT.
1. Gersons Book de auferibilitate Papae proves nothing for the Bishop, or his
Party. 2. St. Hierome and Optatus expounded. 3. The Popes Spiritual
Sovereignty, not prejudicial to that of Temporal Princes. 4. Bishops, of Divine
Institution; yet Subordinate to the Pope by the Law of Christ. 5. Pope
Innocents Simile of the Sun and Moon, in relation to the Spiritual and Civil
Government, an usual Allegory. 6. Why the Book of the Law was anciently
delivered to the Prince. 7. The Pope never pretended to Subject the Emperor to
himself in Temporals. 8. The Jesuits unjustly charged by the Bishop. 9.
Occham, no competent Judge in the question of the Popes Authority. 10. The
Definition of the Council of Florence touching that matter.

1. BUt before we pass any further it will not be amiss to look back,. 26. n. 8.
and examine more narrowly the Bishops Marginal Allegations. Gerson, that
famous Chancellor of Paris and undoubted Catholic, writ a Book, in
troublesome times, entitled De auferibilitate Papae: whence the Relatour
concludes, that the Author was of opinion, the Church might continue in very
good being without a Monarchical Head. A strange Illation, and contrary to what
Gerson expressly teaches in the very treatise the Bishop cites! The drift of
Gerson's discourse is to show, how many several ways the Pope may be taken
away, that is, deprived of his Office, and cease to be Pope as to his own
person, so that the Church pro tempore, till another be chosen, shall be
without her visible Head. But he no where teaches, that the Government of the
Church settled in a Monarchical way, or ruled by a Pope lawfully chosen, can be
absolutely abolisht by any power on earth: but his judgment is clear, even
beyond all dispute, for the contrary.

Hear Gersons own words, and you will see to what great purpose, and with what
Fidelity our Adversary sometimes alleges Authors. Auferibilis est (says he)
aut mutabilis, LEGE STANTE, quaelibet Gerson Tract. De Auferibilitat. Papae.
Consid. 8.
Politia Civilis Monarchica, seu Regalis, ut fiat Aristocratica: at non sic de
Ecclesia, quae in UNO MONARCHA SUPREMO per universum fundata est a Christo:
quia nullam aliam Politiam instituit Christus Item. Consid. 20.
IMMUTABILITER MONARCHIC AM, and quodammodo Regalem, nisi Ecclesiam. In English
thus. Any Auferibilis non est usque ad consummationem saeculi VICARIUS SPON SUS
Ecclesiae, quin aliquis Certus and Unicus (...), etc.
Civil Monarchy, or Regal Government may be taken away, or changed into an
Aristocracy, the Law still continuing in force: But it is not so in the Church;
which was founded by Christ in one Supreme Monarch throughout the world:
Because Christ instituted no other Government unchangeably Monarchical, and as
it were Regal, besides the Church. Can any words be more express in proof of
the Authority of one over the whole Church? And yet (forsooth) from the bare
title of the Book the Relatour will infer, that in Gerson's judgment, the
Church is not by any Command, or Institution of Christ, Monarchical.

2. Neither has the Bishop much better success in his Allegation of St.
Hierome: who, in his Epistle to Evagrius, enveighing (as his manner is)
somewhat vehemently against one, that seemed to prefer Deacons before
Priests, proceeds so far in vindication of the dignity and honor of
Priesthood, that he almost equalizes it with the office of Bishops; plainly
asserting, that Diocesan Bishops have no more belonging to them jure Divino (or
by the Institution of Christ) then Priests, save only the Power of Ordination:
that the riches, wealth, and amplitude of their respective Diocesses make not
one Bishop greater then another; but that all Bishops, where ever they be
placed, are of one and the same merit and degree in regard of Ecclesiastical
Priesthood: which (speaking precisely of the Office, and Power Episcopal in it
self) is very true: for a larger or lesser Diocese makes not one man more or
less a Bishop, then another; St. Austin was as much a Bishop at little Hippo,
as Aurelius was at great Carthage: But this is no impediment to the additional,
or accessory collation (whether by divine or humane Institution) of some
special and more eminent Power and Authority upon the Bishop of one Diocese,
then of another: as we say there is conferred, jure Divino, upon the Bishop of
Rome, as he is St. Peter's Successor; and jure Ecclesiastico upon many other
Bishops, viz. Archbishops, Metropolitans, Primates, etc. who by the Canons of
the Church exercise authority over many Bishops, who in regard of the power
merely Episcopal are equal to them. St. Hierome therefore, when he says
ubicunque fuerit Episcopus, sive Romae, sive Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli,
sive Rhegii, Hier. Epist. ad Evagrium.
sive Alexandriae, sive Tanis, ejusdem meriti, ejusdem est and sacerdotii,
speaks not of the Pope as he is Pope, or in respect of that Supereminent
Authority, which belongs to him as Saint Peter's Successor, but only compares
him with another private Bishop in respect of mere Character, or power of a
Bishop as Bishop only. And as he does not de facto speak of the Pope as
Successor of St. Peter; so is it certain, that de jure he could not speak any
thing to the prejudice of that part of the Bishop of Rome's Authority, without
contradicting and condemning himself, not only in his Epistle to Pope Damasus
already cited, (where he professes, that to be out of the Popes Communion is
to be an Alien from the Church of Christ) but also in his Commentaries on the
13. Psalm, where he calls St. Peter, Head of the Church; and Epist. ad
Demetriad. Virg. where he styles the Pope Successor of the Apostolic Chair;
and speaks to the same purpose in diverse other places of his D. Hieronym. in
cap 16. Matthew. Epist. 54. ad Marcel. and lib. 1. Dial. cont. Lucif.
works.

But now the Bishop, to give a home-blow, as he imagined, to the Popes
Authority over the whole Church, pretends to bring a great and undoubted Rule,
given by Optatus; who tells us, the Church is in Ibidem. n. 9.
the Commonwealth, not the Commonwealth in the Church: whence he positively
concludes it impossible, that the Government of the Church should be
Monarchical. For (says he) no Emperor, or King, will endure another King
within his Dominions to be greater then himself, since the very enduring it
makes him that endures it, upon the matter, no Monarch. But the force of this
Argument will presently vanish, if we but consider, that these two Kingdoms are
of different natures; the one, Spiritual, the other Temporal; the one exercised
only in such things as concern the Worship of God, and the Eternal Salvation
of Souls: the other, in affairs that concern this world alone; and consequently
do not of their own nature hinder, but help one another, where they are rightly
administered. Neither must it come under debate, whether the administration of
the spiritual Monarchy ought to be endured or not, seeing Christ has so
ordained it: nor would the Relatour (I suppose) have urged this argument, had
he well reflected on the person of our Savior; who (as the Bishop himself
would not deny) was, whilst he lived on earth, most truly and properly the
visible Monarch of the whole Church (his Kingdom) whether the Kings of the
earth would endure it, or not.

Again, is it not in a manner the same thing in regard of Temporal Kings, to
have had the Apostles, Universal Governors over all Christians, as if some one
had been a Monarch, or chief amongst them? and yet the Bishop cannot in his own
principles deny, but Temporal Kings were bound to endure this, and did actually
endure it, without unkinging themselves thereby. Nay, is it not as prejudicial
to their Temporal Crowns, Titles, and Prerogatives, to have all their people
(together with themselves) subject to the decrees of a lawful General Council
(which the Bishop denies not) as to be subject to the Decrees of some one chief
Bishop?

3. Lastly, who sees not, that the force of this Argument is utterly broken by
the daily experience, we have of the contrary to what our Adversary pretends?
For instance, do not the Two great Christian Kings of France and Spain endure
it? Nay, does not all the world see, that they do not only endure it, but
maintain the Authority and Government of such a Spiritual Monarch, as we speak
of, in the very midst of their Dominions? and is it not evident, they prosper
so well under it, that it would be no less then Dotage to contend, that the
enduring it is a Diminution of their Majesty?

Our Adversaries reflection upon this particular by way of Answer, is not only
injurious to those Two great Monarchs, but destructive of his own Argument. For
he tells us, the Popes power is of little esteem in the Kingdoms of these Two
Catholic Princes further Ibidem.
then to serve their own turns of him; which they do (says he) to their great
advantage Thus, what the two great Catholic Princes of Christendom profess to
do upon the Account of Faith and Conscience, the Relatour has the confidence
to tell us, they do it merely on the score of policy, and for temporal ends;
though he plainly contradicts himself in this assertion; since he told us but
just now, the enduring such a Monarchy made him that endured it, no Monarch.
You see at once both his Civility toward Christian Princes, and his Constancy
to himself.

Moreover, I wonder the Relatour could not see, that this Argument, The Church
is within the Commonwealth, ergo Subordinate unto it, (had it any force) would
conclude as much against the Aristocratical Government of the Church, for which
he so much pleads, as the Monarchical. For how (I pray) could the Bishops of so
many different Kingdoms and States, when the good of the Church did necessarily
require it, Convene in a General Council, or authoritatively Declare what ought
to be believed, when matters of Faith were questioned? or how should they
(otherwise then precariously) cause their Decisions to be received through the
whole Church, if either there were no Supreme Spiritual Governor at all, or he
bound, as it were, to ask Princes leave to do what belongs to his Office? Is
not a General Council as much within the Commonwealth, as the Pope? If
therefore the Pope, in the administration of his Office be any way subject de
jure to the Authority of Temporal Princes, how can a General Council be
absolute and independent of the same Authority, in the execution of theirs?
Thus you see how by impugning the Monarchical Government of Christ's Church, he,
in effect, overthrows all Church Government whatsoever, even that which himself
would seem to approve.

It remains therefore fully proved, that the external Government of the Church
on earth is Monarchical, not purely and absolutely, but mixed, as has been
already declared. Neither do we style the Pope Monarch of the Church, but the
Deputy, or Vicar General of Christ: that is, his Chief Bishop, by whom he
governs his Church in chief. He is neither King, nor Lord of the Church, but
the Chief-Servant of it, a Steward of Christ's Family, yea a Fellow Servants with
other Bishops, to one and the same Master. Yet the Care of the whole Family is
committed to him, and but part of it to other Bishops; who govern by Commission
from Christ with him, but under him.

4. This duly considered, what the Relatour objects out of the Council of
Antioch, St. Cyprian, and Bellarmin, for the power of Bishops, comes just to
nothing. For we acknowledge Bishops to have a portion, jure Divino, in the
Government of Christ's Flock. They are no less Chief Officers of Christ, then
the Pope, though not in all respects equal to him, or so absolute, as to govern
without dependence on him. And it seems strange, the Bishop should attempt to
prove out of Bellarmin, that the Government of the Church Militant is not
Monarchical, in the sense often declared, because Bellarm. lib. 1. De Romans
Pont. cap. 7.
he teaches it is to be governed by Bishops; since in the place alleged, he
declares the Government of the Church only as it is contradistinct from the
government of Temporal Princes; not as inferior Bishops are distinguished from
the Supreme, or Chief Bishop: that is another question, and treated by him in
another place: it being sufficient to his purpose there to show, that the
Church was to be governed by Ecclesiastical, not Temporal Princes; without
disputing whether the said Ecclesiastical Governors were Subordinate, or not,
one to another.

But the Bishop proceeds in his objections, and tells us the Church Militant
remaining spread in many earthly Kingdoms, cannot so well be ordered by one
Monarch, as a particular Kingdom may by one King. For how (says he) will this
one Supreme execute his Office, if the Ibid. n. 10.
Kings of those several Kingdoms will not give leave? I answer first, this
Difficulty makes as much against the Aristocratical form of Church Government
as the Monarchical. For how will a General Council (to use his own term) enter
to execute their Office, when the necessities of the Church require such a
Convention, if the Kings of those several Kingdoms (from whence the Prelates
are to come) will not give leave? Nay how can the Bishops of any one Christian
Kingdom meet in Synods, if their respective Sovereigns (to whom the Relatour
will have them subject even in Spirituals) will not give leave?

5. As to his Surmize, that we would have one Emperor over all Ibid. n. 11.
Kings, as well as one Pope over all Bishops, I answer, it was a Chimaera of
his own Brain, and as impossible for him to know, as for any of his party to
deny with Truth, that we pray for Peace and Unity amongst all Christian
Princes, wishing nothing more, then that every one of them may enjoy, and rest
satisfied with his own right.

But here the Bishop takes occasion to fall foul upon Innocent the Third,
because (forsooth) comparing the Ecclesiastical and Civil Power to the Two
great Lights, the Sun and the Moon, he made the Sun a Symbol of the
Ecclesiastical, and the Moon, of the Civil Power; which the Relatour interprets
for us to signify the Pope and the Emperor. I answer. First, did not men love
contention; there would be no quarrelling about such Conceits as these; which
are never taken for Argumentative, but merely Allusive Applications of the
Sacred Text touching these Two Powers; which diversely considered give ground
to different Allegories. In times of persecution both the Church, and Pope, may
not unfitly be compared to the Moon, by reason of their declining condition:
but in time of prosperity, if we consider the same Church in relation to the
extent and greatness of her Power beyond the Imperial, (it reaching to all
places and persons in the world, professing Christian Faith) as also in respect
of the Dignity of its Object, viz. Things Caelestial; (whereas the Object of
the Imperial Power are only the Things of this world) there is little question,
but the Ecclesiastical Power excells the Imperial, no less then the Soul does
the Body, or Eternity the Things of this life. In this regard therefore it
could be no just matter of offense, for the Pope to be understood by the Sun,
and the Emperor by the Moon.

But the Pope (forsooth) makes too much odds between his own power and the
Emperors, abasing that of the Emperor so far as to make it forty seven times
less then that of the Pope; which the Bishop proves from the Gloss upon this
Decretal. We answer, the Allegory led the Glosser to it; and that being rather
a flourish of wit and pious conceit, then matter of solid Argument, it was but
lost time for our Adversary to make inferences from it, and would be the like
in us to answer them. The matter we stand upon is, that the Pope is Supreme
Pastor of the whole Church. Let our Adversaries disprove this, and not trifle
about Allegories. We confess also, that the Emperor is Supreme over his
Subjects in all Civil affairs: in fuch sort, as neither of these Powers can of
right hinder the other, in the due execution of their charge. They are both of
them absolute and Independent Powers; though each in their proper orb; the one
in Spirituals, the other in Temporals. By which it appears, we are far from
depressing the Imperial power lower then God has made it, as the Relatour most
injuriously charge us. No, we honor, and very willingly acknowledge the
Emperor, in Tertullians style, Hominem Ibidem. Tertul. adv. Scapulam.
a Deo secundum, and solo Deo minorem, viz. in the administration of all Civil
affairs; in which doubtless all persons within his Dominion, ought to be
subject to him. Yet does it not belong to the Emperor to order the affairs of
the Church, resolve Controversies of Faith, or interpret Scripture in any sense
contrary to the judgment and doctrine of the lawful Pastors of the Church: he
has no power to do any thing of this nature: neither shall we ever read, that
any of them took upon them to be Supreme Governors of the Church, or reform
Religion on their own account, without or contrary to the said Pastors.

6. A Book of the Law ('it is true) was anciently by Gods special command to be
given to the King, Deuteronomy. 17. 18. But to what intent was it given? To govern the
Church, by reading it, or expound the sense of the Law, when it happened to
come in Controversy? Surely no: It was given him to govern himself and Kingdom
by it; that by reading it he might learn to fear God, and keep his words and
statutes, commanded in it, as the Text it self declares.

Neither is it to be doubted, but in case of Notorious and Gross Abuses,
manifestly contrary to Religion, and connived at by the Pastors of the Church,
Christian Princes may both lawfully and piously use their Authority in
procuring the said abuses to be effectually redressed by the said Pastors; as
the examples of Ezekias and Josias prove, alleged by the Bishop. But they
prove not, that Princes may themselves take upon them the Priests Office,
either in whole, or part; they prove not, that they may reform Religion, in the
Substance of it, or enact any thing pertaining thereto by their own Authority,
without, or contrary to the Priests consent; They prove not, that Princes may
determine the Controversies of the Law, God having expressly reserved them to
the Priests judgment, and commanded all to submit to it under pain of death.
Nay, point blank to the contrary we read (2. Paralip. 26. 20.) that Osias,
though a King, was stricken by God with a sudden Leprosy, for but attempting
to usurp the Priests Office: which if it were so unlawful then, must needs now
be yet more, by how much the Functions of the Evangelical Priesthood are more
Sacred, Spiritual, and participatively Divine, then those of the Mosaical Law.

7. Nor did the Popes ever attempt, or so much as pretend to bring the
Emperors under them in Civil affairs, which is another aspersion the Bishop
lays upon them. Gregory the Seventh, and Innocent Ibidem.
the Third were indeed very prudent men, and worthy Champions of the Church, to
assert her just liberties; but they never endeavored to subject the Emperor
to themselves in Temporal matters: and it had been more for our Adversaries
credit, instead of falsely pretending it to be plain in History that they did
so, to have given us at least some one good proof of it. Can any such thing be
solidly concluded from the Allegory of the Sun and Moon? upon which the
Relatour so long insists, and makes so many unsignificant reflections, that
they would better become a person the Moon had particularly wrought upon, then
a Primate of England.

8. The Relatour could not leave his digressive Discourse, without giving a
lash to the Jesuits, by willing them to leave their practicing to advance the
greatness of the Pope and Emperor. But I wonder he could so easily believe,
that men of understanding (as he sticks not to acknowledge Jesuits to be)
should by Vow deprive themselves of the riches and pleasures of this world,
with design to make the Pope and Emperor great: especially seeing, that
without breach of an Oath peculiar to their Order, they can neither seek, nor
so much as accept of any Ecclesiastical preferment, (as other Churchmen and
Religious may) unless by way of Obedience, when expressly thereto commanded by
the Pope, under pain of Sin.

He skips from the Jesuits to the Friars. A certain Friar at Madrid Ibid. n.
12.
( John De Puente by name) in the Year 1612. printed a Book; in the
Frontispiece whereof he painted the Sun and the Moon, so as they clearly
signified the Pope and the King of Spain. (Here the Scene changes; 'twas just
now the Pope and the Emperor.) There were also diverse other Emblematical
Phansies added; by which was intimated; that his Catholic Majesty should be
content to be under the Pope, so he might rule all the world beside. Lastly,
for fear the Scutcheons and Devises should not sufficiently discover the
Design, the Title of the Book lays all open. It Is called LA CONVENIENTIA DE
LAS DOS MONAR QUIAS CATOLICAS; in English, The Agreement of the Two Catholic
Monarchies, viz. of the Pope and of Spain. To all which the Bishop adds his
own particular reflection, that the Book had all manner of License, that a Book
could have, For answer to it, we deny not but such a Book was both licensed and
printed: but doubtless, who ever peruses the contents of it impartially, will
judge it was both licensed and printed rather for its witty conceit, and
divertisement for the King and his Courtiers, then for a solid Foundation,
whereon to build any serious and Dogmatical Assertion.

And as this Spanish Friar stood for his own King, so Campanella (another
Friar) is objected to have stood as much for the late Dolphin, now King of
France, publishing, about the time of his Birth, a certain Eclogue concerning
him; wherein the said Dolphin was promised the Universal Monarchy of the world,
and all other Princes represented as now more afraid of France then ever
before. What such men speak, partly out of Flattery to Princes, (an Epidemical
infirmity, incident to men of all conditions) and partly as delighted with
their own Conceits, makes nothing at all, to the cause of Religion; nor can we
be thought responsible for any such personal Actions, or Assertions, of private
men. It Is sufficient for us to have proved, that the Pope is Universal Pastor
of the Church: what the Kings of Spain or France are, or would be, in reference
to other Christian Kings and Princes, concerns not us either to know, or
examine.

9. But leaving these Digressions, the Relatour does here acknowledge it high
time, to return to his Adversary, and think of Answering A. C.s Argument; which
proves, that in the Church, beside the Ibid. n. 13.
Law Book of the Bible, there must be a living Magistrate and Judge, so
assisted by the Holy Ghost, as he may be able rightly to determine all
Controversies of Religion, and preserve Unity and Certainty of Faith in the
Church. To this he answers in brief, that for determining Controversies in
Religion, and preserving Unity and Certainty of Faith, it is not necessary to
have one Bishop over the whole Christian Church, more then it is necessary for
determining Civil Differences, and preserving Civil peace and unity among
Christians, to have one Emperor over the whole world. To confirm this, the
Authority of Occham is cited, saying, that it is not necessary there should be
one Governor of the whole Church under Christ; but it is sufficient, there be
many Bishops, governing diverse Provinces, as there are many Kings governing
diverse Kingdoms.

I answer first, that besides that these Dialogues (which the Bishop here
alleges) are in the Index of forbidden Books, Occham himself is no such
unquestionable Author among Catholics, that we should think our selves
obliged to defend what ever he says, especially in a question that concerns
the Popes Authority; it being too well known how factiously he sided with an
Enemy of the Church. Secondly, had Christ instituted such a Government of his
Church, as Occham fancies, viz. a Government consisting of many, not
Subordinate to any One, as Head and Supreme over them, it would have been
requisite, that all those Independent and Coordinate Governors in the Church
should have been Infallible: otherwise the Government of the Church would have
been little less then a mere Anarchy, without Unity, or Certainty in any thing:
which must have destroyed the very end of Government, and exposed the whole
Body of the Catholic Church (which yet is and must be One by the Institution
of Christ) to as many Schisms, and varieties of Faith, as there are several
Provinces in (...). Experience shows us this Truth in all Countries, where no
Infallibility is acknowledged.

Again, Occham speaking only de possibili of what our Savior might have done,
had he pleased, his doctrine cannot evince any thing in disproof of what we
maintain to have been de facto established in Gods Church; that is, one
Universal Pastor appointed by Christ over the whole Flock.

10. Remain it therefore a settled Catholic principle, that the Pope has
power over the whole Church of God, according to the Declaration of the
Occumenical Council of Florence, in which both the Greek and Latin Church
concurred; and that to teach the contrary is undoubted Heresy. The words of
the Council are these. Definimus Sanctam Apostolicam Sedem, and Romanum
Pontificem in Universum orbem tenere Primatum, etc. We define (says the
Council) that the Holy Apostolic Sea, and Bishop of Rome have Primacy over
the whole world; and that the said Bishop of Rome is Successor of the Blessed
Peter, Prince of the Apostles: that he is also the True Vicar of Christ, and
Head of the whole Church, and the Father and Doctor of all Christians; and
that to him, in the person of Blessed Peter, FULL POWER was given by our Lord
Jesus Christ, to FEED, RULE, and GOVERN the Universal Church: as it is likewise
contained in the Acts of other Ecumenical Councils, and in the Sacred Canons.
So that Occham, or any other, that seem to oppose this, if they be Catholics,
must be understood to speak only de possibili, of what Christ our Savior
might have done, if he had pleased; or to mean only, that the Pope does not
govern the Church in such an absolute Monarchical way, as that he alone is the
only Governor jure Divino in it, and that all other Bishops are but his
Vicars, and Substitutes.

CHAP. 19. Of the Council of Trent.
ARGUMENT.
1. The Council of Trent as Legal, as any other General Council whatsoever. 2.
The Popes Presiding therein, necessary, and of Ancient Right. 3. The Place it
self, indifferent for all parties. 4. No Oath taken by the Bishops, but what
the Ancient Canons prescribed, and was wont to be taken, a thousand years
before 5. The Council Full, especially in its latter Sessions toward the end;
when the Acts formerly passed, were consented to de Novo by all the Prelates.
6. No real Disparity, as to Legalness, between the Council of Nice and that of
Trent. 7. Neither the Number, nor the Quality of Italian Bishops, any prejudice
to the Councils Liberty. 8. Groundless Suspicions evince nothing, either
against the Pope, or Council. 9. Protestants, no less Censured in effect by the
Greek Church, then by the Latin.

1. THe Bishop, pleading so much the necessity of General Councils,. 27. n. 1.
as if he meant to submit to their Determinations, occasioned A. C. to tell
him, that a General Council (viz. that of Trent) had already judged the
Protestants, to hold errors. This was indeed to lay the Axe to the root, and
bring the cause to a speedy issue: but the Relatour will not be taken
unprovided. He answers therefore, the Council of Trent was neither a Legal, nor
a General Council. Why not Legal? It had all the Conditions ever yet required
by Catholics, to the Legality of a General Council: and why not General?
seeing all Bishops were invited to come, and that a greater number actually
came, and assisted at the end of the Assembly, then were present at some other
Councils, confessedly General. But let us hear the Bishops exceptions against
this Council.

His first exception is, that the Abettours of this Council maintain publicly,
that it is lawful for them to conclude any Controversy, and make it DE FIDE,
and so in our judgment FUNDAMENTAL, though it be not contained in Scripture,
nor so much as probably deduced thence; and for this opinion Doctor Stapleton
is cited in the Margent. I answer, No Catholic Author ever taught, that it
is lawful for the Council to make what ever they please Matter of Faith, as the
Bishop would seem to insinuate; but only that which is expressed or involved in
the word of God, written, or unwritten, that is Tradition: And this indeed is
defined by the very Council of Trent, in these terms, that in matters of Faith
we are to rely not only upon Scripture, but also on Tradition. Now that this
doctrine is true, has been already Chap. 6, 7, 14.
proved; and that it cannot make the Council illegal is manifest, even from the
Bishops own Principles. For he confesses, that Relat.. 16 n. 20.
Apostolical Tradition (when it can be certainly known for such) is as truly
the word of God, as Scripture it self: and it is Chapter 6. 7.
certainly known to be such by the Tradition, or Definition of the Church, as
has been likewise heretofore proved, and by the Bishop himself granted, in the
question touching Scriptures-being the Word of God. Nor did the Council herein
proceed in a different manner from other lawful and Ecumenical Councils,
whiles she grounded her Definitions, partly on Scripture, partly on Tradition,
even in matters not deducible by any particular, or Logical, inference from
Scripture.

2. A second exception is, that the Pope (the person chiefly to be reformed)
Presided in the Council of Trent, and was chief Judge in his own cause, against
all Law, Divine, Natural, and Humane. But the Pope by his Legates presided also
in the fourth General Council at Chalcedon, as the Bishop himself acknowledges:
and yet it is esteemed by all parties a Lawful and Authentical Council. Nor can
it be proved, that the Pope was more the person to be reformed at Trent, then
at Chalcedon. It Is true, the persons condemned by both these Councils
pretended, that (excepting only themselves) the whole Church, and chiefly the
Pope erred, and by consequence were to be reformed: but as the former
complained without ground, in the opinion of all but themselves, so did the
latter, and so do all their Adherents. Alexander, Patriarch of Alexandria, was
esteemed a great Party, and Delinquent, by the Arrians, for having acted so
zealously in defense of the Catholic Faith against their Master, Arius: Yet
he sat a chief Judge with the other Bishops, and had both a Prime place, and
Vote in the first Council of Nice, where their Heresy was condemned. Saint
Cyril presided in the Third General Council, though by the Nestorian Heretics
there condemned, he were counted a Party.

Add to this, that in the abovementioned Council of Chalcedon the cause was
very particular between Pope Leo, and Dioscorus; and yet not only the Legates
of the said Pope presided in the Council, during the whole agitation of the
business, but the condemnation of Dioscorus was even framed by Pope Leo, and
approved by the whole Council: So far was it from being thought a solid
objection against him, that he was a party in the cause, or the person to be
reformed. We deny not but the other Bishops (being also Judges in the Council)
may proceed even against the Pope himself, if the case do necessarily require
it; as should he, for example, manifestly appear to be an Heretic.
Protestants therefore have no just cause to quarrel the Popes presiding in
Councils, especially so long as he is not justly accusable of any crime, but
such, as must involve not only the Council, but the whole Church, as much as
himself; as it is evident he was not, when he presided in the Council of Trent.
It Is not therefore contrary, but conformable to all Law, Divine, Natural, and
Humane, that the Head should preside over the Members; and to give Novellists
liberty to Decline the Popes judgment, or the judgment of any other their
lawful Superiors, upon (...) of their being parties, or by them accused of
error, who sees not, that it is, in effect, absolutely to exempt such people
from all legal censure; nay, even to grant, there is no sufficient means left
effectually to govern the Church, or condemn Heresy, Schism, and other
offenses against Religion?

But the Bishop, in his large Margent, denies as well matter of Ibidem.
Fact, as matter of Right, in this question of the Popes presiding in General
Councils: telling us, that in the First Council of Nice, Hosius was President,
and not the Bishop of Rome, either by himself or his Legates. I grant, Hosius
did preside in that Council; and so did likewise Vitus, and Vincentius Priests
of Rome, but I say they all presided as the Popes Legates, and not otherwise.
This appears, by their subscribing the Conciliary Decrees in the first place.
For, I pray, upon what other title would they have been allowed to do it? There
were Patriarchs, and many other Bishops of far greater Dignity then Hosius,
Vitus, and Vincentius, to whom Precedence in that point must have been given,
had not these represented the person of the Roman Bishop. Hence it is, that
both Cedren. in Compend. Hist.
Cedrenus and Photius, in lib. (...) 7. Synod.
Photius confess, that the Pope gave Authority to the Nicen Council by his
Legates: which is somewhat more, then barely to Preside in the Protestants
sense; and by what Legates, if not by those abovementioned? I add, that in the
old Preface to the Council of Sardica, extant in the First Tome of the
Councils, it is expressly said, that Hosius was the Popes Legate, and in right of
that Legatship presided in the Council. Hincmar. in opusc. 55. cap. 20.
Hincmarus also, an Ancient Author, who lived in the time of Carolus Calvus,
gives the like Testimony in these words. At the Council of Nice, in the place
of Sylvester (who was then Pope) Presided Hosius Bishop of Corduba, and Vitus
with Vincentius, Priests of the City of Rome. Add to these the testimony
Gelas. Cyzicen. in Prolog. ad Syntag. Conc. Nicen. and in Syntag. Conc., Nicen.
lib. 2. cap. 5. (...).
of Gelasius Cyzicenus, who lived in the very next age after the Council of
Nice, above twelve hundred years ago, who witnesses, that Hosius Bishop of
Corduba in Spain, holding the place of the Bishop of great Rome, Sylvester,
together with the (...), Vitius and Vincentius, assisted at the Council of
Nice. Photius (...) Bibliothec. (...). and (...).
Lastly, Photius himself, though a Schismatical Greek, and bitter enemy of the
Roman Church, witnesses, he had read this Book of Gelasius, and in it the
above cited Testimony; and thereupon confesses that the said Hosius was Legate
for the Bishop of Rome at the Council of Nice.

In the second General Council it is true, Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople
was President, and not the Pope, or his Legates. But the reason was, because
Pope Damasus having first summoned that Council to be held at Constantinople,
and the Bishops of the Oriental Provinces being accordingly there met, the Pope
for some reasons altered his mind, and would have had them come to Rome, to
join with the Bishops he had there assembled: which the Prelates at
Constantinople refusing in a submissive manner, alleged such arguments and
just impediments for their excuse, as the Pope remained satisfied with them. So
the Council was, upon the matter, held in two places, at Rome by the Pope and
Bishops of the West, and at Constantinople by Nectarius, and those of the East,
as appears in Theod. lib. 5. Hist. cap. 9. 10.
Theodoret: who also mentions the Epistles both of the Pope to the Oriental
Bishops, and of those again to him, full of mutual respect and amity: So that
while he presided in the Council at Rome, and gave Allowance to their
Proceedings at Constantinople, and considering the frequent intercourse between
them, they were to be looked on as but one Council in effect, and the Pope to
have presibed therein.

In the third General Council St. Cyril presided for Pope Celestin, as appears
by the Letter the Pope writ to him long before he sent any other Legates to that
Council: in which Letter he gives St. Cyril charge to supply his place; as is
testified by Evagr. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Evagrius, Prosp. in Chronic.
Prosper, Phot. in lib. de 7. Synod.
Photius and diverse other Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 24. Liberat. in Breviar. cap.
15. Justinian. in edict.
Authors. In the fourth, at Chalcedon, the Bishop himself cannot deny, but the
Pope, by his Legates, had the prime place: and that it was as Presidents,
appears by the Leo Epist. 47. Epist. Conc. Chalced. (...) Leon. Act. 3.
Epistles both of Pope Leo to the Council, and of the Council to him again. In
the fifth Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople, sat (we confess) as President;
yet so as he acknowledged this privilege due to Pope Vigilius, and that, in
effect, and by Authority, though not in person, he presided there, as those
words of Eutychius his Epistle to the Pope declare, ( Petimus, Praesidente
nobis vestra Beatitudine, etc.) which are extant at the end of the Fifth
Council. In the sixth and seventh the Bishop grants, the Popes Legates presided;
but adds, that the office of Moderatour in the Assembly was chiefly executed
by Tharasius Bishop of Constantinople: which, as to matter of Disputation and
management of the Debates of the Synod, we do not deny, (it being a Greek
Council, and Tharasius an eminent Greek Bishop;) but as to matter of Authority
and Command, all things were ordered by those who were really Presidents of the
Assembly, that is, by the Popes Legates. I conclude therefore, that Bellarmin
had just ground to say, The Pope Bellar. lib. 1. de Council. cap. 21.. Tertia
conditio.
has been possessed, full fifteen hundred years, of the right of Presiding in
General Councils; and the Bishop was grossly mistasten in saying the Cardinal
gives no proof of it, but only his bare word; since in the very place the
Bishop cites, he mentions it as proved elsewhere ( viz. Ibid. cap 19.) where
the Relatour might have found it, had he pleased to have turned to it.

3. His third exception is, that the place was not Free, but either in, or too
near the Popes Dominions. But certainly Trent is not within the Popes Dominion:
and if the Lutherans had reason to require, that the Council should not be held
in Italy, where the Pope was thought too prevalent, surely the Pope, and all
Catholics with him might justly demand it should not be held in Germany,
where the Lutherans Ubi supra.
were so potent. Hereupon Bellarmin well observes, that no fitter place, or
more void of exceptions could have been found, then Trent, in the Confines of
Italy and Germany, had it been left to the arbitrament even of an infidel. As
to what he says, that all were not called, who had Deliberative or
Consultative Voices in the Council, he should have told us who they were, that
were not called, in such manner as was necessary. Must all Bishops and Pastors
have been called by name? It appears by the Popes Bull of Summons, that the the
Invitation was as general as could be; nor can it be denied, but its
publication in all Provinces of Christendom was as general also, as the
distractions and troubles of the times would permit. How then can it be said,
all were not called who had voice in Council?

4. He goes on to a fourth exception. None had Suffrage in Council, but such as
were sworn to the Pope, and Church of Rome, and professed enemies to all, that
called for Reformation, and a Free Council. I answer, it is no new thing for
Bishops to take an Oath of Canonical Obedience to the Pope. S. Gregory mentions
it as an Ancient Custom in his D. Greg. lib. 10. epist. 31.
time: the objection therefore makes as much against the Ancient General
Councils, which Protestants themselves acknowledge, as against this of Trent.
However, certain it is, that the Bishops of those Primitive General Councils,
were so far tied to Rome and the Pope by Faith and Christian Communion, that
they were sworn Enemies of all such Heretics, as then respectively called
either for Reformation, or such a Free Council, as Protestants now do, viz.
that should include all Schismatiques and Heretics whatsoever, profefsing the
name of Christ. Again, the Oath which the Bishops usually take, does not at all
deprive them of the liberty of their Suffrage: nay it does not so much as
oblige them not to proceed, and vote even against the Pope himself, if they see
just cause; but only that they will be obedient to him, so long as he commands
things suitable to the will of God, and the Sacred Canons of the Church.
Neither were the Protestants otherwise pronounced Heretics by the Pope, then
in pursuance of the Canons of the Church, which required him so to do; and of
the Decrees of General Councils, which had already condemnd their opinions for
Heresy.

5. His last exception is against the small number of Bishops, present at the
Tridentine Council: and in the first place he mentions the Greeks; whom he
takes to have been unjustly excluded. But I answer first, the Pope by his Bull
called all that had right to come, Ibid. number. 2.
making no exclusive mention of any. Secondly, the Greeks by reason of their
notorious Schism, had excluded themselves, and (perhaps) durst not venture to
come, as knowing, that the Orthodox Bishops at Trent would have withstood their
admission: it being confessed, that no known Heretic or Schismatique, has
right, othertherwise then by special leave, or permission, to sit in Council.
Those Greeks, whose names are found among the Subscribers of this Council, were
Orthodox Bishops of the Greek Church, not purposely made and sent thither by
the Pope, (as the Relatour surmizes) but expelled, and by force kept out of
their Seas by those who had wrongfully usurped them; and these assisted at the
Council of Trent in their own right, viz. as Catholic Bishops of the Greek
Church. Neither needed they any particular sending from the Greeks, as the case
then stood, and still continues; it is sufficient they were called by the Pope,
and had right of assisting in the Council, as true Bishops of the Greek Church.

We are told again, that in many Sessions of this Council there were scarceten
Archbishops present, and not above forty or fifty Bishops; and for the west
nearer home, it reckoned no more then one English, viz. the Bishop of St.
Asaph. I answer, many more were both called and expected; who likewise came
long before the end of the Council, and confirmed by their Suffrage what had
passed before their coming: which was sufficient. Concerning those of our
Country, the Relatour seems not to have been so well versed in the Acts of the
Council, as he might have been; otherwise he would have found, beside the
Bishop of St. Asaph, Richard Pate Bishop of Worcester present, in the sixth
Session of the Council of Trent. He is also said to have been there at the very
first opening of the Council; and is mentioned both in the thirteenth Session,
and diverse others.

As for his Authority, or Right, to sit there, being not sent, or deputed, by
the English Church, we answer, such Mission, or Deputation, is not of absolute
necessity, but only of Canonical Provision, when time, and state of the
Countries, whence Bishops are sent, will permit: in other cases it suffices,
they be called by the Pope. Now it is undeniable, that for some years before the
Council ended, the English Bishops that should have sent their Deputies to
accompany these forementioned Bishops to the Council, were restrained in prison
by Queen Elizabeth. The Bishop therefore being so apt to mistake in the Affairs
of his own country, we cannot give much credit to him, in what he affirms
either of France or Spain. It suffices, that in diverse Sessions of this
Council, many Bishops of both these Nations were present; and might have been
in all the rest, had the particular affairs of their own Countries permitted
them. The impediment was not on the Councils part; and consequently their
absence could be no just prejudice to the Authority, Legality, or Liberty of
it: and in the latter Sessions (wherein all that had been formerly Defined by
the Council, was de novo confirmed and ratified by the unanimous consent of all
the Prelates) it is manifest the Council was so full, that in number of Bishops
it clearly exceeded some of the first four Councils, which even our Adversaries
themselves account General.

6. The whole matter therefore duly considered, A. C. wanted not. 28. n. 1.
reason to tell the Bishop, that nothing could be pretended by him against the
Council of Trent, which might not in effect have been as justly objected by the
Arians against the Council of Nice. But to this the Bishop will by no means
yield; telling us, the case is not alike between the said Councils, and
endeavoring to show the Disparity in diverse respects. First, says he, the
Bishops of the Nicen Council professed, not to depart from Scripture, but
engaged to prove what they defined, by many testimonies thereof; whereas the
Council of Trent (as the Relatour affirms) concluded many things simply EXTRA,
out of all bound of Scripture, leaving both its Letter and sense. I answer, the
Arians objected the same to the Nicen Fathers, namely that they concluded
things both beside and contrary to Scripture; they alleged Scripture for their
Heresy, they said in effect to the Father's then, what the Bishop and his
party say to us now, we are sure, and we are able to prove, that the Council of
(Nice) had not Scripture for them. There is therefore no such disparity between
them, as the Bishop pretends. The truth is, both these Councils had the
Scripture for their rule, and proved by it the Doctrine they Defined; but
neither of them hold it for their only rule, or so made use of it, as to
reject Tradition; for which the Scripture it self is admitted. In confirmation
of which Theodoret expressly Theod. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 8.
says, that in condemning the Arian Heresy the Council of Nice grounded it
self upon Tradition: not but that many Testimonies of Scripture were rightly
urged by the Bishops of that Council against Arius, but because Tradition was
the principal thing, that was clear and unquestionable on the Councils side;
the Arians, partly by their private and subtle Interpretations eluding the
force of many Texts, which Catholics brought against them, and partly
alleging not a few Texts for their own opinion, against the Catholic
Doctrine.

As to what he adds in the Margent, that the whole Church concluded, that
Scripture was against the Arians, and agreeing with the Council of Nice, but
that the like consent is not, that Scripture is for the Council of Trent, and
against Protestants; We answer, the like consent of the whole Church, both is,
and was, when Protestants first began, that either Scripture or Apostolical
Tradition (which is equivalent to it) was for the Council of Trent, and against
Protestants. Is it not evident (to go no further back then the Year 1500.) that
all the visible Hierarchical Congregations of Christians in the World had Mass,
used Prayer for the Dead, invoked the Saints, reverenced Holy Images and
Relics, believed Purgatory, the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Holy
Eucharist, and generally acknowledged all other Sacraments, declared for such
by the said Council? As yet therefore there appears no Disparity between the
Councils of Trent and Nice.

But he tells us, the consent of the whole Church was, that Scripture stood for
the Council of Nice against the Arians, which he denies it to have done for the
Council of Trent. To omit, that the Bishop proves not his Assertion (which
therefore may as easily be denied as he affirms it, if we extend nor the Church
beyond its due limits) can it be said, the consent of the whole Church was,
that Scripture stood for the same Council in all that they defined to be
Heretical? Had they Scripture for the condemnation of the Quarto-decimani and
Rebaptizers; both which the said Council condemned together with the Arians? If
our Adversaries cannot show us the particular Texts of Scripture, by which the
Council confuted these Heresies, will it not be manifest, they did it by sole
Tradition.

7. The Relatour having insinuated, that the Pope made Bishops purposely for
his side, does here disclaim it upon this account, that none can. 29. number. 1
know the Popes intention but God, who is the Surveyour of the heart. Is not
this to be religiously impertinent; first to possess his Reader with a strong
presumption of the Popes corrupt Design, and then to come no better off, then
by saying, he could not see the secrets of his heart? But he will have it, that
there were valuable Presumptions of making Bishops purposely to maintain his
party: I answer, the Bishop should not have put us off with Ifs and Ands, in
that whereon he grounds an Accusation of so great importance, but have
sufficiently proved, that there was de facto an extraordinary creation of
Supernumerary and merely Titular Bishops, made about that time, and sent to the
Council to serve the Popes designs; which we deny to have been done.

Secondly his pretense, that the Council of Trent could be no competent judge
in matters of Religion, because the Pope had made himself a strong party in it,
is disproved by the very Argument he brings to assert it, viz. the multitude of
Italian Prelates. For who knows not, that the Italians are more divided in point
of Interest and Dependence, then any other Nation in Christendom, by reason of
the many Sovereign Principalities and States, into which Italy is divided?
Though therefore we should surmize, that the Italian Prelates in this Council
were not guided by true principles of piety, yet surely there is little reason
to think, they should combine with the Pope to serve his designs; which in all
probability would not suit so well with their own, or Princes Interest, on whom
themselves, and hope of advancement depended. This Argument therefore has so
much in it of the Chimaera, that certainly no solid judgment will esteem it
considerable.

To what the Relatour says touching the number of Bishops in the Ibid. number. 2.
said Council, that there were in it a hundred and four Italian Bishops, more
then of all the rest of Christendom. I answer first, that having viewed the
Council of Trent with some diligence, I cannot reconcile the numbers there set
down, with what is here avouched to be taken thence. Secondly supposing his
computation true, what does it prejudice our cause? It Is manifest, the far
greater number of Italian Bishops were of the Domions of other Princes, and had
not the least shadow of any Temporal Dependence on the Pope; and consequently
no stricter tie upon them, to serve his Interests, then all the rest of the
Bishops in that Council. The reason, why there might be more Bishops of Italy,
then other places, is evident, in regard that Country was in a far more quiet
condition, then either Germany or France; which at that time, were both
infected with Heresy, and imbroiled in Civil Wars; so that the chief Pastors
of those Provinces, could not so well be spared from their Charge, as these of
Italy: and for other Countries, no wonder if they were thinner, as being more
remote. To which I might add, that there are more Bishoprics in Italy, then
in any Nation of Christendom, of no greater extent. Now these concurring
reasons might well increase the number of Italian Bishops, without any such
Design, as Protestants, and the Relatour here rashly surmizes.

Again, what private Interest had the Pope to look to at the Council of Ibid.
number. 3.
Trent, which was not common to him, with all the Bishops in that Council; nay
indeed, with all the Catholic Bishops of Christendom? Was it not the Interest
of all the Bishops in Christendom (except those of the new stamp) to keep
Heresy out of their respective Diocesses and Provinces? Was it not their
Interest to preserve the Authority of the Canons, and the free Exercise of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction? What other Interest, but this and the like, had
the Pope to prosecute in the Council?

But the Relatour urges this Disparity between the Councils of Trent and Nice,
viz. that at the same time the Council sat at Nice, Ibidem.
Pope Sylvester held a Council at Rome, in which he, with two hundred seventy
five Bishops of the West, confirmed the Nicen Creed, and Anathematized all
those, who should dare to dissolve the Definition of that Holy and Great
Council: whereas no such thing was done by the Greek Church, to confirm the
Council of Trent. This, we confess, is some Disparity, but very little to the
purpose: for though it happened, that this was done de facto in confirmation of
the Nicen Definitions, yet had they not been of less Authority without such an
Accessory Assembly, provided the Pope had ratified them in such manner, as he
did the Decisions of the Council of Trent. Did ever any of the Ancients
attribute the Authority of the Nicene Council, to the approbation given it by
these Western Bishops? surely no.

Neither was this Roman Synod held at the same time with the Council of Nice,
(as the Relatour, to amuze his Reader, pretends) but after it, as the Acts
themselves testify. Nor was the like done in other General Councils, admitted
by Protestants; who cannot therefore in reason make this objection against the
Council of Trent. Lastly, the Doctrine of Faith declared by the Council of
Trent, was universally received by the whole Catholic Church; which was a
confirmation incomparably greater then that of two hundred seventy five
Bishops: and the same Faith has been far more constantly held ever since; none
of the Catholic Provinces of Christendom, represented in that Council, ever
deserting the Faith there declared: whereas many Provinces either in whole or
part, deserted the Faith defined at Nice, and embraced the Arrian Heresy.

8. Here, for want of solid reasons, the Bishop falls again to his surmizes;
Ibid. number. 4.
by which he would fain insinuate to his credulous Reader, that the Fathers in
the Council of Trent were so awed by the Popes Authority, or swayed by his
Interest, that either they durst not, or would not open themselves so far as
to speak freely what they thought. What is this but an empty and injurious
suspicion, or rather an unworthy accusation of so many grave Prelates assembled
in Council? A little more of Christian charity might have taught his Lordship
to frame a far different judgment, and believe, that so many worthy Prelates
would not be neglectful of their charge, to the betraying of their conscience:
especially seeing the Pope had fully declared his desire, that the matters in
Controversy might receive a free and fair Dispute in the Council, in order to
a Settlement of the Truth.

To put a period therefore to this long and groundless Dream of the Popes
strong party, and the Bishops-being over-awed in the Council of Trent, I
conclude, that seeing none of the Fathers there assembled, no not any of those
who lived either under the wing of Protestant Princes, or where Liberty of
Conscience was allowed, ever sided with Protestants, but constantly and
zealously persever'd, even till death, in the Faith and Doctrine they had
subscribed in that Council, and showed themselves solicitous, that all its
Definitions should be Universally held by their people, no Evidence can
possibly be given of any Free Consent, or Vote in Council, if this may be
called in question.

9. Touching HIEREMIAS, Patriarch of Constantinople, you must know, that some
Eminent Protestants of the Lutheran Party, about the end of the last Century,
endeavored to feel the Pulse of the Greek Church, to see if they could there
find any Symptoms of their own Disease. The design was to close with the
Greeks, for the better making out of the pretended perpetual Succession of
their Church: which Project they so hotly pursued, (though formerly in vain
attempted) that they would not desist, till (the Patriarch being settled in his
Throne) they had sent to him the sum of their Reformed Belief; drawn up
according to the Augustan Confession, which had been composed by Melancthon,
and approved by their Patriarch, Luther. After a long intercourse of Letters,
Answers, and Replies, mutually continued for some years, and all arguments
used, that might induce the Patriarch to receive them into his Communion, he
could not be courted to so much as the least show of approving their doctrine;
but did in all his Answers clearly confirm the Tenets of the Roman-Catholique
Church, which those Lutherans endeavored to overthrow. Insomuch that at last
the Patriarch tired with their importunity, gave them a rebuke for their
departure from the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and desired them not to
trouble him any more with their writings. All this is more largely related by
Spondan. Continuat. Baron. ad Ann. 1574. number. 16.
Spondanus, out of the writings of those very Protestants, that treated with
the Patriarch in the business.

Neither can the Censure passed by this Patriarch upon the Lutheran errors be
accounted rash or precipitate; seeing they had a full Hearing by him they had
made their address to: who was not only the chief Patriarch of the Greeks, but
a person of that eminent Esteem among them, that his Censure must in reason be
taken to declare the sense of the Greek Church. Nor matters it that Catholics
account him a Shismatique: this cannot prejudice his Censure in reference to
Protestants. He was such a Schismatique, as they would gladly have made Patron
of their Religion.

The Bishop therefore, by giving no other Answer to this Patriarchs-proceeding
against Protestants, but that he finds not this Censure of Hieremias warranted
by any Authority of the Greek Church, shows he had very little to say in
opposition to it. Was not this Hieremias chief Patriarch of the Greek Church?
Does not he write in a style Definitive and peremptory, touching the matters
debated between him and Protestants? Does he not upon all occasions testify
the Doctrine he declares, to be the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, of the
Holy Fathers, and of the Sacred Councils? Did any of the Greek Bishops ever
disclaim the said Doctrine, either in whole or part; as they disclaimed the
Doctrine of one of his successors, whom they deposed and ejected as an
Heretic, because his Tenets savored of the Protestant Leaven? who then can
doubt, but what he delivers is the common Belief of the whole Greek Church? as
is likewise in effect acknowledged by the Interessed Lutherans themselves, in
their Acta Theologorum Wittenbergensium, etc. published after the Treaty ended,
and more expressly by some See Sir Edwin Sands his Europae Speculum.
English Writers.

Well therefore might A. C. affirm, without making himself a Prophet, that if
ever such a Free Council, as the Relatour seemed to wish, were gathered out of
the East and West Provinces of Christendom, Ross his Pansebia. Brierwoods
Enquiries, etc.
Protestants would doubtless be condemned for Heretics. For this is not to
Prophecy, but to discourse, and draw a Certain Conclusion out of Principles
morally Evident; that is to say, if the French, Spanish, and Schismatical
Greeks also, in their respective Churches, do teach and profess, as matter of
Catholic Faith, Doctrine Diametrally opposite to that of Protestants, no man
can doubt but, (had, or were, they met in a General Council, to declare their
said Belief) they would infallibly condemn Protestantisme, no less then did
this Patriarch Hieremias.

CHAP. 20. Of the Infallibility and Authority of General Councils.
ARGUMENT.
1. The Bishops pretended Forwardness for a General Council, merely Delusive.
2. His Erring General Council, qualified at most but to unite in Error against
Scripture and Demonstration. 3. The Bishops Remedy against his Council
intolerably Erring, instrumental to all Disunion. 4. The Authority of
Ecumenical Councils, whence derived. 5. Their Infallibility evidenced from the
same Texts of Scripture, that proved the Church Infallible. 6. The Text, (Mat.
18. 20.) Where Two, or Three are gathered together in my Name, etc. Vindicated
in proof of the Infallibility of lawful General Councils. 7. The Decrees of
Legally-Confirm'd General Councils, in points of Faith, truly styled the
Oracles of the Holy Ghost. 8. The whole Church liable to Error, if a General
Council may Err, in points of Faith. 9. St. Austins Text, (lib. 2. De Baptism.
cap. 3.) That General Councils may be amended, the former by the latter, etc.
explicated at large.

1. THe Bishop having cast as much dirt as he was able, upon the. 30.
Council of Trent, wishes in fine, that a lawful General Council were called,
to end Controversies. A pure one, you may be sure, if according to his wish:
who, bearing himself very confident upon the impossibility of assembling such a
Council as he would call General, says (as it were to insinuate an
unwillingness on our part to have Controversies ended in so fair a way, as by a
General Council) If you have a most gracious King inclined unto it, how can you
acquit your selves, if you do not consent? As though, forsooth, there were no
more required to the assembling of a General Council, then the Kings
inclination, and the English Catholics consent. Is not this a gross delusion?

He tells us for a wonder, That A. C. marvels, what kind of General Council he
would have, and what Rules observed in it, that were Morally like to make an
End of Controversies, better then our Catholic General Councils. Was this to
express any backwardness to a lawful General Council? or could any thing be
more reasonably demanded of him? Could the Relatour expect an End of Contention
between us by means of a General Council, unless the Conditions and Rules, by
which the said Council should proceed, were first known, and consented to by
both parties? Are not Protestants themselves a sufficient proof of the
Negative, in their Cavillings against the Authority and Proceedings in the
Council of Trent? But what particular Conditions, or Rules, for the
legitimating of a future General Council, could he assign, which had not been
competently observed in former General Councils; nay even in that of Trent?
whose Authority and Decrees nevertheless the Bishop, with the whole party,
utterly rejects.

As to his profession, that any General Council shall satisfy him, that Ibidem.
is called, continued; and ended according to the same course, and under the
same conditions, which General Councils observed in the Primitive Church, it is
too general to be ingenuous, or give real satisfaction to the demand;
signifying nothing at all in relation to a final End of our Controversies:
seeing Catholics hold those general conditions, as much as the Bishop, or any
of their opposers; and yet our Differences are still the same, as to
particulars. To as little purpose (save only to deceive the Reader) cites he
Bellar. lib. 1. de Council. cap. 17.. 2.
the Latin Text of Bellarmin in his Margent, as though he concurred with him in
the requisite conditions of a General Council: whereas by those conditions are
clearly excluded all Excommunicated Bishops, Heretics and Schismatiques, from
being any necessary part of a General Council.

But to come yet closer to the point; who should call this his wished General
Council? If we follow the example of those most Ancient Councils, which himself
acknowledges for General and lawfully called, then the Pope must be the
Summoner of it, or at least the Emperor with the Popes consent: in both which
cases we are not to divine, with what contempt the Protestant party would look
upon such a Council; especially if it insisted in the steps of those Primitive
Councils, in which the Pope (as we have Chap. 19.
shown) presided. To call therefore for a General Council, in the Protestants
sense, is a mere nothing, an empty name to amuse silly people with: since,
morally speaking, it is impossible there should ever be such a General Council,
as they fancy to themselves, viz. an Ecumenical Council, that should consist
as well of Schismatiques, Heretics, and Desertors of the Catholic Church,
as of true Catholic Bishops. But if it were never thought reasonable in a
Civil Commonwealth (which yet the Bishop makes the pattern of his Spiritual one
in point of Authority) that Outlaws and condemned persons should be admitted
to sit with their Lawful Judges, to determine whether they were Delinquents or
not, how instantly soever they might demand it, how can it be thought to stand
with any color of Reason, that Spiritual Outlaws and Desertors of the
Catholic Church, that maintain many anciently condemned Heresies, should be
admitted to Sit and Vote in Council among their Lawful Judges, whether they
were guilty or not? What Rebel would ever be found. Criminial, if he might be
allowed to be his own Judge?

2. Here Mr. Fisher, to show the Bishop, to how little purpose he called for a
General Council, asked him, Whether he thought a General. 31.
Council might err, viz. in its Decisions and Determinations of Faith. To
which the Relatour having answered in the Affirmative, that it might err, Mr.
Fisher thus further Queried. If a General Council may err, what nearer are we
to Unity, after a General Council has determined. What the Bishop replied to
this, I shall not deliver out of the mouth of either Mr. Fisher, or A. C.
because he quarrels with them, though to little purpose, touching the precise
words he used in the Conference; wherein his memory might as well fail him as
the other: You shall have them from his own pen, upon more mature deliberation.
But first hear how he disputes pro and con touching Mr. Fishers first Querie.

Whether (says he) a General Council may err or not is a question of. 32. n.
1.
great consequence in the Church of Christ. To say it cannot err, leaves the
Church without remedy against an error once determined. To say it can err,
seems to expose the members of the Church to an uncertainty and wavering in
Faith, to make unquiet Spirits not only disrespect former Councils of the
Church, but to slight and contemn whatsoever it may now determine. To each
member of this discourse I answer thus in order. To say, and but merely to say
it without good proof, that a General Council cannot err, may leave the Church
indeed without remedy against an error: But to say it cannot err, and prove
it too, both from Reason, Authority, and Gods Word, as Catholics do, is so
far from leaving the Church without remedy against an error; that it secures
all the adhering members thereof from erring in any matter of Faith. Now for
the latter branch, or member, To say it can err does not only seem to expose
(as the Bishop has it) but does actually expose and abandon all the Adherents
of that opinion, to an inevitable wavering and uncertainty in Faith, and makes
them utterly contemn all former and future Councils, when ever they determine
any thing contrary to these men's fancies.

Now to Mr. Fishers second Querie, wherein are we nearer to Unity, if a Ibid.
number. (...).
General Council may err, the Bishop thus positively answers, The
Determination of a General Council erring is to stand in force, and to have
external obedience at least yielded to it, till evidence of Scripture, or a
Demonstration to the contrary, make the error appear, and until thereupon
another Council of equal Authority do reverse it. Is not this a strange (not to
say an impious) doctrine, to be advanced without Authority either of Gods Word,
or of Antiquity, nay contrary to all solid Reason; that men should be tied up
by an Erring Conciliary Decision in points of Divine Truth, against Evidence of
Scripture, or a Demonstration of the Error? For till thereupon another Council
of Equal Authority reverse it, the error is still to be submitted to by all
men, even when they know it. This indeed is a rare effect of a General Council,
to oblige all the members of the Church to Unity in Error, against Scripture
and Demonstration, during their whole lives, or rather to the worlds end; since
such an Utopian rectifying Council as the Bishop here fancies, is morally
impossible ever to be had, as I have already shown.

And to mend the matter, that is, to make us still at a greater loss, this
pretended reforming Council must be one of Equal Authority with the supposed
Erring Council that preceded: this being a Condition expressly required by the
Bishop. Now since Protestants do not hold all General Councils to be of Equal
Authority, who shall determine, or how shall men satisfy themselves, whether
the Succeeding Imaginary General Council be of Equal Authority with the
precedent? The Bishop gives us no light in this particular, but leaves us to
grope in the dark.

But let us indulge so much to our Adversary, as to suppose such a Council met
as the Bishop would have, General and of Equal Authority; yet Maldonats
Argument, (which the Relatour allows for Ibid. number. 2.
a shrewd one) evinces clearly, that by this way we should never have a certain
end of Controversies: since to try whether any point of Faith were decreed
according to Gods word, there would need another Council, and then another to
try that, and so in infinitum. The result of which would be, that our Faith
should never have whereon to settle or rest it self. To this the Bishop
answers, that no General Council, lawfully called and so proceeding, can be
questioned in another, unless Evident Scripture or a Demonstration appear
against it; and therefore we need not fear proceeding IN INFINITUM: which is
either as ambiguous as the rest, or inconsonant to his own Doctrine touching a
General Council; which he says cannot easily err in Fundamental Verity. But
this is neither to exclude possibility, nor fear of erring, etc. Ergo possibly
it may err in (...).

Here the Bishop says, I might have returned upon you again, If a General
Council, not confirmed by the Pope, may err (which you affirm) Ibidem.
to what end, then a General Council? He tells us, we may say yes, because the
Pope, as Head of the Church, cannot err. Thus the Relatour makes a simple
answer for us, and then Triumphs in the Confutation of his own Answer. But let
this piece of Disingenuity pass: and let us examine, how uncandidly he imposes
both on us and his Reader, while he insinuates to him, that we hold for a point
of Catholic Faith, that the Pope alone, as Head of the Church, is unerrable
in his Doctrinal Decisions: which is but an opinion of particular Doctors, and
no man obliged to believe it as a point of Faith. We need not therefore make
such a ridiculous answer, as the Bishop does for us, viz. That a General
Council is necessary, because the Pope, as Head of the Church, cannot err: but
rather the contrary, That a General Council is needful, because it is not De
fide, or received for a point of Catholic Faith, that the Pope can decide
inerrably without a General Council; as all Catholics unanimously believe, he
ever does, when he defines with it. What Is now become of his Lordships brag of
retorting upon us?

3. But the Bishop, foreseeing as it were a Volley of Arguments probably to be
discharged against him upon account of this his Errour-retaining Doctrine, viz.
That the Determinations of a General Council erring is to stand in force
against Evidence of Scripture or Demonstration to the contrary, till thereupon
another Council of Equal Authority reverse it, seeks his defense at last under
the Covert of these restrictive expressions, If the Error be not manifestly
against Ibid. number. 5.
Fundamental Verity, and, unless it (the Council) err manifestly and
intolerably. In which cases you may see, the Relatour holds it not unlawful to
oppose the determination of a General Council. Now what is this but by seeking
to solve one absurdity, to fall into another as great? viz. to leave not only
his Friends still more in the dark, (while he neither determines what points of
Faith are Fundamental, nor what Errors in particular are manifestly against
Fundamental Verity, nor what manifestly intolerable) but opens a wide gate to
all Phanatique and unquiet Spirits (who never want Evident Scripture for what
they fancy) to exclaim (as warranted by the Bishop) against the Church and her
Councils for teaching errors manifestly against Fundamental Verity, or
manifestly intolerable: in both which cases they may, with the Relatours
license, spurn against all Ecclesiastical Authority.

By this you may easily discern upon how Sandy a Foundation the Bishop has
built up his ruinous Doctrine touching the Determinations of General Councils;
whose Authority he endeavors to Square by the Rule of Civil Courts, never
reflecting on the vast Disparity there is between the Government of the Church
in matters of Religion, and the Administration of the Civil Affairs of a
Kingdom, or Commonwealth. The former is principally exercised in Teaching,
Declaring, and Authoritatively Attesting Christian Faith, which must of
necessity be always one and the same: whereas the chief Object of Civil
Government are matters in their own nature variable, and changing according to
Circumstances of Time, Person, Place, etc. So that what is prudently resolved
and Decreed by a Parliament now, may in a short revolution of time be found
inexpedient in reference to the public good, and necessary to be repealed:
which can never happen in Decisions of Faith.

The truth of this is evident, even from the Penalties imposed by these
different Courts; the Civil one never inflicting on the infringers any more
then a Temporary External punishment, Corporal, or Pecuniary: whereas the
Spiritual, viz. a General Council, lays an Eternal Curse on the Dis-believers
of their Decisions. Witness the first Four General, acknowledged for such by
Protestants: which, were they fallible, as the Bishop contends they are, would
be the greatest tyranny (not to say Impiety) imaginable. Most imprudently
therefore did the Bishop, in laboring to Square a General Council by the Rule
of Civil Courts, against Catholic Doctrine. It Is true, some particular Simile
may be drawn from Parliaments against him: not, for him.

But the Bishop has another help at a dead lift, wherein all pretended
Reformers and their Adherents are very deeply concerned: which is, that
National, or Provincial Councils may reform for themselves in case of manifest
and intolerable error, if the whole Church (upon peaceable Ibidem.
and just complaint of this error) neglect, or refuse to call a Council and
examine it. Sure the Bishop had very ill luck, or a bad cause to maintain,
otherwise he could never have spoken so many inter-clashing Ambiguities, in so
little a Compass as he does. For first, he leaves us to divine what those
Errors are, which we must esteem intolerable. Secondly, he forgets to tell us,
whither we should repair to be ascertained of the Intolerableness of the
Error; unless he would have have every man follow herein the Dictate of his
own private judgment. Thirdly he dismisseth us uninstructed, how to make a
just and peaceable complaint to the whole Church: whither are we to repair to
find the whole Church, or its Representative; while, as is supposed, there is
no General Council yet in being. Fourthly he leaves us wholly to guess how long
we are to expect the whole Churches pleasure in point of calling a Council,
till her forbearance therein may be interpreted a Neglect, or Refusal to do it.
Fifthly he scores us out no way, how we should go to work to obtain the
necessary Concurrence of all Christian Princes, to the actual Assembling of
this new modeled Council. It would be too long to point out all the
inextricable Difficulties, that attend this uncanonical way of proceeding in
Religion, recommended by the Bishop. A Doctrine, so far from being a Remedy
against the pretended intolerable failings of a former General Council (upon
supposition of the whole Churches neglect or refusal to call a Council and
examine them) that it is highly instrumental to Division both in Church and
State; giving as good title, if not better, to any new Body of Sectaries to
reform Protestantism, when they get power into their hands, as it did to
Protestants to reform for themselves, against the whole Church.

4. However the Bishop still goes on, harping upon the same string; and in lieu
of giving us solid Arguments to evince the Truth of what he would persuade,
viz. that his opinion touching a General Councils possibility of erring in
points of Faith, is most preservative of peace established, or ablest to reduce
perfect Unity into the Church., he falls. 33.
into a tedious discourse, which he says he will adventure into the world but
only in the nature of a Consideration, which yet he divides into many; entering
upon the First with Two very erroneous Suppositions; which he lays for the
foundation of a tottering Superstructure. The one, that the Government of the
Church is no further Monarchical, then as Christ is the Head. The other, that
all the Power an Ecumenical Consid. 1.
Council has to determine, and all the Assistance it has not to err in its
Determination, it has it all from the Universal Body of the Church; because
the Representative of a Commonwealth has no more power, then what it receives
from the Body it represents.

The first of these, viz. that the Church is not governed by one in chief,
under Christ, is a supposition Chap. 17, 18.
more then once confuted. To the second, (which we have already impugned above)
we further answer, that the Power and Assistance, which General Councils have
to determine Controversies of Faith, so as not to err in the Determination,
cannot possibly be communicated to them by the Church, but must chiefly proceed
from the same Fountain now, it did in the Apostles time, viz. from the
Direction of the Holy Ghost: This Spiritual power for the government of the
Church, being not of Humane, but Divine Institution: nor proceeding so much
from the Natural Wisdom, Knowledge, Virtue, and Abilities of the
Ecclesiastical Governors assembled in Council, as from the cooperation Note,
that we assert not any New Revelations since the Apostles times; but only the
Assistance of the Holy Spirit, in order to the further Explanation and Clearing
of these already delivered.
of the Holy Spirit with them. Whereas in a Civil Commonwealth (which is of
Humane Institution) its representative cannot pretend to any other Power, then
what is derived from the said Commonwealth.

Secondly, the Bishop considers, that though the Act, that is hammered Consid.
2.
out by many together, must needs be perfecter, then that which is but the
child of one man's sufficiency, yet this cannot be Infallible, unless it be
from some special Assistance of the Holy Ghost. This we no way contradict: but
add, that this special Assistance of the holy Ghost is so far ever afforded to
a Lawful General Council, as to render all its completed Definitions of Faith,
Infallible.

5. Thirdly, he considers, that the Assistance of the Holy Ghost is Consid. 3.
Number. 1.
without error: that (says he) is no question; and as little, that a Council
has it. But the doubt that troubles, is, whether all Assistance of the Holy
Ghost be afforded in such an high manner, as to cause all the Definitions of a
Council, in matters Fundamental in the Faith and in remote Deductions from it,
to be alike Infallible. By this expression alike Infallible, the Bishop seems
to grant, that all the Definitions of a General Council, even in Deductions as
well as Fundamentals, are Infallible, and only to doubt whether they be alike
Infallible. I see no necessity of graduating Infallibility in the present
question; since any real Infallibility is as much as Catholic Authors assert
in all Decisions of Faith, be they Fundamental, or remote Deductions in the
Bishops sense: seeing, that as to our obligation of believing them, they are
alike Fundamental, as we have proved in the second Chapter.

Here the Bishop intends to examine the Texts, which he says Stapleton rests
upon for proof of Infallible Assistance afforded to General Ibidem.
Councils, viz. John 16. 13. I will send you the Spirit of Truth, which will
lead you into all Truth. And John 14. 16. This Spirit shall abide with you for
ever. And Matthew. 28. 20. Behold I am with you to the end of the world. Likewise
these, which he says are added by others, viz. The Founding the Church upon
the Rock, against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail, Matthew. 16. 18. and
Luke 22. 32. Christ's Prayer for St. Peter, that his Faith fail not; and Christ's
promise, Mat. 18 20. That where two or three are gathered together in his Name,
he will be in the midst of them. And that in the Acts, (chap. 15. 28.) It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us. A man would imagine these Texts
sufficiently clear in themselves, to evince the Truth of the Catholic
Assertion touching General Councils; but the Bishop is partly of another mind,
affirming, that no one of them does infer, much less enforce Infallibility. He
was loath to say all of them together did not. But let us hear how he quarrels
them in particular.

To the first, which speaks of leading into all Truth, and that for Ibid. number.
2.
ever, he answers ALL is not always universally taken in Scripture; nor is it
here simply for All Truth; but for ALL TRUTH absolutely necessary to Salvation.
I reply, neither do we aver, that it is here universally taken, or does
signify simply all Truth, (for then it would comprehend all natural Truth, and
matter of Fact, which we deny no less then the Bishop) but that it signifies
all Truth necessary for the Apostles and their Successors to know, for the
Instruction and Government of the Church, whether expressed, or but infolded in
Scripture or Tradition.

As to his limiting the words to Truths absolutely necessary to Salvation, we
say, this is but gratis dictum, and a mere groundless restriction, depending
wholly on the Bishops voluntary assertion, as we have already Chapter 14.
shown. It is also clearly refuted by the Context, ( verse. 12.) where our
Savior having told his Disciples, he had many things to say to them, which
they could not then bear, adds immediately, as it were, by way of Supplement
to their present weakness, the forecited words, that when the Spirit of Truth
should come, he would guide them into all Truth; that is, into all those
Truths, which Christ had to say to them, and which they were not as yet in a
capacity to bear. But can any man imagine, Christ had not already instructed
his Apostles touching all points absolutely necessary to Salvation; especially,
considering what himself professes in his Prayer for them to the Father, John
17. 8, 14. I have given unto them the words, which thou gave me, and they
have received them, etc, Can those words, in any Protestants opinion, signify
less then all points absolutely necessary to Salvation? His Lordship here
stumbles in the plain way, endeavoring to impose this absurd Disjunctive upon
his Reader, viz. that all Truth must either signify simply All whatsoever,
(matter of Fact, as well as Faith) or be restrained to Truths absolutely
necessary to Salvation, that is, without which no man can in any circumstance
be saved: the apparent falsity whereof a man half blind may perceive; it being
in effect to say, that either All men are wise and learned, or none but
Socrates and Plato.

To as little purpose is his other limitation, viz. that a Council is then
only Infallible, when it suffers it self to be led by the Blessed Spirit, by
Ibidem.
the word of God. By this again it seems that in things absolutely necessary to
Salvation a General Council is not absolutely Infallible, but may possibly
refuse to be led by the Spirit and Word of God, and consequently fall into
Fundamental Error: in which the Bishop is not constant to himself, professing
the contrary, when it makes for his turn: But if it may so err, what a sad
condition might the whole Church be in; since what a General Council teaches is
as obligatory to the whole Church, as what the Parliament enacts is obligatory
to the whole Kingdom.

His last shift, to evade the force of those words leading into All Truth, is,
that the promise of Assistance was neither so absolute, nor Ibidem.
in such manner to the whole Church, as it was to the Apostles, nor directly to
a Council at all. Who contends it was? who makes it a question, whether the
promised Assistance of the Holy Ghost, were not more absolutely and directly
intended to the Apostles then to the Church; or not more absolutely and
directly to the Chureh, then to General Councils? It suffices us, if it were
in any sort truly and really intended to them all: and that so it was, the very
nature of the promise evinceth: since otherwise, neither the said succeeding
Pastors, north Church of their times, could infallibly decide any arising
Controversies, touching the sense of Scriptural Texts, which are not only
ambiguous, but liable to damnable Interpretations, as the Scripture it self
averrs, 2 Pet. 3. 16. much less determine any point of Faith not expressly
delivered in Scripture, as many are not.

But note, that to the closing words of this first Text and that for ever, the
Bishop says not any thing. The truth is, their clearness is not easily eluded.

To the second proof, which is from Matthew. 28. 20. Behold I am Consid. 3. number.
3.
with you (...), unto the end of the world, the Bishop answers, the Fathers are
various in their Exposition and Application of this Text. We grant, they are
various in words, but agreeing in sense, and that the same in effect we here
plead for. The Fathers, by the Bishops own Confession, understood a presence of
Aid and Assistance, to support the weakness of the Apostles and their
Successors, against the Difficulties they should find for preaching Christ.
But are Heresies and the perverse maintainers of them, no part of the
Difficulties, Christ's Ministers meet with in preaching his Gospel? Sure they
are. And if this be the Native sense of the words, as it is in the Relatours
opinion; it follows necessarily, that the said Ministers, or Preachers of the
Gospel have such a presence of Christ promised them in this place, as
effectually inables them to withstand and overcome those Difficulties; which,
in reason cannot be more conveniently effected, then by a General Council so
assisted, Declaring against them.

But, says our Adversary, few of the Fathers mention Christ's presence, Ibidem.
in Teaching by the Holy Ghost. What matters that? The reason is, because this
is but one Special kind of presence: and the Fathers usually in their
expositions of Scripture (unless some particular occasion carries them to the
contrary) content themselves to express the general importance of the Sacred
Text, without descending to particulars. And yet some of them (as even the
Bishop himself observes) do expressly interpret this place of Christ's presence
in teaching by the Holy Ghost. But they do not extend it (says he) to
Infallible Assistance, further then the Succeeding Church keeps to the word of
the Apostles, as the Apostles kept to the guidance of the Spirit. No more do
we. We confess, the Succeeding Church could not be Infallible, should it depart
from, or teach contrary to the word of the Apostles, no more then the Apostles
themselves could have been Infallible, had they departed from the guidance of
the Spirit. But as the Infallibility of the Apostles consisted in their
constant adhering to and following the guidance of that Holy Spirit, in all
matters concerning Faith and Religion, so is there, and the Fathers teach, such
a presence of Christ with the Succeeding Church, as causes her in all
Definitions of Faith, constantly to adhere to the word of the Apostles, and as
need requires, infallibly to expound it: all which we have sufficiently Chap.
8. 10. 14.
proved: and could it otherwise happen, Christ would not be always found so
present with his Church, as to keep her from incurring ruin by erroneous
Doctrines; which this his promise must at least imply.

Lastly, whereas Maldonat proves, that this kind of presence, by Infallible
Teaching, is rightly gathered from this Text; though not expressly signified by
it, the Bishop by his mis-translation makes him Ibidem.
deny it to be the intention of Christ: which learned Author does not only
assert the Truth of this Exposition, Maldonat. in cap. 28. Matthew.
but brings in proof of it the testimonies of St. Cyril, St. Leo, and Salvianus.

To the Third, Matthew. 16. 18. touching the Rock, on which the Church is
founded, the Bishop says first, he dares not lay any other Ibid. number. 4.
Foundation, then Christ. We answer, all the Apostles are styled Foundations of
the Church; witness St. Paul (who was one of them) Ephesians. 2. 20. Christ indeed
was, and is, the Principal Foundation ( the Chief corner stone in the Churches
building, as the Apostle there speaks) yet Ministerially, and by Authority
Derived from Christ, not only the Apostles, but the Successors of the chief
of them, St. Peter, may be, and are, in a true sense, Foundations of the
Church. Secondly, the Bishop says, (and he does but say it) that St. Peter,
Ibidem.
was only the first in order: whereas the Fathers teach, and we have
sufficiently Chap. 16. 17.
proved, that he was not only the first in order, but in Authority.

Thirdly he tells us, that by the Rock is not meant St. Peter's person Ibidem.
only, but the Faith which he professed: and for this (says he) the Fathers
come in with a very full consent. I answer, we pretend not to understand by the
Rock, St. Peter's person only, but his Faith conjoined with his person, or his
person, confessing and asserting the Faith: and that the Fathers speak in this
sense, (and no other) when they say the Church is built upon St. Peter's Faith,
Bellarm. lib. 1. De Romans Pont. cap. 10.
Bellarmin proves by a whole Jury of the most Ancient among them, and most of
them the same, the Bishop here pretends to bring for himself; beside the
Testimony of the Council of Chalcedon, consisting of above six hundred Council.
cbal. Act. 3.
Catholic Bishops.

As to what he asserts, that by Hell-gates-prevailing against the Church is not
understood principally the Churches not Erring, but her not Ibidem.
falling away from the Foundation, we have already Chap. 14.
fully proved the Contrary, both by the Testimony of the Fathers, and Solid
Reason; showing, that if any Error in Faith could be admitted by the
Catholic Church, the Gates of Hell might in such case be absolutely said to
have prevaild against her, contrary to this promise of Christ. And how
Bellarmin here cited by the Bishop, is to be understood, when he says, there
are many things DE FIDE, which are not necessary to salvation, is already Chap.
2.
shown: where we also proved, that every error in Faith contrary to what is
propounded by the Church, is Fundamental. But the Relatour, (as if his own
word were a sufficient proof) tells us finally, that the promise of this stable
Edification Ibidem.
is made to the whole Church, not to a Council. Why not to both I pray; to a
General Council as well as to the Church? The truth is, it was made neither to
Church nor Council directly and immediately, but to St. Peter and his
Successors, as the Fathers above mentioned show; though for the good of the
Church, viz. her preservation from error in Faith: which morally could not be
effected, if a General Council, lawfully called and confirmed by St. Peter's
Successor, be not Infallible, or exempt from error in its decisions of Faith.

To what the Bishop concludes with upon this Text, that a Council has no
interest in this promised Edification further then it builds upon Christ, that
is, upon the Doctrine Christ delivered, the Rules he gave, and the Promises he
made to his Apostles and their Successors, we agree with him; but that a
General Council confirmed by the Pope, does ever reject, or go contrary to
these, we absolutely deny.

To the fourth place, viz. of Christ's prayer for St. Peter, that his Ibid. number.
5.
faith should not fail, Luke 22. 32. the Relatour will have the native sense of
it to be, that Christ prayed and obtained for St. Peter perseverance in the
grace of God, against the strong Temptation, which was to winnow him above the
rest. And you must take it, if you please, upon his bare word; that by Faith is
here meant Grace. Had the Bishop weighed the pregnancy of Bellarm. lib. 4. De
Romans Pont. cap. 3.
Bellarmins Reasons in confutation of this Exposition, he could not, surely,
have been so positive in it. It should be an unnecessary prolixity to insert
them here; where it is sufficient to observe the contradiction involved in this
pretended Native sense of Christ's prayer. Christ, according to the Bishop,
obtained for St. Peter that he should persevere in Grace: But St. Peter did not
still persevere in Grace, (for he lost it, when he committed that enormous sin
of Denying his Master.) Therefore Christ obtained and did not obtain one and
the same thing of his Eternal Father: which is a formal contradiction. Our
Savior therefore prayed, according to his own expression in Scripture, that
St. Peter might not lose Faith by an Internal act of Disbelief, though the
Devil should so far prevail by his Temptations, as to make him say, contrary to
his own knowledge, I know not the man you have taken prisoner.

But the Bishop objects thus against this Text, to conclude an Infallibility
Ibidem.
hence in the Pope, or in his Chair, or in the Roman Sea, or in a General
Council though the Pope be President, I find no Ancient Father that dare
adventure it. I answer, it is no wonder that they do not sinde, who are
unwilling to see. Bellarmin cites (and that out of See Francis. Turrian.
Defens. Decretal.
Authentic Records, whatever the Bishop mutters against them as And where as
the Relator objects also, that they are falsely alleged, the Reader may know,
that upon particular inspection, they are found, every one of them, to be truly
and faithfully cited by the Cardinal, and rather with omission of something
that might have been further urged to his purpose, then otherwise. The
Authorities cited are these. Lucii Pap. (...). 1. ad Episc. (...). and Gall.
Felic. Pap. epist. ad Benignum Episc. Leo Ser. 3. de Assump. Agathon. Pap
epist. ad Imperat. (...) read and approved in the sixth General Council, Act.
4. and 8. (...) 1. (...). 8. ad Imperat. Michael. Leo 9 epist. ad Petrum
Antiochen. Innocen. 3. epist. ad Episc. (...). All extant in the several Tomes
of the Councils, save the last, which may be found Cap. Majores. Extrav. De
Baptismo, etc.
Counterfeit, without the least proof) Lucius, Felix, St. Leo, and Petrus
Chrysologus, (the last of which lived above twelve hundred years ago:) these, I
say, Bellarmin affirms to have adventured to prove from this Text what the
Bishop denies. And though the three first of these were Bishops of Rome, yet
such was their Sanctity and Learning, as might well vindicate them from the
least jealousy of challenging, either through ignorance or ambition, more then
of right belonged to their office. Nay the Church of Rome was so confessedly
Orthodox in their days, that even Dr. Heylin (a man bitter against
Catholics) thought it not fit, in his Geography, to term the Roman Bishops,
Popes, till almost two hundred years after St. Leo, the last of the three.

And as for Chrysologus, his Contemporary, and no Pope, he adventured, as it
were, to ground the Infallibility we plead for, upon this Text, Epist. ad (...).
when he said, St. Peter as yet lives, and presides in his Sea, and affords the
true Faith to those that seek it: which speech the Bishop will have to be but a
flash of Rhetorique; an easy way of answering the most unanswerable
Authorities. Had Chrysologus written, or addressed his words to the Pope, there
might have been some color for the Evasion; but speaking them to an Heretic,
whom he sought to reduce into the bosom of the Catholic Church, who can
imagine he intended to complement the Pope? Nothing but a weak Cause could
drive so learned a person as the Bishop, to so poor a shift.

So the Testimonies of Theophylact and St. Bernard are slighted by Ibidem.
him as men of yesterday, though they lived, the one above five hundred, the
other near six hundred years ago. But whoever charges St. Bernard with corrupt
Doctrine, either in point of Faith or Manners, might as justly charge St.
Austin and the Fathers of his time: in which time, even by the acknowledgement
of Calvin lib. 4. Insist. cap. 2.. 3.
Calvin, when he is sober, the the Church had made no departure from the
Doctrine of the Apostles. And for Bellarm. de Script. Eccle. Item lib. 2. de
Christo, cap. 21.
Theophylact, he being a Greek Bishop, and of the forwardest in siding against
the Latin Church, and in taxing her of Error touching the Procession of the
Holy Ghost, it cannot be rationally imagined, but what he speaks in favor of
the Roman Church, is extorted from him by the evidence of Truth, and the known
consent of all Catholic Christians in that particular. As to the Gloss upon
the Canon Law, I answer it speaks only of the Pope in his personal capacity,
as a private Doctor; in which quality it is not denied, but he may possibly
err, even in Faith.

Hence may easily be perceived, how unsatisfactorily the Bishop endeavors to
elude the force of this Text concerning Christ's prayer for St. Peter: which I
have Chap. 17.
already proved to be extended to his Successors: and that General Councils
are at least collaterally and by way of consequence comprehended in it, is
evident to reason. For how else can St. Peter be said in his Successors to
confirm his Brethren in the Faith, (which is the following part of the Text) if
the Pope, at least in a General Council, be not Infallible? the Church
Universal being indispensably obliged to follow the Doctrine of such a Council.

6. The fifth place is Matthew. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered Consid.
3. number. 6.
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them; the strength of which
argument (as the Bishop well observes) is not taken from these words alone, but
as they are continued with the former: which his Lordship omitting to set down,
of necessity we must. They are these. Again I say unto you, that if two of you
shall agree on earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be
done for them of my Father, ver. 19. These (...) taken together Bellarmin
averres to be a good proof Bellarm. lib. 2. de Conc. cap. 2.
of the Infallibility of General Councils; the Argument proceeding a minori ad
majus, thus. If two or three gathered together in my name do always obtain
that which they ask at Gods hands, to wit, Wisdom, and Knowledge of those
things which are necessary for them, how much more shall all Bishops gathered
together (in a Council) always obtain Wisdom and Knowledge, to judge those
things which belong to the direction of the whole Church.

This indeed is the sum of Bellarmins discourse upon this Text: and I
conceive the inference for the Infallibility of General Councils to be so
clear, that every intelligent and unbyassed Reader will perceive it at first
sight: seeing it can neither be denied, that the Pastors of the Church,
assembled in a General Council to determine Differences in Christian Faith, are
gathered together in the name of Christ; nor that they do in all due manner beg
of God Wisdom, Understanding, and all necessary Assistance, to determine the
Controversies aright.

However the Bishop makes several exceptions against this Text. His first is,
that most of the Fathers understand this place of consent in Ibidem.
Prayer. So do we too. Is it not the very ground of our Argument? Do we
pretend, that General Councils are proved Infallible from this Text, for any
other reason, then because the Prelates in Council assembled do unanimously and
duly pray, that God will preserve them from Error, and because he has
promised to hear their prayers?

His second exception is, that he doubts, the Argument A MINORI AD MAIUS holds
only in Natural and Necessary things, not in Ibidem.
things Voluntary, and depending upon promise. I answer without any doubt, that
the Argument a minori ad majus holds as well in things promised as natural,
where the motive is increased, and neither Power nor Goodness wanting in the
Promiser. If therefore God have promised to grant the just and necessary
Petitions of two or three assembled in his Name, he does therein impliedly
promise a fortiori to grant the Petition of a General Council, when being
assembled, they unanimously beg, that they may by the Divine Assistance be
preserved from Error in their Dicisions of Faith. Here the motive is greater
then in the former case; the necessities of the whole Church do more forcibly
engage the Power, Love, and Honor of God, then the necessities of a few. By
this it appears, that what he averres, that the Argument from the less to the
greater, can never follow, but where and so far, as the thing, upon which it is
founded, agrees to the less; makes not any thing against us, since we deny not,
but God is ready to grant the just and necessary Petitions in both cases.

Thirdly, he tells us (from St. Chrysostom) there are diverse other
conditions, besides their gathering together in the name of Christ, necessarily
required to make the prayers of a Congregation heard. We agree to it; but must
suppose, that a General Council, lawfully assembled, knows what those
Conditions are, and also duly observes them, till the contrary be clearly
evinced. We also agree with his Lordship, that where more or fewer are gathered
together in the Name of Christ, he is in the midst Ibidem.
of them, to assist, and grant whatsoever he shall find fit for them; and
thence infer, that Christ is always present with the Prelates lawfully
assembled in General Councils, to assist, and grant them immunity from error
in their Decisions of Faith; which he finds not only fitting, but highly
necessary for the Direction and Settlement of his Church.

His last evasion is to make our Authors seem to clash one against another,
viz. Stapleton and Valentia against Bellarmin. To which I answer, the
difference between them is more in words, then sense. For neither Stapleton,
nor Valentia denies, but the Infallibility of General Councils confirmed by the
Pope, may by good consequence be collected from this place by an Argument a
minori ad majus, as Bellarmin urges: Nay Stapleton himself, even where the
Bishop cites him, Haec tamen Christi verba ad Conciliorum firmitatem (...) o
applicarunt Patres Synodi Chalcedonensis, in epistola ad Leonem, per Argumentum
a minori ad majus. Stapleton Relict. Controv. 6. q. 3. ar. 4. ad tertium.
expressly acknowledges, that the Council of Chalcedon did rightly use this very
Argument to the same purpose, in their Epistle to Pope Leo. Their opinion is,
that our Savior did not primarily and directly intend that particular
Infallibility, when he spoke those words, nor does Bellarmin affirm he did, but
only that he signified in general, that he would be present with his Church
and all faithful people gathered together in his Name, so often and so far,
as their necessities required his presence, they duly imploring it.

This (we confess) was all our Savior directly and immediately, signified by
the words where two or three are gathered together, etc. from which
notwithstanding Bellarmin and other Catholic Authors do rightly infer the
Infallibility of General Councils, in the manner declared. Nor does it from
this Doctrine follow, that the like Infallibility is extendible to a National,
or Provincial Synod, or to two or three private Bishops, gathered together in
Christ's name, as his Lordship pretends to argue from Valentia. For though
Christ promises indeed to be present with all, that are gathered together in
his name, yet not the like manner of presence with all, or so as promiscuously
to grant all Graces to all persons, but to each, according to their peculiar
exigencies and necessities: of which there can be none, for the Infallibility
we maintain, in any Council, but a General.

7. The sixth and last place alleged for the Infallibility of General Ibid.
number. 7.
Councils is that of Acts 15. 28. where the Apostles say of the Council held by
them, VISUM EST SPIRITUI SANCTO ET NOBIS, It has seemed good to the Holy
Ghost, and to Us, intimating thereby, that the Decrees of General Councils are
to be received by the faithful, not as the Decisions of men, but as the
Dictates of the Holy Ghost. The Bishop here tells us, The Apostles might well
say it, viz. VISUM EST, etc. for that they had infallibly the Assistance of the
Holy Ghost. But he does not find (he says) that any General Council since did
ever take upon them to say punctually and in express terms, of their
Definitions, VISUM EST SPIRITUI SANCTO ET NOBIS; acknowledging even thereby a
great deal of difference (as he conceiues) in the Certainty of those things,
which After-generall Councils determined in the Church, and those which were
settled by the Apostles, when they sat in Council.

I answer, there is no Essential difference between the Certainty of the things
determined by the Apostles, and those decided by a General Council, confirmed
by the Roman Bishop. Great difference there is indeed between the Apostles and
Succeeding Bishops, in respect of Personal Prerogatives and graces; but none
at all between the Certainty of what either the Apostles by themselves, or
succeeding bishops in a lawful General Council assembled, define for Truth:
seeing what is completely determined therein is no less determined by
Apostolical Authority, then what was determined by the Apostles in that first
Council at Jerusalem, And if After-Councils use not the same Expression
punctually and in terms, it is not material; since they do it in effect, by
universally enioyning the Belief of their Decisions under pain of Anathema.
And this the Holy fathers well understood, when they averred the Decrees of a
General Council to be D. Cyrill. Lib, 10. de Trin.
a most Holy and Divine Oracle, S. Leo. Ep. 37. 54.
a sentence inspired by the Holy Ghost, S. Leo. Ep 50 61. 62.
not to be (...), D. Athanas Ep. ad Epictet. Epiphan. Haeres. 77.
not to be questioned without error, D. Aug. Ep. 162.
that it is the last sentence that can be expected in matters of faith.

What the Relatour means by alleging Valentia I understand not: that Author
clearly speaking of Councils not yet ratified by the Pope. The Bishop therefore
has said nothing in disproofe of Ibidem.
what Stapleton and Bellarmin affirm, viz. that this passage of Scripture is a
proper proof of the Jnfallibility of General Councils: which considered, Dr.
Stapleton is so far from being justly Censurable, for styling the Decrees of
General Councils Oracles of the Holy Ghost, that his Lp. is rather blameable
for pretending such words to be little short of Blasphemy. Is there any thing
more common with the fathers then to give them such like Attributes? Does not
D. Athanas. Ep. ad Episc. African.
St. Athanasius term the definition of the Nicen Council against Arius, the
word of our Lord, which endures for ever? Does not St. Cyrill D. Cyrill. lib.
1. de Trinit.
above cited call it likewise a Divine and most Holy Oracle? Does not
Constantin the Emperor style the same Definition Eusebius. in vita Constan tin
lib. 3.
a Celestial mandate? Does not St. Gregory (with the applause of all true
Christians) profess to reverence the Decrees of the four first General
Councils, as he reuerences D. Greg. lib. (...) Epi. 24.
the four Ghospells? Does not S. Leo. Epist. 53. 54.
St. Leo, St. Gregory Naziazen, D. Greg. Naz. orat. in D. Athanas.
Pope Nicolas Epist. ad Michael. Imperat.
the first, with others, speak to the same sense?

Bellarmins Argument deduced from this Apostolical Council, as 'twas a
President to all future Councils oecumenicall, holds good for their
Jnfallibility: since otherwise they must have been ineffectuall as to the
principal purpose of calling them, Viz. so to determine Controversies of faith,
as to put an end to all debates Ibidem.
of that nature in the Church: which can never be effectually done, where
Infallibility is not acknowledged, as has been Chap. 7. 8. 14.
proved.

To what he objects, that there is not THE LIKE Jnfallibility in other
Councils, where no man Sat, that was inspired, as was in this (of the
Apostles) where all that sat as judges were inspired, I answer, it is
sufficient that the whole Body of the Prelates concurring with their Head, in
any other lawful General Council, were jointly infallible in any kind of
real infallibility, whether like to the former, or not. So in the Bishops own
principles, a General Council, or at least the Catholic Church, is
infallible in fundamentalls, or Things absolutely necessary to salvation,
though he would not acknowledge any ONE in the Church to have that prerogative
of infallibility. As touching Ferus, he avouches nothing contrary to our
doctrine of infallibility; though his Authority would be of no greater force,
then if he were none of ours: His Comment upon the Acts (which the Bishop here
cites) being listed, with most of his other works in Ioannis Feri fra^ciscani
opera omnia in Romano Indice prohibita sunt, exceptis Annotationibus et
Commentarijs in Matthew. et Ioann. Euangelia, et in Ioannis Epistolam primam,
Romae recognitis et impressis. Posseuin. Apparat. Sac. page 875.
the ROLL of Prohibited Books.

Thus have I gone thorough all the forecited passages of scripture, and in
every one of them solved the Bishops objections for rendering them incompetent
proofs of the Infallibility of General Councils: which yet I needed not have
done, since what is clearly proved by any one Text of scripture is as
undoubtedly true, as what is proved by more. But the Bishop tells us, he
easily grants a General Council cannot err in Things necessary to (...),
suffering Ibidem number. 8.
it self to be led by the spirit of Truth in scripture: wherein he seems but
to trifle, saying no more in effect, then that a General Council cannot err,
so long as it does not err. This is a very small Prerogative, and might be
affirmed of any kind of Council, nay of any particular person of how mean
capacity soever. The question is, whether a lawful General Council can ever
be presumable to fall into the Bishops hinted disorder of leaving scripture,
or defining any thing contrary to its true sense. But to speak truth, there
can be no question of it, as being inconsistent with the veracity of Divine
Promises, to permit the whole Church to err in any Doctrinall point she finds
necessary to define by a General Council, for preventing of schisms, and
settling of men's minds in the Truth.

To what he adds, as the Result of his discourse upon these several Texts.
that supposing they promisd Assistance even to Infallibility, yet they are to
be understood of the whole Church principally, and of its Representative but
by consequent, nor any further then the said Representative consents and
eleaues to that upon which it is consequent, viz. the Catholic Body of the
Church. This, I say, is but a weak cuasion. For seeing the Catholic, or
Diffusiue, Body of the Church is bound to believe and profess the Doctrine
taught by her Representative, if the Church Diffusiue have an Infallible
Assistance for her Believing, the Council, or Church Representative, must also
necessarily have Infallible Assistance in Teaching. To which of these this
Assistance is promised principally, is but a vain speculation, since they both
have it, as being absolutely necessary for them both.

Here the Bishop falls again to his Considerations, and will have Consid. 4.
number. 1.
us to observe, fourthly, that there is not the like consent, that General
Councils cannot err, as there is, thatthe Church in General cannot err from
the faith necessary to Salvation, since in this all agree, but not in the
former. J answer, all that have not deserted, nor adhered to the Desertors of
the Catholic Church, do vna nimously agree, that a lawfully-call'd and
confirmed General Council can no more err in point of faith, then the Church
in general: and his Lp. was much out in quoting Waldensis for the contrary: he
being so great a Champion of the Bishop of Rome's Authority, as to assert his
Infallibility in defining ex Cathedra, Ad eiusde^ (Papae) doctrinam, tanqua^ ad
Infallibilem fidei Regulam, Catholici Episcopi illo tempore suos Aduersatios,
Haereticos, coegerunt. Waldens. Tom. 1. Doctrine. fid. lib. 2. cap. 47.
even without a Council, and Ego audacter dico in Christi nomine and Christo
rogante, Romanam Ecclesiam in Doctrina Christi (...). (And a little after) Quid
mirum, si Christo rogante, Romana Ecclesia non potest in (...) deficere;
VValdens. vbi supra.
Chap. 48. ibidem, teaches, that the particular Roman Church as consisting only
of the Pope and his Clergy cannot err, by reason of that privilege obtained
by our Saviors prayer ( Luke. 22. 32.) for St. Peter and his successors. What
therefore the Bishop cites out of him for his purpose, is nothing to the
purpose; Waldensis meaning only unlawful Councils, as appears by his
instancing in no other then the Council of Arimini assembled by an Arian
Prefect, under an Arian Emperor, and that of Constantinople under Justinianus
Minor, which Pope Sergius expressly condemned.

Whereas the Bishop says, it Seems strange to him, this Proposition even in
terms, A GENERAL COUNCIL CANNOT ERR, should not be found in any one of the
Fathers, J answer, it is sufficient the full sense of that Proposition is found
in them, as we have shown in their Texts aboue-alledged: and it might seem
as strange to me, that this Proposition (if it were true) viz. General
Councils can err in definitions of faith, is not to be found in any one of
the Fathers.

Jn the next place he vrges, that St Austin makes it the Prerogative 9 Ibidem
of scripture alone, that whatsoever is found written therein, may neither be
doubted nor disputed, whether it be true or right. But the letters of Bishops
may, not only be disputed, but corrected by Bishops D Aug. lib. 2. de Baptism.
cap. 3.
that are more wise and learned then they; or by National Councills. and
National Councils, by Plenary or General: and even Plenary Councils
themselves may be amended, the former, by the latter. Upon which words of St.
Austin the Bishop seems to triumph, telling us, it was no news with St. Austin,
that a General Council might err, and therefore inferior to scripture, which
may neither be doubted nor disputed, where it affirms. And if it be so (says
he) with the definition of a Council too, viz. that it may neither be doubted
nor disputed; where is then the scriptures Prerogative? J answer, the Relatour
does here canere triumphum ante victoriam. for though it is true, that the
scriptures have no small Prerogative above Councils, (wherein nothing is of
necessity to be believed as matter of faith, but the naked Definition it
self; whereas in scripture every thing, even the least sentence, is to be
believed with Divine faith) yet it is clear, that it cannot be S. Austins
meaning; that General Councils may err in their Definitions of faith, by what
he frequently delivers else where: namely Tom. 7. (...) Baptis. contr.
Donatist. where he expressly teaches, that no doubt ought to be made of what
is by full Decree established in a General lib. 1. cap. 7
Council: and lib. 7. cap. 5. where he makes the Definition of a General
Council and the consent of the whole Church to be all one: against which
latter he tells us also ( Epist. 118. ad Januar.) it is not only error, but
insolent madness, for any one to dispute.

Wherefore, we must either make St. Austin contradict himself, or disapproue
of our Adversaries Exposition of this Text. But what is his meaning then,
you will say? in what cases may General Councils be said to be amended, the
former, by the latter, as this Doctor speaks? Truly in no other then these,
viz. in Matter of fact, in Precepts pertaining to Manners and discipline, or by
way of more full and clear Explication of what had been delivered by former
Councils: which as they are the common Expositions given by Catholic Divines,
of this Text of St. Austin, so are they indeed most agreeable to it, and such as
without force the very words of the Text, taken entirely, will bear no other.
for when does this Mending happen, in St. Austins opinion? Cum aliquo rerum
Experimento aperitur quod clausum est, et (...) quod latebat: then, says he,
when by SOME EXPERIMENT of Things, that comes to be opened which was shut up
and that known which did lie hid. Now who is so ignorant as not to know, that
Experiment has not place in matter of universal Belief, but belongs properly
to Matters of fact, and Things intrinsecally vested with the Circumstances of
Time, place, Person, etc. from which such points of says and General
Doctrines doc abstract, and are wholly independent of them? St. Austin therefore
cannot in reason be supposed to mean, that General Councils may be amended,
the former by the latter, in any thing more, then in matters of fact, precepts
of Manners and discipline; or in the manner of Explication, when by reason of
emergent Schisms and (...), it is Experimentally found necessary for the peace
of the Church, that a fuller and more perfect Declaration be made of some
thing already defined by a former Council; as it happened in the Addition
Ibidem number. 2,
of the word, filioque, to the Creed of the Council of Nice, and in diverse
other cases.

But we must hear the Bishops exceptions against Bellarmin and Stapleton, for
expounding S. Augustine in the sense we have here delivered. He says first,
They are both out, and Bellarmin in a Contradiction, for applying the Amendment
S. Austin speaks of, to Rules of Manners and discipline. I answer, the Cardinal
is in no Contradiction, though elsewhere he averrs, Bellarm lib. 2. de Council.
cap. 2.
that General Councils cannot err in Precepts of Manners. for this is no good
consequence. General Cou^cils may amend one another in Precepts of ma^ners and
discipline, ergo they may err in such matters. The reason is, because Precepts
of Manners and Discipline depend much upon Circumstances of Time, place,
person, etc. which varying, it often so falls out that what at first was
prudently judged fit to be done, becomes afterward unfitting: and when this
happens, it is out of question one General Council may be amended by another,
yet neither of them be justly taxed with Error, they both commanding aright
Ibidem
according to different Circumstances.

To what he objects against this exposition, that St. Austins whole dispute,
in this place, is against the error of St. Cyprian followed by the Donatists;
which was (says he) an Error in faith, namely, that true Baptism could not
be given by Heretics, and Ibidem.
such as were out of the Church, I answer, this euinces nothing against us. For
though this father takes the occasion of his speech from that error of St.
Cyprian, and makes a Gradation in the writings of Bishops Provincial,
National, and General Councils, yet it is manifest he speaks in a different
style in the last place, where he touches on Plenary Councils: clearly
pronuncing, that the writings or private Bishops may be reprehended, si quid
in eis forte a veritate deuiatum est: so he affirms, that Provincial and
National Councils must yield to General ones: but of these he only says
they may be mended by others, when by some experiment of things, that is
opened which was shut up, and that known, which lay hid: which experiment, as
we have said, is only found in matters of fact, precepts of Manners and
discipline, which depend on Circumstances, and are therefore in their own nature
changeable; or lastly, when experience shows, that some new arising errors
call for a further explanation of some Doctrinall point already defined.

Nor matters it, that there was no experiment of fact in St. Cyprians case;
seeing St. Austin does not consine his discourse to St Cyprians case only, but
by occasion of his, and his Councils error, lays down general Doctrine
touching the different Authority of the writings of particular Bishops,
provincial, National, and General Councils. And as for Doctor Stapletons
reading Conclusum for Clausum, it imports little to the present purpose; he
Prine. Doctrine. lib. 11. Controv. 6. page 381.
else where reading it Clausum est. The Bishops exposition therefore of St.
Austins word, experiment, to be a further proof of the question, is
groundleess, and contrary to the known notion of the word. Nor does it help
him that St. Austin in the following chapter (where he speaks of
Rebaptization) says it was a question tenebris inuoluta: since he speaks of
it as it stood in St. Cyprians time, vndefin'd by a General Council. Add
hereunto, that St. Austin expressly teaches in the same chapter, that St.
Cyprian would certainly have corrected his opinion, had the point, in his time,
been defined by a General Council: which is another manifest proof, that
neither St. Cyprian nor St Austin were of the Bishops mind in this particular,
touching General Councils.

Hence also is justified what Stapleton averrs as the Bishop reports him, viz.
That if St. Austin speaks of a Cause of faith, his Ibidem. number. 3.
meaning is, that latter General Councills do mend the former, when they
explicate more perfectly that faith, which lay hid in the Seed of Ancient
Doctrine: as for example, when the Council of Ephesus explicated that of Nice,
concerning the Divinity of Christ, the Council of Chalcedon that of Ephesus,
and the Counil of Constance all the Three. This Stapleton speaks by way of
Solution to the Argument brought by Protestants from this Text of S. Austin
against the infallibility of General Councills: and the Relatour disingenuous,
as to make his Reader believe, that the said Stapleton brings it for a proof;
while he ridiculously asks, whether it be not an excellent Conclusion, These
Councils taught no Error, and were only explained; Therefore no Council can
err in matter of faith. It Is I confess, no Excellent conclusion, nor ever
intended for such by Stapleton. But it is so excellent a solution to the Bishops
Argument, that it made him give an Additionall Turn to the rest of his
Labyrinth.

That St. Austin meant plainly, that even Plenary Councils might err in matter
of faith, and ought to be amended in a latter Council, Jbidem. number. 4.
the Bishop does well to say, I think will thus appear. For in truth he does
but think it, as will soon be manifest.

His maine reason why he thinks so, is taken from St. Austins word emendari,
which the Relatour tells us properly supposes for error and faultiness. J
answer, the word emendari is very properly applyable to the taking away of any
defect, it being derived from Menda, which as Scaliger himself, in his Notes
upon Varro, observes, comes from the latin Adverb Minus, and See Marinij
Lexicon, in verbo Menda.
properly signifies any defect whatsoever; and therefore not solely applyable to
error in faith, but to such defects as I have mentioned above. Stapleton
therefore gives not a forced, but the true and proper signification of St.
Austins word emendari. And this may serve for a sufficient solution to the rest
of his discourse: the word emendari Ibidem. number. 5.
bearing our sense as properly as reprehendi, and ce dear insisted on by the
Bishop.

To what he adds, that St. Austin must be understood to speak of Amendment
of error, because he teaches it must be done without Sacrilegious pride,
without swelling Arrogancy, and without Contention of Envy, in holy Humility,
in Catholic peace, in Christian Charity; which Cautions the Bishop supposes,
necessarily import some Error, or fault committed by the former Council; in
mending whereof the following Council might, without such Caueats be apt to
insult over the former; and the former, or their Adherents, to envy, and
contest the Proceedings of the latter. I answer, St. Austins admonitions in
this kind relate not in particular to General Councils, but to the other
several subjects of his whole discourse, viz. Private Bishops, Provincial and
National Councils; by whom as error may be committed, so it is evident,
Pride, Arrogance, Contention may happen in its emendation, if not religiously
avoided by the am enders.

The Bishop proceeds against Bellarmin, telling us this shift of his is the
poorest of all, viz. That St. Austin speaks of unlawful Councils. But surely
it is no shift at all in the Cardinal, seeing he gives that Exposition only ex
superabundanti and with a peradventure, as the Relatour himself observes. To
what he brings at last, that it is a mere trick, which the Ancient Church
knew not, and (as he thinks) not believed at this day by the wise and learned
of our own side, to require the Popes Instruction, Approbation, and
Confirmation, etc. J answer, wise and learned men will rather think, it is a
mere Resuerie in the Relatour thus to contradict the perpetual known
practice both of Councils themselves, (which always Chap. 17
required the Popes Cofirmation) and of the Church, (which never accounted them
Complete lawful General Councils without it) and of Reason it self, as I
have Chap. 17.
already Shown.

CHAP. 21. In what manner General Councils are Infallible.
ARGUMENT.
1. The Bishop falls into unavoidable Inconveniences, by maintaining, that
General Councills are fallible. 2. They are Infallible in the Conclusion, or
Doctrine defined, though not always so in the Premises: and the Reason, why.
3. What Difference there is between the present Church, and that of the
Apostles. 4. An Explanation of St. Austins Text. (Lib. de!Agon. Christian. cap.
30.) PETRVS PERSONAM ECCLESIAE SVSTINET etc, 5. The Council of Constance, in
point of Receiving under one kind only, not contrary to Christ's Institution.
6. No unreasonableness in the Catholic Doctrine touching Infallibility. 7.
The Bishops various and gross Mistakes about the Popes Infallibility, both in
reference to Councils, and otherwise. 8. His Misunderstanding of St. Ambrose.

1. THe Bishop labors in his fifth Consideration to avoid Two Jnconueniences,
which must needs follow by supposing error to be incident to a General
Council. The first is, that this supposition lays all open to uncertainties.
The second, that it maks way. 33. Consid. 5. number. 1.
for a whirle wind of the Private spirit to come in, and ruffle the Church.
He thinks he has found out a Remedy for this twisted Disease. To the first
Inconvenience he says, that General Councills as lawfully called and
ordered, and lawfully proceeding, are a great and a (...) Representation, and
cannot err in matters of faith, keeping themselves to Gods Rule, and not
attempting to make a New of their own: and that they are with all submission to
be observed by every Christian, where scripture or evident demonstration comes
not against them. But who sees not, that this Remedy is as bad as the Disease?
A General Council is an awful Representation, if it be lawfully called, and
ordered, and proceeds lawfully: but he set's not down the Marks, whereby we
may know, whether it be lawfuIly called, ordered, and proceeds lawfully, or
not. Neither does he tell us who shall be Judge of those Marks. A General
Council, says he, cannot err in matters of faith, keeping themselves to Gods
Rule. But this is both ambig uous, and vnsatisfactory. For if he mean, that a
Council cannot err so long as it teaches nothing contrary to the word of God,
what greater Prerogatlue does he give to the Representative of Gods Church
then belongs to any private Doctor, who cannot err so long as he follows,
and cleaues to this vnerrable Rule? If his meaning be, that a General Council
cannot err, if it considers the testimonies of holy writ, and define any
thing according to the sense in which they understand those testimonies, how
can they be tax't of error, seeing it cannot be denied, but General
Councils, in defining many points contrary to Protestant Doctrine, did
conformetheir definitions to the sense in which (upon serious examination) they
understood the most pertinent places of holyscripture. But Councils must not
attempt to make a New Rule of their own. True But what the Bishop thinks New,
is in the judgment of those grave Prelates as Ancient, as the word of God. To
whom then ought we to submit? To him that is a priu ate Doctor, and averrs it
to be New: or to that lawful Assembly, which asserts it to be Ancient?

He tells us next, that General Councils are to be observed by cuery
Christian with all submission, where scripture, and evident demonstration come
not against them. But who shall judge, I pray, whether scripture or
Demonstration make (...) against them, or not? Does not every Heretic, that
spurns against the Church; pretend that the scripture he vrges, is evident,
and his Reason a demonstration? you will reply, that the Bishop does not mean
by a demonstratiue argument, such an one, as appears so, only to a private
spirit, but such as being proposed to any man, and understood, the mind
cannot choose but inwardly assent unto it. If this be so how can Protestants
be excused, who deny many points defined by General Councils? Many learned
and understanding men of our religion have read the places of Scripture
alleged by Protestants against us, and have diligently pondered all the
Reasons and pretended evidences their adversaries bring; and yet they are so
far from being convinced in judgment, that they evidently oppose the
belief of those points Defined, that they are persuaded of the contrary
wherefore their arguments are not, evident in themselves, but only seem so to
their private Spirits: and therefore all Christians, according to the Bishops
rule, ought to submit to those Councils in the belief of the said points. Nor
will it serve the turn to say, that there was neverany General Council, besides
the four first, wherein nothing was defined contrary to Truth. For hence will
follow, that a Council cannot be known to be General, but by the Truth of
their Doctrine; nor their doctrine to be true, but by the testimony of
scripture: whence will be deduced that we ought to believe nothing for the
Authority of a Council, but that we our selves are the sole Judges, whether
the Definitions of Councils be agreeable to Gods word, or not. If you allow
other Councils to have been also General, and yet to have falsely taught any
of those points, which Catholics now hold contrary to Protestants, you must
either grant that scripture, or demonstration comes not evidently against them,
or auerre, that all learned and understanding Catholics, that have perused
their objections, are conuine'd in judgment, that what themselves hold, is
either quite opposite to the word of God, or contrary to common sense and the
light of reason: both which are manifestly absurd.

As for the Remedy he applies to the second (...), it is as ineffectuall as
the first. The reason he brings, why the supposition Jbidem.
of fallibility in General Councils does not make way for the whirlewinde of
the Private spirit, is, because Private spirits are too giddy, to rest upon
scripture, and too heady and shallow to be acquainted with Demonstratiue
Arguments. But this is contrary to experience. For which of all those, that are
taxt to give way to the private spirit, refuse to rest upon the word of God?
Do the Presbyterians in England decline Testimonies of scripture, when they
Dispute with the Prelatists, against Episcopacy, and other points? Do the
Caluinists fly from scripture, when they contend with the Lutherans in Germany
against Consubstantiation and vbiquity? or with the Arminians in Holland about
Predestination, universal Grace, free will, perseverance etc? would the Bishop
make us believe, that all maintainers of the Private spirit are so void of
understanding, as not to be capable of a demonstratiue Argument? must they
needs be deprived of the light of reason, because they think fit to follow
the Dictamen of their own reason in what they believe? or that they cannot
comprehend any demonstration in Euclide because they give way to their private
spirit in the understanding of scripture? The Bishop esteems them giddy,
Shallow, insufficient, and incapable of a demonstratiue Argument, or of a right
understanding of the word of God: yet they, and their followers are of a
different persuasion. They take them selves to be, and are reputed by many
others, to be persons of strong reason, sharp judgment, deep insight in what
belongs to scripture: and upon this presumption they will take upon them to
call in question whateuer suites not with their private fancy. Now to think
that their private spirit is sufficiently opposed, by saying, they are all
fools, and incapable of reason, is in my opinion to be void of judgment, and
to deserve the like Censure. Ibidem number. 2.


But what shall we say to the Authority of S. Austin, who would have true
demonstrations every where to take place; and professes, that a Truth so
clearly demonstrated, that it cannot be questioned, is to be preferred before
all those motives, by which D. Aug. cont. Ep. fund. c. 5.
a man is held in the Catholic Church? I answer, his words are only
conditional, and signify, that in case any true and cuident demonstrations
could be brought against the motives, that kept him in the Church, they must
take place in our understanding, in regard the assent, which arises from those
motives, is voluntary, and free; where as, that which would arise from such
Demonstratiue Arguments, would be so clear and necessary, that we could no
more prevent it, then our assent to this Principle, The whole is greater then
the part. But hence it follows no more, that the Church can define what is
cuidently contradicted, cyther by scripture, or demonstration, then that an
Angel may feel, taste, hear, because this Proposition is true, An Angel would
seele, taste, or hear, if he had a body, a tongue, or corporal ears.

But to what purpose, does the Bishop go about, to show, that Councils are not
to be our Judges in points that are clearly taught by reason or scripture? we
shall never have recourse to Councils, to know, whether the whole be greater
then the part; nor whether Jsaac had two sons, Jacob and Esau. Neither ever
will there arise any case, in which all wise persons of the Roman Church will
outwardly profess the Doctrine defined by Councils, and inwardly aslent, that
it is contrary to the word of God, and to evident demonstration. The
Controversy which the Bishop should have resolved is this, whether in case one
party pretend, and verily believe, they have clear scripture, and
demonstration for what they say; and the other, consisting of men at least
equal, if not superior, to them, in point of learning, understanding, Moral
Honesty, Prudence, and all other helps conducing to right judgment, shall
affirm the contrary, whether in this case there be not an absolute necessity
of a living, and infallible judge, to end the Controversy; and whether all
Christians ought not to submitt to that judge, notwithstanding any reasons, or
seeming evidences to the contrary?

It Is strange the Bishop should think Bellarmin to grant, that a private man
may lawfully dissent from a General Council, by Ibidem number. 3.
reason of some manifest and intolerable error. The Cardinal asserts indeed,
that inferiors may not judge superiors, whether they proceed lawfully, or
not, unless it manifestly appear, that an Bellarm. de Conc. lib. 2. cap. 8.
intolerable error is committed by them. But there he speaks of the Council
of the Jews, which condemned our savior, and in condemning him, committed an
intolerable error. And in that very place he teaches, that the Council of the
Jews, wherein the High Priest presided, could not err in matters of faith,
before the coming of the Messiah? but that after his birth they might,
according to diverse Prophesyes he there alleges; adding, that at the very
time when the Council was liable to error, subjects were to submitt to their
superiors, viz. the people to their Council, unless it manifestly appeared,
that an intolerable error had been committed by them. But how can the Relatour
infer from thence, that such an error may be committed by our General
Councils, since the Cardinal expressly teaches in that very book, that our
General Councils cannot possibly err in their definitions of faith?

The Bishops next quarrel is with Doctor Stapleton, for teaching, Ibidem number. 4.
that the voice of the Church, in determining Controversies of faith in
General Councils, is Divine? telling us, that the Proposition stick's in his
throat, as if the Doctor had felt some check in the uttering of it. Why?
because (forsooth) by way of explicating himself, Stapleton adds, that it is
not simply, but in a manner, divine. Is this to retract, in any sort, what he
had said? who sees not rather, that it is only to speak with that necessary
caution which the cause requires, and which the cauilling disposition of
Heretics does particularly oblige us to? This Proposition, The voice of the
Church, determining in General Councils, is in a manner divine, is doubtless
not only most true in it self, but also most consonant to Catholic grounds;
to wit, as expressing, that it is not Gods immediate revelation but only an
infallible means of applying immediate revelation to us.

His next objection against the said Doctor is Blasphemy, viz. for aucrring
that the Church is the foundation of faith in a higher kind, then scripture. I
answer, that I have diligently sought for the words alleged, in Stapletons
works, and cannot find them. The Bishop quotes Relect. Contr. 4. quest. 4.
art. 3. but that question has no article at all in it. It Is true, in the fifth
question he teaches, that the Church is more known to us, then scripture; and
that it is the means of applying to us both scripture, and all things else
that we believe. But this is neither Blasphemy, nor Contradiction to his own
grounds. However, should any such proposition be found in Stapleton, J am not
bound to maintain it, seeing J have only engaged to defend the received
Doctrine of the Catholic Church; which no ways depends upon any such
assertion, as is here laid to Stapletons charge.

2. In the sixth Consideration the Relatour argues to this purpose: if a
General Council be infallible, the infallibility of it is either in the
Conclusion alone, or in the Means that prove it alone Consid. 6. number. 1.
(that is to say in the Premises) or in both together. But the Council (says
he) is neither infallible in the Conclusion alone, nor in the Means (or
premises) alone, nor yet in both together: ergo, it is, not infallible at all.
We desire to be breife; and therefore, not standing to consider the reasons,
why he thinks it is not infallible in the Means, we answer it is infallible in
the Conclusion, that is, in the Doctrine defined, though it be not infallible
in the means, or arguments upon which it proceeded to the definition. The
reason is, because the one, viz. that the Conclusion, or defined Doctrine of a
General Council, should be infallibly true is necessary for the due
government of the Church; But the other, viz. that there should be
infallibility also in the Means, or in the disquisition about the matter,
before it comes to be defined, is not necessary: and it is a known maxim
Deus non deficit in necessarijs, nec abundat in superfluis; which holds good in
Theology, as well, as in Nature. God is not wanting in the supply of
necessaries, noris he profuse in affording things superfluous.

To this our Adversary replies, that it is a thing altogether vnknow'n in
nature, and art too, that fallible Principles can, either as father, or mother,
beget, or bring forth an infallible Conclusion. But this is a false Ibidem.
number. 2.
supposition of the Bishop, for the Conclusion is not so much the child of
those principles, as the fruit of the Holy Ghost, directing and guiding the
Council to produce an infallible Conclusion, what ever the premises may be.
This is necessary for the peace, and unity of the Church, and therefore not to
be denied, unless an impossibility can be showed therein. But I hope no man
will attacque Gods Omnipotency, and deprive him of the power of doing this.
Hence it appears how vainly the Relatour fancies to himself, that Stapleton
and all Catholics are miserably hampered in this Argument, whereas they all
easily answer it, as we have done.

What he says next is a mere peruersion of Stapletons meaning; Ibidem. number.
3.
who never teaches that the Church is Simply Prophetical either in the
Premises or Conclusion, but rather the quite contrary, as the Relator might
have seen, (if he had pleased) in the place he cites. It Is true, he uses the
word Prophetical sometimes, speaking Stapleton. Relect. Contr 4. q. 2.
of the Conclusion, or Definition of a General Council: but it is apparent, he
does it only in a less proper, or Analogicall sense, to signify, that, by
virtue of divine Assistance and direction, such a Conclusion, or Definition, in
regard of precise verity, is as infallibly true and certain, as if it were a
Prophecy.

Neither is there any Contrariety in this, betweeen Stapleton and Bellarmin:
for both agree, that neither Church nor Council do publish Jmmediate
Revelations; nor create any New Articles of Faith, but only declare and unfold,
by their definitions, that doctrine, which Christ and his Apostles in some
manner first delivered. Both of them likewise confess, that whether the
Principles, from which the Church, or General Councils, deduce their
definition, have intrinsecall and necessary connection with the doctrine,
defined or not, yet the Conclusion or definition it self, is of infallible
verity: the holy Ghost so directing the Council, that it never defines any
conclusion to be of faith, but what is de facto matter reueasd by God, either
in those Principles from which the Council deduces it, or at least in some
other.

The Relatours whole Discourse therefore, upon this subject of Prophecy, falls
of it self to the ground, as being built upon a pure (I had almost said a
wilful) mistake, viz, that Stapleton maintains the Decrees of a General
Council to be Prophetical in a proper sense, which he does not: and
consequently, that it was wholly needless for our adversary to talk so much of
Enthusiasms and tell us so punctually what Prophecy is, what vision: and that
neither of both are to be gotten with study and Industry. For we know all
this; and therefore we do not style the definitions of Councils Revelations,
or Prophesies, or visions, or the like; but willingly acknowledge they are the
results of much study, and industry: only we aerre the study and industry,
which the Prelates in General Councils do use for the finding out of Truth, is
always crowned by God with such success, as infallibly preserues them from
error.

Stapleton goes on, and gives us the reason, why a General Ibidem number. 3.
Council must necessarily be infallible in the Conclusion, because that which
is determined by the Church, is matter of Faith, not of Knowledge; and that
therefore the Church proposing it to be (...), though it use Means, yet it
stands not upon Art, Means, or Argument, but the Assistance of the Holy Ghost:
else when we embrace the Conclusion proposed, it would not be an Assent of
Faith, but an Habit of Knowledge. To this the Bishop replying, seems to broach
a New Doctrine; namely, that the Assent of Faith may be an Habit of Knowledge.
To this the replying Bishop seems to broach a new doctrine namely, that the
Assent of Faith may be an habit of Knowledge. But surely Divine Faith is,
according to the Apostle, Hebr. 11. an Argument of things which do not
appear, to wit, by the same means, by which we give this assent of Faith:
otherwise our Faith would not be free, and meritorious. It Is true, the same
conclusion may be Faith to one, and Knowledge to another, (according to St.
Austin, and St. Thomas, cited by the Bishop) but this must be upon different
motives: and therefore Faith, as Faith, can never be knowledge; which is all
that Stapleton vrges. The motives of Credibility then, which we have for our
Faith, do not by evident demonstration show the truth thereof, though they
make it evidently credible: in so much as he would be imprudent, who should
refuse to give his assent. So though the Bishop do truly assert, that the
Church in all ages has been able Ibidem. number. 5.
to stop the mouths of philosophers, and other great men of reason, when it is
at the highest; yet this is also true, that our savior did never intend to
set up a school of Knowledge, but of Faith: and that Councils, in their
definitions, rely not, on any demonstratiue reasons, but on the infallible
Assistance of the holy Ghost, promised to them. In like manner, the Faithful
ground not themselves on any demonstration proposed to them by the Church, but
on Gods Revelation, obscurely, but certainly, and infallibly applied to them,
by the Church. Consid. 7 number. 1. 2


In the seventh Consideration, the Relatour takes notice again of a Querie,
that A. C. made to him: viz. if a General Council may err, wherein are we
nearer to unity by such a Council. But in stead of giving a punctual, and
direct answer, as he should have done, he falls a fresh upon certain new
considerations, which he aduances upon this subject; whether the Protestant
opinion, that General Councils may err in defining matters of Faith, or the
Catholic opinion, that they cannot, be more agreeable to the Church, and
more able to preserve and reduce Christian peace: which in effect is little
else, but to answer one Querie, by many; and having brought his reader almost
to the port of his Labyrinth; by a gentle turn, to lead him back again through
all the Meanders thereof: howeuer we must observe his Motions.

3. His First Querie, or Consideration is, whether an absolute infallibility
be promised to the present Church, or whether such an infallibility will not
serve the turn, as Stapleton acknowledges. I answer; no doubt but it will Let
Protestants acknowledge but such an Infallibility in the Church, as that worthy
Doctor maintains, and we shall be agreed for that matter. But the Truth is,
our Stapleton. Re lect. Consr. 4. q. 2. Not. 3.
Adversary does here only confound his reader, and wrong the Author he
alleges, by not, declaring sufficiently, in what sense he speaks. For
Stapleton, in the place cited, expressly teaches, that the Apostles were
infallible not only in their Decree, or Conclusion, but also in the Means, or
Arguments; and this he calls absolute, or exact Infallibility: whereas the
present Church is only infallible in the Decree, or Conclusion; and this also
it has by the Guidance of the Holy Ghost, yet not by a new Immediate
Revelation. Whence it appears, that this Author is clear for the Churches
Infallibility, though he do not in all respects equal it to that of the
Apostles: and consequently, that it is not he, but the Bishop himself, that
wriggles in the bussiness, unworthily endeavoring to draw his Author to a
sense no way intended by him. Bellarm. lib. 2. de Conc. cap. 12.


Bellarmin is used no better; whose doctrine is clear, that in the Decree, or
Conclusion, a General Council is as certain: as the scripture; because both
are infallible: and nothing can be more certain, then what is infallible;
though in other respects scripture has many Preroagtiues above General
Councils; as, that it is Gods immediate Revelation; that there, not only the
Conclusion, but Every thing, is matter of Faith, etc. which agree not to a
General Council.

4. Howeuer (to pass to this second Consideration, or Querie) (...). 3.
we shall not much quarrel his term of Congruous Infallibility, but rest
contented if Protestants will acknowledge such an Infallibility in the present
Church, as is congruous, and agreeable to the promises of our savior, and to
the necessities of the Church; so, as by virtue of the said Infallibility she
may ever be aseuredly preserved in the Belief, and Profession of the true
Faith. But the principal thing the Bishop would have us consider here, is,
that Jnfallibility resides, according to power and Right of Authority, in the
whole Church, and in a General Council only by power deputed. To which purpose
hec cites St. Austin, D. Aug. lib. de Agon. Christian. cap. 30.
Petrus personam Ecclesiae Sustinet; et huic datae sunt claues, quum Petro
datae. Peter (says he) bears the person of the Catholic Church; and to her
were the Keys given; when they were given to Peter. I answer, there is a
twofold representing, or bearning the person of an other, to be observed. The
one Parabolicall, or by way of mere Figure, and supposition only. Thus Agar (
Abraham's bondwoman) Galat. 4. 25. 26. represents the nation, or people of the
Jews, yet living under the bondage of the Mosaicall law: and Mount-Sion, or
Jerusalem, the Churh of God. The other, Historical, and Real, viz. when the
person representing has right, or relation aparterei, in, and toward the thing
represented; by virtue whereof it does, in the rust, and and necessary
interpretation of Reason, bear the person, or stand for the thing represented.
Now St. Peter Sustained the person of the Church in this latter sense; I mean
Historice, non Parabolice, really, and in verity of fact, not in Figure, or
Parabolicall supposition only: he being such a principal, and chief member
of the Church, as did ratione officij virtually, and truly contain in himself
the fullness of Ecclesiastical Power: in the same manner, as a King receives,
the keys of a town, whereof he takes possession for himself, though he
represents the whole kingdom, and receives the keys for the good thereof.
Thus, Isay St. Peter received the keys for himself; as he was Head of the
Church, though that Reception were indeed ordained for the good of the whole
Church.

To receive a thing in this manner, is not to receive it in the others right,
but in his own, not withstanding it be finally meant for the good of the
other. This is so clear, even to common sense, that we have no need of
turning over many Classique Authors to prove it. wherefore the example of an
Attorney taking possession of land for a Purchaser, and of one, who having a
Proxy, receives a woman with the Ceremonies of Marriage in the name of an
other, are not to the purpose; because in such cases the person of an other is
Sustained only Parabolice, or by way of voluntary supposition pro tempore; as
when a Legate receives the keys of a town, merely as substitute, for, and in
the name of his King. But in our case the keys were received Historice, and in
way of real propriety, as by the King himself, Head of the Commonwealth, so
by St. Peter Head of the Church.

This Answer is grounded in St. Austin himself, who teaches St. Peter's
receiving the souereign Authority of the governing the whole Church (signified
hero, by the keys) as he was a Figure of the Church, and represented the
person of the Church, to have been D. Aug. Tom. 8. in psalm. 108. enarrat. 1.
propter Primatum etc. by reason of the PRIMACY which he had amongst the
Apostles. The like he has in D. Aug. Quaest. ex Nou. Testam. quaest. 75. D.
Aug. de verb. dom. sermon. 13.
other places. So clearly does he explicate his own meaning, and confirm the
answer we have given to the text the Bishop brings. Why therefore does the
Relatour labor in vain to wrest the Keys out of St. Peter's hands, and to
bestow them he knows not where? They must remain where Christ has left them.
St Peter, and his successors know best how to use them, and how to turn them
in their proper wards, as the Bishop speaks.

In his Third Consideration he supposes, that though a General Council be
granted liable to error, yet so long as the whole Catholic Ibidem. number. 4.
Church (Diffusiue) be exempt from it in the Prime Foundations of Faith,
absolutely necessary to salvation, there is still a sufficient Means to
preserve, and reduce unity, and to prevent all inconveniences that usually
trouble the Church. One of the greatest inconveniences that can possibly fall
upon the Church, is error in faith; which upon supposition that a General
Council may err in such matters, does unavoidably befall the whole Church
chap. 8. 2.
as we have already shown; and that without any hopes of ever being
certainly cleared of it. For as one General Council fell into Error so may an
other, and a third, and a fourth, etc. Unless therefore General Councils be
granted infallible in matters of Faith, where is the Bishops remedy against
Jnconueniences? How shall the Church be freed from Perplexity? How shall unity
be preserved, or reducd? He tells us, the Church, upon discovery of the
error of a former Council, may represent herself in an other body, or
Council, and take order for what was concluded amiss. But who shall warrant,
that the remedy shall not prove as bad as the disease, or perhaps worse? who
shall secure us, that the second Council shall rightly condemn the supposed
error of the first? or (if it happen so) shall not broach two other for that
one, and thereby be an occasion of fresh Jnconueniences, Perplexities,
Contentions, in, and to the Church?

Again, how shall the whole Church, upon evidence found, of the miscarriage of
a General Council, represent her self in an other body? must every particular
member of the Church first except against the said errors, and concur to the
election, and holding of an other Council? That will never happen. For in such
a multitude, very many will be of the same mind with the precedent
representative of the Church. If not all, but some part only of the Churches
members, be convinced of the pretended error, and, would call an other
Council to (...) it, then not the whole Church in General, but only a part of
it, should take upon them to remedy the abuses of a General Council: which is
absurd. Moreover, if the power of calling General Councils reside only in the
whole Church Diffusiuely taken, as the Bishop here supposes, what likelihood
is there, that there should ever be such a Council called; it being not to
be done, but by the general consent of all Christians; whose interests are so
divided, and for the most part so repugnant to each other, that it cannot be
doubted, but when one Nation, or Country, is willing to have a General
Council called, some other will be found as unwilling. When will all
Christians (think you) agree, that both Protestants, Catholics, Grecians,
Lutherans, and all other Sectaries should meet in Council, and have equal
power, and liberty to vote there? which if they have not; who can expect, that
the excluded party will hold it a General Council, and think themselves bound
to submitt to it?

The Bishop tells us, that the Church heretofore used to reform Ibidem.
the errors of former Councils by calling, and representing her self in a new
Council, and that this is evident in the case at Ariminum, and the second of
Ephesus, and in other Councils named by Bellarmin. But, I answer: our dispute
is about lawful General Councils, confirmed by the Pope; such as neither of
these were; nor any of those other, which Bellarmin mentions in the place
Bellarm. lib. 2. de Conc cap. 16.
quoted by the Bishop: neither can it be said, that those subsequent Councils,
which reformed the errors concluded at Ariminum, and Ephesus, were called by
the Authority of the whole Church in general, but by the Pope, in the same
manner, as that of Trent and others were.

He grants that the Church, though it may err, has not Ibidem.
only a Pastoral power to teach, and direct, but a Pretorian also, to
control, and censure too, where errors, or crimes, are against points
Fundamental, or of great consequence. Are not the Real Presence, Purgatory,
praying to Saints, the five Sacraments of seven which Protestants deny, and
diverse other points, wherein they differ from us, and the Church, things of
great consequence? And did not the whole christian Church generally teach, and
profess these points, both long before, and at the time of Luthers departure
from the Roman Church? why was it not then in the power of the Church to
control, and censure him, with all his followers, for opposing her Doctrine
in the said points? Again, if we ought to obey the Church in points
Fundamental, and of great consequence, as the Bishops doctrine here clearly
implies, why must we not obey her likewise in taking those points to be
Fundamental, and of great consequence, which she holds to be such, and by
her definition declares to be such? Certainly Heretics will never want
reason to justify their disobedience to the Church, if allowing her authority
to control, and censure only in points Fundamental, and of great
consequence, we allow them the liberty to judge, and determine what points are
such, what not. Ibidem.


His instance of a mothers authority, viz. that Obedience due to her, is not to
be refused upon her falling into error, holds not in the Church, because the
authority of a natural mother is not in order to Belief, but to Action: and
it does not follow, that because she has commanded amiss in one thing, that
her child is not to obey her in an other, which it shall not know to be
unlawful. But the authority of the Church over her children consists, not only
in directing them what they are to do, but in obliging them to believe firmly,
and without doubt, what ever she shall esteem necessary to difine; and
propound to them, as matter of Belief. Now its impossible, that the
understanding (which can assent to nothing, but what it apprehends to be true,
nor infallibly believe, but what it apprehends to be infallibly true) should
be moved with any respect due to the Church, to believe without doubt any
defined point, which it did not before, so long as it gives way to this
opinion, viz. that she may, and has defined, and also commanded us to believe
as a point of Faith, a thing false in it self. Ibidem.


As to his citing St. Austins authority in the margent, touching that text of
St. Paul Ephesians. 4. 27. not having Spot, nor wrinckle D. Aug. lib. de Haeresib.
Haeres. 88.
etc. it maks nothing against us. For St. Austin does not deny those words to
be understood of the Church Militant, but only, that they are not to be
understood of her, in the sense given them by the Pelagians: my meaning is, he
does not deny the doctrine of the Catholic Church universally received, or
defined as matter of faith, to be without Spot of error; but he denies the
lives of Christians, even of the most just, and perfect in this life, to be
altogether without Spot of sin. Neither does St. Austin read us any such lesson
as this, that the Church on earth is no freeer from wrinckles in doctrine, and
discipline, then it is from Spots in life, and conversation: but it is the
Bishops own voluntary, scandalous, and inconsiderate assertion, if he speaks
of doctrine universally received, and approved by the Church: if only of
doctrine, and errors taught by private persons, what is it to the purpose?

An other thing considered is, that if we suppose a General Ibidem. number 5.
Council infallible, and that it prove not so, but that an error in faith be
concluded, the same erring opinion, which maks it think it self infallible,
makes the error of it irreuocable, and so lenues the Church without remedy. I
answer: grant false antecedents, and false premises enough, and what
absurdities will not be consequent, and fill up the conclusion? an
Anti-scripturist may argue this way against the infallibility even of the Bible
it self, in the Bishops own style, thus. This Book which you call the Bible,
and suppose to be Gods word, immediate Revelation of Jnfallible Truth in enery
thing it says, IF IT PROVE NOT SO, but that it were written only by man, and
contains errors, THE SAME ERRING OPINION, that makes you think it is Gods
word etc. makes all the said errors contained in it, wholly irreuocable, and of
necessity, for ever to be believed as Gods word, and Divine Revelation. Can
any man deny this consequent, granting the Bishops antecedent, if it prove not
so? The inconvenience therefore which the Relatour here objects, being only
conditional, and the condition, upon which it depends, such, as we are never
like to grant, nor our adversaries to prove, we pass it by, as signifying else
nothing, but how willing his Lordship was to heap up objections against us,
though such, as he, and his party must answer,

5. But how does the Bishop prove, that a General Council has erred? Thus.
Christ (says he) instituted the Sacrament of his Body, and Blood in both
kinds. To break Christ's institution is a damnable error; this error was
committed by the Council of Constante; whose words are these, cited, and
englished by the Licet Christus post Caenam instituerit, et suis Discipulis
administrauerit sub vtraque speie panis et vini, hoc Venerabile Sacramentum:
tamen, HOC NON OBSTANTE non confici debet post Caenam, nec recipi, nisi a
ieiunis; similiter, quodlicet in Primitiua Ecclesia Sacramenta reciperentur sub
(...) specie a (...), tamen haec consuetudo, vt Laicis sub specie panis tantum
suscipiatur, habenda est pro lege, quam non licet reprobare: et asserere hane
esse (...) est erroneum; et pertinaciter asserentes sunt arcendi (...)
Haeretici. Council. Constant. Sess. 13.
Bishop. LICET CHRISTVS etc. Though Christ instituted this Venerable Sacrament,
and gave it to his Disciples after supper, under both kinds of bread, and
wine, yet NON OBSTANTE, notwithstanding this, it ought not to be consecrated
after supper; nor received, but fasting. And likewise, that though in the
Primitive Church this Sacrament was received by the faithful, under both
kinds, yet this custom, that it should be received by Laymen, only under the
kind of bread, is to be held for a law, which may not be refused. And to say
this is an unlawful custom of receiving under one kind, is erroneous, and
they which persist in saying so, are to be punished, and driven out, as
Heretics. The force of the objection depends wholly on the words NON OBSTANTE,
which the Bishop conceiues to import, that the Council defined receiving under
both kinds not to be necessary, NOTWITHSTANDING that our Savior so
instituted it, viz. in both kinds. I answer, Bellarmin rightly observes, that
the words non obstante have no reference to receiving under both kinds, but to
the time of receiving it after supper: which though the Bishop be not
satisfied with, but objects, that the NON OBSTANTE must necessarily ( for ought
he can see) be referred to both clauses, in the words following, because both
clauses went before it; and, has as much force against receiving under both
kinds, as against receiving after supper; yet, I see no reason, but he might
have taken it for a full satisfaction. For to me it seems clear (let the
Bishop fancy what he pleases) that the non obstante can have no reference, but
to the time of receiving after supper. For the words that follow a non obstante
in any sentence, have never reference to any thing, but what has some
opposition with it. Now to consecrate, and receive fasting, (which the Council
opposes to what was done by Christ) has no opposition at all with the
Apostles receiving under two kinds. For it were an absurd, and senseless
proposition to say: though Christ instituted this Venerable Sacrament, and gave
it to his Disciples under both kinds, yet it ought not to be consecrated
after supper, nor received but fasting: wherefore the Consecrating, and
receiving fasting (which is only opposed by the Non obstante to what was done
by Christ) has not reference to the receiving under both kinds, but only to
the receiving after supper.

But the Relatour adds, that the after-words Et similiter ( and likewise)
couple both together in this reference; as if the Council by saying AND
LIKEWISE though in the Primitive Church this Sacrament was received under both
kinds, yet this custom, that it should be received by Laymen, only under the
kind of Bread, is to be held for a law, which may not be refused, should
signify, that Laymen ought to receive the Sacrament under one kind, not only
though it be contrary to Christ's institution, but also to the practice of the
Primitive Church. But how will he prove, that this is the signification of the
words And likewise? may not a man say properly, though the Jews might have
plurality of wives, yet the Christians may not? and likewise; though the Jews
were allowed to desire eye for eye, tooth for tooth, etc. yet notwithstanding
the Christians are not? Here, the words And likewise couple both sentences
together, and yet the Notwithstanding of the latter sentence has no reference
to the words of the first part, since it were ridiculous to fay: Though the
Jews might have plurality of wives, yet Christians are not allowed to require
eye for eye, and tooth for tooth.

As the Decrees of the aforesaid Council are not contrary to the institution,
and ordination of Christ, so neither is the practice of the Church in receiving
under one kind contrary thereto. To show that the practice of the Church were
contrary to Christ's institution, the Bishop should have made it appear, that
Christ did so institute this Sacrament of his last supper, that he would not
have one part to be Sacrament without the other; or that he would not have
one part be taken without the other. Now neither of these two can be proved.
Not that one kind alone is not sufficient to the Sacrament: for if nothing be
requisite to the essence of a Sacrament, but Matter, form, and a divine
promise of Grace to those that shall receive it: the words of Consecration Hoc
est corpus meum is a true form; the element of bread alone, is a true matter,
used by our Savior. He has also promised Grace to those, that shall receive
his Body under the form of bread, as appears by these words, Joan. 6. Qui
manducat hunc panem, viuet in (...). with what reason therefore can any one
deny, that the Body of Christ under the form of bread is a true Sacrament?
Neither can it be proved that Christ commanded Laymen to receive under both
kinds. Not by these words, Drink ye all of this. For if this were a command,
and not a Counsel, (as when he said, if J, your Lord have washed your feet,
you also ought to wash one an others feet,) it was given to the Apostles, who
all drunk of the Chalice. Now as it does not follow, that Laymen are bound to
baptize, and preach to all nations, because the Apostles were commanded to do
so; so neither does it follow, that Laymen are bound to drink of the Chalice,
because the Apostles were.

Nor can this obligation, viz. that Laimen should receive under both kinds,
be inferred out of those other words of our Savior; except you (...) my
flesh, and drink my blood, you shall have no life in you, Joan. 6. for if this
were a precept of receiving under both kinds, and did generally bind all
persons without restriction, it would follow, that all children, especially
such as have the use of reason, are bound to receive this Sacrament, as well as
men, and women; and that all such children, as dyed without having received it,
would be liable to eternal damnation. If Protestants themselus therefore do
not extend this command to persons of all ages, notwithstanding that the words
have no restriction more to one age, then to an other, how will they prove from
thence, that all Laymen are bound to receive under both kinds? Beside, we
will show hereafter, that even in the Primitive Church, when the custom was to
receive under both kinds, the Sacrament was many times administered under one
kind only.

6. But the Relatour pretends we are unreasonable, in holding Ibidem. number. 6.
General Councils infallible, because (says he) no Body collectiue,
whenever it assembled it self, did ever give more power to the representing
Body of it, then a binding power upon all particulars, and it self; nor ever
did it give this power otherwise, then with this reservation in nature, that it
would call again, and reform, yea, and if need were, abrogate any law, or
ordinance upon just cause made evident, that the Representing Body had failed
in trust, or truth. But this is only to suppose, and take for granted, what he
never yet proved, viz. that a General Council has no authority, but what is
merely delegate from the Church universal, which it represents: whereas we
maintain its authority to be of divine institution, and, when lawfully
assembled, to act by divine right, and not merely by deputation, and consent of
the Church, as we have also proved in the precedent chapter. True it is, the
calling of such assemblies was taken up, and has for its pattern the example
of the Apostles, Acts. 15. yet surely there is as little doubt to be made, but
the Apostles had both direction, and precept too, for doing it so often as just
occasion requr'd, from Christ himself. Though therefore a General Council be
the Church representative, and do not meet, or assemble together hic, et
nunc, but by order, and deputation from Man, yet it follows no, but the power,
and authority by which they act, when they are (...) be from God; as doubtless
it is. Jn the first Council of the Apostles the Body Collectiue, as the Bishop
calls it, that is, the People that believed, did neither send, nor choose the
persons to sit in it; neither was their consent asked, whether a Council should
be conuened, or not; but the Apostles concluded this amongst themselves, as
being a particular, and special branch of that Power they had received from
Christ, for the Government of the Church. Neither at this day, is their
consent, or concurrence any more required de iure to the conuening of such
assemblies, then it was in the Apostles time; but the Pastors of the Church
do act, and determine all things pertaining to this affayre, solely amongst
themselves, without requiring the Peoples consent.

General Councils then are a principal, and necessary part of that
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, which Christ instituted for the Government of his
Church, and not an human Expedient only, brought in, or taken up by the
Church her self merely upon prudentiall considerations, as the Bishop will
needs conceive: and their Power being wholly from above, as the Church
Diffusiue properly speaking, gives it not; so neither can she take it away, or
annull any thing in point of doctrine, which the Pastors in such Councils
assembled, shall by full authority decree. I said, in point of doctrine;
because that is ex natura rei unchangeable. The Gospel of Christ and true
Christian Faith (which General Councils are by Christ's Institution appointed
to teach) admitts not of yea, and nay, now the Affirmative, then the Negative,
(as the Bishop Hebr. 13. 8.
by his correcting, and abrogating Power, left to After-Councils would have us
belccue) but only yea. It is always the same, if once declared, and settled by
those, who have the authority, and assistance from God, that is requisite
thereto, (as Councils have, even by the Relatours own confession here.) It must
stand, and be professed without alteration, or abrogation, for ever. His
pretense therefore of the Churches representing her self again, and by a new
Council taking order for what was decreed amiss, signifies nothing in this
case, save only, that our adversary holds still to his first, and false
supposition, that General Councils may err; which was never yet granted him,
nor can we grant it, without offering violence to the nature, and property of
true Christian Faith, which is to be invariable, and to admit no change, not
without derogating both from the institution, and honor of Christ. For a
General Council being of divine institution, and even in the Bishops own
style, and profession, the Supreme, External, Living, Ecclesiastical Judge of
all Controversies in Faith; if any error contrary to true Faith, could be
incident to the definition of such a Council, what Certainty, or
Unchangeableness, could there be in the Faith it sefle? or how can it be
thought not to reflect upon Christ's honor, to have instituted in his Church no
other Power to correct, and repeal the errors of such a Council, but what is
liable to the same, or the like error (...).

The Bishop himself, in this Paragraph) attributes such power, authority, and
high prerogatives to General Councils, that I see not how they can stand with
the possibility of error (...) calling in question any point of doctrine
defined by them. First he tells us; a Council has power to order, settle, and
define differences arisen, concerning Faith. Then, that a Council, lawfully
called, and proceeding orderly, and concluding according to the Rule, the
(...); the whole Church cannot but approve the Council. That the decrees of it
shall bind all particulars, and it self. Lastly, that because the whole
Church can meet no other way, the Council shall remain the Supreme,
External, Living, Temporary, Ecclesiastical Judge of all Controversies. Does
he not now plainly destroy these prerogatives, and contradict himself, when
speaking of such a Council, he says presently after, only the whole Church,
and she alone, has power, when scripture, or demonstration is found and
peaceably tendered to her, to represent her self again in a new Council, and
in it, to order what was amiss?. 32. 11. 5.
A while since he granted, that the definitions of a General Council were to
be held and observed, till such evident scripture, and demonstration were
brought against them,. 33. Con sid. 5. (...). 1.
as being proposed, and understood, the mind of man cannot choose but assent
to it. But here he supposes, the whole Church is made acquainted with evident
scripture, and demonstration against the definitions of a former Council: and
yet, by his own doctrine but a few lines above, all particulars are bound to
stand to those definitions, till such time as an other Council of equal
authority, called by the whole Church, has ordered, and amended, what was
decreed amiss in the former.

Again: how can the whole Church, when scripture, and demonstration is found
contrary to a former Council, represent her self in a new one, to order by it
what was formerly defind amiss, but she must clearly understand, that what was
determined by the former Council was false, and erroneous? upon this
supposition (...). Either the said former Councils false, and erroneous
definitions are still binding, or they are not: if they are binding, it would
be sin to believe the contrary, or at least outwardly to oppose the said
definitions. Now let any body (...), how its possible for the whole Church to
call an other Council to reform those errors of the first, but it must
outwardly show some dislike of them, and thereby declare in effect the doctrine
of the precedent Council to be false, and consequently oppose its decrees,
even while they are supposed to bind.

If you answer they are binding to particulars, not to the whole Church, I
reply; it is impossible the whole Church should ever (...) agree to represent
her self in an other Council, to reform the (...) of the precedent, but that
very many, nay almost all particulars must (...), and also (...) those errors,
before the whole Church (...), and declare them. If therefore the definitions of
the precedent Council, though (...), bind all particulars, till an (...)
Council lawfully called reuerse them and define the control truth, as the
Bishop confesses; how can the (...) Church (which consists of particulars, and
acts nothing but by (...)) call in question the doctrine of any precedent
Council, but very many, if not all particulars, must committ sin, by some
kind of (...) opposition, or not conforming themselves, where they were as yet
bound to yield obedience? And how, I (...), had the former Council power to
settle and define differences of says, and to bind all particulars, if (...),
and every particular person (as the case now supposes) may lawfully think,
and profess, that for ought kee knows, both scripture, and demonstration may
be brought against it; and that in case they be, the errors of the precedent
Council ought to be reform by calling an other?

Again I ask; to what purpose should there be an other Council called to
reform the errors of a former? For either the whole Church has evident
scripture, or demonstrations against the definitions of the former Council, or
it has not. If it has not, the Church her self committs sin, in the
Bishops own principles, by imputing error to the precedent Council; whose
definitions according to him, must stand in force, and be obeyed by all
particulars, and consequently by the whole Church, till evident scripture, or
demonstration be brought against them. If it has, then the whole Church
cannot but clearly perceive the said errors of the former Council, and know
them to be such: and then, what need of an After-Council? what good can it
do? shall it be called to declare that, which every man sees already? or to
define that, about which there is no controversy, nor can be any, so long as
men continue in their right minds, and do but consider what they say or
think?

You will say, a Council ought to be called in this case, to abrogate the law,
or definition, of the precedent Council which erred. I answer, that supposes
the definition of the said precedent Council to be still in force, which is
false: first, because it is unreasonable we should be bound to believe
anything as matter of Faith, solely upon the authority of a Council that is
liable to error, both against scripture, and demonstration. Secondly, because
it is more unreasonable we should be bound to believe what we clearly see to
be error, and contrary both to scripture, and demonstration: and yet in no
other case, but this, even by the Bishops leave, can the whole Church call an
other Council to reuerse the decrees of the former. Thirdly, because, as it did
not bind the whole Church from prosessing her dislike of the errors defined,
and calling an other to (...) the same (...) so did it not oblige the
particulars not to prosess outwardly a disbeleefe, or doubt thereof. Wherefore
it is evident that his Lordship upon this subject says, and vnsays the same;
and what he seems to attribute to General Councils in one proposition, he
takes away in an other.

The Bishop pretends the Catholic opinion touching infallibility Ibidem. number.
7.
to be yet more unreasonable; because we make not only the definitions of a
General Council, but the sentence of the Pope also, infallible. For a General
Council, says he, may err with us, if the Pope confirm it not. So upon the
matter, the infallibility we contend for, rests not in the representative Body
the Council, nor in the whole Body the Church, but in the Head thereof the Pope
of Rome: and if this be so, to what end (says he) so much trouble for a
General Council? and wherein are we nearer to unity, if the Pope confirm it
not? we answer first, the Bishop stumbles at the thresholde: a General
Council is not held by us, to be infallible at all, unless it inuolue the
Pope, or his confirmation: and by consequence here are not two distinct
infallibilityes for our adversary to compare together, viz. of the Council, and
the Pope, but One infallibility only, to wit of the Pope presiding in, and
confirming the votes of a General Council, or (if you will) a General Council
confirmed by the Pope. Secondly, we confess there are two opinions taught in
(...) schcoles concerning the Popes infallibility. The first, and the more con
men is, that the Pope, even without a General Council, is infallible in his
definitions of Faith, when he teaches the whole Church. The second is, that he
is not infallible in his definitions, faue only when he defines in, and with a
General Council. Now had the Bishop (as he (...) to have done) taken due
notice of this second opinion, and proceeded in the point accordingly, these
Doctors would quickly have satissy'd his objection, and told him. that as the
Ccuncil is not infallible without the Pope, so neither is the Pope infallible
without the Ccuncil; and that, infallibility proceeds jointly (...) both, and
is the prerogative of both, not separately considered, but as united, and
making up the complete representative of the Church. But the Bishop sound it
more for his turn to pass by this opinion in deep silence, framing his argument
wholly against the other, as if it were the opinion of all Catholic Doctors.
But of this we have said enough, having prosesled at the beginning, that we
intended not to meddle much with any matters of private dispute, or opinion.
Wherefore I shall briefly pass cuer, what his Lordship has further, touching
this matter, and only correct some (...) of his.

7. His first is, that if the Pope be infallible, then the Council is called;
but only in (...), to hear the Pope give his sentence in Ibidem.
more state. I answer (...), that the (...) has the same force against the
Council called in the (...) time, viz. that 'twas con only to hear St. Peter
(...) his sentence in more state; in regard it will not be denied, but St.
Peter's definition alone, had been as infallible, and as much binding, as that
of the whole Council. Secondly I answer more directly; this follows not with
any the least shadow of consequence, in their opinion, who hold the Pope to be
fallible out of a General Council, as is manifest: and in the other opinion
it is easily answered. For seeing the Pope, when ever he defines matters of
Faith ought to proceed maturely, and use all means morally (...) to find out
the truth, and seeing that the deliberations, and notes of a General Council
are the most proper, and efficacious in that kind, it follows evidently
enough, to all vnpreiudic'd, and impartial judgments, that the Council is
called really to help, and (...) the Pope in that most important affair, and
which equally concerns the whole Church: also, that the advice of the Council
in such cases is, not only a profitable, and fit, but (speaking in a moral
sense) a Necessary medium to this Holiness, whereby to make a full inspection
into the matters he is to define.

Nor does this any way infringe what Doctor Stapleton, here alleged by the
Bishop, affirms according to his own principles: viz. that the Pope acquires no
new power, or authority, or certainty of judgment by being joined to the
Council. For though he acquires no new power, authority, or certainty of
judgment (which in this Doctors opinion he has, whether he be with, or
without a Council) yet he may acquire some thing, which does connaturally
work, and conduce to the due exercise of that power, authority, and certainty
of judgment; to wit counsel, advice, and convenient information touching the
matters in Controversy. The like is to be said to that of Cardinal Bellarmin,
when he asserts, that the firmeness of a Council (to which the Relatour adds of
his own, Infallibity) comes from the Pope only. For he intends to show how the
matter passes in regard of us, who are assured no other way, of the firmeness
of the Councils definition, then by the Popes confirmation alone.

You will object, that if the Pope be infallible without the Council, and the
Council, subject to error without the Pope, it must needs follow, that all the
infallibility of General Councils proceeds from the Pope only; not partly from
the Pope, and partly from the Council. I answer, the Assertours of that opinion
may say, that Christ has made two promises to his Church; the one, to assist
her souereign Head, and Pastor, so as that, he shall never define any thing to
be believed by all the Faithful, but what is divine truth. The other, so to
assist General Councils, or the Representatiues of the Church, that they shall
never err in the doctrine they determine. Now those that affirm the Pope
alone, or without a General Council, to be infallible, as well as General
Councils, hold these two promises to have been made by our savior: and that
when the Pope defines in General Councils, his infallibility proceeds from the
latter promise, by virtue of which, the definitions of Councils confirmed by
the Pope, would be infallible, although the other promise had not been made: as
the Council at Jerusalem would have been infallible, by virtue of the
infallible Assistance, which was promised to every Representative of Christ's
Church, though each Apostle had not been endowed with that prerogative.

The Bishop wonders, that they which affirm the Pope cannot err, do not
affirm likewise that he cannot sin. But why does he not wonder too, that
Christ should give infallibility in teaching to St. Peter, (as the Relatour
cannot deny but he did) and yet not preserve him from those defects, for which
St. Paul says (...) was truly reprebensible? Could not his Lordship observe,
that infallibility in the Head of the Church, would be an effectual means to
settle Religion, confirm the Faithful, suppress Heresies, prevent differences
in matter of Faith etc. seeing none would oppose the doctrine of the Pope, if
they held him infallible? whereas no such good would accrue to the Church, in
point of sanctity, though the Pope were impeccable, and held so to be by all
Christians. For seeing that Prerogative in Christ, whom they hold to be their
judge, and to have power to condemn them to everlasting flames, cannot keep
them in their duty, much less would the Popes impeccability do it, though they
did all generally believe it. Lastly; as the infallibility of the Pope is in so
many respects profitable for the Church, more then his immunity from sin would
be: so the Assertours of it do allege many probable, and pregnant arguments
from scripture, and Ecclesiastical Writers, to prove it: but for his
impeccability none can be alleged.

8. What can be inferred from Pope Liberius his demanding the judgment of St.
Athanasius, I cannot see; unless the Relatour had first shown, that the Pope
did this, after he had passed a definition ex (...) in the matter. But in his
allegation of S. Ambrose he mistaks worst of all. The Bishops intent is, to
show that the Popes definitions in matters of Faith are fallible, and Ibidem.
subject to error. why? because St. Ambrose (lib. 1. epist. 83.) (...), that
many did ask his opinion, touching the observation of Easter, post (...)
Ecclesiae definitionem, Episcopi quoque Romanae Ecclesiae ( after the
definition of the Church of Alexandria, and also of the Bishop of Rome) whereas
the context of St. Ambrose makes it clear, that he speaks not of any
Doctrinall, or (...) definitions touching that point, (which had been long
before determined, by the Council of Nice) but only of such Definitions and
Rules for observing the precise time, on which Easter day fell, as by the
appointment of the Nicen Council the Bishop of Alexandria was yearly to send to
the Pope, and the Pope yearly to publish to the rest of the Church. That such
Astronomicall (not Thcologicall) Definitions were published annually, is
manifest from Baronius: and the reason was; for that, though by the decree of
the Council of Nice, all Christian Churches of Catholic Communion did
celebrate Easter, not upon the Decima quarta mensis primi, or day of the Jewish
Pasche, but upon the day following: yet by reason of the different accounts, or
computation of time, through the various ending, and beginning of Months, it
fell out, that all did not celebrate it upon the same sunday. Wherefore, to
remedy this inconvenience, and reduce the observation of Easter, as much as
might be, to a general uniformity, it was ordered by the Council of Nice,
that by reason the Egyptians were held to be the most exact, and experienced of
all other nations in the calculation of time, the Bishop of (...) in Egypt
should take care, that the fall of Easter day might be exactly calculated every
year, by such, as were most skillfull in that art; and the calculation sent to
the Bishop of Rome so seasonably, as that he might have time enough to (...)
notice of it to all other Christian Churches, to the end, that Easter might be
observed on the same day, throughout the whole Church. Hence comes the frequent
mention of the Cycly, and (...) Paschales in antiquity: and of these only St.
Ambrose speaks (as is clear by the whole epistle cited by the Bishop) and not
of any thing Doctrinall, or Dogmaticall touching the question of Easter, or
anything else. The Reader may see, if he please, Baronius. Tom. 3. ad Ann. 325.
number. 110. 111. and Petauius de doctrine. Temp. against Scaliger. lib. 2. cap.
57. page 205. Also his notes upon Epiphanius, in Here Is. Quarto-decimam.

Nor will those Prophesies (as the Bishop calls them) out of (...) amount to
any just proof of the Popes fallibility, in the sense where in Catholics
deny it, unless he prove the Popes taught them as matters of Faith, to the
whole Church.

Again, he mistakes by affirming that Pope Alexander the Third, with a
Council of three hundred Archbishops, and Bishops Ibidem.
held at Rome, condemned Peter Lombard of Heresy; and that after he had layn
under that sentence for the space of thirty six years, Innocent the Third
restored him, and condemned his accusers. The (...) of the history is only
this. After Peter Lombards death, there was observed in some of his writings
this proposition, Christus, secundum quod est homo, non est aliquid: which
being contrary to the Catholic doctrine touching the perfection of Humane
Nature in Christ, was indeed condemned by Pope Alexander, as the Bishop tells
you; but was never approved by Pope Innocent. That which Innocent approved, was
only the said Peter Lombards doctrine concerning the Trinity; against which,
the Abbot (...) had written: all which you may read in Baronius, and Spondanus
his continuation of him, in the years 1164. 1179, and 1215. Whence it appears,
that neither part of the Bishops (...) concludes any thing against us. For
neither did Pope Alexander err in comdemning the said Proposition of Lombard,
(notwithstanding the Relatour, (...), and without any reason given, reproaches
him with error) nor yet Pope Innocent in justifying his doctrine against the
Abbot Ioachim: for the ones condemnation, and the others approbation were of
several propositions: Alexander condemning a proposition touching the matter
of the Incarnation; which was never repeald by Pope Innocent: and Jnnocent
approving his doctrine in the matter of the B. Trinity; which was never
condemned by Pope Alexander.

How sharp-sighted therefore our adversary is in his observations against us,
appears by this. But seeing these forked syllogismes (...) (...).
( so Dilommas are sometimes called by Logicians) are such Current Coin with
his Lordship, it will not (I hope) be thought unreasonable, if we pay him one,
for many. Thus then I argue. Either the Bishop knew his Relation touching Peter
Lombard to be false, or he know it not. If he knew it not, his ignorance in a
point wherein he would seem knowing, is hardly excusable, and his temerity, in
affirming, without sure ground, such a thing as this, to the scandal of the
(...) Pastor of the Church, and of a synod of three hundred Bishops and
Archbishops by his own confession, altogether blameable. If he knew it to be
false, and yet would affirm what he did, where is his honesty?

The like is to be said of his (...) touching Pope (...), and the eight
General Council defining against Honorius; there is a mistake in it. For
neither did Pope Honorius really maintain the Monothelites Heresy, nor do
we maintain but in a question of Fact, (as this was, viz. whether the said
Pope had really asserted that Heresy) both the Pope, and a General Council,
through Misinformation, or other Jucidents may judge amiss.

The Bishop proceeds, asking us in the next paragraph to this effect; that
since the doctrine of the Popes infallibility, had been so easy a way, either
to prevent all divisions about the Faith, or to end all controversies of that
nature, whenever they should arise, why this brief, but most necessary,
Proposition THE BISHOP OF ROME CANNOT ERR IN HIS JUDICJALL DETERMINATIONS
CONCERNING THE FAITH is not to be found in letter, or sense, in any stripture,
Council, or Father of the Church? I answer first, that in the sense, wherein
Catholics maintain the Popes infallibility to be matter of necessary beleese
to all Christians, it is found (for sense) both in scripture. Councils, and
Fathers, as we have already sufficiently proved, in proving the infallibility
of General Councils, of which he is the most principal, and most necessary
member.

Secondly even in the sense, wherein the Bishop with perpetual impertinency
(...) it, viz. as it signifies his personal infallibity without a General
Council, who knows not, that the maintainers of that opinion allege both
scriptures, Fathers, and Councils for it; probably at least, as may be seen in
their (...) disputations upon that subject. To omit scripture (wherein we
confess there is no express mention of the Pope, but only of S. Peter, in whose
Right the Pope succeeds) what think you of the Council of (...) does not that
Council seem to say in effect, that the Pope is infallible, when upon reading
of his (...) to them: in (...) of the (...) Heresy, the (...) Assembly of
(...) out with acclamation, Conc. Chalced. part. 2. Act. 2. page 228. Item
Act. 3. page 472.
and profess, that St. Peter (who was infallible) spoke by the might of Leo,
and that the Pope was Interpreter of the Apostles voice? what think you of the
Council of (...)? do not the Fathers in that Council seem to attribute
infallibility to the Pope, when they acknowledge, (...) 2. Act. (...) page 234.
Edit. Conc. Latin.
that St. Peter was Head, and Foundation of the Church, and that he STILLL
(...) and (...) causes of Faith in, and by his successors, the Bishops of
(...)?

Does not D. (...) on. Epist. ad Damas.
St. Hierome seem to make Pope Damasus infallible when speaking of him, and
his particular Sea, he says, (...) etc. upon this Rock, J know the Church
(which can (...) fail, or fall away from the (...) Faith) is built? D. Aug.
Ep. 92.
Did not St. Austin do the same, with the whole Council of (...), when beside
their own suffrage (which was but of a particular Provincial Council) they
required nothing, but the (...) sentence only to the full, and effectual
condemning of the Pelagian Heresy? does he not speak also to the same effect:
D. Aug. in psalm. contr. Part. Douat.
When he (...), that the succession of the Roman Bishops is that very Rock of
the Church, against which the proud Gates of Hell shall never prevail. I
might add Fpost. 55. ad (...).
St. Cyprian formerly alleged, as also (...) 93.
St. Leo Pope, Fpist. ad (...). (...)
Innocent the first, Pope Epist. 8. ad (...). Impe rat.
Gelasius, St. Gregory, with others: but I fear it would be answered, that
they were Popes, and spoke partially in their own cause. Beside, having
hitherto wholly declined the defense of that assertion, and professed, that it
would be sufficient for Protestants, to acknowledge the Pope infallible in, and
with General Councils only, I have no obligation to engage further k D. Greg.
lib. 4. Epist. 52.
in that business, nor can I think it any way expedient, to make the entrance
into Catholic Communion, seem narrower to our adversaries, then in truth it
is, and of necessity must be maintayn'd to be.

CHAP. 22. The Bishops vain endeavor to find out Errors in General
Councils confirmed by the Pope.
ARGUMENT.
1. The Councils of Florence and Trent erred not, in defining the Priests
intention to be necessary to the validity of Sacraments. 2. Why the Popes
Confirmation is necessary to the definitions of General Councils. 3.
Transubstantiation no error; nor any such late, or new doctrine, as the
Relatour pretends without show of proof. 4. Communion under one kind, no
error, but the allowed practice of the Church in Primitive times. 5.
Invocation of Saints no error, but the doctrine, and practice of the Fathers.
6. Not derogatory, either to the Merits, or Mediation of Christ our Savior. 7.
Adoration, or worshipping of Images, as allowed by the doctrine of the Church,
neither Idolatry, nor Error. 8. Optatus both partially, and impertinently
alleged by the Bishop. 9. Private abuses in this, or any other matter, not
justly imputable to the Church. 10. Cassander; qualis vir. 11. Llamas,
misunderstood by the Relatour.

1. THe Bishop here, and in the Following paragraphs, brings in a fresh charge
of errors in matter of Faith, committed by such General Councils, as the Pope
confirmed. The first in the endictement, is that of the Priests Jntention,
which the Councils of Florence, and Trent (both of them confirmed. 33. Consi'd
7. number. 11.
by the Pope) defined to be essentially necessary to the validity of a
Sacrament: which the Bishop thinks is an error. But before he goes about to
prove it to be such, he forgets not to tell us, that the Popes infallibility
(of which we talk so much) is a vain, and useless thing. Why I pray? His
reason is, for that before the Church, or any particular man, can make use of
it, (that is, be settled, and confirmed in the truth by means thereof) he must
either know, or upon sure ground, believe, that he is infallible. But (says
the Bishop) this can only be believed of him, as he is St. Peter's Successor,
and Bishop of Rome: of which it is impossible, in the Relatours opinion, for
the Church, or any particular man, to have such certainty, as is sufficient to
ground an infallible belief. Why? because the knowledge, and belief of this,
depends upon his being truly in Orders, truly a Bishop, truly a Priest, truly
baptized: none of all which, according to our principles, can be certainly
known, or believed; because (forsooth) the intention of him that administered
these Sacraments to the Pope, or made him Bishop, Priest etc. can never be
certainly known: and yet by the doctrine of the Councils of Florence, and
Trent, it is of absolute necessity to the validity of every one of those
Sacraments; so as without it, the Pope were neither Bishop nor Priest. This is
the sum of a much longer discourse, which the Relatour makes to this purpose.

In answer to which in the first place I observe, though the Bishop leuels his
argument only against the Popes infallibility, yet it has the same force
against the infallibility of the whole Church in points fundamental. For
seeing the whole Church cannot consist of other persons then such as are truly
baptized, and that no infallible assurance can be had, that either all, or any
one in particular is baptized, how is it possible we should be infallibly
sure, that there is such an assembly in the world, as the Bishop calls the
Church, that is, a company of true Christians, believing all points
fundamental, or absolutely necessary to salvation, since we cannot be
infallibly sure, that any of them are baptized? Secondly I answer, that both a
General Council, and the Pope, when they define any matter of Faith, do also
implicitly define that themselves are infallible, and by consequence, that
both the Pope in such case, and also the Bishops that sit in Council, are
persons baptized, in holy Orders, and have all things Essentially necessary for
that function, which they then execute. Neither is there any more difficulty
in the case of the Pope now, then there was in the time of the Prophets, and
Apostles of old: whom all must grant, that with the same breath they defined
or infallibly declared the several articles, and points of doctrine proposed
by them to the faithful, and their own infallibility in proposing them.

Here therefore the Bishops argument has equal force against all parties,
(his own, as well as ours) and all must answer as we do; narnely, that it is
not necessary first, to believe the infallibility of the proposer, to wit,
prioritate temporis, or in respect of time; and afterward the infallibility of
the doctrine he proposes: but it suffices to believe it first, prioritate
naturae, so as the infallibility of the teacher be presupposed to the
infallibility of his doctrine, as without which, this latter could not subsist,
or be believed by us. Thus, we conceive, the Relatours Achilles is fallen; and
truly it may seem much, that in all his discourse he should take no notice of
this answer to this objection, which is commonly given by divines. Was it
because he knew it not, or wanted a sufficient reply?

But this is but, as it were, the Prologue to the Play: the Relatours maine
business is about the Priests intention; concerning which he first of all
positiuely lays down, that it is not of absolute necessity to the essence of
a Sacrament, so as to make it void, though the Priests thoughts should wander
from his work, at the instant of using the essentialls of a Sacrament; yea, or
have in him an actual intention to scorn the Church. After which he tells us a
story, how learnedly a Neapolitan Bishop in the Council of Trent disputed
against the common opinion, viz. which holds the Priests intention to be
necessary: himself pressing the grand inconvenience, which he thinks would
follow, if any such intention were held to be essentially necessary, in these
words; namely that then no man should be able to secure himself, upon any
doubt, or trouble in his conscience that he has truly, and really been made
(...) of any Sacrament whatsoever; no, not of Baptism: and so by consequence
be left in doubt, whether he be a Christian, or no. I shall speak first to his
principal assertion, which is, that the Priests intention is not absolutely
necessary to the essence, or validity of the Sacrament.

If it be not; I desire a reason of our adversaries, why we should not think
a Priest consecrates the Body of Christ as much at a table, where there is
wheaten bread before him, and that either by way of disputation, or reading the
26. Chapter of St. Matthew, he pronounces the words Hoc est corpus meum, as he
does at the Altar? what is here wanting to the essence of a Sacrament,
according to the Relatours principles? Here is the true form, Hoc est corpus
meum. Here is the true matter, wheaten bread. He that pronounces the Form, is
a true Priest: and yet in all men's judgment Here Is no true Sacrament made.
Some thing else therefore is necessary to the essence of a Sacrament beside what
is here found: and what can that possibly be, if it be not the intention, which
the Church requires? you will say (perhaps) that the outward circumstances at
least must show to the standers by, that the Priest really intends to make a
Sacrament. I answer first, if it be not absolutely necessary that such an
intention should be had, why is it absolutely necessary, it should be
signified? Secondly J deny that any such external signification by
circumstances, is essentially necessary to a Sacrament. Might not a Catholic
Priest, to save the soul of some dying infant, baptize it (if he could)
without making any such signification by circumstances? Might he not upon
pretense that he had skill in Physic, and that it were good for the child to
have it is face often sprinkled with cold water, take occasion himself ever
and anon, to be sprinkling the child's face, and at one time amongst the rest,
to pronounce either softly, or by way of discourse, the words Ego te (...) etc.
with intention to confer the Sacrament? and will any man doubt, but that the
Priest doing this, out of a real intention to baptize, the child is really
baptized, though none of the standers by take notice, by any circumstances, of
what that Priest does?

I ask therefore, if in this case a true Sacrament be made, though no
circumstances do outwardly signify, that the Priest intends to make it, why is
it not likewise so in the other case, viz. where a Priest having due matter
(wheaten bread) before him, pronounces the (...), or words of Consecration,
merely by way of discourse, or reading? Can any reason hereof be so much as
imagined, save only this, that in the former case the Priest has a real
intention to make a Sacrament, or to do what the Church does, or what Christ
did institute to be done, but in the other he has no such intention?

As for the inconvenience, which the Bishop pretends would follow out of this
doctrine, viz. that no man can rest secure, that he has been really made
partaker of any Sacrament, no not of Baptism it self. I answer first, that as
to the far greater part of Christians, the inconvenience follows as much, out
of the Bishops principles, as ours; they cannot be absolutely certain that
they are Baptized. For the Bishop himself holds, that both matter and (...)
are essentially necessary, and that without them the Sacrament were void. But
who sees not, how easy it is for the Priest, especially in Country-Churches,
and villages amongst poor ignorant people, and in private howses too, when he
is called to Christen children ready to dye, Jsay, how easy it is for the
Priest, if he will be so wicked, to vitiate something pertaining to the
Essentialls of Baptism, without being perceived: which if he does, the
Baptism is void. Secondly, as to his pretended inconvenience, that then people
should not be absolutely, and infallibly certain, that they are truly
Baptized, is not Moral assurance, or such, as is liable to no just cause of
doubting, and suspecting the contrary, sufficient? or can any man in his wits
pretend to more assurance then this, touching his Baptism? Such Metaphysicall,
and rare cases therefore, as the Relatour seems to put, ought not to trouble
sober men, much less to fright them, out of the true beleese of the Church:
they only proving, that we cannot by ordinary course, without special
revelation, have absolute, and infallible certainty of our Justification, and
Salvation; which is no way contrary to Catholic Faith, but most consonant to
it.

As for those wandering Thoughts the Bishop speaks of, we easily grant, they
do not nullyfy the Sacrament, because they well stand with a virtuall
intention, which in the general doctrine of our divines is sufficient to the
essence of the Sacrament. Virtuall intention is, when the Priest really does
operate, or celebrate the Sacrament in virtue of an express intention which he
had to do it, but now, at this, or that instant, has not, by reason of some
distraction of mind, or that his thoughts are upon some other thing: which we
may illustrate by an example, or two. A Servant upon command of his Master
undertakes a journey. When he first receives the command, and is bidden to
prepare himself, no doubt but in obedience to his Master, he has an express
intention to do what he is commanded; which probably continues till his first
setting out, and some time after. But upon the road he meets with friends,
lights upon company, falls into discourse, etc. so that he has no longer that
express intention, upon the business he goes about, which at first he had; but
yet he still goes on his way, by virtue of his intention to obey his master. A
laboring man, that is hired to a dayes-worke, whilst he sings, or talks to
his fellowlabourers, has not any express intention of getting money: yet
certain it is, he labors all day in virtue of an intention to get money,
though grown so flacke, that he cannot perceive it. So is it in the
administration of Sacraments, and in all other actions of like nature: we do
not always expressly intend the work we do, (for that is morally impossible)
but we do always virtually intend it, if ever we went seriously, and
deliberately about it, until we do expressly, and actually cease, or intend
the contrary. For seeing the hand moves not without some impulse of the will,
nor the will act at any time without some motive represented by the
understanding, it is clear in all these cases, that the motive, which was first
represented to the will, and by which the will was first of all moved, does still
remain, and operate upon the will, though so obscurely, and vnperceiuedly, by
reason of other objects interuening, that it can hardly be discerned to move us.

Let the Priest therefore be never so much distracted in his thoughts, and
wander, at the instant of applying the matter, and form of the Sacrament; if
he begun the action, not with an intention to deride the Church, but to do
what is usual for Christ's Ministers to do in the like occasions, he makes a
true Sacrament by virtue of that first intention, though he does not clearly
perceive it. Now as for the Neapolitan Bishop we answer, that the most Eminent
Sforza Palauicino, late of the Society of JESUS, and Part 1. lib. 9. cap. 6.
now Cardinal, in his elaborate and learned tomes of the history of the
Council of Trent, observes, that the Council, in their definition touching the
Priests intention in the Sacrament, aimed only at the condemning of that error
of Luther, which denies all virtue to the Sacrament, and auerrs it to have its
full effect from the Receivers Faith alone; so far, as though the whole
action were done in mockage, and derision of the Church, yet it should be to
him that receives it, a true Sacrament. This doctrine the Council expressly
condemned, as indeed it deserved, being so apparently unsuitable both to the
wisdom of our Savior and the Decorum of his Church, contrary to the
universal apprehension of the Faithful, and repugnant to the nature of all
other humane actions.

But as for Catharinus (who is the person the Relatour means by the Neapolitan
Bishop, who as his Lordship says, disputed so learnedly against the common
opinion, in the Council of Trent,) the Cardinal above mentioned, is clear of
opinion, that the Council decreed nothing against him; because he denied not an
intention to be necessary in the Sacrament, but only explicated the thing
differently from the common way of schole-men: into which dispute neither the
Council of Florence, nor Trent thought it necessary to engage; but defined in
general terms, that in the Minister of the Sacrament, an intention was
required faciendi quod facit Ecclesia (of doing what the Church does) which
Catharinus did not deny.

2. Thus have we ( I hope) sufficiently answered the Bishops first Charge of
Error, against General Councils confirmed by the Pope. Before he brings in
the second, he presents the Reader with such a quaint subtletie against the
Popes Right to confirm them, and the necessity we maintain of their being
so confirmed by him, that we cannot well avoid taking notice of it. Thus then
he argues. Noe Council is confirmed till it be finished: and when it is Ibidem.
number 13.
finished, even before the Popes confirmation be putt to it, either it has
erred, or it has not erred. (...) it has erred, the Pope ought not to
confirm it; and if he do, it is a void Act: for no power can make Falsehood
Truth. If it has not erred, then it was true before the Pope confirmed it: so
his Confirmation (...) nothing but his own assent. Thus the Relatour. But I
answer, we must distinguish in the business. A General Council makes a
definition in matter, of Faith, either, with the joint consent of the Pope, or
without it. By defining with the Popes joint consent I understand, that either
the Pope be personally present in the Council, and concur with it, (which
happens but seldom) or that his Legates do it, following the Popes
instruction: in either of these cases the definition, of a General Council is
unquestionably infallible. By defining without the Popes consent, I mean, when
neither the Pope is present, in the Council, nor have the Legates that are
present any instruction from the Sea Apostolic touching the matter; and by
consequence do not, in this case, so fully represent the chief Pastor of the
Church, but that this further confirmation is necessary. Jn this therefore, and
in all other like cases, it is necessary, that the Pope do actually confirm
the Decrees of General Councils, to make them infallible; or that it may be
infallibly certain to us, that such, or such a General Council erred not in
any of its definitions concerning matter of Faith.

So that Exclusiuely to the Popes consent or confirmation we can never be
infallibly certain which has happened, till the Pope ioynes, and adds his
confirmation to the Decree of the Council. We may express the matter in some
sort by the kings consent to Acts of Parliament. Le Roy veut, added to a Bill
presented from both Howses, makes it a binding Law to the whole kingdom; which
before it, was not. So the Popes consent, or confirmation added to the
definitions of General Councils, makes them articles of Christian Belief no
longer now to be questioned, much less contradicted by any, but absolutely to
be believed with infallible Faith. Now this presupposed, we answer the
Relatours argument directly, thus.

To the first part of it, if the Council erred etc. we agree with him; the
Pope ought not to confirm the Decree: adding more over, that it is impossible
he should confirm it. And to the second viz. that if it erred not, then the
definition was true, before the Pope confirmed it, we confess this also, for
the Popes confirmation makes not the definition to be true in it self, but it
makes us infallibly certain, that it is true. Gods Revelation it self, towitt
of the things delivered in scripture, makes them not to be true in themselves;
for so they are, and were, whether he had revealed them, or no; but it makes
them infallible truths to us, or such truths, as both may, and must be
infallibly believed by Christians. So we say, the doctrine of General
Councils was true in it self before the Popes confirmation, but it was not so
sufficiently, and infallibly declared, that it could be believed with an act of
true Christian Faith: that Prerogative belonging to Decrees of General
Councils, only as they include the Head of the Church, and not otherwise. But
whereas then the Bishop inferrs, that the Popes confirmation adds nothing, but
only his own consent to the Councils decree: we utterly deny the consequence;
especially understanding it in the Relatours sense, viz. for no more then the
Assent of some other single Bishop or Patriarch. For we auerre that it is the
assent of the Chief Pastor of the Church, absolutely necessary to the
completing, and giving full force to the acts of such Councils; and also that
it (...) infallibility, or absolute Certainty of truth, to all their decrees
in matter of Faith: which surely is more then nothing.

3. Well. But now the Relatour aduances again with his instances; to wit, of
pretended errors in the doctrine of General Councils confirmed by the Pope:
thence concluding against us, that even the Popes confirmation does not make
the doctrine of such Councils, infallible. The error (...) objects, is against
the Ibidem.
Council of Lateran, confirmed by Pope Innocent the Third; where it teaches
that Christ is present by way of Transubstantiation; which, as the Bishop
affirms, was never heard of, in the Church before this Council; nor can it,
(Says he) be proved by Scripture, and taken properly, is inconsistent with the
grounds of Christian religion. But first, what a strange manner of proceeding
is this, to assert a point of so great importance without soluing, or so much
as taking notice of the pregnant proofs our Authors bring, both out of
scripture, and Fathers, to the contrary of what he so mainly affirms? The
Relatour should not have said, but proved, that Transubstantiation is an error
contrary to scripture, and not consistent with the grounds of Christian
Religion: at least he should have cleared his own Assertion, and in some
manner, or other have explained, how Transubstantiation may be taken
improperly, as his words insinuate. But surely this was a conception of the
Bishops, so new and singular, that 'twill hardly find any defendants. Of all
the words, which the Church uses to express her sense of the Mysteries of true
Religion, there is none, methinks, less apt to be perverted to a Metaphorical,
or Figurative, sense, then this of Transubstantiation.

We deny not, but this term, or word, Transubstantiation, was first
publicly Authorized in the said Council of (...), as that of (...) (whereby
our Saviors Eternal, and Consubstantiall Deity is signified) was in the
Council of Nice, and that of (...) (which in like manner expresses the Mystery
of his Divine Incarnation) was in the Council of Ephesus. But for the thing it
self signified by this term, which is a real conversion of the substance of
bread, into the Body of Christ, and of wine, into his Blood: it is clear
enough, that it was ever held for a Divine Truth. Witness S. Sermon. de (...).
Dom.
Cyprian (or at least an Author of those first ages of the Church) who speaking
of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, says. This common Bread, CHANGED JNTO
FLESH, AND BLOOD, gives life: and again. The Bread which our Lord gave to his
disciples, BEING CHANGED, not in its outward form, or semblance, but in its
inward NATVRE, or substance, (for so the word Nature must, and does always
signify, when it is opposed to the Accidents, or Qualities, of any thing) by
the Omnipotency of the word IS MADE FLESH. Witness St. Gregory Nyssen. Orat.
Catechet. 37.
With good reason do we believe (says he) that the Bread (of the Eucharist)
being Sanctified by Gods word (viz. the words of Consecration) is CHANGED into
the Body OF THE WORD-GOD: and a little after. The nature of the things we see,
being TRANSELEMENTED into him. What can here be fignify'd by Transelementation
of the nature of the outward Element, but what the Church now styles
Transubstantiation?

Witness S. Cyrill of Jerusalem in these words, Cateches. Mystag. 4.
He that changed water into wine by his sole will, ( at Cana in Galilee) does
he not deserve our Belief, that he has also changed wine into Blou'd?
wherefore let us receive, with all assurance of Faith, the Body, and Blood of
Jesus Christ; Seeing under the SPECIES (or Form) of Bread THE BODY IS GIVEN,
and under the SPECIES (or Form), of wine, HIS BLOOD IS GIVEN etc. knowing, and
holding for certain that the bread which we see, IS NOT BREAD (though it
SEEM TO THE TASTE to be Bread) but THE BODY of Jesus Christ: likewise, that the
wine which we see (though to the sense it SEEM to be wine) is NOT WINE for
all that, but the Blood of Jesus Christ. Were it possible for a Catholic to
express his own, or the Churches belief of this Mystery, in more full, plain,
and effectual terms? witness also S. Ambrose, who speaking of the Eucharist
rightly consecrated, Lib. 1. de ijs qui Mysterijs initiantur. Cap. (...).
says. IT IS NO LONGER that which Nature framed (viz. bread, and wine) but
that which the Benediction of Consecration has made it to be. What Is that, but
the Body, and Blood of Christ? adding further thus; you will say (perhaps) I
see an other thing. Why do you tell me Jreceiue the Body of Jesus Christ? How
many Examples have we to prove, that the Idem. Lib. 4. de Sacram. Cap. 4.
force of Benediction is greater, then that of Nature; seeing that by
Benediction, even nature it self is often changed? Again also. This bread, is
bread before the words of the Sacrament: but when Consecration comes, OF BREAD,
IT IS MADE THE FLESH OF CHRIST.

They that desire to see more testimonies to confirm this truth may find them
in Bellarmin libr. 3. de Eucharist. cap, 20. and in diverse other See
Gualtierus Chronol. THE FIRST VERITY in every age.
Catholic Authors. Even the words of scripture it self, taken in their
proper and literal sense, do evidently show, that the only substance which is
delivered in this Sacrament, is the Body of Christ, and that the substance of
bread is no more there. For as he that pointing to an hogs-head of wine, says
this is wine, and he that holding up a purse-full of money, says, this is gold,
if he intends to speak truth, must signify, that the only liquour contained
sub propria forma in the hogs-head, is wine, and all the money in the purse,
gold: so our Savior Christ, by saying, this is my Body must give us to
understand, that all the substance contained under the accidents he showed, was
his Body: which could not be true, unless the substance of bread were changed
into Christ's Body, or ceased to be in the Sacrament. There Is a great deal of
difference between these two propositions: here is gold, and, this is gold. He
that holds a handful of money, of which half is gold, and half silver, may
truly say, here is gold; but he cannot truly say, this is gold. So is it in the
B. Sacrament. If there were both the substance of bread, and of the Body of
Christ in it, we might truly say, showing the Sacrament, here is the Body of
Christ, or this is bread, and the Body of Christ, but not, this is the Body of
Christ. Seeing therefore our Savior at this last supper, speaking of the
Sacrament, said, this is my Body, the meaning of his words must needs be, that
in what he then showed, there was no other substance, but that of his Body:
whence it follows, that there was a true conversion of the substance of the
bread (which ceased to be any longer under the species of bread) into the Body
of Christ.

4. An other pretended errourof a General Council confirmed by the Pope, is
that of administering the B. Sacrament to the Layty under one kind only: of
which we hauc already spoken what may suffice, in the precedent chapter.
Neuertheless to that little which the Relatour adds here, we answer briefly.
The authority of St. Thomas brought by the Bishop, makes rather for us, then
against us. For he tells us, 'twas a custom prouidently observed in some
Churches, not to give the Sacrament in form of wine to the Laity. His words
are, Provide in quibusdam Ecclesijs obseruatur, vt populo D. Tho. (...) part.
q. 80. Art. 12. c.
Sanguis non detur. This Provision was made to avoid the danger of spilling,
and other inconveniences: which likewife moved the Council of Constance to make
a General Decree to the same purpose: although it be certain, that not only in
St. Thomas his time, but in all times of the Church, it were both publicly
allowed, and commonly by some practiced, even in Churches, to receive under one
kind only. For otherwise how is it possible, that the Manichees (who by the
principles of their Heresy never drank wine nor communicated under the Form
of wine) should yet find liberty, and opportunity to Communicate amongst
Catholics in Catholic Churches, without being perceived? as it is certain
they frequently did in Sermon. 4. do Quadrages. Zozom. Hist. lib. 8: cap. 5.
St. Leo's time and after. Likewife it is evident, that all D. Basil. Ep. ad
Cxsar. Pat.
Heremites in the wildernefs communicated often under one kind only. So did D.
Ambros. orat. in obitu. Fratr.
travelers in their iourneyes; Eusebius. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 36. Paulin. in vit.
D. Ambros.
Sick persons in their beds, and Tertull, lib. 2. ad (...). D. Basilvbi supia.
others at home in their howses. Lastly D. Cypriau de lapsis.
Children in the Church, and little infants at home, in their cradles, in form
of wine only.

We grant, that in ancient times, when the number of Christians was but small,
it was the ordinary custom for all that would, (the Laity, as well as others)
to receive the Eucharist in both kinds: but we auerre, this custom proceeded
merely out of free denotion, and not out of any belief, that it was absolutely
necessary so to do, by virtue of Christ's precept: or that it was contrary to
the substance of Christ's institution to do otherwise. This therefore euinces
not that, which the Bishop was obliged to prove; namely, that receiving under
one kind only, is an error contrary to the institution and intention of
Christ; but rather the contrary to that is manifest from the practice of the
Church, which always, even in the first five, or six hundred years, allowed it
publicly to be taken under the form of bread only, and that, as well in the
Church, as out of it: as Bellarmin likewise more largely shows, lib. 4. de
Eucharist. cap. 24. Whose authorities the Bishop shoul have taken notice of,
and not thought it sufficient only to say; this, and that is an error, and
contrary to Christ's institution, without show of proof. For we tell him, the
universal practice of the Church is a better interpreter of Christ's
institution, then the Bishop, or any private person whatsoever: and so we
doubt not, but all soberminded Christians (not too much perverted with
Heretical prejudice) will in time acknowledge. Howeuer, the Relatour, by his
silence as to this particular, gives us leave to go on, and consider his
fourth objected error, viz. Invocation of Saints; to which he adds a fifth
also, Adoration, or worship of Images: both of them (we confess) being points
admitted, and defined by the Council of Trent, which the Pope confirmed.

5. Against the Jnuocation of Saints he tells us in the first place, that what
the Fathers have in favor of it, is only Rhetorical flourishes for the
stirring up of devotion, as they thought. Very good. When the Fathers deliver
Propositions so clearly for us, that it is not possible for our adversaries to
wrest them to any contrary sense, then all is but Rhetorique, and Hyperbolicall
strains of (...): but when they speak any thing, that bears some show
against us, then they are dogmaticall; that is positive Divinity, and the real
sense of the Fathers. Is not this fair dealing? But in the mean time, how can
it seem to any that duly considers it, but most extremely partial, and
strange, to term so many exhortations, so many plain, and positive
assertions, so many instances, examples, histories, reports, and the like,
which the Fathers frequently use, and afford in this kind, (and that upon
occasions, wherein dogmaticall, and plain delivery of Christian doctrine, and
truth is expected) nothing but flourishes of wit, and Rhetorique? not to say,
that such putt-offs as this, serve for nothing else, but to open a gate as it
were, and give a pretense to every Phanatique Heretic, further to reject, and
despise the authority of the ancient Fathers, whenever they teach contrary to
his fancy, under color, that they deliver not their real sense, but only
speak (...), or use flourishes of wit, and Eloquence to stir up devotion.
Nor doc I see, how the Fathers could think to (...) true devotion in the
hearts of their people by using outwardly, and commending Prayer to Saints, if
they had thought it to be a thing in it self unlawful, as Protestants hold it
to be.

In the second place he vrges authority against the Invocation of Saints; to
wit of S. Austin, who speaking of the Christian Sacrifice, has these words.
Aug. lib 22. de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 10.
Ad quod Sacrificium, suo loco and ordine, homines Dei nominantur; non tamen a
(...), qui Sacrificat, (...). At which Sacrifice (meaning no other but the
Sacrifice of the Mass; which we hope the Reader will mark for S. Austins
sake) in their due place, and order (says he) holy men of God are named, or
commemorated, meaning the holy Prelates, and Pastors of the Church, with other
Saints departed; but they are not inuocated by the Priest that Sacrifices. I
answer, the Fathers meaning is, that the Saints departed are not inuocated, or
called upon, by way of Sacrifice; that is, as persons to whom the Sacrifice is
offered. For that being a work of Religion due unto God alone, the Saints
departed are not capable of it. That this only is S. Austins meaning, and not
absolutely to deny, that the Saints departed are in no sort to be invocated, or
prayed unto by the Priest, is very clear, even from the place it self. For he
presently adds these words, as explicating himself, and giving the reason of
what he had said immediately before. Deo quippe, non illis, Satrificat. For the
Priest (says he) Sacrifices to God, and not to them; neither is he their
Priest (that is, to invoke, or worship them, by oblation of Sacrifice) but
Gods. To the same purpose also he Quis enim Antistitum, in locis Sanctorum
(...), assistens altari, aliquando Dixit, OFFERIMVSTIBI PETRE, PAVLE, CYPRIANE
etc. D. Aug. lib. 20. contr. Faust. c. 20.
speaks elsewhere; and it is likewise confirmed by other passages of his works,
where he teaches that not only Commemoration is made of the Saints departed, in
time of Sacrifice, (as he does, even in the text Quamuis in Memoriam Sacrificet
illorum. D. Aug. lib. 22. de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 10.
cited by the Beshop) but that it is done to this particular intent and
purpose, viz. that they would pray for us: which doubtless amounts at least to
a virtuall invocation of them. D. Aug. Tract. 84. in loannem.
Ideo quippe ad ipsam Mensant etc. For this reason (says he) we remember, or
make mention of them, at the Holy Table, not as we do other Faithful
departed, so us to pray for them, but rather, THAT, THEY WOULD PRAY FOR US. And
again, D. Aug (...). verb. Apost. Sermon. 34.
Iniuria est pro Martyr orare, cuius nos debemus orationibus commendari. It Is
an injury (says he) to pray for a Martyr; to whose prayers we our selves
ought to be recommended. Does not S. Austin sufficiently signify by these
words, that the prayers by which we recommend our selves to the Saints
departed, are both lawful, and also pro fitable?

Nor will it serve the Bishops turn to say: this is yet no formal, and express
invocation, here is no Ora pro nobis, as the manner now is; for I answer, that
lib. 21. de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 27. there is as much as Ora pro nobis comes to.
Quod frequentatur ore Christiano, (...) se cuique Sanctorum (...) quisque
commendat, and (...) MEMOR ESTO NOSTRI. D. Aug. lib. 21. de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 27.
S. Austin does there clearly profess it to be the general custom of
Christians, in their recommending themselves to the Saints, to say, MEMOR ESTO
NOSTRI; which surely no man will contend to signify less, then ora pro nobis.
Add to this, what he has further in his sermon upon St. Stephen. D. Aug.
Sermon. de (...). (...). Item, his (...) in (...). (...). upon those words (chap.
^. etc.
Let us therefore recommend our selves (says he) to the prayers of this Saint;
seeing he is now far better heard for those that worthily pray to him. If S.
Stephen be heard for those that worthily pray to him; then to pray to S.
Stephen is not a sinful act, but very profitable. Have not we now more reason
to think the Bishop is mistaken in his construction of St. Austin, then that
the Church and General Councils are, in recommending this doctrine?

6. But it is further urged, that we pray to God, and desire him Ibidem.
to hear our prayers for the merits of Saints: which the Bishop thinks does
not only make the Saints Mediators of Intercession, but even sharers in the
Mediation of Redemption. He tells us likewise, that such Prayers as these stand
( not without great scandal to Christ, and Christianity) used, and authorized
to be used in the Missal. I answer first; our adversary might as well have
taken offense at some prayers used in scripture; where, though the word Merits
be not expressly mentioned, yet the full sense, and meaning thereof is
necessarily employed and understood, as much, as in those prayers of the Church,
which he will seem so much to stumble at. For example: does not Solomon,
Psalm. 132. pray to God to hear him in effect for the Merits of his Father
David deceased, when he says Memento, Domine, David et omnis Mansuetudinis
eius? ( Lord, remember DAVID, and all his MEEKENESS, etc. what, J pray you, is
this but to desire, that God would remember to Salomons benefitt, and good, not
only his own Covenant, and Promise made to David (as Protestants vainly
pretend, without Exodus 32. 13, Baruch. 3: 4. Isa. 38: 3. 63: 17. 65. 8.
any the least ground from the Text) but David's Piety and virtue, by which he
was acceptable to God? For which reason also, after some particular instances
thereof given, he adds again in his prayer, Propter David seruum tuum, etc.
For thy Servant DAVID'S sake (as even the english Protestant Translation reads
it) turn not away the face of thine Anointed. The like was done by Daniel (Dan.
13. by Moses also, Hieremias, and other Prophets, praying unto God, and
desiring their petitions might be heard, for Abraham, for Isaac, and for
Jsraels sake, and for the sakes of other holy men, who had lived before, and
been in their times persons acceptable to God.

Yea to do this, was the general custom of the Primitive Church, witnessed
by St. Austin, in his Quaest. 149.
Questions upon Exodus; where speaking of Moses his praying, and obtaining
pardon of God, for that great sin of the Israelites in making the golden
Calfe, he tells us, that by such an example we are put in mind, that when our
own Merits depress us with fear that God does not love us, we may be
encouraged, and helped BY THE MERITS of those whom he does love. Saepe quando
non est inventus in praesenti vita iustus, PROPTER DEFVNCTORVM VIRTVTEM
viuentium miseretur. -- vnde 4. Reg 19: 34. clamat dicens, (...) PROPTER ME, ET
PROPTER DAVID PVERVM MEVM. D. Chrysostom. Homil. 42. in Genes. Item Homil. 27. in
(...).
The golden mouth of St. Chrysostom vtters the same truth. Whence we
conclude, it is no unwarrantable thing to pray, that God would hear us for the
Merits of saints; seeing in effect it is no more, then to acknowledge our own
unworthiness, and to pray to God, that, for the works of the Martyrs, and
Confessors our brethren, who were, and are most desirous of our salvation, he
would be pleased to grant our requests. We believe, and confess, that Christ
alone is our Redeemer; and that he (and none but he) by the just price of his
most precious Blood has paid our ransom, and fully satisfied the justice of
God for out sins: all that we desire of the Saints, either when we mention
their merits to God, or simply beg their Intercession with God for us, is only
that they would join with us in prayer to God, and that God would be pleased,
for their sakes, whose works were so grateful to him, to bestow on us the
favors we ask: but we still acknowledge that what we ask is principally
to be granted us for the merits of Christ, according to the Council of Trent (
Sess. 25.) which defines, that all onr prayers, and requests made to the
Saints, are to be made for, and through his merits: for which reason also we
usually conclude all our prayers with mention of our Savior, in these, or the
like words, PER CHRISTVM DOMINVM NOSTRVM.

Mow if the Saints merits, (or good works) and their receiving an Eternal
reward for them in Heaven, be not injurious to the fullness of Christ's merits,
why should either their being heard by reason of their said works, when they
pray to God for us through Christ, or our desire that they may be heard for
them, be thought injurious to Christ's merits? And if it be no injury to the
force, and virtue of Christ's Intercession, that the Saints do pray and
interceede for us, through Christ's merits, why should it be accounted an injury
to his Passion, that the Saints merits, (or Good works) be held to have force,
to procure good things from God, both for themselves, and us, yet not
otherwise, then through the merits of Christ, and for his sake?

Jn vain therefore does the Relatour go about to pervert the sense of the
prayers of the Church in the Missal; which, with all the Sophistry he can use,
he shall never be able to show, but Bellarm. lib. 1. de Indulgent. cap. 4.. 3.
to be most consonant to Christian doctrine, and piety. And where as,
Bellarmin is taxed for calling the Saints our Redeemers, it is no fault in the
Cardinal, but a rashness in the Bishop. For both Bellarmin himself professes,
they can only be so called in a large sense, and improper manner of speaking,
and confirms his assertion by a like passage of St. Paul, who says of himself
(1. Cor. 9, 23.) that to all men he became all things, that he might SAVE The
Protestant Translation.
some. The Apostle, if he had pleased, might as well have said that he might
have REDEEMD some: for that, had been no less agreeable to his meaning: and yet
who can deny, but it is every way as proper to Christ to be a Savior, as to be
a Redeemer.

He taxes the Cardinal likewise for styling the Saints Numina: which word he
will have always to signify, either God himself, or at least the Power of
God, or an Oracle of God. Be it so. But in the first place Ifeare, the
Relatours information deceived him: for Bellarm. lib. 2. de Imagine. Sanctor. c.
20.. 3.
in the place he cites, there is not the least shadow, or intimation of any
such matter; his whole discourse there, being of images, and not of the
Saints. Secondly, what matter were it, if the Cardinal had so called them? Does
not the Bishop himself acknowledge one signification of the word Numina to be
the Power of God? and can it be thought so impious, and unlawful to style the
Saints Powers of God, seeing it is undeniable, that God uses them as the
instruments of his Power, and by them works many powerful, and strange
effects? Are not the Angels for this very reason called Powers of God, and the
Gospel it self, the Power of God to Salvation? But this is the Bishops
custom, now, and then to have a fling at Bellarmin, whether he hit, or miss.

7. Against the Adoration of Images the Bishop is very bitter; so as to tell
us, the Modern Church of Rome is too like Paganism in the practice of it, and
driven to scarce intellible subtleties in her servants Ibidem.
writings, that defend it. The Modern Church of Rome is thus, and thus to
blame, says the Bishop. But J pray tell us, wherein do the Modern, and
Ancient Church of Rome differ touching this point? What does the Council of
Trent teach concerning the worship of Jmages, more then the second Council of
Nice did; which was celebrated little less then nine hundred years ago, and
therefore (surely) not to be accounted Modern? The Council of Nice, though it
decreed that the Jmages of Christ, and his Saints should be had in veneration,
and due reverence outwardly given to them, yet it expressly forbad they should
be worshipped with Divine worship, or such as was proper, and due to God alone.
Does the Council of Trent, or Roman Church now, teach otherwise? hear, if you
please, the Prelates themselves speak in that Council.

The Holy Council (say they) commands all Bishops, and all others Conc.
Trident. Sess. 25.
who have the office, and care of teaching, that they diligently instruct
faithful people, teaching them that the Images of Christ, of the Virgin Mother
of God, and of other Saints, are to be bad and retained, especially in
Churches; and that due honor, and veneration is to be given to them: not that
one should believe any Divinity to be in them, or Power, for which they are to
be worshipped; or that one should ask any thing of them, or put confidence in
them, as anciently the Gentiles did, who placed their hope in Idols: but
because the honor that is done to them, redounds to those, whom they
represent. So that by the Images we kiss, and before which we uncover our
heads, and prostrate our selves, we worship Christ, and his Saints, whose
similitudes they are: which doctrine (say the Fathers abouesayd) is established
by the Decrees of Councils, especially of the second of Nice. And a little
after they add. If it happen at any time that the histories, or passages, of
holy Scripture be expressed, or figured out in pictures, whenever it may be
thought expedient for the unlearned, let them be taught, that the Divinity (or
God himself) is not painted thereby, nor can be seen with bodily eyes, nor
represented by any colors, or figures.

J thought it not amiss to set down the words of this Council at large; as
being sufficient, if duly considered, to stop our adversaries mouths, and
silence their calumnies against us for ever, in this particular, without any
recourse to subtleties, and nice distinctions, as the Relatour pretends we are
forced to do. For what is here but plain, and easy? Behold in the first
place, express caution and prohibition, that we attribute noe kind of
Divinity to Images, but only worship them with such honor, and veneration, as
is due to them. Behold in the second place; all Bishops, with others that have
the cure of souls under them, strictly required to teach the faithful no
more, then this plain, and secure doctrine: and that they take care to
prevent, as much as in them lies, what ever danger, or inconvenience may
possibly happen to their people, either by scandalous practices, or (perhaps)
curious, and misinterpretable assertions of private persons, in the matter of
Images. And Protestants (if they had charity) would judge the best, namely,
that the Ordinary Pastors of the Church do themselves, effectually obey the
Council herein, and the people, them: and not condemn the whole Church
(Pastors, and people together) of Paganish Idolatry, and superstition, upon
mere surmises, as the Relatour more then seems to do in this place:
especially considering, that if neglect, or Disobedience be either in Pastors,
or people, it is not the Churches, but their own personal fault who are guilty
of it; the Church having taken the best, and most sufficient order that she
can, for the right instruction of those that belong to her.

8. We acknowledge no less then the Bishop, the Church has always had great
care to avoid the least resemblance with Paganism in any thing: and that
therefore his Lordship might Ibidem.
well note (as he does in the Margent) that the Christians in Optatus his time,
were MVCH TROVBLED upon a false report that Optat. lib 3. cont. Parmen.
some were coming to set an Jmage upon their Altar, viz. immediately before
the Oblation of the B. Eucharist was to be celebrated thereon. But what kind
of Jmage this was, appears not in any sort by Optatus his text. The Relatour
indeed, by his discourse takes it for granted, 'twas either the Crucifix, or
some other Image which the Church of Rome now allows; (for he brings this
passage of Optatus by way of instance to show, that the ancient Church would
not endure that the present Church of Rome allows in point of Images. But his
supposition is easily denied. Jn all probability it was either some Jdoll;
according to that which Albaspineas observes in his Notes upon this place,
which is, that Albaspin. Obseruat. in lib. 3. Optat.
some copies read Dei Imaginem (the Jmage of a God) or else some common Image
of a man, as (perhaps) of the Emperor (for they were the Emperors officers
that were bringing it) or of the Governor of the Province: which kind of
Images, it is confess't the Christians in those times would not endure should be
worshipped, nor so much as stand in the place of Gods worship, towit, upon the
Altar, as appears both by Tertullian in his Apology for the Christians, and
by Eusebius.

But that it was any Image of Christ, or of his B. Mother, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 7.
c. 14.
or of any of the Apostles, or other Saints, is wholly improbable. For why
should Christians be so troubled at them; seeing it is well known that such
Images as these, were in common use, and veneration too, amongst Christians in
the ancient Church? witness that of Tertullian, Apolog. cap. 16. where the
Christians are called, as it were by a common nickname of the Heathens, Crucis
Religiosi, as if you would say Cross-worshipers, or Votaries of the Cross; and
that of S. Chrysostom (Homil. QVOD CHRISTVS EST DEVS) where he testifies, that
in his time the Cross of Chrysostom. Tom. 5.
Christ made a glorious show upon the Altar; with Eusebius. lib. 7. Hist. cap. 14.
Sozom. lib. 5. c. 10. Ambros lib. de Incarn. Domc. Sacram. c. 7. Hieron.
Epitaph. Paulae Lacta^t. (...). de Pass. Dom.
many other testimonies of antiquity, that might be alleged. So that from this
passage of Optatus the Bishop euinces nothing against evther the use, or that
worship of Images, which the Church allows. That which he might have much
more rightly observed from the place is, how plainly this Father makes mention
of Altars, and of a Sacrifice to be offered thereon, as known things, and of
confessed belief, and practice amongst Christians in his time. Cum Altaria
solenniter ponerentur -- Et sic Sacrificium offerretur -- and a little after,
cum viderent DIVINIS SACRIFICIIS nec mutatum quicquam, nec additum -- all
expressly, and vndenyably meant of the Sacrifice of the Holy Eucharist, or
Mass. But it suited not with the Relatours design to make any such Remarques.

9. As little are we concerned in those authorities of Tertullian, St. Austin,
and others, which the Bishop alleges, as finding fault with the making of
Feasts at the Oratories of Martyrs; which seem to him a kind of Parentalia, or
funeral feasts, which the Jdolatrous Gentiles in former times used. We
confess, the Gentiles Parentation was unlawful, and Jdolatrous; because they
did thereby offer Sacrifice to the Ghosts of the dead, as Tertullian Tertull.
lib. de Spectac. cap. 12
shows. St. Austin likewise found fault, not without cause, with those
Christians, who placed wine, and banquets upon the (...) of the Martyrs, and
afterward rioted, and made themselves drunk with it. Such a custom as this
deserved to be reprehended: and St. Austin might justly D. lib. 8. de Ciuit.
Dei. cap 27.
(no doubt) tell us, the better Christians did it not. 'Twas forbidden likewise
by D Aug. lib 2. Confess. cap. 2.
St. Ambrose, and others, both because it had some resemblance more then was
fitting, with that condemned superstition of the Gentiles Parentalia, and also
because it gave occasion of drunkeness; though it be scarcely imaginable, that
those Christians, who used it, did intend to offer any Sacrifice to the
Martyrs; but only to have those things, which they set upon their tombs,
sanctified by God, for the Martyrs merits. Nor did this custom ever prevail
much in the Church; it being at its first coming up, so generally reprehended
by the Catholic Pastors of the Church, that the following ages by little,
and little laid it quite down; so as at present, it seems wholly extirpated, and
that for many hundred of years last past, neither practice, nor shadow of it
can be shown in the Church.

10. To his allegation of (...) who seems to reprehend the Custom of the
Church in the Adoration of Jmages, I answer, that the doctrine of this Author
is not wholly Orthodox. He was a man in his time, that seemed to a great many to
halt, as it were, between God, and Baal, that is, to be neither perfect
Catholic, nor profess't Protestant; and in his works he professedly labors
to reconcile Catholic religion with that of Protestants; but as it must needs
happen to all such undertakers) with so bad success, that the results of all
his study, and endeauours that way, pleased neither party. The Bishop will
needs have it thought that he was one of ours, and that he lived, and died in
our Communion: and we grant, he made no external separation from us, nor was
excommunicated, or cast out of the Church, by any sentence, or Excommunication
ab homine: but whether or no he might not incur Excommunication
Meritoriously, and so be deprived of the Churches Communion Sententia iuris, by
reason of those many unsound, and vniustifyable Assertions, which are scattered
up, and down his writings, too much in favor of Heresy, and of the enemies of
the Church, is not so easy to determine. Howeuer he is long since dead; and
charity obliges us to hope the best of him; namely that before his death he did
effectiuely repent, and revoke whateuer out of humane frailty, and compliance
with the designs of such (...). lib 36. 286.
Temporal princes as set him on work (some of which Spond. (...) Barad (...).
were not altogether unsuspected themselves to be warping in religion) he had
erroneously, and scandalously delivered to the prejudice of Catholic verity.

As to any matter of abuse in this kind, crept in amongst the ignorant, we
have already shown how careful the Council of 1564. number. (...)
Trent was to provide against, and prevent all inconveniences that could
reasonably be fore seen, or feared. And if, notwithstanding such diligence on
the Churches part, there happen something now, and then to be amiss, either
through the infirmity of some particular persons, or the negligence of others,
yet neither is the doctrine, or practice of the Church justly to be blamed for
it; nor yet the pious, and more discrect devotion of the rest for this reason,
to be discountenanced, much less prohibited, or forbiden. Otherwise, for the
like pretended reason of Abuse, and Scandal we might be thought to stand
obliged to blott out of the (...) those words concerning our Saniour, that he
sitts at the right hand of God, and diverse Texts out of the Bible it (...).
Why? because that by them, ignorant and ill-disposed people have been formerly,
and may be still induced to think, that God the Father is of a Bodily Shape,
and has a right hand, and a left, as men have; and likewise to form to
themselves many other false, and dangerous conceptions of God. Abuses of this
nature, if any be, and whenever they happen, must be redressed by better
instruction and information; but the pious, and lawful custom of the Church
must not therefore be abolished, and quite taken away.

11. As for what Llamas, a Spanish Author, relates of the people of Asturias,
Cantabria, and Gallicia, who were so addicted Hiero. (...) in Summa part 3.
cap. 3.
to their old worm-eaten, and ill-fashioned Images, that when the Bishops of
those Provinces commanded new ones, and bandsomer to be set up in their stead,
they begged even with tears to have their old ones still, J confess, there
might be some indiscretion in their proceeding: but J see noe ground the Bishop
has to tax them of (...). For the people did not cry after the Bishops
officers, when they removed these old Jmages, why do you take away our Gods,
give us our Gods again, or the like, as Jdolaters would have done, as well as
Laban, Genes. 31. 30. when he reprehended Jacob for stealing away his Gods.
Beside, what ever was amiss in this kind (as the same Author testifies) was
by a little intruction of their Pastors quickly amended, though the Bishop (a
man, it seems of very hard belief) will not think so. But why should his
Lordship make such difficulty to believe, what a grave Author reports of his
own knowledge?

As to what he further inferrs from the words of Llamas, namely, that the
Jmages of Christ, and his Saints, as they represent their Exemplars, have
Divinity in them, and that we may (...) things of them, and put trust in them
in that regard, my answer is, the Bishop always shows himself over ready to
expound our Authors in the worst sense, even many times, where there is no
rational pretense. This Author sufficiently shows, he could have no such
meaning as the Bishop imputes to him, what ever his words may seem to import.
For in the very place cited by the Bishop, he clearly teaches, that we ought
to worship Jmages Modo a Sacra Tridentina Synodo, Sets. 25. Explicato. Llamas.
(...) Supra.
according to the Prescript of the Council of (...) and how careful that
Council was, that all might be duly instructed in this matter, and no occasion
left, even for the most ignorant, and weak, to offend by conceiving, or
believing any Divine Power to be in the Jmages, or by putting trust in them, or
crauin any thing of them, appears by the words of the Council already cited,
and by the Relatours own acknowledgement, who styles the Fathers religiously
careful in that respect.

Add hereunto the Prouiso, which this Author gives in the Ibidem.
same chapter; which is, that we ought to ask nothing of the Saints, no not
of our B. Lady her self, otherwise then by desiring them to beg it for us at
Gods hand: and that to do otherwise, that is, to ask any thing of them, as if
they were Authors of it, or could of themselves alone give, or grant us the
good things we ask, were Jdolatrie. Thus therefore, we hope, this Author (
Llamas) his intention, and true meaning is cleared of what the Bishop imputes
to him: but it will not be amiss to take notice also, how weakly the Bishops
illation is made out of the said Authors words. Because Llamas writes that the
Images of Christ are not to be (...) as if there were Divinity in them, as they
are material things made by art, but only as they represent Christ, and the
Saints, the Relatour inferrs thus: So then belike, according to the Divinity of
this Casuist, a man may worship Images, AND ASK OF THEM, AND PVT TRUST IN
THEM, as they represent Christ, and his Saints. But what consequence is this?
How does it follow, that we may ask of Images, and put our trust in them, as
they represent Christ, and his Saints, because we may worship them, as they
represent Christ, and his Saints? we many times love, and reverence a picture
for the person it represents; and yet nobody is so foolish, as to ask any
thing of it, as it represents that person. We show a (...) respect to the
chair of state, and chamber of Presence, for the kings sake: yet we neither
make to them any civil invocation, nor place confidence in them, as they
relate to the king. Why therefore must it follow, that we may call upon
pictures, or Jmages, as they represent our Savior, or the Saints, because they
may be honored, or worshipped, as they do represent them?

Nor is it less ridiculous, what the Bishop adds in pursuance of his discourse;
namely, his resolving this proposition of Llamas. The Images of Christ, and the
Saints are to be worshipped, not as if there were any Divinity, in them, as they
are material things made by art, but as they represent Christ and his Saints,
into this other: The Images, of Christ, and his Saints, as they represent their
Exemplars, have Deity, or Divinity in them; making them both to signify the
same thing. For why might he not as well have resolved this proposition? The
kings picture is to be honored, not as if there were Souereign Authority in
it, as it is a material thing made by art, but as it represents the king,
into this other. The kings picture, as it represents its Exemplar, has
Souereign Authority in it. The Bishop here, surely, gives the Reader more cause
to suspect his judgment touching the interpretation of Llamas, then upon his
interpretation of him to tax our Church of Idolatric.

I conclude it therefore most certain, and indubitable, that Llamas, in the
words cited by the Relatour, intended noe more, then to signify, that all
worship done to Jmages, was Relative, and not Absolute; which is to say, that
it was exhibited to them, not for their own, but for their exemplars sake,
which they represent: and that we could be heard in our prayers, and expect
relief, not from the Jmages, but from the Prototypes: which, as it is the
plain doctrine of the Church, declared by the Councils of Nice and Trent, so
it is all, that in this question I have undertaken to defend.

CHAP. 23. Of the Bishops Confession that Salvation may be had in the Roman
Church; and the Consequences thereupon.
ARGUMENT.
1. The Bishop ( though not willingly) grants in Express terms; that some
Catholics may be saved; and in effect, that all. 2. A: (...) Argument That
ours is the SAFER way because Protestants (as well as we) confess it. SAFE
explicated, and defended. 3. Catholics not justly taxed with want of Charity
for telling Protestants they cannot be saved out of the Communion of the To man
Church. 4. Nothing to be concluded in favor of the Bishop against A: (...)
Maxim, from the agreement of old, betwixt Catholics and Donatists in point of
Baptism. 5. Catholics, and Protestants do not agree in any real
participation of Christ, proper to the Sacrament. 6. what Catholic Authors
mean, when they speak of Spiritually-receiuing Christ, and of a Spiritual
presence in the Eucbarist. 7. No peril of Schism, Heresy etc. in
Communicating with the Roman Church. 8. The Relatours various windings upon
this subject, observed. 9. No Parallel, betwixt A: C. argument, and that of
Petilian the Donatist. 10. A: C. unjustly taxed with untruth By the Bishop. 11.
Our adversaries Remainder of instances considered, and satisfied.

1. IN this Paragraph the Bishop brings in the Lady asking him, whether she
might be saved in the Roman Faith: and though by his answer he grants clearly
enough, that there is possibility of Salvation in the Roman Church, yet who
those are amongst us, whom he thinks may be saved, is not so clear. Sometimes
he seems to say, that those only may be saved, who though they err, yet want
sufficient ground, either to doubt, or Ibidem.
know their errors: as for instance, when he writes; the ignorant, that cannot
discern the errors of the Church, so they hold the foundation, and conform
themselves to a religious life, may be saved. And afterward; we have not so
learned Christ; as to deny Salvation to some ignorant silly souls, whose
humble peaceable Obedience, makes. 33. number.
them safe among any part of men, that profess the foundation, Christ.
Likewise, there is no question, but many were saved in corrupted times of the
Church, when their Leaders, unless they repented besore death,. 36. number.
were lost. In other places he seems to intimate, that men may be saved in the
Roman Church, though the Truth (by which he means the doctrine of Protestants)
be sufficiently proposed to them, but not acknowledged by them: as where he
says, Protestants indeed confess there is Salvation possible to be attained in
the Roman Church; but yet they say withal, that the errors of that Church are
so many, Ibidem.
( and some so great, as weaken the Foundation) that it is very hard to go
that way to Heaven; especially to them, that have had the Truth manifested. Now
surely if it be but very hard going that way to Heaven, it is. 35. punct. 5.
not altogether impossible. Again, I am willing (says he) to hope there are
many among them, which keep within that Church, (meaning the Roman) and yet
wish the superstitions abolished, which they know, and which pray to God to
forgive their errors, in what they know not; and which hold the Foundation
sirme, and live accordingly, and which would have all things amended that are
amiss, were it in their power. And to such I dare not deny a possibility of
Salvation, for that which is Christ's in them; though they hazard themselves
extremely by keeping so close to that, which is Superstition, and in the case
of Images comes too near Idolatry. Item I do indeed for Ibidem.
my part acknowledge a possibility of Salvation in the Roman Church: but so, as
that which I grant to Romanists, is not as they are Romanists, but as they are
Christians, that is, as they believe the Creed, and hold the Foundation, Christ
himself; not as they associate themselves wittingly, and willingly to the
gross superstitions of the Romish Church. Js not this plainly to confess, that
even those of the Roman Church, who do willingly, and knowingly associate
themselves to the gross superstitions of that Church, may possibly be saved,
though not indeed as they do this, but as they are Christians, and believe in
the Foundation, Christ? Lastly, when he asks, as it were in anger, would you
have us as malicious, or at least as rash, as your selves are to us, and deny
you so much as possibility of Salvation? Even Mistaken Charity ( if such it
were) is far better then none at all. And if the MISTAKEN be ours, the NONE
is yours etc. Does he not clearly pretend by this to be more Charitable, that
is, to grant more to us Catholics in this particular of being saved, then
we do to them? Seeing then, that even we Catholics grant possibility of
Salvation to those, who join with the Protestant Church, if their ignorance be
invincible; we cannot but suppose, his pretended charity grants more to us;
namely, that there is possibility of being saved to those that join with the
Roman Church, though their ignorance be not invincible and though all, or the
chief motives, which Protestants bring; against us, be never so sufficiently
proposed to them.

Now if, on the one side, both Catholics and Protestants, agree in this, that
such as hold all the opinions of our Church, and continue in them till death,
notwithstanding their being thoroughly acquainted with all the contrary
reasons and doctrine of Protestants, may attain Salvation; and if, on the
other side, all Catholics, as well those that now are, as the infinite
multitude which has been since a thousand years last past, according to
Protestants own account and confession, do deny possibility of being saved to
such as live, and dye in the Protestant Church, except in case of invincible
ignorance, who can doubt, but that our Church is clearly the safer way of the
two to Salvation? and therefore in prudence to be embraced, rather then that of
Protestants?

2. But what shall we say to those Protestants, who grant no more to us, then
we do to them in order to Salvation? How shall those among our Adversaries be
conuinc'd, that the Roman Church and Religion is the safer way to Heaven, who
will allow none of our Religion to be in a capacity to Salvation, but such, as
are in no capacity of knowing, and understanding their errors? J might bring
many arguments to convince them in this point; but for breuity sake J shall
confine my self to these only, which follow.

That Church and Religion is the more safe way to Salvation, in which many are
saved according to the principles which are granted on both sides, then an
other, in which many are saved only according to the principles, or doctrine,
of one party; but very few, or none according to the doctrine of the other.

But in the Roman Church, and Religion many are saved according to the
principles which are granted on both sides, viz. both by Catholics, and
Protestants: and in the Protestant Church many are saved only according to the
principles, and doctrine of Protestants, but very few, or none according to the
doctrine of Catholics.

Ergo, the Roman Church, and Religion is a safer way to Salvation, then the
Church, and religion of Protestants.

The Mayor I'conceiue none will deny. The Minor I prove thus. In the Catholic
Church it is evident that many, being to depart out of this life, do receive
the Sacrament of Penance. These, according to the doctrine of the Roman
Church, are saved, because by virtue of this Sacrament they receive the grace
of Justification, whereby of sinners, they are made the sons of God. and Heirs
of Eternal life: nor can they be denied to be saved, according to the doctrine
of Protestants, seeing they believe in Christ their Redeemer, they confide in
Gods Goodness and mercy for the pardon of their sins, they truly repent of
them, and truly purpose for the future to amend their lives: which is all, that
Protestant doctrine requires to make men partakers of Christ's sanctifying
Grace; and is also necessarily required by Catholics, to make them free
subjects for the Sacrament of penance. Who can therefore doubt but that all
such persons are saved, both according to the doctrine of Catholics, and
Protestants too? J say, who can rationally, and with charity doubt, but that
Catholics, generally speaking, being taught, that Faith, Hope, true
repentance for sins past, and a purpose of amendment, are necessary to the due
receiving of the Sacrament of penance, do not omit to exercise those acts
with all necessary diligence, and sincerity, especially when they are to
prepare themselves against that dreadful passage to Eternity.

That they may exercise such acts, if they will, by the help of Gods ordinary
Grace, and by exercising them, be effectually saved the Bishop himself cannot
deny, seeing he grants so much to the Donatists themselves, whom he confesses
at least to have been Schismatiques, justly condemned by the Orthodox Church,
and in some respects. 35. punct. 5.
in greater danger of damnation, then we Romanists. His words are these.
Ibidem.
A plain bonest Donatist, having, as is confessed, true Baptism, and holding
the Foundation, as for ought I know, the Donatists did, and repenting of what
ever was sin in him, and would have repented of the Schism, had it been
known to him, might be saved. Neither will (J suppose) any other Protestant
deny us the possibility of exercising such acts; seeing they all grant, that
with involuntary errors, true Faith and repentanoe may stand; and have no
sufficient reason to think, that our errors at death, are voluntary and
wilful; or that we do wilfully omit any thing, that we believe to be
necessary for the attaining of Salvation.

But now, according to the doctrine of Catholics, there are very few, or
none, among Protestants, that escape damnation, or that are (...), if they
live, and dye out of the Communion of our Church. Not that it is a point of our
beleese, that many Protestants shall be damned precisely upon the account of
being Heretics, (because heresy is an obstinate, and wilful error
against Faith; and we cannot easily, much less infallibly determine, whose
errors are wilful) but because there are none, or surely but very few
amongst them, but are guilty of mortal sin against Gods Commandments; and
because the ordinary means they use, and prescribe, is not according to our
principles, sufficient to expiate, and blott out such sin. It Is well known,
that though Protestants, to obtain Salvation, believe in Christ, trust in his
merits, and repent of their sins, yet they do it not purely out of a perfect
love of God, so as to hate sin above all evils, merely as it is an offense
against the Divine Majesty, and to prefer God, and his holy Commandments
before our selves, and all other creatures, (for this is a very hard, and rare
act even amongst the best of Christians) but at best, upon inferior, and lower
motives (as the manner of most men is to do) viz. in consideration of the
Beatitude of Heaven, as it is their own particular good, or for the avoiding of
the pains of Hell, as it is their particular, and chiefest harm.

Now, according to our doctrine, such kind of repentance as this, is no
sufficient remedy to blott out sin, unless it be joined which the Sacrament of
penance, viz. Confession and Priestly Absolution, etc. which Protestants
reject. J say, without the Sacrament of penance actually, and duly recoin'd,
all Catholics hold, that neither Faith, nor Hope, nor any repentance, or
sorrow for sin, can save us, but that only which is joined with a perfect
love of God, whereby we are disposed to loose all, and suffer all that can be
imagined, rather then to offend God; yea though there were indeed neither
Heaven to reward us, nor Hell to punish us: which being a thing so hard to be
found, especially (...) such, as believe a man is justified by Faith only, it
follows evidently, that in our doctrine, very few, or no Protestants are
saved. The Conclusion therefore is undeniable, that our Church is a safer way to
Salua ion, then that of Protestants,

My second Argument is this. That Church, and Religion which affords all
necessary means of Salvation, is a safer way to Salvation, then an other which
does not.

But the Roman Church, and Religion affords all necessary means of Salvation;
and the Protestant does not.

Ergo, the Roman Church, and Religion is a safer way to Salvation, then the
Church and Religion. of Protestants.

The Mayor is evident. The Minor consists of two parts; which I shall prove in
order.

The First, which is, that the Roman Church, and Religion affords all necessary
means of Salvation, appears partly by the confession of Protestants
themselves, who acknowledge generally, that in our Church, and Religion are
contained all Foundamentall points; that is, all things absolutely necessary to
Salvation: and partly, because it cannot be proved, that any thing is of
absolute necessity, in order to Salvation, which is not found in our Churches
Communion. The second, that Protestants standing to their own principles,
neither have, nor can have things necessary for Salvation, J prove by this one
Argument.

It is certain that divine Faith necessary to Salvation, according to these
places of Holy Writ, sine fide impossible est placere Deo, Hebr. 11. (without
Faith it is impossible to please God) Qui non crediderit, condemnabitur. Marc.
16. (He that believes not, shall be damned.) It Is likewise certain, that this
divine Faith must be firm, sure, and without doubt, or hesitation: in so much
that if an Angel from Heaven should preach the contrary to what we believe, it
ought not to be altered, according to that of the Apostle. Galat. 1. 8. Now how
is it possible, that Protestants standing to their principles, should have this
firm, Sure, and vndoubting Faith, concerning any mystery of Religion? They
will say upon the Authority of Gods Revelation, or the written word. But Jaske,
how is it possible for them to believe any divine truth firmly, certainly, and
infallibly for the Authority of scripture or the written word, unless they do
first firmly, certainly, and infallibly believe, that scripture is the true
word of God, and that the sense of the words is such as they understand? and
how can they believe this most firmly, and certainly, if they neither are, nor
can be infallibly sure, according to their own principles, that the Church
erreth not in delivering such, and such books for Canonical scripture? or
that those passages, upon which they ground their belief, are the very same
with the Original Text; or in case they understand not the Originalls, that
there has been no error committed in the Translation of them? yea do they
not hold principles absolutely inconsistent with this certainty, when they
teach, that not only private men, but General Councils, and even the whole
Church may err in matters of great consequence? How can they then be sure,
that the words of scripture, for which they believe the Divinity of Christ (for
example) are to be understood in that sense, in which themselves understand
them, and not in the sense, which the Arians put upon them? If General
Councils, and the whole Church, may err in expounding scripture, what
certainty of belief can we have in this, and in diverse other like points?

Jf it be answered, that Christ's Divinity is a Fundamental point, and that in
Fundamental points we must believe the Church; J reply, this answer satisfies
not the difficulty. For J ask, upon what ground do we believe it to be a
Fundamental point? if because the whole Church teaches it to be so, and the
whole Church cannot err in points Fundamental, I answer, it must first be
proved, that the Arians are no part of the whole Church; for if they be a part
of it, the whole Church does not teach it. To say the Arians are noe part of
the whole Church, because they err in Christ's Divinity, which is a point
Fundamental, is to suppose that for certain, which is principally in
question. That Christ's Divinity therefore is a point Fundamental, must be
proved some other way, then by the Authority of the whole Church. If that way
be scripture, the former difficulty returns, viz. how a man shall be sure,
according to Protestant principles, that scripture is to be understood in the
Catholic sense, and not in the sense of Arians. And if it be any other way
beside scripture, according to Protestant principles, it will not be
infallible, but subject to error, and consequently will not be sufficient to
ground infallible certainty. It Is evident therefore, that Protestants, standing
to their grounds, cannot believe either the Trinity, or Christ's Divinity, and
Incarnation, or the Redemption of mankind by his death, or any other mystery
and point of Faith with that firmeness and certainty, which is requisite to an
Act of Faith: nay it follows, that they cannot be altogether sure of these
mysteries of Christian Religion, as they are, or may be of things related even
by heathen Historians; seeing more agree, that those things are true, then that
the sense of scripture, in those controuerted points, is such as Protestants
understand.

These Arguments we conceive sufficient to convince any rational
understanding, that the Roman Church, and Religion is a safer way to salvation,
then that of Protestants. Let us now take notice of the Bishops answers, and
assertions touching this question.

3. Whereas therefore Protestants do commonly tax us for want of Charity,
because we generally deny Salvation to those that are out of our Church, A. C.
proved that this denial, (besides the threatenings of Christ, and the Holy
Fathers denounced against all such, as are not within the Communion of the true
Church) is grounded even upon Charity; it being far more charitable to
forewarn a man plainly of a danger, then to let him run into it, through a
false security. There is but one true Faith (Says he) A.C. page 650
and one true Church, out of which is no Salvation; and he that will not hear
this Church, let him be unto the (Says Christ himself) Matthew. 18. 17. as an
Heathen and Publican. If Salvation then may be had in our Church, as the Bishop
with other Protestants consessed; and there be noe true Church, nor true Faith,
but one, in, and by which Salvation may be had, (as is likewise confessed) it
follows, that out of our Church there is noe Salvation to be hoped for, and
consequently, that it is no want of Charity in us to, tell Protestants of this,
but rather want of light, and good understanding in them, to think our
admonition to be uncharitable. The Bishop himself confesses, that he, who will
not. 35. number. 20.
both hear, and obey the Catholic Christian Church yea the particular Church
in which he lives too, so far, as it in necessaries agrees with the
universal, is in as bad a condition as an Heathen, or a Publican, and perhaps
in some respects worse. But he errs very much in the conceit he frames of the
Catholic Church that must teach us: it being a thing, according to his
description, more like an Jdea platonica, or Chimaera of some fantastical
brain, then a true subsistent assembly; or Society of Christians: a thing as
little able to speak, or declare with requisite authority, any certain and
uniform doctrine, or matter to be believed, as himself and his party are
unwilling to hearken to the truth. For by the Catholic Church, in his notion,
nothing else is (...) understood, but a mixed multitude of all (...) and facts
of Christians, viz. Greeks, Armenians, Lutherans, Caluinists, Prelaticall, and
Presbyterian Protestants, Anabaptists, (...), and what not, beside the Roman
Catholics. But how is it possible, that such a Church as this, should ever
instruct, and command us, what to believe? How shall a man that (...) in the
(...), or in any other remote part of the world, hear the common voyed of a
Church, which speaks by the mouth of so many disagreeing parties? or how shall
a man be sure, that such, and such a doctrine is rightly commanded him by the
Catholic Church, taken even in the Bishops own sense, unless he be first
(...), what the Faith is, without which it is impossible to be a part of the
Catholic Church? Lastly, how shall he before, that all who profess that
Faith, do also teach, and command the doctrinal, which in obedience to the
Bishops (...) Church, he is required to believe?

Again, Ibidem. punct. 5.
if Donatists, for any thing the Bishop (...) held the Foundation, (and
consequently were a part of the Catholic Church) and if errors, that Ibidem.
come too near (...) are (...) repugnant to the word of God, and do shake the
very foundation of Christian belief (as the Relatour pretends our opinions
do) may be found in that which is ((...)) the greatest, and most considerable
pair of the Catholic Church what reason could the Apostle have to shy, that
the doctrine of forbidding Marriage, and eating certain meats, was a doctrine
of (...), and that those who held it, should sall from the (...) why might not
the teachers of such doctrines be a part of the 1. (...) 4. 3.
Catholic Church, as well as the Donatists, and those that maintain other
dangerous opinions, which, in the Bishops judgment, do Shake, but do not
overthrow the Foundation of true Faith necessary to Salvation? or if they might
be a part of the Catholic Church, notwithstanding their departure from the
Faith by holding of such doctrines, what shall hinder, but the Arians and all
other Heretics whatsoever, if they (...) the doctrine of Christ, may,
notwithstanding their errors and how ever they understand the words of Christ,
pretend to be parts of the Catholic Church, whose common voice we (...)
bound to hear, and with all submission to obey (...) see here, good Reader,
what a Church the Bishop assigns the to hear and follow, under pain of being
in as bad, or perhaps in (...) worse condition, then an Heathen and Publican.

4. His Lordship next task is to impugn the Argument which A. C. brings to
prove that the Roman Church and Religion is. 35. number. 3.
the safer way to Salvation, because both parties, viz. Catholics, and
Protestants do agree that Salvation may be had in it, but do not both of them
agree, that it may be had in the Protestant Church, and Religion? The Bishop
brings (...) instances to show, that this Agreement of both parties is no
sufficient ground to think, that ours is the safer way. His first instance is
this. The Baptism of the Donatists was held true, and valid both by (...)
Donatists themselnes, and the Orthodox also; but that of the Orthodox was held
true and valid only, by the Orthodox, and not by the Donatists: yet none of us
grant that the Orthodox were bound to embrace the Baptism of the Donatists as
the safer way of the two. How then does it follow, that a man ought to embrace
the Roman Church and Religion, as the safer way to heaven, because both parties
agree, that in the Roman Church there is possibility of Salvation, but do not
agree there is the like possibility among Prorestants? This is the Sum and
(...) of his first instance.

To which J answer, that no Orthodox could embrace the (...) of the Donatists,
as the safer way, but he must committ two sins; the one of disobedience to the
Orthodox Church, which so bad communication with Donatists and all other
Heretics, in divine Rites, such as the administration of Sacraments is: the
other against Faith, which obliged him to believe the Baptism of the Orthodox
to be as safe as the other. Now how could any man be fuyd to take the safer way
to Salvation, by embracing the Baptism of the Donatists for the agreement of
both parties touching its validity, when the greatest, and most considerable
(...) to wit, that of the Orthodox, hold it cannot be done, except in case of
necessity, without damnable (...), which dobarrs the soul from heaven (...)
whereas the case put by us is quite different from this. For we suppose
Protestants grant a man may line, and dye in the Roman Church; and that none of
his errors shall (...) his Salvation. whatsoever motives he may know to the
(...). But no (...) did ever grant, that a man might with a snse Conscience
embrance the donatists Baptism knowing the (...), reasons, and command of the
Orthodox Church to the contrary: or that a man, who had so embraced the
Baptism of Donatists, might live, and dye with possibility of Salvation except
he acknowledged his fault, and repented of his (...).

You will say perhaps, that as a man ought not to receive the Donatists
Baptism, thought valid in the judgment of both parties, because the Orthodox
held it (...), and forbad it under pair of sin; so (...) may a Protestant,
who is taught by scripture or otherwise, and is fully persuaded, that the Roman
Church and Religion contains many gross errors, contrary to Gods words,
embrace the Roman Church and Religion, though both (...) great possibility of
Salvation in the said Church, and Religion J. answer; and acknowledge, that as
a few, (...), or Arian, is not bound to embrace the Orthodox Faith of
Christians, so long as he is fully persuaded that its a false and (...)
belief: so neither is a protestant bound to embrace (...) Religion, so long as
his conscience tells him, that it (...) errors and superstitions contrary to
Gods word. But J say withal, that as a few, Mahumetan, and (...) were bound to
alter their judgment concerning the pretended erroncousness and falsity of the
Orthodox Faith, if sufficient motives were propounded to him, and that
according to the principles of both parties, the Orthodox Faith were the safer
way to Salvation: so likewise a Protestant would be obliged to embrace our
Religion, if sufficient motives to alter his present judgment concerning our
pretended errors, were offered to him, and that it could be proved by the
joint principles of both Protestants, and Catholics, that Catholic Religion
were the safer way to Salvation. Now that by the joint principles, or doctrine
both of Catholics and Protestants, our Religion, or Faith, is the safer way,
we have already proved in our first Argument: and that Protestants may have
sufficient motives to alter, and depose their present judgment touching our
pretended errors, whenever they will attend to them, is sufficiently
euidenced from hence; seeing, an infinite multitude of persons, who have as
good natural wits as themselves, as tender consciences as themselves, have
read, and pondered the controuerted passages of scripture as much as
themselves, understand all contrary reasons, and objections, as well as
themselves, yet belecue with absolute certainty, as divine Truths, those very
points, which Protestants conceive to be errors.

5. Tho other instances, which he brings, seem rather to argue a weakeness in
the Relatour's judgment, then in the Argument he impugns. In the point of the
Eucharist (says he) all sides agree in the Faith of the Church of England,
that in the most Blessed Sacrament the worthy receiver is by his Faith made
spiritually partaker of the true and real Body and Blood of Christ, truly and
really. -- Your Roman Catholics add a manner of this his presence,. 35. number
3.
Transubstantiation, which many deny; and the Lutherans a manner of this
presence, Consubstantiation, which more deny. If this Argument be good, then
even for this consent, it is safer Communicating with the Church of England,
then with the Roman, and Lutheran: because all agree in this truth, not in any
other opinion. Here are many words spent to small purpose. For first, can a man
be said, in any true sense, to communicate rather with the Church of England,
then with the Roman, or Lutheran, only by believing that, where in they all
agree? and yet the Bishops Argument supposes this. But put case by
communicating with the Church of England he understands such a belief of the
English Protestants real presence, as carries with it an express denial both
of Transubstantiation, and Consubstantiation in the Sacrament; how is it
possible, that a man should be moved to this belief, by the common consent of
Catholics, Lutherans, and English Protestants; seeing only these last agree
in this point?

That which the Relatour adds to this, is no less absurd. He cites (...), a
Catholic divine, as teaching, that to believe Transubstantiation is not
simply necessary to Salvation; and triumphs thereupon against Catholics, as
if he had overcome them with their own arms; asking A. C. what he can say to
this; and seems to admire the force of truth, which was able to draw this
confession from an adversary. But J answer, what matter is it, though Suarez
had really taught it not to be simply necessary to Salvation to believe
Transubstantiation? were that sufficient ground to say, that he agreed with
Protestants against the determination of the Roman Church? must he needs think
that Transubstantiation is an error, or noc point of Catholic Faith, because
he held it not Simply necessary to Salvation? very true it is, all Catholics
teach that whatsoever is defined by the Church, is an article of Faith, which
may neither be doubted of, nor disputed: yet no man thinks it is simply
necessary to Salvation to believe every point so defined, by an express act.

A Protestant, versed in scripture, would think it a sin, if he should deny
that Moses his rod was turned into a Serpent: yet, J conceive, he will hardly
say, that it is Simply necessary to Salvation; or that he is bound, absolutely
Speaking, to believe it with an express act of Faith under pain of damnation.
But the truth is, Suarez, speaks to no such purpose, as the Bishop alleges
him. He confesses indeed, that the manner of explicating the change, or
conversion, that is made in the B. Sacrament, which Schoolmen use, is no
necessary part of the doctrine of Faith in that particular, because it depends
upon Physical and Metaphylicall principles; but as for the conversion it self
(or Transubstantiation) it is most evident, that he holds it for a point of
Faith, which to deny were Heresy. His words are these, in the section
immediately precedent to that which the Bishop quotes. Secundo infero, si quis
confiteatur praesentiam corporis Xti, et absentiam panis, neget tamen veram
conuersione vnius in aliud, in Haeresim labi: quia Ecclesia. Catholica non
solum duo priora, sed ctiamhoctertium tertium definit ac docet. Suarez. in 3.
partem. D. Thomae. disp. 5. quest. 75. Sect. 1.. vlt.
Secundo infero etc. Secondly (Says he) J infer, that if a man confess the
real presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, as also the absense of bread,
yet denies a true conversion of the substance of bread into the sulstance of
Christ Body, he falls into Heresy; because the Catholic Church has defined,
and does teach, not only the two first, but also this last. what say you to
this, Protestants; you that look upon this Bishop as the pillar of your
Church? was it truth and honesty (think you) that moved him thus to misreport
an Author of that worth, that even himself thought not fit to mention him
without SVAREZ.... and he a very Learned Adversary. Relat. Ibid. page 287.
some character of honor? They that please to consult the Author himself, in
the Zuarez. vbi supra.. 2.
place alleged, will find that HOC TOTVM does not signify to believe
Transubstantiation, as the Bishop most falsely and partially renders it, but a
far different thing, as we have said above.

His quarrel with Bellarmin is no less impertinent; whom he censures
(forsooth) of tediousness, and for making (as he conceiues) an intricate, and
almost inexplicable discourse about an Adductiue conversion; a thing, which in
the Relatours opinion, neither Divinity, nor Philosophy ever heard of till
then. But let the Bellarm. lib. 3. de Eucharist. cap. 18.. Ex his colligimus:
et in recgonit. huius loci.
indifferent reader be Judge. Bellarmin explicates his Adductiue Conversion
thus. As meat is changed into the substance of man's body by means of
nutrition, and becomes a living and animate part of man, not because the soul,
which informs it, is de nouo produced in the matter duly prepared, but because
the same soul, which was in the body before, begins now to be in the new
matter; so by virtue of this Adductiue Conversion, the bread is turned into the
Body of Christ, not as if Christ's Body were (properly speaking) produced under
the elements (for it was preexistent before; and nothing that is preexistent
can in proper sense, be said to be produced) but because it was not there
before, and begins now to be under the elementary forms, by virtue of
Consecration. Let any man judge, whether this explication be not far more
intelligible, then what the Bishop himself says touching the point of real
presence.

First of all, he affirms (with Bishop Ridley, and other Protestants,. 35. number.
3.
cited by him,) that the true, real, natural, and Substantial Body of
Christ, that very Body, which was born of the Virgin, which ascended into
Heaven which sits on the right hand of God the Father, which shall come from
thence to judge the quick and dead, is truly, really, and Substantially in the
B. Sacrament; and yet for all this, denies both Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation; that is, in effect, he will have Christ's Body to be really
and Substantially in the Sacrament, yet neither with the Substance of bread,
nor without it. He will have Christ's Body to be really in Heaven, and really
also in very Substance on earth at the same time, and yet stiffly denies, with
all Caluinists, that the same Body can by any power be really present in
several places at once. Is not this to say in effect, that Christ's Body really
is only in Heaven, and no where else, and yet to acknowledge, that at the same
time it is really in the Sacrament on earth? But who is able to understand, and
reconcile these speeches? His saying, that Christ's Body is received spiritually
by Faith, by Grace, and the like, is a plain contradiction to what he had
taught before; seeing by these words are only signified a metaphorical
presence, which in no true sense can be called real. In my opinion Zuinglius,
Peter Martyr, and those of the Sacramentary party, deal faric more heartily in
this point, (who flatly deny and reject all real presence, both name and
thing) then the Bishop, and some other Protestants alleged by him, who confess
the name, but deny the thing.

6. The Catholic Authors, which the Relatour has the confidence to bring, in
favor of his Protestant belief touching this matter, are grossly either
misunderstood, or misexpounded Ibidem. number 3.
by him. For it is evident, when they speak of spiritual Communion they mean,
for the most part, that which is by desire and devotion only, when for want of
opportunity, or some (...) reason, we do not actually receive the B.
Sacrament, but yet do use most of those affections, and devout aspirations of
heart toward God, and our B. Savior, which we are wont to practice, when we
do really communicate. Sometimes indeed they discourse of Christ's miraculous
and ineffable being in the Sacrament; where he is present not like a bodily
substance, but rather like a spirit, that is, whole, in the whole consecrated
host, and whole, in every part of it. But sure J am, they never say, or think,
he is there by such a spiritual presence, as Protestants mean; that is,
exclusive of his truly-reall presence, and by Faith only; or that he is not
there as truly and really, as he is in heaven, whether we exercise an act of
Faith, or no.

Now when the Bishop insists so much upon a spiritual participation of the
true and real Body and Blood of Christ, truly and really by Faith; either he
means such a participation as is proper to this Sacrament, and cannot be had
save only in the orall and actual receiving of the Sacramental elements; or
he means such a participation of Christ's Body and Blood, as devout persons
may have in their souls, whether they receive those elements corporally, or
no. If he means this second only, then both parties cannot be said to agree in
the proper point of Sacramental participation; seeing it is now supposed to be
such, but only a spiritual kind of receiving Christ, common to other devoute
offices of Christian piety, as well as to the Sacrament. If he means the
first, viz. such a participation of Christ's Body as is proper only to the
Sacrament, and cannot be had, but when the Sacrament is orally and actually
received, to make it appear that we agree with Protestants in it, they must
first show what it is, and particularly, that it is something really different
and distinct from a devout elevation of heart, remembrance of Christ's Passion,
trust, and application of his merits, etc. otherwise they relapse into the
former difficulty, viz of putting such a participation of Christ, as is not
proper to the Sacrament: for certainly none of all those participations of
Christ last mentioned, are proper to the Sacrament, but may be exercised at
other times, and by other means; as namely, when one eats his common food at
the table, when he drinks wine or beer, when he looks upon a Crucifix, when he
prays, meditates, or the like.

But this, neither the Bishop, not any of his party can show, standing to
Calvin and their own principles; that is, they cannot show, what their
spiritual participation, or receiving of Christ, signifies in effect more,
then a devout elevation of heart, remembrance of Christ's Passion, trust, and
application of his merits, or something of like nature, done and performed
oftentimes, as really without the Sacrament, as with it: and consequently it
can never be said, that both parties (viz. Roman-Catholiques, and Protestants)
are of the same sentiment, or do agree in any real reception, or
participation of Christ, proper to the Sacrament. For all the world knows, the
(...) participation of Christ in the Sacrament, which Catholics believe
signifies a quite different thing from this.

7. Let us now consider, what his Lordship has to say to A. C. for his
resolute affirming; there is no peril of any damnable Heresy, Schismo, or
other sin, in resolving to line and dye in the Roman Church. This the
Relatour cannot digest; therefore he replies, Ibidem. punct. 5.
not so neither. For he that lines in the Roman Church with such a resolution,
is presumed to beleene, as that Church beleenes; and he that does so, in the
Bishops opinion, is guilty, more or less, not only of the schism, which that
Church caused at first by her corruptions, and now continues by her power, but
of her damnable opinions too in point of misbeleefe, and of all other sins
also; which the doctrine and misbeleefe of that Church leads him into. He
seems by this plainly to retract what he formerly granted touching possibility
of Salvation to Roman Catholics. For how can they possibly be saved, that
live and dye in the guilt of damnable opinions and sins? or what sort of
Catholics are they, whom the Relatour thinks may possibly be in state of
Salvation? are they such only as do not believe, as that Church (viz. the
Roman) believes; but only live in outward Communion with her, and making only
outward show and feigned profession to believe that, which in heart they
disbeleeue? He gives indeed some cause to think, that this is his meaning,
when he tells us, how willing he is to hope there are many among us, which wish
the superstitions of the Roman Church abolished, and would have all things
amended that are amiss, if it were in their power, etc. and of such
particularly professes, Ibidem.
that he dares not deny them possibility of Salvation. But how could it
possibly sink into a sober man's head to judge him capable of Salvation, that
for temporal and sinister ends only, contrary to knowledge and the light of
his own conscience, complies outwardly with superstition and many other sinful
and Jdolatrous practices, all his life long, and deny it to him, who hates all
superstition and sin in his very soul, and would not comply with any, if he
knew it, but adheres to the doctrine and practices of the Roman Church merely
for conscience sake, and for noe other reason, but because he simply and
sincerely believes all her doctrine to be true, and consonant to Gods word, and
all her allowed customs and obseruances to be pious and holy? what is this but
to say, he is an honest man, that takes his neighbors goods wittingly and
willingly from him, knowing them to be his; and that he is a knave and deserves
to be hanged, that takes them unwittingly, and verily believing that they are
his own?

Secondly he tells us, that it is one thing to live (...) Church, and not to
comunicate with it in Schism, or in any false Ibidem.
worship, and an other thing to live in a Schismatic Church, and to
Communicate with it in the schism and corruptions, which that Church teaches;
we grant it; being our selves, in some sort; an instance of this truth, whom
the Catholic Church permuts, both in England, Germany and other Countries, to
live among those she esteems both sehismatiques and Heretics too, (though
we think, this is not, properly speaking, to live in a schismatic Church)
yet she does not permit us to communicate with them in their shisme. But when
he proceeds thereupon to charge the Roman Church with being worse and more
cruel then the Church of Israel, even under Achab and Jezabel was (when so
many worshipped the calves in Dan and Bethel) because (forsooth) he does not
find that this doctrine YOU MVST SACRIFICE IN THE HIGH PLACES, or this, YOU
MVST NOT SACRIFICE AT THE ONE ALTAR IN HIERVSALEM, was either taught by the
Priest, or maintained by the Prophets, or enjoined by the Sanedrim -- Whereas
the Church of Rome (says he) has solemnly decreed, her errors, and imposed
them upon men under the greatest penalties, yea, and erring, has decreed
withal, that she cannot err; we answer, this is not to argue, as a Logician
should, ex concessis or probatis, but rather, upon false and unproven
suppositions, to bring, in lieu of argument, railing accusation against our
superiors; which the Apostle ( Jude. 8. 9.) utterly condemned. Is it
sufficient for the Relatour to say, that Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Forbearance of the Cup are improbable opinions, and contrary to the express
command of our savior?

8. Again, what I pray, does our adversary mean by his Church of Israel under
Achab and Jezabel, when he says the Church of Rome is worse and more cruel
then she? does he mean the true Church there? that is, the number of those
Faithful Israelites, 3. King. 19. 18.
which as the scripture testifies of them, never boued their knees to Baal? Jf
so, his Lordship surely committs a huge Solecisme, when pretending to aggrauate
the crime of the Roman Church, he says she was worse and more cruel, then the
Church of Israel under Achab and Jezabel, as if that Church, at that time, had
deserved the character of bad or cruel. If he means the other part of the
Israelites, who were fallen from the true Religion, and worshipped Ieroboams
calves, we wonder upon what ground he styles them the Church of Jsrael, seeing
manifest Idolaters are no way to be accounted parts of the true Church. But in
what respect is the Church of Rome worse then that of Israel in the time of
Iezabel? because (says he) the Church of Rome has solemnly decreed her
errors, and imposed them upon men under the greatest penalties, viz. of
Excommuncation etc. whereas the Church of Israel did neither solemnly teach,
that men ought to Sacrifice in the high places, nor punish men for going to
Sacrifice at the one Altar in Jerusalem. Admit this were true; though it be
more then the Bishop can prove, seeing Elias complaind in those times, that
Gods Altars were throw'n down, and the Prophets persecuted and slain with the
sword, which argues there was no such liberty as the Bishop pretends: admit, I
say, it were true, yet if there be any force in this argument, it concludes
more against himself, then against the Roman Church. The Bishop grants, that a
General Council, lawfully called and orderly proceeding, may define errors
contrary to scripture, and that in matters even Fundamental, and of maine
importance to Salvation; yet he. 38. number. 15.
teaches withal, that the decrees of such a Council must stand in force, and
bind all particular men at least, to external obedience, till the whole
Church by an other General Council, reuerse the definitions of the former. Is
not this likewise to be worse then the Church of Jsrael? Is not this to oblige
people to make profession of false doctrine contrary to scripture and evident
reason, or demonstration? yea, is it not to be, in this respect, far worse
then the Church of Rome? which requires indeed, that all persons do submitt to
the decrees of General Councils, but does not require this as granting
Councils to be fallible or subject to define error in stead of truth in
matters of Faith; but as assuredly persuading her self that they are, by the
special assistance of the Holy Ghost, infallible, and cannot define any thing
in such cases, but what is truth.

Lastly, if inference be to be made from the practice of the Jewish Church it
will serve rather to iustisie, then to condemn the proceedings of the Roman.
When power resided in the true Prophets of God, and in his true and lawful
Priests, Idolatry and disobedience to the law of Moses was severely punished;
but in corrupted times every one had liberty to do what ill he listed. The
Roman Church therefore is rather to be commended for her zeal, and imitating
the Synagogue in the times of its greatest (...), to wit, by exacting strict
obedience to her doctrine lawfully declared and established by General
Councils; which she also believes, and is as well assured, to be according to
divine revelation, and not repugnant to Gods honor, as the Synagogue was of
their doctrine: the Roman Church, I say, is rather to be commended for this,
even from the example of the Jewish Church, then to be taxed with cruelty, for
not symbolizing with the corrupted and Apostatized Synagogue, in giving
promiscuous liberty to all, to believe and practice what they list in point of
Religion.

As for what he auouches concerning Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and
Forbearance of the Cup, that they are improbable opinions, and contrary to Gods
word, we answer, it is according to his custom to speak without proose; and
therefore we are not troubled at it. It Is that, which every Heretic may say,
if he please, (an Arian, as well as an English Protestant) the doctrine of the
Roman Church is improbable, is contrary to Gods word, where it contradicts
their particular Heresy. Nay, is it not a thing, they might as justly say of
the English Church, as of the Roman, viz. that she is in this regard worse and
more cruel then the Church of Israel; that she has Solemnly decreed
improbable opinions, to wit the doctrine of the Trinity, and the Deity of
Christ, and to keep of disobedience, how false soever her doctrine be, she
binds it up under pain of Excommunication; yea and kindles the faggot too
sometimes, when nothing else will serve the turn? Witness the books of Canons,
which inflicts Eccommunication ipso facto upon any that denies the 39. Articles
of the Church of England; and the proceedings against several persons, who
have been burned, hanged, draw'n, and quartered in this nation merely for
Religion, since Protestantisme bore sway here.

To false premises the Bishop ioynes a Conclusion as enigmaticall and
ambiguous. This then (says he) may be enough for us to leave Rome, though the
old Prophet (3. king. 13. 11.) left not Israel. By leaving Rome (...)
understands (surely) their refusing any longer to adhere to the Roman Church,
and to communicate with her in those things, which they account superstitions
and errors. But did not both that old Prophet, and also all the true Prophets
and people of God, in this sense, (...) corrupted Israel, in the time of
Aobaband and Jezabel? did they join (think you) with the Idolatrous Tribes in
the Sacrifices at Dan and Bethel?

9. The like is to be said of the comparison he mak's between A. C. and
Petilian the Donatist; it signifies not much. For who Ibidem.
sees not a manifest difference in the case and argument of these two? Petilian
would have Catholics refuse and desert the Churches Baptism, to embrace that
of the Donatists, only because Catholics (or the Catholic Church)
acknowledged the Donatists Baptism to be in it (...), valid, or true Baptism,
though by reason of their (...) the same Church likewise taught it to be (...)
sin and inconsistent with Salvation for any Catholic to seek their
Baptism voluntarily, or to admit of it otherwise then in case of extreme
necessity: whereas A. C. would have Protestants become Catholics upon this
ground viz. because, that even Protestants themselves, at least the most
learned, most wise, and most considerable among them, Doc grant us possibility
of Salvation, notwithstanding any thing that we believe, or do. How then can
the Bishop (as he pretends) answer A. C. just as St. Austin answered Petilian
the Donatist? That which deceived him is, that he did not well observe the
force of A. Cs. maxim, viz. that it is safest in order to Salvation to take
that way which both parties agree in; which imports not any agreement
whatsoever, indefinitely speaking, but determinately and specially such an
agreement, or an agreement, so far betwixt adverse parties concerning such a
point, or thing, as to acknowledge the belief, or doing of it does not destroy
Salvation, or does not hinder the parties being saved that does it. Had due
notice been taken of this, it would have saved him the trouble of bringing
this, and so many other instances, to noe purpose; of which more in due place.
Jn the mean time, we conceive the disparity betwixt the case and argument of
Petilian and A. C. so manifest, that it needs no further illustration.

10. But here the Relatour grows into choler, taking A. C. of a most (...)
untruth, and such, as an ingenuous man would not have spoken, for no other
reason but for saying, there is confessedly noe peril of damnation by living
and dying in the Roman Church. J answer, whateuer the Bishop granted, or
granted not, in express terms to A. C. touching this matter, it is certain,
that from what he does confess, it really and necessarily follows, that there
is no peril of damnation per se loquendo, or precisely, by living and dying in
the Roman Church. For first, as to the ignorant which hold the pretended
errors of our Church, but cannot. 34.
discern them, those he professedly exempts from peril of damnation, if they
conform themselves to a religious life. Secondly, he grants that such others
of the Roman Church, as do even (...) and knowingly associate themselves to
the gross superstitions of the Romish. 35. punct. 5
Church, if they hold the Foundation Christ, and live accordingly, are not to
be denied Salvation. Whence I argue. If, according to the Bishops (...), (...)
voluntary, nor inuoluntary superstition excludes a Papist from possibility of
being saved, it is no loud untruth, nor indeed so much as a mistake; to say,
that in the Roman Church there is confessedly noe peril of damnation, in the
sense abouesayd, that is, merely by living and dying in that Communion.

What he adds after this of some among us, who wish the superstitions
abolished which they know, and pray to God to forgive their errors in what
they know not, and would have all things amended that are amiss, were it in
their power, if he means, that such persons should know any superstitions
taught and allowed by the Church as duties of Religion, or that they would have
any thing amended in the Churches public Authorized doctrine, he mistakes
very much in supposing such persons to belong to our Church and Communion; it
being contrary to Catholic Faith to believe, that any such errors, or
uperstitions can be taught by the Church; and he might as well suppose (if he
had pleased) that those are Protestants, who go to Church, and join with
Protestants in exterior service, only to save their estates, or for some other
temporal ends, though they hold the Protestant Tenets, contrary to the
doctrine of the Roman Church, for no better then Heresies, and would, if it
were in their power, much more willingly hear Mass then common prayer, when
they go to Church. Neither can he be a Catholic, who prays to God to
forgive his errors, in any matter or point defined by the Church: for that
implies a belief, or doubt, that the Church may have erred in defining some
doctrine of Faith; which, according to us, is absolutely inconsistent whith
true Faith: no more then (we presume) he could have been thought a Christian,
or Protestant in the Bishops opinion, who should ask God forgiueness for
believing some thing delivered in Canonical scripture.

Jn answer to A. Cs. Assertion, whereby he preferrs, both for number and worth,
those who deny there is any peril of damnation by living and dying in the
Roman Church, before those who affirm there is, the Bishop, that he might more
easily confute the passage, first of all, cunningly diuides it, and endeauours
to show, that number alone, is no sufficient ground of truth. Who says it is?
Not A. C. J am sure; who as clearly as he could, joined both together, worth to
number, as a necessary supplement, and concluds what he intends, jointly from
them both. Now this term ( worth) comprehending, not only eminency of power and
authority, but also of virtue, learning, zeal, prudence, sanctity, etc. can
any man doubt, but those, who have the greater number and worth on their side,
are in all prudence to be thought rather in the truth, then those who have
incomparably less, or indeed nothing at all in comparison of them? His long
marginall allegations therefore (which mention number only) serve to no purpose,
but to amuse. And yet neither does A. C. nor any of us say, that our Faith
rests upon the number or worth of men (as the Bishop will needs insinuate) but
upon Gods infallible veracity and authority: number and worth of men being
only motives of credibility, to induce, and direct us prudently to determine, to
which of the two parties we are to give credit, when they teach us contrary
doctrines.

A. C. thought it so evident a thing, that those of the Catholic Ibidem.
belief, in the points controuerted betwixt us and Protestants, do
incomparably exceed those of the contrary party, as the Bishop would never
have called for a proof of it; as indeed it needs none. For if we compare
those spread over the whole face of Christendom for the last thousand years
(a space of time commonly granted us by our adversaries) who believed, as we
believe, and never dreamed of any peril, either of schism, Heresy, or sin,
by living and dying in the Roman Church, with those few, that since yesterday
as it were, began to dissent from us, and pretend there was peril of schism
etc. by living and dying in the said Church, we shall find these, in worth
and number just nothing in regard of the other. So that in truth, the Relatour
Ibidem.
himself (had he well considered it) should have blushed at his own extrauagant
objection ( you have not yet proved your party more worthy for life or
learning, then the Protestants) and not bid his adversary blush for speaking
the truth. For in this case who sees not, that all true Christians, who for a
thousand years together lived in the world, were, and are of our party?

II. But let us consider what other instances the Bishop brings to impugn A.
Cs. maxim, that it is safest to follow that way in Religion, in which the
differing parties agree there is possibility of Salvation. His first is taken
from the article of our Saviors descent Ibidem. (...)
into hell. The Church of Rome (says he) and the Church of England (dissenting
parties) do agree, that our Savior descended into hell, and that hell is the
place of the damned. Therefore, according to A. Cs. rule, it should be safest to
believe that our Savior descended into the place of the damned. But this
(says the Bishop) the Romanists will not endure; because St. Thomas, and the
school generally agree in it, that he went really no further then LIMBVS
PATRVM. I answer by denying his proposition. There is no such agreement of
parties, as the Bishop pretends; though the Church of Rome and the Church of
England do (both) agree, that our Savior descended into hell, yet they do
not (both) agree that by hell, either in the Creed, or in all places of
Scripture where hell is mentioned, is understood the place of the damned. Here
therefore our adversary clearly disputes ex falso supposito; and the argument,
in truth, may be much better retorted upon himself, thus. Both parties agree,
that Christ descended into hell: but both parties do not agree, that by hell
is understood here the place of the damned (for the greater and better part of
Divines hold the contrary) ergo, it is safer not to believe that he descended
into the place of the damned, then positiuely to assert it, as some English
Protestants do.

His next instance is about the Sacraments being received in both kinds; and
as little to the purpose as the former. For though we agree that our Savior
instituted the Sacrament Ibidem. (...) 2.
(that is, made it himself, and ordained it to be made by his Ministers) in
both kinds; yet we neither agree, that he instituted with intention, or gave
any command, that it should be always received in both kinds, by all the
Faithful: nor do we grant possibility of Salvation to any, that out of
private Heretical persuasion holds, it ought to be received by all, or out of
contempt of the Churches order to the contrary, do receive it in both kinds.
Our Savior gave it in one kind only to the two Disciples at Emmaus ( Lucae.
24.) as both St. Aug. lib. 3. de Consens. Evangelist. cap. 25.
Austin, St. Chrysostom. Homil. 16. operis imperfect. in Math.
Chrysostom, Hieron. in Epitaph. Pa lae.
St. Hierome, Theophyl. in cap. 24. Luc.
Theophylact, and Hesych. lib. 2. in Leuitic. cap. 9. Beda. in cap. 24. Luc.
others of the Ancients witness: whose example the Church following, always
allowed the use and manner of receiving this Sacrament, free as to the
Faithful, viz. either to receive it in both kinds, if their devotion inclined
them thereto, or only in one, in case they desired no more: till of later
times, the custom of receiving it in form of bread only, growing more
general, and inconveniences of receiving it in both kinds multiplying, the
Council of Constance totally abrogated the manner of receiving it in form of
wine, and inioyn'd what is now in use. Whence likewise it appears, 'twas not
injuriously, (as the Bishop pretends) but justly required of the Bohemians, not
to condemn the practice of the Church for receiving in one kind, when she
dispensed with them to receive in both.

To what he objects against the doctrine of concomitancy, invented (as he
says) by St. Thomas of Aquin, and contrary to truth; for that the Eucharist is
a Saerament of Blood, shed and powered forth, and not of Blood contained in the
Body; I answer, that howeuer the term it self might (perhaps) be first used by
the Angelical Doctor; yet the thing thereby signified was always the constant
doctrine of the Catholic Church; which ever taught, that by Consecration,
under each species the entire Sacrament, or whole Christ, was putt; and
therefore under each of them, as well the Body as the Blood, and as well the
Blood as the Body was contained: notwithstanding it be certain, that the
precise words, in the Consecration of bread express noe more, then Christ's
Body; nor those used in the Consecration of the chalice, any more, then Christ's
Blood. Wherefore to show what is in the Sacrament by force of the precise words
of Consecration, and what by virtue of natural connection, or union, Divines
commonly make use of this distinction, ex vi verborum, and per Concomitantiam.
Ex vi verborum, or by virtue of the precise words of Consecration, Christ's Body
only is under the form of bread, and his Blood only under the form of wine:
but per Concomitantiam, by reason of natural connection, or union, (whereby the
parts of Christ's Humanity are never to be divided one from an other) the Blood
is under the form of bread also, and his Body under the form of wine, and his
foul, and divinity or Godhead, under both. And this the Bishop must grant, if
he hold the real presence; except he would have us think, that Christ is dead
in the Sacrament, contrary to St. Paul, who plainly tolls us, Romans 6. 9. He
dies no more. As for the Priest that consecrates, there is a double necessity
for him to receive under both kinds. The first is gathered from Christ's words
spoken to his Apostles at the institution of this Sacrament, and interpreted to
us by the universal doctrine and practice of the Church. The second, grounded
upon the nature of the thing; which is not only a Sacrament, to be distributed
among the Faithful, but a true, proper, and perfect Sacrifice, representing
that upon the Cross; where not only Christ's Body was Crucified, but also his
Blood was shed for us. And therefore the Priest, who offers this Sacrifice of
the Altar, must not only consecrate in both kinds, but receive in both kinds,
to complete the sacrifice.

His third instance is about the Commemoratiue Sacrifice in Ibidem. punct. 3.
the Eucharist, wherein he pretends that they and we agree. But this is false,
speaking in the Protestants sense, or of such a Commemoratiue Sacrifice, as
excludes that, which is real and proper. Where did Catholics ever agree with
Protestants, that it was not (...) sin in them, to deny the true, real, and
propitiatory Sacrifice of the Eucharist? or, that they might be saved,
acknowledging only such a Commemoratiue Sacrifice in the Eucharist, as they
do? Let one only Author of the Roman Church be named, who teaches this; or
that bread broken, and wine powered out (understanding natural and substantial
bread and wine, as the Bishop must do, according to Protestant principles)
were, in true and proper sense, a Commemoratiue Sacrifice amongst Christians.
For this were to say in effect, that Christians under the Gospel, did really
Sacrifice to God natural bread and wine; and thereby add another Sacrifice to
that of Christ's Body: which were a very gross error.

In his fourth about the intention of the Priest in Baptism, Ibidem. punct. 4.
he lapses again. For what we agree with Protestants in, we stand to, as
most safe to be done in order to Salvation. Now this is only (in the present
case) that due matter and form must necessarily be used for the validity of
Baptism. Do any of us, or can any man deny, but it is safer in order to
Salvation, to use due matter and form in the Sacrament of Baptism, then not
to use them? The Bishop indeed would gather from hence, that we must also
account due matter and form sufficient without intention. But this is more
then the rule obliges us to do. The rule, Ibidem. punct.
certainly, binds A. C. to no more, then to acknowledge the thing, wherein
differing parties agree, to be saser then the contrary, or negative of it;
which we do clearly in this case.

His fifth instance is, that Catholics and Protestants agree, that in the
English Lyturgie there is noe positive error: but both parties do not agree,
that there is no error in the Roman Missal. Therefore, (says the Bishop)
according to A. Cs. rule, it should be better and more safe to worship God by
the English Lyturgie, then by the Roman Missal; which he is sure we will not
grant. I answer first, all Catholics do not agree, that there is no positive
error in the English Lyturgie; neither dares the Relatour affirm they do:
but only that some Jesuits confess't so much in his hearing. Secondly, though
they did; that is, though all Catholics did grant, there were no positive
error in the English seruicebooke, yet it follows not, that therefore the
English Lyturgie is better, or more safe to be used in the service of God, then
our Missal. Why? because Catholics do not agree, that it is so much as
positiuely safe, or consistent with Salvation, to use it as Protestants do
that is, out of Heretical persuasion, and with Heretical contempt of the
Roman Missal. For though it contains no positive error, yet to use it out of
any such principles, is certainly damnable sin, and destructive of Salvation.
The Arian Creeds contained no positive error against Faith; yet because they
did not contain all that was necessarily to be believed and confessed by
Christians, and were set forth by such as were known enemies of the
Catholic Faith, which was wanting in them, they were always anathematized and
condemned by the Church, as much as if they had contained positive and express
error. Did Catholics grant, that those, who both use the English Lyturgie,
and reject the Roman Missal as Protestants do, were for all that, in state of
Salvation, though they never repented, and did sufficiently know the grounds
and reasons, why the Church forbids the use of it, the argument would have
force: but seeing it is otherwise, our maxim stands yet good, and it is safer in
order to Salvation, to worship God according to the Roman Missal, rather then
according to the English seruice-booke; notwithstanding it were granted (which
we do not) that the English book contained no positive error.

To his Sixth of the Arians confessing Christ to be of like Ibidem. number. 8.
punct. 1.
substance with the Father, and the Catholics consessing him to be of the
same substance, J answer, the Catholics never granted possibility of
Salvation to the Arians upon the account of that Confession, but always
withstood and condemned it, as an Heretical, False and impious assertion,
taken in their known sense, that is, restrictiuely, and as importing no more
then like. For in this sense, that Maxim holds good, nullum simile est idem:
and to say the son of God was of like substance with the Father in that sense,
was plainly to deny him to be true God, and of the same substance with the
Father.

The like is to be said of his seventh, grounded upon the agreement of
dissenting parties in the Metaphorical Resurrection Ibidem. punct. 2.
of the soul from sin; whence the Bishop would gather, that by A. Cs. rule,
it should be safest to believe only the said Metaphorical Resurrection of the
soul, and let that of the body alone. But most untruly. For did ever any good
Christian allow possibility of Salvation to any that denied the Resurrection of
the body? If not, how is this instance within the rule? which supposes, that
both parties must agree in granting Salvation to one, in his way, or contested
opinion.

The same Fallacy is apparent in his Eighth and Ninth. For Ibidem. punct
(...).4.
did ever any Catholic Christian allow Salvation to a Turk, or a Jew, in his
Religion, because they believed one God; or to a Nestorian Heretic, because
he believed that Christ was true man? what gross impertinences are these? But
no marvel. For it is too apparent, our adversary has quite forgotten the
rule, and framed another thing of it. A. Cs. rule speaks precisely this,
andnomore; viz. that when two parties differ in point of Religion, it is in
prudence safest to take that way, wherein both parties grant Salvation to be
obtainable, or to contain nothing in it opposite, or inconsistent with
Salvation: whereas the Relatour presents it in an other dress, and makes it
speak thus; viz. that when parties disagree, as abouesayd, it is safest to
resolve a man's Faith into that, in which the dissenting parties agree, and to
believe no more then they do agree in: which is far from truth, and a thing
which never came into A. C.s thoughts: and yet upon this mistake it is evident
to any that will consider them, most of the Bishops instances run.

Tlius all the Relatours examples, duly weighed, are found too light, and
discovered to be indeed rather amusements, then proofs: A. Cs proposition, that
it is safest in Religion to go that way, which is confessed by both parties to
afford possibility of Salvation, or to contain no damnable sin in it,
remaining in the mean while, a firm and unshaken truth, notwithstanding all
our adversaries endeauours to undermine it. If any thing yet be wanting to the
due justifying of it, it shall be declared in the following chapter. At
present, the Bishop having made so many assaults in vain, seems to retire,
and put himself upon the defensive; Ibidem. number. 9
pleading, he is not out of the Catholic Church (though out of the Roman)
because the Roman is not the Catholic, but a member of it, as the Church of
England (he says) is: and requiring us to Ibidem, in margin.
show, how one and the same Church can be, in different respects and relations,
both a particular, and also the Catholic Church. But I answer, how often has
this been shown already, by all Catholic writers, (had his Lordship been
more willing to understand See chap. 10.
the truth from them, then to cavil about words) and also by us in this
treatise? namely, that the Roman Church, as it signifies the Christians of the
Diocese, or Province of Rome only, is a particular Church; but as it signifies
the Society of all such Christians, as professing the Catholic Faith, do
acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for St. Peter's Successor and Head of the whole
Church under Christ, so it is ( formally and properly speaking) not a
particular, but the very Catholic and universal Church of Christ; they
being all, either Heretical, or Schismatic Churches (or both) that do not
acnowledge this.

Our adversary therefore might flourish as much as he pleased, with his vain and
feigned Allegory of an elder and younger sister; Ibidem.
but we tell his followers, such Rhetorique may serve to palliate, but shall
never justify, nor excuse Schism. The Roman Church will be found, in the day
of account, to have been, not an elder sister, but a mother; and such a mother,
whose Prou, 1. 8.
Law and Authority was not so lightly to have been forsaken, and rejected by
any of her petulant and disobedient Daughters. Nor matters it much, whether
Britains first Conversion were before St. Peter's coming to Rome, or after. He
was Pastor of the universal Church, before he settled his seat at Rome: and
the British Christians, if any such were before that time, might very well (at
least for ought the Bishop shows to the contrary) be instructed by their
preachers to believe, and acknowledge him for such.

CHAP. 24. The conclusion of the point touching the Salvation of Roman
Catholics; and the Roman Faith, proved to be the same now, that it ever was.
ARGUMENT.
1. All Catholics in possibility of Salvation; and all Protestant teachers
excluded, by the Bishops own grounds. 2. No Church, different in doctrine from
the Roman, can be shown to have held all Fundamental points in all Ages. 3.
The Bishops confident pretense to Salvation, upon the account of his Faith,
rather presumptuous, then well grounded. 4. His pretending to believe, as the
Primitive Church and four first General Councils believed, disprou'd by
instance. 5. Christ's descent into LIMBVS PATRVM, the doctrine and worshipping of
Images, the public allowed practice of the Primitive Church. 6. A. C'.
Interrogatories defended. 7. Protestants, have not the same Bible with
Catholics, in any true sense. 8. The index expurgatorius, not devised by us
to corrupt the Fathers. 9. Noe disagreement amongst Catholics, in points
defined by the Church. 10. Catholics have infallible Faith of what they
believe either explicitly, or implicitly; but Protestants, none at all that
is infallible.

1. THe Controversy goes on touching Roman-Catholiques Salvation. The Bishop
having first yielded 36. number. 1.
absolutely, that the Lady might be saved in the Roman Faith, nettled a little
(as it seems) by Mr. Fishers bidding her mark that, returns smartly upon him
in these words, she may be better saved in it, then you, and bids him mark
that too. Well. we will not interpret this to be any restraining of his former
grant, touching the Ladies Salvation, but only an item to his adversary to
look to himself; for that, in the Bishops opinion, his case was not so good
as the Ladies in order to Salvation. But what is his reason? because (for
sooth) any man, that know's so much of the truth, as Mr. Fisher and others of
his calling, do, and yet opposes it, must needs be in greater danger. So that
it seems, learning and sufficiency, according to the Bishop, have such a
connection with Protestant doctrine, that it (...) easy matter to have the one,
and not to see the truth of the other. But how false this surmize is, appears
by the experience of so many learned men in the Catholic Church, who are so
far from discovering errors in the Roman Church, and truth in the contrary
doctrine of Protestants, that the more learned they are, and the better they
understand and weigh the grounds of Controversies, betwixt the Roman Church and
her adversaries, the more they are confirmed in the Catholic doctrine.

Again, what likelihood is there, that by pondering the pretended reasons of
Protestants for their Religion, I should ever come to a right and full
understanding of Divine truth's; seeing it is evident, that following their
principles I can be certain of nothing, that belongs to Divine Faith? For,
teaching as they do, that all particular men, all General Councils, and the
whole Church of God may err, what assurance can they give me, that either
their Canon of Scripture is true, or that the sense of the words of Scripture,
by which they prove their doctrine, is such as they understand; or that their
Church (which they grant to be fallible) does not err in those points, wherein
they disagree from us. Ibidem:


What he asserts afterward, by way of reason why he allows possibility of
Salvation to Roman Catholics, viz. because they are within the Church, and
that no man can be said simply to be out of the Church, that is Baptized and
holds the Foundation, is a Paradox, and may be proved to be false even from his
own grounds. For, seeing he has often delivered, that by Foundation he
understands only such points, as are Prime, Radical, and Fundamental in the
Faith, necessary to be known and expressly believed by all Christians, in
order to Salvation: and seeing that many Heretics are Baptized, and hold the
Foundation in this sense, what does he but bring into the Fold of the Church,
and make Members of Christ's Mystical Body, most of the Heretics that ever
were, and that, even while they remain most notoriously and actually divided
from it?

Nor is he content with one absurdity, unless he adioyne a second. Ibidem.
There is no question (says he) but many (viz. ignorant Catholics) were
saved in the corrupted times of the Church, when their Leaders, unless they
repented before their death (as it is morally certain, none of them did) were
lost. See here a heavy doom pronounced against all the Roman Doctors in
general. But what? were they all lost who repented not of those pretended
errors, which, as Pastors of the Roman-Catholique Church they taught so many
years together? How could that be? were they not all, even by the Bishops own
principles, members of the true visible Church of Christ, (notwithstanding
those errors) by reason of their being Baptized, and holding the Foundation?
If they neither lost that Faith, by which they were members of the true Church;
nor can be proved to have taught any false doctrine against their conscience
(by means Ibidem.
whereof they might fall from Grace) with what truth, or Charity could the
Bishop pronounce such a sentence against them?

He adds, that erroneous Leaders do then only perish, when they refuse to
hear the Churches instruction, or to use all the means they can, to come to
the knowledge of truth. But J demand, if no Misleaders but such, do perish,
with what countenance (conscience J might say) could the Relatour pass his
judgment of ours, in the manner he does, that they were lost? Can it with any
color of equity or truth, be charged upon them, that they refused the Churches
instruction? what visible Church was there in the whole world for so many
hundred years together, by which, had they been never so willing, they could
be instructed, to teach otherwise, then themselves taught in their respective
ages? and what other means could they be bound to use more then they did, to
come to the knowledge of truth?

Why should not our adversary, in reason, have rather excused (...).
these Leaders of the Roman Faith and Communion, from Heresy, and all other
damnable error, then he does even St. Cyprian himself and his followers?
seeing it is manifest, these last opposed, and contradicted the more general
practice of the whole visible Church; whereas the Roman Catholic Doctors had
always the universal practice of the Church on their side, in the points now
controuerted, and for which Protestants condemn them of error. The truth is,
the Bishop is a little entangled here. Something he must say by way of
threatening against Catholics, to keep his own people in awe, and to fright
them from becoming Catholics: but positiuely and determinately what to say,
he is scarce provided. He gives a hint at the difference between Error and
Heresy; but dares not so much as apply the distinction, for fear he should be
forced either to acquit our Leaders too manifestly, or otherwise pass such a
censure upon them, as he should not be able to maintain. But the wary Reader
will easily discover by his timorousness and hesitancy here, his uncharitable
temerity, and forwardness in the precedent passage.

He tells us likewise, that a teaching Heretic, if he add Schism to his
Heresy, is lost. Very good. We grant it no less willingly then himself; but
wonder, his Lordship would not first make it clear, that our teachers added
Schism and obstinacy to their errors, (as he is pleased to call them) before,
he gave sentence upon their persons, by saying that they were lost. But that
which he adds concerning St. Cyprian and his followers, gives a plain
advantage against him, and his followers; namely to prove, that all Leaders of
Protestant Religion are guilty both of Heresy and Schism; and by consequence
liable to damnation, except they repent. St. Cyprian, he says, was a maine
Leader in the error of Rebaptization; yet that the whole Church grants him
safe, and his followers only (that were after him) in danger of damnation. And
why this? but only because St. Cyprian did not refuse the Churches instruction,
did not obstinately and formally oppose the Churches authority; which had not
as yet defined the contrary doctrine. But after the Churches determination,
those that followed St. Cyprians error, and misled the people, were judged
both Heretics and -- Schismatiques, and that justly too, by the Bishops own
confession; and so, by consequence, were lost without repentance.

But is not this a conuincing instance against Luther, Calvin, and all other
ringleaders of the Protestant profession? does it not evidently prove them also
to be both Heretics and Schismatiques? did not they refuse to hear the
Churches instruction, as much as any of those post-nate followers of St.
Cyprian did? was not the contrary doctrine, to what these Protestant Leaders
taught, as much, and as solemnly defined by the Church, as that which was
contrary to the error of rebaptization? It Is evident therefore, if St. Cyprians
followers were justly accounted Heretics and in danger of damnation, for not
hearing the Churches instruction, given them by the voice of a General
Council, and for teaching contrary to what the Church had solemnly defined and
declared, as by the Bishops own discourse they were; neither Luther, nor
Calvin, nor any that succeed them in their doctrine and profession, can be
justly acquitted of the like crime.

If you answer, the whole Church of Christ condemned the error of
rebaptization; but the doctrine of Protestants was condemned only by the
particular Church of Rome, I ask what you mean by the whole Church? If all
such people, and all such particular Churches, as believe in Christ, and hold
all Fundadamentall points in Protestant sense; that will comprehend the
rebaptisers themselves, or those followers of St. Cyprians error; whom the
Bishop here confesses to have been Heretics. For doubtless they believed in
Christ, and held all points, which according to the Relatours principles, can
be accounted Fundamental, or absolutely necessary to Salvation; otherwise St.
Cyprian himself had erred in a point Fundamental. Therefore the whole Church,
in that sense, did not condemn the doctrine of rebaptization. And to say it
was the whole Church in any other limited sense, makes it in effect but a
particular Church in regard of the Church Catholic; and also, according to
the Bishops doctrine, no less fallible and subject to error, in defining
vnfundamentall points, (as this of rebaptization was) then was the Church which
condemned Protestant doctrine, whatsoever Church that was. Besides, how often
shall we be forced to reminde our adversaries, that when Luther first began to
oppose the Roman Church, the Protestant doctrine concerning Real Presence,
Invocation of Saints, Prayer for the dead, two Sacraments only, etc. was
contrary to the General belief of the whole Christian world; whereof the
far greater part also were such, as professed obedience to the Sea of Rome.

2. The greatest part of his (...). paragraph is taken up. 37.
with personal matters, and matters of fact, viz. what A. C. what Doctor
White, and the Bishop in their respective conferences with Mr. Fisher, said; in
which kind of differences, I shall not interpose. That which I shall observe
here, is, that the Bishop formalizeth without cause upon those words of A. C.
different from the Roman, which he uses page 67. where he tells us, that
Doctor White expressly granted, that he could assign no Church DIFFERENT FROM
THE ROMAN which in all ages held all Fundamental points. The Relatour will not
seem to understand, what A. C. bidem. number. 4.
means by a Church different from the Roman; whether he means different in
place, or different in doctrine. whereas if he had perused never so little
Doctor Whites answer, where it is first reported. page 22. he would have found
in express terms different in doctrine, twice over for failing. Beside, the
very acception wherein A. C. in that place, takes the word Roman Church,
towitt, for the whole visible Catholic Church, euinces, that he could not
mean any Church different from it in place, seeing the Roman Church in that
sense comprehends all places in Christendom, and all particular true Churches
throughout the Christian world.

Nor can it with truth be avouched, that the Greek Church has ever held and
taught the Foundation in all ages, as the Bishop pretends; seeing all, or most
of those Primitive Heresies, Arianisme, Eunomianisme, Nestorianisme,
Eutychianisme, etc. have been anciently embraced and professed respectively by
the Greek Patriarchs and their Churches at some time or other. Neither does
even the present Greek Church hold and teach it so entirely and soundly, as it
ought, even by the Relatours own Relat.. 9. page 24.
confession, touching their error about the Procession of the Holy Ghost.
Lastly we have proved, chap. 1. of this treatise, that the Greeks error in
that point is Fundamental, and sufficient to unchurch them.

By a Church different from the Roman then, the Relatour should have here
understood, without making any scruple about it, a Church different from her,
not in place, but in doctrine; and differing also not in points Fundamental
only, (which is an other scruple too, as needlessly added) but in points not
Fundamental also in Protestant sense; that is, a Church differing from the
Roman in any point of doctrine which the Roman Church now teaches; or in any
of those points, which Protestants reject, and for which they separate
themselves from the Roman Church. This, we say, was the sense of Mr. Fishers
demand to Doctor White; and consequently must be the sense of Doctor Whites
answer and concession to him, viz. that noe Church, differing in any points of
doctrine what ever, (Fundamental, or Not-Fundamentall) from the present Roman,
could be assigned, which held in all ages all Fundamental points. And if our
adversaries like not his answer, we challendge them again to show us such a
Church.

Moreover we auerre, that from Doctor Whites grant abouementioned, Ibidem.
number. 5.
A. C. inference is rightly gathered, namely, that the Roman Church held and
taught in all ages, unchanged Faith in all Fundamental points, and did not in
any age err in any point Fundamental: and that the Bishops Criticisme is much
more subtle, then solid; when, to make good his denial of it, he distinguishes
betwixt the holding unchanged Faith in all Fundamental points, and the
Not-erring in any Fundamental point; granting the first of these, viz. that
the Roman Church has in all ages held unchanged Faith in all such points, to
follow out of Doctor Whites concession, but not the second, viz. that she has
not erred in any point Fundamental. But with what ground, or consonancy to
himself and truth, let the Reader judge.

His precense is, that the Church of Rome has kept the Faith unchanged only in
the expression, as he calls it, or bare letter of the Article; but has erred
in the exposition, or sense of it. J answer, if she has erred in the
exposition, and sense of an Article, how can she be truly said to have held it?
Can any man with truth say, that the Arians held the Article of Christ's
Diuiunity, or the Antitrinitarians, the doctrine of three divine Persons,
because they allow, and hold Scriptures, in which these Mysteries are
contained? who ever (...) this word hold, in a question of Faith, to signify
no more then profession, or keeping of the bare letter of the Article, and not
the belief of the Mystery it self in its true sense? Is it not all one to
say, Roman Catholics hold the doctrine of Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Invocation of Saints etc. and to say, they believe the said doctrines? Jf then
it be true, that the Church of Rome has ever held all Fundamental points,
it is likewise true, that she has ever believed them: and if she has ever
believed them all, it is manifest she has not erred in any; there being noe
other way (properly and truly speaking) whereby a man can err against an
Article of Faith, but only by disbeleeuing it.

If therefore it be granted that the Roman Church held and believed in all ages
all Fundamental points, it is by necessary Ibidem.
consequence likewise granted, that she never erred in any such points, how
unwilling soever the Bishop is to have it so. He tells us indeed (but his
accusation has noe proof,) that our Church has erred grossly, dangerously,
nay damnably in the exposition of Fundamental points; that in the exposition
both of Creeds and Councils, she has quite changed and lost the sense and
meaning of some of them; lastly that her beauty, in this respect, is but mere
painting, as preserving only the outside, and bare letter of Christ's doctrine,
but in regard of inward sense and belief, being neither beautiful nor sound.
Thus he. But was ever calumny more falsely and injuriously advanced? Let our
adversaries show, in what one Article of all the three Creeds, the Roman Church
has either lost its true sense, or erred in her exposition of it. Beside, they
must likewise show, how this censure can stand with the Bishops former grant,
touching the possibility of Catholics Salvation. Jf true Faith in all
Fundamental points be necessary to Salvation (as it is certain none can be
saved without it) and that true Faith consists in the sense and inward belief,
and not in the bare letter, how can those, which live and dye in the Roman
Churches Communion, believing all things as she teaches, and noe otherwise,
attain Salvation?

3. The Lady here asks a second question, whether she might be saved in the
Protestant Faith; in answering whereof the parties conferring are again put
into new heats. upon my soul (says the Bishop) you may. upon my soul (says
Mr. Fisher) there is. 38. number 1.
but one saving Faith, and that is the Roman. You see their mutual confidence;
but which of them is better grounded the Reader must judge. Mr. Fisher seems
to lay the ground of his, upon that which cannot be denied to be a Fundamental
means, and condition also, of Salvation, viz. Catholic Faith; which unless
it be entirely and inuiolately professed, saues none: witness St. Athanasius in
Whosoever will be Saved, before all things, it is necessary that he hold the
CATHOLIQVE FAITH: Which FAITH, except every one do keep WHOLE and UNDEFILED,
with out doubt, he shall perish everlastingly. See the English Lyturgie.
his Creed, admitted by Protestants. The Bishop declares the ground of his
assertion in these words. To believe the Scripture and the Creeds; to believe
these in the sense of the Ancient Primitive Church; to receive the four great
General Councils, so much magnifyed by Antiquity; to believe all points of
doctrine generally received by the Church as Fundamental, is a Faith, in which
to live and dye cannot but give Salvation to which he adds; in all the points
of doctrine that are contreuerted between us, I would feign see any one point
maintained by the Church of England, that can be proved to depart from the
Foundation. This, in fine, is the ground of the Bishops confidence.

But I answer, his Lordship fails in two things. The first, that he does not
show, that such a Faith as he here mentions, is sufficient to Salvation,
notwithstanding whateuer error, or opinion, may be joined with it. The second,
that he does not show, that at least his English-Protestant Faith is really and
indeed such a Faith as he here professes; that is, in nothing different from
the Faith of the Ancient Primitive Church, and from the doctrine of those four
great General Councils he speaks (...). For as to the first of the pariculars,
did not the Bishop himself but even now affirm, that St. Cyprians followers
were lost, without repentance, because they opposed the authority of the
Church, which in, and by a General Council had declared their opinion to be
erroneous? Put case then, that in aftertimes the whole Church, or a General
Council of like Authority with that of Nice, should declare some other opinion
to be erroneous, which were not sufficiently declared to be so, either by
Scripture, Creeds, or those Four first General Councils; were not he that
should hold it, after such definitive declaration of the Church, or Council, in
a like damnable condition with those followers of St. Cyprian, though he
believed the Scripture the Creeds, and four first General Councils? If not,
let our adversaries show, why rebaptizers only should be put into a damnable
condition merely by the authority of the Church, or the Councils definition,
and other people, who do no less resist and contradict like definitions and
authority, should not.

Does not the Bishop himself in effect teach it to be damnable sin, to
oppose the definition of a General Council, when he auerrs, that the decrees
of it bind all particulars to obedience, and submission, till the contrary be
determined by an other Council of equal authority; and censures the doing
otherwise for a bold fault of daring times, and inconsistent with the Churches
peace? How can this possibly be made good, if to believe Scripture and. 33.
number. 5.
the Creeds in the sense of the Primitive Church, with all Fundamental points
generally held for such and to receive the four first General Councils only,
and noe more, be a Faith, in which to live and dye, cannot but give Salvation?
Did our Savior mean the Primitive Church only, or only the four first
General Councils and noe others, when he said, Matthew. 18. 17. He that does not
hear the Church, let him be unto thee, as an Heathen and Publican? And if it
be to be understood (as without doubt it is) of the Church and General
Councils in all ages, how could the Bishop, how can Protestants think
themselves secure, only by believing the four first Councils, and the Church
of Primitive times, if they oppose and contradict others, or contemn the
authority of the true Catholic Church of Christ, that now is?

And for the second, viz. that the English-Protestant Faith is not really and
indeed such a Faith, as the Bishop here professes, will appear upon
examination, thus. You believe, say you Protestants, the Scripture and the
Creeds; and you believe them in the sense of the Primitive Church. J ask
first, do you mean all Scripture, or only a part of it? if part of it only,
how can your Faith be thought such as cannot but give Salvation; seeing for
ought you know, there may be damnable error and sin, in rejecting the other
part? If you mean all Scripture, you profess more then you are able to make
good; seeing you refuse many books of Scripture, that were held Canonical by
very many in the Primitive Church, and admit for Canonical, diverse others
that were, for some time, doubted of, and not reckoned for any part of the
Canon, by many ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, more then those were,
which for that reason chiefly, you account Apocrypha.

4. You pretend to believe both Scripture and Creeds in the sense of the
Primitive Church. But when will this be proved? we bring diverse testimonies
from the Fathers and Doctors of those ancient times, understanding and
interpreting Scripture in a sense wholly agreeable to us, and contrary to your
doctrine. Must all our allegations be esteemed apocryphal, and counterfeite,
or misunderstood, because they impugn your reformed belief? must nothing be
thought rightly alleged, but what suites with your opinions? you pretend
conformity with the four first General Councils too: but the proceedings of
those Councils clearly show the quite contrary. The Council of Nice beseeches
Pope Syluester to confirm their decrees. Do Protestants acknowledge the like
authority in the Pope? The great St. Athanasius, Athanas. Apol. 2.
with the Bishops of Egypt, assembled in the Council at Alexandria, profess,
that in the Council of Nice it was with one accord determined, that without
consent of the Bishop of Rome, neither Councils should be held, nor Bishops
condemned. Do not the Fathers of the Relat. 6. Synod. ad (...)
Council of Chalcedon, by one common voice profess, that St. Peter spoke by the
mouth of Leo; that the said Pope Leo endowed with the authority of St. Peter,
deposed Dioscorus? Do they not call him the universal Bishop the universal
Patriarch, the Bishop of the universal Church? Do they not term him the
Interpreter of St. Peter's voice to all the world? Do they not acknowledge him
their Head, and themselves his members, and consets, that the custody, or
keeping, of Christ's vineyard (which is the whole Church) was by our Savior
committed to him? Js this the dialect, or belief, of English Protestants?

Did not likewise the D. Aug. Ep. 90.
whole Council of Carthage desire Jnnocentius the first, Bishop of Rome, to
confirm what they had decreed against the Pelagian Heresy, with the authority
of the Sea Apostolic, pro tuenda Salute multorum etc. for the saving of many,
and for correcting the perverse wickedness of some? and did they not with all
reverence and submission receive the Popes answer, sent to them in these words.
Innocent. F.p. ad Council. Carth. qua est 91. inter Ep. D. Aug.
In requirendis hisce rebus etc. you have made it appear (says he) not only
by using all diligence, ( as is required of a true and Catholic Council) in
examining matters of that concernment, but also in referring your debates to
our judgment and approbation, how sound your Faith is, and that you are
mindful to observe in all things the examples of ancient tradition and the
discipline of the Church: knowing, that this is a duty which you owe to the
Apostolic Sea; wherein we all desire to follow the Apostle, from whom both
the office of Episcopacy and all the authority of that name is derived: and
following him, we cannot be ignorant, both how to condemn what is ill, and
also to approve that which is praiseworthy. oYou do well therefore, and as it
becomes Priests, to observe the customs of the ancient Fathers, which they
grounded not upon humane, but divine authority, that nothing should be finally
determined in remote Provinces, without the knowledge of this Sea; by whose
full authority the sentence given, if it were found to be just, might be
confirmed; this (Sea) being the proper Fountain, from which the pure and
uncorrupted waters of truth were to stream to all the rest of the Churches.
Will English Protestants consent to this?

Do not the Prelates in the Council of Ephesus, hear, with like attention and
approbation, Philip the Priest, one of the Popes Legates to that Council,
auouching publicly in full Council, the authority of St. Peter's Successor in
these words, nobody doubts (says he) nay it is a thing manifest, and
acknowledged in all ages, that the holy and most Blessed Peter, PRINCE AND HEAD
OF THE APOSTLES, AND FOUNDATION OF THE CHVRCH, received from our Lord Jesus
Christ the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven, and that to this day he still lives
in his Successors, and determines causes of Faith, and shall ever continue so
to do? With what confidence then could the Bishop pretend, that Protestants
conform themselves to the doctrine of the four first General Councils? Those
Councils submitt their definitions and decrees to the Bishop of Rome;
Protestants disclayme from him, as from an enemy of Christ's Gospel. Those
Councils acknowledge him universal Pastor, and Head of the Church;
Protestants cry out against him, as an Usurper, and Tyrant over the Church.
Those Councils confess him St. Peter's Successor, who was Prince and Chief of
the Apostles; Protestants call him, and esteem him Antichrist. The Councils,
own his authority over the whole Church, as proceeding from Christ; Protestants
allow him noe more power, by divine right, then they allow to every ordinary
Bishop. Lastly, these Councils, with all submission profess, that the Pope was
their Head, and themselves his members; Protestants give us, in contempt and
derision, the nickname of. Papists for doing the same; that is, for owning
subjection to the Pope and Sea of Rome.

I might instance in many other points, wherein Protestants disagree from the
four first General Councils; but I pass them over, to take notice of what
follows. There is (says the Bishop) but one saving Faith. But then every
thing, which you call DE FIDE (of Faith) because some Council or other has
defined it, is not such a breach from that one saving Faith, as that he which
expressly believes it not, nay as that he which believes the contrary, is
Ibidem.
excluded from Salvation; so his disobedience therenhile offer no violence to
the peace of the Church, nor the charity that ought to be amongst Christians.
We do not say that every thing is de Fide, that some Council, or other,
indefinitely speaking, be it general or particular, hash defined; but that
every thing is de fide, which is defined by a Lawful General Council. And for
this, how contemptuously soever he is pleased to speak of it, ( because some
Council or other has defined it) we challenge all his adherents to show, what
one General Council (acknowledged for such either by themselves, or us) did
ever define any point of doctrine, which they did not require all Christians to
hold and believe as matter of Faith, after it was so defined: as likewise to
show, how it is possible for Christians to disbeleeue what such a General
Council has defined, without making themselves guilty of that sentence of our
Savior, Matthew. 18. 17. He that will not hear the Church, let him be as an
Heathen, or Publican; yea of that other, Luc. 10. 16. He that despises you,
despises me.

Why shall not such a man be excluded from Salvation, seeing that by the
Bishops own doctrine the decrees of all General Councils are binding, till
they be reuers'd by an other Council of like authority? why did he account it
damnable sin to adhere to the condemned error of St. Cyprian, after it was
condemned by a General Council; seeing it is manifest, disobedience in that
particular did of it self, neither offer more violence to the peace of the
Church, nor to the charity that ought to be amongst Christians, then
disobedience in points determined by other General Councils, is apt to do,
and has ever done, as experience witnesses? So that in truth, to suppose a
disobedience to General Councils in point of defined doctrine, which shall
offer no violence to the peace of the Church, nor to charity that ought to be
amongst Christians, is to suppose an impossibility, and in effect, to think,
that rebellion may consist with the peace of the state, and that to cast of
obedience to superiors is not to contemn their authority.

We do not deny but there is a Latitude in the Faith, as Ibidem.
the Bishop speaks; that is, all things pertaining to the doctrine of Faith
are not necessary to be expressly known and believed by all persons in order
to Salvation; and this Multa sunt quaenon Fide, quae non sunt absolute
necessaria ad Salutem. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Eccl. Mil. cap. 14. Quinto, si (...).
Bellarmin's authority cited by the Bishop rightly proves. But it follows not
from hence, that any man may deny, or doubt of any point whatsoever, that he
knows is defined and proposed by the Church to be believed, as the Bishop and
all Protestants do. It is not in it self absolutely necessary to Salvation,
to know or expressly believe many things reported in Scripture; as for Example,
that Judas hanged himself, that St. Paul was thrice beaten with rods, that he
left his cloak at Troas etc. but yet, for any man to deny, or doubt of these,
knowing them to be testified in Scripture, I do not doubt, but even
Protestants themselves will acknowledge to be a great sin, and without
repentance inconsistent with Salvation. In like manner, though it be not
absolutely necessary to know, or believe expressly all verities defined by the
Church, (as Bellarmin truly teaches) yet it may be, and is absolutely necessary
not to disbeleeue, or doubt of any one point that is known to be so defined.

As for our adversaries being sure, that our peremptory establishing so many
things, that are remote deductions from the Foundation, to be believed as
matters of Faith, has, with other Ibidem.
errors, lost the peace and unity of the Church, it is but a partial and
groundless faney, which all Heretics and Schismatiques will plead as well as
himself; when they are put to it, and may with as much right. Was there not
more disturbance and tumults in the Church, during those Primitive ages, by
reason of Arianisme, Pelagianisme, Manicheisme, and other Heresies that then
raged, then there was for many hundred of years together before Luther began?
in which time neuertheless either all, or most of the points now contested by
Protestants, were as fully defined by the Church, and as generally believed by
Christians, as now they are. With what truth, or conscience then can it be
said, that the defining, or establishing such points have lost the peace of the
Church? True it is, the Greekish Church has opposed the Roman for a long time;
but what does that help Protestants? seeing the world know's, it is not for
such points as Protestants do now condemn in the Roman Church, but for such
errors as they themselves, for the most part, do as much condemn in the
Greeks, as the Roman Church does. It Is evident, the Greek Church consents with
the Roman, in all the chief points of controversy betwixt the Roman Church
and Protestants: and this general peace of the Church might still have
continued, had not the pride, arrogance, and temerity of Protestant Predicants
first opened the gap to dissension, by reviving and setting on foot condemned
Heresies, and by cooperating to so many other wicked, Schismatic and
unchristian disorders, under pretense of reformation and obedience to the
Gospel.

A: C. tells his adversary, it is not sufficient to beget a confidence in this
case, to say we believe the Scriptures and the Creeds, in the same sense which
the ancient Primitive Church believed them. What says the Bishop to this? He
confesses it is most true, (to wit, that Ibidem. number. 2.
which A. C. told him) if he 'did only SAY so, and did not believe as he said.
But (says he) if we do say it, you are bound in charity to believe us,
unless you can prove the contrary. For I know no other proof to men, of any
point of Faith, but confession of it and subscription to it! J reply, the
Bishops answer falls short of A. Cs. demand. For who can doubt, but A. C. when
he told the Bishop it was not sufficient in this case to say we believe
Scripture etc. meant, that beside verbal profession and giving it under his
hand, that he does believe so and so, he should prove it by solid and
conuincing arguments, that the sense in which he believes the Scripture and the
Creeds, is the same with that, in which the ancient Primitive Church believed
them? for otherwise, he can neither be sufficiently assured himself, nor can
he give sufficient assurance there of to others.

Just reason, I fay, had A. C. to demand this of the Bishop namely, that he
should prove his Faith to be agreeable to that of the Primitive Church,
obsignatis tabulis as they say, that is, by special undeniable evidence, and
not think it sufficient only to profess and affirm it to be so. But
Protestants (to note it only in a word by the way) have not the like reason to
require any such thing of us Catholics, viz. that we should positiuely and
by special evidence prove our Faith to be the same with that of the Primitive
Church; not that we are unable, or unwilling to do this in due time and
place, but because being in full and quiet possession of our Faith, Religion,
Church, and all things pertaining thereto; by immemoriall Tradition and
succession from our ancestors, we do upon that sole ground viz. of quiet
possession, justly See Teriullian's whole book de prescriptionibus etc. for
this.
prescribe against our adversaries; and our plea must in all Law and equity be
admitted for good, till they (who are our aggressours in this case) do by more
pregnant and conuincing arguments disprove it and show, that our possession is
not bonafidei, but gained by force, or fraud, or some other wrongful and
vnallowed means.

A Gentleman, that is in quiet possession of an estate received from his
ancestors, is not to be outed of it, because an other says, and perhaps
believes, he has a better title to it; neither is (...) in possession to be
forced to make good his title by producing his evidence, but the other is bound
to euict him, and demonstrate that his possession is not good, and to show by
special evidence and proof, that his own claim is better; otherwise in stead
of gaining an estate, he will get nothing but a check. In like manner the
Lady, being in possession of a Faith, which for many ages together, had been
professed by her ancestors, and generally by the whole Christian Church, it is
not the Bishops telling her, that he believes the Scriptures and Creeds in the
same sense the ancient Church believed them, that must either turn her out of
the Church of Rome, or justly move her to believe, that the Faith of
Protestants is agreeable to that of the Primitive Church; but he must make it
appear to be so, by producing evident and clear testimonies out of all, or
the chief Doctors of those ancient times; otherwise his pretended belief of
any such matter, is to be accounted folly, and his confidence, rashness.

I add, how is it possible for the Bishop to make good what his answer
pretends viz. that his English Protestant Faith is the same with that of the
Primitive Church. English Protestants (for example) believe the Popes power
iure diuino, is no more then of an other ordinary Bishop: but the Primitive
Church accounted him to be the Souereign Bishop of the Church, the Bishop of
Bishops, witness Tertull. lib. de pudicit. cap. 10.
Tertullian; and this, long before the Canons of the Church, or Imperial
Constitutions had given him any authority. The Primitive Church believed, that
the authority of the Roman and Apostolic Sea, over all other Churches and
Christians, was not from men, but from our Lord Jesus Christ. Witness the
Epistles of Epist 1.
St. Clement, Epist. 3.
St. Anaclet, Ep. 2.
St. Sixtus the first, Ep. 1. 2.
St. Pius the first, Ep. 2.
St. Anicet, Epist 1. See Tom 2. Council. Edit. Bin.
St. Victor, with diverse other Epistles of those ancient Primitive Popes, and
Martyrs of the first ages of the Church: all of them clearly testifying and
asserting the souereign authority of the Bishop of Rome as he is St. Peter's
Successor, and of the Roman Sea over all other Churches and Christians
whatsoever. So as even the Centur 2. cap. 7. in sine.
Centurists themselves, and all other Protestants never so little ver'st in
antiquity, are forced to confess it. They pretend indeed, that these Epistles
are counterfeite, and not the genuine Epistles of these Popes. A weak plea:
for, beside what we have already said in derence of them, it is certain, that
Isidorus Hispalensis, who is an Author of above a thousand years antiquity.
In his collection of Ecclesiastical Canons, mentions these Epistles as owned
by the Bishops of his time, and professes, that himself was specially
commanded by a Synod of fowrescore Bishops, to make his collection out of them,
as well as out of other Epistles and writings, which Protestants do not
question. Not to urge, that the Council called vasense celebrated in St. Leo
the firsts time mentions some of them; and Ruffin. praefat in Recognit. Clement.
Rufinus himself others, who was contemporary with St. Hierome: nor yet the
absolute conformity, in point of doctrine and style, that there is betwixt
those Primitive Epistles, and those of succeeding Popes in the most flourishing
ages of the Church: viz. Julius the first, Pope Damasus, Syricius, See Magd.
Cent. 3. 4. et 5. Item. Calvin. lib 4. Institue. cap. 7.. 11.
Innocentius, Leo, and others, which even Protestants themselves neither do,
nor can pretend to be forged; but only say, that the Popes of those times were
arrogant men, and began to take too much upon them.

The Primitive Church believed the root and original of Heresies to be, Neque
enim aliunde Haereses obortae sunt, aut nata Schismata, quam inde, quod
Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur, nec VNVS in Ecclesia ad tempus SACERDOS, ^^ ad
tempus IVDEX, vice Christi, cogitatus: cui, si secundum magisteria diuina
obtemperaret FRATERNITAS VNIVERSA, nemo aduersus. Sacerdotum Collegium quicquam
mussitaret, D. Cyprian. Ep. 55. ad Cornel. alias lib. ^. Epist. 3.
because the whole Fraternity of Christians did not, according to Gods
commandment, acknowledge ONE PRIEST AND ONE JUDGE for the time being, Vicar
of Christ in the Church. The Primitive Church professed, that for what
concerned the correction and consolation of the Faithful (to wit, in matter
of Religion and Faith) the Roman and Apostolic Sea was the bond and mother of
all Churches. Witness St. Athanasius and the Bishops of Egypt with him in their
D Athanas. Tom 4.
Epistle to Pope Marcus, that the form and pattern of that Church was to be
followed in all things: witness D. Ambros. lib. 3. de Sacram. cap. 3.
St. Ambrose and the whole Council of Arles in their Epistle and petition to
Pope Julius. The Primitive Church accounted them all Scismatiques, and sinners
(...), that set up an other Chair against that one Chair of St. Peter in the
Roman Church. Witness Optat. Mileu. lib. 2. contr. Par. men.
optatus Mileuitanus, that the Roman Church was that sealed Fountuine and
Garden enclosed, to which all must repair for the waters of life; that she is
the Rock, upon which the Church is built; that to be out of her Communion, was
to be an Alien from the household of God, to be out of the Church, to be as a
profane, or unclean person (who might not come into the Camp, or
Congregation, of Israel:) in brief it was to belong, not to Christ, but to
Antichrist, witness Hieron. Ep. ad Damas.
St. Hierome. The Bishops of the Primitive Church, being at any time
persecuted and uniustly eiected out of their Seas, from all parts and Provinces
of Christendom, had recourse to the Pope and Sea of Rome, as to their proper
and lawful Judge, for justice and relief; and were likewise by him righted,
and for the most part effectually restored to their Seas again. Witness the
examples, already alleged, of St. Athanasius and his fellow Bishops eiected by
the Arians: also of St. D. Chrysostom. Epist. ad innocent
Chrysostom, Socrat. lib. 2. cap., 15 D. Basil. Epist. ad Athanas.
The odoret, and diverse others. Lastly, not to insist upon many other
particular Acknowledgements of the Popes authority, already mentioned and
proved in this treatise, the Primitive Church believed, that the Principality
of the Apostolic Sea had always flourish'tin in the Roman Church, and that by
reason there of the Pope had power both to judge in matters of Faith, and also
finally to decermin the causes of all Bishops whatsoever. Witness D. Agust.
Epist. 162.
St. Austin, the Councils Council. (...). Cau. 4. et 7.
of sardica, (...) ad Caelestinum.
Ephesus, Cone. Cha leed. Act. 1
Chalcedon, with the Emperor Valentinian himself, in his Epistle to
Theodosius, (...) among the preambulatory Epistles of the Council of (...).

Here you see a General consent of the Fathers of the Primitive Church for
belocning the so much contested Power and Principality of St. Peter and his
Successors, over the whole Church. Do the Bishop and his English Protestant
Church believe this? Do they interpret Scripture and the Creeds in this sense?
Again Protestants deny that there is a Purgatory; or that the souls of the
faithful departed do either need, or can receive any kind of help or
benefitt, any kind of relief, case of pain, or other consolation from the
faithful living. Yet it was the general belief of the ancient Primitive
Church, that they could, and did many of them receive help and benefitt, after
their departure, from the faithful Living; namely by the Oblation, or
Sacrifice of the Holy Eucharist; by the prayers, alms-deeds, and other offices
of Christian piety, that were done for them; grounding this their belief both
upon Tradition and several texts of Scripture; as we shall make further to
appear in the following chapter, where this point is particularly to be
treated. How therefore could the Bishop, or how can Protestants pretend, that
their Faith is agreeable to the Primitive Church, and that they interpret
Scripture in the sense of that Church?

5. But the Relatour, if he cannot make good his own cause, at least he
endeauours to show, that we Romanists, do not believe Scripture and the
Creeds in all points according to that sense, in which the Primitive Church
understood them. The Primitive Church (says he) never interpreted the descent
of Christ into Hell, to be no lower then LIMBVS PATRVM. But how will it be made
to appear, that the Primitive Church interpreted Ibidem. number. 3.
Christ's descent to be as low, as the place, where the reprobate are tormented?
Because it is said in the Creeds, that Christ descended into Hell, must we
needs understand that he descended even to the place of reprobate and damned
souls? Did Jacob mean that place, of punishment, when, expressing his grief
for the supposed death of his son Joseph, Genes. 37. 35. he said I will go
down to my son, mourning into Hell? Does not Calvin himself grant in effect
what our Church understands by Limbus Patrum, Calvin. in Psychopanny chia
when he says, Let no body wonder, that the holy Fathers, who expected Christ's
redemption, were shut up in prison? Does not St. Irenaeus, that ancient father,
affirm, Iren. lib. 5. cap. 31.
that in those three days and nights, in which Christ was dead, he remained
with the Patriarchs; who could not be held to be among the damned? Does he not
likewise teach, that Iren. lib. 4. cap. 45.
our Savior desoended to them that are under the earth, that he might make
known his coming, and acquaint them, with the remission of sins, given to
all those, that believe in him? Does not Origin plainly avouch, that Origin.
Hom. 15. in Genes.
Christ delivered from the place into which he descended, our first Father
Adam; whom none will auerre to have been among the damned? and does he not
understand those words of Christ to the good thief, (Luc. 23.) hodie mecum
eris in Paradiso ( this day shall thou be with me in Paradise) to have been
Idem. ibid.
verifyed also of all those to whom Christ descended? Does not Eusebius (...)
say Eusebius. Casar. lib. 4. de Praep. euang. cap. 12.
that the soul of Christ, having recommended it self to the Eternal Father,
left the body, and descending into Hell delivered from thence the Fathers? In a
word, does not St. Hierome by Hell understand Limbus-Patrum, when he says, D.
Hieron, Epist. 3.
that before Christ, Abraham was ( apud Inferos) in Hell, but after Christ,
even the thief is in Paradise? Why therefore should the Bishop so peremptorily
deny, that by Hell, into which Christ descended, none of the ancient fathers
did understand Limbus Patrum?

But he proceeds. The Primitive Church (says he) did not acknowledge a
Purgatory in a side part of Hell. But it did acknowledge Ibidem.
a Purgatory, which the Bishop denies. Let Protestants but grant there is a
Purgatory; and the Church of Rome will not bind them to place it in a side
part of Hell; this being noe article of our belief. The Primitive Church
(says the Bishop) did not interpret away half the Sacrament from Christ's
institution: neither did it ever interpret Christ's institution to be such, as
did oblige all Christians, under pain of sin, to receive it in both kinds, as
we have already proved. The Primitive Church did not make the Priests
intention to be of the essence of the Sacrament etc. very true: neither does
our Church make it to be so; but it was Christ himself, that so ordained it,
chap. 22.
as we have also shown. The Primitive Church believed no worship to be due to
Jmages. But how will it be proved they believed it to be sin, and unlawful
to worship them for their Prototypes sake? Does not Lactantius in the Primitive
Church, write thus in his Poem de Passione, addressing his speech to a
Christian, as then entering into the Church -- Flecte genu, lignumque Crucis
VENERABILEADORA? -- Does not St. Basil. ( Epi st. 53. in Julian.) reported in
the second Council of Nice. Action. 2. profess, that he publicly adored
Jmages; D. Basil. lib. de Sp. Sto. cap. 27.
and that the honor done to them, redounds to the persons whom they
represent? Does not St. Ambrose praise the Empress St. Helena D. Ambros. orat.
in obit. Theodosij
for setting the Cross upon the head, or crown, of Kings, that it might be
adored in them? and does not St. Hierome report of her, that having at
Jerusalem happily found the Cross, upon which our Savior suffered, D. Hieron.
in Epitaph. Paulae.
she adored it as if she had even then seen our Lord hanging upon it? Does not
St. Chrysostom D. Chrysostom. Homil. de Adorat. Crucis. Tom. 5.
likewise exhort Christians to come with fear and devotion to worship the
Cross upon the aniuersary, or yearly holy * day, on which they were then wont
solemnly to perform that duty, as Roman Catholic generally now do upon
Goodfryday? Does not Paulinus Paulin. Epist. 11. ad Seueru^.
Bishop of Nola mention the like custom in Jtaly? Iustiniane in Aushensis. de
Monach. Collat. 1. Tit 5.
and Justinian the Emperor style the Cross in that very regard adorandam vere,
and honorandam Crucem? To conclude (omitting diverse other pregnant instances
of the perpetual use and veneration also of sacred Images, among Christians,
related by lib. 7. c. 14.
Eusebius, lib. 2. c. 19.
Historia Tripartita, lib. 2. c. 41.
Nicephorus and others,) if the Primitive Church acknowledged no worship to be
due to Images, how could the General Council, according to the latin
translation of it, style them venerabiles, and Can. 82.
profess to give adoration to them MENTE, SERMON, SENSV, both in mind, body,
and words? Yea, how could St. Gregory say, non quasi ante D. Greg. lib, 7.
Epist. 53 -- ad (...).
Diuinitatem, ante illas prosternimur? confessing prosternimur, that Christians
did use to bow, or prostrate their bodies before them, but not as unto the
Deity it self, or as attributing Divinity to them. But above all how could the
second Council of Nice, an assembly of Bishops, for number exceeding the first
it self, so much celebrated by Christians, and conuen'd from all parts and
Provinces of Christendom, so publicly avouch it to have been Conc. Nicen. 2.
Action 7.
a Tradition of the Apostles, to worship Images, if it had not been a thing
confessedly practiced among Christians ever since the Apostles times, and with
their knowledge and allowance? Is it credible, that so many Catholic and
Orthodox Bishops should conspire to deceive the world with such a loud
untruth, if it had been otherwise?

As for Transubstantiation, which is an other point the Relatour pretends the
Primitive Church did not believe, we have Ibidem.
Chap. 22. th
already shown, that what is signified by the word, to wit, a true and real
change of the substance of bread into Christ's body, was clearly held and taught
by diverse ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church. His bare saying, it is a
scandal to both Jew and Gentile and the Church of God, signifies but little.
Christ crucified was a scandal both to Jew and Gentile; but yet a true object
of our Faith: nor are they the Church, or any part of the true Church, that are
scandalized at it, but Infidells and Heretics, who will be scandalized at any
thing, that suites not with their own fancies. As little can he infer against
us from the difficulty, which Catholic Divines have to explicate
Transubstantiation. Js not the Mystery of the B. Trinity, in the Bishops own
opinion, as inexplicable; and yet firmly to be believed? why then must
Transubstantiation be rejected, or disbeleeu'd, merely upon that ground, or
because it is hard to be explicated? Neither was it Transubstantiation
precisely, which bred that pretended scandal in Auerroes, but the Real
Presence, Mundum peragraui, et non vidi Soctam deteriorem, aut magis fatuam
Christiana, quia Deum, quem colunt, dentibus, deuorant. (...). lib. 4. de.
Adorat. Eucharist.
as his words show, cited by the Bishop. Yet the Relatour himself, and his
master Calvin too sometimes, make profession to believe the Real Presence.

After so many unadvised assertions, our adversary falls at last to quibble
upon those words of A. C. Roman Catholics cannot be proved to depart from the
Foundation so far as Protestants, telling us, it is a confession, that
Romanists may be proved to depart from the Foundation, though not so much, or
so far, as Protestants do. A doughty inference I promise you. But what
gains he by it? Does not the Bishop himself (number. 1. of this very Paragraph)
use the like speech of us, when he says, you of Rome have gone Ibidem. number. 4.
further from the Foundation of this one saving Faith, then can ever be proved,
we of the Church of England have done? If this must not be accounted a
Confession that the Church of England has departed from the Foundation, why
must that of A. C. be see interpreted, as the Bishop will have it? what ever
explication be given to the Bishops words, will serve A. C. as well: whose
meaning only was, that there cannot be brought any arguments to prove our
Churches departing from the Foundation, but more, and better may be brought to
prove, that Protestants do likewise depart from it in more and greater points.
It is not to grant, that the arguments which Protestants bring, to prove our
departing from the Fonndation, are solid and conuincing, or do really prove
that, for which they are brought. This the Relatour is only willing to suppose
for himself, and to insinuate; which A. C. absolutely denies.

And as the Bishop had noe reason to infer any such Confession, Ibidem.
cut of A. (...). words, so had he as little reason to make such a confident
demand in behalf of his Church of England. Let A. C. instance, if he can, in
any one point, wherein she has departed from the Foundation etc. For that was
already done to his hand. A. C. had already given him this very error for
instance, viz. the Church of Englands denying infallible authority to lawful
General Councils; this being in effect to deny infallibility to the whole
Church; and by consequence to subvert the ground of all infallible belief in
any articles, or points of Faith whatsoever. Nor does it help him to say,
there is a great deal of difference betwixt a General Council, and the whole
body of the Catholic Church. For what ever difference may be in other
respects, in this, viz. of infallible teaching what is true Christian Faith,
and infallible believing what is so taught, there is no difference betwixt the
Catholic Church and a General Council. For if such a Council may err, the
Church has noe infallible means to rectify that error, or sufficiently to
propose any other point of Catholic doctrine to be infallibly believed by
Christians.

His allegation of the second Council of Ephesus for a General, or
oecumenicall, Council, shows nothing, but what a desperate cause the Bishop
maintains. That which was never styled, Ibidem.
or esteemed by Catholic antiquity, but Praedatoria Synodus, and Latrocinium,
not Concilium Ephesinum, a den of Robbers and Free-booters, a Conuention of the
most turbulent and seditrous Heretics, that ever troubled, or dishonored the
Church by their unlawful actings, where nothing but secular violence, rage and
cruelty bore sway even to bloodshed, and murder of the B. Prelate St.
Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople; this his Lordship brings for an example, of
a General Councils erring. Very worthily indeed, let his friends make their
benefitt of it. Jn the mean time, they may know, that as on the one side we
readily confess it very necessary, the Church should have remedy against such
Councils as this; so on the other side we auerre, that the infallibility of
General Councils truly and rightly so called, is such a Foundation of the
Roman, that is, the Christian Catholic Faith, that without it, we know not
what can be, nor has the Bishop as yet shown, how any thing can be certain in
the Faith.

6. A. C. after this, endeauours by interrogatories to draw from his Adversary
the confession of truth: in answer whereto, seeing the Bishop repeats much
matter already consuted, especially in the 7th. and 8th. Chapters of this
treatise, it will oblige us (to avoid tediousness) to be more brief in our
reply. A. (...). first Querie is, how Protestants, admitting noe insallible
rule of Faith but Scripture only, can be infallibly sure, that they believe
Ibidem. number. 5.
the same entire Scripture, Creed, and four first General Councils, in the
same incorrupted sense, in which the Primitive Church believed them? The
Relatour in answer to him tells us, that he believes Scripture, 1. by
Tradition. 2. by other motives of Credibilliy. 3. by the Light of Scripture it
self. But first, this is not to make a direct answer to the question; which is
not, whether Scripture can be any way believed or no, standing to the Bishops
principles: but whether, and how he can be infallibly sure of what he does
believe concerning it. Secondly, it is undeniable in the common principles of
all Protestants, and proved Chap. 7. 8.
already, that the two first of these, viz. Tradition and the motives of
Credibility can be no ground to Protestants of infallible Faith, or assurance,
concerning Scripture: and for the third, viz. Light of Scripture it self, it
is not only petitio principij, a begging of the question (for none of us ever
yet granted him, that there was such light) but also contrary to experience:
there being noe man, that merely by reading such books as are called
Canonical and others that are accounted Apocryphal, can come to know which
are Canonical, which not; as may appear by the example, not only of such as
were never taught the maxims of Christian Religion, but also of many
Christians, who though they be able to read, yet being never taught which
books were Apocryphal, which not, know them not by reading.

Whence it follows likewise, that all the ensuing discourse, which the Bishop
makes, touching his infallible belief of Scripture, falls to nothing; seeing
what he lays as its principal Foundation, apparently sinks under the weight.
For a meerly-humane and infallible assurance will never support an infallible
Faith of Scripture, as. 16. number. 6.
even our Adversary himself grants. Nor can he, in any better sort, make good,
what he affirm's concerning the Creed and four first General Councils;
namely, that he believes them infallibly in their true incorrupted sense, and
knows that he believes them so in points necessary to Salvation. For seeing he
has no infallible certainty, that the words, or text of the Creed, and the acts
of the Councils, or the books of the ancient Fathers, have not been corrupted,
how can he have infallibility in the true sense of them, and their conformity
to Scripture? He pretends indeed to be sure, that he believes Scripture, and
the Creed, in the same incorrupted sense, in which the Primitrue Church
believed Ibidem.
them, because he crosses not in his beleese any thing deleuered by the
Primitive Church; and this again he is sure of, because he takes the belief
of the Primitive Church, as it is expressed and delivered by the Councils and
ancient Fathers of those times. But how true this is, and how sincerely he
takes the belief of the Primitive Church, as it is expressed by Fathers and
Councils, may appear to any, that duly considers, by the testimonies, we have
already alleged against him upon several occasions, out of the Councils and
Fathers, particularly in this very Chapter, and shall yet further allege in
those which follow.

A. C. asks again, what text of Scripture assures us, that Protestants now
living, do believe all this (to wit, the Scriptures, Ibidem. number. (...).
Creed; and four first General Councils in their incorrupted sense) or that
all this (viz. all that Protestants take to be the true sense of Scripture,
Creeds, and four first General Councils) is expressed in those particular
Bibles, or in the Acts of Councils, or writings of the Primitive Fathers, which
are now in the Protestants bands: and at this, his Lordship will needs seem to
wonder. But let them wonder that will. The Querie will ever be found both
rational and pertinent, notwithstanding such wondering. For can any man deny
but this is a good consequence: Protestants admit Scripture to be the only
infallible rule of Faith; therefore they cannot believe infallibly all this
above mentioned, without some particular text, or texts of Sripture to be
showed for it? And had not A. C. just cause to ask, whether all this be
expressed in the Bibles, which are now in Protestants hands? For seeing it is
not in our Bible, if it were not likewise in theirs, it would be Ibidem.
(J hope) sufficiently euidenc'd to a reasonable Adversary, that it can be
found in none. But (says he) it is not necessary that this should be showed by
any particular text, because it is made plain before, how we believe Scripture
to be Scripture, and by divine and infallible Faith too; and yet we can show
no particular text for it. But how (we pray) was this made plain? He told us
indeed that he believed the entire Scripture, first by the Tradition of the
Church, then by other credible motives, lastly by the light of Scripture it
felfe. But the two first of these are, by his own confession of no infallible
authority; and the third in effect no more then the Private spirit, as we have
often demonstrated to him.

But admit the Bishop were sure, that the Primitive Church expounded Scripture
in the same sense as Protestants believe it, yet how will he be able to make
good what he adds, standing to his own principles; this Rule, meaning the
Scripture, as expounded. 38. number. (...).
by the Primitive Church, can never deceive me? Did Christ promise
infallibility to the Primitive Church, and not to the succeeding Church? and if
no such infallibility be promised, or signified in Scripture, how can he be
certain, they could not err, or deceive him in their expositions?

7. The Bishop tells us, they have the same Bible with us: but I see not how
this can be affirmed with any truth. For Protestants Ibidem.
both leave out many books, which we esteem part of our Bible; and those
which they have with us, are corrupted both in Originalls and Translations.
Neither do they admit and receive the Bible upon the same motive, or reason,
that we do. We admit it for the infallible authority of the Church,
propounding it to us as a divine book: which infallible authority Protestants
deny, and by consequence, seeing they assign noe other in lieu of it, cannot in
reason be so infallibly sure of their Bible, as we are of ours. Much less
could the Bishop justly say, that all is expressed in their Bibles, that is in
ours, upon this ground only, because all Fundamental points are as proueable
without the Apocrypha, as with it. For who sees not, that the same may be
affirmed with exclusion of diverse other books admitted into the Protestants
Canon, noe less then ours; for example, the Epistle of St. Jude, the two last
Epistles of St. John, the Epistle to Philemon, the books of Ester, Ruth,
Paralipomena, yea perhaps all, or very many of the small Prophets? it being
scarce credible the Relatour, or any other Protestant should maintain, there
were any Fundamental points of Faith (in their sense) to be proved out of
those books, which cannot be proved out of any other books, or parts of
Scripture. So that if this reason were good, an Heretic that reiects, upon
the matter, one (...) or one third part of the old and new Testament, shall yet
be allowed to pretend, that he has the same Bible with Catholics, and
delivered to him by the same hands, and that all is expressed in his, that is
in the Catholic Bible. Sure with very much truth and modesty.

We agree with Bellarmin, that all matters of Faith, speaking properly, are
revealed only by the word of God Written or unwritten: Bellarm. lib. 3. de
Instificat. cap. 8.
but we auerre, that they are infallibly declared and testified to us to be so
reueai'd, by the authority of the Church, or General Councils. Nor does St.
Austins text against Maximinus the Arian, any way cross, or prejudice our
(...): although it be manifest, D. Aug. lib. 3. contr. Maximin. cap. 14.
he speaks there (...) by way of condescension, and voluntary yielding to his
adversary, and not as forced there to by any necessity of reason. St. Austin
knew, that Maximinus refused (though very unjustly) the Council of Nice, as
much as himself did that of Arimini. (...), that he might dispute effectually
with him, he thought fit for the present to wave the argument taken from the
authority of Councils, and to urge him only with such common principles, as
were admitted by them both: such as were chiefly the holy Scriptures; but yet
not them alone: for it is evident he used other reasons against him, (beside
Scripture) founded upon, and deduced from such maxims of Christian religion,
as were not disowned by his Adversary. And might not (I pray) any Catholic
disputant at this day, argue with a Protestant in some particular question,
only out of Scripture, and tell him in these, or the like words, I will not
urge you with the Councils of Lateran, or Trent, I will convince you of error
by Scripture only, yea by your own Bible etc. might not, I say, a Catholic,
in some case, speak thus to a Protestant, but he should be thought presently
to rerect the authority of those Councils, or to esteem them not infallible in
their definitions of Faith?

8. The Index Expurgatorius, J consess, is through misunderstanding, such a
common stumbling-blocke with all sorts of Protestants, that we do not much
wonder, the Bishop himself should trip at it, as he does here, obliquely and
by way of insinuation at least, accusing us of having expunged some things out
of the true and authentical writings of the Fathers. A heavy charge,
doubtless; but our comfort is, no less injuriously imputed, then heavy. For how
does he prove it? What authors, or places of authors, does he allege thus
expunged by us? why named he not the Index, in which such expunctions are
registered? why cited he not some of his purer and more authentic Copies,
different from ours, and where those texts, are restored, or standing upon
record, which our Indexes are pretended to have expunged? How came (...) to
find out the true, genuine, and authentical thenticall writtings of the
Fathers, if they were not so extant and preserved amongst us, and by us? of any
thing to this purpose (which yet alone could be to purpose in the present case)
the Relatour brings not the least syllable of instance; thinking it enough only
to accuse.

For as to what he pretends to allege out of Sixtus Senensis his Epistle to
Pope Pius Quintus, whoeuer observes it well, will find it really to speak the
clean contrary to what the Bishop would seem to prove by it; and directly to
accuse, not us, but Protestants, of corrupting the works of the Fathers. The
Reader may see the whole text here in To (...) prodijt decretum illud
sanctissimum de reparanda totius Christianae Ecclesiae Bibliotheca, quam
perditissimi nostrorum temporum Haeretici suis morbis ac (...) ita corruperunt,
vt nihil aliud quam certissimum eius exilium esset expectondum, nisi TV repent
opem attulisies. Primum enim toto Christianotum orb conquiri (...) doctrinae
libros, et public exuri (...): deinde EXPVRGARI (...) EMACVLARI curasti omnia
Catholicorumetlptorum, et PRAECIPVE VETERVM PATRVM scripta, Haeroticorum
aetatis nostrae FOECIBVS CONTAMINATA et VENENIS INFECTA, Postremo Catalogum,
vel Indicem edi (...) Auctorum et Librorum Haeretici nominis etc. Sintus
Senens. epist. Ad Pium Quintum. Prefix. Bibliothes. Sunct.
the margent at large (whereof the Bishop thought not good to give us so much
as one word, but only to make use of the authors name) and thereby clearly
perceive, that it was not to purge the ancient texts of the Fathers writtings,
but only the false readings, spurious notes, commentaries, and interpretations
of Heretics, upon their said writings and texts, that the Index Expurgatorius
was commanded to be made by the authority of Pius Quintus, while he was yet
Cardinal and President of the holy Inquisition: not to speak of their alike
false and corrupt translations of them; which were also forbidden. J say
therefore, let all our Jndices expurgatorij pass the sorutiny even of our most
rigid adversaries; and let them show us, if they can, wherein any authentical
writings of the ancient Fathers have been either purged, or clipped by us, or any
thing of the text altered in point of reading, but upon iustifyable and auowed
reason; namely, the authority of some more ancient and better copy: and if
they cannot, let them here after, for shame at least, be silent, and object
the Index expurgatorius no more.

A. C. asks further, whether Protestants be infallibly sure, that Ibidem. number 7.
they rightly understand the sense of all that is expressed in their books,
according to that which was understood by the Primitive Church, and the Fathers
that were present at the four first General Councils; and for this the Bishop
finds great fault with him, as asking the same thing over and over again. We
answer first, his Lordship might see by this, how earnest A. C. was for a
direct and punctual answer to his Querie. Secondly, the Relatour should have
reflected, that as yet A. C. had received no satisfactory answer to the demand;
and till satisfaction be given in such cases, it is consonant enough to the
rules of arguing, to repeat and urge the demand: and to do otherwise, were
but to run from one thing to an other without end, and never sift out the
certain truth in any question whatsoever.

The truth is, the Querie is such, that it will be matter of eueriasting
vexation to all that follow, or go about to defend the Bishops assertions: it
being evidently impossible to give a satisfactory answer to it, without having
recourse to the infallible authority of the Church, as we Catholics do,
when the like demand is made to us by our Adversaries. The Relatour indeed, out
of his wonted liberality in this kind, is pleased to call it a dry shift: but
the reason he gives is no better, then a gross mistake. For the Churches
authority does not always beget an implicit Faith, as the Relatour thinks, but
very often an explicit one: to wit, when either the definition it self
expounds to me the sense of Scripture, or that Church-Tradition concerning it,
is so clear, that it needs not the definition, or declaration of a Council,
to make it certainly known.

Whersore seeing General Councils, by reason of their already-prou'd
infallibility, are always to be presumed to speak in that sense, which is
agreeable to the doctrine of Christ; and that the universal tradition of the
present Church is also an infallible witness of that doctrine, we Catholics
do evidently show, according to our grounds, how we are infallibly sure, that
we understand the texts of our Bibles conformably to the sense of those four
first General Councils, and of the Primitive Church of their times. For why?
the sense of the Primitive Church is necessarily inuolued in that of the
Councils; and if there happens to be obscurity in the words of any Councils, by
being infallibly sure, that that only can be their sense, which is conformable
to the present Church-Tradition, and that the opposite sense cannot possibly be
theirs; howeuer the words themselves may (perhaps) be wrested to it: by
consequence we are infallibly sure, that we understand Scripture in the same
sense now, which the said General Councils and Primitive Church anciently did;
to wit, by the infallible authority and Tradition of the present Church.

I answer to A. Cs. fourth Jnterrogatorie, which is, whether Protestants can be
infallibly sure, that all and only those points, which they count Fundamental,
and necessary to be expressly known by all, Ibidem. number. 8.
were so accounted in the Primitive Church, the Bishop would seem at last to
tell us which points are Fundamental, and were esteemed such in the Primitive
Church. A question hitherto often asked in vain; and which himself once
plainly declined the answering, *as. 38. number. 1.
being no work for his pen. But let us hear what he says upon second
thoughts. Fundamentalls (says he) so accounted by the Primitive Church, are
but the Creed, and some sew, and those immediate deductions from it. But this
leaves us (...) in the dark. Who shall resolve which those sew and immediate
deductions are? And what does he mean by immediate deductions? only such as
(...) in themselves evident and necessary? If so, it were in effect to deny
both the Divinity and Incarnation of Christ, to be Fundamental points. Jf in
evident and only probable, who shall infallibly assure us, that the deduction
is true and certain? what shall we think of Scripture? Is not that a
Fundamental point in the Relatours belief? can any man be saved that reiects
Scripture, provided he admitts the Creed and some few immediate deductions from
it?

Nay we are told, that even the immediate deductions themselves, are not
formally Fundamental for all men, but only for such Ibidem.
as are able to make and understand them; and that for others it is enough, if
they do not obstinately and Schismatically refuse them, after they are once
revealed. But had not prejudice troubled his eyesight, our Adversary might
easily have seen as much reason, to say It Is Fundamental in the Faith, not to
question, or deny Schismatically and obstinately any thing at all, that is
sufficiently proposed to us as revealed by God. Let him cite what he can out of
the Fathers, he shall never prove, that a man cannot fall from the true faith
by an act of disbeleefe, so long as he believes the Articles of the Creed:
seeing the Apostle teaches, that some fall from the Faith by forbiding Marriage
and certain meats as absolutely unlawful: and many have been condemned for
Heretics in those ancient times, who never opposed the Creed. Now if a man
may believe the Creed, and yet be damned for Heresy and mis-belcefe in other
matters, how can Protestants assure themselves of Salvation, or be accounted
Orthodox Christians, merely, by this pretended conformity with the Primitive
Church in the belief of the Creed; unless it could be proved withal, that
they held no other unlawful doctrine? But certain it is, that to deny
Purgatory, the Popes Supremacy, and diverse other points, as Protestants do,
is most unlawful and was so held by the Primitive Church.

9. As for Tertullian, Ruffinus, St. Irenaeus and St. Basil here alleged by
the Bishop, they neither severally, nor all together, make an infallible
authority, to assure Protestants, that all and only those points which they
account Fundamental, were so esteemed by the Primitive Church: which yet was
the only thing, that A. C. in his Interrogatorie required him to show. The
doctrine by us delivered, stands very well with the resolution of Occham here
cited, that it is not in the power of the Church, or Council, to make new
Articles of Faith. For the Church never took upon her to do this, but only to
declare infallibly what was expressed or inuolued either in Scripture, or the
word of God not-written, viz. Tradition. And it is a mere untruth to affirm,
that Catholics agree not in this, that all points determined by the Church
are Fundamental, in the sense declared. For neither Sixtus Senensis, nor any
other Catholic did ever doubt, or make scruple of those books of holy
Scripture, which they acknowledged to have been defined by the Church for
Canonical: they only question some other books, concerning which we have not
had as yet the resolution of any General Council; such as are the third and
fourth of Machabees, the third and fourth of Esdras, the prayer of Manasses etc.

It Is true, Sixtus Senensis has something about those chapters of the book of
Ester, which Protestants count `Apocryphall, whereby he may be thought not to
hold them for Canonical Scripture, even after the decree of the Council of
Trent, But the reason was, because he judged, that the decree of the Council
touching Canonical Scriptures, did not comprehend those loose uncertain
pieces, as he calls them. Beside, his opinion therein was both singular and
disallowed, as may appear even by the book it self; where, Sixtus Senens.
Biblioth. Sanct. cap. 8.
over against the place, whence the Bishop takes his objection, there stands
printed in the margent this note, or censure. Non est haec Sententia Sixti
probanda, cum repugnet sess. 4. Concilij Tridentini, quam ipse detorquet, ne
videatur ei repugnare. This opinon of Sixtus, (says the note) is not to be
allowed, seeing it is contrary to the fourth session of the Council of Trent;
which Sixtus wresteth, that he may not seem to be contrary to it. The edition
of Sixtus Senensis his book, where this Censure is found, is that of Paris
1610. in folio: which it is hardly credible that the Bishop himself should not
have seen; and if he had seen and did know it, with what conscience, or
ingenuity toward his Reader, could he make the objection?

To what he says touching Pope Leo the tenths defining in the last Council of
Lateran, that the Pope is above a General Council, I answer, our Adversaries
know, that those Catholic Authors that hold the negative, do likewise deny,
that the point was there defined as a matter of Faith, but only, that by way of
Canonical, or Ecclesiastical Constitution, it was declared, that the right of
calling, translating from one place to another, and likewise dissoluing of
General Councils, did entirely and solely belong to the Bishop of Rome
Successor to St. Peter: those being the things, which had been formerly
contested by the Councils of Constance and Basil against the Pope. likewise the
said Authors deny, that the last Council of Lateran was a full General
Council. Ibidem. number. 9.


After so many questions (none of which as yet have been sufficiently answered)
A. C. inferrs, that his Adversary had need seek out some other infallible
rule, or means, by which he may know these things infallibly; or else, that he
has noe reason to be so confident, as to adventure his soul upon it, that one
may be saved, living and dying in the Protestant Faith. What says the Relatour
to this? His answer is, that if he cannot be confident for his soul upon
Scripture, and the Primitive Church expounding and declaring it, he will be
confident upon no other. But this is still to beg the question. For the
difficulty is, how he comes infallibly to know Scripture, and the exposition of
the Primitive Church? or that the Primitive Church did not err in her
exposition? without certain knowledge of which, his confidence in this case,
cannot be well grounded. He might more truly and ingenuously have answered, if
I cannot be confdent for my soul upon the Scripture and exposition of the
Primitive Church, received and interpreted according to my own private sense
and judgment, J will be confident upon noe other. For, this in effect he does
say; and with truth can say noe more, standing to his own principles.

10. The implicit Faith of Catholics (at which the Relatour again glanceth)
in points they are obliged to know only implicitly, gives them sufficient
infallibility in their Faith; but has noe place in this present debate. For
we now treat only Chap. 2.
of such points as are Fundamental quoad rem attestatam, (as we have formerly
distinguished them) that is, according to the importance of the matter they
contain; such as are the prime, radical Articles of our Faith, which every
one is obliged, necessitate medij or praecepti, to know expressly: in so much,
that where ignorance of these points is culpable, and through our own default,
we are so far from thinking, that implicit Faith can be sufficient for the
attaining of Salvation, that we teach the clean contrary: asserting likewise,
that in those of the first kind, viz. which are necessary by necessity of
means, even invincible ignorance will not serve the turn. So little cause in
truth had the Bishop to tells us by way of Irony and scoff, that a
Roman-Catholique may use implicit Faith at pleasure. As to his carping at the
word know, used by A. C. the Relatour should have known, that his adversary
takes it not in the most proper sense, for demonstratiue, or scientificall
knowledge (as some speak) but only for certain assurance, and for infallible
belief, as it is frequently taken by others.

But as for Protestants, standing to the Bishops grounds, it is impossible they
should have infallible Faith, either explicit, or implicit of any thing they
bleeue; because the authority of the Church, being, in his opinion, fallible,
they can never by force thereof be infallibly certain, that the books of
Scripture, which it commends, are all, or any of them the word of God; or that
the exposition of Scripture made either by the Church, or any private man, is
agreeable to the true sense of the holy Ghost. Now, so long as he is not
infallibly certain of this, it may happen (for ought he knows to the
contrary) that some of them may prove not to be Gods word: and seeing the
Churches authority attests them all alike, he may (if he please) conceive a
like fear of every one of them.

What he further adds in this page (viz. 337.) is only matter of references, to
what himself has formerly delivered: so as I think it also sufficient to
refer my reader to what I have Ibidem. number. 10.
answered in those places, viz.. 25. number. 3.. 33. Consid. 3. number. 1.. 21. number
1. But I cannot sufficiently wonder to hear him affirm here, that he holds
the authority of the Catholic Church as infallible, as A. C. does. This
surely must be accounted a Paradox, or nothing can be justly taken for such.
For is not the greatest part of this comerence spent in debating the difference
between himself and A. C. toutching the extent of the Churches infallibility?
and does not the Bishop all along professedly sustain, and endeavor to prove,
that she is fallible both in the delivery of Scriptures, and in the defining of
all points; in his opinion, Not-Fundamentall? and also in her Traditions, even
immemoriall and universal? And does not A. C. in direct opposition to him,
maintain and assert the Churches infallibility in all these?

But J wonder yet more at the proof he brings for this assertion; to wit, his
referring us to. 21. number. 5. of his own book. For there ( page 139.) he
expressly limits the Churches infallibility to absolute Fundamental doctrines;
which A. C. never does: and in the progress of his discourse, explicating the
said infallibility even in Fundamentalls too, he falls so low, and attributes
so small a portion thereof to the Church, that he brings it down at last to
this pitiful state; and if she err (says he) in some ONE, or MORE
Fundamental points, she may be a Church of Christ still, but not holy etc. Is
this to acknowledge the. 21. number. 5. page 141.
Catholic Church as infallible as A. C. does? not to urge here the dangerous
consequence, and also inuolued implicancy of the assertion it self; Chap. 11.
which I have already noted in my answer to that place.

The rest of this Paragraph is spent only in repeating objections, which have
been more then once sufficiently answered, viz. concerning Transubstantiation,
Communion under one kind etc. wherein we cannot think our felues obliged to
follow our Adversaries example; but rather to remitt the Reader to the Chap.
22. 24.
places, where we have already given satisfaction touching those matters. As
little notice shall we take of his obiecting again to us the doctrine of
deposing and killing of kings. This was added to inuenome the rest of his
arguments, which he knew otherwise would not be mortal to us. We hope, our
demeanor in these late dismal distracted times of trial, has sufficiently
cleared us from all such aspersions in the judgment of indifferent persons:
nay indeed in the opinion of our greatest enemies. For, who knows not, that
under the late usurping powers, the greatest crime laid to our charge was our
Loyalty and Fidelity to our Souereign? in so much as 'twas held by all that
party, a thing almost impossible, for a man to be a profess't Catholic and
not a Caualier too. But to this objection we have likewise Chap. 21.
already spoken what may suffice. To sum up all in brief, we utterly
renounce all doctrine and opinions whatsoever, prejudicial unto, or
destructive of that loyal obedience and Fidelity, which is due to all
Souereign Princes and Magistrates. And if any thing of that nature has
(perchance) dropped srom the pen of any of ours, we own it not, but censure it
deeply, prohibit it strictly, and in case it be obstinately maintained, punish
it severely, and lastly command all books to be corrected, that contain any
such doctrine.

CHAP. 25. A further prosecution of the point, touching the vnchangedness of
the Roman Faith, with a defense of Purgatory.
ARGUMENT.
1. A. C. Argument, that the Roman Faith is still the ONE SAVING, CATHOLIQVE
Faith, made good. 2. The words of St. Athanasius his Creed, Quam nisi quisque
INTEGRAM JNVIOLATAMQVE seruauerit etc. vindicated from the Bishops Gloss. 3.
The Bishops distinguishing betwixt not-beleeuing the Creed in its true sense,
and forcing a wrong sense upon it, vayn and impertinent. 4. Protestants are
chusers in point of belief, noe less then all other Heretics. 5. They are
not guided by the Church, further then they please themselves. 6.
Church-infallibility, to what it amounts, according to the Bishops measure. 7.
In what sense General Councils may be said to be infallible even a part ante,
or at first sitting down. 8. All the ancient Fathers ( generally speaking)
believed Purgatory. 9. Prayer for dead, as used by the ancients, necessarily
inferres Purgatory. 10. The Relatour labors in vayn to avoid the Authorities
of the Fathers in this point. 11. St. Gregory Nyssen and Theodoret, even by his
own confession, clear for Purgatory. 12. St. Austin, not wavering about it,
as the Bishop pretends. 13. Purgatory, an Apostolical Tradition, if St.
Austins Rule be good. 14. In what manner of necessary belief.

1. But let us return to A. C. who very charitably, and no less truly minds
the Bishop, that there is but one saving Faith, that by his own confession, it
was once the Roman, and by just consequence is so still, because it is granted,
that men may be saved in it: wishing his Lordship therefore well to consider,
how we can hope to have our souls saved without we. 38. number. 11.
hold entirely this Faith; it being the Catholic Faith, which, as St
Athanasius in his Creed professes, UNLESS A MAN HOLD'S ENTIRELY, HE CANNOT BE
SAVED. To all which the Relatour tells us, he has abundantly answered before,
referring us to. 35. number. 1. and. 38. number. 10. of his Relation. The question is
not how abundantly, but how sufficiently his Lordship answers: and for that
we also refer our selves to the Readers judgment, upon our reply there
made. What he adds here, that A. Cs. conclusion has more in it, then is in the
premises, is manifestly untrue, to any that observes the force of the
argument; which stands thus. There is but ONE Saving Faith; the Roman was once
this saving Faith, and by the Bishops confession is still a saving Faith: ergo,
it is still that one saving Faith; and by consequence is still the Catholic
Faith. This inference, J say, is evident and undeniable, unless we suppose
either more saving Fayths then one, or that the one saving Faith is not the
Catholic: both which are evidently false, and contrary to our adversaries own
confessions.

His discourse about Additions pretended to be made by the Council of Trent
unto the Catholic Faith, imports not much. For either the said Additions are
such, as by reason of them the present Roman Faith ceases to be a saving Faith,
or they are not. Jf the first, he contradicts himself, having already granted
that Salvation may be had in the Roman Faith: if the second, it necessarily
follows, that either the Roman Faith is now the one saving Faith, or that
there are more saving Fayths then one; which the Bishop denies. What he also
affirms of the said Council of Trent, viz. that it has added a new Creed to
the old, and extraneous things, without the Foundation, etc. is noe more, then
what the old Heretics might as truly, and, no doubt, did as freely, object to
those ancient Primitive Councills: and if it be just and sufficient, in defense
of them, to assert, that the Additions they made, were only perfectiue, that
is, further and more clear explications of the Faith formerly believed, and
not corruptiue of the ancient Primitive truth, we think it sufficient to make
the same answer in behalf of the present Roman Church, and Council of Trent.

2. Nor do those words of St. Athanasius set down in the beginning and end of
his Creed This is the Catholic Faith, signify any such thing as the Bishop
pretends, viz. that this, and no other doctrine, is Catholic Faith, this, and
no more then is here Ibidem.
delivered, is to be believed etc. I say, St. Athanasius his words admite not
of this Gloss. For so we might, without any breach of the Foundation, reject
in a manner the whole Scripture, with a good part of the Apostles Creed, and
all other points of Christian doctrine beside. The Relatour himself could not
be ignorant, that the non-rebaptising of Heretics was a point of Catholic
Faith, already in St. Athanasius his time defind by the Council of Nice; yet
sure he finds noe mention of it in the Athanasian Creed: noe more then he does,
that our Savior was conceived by the Holy Ghost, or born of a Virgin; not to
speak of Remission of sins, Baptism, Eucharist, or any other Sacraments,
etc. none of all which being expressed in that Creed, will Protestants think
they may be denied, without breach of the Catholic Faith, meant by St.
Athanasius?

To salve the matter in some sort, the Relatour here casts in Ibidem.
a Parenthesis in these words, always presupposing the Apostles Creed, as
Athanasius did; meaning that the Apostles Creed presupposed, rhon (and not
otherwise) this of St. Athanasius is so sufficient, that there needs no other,
nor that any thing else should be added to it. But this helps him not at all.
For first it is manifest enough, St. Athanasius supposed many other things, at
the composing of his Creed, beside the Creed of the Apostles, viz. the whole
Canon of Scripture, the decrees of the Nicen Council, the universal
Traditions of the Church, as matters appertaining to Christian Faith: all
which, are not only supernumerary, but inconsistent with the Bishops assertion,
This, and noe other is Catholic Faith. So that in reason it cannot possibly
be thought, this Father meant to signify, that his Creed contained all
necessary points, whatsoever, pertaining to Christian belief, but only to
express what was to be hel'd by Christians in those maine and principal
articles touching the B. Trinity, our Saviors incarnation, etc. which were at
that time so much controuerted; and withal to give us a certain Rule, or
Form of Catholic confession touching those points. Whence also it is
evidently deduced, that as 'twas necessary to Salvation for Christians to
beleeuo and confess according to the Catholic Faith; in the points there
specifyed; so, a paritate rationis, it is likewise necessary they should do,
in all other points and doctrines whatsoever. For doubtless, if the Catholic
Faith may be contradicted in any one point, without peril to a man's Salvation,
it may be also in an other, and an other, yea in all the rest.

A. C. goes on, and endeauours a little further to unfold the meaning of this
great father of the Church; observing, that in his Ibidem. number. 12.
Creed he says, without doubt every man shall perish, that holds not the
Catholic Faith ENTIRE. that is, in every point of it, and INVIOLATE, that is,
in the right seuse, and for the true formal reason of divine Revelation,
sufficiently applied to our understanding by the infallible authority of the
Catholic Church, proposing to us by her Pastors, this Revelation. To which
discourse of A.G. the Bishop so far agrees, as to acknowledge, that he, who
hopes for Salvation, must believe the Catholic Faith, whole and entire in
every point: which I note only by the way, as a matter worthy to be seriously
reflected upon, by all his followers. But then he objects, the word Jnuiolate
is not in the Creed, and falls a taxing the latin Translatour with error, for
so rendering St. Athanasius's word; which, says he, is (...), and ought to be
rendered undefiled. But I fear, the Bishop will here also be found in a Baron.
ad Ann. 340. number. (...).
mistake, rather then A. C. For first, Baronius shows, in the year of our
Lord 340. that St. Athanasius did himself compose and publish this Creed first
of all in the latin tongue, namely when he presented it, as the confession of
his Faith, to the Pope and a Council of Bishops held at Rome, whither he had
been called, upon occasion of some things laid to his charge by Heretics: and
with the acts of the said Council was it registered and preserved, till in
tract of time, it came to be publicly and generally used in the Church. Now,
the latin copy reads (...), and anciently ever did so; let our Adversaries
show any thing to the contrary: and it is evident by the Creed it self, that it
was not this Fathers intention, to exhort to good life, or to teach how
necessary good works were to Justification, or Salvation, but only to make a
plain and full Confession of the Catholic Faith, concerning those two chief
and grand Mysteries of Christian Religion, viz. of the B. Trinity, and the
Incarnation of the son of God.

3. What the Relatour's reachis is in affirming, that it is one thing not to
believe the Articles of Faith in the true sense, and an other to force a wrong
sense upon them, intimating, that Ibidem.
this only is to violate the Creed, and not the other, I must confess, I do
not well understand. For, supposing I believe, that is, give my assent to the
Creed, sure I must believe, or give my assent to it, in some determinate sense,
or other. Jf therefore I believe it not in the true sense, I must necessarily
believe it in a false; and what is that but to offer violence, or put a foreed
sense upon the Creed? unless (perhaps) he would have us think the Creed were
so composed, as to be equally, or as fairly capable of a false sense, as a
true. But this is not the first time our Adversaries acuteness has carried him
to inconveniences. It is therefore a natural and well-grounden inference, and
noe strain of A. C. to assume, that Protestants have not Catholic Faith,
because they keep it not entire and inuiolate, as they ought to do, and as
this Father (St. Athanasius) teaches it is necessary to Salvation for all men to
keep it: which is also further manifest. For if they did believe any one
Article with true divine Faith, they finding the same formal reason in all,
viz. divine Revelation sufficiently attested and applied by the same means to
all, by the infallible Authority of the Church, they would as easily believe
all, as they do that one, or those few Articles, which they imagine themselves
to believe.

And this our Antagonist will not seem much to gain say, roundly telling A. C.
that himself and Protestants do not believe any one Article only, but all the
Articles of the Christian Faith, for the same Ibidem number. 14.
formal reason in all, namely because they are revealed, from and by God, and
sufficiently applied in his word, and by his Churches ministration. But this is
only to hide a false meaning under false words. We question not, what
Protestants may pretend to do, especially concerning those few points, which
they are pleased to account Articles of Christian Faith, to wit, Fundamentalls
only; but what they really do. Now, that really they do not believe, either
all the Articles of Christian Faith, or even those Fundamental points, in any
sincere sense, for Gods Revelation, as sufficiently applied by the ministration
of the Church, is manifest from their professing, that the Church is fallible
and subject to error, in all points not-Fundamentall, and even in the delivery
of Scripture, from whence they pretend to deduce their said Fundamentalls:
consequently, they can in no true sense believe any thing, as Catholics do,
for the same formal reason sufficiently applied. To believe all in this sort,
as A. C. requires, and as all Catholics do, were in effect to renounce their
Heresy, and to admit as matter of Christian Faith, whatsoever the Catholic
Church, in the name and by the Authority of Christ, does testify to be such,
and require them to receive and believe for such: which the world sees, how
unwilling they are to do.

4. The like art he uses in his answer to A. Cs. objection (page 70.) viz.
that Protestants, as all Heretics, do MAKE CHOICE of what they will, and
what they will not believe, without relying upon the infallible Authority of
the Catholic Church. He answers first, that Ibidem.
Protestants make no choice, because they believe all, viz. all Articles of
Christian Faith. But this is both false and equivocal. False; because, as was
just now showed, they believe none with true Christian Faith, as Catholics
ought; or for the true formal reason of divine Revelation, rightly applied,
but only for, and by their own election. Equivocal; because it is certain he
means by Articles of Faith, only Fundamental points in Protestant sense:
whereas it is the duty of Catholics, and the thing by which they are most
properly distinguished from Heretics, to believe all Articles, or points of
Christian doctrine whatsoever, delivered to them by the Authority of the
Church, in the quality of such truths, as she delivers them.

Secondly, he says, Protestants (with himself) do rely upon the infallible
Authority of Gods word, and the Whole Catholic Church. True, so far as
they please they do, but not so far as they ought; not entirely, as A. C.
requires. And what is this, but to make choice, as all Heretics do? Again
why speaks he not plainly? If the Bishop meant really and effectually to
clear himself of A. Cs. charge, of doing in this case, as all other
Heretics do, why does he not say (as every Catholic must, and would have
done) we rely upon the infallible Authority of Gods word, and of the
Catholic Church, thereby acknowledging the Authority of the Catholic Church
to be an infallible means of applyinge Gods word, or divine Revelation to us.
Whereas to ascribe infallibility only to the word of God, and not to the
Catholic Church, what is it in effect, but to do as all Heretics do, and
tacitly to acknowledge, that really and in truth, he cannot clear himself of
the imputation? Let our adversaries know, it is not the bare relying upon the
whole Catholic Church, (which may be done in some sort, though she be
believed to have noe more then a mere humane, moral and fallible Authority in
proposing matters of Faith) but it is the relying upon the Churches infallible
Authority, or upon the Church, as an infallible means of applying divine
Revelation; which can only make them infallibly sure both of Scripture and its
true sense.

A: C. therefore had noe reason to be satisfied with the Bishops answer, but
had just cause to tell him, that though Protestants in some things believe the
same verities which Catholics do, yet they cannot be said to have the same
infallible Faith which Catholics have. But the Bishop here takes hold of some
words of A. C. which he pretends to be a confession, that Protestants are good
Catholics, bidding us mark A.Cs. phrase; which was, that Protestants in some
Articles, believe the same truth, which other good Catholics do. The
Relatour's reason is, because Ibidem. number. 14.
the word other, cannot be so used as here it is, but that Protestants as well
as we, must be supposed good Catholics. J answer, it is clear enough, A. C.
meant only this, that Protestants in some things believe the same truth with
other people, who are good Catholics; which is very true, but far from
implying that confession, which the Bishop would infer from him. Howeuer, I
think not the matter worth standing upon. The Bishop himself acknowledges A.
C. intended (...) to call them Catholics; and if unawares some thing slipped
from his pen, whereby he might seem to call them so, what matter is it? seeing
it is incident, even to the best Authors sometimes, to let fall an improper
expression.

5. To as little purpose is it for him to tell us, that next to the infallible
Authority of Gods word, Protestants are guided by the Ibidem.
Church. For, as we said before, so far as they please, they are guided by
the Church, and where they chinke good, they leave her. We entreat our
Adversanes to tell us, what is this, but to follow their own fancy and the
fallible Authority of humane deductions in believing matters of Faith? both
which the Bishop does so expressly disclayme in this place. To what A. C. adds,
that by the Church of God he understands here men infallibly assisted by the
spirit of God in lawfully-called, continued and confirmed General Councils,
the Relatour answers, according to his wonted dialect, that he makes no doubt,
the whole Church of God is infallibly assisted by the spirit of God, so that it
cannot by any error fall away totally from Christ the Foundation. The whole
Church cannot do thus. Surely, his kindeness is great; and the Catholic
Church is much obliged to him for allowing her such a large prerogative and
portion of infallibility, as that of necessity, some one person or other must
still be sound in the Church believing all the Articles of the Creed, or (if
that be too much) at least all Fundamental points in Protestant sense. For so
long as but two, or three persons hold all such points, it will be true, that
the whole Church is not by any error totally sallen away from Christ the
Foundation. All the lawful Pastcurs of the Church may, in the Bishops opinion,
err, every man of them, and fall away, even from Christ the Foundation, yea
draw all their people to Hell with them, without any prejudice to the promises
which Christ made to his Church; if but two, or three poor souls be still
found, whom God preserues from such error, as our Adversaries call
Fundamental. All is well; the gates of Hell do not prevail over Christ's
Church; though every particular Christian, save only some few in an age, perish
by Heresy: the holy Ghost does not cease to teach the Church all necessary
truth, notwithstanding that in all ages and times of the Church, he suffers
such an universal deluge of all damning and Soule-destroying errors as this,
to ouerspread the whole face of Christendom.

6. This is the infallibility our Adversary grants the whole But A. Cs. words
concerning the holy Ghosts assistance in lawfullycalled, continued and
confirmed General Councils, oblige the Bishop some what further to declare
himself in that point; Ibidem.
wherein, though we sufficiently know his mind already, yet it shall not be
amiss to hear him speak. He utterly denies therefore (and that twice over for
failing) that General Councils, be they never so lawfully called, continued
and confirmed, have any infallible assistance, but may err in their
determinations of Faith. Whether they can or no, has been already sufficiently
Chap. 20.
handled, and the Relatours assertion confuted: so that there is noe necessity
of repeating what has been said. All that I shall desire of the Reader here
is, that from this and the former passage of the Bishop, he would take a right
measure of his judgment, and of the judgment of all his followers, in this
maine point concerning the Churches Authority, and to reflect how much they do
in reality attribute to it. They are oftentimes heard indeed to speak fair
words, and to profess great respect to the Church and to Councils, especially
such as be General, and oecumenicall; pretending at least to refuse none, but
for some manifest defect, or faultiness; as that they were not truly, or fully
General, or did not observe legal and warrantable proceeding in their
debates, etc. But let them give never such goodly words, let them
counterfeite Jacobs voice never so much, here is the touchstone of their
judgment and inward sense: whatsoever they say. this they all hold, General
Councils, how lawfullysoeuer, and how lawfully and warrantably soever
proceeding, have no infallible assistance from God, but may err, and that
universally too, (for so he means, as we have Chap. (...)
already proved) that is, in all matters and points whatsoever, Fundamental or
Not-Fundamentall.

But you will reply, the Bishop grants infallibility to a General Council, to
wit, de post facto (as his words are) after it is ended and admitted by the
whole Church. I answer, this is to give as much infallibility to a General
Council, as is due to the meanest Society, or Company of Christians that is.
For while they judge that to be an Article of Christian Faith, which is so
indeed, and received for such by the whole Church, they are every one of them,
in this sense, infallible, and can noe more be deceived, or deceive others, in
that particular judgment, then a General Council; or then the thing that is
true in it felfe, and also found to be true by the whole Church, can be false.
In this indeed the Relatour is just as liberal now to a General Council, as
he was formerly to the whole Church, in Relat.. 25. number. 5.
granting it not to err, while it erres not.

The truth is, he vainly trifles in the whole business, and dallyes with the
Reader by obtruding upon him a Grammatical, or at best, but a Logical notion,
or sense of the word infallible, in stead of the Theological. For how J pray,
or in what sense is a General Council acknowledged by the Relatour to be
infallible, even de post facto, after it is ended, and (as he will have it)
confirmed by the Churches acceptance? Certainly, if you mark it, no otherwise,
then every true Proposition is, or may be said to be infallible, that is,
hipothetically, and upon supposition only. For surely no true Proposition, qua
talis, or so far as it is supposed, or known to be true, though but by some
one person, can deceive any man, or possibly be false. Jn this sense it is a
known maxim in Logique, Quicquid est, quando est, necesse est esse. Every
thing that is, has an hypotheticall necessity and infallibility of being,
since it cannot but be, so long as it is. And is it not (think you) a worthy
prerogative of the Church, to be thus infallible in her definitions? Does not
the Bishop assign a very worthy and fit means to apply divine Revelation to
us in order to the eliciting an act, or assent, of divine infallible Faith?
Now, that this is all he means by allowing General Councills to be infallible
de post-facto, is evident from his own words, which he gives as the reason of
that his concession. For so (says he) all truth is, that is, infallible in it
self, and is to us, when it is once known to be truth. What, J say, is this,
but to proclayme to all the world, that the decisions of General Councills are
noe more infallible, then any contingent, yet true proposition is, though
delivered by a person never so much giving to lying.

7. Finally J add, that though A. C. speaks of a Council set down to
deliberate (as the Bishop vrges) yet, when he styles it infallible, Ibidem.
it is evident in his principles, that either he means a complete and full
Council, including the supreme Pastor of the Church jointly with the rest,
and voting in Council with the rest of the Prelates, (in which case his suffrage
is a confirmation of their decrees) or in case the chief Pastor be absent A.
C. accounts it not a full and and complete Council, till his consent be had,
and annexed to the votes of the other Prelates. So that the Relatour does but
mistake A. Cs. meaning, when he talks of a Council held, or supposed by him to
be infallible A PART ANTE, when it first sitts down to deliberate etc. Neither
does A. C. use any cunning at all in the business, but as much plain dealinge
as possible: nor had the Bishop the least cause to suspect, that the words
lawfully-called, continued and confirmed were shuffled together by A. C. out of
design to hide his own meaning, or shrowde himself from his Adversary. For
are not the words themselves of most plain and obuious signification? are they
not also of absolute necessity to be used by him, for the full and clear
expression of his meaning in this point? and does he not, so often as occasion
requires, constantly use them (or the like) to that end, treating upon this
subject? what ground, or even occasion then, could the Relatour have to object
cunning and shuffling here?

And yet by the way we little doubt, but General Councils may, in a very true
sense, be styled insallible even a part ante (as the Bishop speaks) at their
first sitting down, and before any thing is so much as voted or deliberated
upon, by the Prelates; much less confirmed by the Pope; to wit, by virtue of
Christ's promise; by which they are sure, in due time, to be led into truth, and
preserved from error in the issue and resule of their deliberations, in the
manner aboue-declar'd. even as the whole Catholic Church is said by the
Bishop to be infallible in Fundamental points. For as Christ has promised not
to suffer the whole Church to err in points Fundamental, so he has promised,
that General Councils, consisting of the Head and Prelates of the Catholic
Church, shall not err in their definitions. So that to this infallibility the
Churches acceptance is wholly unnecessary. Nay it is certain, the whole Church
disfusiue is so far from confirming, in any authoritatiue and proper sense,
the decrees of such Councils, as we in this case and controversy style
oecumenicall, that it self (the Church difsusiue I mean) is absolutely bound
to accept and receive their desinitions, and cannot without Schism and sin
refuse to accept them.

The following Paragraph is wholly spent in palliating obstinacy Ibidem. number. 15.
in private opinion, against the sense and belief of the Church, with the
title and pretense of Constancy; which for the most part is taken in a good
sense, and held for a virtue: but here it cannot be so: and deliberately to
doubt, yea to deny (if a man please) the doctrine that is defined and declared
by the Church, to be matter of Christian Faith, is styled a modest proposal of
doubts. But we have Chap. 20.
already sufficiently discovered the fraud and impertinency of these
pretenses; and likewise largely treated the whole matter of external
obedience, which the Relatour here again brings upon the stage. We only
desire at present; to have some certain and infallible direction, or rule given
us, to know, when the resusall to submitt to a General Council is out of pride
and presumption of a man's own judgment (which the Bishop himself condemns)
and when (perhaps) from better and more honest motives. Was there ever yet
Heretics so impudent and past shame, as to profess, or auow that he
contradicted the doctrine of the Church, or the definitions of General
Councils, merely out of pride and presumption of his own judgment? Doc they
not all pretend evident reason and conviction of conscience for what they do?
What is it then, but a masque that may serve all faces, and a plea for all
delinquency in matter of Religion, for the Bishop to talk as he does, of
probable grounds, modest Proposalls, without pride and presumption etc? these
being things, that all Heretics pretend alike to, and with equal truth.

But as for those words of the Bishop, that a man may not upon very probable
grounds, in an humble and peaceable manner deliberately doubt, yea and upon
demonstratiue grounds constantly deny, Ibidem.
even such definitions, viz. the definitions of General Councils in matter of
Faith, yet submitting himself and his grounds to the Church, in that, or an
other Council, is that, which until now, was never imposed upon believers etc.
I wonder what sense can be made of them. First, he supposes that a man may have
very probable, yea demonstratiue grounds against the definitions of a General
Council, and by virtue thereof, be warranted both deliberately to doubt, no
otherwise, then every true Proposition is, or may be said to be infallible,
that is, hipothetically, and upon supposition only. For surely no true
Proposition, qua talis, or so far as it is supposed, or known to be true,
though but by some one person, can deceive any man, or possibly be false. Jn
this sense it is a known maxim in Logique, Quicquid est, quando est, necesse
est esse. Every thing that is, has an hypotheticall necessity and infallibility
of being, since it cannot but be, so long as it is. And is it not (think you)
a worthy prerogative of the Church, to be thus infallible in her definitions?
Does not the Bishop assign a very worthy and fit means to apply divine
Revelation to us in order to the eliciting an act, or assent, of divine
infallible Faith? Now, that this is all he means by allowing General
Councills to be infallible de post-facto, is evident from his own words, which
he gives as the reason of that his concession. For so (says he) all truth is,
that is, infallible in it self, and is to us, when it is once known to be
truth. What, J say, is this, but to proclayme to all the world, that the
decisions of General Councills are noe more infallible, then any contingent,
yet true proposition is, though delivered by a person never so much giving to
lying.

7. Finally J add, that though A. C. speaks of a Council set down to
deliberate (as the Bishop vrges) yet, when he styles it infallible, Ibidem.
it is evident in his principles, that either he means a complete and full
Council, including the supreme Pastor of the Church jointly with the rest,
and voting in Council with the rest of the Prelates, (in which case his suffrage
is a confirmation of their decrees) or in case the chief Pastor be absent A.
C. accounts it not a full and and complete Council, till his consent be had,
and annexed to the votes of the other Prelates. So that the Relatour does but
mistake A. Cs. meaning, when he talks of a Council held, or supposed by him to
be infallible A PART ANTE, when it first sitts down to deliberate etc. Neither
does A. C. use any cunning at all in the business, but as much plain dealinge
as possible: nor had the Bishop the least cause to suspect, that the words
lawfully-called, continued and confirmed were shuffled together by A. C. out of
design to hide his own meaning, or shrowde himself from his Adversary. For
are not the words themselves of most plain and obuious signification? are they
not also of absolute necessity to be used by him, for the full and clear
expression of his meaning in this point? and does he not, so often as occasion
requires, constantly use them (or the like) to that end, treating upon this
subject? what ground, or even occasion then, could the Relatour have to object
cunning and shuffling here?

And yet by the way we little doubt, but General Councils may, in a very true
sense, be styled insallible even a part ante (as the Bishop speaks) at their
first sitting down, and before any thing is so much as voted or deliberated
upon, by the Prelates; much less confirmed by the Pope; to wit, by virtue of
Christ's promise; by which they are sure, in due time, to be led into truth, and
preserved from error in the issue and result of their deliberations, in the
manner aboue-declar'd. even as the whole Catholic Church is said by the
Bishop to be infallible in Fundamental points. For as Christ has promised not
to suffer the whole Church to err in points Fundamental, so he has promised,
that General Councils, consisting of the Head and Prelates of the Catholic
Church, shall not err in their definitions. So that to this infallibility the
Churches acceptance is wholly unnecessary. Nay it is certain, the whole Church
diffusiue is so far from confirming, in any authoritatiue and proper sense,
the decrees of such Councils, as we in this case and controversy style
oecumenicall, that it self (the Church diffusiue I mean) is absolutely bound
to accept and receive their definitions, and cannot without Schism and sin
refuse to accept them.

The following Paragraph is wholly spent in palliating obstinacy Ibidem. number. 15.
in private opinion, against the sense and belief of the Church, with the
title and pretense of Constancy; which for the most part is taken in a good
sense, and held for a virtue: but here it cannot be so: and deliberately to
doubt, yea to deny (if a man please) the doctrine that is defined and declared
by the Church, to be matter of Christian Faith, is styled a modest proposal of
doubts. But we have Chap. 20.
already sufficiently discovered the fraud and impertinency of these
pretenses; and likewise largely treated the whole matter of external
obedience, which the Relatour here again brings upon the stage. We only
desire at present, to have some certain and infallible direction, or rule given
us, to know, when the resusall to submitt to a General Council is out of pride
and presumption of a his own judgment (which the Bishop himself condemns) and
when (perhaps) from better and more honest motives. Was there ever yet
Heretics so impudent and past shame, as to profess, or (...) that he
contradicted the doctrine of the Church, or the definitions of General
Councils, merely out of pride and presumption of his own judgment? Do they
not all pretend evident reason and conviction of conscience for what they do?
What is it then, but a masque that may serve all faces, and a plea for all
delinquency in matter of Religion, for the Bishop to talk as he does, of
probable grounds, modest Proposalls, without pride and presumption etc? these
being things, that all Heretics pretend alike to, and with equal truth.

But as for those words of the Bishop, that a man may not upon very probable
grounds, in an humble and peaceable manner deliberately doubt, yea and upon
demonstratiue grounds constantly deny, Ibidem.
even such definitions, viz. the definitions of General Councils in matter of
Faith, yet submitting himself and his grounds to the Church, in that, or an
other Council, is that, which until now, was never imposed upon believers etc.
I wonder what sense can be made of them. First, he supposes that a man may have
very probable, yea demonstratiue grounds against the definitions of a General
Council, and by virtue thereof, be warranted both deliberately to doubt, and
constantly to deny such definitions; and yet tells us, he must submitt both
himself and grounds to the Church, in that, or an other Council. Either his
grounds are really such as he speaks of, viz. (...), certain and
demonstratiue, or only seemingly such. If only seeming such, what is it but to
give power to every Phanatique and presumptuous spirit, to oppose General
Councills and contradict their definitions, whenever he fancies to himself
to have an cuident text, or conuincing argument against them, how foolish and
fallacious soever it be? If real and true demonstrations, how can he that
knows them, submitt himself and his grounds to a General Council? Can any
thing be more absurd and unreasonable, then that a true demonstration, and a
true judgment grounded upon it, should yield to a fallible Authority; such as
that of all General Councils is supposed to be? Again, who shall assure us,
that the General Council, to which he submitts, shall not desine the same
article, or error, which was defined before.? In this case, either he is bound
to believe the article de nouo defined, or he is not. If he be not bound to
believe it, why does the Bishop teach, that notwitstanding a man may constantly
deny the definitions of a General Council upon monstratiue grounds, yet he is
bound to submitt himself and his grounds to an other Council? if it be
lawful for him to oppose the second Councills definition, as well as the
first's, where is his submission? If he be bound to believe as the second
Council defines, it is evident, he is bound to prefer a fallible Authority
before a true demonstration, and known to be such: which is not only absurd,
but also impossible.

8. As to that text of St. Austin which the Bishop cites again in his margent,
touching the emendation of former General Councils by latter, we have Chap 10.
already answered the objection taken from it. Jn the next place, he presents
us with a long marginall note, concerning Purgatory and the Council of
Florence; whereby, from the testimony of Peter Martyr a profess't Adversary, he
would insinuate a doubt, as if the Council of Florence had not been unanimous
enough in defining the belief of Purgatory. Whereas it is most evident, that
the Greeks in that Council, never doubted in the least measure, nor denied
Purgatory it self (that is, the penal state and condition of some saythfull
souls departed this life, before they enjoyed God) but only questioned,
whether the fire of Purgatory were material and real fire, or only
metaphorical: wherein the Greeks opinion, who maintained the negative, viz.
that it was not material and real fire, is not at this day held to be against
Faith. But it is beyond admifation strange, what his Lordship asserts
afterward, in contradiction to the Council of Trent, that scarce any Father,
within the first three hundred years, ever thought of Purgatory: then Ibidem.
which, I think there can (...) be advanced a greater Paradox.

(...) not (...) a Father of the first three hundred years? Does not he teach
Purgatory, when, speaking of the public customs and observations of
Christians concerning the dead, he says, Tertull. Iib. de coron. (...). c. 3.
oblationes pro defunctis annua die facimus. (We make offerings in behalf of
the dead, every year upon the day of their death) and speaking of what a
Christian widow was accustomed to do in behalf of her husband departed, does
he not say, Idem. libr. de monogam. c. 10.
pro Anima eius orat (she prays for his soul) et refrigerium adpostulat ei
(and beggs of God refreshment, or ease of his pains for him?) et offert annuis
diebus dormitionis eius, (and every year, upon the day of his death, offers at
the Altar for him?) Is not this clearly enough to teach Purgatory?

Is not St. Cyprian a father of the first three hundred years? and does not he
teach Purgatory, when he says D Cyprian Epist. 52. ad monogam.
(speaking of the different states and conditions of the Faithful departed)
Aliud est, ad veniam stare, aliud ad gloriam peruenire, ('it is one thing to stay
in expectation and hope of pardon, an other thing (says he) to come presently
to glory;) aliud, missum in carcerem non exire inde, donec soluat nouissimum
quadrantem, (It Is one thing to be cast into prison, and not to come out thence,
till you have paid the last farthing) Aliud, statim Fidei et virtutis mercedem
accipere; an other, to receive presently after our death the reward of our
Faith;) lastly (to take away all pretext of cauilling) aliud, pro peccatis
longo dolor emendari, et PVRGARI DIV IGNE, aliud, peccata omnia passione
purgasse: ('it is one thing (says he) for a man to be tormented with long pain
for his sins, to his amendment, and to be purged a great while together with
fire; and an other, to have purged away all his sins at once, by Martyrdom,
or suffering death for Christ's sake.) Did not St. Cyprian think of Purgatory,
when he taught this?

The like is to be said of Origin, whose testimonies to this purpose are so
plentiful and clear, that the Bishop himself Ibidem. number. 16.
professes to think (though most falsely) that he was the first founder of
Purgatory. See him, Homil. 6. in Exodus Homil. 14. in Leuitic. Homil. 25. in
Numer; and in Hom. 2. in Psalm. 36. Hom. 12. in Ierem.
other places, but especially in his Commentary upon St. Paul's Epistle to the
Romans lib. 8. cap 11. where he expressly avouches, that concerning Purgatory
pains (or the purging state of souls after death) noc man knows how long they
continue, but God only: verum haec ipsa purgatio, quae per poenam ignis
adhibetur, quantis temporibus, quantisue saeculis de peccatoribus exigit
cruciatus, solus scire potest ille, cui Pater omne iudicium dedit. Christ, the
judge both of quick and dead (says he) only knows, how long time, souls
remain in Purgatorypaines. But that they are purged after death, by such
pains, Origin delivers, as the public Faith and belief of Christians.

9. Bellarmin therefore does not more boldly, then truly affirm, yea evidently
prove, Bellarm. lib. 10. de Pur. gat. cap. 10.
that all the Fathers, both Greek and Latin, did constantly teach Purgatory
from the very Apostles times: consequently, that it must be held for an
Apostolical Tradition or nothing can be. It Is true, he diuides his proofs out
of the Fathers for this point, into two ranks, as the Bishop observes. In the
first he reckons up such, as affirm prayer for the dead; because, that does
necessarily infer Purgatory, what ever the Bishop vainly insinuates to the
contrary. For if there were no other place, or condition of being, for
departed souls, but either Heaven or Hell, surely it were a vain thing to
pray for the dead; especially to pray for the remission of their sins, or for
their refreshment, ease, rest, relaxation of their pains, as ancients most
frequently do. For the saints in Heaven have noe need of such prayers, and the
Reprobate in Hell can receive noe benefitt by them. So that, according to the
doctrine and practice of the fathers in this point, it is necessary to
acknowledge a third place, or condition, wherein souls both suffer pain, (as
in Heaven none do) and are capable of ease, refreshment, and deliverance from
their pains, as in Hell none are.

To this, the Bishop gives a very slight answer. For not being able to deny,
that the Fathers generally teach it to be good and profitable to pray for the
dead, he tells us, it is most certain the ancients had, and gave other reasons
of prayer for the dead, then freeing them out of Purgatory. But I answer, if by
other reasons he means such as were exclusive of Purgatory, and inconsistent
with that doctrine, the contrary is most certain. Jf he means such as were
consistent with the belief of Purgatory, what do they concern us? we do
not conclude Purgatory (as the Relatour here, and other of our Adversaries
commonly, but very falsely pretend, and impose upon us) from all kind of
prayer sor the dead, absolutely and generally speaking, but from that special
and particular manner of praying for them, which the Fathers use; namely their
praying sor the remission of their sins, for the releasement of their pains,
for their ease, comfort, refreshment, rest, deliverance, and the like. From
such prayers as these, we conceive Purgatory is proved; and that so
vndenyably, as the Relatour finding nothing himself sufficient to answer, was
forced to putt us off, to the late Primate of Armagh's answer to the Jesuits
challenge. Ibidem.


J have, at his Lordships command, perused that answer, and must confess, that
in the chapter alleged, by many allegations of antiquity the Author shows
that, which none of us deny, viz. that the prayers and commemorations, which
the ancient Church Doct. Vshers answer to the Jesuit. cap. 7. Edit, 1625.
used for the dead, had reference to more souls, then those only which were in
Purgatory; namely, to the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and
generally all Saints departed. Do any of us deny this? do we not all
acknowledge with pro valde bonis gratiarum actiones sunt: pro non valde malis
Propitiationes sunt etc. D. Aug. (...). ad Laurent. cap. 110.
St. Austin, that in respect of the Saints, or Blessed in Heaven, such
commemorations and prayers, as the Primitive Church used for the dead, were
thanksgiuings to God sor the glory which the Saints had obtained, and as it
were Congratulations with them, upon that account: but in respect of other
Faithful departed they were Propitiations, that is to say, good offices done,
out of intent and desire to make God (...) and favorable to them? But whereas
that answerer of the Jesuit, would by those allegations of his, insinuate to
the Reader a conceit, that the Ancients used prayer for the dead, only for
these two reasons, and noe other, viz. that the body might be glorified as well
as the soul, and to praise God for the finali happy end of the deceased (as
it is clearly his intent to do) this we must needs avouch to be most lowdly
untrue, and so manifestly contrary to the doctrine and practice of the
Fathers, as nothing can be more,

The practice of the Fathers is to pray for the soul, and not for the body;
they teach that souls departed want our help, and not their bodies; and that
when we pray for them, they receive ease, comfort and refreshment by our
prayers; they teach, that we obtain pardon and mercy and deliverance from
pain for them, and that by the help of our prayers, they are brought to
eternal rest and happiness. Jn this manner, and to these ends the fathers both
commend and practice prayer for the dead, whateuer the Bishop and his Author
most falsely pretend to the contrary. Neither do the fathers always, or only
praise God, or give him thanks for the faithful person departed, much less for
his final happy end, or departure (of which for the most part they have noe
certainty) but supplicate God on his behalf, and deprecate by way of
intercession the severity of Gods justice toward him, as we have in part
shown already, and shall further evidence in this following discourse. At
present, we desire the Reader to take notice of what this alleged Author (
Doctor Usher) himself professes, in the very beginning of the chapter, which
the Bishop cites. Prayer for the dead (says he) as it is used in the Church of
Rome does necessarily suppose Purgatory. If it does, let our Adversaries
show, what kind of prayer for the dead the Roman Church now uses, which the
ancient Church did not use. We maintain it is the very same; and
consequently, that as the prayers of the present Church of Rome do, by our
Adversaries own confession, necessarily suppose Purgatory, so likewise do
those of the Ancients.

Again, is not Dionysius Areopagita an Author of the first three hundred
years? You will say (perhaps) no, and call Erasmus, Laurentius Valla, and some
few others to witness, that the books de Caelesti and de Ecclesiastica
Hierarchia, and de Diuinis Nominibus etc. fathered commonly upon him, are not
the works of that Dionysius converted by St. Paul, Acts. 17. 34. as is
pretended, but of some other later Author. I answer, See Bellarm. de Scrip.
Ecclesiastic. Baron. Tom. 1. Annal. Delrio's. Vindiciae Areopagita.
Catholic divines have so largely proved the contrary, and so euidenc'd the
said writings to be the genuine and undoubted works of that St. Denis mentioned
in the Acts, that I suppose, few learned men do at present, doubt of the
matter. Howeuer it may suffice, that the Author of these books is confessedly
by all, acknowledged for a writer of great Antiquity: and more particularly in
our present case, that the now-cited Primate of Armagh (himself a famous
Antiquary) does profess of him, that Doctor Vshers Answer to tho Jesuit. page
248. 249.
in his writings he takes upon him the person of St. Paul's Scholar, though for
his own part indeed, he holds back which the rest, and will not expressly
acknowledge him for more then an ancient writer. I say then, be it St. Denis
the Areopagite, or be it some other Author of primitive times does not this
ancient writer in effect teach Purgatory, when describing the customs of
primitive Christians for, and about the dead, Dionys. de Ecclesiast. Hierarch.
cap. 7 part. 3.
he tells us, that when the body is made ready for buryall, the venerable
Prelate (or Priest) comes, and makes a prayer over him; in which he beseeches
the divine Goodness TO FORGIVE the party deceased all THE SINS he had
committed through humane frailty, in his life time, and to place him in the
light and country of the living etc? would not both the Archbishop, and Primate
have thought that man a Papist, who should have made the like prayer for his
deceased friend in their hearing?

10. But let us see, how the Bishop endeauours to euade the Ibidem. number. 16.
authorities we have already alleged in proof of Purgatory, together with
others; which Bellarmin brings to the same purpose out of the Fathers. First.
Tertullian (says he) speaks expressly of Hell, not of Purgatory. But this is
(expressly) a very poor shift: it being a known thing, that Purgatory is
commonly taken to be a part of Hell, and as it were, an upper region of it,
confining upon the Hell of the damned; and therefore not vnusually expressed in
ancient writers by the general name of Infernus, or Hell. Beside, that
refreshment, or ease of pain, which the Christians in Tertullians time (as
appears by his testimony already cited) begged of God for the departed souls,
cannot be understood of any soul in Hell, taken in the Bishops strict sense
for the Hell of the damned: for there is noe comfort, nor ease to be expected:
nor yet can it be understood of any soul in Heaven; where there is noe pain,
nor grief. Wherefore, of necessity, it must be understood of souls, in some
third place, where both pain is suffered, and case, or refreshment may be
obtained: and that is Purgatory.

Secondly, he thinks St. Cyprian speaks not of Purgatory, as Ibidem.
we would have it, because he mentions a purging to amendment. which cannot be
after this life: which certainly is both a frigid reason, and a great mistake
in the Bishop: for, as Gold is refined and amended by the furnace, so is a
soul in Purgatory refined and purged from the dross of venial sins, which
rendered it less acceptable in the sight of God; and consequently, she is thereby
amended, or made better then she was. And J would gladly know, of what place,
or condition of souls St. Cyprian should speak, if he meant not to speak of
those in Purgatory. For surely there is noe amendment of any souls in Hell; nor
no suffering of pains, nor purging of souls in Heaven: and yet it is certain,
he speaks of the state of souls after this life.

Origin is granted to have taught Purgatory; but withal taxed with error
concerning that point: which I will not deny. J only say, his adding to the
true doctrine of the Church concerning Purgatory, that false opinion of his
own, viz. that all, even the Devils themselves after a time, shall be saved,
can be noe prejudice to the weight of his testimony, in that wherein he never
was taxed of error, but acknowledged to have taught according to the common
sense and belief of the whole Church. Whatsoever Origin taught in other
places, certain it is, Homil 6. in Exodus
in the place alleged by Bellarmin, he teaches noe such Heresy; speaking
there only of souls being expiated from light and venial sins, which do
not deserve Hell, or damnation eternal. These he styles aliquid de specie
plumby; they are in Faithful souls as a mixture of lead, or some baser metal
in gold: souls are defiled by them. And then, putting a difference betwixt
those souls, which have much gold, and but small quantity of lead, and such as
have much lead, and but little gold, he says of them both, that they shall,
after this life, be purged by fire, more or less, for a longer or shorter time
of pain, according as they had more or less lead, that is, vice and sin to
be purged in them: but for others, viz. such as be all lead and have noe gold,
that is, noe true merit of virtue and grace in them, they (says Origin) shall
sink down into the bottomless pit for ever. This is the sum of his
discourse in that place: and can any thing be spoken more clearly for Purgatory?

In the fourth and fifth ages, Bellarmin brings more plenty of authorities; and
the Relatour is pleased to call these, the great and learned ages of the
Church: therefore, surely the less subject to be seduced and led away from the
truth, by any private false doctrine of Heretics. D. Ambros. in Psalm. 36.
St. Ambrose is plain enough for Purgatory: for, speaking of what happens to
the dead after this life, he says, some shall be saved as by fire; alluding
manifestly to those words of St. Paul 1. Cor. 3. If any man's work burn, he
shall suffer detriment; but he himself shall be saved, yet so, AS BY FIRE. But
the words in St. Ambrose ( AS by fire) at which the Bishop will seem to
stumble and pretend difficulty, relate not so much to the thing, or fire it
self, as if St. Ambrose meant not Ibidem.
true fire, or that it were not truly and really to be passed thorough, save
only in way of similitude, or figure: but it relates to the person; to wit, of
him that does pass thorough it; signifying, that those who are cleansed after
this life, are not burned up, Etsi no^ exurimur, tamen vrimur. D. Ambros. ubi
supra.
and quite destroyed by fire (as those in Hell are, over whom that fire
preuailes for ever) but only that they suffer detriment for a while; like him,
that passes through fire, and in his passage has his hair and garments
singed. Thus, I say it is, that St. Ambrose teaches, some are saved quasi per
ignem ( as by fire.)

I add, that suppose St. Ambrose by his quasi per ignem did not intend to
signify true and material fire, but only Metaphorical, as pains analogicall
to fire, yet it will not thence follow, that he intended not to signify
Purgatory: since it is not yet declared by the Church to be matter of necessary
belief, that souls in Purgatory are tormented by fire in that sense, but
only that they endure pains and dolours there, by which they are purged, and
which for their extremity are not vnfittly, according to Scripture phrase,
expressed and signified by fire; what ever the means, or immediate instrument
be, by which God inflicts them. See Council. Florentin. in lit. union: likewise
St. Ambrose, in his oration upon the death of that good Emperor Theodosius,
where he prays for his soul in these words, give REST to thy Servant
Theodosius, -- that REST, which thou have D. Ambr. orat. in obit. Theodos.
prepared for thy saints; and prosesses out of great affection to him, that he
would never leave so praying, day nor night, till by his prayers and tears he
had brought him to the place, whither his merits called him, to the holy
mountain, where is life everlasting. Jf you object, that St. Ambrose, in this
very oration, professes to believe, that Theodosius was already in heaven, J
answer, out of his charity he might hope so, knowing how good a Christian that
Emperor was; yet not being certain of it, he held it necessary (as we see)
and agreeable to Christian piety, to pray for him: which clearly rather
confums, then ouerthrows the doctrine of Purgatory.

St. Hierome also is nce less plain for a purging fire after this life; yea so
expressly, that he makes it to differ from that of Hell only, because through
this they pass, as the Israelites did through the red sea; but through that of
Hell, none pass, but all (with the D. Hieton. in cap 66. (...). in fine.
Egyptidns) are drowned therein and perish eternally. As for the word
arbitramur which the Relatour catches at, as if St. Hierome thereby delivered
only his own private, and but coniecturall opinion and not any matter of
Christian belief, we answer, arbiramur does not always signify opinion, or
doubt, but simply a man's sense, or judgment in whatsoever matter, or question
propounded, as every common Lexicon might have informed him. Does the word
signify noe more then mere opinion, in that text of St. Paul Philip. 2. non
rapinam ARBITRATVS est, esse se aequalem Deo etc? And would not the Bishop
(think you) have been shrewdly putt to it, to find a proof for
iustificationby Payth been only, should that of Romans 3. 28. have been wrested
from him in this manner, St. Paul is here only at his ARBITRAMVR, WE THINK,
that a man is iustisyed by Faith without the works of the Law? he delivers not
a point of Faith, but only his private opinion, leaving it sree for other men
to think otherwise if they see cause.

Howeuer the Reader shall do well, to take a little notice of the Bishops
doubling here. He makes a show of answering the texts, which Bellarmin brings,
out of the fathers, to prove Purgatory, but in stead of performing punctually
what he pretends, is content to pass by, many of them, and to frame an answer
only to some few, which he thought fit. Can any reason be conceived of (...)
proceeding, but only that he found the omitted places too hot for him, and not
capable of any colorable perverting? Let the Reader judge in part by this one
of St Hierome, which to that end is here presented in the margent, verbatim, as
it stood (and should have been answered) in Bellarmin, Si (...) Origenes omnes
rationabiles clearuas dicitnon esle perdendas, et Diabolo tribuit paenitentiam,
quid ad nos? qui Diabolum ac satellites cius omnesque impios et praeuaricatores
(...) (...), et Christianos, si in peccato praeuenti fucrint, (...) esse post
panas. D. Hieron. lib. 1. contr. Pelagian.
si autem Origenes etc. what is it to us (says St. Hierome) if Origin teach,
that all reasonable creatures whatsoever, shall be saved at last, and that even
the Devil shall come to repentance; seeing we hold no such matter, but
confess, that the Devil and his Ministers are damned for ever, and that all
wicked impenitent sinners shall likewise eternally perish, and that such
Christians only as ARE PREVENTED IN SIN, that is, dye before they have done
full and perfect penance for the sins, of which they had truly repented,
shall be siued after a time of punishment. To which we may add, what he says
in his Commentaries Idem in cap. 11. Prou.
upon the Proverbs, where he plainly avouches, that the faithful after death,
may be absolved from light sins, in which they dyed, viz. either by the
chastisement of such pains, as they suffer after death, or by the prayers and
alms of their friends living, and by the oblations of the holy Eucharist.

St. Basil teaches the same doctrine with St. Hierome in the place D. Basil. in
cap 9. Isaia.
mentioned by the Bishop, expressly nameing Purgatoriefire, in allusion to that
commonly-alledg'd Text of St. Paul. 1. c. 3. and it is evident likewise from the
context of his discourse. For he speaks of sins already in part expiated by
confession (comparing them for that reason to withered, or dead, grass) whose
mortal, or eternal guilt, being remitted by the Sacrament, it is out of
question they can be noe matter for Hellfire to feed upon, but only for that
of Purgatory. Whence also he styles this punishment afterward, not an utter
rficetion, but an expurgation, Epist. 350.
as by sire. St. Paulinus indeed speaks only of Prayer for the dead; but seeing
he prays, that such souls departed may be refreshed with the dew of mercy
procured by prayer, who can deny, but he means Purgatory?

And why is not St. Gregory Nazianzen's a manifest place too? who exhorting his
Auditory to good life and Christian perfection, tells them, D. Greg. Naz. Orat.
39. in fine.
if they go not that way in this life, they will, peradventure, be baptized
with fire in the next. Who sees not, that he supposes for certain, that there
is, after this life, a place and condition of being, wherein souls are
baptized, that is, cleansed and purifyed by fire? For, as to the word forte (
peradventure) which stands in the Bishops way, it relates to the persons only
(viz. his Auditory) of whom it was really uncertain to him, whether they
should go to Purgatory, or not; it being possible for them as yet, to escape
it; namely by following good counsel, and applying themselves to perfection of
holy-liuing. I say the word forte (whick this father uses) does not import
uncertainty. or doubtfullness, concerning the place, or state of Purgatory, but
only uncertainty of their going thither, to whom St. Gregory then spoke. As if
I should say to some friend, take heed you do penance in time of health; for
if you do not, it is a bazard but you will go to Hell. By this manner of
speaking J doc not doubt of Hell; that is, whether there be such a place or
not, but J doubt of my friends condition, and fear his going thither. Nor
could St. Gregory indeed speak otherwise, then by peradventure, in such a
case, without a Revelation. So that Bellarmin had no need to omit the word,
out of cunning, as the Bishop pretends. what ever was the cause of its'omission.

Lactantius follows; with whom, what ever the Relatour insinuates to the
contrary, Card. Bellarmin has very good success: For does not Lactantius
clearly affirm of some Christians, Ibidem.
that after this life they shall be sharply touched, and as it were singed by
fire? to wit, those, whose sins have so far prevailed, Lactant. lib. 7.
cap. 21.
that in their lifetime they did not do full and perfect penance for them?
or can we think he would use such an expression of those who go to Hell;
that they shall be only touched and singed by fire? Doubtless, perstringentur
and amburentur are words of too light signification to express the woeful and
irreparable condition of those souls, who are wholly plunged and swallowed up
in an abyss of torment. He speaks therefore without doubt, of such souls, as
being in the state of grace, do yet depart this world, before they have
performed sufficient penance for their mortal sins committed; or do carry
with them venial sins not repented of, which of necessity must be purged,
before they can see God, or enter into the glory of Heaven. Add hereunto,
that he calls them iustos (just persons) which surely, is no epithet of the
damned, or (to use the Bishops words) of such as are for Hell.

St. Hilary speaks home too; for he D. Hilar. in illud Psalm 118. concupiuit
anima (...) etc.
auouches such a fire, or afflictiue condition, to be endured after this life,
as may expiate souls from sin; which cannot be said of the fire of Hell; for
that punishes indeed all souls that are cast into it, but expiates none. This
authority therefore serves Bellarmins turn very well. For though the proper
guilt of mortal sin (which is to exclude the soul eternally from the
beatificall vision of God) be always remitted in this life; yet seeing there
ordinarily remains some temporal punishment to be suffered for such sins,
either here, or in the other life, when this temporal punishment happens to be
remitted to any soul after death, (as oftentimes it does) it is truly said,
that sins are remitted; towitt, as they render us guilty, or obnoxious to such
punishment. Beside, Scripturae et Patres diserte docent post hanc vitam remitti
peccata leuia. Bellarm. de Purgat. lib. 1. cap. 14,. res. (...).
Bellarmin (with the common opinion of Divines) expressly teaches, that venial
sins are remitted in Purgatory: which I do not wonder our Adversary would
take noe notice of; since he could not but see, it did utterly break the force
of his argument against this text of St. Hilary.

Boethius is also for us; and though none of the fathers of the Church, yet a
Christian Philosopher, and without doubt, in many other respects, so famous and
worthy a man, that his testimony cannot but be held competent in any question
of ancient Theology and though he uses the word Nullane supplicia animarum
post defunctum morte corpus relinqui l and magna quide; quorum alia Panali
acerbitate, alia Purgatoria clemetia exerceri pute. Boet. lib. 4. de Cousolat.
Philosoph. pros. 4.
Puto, (which the Bishop fastens upon) yet without doubt he means either the
same with Credo (I believe,) or J am persuaded) as the word often signifies; or
else, being (as the Relatour observes) not long before, a Convert to
Christianity from Paganism, he uses a word of lasser signification, as not
being as yet so sufficiently informed how to express himself in matters of
Christian belief. Howeuer it is patent enough, how resolved the Bishop was to
cavil upon this subject, by the Criticisme he makes. For, if his observation
be good, that PVTO is no expression for matter of Faith, Boethius must be
thought so mean a Christian, as that he believed neither Purgatory nor Hell,
as matters of Faith, seeing he uses the same word Puto in reference to them
both.

11. The authorities of Theodoret and St. Gregory Nyssen are Ibidem.
by the Relatour himfelfe consess't to be pregnant, and to seem at least, to
come home: yet he is resolved to shift them of so well as he can. To that of
Theodoret he finds nothing to say, but that Bellarmin took this Authority upon
trust, and that the words are not to be found in scholijs Graecis, as Dellarmin
cites him. It Is answered, lib. 1. cap 5.
the Cardinal had confess't thus much before, and told his Reader, that he had
not the words immediately out of Theodoret, but from Gagneius, who cites the
words in greek, and from St. Thomas, who in his Tractate against the error of
the Greeks, D. Tho: opuse contr. Grae. cos.
reports Theodoret, as commenting upon chap. 3. of St. Paul's first Epistle to
the Corinthians in these words: we believe this purging fire, by which souls
are purified, as gold in the furnace.

St. Gregory also ('it is confess't) is clear for us, speaking of a D. Greg.
Nyss. orat. pro Mortuis.
fire for purging of souls after this life; which can be no other, then the
fire of Purgatory, which we assert: in which the effects of mortal sin, and
also venial sins are purged. Neither is it against us, that this purging
fire is said by St. Gregory to be a fire that sleeps not, seeing his meaning
is, that it goes not out, nor cease to burn, till the soul be perfectly
refined by it. We confess also, that St. Gregory proves the Resurrection of
the body Sermon. 3. de Resurrect.
by this argument, because it is fitting, the body which has been partaker in
sin, should likewise be partaker in punishment. But how does this disprove
Purgatory? Yes, says the Bishop: for this Father teaches withal, that the
soul cannot suffer by fire, but in the body. Jf he means naturally and by
material fire, Weo grant it too; but supernaturally, and by divine power so
ordaining it, we auerre, that both Devils and damned fowls do now suffer by
fire in Hell; though it be not matter of necessary Faith, to believe, that
souls in Purgatory, are now purged by material fire. It suffices, that they
suffer real pains, real affliction and dolours, whatsoever those be, and by
what means soever applied; and that by suffering them, they are purged from
their sins.

What the Relatour adds here, concerning diverse of the ancients, especially of
the Greeks, viz. that they were a little too much acquainted with Plato's
school; if his meaning be, that they were thereby led into error, or that
they corrupted the Christian doctrine with the opinions of Plato, or any other
Paganish Philosophers, it is a groundless calumny, and extremely injurious to
those worthies. But our Adversary seems not much to care what he imputes to
the fathers, so he may impose upon his Reader, and make him believe, those
primitive and zealous Assertours of Christian verity, against both
Philosophers, Heretics and all enemies whateuer, held against us in this
point, or taught not Purgatory as a part of Catholic doctrine.

12. But St. Austin has the ill hap to be used worst of all. The Bishop makes
him say and unsay, and waver in his doctrine touching this matter, as if he had
been rather a nouice in the Faith, then a father of the Church; thence
concluding, that the doctrine of Purgatory was noe matter of Faith in St.
Austins time: for if it had been such, St. Austin would never have spoken so
doubtfully of it. Excellenty concluded! But I answer, the argument proceeds
only upon a willing mistake of our Adversary, and an affected ignorance of St.
Austins meaning in the places alleged. That he could not possibly be thought
to deny, or doubt of Purgatory, quoad rem, that is, as it signifies a pen all
state of faithful souls departed, from which they are in time delivered, is
so evident, that we refer it to the judgment of every indifferent Reader,
after he has seriously weighed these places; not to repeat here those other,
which Bellarmin cites out of him. D. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 21. c. 24.
Constat animas purgari post hancvitam etc. (this the Bishop himself also
cites) it is certain (says he) that some souls are purged after this life. If
St. Austin held it certain, how could he be thought to doubt of it? D. Aug.
Enchirid. cap. 110.
neque negandum est etc. It is not a thing to be denied (says he again) but
the souls of the dead are helped by the piety of their living friends, when
the sacrifice of Christ's Body is offered for them, or Alms given on their
behalf. To the same purpose he writes also lib. 21. de Ciuit. Det. page 13.
lib. 2. de Genes. contr. Manich. cap. 20. Epist. 64. ad Aurel. Episc. Item in
psalm. 37. Lastly, what he says Sermon. 32. de verb. Apost. Orationibus Sanctae
Ecclesiae, et Sacrificio salutari et eleemosynis, quae pro eorum spiritibus
erogantur, non est dubitandum mortuos adiuuari etc. we may not at all doubt
(says he) but the Prayers and Sacrifice, of the Holy Church, with Alms
distributed for their souls, do help the dead, so as to procure, that our
Lord deal more mercifully with them, then their sins have deserved; this
being a thing, which the universal Church observes by Tradition from the
Fathers.

Compare this, good Reader, with that known maxim and resolution of St.
Austin in his Epistle to Januarius (that it is Epist. 118. c. 5.
noe better then insolent madness, to question, or dispute that, which the
universal Church holds) and tell me, if thou can possibly think, that St.
Austin doubted of Purgatory. The thing he doubted of, was not, whether there
were such a state of souls after this life, as we now style Purgatory, but
only, what was the most proper and genuine sense of that place of St. Paul. 1.
Cor. 3. 12. 13. etc. siquis superaedificauerit etc. and more particularly,
whether the Apostle meant the afflictions of this life, or those after this
life, by this fire he speaks of. He doubted also, and offered it to
consideration, whether souls departed might not be thought to be in part,
tormented, even after death, with the sense of such grief as they suffered in
this life, when they were deprived of things, which were most dear to them. Of
these we confess, St. Austin seems in some sort to doubt, but yet so little,
that it is evident, he always allows it for a good and sound exposition of text
abouesayd 1. Cor. 3: 12. etc. to understand it literally of the pains of the
next life, and very D. Aug. in psalm. 37. Item. lib 50. Homiliarum. Hom. 16.
frequently so understands it himself, without making any difficulty, or
question about it, and without mentioning any other sense.

All which, presupposed and well reflected on, it could have been no hard
matter, sure, for the Bishop to have reconciled all that St. Austin delivers
upon this subject, without making him seem to doubt of that which he teaches,
data occasion, no less constantly, then he does the doctrine of Heaven and
Hell: or else to speak contrary to himself; which is neither beseeming, nor
so easily to be imputed to such a person, as this Father was known and
confessed to be in the Church of God. Nor can I but wonder, seeing the Bishop
grants, that St. Austin sometimes asserted Purgatory, though at other times he
left it doubtful, why the Bishop and his party should make it such a necessary
point of their doctrine to deny it; whereas St. Austin never denied Purgatory.
Whence is derived to Protestants that light, which St. Austin, and the whole
Church of his time, could not see? They had the word of God then, as well as
Protestants can pretend to have it now; and were much nearer to the Primitive
and Apostolical times; in which, even by our Adversaries acknowledgement,
there was not that dross of superstition, which they complain of in latter
times. If it were a truth so important to Salvation, and so clear in Scripture
as Protestants now make it; or the beleese of Purgatory an error so derogatory
to the merits and satisfaction of Christ, as they say it is, how happened it,
that St. Austin and the Church of his time, could not see both the one and the
other?

J must not omit the Authorities of St. Cyrill of Jerusalem and St. Iobn
Chrysostom, though the Bishop does in his answer; the first of which gives
testimony to the doctrine of Purgatory, in these words. D. Cyrill. Hierosol.
Cateches. 5.
We pray (says he) for those amongst us, who are departed this life;
believing, that it is GREAT HELP TO THEIR SOVLES, for whom the Oblation of his
holy and dreadful Sacrifice, upon the Altar, is offered. The second speaks
thus. D. Chrysostom Hom. (...). in Act.
It is not in vain, that we make Oblations for the dead; it is not in vain,
that we pray and give Alms for them: doubt not, but there comes much good of
it: and more toward the end, let us consider (says he) how great
consolations we may cause to the dead, by these our tears, and giving of Alms
for them, and by our prayers. Again, D. Chrysostom. Hom. 41. in. 1. ad (...)
If thy dead Brother be departed with any sin, (that is, with sin not so
fully repented for, and not so fully expiated by works of Penance as it ought,
and as we have often declared) we ought to the utmost of our power, to GIVE
HIM SVCCOVR by our prayers, supplications and tears; and by procuring
Oblations, (or Masses) for him. For it is not in vain, that in the divine
Mysteries, we remember the faithful departed. We do it to the end, they may
receive CONSOLATION; and what we do in this kind, is (not any superstitious
invention of man, as the Relatours 139. Articles say it is, but) the Ordination
of the Holy Ghost.

13. What can be said more then this, to the full assertion of our Catholic
belief in this point? Especially, seeing out Adversary himself grants,
concerning St. Gregory and all the fathers after his time, that they
undoubtedly held Purgatory: so Ibidem.
that for a thousand years and more, he confesses Purgatory was the general
Faith of Christians. It would be considered by indifferent men, whether it be
not sarre more likely, to have been always the Faith of Christians; and that
our forefathers were in truth frighted into the belief of it, (as the Bishop
will needs speak) by noe other means, then they were frighted into the
belief of Hell; that is, by the Tradition of the Catholic Church, and the
preaching of their lawful Pastors conformably thereto. I conclude therefore,
that Purgatory can be noe other then a doctrine of Apostolical Tradition, if
St. Austins Rule be good, lib. 4. de Baptism. cap. 24. which teaches, that we
justly hold all things of this nature proceed from the Apostles, if they be
taught by the whole Church, and we find noe beginning, or first Institution
of them in Councils National, Provincial, or oecumenicall. Now we challenge
our Adversaries to show, when, or in what age the doctrine of Purgatory first
began to be taught; or (which is all one) when the doctrine of Praying for the
dead, that their sins might be remitted to them, that they might find mercy,
and milder chastisement from God, refreshment, ease of their pains, help, and
reast in our Lord etc. first began to be practiced in the Catholic Church.

Neither does Bellarmins proving it from Scripture, hinder the point from
being a Tradition of the Apostles. For does not St. Austin, with Bellarmin and
all divines, not excepting even Protestants themselves, acknowledge the
Baptism of infants, and doctrine of Original sin, and diverse other points
to proceed from Apostolical Tradition, and yet endeavor to prove Ibidem. number.
17.
them also from Scripture? much less does the Cardinal contradict himself (as
our Adversary likewise pretends he does) by endeaucuring on the one side, to
prove Purgatory by nineteen places of Scripture, and yet auerring on the
other, that we find no beginning of this doctrine. For first, his assertion
that we find noe beginning of this doctrine, imports noe more, then that noe
first Author of the doctrine of Purgatory could be found, since the Apostles;
that being fully sufficient to his purpose; which was only to show, that the
belief of Purgatory was an Apostolical Tradition. And yet secondly supposing
his speech absolute, that no beginning at all could be found of this doctrine
in any age, either since the time of the Apostles, or before, yet should he not
contradict himself, by thinking, or saying it might be proved by Scripture.
Who doubts, but the doctrine of souls immortality is effectually proved out of
the Gospel, and the bodies resurrection out of St. Paul's first Epistle to the
Corinthians chap. 15? Yet will any man pretend, that the first beginning of
those doctrines is found in the Gospel, or in St. Paul's Epistles? was not the
immortality of the soul and resurrection of the body believed by the faithful
before Christ's Incarnation? So that in truth the Relatour committs the grand
absurdity himself, in arguing (as he does) that if Bellarmin did find it in
Scripture (to wit, the Ibidem;
doctrine of Purgatory) then he is false in saying, we find noe beginning of
it. Certainly, to find a thing to be taught, and to find the first beginning
of its being taught, is not all one, in any sober man's judgment, except it be
the Relatours. Ibidem.


What he adds touching Alphonsus a Castro's telling us, the mention of
Purgatory in ancient writers is almost none at all, and that it is not believed
by the Grecians to this very day, is in part contrary to himself, who has
already confess't, number. 16. in fine.
that from St. Gregory's time, all the Fathers taught, and all Christians
(generally) believed Purgatory; and misunderstood in the whole. For certainly,
it is only of the name ( Purgatory) and quality of the fire there, that a Castro
and some others speak, when they affirm, that few of the ancients believed
Purgatory: it being impossible to conceive, they could be ignorant of what is
both generally taught by the Fathers, and was unanimously, without the least
difference, or dispute concluded both by Greeks and Latins, in the Council of
Florence, touching the thing, that is, the penal state of some Faithful
souls departed, after this life. The Bishop might as well have told us, that
those Authors pronounce the same, touching the Holy Ghosts proceeding from the
Father and the Son, and of some other points, namely, that there is little
mention of them in the ancient Fathers, (to wit, express and in terminis) but
yet without doubt suppose, those ancient and Orthodox Pastors of the Church
did ever teach the said points, as to the substance of doctrine and sense.
Ibidem.


His Lordships assigning Origin to be the first Author of the doctrine of
Purgatory is a manifest falsity, already disprou'd by the testimonies of
Tertullian and St. Cyprian, ancienter then he; likewise by St. Denis the
Areopagite, contempory with the Apostles: to whom we may add lib. 8. Constie.
Apost. cap. 47.
St. Clement, an Author of the same age, cited by Bellarmin: in both which,
such prayer for the dead, as does necessarily infer Purgatory, is auouch'd to
be a Tradition received from the Apostles, Tertull. lib. de Coron. Milit. cap.
3.
Tertullian also does the same with St. Hom. 3. in Epist. ad Philip.
Chrysostom: yea once again we challenge our Adversaries to nominate, if
they can, any one ancient Father, or Christian writer, that ever noted this an
error, or private doctrine in Origin, that he taught Purgatory, or that in any
sort intimates him to have been the Author, or inuentour of it: and yet the
world knows, Origens errors and private opinions were diligently noted by
Antiquity. But this, it is sure enough, our Adversaries can never do: and
therefore let noe man think it unreasonable in us, that we still confidently
presume and assert, that this doctrine has no beginning assignable, and
consequently, according to St. Austins rule above mentioned, is to be thought
an Apostolical Tradition.

14. It is therefore firmly to be believed by all Catholics; that there is a
Purgatory; yea we are as much bound to believe it, as we are bound to believe
(for instance) the Trinity, of Incarnation it self; if by this manner of
speaking be meant only, that we can noe more lawfully, or without sin and
peril of damnation, deny, or question this doctrine; being once known by the
Churches definition, to be reueald by God, and pertaining to the Catholic
Faith, then we may deny, or question the said Articles of the Trinity and
Incarnation: though we confess, there is not the same necessity, or
obligation, for all men, to know the one, as the other, or to have explicit
belief of one, as of the other. Nor can J doubt, but the Bishop himself would
have confessed, in the sense above mentioned, that we are as much bound not to
disbeleeue any thing, even of least moment, contained in Scripture, when we
know it to be there contained, as to believe the said Articles: and as this is
far from being esteemed blasphemy, by any good Christians, so is the other,
if rightly understood.

CHAP. 26. The infallible certainty of Christian Faith, confessed, yet
subverted by the Bishop.
ARGUMENT.
1. Why noe matter of doctrine defind by General Councils, may be deliberately
denied, or doubted of. 2. A. C. does not teach, that every Catholic Priest in
the Roman Church, able to preach, is infallible. 3. Jnfallibility in teaching,
how rightly inferred by him from the Holy Ghosts Assistance. 4. To what intent
our Janiour left the Prerogative of infallibility in his Church. 5. No certain
means, in our Adversaries principles, to be assured, that a General Council,
erring in one point, does not err in all. 6. The Relatour, by allowing private
persons to examine the definitions of General Councils, allows them in effect
to judge and censure them. 7. Posteriour Councils, no less necessary for the
infallible determination of controuerted points of Faith, then the four first.
8. Infallible assurance, requisite in superstructures, as well as points
Fundamental. 9. The insufficiency of the Relatours reason to the contrary: 10.
No help for him, from St. Thomas and our Authors, touching the extent of
necessary points. 11. His nugatory descanting upon words.

1. THus much for Purgatory. It Is time now, that we return again to A. C.
who gives his Adversary a why no man may deliberately doubt of, much less deny
any thing defined by a General Council viz. because every such doubt is a
breach from the one saving Faith, in that it takes away infallible creditt from
the Church: so as the divine revelation, being not sufficiently applied, it
cannot, according to the ordinary course of. 38. number. 28
Gods Providence, breed infallible Faith in us. Jn answer whereto the Bishop
insists wholly upon principles already confuted; viz. that deliberately to doubt
and deny what is defined by General Councils, does not take away infallible
creditt from the whole Church; the contrary whereof we have often shown in
this See chap. 23.
Treatise. Likewise he tells us, the creditt of the Catholic Church is safe,
so long as she is held infallible in things absolutely necessary to Salvation:
which absolutely necessary things neither himself, nor any body else, could
ever yet resolve us, what they are, or how to know them. And beside, seeing he
teaches, that all points absolutely necessary to Salvation are plainly set
down in the Creed and Scripture, how is it possible we should have need of the
infallible Authority of the Church, now or hereafter, to believe any such
points of Faith? Again, if the whole Church may err in points not absolutely
necessary to Salvation, noe reason can be given, but it may also err in
delivering and interpreting any particular texts of Scripture, which contain
matter, or doctrine not absolutely necessary: which supposed, it necessarily
follows, that we cannot believe with certain, infallible and divine Faith,
any thing deuer'd in Scripture it self, save only a very few points; to wit,
the chief and Fundamental Mysteries of our belief. Lastly, seeing the whole
Church consists of all particular members, which can never be found out, and
consulted with, by any person; and that consequently there can be no sufficient
assurance had of what they all hold, as absolutely necessary to Salvation: how
is it possible we should be moved by their Authority (as the Bishop here
supposes) to believe all, or any points of Faith absolutely necessary to
Salvation? Ibidem. number. 17.


2. The Relatours next work is to carp at the gloss, which A. C. gives to
those words of St. Paul, Romans 10. 15. how shall they preach etc. that is, says
A. C. how shall they preach infallibly. By which manner of speaking yet, he
does not mean (whateuer the Bishop imputes to him) to make every Priest in the
Church of Rome, that has learning enough to preach, an infallible Preacher. He
was not ignorant, that the native and immediate sense of those words, compared
and joined with the foregoing, how shall men believe unless they hear etc. is
only to signify, that for the Propagation of the Gospel, it is necessary there
should be Preachers, and that noe man ought to take that office upon him unless
he be sent, that is, ordained and called by Allmighty God. He was not so simple
as to think every private Preacher infallible. You will say then, why does he
comment upon the words how shall they preach etc? thus; how shall they preach
INFALLIBLY, unless they be sent from God, and infallibly assisted by his
Spirit? J answer, the reason hereof was, because the word preach (which the
Apostle uses) does not signify sermons only, but absolutely, the announcing,
or publication of divine doctrine, by all such as are lawfully appointed to
publish it, and in what manner soever it is necessary for believers, that it be
published and announced to them.

Now, there being (confessedly) a twofold annunciation, or manner of
publishing divine doctrine to Christians; the one private and merely
ministerial, which is performed by private and particular Pastors to their
particular and respective flocks; the other public and authoritatiue, viz. of
the Pastors of the whole Church assembled together in General Councils: and
this latter, in regard of the public and universal benefitt which comes by
it, the more important of the two, A. C. could not doubt, but that really it
was intended, and must necessarily be included in the sense of those words of
the Apostle, how shall they preach etc. no less then the former. J say, that
special annunciation, or preaching of Christian doctrine, must necessarily be
included in the latitude of those words, whereby the Prelates of the Church do
sufficiently apply divine revelation to Christian people, for the grounding
and eliciting an assent of true divine Faith: which, as we have often shown,
cannot be done by any Authority, or means, which is not infallible. A. C.
therefore takes not the whole, but only the principal part, or one principal
kind of preaching Christ's Gospel, when he so glossed upon St. Paul's words.
And well might he so do; it being that, without which the preaching of all
particular Pastors to their particular flocks, would be to little purpose; for
they could preach nothing but uncertainties; or at best, but probable Ibidem.
doctrine.

As little cause had his Lordship to tax A. C. of bragging, because he auerrs,
that we (Catholics) use to interpret Scripture by union, consent of fathers,
and definitions of Councils. For, in a just and true sense, so we do: in as
much as we never decline, but always follow that interpretation of Scripture,
which has consent of Fathers, and the definition of General Councils. Can
Protestants say so much for themselves? And yet our meaning is not, that noe
exposition of Scripture is good, but what has express consent of Fathers, or
the definition of some General Council to back it: we do not deny, but
even private persons may discourse upon Scripture, and declare their judgment
concerning the sense and meaning of it; provided, they neither hold, nor
obtrude any sense contrary to the common consent of Fathers, or the definitions
of General Councils, but hold, and do all things with due submission to the
Church.

But the Relatour will prove from the authorities of Scotus and Canus, cited in
his margent, that the Apostle in this place, speaks not at all of infused (that
is, of divine and infallible Faith) but Ibidem.
of Faith acquit a, to wit, by natural and humane industry and means; which
being not infallible, nor requiring any infallible Authority in them that
preach it, the Bishop thence concludes, that A. C'. Gloss is not good, but
rather that he grossly abuses the text by it. J answer first, the precedent
discourse and reason given for the gloss, do sufficiently discharge A. C. of
that imputation; leaving the note of a Precipitate censure upon his adversary.
Secondly I say, the Bishops information abuses him; there being not one word,
or syllable Scotus. in 3. sent. D. 23. quaest, vnica.
in Scotus, which denies infused, that is supernatural, divine, true, Christan
and infallible Faith to be understood in that Tex't of the Apostle. It Is true,
Scotus alleges the words in particular proof of Faith acquired, viz. of that
Faith, which is gained by hearing of particular Preachers, and depends only on
their Authority. But yet he there maintains (with all Divines) an absolute
necessity of Faith infused, or supernatural; which, as the Bishop himself
here proves out of Canus, must rest upon some infallible motive; and
consequently requires an infallible preaching to apply it sufficiently to us:
which is all, that A. C'. gloss imports. Add hereunto, that acquired Faith
being, according to the ordinary course of Gods Providence, prerequired and
antecedent to Faith divine and supernatural, (as Canus Loc. Theollib 2. cap.
8.. cui et tersiuni.
Canus likewise here teaches) it cannot in any sort be supposed to exclude it.

Lastly, by an argument a fortiori, it is evidently concluded, that the text
ought to be extended to divine and infallible Faith, as well as to humane and
acquired. For if we cannot believe, even with natural and acquired Faith,
without a Preacher, surely much less can we believe, with infused and
supernatural Faith, without one: still speaking according to ordinary course:
which Preacher must also be infallible, either in his own person, as all the
Apostles were, or as he delivers the doctrine, and performs the office,
committed to him by an infallible authority; such as is that of the Church, by
whom, every particular Preacher is deputed to deliver the doctrine which she
holds. I might urge also the common consent of interpreters, who expound the
place of noe other Faith, but that, by which Christians are iustify'd and
saved; which surely, can be noe other, but supernatural and infused Faith. And
this is most certain, whateuer Biel. iu 3. sent. Did. 23. quaest 2. art. 2
Conclus. 1.
Biel, out of his private opinion, asserts to the contrary. But we have stood
longer upon this subject, then the small importance of it requires: since
neither our, nor A. C'. doctrine touching the infallibility of General
Councils, does at all depend upon this text; but is sufficiently proved by
those other Chap. 20.
already alleged to that purpose.

3. The Bishop in the next place tells A. C. he has ill luck in Ibidem, number.
20.
fitting his conclusion to his premises, and his consequent to his antecedent.
The business is, because he seems, from the assistance of the holy Ghost to
infer infallibility. But J answer, our Adversary has not much better luck
so often to mistake, and pervert A. C'. meaning. For certainly, A. C. does not
deduce infallibility, either of Church, or Councils from any assistance of the
holy Ghost whatsoever, but from such assistance, as is necessary for them both:
and from thence infallibility is rightly and inuincibly concluded, as we have
often shown, by the grand inconueniencies, which otherwise would unavoidably
follow both to Religion and the Church. What therefore he vrges, that the
ancient Bishops and Fathers of the Church were assisted by Gods Spirit, and yet
not held to be of infallible creditt, is beside the purpose: A. C. making no
such inference, as the Relatour by this objection, supposes him to do.

As for the question which A. C. asks, if a whole General Council, defining
what is divine truth, be not of infallible Creditt, what man in the world can
be said to be infallible, the Ibidem.
Bishop seems rather to slight, then satisfy it, when he says, J'le make you
a ready answer; noe man; no, not the Pope himself. No. Let God and his word
be true, and every man a liar; citing Scripture for it. Romans 3. 4. But what?
cannot Gods word be true, unless the Pope and General Councils be held
fallible, and subject to err, when they define matters of Faith? were not
those words of the Apostle true, when both himself and all the rest of his
Fellow-Apostles, lived upon earth, and were infallible? And if they were true
then, why not also now, though the Pope and General Councils be held
infallible? Certainly A. Cs. question deserved a better answer then this; or
rather was unanswerable by the Bishop, without deserting his auowed principles.
For thus J argue ex concessis. Jf General Councils, defining what is divine
truth, be not of infallible creditt, noe man, nor men in the world, can be said
to be so: this the Bishop grants. But then, if neither General Councils, nor
any man in the world, be of infallible creditt, who sees it not to follow,
there can be noe infallible creditt among men, noe, not in the whole Church,
even in points Fundamental? For seeing noe testimony can be of infallible
creditt, except it be known; and that it is impossible for any man certainly
to know, either who those are that make up the whole Church, in the Bishops
sense, or that they do all of them believe and testify such a point of
doctrine to be Fundamental, and absolutely necessary to salvation, how is it
possible for the whole Church, in that sense, to be of infallible creditt, or
to give infallible certainty to any points whatsoever, whether Fundamental, or
not Fundamental, whether absolutely or notabsolutely necessary to Salvation?

To his Adversaries demand, why a General Council; if it may err in defining
one divine truth, may not err in defining an other, Ibidem. number.
and so in all, the Relatour answers by way of Confession, that it may err
even in all, to wit, of like nature; using this limited manner of speech ( in
all of like nature) on purpose to avoid inconueniencies, and that he might,
upon occasion, take the advantage of his wonted distinction between
Fundamental points. For so presently (as it were by way of anticipation) he
tells the Reader, that of things not absolutely necessary to Sabuation (or
not-Fundamentall) there can be noe necessity of infallible certainty in the
whole Church, much less in a General Council; and consequently, quently, it is
noe matter with him, though a General Council be supposed liable to error in
all such points, as well as in any one. But it suffices, that we have Chap 3.
14.
already shown the contrary both for Church and Council: namely, that in many
cases, it may be absolutely necessary for the Church to have infallible
certaintle of points in their own nature, not absolutely necessary to
salvation; or (which is all one) to have such points, when brought into
controversy amongst Christians, infallibly defined by a General Council: so
as we need not trouble the Reader here, with repetitions.

Nor could it serve his turn, or justify his assertion from being, in the
highest degree, injurious and derogatory to the honor and authority of
General Councills, though it were otherwise: that is, though we had not
already proved a necessity of infalliblydefining, by General Councills, all
controuerted points of Religion whatsoever, whether absolutely, or
not-absolutely necessary to Salvation. For it is certain enough, the Relatour
holds, that General Councills may possibly err even in points, that are
absolutely necessary to Salvation, or Fundamental, as we have heretofore
Chap. 20 24
observed, though he declines somewhat the open profession of such a doctrine.
But this supposed, let his adherents tell us, what does his maxim (if in one,
possibly in all) proclaim, but that a General Council may, not only fall
into error, in defining some one, or other point of Christian Faith, but even
totally Apostatize, and define against Christianity it self? A proposition,
sufficiently confuted by its own apparent impiety, and which may justly serve
for a second instance of our Adversaries sincerity, when they profess fo much
esteem and reverence toward General Councills.

4. We do not say, that Christ our Savior left infallibility in Ibidem.
his Church to satisfy either contentious, or curious, or presumptuous
spirits, as the Bishop would seem to impose upon us: for it is evident enough,
by the experience the world has of the several sects and Heresies of
Protestants, that such kind of people will be satisfied with nothing, but the
full swing of their own obstinate and erroneous phansies. Nor will we,
Catholics, ever desert the confession and defense of it, because such people
will not be satisfied. But we tell them, Christ left that legacy to his
Church, for these ends, viz. to guide the humble and sober-minded securely and
certainly in the right way of Salvation; he left it also to curb the
contentious, to restrain the curious, and to give sufficient check to such
presumptuous spirits, as should dare, in matters of such high and difficult
nature, as the truths and Mysteries of Religion are, to be wise in their own
eyes, and to prefer their private phansies before the public and general
judgment of the Church, and their own lawful Ecclesiastical superious: none
of all which ends could be effectually attained, or duly provided for, without
the said infallibility: which therefore, for the Relatour or any other, out of
private opinion, to go about to take away from the Church, is without doubt
both intolerable presumption and error; especially doing it upon no better
grounds and pretense of reason, then he lays down here; viz. because the
Foundation (that is, in his sense, all Fundamental and absolutely-necessary
doctrine) is so strongly and plainly laid down Ibidem.
in Scripture and the Creed. Stongly and plainly laid down, does he say? Surely
the Bishop when he wrote this, thought little of those swarms of Arian and
Socinian Heretics, who deny such points of Faith, as he himself grants to be
Fundamental. To say those points are so strongly or plainly delivered in
Scripture etc. as not to require some other infallible authority, beside
Scripture, to support and make good our belief of them, must needs argue a
very strong prejudice, to any man that duly considers, how those controversies
are handled betwixt the Orthodox and them, and how equally those Heretics
bandy texts with their Adversaries both ways; that is to say, as well upon the
offensive as defensive part; as well by opposing the truth with the pretense
and allegation of many Scripture-texts, as by answering and euading what ever
is, by their Adversaries, argued out of Scripture for it, or against them. So
as indeed, a modest man (to borrow a little of his Lordships own style) may
justly wonder, whither the Bishop would have us to run for infallible
certainty in those points, if not to General Council: which yet he will by
noe means allow us to do.

5. But A. C. (says the Bishop) has more questions to ask. His next is, how
we can, according to ordinary course, be infallibly assured, that a Council
erres in one, and not in an other point, when she equally defines both, by one
and the same authority, to be divine truths. This may be thought a shrewd
question too; and the Relatour Ibidem. number. 22.
does a little discover himself nettled by it, in telling us, that A. C. turns
Questionist here, to disturb the business, viz. which his Lordship had with Mr.
Fisher, and indeed the Church, as much as he can. Howeuer, he answers the
question by distinction, thus. If a General Council erres (says he) either
it erres in things absolutely necessary to Salvation, or in things not
necessary. If in the first sort, we may be infallibly assured by the
Scripture, the Creeds, the four first Generals Councills and the whole
Church, where it erres in one, and not in an other point. Jf in the latter
sort, it is not requisite, in his opinion, we should have any infallible
assurance at all, viz. whether the Council errs, or errs not in such points,
or in which of them she does, and in which she does not err. Where first good
Reader, observe (what J hinted above) the Bishop does not deny, but a General
Council may err in things absolutely necessary to Salvation, seeing he here
prescribes thee a rule, how to know infallibly when such a Council does err
in such matters, and when not; to wit Scripture, the Creeds, the four first
General Councils, and consent of the whole Church.

But I ask, why does he refer us to the four first General Councils and
the whole Church, to know, when a General Council erres in things necessary
to Salvation, and when not? Fyther the four first General Councills were
infallible in their definitions, or no: if infallible, why are not other
Councills also infallible, seeing Christ has not made promise of infallibility
to one General Council more then to an other? Jf not infallible, how can J by
their authority be infallibly assured, that an after-Generall Council has
erred, or does err in some things absolutely necessary to Salvation? Again,
what does he mean by the whole Church, by whose authority he pretends we may
be infallibly sure when a General Council erreth in things absolutely
necessary? If all particular persons that hold the Fundamentalls, where shall I
find them? what means can I possibly use, to be certainly assured of their
testimony? If only the generality of all particular Churches, they are noe more
the Whole Church then a General Council is; seeing all believers make up the
true Church of Christ. Neither can I, by the consent of the Whole Church only,
be infallibly assured whether some after-Councills definition be erroneous in
matters Fundamental. For seeing the essence of the Church, according to the
Bishop, consists in the belief of such points as he terms Fundamental, unless
J know beforehand all Fundamentalls, how can I know what particular Churches,
or Assemblyes of Christians, do constitute the Whole Church? How can J be
certain, but that some particular Church, whose judgment J refuse, may by
believing the point controuerted as truly Fundamental, be a part of the whole
Church; and some others, whose testimony J embrace, may by not-beleeuing the
said point, be no part of the Church whose consent J seek?

I demand secondly, how does this rule of the Bishop hold good, The Scripture,
Creeds, four first General Councills, and the whole Church shall infallibly
assure me, when after-Councills err in defining Fundament all points? Does
the Scripture, Creeds, four first General Councils etc. particularly tell us,
or give us any certain and infallible rule, by which we may know, when it is
Fundamental error to contradict what they teach, and when it is not? or to
know what and how much of the doctrine they contain, is absolutely necessary
to Salvation, and all the rest only expedient and profitable? Jf they do, we
request some of the Relatours friends to be so charitable to us, as to show us
that rule, or direct us where to find it: for as yet, we Catholics, never
heard of such a thing. If they do not, how is it possible for us to be
infallibly assured by them, when a posteriour Council erres in one point, and
not in an other, when it defines both of them for divine truth by one, and the
same authority equally?

The Relatours answer therefore, as to the first part of his disjunctive (which
concerns General Councills erring in points Fundamental) is so manifestly
vnsatisfactory, that it may be justly wondered, how he could think it should
give satisfaction to that Querie of A. C. And as to what he affirm's in the
latter part, viz. that it is not requisite to have infallible assurance in
points not absolutely necessary to Salvation, our answer is, we have chap. 23
fully proved the contrary. We only demand here, whether the determinate
belief, that such and such books (for example the Epistle to the Hebrews, the
Epistle of St. James, St. Jude, etc.) are divine Scripture, or the word of God,
be in the list of the Bishops absolutely-necessaryes, or not? He could not have
said they are, without condemning a very great part of Orthodox Christians, for
three or four hundred years after Christ, Epist, ad Dardan. Eusebius. lib. 6. c.
14.
if St. Hierome and others say true: and yet it is certain the Relatour does
not only assert, but earnestly endeavor Relat.. 16. number. 6. 7.
to prove, that we ought to have insallible assurance of this point. Seeing
therefore the Bishop pretends, infallibly to believe, that these books of
Scripture are the true word of God; and that he cannot believe this, but for
the Authority of the Church some ages after the Apostles, either he must grant,
that our infallible belief may be grounded upon an authority merely fallible
(which is absurd, and often denied by himself) or that the Church is
infallible even in points not absolutely necessary to Salvation.

His next period contains only a long and captious discourse touching the
words one and the same authority, used by A. C. in framing his demand to the
Bishop; it being evident to any man, not unwilling to see, that when his
Adversary supposed a Council, according to the Relatours opinion, to define
both truth and error, by one and the same authority equally, he meant
precisely the authority of the Council, abstracting from any other, whether of
Scripture, Tradition, consent of Fathers, or the like. It is clear, I say,
from the subject about which A. C. treahs, that his meaning could be no other
then this, viz. that the said Council, in the supposed case, intended to
define, and did actually define both the pretended fall article and the true
one with sull conciliary authority, and did as much exact the infallible
belief of that as this, by virtue of the power they had from Christ to
determine such matters, and the obligation that is upon Christians to receive
and submitt to their determinations, in such cases, under pain of Anathema.
Now let our Adversaries if they can, show us how it is possible to be
infallibly assured, that a Council erring in one, does not err in the other
point, when she defines both by the same Authority in this sense, that is, by
her own Authority precisely: for example, how a man may be infallibly assured,
that a General Council erred not in defining that there is Original sin,
as well as in defining that there is a Purgatory; as well in defining that the
Apocalipse is divine Scripture, as that the Books of Machabees are: and once
again we ask them, in case a General Council defines any point of doctrine,
verily judging it to be agreeable to Scripture, how can our Adversaries be
infallibly sure, that it is not so? or that their contrary interpretation, is
better, then that of so great and learned an Assembly of the Prelates of the
Church?

To tell us therefore (and dispute the matter so largily as he does) that there
is not the same Authority of Christ, of Scripture, and the whole Church in the
falsely-defined Article, that there is in the true, and that the Scripture does
not equally give either ground, or power, to define truth and error, what is
it but to trifle tediously? For we neither say, nor suppose, any such thing.
So as the Bishop by his discourse here, merely labors to declare ignotunt per
ignotius: it being a thing wholly vnknow'n to us, yea impossible for us to know
infallibly and certainly, when the Council defines matters equally, by and
according to the Authorities of Scripture, or the whole Church, but by the
Councils own Act; that is, by her definition so expressed and framed, as there
can be noe just cause to doubt, but that she defined, or presum d herself to
define both the one and the other point conformably to Scripture and the sense
of the whole Church. See now, what great reason the Relatour had to object
cunning and falsity to A. C. in this business.

Our Adversary here again runs from the mark. A. C. Ibidem. number. 2.
in giving the reason of his former demand, speaks of examining only, and not
of judging, as his words show. If we leave this (says he, meaning the erring
and not-erring of a General Council, in the points which the Bishop supposes
she defines fallibly) to be EXAMINE'D by every private man, the examination not
being infallible, will need to be examined by an other, and that by an other.
Without end, or ever coming to infallible certainty etc. The. Bishop answers,
that he has (...) us the way, how an erring Council may be rectifyed, and the
peace of the Church either preserved or restored, etc. viz.. 32. number 5.. 33.
consid. 7. number. 4. of his Relation: and we have likewise shown all his
pretended ways to be deuicus, and not to lead to the end he aims at. But does
he there, or any where else, show, how we may be infallibly assured, that a
Council erring in one point, does not also err in the other, in the case
above mentioned; which is the only thing his Adversary here vrges him withal?
does he show, that A. Cs. objected process in infinitum can be avoided by any
private and fallible examination of the Councils decrees? or does he prescribe
any other means of examining them, but what is, in his own opinion, fallible
at least, though (perhaps) not private?

First, he assigns Scripture for a way to examine a Councils definition: but
how can the examiner be sure the Scripture bears that sense, in which he
understands it, and not that, in which the Council understands it? Secondly,
he assigns the four first General Councils: but how can he be sure, that
their Authority in defining is such, as every one ought to obey, and not that
of after-Councils? Thirdly, he assigns the Creeds, as containing all things
necessary and Fundamental in the Faith: but does he mean all of them? all the
three, Apostolical, Nicen, Athanasian? By his words it seems he does, for he
makes noe difference betwixt them; and in reason it is necessary he should,
seeing it is evident, the Apostles Creed alone, will not ferue the turn: it
making no express mention of the Divinity of Christ, and of the holy Ghost, nor
of the Mystery of the Trinity, Jncarnation etc. which yet we confidently
presume are (all of them) Fundamental points in the Bishops Creed.

But then we ask, how come these latter Creeds (the Nicen and Athanasian) to
be infallible; seeing their Authors, in the composing of them, were fallible
and subject to error, in the Relatours opinion? How can they be a ground of
infallible certainty to me, if possibly in themselves they man be false?
which, though it cannot be said, or suspected of the Apostles, (nor, by
consequence, of their Creed, as it was composed and published by them) yet we
make a Querie, what infallible Authority assured the Bishop, or assur's us now,
that the Creed which we have at present, and commonly call the Apostles Creed,
is really the same, which the Apostles first composed? or that we have it
entire and unchanged? Tradition, or the Church, by the Relatours grounds, must
not be pretended here; seeing they are (both of them) fallible with him, and
may deceive us. It follows then, even from his own principles, that he neither
has, nor can have infallible certainty for his believing the Creeds: and as
for the four first General Councils, the Relatour must needs have less
pretense of reason to allege them for a ground of infallible certainty in
believing; seeing in all his book he never acknowledges, nor with consonancy
to his own doctrine could acknowledge, Councills to be infallible, even in
Fundamentalls. Where is then his infallible certainty, for that one Faith
necessary to Salvation? Ibidem.


6. How far the Relatour speaks truth, when he says, be gives noe way to
any private man to be judge of a General Council, let any man judge, that
considers his doctrine. Liberty to examine even the definitions of General
Councils, if they see just cause, he does expressly grant to private persons;
yea and some kind of judgment too, he allows them, viz. that of discretion,
though not the other of power, as he distinguishes. But is there not a inake,
lurking in the grass here? may we not fear foam poison under the gilded pill
of his Lordships distinction? This judgment of discretion (as he calls it)
especially if common experience and practice may expound it, what does it
signify less, then a power assumed by every private person, not only to examine
the validity of such reasons and grounds, as confirm the defined article, but
See Relat.. 38. number. 15. p. 345.
constantly to deny both it and them, if his private spirit, or discretion
tells him, that he has better reasons for the contrary, or that the Councils
definition is an error? Has not this always been the way and method of
Heretics? To what end do they, at any time, put themselves upon this
scrutiny of examining the definitions of General Councills? was it ever for
any other reason, but to see, whether they could find a flaw in them? which,
when they persuaded themselves to have once spied, did they not presently, in
their own vain hearts, fall to despise the Council (which they supposed to
err) as ignorant and ouerseen in their proper business? did they not usually
thereupon pretend scruple presently and tenderness of conscience, in lieu of
necessary obedience and submission? Did they not forthwith imagine themselves
enlightened persons; and soon after that, obliged in conscience to impart
their pretended lights to other people, and under a pretense of informing
weaker brethren, draw them to the like discret examining of the Churches
defined and generally received doctrine with themselves? Js not this the known
course of the humor? Is not this Satan's method, by degrees to usher in
public and general defections from the Authority both of General Councills,
and all the Lawful Pastors and Governors of the Church? See in effect the
whole benefitt of the Bishops goodly devise. This, and very little else (as the
experience of all ages and times show) is the fruit that comes to the Church
and true Religion, by allowing private persons this judgment of discretion, or
liberty to examine the definitions of General Councills.

Not to urge, that from this doctrine of the Bishop it necessarily and plainly
follows, that the Authority of General Councils is of noe greater force, for
the settling of our Faith and the satisfaction of our understanding in matters
of Religion, then the testimony and resolution of any private man is, or may
be. For if J be allowed to examine the grounds of the one as well as of the
other, and may (if in my own private judgment J think J have just cause) as
lawfully doubt, and deny the desinitions of the one, as the resolution of the
other, wherein do J attribute more to a General Council, then J do to a
private person? Seeing it is evident, that neither the one, nor the other have
further Authority with me, or command over my understanding, then their
several reasons, in my own judgment, deserve; and that, if the reasons of a
private man appear to me to be more weighty and conuincing then those of a
General Council, J am permitted freely and without sin to embrace the said
private persons opinion, and refuse the doctrine of a General Ibidem.
Council.

7. His asserting so confidently, that for things necessary and Fundamental in
the Faith, we need noe assistance from other General Councills, beside the
four first, seems noe less strange, and is sufficiently disprou'd even by
evidence of fact. For has not the assistance of posteriour General Councils,
since the four first, been really and de facto found necessary for determining
matters of Faith? what do our Adversaries think of the fifth General
Council, or second of Constantinople? was it not matter of Faith, and
necessary to Salvation, what this Council defined against the Heresy of
Origin and his Adherents? what think they of the sixth, against the
Monothelites was not the doctrine and belief of two distinct wills in Christ,
defined by this Council, in the Bishops opinion, as Fundamental in the Faith,
as the doctrine and belief of two natures, defined by that of Chalcedon?

Again, may not fresh errors arise? may not some new vnheardof Heresy spring
up, corrupting the Faith contradicting Fundamental matters, in Religion? Jf
they do, shall it not be necessary for the Church, that such errors be
condemned by General Councils? The Relatour pretends here that some that some
of our own, very honest and learned men (as he is pleased to qualify them,
when it serves his turn) are of the same opinion with him in this point, citing
in proof hereof, certain words (as he pretends) of Petrus de Alliaco, an
ancient Schoole-Author, otherwise known by the name of Cardinalis
Cameracensis. Vertsstmum esse etc. It Is most true; all things (pertaining to
Religion) are well ordered by the fathers, if they were as well and diligently
observed. But first, here is a great mistake. The words which the Bishop cites,
are not the words of Petrus de Alliaco, nor any part of the book which he
wrote de reformatione Ecclesiae, and presented to the Council of Constance,
but of one Orthuinus Grauius who published it, with diverse other small
tractates of that nature, in his fasciculus rerum expetenilarum etc. printed at
Basil. 1535. as any man may see that peruses that book.

Secondly, admitting they were, or that Petrus de Aliaco did in his treatise
say the same thing in effect, yet were it little to the Bishops purpose. For
the Authors meaning is, that those Fathers have so well ordered all things in
respect of the Mysteries which were then opposed by Heretics, that if they
were well observed, there would be noe need of making new definitions in
reference to the same doctrine. But he does not deny, but that upon new
emergent occasions, other General Councills may be necessary in the Church:
nay the design of his whole treatise is to show, that how well soever all
things had been ordered and determined by former Councills, yet by reason of
the long Schism that had been in the Church, and of many Heresies springing
up, the Authority of an other General Council (to wit, of Constance) was
necessary, as well to determine the controuerted points of Faith, as to
extirpate the Schism, and all other abuses and disorders in the Church. With
what truth then could the Bishop pretend, that Petrus de Aliaco is of the same
opinion with him touching the no-necessity of making any new determinations in
matter of Faith by any General Councills whatsoever, after the four first?
And as for in 1. Sent. q. 1. ad 4.
Holkot what ever he may teach concerning Heresy or Infidelity, when the
error is not known to be against the definition, or universal Tradition of
the Church, yet doubtless, when it is known to be so (and under that quality
only we dispute of it with the Bishop) neither he, nor any other Catholic
Author, will deny it to be formal Heresy or Infidelity, to hold it.

St. lib. 2. Epist. 1.
Cyprian, here likewise alleged, speaks clearly of such matters, as were then
undefined, and were not, till a long while after, defined by the Council of
Nice. St. Thomas speaks only deminis D. Thom. 2. 2ae. q. 29. a. (...). ad 2.
et opinionibus, as his words show (of small matters and private opinions)
which in no sort concern our present controversy; and wherein we acknowledge
(with the Relatour) Christian men may differ one from an other without breach
of that one saving Faith, or Christian charity, necessary to Salvation. But for
matters, which the Church has found necessary, for prevention of Schisms,
preservation of unity, and for vindicating, or clearing the ancient received
truth from corruption and error, once to determine by General Councils, how
small and vn-fundamentall soever the points themselves were in their own
nature, we challenge our Adversaries to produce one Catholic Author of good
name, ancient or modern, who taught, that Christians might lawfully disfer in
such points after their said definitions; or that they might dissent and
believe contrary to what the Church had defined. This the Relatour should have
shown, had he meant to deal heartily with his Reader, and not merely to
amuse him, by filling his pages with Authorities, cited to noe purpose.

8. Had not the Apostles (those first-preachers of Christian Faith to the
world) Reuclation from God, not only of things absolutely-necessary to
Salvation, and Fundamentalls in the Relatours sense, but of all other divine
truths belonging to Christian Religion? and did not they deliver the one as
well as the other for divine truths to their immediate successors according to
that of St. Paul. Acts. 20. 27. I have kept back NOTHING that was PROFITABLE
unto you -- J have not shunned to declare unto you ALL THE COUNCIL of God etc.
(as the Protestants translate it) with command and obligation, that they also
should both preach and testify the same divine truths to the world, entirely,
and without defaulking of any part? And did they not intend, that the like
should be done by continual succession of Pastors in all ages of the Church
for cuer? And how can the Church perform this, if she has not sull and equal
Authority to attest both the one and the other, and to condemn all error
whatsoever contrary to them? How can she be accounted, in those respects, the
Pillar and Foundation of truth, as it is certain, even by the exposition of
Protestants; St. Paul does style her, 1. Tim. 3. 15. or how is she said to be a
Faithful Preserver of that whole DEPOSITVM 1. Tim. 6. 20. committed to her
charge, (...). adu. (...). cap. D. Aug. lib. 1 de Symbol. cap. 6 D Chrysostom.
Hom. in cap, 2. Isa. D. Cyrill. (...). Catech. 18.
as the fathers frequently profess and teach her to be? J say, how is it
possible the Church should be accounted, either a sure Foundation, Faithful
Depositary, Guardian, or witness of all divine truth pertaining to Religion (as
she is, by Scripture and all Antiquity generally) if either, through ignorance
and oversight, she her self might possibly happen to corrupt it (as the Bishop
with all Protestants supposes she may) or that she wanted any necessary power
and authority to prohibit them that would?

Whereas therefore the Bishop affirms, that want of unity and peace proceeds too
often, even where Religion is pretended, from men and their humors, rather
then from things, and errors to be found in them, J grant it to be very true,
in those that will not rely Ibidem.
upon the Churches judgment and authority, but upon their own reason and
interpretation of Scripture; which is the practice of Protestants, and all
Heretics before them: and if the Bishops Adherents think it to be otherwise,
let them fairly make it appear, that the disagreement, which is at present
(...) the English-Protestant and Roman-Catholique Church, proceeded not
originally from the bad humors of English men, as much as the disagreement
betwixt the Prelaticall and Sectarian parties in the said Church of England,
proceeds not from the Prelates and their adherents, but merely from the
Sectaries; who (it cannot be denied) allege scripture abundantly, and accuse
the English Prelaticall Church of error and superstition, both in doctrine,
discipline and worship, no less then they accuse us of the same faults.

9. But the Relatour will now give us a reason why it cannot Ibidem. number. 24.
be necessary for the Church to have power, infallibly to determine points
not-Fundamentall in Protestant sense, although, even by his own supposition,
they be divine truths, and their opposite errors dangerous to souls. His
reason is, because St. Paul tells us 1. Cor. 11. 19. oportet Hoereses esse etc.
( there must be Heresies) whence he concludes; it is out of doubt, Christ never
left such an infallible assurance, as is able to prevent them, or such a
mastering power in his Church, as is able to ouer-awe them. But J answer, what
consequence is here? There must be, (...) there will (unavoidably) be Heresies;
crgo the Church has not full power to condemn them, and to vindicate the
contrary truth? To me the contrary seems far more justly and rightly
concluded, viz. that because there will be Heresies ever and anon springing up,
amongst Christians, therefore the Pastors of the Church have, and ought to
have, all necessary power to obuiate their proceedings; and to preserve the
flock of Christ in the integrity of true Faith: which (as we have often
shown) cannot be done; if the Pastors of the Church lawfully assembled in
General Councills to that purpose, should either themselves happen to crre, or
to determine the truth, withless then absolute and unquestionable certainty.

But as to the objection it self, the Bishop clearly mistakes our meaning.
When we say the Church has power to prevent Schisms and Heresies, it is not
meant, that they shall not be at all, but so as they shall not be without just
control and censure, so as they shall not so much as seem lawfully and
reasonably to be nor so far prevail by their being, as to peruerte the true
doctrine of the Church. Heresies may be; but the Faithful members of the
Church, having due care of themselves, and performing their duty well toward
their lawful Pastors, shall be ever fully secured against their snares, and
none deceived by them at least, not unto damnation or guilt of mortal sin,
but such as through their own voluntary fault and negligence, suffer themselves
to be misted by them. Could his Lordship possibly be ignorant, that the Church
susficiently preuents Heresies and Schisms, on her part, when she certainly
declares the truth, and rightly determins the matter, about which Christians
began to contend, and to be divided in opinion one from another; when the duly
censures and anathematizeth the contrary error? lastly when she uses all
lawful and practicable means within her power to prevent and extirpate them?
This is prevention both necessary, and also sufficient, on the Churches part;
and this being done, if the effect follow not, it must not be ascribed to want
of any spiritual power and authority in the Church, but only to the
incorrigible pride, obstinacy and malice of her rebellious children; which
nothing, but the hand of God, can ouerrule and master.

A thing most clear and manifest in all civil Commonwealth's, prudently
instituted: wherein, when seditions and rebellions happen to arise, (and they
do happen sometimes in the very best) wise men do not think it is for want of
any requisite power and authority in the chief Magistrate, or state, to
command and compel all men to be obedient to laws; but that it proceeds from
those unavoidable distempers, which by corruption and frailty of humane
nature, are incident to men's minds, and which can neither be foreseen, nor
quelled, in an instant, by any power on earth.

J add, that the Relatours objection ( oportet Haereses esse etc.) has as much
force to prove the Church not infallible, even in points Fundamental and
absolutely necessary to Salvation; and would exclude the necessity of any
infallible power and authority in the Church, to prevent errors contrary to
such points; which were repugnant even to the Bishops own assertions. For, the
words of St. Paul, there must be Heresies, are as true of errors contrary to
Fundamental points, as other; and there will be Heresies, more or less, in all
ages, in matters absolutely necessary, as well as in things not necessary. Yea
surely, according to the more common principles and opinion of Protestants,
such errors only are properly to be esteemed Heresies, which are contrary to
Fundamental and absolutely necessary points; in regard they say, that saving
Faith may consist with all other errors whatsoever. So that, if because
Heresies must be, or will be, the Bishop will conclude, there is neither
infallible certainty, nor any means of infallibbe certainty in the Church for
the knowing and determining the truth, in such points as are contested by
Heretics (as he does most plainly and evidently pretend to conclude, by his
allegation of this text) he must in consequence also confess, there is noe
infailible certainty, nor means of infallible certainty, less in the Church,
for the teaehing and belief of any points at all, even of the most absolutely
and universally necessary.

In the close of this Paragraph he taxes those of pride, who will not (...)
their private judgments: where, with good conscience, they may and ought. We
may easily divine whom he means; but are sure, he could not exempt himself
and his adherents from the sting of that censure; though he endeauours it by
saying, it is noe pride, not to submitt to known and gross errouts. Very good.
But we ask, what Sect, or company of Heretics in the world, uses not this
plea? Do not even the Artans, Socinians and (...) arians themselves urge it as
earnestly against Protestants, as Protestants do against us? So that (...) the
Relatour pretended that the convocation of English Prelates and Clergy
adherent to them, should (...) Dictatours, in the business of Religion, over
all Christendom beside, and determine vncontroulably what is, what is not to be
accounted gross and dangerous error, I see not what his discourse here
signifies.

But whereas himself objects error to three General Councills at once, viz.
those of Lateran, Constance and Trent, yea such error, as in his opinion, gave
a greater and more urgent cause of breaking the unity of the Church, then any
pride of men, we shall not for the present tax him with want of modesly: we
only tell his followers, it is as yet, only saying without proving? and they
cannot but acknowledge, that in point of morality it is oftentimes very
sufficient and very bonest for a man, barely to deny a crime that is objected
to him; but it is never sufficient, nor ever honest, barely to object it.
Beside, we have much more reason to think, that he (a private Doctor) is
mistaken in his censure, then that those three General Councils were deceived
in the matters of Faith, which they defined.

10. His acknowledgement that it is noe work for his pen to Ibidem. number. 25.
determine how far the necessary points of soule-sauing Faith extend, would
have been ingenuous enough, had he not made it intricate and meander-like, by
applying it to different persons, but kept it in its absolute nature, viz. what
is simply necessary for all in which sense, he has treated the point all this
time. Now sure, it the determining this maine, and (as I may say) Cardinal
difficulty, be not work for his pen, neither was it, of any right, work for
his pen to draw upon himself and his party, a necessity of at least being
called upon, and required to do it. who counsels them, contrary unto, and
without the example of any Orthodox Christians, to restrain the infallible
Authority of the Church in determining controversies of Religion, to they know
not what? or to such points as they neither do, nor ever will be able
certainly to know and determine? For as it is that only, which brings our
unanswerable demand upon them, so till they have answer, (...), and clearly
determined what those simply, or absolutely necessary points are, in which the
Church cannot err, we must proclayme, they leave all Christians, that well
consider what, and upon what grounds they believe, vnsatisfy'd, vncertaino, and
doubtful, how far, or in what matters they are obliged, under pain of
damnation, to believe what is declared by the Church to be divine truth: and
yet withal teach them, that they neither can with true infallible Faith, nor
ought, nor lawfully may belecue her in all she teaches, because in much of it,
she cyther erres, or is subject to err and teach them falsehood, yea gross and
dangerous error, in stead of divine truth: which if it be just, or reasonable
in our Adversaries to do, or tending to any thing else, but to (...) and
perplex the minds of all conseientious Christians with inextricable doubts and
scruples, (...) the indifferent Reader judge.

Nor can he to any purpose help himself here, by what St. Thomas Ibidem.
and our Authors teach, concerning points, precisely necessary necessitate
medij. For neither will the Bishop stand to that scantling. as he calls it;
that is, he will not dare to teach, there are no more Fundamental points in
his sense, then our Divines teach, there are points necessary necessitate
medij: nor is the case alike. For that doctrine has place only, where
invincible ignorance excuses from further knowledge and from express belief;
whereas here both sufficient proposition, and actual knowledge of all articles
defined by the Church, is supposed, so as noe Jgnorance can be pleaded in
excuse of the party that erres; and yet they teach, that of these articles
(all equally, so far as concerns the Church, defined and propounded,) some
may be refused, but all the rest must of necessity, under pain of damnation,
be believed with divine and infallible Faith; neuertheless, giving no certain
rule to know either the one, or the other. Is not this, Daedalus-like, to lead
men into the midst of a Labyrinth, and there leave them?

11. Jn the following Paragraph the Relatour does little else, but dally with
his Reader in the equivocation of words, Catholic, Roman Church, particular,
universal, one, holy, Mother Church Ibidem. number. 26.
etc. upon all which he makes a brief descant at pleasure. But we answer,
much is said, nothing proved, nor so much as offered to be proved to any
purpose. The Church of Rome, in the sense that we maintain, and have often
declared, is not only one, but THE ONE Church of Christ. In the sense that we
maintain, she is holy: all her doctrine, (defined) all her Sacraments, all her
institutes are holy. and tend to Holiness. In the sense that we maintain she
is Catholic, or universal, both for extent of Communion and Integrity of
doctrine, with continued succession of Pastors. There is no Christian Country
in the world, where there are not some, that acknowledge the Popes Authority,
and profess the Roman Faith. Nor does the Roman Church now teach any thing as
Faith, which is contrary to what the Catholic Church has ever taught.
Lastly, we have showed, that even in the Primitive Church, or first
siue-hundred years after Christ, the Faithful owned subjection to the Roman
Church, and a necessity to communicate with her in points of Christian doctrine.

We acknowledge the Church of Jerusalem is sometimes, by Antiquity, styled a
Mother Church, and the Head of all other Churches. But we say withal, it is
merely a title of honor and dignity given her, probably for this reason, viz.
because the first Foundations, as it were of Christian Religion were laid
there, by the preaching and Passion of our Savior; and because from thence,
the first sound, and publication of the Gospel was made by the Apostles, to
all the Churches of the Gentiles. It was noe title of Authority and power
properly so called, as it was in the Roman Church. Jf our Adversaries think it
was, let them show what Authority, or Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical the Church,
or Bishop of Jerusalem exercised over all other Churches, either before it was
erected into a Patriarchate, or after; as we have proved the Bishop of Romes
Ecclesiastical (...) over all parts and Provinces of Christendom.

THE LAST CHAPTER. Several other Mistakes of the Bishop with a conclusion of
the whole work.
ARGUMENT.
1. St. Cyprians text (Epist. 45. ad Cornelium) touching the root and matrix
of the Catholic Church, vindicated from (...). (...). number. 27.
the Bishops peruersions. 2. All Charches (in St. Cyprians bpiniony) one, by
Communion with that of Rome. 3. Tertullian of the same sentiment with St.
Cyprian. 4. The Bishops (...) betwixt the Essence and Existence of the Church,
not pertinent. 5. His (...) touching the Ladies going to Church, so persuaded
in conscience as she was, not (...). 6. Going to Protestant Churches in
England, never held by lawful Catholics. 7. The Heretics badge, viz. pride
and presumption of ones proper judgment, not well putt off by the Bishop. 8.
The same charge cannot be retorted upon Catholics, in matters of Faith. 9.
Catholics maintain the same succession to be a mark of the true Church,
which the Fathers did, viz. the ioynt-succession of persons and doctrine. 10.
Stapleton not contrary to this, nor to himself, whateuer is pretended by the
Bishop. 11. Temporary Contestations about the Papacy, no interruption of the
Lawful Succession of Popes. 12. The Bishop standing to his principles, cannot
rid himself of A. C. Dilemma, viz. of making (...) noe judge at all, or every
man judge for himself, in Controversies of Faith. 13. Infallibility, the true
Foundation loath of Church and Religion; with the Authors (...) and Prayer for
the (...).

THe Bishop has still a pieque against the Roman Church, being ever willing
to lessen, as much as in him lies, the respect, which good Christians of
ancient times, may be thought to have born toward that Sea. Out of this humor
it proceeds, that he will not endure, the Roman Sea should be styled the root
and matrix of the Church Catholic; but (to a void it) takes occasion (even
where he confesses none was given him, by his Adversary) to make a long
discourse of no less, then eight or nine pages in folio, only upon a text of
St. Cyprian: which he calls indeed a difficult place, (that he might not seem
to want some reason for his tediousness) but I presume, an indifferent Reader,
having observed the text, and well weighed the Bishops comment upon it, will
judge it difficult in no other sense, then that the Relatour found it somewhat
a hard matter for him, to disguise and pervert it from its true sense. But a
bad cause will plunge the best wits sometimes into difficulties, and J am apt
to think our Adversary, in this digtession, contends more then a little,
against what he could not, but in his own conscience, see to be most probable.

1. For first, as to the truth of the story, the occasion of writing that
Epistle, wherein St. Cyprian is by us supposed to D. Cypriam. Epist. 45. ad
Cornel alias. lib. 4. Epist (...).
style the Roman Church the ROOT and MATRIX of the Church Catholic, was not
that, which the Relatour setts down, but very different from it. The Relatour
tells us, they were St. Cyprians own letters, about which, Cornelius Bishop of
Rome expostulated with him, and complained, that they were not directed to
himself (as of right they ought to have been) but to the Roman Clergy;
whereas in truth, St. Cyprian and his Colleagues had taken a resolution, not to
write at all to Rome, by reason of the Schism that was there (...), till they
had first heard from their Legate (the Dishops Caldonius and Fertunatus) whom
they had sent on purpose to Rome, to know the true state of affairs, betwixt
Cornelius the lawful Bishop, and (...) the Schismatique. But those letters
were written by certain Priests and others of the African Clergy, pertaining
to the Diocese of Adrymettium (where St. Cyprian happened to be at that time)
and in the absence also of the Bishop of the place. This appears by the very
(...) et (...) in Hadtumettino consistentes, Polycarpo Coepiscopo absente,
(...) quid nobis in commune placuisse: etc. D. Cyprian. Epist. 45. ad Cornel.
words of the Epistle it felse: nor does St. Cyprian answer, as the Bishop
feignes him to do; to wit, as owning, or acknowledging the writing of those
Letters himself, or that they were sent with his knowledge, but professes, the
thing was done out of ignorance of what himself and Colleagues had resolved,
and only by some in Afric, during the absence of their Bishop.

Secondly, as to the words, whereby St. Cyprian professes to Gornelius, that he
for his part, did exhort all that sayld out of Afric to Rome, that they
should acknowledge and embrace the ROOT and matrix of the Catholic Church,
who can imagine any other thing should be meant by them, but that he exhorted
such people, when they came to Rome, that they should join themselves to the
party and communion of the lawful Bishop of Rome, because his Communion was
the root and matrix of the Church, and have nothing to do with the
Schismatiques? The Bishop would have us think, he meant only to exhort them
in general to acknowledge and adhere to the unity of the Catholic Church,
which though we deny not but it may be, in some sense, termed the root and
matrix of the Church, yet surely in this place, it can be thought little less
then frivolous for St. Cyprian so especially to exhort those travelers to
acknowledge, that unity is the root of the Church. Beside, what satisfaction,
or just apology could St. Cyprian think it would be to Cornelius, (already
somewhat offended with him, though by mistake, for not duly acknowledging his
Authority) to tell him, that he exhorted all people that came out of Afric to
Rome, that they, should acknowledge unity to be the root of the Church, or
that they should keep the unity of the Church in general, without specifying
his communion, or the communion of the lawful Bishop of Rome in particular?

The acknowledgement then of the root and matrix of the Church, which St.
Cyprian here means, and exhorts good Christians to make and constantly stand
to, when they came to Rome, has doubtless something in it more special then
this; that is to say, it must relate to that, which even by St. Cyprians own
judgment Ad Petri Cathedram, vnde vnitas Sacerdotalis exorta est. D. Cyprian.
lib. 1 Epist. 3.
elsewhere delivered, is the root and matrix of the Churches unity; to wit,
the lawful Successor of St. Peter, to whom the Church it self owes her
unity, and about whom, there was at that time dispute and controversy, and a
doubt raised among Christians at Rome. So that with very good reason, St.
Cyprian might exhort such as sailed (...), to adhere to him, and acknowledge
him as being indeed the root and matrix of Ecclesiastical unity; as likewise
to disown and reject the party they should find auerse to him. This indeed
was a convenient subject of exhortation, and well worthy of St. Cyprians
charity and zeal; but that he should exhort them to any thing else in this
place, or not more then the Relatour will seem to think, is wholly incredible.

But the Bishop conceiues, it could not be St. Cyprians meaning and intention
here, to teach, that the Sea of Rome is Ibidem.
the root and matrix of the Catholic Church. Why? His reason is, because
that there was at this time, an open Schism at Rome; two Bishops Cornelius and
Nouatian; two Congregations, which respectively attended and observed them: so
that a perplexed question must needs have divided their thoughts, which of
these two had been the root and matrix of the Catbolique Church. I answer
first, supposing it had been, for a while, really doubtful to St. Cyprian and
those of Afric, which of the two Bishops of Rome ( Cornelius or Nouatianus)
were the right and lawful Bishop: yet to those that were at Rome, and
understood the true and certain carriage of affairs, touching their
respective elections, it was not doubtful; at Rome, without question, the
truth concerning this matter was sufficiently known. Now we say, St. Cyprians
intent, in the words alleged was not (precisely) to exhort people to adhere
either to Cornelius, or Nouatianus, in particular and by name; but to adhere to
him, they should for certain find, by the general report and judgment of
the Faithful at Rome, to have been lawfully and Canonically chosen Bishop of
that Church, and not to join themselves to him, that was chosen Schismatically.

Secondly I answer, it is not so certain as the Relatour supposes, whether at
the writing of this very Epistle, it were really doubtful to St. Cyprian
himself, which of the two, Cornelius or Nouatianus, were the true and lawful
Bishop of Rome: yea unless the Publishers of St. Cyprians Epistles have by
mistake inuerted the order of them, the contrary seems to be clear; because
by the 41. 42. 44. all precedent to this alleged by the Bishop, it manifestly
appears, that both St. Cyprian and his Colleagues had been already, by
intelligence from Rome, so fully satisfied touching the lawful election of
Cornelius, that they both denied Communione eos nostra statim (...) esse
censuimus. D. Cyprian. Epist. 41.
Communion to the Legates of Nouatian sent into Afric, Grauitati nostrae (...)
conuenire, (...) nostri iam delecti et ordinati ven. (...) vltra famam etc.
patiamur. Idem Ibid.
and also refused to hear their accusations against Cornelius: though in
regard of the Nouatian faction in Afric, they thought good to send their
Legates to Rome to be more paticularly informed of the business, Nam (...) erat,
vt tu te Episcopum factum esse (...); (...) essetex (...) discrepans sactio,
cui sopiendae ect Idem, Epist, 42.
and did not require the people of their respective Provinces, publicly to
acknowledge Cornelius for Pope, till they had received the report of their own
Legates from Rome. Now this supposed, what should hinder but St. Cyprian might
privately exhort passengers to Rome, not only to acknowledge the lawful Bishop
of that Church, but even Cornelius by name, notwithstanding the Schism, that
was by some raised against him.

Wherefore, the Bishops following devise, viz. that St. Cyprian should require
all strangers traveling to Rome, to suspend their Communion there, that is, to
communicate neither with Cornelius, nor Nouatianus, till they saw, how the
Catholic Church would incline to approve, or disapproue, their respective
elections (to speak truth) is but an ayery fiction; it being by St. Cyprian
and his Colleagues presumed to be even then sufficiently known and certain at
Rome, which of the two was lawfully chosen Bishop: otherwise, to what purpose
should they send their Legates out of Afric to be certainly informed of the
truth touching that matter? J add, when, or how could the Catholic Church
declare her judgment in the case so authentically, as to oblige all persons to
acquiescence? would the Bishop have had all Christian strangers to suspend
their communion both from the one and the other, till a General Council had
determined the controversy? or how could a Council possibly determine it, but
by and upon such Ibidem.
grounds, as did already make it unquestionable at Rome, which of the two was
the true Pope?

We acknowledge indeed, with Baronius here cited By the Baron. ad Ann 154.
number. 64.
Bishop, that St. Cyprian and his Colleagues did for a while suspend their
Communion from both parties; which upon this occasion they might justly do;
yet not separate from the Roman Church, as the Relatour, too hastily inferres.
For it was for a while, as it were sede vacant to them in Afric, till they
had received sufficient information who was lawful Bishop of that Church:
which as soon as ever they had obtained, they showed by their practice, how
necessary they held it, to be in Communion with him. St. Cyprian then did very
well to exhort all Christians, that had occasion to go to Rome, to acknowledge
and stick close to the root and matrix of the Church, that is, not to suffer
themselves to be draw'n into Schism, or to side with the Schismatiques, but
Constantly to adhere to the true and lawful Bishop of the Roman Church. And as
this was a proper exhortation for St. Cyprian to make, so was it also a just
and sufficient Apology for him to Cornelius, as showing that he did neither
disowne the Sea Apostolic, nor slight the true Bishop thereof. Whereas, if
we suppose him to mean only, according to the Bishops exposition of his
words, that people should acknowledge and hold the unity of the Catholic
Church in general, but suspend their Communion both with Nouatian and
Cornelius too, till the Church herself should determine the controversy, what
respect does he show to the Apostolic Sea and its lawful Bishop, more then
he does to an Heretical party, and the Schismatique which they followed?

Beside, this imaginary suspension of Communion, till the Catholic Church
should declare her approbation or disapprouement of the said elections, is
clearly refuted by the very Epistle, which the Bishop cites: wherein, St.
Cyprian and his Colleagues profess in esfect, that they did not expect any such
declaration of the Church, but that upon the first report, or answer of their
Legates from Rome touching the election passed, letters were presently to be
sent, to all the Bishops of Africa, to suspend their Communion noe longer, vt
-- rete^t a per nos veritate, et ad comprobandam Ordina. tionem tuam facta
Authoritate maiore, LITERAE FIERENT, vt te vniuer si Collegae nostri, et
Communicatione^ tuam, id est Catholicae Ecclesiae vni tatem pariter et
charitatem probarent firmitet et retinerent. D. Cyprian-Epist. 45. ad Cornel.
but to acknowledge Cornelius the lawfully-elect Bishop of Rome, and his
Communion to be the union of the Church.

2. By the way, good Reader, I pray, observe and judge, whether St. Cyprian
does not here sufficiently expound himself, and show what he means by those
words root and matrix of the Catholic Church, when speaking of the Communion
of the Pope, he plainly pronounces that it is the unity of the Church. What is
this but to say with us, and directly contrary to the Relatours Gloss, that it
is the root and matrix of the Church? For, seeing the form, or at least the
most formal and essential property of the Church, is unity in the profession
of the true Faith, if the Popes communion be that, which gives unity to the
Chnrch, and ties all together in the profession of the true Faith (as St.
Cyprian here affirms it to be) sure, noe man can be so unreasonable, as to
think it deserves not to be styled the root and matrix of the Church. Not to
urge, that in these very Epistles St. Cyprian blames the Schismatiques at Rome,
for their endeavoring to create a new Bishop there, against one that was
already lawfully elected and ordained, upon this ground, that by so doing, they
did, as much as in them lay, procure Ecclesiam alteram institui (the forming
Epist. 44.
of an other Church) which, says he, nefas est nec licet fieri (may not in any
wise be attempted) telling them, that their preceedings herein, were contra
Institutionis Catholicae vnitatem, (contrary to that unity, in which all true
Catholic Christians were instructed, by the very principles of Catholic
Religion, to hold and maintain) that it was contra Sacramentum semel traditum
diuinae dispositionis and Catholicae vnitatis (against that Order or Authority,
which God, once for all, appointed in his Church, for the preservation of
Catholic unity and peace amongst Christians.) likewise, not to urge, that in
other places also, St. Cyprian does in effect style the Popes chair the
Center, Lib. 1. Ep. 4. Item, lib de vmt. Eccl.
from whence Ecclesiastical unity is derived; that the Primacy was therefore
given by Christ to St. Peter, that there might be ONE Church and ONE chair;
and that he cannot be in the Church, who deserts the Chair of St. Peter.
Lastly, not to urge the confession even of the Schismatiques themselves (some
of them at least) voluntarily, yet solemnly made, when they returned to the
Popes obedience: Nee ignoramus vnum esse Deum. vnum Christum esse Dominum. quem
confessisumus; vnum Spiritum sanctum: Item VNVM EPISCOPVM INEC CLESIA
CATHOLICAESSE DEBERE. Epist Cornel. apud Cypria^. Epist. 46. Ibidem.
whereby they profess't, that as God is ONE our Lord Jesus Christ ONE (whom
they had lastly confessed in prison) and the holy Ghost ONE; so likewise in the
Catholic Church, there ought to be acknowledged by all, ONE BISHOP viz. the
Bishop of the Roman Church, to whose obedience and Communion they then returned.

What are all these testimonies but so many evident conuictions and
demonstrations of the Relatours huge mistaking, (not to say any worse) when he
pretends, that by the root and matrix of the Church, St. Cyprian understands
noe more, but the unity of the Church in general? nor are they any whit
infringed by what he brings out of St. Cyprians Epistle to Iubaianus written
against the Nouatians, who durst rebaptize Catholics: in which Epistle St.
Cyprian has these words, WE ARE THE HEAD OF BAPTISM. What makes this against
us? For first, the Bishop himself acknowledges, that by WE, St. Cyprian does
not understand his own person, or Church precisely, but includes all other
particular true Churches, and chiefly the Roman, where Nouatian himself was
baptized. The Head of Baptism then in St. Cyprians meaning, are all true
Churches, as they stand in due subordination and Communion united with the
Roman, and not otherwise: which we willingly grant. But yet it follows not
from hence (as the Bishop would have it) that it is all one to be head, or
root of Baptism, and to be head and root of the Church. For the whole
Church, as one by Communion with the Sea of Rome, may properly enough be styled
the head of Baptism, which signifies noe more, then that the chief and
ordinary power of baptizing, is in the Catholic Church: but it will never be
proper to say, the Church is the head and root of the Church; for that were to
make the whole to be only a principal part; which is absurd.

Now that St. Cyprian did hold all true Churches to be ONE, by Communion with
the Roman Bishop and Church, is sufficiently euidenc'd by what is above said.
Nor can he with reason be Ibidem.
understood in any other sense, when he speaks those words in the beginning of
that period cited by the Bishop, Nos qui Ecclesiae vnius caput et radicem
tenemus, etc. For as by Ecclesiae vnius it will not be denied, but he means
the Church Catholic, so by the words caput et radicem (if we expound him
with conformity to his already cited assertions) we cannot possibly understand
any thing else, but the Bishop of Rome and his Sea: the one, as head ruling and
commanding by Authority: the other, as matrix, by Communion, embracing and
comprehending all true Christians, or the whole Catholic Church on earth.

Beside this, it is very obseruable what the Relatour himself alleges, and
concludes out of an other Epistle of St. Cyprian, viz. that St. Cyprian and the
Bishops of Afric sent their Legates to Ibidem.
Rome, on purpose to bring the `Nouatians, that is, the Schismatic lib. 2.
Epist.
party there, to the unity and Communion of the Church universal, but that by
reason of the obstinacy and stiffness of those Schismatiques, their labor was
lost. Now (for ought appears to the contrary by the said Epistle) the
reduction of the Nouatians to the Churches unity (whereof by the Bishops own
confession St. Cyprian there speaks) was nothing else, but the bringing them to
obedience and Communion with Cornelius the lawful Bishop of Rome, as the
Relatour himself also intimates: and consequently, it must be acknowledged,
there is something in resisting and opposing the lawful Bishop of Rome, which
has greater contrariety to the unity of the Church, then there is in resisting
and opposing any other particular Bishop.

And if it were otherwise, why should all the Churches of Africa esteem
themselves, and the whole Church so concerned in it? why should they send
Bishops of their own, on purpose to Rome, to reduce the Schismatiques, with so
much diligence and care, to the obedience of their lawful Bishop? what reason
can be given of this, but that they foresaw and feared, that if a Schism
proceeded there, the whole Church would, in a short time, come to be inuolued
in it, and divided into two several parties, by acknowledging two heads, or
Roman Bishops? When Nouatus set up Maiorinus, the first Donatist Bishop, at
Carthage, against Caecilian the lawful Bishop; and when Meletius and Paulinus
had their several parties at Antioch; likewise, when Anthimus, an Eutychian
Heretic, was intruded into the Sea of (...) against the Catholic Bishop
thereof, there was noe such thing feared as breaking the General unity of the
Church; there being still a visible and certainly-know'n head of the Church
Catholic, viz. the Bishop of Rome, who by his authority, kept all in unity,
and first or last rectified and composed those dissentions. But here, of
necessity it would have been otherwise. For the breach of Ecclesiastical unity
being in the very head, fountain, and root thereof, would (unless prevented)
unavoidably, in no long time, spread it self over the whole Church: and thence
it was, that the Bishops of Africa thought it necessary, with extraordinary
diligence, to make up the breach there, and reduce the separated parties to
unity.

3. Tertullian (whom the Relatour also cites) makes nothing against us. For he
only affirms, that all those many and great Ibidem.
Churches founded by the Apostles, are that ONE Church, which is from the
Apostles; and that they are all FIRST (or primitive) Tertull. lib. de
praescript. cap. 20.
Churches, and all of them APOSTOLICAL, because they do all of them allow and
approve ONE UNITY; that is, (say we) an unity derived from one, and centered
in one; who is no other, but St. Peter's lawful Successor, the Bishop of Rome;
by subordination unto whom in Faith and discipline, as unto the universal
Pastor of the Church, all particular Churches are made one, and do in effect
continue one and the same Catholic, Primitive, and Apostolical Church, or
Churches, which the Apostles first of all founded. So that, till our
adversaries either disprove this gloss, or give a better, we shall make no
scruple to assert, that in Tertullians judgment as well as St. Cyprians, Rome
(or the Roman Church) may well be termed the root and matrix of all other
Churches, because none remain in the Catholic Church; but by unity with Rome
and the Bishop thereof.

Nor matters it, that Pamelius reckons up diverse Churches ibidem.
(which he calls Original and Mother-Churches) before the Roman. For as to the
name ( Original and Mother-Churches) we have given the reason of it in the
precedent chapter, when we spoke of the Church of Jerusalem: and for the
thing, viz. that he reckons. Rome in the last place (as if therefore the Church
of Rome were to be accounted inferior to those other) we answer, his Lordship
would never have made this observation page 368. and page 371, in margin.
twice, had he, first consulted the Master of Ceremonies about it. For he
certainly, would have resolved him, that in marshalling dignityes subordinate
one to an other (as the case was here, all the particular Churches mentioned by
Pamelius viz. Smyrna, (Philippi, Corinth, Ephesus, being subordinate to Rome)
the Principal, or Souereign is to be ranked in the last place. Does Pamelius,
or Tertullian himself, acknowledge the like privileges and authority in
regard of the whole Church, to belong to those other original and
Mother-Churches, which they do to the Roman?

As for that irreligious Act of the Emperor Adrian, (which the Bishop
mentions) it is but too much imitated by Protestants. For as he set up the
Image of Jupiter in the very place where Christ suffered; and as he profaned
Bethlehem with erecting the Temple of Adonis, as thinking to destroy Christian
Religion, by laying wast the place where it was first founded; so do our
Adversaries plant all their batteries against Rome: persuading themselves, that
if they could beat down that chief fortress of the Catholic Church, they
should soon destroy our whole Church. But as that Heathenish Emperor (
Adrian) did, so do these enemies of God and true Religion; they labor in
vain. For the Church is invincible, the gates of Hell it self cannot prevail
against her: and D. Aug. lib. 1. de Symbol ad Catech. cap. 60
as St. Austin long since observed, all Heresies whatsoever do indeed go out
of her, being cut off from her, as unprofitable branches from the vine. But
the Church herself always remains in her ROOT, in own VINE, in her own
CHARITY, viz. by remaining always united with the Bishop of Rome.

Jn the most principal and proper sense then, the Roman Church (and that only)
is both the rock and root of the Church-Catholique, as being by institution
and appointment of Christ, principally and solely ordained to supply the
place, and perform the office both of rock and root to all other Churches
whatsoever; how be it, in a less principal and limited sense, in reference to
particulars only, we do not deny, but some other particular Church, or
Churches beside the Roman, may sometimes be are the style, that is, be called
rock, or root. Thus (for example) we confess St. Austin, cited by the
Bishop, styles the Eastern Churches the root, in regard of the Africans. D.
Aug. Epist. 170.
Pars Donati non consider at se praecisant (...) RADICE Orientalium
Ecclesiarum. But the reason is (...), 'twas either because the Eastern Churches
were a larger and more noble part of the Church universal, then the Africans
were; or because the Africans first received the Gospel from them, as St.
Austin vudeEuangelium in (...) venerit. D. Aug. vbi supra
also testifies in the same place: and not, that they were such a root of the
whole Catholic Church as Kome was, or in all properties pertaining to a
root, equal to Rome. That Is only the Relatours voluntary supposition and
mistaken inference.

4. Nor will his speculation hold, whereby he distinguishes the essence of the
Church from its existence; and makes that unity which is an attribute of ENS to
be the root and matrix of the Church. For first, in true Philosophy, the
essence of a thing is not really (...) from its existence. Secondly, because in
this sense of his, the Church should rather be the root and matrix of unity,
then unity the root and matrix of the Church: for unity, as an attribute,
flows from ENS, and not ENS from it: as like wise in natural Philosophy, all
Properties flow from their subjects, and not their subjects from them. Thirdly,
what unity does our Adversary here speak of, when he tells us ENS and VNVM,
being and being one, are conuertible? This is Metaphysicall unity only;
entitatiue unity. But is that all the unity the Bishop acknowledges to be
necessary in the Church? if not, why is that only mentioned here, and no other?
Christians, when they dispute, and teach that the Church is one, understand
(sure) a further unity then this; namely a moral unity, an unity of mind and
judgment, touching the verityes of Christian Religion; and not only an unity
of nature, definition and essence. This therefore was (...) to equivocate, or
mistake (...) in the business. But we pass it by, as likewise we do the
remaynder of the paragraph; as being farc'd only with assertions without
proose, or with proofs against no Adversary.

5. As St. Cyprian ought to be commended for his exhorting those who crauelled
to Rome, to acknowledge and maintain the ROOT and MATRIX of the Catholic
Church, so did the Jesuit well, to persuade the lady to do the same. Of whose
Counsel,. 39. number. 1.
by the report of Mr. (...), she made thus far good use, that upon this and
the precedent conferences the rested in judgment fully satisfied of the truth
of the Roman Churches Faith: yet upon frailty and fear to offend the king,
she yielded (for a while) to go to Church: for which she was (...) very sorry.
The Relatour seems willing enough to have (...) all this, if he had known how:
but not being able to do that, he contents himself to (...) it as suspicious
and (...) as he can, (...) it were so, or no. He (...) not, (...) that
honorable (...) was (...) in conscience and judgment; nor (...) it were
fear, or (...), or other (...), that made hor yield to go to Church; nor how
sorry she was for it; nor, who can testify that sorrow. The Bishop knows none
of all these particulars. Well; it is sufficient that others did, and do know
them. Howeuer he confidently tells us, the lady would more (...) be able to
answer to God for her coming to Church, then for leaving the Church of England.
To which, when A.C. takes modest exception, and only tells him, that he neither
does prove, nor can prove it to be lawful for one, especinlly so persuaded as
the lady was, to go to the Protestant Church, the Bishop sharply replies,
there is a (...) deal of cunning, and as much malice in this passage of A. C.
But where, I pray, (...) either the cunning, or malice of this speech or what
does it contain, but plain real truth, and (...)? Ibidem.
A. C. had proved through his whole discourse (as we likewise have (...) to
do in this or ours) and the lady (...) that the Protestant Church was not an
Orthodox, but (...) Church, that it protessed a salfe and corrupt Faith: so as
a man could not communicate with it without making himself guilty of Heresy.
To (...) this, and yet go to Church were evidently to halt (...) two opinions,
which in Religion is never 3 Kings. 18 21.
lawful (...) do; It were to serve God and Baall too, though neither of (...)
well. Lastly, it were to dissemble in that, wherein it (...) man, more then in
all other matters, to be sincere, and use (...) doubling, (...) to walk with
integrity and (...) of (...), before God and the world. For as the Scripture
says, ((...) 2. 12.) fearful (...) fearful hearts and (...) hands, and to
the (...) that gods TWOE WAYS; one in outward show and protession; and an
other, in the inward judgment of conscience. Is there now any such cunning or
(...), to admonish one of (...)?

But the Relatour tells us, he never went about to prove, that a
Roman-Catholique, being and (...) such might against his conscience go to
Church. Neither does A. C. tell him, that he ever (...) about to prove it; but
yet in effect he did say it and (...), when he affirin'd that life lady, being
so persuaded as the was, by Mr. Fishers report, (and as the Bishop himself
(...) did, nor could (...) her to have been) might more eastly (...) to God for
her coming to the English Protestant Church, then for her going to the Roman:
which, though he be pleased to (...) with the (...) of (...) and (...); yet,
that afters not the case at all to the (...), who was otherwise persuaded of
those things which he calls superstitions and errors nor does it (...) his
assertion to plead (as he does) that the Church of England is an (...) Church,
and that he has proved it so. For, still we say, the lady was otherwise
(...); she neither did, nor could possibly think, being thus persuaded in
judgment, that the Church of England was an Orthodox Church, or that the
Bishop had sufficiently (...) it to be such; but rather (...) the contrary. How
then is it possible for the Bishop to make good what he (...), that Ibidem.
though the lady were a Roman-Catholique, yet she might more easily answer to
God for coming to the Church of England, then by (...) English Church to
communicate with Rome? which is as much as to (...), that she might more easily
answer to God for coming to a Church, wherein she verily believed Heresy and
false doctrine was taught, then for joining her self to a Church, whose
communion she verily believed was necessary to Salvation, and wherein she was
firmly persuaded, that noe (...) doctrine was taught by any public allowance,
nor superstition practiced: for all this is necessarily employed in being a
Roman-Catholique.

Nay, is it not manifestly contrary to his own professions here? J say the same
thing with A. C. viz. that it is not lawful for Ibidem. number. (...).
one that is resolved of the truth of the Roman Church, to go to the Church of
England, and in that manner to serve and worship God; because that were to halt
on both sides, to serve two masters, to dissemble with God and the world: and
that noe man may outwardly profefs a Religion, in conscience known to be
false; (...) Scripture for it, Romans 10. 10. For with the heart man believes to
righteousness, and with the mouth he consesseth to Salvation: adding withal
that noe man can confess a known false Religion to his salvation. Whence I
argue. Jf a Roman-Catholique, being and continuing such, may not, against his
conscience, go to the Protestant Church; if it be not lawful for one, that is
resolved of the truth of the Roman Church, to go to the Church of England, and
in that manner to ferue and worship God; if noe man ought to believe Religion
after one sort, and practice it after an other; if it be sin to dissemble
with God and the world in such maine points of Religion, as are in controversy
betwixt Catholiqucs and Protestants, how could the lady (being supposed to be
a Roman-Catholique) better answer to God for coming to the English Church, and
leaving the Roman, then for continuing to communicate with the Church of Rome?
what sin could the Bishop think she committed by communicating with the
Roman Church, if in her heart she were a Roman-Catholique, and apprehended
nothing as superstitious and unlawful, that was allowed by that Church; but
rather pious and godly? In this she did nothing contrary to her conscience; but
in going to the Protestant Church, she did that, which was clearly against her
conscience, and by consequence sinned in doing it.

Again, admit there were errors and superstitions in the Roman Church, as
the Bishop will needs suppose, yet how will he prove the lady should be in any
sort answerable for them, unless we suppose also, that she held them against
her conscience, or by holding and practicing them, opposed the known truth?
which to do, were contrary not only to all Christian charity, but even to the
(...) own maxims, who confesses, that none but God, and a man's self, can
know, how far he opposes truth in that manner, and. 37. number. 1. tells A. C.
thus, you are the happier. 36.
in your error that you hold nothing against your conscience especially if you
speak not against conscience while you say so. But this noe man can know but
your self. For noe man knows the thoughts of man, but the spirit of man that
is within him. 1. Cor. 2. 11. if now, errors in Religion be not sin, so long
as the person that holds them, opposes not the known truth, or holds them not
against conscience; and that by the Bishops own confession also, 'twas not
possible for him to know, that the lady, by embracing our Faith and Church, did
any thing contrary to her conscience, or opposed any truth she knew, upon what
ground could he condemn her of sin in what she did; or say (as in effect he
does) that she could not so easily answer to God for her doing so, as she might
for going to his English-Protestant Church? wherein, even by his own grounds,
(being supposed to be a Roman-Catholique) she did manifestly committ sin, in
doing against her conscience (which is always sin, more or less) in dissembling
with God and the world, in matters of so great moment, in halting on both
sides, and in believing Religion after one sort, and practicing it after an
other. Ibidem.


6. As for what concerns Catholic Authors, who may possibly affirm it
lawful, in some cases, and with due limitations, for Catholics to go to
Protestant-Churches, there doctrine is necessarily restrained unto such
countries and places, in which, going to Protestant-Churches is no distinctiue
sign of Religion, that is, where it does not with any presumption signify,
that a man is a Protestant: which falls out otherwise in England. For here it
has always been held a conformity to and with the Protestant Religion
professed in England, to go to Church: and therefore, not allowed by any of our
Divines; who never give way to the profession of false doctrine. Now, who is
more guilty of dissimulation in Religion, which the Bishop charges upon some of
our party, then the Bishop himself? Does he not. 35. punct. 5. professedly
allow possibility of Salvation to such Catholics, as do both wittingly and
knowingly associate themselves, even to the gross superstitions of the Romish
Church, and such as come even near to Idolatry, only because they believe the
Creed and hold the Foundation? what is this but to teach it lawful, at least
no sin excluding Salvation, to join ones self outwardly to a superstitious
Church, in a superstitious, false, and even Idolatrous way of worshipping God,
contrary to ones knowledge and constience only for some temporal and worldly
respects? and consequently, that men are not always bound to seem and appear
as they are, but sometimes at least, may have liberty to wear a masque?

But certainly, that which follows, is a most strange and inconsequent
Paradox, if ever any was. Jf the Religion of Protestants (says the Bishop) be
a known false Religion, then the Romanists Religion is so too. For their
Religion, meaning Catholics and Protestants, is the same, says he: nor do
the Church of Rome and the Protestants set up a different Religion, ( for the
Christian Religion is the same to both) but they differ in the same Religion;
and the difference is in certain gross corruptions, to the very endangering of
Salvation, which each side says, the other is guilty of. What is this but to
heap absurdities one upon an other? which of all these propositions is
maintainable in any true and proper sense? The Religion of Catholics and
Protestants is the same. The church of Rome and the Churches of Protestants
set not up different Religions. Christian Religion is the same both to
Catholics and Protestants: they are of the same Religion, and yet differ in
it. First, are we of the same Religion, because we agree in some few general
points? why might he not as well have said, that Arians, and all other
Heretics are of the same Religion with us. by reason of their agreement with
us in some points of Faith? Secondly, is Christian Religion, J mean in the
necessary soundness and integrity of it, common both to Catholics and
Protestants? what Protestant will affirm that it is? and if it be not, why
would the Relatour trifle and abuse his Reader with such vain and pernicious
amphibologie, as he here uses, in a business of so great importance? Thirdly,
if we, Catholics, be of the same Religion with Protestants, how can we be
said to differ from them in the same Religion, as the Relatour here expressly
says we (...)? can I be of the same (...) with my neighbor, and yet differ
from him, in the same thing? surely, if our Religion and that of Protestants be
the same, we are not to be said to differ, but to agree in it, unless our
adversary and his party think, they may vary the common sense and notion of
words, at their sole pleasure. Beside, those points, about which, under the
notion of corruptions and errors, the Bishop himself acknowledges, that we
do differ; either they are parts of Chrstian Religion, or they are not. So
they be parts of Christian Religion; seeing by his own confession we differ in
them from Protestants, how is Christian Religion in gross, said to be common to
us both? how is it the same to Catholics and Protestants? If they be not
parts of Christian Religion, how can we, by reason of them, be said to differ
from Protestants in Religion, or in the same Christian Religion?

But, what (says the Bishop) cannot I prove any superstition, or Ibidem. number.
4.
error to be in the Roman Church? none at all? (A.C. it seems had told him
so.) now truly I would to God from my heart, this were true, and that the
Church of Rome were so happy, and the Catholic Church thereby (...) with
truth and peace. For J am confident, such truth would soon either command
peace, or confound peace breakers. But, is there (...) superstition in
adoration of Images? None in Invocation of Saints? None in adoration of the
Sacrament? Js there (...) error in breaking Christ's own Institution of the
Sacrament, by giving it but in one kind? None about Purgatory, and common
prayer in an unknown tongue? These and many more are in the Roman Religion,
and it is noe hard work to prove every one of these to be error, or
superstition, or both. We answer, it is a harder work to prove them to be so,
then barely to affirm them to be so, otherwise we are confident, his Lordship
would have been as liberal of his proofs in this kind, as he is of his (...):
for surely, it more imported him to prove, then to accuse. But we ask, how
will his friends, and adherents after him, prove them to be superstitions and
errors? By Scripture only? who shall be judge that the places alleged out of
Scripture to that purpose, bear the sense, in which Protestants understand
rather then that, in which General Councills understood them, when they
defined the recited particulars, as the present Roman Church believes and
observes them at this day? when they have done all they can, the final
resolution of the business, must, according to Protestants, be reduced to
private judgment; which in such matters as these, according to St. Austin, is
most insolent madness.

Nor do J see upon what ground the Relatour could be so Epist 118.
confident, that if the Roman Church were so happy as to teach nothing but
truth, to wit in Protestants sense, that is, to agree with Ibidem.
Protestants in condemning the worship of Jmages, Jnuocation of Saints,
Adoration of the Sacrament, Purgatory etc. it would so certainly, either
command peace, or confound peace-breakers, as he imagins. What confusion, I
pray, would it be for such people, to disagree from a Church, which proclaymes
her own erroneousness to all the world, by beginning now to teach contrary,
not only to her self and her own former belief, but contrary to the general
belief of all Christendom beside, for many hundred of years? would not the
very alteration of doctrine (which in this supposition, the Roman Church must
necessarily make) render it evident to all men, that both her self, and the
whole Church of Christ with her, may err, and has erred, in points of
greatest importance concerning the Faith? what peace-breakers would be
confounded with the authority of a Church so apt to fall into errors and
superstitions of such dangerous nature? Truly for my part, I am so far from
thinking, such an impossible case as the Bishop here putts, would either
command peace, or confound peace-breakers, that is, the Authors or Abettours
of private and contrary opinions in Religion, that I see nothing in the world,
more likely to animate and encourage them still to persist in their obstinate
refractariness, and to cast off even all sense of due obedience and reverence
of the Churches authority.

7. But the Bishop being so well content (as he tells us) with Ibidem.
men's opinion of his weakeness, it will be no hard work for his friends to
excuse his ouer-confidence in this particular, when they please, upon that
ground: only of pride he is not willing to be taxed. For which reason, A. C.
having told him (as most justly he might) that he could not prove any error or
superstition to be in the Roman Religion, but by presuming with intelerable
pride to make himself, or some of his fellows, to be judge of controversies;
and taking authority to censure all for superstition and error, that suites
not with their fancies, he complains, as being in this deeply censured by A.
C. and demands wherein does his pride appear? I answer, his own confession
sufficiently shows that, in the very next lines, where he says, indeed if I
took this upon me, J were guilty of great pride. This, that is to make
himself, or some of (...) fellows, judge of controversies; or to endeavor to
prove error and superstition in the Roman Church by taking such authority upon
him, he confesses were great pride. Well. But how does he clear himself of
the charge? How does he convince the Roman Church of error and superstition,
otherwise then by taking this authority him, and making himself or some of his
fellows Judge of Controversies? To say only as he does, I absolutely make a
lawful and free General Council judge of conerouersies, by and according to
Scripture, will not serve his turn; by reason that if he stand to his own
principles and the general practice of Protestants hitherto, none but himself
and some of his fellows shall be judge, whether the Council be lawful and
free, or not. For, if either it consists of such as favor not their opinions,
or will not observe such conditions, as he and his fellows think good to
prescribe, though never so contrary to the Canons and legal proceedings of
former Councils, we are sure enough, it will never be acknowledged for free or
lawful, by our Adversaries.

Again, standing to the Bishops principles, and the common practice of his
party expounding them, who but himself and his fellows shall be judge,
whether a lawful and free General Council has defined, or does define, by
and according to Scripture? Does not the Relatour himself expressly teach. 38.
number 15. that if a General Council shall forget it self, and take upon it to
define things not absolutely necessary to be expressly known, and actually
believed by all, neither it, nor the whole Church has any such infallible
assistance but that Christians ( every private Christian he says number. 23.) may
upon just grounds both deliberately doubt, and constantly deny the definitions
of such Councils? Likewise does he not tell us ( Ibidem. number. 24.) that it is
no pride, not to submitt to known and gross errors defined by Councils;
instancing by name in the Councils of Lateran, Constance, and Trent as having
made erroneous definitions in matter of Faith? what is this in effect but to
teach, that noe man is bound to admit the doctrine defined by General
Councills, merely for the Authority of the said Councills? and if not, who sees
it not manifestly to fallow, that cuery private Christian (that is, in other
terms, himself or some of his follows) is by our Adversary made judge of
Controversies, and allowed to take the Authority upon them, of censuring all
for superstition and error, that suites not with their private judgment?
which is the thing his Lordship, but even now, confessed to be great pride.

But the Relatour will prove from the testimony of A: C. himself, that he is
not guilty of pride in this particular, viz. of making himself Judge of
Controversies, etc. For why, A: C. Ibidem.
taxes him for giving too much power to General Councils, and binding men to a
strict Obedience to them, even in case of error. Therefore sure (says he) most
innocent I am of the intolerable pride, which he is pleased to charge upon me.
J ask, is this testimony of A: C. true, or not? If it be not true, how can he
from a false testimony infer his own innocence? If it be true, viz. that the
Bishop by his doctrine, does really bind men to a strict obedience to the
definitions of General Councills even in case of error, how grossly does he
contradict himself when he says, 'tir noe pride, not to submitt to known and
gross errors, even of General Councills? and teaches, that a private man,
upon just grounds, may both deliberately doubt, and constantly deny the defined
doctrines of some Councils? This surely, is in effect to deny both internal
and external obedience too, to General Councils. For if we may deliberately
doubt, where is internal obedience? If we may constantly deny, where is the
external? Does he not also teach, Ibidem. number. 23. that a private Christian
may, not only consider and examine the definitions of General Councils, both
for his own and the Churches satisfaction, but also propose his doubts in
opposition to the Councils doctrine, in such manner as the whole Church shall
be obliged to call an other General Council to consider of the matter etc?
How can this be done without expressing dislike, or showing some external
disobedience to the precedent Council? let our Adversary, if they please,
show how. But we have already, chap. 20. and 21. largely treated of this
subject.

To as little purpose is it for him to plead, that be submitts his judgment in
all humility to the Scripture, interpreted by the Primitive Church. But, that
this is a false pretense we have all along in this treatise demonstrated; but
more particularly, chap. 20. 21. The Bishop proceeds, saying that he submitts
upon new and necessary doubts to the judgment of a lawful and free General
Council. Fairly spoken. Upon new and necessary doubts he will submitt; not
otherwise. But we must know, in the Bishops sense and according to the
principles already advanced and resolutely insisted upon by him, noe doubts are
necessary, but such as concern matters Fundamental in Faith, that is, as he
perpetually explaines himself, absolutely necessary to be expressly known and
believed by all Christians for Salvation. So that, in all other points of
doctrine, either determined and defined already, or hereafter to be determined
and defined by the Church, he does upon the matter openly profess, that he will
not submitt to the judgment of a General Council but follow his own private
opinion, though contrary to it. Now what is this, but to take upon him to be
judge of controversies, in opposition to General Councills, and to censure for
superstition and error what suites not with his private fancy?

8. But our Adversary would have A.C. consider, how justly all this may be
turned upon himself. viz. that be has nothing to Ibide (...).
pretend, THERE ARE NOT GROSS ERROVRS AND SVPERSTITIONS in the Roman persuasion
(as he calls it) unless by intolerable pride he make himself and his party
judge of Controversies. But who sees not, this is a most palpable untruth? All
the world knows, that A. C. and all his party, submitt with most absolute
humility of judgment to the desinitions of General Councills, and so have
ever done. A. C. makes not himself judge of controversies betwixt him and his
Adversaries, but a lawful General Council; yea all the lawful General
Councills, that ever the Church had or esteemed such. To them he appeals; to
them he stands: let Protestants do as much, and the controversies would not
be hard to be ended. So utterly false it is what the Bishop affirms here, that
We will he judged by none but the `Pope, and a Council of his ordering. Do
the Relatours Adherents think, there was ever a General Council in the
Church, well ordered? let them name it; we stand to its sentence. Neither do
we require, that any Council should be of the Popes ordering, further then
the Canons of the Church do allow him, and his Predecessors have in effect
done in all General Councills, even the four first. True it is, A. C. and all
Catholics with him, acknowledge noe Council to be a lawful ludge of
controversies, unless it be approved and confirmed by the Pope: but in this
there is noe pride. For the right of confirming the decrees of General
Councills, (wherein controversies of Faith are judged) has ever belonged to
St. Peter's Successor, as we have Chap. 17.
already shown; and St. Austin ( Epist 62) with the whole Council of Mileuis,
professes it to be grounded on Scripture: yea the Canons of the universal
Church do expressly allow it him; witness even Socrat. (...). lib. 2. cap. 13.
17. lib. 3. (...). 8,
Socrates himself, noe very great friend of the Roman Church, Sozom. Hist. lib
2. cap 9.
Sozomen, (...), Hist. (...). 2. c. 22 Julius 1. Ipist. ad Ori. ental. Synod
Alexand. Epist. ad Felicem. Innocent. 1. Epist. ad Conc. Carthag. Damas. Epist.
4. ad (...). Numid. Gelaf Epist. ad Epise. Dardan. Justinian. Epist ad Ioa^. 2.
in Cod. tit. 1.
with others: and in the General Council of Chalcedon ( Action 1.) Dioscorus,
no meaner person then the Patriarch of Alexandria, is for this very reason
denied the privilege of sitting in Council, because he had presumed to hold a
General Council (to wit, the predatory, or pretended second Council of
Ephesus) without the Popes Authority: a thing, which (as the Fathers there
acknowledge) was never lawful to do, nor ever done before. ( NVNQVAM LICVIT,
NEC VNQVAM FACTVM EST.)

Why therefore shall A. C. be taxed of pride, if he believes the doctrine of the
Roman Church to be true, upon the Authority of General Councills confirmed by
the Pope? who sees not a great deal of difference betwixt him and his
Adversary in this regard? A. C. in his understanding of Scripture follows the
exposition of General Councills; the Bishop relyes upon no interpretation, but
this own; teaching that General Councills may err in their exposition of
Scripture, even in points Fundamental and absolutely necessary to Salvation.
A. C. acknowledges, he can be infallibly certain of nothing in matter of
Faith, by the bare letter of Scripture and the light of his own understanding
only: the Bishop is confident, that by the letter of Scripture only, and his
own judgment, he can be infallibly assured of all necessary points of Faith.
A. C. is ready to submitt his judgment to a General Council in any point of
doctrine, whatsoever seeming reasons, or grounds he may privately have to the
contrary: the Bishop allows a man, upon probable grounds to doubt, and upon
cleerer grounds to deny and oppose the definitions of such a Council. A.C.
thinks it an ungodly presumption to tax General Councills of error and
superstition; the Bishop makes noc scruple to censure diverse of them for
damnable errors. A. C. holds it altogether unlawful for any Christian to
dissent from the Catholic Church, in any point of defined doctrine
whatsoever, great or small; the Bishop maintains, that the whole Catholic
Church may err, both grossly and dangerously in all points not Fundamental,
and that all private Christians, who understand, or perceive such errors to be
in the Church, may dissent, yea if need be, that is, if the Church will not
reform the said errors upon their admonition, separate from her, as Luther
and his followers did, when they first began their reformation. Let any
indifferent person then be judge, whether that which A.C. charges upon the
Bishop concerning pride, and taking upon him to be judge of Controversies, in
opposition to General Councills, may be as justly turned upon himself, as the
Relatour here pretends.

His next Paragraph only tells us what was the conclusion of his
first-publish't Relation of the conference with Mr. Fisher; wherein he falls
again to his wonted custom, of charging his Adversary Ibidem. number? 5.
(indirectly at least) with what he does not own. A. C. does not maintain the
Pope to be infallible in all controversies of Faith, otherwise then in and with
a General Council; witness his own words in the end of his answer. I wish
(says he) the Chaplain and his lord, and every other man carefully to
consider, whether it be not more Christian etc. to think that the Pope, being
St. Peter's Successor, WITH A GENERAL COVNCILL, should be judge of
Controversies, and his Pastoral judgment (viz. in and with such a Council)
be accounted infallible, then to make every man that can read Scripture, an
interpreter of Scriptures and decider of Controversies, even to the controuling
of General Councills, or to have noe judge in controversies of Faith at all.
This is the sum of all that A. C. teaches, touching the Popes infallibility:
and if the Bishop could really think this to be such a brayne-sicke device, as
he talks of, I doubt it will be thought by some, that his own head was not
always in good temper.

9. A. C. to show, that in matters of Faith we ought to submitt our judgments
to such doctors and Pastors, as by a continual visible succession, have
without interruption or change, Ibidem. number. 6. 7.
brought the Faith down from Christ and his Apostles to these our days, and
shall, by virtue of Christ's promise, in the like continued succession, so carry
it down to all future generations till the end of the world, makes use of that
text of St. Paul, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 13. etc. where it is said, that Christ
ascending, gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come, in the
unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect
man etc. It Is true, some from this place gather the Popes infallibility too, as
well as the necessary succession of lawful Pastors; because it is intimated,
there shall be noe more wanting, in the sacred Hierarchy of the Church, the
office of of an Apostle, then the office of a Pastor, or teacher, till the end
of the world. Now to the office of an Apostle two things are necessary, viz.
infallibility of judgment in teaching, and power of jurisdiction, or
government, over the whole Church-Wherfore, seeing (as they suppose) it is
manifest from this text, that an Apostleship must always be in the Church, and
that noe other Ecclesiastical Pastor can, with any probable pretense, lay
claim to that office, but only the Bishop of Rome as he is St. Peter's
successor, they conclude, that the successor of St. Peter must of necessity
have those two (...) of Apostleship vested in his person; that is, he must be
infallible in his doctrine and have jurisdiction over the whole Church. So that
it could not have been counted a mere begging the question in A.C. had he
alleged this text expressly in proof of the Popes infallibibility; which yet
the Relatour himself cannot affirm that he did.

And it is of it self, clear enough, that A. C. alleges it to prove the
continual succession of Pastors and doctors in the Church, who have brought
down the unchanged Faith of Christ, from the Apostles to our days: this being
one part of the proposition he had laid down, and by consequence, was to prove;
and none of his other marginall allegations, viz. Matthew. A. C. page 73. 74.
16. 18. 18. 18. Luc. 22. 32. looking that way, but only at the infallibility
of General Councills, or of the Popes Pastoral judgment in them; which was
the second part. This succession of lawful Pastors A. C. auerres it apparent
in the Church of Rome, and cannot be shown in the Protestant Church. The
Bishop not being able to deny but a continual succession of lawful Pastors
is rightly concluded from this text, has this only to answer, that it is not
necessary, that this succession should be personal in any one particular
Church, Roman or other. Admit it were not necessary; what does this help the
Bishop, or his party? Protestants are far enough from showing any succession
for themselves, either in a particular Church, or in the Church universal. And
the scope of A. Cs. argument here, being only to exclude, or bar Protestants
(and with them all other Nouellists and Sectaries beside) from being either in
whole, or in part the true Church of Christ, it serves his turn well enough,
that they can show no such personal continued succession at all: for thence
it is conuinc'd, they are noe part of the true Church; which it is confess't,
must have always such a personal succession of lawful Pastors, somewhere,
or other in some Church, or other, handing down the unchanged Faith of Christ,
in all ages, from the Apostles to the end of the world: and if our Adversaries
do pretend to such a succession, let them show it.

But then secondly I say, though it appears not precisely by this text alone,
that the abouesayd succession should be personal in any one particular Church,
yet seeing it is certain, our Savior did chiefly radicate and fown'd this
succession in him, that was to be the chief of these Pastors, (to wit, St.
Peter) and in the line of those, that were perpetually to succeed him, of
necessity it was to be more eminently visible and perpetual in (...) and them,
then in any other. We confess also, that if St. Peter had continued (as by his
first institution he was) only universal Pastor of the whole Church, and had
not been particular Bishop any one city, or Diocese, his successors would
have succeeded him only in his universal charge. But seeing besides this, St.
Peter was Bishop of Rome, and dyed Bishop of that Sea, and that his successors
in the universal Pastourchip have likewise always hitherto succeeded him in
that particular charge, viz. as Bishop of Rome, per accidens at least, and de
facto (though not absolutely and by virtue of any divine institution) it comes
to pass, that this succession of Pastors is now determined unto a particular
Church, and is as visible, perpetual, uninterrupted in a particular Church, as
it is in the Church universal; and so must necessarily continue, until St.
Peter's successors shall cease to be Bishops of that particular Church. For
till they do, the Pope wheresoever he chances to live or dye, is still true
Bishop of Rome, and by virtue of his being so, the succession of lawful
Pastors founded upon him, is still uninterrupted in the Roman Church.

In this then, and in noe other sense, do we maintain the succession of
lawful Pastors to be local or determined to a particular place, or Church.
Nor is it by any, thought so absolutely necessary, as that if either the city
of Rome should be quite destroyed or wholly possess't by Jnfidells, or by any
other accident made incapable of being any longer the Sea of St. Peter's
successor, and thereupon the Apostolic Sea be removed from thence to some
other city, that therefore the succession it self, whereby the Government of
the supreme Bishop or Pastor of the Church, is perpetuated, should fail, or
be broken off. Neuertheless it cannot be denied but the Fathers, (who in this
point look upon the principal and adiunct as one thing, that is, upon the
universal Pastourship as connex't, and as it were, fixed to the particular
Diocese of Rome) do clearly make the local and particular succession of the
Bishop of Rome, a sign and mark of the true Church. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Witness St Jrenaeus, reckoning up the Roman Bishops from St. Peter to Pope
Eleutherius, who sat in his time, and testifying, that by this succession, all
Heretics are confounded. And if the same Father mentions the like succession
in some other Churches of Asia (as the Relatour vrges) yet it is Ibidem.
with manifest deference to the Church of Rome; to which, he there professes,
Iren. vbi (...).
that all Churches, or the Faithful from all parts of Christendom, must have
recourse, by reason of its more powerful principality. D Aug. in psalm. contr.
part. Donat.
Witness likewise St. Austin, who in confutation of the Donatists opinions and
practices, makes a Catalogue of the Roman Bishops from St. Peter to Anastasius,
who was St. Austins contemporary, auerring, that same series or succession of
Bishops, to be the Rock, against which the gates of Hell prevail not; and
finally, by way of reproach, telling them, D. Aug. Epist. 165.
that in the whole order of that succession, there was not one Donatist Bishop
to be found. We might add, nor any Protestant. Other Fathers you may find to
this purpose Bellarm. lib. 4. de not. Eccl. cap. 8.
cited by Bellarmin. It Is true, Vincentius Lirinensis makes noe special, or
distinct mention of this note of continual succession; contenting himself
only to name Antiquity, universality, consent. But is it not manifestly
inuolued in the two first? at least it cannot but be thought so, as Vincentius
explicates himself. Let us hold (says he) that which has been believed by
all, every where and always. Is not this in effect to teach a continual
succession of Pastors and doctors ever delivering the same Faith? without
doubt, what is always delivered, must be delivered by continual succession.

But we are told, the succession meant by the Father, is not tied to place,
or persons only, but is tied as well to the verity of doctrine. Who teaches
otherwise? who says it is tied to place and Ibidem. number. 8.
persons only? who denies, but succession of the same, and by consequence, of
true doctrine, is required, together with succession of persons? This
Memorandum therefore serves us only for an occasion to acknowledge, Tertull.
lib. de (...). cap 32.
with Tertullian, that besides the order of Bishops (which is personal
succession) there is required consanguinitas doctrinae (conformity of doctrine)
in those persons, to the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles: it is required, I
say, that the doctrine, which succeeding Pastors teach, be allied in blood,
and of Kin to that, which Christ and his Apostles taught; as the Relatour also
vrges: in so much, as if the doctrine, which succeeding Pastors teach, be
strange, that is, contrary to the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, the
succession it self will be judged Alien and strange too, what neereness soever
of persons is pretended. All this we willingly confess with Tertullian in the
places cited by the Bishop. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 43.
Irenaeus likewise teaches, that we are to obey those Presbyters (or Bishops)
who together with the succession of their Bishopriques, have received the grace
(or gift) of truth; to which we subscribe: and for this reason maintain,
that the Greek Church would want one necessary mark of the true Church,
though she could show a continual visible succession of persons in her
Hierarchy; because they have long since erred, and do still continue in error
against the true Faith, by denying the procession of the holy Ghost, to be from
the Father and the Son, as it has been defined in General Councills.

As for Protestants it is manifest, that upon this account they are excluded
from being part of the true Church; seeing it is confess't by Protestants, that
for near a thousand years before Luther, there was noe visible Church that
denied those points of doctrine, which Protestants now deny, and account
damnable errors and superstitions in our Church. And J wonder, how any
rational man can imagine, that in so long a tract of time wherein the pretended
errors are said to be introduced, all those Watchmen, upon thy Walls, leru.
(...), I have appointed Watchmen, all the day and all the night; for ever they
shall not hold their peace. Isa. 62. 6.
appointed by God to be vigilant over the Church, and not to hold their peace,
should be so dead a-sleepe, as not to take the least notice of them for such;
and Protestants alone, after a a thousand years, so much awake, as not only to
observe them, but to break Communion upon account thereof.

10 Well. But we must now help Doctor Stapleton out of the brieres, upon which
(says the Bishop) he has torn his credit. The Ibidem.
Relatour himself acknowledges this Author for a great Clarke; but will have
(...) believe, that to make good the succession to the Roman Church, he is
forced to contradict himself. Why? because he first affirms, (...) Sana est ab
ipsa (...) and legitima successione indivulsa Staplet. Relect Contron. 1. Q. 2.
(...). 2. notab. 1.
that sound doctrine is iudiuisible (or inseparable) from true and (...)
succession; and presently after tells us nam e Pastore Lupus sieri potest. Ibid
notab. 4.
that a lawful Pastor may become a Wolf; to wit, by teaching Heresy and
false doctrine: which if it may happen, the Bishop concludes sound doctrine and
lawful succession are separated: which is contrary to what Stapleton said
before. But our Doctor needs no such help, as the Bishop imagins; it is but
fairly and rightly understanding him, and the business is done. Doctor
Stapleton, when he teaches, that sound doctrine is inseparable from true and
lawful succession, takes succession collectiuely, or for the whole succession
of lawful Pastors in any particular age of the Church: meaning thereby, that
it can never happen, that all the lawful Pastors of the Church, in any age,
should desert sound doctrine, or teach Heresy: he takes it not distributiuely
for any particular Pastor, or Pastors of the Church; all which generally
speaking, he knows very well may err in their own persons, and desert sound
doctrine. Like as when the Bishop himself teaches, that the Catholic Church
cannot err in points Fundamental, he means only that the whole Church cannot
so err, but any particular person, or member of the Church, may. Now what
contradiction is there betwixt these two propositions, the whole succession of
lawful Pastors cannot be separated from sound doctrine, and some particular
Pastors (that is, part of the whole) may, and become of Pastors wolves? truly
just as much, as there is betwixt these; the whole Church of Christ cannot fall
away from the truth; but every particular member of the Church may.

This worthy Doctor therefore will never be forced (as the Relatour thinks, and
would feign have it) to quit the great note of Church-succession, that he may
agree with the Fathers: but he will inuincibly and unanswerably maintain that,
which both the Fathers and himself mean by this great note: to wit, a
legitimate succession, a succession of Pastors, which hold entire, both the
unity and Faith of the Church: this being the sum and vpshot of all his
doctrine touching this point; namely, that the true Catholic Church is known
by this, that there is in her a perpetual succession of lawfully-sent
Pastors, delivering and receiving the doctrine of Christ one from an other
continually, or in all ages: which likewise they are always to be supposed to
have done, and to do, so long as the Church, in no succeeding determinate age,
notes any change of doctrine, or public introduction of nouelty, to hane been
made by any of them; nor that any such change is found recorded by any of those
approved Authors, who lived in the respective ages of the Church, and in their
writings, left report to posterity, of all such public occurences, both
concerning Religion and the Church, as happened in and about their times.
Wherefore to accuse the Church of Rome of change in doctrine (as the Bishop
here, and all Protestants do) without alleging such Authentic proof, what
is it, but out their own arbitrary presumption and malice, to pass an
uncharitable and rash censure upon their mother, contrary to all rules of
equity, truth, justice, and Christian piety? Till therefore such proof of
change be alleged from sufficient and creditable Records, all prudent and
impartial men will judge the accusation signifies not much, save only, that
the Church is unworthily and shamefully wronged by her Adversaries; which is no
new thing.

This then is the hair (if we may so speak) in which the Ibidem.
strength of that our English Sampson (Doctor Stapleton) lies: which none of
the Philisthims of Gath or Ekron (either Prelaticall, or Presbyterian
Adversaries) whateuer they may talk, shall be able to cut off. The promise
and power of Christ so defends it, that no Adversary powers shall ever
prevail against it. Matthew. 16. 18. J mean the continual uninterrupted
succession of lawful Pastors, teaching the same doctrine of Christ in all
ages of the Church without any assignable beginning, since the time of the
Apostles.

11. Those pretended Schim's, which the Bishop objects out Ibidem.
of Onuphrius; (that is to say, the contestations, which have sometimes been,
touching elections to the Papal dignity, whereby several persons at the same
time have pretended to be Pope,) neither hinder, nor make void the legitimate
and necessary succession of the Roman Church, as Doctor Stapleton maintains
it. For first, even when differences did happen, there was for the most part a
lawful Pope presently chosen upon the vacancy: so that the succession of the
Roman Bishops was not at all broken off, or interrupted in this case. And for
the guilt of Schism (if any were) it lay only on their part, who wilfully
opposed the lawful Pope after he was sufficiently declared. Secondly, when it
so happened, that either a lawful Pope was not presently chosen, or that it
was not certainly known, which of the pretending parties was the lawful Pope,
yet neither in this case was the succession itself euacuated (as any man in
reason may see) but only suspended for a while, or the evidence thereof, as to
the person succeeding, pro tempore obstructed. For either by death, or by
cession and resignation of the pretendants themselves, or by deprivation of
those, whose elections were notoriously illegitimate, or by some other lawful
and Canonical means, first or last, the right of election to the Apostolic
dignity, was always cleared of doubt, and legally settled upon one person;
whom thereupon the whole Church presently acknowledged for true Pope.

And as for the Interregnum, as we may call it, or the time, that such
Contestations about the Popedom lasted, though it were an unhappy state of the
Church to be so divided within it self, yet for the most part, there was noe
formal Schism on either part. For neither did the Anti-popes themselves,
properly speaking, separate from the Catholic, or Roman Church, so as to deny
its Authority, but only contested, for a time, with the person of that was
lawful Pope, and upon a presumption, at least pretended, that themselves were
Pope, and not he. And though there had been formal Schism on their part, yet
seeing there was none on his part that was true Pope, what man can be so
unreasonable as to think that the fault of pretenders could prejudice the
lawful succession of him that was rightly chosen? Now our Adversaries (we
hope) know, that the line of succession is continued, not by the Anti-popes,
but by the true Popes. To which we may add, that in all such cases, viz. of
contestations about election to the Papacy, when the matter was really dubious,
as it was not of any absolute necessity for the Church or the several
provinces of Christendom, to acknowledge either the one, or the other
pretendant for true Pope; so it was lawful for them to acknowledge him for
such, whom they did bona fide and prudently judge to have been lawfully
chosen. Ibidem.


The superstitions he talks of, in the end of this Paragraph, are (...) laid to
our charge; and though they were even justly charged upon us, yet seeing by his
own principles and profession, they are not inconsistent with true Faith
necessary to salvation, it is evident, they cannot be urged by him, as an
Argument to intringe and nullify the perpetual succession of Pastors in the
Roman Church.

12. To A. C. friendly and serious advice, that his Lordship Ibidem. number. 9.
would consider carefully, whether it be not more Christian, and less
brain-sicke, to think that St. Peter's successor together with a General
Council, should be an infallible judge of controversies in matters of Faith,
then to make every man, that can but read Scripture, an interpreter of it and a
decider of Controversies, or to have noe judge at all in such matters, the
Bishop answers, that he has considered all this carefully, and finds himself
no way chargeable with the inconveniences which A. C. specifies, of making
every private man judge of Controversies and a Controuler of General Councils;
or else of admitting noe judge at all to determine such Controversies. His
reason is, because he admitts Scripture interpreted by the Primitive Church,
and a lawful and free General Council, determining, according to them, to
judge of Controversies; and holds, that noe private man whatsoever may be judge
of these. But here the Bishop himself is in the briers. For tell me, I pray,
how does this doctrine ( noe private man whatsoever may be judge of these)
consist, with what he professedly auowes * elsewhere, as we have often Chap.
20. 21.
seen, that private Christians may upon just grounds, both deliberately doubt,
and constantly deny the definitions even of General Councils? and that if they
err grossly and dangerously (as in his opinion they may, and have done) it is
noe pride to refuse submission to them? Is not this to make private men judges
of these things; that is to say, whether or not General Councils do determine
according to Scripture and the Primitive Church? A thing, which the world sees,
all Protestants do take upon them to judge; and the Bishop himself as freely
as any, notwithstanding his great, but feigned profession here, to the
contrary; and utter disclayming from that desiunctiue imputation of either a
private judge, or not judge. Jn the very next line he openly professes he
cannot swallow this proposition, that the Pope with a General Council Ibidem.
should be judge. Yet the Primitive Church did, not only swallow this
proposition, but also very well relish it; witness its willing and absolute
submission to the sour first General Councils, consirm'd by the Pope, as
judges of those grand and Fundamental Controversies, that were then agitated;
and allowing noe private man to examine and consider their definitions, whether
they were consonant unto Scripture or not. He should have done well to have
told us, what other judge but this (the Pope with a General Council) in
Controversies of Faith the Church has had? what other judge but this ever was,
or indeed can be acknowledged for such matters? And thersore, if this judge be
not admitted, and that absolutely by us, it is certain, either no judge at all
will be found to end these Controversies, or in the final deuolution of the
business, every private man will be made judge.

The Relatour (had he pleased) might have found a sufficient answer in
Bellarmin, to the matter he brings out of AEneas Syluius, Ibidem.
otherwise called Pope Pius the second: namely, that he retracted, in his
maturer age and upon better consideration, what he had formerly, as it were in
his youth, out of heat of contention, and upon presumption of Scholasticall
learning, written upon the subject of the Popes Authority in reference to
General Councils. Neither can the mere want of learning (which the Bishop
here objects to some Popes) be any sufficient prejudice against their
authority; nor hinder the operation and assistance of the holy Ghost from
concurring with them, and working by them in all cases necessary. The Apostles
themselue, and many worthy Bishops in the Primitive Church, were persons of noe
great learning; and it is the counsel and wisdom of God, for the most part,
to choose the weak things of this world, to confound the strong, and the
foolish things of this world to confound the wise. Nor do we make the
infallibility of the Church to depend upon the Pope alone, as the Relatour
perpetually insinuates, but upon (...). Cor. 1. 27.
the Pope and a General Council together. So that if this be granted by our
Adversaries, we shall acquiesce, and require no more of them, because this
only is matter of Faith.

13. But neither the Pope by himself alone, nor a General Council with him,
do ever take upon them to make new articles of Faith, properly speaking, but
only expound and declare to us what was before Yome way revealed, either in
Scripture, or the unwritten word. Yet they declare and expound with such
absolute authority, that we are obliged under pain of eternal damnation,
neither to deny, nor question any doctrine of Faith by them proposed to be
bclceued by us. This (under Christ) is the true Foundation of the Catholic
Church and Religion. Whosoever goes about to lay any other, and to erect
superstructures upon it, will find in the end, that he laid but a sandy
Foundation. and raised a tottering edisice, which will one day fall upon his
own head, and crush him to his utter ruin.

Let this therefore remain as a settled conclusion, that the Ibidem.
Catholic Church is infallible in all her definitions of Faith; and that
there is noe other way but this to come to that happy meeting of truth and
peace, which the Bishop will seem so much to have labored for, in his
lifetime. J beseech God, to give all men light to see this truth, and grace to
assent unto it; to the end, that by living in the militant Church with unity of
Faith, we may all come at last to meet in glory in the triumphant Church of
Heaven: which we may hope for by the merits of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all honor and
glory world without end.

AMEN.
An Alphabetical Table of the most remarkable matters contained in this Book.
Apostles.
Christ's promises to his Apostles, when extendible to their Successors; and
when not. page 103 The Apostles were first proved to be Infallible, not by
Scripture, but by their Miracles. page 56, 57 As necessary for the Church, in
some cases, that the Apostles Successors be guided and settled in all Truth, as
the Apostles themselves. page 103, 104
Appeals.
The Canons of the Council of Sardica expressly allow Appeals to Rome. page 194,
195 Appeals to Rome, out of England, anciently practiced. page 189 From all
parts of Christendom, in St. Gregory's time. page (...) Councils that restrain
them, look only at the abuse of too frequent and unnecessary Appealing. page
194 What the Council of Carthage desired of the Pope, in the matter of Appeals.
Ibid. Inferior Clerks only, forbidden to Appeal to Rome. page 188
Authority.
No Authority merely Humane, absolutely Infallible. page 123 Nor able,
sufficiently to warrant the Scriptures Infallibility. Ibid. Divine Authority,
necessary for the Belief of Scriptures Infallibility: and what that is. page
64, 65, 69 Authority of the Church, sufficient to ground Infallible Assent.
page 75, 78, 108 The supreme Authority of One over all, as necessary now, as
ever. page 207. And will be so to the end of the world. Ibid.
Authors,
Either misalledg'd, or misinterpreted by our Adversary. page 4, 7, 8, 9, 10,
22, 47, 80, 81, 98, 113, 118, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 143, 175, 187, 193,
201, 202, 204, 210, 218, 222, 240, 248, 309, 310
Baptism.
Infant Baptism, not evidently expressed in Scripture, nor demonstratively proved
from it. page 51, 52, 53. Acknowledged, for an Appstolical Tradition by St.
Austin. p. 26, 53, 67 That lawful Baptism may not be reiterated, a Tradition
Apostolical. page 67
Bishops.
Not merely the Popes Vicars, or Substitutes. page. 219, 224 They govern in
their own right, and are, jure divino, Pastors of the Church, no less then the
Pope. Ibid. Yet, by the same law of God, under the Pope. Ibid. In what sense it
may be said, that all Bishops are equal, or of the same merit and degree in the
Ecclesiastical Priesthood. page 222 The Bishop of Canterbury, made Primate of
England by the Pope. p. 190
Universal Bishop.
The title of Universal, or Ecumenical, Bishop, anciently given to the Popes.
page 196 But never assumed, or used, by them. Ibid. Used by the Patriarchs of
Constantinople, but never lawfully given them. page 196 What the more ancient
Patriarchs of that Sea intended by their usurpt title. Ibid. The Sea of
Constantinople, always subject to that of Rome. page 196, 197, 198 In what
manner Gregory the seventh gave the title of Universal Bishop to his
Successors. page 199 Likewise, in what manner Phocas, the Emperor, might be
said to give it. Ibid.
Catholic.
THe several Acceptions of the word Catholic, page 130 Causally the particular
Church of Rome is styled the Catholic; and why. Ibid. No such great Paradox,
that the Church in general should be styled Catholic, by its agreeing with
Rome. Ibid. In what sense it is both true and proper, to say the Roman Catholic
Church. page 132
Certainty.
No absolute Certainty of any thing revealed by God, if the Churches Testimony
be not Infallible. page 29, 30 Moral Certainty, even at the highest, not
absolutely Infallible. p. 123
Church.
The Church cannot err, and General Councils cannot err, Synonymous with
Catholics. page 19, 20, 177 The Churches Definitions make not Divine
Revelation more certain in it self, but more certainly known to us. page 21, 24
How the Churches Definition may be said to be the Churches Foundation. page 35
Nothing matter of Faith in the Churches Decrees, but the naked Definitions.
page 64 What the ground of Church-Definitions in matter of Faith is, and must
of necessity ever be. page 230
Roman Church.
The Principality of the Roman Church, derived from Christ. p. 183 The Roman
Churches Tradition esteemed of old the only Touchstone of Apostolical and
Orthadox Doctrine. page 202 No peril of Damnation in adhering to the Roman
Church. page 212 No Errors, or Abuses, in Religion, at any time, more
imputable to the Roman, then to the whole Catholic Church of Christ. page 142
The African Church, always in Communion with the Roman. p. 190, 191 The Roman
Churches Defining of Superstructures, or Non-Fundamental Points, no cause of
Schism. page 332 The Roman Church rightly styled the Root and Matrix of the
Catholic. page 391, 392, 393, 394, 395
Church of Jerusalem.
Why (with some others) styled sometimes Mother Church. p. 389, 390, and why
Pamelius, in his list of those Churches, might reckon them before the Roman.
page 397
Contradictions,
Slipped from our Adversaries pen. page 51, 54, 70, 83, 90, 99, 112, 124, 146,
150, 223, 249, 308, 310
Councils.
General and Ecumenical Councils, of how great Authority. page 32 The most
proper remedy, for errors and abuses, that concern the whole Church. page 165
National and Provincial Councils determine nothing in matter of Faith, without
consulting the Apostolic Sea. page 164, 166, 167, 168 To confirm General
Councils, no Novelty, but the Popes ancient Right. page 215 The Churches
Acceptance, only a secondary and accessory Confirmation of them. Ibid. Not
absolutely necessary, as the Popes is. Ibid. In what sense it is said, that all
Pastors are gathered together in General Councils. page 213 The whole Churches
consent, virtually included and effectually declared by a General Council. page
216 The Prelates in General Councils assembled, may proceed against the Pope
himself, if his crimes be notorious. page 231, 233 What kind of Free Council
it is, that Protestants call for. page 233 No Conditions, or Rules, for holding
a General Council, justly assignable now, which have not been competently
observed by such former General Councils as Protestants reject. page 240 The
Church Universal, indispensably obliged to embrace the Doctrine of General
Councils. page 250 The Decrees of General Councils, in matters of Faith, to be
received, not as the Decisions of men, but as the Dictates of the Holy Ghost.
p. 252 General Councils not of Humane, but Divine, Institution. page 245 No
known Heretic, or Schismatic, has Right to sit in General Councils. page 233
In what Cases General Councils may be amended, the former by the latter. page
255, 256, 257, 258 They are Infallible in the Conclusion, though not in the
Means, or Arguments, on which the Conclusion is grounded. page 263, 264
Infallibility of the Apostles, and succeeding Councils, how they differ. page
265, 266 The Councils of Arimini, and second of Ephesus, no lawful General
Councils. page 268, 339 The Supposition of a General Councils Erring in one
point, renders it liable to Err in all. page 378
Creed.
St. Athanasius his Creed, no absolute Summary of the Catholic Faith. page
350, 351 No, not even supposing the Creed of the Apostles. Ibid. What the
Authors intent was in composing it. Ibid. St. Athanasius first composed and
published it in the Latin Tongue. page 351
Donatists.
A Narrative of their proceedings in the business of Cecilianus, their
Archbishop and Primate of Africa. page 185, 186 Donatists, why they addressed
themselves to the Emperor Constantine. Ibid. The Emperor openly professes,
that the Donatists cause belonged not to his Cognizance. Ibid. What he did in
it, was forced from him by importunity. page 185, 187 He promises to ask pardon
of the Bishops, for meddling in the Donatists business. page 186 The Donatists
thrice condemned. page 185, 186
Emperor.
No secret compact between the Emperor, Sigismund, and the Council of
Constance, in the cause of Huss. page 156 No just Sentence ever pronounced by
an Emperor, against the Pope. p. 192 In what manner the Emperors, for some
time, ratisy'd the Popes Election. Ibid. That Custom (...) long since by the
Emperors themselves. p. 193. The Emperors favor some advantage to the Popes
Temporal Interest; no ground of his Spiritual Authority. page 200 The Surmize
of having one Emperor over all Kings, as well as one Pope over all Bishops a
mere Chimaera, or fiction. page 225 The Emperor as Supreme, over his Subjects,
in all Civil Affairs, as the Pope is in matters Spiritual. page 226 The Popes
never practiced to bring the Emperors under them in Civil Affairs. Ibid. No
Catholic Emperors, ever took upon them to reform religion, without, or
contrary to the Pastors of the Church. Ibid.
Error.
In matters of Faith, though not Fundamental, inconsistent with the
acknowledged Holiness of the Church. page 150 Every Congregation unchurched,
that holds Error in Faith; and the reason why. page 151
Eucharist.
That the holy Eucharist be received Fasting, is a Tradition Apostolical. page
67 Receiving it under one kind, no Error in Faith. page 207, 271 Nor contrary
to Christ's Institution. Ibid. The Non-obstante, in the Council of Constance's
Decree touching the Eucharist, to what it refers. page 271, 272, 273 The
Eucharist under one kind, a perfect Sacrament, page 271 Frequently received in
Primitive times, under one kind. page 289 Given by Christ himself in one
kind. page 318 Why necessary, that the Priest, who consecrates, should receive
in both kinds. page 319
Excommunication,
Never pronounced, in the Catholic Church, but where Obstinacy and
perverseness enforce it. page 48 Incurred ipso facto by all English
Protestants, for denying any one of the 39. Articles. page 49 The English
Church, more justly censurable for tyranny, in point of Excommunications, then
the Roman. page 49, 50
Faith.
Divine and infallible Faith, inconsistent with the denial of any one point
sufficiently propounded by the Church. page 17 Faith Implicit, what it imports
in Catholic sense. page 20 Implicit Faith, necessary to be had of all Divine
Revelations whatsoever: Explicit, only of what the Church defines, and
propounds for such. page 20 The English Protestant Faith, not the Faith of the
Primitive Church. page 328, 329, 330, 331 Implicit Faith, not used by
Catholics at pleasure. page 346, 347
Roman Faith.
The Consequence of this Argument made good: The Roman Faith was once THE ONE
SAVING FAITH; Ergo, it is so still. p. 340, 350
Fathers.
Catholics show all due respect to the Fathers, yet without derogation from
the Authority of the present Church. page 60, 61 The Fathers account none
Catholics, but such as agree with the Roman Church. page 131 Proofs of the
Churches Infallibility, from the Fathers. page 102, 105, 108. 131, 137, 178
Protestants profession to stand to the Fathers, what it signifies. page 208
Fundamental.
A word in Religion of various and ambiguous Acception. page 14 How it ought to
be taken in the present Dispute. page 14, 34, 44 Catholics allow a
distinction of Fundamental and Non-Fundamental points, in some sense. page 15,
20, 21, 23, 34, 44 All points defined by the Church, and sufficiently known to
be so, are Fundamental, that is, not to be doubted of, or denied, under pain of
damnation. page 15, 16, 27 Points not-Fundamental, deposited with the Church by
Christ and his Apostles, no less then points Fundamental. page 38 Points
Fundamental, necessary to be known in specie, or particularly. page 45, 176,
177, 217, 243
Government.
THe Government of the Church in a Monarchical way, not changeable by any power
on earth. page 221, 222 The difference between the Government of the Church, in
matters of Faith and Religion, and the Government of the State in matters of
Policy and Civil Concern. page 243, 244, 245
Greeks.
Their Error against the Holy Ghosts procession from the Son, properly
Heretical. page 6, 7 King James his censure of the Greek Church. page 5 Ancient
Greeks differed only in Words, or manner of speaking, from the Latins; not in
sense. page 7, 8, 21, 22 The Greeks excluded from the Council of Trent, not by
the Popes Summons, but by their own Schism page 233 Diverse Orthodox Bishops of
the Greek Church, present in the Council of Trent. page 233, 234 Modern Greeks,
no True Church. page 10, 11 The business of Hieremias, the Greek Patriarch of
Constantinople. page 238 His Censure of the Lutheran Doctrine, a sufficient
Testimony of the sense of the Greek Church. Ibid. He utterly rejected the
Lutherans Communion. Ibid.
Hell.
THe word Hell does not always signify the place of the Damned. page 336
Heresies.
Even in points Not-Fundamental in Protestants sense, by St. Austin and the
Churches account. page 17 Pelagian Heresy, not condemned in the Council of
Ephesus. page 33 Nor in any other General Council, acknowledged by Protestants.
Ibid. Heresy, what it is. page 178 Properly speaking, not within, but without
the Church. page 218
Heretics.
Those of former times, as great Pretenders to Scripture, as Protestants. page
50 Faith necessary to be kept with Heretics, the constant Tenet of all
Catholics. page 152
Jews.
THe Jews proved the Old Testament to be Gods Word, the same way that we
(Catholics) do the New. page 121 They held not the Old Testament for their
sole Rule of Faith. page 122
Images.
No real difference betwixt the Ancient and the Modern Church of Rome, in point
of Images. page 294 The Second Council of Nice expressly forbad the Worship of
Images with Latria, or Divine Worship. Ibid. etc. The Definition of the Council
of Trent, touching the Worshipping of Images. Ibid. The Church has done what
in her lies, to prevent abuses in Image Worship. Ibid. Images, in common use
and veneration amongst Christians, in Primitive Times. page 295, 296
Index.
The Index Expurgatorius justified, against the Bishops Calumnies. page 342
Infallible.
The Catholic Church proved to be Infallible by the same Means, that Moses,
Christ, and his Apostles were proved such. page 55, 56, 62 In what sense
Catholics maintain, that the Tradition of the present Church must be as
Infallible; as that of the Primitive and Apostolical. p. 80 No Means to be
Infallibly sure of Prime Apostolical Tradition, if the present Church be
Fallible. page 83 Necessary for the Church, to have power to determine
Infallibly, as well Not-Fundamental, as Fundamental points. page 385
Infallibility.
Whence the Infallibility, both of the Catholic Church, and General Councils,
proceeds. page 43 The Infallibility of the present Church, proved from
Scripture. page 101, 102, etc. page 177, 178, 179 In what manner, the Churches
Infallibility in Teaching is rightly inferred from the Holy Ghosts Assistance.
page 375, 376
Intention.
What kind of Intention in the Priest, is absolutely necessary to the validity
of the Sacraments. page 281, 282, 283 No real Inconveniences, following the
Catholic Doctrine touching the Priests Intention. page 284, 285
Judge.
Our Adversaries demand of a Third person to be Judge, and Umpire betwixt the
Roman Church and Them, nugatory and frivolous. page 157, 171, 172, 173 The
notorious partiality of English Protestant Prelates, in this case. p. 174
General Councils, by the Bishops own confession, the best Judge on earth, for
Controversies of Faith, where the sense of Scripture is doubted. page 213 A
visible, supreme, living Judge, to determine Controversies, as necessary in the
Church as State. page 219
Legates.
NEither Hosius, nor any other person, presided at the Council of Nice, but
only in quality of the Popes Legates. page 231 Why the Pope sent no Legates to
the second Council, at Constantinople. page 232 At the Council of Ephesus, St.
Cyril presided, as Legate to Pope Celestin. Ibid. The like was at Chalcedon, and
other General Councils. Ibid.
Limbus Patrum.
The Fathers (generally) teach Limbus Patrum. page 336
Literae Communicatoriae.
The Literae Communicatoriae, by whom first ordained, and to what end. page 220
They evidently prove the Popes Authority. Ibid. The difference betwixt Those
granted by the Pope, and Those granted by other Catholic Bishops. Ibid.
Lyturgie.
The English Lyturgie, why unlawful to be used by Catholics. page 319
Manichees.
GReat Braggers, and pretenders to Truth, when they most opposed it. page 30
Miracles.
None ever wrought in confirmation of the present Canon of Scriptures, either
Protestant or Catholic. page 109 Miracles rather confirm the Churches
Infallibility, then the Scripture's. page 110 They are always sufficiently
convincing, though they do not actually convert. page 115
Monarchy.
That of the Church, not a pure, but mixed, Monarchy. page 219, 224 Monarchy,
acknowledged by Philosophers the most perfect form of Government. page 220 The
impugning Monarchical Government of the Church, to what it tends. page 224
Multitude.
Catholics make not Multitude alone, any Infallible Mark of the True Church.
page 162
Necessary.
POints said to be Necessary to Salvation, in a double sense. p. 15, 92 Not
absolutely necessary to Salvation, to believe Scripture. p. 91, 92
Nice.
No Synod held at Rome, in the time of the Nicen Council. page 237 The Council
of Nice of absolute Authority, without the concurrence of any other Council.
Ibid. The Council of Sardica, esteemed anciently but an Appendix of the Council
of Nice; and the reasons why. page 194, 195 The (probable) occasion of Pope
Zosimus his citing the Council of Nice for that of Sardica. Ibid.
Obedience.
NO External Obedience to be given to the Definitions of General Councils,
should they manifestly err against Scripture and Demonstration. page 241, 242
Object of Faith.
Material and Formal, a necessary Distinction. page 15, 18 What it imports.
Ibid.
Patriarchs.
IN point of Authority, not Equal to the Bishop of Rome. p. 183, 184 The Bishop
of Rome, Head and Prince of all the Patriarchs, by the very Canon of the
Council of Nice. Ibid. The Popes Confirmation, required to all new-elected
Patriarchs. Ibid. Eight several Patriarchs, deposed by the Bishop of Rome.
Ibid. Other Patriarchs, restored to their Seas, by the Popes Authority. Ibid.
St. Peter.
In what manner St. Peter represented, or bare the person of the whole Church,
when he received the Keys, Matthew. 16. 19. page 266, 267 Christ's whole flock,
more absolutely and unlimitedly committed to St. Peter, then to the other
Apostles. page 211
Pope.
The Popes Authority, always included and supposed in that of the Church. page
33 The Infallibility of the Pope, not necessarily tied to the particular
Church, or city of Rome. page 132 Catholics, not obliged to maintain the Pope
Infallible, save only with a General Council. page 133, 143 In what manner the
Popes, trewhile, endured the Emperors censures. page 192 The Popes Authority
duly acknowledged, would effectually prevent Heresies, and preserve Unity in
the Church. page 218 The Popes Greatness, no effect of Humane Policy. page 13
Nor of his Residence in the Imperial-City. page 192 The Definition of the
Council of Florence touching the Popes Authority. page 228, 229 The Popes
Authority, not prejudicial to that of Temporal Princes. p. 223 Pope Alexander
the Third and Pope Innocent the Third, not contrary to one another in the cause
of Peter Lombard. page 279 Pope Honorius, not really guilty of the Monothelites
Heresy. p. 279, 280
Priest.
The judgment of the High Priest and his Sanhedrim, in Controversies
concerning the Law, Infallible under the Old Testament. p. 97, 123
Prescription.
Justly pleaded by Catholics for their Religion; not so by Protestants. page
333, 334
Primacy.
PRIMATUS and (...), what they signify, especially in Ecclesiastical sense.
page 200 Primacy inferrs Supremacy, and belongs to St. Peter's Successors, (...)
then to himself. Ibid.
Protestants.
Neither Scripture, nor any other point of Christian Religion, believed by
Protestants with Divine Faith. page 125, 126, 127, 352 Their Protestation at
Auspurgh, 1529. directly against the Roman Church and her Doctrine. page 146,
147 To Protest against the Roman Church, in the manner they then did, was to
Protest against all True visible Churches in the world. page 147 Protestants
are Chusers, in point of Faith, as much as any other Heretics. page 353 How
far Protestants rely upon the Infallible Authority of the whole Church. Ibid.
Why unlawful for Catholics in England, to go to Protestant Churches. page 401
Purgatory.
The Council of Florence, unanimous in defining the point of Purgatory. page
358 The Fathers, as well within the first 300. years as after, constantly teach
Purgatory. p. 359, 360, 361, 362, 363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369 No real
difference betwixt praying for the Dead used by the Ancients, and praying for
the Dead used by the Roman Church at present. p. 360, 361 The Testimonies of
the Fathers, in proof of Purgatory, made good. page 358, etc. ut supra
Purgatory, rightly esteemed an Apostolical Tradition. page 370
Reformation.
Always, and professedly intended by the Popes themselves, in what was really
needful. p. 147. effected by the Council of Trent. Ibid. The Church of Juda, no
pattern of the Protestants Reformation. p. 160 The Parallel for them holds
better in the revolted Tribes. page 161 Sacrilege, the natural fruit of
Protestant Reformation. page 170
Regicide.
No doctrine of Catholics. page 212, 348
Resolution of Faith.
How Catholics do necessarily resolve their Faith into the Churches
Definition; and how not. page 58, 60, 63. How such and such Books, contained in
the Bible, are known to be the word of God. page 59, 122 No vicious Circle
incurred by Catholics, in the Resolution of their Faith. page 55, 62, 117,
126 In urging the Circle, both parties must be supposed to believe Scripture
with Divine and Infallible Faith. page 111 The Bishop, in his Resolution,
cannot avoid the Circle. page 64, 111
Revelation.
The Churches Testimony, or Definition, no New, nor Immediate, Revelation from
God. page 58, 65 Divine Revelation, the only Formal Object, or Motive, of
Infallible Faith. page 59
Safe Conduct.
GRanted two ways; jure communi, and jure speciali: and how they differ. page
153 The Safe-Conducts, granted to John Huss and Hierome of Prague, were merely
jure communi, and secured them only against unjust violence. Ibid. The
Safe Conduct, granted to Protestants by the Council of Trent, was jure
speciali, and as Full and Absolute as themselves could desire, or the Council
grant. page 153, 154 The (...) of the Council of Constance, touching
Safe-Conducts granted by Temporal Princes, what it intended. page 154, 156 It
contained nothing against keeping Faith with Heretics. Ibid.
Salvation,
Attainable in the Roman Faith and Church, by our Adversaries own confession.
page 300, 301, etc. Catholic Doctors, in possibility of Salvation, by the
Bishops own grounds. page 323, 324 The Roman Religion, demonstrated to be a
more safe way to Salvation, then that of Protestants. page 301, 302, 303, 307,
308
Saints.
Invocation of Saints, no Error in Faith. page 290, 291 The Fathers teach it
ex instituto and Dogmatically. Ibid. St. Austin, expressly for it. Ibid. The
Saints, Mediators of Intercession, not of Redemption. page 292 The faithful
under the old Testament, desired to be heard for the merits of Saints, no less
then we. Ibid. The Intercession of Saints departed, not derogatory to the
Merits, or Intercession, of Christ. page 293
Schism.
Protestants (not Catholics) made the present Schism, and how. p. 144, 145,
146, 212 Schisms at Rome, not in the Roman Church, properly speaking. p. 144
The true and real causes of Protestants being-Excommunicated by the Roman
Church. page 145, 158 In point of Departure, as well as other Circumstances,
the Parallel betwixt them and the Arians holds good. page 145 No just cause
assignable for Schism. page 151
Scripture.
Not believed to be Divine, but for the Churches Authority. p. 17, 66, 67
Scripture alone can be no sufficient ground of Infallible Assent to
Superstructures, or non-Fundamental points contained in it. page 19 No means of
Infallibly-discerning true Scripture from false, unless the Church be
Infallible. page 85 In what cases it is both lawful and necessary, for
Christians, to riquire a proof, that Scripture is Gods word. page 118 Scripture
alone, in the Bishops opinion, the whole Foundation of Divine Faith. page 116
In what sense Christians must suppose, or take it for granted, that it is
Divine, or Gods word. page 121 What Light the Scripture must have, to show it
self to be Gods Word. page 87 The Belief of Scripture for its own pretended
Light, imprudent. p. 88, 89, 90, 91, 116, 125 The Fathers for some hundred
years after Christ, (...), saw no such Light. page 70, 91 No reason can be
given, why Catholics should not see that pretended Light, if there were any
such. page 90 The Council of Nice made not Scripture their only Rule of Faith,
in condemning the Arian Heresy. page 125 The Scriptures prerogative above the
Church. page 60, 64 Scripture, in a proper sense, no first principle. p. 51,
90, 114, 118, 119
Succession.
St. James, not Successor to our Lord in the Principality of his Church. page
205 Our Saviors Prayer (Luc. 22. 32.) effectually extended both to St. Peter
and his Successors. page 208 Lawful Pastors, visibly Succeeding each other,
and handing down the same unchanged Doctrine, from Christ to this present time,
an infeparable mark of the true Church. page 410, 411 Sound Doctrine,
indivisible from the whole lawful Succession. Ibid. The Popes Succession, not
interrupted by Contestations about the Papacy. page 412, 413
Sunday.
That Sunday be kept Holy instead of the Jewish Sabbath, an Apostolical
Tradition. page 67
Synods.
The Pope, no enemy, or opposer, of National Synods. page 166 Sundry National
Synods, impertinently alled'gd by the Bishop, in point of Reformation. page
167, 168, 169
Tradition.
NOt known, but for and by the Churches Authority. page 17 Traditions
unwritten. page 26, 67 What Traditions are to be accounted truly Apostolical,
and the unwritten word of God. page 66, etc. Universal Tradition (morally
speaking) less subject to alteration, or vitiating, tiating, then Scripture.
page 98 Church-Tradition, a necessary condition of Infallible Belief. page 59
How necessary it is, that the Tradition of the present Church should be
Infallible. page 126
Transubstantiation,
No error in Faith. page 287 Not inconsistent with the grounds of Christian
Religion. Ibid. The Thing it self, always believed by Christians. page 288
Evinced from the Text. page 288, 289
Trent.
The Council of Trent, a lawful and free General Council. p. 165, 229 Nothing
to he objected against it, more then against all General Councils. Ibid. The
Popes presiding therein, contrary to no Law, Divine, Natural, or Humane; but
his undoubted Right. page 230, 231, 232 The Pope, no more the person to be
reformed, at the Council of Trent, then at those of Nice and Chalcedon page 232
The place, as indifferently chosen for all parties, as could be. page 233 The
Summons general, and exclusive of none, that had right of Suffrage. Ibid. No
Oath taken by the Bishops, but what was Canonical, and of more then a thousand
years use in the Church. Ibid. The Sum of it. Ibid. Some English Catholic
Bishops, present in that Council. page 234 Want of Deputation from the English
Clergy, no just impediment to their Sitting and Voting there. Ibid. For number
of Prelates, this Council more Full, then some of the four first. Ibid. The
Prelates unanimous, in their consent to all things defined by it. Ibid. No
material Disparity betwixt the Council of Trent, and that of Nice. page 234,
235, 237 The consent of the Church, at the time of the Council of Trent, as
much against Protestants, as at the Council of Nice, against the Arians. page
235 The Italian Bishops no prejudice to the Councils Liberty. page 236 What the
Popes Interest was, at the Council of Trent. page 236, 237 The Bishops there,
neither overaw'd, nor biased by the Popes Interest. page 237
Will, or Testament.
Catholics in no sense maintain, that Christ dyed Intestate, or without a
Will. page 214
FINIS.
The Author does desire the Reader, to correct these following Errata with his
Pen.
PAge 11. line 48. for the Articles still, read the Miters still: page 16. line
4. for this supposition, read his supposition: p. 18. at these words Some
modern Protestants, beginning the Paragraph, add the figure 5. and p. 19. at
these, This I evidence, add the figure 6. p. 50. l. 23. ending the Paragraph,
there wants the interrogative point: Ibid. l. 33. for strangeis, r. strangers:
p. 64. l. ult. for standing, r. standing: p. 103. l. 5. for of our, r. of ours:
p. 238. l. 38. for Shismatique, r. Schismatique: p. 244. l. 18. for have have,
r. have: p. 253. l. 39. for Naziazen, r. Nazianzen: p. 257. l. 5. for cuinces,
r. evinces: Ibid. l. 10. for pronuncing, r. pronouncing: p. 259. l. 28. for as
lawfully, r. lawfully: p 260. l. 16. for lawful assembly, r. awful assembly:
p. 265, l. 1, 2, 3. deleantur all these following words, To this the replying
Bishop seems to broach a new Doctrine, THAT THE ASSENT OF FAITH MAY BE AN HABIT
OF KNOWLEDGE: p. 267. l. ult. in the margin, for chapter 8. 2. r. chapter 8. 20. p.
269. l. 18. for difine, r. define: p. 270. l. 3. for enery, r. every: Ibid. l.
12. for else nothing, r. nothing else: Ibid. l. 29. for erroneous, r.
erroneous: Item l. 12. in the margin, for Laicis, r. a Laicis: p. 271. l. 36
for Sacrament, r. a Sacrament: p. 275. l. 4. for ke, r. he: p. 276. l. 35. for
don, r. done: Ibid. l. 44. for notes, r. votes: p. 277. l. 1. for this, r. his:
p. 278. l. 35. for day, r. Sunday: Ibid. l. penult. for Cycly, r. Cicli. p.
279. l. 6. for Quarto-decimam, r. Quarto-decimani: Ibid. l. 8. for Avsntinus,
r. Aventinus: p. 280. l. 14. for Stripture, r. Scripture: Ibid. l. 33. for
might, r. mouth: Ibid. l. 38. for stilll iveth, r. still lives: Item. l. and
voce ult. for thta, r. that. p. 285. l. 48. for schole-men, r. Schoolmen: p.
287. l. 44. for nonc, r. none: p. 292. l. 13. for Cristianity, r. Christianity:
p. 293. l. 12. for our, r. our: Ibid. for the, r. the: Ibid. l. 16. for Mow, r.
Now: Item l. 23. for interceede, r. intercede: p. 294. l. 10. for intellible,
r. intelligible: Ibid. l. 34. for Images with a full point, read Images with
the latter part of a Parenthesis: p. 297. l. 2. in the margin, for 36, 286 r.
36. page 286. Ibid. l. 6. join 1564. number. 26. to the words ad Ann. l. 5. p.
298. l. 5. for intruction, r. instruction: p. 299. in the Argument of chap. 23.
mend. the pointing, and for confess it. Safe, r. confess it safe: p. 300. at
the beginning of the Chapter, add in the margin 34. p. 304. l. 5. for Divine
Faith necessary, r. Divine Faith is necessary: p. 305. l. 13. for sure, r. so
sure: Ibid. l. 31. for the, r. thee: Item l. 38. for in us to, r. in us, to: p.
306. l. 41. for assigns the, r. assigns thee: p. 307. l. 42. for Gods words, r.
Gods word: p. 309. l. 30. for Christ body, r. Christ's Body: Ibid. l. 42. for
tediousness, r. tediousness: p. 313. l. 15. for boued, r. bowed: Ibid. l. 13.
for then she, r. then she: p. 322. l. 9. in the Argument, mend the pointing,
and for doctrine, and, r. doctrine; and: p. 327. l. 12. for Diviunity, r.
Divinity: p. 331. l. 19. for therenhile, r. therewhile: Ibid. l. 40. for
condemned, r. condemned: Ibid. l. 42. for particular, r. particular: p. 337. l.
27. for aniversary, r. anniversary: Ibid. l. 37. for the General, r. the sixth
General: p. 338. l. 45. for Fonndation, r. Foundation: p. 340. l. 22. for
infallible assurance, r. fallible assurance: p. 343. l. 1, 15. for writtings,
r. writings: p. 344. l. 31. for I answer, r. In answer: Ibid. l. 46. for in
evident, r. inevident: p. 347. l. 15. for tells, r. tell: Ibid. l. 47. for
points; in his, r. points in his: p. 352. l. 20 for well-grounden, r.
well-grounded: p. 355. l. 25. for lawfully soever, r. lawful soever: p. 356. l.
20. for giving, r. given: Ibid. l. 28. for and and, r. and: p. 357. l. 30. for
Heretics, r. Heretic: p. 360. l. 5. for Ancients, r. the Ancients: p. 363. l.
6. for plumby, r. plumbi: p. 365. l. 16. for 1 c. 3. r. 1. Cor. c. 3. p. 369.
l. 34. for of his holy, r. of this holy: p. 370. l. 16 for nature proceed, r.
nature to proceed: Ibid. l. 24. for reast, r. rest: Item l. 45. for souls, r.
the souls: p. 371. l. 32. for contempory, r. contemporary: p. 373. l. 25. for
dever'd, r. delivered: p. 376. l. 46. for Fundamental points, r. Fundamental
and not-Fundamental points: p 378. l. 5. for stongly, r. strongly: Ibid. l. 21.
for General Council, r, a General Council: p. 380. l. 24, for treahs, r.
treats: p. 382. 1. 5. for man, r. may: p. 388. 1. 2. for sut, r. sit. p. 390.
the citation 38. number. 27. in the margin, must be brought down to the beginning
of the Chapter. Ibid. in the Argument, 1. 9. for (...) lawful, r. lawful by: p.
397. 1. 42. for her root, r. her own root: Ibid. 1. 43. for in own, r. in her
own: p. 399. 1. 25. for Eccles, r. Ecclus: p. 404. 1. 30. for fallow, r.
follow: p. 406. 1. 32. for this own, r. his own: p. 409. 1. ult. for universa,
r. universality: p. 411. 1. 1. for to the, r. of the: Ibid. 1. 43. for hane, r.
have: p. 412. 1. 19. for Schims, r. Schisms. In the Preface, p. 5. 1. 19. for
shipped, r. slipped: Ibid. p. 6. 1. 7. for beside, read aside.


