TWO SERMONS Preached in the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH OF BRISTOL, JANVARY the 30th
168079. AND JANVARY the 31th 1680/1. BEING The days of Public HUMILIATION FOR
The EXECRABLE MURDER OF King CHARLES the First.

-- accipe nostro
Dira quod exemplum seritas produxerit aevo.
Juven. Sat. 15. By SAMVEL CROSSMAN, B.D.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, and to be sold by Charles Allen in Bristol.
1681.

To the Right Worshipful Sir RICHARD HEART Knight. MAYOR of the City of Bristol.
SIR,
YOur own and the joynt-desires of others having rendered these Melancholy
Discourses thus public, you must now be pleased in course to accept of them.

The prodigious Discomposures of our Times, cannot but occasion great thoughts
of heart with all sober persons: and it were a most amazing Infelicity, if we
who might live together with so much mutual Comfort, should quarrel our selves
into common Misery.

These solemn Fasts may serve as sad Remembrancers to show us where we lost our
way, that we wander so wretchedly no more.

The ways of Faction in the State, they are (as one has well observed of
Separation in the Church) A Labyrinth wherein men tire themselves, Mr. John*
Ball.
and grow giddy, as in a maze; but when all is done, there is no way out but
that whereby they entered in.

(...). Arist. Eth. l. 8. c. 12.
Now if Monarchy be (as our greatest Writers tell us) the best of Governments,
and Popularity the very dregs and worst; our Peace and Welfare bound up in the
one, our War and Calamities brought in by the other; we may then fairly hope
all wise men will reflect with the deeper sorrow upon our late Confusions, and
hold themselves greatly concerned to consist the more steadily with that happy
Restoration which God in so much mercy has vouchsafed to us. God has granted
it, and every true Englishman will be highly thank-ful for it.

Sir, I cannot but heartily acknowledge your worthy conduct of Affairs in that
great Trust committed to you. God Almighty enable you to continue therein with
that Integrity and Vprightness, that Prudence and Resolution, which becomes a
good Christian, a good Magistrate, and a good Subject. Which is the daily
affectionate desire and prayer of

Right Worshipful, Your very humble, and truly respectful Servant, Samuel
Crossman.
Bristol, Feb. 28. 1680/1.
TWO SERMONS Preached in the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH OF BRISTOL. JANVARY the 30th
1679/80. AND JANVARY the 31th 1680/1. BEING Days of HUMILIATION FOR The
EXECRABLE MURDER Of our late Sovereign King Charles I.

By SAMVEL CROSSMAN, B. D.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, and to be sold by Charles Allen in Bristol.
1681.

The first SERMON.
LAMENTATIONS 4. 20. The breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord was
taken in their pits; of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the
heathen.


OUR Sorrows should always bear some due proportion to the just magnitude of
their causes. In most of the troubles incident to humane life, a Sigh may
suffice; We should weep as if we wept not; with a bridle of Restraint and
Moderation, wisely laid upon our Affections. But some Calamities being of a far
deeper nature, every good man may be allowed, in reference to them, Isai. 22.4.
to say as the Prophet, Look away from me, for I will weep bitterly, because of
the spoiling of the daughter of my people. Both Humanity and Piety oblige us to
hang up our Harps, and to sit down as persons astonished, whose grief is very
great.

The mourning of this day, it is upon diverse accounts (as they said of the
Patriarck Jacob's Funeral) a grievous mourning: England's Sorrow, and England's
Shame.

As to the Sanction of it, it is (like that of Nineve) by the decree of the King
and his Nobles; blowing the Trumpet in Zion, proclaiming this Fast, calling
these solemn Assemblies, that the Inhabitants of the whole Land might tremble.

As to the grounds of it, it is an Humiliation for the barbarous shedding of
Royal Blood, the inhumane parricide of the sacred Father of our Country: An
offense so heinous in the just aggravations of it, that we might say as once
Daniel in another case, Under the whole heavens has not been done as has been
done here in England.

We have risen up, the Feet against the Head, the Servants against the Lord of
the Vineyard; rebelliously saying as those wretches in the Gospel, We will not
have this man to reign over us. We have been open fighters against God and his
Anointed; too far verifying that sad story, (...). Apol.
Tot de Diis, quot de gentibus triumphi: So many Battles, so many Attempts
against God himself; so many Victories, so many Triumphs over the Ark and
Religion. Lord, we beseech thee, let us see no more of these Triumphs, no more
of these joyless Thanksgivings in our Land.

^alvian.
'Twas then written in Characters of Blood, Atrocius sub Sancti nominis
professione peccatur: We call our selves Saints, and then take leave to play
the Devils. A specious Profession becomes villainously usurped, to patronize
the most horrid actions.

In this case we must not think hardly of our Governors, if they deal by us as
Moses by the Children of Israel; when they had in that popular tumultuous fit
of impatience made that golden Calf, Exodus 32. 20.
it is said. He burnt it in the fire, he grownd it to powder, he strewn it upon
the water, and made the Children of Israel drink of it. And this he did upon
great deliberation, ut majorem eis peccati nauseam induceret, that they might
hereby become the more ashamed and sick of their sin.

The like penance have our Moses's enjoined us this day. These Anniversary
Humiliations, they do (as it were) lay the Royal Body of our late slaughtered
Sovereign bleeding afresh before us, accusing us as the Betrayers and Murderers
of it.

We read of God, he took a far greater notice of Abel's murder than the
Murderer himself was willing to do: Genesis 4.10.
The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me; God hears what Cain (it seems)
would not. Guilt is a sullen froward thing. I am sorry at the angry Objections
of many against these solemn Fasts, as if they were a needless Reproach
continued upon the Land. I hope for our parts we shall rather from year to year
(as becoming good Christians, and good Subjects) more ingenuously accept this
punishment of our iniquity, acknowledge our sin, and renew the firmest
Resolutions that we will offend no more.

This whole Book is styled, A book of Lamentations. Our ancient Poets Tragedies
seem but Comical Plays, compared with the unparalled mournfulness of this
Scene: A weeping Jeremy, a person skilful in Lamentations, is chosen to be the
Penman to these divine (...), these pathetick Elegies. He proves the best
Orator for God, that speaks from the very heart, that draws the life of his
Eloquence from his own internal sense of what he delivers unto others.

The Church and State, Prince and Priest, Throne and Altar, they are all
brought in by the Prophet as clothed in mourning. 1 Samuel 4.10, 11.
If the Ark be taken in one verse, the same sad story tells us all Israel is
smitten in another. We may humourously attempt to divide; but in all History
they live or die together.

While the Prophet thus weeps over the Calamities of Gods Zion and Jerusalem,
Graviter gemitus imo de pectore ducens, he breaks forth into this of the Text,
as a memorial of sorrow never to be forgotten by him, The breath of our
nostrils, the anointed of the Lord, etc.

In the verse we have to consider, 1. The person spoken of, who it is the
Prophet here means. 2. The Calamity into which he fell, he was taken in their
pits. 3. The honorary Character here given him, the Anointed of the Lord. 4.
The Jews concern in his weal or woe; he was the breath of their nostrils, under
whose shadow they might have lived among the heathen.

I. The person spoken of, who that should be. I answer, Not Josiah, (as some
have conceived;) he was already gathered to his fathers in peace, honorably
interred amongst the royal Sepulchers of his Ancestors, his eyes closed with
all due Funeral-rites, some time before these tragic evils so fatally broke
forth. Our several seasons of life and death, when we enter the Stage and when
we go off, they are all in Gods hands.

Three Kings had now successively reigned after Josiah; Zedekiah the third, in
whose time all these amazing miseries, so pathetically here described, befell
Jerusalem.

Whatever personal failures might be in Zedekiah, Rex tamen and typus Christi,
says one, (no great favourer otherwise of Monarchy) Zedekiah was nevertheless a
crowned Head, and Type of Christ; Sovereign of the true (...), the City of the
great King, the Imperial Princess among the Provinces.

Such was the Person, no Plebeian; but one of Royal Extraction, of the true
House and Lineage of David; and now raised (though in a tempestuous conjuncture
of Affairs) to sit on the Throne of his pious Father Josiah.

And has our Prophet such tears of Loyalty wherewith to condole this Princes
Fall? Certainly, my Brethren, our eyes must not be dry.

1. If Isreal's Zedekiah fell, 'twas not without great personal blemishes in
himself. 2 King. 24.19.
He did (says the Text) that which was evil in the sight of the Lord. But our
late Sovereign, a person of that stupendous exemplariness, so amiable in
whatever might become him as a Christian, in whatever might adorn him as a
Prince, that his Piety became at last his Crime; his Love to Gods Church, the
ground of his Hatred with the Rabble. He is stoned for his good works: He is
invidiously aspersed as affected to Popery; yet dies in the professed Communion
of this Reformed Church: The Defender of it, a Martyr for it. He is odiously
upbraided as designing Arbitrary ways of Empire and Tyranny; yet dies, because
he could not in conscience give up those great things of Church and State,
Religion and Law, our true Magna Charta, the Body of our ancient English
Government, to the tumultuous wills of violent and unreasonable men.

2. If Zedekiah fell, 'twas at Babylon, above six hundred miles from his own
Kingdom. The very place was no less than Exile, and the distance a most certain
exposure to all inevitable dangers. But lo here (though under different
circumstances) a far sadder story; Our Sovereign, after an Iliad of other
preceding indignities, is murdered at his own Royal Gates, in the very face of
his Court and Palace. He is first barbarously driven away by rude Tumults,
after that forcibly brought back again by bloody Soldiers; full often (as
himself so lively expresses it) did he change his Keepers and Prison, but not
his Captive condition: And at last the woeful upshot proves, (as David said
concerning Ishbosheth) Wicked men came upon this righteous person, and slew him
even in his own house; the walls and windows being the sad Spectators both of
his Fall and our Treason.

3. If Zedekiah fell, 'twas by the hands of profane Pagans, Nebuchadnezzar's
unruly Janissaries, not by his own Subjects: Zedekiah's Murderers, their very
temper was Cruelty, their nature Rage; verifying the sour character Gods
Prophet gives of them, Hab. 1.6.
A bitter and hasty nation. They breathed out no better than Blood and
Slaughter. In this case the utmost Inhumanities could be no Surprise; all
manner of Misery, and Death it self, the fairest Quarter that could be
expected; where the Turtle was amongst such ravening Vultures, and the Lamb in
the midst of such savage Lions. But lo here, horresco referens, our Sovereign
falls under far other hands.

With civilized Nations, the mildness of their Education is accounted security
enough against the irruptions of Violence; where Government is received, the
Laws yield Protection; where the sacred profession of Christian Religion takes
place, we are still bound to a far better behavior of the quietest
peacefulness in our places: But alas, all these divine Bands were here
contemptuously broken asunder; and then of course, upon the violation of them,
this execrable and horrible thing became committed in our Land.

'Twas not an Enemy that did it; 'twould then have been more easily born: 'Twas
the servant who had eat of his Masters bread, that here lift up his heel; 'twas
the Subject who had solemnly sworn to bear true Homage and Fealty, that now (
Zimri-like) conspired and slew his Sovereign. Oh what Declarations and
Protestations (as the language of those times then went) that they would make
him a most glorious Prince! What solemn Appeals to God and the world touching
the Loyalty and Integrity of their hearts! Now what danger can possibly be
suspected, where so much kindness is pretended? In ipso sceleris molimine
Tereus creditur esse pius. No such Friends in words, yet no such Foes in deeds.
Oh how wretchedly did we then dissemble both with God and man! staining as well
our holy Profession, as our own Names to all Posterity. But no words can
express these Villainies so lively as his who suffered them: (...).
I die (says his sacred Majesty) a King, by the hands of my own Subjects; a
violent, sudden, and barbarous death; in the strength of my years, in the midst
of my Kingdom; my Friends and loving Subjects being helpless Spectators, my
Enemies insolent Revilers, and Triumphers over me. His comfort was (as himself
so composedly relates it) If he thus died a violent death with his Savior, the
sequel would be happily this, Mortality would be thereby crowned with
Martyrdom.

4. If Zedekiah fell, yet we read not of any indecent measures used toward him
in matters of Religion. When the King of Assyria had carried away Israel not
long before captive, and had transplanted another people into the Holy Land, we
find he gave express order, 2 King. 17.27.
that a Priest from among the Captives should go and dwell at Bethel to teach
and observe the stated Rites of Religion formerly used amongst them.

But with us the case strangely alters: Many can impetuously demand liberty of
Conscience for themselves, as the immediate Redress to all our Grievances, the
only Salve to every Sore, a Kindness that should be withheld from none: Yet
after all these oily words to please the deluded people, we may find our
Sovereign in his Restraint entreating the attendance and comfort of his
Chaplains, whom for their Function he reverenced, and for their Fidelity (he
was pleased to say) he loved them: But alas, he is churlishly denied. He often
requested it (as himself tells us) hoping that by the help of their Learning,
Baker's Chron. 548 (...).
Piety, and Prayers, he might the better sustain the want of all other
Enjoyments. But still he receives no better than harsh Repulses to his most
Christian harmless Desires. What was so modestly asked by so great a person, in
so distressed a condition, might it seems by no means be heard. God keep all
Princes from lying at such Subjects mercies. Nor would they indeed suffer so
much as a book of Divine Service to be allowed him for his own private use. The
Gates were thrown wide open to take in the Trojan Horse, the utmost
licentiousness to all wild novel Opinions; but no liberty for that Divine
Service so advisedly established, so often confirmed by fundamental Laws. Lord!
what Monsters are Subjects when once Rebels?

II. Concerning the Calamity into which Zedekiah fell, it is said, he was taken
in their pits; as the Bird into the Fowlers Snare, as the chased Deer into the
Hunters Toil. The Hunters were the Babylonians; the Game they pursued and
sought for, was Zedekiah. He fell into their hands as into a pit of
destruction, from whence he never came forth again. (...) so the Hebrew. (...),
so the Septuagint; a word which the Grecians use in the immediate sense of the
Text, (...), so Demost. Zedekiah fell into the fatal Slaughterhouse, where he
was dispoil'd of Life and Crown, inhumanely butchered, and made away.

Several Transactions of Remark passed between Zedekiah and our Prophet, during
the Siege of Jerusalem by the Babylonians (as we find Jer. 37.) but the sad
issue proved, Hostis habet muros, the rude Enemy at last entered into the
Sanctuary; Gods Holy Temple was now defiled, and Jerusalem made an heap of
Stones. The Prince himself taken and bound in Chains, carried Prisoner to
Riblah: where his Children were first slain before his face, then his eyes most
barbarously plucked out, and after that his royal person dragged with all
circumstances of scorn as an abject Captive to Babylon. So true is that ancient
Proverb, The tenderest Mercies of some men are little better than savage
Cruelties. Oh what sore and unexpected measures may even Majesty it self meet
with from the hands of cruel and blood-thirsty men! Heaven only yields what
Earth cannot; a perfect Freedom from all Violence. Thrones (the highest of
Seats) have their dangers. Happy are those Princes, who wrapping up themselves
in Gods Grace and their own Innocence, can say (as our late Sovereign) They are
not sollicitous what wrong they suffer from man, while they retain in their own
Souls what is right in the sight of God.

III. The Honourary Character here given him, it is this: The Anointed of the
Lord. One severed from the rest of the people, and advanced to Sovereignty;
(...), The Lords Messiah, the Lord Christ. Such high, such honorable Language
does our Prophet think meet to mention his Prince in. It Is not the coarse
Northern Salute, Good morrow King Jeamy for all day; nor is it the Southern
Quakerism more demurely canted, Plain Charles Steward. A good Nathan, his
gestures and words shall freely declare the profound Reverence his very Heart
bears to Majesty: 1 King. 1.23, 24.
And Nathan bowed himself before the King with his face to the ground, and
said, My Lord, oh King! Certainly Rudeness is not Religion.

The same God that has anointed his own Son as our Spiritual Messiahs for our
eternal Salvation in Heaven, has likewise anointed Princes as our Civil Messiah
for our temporal Preservation here on Earth.

This divine Unction, 'twas aromatic and fragrant, rich and costly,
significant and instructive; poured forth as a mysterious inauguration, in
token of those Princely Endowments, in testimony of that transcendent Majesty
which God herewith conveyed.

'Twas Armor of proof for Safety, a Robe of Honor for Royalty: And there
needed no more to bespeak the deepest Reverence, to attract the highest Love,
to exact the awfullest Respects, or to fix the truest Allegiance, than this
single consideration, Gods Anointed.

'Twas this that swayed so far with David while Saul was yet alive: 1 Samuel 26.9.
And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? He speaks as in a holy passion,
as one greatly moved at the hainousness of this bold Solicitation. Nolo hanc
mihi extorqueri obedientiam: as if David had said, No, no; Abishai, thou
seem my friend, but art my foe: Get thee behind me, Satan, I will never
suffer my Loyalty to be thus wrested out of my hands: This fair advantage
before me may serve to clear my Innocence; but it shall never tempt me to
Rebellion: Saul is the Lords Anointed to me, and I must be a true Liege-Subject
to him.

'Twas this that aggravated the case so highly when Saul was soon after slain.
2 Samuel 1.14.
And David said to him (that is, to the young man, the Amalekite) How wast thou
not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the Lords Anointed? Saul had
fairly spared the Amalekites to his own ruin. That very people whom he had so
far sheltered, contrary to Gods express command, even they can now afford the
person that shall destroy him. Whosoever is wise, will consider it; prudent, and he
will lay these weighty Memoires of Holy Scripture seriously to heart.

The Jewish Writers tell us, this young man was the Son of Doeg, that cruel
wretch who imbrued his hands in the blood of above fourscore Priests, the
Ministers of the Lord that wore a linen Ephod, for no other fault than the
innocent discharge of their sacred Function. The very Ministry, and the
faithful Services of it, are crime enough in some men's eyes. Doeg himself (as
diverse circumstances seem to imply) was at this time Readiness Armor-bearer; who
seeing the issues of that fatal battle on Mount Gilboa, and foreseeing how
little favor he could expect from David, whom he had so highly offended; in
the depth of despair falls upon his own Sword. But before he thus dies with his
Master, he calls his Son to him; he gives him Readiness Crown and Bracelets, that
by these Presents he might make his peace with David, when he himself was dead
and gone.

But now see, my Brethren! behold and see the wakefulness of divine Vengeance;
Lo the severe hand of a just God upon the bloody malicious Family. That
terrible Prediction which had hung for some time as a drawn-sword over Doeg and
his House, was now visibly fulfilled: God shall destroy thee for ever, Psalm.
52.5
he shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy dewlling place, and root
thee out of the land of the living. 2 Samuel 1.15.
God had spoken it, and God made it good: And David called one of the young
men, and said, Go near, and fall upon him. And he smote him that he died. Let
not man dare to wound, where God anoints.

Tibi summum rerum judicium Dii dedere, Tacitus Annal. l. 6.
nobis obsequii gloria relicta est, said that Roman Knight, with a rare
modesty, to the Emperor. He that has given his Anointed Authority over us,
the same God has left us the honor of a quiet and peaceable submission unto
him. It Is our Duty, and it is no less our Glory. The smallest Star may shine as
truly as the Sun. The Subject may as well adorn his Sphere as the Prince: Every
one in his proper Orb. May our light, in our several places, so shine, that men
may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

Baker's Chron. 742
This emblematical anointing has been the ancient way of investiture to our
British Kings, and is still so continued at their Coronations. They are
anointed on the Head, in token of Superiority; upon the Breast, as an
obligement to Sanctity; on both the Arms, in signification of Royal Strength
and Authority.

Now where God is thus pleased (as in David's case) to say, Psalm. 89.20, 21, 22.
With my holy oil have I anointed him; we can do no less than religiously take
up the ensuing words as our proper Respond, Oh let thy hand establish him, and
thine arm strengthen him. Beat down his foes before his face, and let thy
faithfulness and mercy be with him for ever.

IV. The fourth and last particular is Israel's concernment in their Princes
weal or woe. He was the breath of their Nostrils. M^noch.
Nobis aeque dilectus ac spiritus vitalis: As if the Church had said, Our Vital
breath is not more dear to us, than the safety of our Sovereign.

We all observe, there is nothing more immediately requisite to this natural
life, than our breath. Such is Government to our civil life; such the true weal
of our Governors in the esteem of Holy Scripture. The phrase before us, it is
not a complemental flourish of gay Oratory, no vain Hyperbole of
Court-flattery. The words, they are the words of Truth and Soberness, the
Language of solid Divinity, the express Assertion of Almighty God and his
Prophet, that we might receive them with the greater reverence. The breath of
our nostrils, in whom the whole body of the Kingdom (as it were) lives, and
moves, and has its well-being.

One (it may be) in a sullen frowardness murmurs, his Princes manner of life
it is too splendid, his Crown too imperial, his Throne too radiant, his Court
too noble, his Train too numerous, his Revenues too large, and his Guards too
awful: Nay, but who art thou, oh man, that thus quarrellest against the breath
of thine own Nostrils? When the Hands and Feet in the Fable were so mutinous
against the Stomach, a little time sufficiently convinced them, the conspiracy
'twas rather against themselves. To suffocate the Breath, is to destroy the
Body.

When the Queen of Sheba had seen the unparalled Royalties, the Order and
Administration of Solomon's Court, instead of carping with splenetick Censures,
she breaks forth into Ejaculations of the highest joy and praise: 1 King. 10.9.
Blessed be the Lord thy God which delighted in thee, to set thee upon the
Throne of Israel; because the Lord loved Israel for ever. He that delighted in
Solomon, did still as truly love Israel: The raising of the one, 'twas no
despising of the other.

The condition of the Jews (under our Text) was through their many provocations
against God, brought now very low: that City which had been sometime Princess
amongst the Provinces, was now tributary. 'Twas however a great comfort to
them, under their many other sorrows, that they had yet a King of their own:
his presence they reckoned as their very life; Under his shadow we shall live
among the heathen. They hoped in him to reap the fruits of that comfortable
promise between Prince and People; Isai. 32, 2.
He shall be an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest: as
rivers of water in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great rock in a weary
land. Now his single Death clothed the whole Land in Mourning.

Thus David's Worthies concluded, if their Prince fell, the lamp of Israel
would be forthwith quenched. Sub regno tuo tanquam sub luce: Cajetan.
as if they said to David. While thou art with us it is day; if we lose thee,
it is likely then to be a dark and dismal night.

From the greatness of our concern herein (it may be) it became so weighty a
Maxim in the Law, Crompton.
Rex non potest mori: The King cannot die. In his natural personal capacity, he
is mortal; but in his Royal political capacity, he is immortal. That the body
of the Kingdom might not perish for want of a never-dying Soul to animate and
enliven it, that there might be no Chasm, no evil befalling the Kingdom; the
Law reckons, that at the very instant of the Sovereigns death, by a kind of
State- Metempsychosis, the Sovereignty becomes immediately transfused to the
next Heir of the Crown.

Of all Nations, we in this Island may thankfully say as the Church, The breath
of our nostrils. We have been here under the government of Kings beyond the
utmost Records of all History: So that multitude of days seem to tell us, in
point of prudence as well as conscience, we should now fear God and the King,
and not meddle with them that are given to change.

Of all Nations (in the acknowledgement of foreign Writers) we may modestly
boast what none else can, Britannia omnium provinciarum prima publicitus
Christi nomen recepit: Sabell. Enn. 7. l. 5.
'Twas Britain that yielded the first Christian King, by whose piety we also
became the first professed Christian people. 'Twas Britain that yielded the
first Christian Emperor, so great a blessing to the whole Church of God.

'Twas still under the same good conduct of Kings, that we were brought to this
happy state of Reformation whereat we now stand: And if there be any thing
which at this day either dishonours or endangers us, it is our want of that due
consistence which we owe thereto.

We have been rescued by these Jerubbaals from the Usurpations of Popery over
our State, deposing our Kings, and disposing of their Crowns as the Pope
pleased; by secret Artifices withdrawing and alienating the minds of Subjects
from their bounden Allegiance to their Princes; abetting Seditions and
Rebellions, as best served his ends: And now shall we tread in the same
perverse steps? God forbid. Shall we do the same things which we so justly
condemn in others? Shall we traitorously depose or murder Kings? Shall we dare
to dispose of their Crowns as every popular Tumult shall happen to incline? far
be it from us. What is so bad in a Pope, is scarce much better in the People.

We have been recovered by these Jerubbaeals from the corruptions of Popery in
our Church: They have gone (as our Savior into the Temple) with authority and
zeal, casting out the abuses that had crept into Gods house. They have left the
state of divine worship so deliberately reformed in our Liturgy, that (in the
judgment of our greatest sufferers under Queen Mary's Reign) no Christian
Conscience could be offended at any thing therein contained. Dr. Tailors Acts
and Monum.
And shall we now turn Gods Grace into Wantonness? Shall we grow weary of our
own Mercies, as persons sick of that good Reformation which has received so
honorable, so respectful a right hand of Fellowship from the reformed Churches
abroad? We may not, we may not; and I hope we shall not.

Are we happily set free from the follies and trifles of former Superstitions,
and shall we now instead of them, choose new Gods, Gods newly sprung up, such as
our Fathers, the ancient Church, and Primitive Christians never knew? Such
lenities they may indeed please us, but (as our ignes fatui) they will most
certainly mislead us.

The extremes of the circumference may seem strangely opposite one to the
other; and yet both equally distant from the center of Truth. It Is not much
odds whether it be frenzy on this hand, or on that: God in his mercy keep us
from either.

To draw toward a close, I see I must at present forbear what I would very
willingly have added. Let Israel's Lamentation, become England's Instruction:
And the Churches deep Sighs thus mournfully expressed in the Text, may they
excite the like pious sense throughout the Assembly.

We must not by any means flatter our selves concerning the black action of
this day. It Is well known (and I wish it may be as well laid to heart) how
great an abhorrence primitive Christians had of such execrable Crimes. We may
easily find Albinians, or Nigrians, or Cassians, that is, Mutineers and Rebels
amongst you Romans; Tertull.
(says one who lived within less than 200 years of Christ:) but (says he) you
shall never find any of this seditious turbulent humor amongst us Christians.

Julian himself (how bitter soever, yet) fairly vindicates the Christians of
those times in this point: If any (says he) carry themselves disorderly toward
their Sovereign, (...). that is, the rest of the Church immediately inflict the
most severe punishments upon them. Rebellion against lawful Authority, violence
against the Lords Anointed, this heinous spot 'twas not then the spot of Gods
Children.

2 Samuel 20.1.
And is it now ours? Have we, as Shebah, lift up our rebellious hands against
our David? We must then mourn out the rest of the day, and set our selves in
the greatest seriousness to bring forth fruits meet for all unfeigned
Repentance in this sad case the rest of our life.

This 'twas the great confidence of his late Majesty, as himself mentions it in
his Advice to our present Sovereign: You shall receive it in his own Princely
words. None (says he) will be more loyal and faithful to me and you, (...).
than those Subjects who being sensible of their Errors and our Injuries, will
feel in their own Souls most vehement motives to Repentance, and earnest
desires to make some reparations for their former defects.

He has promised it; oh let us perform it: And we shall thereby translate our
Prophets mournful lamentations into Anthems of praise; and this Song shall be
yet sung in our Land, The breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord,
sits in honor and safety upon his throne, environed with the love and
loyalty of his people, under whose shadow we live in peace among the nations.
And let all true Christians and true Englishmen, say,

AMEN.
The second SERMON.
LAMENTATIONS 4.20. The breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord was
taken in their pits; of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the
heathen.


UPon the like mournful Solemnity the last year, we sat down and wept with this
sad Elegy. We found the Scene too truly in England, the doleful Tragedy here,
and our selves the wretched Actors of it. 'Twere but a joyless question to ask,
as in the Poet, -- quae causa indigna serenos
Foedavit vultus, Virgil.
aut cur haec vulnera cerno?
Oh how comes Majesty to be thus basely, thus barbarously treated? What mean
such Instruments of Cruelty about the mourning Scaffold? Such numerous Troops
of armed Assassinates so furiously raging with that cursed cry, Crucify him,
crucify him: or in their own Language, Justice, Justice; that is, in plainer
terms, We will have the King's Blood.

Such were our woeful Outrages. And instead of excusive Palliations, we must
with one common blush confess, So it was.

Our Prophet's Jerusalem bleeds with us in Britain. The Zedekiah in the Text,
proves to be our own Sovereign. The Pit wherein he was taken, the traitorous
hands of his ungrateful rebellious Subjects. The Honorary Character here given
to him, every way as proper in our case, the Anointed, the eminently Anointed
of the Lord. And our concernment in his Weal or Woe, as deep as Israel's could
possibly be in Zedekiah's. Our Prince was also the very Breath of our Nostrils;
and under his shadow, had not we our selves laid violent bloody hands upon him,
we might have lived with much comfort, with much happiness and honor amongst
the Nations. You have already received some abrupt account of these several
particulars: the sadness of the matter invites not to any fresh insistance upon
them.

It Is the Glory of God, that he is able to bring good out of evil. 'Twill be at
present our work from the remains of this Text, as far as we can, humbly to
imitate God in so divine an Art, and to make trial what good improvement we can
likewise draw from so horrid, so great an evil; and that shall be twofold.

1. To make our penitential Lamentation together, for what was this day done.

2. To adjure one another to the utmost Allegiance, Loyalty, and Duty, as our
preventives from relapsing into the like Villainies any more. All curious
discourses may now be very well spared; the plainest matter (if truly
pertinent) will be to this sad occasion most proper.

The first and fairest expression of our Piety, in reference to so unparalled
a Murder, were plainly this: To bear a due sense of it, and to melt into a
truly penitential sorrow for it. If David's heart so deeply smote him because
he had cut off the skirt of Readiness Garment, how severely then ought our hearts
to smite us, who have cut off not the Garment but the person; our Sovereign
himself from the land of the living?

But sins (especially of this nature) are sooner committed, St. Aug.
than repented of. Peccare non pudet -- de ligatura vulneris erubescit. Where
we could well enough brook the sin, we can by no means bear the shame. And it is
one very hard abodement upon England at this day, that we are so loath
ingenuously to acknowledge our iniquity in this particular.

I shall therefore, that I may the better promote that great humiliation which
the day so earnestly calls for, lay before you these few aggravating
considerations.

1. The violence this day committed; 'twas a most high affront to that
Signature of Sacredness, wherewith God has invested the persons of Princes. He
has said (and certainly he has not said it in vain) Ye are God: Psalm. 82.6.
A kind of terrestrial Angels; Heavens Viceroys, 1 Chronicles. 29.23.
sitting (as was said of Solomon) upon the throne of the Lord. 'Twas Solomon's
Throne, and yet God's: 'Twas God's Throne, and yet Solomon's. 'Twas God's in
way of donation, Solomon's in way of possession. And this in a true propriety
of speech, Sic omnes throni Principum Dei throni dici possunt. Lavator in locum.
Neither was this Solomon's single prerogative. The Thrones of all other Kings,
the Thrones of our Kings, they are no less than the Thrones of God; that we
might always look with the more aweful reverence upon them.

The Jews tell us, that man in his primitive condition had a bright mark set
upon him, which they called (...) Pavor, at the sight whereof all inferior
Creatures stood in awe, and became subject to him: And this upon man's Apostasy,
they say, became in a great measure lost. We may safely say this orient
Signature it is fairly visible upon the persons of Princes, that their Subjects
might fear and tremble before them. Oh let not us by our Rebellions attempt to
deface it.

It Is of some moment this way, what we find reported concerning our own Realm.
If a Villain pursued by his mean Lord, could but come and prostrate himself ad
sacra vestigia, Plowden.
that is, at the Kings sacred feet, he was then esteemed as one safe at
Sanctuary, his Pursuer might now trouble him no further.

And is the royal presence such an unquestionable Asylum to others? Oh then let
Reason and Modesty judge how Sacred must the royal person it self be to the
Consciences of all good men.

From the deep sense of this Sacredness it is, that the Addresses of religious
persons to Majesty, are usually tendered in Holy Scripture with the utmost
lowliness; As an Angel of God, 2 Samuel 14.17.
so is my Lord the King. The Princes Sphere, it is an Angelical Sphere; and in
our access to such, we stand before those who are already (...), as the Angels
of God.

Holy men of old were far from contriving the base Artifices how to expose
Majesty as cheap in the eyes of the People. Job 34.18.
They thought not fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked; or to Princes, Ye are
ungodly: Their Language and Carriage savor'd of a far better Spirit. Whether
their Affairs went smooth or rough, they were still at this good frame, 2 Samuel
19.29.
My Lord the King is as an Angel of God.

These impressions were then indelible when temptations were most busy with
David, and all outward circumstances concurrent to have made him (if possible)
a bad Kings-man; yet then, even then, he retains his Loyalty and Veneration for
his Prince as high as ever. God forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand
against the Lords Anointed. 1 Samuel 26.11.


This Sacredness of the Sovereigns person was held inviolable in the Jewish
Church, where their express Doctrine was, that no creature may judge the King,
this judgment it is left to the holy and blessed God alone.

Thus has God set bounds (as at Mount Sinai) that the people might not rudely
break through, or rush with insolences upon those whose persons he has made
sacred.

2. The violence this day committed, 'twas a most unnatural breach of that near
connection wherein God has knit Prince and People together. The welfare of the
one, it is the welfare of the other; the distress of either, the danger of both.
This it is the plain language of the Text: He that runs may read it. Zedekiah's
Calamity it is all Israel's Lamentation. Any evil befalling him, it is most
deeply laid to heart by them.

We have in the Prophet Ezechiel an aenigmatical passage of this nature: Ezekiel.
19.14.
Fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, which has devoured her fruit, so
that she has no strong rod to be a scepter to rule: this is a lamentation, and
shall be for a lamentation.

The Prophets phrase it is metaphorical. Zedekiah and his Sons were now
miserably destroyed and slain; the other Branches of the Royal Family
inhumanely cut off. The first part of this dismal Tragedy 'twas acted by
Nebuchadnezzar, at Riblah and Babylon: The second part wherein fire is said to
have gone out of a rod of her Branches, and to have devoured her fruit, so that
she had no strong rod to be a Scepter to rule; this may (possibly) relate to
Ishmael, mentioned in the 41 of Jeremy, who being of the Seed-royal, might be
not improperly called one of the Rods of those Branches. Sure we are, fire came
out from him, and devoured Gedaliah and 70 other eminent persons, as that
Chapter sadly attests; so that there seemed now no strong Rod left to be a
Scepter to rule.

Hereupon the Prophet so pathetically cries out, This is a Lamentation, and for
a Lamentation. (...) so the 70; it is, and it shall be a proverbial mourning, a
precedent, a leading case to future Ages. Ad suos usque nepotes: as if the
Prophet had said, While time, lives, this sorrow will scarce die. It Is not, The
King is taken away, the Government broken up, and what care we? no, no, the
Church resents it with a far deeper sympathy: the Funeral may be his, but the
Mourning must be ours; both ours, and our Childrens after, us. We must go down
sorrowing to the Grave. The joy of our heart is ceased, the crown is fallen
from our head. May this Piety in Subjects toward their Sovereign live for ever.

It Is thus in the natural body: He that wounds the Head, endangers the whole
man. It Is thus in the civil body: The smiting of the Shepherd, it is the
scattering of the whole Flock. We have the brighter side of this Truth, fairly
exemplified in Solomon's case; where his Greatness and his Peoples Happiness, 1
King. 4.
his Grandeur and their Welfare, went hand in hand kissing and congratulating
each other* Solomon he reigns over Israel; Verse. 1, 21.
and they brought presents and served Solomon all the days of his life.

Nor was Israel at all eclipsed by it. Verse. 25.
And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his Vine, and under his
Fig Tree, from Dan to Beersheba, all the days of Solomon. Here needs be no
envying: The Princes Felicities, they are as Aaron's rich Ointment, which
presently ran down to the skirts of his Garments; where the Head is thus
honored, the whole Body shares, and of course rejoices with it.

The sadder, the darker side of the Cloud, we see that too fully verified in
the unhappy interregnums under the Judges. Judge. 17 6.
In those days there was no King in Israel: but every man did that which was
right in his own eyes. Right in their own eyes it might be, but wrong enough in
the eyes of God and all good men. Gross Idolatry in Religion, the most odious
Savageness in Conversation, as the Sequel attests. Such are the barbarous
products of loose times.

Hitherto the Princes Sovereignty and the Subjects Safety, his Augustness and
their happiness (as those wings of the Cherubims over the mercy-seat) they meet
and embrace each other. What God has thus exemplarily put together, it is pity
that man should attempt or dare to put asunder.

The relative Titles which our ancient Laws with so much sageness use, may
further confirm us in this point. Pater patriae, Medicus, Maritus regni: The
Sovereign is the common Father of the Country: He the Physician, we the weak
Patients; he the Husband, the Kingdom his Spouse, betrothed to him with a
solemn Coronation-Ring. His absence makes us a Family of desolate Orphans, an
Hospital of languishing Patients, and the whole Kingdom a solitary helpless
Widow exposed to endless Oppressions. Such a Prince did we lose, and such were
the Calamities that ensued upon it.

It Is true, all specious persuasions were used to raise that wretched War
against the King; nothing but golden Declarations set forth to reform Church
and State, to remove evil Counselors, to redress Grievances, and to secure
Liberty and Property to the People. Dajustum sanctumque videri. So fair the
pretense (it seems) must needs be. But alas, this Angel of Light soon vanished
as a personated appearance, and the issue proved such, as we have but small joy
to relate. A wild Skepticism in Religion, an utter Subversion of Government,
such excessive Taxes and Impositions, such fifth and twentieth parts, such
Sequestrations and Decimations, such Views and Reviews, such plundring of Loyal
Subjects and illegal sales of their Estates, such vast expense of Blood and
Treasure, as England till then had not known.

These sore pressures by degrees filled the whole Land with sighings, Vtinam
viveret: Oh that the King were alive and upon his Throne again; for then was it
better with us than it is now. Our sin became our punishment: In the day that
we rebelled against our Sovereign, in that day we laid violent hands upon our
own Happiness.

3. The violence this day committed, 'twas a most open Violation of all Laws
both Divine and Humane; whatever may be the sinews of boisterous War, we are
sure good Laws are the sinews of all civil Society and Peace; where they fall,
we also fall with them: Plebs sine lege ruit.

That God who has created man a reasonable creature, has thereby showed his
intentions to govern us by such moral Ductures, his holy Commands and Laws: but
these we wretchedly cast behind our backs.

As our sovereign Legislator, he has set over us (...), Supreme Powers. The
persons commissionated, are honorably styled the Ministers of God; Romans 13.1,
2, 4.
and the Commission entrusted in their hands, no less than the Ordinance of
God, thus issued forth for our good. And all this, while Princes were then open
Pagans; with this severe caution added to the convert Christians of those
times. That resisting this power, 'twould be a confronting the Eutaxie, the
Oeconomie, and good Order of Heaven; a supplanting the true jus divinum, a
despising not the Delegate, but the Original; not man, but God. Lord! how
apocryphal were these great Doctrines of the Gospel esteemed in our late
Rebellion! Or rather, what unchristian Christians were we then grown!

Solomon tells us, Eccl. 8.4.
Where the word of a King is, there is power; that is, Authority and Majesty;
and who may say unto him, What do thou? It Is not for every clownish Peasant,
it is not for every pragmatical Mechanic, Grotius.
rudely to censure his Princes actions. Non potest ad rations vocari: He is a
Person too high to be cited before their Tribunal.

Thus our English Laws in all humble reverence of the Divine, tread plainly in
the very same steps. Omnis sub Rege, Bracton.
and ipse sub nullo nisi tantum Deo: We are Subjects to the King, he a Subject
to none but God. If we do ill, the King is a Revenger to execute wrath upon us;
if he does ill, Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis, God himself will take
cognizance of that matter in a Superior Court. Idem.
Satisque ad poenam, quod Deum habet ultorem. This is the check in his case;
God stands ready both to inspect and punish his faults.

But that we might not incroach upon Gods Prerogative, we have Angels set (as
it were) with flaming Swords before us. Psalm. 105.15.
Touch not mine Anointed, curse not the King, Eccl. 10.20
no not in thy thought. In the nearest Harmony wherewith our own Laws have most
religiously determined, The very thoughts of evil against the King, though
never spoken, they are treason; and could they be proved, they would be death.

Hence it is that so strict care is taken for the Person, the Life, the Crown
and Dignity of the Sovereign in the Oath of Allegiance, which by Act of
Parliament is to be administered to all forts of persons, that the Oath of God
might make us the better Subjects to our King.

The same pious sense our Parliaments have as loyally from time to time
expressed to our Kings: The Crown of England has been so free at all times, 16
R. 2 d. 5.
that it has been in no Earthly subjection, but immediately subject to God. So
one Parliament at another time, The King has no Peers in his Land, and cannot
be judged. And in King James's time the Parliament having agnized upon the
knees of their hearts, their constant Faith, Loyalty, and Obedience to the King
and his Royal Progeny, they proceed in all lowliness to this further Address: 1
Jac. c. 1.
We recognize, as we are bound by the Law of God and man, that the Realm of
England, and the Imperial Crown thereof, does belong to You by inherent
Birthright. Which they beseech the King to accept as the First Fruits of their
Loyalty and Faith to his Majesty and his Posterity for ever.

And well had it been for us, had we kept these sacred Memorials, this sense of
our bounden Duty, truly engraven upon our hearts: The Sovereign had not then
been so heavy a Sufferer; the Subject had not then been so heinous a Criminal:
but both eminently happy in Gods blessing.

The Counsel was certainly good, and well worthy his Robe, Judge Jenkins.
who then gave it, Hold to the Laws, and the great Body recovers; forsake them,
and it will certainly perish.

Men and Brethren, we have thus far made our Preparations for some penitential
Sorrow. We have now to sit down together, as Job's three Friends, every one
with our Mantle rent, and Dust upon our heads, making our confession, as
Joseph's Brethren, Verily we are guilty concerning our Sovereign's blood.

Methinks we may see him religiously preparing himself the better to receive
this bitter Cup, solemnly taking that divine Cordial, our Spiritual Viaticum,
the blessed Sacrament, in commemoration of our Savior's death. D. of Gloc. and
Lady Elizabeth.
Then embracing his Children (such as might come to him) with the tenderest
affections of a most loving Father; and yet that Princely spirit of strength
which so highly became a Royal Martyr, leaving his last Blessing and Counsel
with them, Baker's Chron. 580
Fear God, love one another; forgive my Enemies, I my self have done it; but
trust them not, for I have found them most false to me.

Methinks we may see the butcherly Irons and Ropes fastened to the Block and
Scaffold, Baker's Chron. 581
to have forced and bound down Majesty with the utmost barbarousness, in case
(which they feared) he should have resisted; who came, alas, as a Lamb to all
this slaughter, in the glories of his Savior's patience, no way discomposed at
the Vizar and disguise of the Executioner, who sought in the depth of his
consciousness to conceal himself and his infamous person (if it could be) from
the knowledge of God and man. But lo our Sovereign's serenity and condition!
every place it is to him a Theater for the exercise of his Piety and Virtue. In
the very Agonies of Death, he closes as one already in Heaven. He endured the
Cross, he despised the Shame, and through the joy that was set before him,
leaves these holy dying words behind him (as the Garments that fell from
Elijah) in his very departing from us: I have a good Cause and a gracious God
on my side. I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown, where no
disturbances can come.

Methinks we may, without a Prosopopeia, hear the deep Groanings of the whole
Land; without any Hypotyposis, we may behold a numerous train of Mourners from
all parts attending that Funeral, which might then have no solemnity allowed to
it.

Methinks we may see the Royal Family, though scattered through violence, yet
upon this sad occasion, present as close Mourners, with that amazing Scripture
dropping from their pale lips. As a man falls before the wicked, so fell our
Father this day.

Methinks we may see the Church, as Jerusalem, with Tears upon her cheeks,
bitterly crying out, that our David who had set his affection so piously upon
the House of God; Fuller's Church History.
another Constantine, a truly nursing Father, who was never sensible of any
loss to himself, if thereby gain might redound to God; as our Historians so
justly acknowledge of him. Methinks we cannot but see the Church lamenting that
this Royal Patron of Religion and Learning was thus barbarously taken from us.

Methinks we may see the whole People trembling as at that great Mourning of
Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon, when Josiah, the desire of their eyes,
the joy of their hearts, was now no longer with them.

This was that distressed day wherein the beauty of Israel was slain amongst
us. Ye Daughters of England, weep over your murdered Sovereign, who clothed you
in Scarlet, and put upon you Ornaments of Gold; who crowned the Land with such
Riches and Plenty. Oh tell it not in Gath, oh publish it not in the streets of
Ascalon, that other Countries (if possible) might neither hear nor know what
Christians, what Protestants this day so prodigiously did before all Israel,
and before the Sun.

And that the measures of Inhumanity might be full and running over, when it
came to our Sovereign's Interment, though diverse noble Lords entreated the
rights of Christian burial for their Royal Master, Fuller's Church History.
and the then Lord Bishop of London stood ready with tears to have officiated
that last service to the remains of Mortality now to be deposited in the joyful
hopes of a blessed Resurrection; yet neither were able to prevail: so that
silence and sorrow were the only circumstance of remark, the sad ceremonies of
State to so great a Funeral. But we must draw the Curtain (as in Agamemnon's
case) -- Tanto par nulla figura dolori.

We must greatly blush, as persons who stand ashamed, yea even confounded, that
ever so odious an evil was wrought amongst us. Were the several sad
circumstances of it gathered together, and laid in order before our eyes, we
might say as once the Tribes of Israel in another case, There has no such deed
been done, nor seen, from the day that England became a Christian people to
this day. Consider of it, become truly humble under it, and lastly watch with
all unfeigned solicitude against whatever might endanger our relapsing into it.

Which leads to the second particular mentioned at first. There are diverse
things of unhappy tendency this way. Give me leave to enter some needful
Caveats against them, and then I close.

1. The first shall be against erratick disloyal opinions. The Head usually
betrays the Heart, and debauches the Life. On the one hand, when Papists shall
grow leven'd with Jesuitical insinuations, that it is a meritorious work to
dispatch an excommunicated Prince, and that the Assassinate shall forthwith
become a Saint; when Popes shall proudly tread upon the necks of Kings, and
take upon them to absolve Subjects from their due Allegiance; when they shall
exalt themselves above all that is called God, setting the Crozier above the
Scepter: then 'ware Kings and Kingdoms, danger is not far off.

And on the other hand, when a Fanatical Vertigo shall creep into the heads of
others, that the Saints must by all means govern the world* which Saints are
they; the next work is commonly this, Let us kill the Heir, that the
inheritance may be ours.

The late Rebellions in Scotland, scarce yet quietly allayed, are too ready an
instance of this nature. What influence the extravagant Opinions of some of
their former great Kirk-men might give to such bad practices, I shall not here
determine. Their Positions have been such as these: Kings and Governors have
their Authority from the People, and upon occasion the People may take it away
again. So one of them, He that by Excommunication is cast into Hell, is not
worthy to enjoy any life upon Earth. So another. And when a Party of this
humor had taken a very odd way to make the King their own, Spotswood History.
by a forcible detaining his person at Ruthuen, 1582. that they might thereby
bring him to their own wills, though the action were Treason by the Law of
Nature and Nations, adjudged by the Estates of Scotland as Crimen laesae
Majestatis, and the insolence so deeply resented by the King himself, K. James.
that he cried out he was a Captive, and desired all his good Subjects to
procure his liberty; yet the Kirk-Assembly stands up to justify it, and
ordains all to be excommunicated, and subject to further civil punishment, that
agreed not with them herein.

There is a full, though joyless truth in the common Observation: Superstition
(whether Popish or Fanatic) wherever it takes place, introduces a new
Primum Mobile, which commits a Rape upon the Spheres of the civil World, and
puts all into utter Confusion.

Thus delirous did we also grow in England; so far transported with these
religious Frenzies, that after many lesser Skirmishes against the innocent
Rites of the Church, men drew up at last into open Battalia against the State.
The Walls became scaled and taken; any House of Lords was voted useless; a
single Person (that is, the King) was voted needless; and the life of our
Sovereign traitorously taken away by an infamous Conspiracy of men, pretendedly
styled an High Court of Justice. Such was the Series; Wild Opinions led the
Van, and open Rebellion brought up the Rear.

It may and must be a just Argument with us and our Posterity after us, to be
sober-minded. There is a chastness, and there is a wantonness of spirit in
things pertaining to Religion. The sober Christian chastely consists with the
plain Soul-saving Truths of God. The wanton Professor is fond of every strange
face he sees, As Sampson in his wandering Amors, none of the Daughters of
Israel could please him; he must needs have a Dalilah from among the
uncircumsised Philistims: by which means both he and all Israel fell with him.

The case it is too applicable to our selves. The venerable Orders of a reformed
Church, the mildest Laws of a well-constituted Kingdom, cannot (it seems)
please many men's minds; they must needs have some other Dalilahs of their own:
God forgive it. And I beseech you, my Brethren, hold fast a form of sound
words, and labor to steer your whole Conversation by the Spirit of a sound
mind.

2. A second Caveat I must as heartily enter, is against excentricalness of
Carriage. We are almost as many Rulers as ruled: Rather Privy Counselors, and
chief Ministers of State, than ordinary Subjects: Great Agitators, exercising
our selves in matters too high for us. This apparently endangers the whole.

The Locusts mentioned in the Prophet, break not their Ranks, they thrust not
one another, they march every one in his Path; but we, like some bad Husbands
at home, spend most of our time abroad: mightily taken up about the Duties of
others, but supinely negligent in our own.

These St. Peter couples with very coarse company: Let none of you suffer as a
murderer, 1. Pet 4.15.
or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busie-body in other men; matters.
The Apostle shakes them all together in the same bag: murderers, thieves,
busybodies, and evil doers; as several sorts of jayl birds, all of them
selons and criminals against the divine Law.

I shall not compare these sins one with the other, to extenuate here, or to
aggravate there. The whole Assembly will rather say, God of his mercy keep
every honest man from falling into any of them.

'Twere certainly both modesty and prudence, for every man to wash his hands
from that pragmaticalness with which this Age is so much defiled.

Unless some evil Spirit troubles and haunts us, which God forbid, otherwise
what hinders, but that we might (according to that Apostolical Counsel) study
to be quiet, and to do our own business? taking that good advice, of learning
every man his own Lesson: quem te Deus esse Jussit, Persius.

and humanae qua part locatus es in re.
When the eye, the hand, and the foot keep steady to their own proper offices,
then is the whole body most happy and like it self.

3. The next thing we have as much cause to take notice of, is the instilling
of strange false suggestions into the minds of others. Such impressions are
easily made. In all History the people greedily receives them, but scarce ever
parts with them.

The evil Spies were very industrious this way: They buz'd such formidable
stories up and down, that Israel concluded themselves quite undone; Numb. 14.1.
And all the Congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and the people wept
that night. But pray was there any real cause for all these panick frights and
fears? Surely no. Joshua tells them more comfortably, Verse. 9.
The Lord is with us. And Caleb, to whom God himself gave this high testimony,
Numb. 13.30.
that he had followed God fully, it is said of him, that he stilled the people.
He did a far better office in Gods account that quieted, than they who thus
troubled the peoples minds. If evil surmisings be a fruit of the flesh, we may
justly suspect amusing insinuations are the cursed root from whence they grow.

Absalom had perfectly learned this knack of popular wheedling: 2 Samuel 15.3.
And Absalom said, See, thy matters are good and right, but there is no man
deputed of the King to hear thee. Things (it seems) went very bad, and were
likely to grow daily worse: But is there no remedy in such a dangerous
conjuncture of affairs? If Absalom would but please to speak out, it may be he
knows of some expedient that would relieve us; yes he does. And rather than we
shall want it, he will be so kind as to expound his mystical Riddle, and tell
us what it is. Verse. 4.
And Absalom said, Oh that I were made judge in the land, that every man which
has any suit or cause, might come to me, and I would do him justice.

A brave contrivance, well worth his good wishes to the peoples welfare! They
must be courted (it seems) into their own ruin. Lord! what a religious cheat
is here, to steal away the hearts of the People from their lawful Prince! Yet
thus the Scene was laid, and thus a most unnatural Rebellion was soon after
raised; only a just God brought it severely home upon the heads of the Rebels,
the first raisers of it.

David (it seems) neglects them, Absalom is the only man that takes care for
them; it is but rising up briskly for Absalom, and all is well. Here Is the
poisoned Arrow that flies by day, here is the devouring Pestilence that walks
in the darkness. God preserve us from it.

Men and Brethren, let us not deceive our selves. False suggestions of this
nature, they are as Brutus dagger at Caesar's heart; a secret stabbing of any
Government. But we are persuaded better things of England, and such as may
become that gratitude which we all owe to God and our Sovereign, for that Peace
and Plenty, that Liberty and Property, those many comforts both for Soul and
Body, which we so freely enjoy under his Government.

4. A fourth thing, as natural for us to take heed of as any of the former, is,
a froward murmuring against those whom God has set over us. This was the great
sin of Israel in the Wilderness: Exodus 16.2.
And the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses
and Aaron. How hard is it to please some people!

God had brought Israel safely out of their House of Bondage with an
outstretched arm; they were now traveling to the Land of Promise, feasted day
by day with Angels Food, supplied from the Rock with streams of Living Water,
which followed the Camp wherever they went; directed by a Pillar of Light
through their whole Journey; their Cloths still fresh (without any waxing old
for forty years together) upon their backs; yet they murmur. So querulous a
creature is man.

They murmured against Moses. Never had man deserved more highly of any people,
than Moses of them. He had waved all the Honors of the Court and Crown of
Egypt for their sakes; he had chosen to suffer the sharpest afflictions with
them; he had managed their affairs with that happy conduct, that they were now
brought fairly from the reach and power of their Oppressors; yet they murmur
against him with that rage and bitterness, that he mournfully complains to God,
He was even weary of his life, and knew not how to bear the burden of this
wayward People. It becomes us to be truly faithful to the welfare of others;
but let no man ever expect that good services should be always duly resented
by those for whom they are done.

They murmur against Moses and Aaron, against Church and State, highly
discontented at the posture of things in both. Verse. 8.
But says Moses, What are we? your murmurings are not against us, but against
the Lord. Take heed, in Gods name take heed; murmurings against Moses and
Aaron, murmurings against Church and State, may be murmurings against God
himself.

He that has said thou shall not revile the Ruler of thy People, it may be will
not take it well at our hands if we shall dare to despise Dominions, and speak
evil of Dignities; as if depretiating of Majesty were grown some essential
branch of the Subjects Liberty.

'Twas, no doubt, upon weighty grounds, that the Parliament expressed their
sense with so much freedom and plainness to our present Sovereign in this
matter: The growth and increase of our late Troubles and Disorders, Ca^ol. 2.
cap. 1. Proem.
did in a very great measure proceed from a multitude of seditious Sermons,
Pamphlets, and Speeches, daily preached, printed, and published, with a
transcendent boldness, defaming the person and government of his Majesty. These
(we see) went before, and all know what followed soon after: Upon Cadmus sowing
these Serpents teeth, whole Troops of armed men forthwith grew up.

We find Corah a very busy seditious Stickler this way: And because he saw he
could effect but little alone, he draws in 250 Princes of the Assembly,
Leading-men with the people, into his Party; and now both he and they thunder
to purpose, Majesty becomes confronted to his very face. Numb. 16.3.
And they gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron, and said, You
take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of
them, and the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift you up your selves above
the congregation of the Lord?

You King Moses, and you Priest Aaron, you take too much upon you. They charge
them as plain Invaders of the Peoples Rights, as persons that went about in an
arbitrary tyrannical way to set up themselves far above what they ought.

But there was a still and secret Snake hid in the grass, Jos. ant. l. 4. c.
scarce yet discovered. Haec Cores videri volens reipublicae curam habere: hoc
interim revera agens, ut concitato populo honorem invaderet. His words were
softer than Oil, yet were they drawn Swords; smooth Pretentions of a Public
Good, but the devilish design at the bottom (says Josephus) 'twas this, how
he might attack the Government, and usurp it himself.

God saw it, and God punished it. The ground clave asunder that was under them.
Numb. 16.31, etc.
The earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, and all that appertained to
Corah, and all their goods. And they went down alive into the pit, and the
earth closed upon them. And all Israel that were round about them fled at the
cry of them. Thus ended that wretched Mutiny; They perished (says St. Jude) in
the gainsaying of Corah.

Men and Brethren, there is no administration of Government upon the face of
the Earth, without many defects. From the Cottage to the Throne, we are all but
men: It Is the peculiar glory of Heaven, that that place, and that alone, is
free from all imperfections. However, the Mercies we enjoy under our
Government, they are many, even to the envy of other Nations. And oh that we
did but understand our own Happiness! it might fairly silence our Murmurings,
and fill our lips with David's praises, The lines are fallen to us in pleasant
places.

5. The last Caveat I shall need to add, is this: Let us take heed that we
withold not the due Supports of Government. A churlish Egyptian may possibly
demand the full tale of Brick, and yet afford no Straw; but the true Christian,
the loyal Subject, cheerfully renders tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to
whom custom: and ingenuously considers, That Government is scarce likely to
protect us, that is not duly supported by us.

'Twere but a low-priz'd kindness, demurely to say, Be thou warmed, be thou
clothed. For our parts, we wish very well to the Government: But if after all
these fair words, we give not those things that are needful, God may justly ask
us, as in that Scripture, What does this profit? Jam. 2.16.
All wise and good men know, Imperium sine vectigalibus retineri nullo modo
potest: Cicero
If Government be essential for us, these Supports are as truly essential to
that.

We read of Saul, when he was anointed and inaugurated into his Kingdom, some
still despised him, and brought him no presents; But says the Holy Ghost, They
were the children of Belial. 1 Samuel 10.27.
Saul indeed wisely overlooked it, but they nevertheless offended very highly
in it; They brought him no presents, but he held his peace. In raising the
Tabernacle, in supplying the Crown, divine Wisdom thought not the
Free-will-offerings of the people any disparagement to either. Nor did God
check or obliquely frown upon, but express a very kind acceptance of both.
Moses with much honor records the one; And the children of Israel brought a
willing offering to the Lord. Exodus 35.29.
And the Author of the books of Samuel makes as respectful mention of the
other; 2 Samuel 19.32.
Now Barzillai (that worthy Patriot in his Country) provided the King of
sustenance while he lay at Mahanaim. And I hope in things of this nature, God
of his mercies will ever give a most endeared mutual good understanding between
Prince and People amongst us.

I must conclude. This day was our royal Orpheus and his Harp, King and
Kingdom, barbarously torn in pieces by furious Bacchides: A Theme beyond all
expression bad. Sen. Epist.
We read of Cato, Hunc civitas diu ignoravit, nec intellexit nisi cum perdidit.
The present Age understood not his worth: He was better prized, more feelingly
lamented, when lost and gone. The like Reflections must we make upon this
horrid action: We have rebelliously cut off a Prince of most incomparable
Pieties and Virtues; invidiously traduced in life, but shining (as Caesar's
Star) with greater brightness after his death.

The Devil of Rebellion has been at length driven out of the Land. He seems
for present to walk up and down in dry places. God forbid that evil Spirit
should ever return and find our hearts (as that house) garnisht and ready again
to receive him.

'Twere but a specious kind of Hypocrisy, to disclaim the execrable Enormities
of the late times in words, and yet to abet Disloyalty afresh in our deeds;
like those Jews that built fair Sepulchers for the former Prophets, but still
went on to stone those that were for present amongst them.

There is one, and but one way before us, in any measure to wash out so foul a
stain, and that must be sincerely and practically this: For the wretched
Indignities thus offered to such a Father, to take all faithful care that we
repay a double Loyalty, the utmost Allegiance and Duty to the Son.

Which God through his Grace enable us all to do.

AMEN.
Several TRACTS Printed for Henry Brom, and Written by Mr. L' Estrange;
Being most against POPERY, and Being most PRESBYTERY, Viz.

THe Relaepsed Apostate, Toleration discussed. The Growth of Knavery. Tyranny
and Popery. Reformed Catholic. Freeborn Subject. The Case put for the D. of
York. The Appeal from the Country to the City Answered. Seasonable Memorials. A
Dialogue between Cit and Bumpkin, in Two Parts. A further discovery of the
Plot. Discovery on Discovery. A Narrative of the Plot. The Committee, or Popery
in Masquerade. Answer to Libellers. Richard against Baxter. Ephraim and Zekiel,
being his Case. An Appeal to the King and Parliament.


And besides,

The History of the Plot, in Folio. Erasmus 's Colloquies against Popery.
Seneca 's Morals. The Guide to Eternity. Cicero's Offices in English. Five
Love Letters. -- His Vindication. Dr. Woodford on the Psalms, and his Divine
Poems. Camfield of Angels. Dr. Comber on the Common Prayer, in 4 Vol. -- His
Right of Tithes. -- His Exposition on the Church-Catechism. -- His Advice to
the Roman Catholics.
Christianity no Enthusiasm. The Love of Jesus. The Christian Education of
Children. The Education of Princes, in Twelves.
FINIS.

