A SERMON PREACHED UPON APRIL xxiii. MDCLXXX. IN THE Cathedral Church OF
BRISTOL, BEFORE THE Gentlemen of the ARTILLERY-COMPANY, newly raised in that
CITY.

By SAMUEL CROSSMAN, B. D.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Allen, Bookseller in Bristol. 1680.

To the Right Worshipful and Much Honored, the Gentlemen of the Artillery
Company, newly raised in Bristol, by the favorable allowance of his Sacred
Majesty.
Gentlemen,
YOur voluntary undertaking this honorable loyal Exercise of Arms, is in
order to render your selves thereby the more useful to your King and Country.

That Government which preserves us (that it may so do) must be inviolably
preserved by us: And certainly it is a great Debt and Duty which we all owe to
it.

'Twas long since the wonder of an ingenious Platonist, Max. Tyrivs
(...), etc. Speaking of Man, says he, Oh God! the Creator of all things, what
a strange, temerarious, rash, unmanageable kind of Creature is this which thou
have placed upon the earth!

We may resolve his Riddle, and answer as Solomon, Eccl. 7. 29.
God made man upright at first But ever since the wretched Fall of our First
Parents, all manner of Distempers and ill humors are like the Sons of Zerviah,
too hard for us; and even inherent in our corrupt Natures.

Experience shows us, Jam. 3. 7, 8.
all other Creatures are and have been tamed by Mankind; but (as holy Scripture
observes) we our selves remain still in many things too unruly.

The All-wise God has given us the harmony of Government (as David' s Harp in
Saul' s Case) to charm this unquiet and evil Spirit; That we might go the
journey of life, not as Savages but as Men. And (which is far more) as the
professed Servants of that God, who is not the Author of confusion, 1 Cor. 14.
33.
but of peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints.

My Endeavors have been, inoffensively to strengthen so Divine a Concern in
this ensuing Sermon. As your desires occasioned the composing of it at first,
and your importunities the publishing of it at present; so You must now please
(such as it is) to accept of it from,

Gentlemen, Your cordial and very humble Servant, Samuel Crossman
Bristol, May 10. 1680.
2 Kings XI. 8. And ye shall compass the King round about, every man with his
weapon in his hand; and he that comes within the ranges, let him be slain; and
be ye with the King as he goes out, and as he comes in.
IT has been very well observed by a judicious Author, though the Case is
scarce either minded or regarded as it justly deserves, Plutarch.
(...). In the whole compass of humane life there is not any one thing of
greater importance and value toward our true welfare, than a due consistence
with public Government.

Which moved a modern Writer as positively to conclude, Danaeus.
Nusquam periculosius a^ hominibus erratur, quam in Politicis, Men never err
more dangerously, than when they happen to dash against the true rules of Civil
Society.

Other errors may be personal, unhappy to our selves, and there they cease;
but these, as Phaeton, attempt to fire the whole world; as Achan, they trouble
all Israel.

Our late times have proved too clear a Comment upon so sad a Text: wherein the
insolent extravagant fancies of some few, brought in confusion upon the whole.

Then was that joyless Scripture written in large Characters, in letters of
blood, he that ran might read it; (...) 3. 5.
The Child then behaved himself proudly against the ancient, and the base
against the honorable; then were the people oppressed every one by another.
And the foot of that doleful Song was still of the same Tune, Jud. 17. 6.
and like the rest, In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man
did that which was right in his own eyes. The Text offers very fair to obviate
these great evils, and may serve as a Divine Antidote to prevent our relapsing
any more into them.

The words are part of a very memorable History. For our better understanding
whereof, we may take notice, 1. Of the action it self here on foot, The
security of the King and Kingdom. 2. The Conjuncture of time when, Upon a happy
Restoration. 3. The Person chiefly managing this great affair, Jehojadah the
High Priest. 4. The means and manner whereby he carries it on; and they are
both Divine and humane.

1. The action it self here on foot, The security of the King and Kingdom: A
high Concern! The preserving the Ship wherein we are all imbarqu'd. A loyal
care for the support of Government, the Subjects, as well as the Sovereigns
safety. A Concern so essential, that the Roman Orator (and indeed all
experience as freely) tells us, Neither Family nor City, neither People nor
Country, neither the Heavens nor the Earth, can any of them subsist without it.
He that faithfully stands by Government, shows himself a friend to his own
safety, as well as a true Liege-man to his Prince. Lam. 4. 20.
Gods anointed, and the breath of our nostrils, they may be two distinct
Periphrases, but they both make up but one and the same Person in Scripture
account. Our loyalty to him, is at second hand a kindness to the breath of our
own nostrils.

The Government thus zealously owned in the Text, is that of Monarchy. (...),
as the Philosopher calls it, The first, the ancientest, the noblest, the
divinest Form of Government upon the face of the Earth. In the time of the
Patriarchs, in the time of the Judges, in the time of the Kings of Israel the
titles might and did vary; but 'twas still a real visible Monarchy. The bright
Image of Gods Government over his Creatures, The Kingdom is the Lords, and he
is the Governor amongst the Nations.

Upon which account the Ancients paid so great a veneration to it. Plato.
(...). When we see a King amongst his Subjects, we may therein behold a
prospect far more divine, a less but lively Pourtraicture of the Celestial
Empire. It fairly brings to mind the regency of Almighty God over the Universe.

Now as to their fidelity to this Government. The Text would have that
demonstrated in their utmost care for the person and safety of the Governor.
In this sense the meanest Subject may be truly said to be one of his Sovereigns
Lifeguard, most highly concerned in his preservation. If we would strengthen
the house, Psalm. 75. 3.
we must not weaken him that bears up the Pillars of it.

We have here no news of that traitorous Position, Taking up of arms by the
Kings Authority against his Person. The Lover of his Prince is not here run
down in a popular fury as a dangerous Malignant. The faithful Royalist is not
here sequestered and sentenced as a Criminal Delinquent. We hear of no specious
hypocritical crying up the well-affected Party, or the Good Old Cause; the more
easily to oppress, the more invidiously to bring into contempt any that should
dare (though never so modestly) to own our fundamental Laws and Government.

The Text is of a far different Genius; serene and regular, deliberately
issuing out a legal Commission of Array for the just defense of King and
Kingdom. The truest Patriot to his Country bears as true Allegiance to his
Prince: what God and right reason have so nearly joined together, he dares not
morosely put asunder. He understands not, how bad measures toward the Pilot can
ever become good offices to the Ship. The Relate and Correlate (in all true
Polity as well as Nature) either live or dye together. God save both King and
Kingdom.

2. We have the Conjuncture of time, when this great transaction happened, upon
a most welcome restoration. The Case was briefly this, Athaliah the Daughter of
Ahab becomes married to Jehoram King of Judah: upon his death Ahaziah his Son
succeeds in the Throne. He being slain by Jehu, Athaliah his Mother (an
ambitious idolatrous Woman) destroys all the Seed Royal that She could any way
come at, and for several years usurps the Crown. Most unnaturally verifying
that of the Poet, Saevus Amor docuit natorum sanguine matres
Commaculare manus.
Whether it were by Sword or Poison, or by what other means this wretched woman
procured the death of these Children (many of them her Nephews and near
Relations) is not expressed: but plain it is, 'twas most impiously and
inhumanely done. Per fas per nefas, is the great Maxim of State wherever
Ambition reigns. While the rightful Prince chooses to proceed by methods of
clemency and gentleness, the Tyrant or Usurper swims commonly through Seas of
Blood to his desparate Designs.

Athaliah's aim was to cut off the right Line of the House of David. More
particularly, all that descended from that pious good Prince Jehosaphat, (her
own Husbands Father) whose Reformation She had so highly stomach'd, and now
thrown down. Never did the most vindicable Reformation want its Enemies, or the
most treasonable enterprise some Bigoted Zealot, some blind Devoto to engage
in it.

But behold, after she has waded thus far in blood, she begins now (like
Pharaoh and his Chariots) to sink in this Red Sea. Never did Treason thrive
long with the Traitor. The rightful Heir is still safe, survives the attempts
of malice, and is brought with triumph to enjoy his own. Jehoshebah the
daughter of king Joram sister of Ahaziah, 2 Kin. 11. 2.
took Joash the Son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the kings-sons which
were slain; so that he was not slain. There is a God in Heaven that takes care
of Princes here on Earth. The rage and imaginations of the people against him
and his Anointed, they are but vain, successess things. Pharaoh may give strict
charge to destroy the Children of Israel, but Gods Moses is even miraculously
preserved, that he might be King in Jesurun; Herod may murder the Infants in
Bethlehem, but the Lords Christ escapes his bloody hands.

The Text exemplifies the Case with a living Joash, England illustrates it with
a living Charles, after all the various snares of death so often contrived and
laid for both.

And now the day dawns apace, the Restoration becomes conspicuous, They
brought forth the kings son, 2 Kin. 11. 12.
they put the Crown upon him, and they made him King. The Archers shoot sore,
yet the royal Bow abides still in strength. Thus signally does the Providence
of God baffle and triumph over the Conspiracies of men.

We might modestly challenge the treasonable Plottings of most Ages in the
language of the Prophet, Surely this turning of things upside down is but in
vain. The Stone which the Builders refused, becomes nevertheless the head of
the Corner.

At this posture were the present Affairs of Judah: Joash (far beyond all
humane expectations) brought as another Isaac in a Figure from the Dead,
restored with Honor to the Throne of his Forefathers. All their former
confusions now fairly ended, the Land orderly settled, verse. 12.
the people clapping their hands, and saying, God save the King.

And so we come to the third, The person chiefly instrumental in bringing about
this eminent, this desired revolution. It Is pity that good actions should stick
in the birth for want of some willing hands to assist, and facilitate their
being brought forth.

No doubt, there were many Worthies in Israel, heroically appearing in so just,
so generous, so public a concern. The Agent we find chiefly mentioned in the
History, is Jehojadah the High Priest.

Jehoshebah, she has the honor of sheltering the King under his first and most
imminent dangers. That God that has the whole world at his command, chooses what
instruments he will please to work by. A weak woman (as you have already heard)
acts so noble a part toward the preservation of the whole Kingdom.

She was both Daughter and Sister to a King; and now Wife to this Jehojadah the
High Priest: which gives us occasion of calling to mind that passage of
Pharaoh, when in token of further favor he would choose a Wife for Joseph his
prime Minister of State, he gives him Asenath the Daughter of Potipherah Priest
of On; supposing (as it seems) a Match into such a Family no disgrace to the
greatest Peer in his whole Kingdom.

Such was Jehojadah, venerable in his Function, and as honorable in his
Relation, Uncle to the present King, Brother to the former, an eminent pillar
both in Church and State all his days. He lived in this unspotted piety an
hundred and thirty years, and died as he lived, still laden with fresh honors.
For the sake of this and many other his great services to the Public, he was
solemnly interred amongst the Royal Sepulchers of the Kings of Judah, 2 Chronicles.
24. 16.
And they buried him in the City of David among the Kings, because he had done
good in Israel, both toward God and toward his House.

Men and Brethren, would to God you could bear with me a little in my folly,
and indeed bear with me, if I say, The Priesthood has been (as you see) highly
esteemed in elder times, how contemptible soever it may seem to many in these
late disingenuous days. Sacred and profane History are both unanimous in this.
Our reverence to God will manifest it self in our respects to his Ministers. He
that truly loves the Master, will not be very forward to despise his Servant.

We find Jehojadah Privy-Counsellour to Joash: Nor was it amiss either for King
or Kingdom. If he had a potent hand, he had also a successful hand in the
administration of Affairs: which the holy Ghost is pleased to take a particular
notice of, to the honor of those happy times, and so to leave it upon record
for the instruction of future Ages, 2 Kin. 12. 2
And Joash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all his days,
wherein Jehojadah the High Priest instructed him.

Now if Princes out of reverence to such ancient Scripture-Precedents (no bad
Copies for any to write after) if they have seen meet in these later days to
continue somewhat of this practice in their Councils, here seems no matter of
grievance or offense given to any. Nor needs our eye be evil, where the eye
of God is good.

Sure we are, Orat. ad Pontif.
Cicero valued it as a nihil praeclarius, etc. he thought they had nothing more
noble in the whole economy of their Government than this, That their Priests
were highly honored, and persons whose joint assistance was always so
respectfully taken and made use of in the arduous affairs of their State.

Nor was it so much personally for their own sakes, but rather for the sake of
the Sphere in which these men stood, that wise and sage Governors saw cause to
confer such signal tokens of honor upon them.

It seems to savor very much of unkindness or prejudice, to labor the
depreciating of so sacred an Order. Had the committing of any Civil trust or
power into such hands, been so prodigiously irregular or dangerous to
Government (as some would censure it) certainly Almighty God would never have
given that express charge, which we find he did to Israel, The Priests the Sons
of Levi, Deuteronomy. 21. 5.
whom God has chosen to bless in his Name, by their word shall every
controversy and every stroke be tried.

The Kingdom of Judah had now for several years lain under a most horrid
Apostasy and Usurpation; Jehojadah restores the King to his Throne, and
(together therewith) Religion also to its true ancient state. It had been
prostituted to all abominable Idolatries; it is now most happily recovered to
pure original institution, Jehojadah appointed the Offices of the House of the
Lord by the hands of the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 23. 18.
the Levites, whom David had distributed in the House of the Lord, to offer the
burnt-offerings of the Lord; as it is written in the Law of Moses, with
rejoicing and with singing, as it was ordained by David.

The Usurpation over the State was not without a depravation of Religion in the
Church. They are commonly both involved in the same Fate. The Case before us is
a lively instance of it. The return of Joash, the right Heir to the Throne, is
immediately crowned with the re-establishment of the true state of Religion.

And all this so acceptable throughtout the Kingdom, that it is said, All the
people of the Land rejoiced; 2 Chronicles. 23. 21.
and the City was quiet. So happy are the consequences of a right settlement in
Church and State: all is then at a kindly rest, fairly reposed in its proper
Center. Cursed be he that would disturb so just a joy, or disquiet so good a
peace. May England long enjoy this dear, this sacred blessing; and let all the
people say Amen.

4. We have the means whereby Jehojadah carried on the whole; and they are in
part Sacred and Divine, in part Martial and Military.

1. Sacred and Divine. 2 Kin. 1^ 12 -- 1^
Jehojadah administers to the King the Coronation Oath, solemnly anoints him,
and delivers the testimony of the Law into his hands: which Book (as the Jewish
Writers relate) was to be always, and in all places present with him. If he
went out to War, that also went along with him. If he sat in Judgment, that
was constantly laid before him. That he might consult with it as with the
Oracle of God, to direct him in all his ways.

It Is Religion that is the true Jachin and Boaz, the strength and stability of
any Kingdom. The Tragedian could easily observe, Ubi non est sanctitas,
pietas, fides, instabile Regnum est. Where piety and virtue die, the Kingdom it
self dies also with them.

God forbid, we should be careless of that which (through the Divine Blessing)
is to be our best and chief support. Have we any principles of honor? any good
will to public welfare? ought that may become the dignity of humane nature, or
the sacredness of Christian Profession? Oh then instead of this common cursed
waywardness one against another, let us unanimously pluck up generous
resolutions, to do every one what in us lies for retrieving (what we all seem
to long for) solid, practical Christianity; the hearty exercise of all moral
virtues, all Christian Graces, that England may yet flourish, and Religion
become indeed a praise amongst us.

Most will seem, as Judas, to kiss, though too many rather betray this sacred
interest. Religion is high, and little understood. There may be much of popular
humorousness, too much of fulsome, stubborn conceitedness, and yet too little
of real genuine religiousness.

The Weavers Shuttle may serve in his Loom, the Shoo-makers Last may be of use
in his Shop; but when the common People must needs turn Dictators in matters
too high for them, and take the Chair in the Divinity-Schools, the issue
generally proves like that in Exodus, They turn presently out of the right way,
they make but calvish Gods, and (as Aaron complained in that case) they show
themselves set upon mischief.

The Reformation of the Text is more august and solemn. The service of the
Temple in its just decency and order; Scripture peaceably practiced, though not
litigiously or absurdly canted and talked of.

2. The second sort of means was Martial and Military, Every man with his
weapon in his hand. The insolences and mischiefs had been so notorious under
the late usurpation, that Jehojadah sees it needful to provide the stronger
Guards for his Princes safety now.

These Arms were said to be David's, 2 Kin, 11* 10.
given by him, and now laid up in some Chambers of the Temple in a readiness,
as any occasion might afterward require. Sanctus Rex post partas victorias,
Peter Martyr.
Arma sua voluit esse Deo consecrata; Holy David after his many achievements
and victories, consecrates his Arms to God. Thus he had laid up Goliah's Sword
with Ahimelek the Priest long before. These he dedicates as Trophies for honor
and instruction: for honor to Almighty God, the supreme Deliverer; for
struction to men, that they might the better preserve the history and memorial
of Gods great goodness.

The charge of these Guards was both offensive and defensive. 1. Offensive, He
that comes within the ranges, let him be slain; that is, he that thrusts
himself beyond the appointed bounds, he that rudely rusheth within the
Centries, nearer the Royal Presence than may consist with the safety of the
Sovereign, let him be slain. There is a distance to be observed, as well as a
reverence to be paid, in all our approaches to Majesty.

2. Their ultimate charge and service, was the defense of the Kings Person. In
Nature, the hand or arm upon any danger offers it self of its own accord to
shelter the head. In Government the Case is still parallel; The loyal Subject
sees no such way to preserve the Body, as by being truly careful for the head.

Upon this account, David's Worthies, though they cared not how far they
jeoparded themselves, yet they could not bear that their Sovereigns Person
should come within the least shadow of danger, Then the men of David swear unto
him, 2 Samuel 21. 17.
saying Thou shall go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench not the
light of Israel. Lo here their piety as to their Prince, lo here their prudence
as to themselves. They easily concluded the Eclipse of this Sun in their
Horizon, would be darkness to all Israel. The smiting this Shepherd would be no
less than the scattering of the Flock.

In this respect his most religious faithful Subjects thought it no flattery to
tell him elsewhere, 2 Samuel 18. 3.
Thou art worth ten thousand of us. In a theological sense, the meanest of
David's Servants, had a heaven-born, immortal Soul as well as David, and
therein of the same equal price and value in the sight of God. But in a
political sense, David's single life weighs more than many thousands of theirs.
The Person of our Sovereign must be sacred with us.

Gentlemen, I shall not now affect to exercise you with any further discourse
in military language from the Pulpit. There is a (...), a decency proper to the
Church, a decency proper to the Field. All things are most beautiful in their
own places.

Neither shall I Classicum canere. 'Twas but ill with England, when our Pulpits
sounded at that thundering rate, Curse ye Meroz. By such specious fallacies the
poor unstable multitude were conjured up into an open Rebellion against their
lawful Prince. By such Bellows were the flames of our bloody wars too much
blown up. The Christian Ministers work is more gentle; the preaching up of
peace, the sweetning the minds of all one toward another. That all meekness
may be showed toward all men, especially toward those whom God has set over
us. Others may be for fierceness, unadvisedly calling for fire from Heaven; but
nil nisi mite suadet Evangelium, the Gospel pleads for a more sedate calmness
and candor of spirit.

I confess, as one well observes, Expert Soldiers and good Arms, Tacitus.
they are in Pace Decus, in Bello Praesidium, our Ornaments in Peace, our
Safety in War. But still the Christian Soldier looks upon War as the means,
Peace as the more desired end. War, though in some cases both needful and
lawful, it is yet to him as so much Physic, always sharp: he esteems Peace as
health; of a far sweeter relish, and much more welcome to all.

He wants not valor. When ever just occasion calls for it, he could cheerfully
say to his Prince, as David to Saul, I will go and fight with this Philistine;
and yet so mild in his own habitual temper, that the same David's Motto is as
truly his, Psa. 120. 7.
I am for peace.

Your appearance here upon this auspicious Day, The Kings Coronation-Day.
as it is by virtue of Royal Authority, and with your voluntary avowing all
faithful Allegiance; so is it in it self highly honorable, the fair expression
of a generous Loyalty in this great City. The more valuable, because so
eminently seasonable. While we hear of Plottings against the Government, and
dangers to his Majesty's Sacred Person, it well becomes every true-hearted
Subject (by a noble antiperistasis) to show the greater zeal for both.

And I hope your regular forwardness herein may prove a happy Precedent to
other Parts; That it may be said of the King of Great Britain, He is King of
hearts, as well as King of persons: Or as of Solomon, Behold the valiant men of
Israel are about his Throne, they all hold Swords, being expert in War; every
man has his Sword upon his thigh, that the Government might be at the better
safety from all danger.

And now, Men and Brethren, while we occasionally thus name the word, we must
become afresh in love with the thing it self. Oh the happiness of England's
Government! Here (if any where upon the face of the Earth) here is the easy
yoke, the light burden.

A Government of that rare balance and temperament in the State, that
Prerogative and Property even kiss each other.

Altius egressus coelestia tecta cremabis,
Inferius terras.
Lo here one of the fortunate Islands indeed, a temperate benign Climate, most
comfortably habitable, fairly situate under the true Equator, at just distance
both from the torrid and frigid Zone. While the Sovereign sits upon his Throne
in the brightness of Imperial Majesty, the meanest Subject may as truly sit
under his Vine and Fig Tree, enjoying his own with security, peace and plenty.

A Government of so impartial Reformation in the Church, that it dares own the
venerable Antiquities of primitive and purer Times; and yet as zealously reject
the absurd inchroachments and corruptions of later Ages. A Reformation, so
clearly subservient to all good ends; so careful to nourish us up with
wholesome food, the words of sound Doctrine; so ready to furnish us with the
means of Grace, (soberly and truly so called) that if our design by Religion be
(what it ought to be) nakedly to save our Souls, we may then in all quiet
Communion with the Church of England, pass fairly to Heaven, as the Traveller
who goes his whole journey in a pleasant sunshine day.

God has not dealt so with other Nations; neither have they such confortable
freedom in Gods ways. Your selves, who have many of you traveled into Foreign
Parts, and have seen the sad circumstances of poor Peasants there, your selves
right well know it. And we may all of us gratefully sing as David, The lines
are fallen to us in pleasant places, Psalm. 16. 6.
and we have through the Divine Providence a goodly heritage.

I could not but offer you this memorial for your encouragement from the
excellency of the Government: A Government most highly prized by others abroad,
O let it not be as unworthily despised by us at home.

I might as pathetically adjure you from the common miseries (scarce ever to be
forgotten) under our late want of it. A Subject fitter for tears than words.
The desire of all good men that it might for ever sleep in the deepest silence,
did not the noise of our present distempers and dangers awake it, that it might
fairly give warning to all.

Then was that Scripture-Lamentation so mournfully revived, Woe is us, the Crown
is fallen from us. Then were the barbarous assaults against sacred Majesty so
common and daring in almost all places. First in Effigy, At one place the eyes
in the Statue of King Edward VI. insolently plucked out, with this absurd,
villainous taunt, All this mischief came from him, in his establishing the Book
of Common Prayer.

At another place, the Crown upon the Statue of our late Sovereign
contumeliously mangled by the rude Soldiers Swords. Then the Regalia, which
had been laid up with all care and safety through the successive Reigns of so
many Kings; The Royal Crown, wherewith our Kings were usually crowned; the
Robes, the Sword, the Scepter of King Edward the Confessor, all forcibly
plucked out from their repository by a pretended order, and after many most
unworthy and unmanly abuses (far beneath humanity as well as loyalty) offered
to those ancient (I might almost say awful) Ensigns of Sovereignty, this base
Sarcasm was thrown out in way of scorn, There would be no further use of these
toys and trifles.

After these ominous Praeludia in Effigy, then follows, Quis temperet a
lachrymis? then follows the real Murder and Martyrdom of our Sovereign himself
in his own Person; with whom fell likewise this ancient and flourishing
Government. Then was the Royal Family it self proscribed and scattered. Our
Nobles, who had been brought up in Scarlet, many of them forced then to embrace
the Dunghill. Then were the Fields and Scaffolds so often stained with noble and
loyal blood. Then were heard those heartbreaking groans of so many ruined
Families; the deep sighings of poor Widows and Orphans, bewailing the loss of
their dear Husbands and Fathers, destroyed and cut off for no greater crime
than paying their just duty to God and their King. Property (the choicest
flower in the Subjects Garden) was then violently torn up. Ancient and
indefeasible Estates arbitrarily taken away and sold. The whole course of the
Law, and Magna Charta it self, forced to strike sail to the boundless power and
pleasure of some new-raised Committee.

En quo discordia Cives! See, see, what Iliads of misery our discords and
tumults brought in upon us! We would needs then violently remove our ancient
Landmarks, and we became thenceforth inevitably exposed to all this series of
common calamity.

Nor was the Church less tragically passive on her part. Our Books of public
Liturgy, compiled with so much decent gravity, adapted with so much care and
prudence to general edification, confirmed and recommended so often by supreme
Authority; became nevertheless the common subject of profane sport and disdain
to the Genius of those licentious times.

The blessed Sacraments (the very seals of the Covenant of Grace, the richest
treasures in all Christian Religion) fell then under a supine neglect and
contempt. These fair Temples dedicated to the highest ends and uses that such
Structures are capable of, the Service and Worship of Almighty God, his
Bethels, his peculiar Houses here on Earth, the Tabernacles of solemn meeting
between him and his people; were then nevertheless in a kind of rage and
frenzy more wretchedly defaced within the space of very few months, than many
years are or will be yet able to repair.

Our Cathedrals in some places (to the great affront even of Religion it self)
turned into beastly Stables. In other places into Gaols, for poor, cold,
starving, loyal prisoners; and no fuel allowed them, so long as the curious
carved Wainscoat of the Choir afforded any.

The Statue of our Savior in stone being espied at one Cathedral, no fewer
than forty Musket Shot were discharged at it, and high triumphing who could
hit the head or face. The Ornaments, costly Vessels and Plate of the Church
sacrilegiously ravaged and torn away.

At another Cathedral, the Chalice for the holy Eucharist being snatched up as
spoil of more than ordinary prize, some entreaties were modestly made that it
might have been spared, and restored for that sacred use; but they received no
better than this churlish answer, They might serve that turn in a wooden dish.

Neither might the holy Table it self, where the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is administered, escape its share in
these indignities; although for modesty sake, that I may not contaminate any
civil ears, I must forbear the relating of them.

But alas! what are these Buildings of stone, these dead (though curious)
Fabrics, in comparison of the Living Temples, the Ministers of God? 'Twas they
who drank so deeply of this bitter Cup; and might now weep upon an unexpected
account between the Porch and the Altar.

The great City of London, and the lines of that Communication, may be too true
a witness in this unwelcome Case: where in a short space of time far above an
hundred reverend learned Divines (the flower of England's Clergy) were most
illegally and unworthily turned out of their Ministry and lawful possessions,
they and their families, to irreparable ruin.

Then followed that numerous sequestring of the Clergy in almost all Parts. the
ejecting and silencing such vast multitudes of worthy able Ministers. A Case
that even astonished many Churches abroad, what England was then a doing, how
these violences against Religion, and the Ministers of it, could possibly agree
with (what was so much then pretended) the promoting of the Gospel.

Your selves may possible remember this place was not without some deep
sufferers in that kind. One instance (adjoining to our very walls) offers it
self too appositely to this sad Subject. I am almost at a loss whether to
suppress or relate so woeful a story: Bishop Howell, a Person to whose memory
all good men (who had any knowledge of him) will ever pay a very high respect
and honor; he being in the time of our late Wars Bishop here, his Episcopal
and Personal Estate both taken from him, himself with his Wife and a numerous
Family of nine or ten Children in the Palace, She lies in; but those who had
pretendedly bought the House, to make sale of the Leads, uncover the room
wherein She lay in Childbed; So that the rain and weather beating in (and it
may be a mixture of grief together with both) She becomes carried from her
Childbed to her Bed of Clay. Nor might this suffice, affliction is further
added to the afflicted. The distressed, disconsolate good man must next be
dragged forth: He catches hold upon the Staple of the Door, loath (as it seems)
to lodge in the Fields, and scarce knowing how or where to shelter his now poor
motherless family. With this struggling he lingers some few days in the house,
and in less than a fortnights space, overwhelmed with these indignities and
sorrows, he dies also, and so retires to God and Heaven as his truest asylum,
his safest retreat from all these oppressions.

So far were the very rights of humanity, as well as the ancient laws of the
Land, and (which is far more than either) the sacred Precepts of Christian
Religion, abandoned by the phrensies which we were then distempered withal.
Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. 'Twas grown with some almost a Point of
Religion, to be in these Cases inhumane and irreligious. Scarce any thing but
might be then allowed, save only what the Law it self required, what our just
duty to Gods Anointed and his Church obliged us to perform.

But I must break off (though never so abruptly) from this unpleasing Theme.
Far be it be from us to take pleasure in exposing the wretched miscarriages of
those joyless times: The remembrance of them may be instruction to all, delight
to none. He that is truly sensible of his deviations then, will modestly say,
(as in Job) I have done iniquity, but will offend no more.

The only end why these things have been thus mentioned is nakedly this, That
we might hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly. Small rushings against
Government, may by degrees bring on far greater and sorer evils than we can at
first foresee. That may be the unhappy end of the action, which was not the
real intention of the Agent. No doubt, in our late confusions, many abhorred at
first what was yet done at last. But those ill actions being once set on foot,
could not be so easily stopped; they ran on to those fatal mischievous
consequences which became an astonishment to all. I confess, we are easily
flattered into irregularities, by fond presumptions that we could presently
make all things much better. Our project, forsooth, (if we might but try it)
would infallibly heal all. But such counsels prove commonly (as the Historian
has observed to our hand) Prima specie laeta, Livius.
tractatu dura, eventu tristia. They may seem to begin briskly, but soon after
they drive on (as Pharaoh's Chariots) more heavily, and they always end most
miserably. Thus Absalom in his hot-brained insurrection mended the matter very
fairly, by ruining both himself and multitudes with him.

Whence it is that the wisdom of God tells us, Prove. 17. 14.
The beginning of strife is as when one lets out water. We open Pandora's
Box. We let loose an unruly Element. Whereas our care should rather be, not to
stir those floodgates, lest we be drowned in the torrent. God has graciously
spoken peace to us, O let not us return any more to such folly.

It were a noble posture for every man wisely to stand upon his own guard, and
not to suffer himself to be weakly imposed upon, or speciously drawn aside from
his just duty toward God or man. There are diverse opinions and courses, which
upon sad observation are found to breed much fond conceitedness of our selves,
an unchacharitable disesteem of others, a morose sowrness of Nature, a rash
cenforiousness of Superiors, and a dangerous pragmaticalness in all our ways.
For Gods sake, even for Gods sake, let not any of your Souls come into those
Secrets, imbibe not such feral opinions. They are as Circe's Cup, and will
intoxicate. The Distemper once flown up into the head, will certainly produce
irregularities in the life.

I must conclude. Gentlemen, You have willingly offered your selves to serve
the Government. You cannot but have a deep sense of the manifold blessings we
all enjoy under it; the woeful distractions we were all exposed to by the late
violences offered to it.

In Gods name, stand by this Government. It Is well worthy your highest valor,
well worthy your truest fidelity. Modesty it self may say, as that pious man
long since,

Haec tibi sola salus ejus servare salutem. Nic. de Clema^g.


Our welfare is apparently bound up in the welfare of the Government. There
needs no more, under God, to make us a happy people, than honest endeavors,
every one in his proper place, for the faithful administration of it, whether
in Church or State. This may our Divisions hinder. This might our love and
harmony promote. We need not then fear what Superstition could do against us on
the one hand, or Faction on the other. He that fixes uprightly with his duty,
may safely bid defiance to all the attempts of Men and Devils.

Put on, I beseech you, as good Christians, and good Englishmen, a generous
largeness of spirit. It Is a counsel no way to be despised, Alteri vivas
oportet, si vis tibi vivere. Seneca.
We must comport in a virtuous nobleness with the public, if ever we desire it
should be truly well with our selves in private.

It Is the excellency of humane life (says the Royal Philosopher) when man has
learned a real dexterity, Antoni^
(...). When we have learned our true postures of conversation, so that we dash
sullenly against none, but demean our selves with amiable and just observances
toward all, Rendering to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the
things that are God's.

And this might be honorably done, non amittendo fidem, St. Gregor.
sed oftendendo pietatem. Such a well tempered carriage would be no betraying
our Religion, but a fair approving our selves to be (what we profess) persons
truly religious. We are not less thine, O Lord, for being faithful Subjects to
thy Vicegerent, or dutiful Children to our Mother, thy Church.

Long may the Crown of David flourish, long may the Rod of Aaron blossom: May
those that have ill will at Zion, be as the grass upon the house tops, which
withers before it grows up. But let all those that love thee, O Lord, and
thine Anointed whom thou have set over us, let them be as the Sun when he goes
forth in his might; and the whole Land blessed with peace and rest to all
Generations.

Now unto him that is the Lord of Hosts, and yet King of Peace, be Glory in the
Church through all Ages. Amen.

FINIS.

