A Congratulation, In Honor of the Annual Festival of the Lords, Knights, Esquire
and Yeomandry of the County of Hertford, at Merchant Tailors Hall, on Thursday
Sept. 6. 1655.
WInged with zeal, and love, I hither bring,
Unto your Feast, an humble offering,
As a just Tribute, due to you that are,
The Columns that sustain good Hertford-shire,
The union of your Country, the Cause that we,
Thus pay our vows to your Solemnity.
But whence should I assume Prophetic Rage
Rapt up in Sacred fury to Presage,
Your happy Omens, It Is your loves inspire
My humble muse with this Aetheriall fire:
My frosty soul; so as promaethian heat
Gives my cold Clay a warmth, or birth as great
As is my Countries Crop; your Sun-like Eyes
First fired my heart offered you sacrifice.
Burning in zeal, better then pounds of Gumms
Or Altars smoking with fat Hecatombs:
Which you (I hope) like Charity of Heaven
Accept my grain of Incense, that is given
For to unite you, in this mutual love
Equal unto those knowing powers above.
The true Description of the County of Hertford, with a Character of the
People, their Manners, and Conditions, formerly written by some ancient
Chronologers.
THe Country is Champion, the Air temperate and healthful, the Soil fertile,
and very plentiful, Especially for wheat and Barley; it having 19. Market
Towns, and 120. Parish Churches, One main River, (besides diverse Rivolets)
Bridges 24. Parks 23. The people of this County are generally of Noble
dispositions, Courteous and generous, but chiesly noted for true heartedness,
valor, and fidelity, Even by Julius Caeser himself who held them in great
veneration, sufficiently having made trial of them in his wars against the
Picts and Scots and other invaders of this Nation. There have been 3 Bloody and
Mortal Battles fought in this Country; The first at St Albones, May 23. 1455.
between Richard Duke of York, and the Earl of Warick. The second at St.
Albones Feb. 17. 1461. by Queen Margaret against the Duke of Norfolk and
Suffolk. The third, at Barnet 14. April 1477, between K. Herald etc.

I hope you cannot think that there can be
In me (dear SIRS!) the seeds of flattery;
I were unworthy, if I would not sing
My Countries Worth; and when I touch a string
Of my Phaebeian Lyre, Chaste Daph^^ shall
Tender her Bays to deck your Festival;
Devoted to your merit, Bacchus then
Shall with his Richest Nector swelling pen
Indue mo, with such wine, as I do think
At least do wish, that you your selves may drink;
Then pray, that many years, your feasts made even
In mutual love, you all may feast in Heaven.
Which are the Cordial desires of your unworthy Countryman, JOHN CROWCH.
The Stewards mames for this present feast 1655. are these Gentlemen following,
Mr William Thomson Mr John Berresford Mr John Ellis Mr Robert Thomson Mr Robert
Waller Mr Josoph Sibley Mr Robert Brisco Mr Thomus Bateman Mr William Lee Mr
Richard Mead Mr William Robinson Mr Robert Warner.





