A SERMON PREACHED In Christ's Church Bristol, At the Assizes for that City and
County, Holden August the 1st. 1676. By Samuel Crossman B. D. One of his
Majesty's Chaplains, and Prebend of Bristol.

Imprimatur, Tho. Turner, R. P. Dno Episcopo Land. a sacris domesticis.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1676.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Robert Cann, Knight. and Baronet, Mayor of the City
of Bristol.
Right Worshipful,
It Is matter of just amazement, that sin so wretched in its nature, so
pernicious in its issues; should yet obtain so vast, so general an Interest all
over the world.

This great dishonor thus apparently done as well to Reason, as Religion, must
certainly be attributed to the common depravedness of mankind, to the
naughtiness of our own hearts, which (in this collapsed condition of ours) are
now carnal, and sold under sin. Or (as Solomon expresses it) fully set in us
to do evil.

For the better redress whereof, God having erected those solemn ordinances
Magistracy, and Ministry, has put this matter into both their Commissions;
making it an eminent part of their work in their several spears, to give all
due rebukes to vice, all due encouragements to virtue; as the proper direct
method both to civil, and sacred welfare.

Such has been the gracious care of God in our behalf. Every good man must,
and will heartily say, Amen; Oh let this righteous pleasure of the Lord prosper
in their hands.

In some desires of serving these good ends was this discourse at first
composed; and since thus published.

Honored Sir, Omitting any circuitous ambages; I shall only take leave with
all due gratefulness to acknowledge the many obligements you have pleased to
lay upon me: and by this paper to offer to your second Meditations, what you
vouchsafed so religiously to resent, when first preached before you, by

Honored Sir, Your justly obliged, and Truly humble servant Samuel Crossman.
Bristol, Aug. 10. 1676.
A SERMON Preached in Christ's Church at Bristol, At the Assizes holden for that
City and County, August 1. 1676.
St. Matthew. 24. 12. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall
wax cold.
A Severe declaiming against present times, may be in some cases not so much
the fruit of piety, as of pettishness. A querulous ingratitude toward God, and
as unhandsome disingenuity toward men.

It Is a caution justly given by Solomon; say not, what is the cause that the
former days were better then these? for thou do not enquire wisely concerning
this. Eccl. 7. 10. Certain it is, the world has its frequent vicissitudes in
morals, as well as in naturals. It has had its open alternations and seasons
of sinking sometimes into viece and of recovering it self again at other times
to some competent degrees of virtue; else we had long since come to those sad
Hercules pillars whereof the Poet so satyrically speaks, Non habet ulterius
quod nostris moribus addat posteritas. --

Sin had long ago risen to its utmost Zenith, its fullest growth and height,
beyond which it could have proceeded no further.

But still though some ages may have the happy lot of appearing as a hopeful
spring after a dead winter: yet others prove as a declining autumn after a more
fruitful summer. The succession of ages it is very often like that of families.
If a pious Josiah comes forth after a wretched Amon; it is as true a wicked
Manasseh may succeed a righteous Hezechiah. This decay touching these last
days, it is not only the conplaint of the vulgar (where we have many times as
much passion, as judgment) but the deep sense and sorrow of all impartial
serious persons, that iniquity abounds, and the love of manywaxeth cold.

We have in this and the next Chapter our Saviors memorable prediction both of
the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the end of the world, The former as some
Emblem, and adumbration of the latter.

Plain it is from all writers, scarce any judgment (in many circumstances)
fuller of consternation then that which befell these hard hearted Jews for
their rejection of Christ, Their sin 'twas dearly bought, dearly paid for.

That kingdom which had sometime appeared as Princess among the provinces; that
City which had been so honorably styled, the joy and beauty of the whole
earth; that Temple which Tacitus acknowledges a structure of most immense
magnificence and riches; one of the just wonders of the world (as others call
it) for all exquisitness and splendor; lo, now people and kingdom, City and
Temple, all these goodly buildings laid together under one common ruinous heap.
And if Josephus (their own historian) may be believed, (...)
(...), etc.
Travelers passing by could scarce see or say; here was once Jerusalem.

The stones of emptiness, and line of confusion were now truly enough stretched
upon it. Turnus Rufus (that (...), that Wicked wretch, as the Jewish writers
with indignation call him) had now drawn a plough in scorn over that very
place, where formerly the Temple stood. Fulfilling literally what was (in all
probability neither believed nor feared though) so expressly foretold; Zion for
your sake shall be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the
mountain of the house, as the high places of the forest, Mich. 3. 12.

Thus was the admired Naomi become now another Marah. The joyous City and
people made a sad spectacle of astonishment, a second Shilo, a pillar of salt,
a terror and warning to all.

Men and Brethren! let us not deceive our selves, sin it is no trifle, nor can
God be mocked. He that spared not Jerusalem, how shall he spare us, if we tread
under foot the things that belong to our peace?

The Text it is one of those previous signs, which should forerun Ierusalems
ruin. Many whereof (as Aretius very well observes) Ad diem judicii quoque
accommodari possint, they do as well suit with, and may as safely be applied
to, these last days of the world, as those of Ierusalems fall. So that we may
too truly say; this day is this Scripture fulfilled, iniquity abounds and the
love of many waxes cold.

Iniquity, that is, (taking the word as Grotius in a restrictive sense) the
iniquity of persecutions, the continuance and increase of their savage
cruelties against Christians. Such a bloody trade did the Devil then drive in
those primitive perfecutions. Oh what abundant cause of thankfulness to God
have we! to whom Divine providence has reserved milder times, times of
serenity and freedom in the profession of Christian religion. May we be wise
unto soberness, and make a right improvement of our mercies.

Or 2dly, Iniquity, that is (say others) those manifold scandals, which not
long after did arise, some from the persons seducing, such as Benchochab, that
false son of the stars, with his wild rabble after him: some from the numerous
heaps of persons seduced, crying lo here, and lo there! in a mere phrenzy of
delusion; whereby the luster of the Christian Church became greatly ecclipsed,
and multitudes (no doubt) unhappily cooled, and taken off from the due
embracement of the Gospel.

Such sad spectacles (both the one and the other) have most ages afforded: so
prone have some been to believe a lie. And so unable have others been, to step
over this stone of offense, and to continue (notwithstanding this sore
temptation) a sober constant love to deserted, slighted truth.

3ly, And lastly, Iniquity, that is, taking the expression (as some others) at
a greater latitude, it then imports, Communem naturae humanae pravitatem, the
common pravity of humane nature. As if our Savior had said, this as another
Nilus shall overflow all its banks. Exiliet fraenis Natura remotis.
The reins being laid loose, mankind shall be seen to run even wild into all
excess of vice: (...), that is, 'twill not be the bare subsistence and being of
sin, but sin multiplied and increased: measures of iniquity heaped, and running
over; sin rampant, with all circumstances of hainousness accompanying of it:
fulfilling that ancient similitude of the prophet; the press is full, the fats
overflow, their wickedness is great, Joel. 3. 13.

Such (says our Savior) will be the forepart of the seen, and the latter as
dismal; The love of many shall wax cold. That love which is the end of the
commandment, that love which is the fulfilling of the whole law; (...), it
shall lose its vital heat and warmth. It shall become in this hard season, as
it were frozen to death; disheartened, and driven off the stage by the violence
of sin. An issue sad enough, but too likely to ensue where sin prevails. Vera
pietas extinguetur, so Gerhard. the prodigious torrent and inundation of sin,
shall even quench, and discourage almost all practice or owning of any piety
or virtue.

We have in the words (without any labor of more curious division) the cause
and effect, the antecedent and consequent, all of the same sad complexion; sin
upon sin, and misery upon misery as devouring waves immediately following one
another. Iniquity shall abound, and the love of many shall wax cold.

From the verse as it stands capable of a various aspect, we have several
weighty truths emergent, such as may sadden us, but such as must also concern
us.

1. Looking upon the words in their causality and influence they bear, the
former to the latter, we may thence observe; the growth and increase of sin,
it is an extreme prejudice and hindrance to all goodness. Because iniquity shall
abound, the love of many shall wax cold.

2. Looking upon the words as they stand in conjuncture with the times they
point unto, we may then observe; All those seasons when people both might and
should be best, it may so fall out, that they prove then far worst.

3. The last view of the words is in some respects yet sadder; Looking on them
as one of the previous signs of Ierusalems destruction, they plainly import;
The increase of sin, the decay of piety, they are things fatal and ominous to
any people, presages of impending calamity, where these go before we may justly
fear the tragical sequels they here relate to. Then shall there be great
tribulation. verse. 21.

1. Looking upon the words in that causality and influence the former bear to
the latter, we may thence observe, the growth and increase of sin, it is an
extreme prejudice and hindrance to all goodness. Because iniquity shall
abound, the love of many shall wax cold; sin, it is as the weeds in the field,
their increase impairs the whole crop of corn; or as that venomous tree the
Arcadian Yew-tree; which (as Pliny relates) casts a deadly killing shade;
nothing kindly thrives wherever that spreads its branches. That men as men, owe
to God a life of virtue, and as Christians a life of more transcendent piety;
all our hearts, and indeed the whole world must freely yield, and Echo, Yes.
But alas? where sin sets up its hellish standard, how shall this be performed?
Humane nature is weak and example proves more then whole loads of arguments,
Pecorum ritu antecedentium gregem sequimur, pergentes non qua sit eundum sed
qua itur; said Seneca very truly; we are like sheep following the common tract
of others, though never so far out our way: principles of good are but faint
and weak even in the best: when the iron age comes on indeed, the next news is,
Vict a jacet pietas.
Vice goes up, and the sacred interest of virtue that goes as fast down.

Daily experience shows it in things natural. Contraries (we say) abide not
together. They are of a contending nature; the one chaseth away the other. Thus
where darkness comes, light is forced to go: Thus where the extremity of cold
prevails, the more desirable warmth and heat are lost. The case, it is
parallel in a diviner sense: after this manner (says the Apostle) does sin
(...), Romans 7. 23. It fights, and fights in earnest against the whole
interest of holiness. It seems to cry out againg piety, as the Edomites did
against Jerusalem; Raze it, raze it, even to the ground. Let but evil once get
up, and that will quickly bring down whatever is good. Where the one usurps the
other becomes dethroned.

To be truly religious in the best times it is much, but to be such in bad
times, it is almost a miracle: If ill words be enough (as the Apostle observes)
to corrupt good manners; ill words, and ill works put both together, are much
more able to do it. In such a common degeneracy one Lot, one Noah is a great
raritie in Gods own reckoning. Thee (that is thee only) have I seen righteous
before me in this generation, Genesis 7. 1.

To put the case into a familiar way of instance; when Atheism and contempt of
religion shall generally reign, how shall an ingenuous person (without very
much conflict in himself) be able to bear up any due acknowledgments of God in
all his ways? when almost all places shall run into drunkeness and excessive
healths, how shall the most sober person contain himself within the due bounds
of temperance? when uncleanness and all manner of wanton lusts shall appear
Epidemical, impudent, and as the sin of Sodom; how hard is it then to observe
and honor chastity as it ought? when people shall every where become
effeminate and fond in their attire, how loath shall we be to expose our selves
to the scorn of others, by continuing a plain, decent modest habit? when
profane swearing shall grow the common dialect, how prone will our own lips be
to take up those unhappy accents? when every novell wild opinion, shall grow
the more creditable religion, who can then (without very much grace,) steadily
consist with ancient sound doctrine? Lastly (to ask no more of these fadning
questions) when debauchedness and drollery shall grow the only gentile mode, oh
how ready shall we all then be, to grow ashamed of holiness and the fear of
God? Thus may a righteous cause become oppressed, and religion it self even
laughed to scorn through the insolences of sin.

Under such hard circumstances, the best of men may be prone to fall into such
convulsive fits, as one sometimes expressed; Ah! quoties mecum dixi numquid ego
solus sapio? etc. It is the secret language of many a good man's heart; Lord! my
judgment is satisfied, my affection settled; I could truly say; methinks no life
like a life of serious piety. But when I look abroad into the world, I see it is
far otherwise: Lo, there, rioting and drunkenness, chambering and wantoness,
strife and envying. And these things, I must confess, almost quench and cool
all my former willing thoughts for heaven: I could often lay my hand upon my
heart, and say; what? am I wiser, am I better then others? who, or what do I
take my self to be?

Oh my Brethren! A holy life it is not without its difficulties; Lo, here the
snare unseen, the temptation that presses so hard upon the most candid
persons; They are many times better inwardly then they know to show themselves
outwardly; Others are bad, and this makes them half ashamed to be good: Loath
they are to disoblige, loath to do any thing, which might seem to reflect on the
vices of others. And this makes us still at our former loss; sin depresseth
better things: When that is at its highest Tropic, Religion is usually then at
its lowest.

We commonly say (and the preceding instances are evidence enough of it) that
scarce any man sins singly to himself alone: he becomes a snare and danger
to others. At this unhappy rate have the overflowings of ungodliness in these
last days drowned many. The devils work proves done to his hand. Ingentious
natures become daily debauched, hopeful inclinations immediately blasted, green
unpoiz'd years easily drawn aside. And all this through the common increase of
sin. Thus as the Poet said, is Astraea driven away; or rather thus may we say,
is Piety weakened and wounded amongst us.

Honored and Beloved! the consideration it is momentous, it is truly great and
weighty, it calls upon us all in our several places, to be real and earnest
for the suppressing of evil, lest otherwise that pulls down whatever is good:
our kindness to sin, it is our unkindness to God. So far as we countenance
vice, so far we frown upon virtue; and tread under foot whatever is honest,
whatever is lovely, whatever is praiseworthy in the sight of God, or men.

2dly, Looking upon the words as they stand in conjuncture with the times they
point to, we may then observe; At those seasons when people both might and
should be best, it may so fall out that they prove then far worst.

We may look upon the present arraignment as relating either to the sins of the
Jews or of the Gentiles. It Is the same truth we have, the same equal grounds
for the observation in both.

1. In reference to the Jews:

'Twas Gods complaint in the prophet; When I would have healed Israel, then the
iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, Hos. 7. 1. An extreme improper season. The
accent of time when, made the offense sevenfold the greater. 'Twas sin very ill
timed. Such was Ierusalems case. The Messiah was now come, on this very design,
That he might destroy the works of the devil, the darkness was now passed, and
the true light shining, life and immortality (those dear desirable things)
brought now to light. The times of former ignorance God had winked at: but now
called upon all men every where to repent. The Apostles (those blessed
Ministers of state) ready at hand to assist in this heavenly work. A definitive
time prefixed, (as in the Ninevites case) yet within a few years, or it would be
too late. Temple and City, and People, would all lie under ashes, if the sore
threatened judgment were not prevented by a religious speedy turning to God.

But lo, after all, in stead of grapes, behold wild grapes, in stead of
holiness to the Lord, it proves (as the Apostle relates their case) far
otherwise; A filling up their sins that wrath might come upon them to the
uttermost, 1 These. chap. 2. ver. 15, 16.

Jerusalem that very people to whom Christ had so divinely preached; Never man
spoke like this man, John 7. 46. that very people over whom he had so
pathetically mourned, And when he was come near, he beheld the City and wept
over it, Luke 19. 41. that very people for whom after all their indignities,
and in the midst of all his own extremest Agonies, he yet so affectionately
prayed, Father, forgive them for they know not what they do, Luke 23. 34. that
very people toward whom his bowels had always so particularly, so tenderly
yearned, Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem! how often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as an hen gathers her chickens? Math. 23. 37. yet this, this
very people, as if incapable of being obliged by all the methods of love and
sweetness; nothing can relish, nothing seems to take with them but sin and
hell: Iniquity abounds.

Men and Brethren! who can conceive how far the hopefullest persons, the
fairest seasons may fall short of divine expectation? 'Twas Ierusalems case, it
was their sin, it is our danger.

Or 2dly, If we take the words as relating to the sin of the Gentiles, the
aggravation is still the same. now was their Accepted time, now was their Day
of salvation. Now were those wild branches to be ingrafted with so much honor
into the good Olive: Divine grace, hitherto so great a stranger to them, and
they to that, sought now for their embraces, this was their heavenly nuptial
day, Lo (says the Apostle) we turn to the Gentiles; that is, to carry, and
tender to them that kingdom, those treasures of mercy, which you Jews so
unworthily turn your backs upon, how justly might the worth of the message make
the feet of those holy men who brought these blessed tidings beautiful and
welcome to them? yet here also, (as if all flesh were wilfully set upon
walking contrary to God) we find the holy City trodden under foot by these
Gentiles, and by them polluted with Idols.

The religious Jerusalem was now turned into a profane Aelia; A swines head
set up at the gates in derision of the Jews: And (that they might at once bid
the more open defiance to Christianity, and give the fullest establishment to
Heathenisme) a temple is set up for Jupiter with all Paganish solemnities upon
Mount Zion.

It might have then been said with very little alteration as in the Psalms; The
blood of thy Apostles and primitive Martyrs have they shed like water in the
streets; the dead bodies of thy Saints have they given to the beasts of the
earth, not only putting them to death but (as Tacitus though a heathen
confesses) Pereuntibus addita ludibria, ut serarum tergis contecti, canum
laniatu interirent, etc. The most barbarous inhumane cruelties (cruelties not
fit to be related for their unparalled savageness) were frequently added, in
the manner of taking away the lives of these holy men; making the Christians
extremest dying torments their play, their sport, and pastime. So that look
which way we will, we have much one and the same joyless prospect still before
us, Iniquity every where abounds.

And now may we too justly come from Jerusalem home to our selves: He that
should sometime since have asked us here in England; If God should put up the
sword of blood and war once more into its sheath; If God should pity our wild
confusions, and restore our ancient rightful Government in peace; If God should
recall his destroying Angel, and arrow of noisome pestilence, sparing a remnant
of us as brands plucked out of the fire; would we after such severe judgments,
after such signal mercies wallow as swine in the mire of fin any more? I know
we should have answered with indignation, as Hazael did to the Prophet; Is thy
servant a dog that I should do this thing? But, not to dispute that question;
we may thankfully say, men we are, not dogs: and yet as dogs have we returned
to this vomit.

Let me (as Samuel once said to the Israelites) reason a little with you before
the Lord in this matter. Can we in cool blood think that we were delivered to
commit all these evils? Or that vicious courses carry any thing of a reasonable
manlike return to divine goodness for such tender mercies? can we come off at
the bar of our own conscience, with any excuse that holds water, that bears
worth or weight in it? Do we thus requite the Lord, Oh foolish people and
unwise? Shall good nature and Education teach us better carriage toward men,
for kindnesses received from them, and shall not Religion and grace much more
keep us from returning evil for good unto God? Has former history brought such
honorable reports to us, of others that have been so eminently good in bad
times, and shall future history transmit our names with so much disgrace to
posterity, for being as wrechedly bad in good-times? Oh that this danger and
reproach might be rolled from us.

What we might and should be, under those manifold advantages and mercies which
(blessed be God) we comfortably enjoy, our own consciences are able to inform
us. What we are, it is matter of amazement to most that know or hear of us.

Former ages in this Island (it may be) have had their peculiar stains; as
Gild^s and several other Writers pathetically enough relate. But such a general
irruption of all sorts of sin as now, we scarce find in any history. If
heretofore times have been shamelesly dissolute, it is now much more. The
foundations themselves are very far out of course. It Is become with many open
Atheism toward God; the Almightly himself is not spared. It Is become with many
mere giddy skepticism in the most fundamental points of faith; that faith which
is reverently to be embraced, not rudely or desultoriously to be tossed to and
fro. It Is become with many common schism and separation from the public
assemblies of the Church. A general irreverence, contempt and scorn of almost
all Government.

And what too easily follows from such untoward premises, the utmost
immoralities of life. Those evils which modest nature would heretofore have
startled at, they grow now the fashion and familiar practice of multitudes,
what horrid swearing! the first and chief language that is heard from many
children in the open streets: what common drunkenness! what wretched lewdness!
as if we might abuse our selves, and dishonor our bodies, those bodies, which
should be as so many Temples to the holy Ghost, after any fordid sensual rate,
as we please.

What intolerable phantasticalnesse of habit! what filthy laciviousness of
speech! what loathsome debauchednesse (as the Sanies of Hell) upon the whole
Conversation! so that as Reverend Hammond complains) were it not for some few
ancient primitive spirited persons, we might have reason to think and say; That
Christian men are grown the impurest part of the world.

It Is a smart exprobration we meet with in Salvian upon this account, Non
sufficient multis consuetudinarij reatus, non vinolentiae, non adulteria, non
homicidia; nisi manus etiam in Deum injiciant. The ordinary rates of sin would
not then serve men's turns, they were furiously set upon it (like those Giants
in the Poet) to fly in the very face of God himself.

Men and brethren! we must with blushing confess; to these high spring tides
of sin, to this exorbitant outrageous posture are we also come. The prophets
Indictment may be in several particulars found true against us; They overpasse
the deeds of the wicked, Ier. 5. 28. In defiance of all sober counsel from God
or man; many will be not only wicked, but (to use Solomon's phrase, Wicked
overmuch, though to the astonishment of beholders, they thereby destroy
themselves, and die before their time.

Magistracy we have, and Ministry we have; And blessed be God, we have them.
But still (like the churlish Quartan Ague, that stubborn dedecus medicorum) as
if the disease were too strong for the physic; or our distemper above the
means of cure: much so it fares with us: sin proves (as those sons of
Zerviah) too hard for us, it seems to bear no check; but rather strugleth to
get further ground of us. And we must lament together, both Magistrates and
Ministers; whether through defectiveness in us, or through averseness and
renitencies in the people, or through the just displeasure of God against this
whole Age; so it is, the good work of God for the suppressing of vice and
promoting of virtue and piety, succeeds but very poorly upon our hands.

These things are not spoken, that we should as ships in a sea-storm fall fowl
one upon another. God forbid! Obliquities of this nature were the adding of
evil to evil, that our guilt might become yet greater. He that is without sin,
let him cast the first stone at his neighbor.

It Is not the nature or temper of true holiness to make much popular noise in
the world; as if we were then only the brave Heroes, and Champions for
Religion, when we can most satyrically lash at others, No, no: every man stands
or falls to his own master. The greatest complainants, (if the case be
impartially searched,) are sometimes found, persons as deeply in fault as any.

The best, the holiest may safely lay their hands in a due modestness upon
their hearts, and say; Are there not with us, even with us also, sins against
the Lord our God?

The best acquitment of our selves in times of common corruption, were, to walk
as Noah, and to grieve as Lot; Ingenuously to mourn, and exemplarily to deport
our selves, every man in his place, as becomes persons that truly fear God.

3ly, The last aspect of the words, is upon some account (in reference to the
consequences) yet sadder. As they are one of the previous signs of Ierusalems
destruction, they import; The increase of sin, the decay of Piety, they are the
presages of much impending calamity.

1. The increase of sin; what diseases, and infections are to our bodies
personally, such are common raging vices to Kingdoms, and Nations publicly;
Apparent ill habits, moral Pestilences. If the former may be death to us, the
latter may be as truly ruin to them. The Amorites sin was the Amorites undoing.

We are told in the Prophet, Amos 9. 8. The eyes of the Lord God are upon the
sinful kingdom; and I will destroy it from off the face of ths earth, says
the Lord. Thus is sin the abomination that makes desolate wherever it comes.
The Achan, the accursed thing that always troubles Gods Israel.

There is no delusion more frequent then for wicked persons to flatter
themselves with hopes of favorable fair issues, in their most villainous
fowlest actions. It Is taken for granted, some may be so bold, so hardy, as to
say; I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst But it seems the Conclusion is too hastily drawn; Gods
reckoning and theirs agree not. The Lord will not spare him; but the anger and
jealousy of the Lord shall smoke against that man. Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. so
inseparable a connection there is between the cause and the effect. Cain quickly
found it a real truth. He has no sooner done his bloody work, but the next
tidings is; My punishment is greater then I can bear. Genesis 4. 13. (...) my sin,
one and the same word is left in the Hebrew to express both, in token that the
sinner carries his punishment in his sin. If he will needs have the one; God
will see that he shall also have the other.

The case it is plainly the same toward whole Nations, that we find here
toward one Cain: If there be any difference, it is this; some pious learned
persons who have most sollicitously observed the methods and history of Divine
Providence have thought; that God who shows many times such great patience
toward particular persons in their sins; proceeds usually with a more visible
severity, when sin becomes common and National; when all flesh shall have
corrupted their way; then is a time for God to take the case more immediately
into his own hand, then may we fear days of vengeance and visitation.

All ages, all histories have jointly exemplified the reality of this danger:
thus (Xenophon relates) the Persian Monarchy became ruined: (...),
(...). etc.


In part through their impieties toward God, in part through their injuries and
evil courses toward men. Thus the Grecians, and thus after them the Romans,
they also fell. As vice was seen to rise, they and their Empire were as
manifestly observed to decline and fall.

An hundred Walls (as the Comoedian sportingly said in that serious matter) are
no desence to a vicious City; It lies still open and naked to all misery.
(...).


Thus firmly was this great truth believed, thus openly asserted among the
Heathen by their own Poets. For these things (say they) God has visited, and
for these things God will yet visit. So that, if we either credit Gods word or
man's experience, we may safely say; sin leads to ruin.

2dly, The decay of Piety, that is likewise as hard an abodement: we find this
very case proposed as Moses's, life or death, a blessing or a curse, and the
sequel left to the peoples practical choice. The Lord is with you, while ye be
with bim: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. 2. Chron. 15. 2. As if
the great Crisis lay perfectly here; And the truest calculation of all public
welfare or misery, were to be derived from our faithfulness, or unfaithfulness
to God.

Religion it is as those sacred ministrations in the Temple; the preservatives
of the City. And on the contrary, where the Holy fire goes out: where the
Daily sacrifice cease; calamity seems there to follow (as it were) of
course.

When Abraham gives over interceding, then Sodom burns down to ashes indeed.
When Moses's hands fall down through faintness, then Amalck prevails: When
there is none found to stand in the gap, then God powers out his indignation
upon Israel: When the Disciples fall to slumber, we may too truly say; then is
Satan's hour and the power of darkness.

I confess, we neither need, nor can believe, that every stir and bustle that
is preposterously made in the world about Religion, goes for real piety in the
sight of God. We have all of us more of dross then gold; More of carnal passion
and animosity, then of spiritual devotion and zeal for God or Heaven. Religion,
it is a sacred concern, and must be modestly, not boisterously managed. There is
scarce any consideration sadder then that of those manifold dismal mischiefs
that have been acted from mistakes of this nature.

But still there is such a thing, as a cordate affection, and forwardness for
Religion; Our bounden duty, and of great price in the sight of God: and
wherever this first love is once lost, we may justly fear, Gods Candlestick is
in imminent danger of being removed.

It were extreme arrogance, and disrespect toward the common sense of mankind,
for any of us to think, that slights of Religion are safe things. Italy (says
the Poet) has smarted sorely upon this very account; D^j multa neglecti dedere
Hesperiae mula luctuosae.


And we find Livy taking up the case into a peremptory standing assertion;
Omnia prospera eveniunt colentibus Deos, adversa spernentibus; all things
(says he) succeed well where Religion is duly observed; and where that lies
neglected all things go usually as backward and ill.

But we shall close up this Consideration with a greater Testimony then any of
these, even that of dying Moses, who taking his last leave of Israel, and
having forewarned them, that in case of their revolt from God, he would heap up
mischiefs upon them; at length seals up his whole Discourse with this moving
Argument, putting duty and mercy both together. Observe (says he) all the
words of this law; for it is not a vain thing for you, because it is your life,
and through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land whither ye go,
over Jordan to possess it: Deuteronomy. 32. 46, 47. May it be our care to approve our
selves faithful in the one; may it be our lot to experience Gods goodness in
the other.

The Application.
And now Honored and Beloved! I have but one Use to make of the whole: but it
calls for the utmost seriousness at all our hands.

Such (as you have heard) such is the riseness, such the contagiousness, such
the destructiveness, of Sin. In Gods most holy Name, let us fear and tremble,
lest we also fall under this sad infection, and so iniquity become^h our ruin.

If sovereign Antidotes be so greatly esteemed in times of common Pestilence;
(unless we do most wretchedly prevaricate in the whole profession of Religion)
thus highly must we value, thus heartily must we seek Gods Grace, as the souls
divine, and only true Antidote in evil times.

And blessed be God, a holy watchfulness (duly kept up) may preserve us, while
security and carelessness would most certainly betray us into danger. Watch and
pray, that ye enter not into Temptation.

Diogenes Laertius reports of Socrates, though he lived in Athens, where the
plague often raged, even to extremity in his time: yet by his strict Temperance
he kept himself in perfect health through all those dangers. Such is the world
likely enough to be; An infected Athens, Oh that we may be found as Socrates,
in a state of better health, untouched of all the evils of it.

Our Duty herein it is truly great, such as may prove a full employment for the
whole soul: but still such, as approves it self to every man's Conscience in
the sight of God.

We may freely say (as once Moses,) What does God the Lord require of us, but
to keep our selves inoffensively clear from the sins of these last days? not
waving the good offices of love or kindness due to the persons of any: and yet
pertaking in evil with none.

Like Cassianus his Jewel-signet; Universa quae occurrunt ad sui statum
transformat; nullius vero incursibus insigniri potest. Such should every one of
us likewise be. As a seal of Diamond, giving fair impressions of virtue (upon
every occasion) to others: but (of that firmness, as) not to suffer the least
impressions of vice to be made by any means upon our selves.

How happy, oh how lovely were it! could men be truly brought to this good
consistency, raised to this harmony with Heaven, settled in this excellency of
Spirit, this steadiness of Life! neither superciliously forward, nor yet
sinfully facile: but discreetly Religious. Then neither should Iniquity abound,
nor Piety decay; then neither should our welfare fly from us, nor those
miseries which are the common attendants on sin, hover with such frightful
wings about us.

The general mending of bad times (we must all confess) it is a great work; it
may be too great for particular persons, and beyond their Sphere. Abi frater in
cellam, etc. (as he said) Our private prayers and tears may better become us,
then excentrical agitations. But still it is very much, that every one might
truly do in his place, so much, that could all be fairly persuaded, the whole
might soon become happily redressed. However at the lowest ebb, Noah, Daniel
and Job, (all good men) may yet deliver their own souls, when they cannot
prevail to save the land.

But why speak we thus dejectedly? Be of good cheer all ye that fear God, Dabit
Deus his quoque finem. I am prone to hope, it might be safely said; Atheism,
and giddiness (those hateful short lived things) will quickly run themselves
out of breath, and the serious fear of God shall yet become a praise in the land

Religion is an ancient weather-beaten Ship, that has successfully out-ridden
many a hard Sea-storm, and behold it is still above water: or like those
Witnesses in the Revelation: Profane men may rant and huff, they may deride
and insolently run over it, supposing that they have dispatched and slain it:
But this kind of crucifying effects little; it hinders not the promised
Resurrection. Our Savior after his sufferings, and the Witnesses after their
slaughter, they both presently revive. And thus Religion after all these rude
affronts, after all these vain attempts to eclipse it, usually shines forth
(to the joy of all good men) as the Sun out of a dark cloud with much brighter
rays.

To draw to a Close; The Ends of the World are come upon us; evil Days. Days
full of Sin, full of danger, as an holy man said, Omnia periculis plena, plena
laqueis, All things, all places are (as it were) filled up with Temptations and
snares: Pude^ non esse impudentem, as St. Austin so pathetically cried out. It
is come (says he) to that height of impudence, that a virtuous person is p^^
almost to blushing, if he be not as shamelesly forwa^d in evil as the worst.

Now (if ever) may we say as the Apostle, (only, Oh that it may be conducted
with all due circumstances of candor!) Save your selves from this untoward
generation: Partake not with wicked men in their sins, that you partake not
with them in their plagues.

This good care we owe to our selves, and our own preservation; But that is not
all; There is somewhat more we still owe to God; A striving against sin, Hebr.
12. 4. (...), exerting our utmost strength and spirits even to an Agony, in
this Sacred Combat, to foil and bring down the Enemy.

Upon these terms we became initiated into Christian Religion. Thus to renounce
the Devil and all his works; Thus to bear up (as Israel against Ama'ek) a
perpetual hostility against evil. We ^a^e opened our mouth to the Lord (as
Iephthah) and ^^nnot go back.

^his is that Holy War, to which we are all called, (that harml^ss war which
alone aims to save, not to destroy;) And happy are those that are found Gods
Worthies in it. Such virtuous Cato's did the Romans account as needful to
contend against the vices of peace at home, as their most valiant Scipio's to
fight their enemies in times of war abroad.

We may slothfully meditate many foolish excuses: but certainly while there is
so much of sin up and down the world; Every true Christian must hold himself
very highly concerned, to appear so much the more visibly for God, and goodness
in his place. Christianity it is not the bare acknowledgment of that worthy name
by which we are called; but the practical exhibiting of such a Conversation as
may be fairly presidential, a real Pattern, and Copy to all.

And praised be God, it is possible; (as he said in the Poet) Exemploque suo
mores reget. The strength of solid good Examples may very far stem the stream
of Vice; and by degrees recover men from the error of their ways, to the love
and acceptance of better things.

Goodness of Life it is an Argument will be resented, and heard, when (it may
be) the lowdest words are not. Conversation best wins Conversation; and is
always the most prevailing Orator in this case, that may gain many happy
converts; where other means (though truly righteous) may yet prove abortive,
and miscarry.

And now could this desirable effect, this pious conquest be attained; we
should soon find the consequence like that rare passage, that religious Close
between Caecilius, and Octavius in Minutius Felix; Both joy'd, neither grieved.
Both Victors and yet neither Captive. Such might our case also be; a mutual
mercy, a general Triumph, an universal joy, satisfaction, and honor on all
hands.

Our stations may be different, (as the Occasion which we this Day wait upon,
shows) but our Duty it is to all of us (at least for substance) but one; An
unfeigned, upright approving our selves to God in all well-doing.

May we so resolve, and so practice; we have this just comfort, that none can
take from us; whoever falls, this man stands; whoever is found a curse or
shame to the place or times he lives in, lo! here is one whom Posterity shall
freely acknowledge, both a Blessing and Honor to his Country.

We may cheerfully say, as the spirit of God to the Churches in the Revelation;
They that defile not their Garments, shall walk with God. Or as our blessed
Savior in the Consolatory Promise, immediately added, to allay the sad tidings
of the Text; Though iniquity should abound, and the love of never so many wax
cold; yet He that endures to the end, the same shall be saved.

Which God of his Mercies vouchsafe to us.

FINIS.

