Sir Courtly Nice: OR, It cannot Be.

A COMEDY.

As it is Acted by His MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by Mr. Crown.

LONDON, Printed by H. H. Jun. for R. Bently, in Russel Street, Covent Garden,
and Jos. Hindmarsh, at the Golden-Ball over against the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill. M.DC.LXXXV.

The Names of the Persons.
LOrd Belguard. Leonora's Brother, in love with Violante. Sir Courtly Nice A
Fop, overcurious in his Diet and Dress: In love with Leonora. Farewell. A young
Man of Quality and Fortune, his Rival. Surly. A morose, ill natured, negligent
Fellow, in love with Violante. Crack. A young subtle intriguing Fellow.
Hothead. A choleric Zealot against Fanatics. Testimony. A Canting
Hypocritical Fanatic. Violante. A Lady of Quality and Fortune, in love with
Belguard. Leonora. Belguard's Sister, in love with Farewell. Aunt. Leonora's
Governess -- an old Amorous, envyous Maid.

Scene Covent Garden.

To his Grace the Duke of ORMOND, Lord Steward of His Majesty's Household,
Chancellor of the University of Oxford.
May it please your Grace,
THis Comedy was Written by the Sacred Command of our late most Excellent King,
of ever blessed and beloved Memory. I had the great good Fortune to please Him
often at His Court in my Masque, on the Stage of Tragedies and Comedies, and so
to advance my self in His good opinion; an Honor may render a wiser Man than I
vain; for I believe he had more equals in extent of Dominions than of
Understanding. The greatest pleasure he had from the Stage was in Comedy, and
he often Commanded me to Write it, and lately gave me a Spanish Play called No
Puedeser: Or, It cannot Be. out of which I took part of the Name, and design of
this. I received the Employment as a great Honor, because it was difficult;
requiring no ordinary skill and pains to build a little Shallop, sit only for
the Spanish South Seas, into an English Ship Royal; but I believe my self able
for the Work, because he thought so, who understood me and all Men, better than
I only knew my self, encouraged by Royal judgment that never was mistaken, I
have attained a success I never should have met with, had I only followed my
own feeble Genius, which often deceives me. That I may enjoy the little fortune
I have got with the better reputation, and not ramble the World like a blind
Author, observing none but my self, I make this humble Application to your
Grace. I am sure all the World will approve my choice. I cannot be guilty of
Flattery if I would; nor slander Wit (if I had any) by fulsome and wanton
Paintings. Here will be no Trial of skill how I can praise, Nature has done it
to my Hands, and devised and exposed finer Ideas, than I am able to Translate.
A gracefulness of Person, excellence of Understanding, largeness of Heart, a
Loyalty, Gallantry, Integrity, Humility, and many Qualities above my
description. Fortune also has been more wise than usual, She frequently honors
and enriches others to her own disgrace -- but here She shares in the Praise,
and Commends her own Wisdom, in what She bestows on your Grace. She has
advanced Honor in Advancing you, Titles, Greatness and Command may be proved,
they have attained you. Wealth has a value in your Hands, It Is no vile pardon,
poor flatterer, servile Lacquey, wretched Prisoner; but excellent Minister of a
just wise and liberal Prince. Should I mention all the Qualities, that have
long gained you the highest Honors from Prince and People, I should rather
seem to describe a Province than a Man; for what single Province can afford
what are at once in your Grace, a General, a Statesman, Courtier, and all in
perfection; and which is rare in such company, a Martyr. What has your Grace
both done and suffered, for our Religion, Laws, Liberties and Honor? And not
only in the former times of Rebellion, but the latter of Confusion? When the
pretended Protestants of the times, out of their Zeal against all Popish
Doctrines, abhorring you for adhering to good Works.

As an Englishman, I am bound in justice, to pay you all the Honors I can.
You have been an Ornament, and support to the Crown and Church of England, both
in your Person and Posterity. Many great Men no doubt have sprung from your
example, but none equalling those descended from your self. The late brave Earl
of Ossery, advanced the Honor of our Nation, both by Sea and Land. It Is hard
to say in which Element he made us most renowned, and for which virtue. He was
no more to be vanquished by falsehood than fear; Loyalty, Fidelity, and
Gallantry, are Virtues inseparable from the House of Ormond; we find them in
every branch of it, and at all seasons. The Earl of Arran, Attacked in the late
days of Confusion, a Bloody, Popular, and Formidable Error in its Camp,
Fortified and Defended by all the strength of England; and for ever secured his
own, and so much of the Public reputation as was entrusted to him; managing
that charge with the same Wisdom, Justice, and Fidelity he has done the Kingdom
of Ireland, and many other great Commands, for the Honor and Service of the
King. In the Young Earl of Ossery we have great assurances, the Grandfather and
Father shall live in him, and receive the last rewards of Virtue Men are
capable of in this World, to have their Honor and Happiness extend beyond
their own beings. And herein the History of your Grace seems a Comment on the
Fifth Commandment, you have always Honored the Father of your Country, and
your Days of Honor continue long in the Land, in your own Person, and your
Illustrious Race. A useful President to England.

That I may approve my self an honest and grateful Englishman, is one reason
of my Address: I have also other obligations on me. Your Grace has been a
Princely patron and encourager of Poetry; a Pleasant but Barren Country where
my Genius and inclination has cast me. I am entangled among the inclinations of
it, though it affords nothing but a good Air, a little vain reputation, and we
must climb for it, and shall miss it too, if envy or ill nature can hinder us.
There were no living, if some great Men elevated not only in Quality but
Understanding above the rest of the World, did not Protect us from these
Barbarians, because they know us. I beseech your Grace then give me leave to
pay my Duty to you. Many and great are your Revenues in Honor, in the Camp,
the Court, the Church, and the whole Commonwealth of Learning. The Poet may be
employed as well as the Historian. I have made but a small Collection, but I
have put it in hands that I hope will not soon embezle it. This Comedy has
raised it self such a fortune in the World, I believe it will not soon run
away. Give it leave to Honor it self with your great Name, and me with the
Title of,

May it please your Grace, Your Graces most Humble and Obedient Servant. John
Crown.

The Prologue.
WHat are the Charms, by which these happy Isles
Hence gained Heaven's brightest and eternal smiles?
What Nation upon Earth besides our own,
But by a loss like ours had been undone?
Ten Ages scarce such Royal worths display
As England lost, and found in one strange Day.
One hour in sorrow and confusion hurld,
And yet the next the envy of the World.
Nay we are blessed, in spite of us it is known,
Heavens choice for Us was better than our own.
To stop the blessings that oreflow this day,
What heaps of Rogues we pild up in the way?
We chose fit tools against all good to strive,
The sawciest, lewdest, Protestants alive.
They would have formed a blessed Church indeed,
Upon a Turn-coate Doctor's lying Creed.
To know if e're he took Degree is hard,
It Is thought he will have one in the Palace Yard,
Plot swallowers sure will Drink no more stuff down,
From that foul Pitcher when his Ears are gone.
Let us rely on Conscience, not on Cheats,
On Heavens wisdom, not on Juglers feats.
How greatly Heaven has our great loss supplied?
It Is no small Virtue heales a Wound so wide.
Nay in so little time to rear our Head,
To our own wonder, and our Neighbors dread.
They see that Valor Crowned with regal Power,
They often have seen what Laurels Crowned before.
Verse is too narrow for so Great a Name,
Far sounding Seas hourly repeat His Fame.
Our Neighbors vanquished Fleets often wafted over,
His Name to theirs and many a trembling Shore;
And we may go by His great Conduct led
As far in Fame as our Forefathers did.
At home he milder ways to Glory chose,
God like, by Patience he subdued his Foes;
Now they and their designs are Ruined all,
Beneath their fallen, accursed, Excluding Wall.
These are not all the blessings of this Isle,
Heaven on our Nation in a Queen does smile.
Whose Virtue's Grace by Beauty shine so bright,
All the Fair Sex to Virtue She Will invite;
And all the Clouds turn to a glorious Day,
By that Illustrious paire's united ray,
Who both Reform and Grace Us by their sway.
Epilogue.
It Is a hard Case, an Audience now to please,
For every Pallat's spoiled with some Disease.
Poor Plays as fast as Women now decay,
They Are seldom cared for after the first day;
How often have I heard true wit called stuff,
By Men with nothing in their Brains but Snuff?
Each Shante Spark, that can the Fashion hit,
Place his Hat thus, role full Forsooths a Wit;
And thinks his Clothes allows him judge of it.
The City Gallant, the Exchange being done,
Takes Sword at Temple Bar which Nice stuck on.
Comes here and passes for a Beaugarzoon.
Audacious Vizards too, so fast do grow,
You hardly can the Virtuous from 'em know.
Nay Parents now not likely can endure,
Their Childrens faults, but what is worse procure.
Of Old the Mother full of Parent sway,
Kept Miss a Vassal to her work all day;
And to the Wooing Spark Miss was not brought,
But some fine Golden thing her wheedle wrought:
Now you shall meet young Lady and her Mother,
Rambling in Hackny-Coaches masqu't together;
Yes, and to say the truth, to work they go,
Fine work but -- such as they will never show.
Unless some Not to draw a Fool to Wed,
And then he finds Miss rare at work a Bed.
But the Grand Randevouz is kept of late,
Exact at Nine, hard by over Chocholate,
Sad fate, that all the Christian Youth of the Nation,
Should be obliged to Jews for Procreation.
Nay, what is worse, that is, if reports be true,
Many a Christian Gallant there turns Jew;
That is, so often some rotten Strumpet plyes him,
The Chirurgion's forced at last to Circumcise him.
Our Bridges-street is grown a Strumpet Fair,
Where higling Bawds do Palmb their rotten Ware.
There Fowler like the watching Gallant Pores
Behind his Glove, to get a shot at Whores;
And from his tongue lets fly such charming Words,
That strait he carrys off the wounded Birds.
Another waits above in the great Room,
Till a new Cargozoon of Strumpets come.
There by three Glasses placed the Affected Dunce,
Acts you Four Courtly-Nices all at once;
Our Gallerys too, were finely used of late,
Where roosting Masks sat cackling for a Mate:
They came not to see Plays but act their own,
And had thronged Audiences when we had none.
Our Plays it was impossible to hear,
The honest Country Men were forced to swear:
Confound you, give your bawdy prating over,
Or Zounds, I Will fling you in the Pit, you bawling Whore --
This Comedy throws all that lewdness down,
For Virtuous Liberty is pleased alone:
Promotes the Stage to' the ends at first designed,
As well to profit, as delight the Mind.
A COMEDY Called Sir Courtly Nice: OR, It Cannot Be.
ACT. I.
Enter at several Doors Leonora and Violante. Scene, Lord Bellguard's House.
Leo. MY Dear --

(they embrace)
Vio. My Dear, how is it with thee? What amendment in thy Brothers humor, and
thy condition?


Leo. None.


Vio. Oh! thou break'st my heart, for I love him extremely, and am, I think, as
well beloved by him; but whilst he has this Disease upon him so mortal to
Liberty, dare venture on him no more, than if he had the Plague, or any other
Distemper dangerous to Life. For what is life without Liberty? To be his Wife
is worse than to be a Ghost, for that walks and enjoys a little chat sometimes,
but I must be laid by a Conjurer called a Husband for my whole life, I would
not be a Queen on the terms; no nor on any terms, because a Queen is confined
to Forms, so fond am I of Liberty; but next to that I love your Brother; I
would give all the World to cure him, is there no way?


Leo. None that I know off.


Vio. Must we then be for ever unhappy, I in the loss of him, and you in
Eternal Slavery?


Leo. I might have Liberty, but on such terms --


Vio. What Terms?


Leo. Marriage with such a Coxcomb, you know him -- Sir Courtly Nice.


Vio. A tempting Man, he has a vast estate.


Leo. But encumbered.


Vio. With what?


Leo. A Fop, it is morgag'd to a thousand expensive Follies, if it were not, I
would not drink water for the sake of a fine Bowl chained to the Well. The
Youth I love has a fair and free Estate.


Vio. Mr. Farewell is it not?


Leo. The same.


Vio. Ay, but he is forbidden Fruit.


Leo. I know it to my sorrow.


Vio. What Is the reason?


Leo. History must tell you. There has been a pique between our Families since
the Conquest; none were thought truly of our Blood, that had not that Scurvy in
it; because mine began to sweeten, my Father almost suspected my Legitimacy;
and left me no Fortune but on condition I retained the Ancient mark of our
House.


Vio. There arises then your Brothers great Authority. He has the disposal of
your Fortune, by consequence of your Person; Fortune is all Men seek now. They
are so cowed from Marriage, they will go Volunteers into a Battle but must be
pressed to marriage; and it is the Shilling does it.


Leo. Too true, But I believe Mr. Farewell of a more generous temper, he
addresses still.


Vio. It may be he does not know how it is with you, you have the Fame of Ten
thousand pound.


Leo. And the Money too, if I marry with my Brothers consent, not else.


Vio. That Is hard, but Mr. Farewell has enough for you both.


Leo. Ay, if he will venture on me; yet if he will I know not how to come at
him, I am so watched, not only at home but abroad. I never stir out but as they
say the Devil does, with Chains and Torments. She that is my Hell at home, is
so abroad.


Vio. A new Woman.


Leo. No, an old Woman, or rather an old Devil; nay worse than an old Devil, an
old Maid.


Vio. Oh! there is no Fiend so envious.


Leo. Right, she will no more let young People sin, that the Devil will let 'em
be saved, out of envy to their happiness.


Vio. Who is she?


Leo One of my own Blood, an Aunt.


Vio I know her, she of thy blood? she has not had a drop of it, these Twenty
Years; the Devil of envy sucked it all out, and left verjuice in the room.


Leo. True, this Aunt hangs on me like a daily Ague; but I had rather endure
her, then be cured by such a nonsensical Charm as Sr. Courtly is. And nothing
else can be applied to me; for to assist my governing Aunt, there is a whole
Army of Spies in the House; and over them two Spies General: And there my
Brother thinks he shows a Masterpiece of Policy.


Vio. Why? what are they?


Leo. Two, that will agree in nothing but one another confusion. The one is a
poor Kinsman of ours, so fierce an Enemy to Fanatics, that he could eat no
other meat; and he need no other Fire than himself to roast 'em, for he is
always in a flame when he comes near 'em, his Name is Hot-head.


Vio. And I warrant thee the other is a Fanatic.


Leo. Oh! a most Zealous Scrupulous one; with a conscience swadled so hard in
its Infancy by strict Education, and now Thump'd and Cudgel'd so sore with
daily Sermons and Lectures, that the weak ricketty thing can endure nothing.


Vio. Certainly these two, must make you sport.


Leo. Oh! their faces, Dresses, Names are jests. The Fanatick's Name's
Testimony.

Where is my Lord? Where Is my Lord?

Hot-head within.
Leo. Oh! I hear my Choleric Cousin Hot-head.

Enter Hot-head.
Hot. Where Is my Lord? Where Is my Lord, I say?


Leo. What would you do with my Lord?


Hot. Call him to an account if he were not my Cousin, cut his pate, it may be
Cudgel him. Heaven be thanked to Cudgel a Lord is no Scandalum Magnatum.


Leo. What Is the reason of all this anger?


Hot. He affront's me, he invites me to live in his house, and then keeps a
Fanatic to make a jest of me. He knows I sweat when I see one.


Leo. May be he has occasion for one.


Hot. What occasion? He is not in a Plot, is he? Fanatics are good for nothing
else that I know of.


Leo. Why not? Toads are good for something.


Hot. Ay, when they are hanged and dried, so is no Fanatic. He is such a
cankered Rogue, he does mischief when he is hanged; let him spread Ink upon
Paper and it raises blisters. -- But here the Rogue is.

Enter Testimony. [Sirrah! Sirrah, What Is your business in this House, Sirrah?


Test. What Authority have you to examine me, Friend?


Hot. Friend, you Dog! call me. Friend, I Will knock you down Sirrah.


Test. Poor Soul -- poor Soul --


Hot. You are an Impudent Rascal to call me poor Soul -- Sirrah, I have a
Loyalty and a good Conscience, and that is a better Estate, than any of your
Party have; and if you live in the House with me, I Will settle it on you with a
Pox to you.


Test. Yes, Mr. Hot-head I know you well enough, I know you would hang us all
if you could.


Hot. I need not Sirrah, for Heaven be praised now you begin to hang your
selves; I knew when Tyburn was bestowed upon the Priests and Jesuits, the
Fanatics and Re-publicans would not long be without it, for they are very fond
of all Church Lands, come, Sirrah, if you live here, I Will make you turn over a
new leaf, I Will make you go to Church, Sirrah.


Test. That Is more than you do your self Mr. Hot-head, you go not often to
Church.


Hot. What then? I Am for the Church, Sirrah. But you are against the Church,
and against the Ministers, Sirrah.


Test. I cannot be Edifyed by 'em, they are formal, weak, ignorant, poor Souls
-- Lord help 'em -- poor Souls.


Hot. Ignorant? you're an impudent Rascal to call Men of their Learning
Ignorant; there is not one in a hundred of 'em, but has taken all his Degrees at
Oxford, and is a Doctor, you Sot you.


Test. What signifies Oxford? cannot we be saved unless we go to Oxford?


Hot. Oxford don't lie out of the road to Heaven; you Ass.


Test. Pray what do they learn at Oxford? only to study Heathens; they will talk
of Aristotle in the public, they may be ashamed to name Aristotle among civil
People.


Hot. Oh! you Sot.


Test. Our Ministers are powerful Men. Oh! Forsooth I wish to Leo. you were
under one of our Ministers; you would find they would pierce you forsooth; they
would go to your inward parts.


Hot. This Rogue is talking Bawdy.


Test. They would show you the great -- great sinfulness of sin, that sin is
one of the sinfullest things in the whole World.


Hot. You senceless Rascal, what should be sinful but sin? what should be
foolish but a Fool?


Leo. Are not these a ridiculous Couple?


Test. Come this is very provoking, and very Profane; I shall have a sad time
on it in this wicked Family.


Hot. Wicked! Sirrah: What wickedness do you see in this Family?


Leo. Ay, Mr. Testimony, now we are all concerned, what Vices do you find among
us?


Test. Suppose I see not many Vices, morality is not the thing; the Heathens
had morality, and forsooth would you have your Coachman or your Footman to be
no better Men than Seneca?


Hot. A Coachman a better Man then Seneca?


Leo. I would have him be a better Coachman than I believe Seneca was.


Test. Ay, and a better Christian too, or woe be to him. But truly I see great
wantonness even in your self forsooth, -- the very Cook debauches you. --


Hot. How? call the Cook! -- Cook! -- Cook! --


Leo. The Cook debauch me, Sirrah?


Test. I mean by pampring you, Morning, Noon, and Night with one wanton
kickshaw or another. --


(...). You Coxcomb.


Leo. Sot.


Hot. Rascal, I thought the Cook had layn with my Cousin -- Sirrah, you deserve
to have your bones broke. Well Sirrah, since you find my Lords. Table is too
Iusty, I Will have it guelded; I Will make you keep Lens, and fast Wednesdays and
Fridays.


Test. I will not, I abhor it, it is Popery.


Hot. Then you shall fast Tuesdays and Thursdays.


Test. And then the Family will slander me, and say I do it out of
contradiction, -- I will not do it, I do not love to grieve the weak.


Hot. To grieve the strong thou mean, thy own strong stomach.


Test. You are offensive.


Hot. I will be more. I will watch you Sirrah, and know why my Lord feeds such
Rascals.


Test. I tarry not for his feeding, the Family is a sad Family, and I tarry out
of pure Bowels.


Hot. Out of empty Bowels, which you have a mind to fill, and it may be you may
fill other empty bellys, I mean among the Wenches, some of you Godly Rogues
play such tricks some times. I Will watch you Sirrah.

(Exit.
Test. And I Will watch you, my Spirit rises at this Man exceedingly.

(Exit.
Vio. These are a pleasant Couple.


Leo. Is not my Brother politic? These are to see no Provisions for wantonness
be conveyed to me from abroad, and be sure they will not agree to deceive
him. And that I may have none at home, My Brother will not venture a handsome
Servant in the house; he swears he will not be Brother in Law to er'e a Butler
or Footman in England; and he has culled for his Family, the most choice pieces
of deformity he could find in the Nation. I believe they are now altogether in
the Pantry, and my Aunt among 'em distributing their Breakfasts -- the Monsters
will be worth seeing -- open the Door. --

The Scene is drawn, and a Company of Crooked, Withered, ill-look'd Fellows are
at breakfast, and Aunt with them.
Aunt. How now? Who opened the Door without my leave? Neice, this is one of
your Girlish tricks, will you always be a Child? Will you never learn staidness
and gravity, notwithstanding the perpetual Counsel you have from me, the
perpetual displeasure I show at all sort of youthful Follies; do not you know
how I hate impertinent Youth?


Leo. Or any sort of youth to my knowledge.

(aside.)
Au. Do not I always tell you how sine a thing it is to be Grave; that Youth
with Gravity is very passable, and almost esteemed equal with years? Very wise
Persons will not be ashamed to match with Grave Youth; daily experience shows
it, and will you never leave? Fie -- fie -- fie -- I would not for the World
any Wise Sober Person of Quality that has an Inclination for you, should have
seen this rudeness in you, to Expose your Aunt in this manner, in her undress;
it might have created in him an aversion for you.


Leo. An aversion to me, to see your ill dress?

(aside.)
Au. Madam, I hope you will pardon the liberty I take in your presence.


Vio. Oh! good Madam. --


Au. Oh! Madam -- pardon me -- I know I commit a Solecism in good Manners, --
but you are a Lady that has a great deal of goodness, and a great deal of
worth. --


Vio. Oh! sweet Madam! --


Au. Oh! Madam! our Family has found it -- you are pleased to Honor us with
your Friendship. We may venture to expose our Frailties before you, Madam,
you will be so good to pardon -- Madam --


Vio. Oh! Madam! --


Au. Well really Madam -- I wonder where my Neice learns her wantonness, we are
the most reserved Family in the World. There were Fourteen Sisters of us, and
not one of us married. --


Vio. Is It possible?


Leo. To your great grief --

(aside.
Au. We were all so reserved. Oh! Madam! no Man durst presume to think of us;
-- I never had three love Letters sent to me in my whole life.


Vio. Oh! strange!


Au. Oh! we were very reserved. Well Madam I am very much out of Countenance to
appear thus before you.


Vio. Oh! Madam, every thing becomes you Madam.


Au. Oh! you are very obliging Madam. -- Do you hear Niece -- learn of this
Lady?


Leo. To flatter you. --

(aside.
Au. Madam I am extreme unfortunate, the affairs of the Family call me away
from your sweet Conversation.


Vio. the misfortune is mine, Madam.


Au. Oh! sweet Madam your most humble Servant.


Vio. Your humbler Servant dear Madam. Ha! ha! ha! what Exit Aunt. ridiculous
piece of Antiquity is this? Thy Brother has a great Honor for his Family since
he will keep such a relick of his Ancestors as this.


Leo. All the house is of a piece.


Vio. Nay if thou learn'st lewdness at home, thou have a great Genius to it.


Leo. Well, what do you think of my condition?


Vio. I like it.


Leo. Like it?


Vio. Ay, for I perceive your Brother has put the whole force of his Wit into
this Form of Government; now if we can baffle it, he will find it is a dream
fit for nothing but Utopia; and never torment himself and his Friends with it
any more, then he will be a faultless Creature, and all of us happy in our Loves,
Here he comes.

Enter Lord Bellguard. Your Servant good my Lord.


Bell. Your most humble Servant Madam.


Leo. My Lord, why do you call him Lord? he is a Doctor and curing me of the
Palpitation of the heart, Falling Sickness, Convulsions in the Eyes, and other
such Distempers.


Vio. A Doctor? a Quack by his false Medecines; shortly we shall see him mount
the Stage, or stand at the Old -- Exchange and cry a Cure for your Horns, a
Cure for your Horns.


Bell. I Am glad to see you so pleasant Madam.


Vio. How can I otherwise choose my Lord, and see your Family and Government?


Bell. Faith, Madam he that will have a Garden must enclose it, and cover
tender Plants: This is a very blasting age to Virtue, 'twill not thrive without
a covering.


Vio. Ay, but my Lord, you force your ground too much, what Horns would not
grow in your Soil? When would not your Forehead sprout? Were I your Wife and
thus kept, I should spread like a Vine, and all the Walls in England would not
hold me.


Bell. I Am not of that opinion, Madam.


Vio. Why should you think better of me than your Sister?


Bell. I judge very well of her, but must speak freely I think few Women may be
trusted in this life, this World is, and ever was a great brothel; where? or
with whom may a Woman be trusted? with ancient Ladies; they are the chief
Beauty Merchants, venders of fine Love.


Leo. Ladies of that Profession.


Bell. Oh! the most excellent, and most in Employ. Pedling Women cry Scotch
Cloth of a groat a yard, stuff only fit for Footmen. But would you have fine
Beauty, Choice of Beauty, and with ease Security and Decency, go to your Lady
Merchants; in Common houses the work is managed as slovenly as Religion in
Conventicles, enough to put one out of conceit with it; but in Brothels of
Quality, Iniquity is carried on with that venerable order would entice any one
to Devotion.


Vio. Fie! fie!


Bell. And with that security. A Man may there enjoy a Lady whilst her Husband
holds her Cards.


Leo. And shall the Lady of the house know of these things?


Bell. And manage 'em too; break the Lady to the Lovers hands; that is the
advantage of Quality, if a young Lady has not a natural amble, a poor Bawd
cannot have access to teach her.


Vio. What can a Lady of Quality propound by such doings?


Bell. Oh! many things. As Presents; and Pleasures. She has her house full of
good Company, her Ears full of wanton Stories; her Eye full of tempting Sights,
and now and then her Lips get a close kiss. Oh! Madam! do you think it does not
warm an Elderly Lady's blood, to have a brisk young Spark always by her side?
he is her Liquour of life, and though she never gets a full draught, a taste
chears her heart.


Leo. Who are these Ladies? where do they live?


Bell. Oh! you would feign be acquainted with 'em? no such matter; and yet I Will
tell you where they live.


Leo. Where?


Bell. Almost every where; where there is an Amorous Aunt, or over-indulgent
Mother.


Leo. Mothers? will Mothers corrupt their Daughters?


Bell. Ay, or if they wont Daughters will corrupt their Mothers. Things are so
inverted, that Ladies who were honest all their Youth to be like their Mothers,
turn lewd in their old Age to be like their Daughters. There never was such an
open and general War made on Virtue; young ones of Thirteen will pickeere at
it, and by that time they are twenty, they are risen to be Strumpets General,
and march in public with their Baggage, with Miss, and Mass, and Nurse and
Maid, and a whole train of Reformade sinners, expecting the next Cully that
falls.


Vio. You talk of paltry husses.


Bell. Very good Gentlewomen.


Leo. Gentlewomen of those employments.


Bell. Ay, purchase 'em. I have known a fair young Lady give all her Fortune to
attend a Man of Quality in his Bedchamber; be his chief Gentlewoman.


Leo. Suppose so, what is all this to me? If they be bad must I be so?


Bell. Truly Sister, a rambling Woman let her be never so good a manager, will
be apt to bring her Virtue as a Traveller does his Money, from a Broad piece to
a brass Farthing: But say she does not, is reputation nothing? and let me tell
you, Reputation will hang loose upon a galloping Lady; you may as well go among
high Winds and not be ruffled, as among Men and not have your good Name blown
over your Ears.


Vio. Those Winds blow where they list. A Woman is not secue rat home from
Censure.


Bell. But you must allow a Jewel is not so safe in a Crow'd as when locked up.


Leo. Locked up? do you think to lock me up?


Bell. I think to secure thee, my dear Sister.

Women like Cheney should be kept with care,
One flaw debase's her to common ^are.
[Exit.]
ACT II.
Scene Violante's house. Enter Violante' and a Servant. Vio. IS Mr. Farewell
coming?


Ser. Yes Madam, he is just at the Door.


Vio. That Is well, if this brisk young Fellow, has but Love enough to undertake
this work, and Wit enough to go through with it, we shall all be happy.

Enter Farewell.
Fa. Where Is your Lady? Madam, your most humble Servant.


Vio. Your Servant Mr. Farewell; you are a happy Man, young, rich, and in the
Ladies Favors.


Fa. I Am glad to hear that, Madam; who are these Ladies Madam,? a day, and hour
of Youth and good Fortune is precious; and Ladies like Birds must be aimed at
whilst they hop about us, miss that opportunity you may loose 'em for ever.
Therefore the Ladies, good Madam, quick, quick, for if you defer but half an
hour, they will be in love with some body else.


Vio. No Mr. Farewell, there is one Lady more Constant, you will own it when I name
her; my Lord Belguard's delicate young Sister. What say you to her?


Fa. I adore her.


Vio. And dare you attempt her?


Fa. Dare I?


Vio. Ay, for do not you know you are the only Man forbidden her.


Fa. Do I know of what Race I am, Madam? Never was such a pack of Fops as my
Lord Belguard's Ancestors and mine. They loved wrangling more than we do
intriguing; kept Lawyers instead of Wenches, and begot upon their bodies, a
thousand illegitimate Law Suits, the Terms they observed as duly as the River
does the Tides, and Land was carried too and frow, as mud is in the Thames. Nor
were their quarrels so bitter about Land, as place; so big were their great
hearts, they could not come into one Room together, for fear of loosing place.
My Lord Belguard's Father to end the difference, most piously endeavors to be
a better Man than any of his Ancestors. That is to say a Lord.


Vio. And then the strife ended?


Fa. Was more enflamed. For my Lord was more insolent, as having Authority
under the Broad Seal to be proud, by Consequence my Father more enraged; and
both the old Gentlemen contended who should have the greatest Estate in malice,
and attained to be very considerable, and when they dyed, endeavored to settle
it all upon us. But truly the young Lady and I most prodigally consumed all our
Portions at one look, and agreed to cut of the wicked Entail.


Vio. You did well, but how will you accomplish your desires? her Brother has
such guards upon her.


Fa. Oh! it is Decreed! nor shall thy Fate oh! Brother! resist my Vow, though
Guards were set on Guards, till their confounded Coxcombs reached the Skies,
I Would over 'em all --


Vio. You are in a Rapture.


Fa. Ten thousand when ever I think of her.


Vio. But how will you do this?


Fa. I have leagued with a Witch; at least a young Fellow that has more tricks
than a Witch; he was a poor Scholar at Oxford, but expelled for studying the
Black Arts.


Vio. For Conjuring?


Fa. Yes, Madam, not only any Man's Pigs or Poultry, but Wife or Daughter into
his Chamber. Nothing could escape him, and he escaped every thing. The Proctors
watched more diligently for him, then a Benefice, and could never catch him.
The Grave Doctors abhorred him worse than a Haeresie, and studied more to keep
him out of their Families, but he confuted their Skill, and they could no more
light upon him than on a jest.


Vio. I long to see him.


Fa. I ordered him to come hither to me.

Enter a Servant.
Ser. Here Is one Mr. Crack enquires for you, Sir.


Fa. That Is he -- bring him in --

Enter Crack.
Mr. Crack your Servant.


Cr. Your Servant Sir, your humble Servant, Madam.


Vio. Your Servant Sir, I am told you have been an Oxford Scholar.


Cr. A Scholar Madam? a Scholars Egg -- emptyed by old suck. Eggs, of all
that Nature gave me, and crumbled full of Essences, Hypostases, and other stuff
of their baking.


Vio. Why did not you apply your self to Divinity?


Cr. Leave Wenches for Pigs, Madam; it is true I may Wench then too, but it must
be with Fear and Reverence, I hate that.


Vio. Why would not you be a Physician?


Cr. A Gold-finder Madam? look into Jakes for bits of money? I had a Spirit
above it. I had an ambition to be of some honorable profession; such as People
of Quality undertake. As for instance, Pimping. A Pimp is as much above a
Doctor, as a Cook is above a Scullion; when a Pimp has foul'd a Dish, a Doctor
scours it.


Vio. This is an arch Blade.


Cr. Oh! you are pleased to say so, Madam; it is more your goodness than my
desert.


Fa. Well Mr. Crack, you know what you have undertaken.


Cr. I Will do it -- The Lady's yours. -- Give me some Money.


Fa. There, there. --


Cr. Gold! thou Son of the Sun, and Brother of the Stars, Nutmeg of comfort,
and Rose of delight, as my Friend the King of Persia call's himself, -- what
can thou not do great Prince, if I be thy chief Minister? --

(Exit.)
Vio. This is a notable Fellow, -- our next Plot must be to secure your Rival
Sr. Courtly Nice.


Fa. Hang him, he secure's himself by his Foppery's, she despises him.


Vio. Not many Lady's do so.


Fa. Oh! no, Madam, he is the General Guitarre of the Town, inlay'd with every
thing Women fancy; Gaytry, Gallantry, Delicacy, Nicety, Courtesy.


Vio. And pray, put in Gold too.


Fa. True Madam, Oh! the Ladies love to have him in their Chambers. and play
themselves a sleep with him.


Vio. Well, I have provided one shall thrumble on him.


Fa. Who Is that?


Vio. Surley.


Fa. Oh! Fire and Water are not so contrary, Sr. Courtly is so civil a
Creature, and so respectful to every thing belongs to a Gentleman, he stand's
bare to his own Perewig. Surly uncovers to nothing but his own Nightcap, nor to
that if he be drunk, for he sleeps in his Hat. Sr. Courtly is so gentle a
Creature, he writes a challenge in the style of a Billet-doux. Surley talks to
his Mistress, as he would to a Hector that wins his Money. Sr. Courtly is so
pleased with his own Person, his daily contemplation, nay his Salvation is a
Lookinglass, for there he finds Eternal happyness. Surley's Heaven at least,
his Priest is his Claret Glass; for to that he confesses all his Sins, and from
it receives Absolution and Comfort. But his damnation is a Looking glass, for
there he finds an Eternal fire in his Nose. In short if you would make a Posset
for the Devil, mingle these two, for there never was so sweet a thing as Sr.
Courtley, so sower as Surley. But how will you get 'em together? for nothing
has power over Surley, but Claret and the Devil.


Vio. Yes I have. Heaven is pleased to think the Devil himself has not mischief
enough to plague that ill-natured Rogue, and joins me in Commission with him to
torment him with Love; he loves me. --


Fa. Love? can he love?


Vio. So much, he neglects his Claret for me; and comes hither hourly to
perform his Devotions to me, but in such a slovenly manner; it is such a
Nonconformist to all decent Ceremonies.


Surley within. Where Is your Mistress?


Vio. I hear him, we will have sport with him. He abhors his Love worse than Murder
or Treason, for those are mischiefs to others, but Love he accounts
High Treason against his own damnable Person; and he is more ashamed of it, than
he would be of a Beasts Tail if it grew out of him. Therefore I Will conceal,
and do you charge him with it, you shall hear how he will renounce it, then will I
appear like Conscience to a sick debauch, and you shall see what an aukard
Penitent I Will make him.

(Ex. Enter Surly.
Fa. Honest Surly, how do do?


Sur. Prithee look in my Water.


Fa. In thy Water?


Sur. Ay, for I don't love to answer impertinent questions,


Fa. Is it impertinent to enquire after the health of a Friend?


Sur. A Friend? thy talk is more boyish than thy Face. Do thou think there
are such Friends? thou believ'st there are Mair-maids and Centaures I warrant;
for such Friends. Monsters that grow to some other Beasts, and are the least
part of themselves?


Fa. Why? have thou no concern for any Beasts but thy self?


Sur. Yes Bird, for many things for my own sake; for Witty Men whilst they
drink with me, handsome Whores whilst they lie with me, Dogs, Horses or Cattle
whilst they belong to me; after that, I care not if the Wits behang'd, the
Whores be pox'd, and all the Cattle bewitched.


Fa. A very generous temper.


Sur. It Is a wise and honest temper. The pretended good nature is ill nature;
it makes a Man an Ass to others he bears their Burden, a Rogue to himself, he
cheats himself of his quiet and Fortune. I am so very honest to my self, if the
whole World were hanged it should not rob me of a Minutes ease, I thank Heaven
for it.


Fa. Was ever such a Barbarian?


Sur. Thou 'rt an Ass; which is the Barbarian, he that eats Man, or the Man
that is eaten? The Rogue that grieves away my Flesh eats me, and is a Barbarian;
so is he that with vexation gnawes himself; I am no such Cannibal.


Fa. Have thou no compassion?


Sur. I know not what it is.


Fa. Suppose you see a Man of Quality in misery.


Sur. Let him be in misery and be damned.


Fa. Are you not concerned for his Quality?


Sur. The less for that, because if he fancies the whimsey he has it to please
him.


Fa. To trouble him.


Sur. Then to comfort him I Will tell him he is the Son of a Whore, and his
Grandfather rose by Pimping.


Fa. Suppose you saw a Man of parts unfortunate?


Sur. Let his parts look after him.


Fa. They Will afflict him.


Sur. Then to quiet him I Will tell him he is an Ass.


Fa. Have you no charity? do you never give any thing to the Poor?


Sur. As much as any Man.


Fa. What Is that?


Sur. Nothing.


Fa. Does no Man give any thing?


Sur. Not to the Poor; they give it to themselves; some Fools have Diseases in
their Natures, they never see any one in pain, but they feel half on it, and so
they give money to ease themselves.


Fa. Have you no love for any thing?


Sur. I have Appetite.


Fa. Have you no love for Women?


Sur. I have Lust.


Fa. No Love?


Sur. That Is the same thing, the word Love is a Fig-Leaf to cover the naked
sense, a fashion brought up by Eve, the Mother of Jilts, she Cuckolded her
Husband with the Serpent then pretendedto modesty and fell a making Plackets
presently. And her Daughters take up the Trade, you may import what Lewdness
you will into their Commonwealth, if you will wash it over with some fine
Nmae. You may proclaim at Mercat Cross, how great an Adorer you are of such a
Woman's Charms? how much you desire to be admitted into her Service; that is,
how lusty a Centaur you are, that the Horse in you is much the major part, and
she shall receive all this without a blush, whilst the Beast trots to her
under the Name of a Lover; when if she had any Wit she would know, a Lover is a
more impudent Name than Whoremaster; for a Whoremaster throws all his Bombes at
a whole City, your Lover wastes all his upon a single House. That when a Woman
desires a Lover, she desires to have the whole Brute to her self.


Fa. Ha! ha! ha!


Sur. What do you laugh at Sir?


Fa. Only that your Mistress has heard your learned Discourses Sir. Pray appear
Madam, and own you have lost your Wager, is he a Lover or no?

Enter Violante.
Sur. Here Is a young Treacherous Rogue.


Vio. Yes -- a Brutal one -- are these your Sentiments of Love Sir? was it this
you meant when you talked of Love? when we grow Lovers do we degenerate into
Brutes? I thought there was a generous Passion, of which a Beast could have no
more sense, than he has of Music or Poetry. And to such Love you pretended Sir.


Sur. I Will whedle her, (asideto Fa.) So I do still Madam, but why must I let a
Boy Catechize me? I have that Musical, Poetical, Fantastical love, you speak
of, and a pox on me for it; you will neither be my Slipper, nor my Shoe, my Wench
to slip on and of at pleasure, nor my Wife, that is a Whore buckled on.


Vio. You are charming in your expressions.


Fa. Mr. Surly, Madam, is a mistical piece, to be understood like a Prophecy,
where Rams and He-Goats stand for Kings and Princes. Mr. Surly's, rank
expressions must signify Virtue and Honor.


Vio. No, no, they signify his own filthy meaning; and the truth is, love has
no other sense, in this corrupt Age. Now if a Woman by blushes or otherwise,
confesses she thinks a Man, a fine Gentleman, he to requite her sends her
presently a Libel called a Billet-doux, where he in fine words tells her to her
Face, he thinks her a Wench, and invites her to lie with him. This ruins all
Conversation, Men are always driving their brutal appetites to the Plays, the
Court, to Church, like Drovers their Beasts to every Market; and there is no
conversing with 'em, unless you will take their Cattle of their hands.


Sur. Madam, I love your in your own fashion, admire you, adore you, and the
Devil and all, what would you have? -- Now will this simple Jade believe me?


Fa. He calls you simple Jade, Madam, and says you will believe him.

aside to Fate.
Sur. You Malapert Boy, why do you meddle in my business?


Fa. It Is my business, she is my Friend, and I wont see her abused.


Sur. A Friend to the Woman loves your Enemy, Tom-Fool?


Fa. No, she hates him, and has quarreled with him, and I would have had you
step into his room.


Sur. Oh! ho!


Fa. Now who is the Tom-Fool?


Sur. I am, look you Madam, that Rogue despayr made me talk like an Ass, and I
am sorry for it.


Vio. I know you are Sir, I know your base desire is for your punishment;
confined to my Eyes, and I Will use you as you deserve.


Fa. Come, Madam, let me interpose; though you will not receive Mr. Surly as a
half Horse, you may as a whole Ass, a Drudge, you know you have business most
agreeable to his ill Nature, pray employ him.


Vio. Well; I Will make trial of him, you pretend you love me Generously.


Sur. Yes, and Damnably.


Vio. Know then my Lord Belguard, is (as I have of late perceived) sunk with
the rest of the Age, into base opinions of Love and Women, that I am angry I
ever had a good thought of him.


Sur. Good.


Vio. Look upon his address to me, as an affront, and will revenge it.


Sur. Better and better.


Vio. And you shall do it.


Sur. Best of all.


Vio. Do not you know Sir Courtly Nice?


Sur. That you should join knowledge with such a Fop? it is a question to be put
to a Boy? I may know Philosophy, but to ask a Man if he knows a Horn-Book? for
such a thing is this Fop; gilded on the out side, on the inside, the Criss
Cross row, and always hanging at the Girdle of a Girl.


Vio. You have described him right. This rop has my Lord Belguard entie'd to
accept his Sister with no Fortune, but her Birth and Beauty. Now if you will break
the Match, you will be to me the most annable Creature in the World.


Sur. Or the most damnable, if you Jilt me.


Vio. In earnest of a farther favor here is my hand.


Sur. There Is the Devil in it. It Is transforming my shape, I am growing a Woman's
Ass, I feel the Ears prick out of my skin already; and I must hoof it away with
her load of Folly upon my back. Well I am thy Ass at present, but if thou Jilts
me, I will be thy Devil.

(Exit.)
Vio. It Is the fittest Office for thee; thou art so like one already, you may
pass for Twins. Now Mr. Farewell let us go in and Laugh.

(Exit.) Scene Lord Belguards House. Enter Hot-head and Testimony.
Test. He shall not speak with her, I don't approve of it.


Hot. You approve Sirrah? what have you to do?


Test. I have Authority.


Hot. You Authority?


Test. Yes, from my Lord.


Hot. You had it then out of his Kitchen, Sirrah; the Beef of the Nation breeds
all the Maggots in the Peoples heads. I am sometimes tempted to throw down
their Porridge-pots, and spill the Divine Right of Presbitery. In short my Lord
is a man of honor, and you have belyed him, Sirrah.


Test. It is well known I make a Conscience.


Hot. Ay, you Rogues making of Consciences is a great trade among your Party,
and you deserve to loose your Ears for it.


Test. I mean I keep a Conscience.


Hot. You Have reason Sirrah, it keeps you; but that an honest Lord should give
money for a Rogues false Conscience. -- Oones! --


Test. Well but don't swear.


Hot. Sirrah, who swears?


Test. Dee hear? -- don't swear I say.


Hot. Oones! Sirrah, don't preach to me.


Test. Don't swear then.


Hot. Sirrah, if you preach to me, I Will cut your Pate.


Test. Had I a Sword 'twere more than you could do.


Hot. How now Sirrah?

(takes Test. by the throat.)
Test. Nay but don't throttle me, don't Godfrey me.

Enter Aunt.
Aunt. What Is the noise? what is the rudeness, Cousin Hot-head? you a Gentleman,
and make a Bear-Garden of a Persons of Honors house?


Hot. Better make a Bear-garden of it than a Conventicle; here is a Fanatic
Rogue ordained ruling elder of the Family by my Lord, as the Rogue says, so he
undertakes to govern and Preach.


Au. And you undertake to Govern and correct? Cousin no body Governs here but
I; if he had committed faults, you should have brought him before me.


Hot. Oh! you would have him entered in your Office?


Au. What do you mean? obscenely? you are confident You are the first Gentleman
that offered to say a wanton thing to me.


Hot. To your great sorrow.

(aside. Enter Leonora.
Leo. What Is the quarrel here?


Hot. There Is a Tailor would fain speak with you.


Leo. All this noise to introduce a Tailor?


Hot. He cannot get through this Fellows narrow Conscience, yet there is room
for a whole Commonwealth.


Au. Call in the Tailor; there must no Clothes be made without my orders, that
I may see 'em modest.


Leo. A Tailor? I ordered no Tailor.

(aside.) Enter Crack
Au. How now, Sir? what are you?


Cr. A Tailor, Madam.


Au. Who sent you? I know you not.


Cr. Your own Tailor, Mr. Stitch, Madam.


Au. How chance he came not himself?


Cr. He Is sick, Madam.


Au. And can you work well, for we are very hard to please? There Is scarce a
Tailor in Town can make me endure to see my self.


Leo. The fault lies in -- Fifty -- Fifty --.

(aside.)
Cr. Indeed Madam, I must needs say my Country men are not the best Tailors in
the World. This is a fine Nation, and all spoiled by the Tailors. Heaven makes
the Women Angels, and Tailors make 'em Hedg-hogs; it is a sad sight to see 'em,
now I Will make an Angel of a crooked Pin.


Au. Ay, where did you learn your Skill?


Cr. In France, Madam.


Test. In France? then Friend I believe you are a Papist.


Hot. Sirrah, I believe you are a Presbyterian.


Test. Friend, if you be a Papist I Will have you before a Justice.


Hot. Sirrah, if you be a Presbyterian, I Will kick you down Stairs.


Test. What are you Friend?


Hot. Ay, what are you Sirrah?


Cr. What am I? why, I Am a Tailor, I think the Men are mad.


Au. Intolerable; Mr. Testimony pray leave us, and Cousin Hot-head, I shall
desire the same of you, unless you will behave your self like a Gentleman.


Hot. I will behave my self like a Gentleman, for I Will know of my Lord when he
comes home, if he has given this Rogue Authority over me; if he has I Will demand
Satisfaction of him; if he be innocent woe be to your prickears, Sirrah.


Test. I fear you not.

(Exit Hot.)
Au. Mr. Testimony, I once more desire you will give us liberty.


Test. Yes, Forsooth, I dare trust the young Gentlewoman with you, Forsooth --
you are a grave -- Gentlewoman and in years -- Forsooth. --


Au. In years, rude Clown. --


Test. And truly she is a very pretty sweet Woman, and deserves to have great
care taken of her.


Leo. Well Sir, we will excuse the care at this time. --


Test. Pretty Woman. --

(aside.
Leo. Pray leave us --.


Test. Sweet Woman -- I profess she is strangely alluring, I had best retire
least I fall into frailty, and be discovered.

(Exit.
Cr. Now, Madam, before I take measure of you, I Will show you some Patterns --
please you to look upon some Madam, you have judgment --.

(to the Aunt.
Au. Let me see.


Cr. To you, Madam, I would recommend this piece.


Leo. Mr. Farewel's Picture? oh! I Sirrah! now I guess thee -- my Dear -- Dear
--

(kisses the Picture.
Cr. Have a care of your Aunt Madam. -- I have a Letter too. --


Leo. Give it me -- quick -- quick --


Au. These are pretty Silks.


Cr. The best in France, Mdaam.

Where Is my Sister?

(Belguard within.
Leo. My Brother? I hope he does not know thee.


Cr. No, if he does I Am a dead Man.


Leo. Have thou no disguise for fear he should?


Cr. Only this great pair of Spectacles.

Enter Lord Belguard.
Bell. What Fellow's this?


Leo. A Tailor.


Bell. Not your Tailor?


Au. No, he is sick and sent this Fellow in his Room.


Bell. How comes such a young Fellow to wear Spectacles?


Cr. Young my Lord? I Am above Five and Fifty.


Bell. Thou bear thy age well.


Cr. Ay, every where but in my Eyes I thank Heaven.


Bell. This Fellow may be a Bawd for ought I know, I Will watch him.

[Exit.] Aunt views the Patterns, Bell. stands behind his Sister, and watches
Cr. Cr. mean while puts his Measure before, and delivers her a Letter.
Cr. Well, Madam, I perceive your Ladyship likes the Pattern I showed you first.


Leo. I have seen the whole piece.


Cr. And your Ladyship likes it?


Leo. Oh! very well.


Cr. I Will assure you, Madam, you will like it mightily when it is upon you, and you
have a sweet body to work for. I do not doubt, Madam, but to get a great deal
of credit and a great deal of Custom by you, among the Ladies, as soon as ever
they see my work.


Leo. Well let us see your work, and I Will say something.


Cr. That you shall and speedily, Madam, I Will bring you home as sweet a piece
of Work, as ever you had in your Life. You Will look upon the Pattern I showed you
last?


Leo. Yes.


Cr. That Is for the inside; do you like much Bombast, Madam?


Leo. No --.


Cr. Well, Madam -- I have taken a Surveigh of your fine Body -- now you shall
be pleased according to your own hearts desire -- your Servant Madam --.

(Exit.)
Bell. Well Sister -- prepare to receive a Visit from Sr. Courtly Nice, this
Afternoon.


Au. Oh! dear! then I must dress. He Is a great Critic.

(Exit.)
Leo. She designs him for her self, would she could get him.

(aside.)
Bell. Sr. Courtly and I have agreed; pray give him your promise.


Leo. So soon? 'twill be fulsome, he is abstemious.


Bell. Therefore take him whilst he has an edge.


Leo. You use to despise Fools, how chance you marry amongst 'em?


Bell. Because none but Fools will marry. Wits are but few and commonly poor;
Fools are numerous and rich. Fortune is as fond of those bits of Men, as Bigots
are of Relics; wraps 'em in Silver.


Leo. Better they were buried. A Fool in a Coach is like a Knave in a Pillory,
the Object of public derision.


Bell. Oh! there are few to deride 'em, many to admire 'em, so many, I have often
admired how one Apple,

Should such Diseases in old Adam breed.
That from his Loins not Men, but Wroms proceed.
(Exeunt omnes.
ACT. III.
Scene, Covent-Garden-Square. Enter Farewell and Crack meeting. Fa. Oh! the
News! the News! art thou an Angel or a Devil? bring'st thou Joys or Torments?


Cr. Joys! joys! joys!


Fa. Angel! Angel! Angel!


Cr. In the first place I delivered your Picture.


Fa. Rare.


Cr. And she kissed it.


Fa. kissed it?


Cr. Sweetly, wantonly, lasciviously. She set me so on fire, I kissed all the
Wenches as I came along, and made their moist lips fiz again.


Fa. Oh! Rogue! Rogue! delicious Rogue.


Cr. Then I delivered the Letter, and before her Brothers face.


Fa. Before his face? ha! ha! ha!


Cr. Prepare this Night to be the happyest of Mortals. Give me some more Money.


Fa. Money? I Will sell my Land rather than thou shall want. That one Inheritance
will purchase me two, one in Love, and another in laughing at this politic
Brother.


Cr. No, no, Inheritances as for laughing, I believe you will have an Anuity
for life; but for Love you will only have a lease for three or four Years.


Fa. Pleasant Rogue! here is Money.


Cr. So, so, I wish you joy I wish you joy.

(Exit.)
Fa. See Surly going to my Rival; my affair thrives admirably.

(Exit.) Enter Surly. Knocks, enter a Servant.
Sur. Is Nice within?


Ser. Nice Sir?


Sur. Ay, Nice Sir; is not your Masters name Nice.


Ser. It Is Sir Courtly Nice.


Sur. Well Sir, if I have a mind to clip half his Name, it is not Treason, is it
Sirrah?


Ser. I believe not Sir.


Sur. Then get you in, and tell your Master I Would speak with him


Ser. What sort of domineering Man is this?

Scene, a Chamber -- Sir Courly Nice dressing, Men and Women singing to him.
Sir Co. Very fine! extremely fine. Gentlemen and Ladies, will you do me the
favor to walk in, and accept of a small Collation? I am in some have to dress
upon an extraordinary occasion. You Will Pardon me? -- your very humble Servant --.

(Exit Music.)
Ser. Very fine.


Sir Co. You Sot, 'twas very barbarous.


Ser. Your honor said 'twas very fine.


Sir Co. You Clown, don't you know what belongs to a Gentleman? Complaisance is
the very thing of a Gentleman, The thing that shows a Gentleman. Wherever I
go, all the World cries that is a Gentleman, my life on it a Gentleman; and when
you have said a Gentleman, you have said all.


Ser. Is there nothing else Sr. belongs to a Gentleman?


Sir Co. Yes, Bon mine, fine Hands, a Mouth well furnished --


Ser. With fine Language --.


Sir Co. Fine Teeth you sot; fine Language belongs to Pedants and poor Fellows
that live by their Wits. Men of Quality are above Wit. It Is true for our
diversion sometimes we write, but we never regard Wit. I write but I never writ
any Wit.


Ser. How then Sir?


Sir Co. I write like a Gentleman, soft and easy.


Ser. Does your Honor write any Plays?


Sir. Co. No, that is Mechanic, I bestow some Garniture on Plays, as a Song or
a Prologue.


Ser. Then your Honor is only a Haberdasher of small Wares?


Sir. Co. A Haberdasher, you saucy Rascal?

Enter a Servant.
2. Ser. Here Is one Mr. Surly to visit your Honor.


Sir Co. Surly, what the Devil brings him hither?


2. Ser. He has been walking about the Rooms this quarter of an hour, and would
not let me bring him in, till he had fould 'em all with his dirty Shoes.


Sir. Co. A Nauseous, Beastly, Sloven, Clown, Fool, Sot.

Enter Surly.
Dear Mr. Surly your most humble Servant. (Sir Co. Bows to receive him.


Sur. What, are you unbu -- buckling my Shoe?

(Sur. is Drunk, stammars and belches.)
Sir Co. Dear Mr. Surly -- he stinks horribly -- aside.) How came I to enjoy --
a very Polecat -- aside.) This great happyness? -- pox! foh! you and I have
been aside.) long piquee, and I Am amazed to see you at my levee.


Sur. I begin to think, thou art a good honest Fellow, and have a mind we
should no longer be two lo -- lo -- Loggerheads, but one.


Sir Co. Dear Sir, you are always so divertising; Well Sir, shall I beg a
favor of you?


Sur. What Is that?


Sir Co. Leave to dress before you, Sir. I am to meet some fine Women to day,
one presently.


Sur. Prithee dress, and be damnd -- shall we di -- dine together?


Sir. Co. Yes Sir, I suppose, and Sup too --.


Sur. That Is kind, well when?


Sir Co. About Five of clock Sir.


Sur. Where?


Sir Co. In the Kings Box, Sir.


Sur. Must you and I, dine in the Kings Box?


Sir. Co. Oh! dearest! I beg your Pardon Ten thousand times, I thought you
asked me where I should meet the Lady.


Sur. Pox of the Lady; I ask where we shall Dine?


Sir Co. Really Sir I don't know, I cannot put my head into one of your beastly
eating houses, nor swallow the filthy meat you eat there, if you would give me One
hundred pound.


Sur. Filthy Meat? Sir I eat as good Meat as you do.


Sir Co. Oh! dear Mr. Surly, no doubt the meat in its own nature may be very
innocent; but when once it has committed familiarity with the beastly Fists of
Cooks and Butchers, it is to me an unpardonable Sinner. My Butcher cuts up all
his Meat with a Fork.


Sur. Does he cut up an Ox with a Fork?


Sir Co. Ay, and he cuts up an Ox as neatly as a Lady does a Partridge.


Sur. Well, then I Will accept of thy Dinner.


Sir Co. Dear Sir, your most humble Servant; pox on him (aside) I wish I be
capable of the great happyness. For I came but last Night from my Country
house, and I question whether I have all things in order or no, Whose there?
are all things brought from my Country house?


Ser. No Sir, your Butler has forgot your Salt.


Sir Co. Left my Salt? careless Rascal. Let him take Horse immediately.


Ser. Sir he is rid post for it.


Sur. Rid post for Salt? whether?


Sir Co. To my Country house.


Sur. How far's that off?


Sir Co. But a little way, not above Forty miles.


Sur. Send Forty miles out of London for Salt? Is there not Salt enough in
London for you?


Sir Co. Ay, stuff pawm'd by Butlers and Waiters, they take up the Wenches
coats, then handle the Salt.


Sur. Here Is a Rogue -- (aside) well come let us drink a Glass of Wine then.


Sir Co. Oh! dear Mr. Surly, if you name Wine, you make me throw up my Soul. I
have abhorred Wine ever since I was in France, and saw what barbarous Education
they give that generous Creature. Duce take me, Sir, if the Clowns don't press
all the Grapes with their filthy naked Feet. Oh! beastly nasty Dogs! no wonder
we are poisoned with their Wine.


Sur. Prithee what of that? the Wine purges before it comes over.


Sir Co. Oh! Lord Mr. Surly what a Phrase is there? you will Pardon my Freedom,
Sir? --


Sur. Most civil Coxcomb (aside) well what must we drink for drink I must?


Sir Co. I have several drinks of my own composing at your Service, as Mead,
Syder, Ale. --


Sur. Ale? there is Sauce for a Woodcock. Come let us taste a Bottle.


Sir Co. Fetch a Bottle; This Fellow will Poison me --.

(aside.)
Sur. Well I come to request a favor of thee.


Sir Co. Your most humble Servant Sir, how de'e' like this Cravat?


Sur. What Is that to my business? I come to make a request to thee.


Sir Co. It Is well tied too, with a great deal o'humour.


Sur. A Pox on thee, mind me.


Sir Co. Your most humble Servant Sir.


Sur. I am going to make Love.


Sir Co. Before you drink Sir?


Sur. Before I drink Sir --.


Sir Co. Well Sir, since you will have it so, I Will wait on you down stairs.


Sur. Is the Devil in the Fellow? I tell thee I Am going to make love.


Sir Co. Oh! Lord Sir, I beg your pardon a thousand times.


Sur. And I come to beg thy assistance.


Sir Co. Oh! dear Sir.


Sur. For thou have a knack on it. Thou art the only Court Card Women love to
play with; the very Pam at Lantereloo, the Knave that picks up all.


Sir Co. Oh! Sir, you are so obliging; -- and stinking -- Pox take him. --

(aside.)
Sur. And it is a very pretty Woman I Am in love with; my Lord Belguard's Sister
Leonora; thou know her.


Sir Co. The Rogue's my Rival, he was born for my confusion (aside.) Ay, Sir, I
have the honor of some small acquaintance there.


Sur. Prithee speak for me.


Sir Co. Oh! dear Sir, you have a great Talent of your own:


Sur. But thine's a better. One thing I am sure thou may do, there is an
abominable Fop makes Love to her, and I am told is to marry her; prithee tell
him he is a Son of a Whore.


Sir Co. Really Sir I Am unfortunate; I have no manner of Genius to that sort of
Conversation.


Sur. Say my words. Tell him if he proceeds, I Will not only Libel him, but tweag
him by the Nose, Kick him, Cudgel him, and run him through the Guts. Prithee
tell him this.

(hugs Sir Co.
Sir Co. Oh! pray Sir give me Air.


Sur. Prithee do.


Sir Co. Sir I am ready to --


Sur. And thou will tell the Puppy this?


Sir Co. I will upon my Soul.

Enter a Servant with Wine and Glasses.
Sur. Then thou art an honest Fellow -- so, is the drink come? fill a Glass,
why two Glasses? do you think I cannot drink after your Master?


Sir Co. Pox of your Complyment --.

(aside.) Sur. flings away a Glass.
Sur. Here Nice, my Mistresses health.


Sir Co. What misery is this Beast imposing on me? he coughs in the Glass too
--

(aside.)
Sur. Pox on it, a whole gulp went the wrong way, come off with it It Is my
Mistresses health.


Sir Co. This Fellows the Devil --

(aside.)
Sur. Off with it, Man.


Sir Co. I never was so embarass'd since I was born. --


Sur. Oones! off with it.


Sir Co. I must take the beastly portion down, but I shall be most horrible
sick after it. --

(drinks.)
Sur. So, now thou art an honest Fellow, now I Will kiss thee.


Sir Co. The Devil thou will? more miseries? (aside.) nay but Mr. Surly.


Sur. I swear I will.


Sir Co. Nay but you will disorder me.


Sur. I swear I will.


Sir Co. But Sir I Am going upon your occasions to your Mistress.


Sur. Nay then I Will give thee two kisses, one for thy self and another for her.


Sir Co. Oh! Hell. (aside) nay but Mr. Surly.


Sur. I swear I will.

(kisses him and belches --) This Bottle Beer is damned windy -- well honest
Nice farewell to thee.

(Exit.)
Sir Co. Who Is there? I Am sick to death, -- to death! -- lead me in -- get my
bed ready -- and a Bath -- and some Perfumes -- I Am sick to death, -- I Am dead.

(Exit.) Scene Lord Belguard's House. Enter Bell. with Farewel's Picture in his
hand.
Bell. Thou horrid Vision! would I had met with the worst Fiend in Hell, rather
than thee; in thee there is a Legion exciting me to Blood -- blood -- Who Is
there?

Enter a Servant.
Ser. My Lord --


Bell. My Coach -- to blood -- blood --

Enter Leonora and Aunt.
Leo. To Blood? what means my Brother?


Bell. Be gone:


Leo. To whom do you speak?


Au. Bless us; Nephew what ailes you?


Leo. Alas my Lord, I fear you are a going to quarrel.


Bell. Yes, I Am going to punish one who Violates my Fathers, my Will and calls
my Mother Whore.


Leo. What execrable Wretch is that?


Bell. Thy self.


Leo. Me?


Bell. Yes, what do thou else but proclaim our Mother false, when she
conceived a thing so opposite to all our Fathers race as thou art?


Leo. In what?


Bell. In Infamy; when was there a spot in our name, till Heaven for our sins
sent thee among us? and I am going to destroy thee in thy lewd undoer


Leo. I know of no reproach in our Family but your madness, destroy that. What
are your Spies and Coxcombs, but so many Capital Letters, wherein you write
over your Door, My Sister is a wanton Woman.


Bell. It Is truth, you are not only a wanton, but a wicked Woman; not only
Intrigue, but with the Enemy of our Family, Farewell.


Au. How?


Leo. I am betrayed --

(aside.
Bell. Do you blush?


Leo. At your Folly.


Bell. Dare you deny it?


Leo. Who dare accuse me?


Bell. This Picture, which I found in your Chamber.


Au. Horrid Creature! -- I shall swoon away.


Leo. How shall I bring off this (aside) All this noise for a Picture? if you
had found a little humane Effigies in swaddling Clouts, there might have been
some squawling.


Au. Do you laugh at your shame?


Bell. She shall have no cause.


Leo. Do, kill me, before you know whether he is guilty or no.


Bell. I Will know it from himself. If he denis it, it will be some revenge to
make him stab his Soul with Lies. He shall swear not only that he never did,
but never will send so much as an Imagination to you.


Leo. Do, if you would force him hither, what charm to a Man of spirit, like
daring?


Bell. She speaks sense in that.

(aside.)
Leo. If you would be fighting, fight your own jealousy, which abuses you
worse than Mr. Farewell can do, my Honor protects you from him; but neither Wit
or Honor, can guard you from the rude insolence of your jealousy, which is
now sending you of an Errant, a Footman of Spirit would scorn, to proclaim the
dishonor of your own Sister. Fie! Fie!


Bell, And so I must sit down tamely with this abuse?


Leo. You are not abused, the Picture was found at Church.


Au. At Church? do you intrigue at Church?


Bell. They do nothing else, the Church is almost as bad as the Porch.


Au. Nay there is shameful doings, that is the truth on it, it provokes my Flesh
to see how the young Men fling their Eyes about.


Leo. And not upon her. --

(aside.)
Au. But it is no marvail; when Women will encourage 'em. No Fellows dare gape
upon me, because I never encourage Fellows.


Leo. A Face of Fifty is small encouragement.

(aside.)
Bell. Nay no wonder the Devils cause thrives, he has a numerous Clergy, Heaven
has but one Minister in the Church, and whilst he is Preaching Divinity, the
Devil has a thousand of both Sexes, by all the Oratory of looks and dresses,
preaching Fornication and Adultery.


Au. Too true, well she is certainly undone. I dare not examine her Breasts, if
there should be any thing in 'em, I should dye.


Leo. In my breasts?


Au. Ay, Gentlewoman, do you think I regard your Flim flam story of the Church?


Leo. It Is not my story, my Woman found it in Westminster Abbey, at Prayers, and
I knowing what work would be made with it, commanded her to burn it, and she
has dared to dissobey me.


Wom. Indeed, Madam, I thought to have presented it to a Friend of mine; and
laying it out of my hand unfortunately in your Honors Chamber, my Lord found
it.


Bell. Oh! how nimbly she takes the lie at the first rebound?


Au. Out upon you; I Am extreme sick -- lead me in -- not you -- you are not fit
to touch a Woman of my Virtue. These things have strange impression upon me. --

(Exit.)
Leo. That you don't share in 'em --

(aside.)
Bell. Pray, Sister, go out of my sight, you are an horror to me.


Leo. Your own Dreams are. You Are as mad as a Prophet, you have always before
your Eyes a Vision of Horns and Whores.


Bell. All this goes upon the score of Farewel's heart blood if he be guilty,
I Will make enquiry presently, and search at what gap this Treachery entered.


Leo. Oh! unfortunate negligence!

(aside.) (Exit.) Enter Hothead.
Bell. Who Is there, Cousin Hot head, Testimony?


Hot. Oh! are you here?


Bell. Ay, to your sorrow, if you have played me false.


Hot. You have served me finely.


Bell. Do you first complain?


Hot. Coupled me with a Dog?


Bell. But you have Coupled my Sister Sir.


Hot. With a Fanatic Rogue.


Bell. No -- with a finer Gentleman. Who brought this Picture?


Hot. The common Fire-fork of Rebellion.


Bell. A Fire-fork. -- Fork me no Forks -- Who brought this Picture?


Hot. The rotten rump should have been burnt -- when 'twas only Roasted.


Bell. The rotten Rump -- Answer me, or i will fight thee.


Hot. Answer you what?


Bell. Who brought this Picture? I found it in my Sister's Chamber.


Hot. Then your Fanatic Rogue conveyed it thither to make me suspected, out
of his malice to the Common Prayer. I Will cut the Rogue to pieces.

Enter Testimony with a great Sword by his side.
Bell. Testimony.


Test. I am here.


Bell. How now, Sworded?


Test. To preserve my Life. My life is threatened by that bloody Papist.


Hot. How, Sirrah? dare you think of fighting me?


Test. Yes, and hope to do it, through Providence.


Bell. Drawing before me?

(Hot. and Test. offer to draw)
Hot. Will you protect a Fanatic? I see what you are.

Well Sirrah, though I may not cut your Throat, i will choke you Sirrah.


Test. De'e, hear the bloody Papist? He Will throttle me.


Hot. Sirrah, i will cram the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy into you, and
they will stick in your Throat, though Treason wont, and so i will to a Justice
presently.

(Exit.)
Bell. And stay with him, and never plague me more. Now Sir do you resolve my
question.


Test. I do resolve I will not take the Oaths.


Bell. I do not ask you about the Oaths.


Test. Why, if you ask me Ten thousand times, I will not take the Oaths.


Bell. Did one ever see such a Coxcomb?


Test. Call me what you please, I will not take the Oaths -- So do your worst.

(Exit.)
Bell. A very fine account of my business.

Enter a Servant.
Ser. My Lord a Gentleman desires to speak with your Honor.


Bell. I Am not to be spoke with, i am a broad -- my Soul is -- in the heart of
Farewell, ripping it up for this Secret. What Gentleman?


Ser. One from the East Indies, My Lord, he brings a Letter from your Uncle
Rich.


Bell. He comes in a Storm; he will find worse Weather here, than any he met at
Sea. But i will endeavor to compose my self -- admit him --

Enter a Man dressed like a Merchant.
Man. My Lord, your Lordships most humble Servant. I perceive your Lordship has
forgot me; you will know me better, when I acquaint you, who I am. My Father
had the honor of being a Retainer to your Lordships Father, of Honorable
memory; and sent me some Years since to the East Indies, in the Service of your
Noble Uncle, Mr. Rich. My name is Waytewel.


Bell. Oh! Mr. Waytewel, I am glad to see you, truly you are so changed, if you
had not told me who you was, I should never have known you.


Man. I believe so my Lord -- for I Am sure you never saw my Face before, but
the Picture of it you have -- for Waytewel was my Picture. (aside) Time and
Travels will alter a Man, but truly I have lost nothing by my Travels but my
Countenance; and in the room have gotten what is better, a convenient small
competency of some Seven or Eight thousand pound; Heaven and your Uncles love
be praised. I have brought Your Lordship some Letters from your Noble Uncle,
and a small Present of some Threescore thousand pound.


Bell. How?


Man. Only the trouble of it, my Lord. Your Uncle contracted in the Indies an
intimate Friendship with Sir Nicholas Calico, President for the East India
Company. Sir Nicholas dyed, and left most part of his Estate (which was near a
Hundred thousand pound,) to his only Son, Sir Thomas. But poor Sir Thomas
happened in his Fathers Life time to fall into a Distemper, which gave him a
scurvy flaw in his Brain, that Sir Nicholas left him and all his Estate to your
Uncles Guardianship. Now your Noble Uncle perceiving his affairs are like to
detain him many Years in the Indies, and fearing if he should dye, poor Sir
Thomas might be cheated of all; he has like a Worthy and honest Gentleman, sent
Sir Thomas and all his Estate to your Lordships care, as these Letters will
testify. I suppose your Lordship is well acquainted with your Uncles Hand and
Seal.


Bell. I am, and this is his Hand and Seal reads -- um -- um -- um -- to
preserve him from being cheated here, or begged in England, I take the boldness
to recommend him, to the care of so Noble a Person as your Lordship -- um -- um
-- um --. Well Sir the Letter expresses what you told me. -- Where is the
Gentleman.


Man. I brought him along with me; he is in the next room, my Lord. Poor
Gentleman, he has the oddest Phrases and ways with him. He will needs be
attended like a great Indian Mandarine, or Lord. And has brought with him
several Siamites and Bantammers, that serve him as his Slaves, in the
ridiculous Dresses and Modes of their own Countries. we had such a gaping
Rabble after us, as we came along.


Bell. Pray call him in, I long to see him --


Man. -- Sir Thomas -- pray come to my Lord.

Enter Crack ridiculously dressed, attended by Men, in the Habits of Siamites,
and Bantammers.
Cr. Which is the Peer?


Man, This is my Lord.


Cr. Great Peer, your extreme humble Servant.


Bell. Your Servant Sir, you are recommended to me, by my Uncle.


Cr. I know it my Lord, and am most incomparably obliged to him --. He is a
Person, my Lord, that as to the altitudes of Friendship, and the most glorious
Circumstances of a Singular Person, is not to be cast up by the Logarithmes of
Oratory, nor his Latitude to be taken by the quadrangle of Circumlocution.


Bell. So -- I find I shall have store of Nonsense.


Cr. My Lord, I Am a Person that as to the Circumstances of Money, am not
indifferently contemptible; and as to the circumstances of Honor, I am by
profession a Merchant, by Generation a Knight. Sir Nicholas Calico applying his
Person to my Mother, was the Author of, Sir, Your humble Servant.


Bell. So the Letter says.


Cr. The Letter contains Verity.


Bell. Pox I shall be teased.


Cr. One thing more Sir, I am a Person that as to understadning, am under the
circumstances of Witchcraft. I loved in the Indies, a fair Christian Curiosity,
and a nauseous Indian Baggage, had a mind to apply to my Person her Tawny
Circumstances; and finding she could not obtain her Ambition, applys her self
to an Indian Bawd, and Bewitches me.


Bell. Pshaw! Bewitch! what stuffs here? --

(aside.)
Cr. Bewitches me Sir, what fallows thereupon? a loathing in me of Females? I
abhor Women; fall into Agonys when I see Women. Pray let me see no Women.


Bell. You shall not Sir.


Cr. Pray My Lord, no Women.


Bell. I Will warrant you Sir.


Cr. But as much Supper as you please, my Lord.


Bell. You shall Sir.


Cr. You are highly civilized.


Man. I told Your Honor he had such odd ways; well My Lord, as soon as the
Ship is come up the River, which will be in few days, I Will bring the Captain to
wait upon Your Lordship, with the account of Sir Thomas his Estate, Aboard;
which will amount to Forty thousand pound, besides Ten thousand pound he has
brought a shore in rough Diamonds. So, My Lord, your very humble Servant. Sir
Thomas your Servant I leave you in good hands.


Cr. Your Servant, Sir.


Bell. I Will order things for you. I must dispose this Man quickly, for i am
horribly weary of him, and also impatient to go about my Affairs.


Leo. It Is he -- I Am sure it is he --

(Leo. peeps.)
Bell. How now Sister? what is your business here?


Leo. Staring at this strange sort of Man.


Bell. You were no Woman else -- pray get from him speedily.


Leo. You are not jealous of a Madman sure? he is mad is he not?


Bell. Yes, and impertinently brings me vexation too from the Indies, at a time
when I Have enough at home, as every Man has, that keeps a Woman. Pray get from
him, he hates to see Women.

(Exit.)
Leo. Hates to see Women? ha! ha! Sir Thomas Calico your humble Servant, you
are welcome from the Indies; but have a care of being discovered, least you be
under the circumstances of a Cudgel.


Cr. Truly Madam, I expect to have something stick by my ribs presently, that
is to say a good Supper; which I have ordered. My Lord and I will sup together,
and you and Mr. Farewell.


Leo. We sup together? where? in the Grave? a fatal accident has' happened, will
bring us both thither. My Brother has found Mr. Farewel's Picture in my Chamber.


Cr. He shall not keep it, he shall deliver both Picture and jealousy.


Leo. Then thou art a Master. I told him my Woman found it in Westminster-Abby;
may be thou may make something out of that?


Cr. Stay let me consider Westminster-Abby, or the Abbey of Westminster -- um --
um -- Let me alone -- begone -- he comes.

(Exit Leo.) Enter Bell.
Bell. Come Sir, let me wait on you to your Chamber.


Cr. Hold, my Lord, a word, I have business of great consequence, I must humbly
apply to your understanding.


Bell. So, I must be hindered with more Nonsense.

(aside.)
Cr. I Have in the Indies, a delicate piece of my Fathers Rib, I beg your
Lordship to advise me in the disposal.


Bell. Oh! dispose it how you please, Sir.


Cr. It Is a Sister I mean, Sir.


Bell. Oh! that is something.


Cr. She Is sweet and slender as a Clove, and is worth two Millions of Coxcombs
-- Three hundred of 'em comes to Three Farthings; it is a Chinese Money. This
Money makes her much sought in Marriage: The great Hobbommoccoes of the Indies
come gallopping upon Elephants, Camels, Rhinoceroses, and Oxen to see her. Now
my Father was under the circumstances of great obligation, to a Gentleman in
England; and out of gratitude to him, ordered me on his Death bed, to bestow my
Sister on his Son, and Heir, if his actions have any sort of smile in 'em to
his incompatible Father, which is the query. Pray resolve it.


Bell. First let me know the Gentleman.


Cr. You shall, I Will give you a Map of his Face, a Picture contained in my
pocket. -- ha! -- I have lost it, -- I have lost it --.


Bell. Tell me his Name, Sir.


Cr. I have dropped it out of my pocket.


Bell. I, but his name.


Cr. I have dropped it out of my pocket.


Bell. Have you dropped his Name out of your pocket? his Name Sir?


Cr. Oh! his Name, I Will tell you both his Name, and Cogname. His Name is
Andrew, his Cogname Farewell.


Bell. Farewell? what comes into my head? Sir can you guess where you might
loose this Picture?


Cr. A guess may be obtained -- by the Prayers of Mariners --


Bell. No other way? those I seldom hear of --


Cr -- I was drawn down -- stay let me see -- remembrance begins to be idle --
has London no place in the West?


Bell. Ay, no doubt.


Cr. Ay, but something very West? something called West?


Bell. Yes -- there is VVest-Smithfield.


Cr. That Is not the appellative. Is there no Monster in the West, called
Westmonster?


Bell. Westminster I believe you mean.


Cr. You Have nicked it it. To Westminster I rode, to behold the Glorious
circumstances of the Dead; and diving into my pocket, to present the
representer with a Gratification, I am fully confirmed, I then lost it; for my
Eyes and the Picture had never any rencounter since.


Bell. This exactly agrees with my Sisters story, what a Prodigious thing is
this? a discovery of my Sisters innocence, sent to me from the Indies, in a
heap of Nonsense? and in so Critical a minute; excellent Providence?


Cr. What Is an excellent Providence, Sir, that I have lost my Picture?


Bell. No Sir, that I have found your Picture.


Cr. Found my Picture?


Bell. Ay, Sir, 'twas found by a Friend of mine, in Westminster-Abby -- there
it is --


Cr. Oh! my Picture! -- my Picture! -- my Picture! --


Bell. Oh! my eased heart!


Cr. Oh! my Picture! my Picture! my pretty Picture!

My Lord I must requite this favor, open that Casket, and give my Lord a
handful of Diamonds.


Bell. A handful of Diamonds.


Cr. Ay, my Lord, I beg your Pardon for the inconsiderableness of the Present.


Bell. Inconsiderableness? what a Market would some make of this Man? -- put up
your Diamonds.


Cr. By no means, my Lord.


Bell. Put 'em up Sir, or you will dissoblige me.


Cr. You overwhelm me with Favors, I wish I had you at my house in Bantam.


Bell. I thank you, Sir; we are better where we are.


Cr. My Lord, you put me under the circumstance of blushing.


Bell. Pray let me put you into a Chamber, to rest your self.


Cr. Rest is good -- yours humbly --


Bell. Yours as humbly -- What a Fire did I kindle in my house, to clear the Air
of a Pestilence, was not in it? my Sister and all my Family are innocent. But
what a fantastic thing is Women's Honor?

Whilst She enjoy it, it is not seen or known,
And yet when lost She Is utterly undone.
(Exeunt Omnes.
ACT. IV.
The Scene continues. Enter Violante and Leonora laughing. Vio. HA! ha! ha!
what an excellent Fellow is this? what Engines he has in his head? not only to
wind himself into my Lords house, but the Picture out of his hands?


Leo. He undertakes to bring Mr. Farewell hither to Night. If he engaged to
bring him in a Church with a Parson to marry us, I would not doubt it.


Vio. Certainly my Lord must be in a most mortified humor; now is the time to
scarify him, and take out his Worm.


Leo. Here he comes, now will I carry my self with all the insolence of a
Virtuous Woman.

Enter Lord Belguard. So my Lord have your Slaves been gathering any more
scattered smiles of mine? what loads of that Gold Sand have your Asses brought
home?


Bell. They have heard all, now I am ashamed to show my Face.


Vio. Come, my Lord, would you confine a Woman of Honor? give her Liberty;
would you corrupt her? confine her.


Leo. It Is true; were I a Wife to such a Man, I should abuse him out of Pride;
and think my self not an ill but a great Woman, since to punish is a mark of
Princely Dignity.


Bell. This I confess is the English Dialect; and when I talk of Governing
Women, I talk of a thing not understood by our Nation. I admire how it came
about, that we who are of all Nations, the most wise and free in other
respects, should be the only Slaves and Fools to Women.


Vio. Oh! you are the Wisest of all Nations, you know let Men do what they can,
Women will do what they please; and whereas other Nations by their spies and
Governantes are at great toil and charges to be Cuckolds, you have it for
nothing.


Leo. Come Brother, do not dress me in a Fools Coat, nor hang spies about me,
like so many gingling Bells, to give notice of all my motions. I can count, and
know that one and one, put shamefully together, are two lewd Fools, and not one
happy pair, as ill Women reckon, and deceive themselves.


Bell. Sister, I believe you Virtuous, but I would have you not only be
Virtuous but thought so. And truly a Woman may be Virtuous, but is seldom wise
in Men's company. Her vain honor will put her on new Conquests. And Women's
Conquests are pretty things; they often end like those of Highway Men, in a
shameful Execution on their one Persons. And yet all the business of their
lives is mustering up Forces. To day the Beauty Lies ambush'd in undresses, the
hair pined up in Papers, like Serpents coyl'd to fly on you with greater force;
the Garments are loose and flowing as the Sea, to show a Venus is there. To
morrow she is as regularly fortified as a Low Country Town, and often a party of
Charming looks are sent abroad to put all Spectators under a contribution.


Vio. Your Wife must not dress?


Bell. Why should she? I think Women's Points and Embroyderies, but so many
Billet-doux in Needle work.


Vio. She must not go abroad or see a play.


Bell. Yes, She may go to Plays, provided she will see Plays and not Fools, it may
be enter into Conversation with 'em, and instead of getting Wit from the Plays,
get folly from the Fops; and so her Wit being spoiled in her Youth, shall like
a Clock set wrong in the Morning, go false all the day after. In short, no Wife
or Sister of mine shall dabble in conversation with any Man; I hate a Slattern
in her credit.

(Enter Surly peeping.)
Sur. IN my conscience I think I hear Belguard and his Mistress quarrel in good
earnest.

(aside.)
Vio. Let no Woman marry a Man of your humor, but she that for her Crimes is
condemned to Transportation. The Slave that in Virginia toyls to plant her Lord
Tobacco, is not more miserable, than she that in your bosom Labors to plant a
good opinion; both drudge for smoke. I scorn the slavery, nor will marry a King
to increase his Dominions, but to share 'em.


Bell. I offer you the entire Dominion of my self; only desire you, not to aim
at further conquests.


Vio. I should be a fine Sovereign, where Jealousy, Pride, Rage, and such a
saucy Committee shall give me Laws; which they would never do to a Prince they
loved.


Bell. I think I Have given convinceing Proofs of Love.


Vio. When?


Bell. When I offered, Madam, to take you for better and for worse; those are
Heroical Complements. The form of Matrimony out-does Ovid for passionate
expressions.


Vio. Ay, my Lord, but that is none of your Wit, and I would not have a Man of
your parts, steal other Men's Phrases; so Your Lordships humble Servant. -- Come
away Child

(Exit Vio. and Leo.) Enter Surly.
Sur. Rare! they are parted; once a Woman spoke truth. My Lord, your Servant.
I Have over heard your quarrel, and I honor you, you are the only Man in the
Nation that understands himself. Lock up the Women till they are musty, better
they should have a Hogo, than their Reputations. And their Honors are not like
their Smocks, whitened by lying abroad.


Bell. Nor have their adored Faces the more esteem, for often appearing.


Sur. pox on 'em, they varnish like Copper, and the Women are sensible of it,
that is the reason they forge new faces every time they go abroad; and all the
Arts of Paint and dress are suborned to give a Bastard beauty Title to Reign,
because the Legitimate Face is fallen into contempt by familiarity. No more to
be said, keep your ground like a Man of honor; and loose your Mistress like a
Coxcomb. --

(aside.) (Exit.) Enter a Servant.
Ser. An't please your Honor, Mr. Hothead and Mr. Testimony, are returned, as
your Honor gave order.

Enter Testimony.
Bell. That Is well -- come Mr. Testimony; here has been a mistake gave me a
harsh opinion of you -- I Am sorry for it.


Test. Oh! My Lord, have a care of censuring Professors -- for a Professor.


Bell. Nay, prithee don't profess too much. I am satisfied with thee.


Test. Truly you would, if you knew of what a tender Spirit I am of. I was only
deluded the other day into a Playhouse, and truly it will be a burden to my
Spirit whilst I live.


Bell. A lack a day, well I hope you will be the more tender of my Sister, your
trouble will not be long. I have engaged her to a Gentleman, whom about this
time I expect. What a clock is it?


Test. Truly I do believe it is about Four, I cannot say it positively; for I
would not tell a Lie for the whole World.


Bell. This is an excellent Fellow, if he be what he pretends. (knocking. Hark!
some one at the Door -- may be it is he -- see --

Enter Hothead.
Hot. Did you send for me, my Lord?


Bell. Ay, Cousin, to reconcile my self to thee; I was in a mistake.


Hot. I think you was, when you judged a Rascally Fanatic a better Man than I.


Bell. The contrary Cousin -- I think thee so much the better Man, I keep thee
to have an eye over him, because I don't know if he be a Knave.


Hot. Not know if a Fanatic be a Knave? You Are fit to sit in the House of Peers
I faith.


Bell. Well, thou art a very honest Fellow Cousin -- let me have thy Company.
But what are those Patches on thy Face, for Ornament?


Hot. they are for Plasters, but they are Ornaments. I have been in a Fanatic
Coffee-House, and this is the Beauty they gave me.


Bell. 'Twas to reward some honorable Names, thou gav'st 'em.


Hot. I gave 'em no wrong names. I called 'em Rogues indeed, but that is their
proper Name; and they all set their hands to it immediately, and subscribed
themselves Rogues upon my Chops, the only true Narrative they ever writ.


Bell. Thou art a mad Fellow -- prithee go in.

Exit Hot. at one Door. Enter at another Testimony.
Bell. Well -- who is at the Door?


Test. A lamentable Soul.


Bell. A Beggar?


Test. A more sad Object; but I conceive he comes rather to rob than beg, for
he comes Armed with a strong Bow and Arrows.


Bell. A Bow and Arrows? what, is he a Tartar?


Test. A Bow and Arrows made of Ribons, Laces, and other idle Vanities,
wherewith he intends to wound your Sister's heart.


Bell. Oh! the canting Coxcomb.


Test. Nay, why canting Coxcomb?


Bell. Be gone you senceless Ass; and bring in the Gentleman.


Test. Nay, why senceless Ass? this is unseemly.


Bell. He wont stir.


Test. I am no senceless Person -- I have more senses than your self* I have a
sense of Vanity, and of the nothingness of the things of this World -- and a
sense of Sin, and a sense of the insinuating nature of sin -- I dare not bring
this wanton frothy young Man to your Sister -- for she is frothy also -- and
sin will get in at a little crany -- and if sin once get in his head, he will get
in all his whole body. now your honor has not that sense of these things. You
ought to have that Your Honor is a senceless Person --


Bell. -- How Sirrah --?


Test. In a spiritual sense --.


Bell. There Is no getting this preaching Fellow away. -- Cousin Hothead.

Enter Hothead.
Hot. My Lord.


Bell. Why do you let this canting Coxcomb plague me?


Hot. Why do you keep such a canting Coxcomb? let him plague you, Pox you, and
Damn you, I don't care.


Test. Oh! sad! oh! sad!


Hot. Oh! shad! oh! Sot!


Bell. So, now I Have brought 'em both upon me.


Hot. He Is always tuning his Nose, too high too low, like a Sowgelders Horn


Bell. Well, Sir, if you please, tell me who is at my Door?


Hot. Forty One is coming in ding dong.


Bell. Into My Door? who is at my Door, I say?


Hot. Old Forty One, In Faith.


Bell. I cannot have an answer -- Sirrah -- who is at my Door?


Test. Popery, I Am sure is coming in.


Bell. Into my Door? I ask you, who is at my Door?


Test. Popery I Am sure.


Hot. Roguery I Am sure.


Test. Popery I Am sure.


Hot. Roguery I Am sure.


Bell. Confound you both.


Hot. And confound you both.

(Bell turns them both out.)
Bell. You Boy, is there any one at Door?

(to a Page.)
Pa. Yes my Lord.


Bell. So, this Boy can answer, who is it?


Pa. Sir Courtly Nice, My Lord.


Bell. O! these Rogues, have they made him wait all this while? introduce him
quickly. He comes most seasonably to rid me of my plague, now I Am very sick of
it.

Enter Sir Courtly and the Page, bowing to one another. Dear Sir Courtly, my
Servants did not tell me who you were, that I have ignorantly made you wait, I
am a shamed to see you.


Sir Co. Your Lordships most humble Servant.


Bell. Your very humble Servant Page -- call my Sister.

Enter Aunt and Leonora. goes to Salute Leo. Aunt steps first.
Sir Co. Madam your most --


Au. Sir Courtly, your very humble Servant.


Sir Co. Oh! your Ladyships very humble Servant --

(Salutes Aunt.)
Au. Your most humble Servant.


Sir Co. Now Madam, your most humble Servant.

(to Leo.)
Au. An incomparable fine Gentleman.


Bell. Well, Sir Courtly, now I Have brought you thus far of your way to my
Sisters inclinations; I Will leave you to pursue the rest of your journey by your
self; you need no guide to Ladies hearts.


Sir Co. Oh! your most humble Servant.


Au. No, Sir Countly commands all. If my Neice does not receive you, Sir
Courtly, in all the obliging manner in the World, it is for want of experience
and understanding merit -- I Will assure you, Sir Courtly, I who have some little
more judgment, have had a very particular value for you, Sir, from the first
Minute I had the honor to see you, Sir.


Sir Co. Oh! Madam, your most humble Servant.


Au. A very particular --


Sir Co. Oh! your most humble Servant.


Au. And if my Neice has not, it proceeds from her want of Years to know
Desert. And indeed all Youth is indiscreet, I would by no means advise a
Gentleman of Merit, to marry any Person, that has not some Years and experience
upon her --


Bell. She Is setting up for her self I think. Aunt. --


Au. Nephew --


Bell. Pray leave the Lovers together.


Au. Sir Courtly, your most humble Servant.


Sir. Co. Madam, your most humble Servant.


Au. Pray, Neice, behave your self so to Sir Courtly, as at least to do me
right; and by all your expressions and behavior, he may know how very
particular an honor I have for him.


Bell. She has for him? --

(aside.)
Au. Most particular. --


Bell. Pray Aunt in particular -- come with me --


Au. Very particular --


Sir Co. Oh! Madam -- Madam --


Bell. Aunt --


Au. Yes Nephew -- Sir Courtly, I am exceeding unwilling to leave you to to the
Conversation of a young Lady, whose Years I Am afraid will not afford her Wit
enough to entertain so fine a Gentleman --


Sir. Co. Oh! Madam! Madam! Madam!


Au. But I Will return with all speed possible. --


Bell. But you shall not, if I can help it --

(aside.)
Au. And so your very humble Servant.


Sir Co. Oh! Madam! your most humble Servant.

(Exit Aunt and Bell.)
Leo. Now will I manage him, humor him -- pretend to admire him -- to draw him
into love, laugh at him and revenge my self on him, for plaguing me.

(aside)
Sir Co. Now, Madam, is the glorious opportunity come, which my Soul has long
wished, to express how much I admire, adore --


Leo. Oh! Sir Courtly --


Sir Co. Extravagantly adore! --


Leo. Oh! Sir Courtly -- I cannot receive all this.


Sir Co. Oh! Madam, is there any thing on the Earth so charming? -- I never saw
any thing so fine as your Ladyship, since I was born.


Leo. Fie, Sir Courtly --


Sir Co. Never since I was born --


Leo. You Will kill me with blushing.


Sir Co. I speak my Soul -- Heavens! what Divine Teeth there are?


Leo. Fie! fie! I shall never open my mouth more.


Sir Co. Then you will undo all the World. Oh! there is nothing so charming as
admirable Teeth. If a Lady fastens upon my heart, it must be with her Teeth.


Leo. That Is a pleasant Raillery -- ha! ha! ha!

feigns a Foolish laugh.
Sir Co. Oh! Madam, I hope your Ladyship has a better opinion of my good
Manners -- Railly a Lady of your quality?


Leo. Oh! you Wits, turn all things into ridicule.


Sir Co. Madam, I never was so serious since I was born; therefore I beseech
your Ladyship have pity upon me. -- I swear and vow if you do not, I shall dye.


Leo. Dye! ha! ha! you Wits will be raillying.


Sir Co. Heavens, Madam! how shall I convince you, I am serious.?


Leo. Really, Sir Courtly, I should be very sorry if you be serious.


Sir Co. Oh! Heavens! why so Madam?


Leo. Because it is pity so fine a Gentleman should lose all his Gallantry --


Sir Co. Now you frighten me, Madam. Is it impossible for me to attain the
Glory of your inclinations?


Leo. It will be impossible for me to keep the Glory of your inclinations, Sir
Courtly; so I dare not venture on 'em.


Sir Co. Oh! as to that, Madam, I Will swear Eternal constancy, eternal services,
and all those things.


Leo. You are not in your own power, Sir Courtly. You fine Gentlemen, like fine
Countries, are desired and fought by all, and therefore in a perpetual War. If
I should place my heart in you, it would not have a minutes quiet. A thousand
Potent Beauties would every day assault you, and you would yield out of
Complaisance, your good Breeding would undo me.


Sir Co. Oh! Madam, this is extremity of Gallantry; your Ladyship pushes things
to a strange height.


Leo. I speak my Soul. Besides i have another humor, but that is a Foibless will
ridicule me.


Sir Co. Oh! Madam.


Leo. Nay i will confess it. I am strangely curious -- extravagantly curious -- I
nauseate a Perfume if it ever saluted any Nose but my one.


Sir Co. Oh! fortunate! my own humor.


Leo. Nothing must come near me, that was ever once touched by another.


Sir Co. Is it possible?


Leo. Not if you would give a Hundred pound.


Sir Co. My own Phrase too, i have observed it in my self, i am strangely
fortunate -- we shall be fond to an infinite degree.

(aside.)
Leo. For that reason, your fine Gentlemen is my aversion, he is so tempted by
all Ladies, so Complaisant to all Ladies, that to marry a fine Gentleman, is to
accept the leavings of a Thousand Ladies.


Sir Co. Oh! Madam! you have met with the Creature you desire; -- I never
touched Woman since I was born.


Leo. That Is pleasant, I believe you have ruined a thousand.


Sir Co. Not one upon my Soul.


Leo. It Is impossible.


Sir Co. Oh! Madam! there is not one Lady in a thousand I can Salute. I only
touch the tip of their ear with my Cheek.


Leo. Fie! fie!


Sir. Co. Not one Lady in a Million, whose breath I can endure. But I could not
go into their Beds, if you would give me a Thousand pound. I could not come into
the Air of any Bed in England but my own, or Your Ladyships, if you would give me
all the World.


Leo. This is all Gallantry, Sir Courtly. You have been told this is my humor.


Sir Co. Is it really, Madam?


Leo. Oh! above all things. I suffer nothing to come near my bed, but my
Gentlewoman.


Sir Co. Nor I, but my Gentleman. He has a delicate hand at making a Bed, he
was my Page, I bred him up to it.


Leo. To making Beds?


Sir Co. Ay, Madam, and I believe, he will make a Bed with any Gentleman in
England.


Leo. And my Woman has a great Talent.


Sir Co. Is it possible? Ladies commonly employ ordinary Chamber Maids -- with
filthy Aprons on, made by sluttish Women that spit as they -- spin -- foh!


Leo. Foh!


Sir Co. Your Ladyship will pardon me -- my Linen is all made in Holland, by
neat Women that dip their Fingers in Rose Water, at my charge.


Leo. Delicate.


Sir Co. And all washed there.


Leo. And so is mine at Hearlem.


Sir Co. At Hearlem, I hold a constant correspondence with all the Eminent
Washers there.


Leo. That Is delicate, and agrees wonderfully with my humor.


Sir Co. Oh! happy! we shall be fond to an infinite degree.

Enter Surly.
Leo. Oh! foh! here is that beastly rude Clown Mr. Surly.


Sir Co. Oh! foh! what shall we do with him?


Sur. How now? how now? you two are intimate -- hark you, Madam.


Leo. Oh! foh!


Sir Co. Foh!


Sur. Foh! what is this fohing at?


Sir Co. No body Mr. Surly; only at present we are accosted with an ungrateful
smell.


Sur. Yes, I smell an ungrateful smell, your Rogury. Madam, I employed this
Fellow to speak for me, and i will be hanged if he be not false to me.


Leo. To speak for him? ha! ha!


Sir Co. Ay, for him, Madam, ha! ha!


Sur. Ay, for me Nickumpoop.


Sir Co. Your humble Servant Sir, y' are very civil.


Sur. So I am, that I do not execute thee for this theft upon the place; but
thou plead'st thy Face, as Whores do their Bellys; it is big with Fool.


Sir Co. Very civil -- Sir.


Sur. Sure, Madam, a Woman of your sense, will not choose him before me. He has
more Land? not more improved Land. His Acres run up to one great Weed, I mean
himself; and there it Blossoms in Periwigs and Ribons. Oh! but he has a finer
Person! that is a cheat; a false Creed imposed on you, by a General Council of
Tailors, Milleners and Sempstresses; let my hat expound his Face, and you will see
what a piece of simple stuff it is.


Sir Co. Horrid! he has put his beastly Hat upon my Head -- pray Sir do me the
favor to remove it, or I shall grow very sick --

(to a Ser.)
Sur. Sick? I hope thou will eat my Hat. Now, Madam, you see what a cheat he
is, and whether he deserves any more favors, then to be decently hanged with
the rest of his Brothers.


Sir Co. My Brothers hanged, Mr. Surly?


Sur. I mean the Pictures in the Hangings, for they and thou are all but
Needle Work; and thou would serve for a piece of Tapstery, but for a
Husband, Lord, have Mercy on thee.


Sir. Co. Your Servant, Mr. Surly. You are a very well bred Gentleman, Sir, and
pay great Veneration to a Lady of Quality, and your Mistress -- ha! ha!


Leo. His Mistress? ha! ha!


Sir Co. Let Us railly him to death, Madam -- ha! ha! --


Sur. Railly? does the ridiculous Figure pretend to laugh at any thing?


Sir Co. Dee' hear, Madam?


Leo. Sir Courtly, you are a Martyr to good manners, and suffer out of respect
to me, more than is fit for a Man to bear.


Sur. He a Man? I have seen a Butler make a better thing out of a Diaper Napkin.


Sir Co. Your most obliged humble Servant -- Sir.


Leo. Sir Courtly, I Will withdraw, that you may do your self Justice -- and be
kicked --

(aside.)
Sir Co. Your Ladyships most humble Servant.


Leo. I Will no longer protect such a Coxcomb -- as your self.

(aside.)
Sir Co. Your very humble Servant, Madam; I Will push his Soul out presently.


Leo. Oh! don't do him that favor, Sir, only correct him.


Sir Co. Well, Madam, what your Ladyship pleases. --

Your Ladyships very humble Servant.

(Exit Leo.)
Mr. Surly, I have received some favors from you, Sir, and I desire the Honor
of your Company, Sir, to Morrow morning at Barn-Elms, Sir, -- please to name
your Weapon, Sir.


Sur. A Squirt.


Sir Co. A Squirt?


Sur. Ay, for that will go to thy heart, I Am sure.


Sir Co. Well, Sir, I shall kiss your hands.


Sur. Kiss my Breech. --

(Exit.)
Sir Co. Beast, Clown, Fool, Rascal. Pox take him -- what shall I do with him?
it goes against my stomach horribly to fight such a Beast. If his filthy Sword
should touch me, 'twou'd make me as sick as a Dog.

(Exit.) Scene a Garden. Enter Cr. and Leonora.
Leo. Ha! ha! I Will secure the Coxcomb -- I Will get him confined upon the Guard,
among Tobacco takers and that will confine him to his Bed and Bagnio's for one
Month.


Cr. That will do rarely. About this time I expect Mr. Farewell, I ha sent for
your Brother to introduce him.


Leo. My Brother?


Cr. Your Brother I say, to show my skill. Retire, and stay concealed in the
Garden. Here your Brother comes.

(Exit Leo.) Enter Belguard. Now for lies and nonsense to entertain this
jealous Brother till the Lover comes.


Bell. Sir Thomas your Servant, what is your will with me?


Cr. Talk -- I love talk -- begin.


Bell. Very pithy.


Cr. In what circumstance are we?


Bell. Circumstance?


Cr. Ay, what call you this, where we are?


Bell. A Garden.


Cr. A Garden? i have seen in the Indies a Melon as big.


Bell. As all this Garden?


Cr. Bigger.


Bell. Well lied of a Madman. (aside.) Are all your Fruit so large?


Cr. All.


Bell. Your Nutmegs and Pepper are not.


Cr. Your History is erroneous. We have Nutmegs as big as small Fly-boats, I
have sailed a hundred Leagues in a Nutmeg.


Bell. Well lied.

(aside.).
Cr. Our Oysters have wonderful conferrence.


Bell. Circumference I suppose you mean.


Cr. Y' ave nicked it. Three of 'em block up a Harbor. It Is our way of
Mortification.


Bell. Fortification.


Cr. You are in the right -- Pox on it I have been so long abroad, I have almost
forgot my Mother tongue.

Well -- when will this Lover come? it is near the hour, and delicately dark.

(aside.) Farewell within. Murder! murder! murder!

clashing of Swords.
Cr. That Is he! he is come! (aside.) murder cried out.


Bell. And at my Coach-house Door?

Farewell within. Oh! Cowardly Rogues! Four upon one.


Bell. A Gentleman assassinated?


Cr. Open the Door.


Bell. Who Is there?

Enter a Servant.
Ser. My Lord.


Bell. Call some of the Servants to assist a Gentleman, set upon at my
Coach-House Door.


Cr. Ay -- quick -- quick --

(draws.)
Bell. How, Sir Thomas? will you venture among 'em?


Cr. Dee' think I wont? a Gentleman and not fight?


Bell. I must not suffer it, you may be hurt.


Cr. No Sir, I Will fight like a Gentleman; I Will come by no hurt I Will warrant
you. -- Come quick -- quick -- open the Door --

Enter Servants. Now Sound a Trumpet, Tivy -- tivy -- tan tan -- tivy -- Tone,
-- Pox on it it is a Horn -- I don't know a Horn, I have forgot every thing
belongs to a Gentleman. -- among 'em -- helter skelter --

(Exit Bell. Cr. and Ser. mean while Farewell steals into the Garden. Enter
Leonora and her Woman.
Leo. IN my conscience this is Cracks design to let in Mr. Farewell.


Fa. Dear Madam you are in the right.


Leo. Mr. Farewell? I know your voice --


Fa. Oh! Madam, I adore you for this bounty.


Leo. And I should blush for it.


Fa. Why so, Madam?


Leo. Should a Woman admit a Lover by night at a Backdoor into the same house
where she lies, and converse privately with him before Marriage.


Fa. Your Brother admitted me.


Leo. It Is true indeed, you may thank him for the favor, I thought your
sufferings deserved pity, and my Brother would let me show it, no other way.


Fa. A thousand Blessings on you.


Leo. I doubt not but my honor is very safe in your keeping, I wish your
Person, were as secure in mine.


Fa. I am glad of the danger, since it is some assurance of my Love.


Leo. Your Friend Mr. Crack plays his part very well, and I doubt not but he
will secure us here, and conveigh us hence, but then other dangers will follow
you.


Fa. What are those, Madam?


Leo. The danger of marrying without a Fortune, my Ten thousand pound is at my
Brothers dispose.


Fa. I am glad of that too, Madam, 'twill show my love is not mercenary.


Leo. The danger of being laughed at by the Wits, for marrying at all.


Fa. Oh! let the Wits keep the Jilting rotten Wenches, and leave the sweet
Virtuous Ladies to us marrying Fools, I can be as well pleased to keep a fine
Wife to my self, as they can be to maintain five Wenches for all the Town.


Leo. Nay, your keeping Men, Keepers like have commonly but the Offals for
their Slave. Well the Evening Air will be unwholesome to you, if you stay longer
in it, you will be in danger of Thunder and Lightning presently, I mean my Brother
-- he comes -- follow me --

(Ex. Leo. Fa. Wom.) Enter Belguard, Crack, etc.
Cr. What Cowardly Rogues were these? they ran upon our first sallying.


Bell. They had a reason, you are a Lion.


Cr. I used to kill Lions and Tigers in the Indies, as you do Hares and Conyes
here. I kept a Tiger Warren, I killed a brace every morning to get me a stomach.


Bell. It was a good one sure, you offered dear for it. Well I hope you have got
no hurt?


Cr. Yes, something very sharp, went quite through my stomach.


Bell. How? through your stomach? then you cannot live.


Cr. Yes, if you anoint it presently with a good dish of Jelly-broth, and Tent
it with a bone of Roast-beef.


Bell. Is that the wound? it shall be healed presently.


Cr. Presently, for my stomach is Captious.


Bell. It shall be done. Go to my Aunt and desire her to order Sir Thomas his
Supper --


Ser. She Is not very well, my Lord, and gone to bed.


Bell. Then let the Steward do it. Sir Thomas I am going out and shall stay
late. Pray command my house -- good Night to you --

(Exit.)
Cr. Your Servant Sir -- you keep a Woman? -- now to the Lovers -- where are
they? --

Enter Farewell, Leo. and her Woman.
Fa. Here! here! thou Divine Fellow.


Cr. So, so, kiss! kiss! kiss! --


Leo. Before Marriage?


Cr. Ay, for fear you should not kiss after marriage -- well the house is our
own, and the Night our own -- your Aunts gone to bed, and your Brother abroad,
we will Tory -- rory, and it is -- a fine Night, we will Revel in the Garden -- Slaves
go bring my Supper -- quick -- quick --

Ex. Slaves -- and enter with Dishes: Farewell, Leo. and Crack sit down. Enter
Siamites and Bantammers. Now a Song and Dance of your own fashion -- but shut
the Garden. Gates -- and look to 'em well, for I Will be private in my pleasures
--

(a Songs and Indian Dance.) -- So -- now to my Chamber -- well -- there is no
public Officer like your Pimp --.

Pimps manage the great business of the Nation.
That is -- the Heavenly work of propagation.
(Exeunt Omnes.)
ACT. V.
Scene Cracks Chamber. Enter Farewell and Crack. Fa. OH! thou Divine Fellow,
what joys have thou procured me?


Cr. What joys?


Fa. All that Innocence could afford.


Cr. Innocence? that is insipid stuff.


Fa. No Mr. Crack, there is difference between the Mannah that came, from
Heaven, and that out of 'Pothecaries Shops; a touch of Leonora's hand like
Mannah from Heaven has all that Man can fancy. Here she comes.

Enter Leonora. This, Madam, is bountiful after an Evenings Conversation, to
afford me a Morning too.


Leo. We should be charitable ^o Prisoners.


Fa. I am a Prisoner, but such a happy one, as a King is when Lodged in a Royal
Tower, to prepare for his Coronation. My hour of Coronation draws near, I want
only the Church Ceremony and the Oath.


Cr. Madam, how dirst you venture hither, by day light?


Leo. My Aunt, and Brother, are both gone abroad, and will not come home till
Noon. So all those hours are mine, and now Mr. Crack to requite your Music I
have brought some of mine to entertain you.

A Song -- And enter a Woman.
Wom. Oh! Madam -- undone -- your Brother.


Cr. How? how?


Wom. Just coming up stairs, to visit -- you Sir Thomas.


Cr. Pox of his civility. Hide, Sir Hide. And do you Women shreike! -- shreike!
and cry out murder.

Cr. throws himself on the ground and scrambles in distracted postures after
the Women. They shreike -- Enter Belguard.
Bell. So, here is my Sister got into the Madmans Room; and has put him into a
frantic fit. Oh! the insatiable curiosity of Women.


Cr. You Whores! -- you bewitching Whores, do you come to bewitch me? I Will
fetch blood from you.


Bell. Why would you offer to come hither, Sister?


Cr. What are you, Sir, the King of Bantam?


Bell. No Sir, no.


Cr. Oh! the Mogul.


Bell. Nor the Mogul.


Cr. What do you then with all these Concubines? -- Oh! I know you now, you are a
fine man, you have put me into brave circumstances. Did not I desire you to let
me see no Women? and here, you keep a company o'rambling Whores in your house,
that have put me into the circumstances of distraction. I was a top of the
Staircase taking a prospect of the Cape of Good-Hope, and these Flyboats came
sailing under my Nose. What do me I? but leap down to break their Necks? and
have broke my own I think. I am certain, I have broke something, but what I
don't know. Pray take me up, and look over my bones, see if none be missing; if
they be, Bone for Bone will be demanded.


Bell. Poor creature! who is there?


Cr. Who Is there? will you trust me to your servants! so if a Leg or an Arm of
mine be broke, they will leave it behind them, and I shall loose it. I expect all
my Limbs and Bones from you, as you received 'em. So -- come and take account
of 'em.


Bell. I will -- I will --

(Takes him up.)
Cr. Oh! have a care -- Oh! --


Bell. Alas! I fear he is hurt; your foolish curiosity has done this? did you
not gape enough upon him before?


Cr. Oh! gently! gently! -- so -- so --

(Bell. leads him out.)
Fa. Oh! this pleasant Rogue! ha! ha!


Leo. It Is an excellent fellow. As soon as we hear my Brother is returning, slip
into that passage, 'twill lead you to Crak's Bedchamber.

Enter Aunt.
Au. How now Gentlewoman? a man wi' you? Nephew -- Nephew -- Nephew. --


Leo. Begone -- begone -- through that Entry.

Ex. Fa. at one Door, at another Enter Bellguard.
Bell. What Is the matter?


Au. Our family's dishonored, dishonored -- here was a fellow, a handsome
young fellow wi' my Neice. Oh! my flesh! my flesh.


Leo. Wi' me?


Au. Will you deny it Confidence?


Bell. Who Is there? Hothead, Testimony, all of you come hither.

Enter Hothead, Testimony, Exit.
Test. What Is your honors pleasure?


Bell. To cut all your throats, you are all Bauds and Villains.


Hot. Leave me out of the number you had best.


Bell. I will not Sir, For here was a young fellow wi' my Sister;


Leo. My Aunt's whimsy and jealousy.


Au. I could tread you under my feet.


Bell. Which way went he?


Au. Into that passage: He cannot be got further, then Sir Thomas Calicoes
Bedchamber.


Bell. Lock all the doors, Arm and beset Sir Thomas Calicoes lodgings.


Leo. This will prove such another wise business as the Picture.


Bell. Hold your peace -- get you into that room wi' my Aunt. Aunt pray look to
her.

(Ex. Bell. Hot. Test. etc.)
Au. I Will keep her, I warrant her -- come in gentlewoman. -- you are a fine
gentlewoman.


Leo. Oh! my heart trembles -- Heaven inspire Crack.

(aside) Ex. Aunt and Leonora. Scene changes to another Room. Enter Farewell
and Crack.
Fa. Oh! cursed fortune.


Cr. Well don't trouble your self. I Will bring you off safe.


Fa. Not trouble my self, when Leonora's honor is in danger? she will be the jest
of every prating Fop, and malicious beauty.


Cr. Her honor shall be safe too. This blustering -- Brother shall entertain
you. --


Fa. With a Blunderbuss?


Cr. Ay, full of Claret. Away -- away -- he comes?

Ex. Fa. and Enter Bellguard, Hothead, Testimony, and the Servants armed.
Cr. How? the High and glorious Emperor of Siam with all his guards? Thou most
invincible Paducco, Farucco, -- nelmocadin -- bobbekin -- bow -- -- wow -- ww
-- why do thou seek to destroy us English, seated on thy Dominions by thy own
Letters Patents?


Bell. Pish! -- take him away.


Cr. Take away our Privileges? then this goes to my heart.

Draws his Dager, and pretends to stab himself.
Bell. Hold, hold -- Sir Thomas -- Sir Thomas, no hurt is meant to you.


Cr. Most Great and Glorious Emperor, I humbly thank, and do humbly Implore
thee; that thou would command thy Invincible guards, to lay down their arms,
and put us out of our frights, and we will submit our persons to thee. This is
some Interlopers work.

(aside)
Bell. Pox of this impertinent mad -- coxcombe? Lay down your weapons, may be
if we humor him, he may come to his senses, and give us leave to search the
rooms.

(They lay down their Weapons)
Cr. My Lord Bellguard, your most humble servant.


Bell. He Is come to himself; that is well. Sir Thomas your servant, how do you?


Cr. A little discomposed, something has frightened me, and put me into the
circumstance of a sweat.


Bell. I Am sorry for that. Shall I beg leave, to search your rooms for a theif
that is got in?


Cr. Pardon's begged; search must not be made; for I have a friend there, you
must not see. Would you and your friend were hanged.

(aside.) A very honest Gentleman, but very much addicted to marriage. It Is he
that I told you, is to marry my Indian Fubs of a Sister -- Mr Farewell.


Bell. Mr. Farewell?


Cr. Ay, hearing of my arrival, and what circumstance I was in; hovered all
this morning about the house to get a sight of me; but cared not to come in,
for it seems there is enmity between you.


Bell. It Is True, and I wonder how he got in without my knowledge.


Cr. I made him come in. I was throwing my legs about in the Hall, and the door
being open, our eyes knocked immediately, and gave remembrance such a bang,
that we ran full speed into the circumstances of embracing?


Bell. And pray who saw this?


Cr. Who saw? what care I who saw? I care not if the whole Town saw, I Am not
ashamed of owning Mr. Farewell.


Bell. No Sir, but I mean which of my family saw? that I may thank 'm for their
care.


Cr. What do I care for your family? if I may not bring a friend into your
family, a fart for your family.


Bell. Nay be not angry Sir Thomas, your friend's welcome.


Cr. I doubt it not, for I have found you a very civil person. And now
recollection is active, I fancy he is the man you take for a theif. It Is so --
ha! ha! -- excuse me -- ha! ha! -- leave is implord -- ha! ha! -- brot'her
Farewell.

(Fa. within.) Brother.


Cr. Come out, and participate of laughter.


Bell. So, now have I played the fool again, vexed my self, and wronged my
Sister with my impertinent jealousies.

Enter Farewell.
Cr. Come brother -- ha! ha! laugh -- but first salute.


Fa. My Lord, I believe you wonder to see me here, and you may; I call my self
Bastard, and renounce the blood of my family, by coming under your roof with
any design, but to prejudice you, which at present I must acknowledge to my
shame is not my intention. I visit my friend here for his own sake, and the
sake of a great Beauty, which you shall not hinder me of, My Lord.


Bell. I will not Mr. Farewell, I scorn those effeminate revenges. If I hurt any
Man it shall be with my Sword.


Fa. Your Sword, my Lord?


Cr. Hold? hold.


Bell. Ay any where but here Mr. Farewell, my House is your Sanctuary, and here
to offer you violence, would prejudice my self.


Cr. What a quarrelling's here? i'my conscience I believe, my Lord, it is
because you think he came to steal me, I being under whimsical circumstances,
for I remember you called him a Thief. Look you, My Lord don't fear me, I will not
be stole -- I know when I Am well -- Brother I Am very well provided for, I want
nothing but my Wits; and what do they signify? if a Man lives like a
Gentleman, no matter whether he has Wit or no --


Fa. Well, my Lord, though I have the misfortune to be your Enemy, I am none to
good manners; I am sorry I have given your house this trouble, and the more
because my Friend receives such generous usage in it.


Bell. Nor am I an Enemy to Love, and the fair Sex. If the Lady you come for
loves you, for her sake I wish you success. --


Fa. Now my Lord you vanquish me.


Cr. He Is a brave Man -- Faith. --


Fa. I fancy we shall live to be better Friends, at present I Will take my leave,
-- my Lord your Servant. --


Bell. Your Servant Sir.


Cr. Brother I must see you down stairs. This was a Master-peice. ha! ha!

(Exit Fa. and Cr.
Bell. Now I am cool again. What a flame had your negligence put me into. Here
release my Sister, I Am ashamed to see her --

(to a Servant.)
Hot. Sirrah! Sirrah! you did this to make me suspected.


Test. Ay -- ay, I must be abused, because I Am a Protestant.


Hot. A Protestant? a Dog. But with such Names the Rogues divide the Rabble,
and make the Nation go like the Devil, upon Cloven Feet.


Bell. Hold your prating, and by your future care make amends for your past
negligence; your trouble shall not be long, within this Eight and forty hours
I Will marry her, or send her into the Country.


Hot. Well -- well -- I Will look to her, for the Honor of my Family, not your
huffing.

(Exit.
Test. I to discharge a Conscience --

(Exit.) Enter Leonora.
Leo. So -- Sir --


Bell. My Sister --


Leo. Do you run from me? is that the reparation you make for the intolerable
wrongs you have done me?

(pretends to burst into tears.)
Bell. Well, I have wronged you, I Am sorry for it, and beg your Pardon -- I
must be gone -- about business -- your business -- to fetch Sir Courtly Nice.
your Servant, Sister.

(Ex.)
Leo. Oh! your Servant Sir -- ha! ha! -- he runs -- I may chance Sir to run as
nimbly from you, if Cracks Wit do not fail him -- here he comes --

Enter Crack. Thou admirable Fellow, what have thou done with Mr. Farewell?


Cr. He Is in the Street staying for you.


Leo. Staying for me? and can thou conveigh me to him?


Cr. Dee' question it? put on a Vizard and something over your Clothes.


Leo. Sweet Rogue.


Cr. Nay, nay be gone.


Leo. Delicate Rogue.


Cr. Nay, nay he stays for you.


Leo. Incomparable Rogue.


Cr. Pshaw! put on your Vizard.


Leo. Most excellent Rogue.


Cr. Oones! put on your Vizard.


Leo. I will -- I will -- ha! ha! toll -- loll -- derol --

Cr. goes out, and as Leo. is going out singing and danceing, She Is met by
Bell. and Sir Co.
Bell. Oh! Sister your tune's altered.


Sir Co. Oh! Madam! I Am happy to find your Ladyship, in so gay a humor.


Leo. You Will not find it so --

(aside.)
Bell. Sir Courtly I Will betray her to you. I left her in Tears upon an unhappy
occasion, and at parting told her I would bring you. Now you are come, I find
her in joy. Nothing else could cause the change.


Sir Co. Oh! fortunate.


Leo. Oh! Fop! --

(aside.)
Bell. Now improve your interest, and let us see how great a Master you are in
Courtship, by your dextrous dispatch. I leave you together --

(Ex.)
Sir Co. And upon my Soul I will. Oh! Madam, am I so Fortunate, so Glorious, to
be well in your fine inclinations?


Leo. Oh! fie, Sir Courtly -- if I had any such guilt upon me, do you think I
would confess?


Sir Co. You do confess, Madam -- your fine Eyes, and your languishing Air, and
your charming Blushes, and all those things --


Leo. I hope I carry no such false things about me; for if they say any such
thing they infinitely wrong me.


Sir Co. Oh! now you are cruel, Madam; you kill me.


Leo. Can you hope for my heart Sir Courtly, till I Have some assurance of yours.


Sir Co. What assurance would your Ladyship have?


Leo. All manner -- he that pretends to my heart -- must sigh, and wait, and
watch -- and pant -- and fight, and write -- and kill himself.


Sir Co. All this I have done, Madam, and Ten thousand things more. Drove by
your Windows, a thousand times a day, sought you at the Parks and the Plays.
Was a constant faithful Attendant at all Tragedys -- for I presumed your
Ladyship nauseates Comedys --


Leo. Oh! Foh! --


Sir Co. They are so ill -- bred -- and saucy with Quality, and always crammed
with our odious Sex -- that have not always the most inviting smell -- Madam,
you will Pardon me -- Now at Tragedies, the House is all lined with Beauty, and
then a Gentleman may endure it. And I have gone, found not your Ladyship there,
drove home, killed my self with sigthing, and then writ a Song.


Leo. Oh! Heavens! Sir Courtly, did you ever write a Song upon me?


Sir Co. Above a thousand.


Leo. Oh! there is nothing charms me like a Song --

For Heavens sake -- the Song! -- the Song --


Sir Co. I Have above forty here in a sweet Bag, I Will show you the first I made
upon Your Ladyship. It Is thought to be a pretty Foolish soft Song, most Ladies
are very kind to it.

As I gazed unaware,
On a Face so fair; --

Leo. Oh! Sir Courtly --


Sir Co. -- Your cruel Eye,
Lay watching by
To snap my heart,
Which you did wi' such art;
That away wi't you ran,
Whilst I looked on. --
To my ruin and grief;
Stop Thief -- stop Thief.

Leo Oh! fine! oh! fine!


Sir Co. That stop Thief, Madam, is pretty Novel.


Leo. Oh! delicate! I Am charmed! I Am lost! -- fie what have I said --


Sir Co. What makes me the happyest of Creatures.


Leo. I only railly -- I renounce all --


Sir Co. Not for the World --


Leo. Away -- the Song again -- the Song -- I Will hear nothing but the Song. Is
there no tune to it?


Sir Co. One of my own composing.


Leo. That accomplishment to? Heavens! how fine a Gentleman is this?


Sir Co. Oh! Madam, how proved you make me?


Leo. Oh! dear, how I betray my self? foolish Creature -- no more -- no more --
the Tune, the tune.


Sir Co. I always humor my words with my Air. So I make the Voice shake at the
last Line, in imitation of a Man that runs after a Thief. Sto -- ho -- ho --
hop -- Thief --

(sings.)
Leo. Oh! delicate! cannot I learn it? sto -- ho -- ho -- ha! ha! ha!

(imitates his Foolish singing and falls into a laugh.)
Sir Co. Dear Madam, what makes your Ladyship laugh?


Leo. At a Coxcomb, that thought to win me with a Foolish Song, this puts it
into my head.


Sir Co. Oh! Foolish! there are abundance of those Foolish Fellows, and does
the Song please your Ladyship?


Leo. Infinitely, I did not think you had been so fine a Poet.


Sir Co. Poetry, Madam, is my great foible, and when I see a fine Woman I
cannot command my foible.


Leo. How? dee' make Songs upon other Ladies? unfortunate I Have given my heart
to aninconstant Man --


Sir Co. Oh! Madam, -- only Gallantry.


Leo. I Am abused -- unfortunate --

(pretends to weep.)
Sir Co. Oh! Madam, you take it wrong --


Leo. I Am abused. --


Sir. Co. Oh! Heavens!


Leo. But the Songs very fine! -- sto -- ho -- ho -- ha! ha!


Sir Co. Pleasant Creature.

(sings and laughs)
Leo. Coxcomb. --

(aside.)
Sir Co. We shall be infinitely fond -- a pretty Glass, this Madam

(looks in a Glass.)
Leo. So he is making an assignation with his own foolish Face, I Will leave him
to Court that and steal away.

(Exit.)
Sir Co. Sto -- ho -- ho -- hop --

Enter Aunt.
Au. Singing, Sir Courtly?


Sir Co. At your Service, Madam. Well, Madam, you have said so many fine things
to me, that I assure my self of your heart, and now I am resolved to push this
opportunity, to an extremity of happyness.

(Sir Courtly looks in the Glass while he speaks.)
Au. Oh! fortunate! this to me? I did make him some advances to day I confess,
and have they had this success? my heart pants: I am surprised with infinite
joy, and am not able to answer --

(aside.)
Sir Co. Well, Madam, I must be happy, and so upon my -- the Lady gone --

(turns from the Glass.)
Au. Sir Courtly you put me in great confusion --


Sir Co. The Lady's consent is very considerable -- she governs her Neice, and
under her conduct may make me happy, with a reserve to Modesty. (aside.) Well,
Madam, shall I have your consent to my happyness, my glory?


Au. Oh! dear Sir! is it possible to answer you so soon?


Sir Co. So soon, Madam? you know my passion has been long.


Au. Is it possible? I swear I never heard of it before.


Sir Co. That Is strange; would not my Lord, your Nephew acquaint you?


Au. He never said one word of it to me.


Sir Co. That Is amazing.


Au. I find my Nephew has been false to me. It seems it is me the Gentleman
loves, and my Nephew would defrau'd me of him, for his Sister -- here is fine
doings. --

(aside.)
Sir Co. I swear I thought your Ladyship had known, and granted your consent --
you said so many fine things --


Au. I said no more, -- Sir Courtly, then what were the result of my thoughts,
upon the contemplation of your great desert --


Sir Co. Your Ladyships most humble Servant -- then I hope, Madam, since my
passion has been long, though you knew not of it, you will not deferr my
hapyness -- it is in your power I Am certain, no Person controuls you --


Au. Controuls me? that is pleasant -- no Sir.


Sir Co. She says true -- she can bring her Neice -- (aside.) I beseech you,
Madam, take pity of a suffering Lover.


Au. Oh! Sir, should I consent so soon, 'twou'd be against all Forms. --


Sir Co. I would not for the World offend against any Forms. No Man living more
studyes, and adores all manner of Forms -- but my passion has been long.


Au. I know not what to say, Sir, indeed I must not. --


Sir Co. Oh! Pardon me!


Au. Oh! Pardon me!


Sir Co. Oh! Madam!


Au. You confound me, Sir:


Sir Co. You distract me, Madam. It must be. --


Au. Well, Sir I yield, but with an extremity of blushing.


Sir Co. Your most obliged humble Servant.


Au. My severe temper would never have been wrought on so soon, but by so fine a
Gentleman.


Sir Co. Your most humble Servant.


Au. And to revenge my self on my Nephew, for his false play.


Sir Co. Well, Madam, we will in my Coach to the next Church presently.


Au. It Is very hard to resist you, Sir Courtly. If you please I will first put
on a Disguise; for I desire it may be managed with all secrecy, till the
Ceremony of Marriage be over.


Sir Co. With all my Soul; for I infinitely love a secret Intrigue, especially
when every body knows of it.


Au. Least my Nephew light on us, and prevent it.


Sir Co. He Is for the Match.


Au. He Is very false.


Sir Co. Is it possible?


Au. Is it not apparent, when he concealed the whole matter from me, least I
should promote it?


Sir Co. That Is unanswreable, I Am amazed at it. Well, Madam, I shall not fail
of being happy? --


Au. Immediately, Sir.


Sir Co. And you think you have power?


Au. Power? that is pleasant.


Sir Co. So -- so -- she will bring or send her -- (aside.) Well, Madam, Your most
humble Servant.


Au. Your very blushing Servant --

(Ex.)
Sir Co. Your humble -- sto -- ho -- ho -- hop -- Thief --

(Exit.) Enter Crack and Leonora laughing.
Cr. An humble Thief indeed, steal an old Woman? --


Leo. This was a pleasure I could not have thought of. Now to our Affair.


Cr. Come -- on with your Vizard.

(Exeunt.) Scene changes to the Hall. Enter at one Door, Hothead and Testimony,
at another Crack.
Cr. Barbarity! falsehood! treachery! murder


Hot. What Is the matter?


Cr. Did not I stipulate upon the surrendry of my self to this House, to be
kept from Women? and I am devoured with them; here is come into my Chamber, a hot
burnt Whore, with a black crust upon her face -- here she is, Avaunt.

(Exit.) Crack pull's in Leonora vizarded.
Hot. You damned Whore, how came you into this house? and what are you? I Will
see your face.


Cr. Then I Will see your brains, I swear by Gogmagog, and all the seven
damnable Sins.


Test. Oh! sad! oh! sad


Cr. Show me the face of a Woman? I had rather see forty full moons.


Hot. Stand off Impertinence; I will see her face.


Cr. Murder! murder! call my Lord -- Lord, Lord -- murder -- murder! Lord --
Lord -- Lord.


Hot. Hold your bauling, I Will let her go. -- For now I think on it, If my Lord
should find this Whore here when he gave such strickt orders, we should let no
body out, or in, he will make more noise than this mad fool -- so let us kick her
out of Doors, and say nothing.


Test. Hold, let us not use violence to her -- she is a great temptation to me.
(aside) I Will reprove the idle Woman, it may be, I may gain upon her.


Hot. Gain a Clap Sirrah! for this is some of the footmens Whores, picked up in
the dark. Get you out you Whore.


Test. No violence pray. She Is a great snare to me. (aside.) woman get you out
woman -- and dee hear? -- I Will follow you, and we will drink a bottle.


Leo. Do old godly knave, and thou shall be welcome.


Test. I come! I come! (aside) get you out woman.


Hot. Get you out -- you Whore.

(they thrust Leo. out.)
Cr. Good morrow -- up so early?


Hot. What Is the whimsy now?


Cr. Am not I in Bed?


Hot. In Bed?


Test. Poor soul, poor soul --


Cr. I am not in faith. Then I walk in my sleep: I was fast a sleep just now,
and dreamed I saw women, and Vizards, and all that Trash; and the fright put me
in a Fever. I burn; prithee give me a mouth full of sweet air.

(Exit Cr.)
Hot. Prithee take a belly full and be damned. A fine time on it I have; with
Whores, and Fools, and mad Men, and Fanatiques.

(Exit.)
Test. So, now I Will steal after her; for I find in me a very great uproar.

(Exit.) Scene changes to Violante's house. Enter Farewell -- Leonora vizarded,
Testimony.
Fa. Come in, come in honest old Fornicator, though the girl be mine, when I
have had my collation, if she will consent, faith, thou shall have a bit; I love a
Wenching Rogue in my heart.


Test. Oh! dear Sir, your very humble servant, and truly I am a kind of a wag.
I love a pretty bit sometimes.


Fa. And I love thee the better for it, and this is a pretty bit, thou shall
see her

(Leo. pul's off her vizard.)
Test. Oh! dear! undone! undone!


Leo. Nay, nay Mr. Testimony will not you be as good as your word? shall not we have
a Bottle?


Test. Oh! Madam, don't discover me to my Lord, and you shall not only have my
prayers, but the prayers of all the sober party for you all days of my life.


Leo. So, he runs from Whoring to Praying.


Fa. Are not you a Rogue Sirrah?


Test. I know I shall be called Rogue, by the Popish party -- they will rejoice
at my fall, but I hope my fall will be sanctified unto me for my better
Upstanding. --


Fa. Among the Wenches -- Sirrah -- come, Sirrah, you shall stay till my Lord
comes, for his mortification, as well as yours.


Test. Oh! my flesh, it has undone me.

Enter Violante, and Crack.
Vio. My dear.


Leo. My dear. --


Vio. Excellent Crack; for this great piece of service, I Will have thee knighted
under a petticote. Well we must send for my Lord, to laugh at him.


Test. Oh! dear! I tremble!


Vio. Who Is there? well my Lord, I desire to speak with him.


Leo. Pray let him bring Sir Courtly Nice, and his bride with him; be sure you
say nothing of me. --

(Ex. footm.)
Vio. Are you a Bride yet?


Leo. Not yet.


Vio. Get in, and let my Chaplain make you one.


Leo. Come Mr. Testimony. Mr. Crack, bring him.


Cr. How now you Rogue? what is your business?


Test. Oh! my reproach will be great.

(Ex. Fa. Leo. Cr. Test.)
Vio. Mr. Surly.

Enter Surly.
Sur. Well, what now?


Vio. Now, you shall be my Husband.


Sur. Your Jack, to turn and roast you for another, whilst I have no share in
you.


Vio. According to the share I have in you: You men would feign engross all
manner of Sins, by the pretended Prerogative of your Sex; well if iniquity be
your Estate, when you have married me, I Will put in for my thirds.


Sur. I doubt it not; within this week, I shall see in a Fop's hand, a Billet
Doux, that is a Ticket to let him into your Playhouse.


Vio. Prithee leave of this doged humor.


Sur. I have none; fawning is a Dogs humor.


Vio. Nay but Sullenness; it taxes thy Estate, that thou art never the better
for it; it is a french Estate.


Sur. Ay, but to lick a fool's shoe, is a Spaniels Estate.


Vio. Prithee dress like a Gentleman.


Sur. So I do,; but I would not dress like a Gentleboy, lag at my years among
those Children, to play with their Toys; be always followed up like a love
letter, with a superscription, these to the next pretty girl.


Vio. There Is no altering thee -- go in a while.

Ex. Surly. Enter Lord Belguard, Sir Courtly, Aunt vizarded.
Vio. My Lord, your humble servant. I invited you hither, to reconcile you to
your Sister, she is weary of your Government, and has disposed of herself.


Bell. Ay, Madam, but according to my own desires, that now I suppose you will
acknowledge the good effects of my Government; -- Sister salute your friend.


Vio. Do you take that for your Sister? then I Will show you the good effects of
your Government. Open the Door.

The Scene is drawn, and Farewell, Leonora, a Parson, Crack, Testimony, appear.
Bell. My Sister there? call my servants.


Cr. Nay then call mine, the great Mogul, and the King of Bantam, I Will pepper
you.


Bell. Then you were the Pimp were you -- Sirrah -- I may chance begin with you.


Vio. How? in my house and presence? touch him if you dare.


Bell. I Am made an Ass on.


Cr. Not far from that circumstance.


Bell. You Rascal --


Vio. Again?


Sir Co. But what the Devil am I made? what have I got?


Leo. Even my stale Aunt.


Au. Saucy huzzy.


Sir Co. The Aunt? what have you put upon me, Madam?


Au. What have I put upon you, Sir, more than your self desired? Did not you
declare you have long had a passion for me?


Sir Co. A Passion for you? Comical! that is probable! Rot me if ever I had a
Passion for you in my Life. I meant all to your Neice; a Passion for an old
Woman?


Au. Ill-bred Fop.


Sir Co. Very fine --


Vio. Now, my Lord, what say you of your fine Cotqueen art of Conserving Woman?
will she keep if not candied with Virtue? here is a piece of dried Sweet-meat,
you see could not keep; and proves by her example, that the Hufls of either
Sex, when they are boldly attacqued in private, soonest deliver their Weapons.


Au. This is all ill manners.


Vio. Ay, but here is an old Cat will suffer no Vermin to come into the House;
but then he has a Liquorish tooth, and loves to have a sweet bit for himself;
he would fain have picked up your Sister for a Wench.


Bell. How?


Test. It Is true indeed my Lord; I will not tell a lie for the whole World.


Bell. Oh! Villain -- well Sirrah -- I Will leave you to my Cousin Hotheads
correction.


Vio. But your faults my Lord I Will take into my correction, and give my self to
Mr. Surly --! Mr. Surly.

Enter Surly.
Sur. Well --


Bell. To Surly?


Sur. Ay, now Nico thy quarrel and mine is at an end, I Will let thee be an Ass
forty years longer.


Sir Co. You are a rude fellow and you are all ill -- bred -- and I Will revenge
my self on you all, as far as my Sword and my Wit can go --


Leo. Wit -- ha! ha --

(all laugh)
Sir Co. -- Very fine manners this -- my Coach -- Madam, you may follow your
own occasions -- I have none with an Old Woman.

(to the Aunt.)
Au. You are a Coxcomb.


Sir Co. Your Servant -- my Coach --


Leo. Must I lose you Sir Courtly -- stop Theif -- stop Theif --


Sir Co. Oh! your Servant -- my Coach you Dogs --

(Ex.)
Vio. Come my Lord, I see Patience in your Face, all may be well yet.


Sur. How! Jilting already?


Vio. Promise I shall enjoy all and singular the Privileges, Liberties, and
immunities of an English Wife.


Bell. All.


Vio. That is to say, Ramble, Rant, Game, Dress, Visit, Prate, Ogle, Kiss --
and --


Bell. Hold -- hold -- whether the Devil is she running: Kiss, kiss -- and --
stop for Heavens sake.


Vio. Kiss, and before your Face; is it not the Prerogative of an English Wife?
Surly, I owe thee a reward for Service, kiss me.


Bell. That Is not to be borne.


Vio. Surly, I am thy Wife.


Bell. Hold -- hold -- for Heavens sake -- do not use me thus?


Vio. Then do not Rebel but practice obediently, the postures of an English
Husband, before you are Listed; Poise your Hat, draw your left Leg backward,
bow with your Body, and look like an Ass, whilst I kiss like a -- Wife --
Surly kiss me.


Bell. -- If he does --

(lays his Hand on his Sword.)
Sur. With all my Heart. If I kiss thee, let the Devil Marry thee.

(he offers to kiss her, and she gives him a box of the Ear.)
Vio. And the Devil kiss thee, could thou think any Woman would suffer thy
face to come near her, but some Dairy Milk, to curdle her Milk?


All. Ha! ha! ha!

(all laugh.)
Sur. Hoh! hoh! What a society of Gotam's are here, to laugh at Man for missing
a Woman? had I Married her, as my Lord Wise-acre intends to do, I had deserved
to have been laughed at, for a Coxcomb, and a Cuckold, as he will be in few Days.


Vio. How?


Sur. Ay, you are all Whores, Pox on you, all Whores.

(Ex.) Enter Hothead and all the Servants.
Hot. Did you send for us?


Bell. Yes, do you see where my Sister is?


Hot. By what witch craft was this?


Vio. Do not you remember a Vizard you turned out of Doors?


Hot. Was it you?


Leo. Even the same.


Hot. Then you deserve to be turned out of Doors again.


Bell. But what do you deserve Sir? that not only turned my Sister out of Doors
-- but let Mr. Testimony -- pick her up for a Wench.


Hot. Oh! Dog -- oh! Rogue --


Tes. I am no Rogue -- a Man may fall, and be Godly in the main -- I am
satisfied in my Spirit, I am a Godly Man --


Hot. -- Here Is a Rogue -- Sirrah -- Sirrah --

(beats and kicks Tes.)
Tes. Persecution -- Persecution -- Papist -- do -- kick the Godly, kick the
Protestants out of Kingdom -- do Papist -- I see what you would be at --

(Ex.)
Bell. So Cousin now I have done with spies -- you may follow your own
business, if you have any --


Hot. Business? yes I have business, and will have business as long as there is
a Fanatic in the Kingdom, and so farewell --

(Ex.)
Bell. I am now convinced, Virtue a Woman's only guard. If she be base Metal, to
think by Chimistry, to turn her into Gold,

Is a vain dream of what we never see,
And I Will proclaim to all -- It cannot be.
(Exeunt Omnes.)
FINIS.
A SONG to be Sung in Dialogue between a Man and a Woman in the Third Act, to
Sir Courtly Nice, at his first appearance.
Man. OH! be kind, my Dear, be kind,
Whilst our Loves and we are Young.
We shall find, we shall find
Time will change the Face or Mind;
Both will not continue long.
Oh! be kind, my Dear, be kind.

Woman. No, I Love, and fear to loose you,
Therefore it is I must refuse you,
When I Have yielded you my Crown
You Will no more Obedience own.
No, I Love, and fear to loose you
Therefore it is I must refuse you.

Man. The Fair by kindness Reign,
By cruelty Destory.
If you can Charm with the Pain
Of Love, then what can you do with the Joy?
The Fair by kindness Reign,
By cruelty Destroy.

Woman. I fear to yield, but cannot deny.

Man. If you do not I shall die.

Woman. So shall I.

Both. So shall I.

Chorus together. Then come to Joy -- come to Joy,
Better Love than we should die.
Come to Joy, come to Joy.

A Dialogue Sung between an Indian Man and Woman, in the Fourth Act, to
Farewell, Violante, Crack. Being an imitation of a Song, Sung by some Natives of
India, before the late King.
Man. THou lovely Indian Sea of Charms,
I Would envy no Jaw-waw alive
Might I be so, blessed to dive
In thy soft yielding Arms
With a Jimminy, Gomminy, whee-whee, whee.
With a Gomminy, Jimminy-whee.

Woman. I would if you would be true,
But when you have done
You Will be gone,
And throw me of with a Shooh-shooh, shooh.
And a hush pooh,
And a fush whooh,
And a migotty, magotty, migotty, magotty,
Migotty, magotty, shooh.

Man. No, no, my other Females all
Yellow, Fair or Black,
To thy Charms shall prostrate fall,
As every kind of Elephant does
To the White Elephant Buitenacke.
And thou alone shall have from me
Jimminy, Gomminy, whee, whee, whee,
The Gomminy Jimminy, whee.

Woman. The great Jaw-waw that Rules our Land,
And pearly Indian Sea
Has not so absolute Command,
As thou have over me.
With a Jimminy Gomminy, Gomminy
Jimminy, Jimminy Gomminy, whee.

Both. Thou alone shall have from me
Jimminy Gomminy, Gomminy,
Jimminy, Jimminy, Gomminy,
Whee, whee, whee, whee, whee, whee.


