REGULUS: A TRAGEDY.

As it is Acted by Their Majesty's Servants.

Written by Mr. Crown.

LONDON, Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1694.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now in the Press, and will be published this Term, The Memoirs of
Monsieur De Pontis; who served in the French Army six and fifty years, under
Henry IV. Lewis XIII and Lewis XIV. Kings of France; containing many remarkable
Passages, relating to the War, the Court, and the Government of those Princes:
In two Parts. Faithfully Englished at the Request of his Grace the Duke of
Ormond. By Charles Cotton, Esquire

Dramatis Personae.
The Names of the Persons in the Roman Camp before Carthage.
REgulus, Consul of Rome. Mr. Batterton. Metellus, Proconsul. Mr. Kynaston.
Lepidus, A great Roman Commander. A Roman Augur. Fulvia, Metellus's Daughter.
Mrs. Barry. Her Women.

In Carthage.
ASdrubal, A young ambitious Prince, aiming to overthrow the Commonwealth of
Carthage, and make himself King. He is in Love with Elisa. Mr. Mountford.
Gisgon, A rich Carthaginian Senator of Asdrubals Party. Mr. Leigh. Hiarbas, A
luxurious Priest, a Flatterer of Asdrubal. Mr. Underhill. Batto, A rich
treacherous Citizen that trades secretly with the Romans, flatters all sides
for Profit. Mr. Dogget. Hamilcar, A noble Carthaginian, Prince of the Senate.
Mr. Sandford. Xantippus, A Spartan, chosen General of the Carthaginian Armies.
Mr. Williams. Elisa, Hamilcars Daughter.

PROLOGUE,
MEthinks the late victorious day has spread
Over all your Cheeks, a lively pleasing red.
Our Naval Glory warms you, flaming joys
Kindle illuminations in your Eyes.
The Monsieurs thought our men by Sea and Land
Would run, and nothing but the women stand;
They knew they would charge again, so their intent
Was on the Fair to make a fierce Descent.
Now we once more shall have the full contoul
Of our own Seas, the French never won, but stole.
More goods will fall from France's wounded hand,
This Shock at Sea, will settle many a Land.
Even France may quit her Chains, and more enjoy
Than a vain brag, Nous avous un Grand Roy;
For that is their all, it serves the Great instead
Of Manly Freedom, and the Poor for Bread.
You Have a Great King indeed, poor harrass'd Slave,
And that Great King has you, and all you have.
If I may name among the High, the Low,
This will a Peace upon the Stage bestow;
Where Factions often with Claps and Hisses fought,
But now one Party has a total Rout.
TO expose their Pictures now we might be bold,
When Families are broke, their Goods are sold.
But we are too much pleased for Anger now,
What do not our brave Warriors bestow,
Defense and an Eternal Glorious Name?
Even we who fight not, share the Fighters Fame.
You cry we have beat the French, when only here,
You board a Vizard, a French Privateer.
But, Sirs, we must not throw contempt on you,
Great is the public service Lovers do.
It Is needful since Mankind in Battle dies,
Beauties and Sparks should beat up for Supplies.
EPILOGUE, Spoken by her that acts Elisa 's part.
I AM in the closing of my part constrained
To leave my Native Soil, for Foreign Land;
I fly not for Religion, and the Laws,
But for Sweet Love, the common good old Cause.
I shall the Pity of all Parties move,
For every Faction is a Friend to Love.
The Oliverian Saints with Love made Leagues,
Religion was the Masque of their Intrigues.
The pious Beauties of that Age were wise,
They hid their Sins, and showed their charming Eyes.
Our Vizards, just Antipodes to those,
Conceal their Beauties, and their Faults expose.
In putting off false Money, she is an Ass
Who hides the Silver, and shows all the Brass.
Though no one Woman long to you is dear,
To the Fair Sex all Parties are sincere.
Therefore our Author chiefly doubts to day,
His Hero's Part, the Pillar of his Play.
He leaves a Beauty, all the World would prize,
To preserve Faith, too many now despise.
Knavery's so loved, rather than not be Knaves,
Some cheat themselves, plot to be wretched Slaves,
We Women do not find one Lover true,
You are as false to us, as we to you.
When young, untouched, a Woman comes in Print,
Into the World, like Money from the Mint.
She Is sought by all, but soon she is made a Scoff,
A false Knave clips her, and then puts her off.
The Knaves and doting Women in the Play,
Are natural parts, you meet 'em every day.
But by some men our Hero will be damned,
Good reason, for by Heroes Knaves are shamm'd.
The French, ay and some English I Am afraid,
Have cause to wish Heroes had never been made.
ACT I.
SCENE CARTHAGE.
Gisgon and Batto looking through Prospective Glasses. Gisg. NIneteen, twenty,
one and twenty Towns of fire.


Bat. Nay, I see two and twenty, an't like your Honor.


Gis. I see the the other now under a Mountain. Well, tho our people are Rogues,
and go to Hell, our Houses go up to Heaven.


Bat. Regulus plays the Devil, an't like your Honor: He beats us by Sea and
Land; over-runs all our Country; is now come up to the Walls of Carthage, and
here he burns our Forts and Towns, under the nose of our capital City.


Gis. I will not trust this knave: But these confusions I hope will make my friend
Prince Asdrubal King. aside.


Bat. Your Honor is a gallant Gentleman. If the Prince gets the management of
the Commonwealth into his hands (as I hope he will) you will be at the top of
affairs; but you will be above troubling your self with business. If your Honor
pleases to employ me, who have been in business all my life, as a Merchant, a
Banker, a Farmer of the Customs --


Gis. And have cheated in 'em all; thou have cheated the Commonwealth of a
thousand Talents.


Bat. Ah dear! I would I had, an't like your Honor. I am not worth much.


Gis. Thou! no, who will give any thing for thee? but your Bags are, Sir. Were
not you rated to the public charge?


Bat. Rated? ay, but I swore off.


Gis. Nay, thou will swear off thy Ears, to save thy Money. Sir, you have as
good an Estate as I have: And I am a man of quality, and you are but a Pedlar.
Is that fit? you are a Pedlar I say, tho you trade for thousands. If you had
any Honor by birth, you lose it by trade, and are a pedling fellow.


Bat. I honor! an't like your Honor, I don't pretend to it; if I did I should
be undone. I live by my credit, and if I should pretend to be a great man. and
a man of Honor, no body would trust me; for men of Honor think they may do
any thing.


Gis. We men of quality do sometimes endeavor to humble such mechanic fellows
as you are, and punish you for your insolence. I married a Persian Lady of
noble birth and fortune; and the King did me the Honor to dance at my Wedding;
I shall be proud of it as long as I live. Now you are a Mechanic, and married
a Wife no better than your self; and your Wife has the insolence to vye for
finery, and dresses, with my most noble Lady. I tell you what, humble your
Wife, or I Will break your pate.


Bat. I cannot, an't please your Honor, she humbles me.


Gis. I Will humble you both then. How now! what graceful person comes this way?
oh! it is my very venerable friend, the Priest of Hercules.


Bat. He has the marks of a jolly rich Priest; a rubric Nose, and a canonical
belly.


Gis. You Would have him as errant an Ass as you are, Sir; starve in the midst of
wealth. He eats and drinks like a man of sense. Here he comes. Enter Hiarbas.
My very venerable friend, how does your Reverend person?


Hi. Very -- aw -- (yawns) -- well -- aw --


Gis. Your Reverence I think is drowzy.


Hi. Yes in troth, I crop'd my Nap something short last Night, and now it
springs again. Drowziness twists Vine-like about my Chops, and arrests me for
the Hours I borrowed of her.


Gis. What? you were up at study?


Hi. No in troth, I study not of late, it makes me fat; it is a great hinderer
of digestion.


Gis. Not of digesting Books, my reverend friend.


Hi. I have not leisure now to digest Books. I laid in a good stock of Academick
sense when I was young, and faith that serves me now. How do thou do, Batto?


Bat. Thank your Reverence.


Hi. This is an honest fellow, Senator.


Gis. No, no, a knave, a knave.


Hi. He comes to my Temple sometimes, and gives me my dues: if a man does that,
I forgive him a great many frailties: I love to season life with a good even
hand; Virtue, Morality and Piety, are very wholesome things, but not over
toothsome. We must mingle a little liberty and frailty with 'em, and then they
relish well.


Gis. Your Reverence speaks like a Gentleman. But I am not of opinion, because
a man of quality now and then makes bold with Heaven, therefore every Jack
Sauce may do it. I think a Gentleman should be indulged.


Hi. Sir, a Prince is to have his will, for he is the Image of the Gods; a
Gentleman is to have his pleasure, for he is the Image of his Prince; a common
fellow is to drudge, for he is the Image of an Ass.

Shout.
Gis. Did not your Reverence hear the shouts and huzza's of the people after
our splendid friend Prince Asdrubal. A word wi' you -- He Is in a fair way to be
King. aside.


Hi. Silence, have a care. (A shout.) Hark, I think he comes.


Gis. Ay. it is he! it is he! and all the World after him, I am overjoyed. Enter
Asdrubal, followed by an armed multitude. Sir, I am in raptures, I cannot
govern my joy. I most ardently embrace your knees.


Asd. Enough.


Gis. Sir, I can never have enough.


Hiar. A word wi' you, Senator, you will betray all. (aside.) No body will
believe these Transports of Joy, at the Princes advancement, are for the sake
of the Public.


Gis. Damn the Public! I care not a Farthing for the Public.


Hiar. Every body believes that; therefore these Raptures are plain confessions
of some other aims. (aside.) Well Fellow Citizens, you are in a fair way to be
great and happy; you address to a Prince, who has power and virtue, can, and
will save you.


Asd. To serve you all, I Am sure I have a Will.
If I want Power, that is not my Fault.
And here are coming some to take away,
That little Power I have, I mean the Guards,
They Are coming to oppose me, and themselves;
For I Am it may be the best Friend they have.

Hiar. There Is Lord Hamilcar in the head of 'em.

Gis. He Is a wise man, did not your Highuess offer to marry his Daughter?

Asd. I did. I thought him then a man of Honor.

Gis. Well, let 'em come, we 'ave strength to deal with 'em.

Enter Hamilcar, and a Guard. Ham. Lord Asdrubal, why will thou force the Senate
To use your ill? your noble Ancestors
Highly obliged your Country; their deserts
Have pleaded for you, and we lent an ear,
Till your extravagance ran to this height,
And in the Town made a wide dangerous rent;
When mighty Regulus is at our Walls,
And our united strength can scarce preserve us.

Asd. Have you spoken?

Ham. I have.

Asd. Then pray bear patiently some words from me.
I Have suffered tamely many wrongs from you,
And the whole Senate. For the sake of peace,
My private wrongs I never will revenge:
But for the sake of peace and public good,
The injuries your self, and many more
Have done the Commonwealth, I Will never forgive.
No, with the hazard of my life, I Will try
To right my Country upon all of you.

Ham. My Lord, we understand you well enough.
We know what Serpents lurks under these Flowers,
Ambition; you are laboring to be King.

Asd. It Is false, I take the Gods to be my witness.

Ham. Why do your favorites then insinuate
In every place, that you are of Royal Blood?

Asd. Am I to answer for my followers?
And I have Royal Blood, is it a fault?

Gis. Now I am concerned to speak. For a Person of Quality, I am a tolerable
Scholar. I read books, and books of Heraldry delight me much. I dabble much in
the fountains of great Families. By consequence I am not ignorant of his
Highness Prince Asdrubal's extraction; I know he is descended from King Strato,
the Royal Ancestor of Queen Dido of ever blessed memory.


Ham. Well, what then?

Gis. Why, then he is descended from King Sicheus.

Hiar. Then his Highness shows the more humility, by submitting to serve.


Asd. I declare my self the humblest Servant of the poorest man here.

Hiar. Here Is a fine Gentleman.

Gis. A delicate Prince; it does my heart good to look upon him.

Asdr. I never will renounce my Royal Blood;
But any Title, or Desire to reign,
I solemnly renounce, before the Gods.
What can the Crown give me? many more troubles,
Little more Greatness, than I now possess.
My Patrimonial Lands are a large Empire.
I love my ease too much to wish to reign.
It is my Fault, I was so long a rising
To serve the Commonwealth, I am afraid
I'rise too late; and things are gone too far.
Now I Am disturbed, I Will not take any rest,
Till I have fixed (or done my best to fix)
The Commonwealth in Safety and Repose.
Therefore my Lord, give up your Power this minute,
Or I will try by force to make it mine.

Ham. This is no Season for domestic Strife.
My Lord consider.

Asdr. I Have too long considered.

Ham. Will you give us some leisure to consider?

Asd. I Will give you Forty hours, if in that time,
You do not find some reasonable way.
To give the Commonwealth speedy Relief,
I will repair to utmost violence.

Ham. Well, you shall very quickly hear from me.
Ex.
Asd. You see my Friends, what a great Stake I lay,
That you may win, for I can be no greater,
Nor richer than I am; but in your Love;
But you I hope will get all your desires.
Exit.
Gis. Here Is a Prince!

Hiar. Thank the Gods, for giving you such a man!

Gisg. Look if they huzza; huzza, for shame, huzza!
Ex. shouting.
Bat This Prince Asdrubal, has some great design in his head, or he would never
take all this trouble upon him. It is for some extraordinary Pleasure. I fancy
it is for a Crown; and if he gets it, he will to pleasure again. We Men of
business shall have the management of all things, but his Women. He will keep
Generals to be beaten for him, and such Men as I to be hanged for him. He Will
commit Faults in his own Person, and think to be hanged in ours. But he is
mistaken; for when we have got the Money, and impoverished him, we shall be
honored for being rich Cheats, and he will be despised and punished for being
cheated. No man forgives Poverty or Folly.


SCENE Hamilcars House.
Enter Hamilcar, and a Gentleman. Ham. Where is the Spartan General.

Genesis Gone to view
The new Recruits, encamped before the Town,
But he is returned, I see him come this way.
Exit. Enter Xantippus.
Ham. Oh welcome! brave Protector of our State,
What News out of the Field? I need not ask.
I see a mournful paleness on your cheek.

Xant. There is a burning Face you do not mind,
The Face of Heaven scorched with your flaming Towns.
The great victorious Roman Regu^us,
Is not content to take your Seas and Lands,
He also means to conquer all your Skys;
Look out you will see him scaling Heaven by fire.

Ham. What need he? he is already Master there,
Since his bold landing here, no happy Star,
Has corresponded with our falling State;
As if he barred up all the Roads above,
As he does those of our lost Provinces.

Xant. Would he could bar up all the Roads of Hell;
That Hell might have no correspondence here.

Ham. Ay, that commerce has brought our Commonwealth,
From a stupendous height of Power and Wealth,
To be a Beggar, and a public Charge,
Depending on our Neighbors Charity.
Had not you brought your Spartans to our aid
We must have sunk; and we are so corrupt
I think it is a sin to buoy us up,
And destroy men who ought to be adored,
To preserve men who ought to be destroyed.
The meanest Roman seems the Son of Jove,
And mighty Regulus seems Jove himself.

Xan. Well we must make a speedy desperate push,
Or else between the glorious Regulus,
And corrupt Asdrubal we shall be crushed.
Asdrubal gets the ground we lose in Town,
And Regulus our Provinces abroad.
And this good man, our honest careful spy
Tells me, the Romans look the next fair wind
Should land 'em here, at least two Legions more.

Spy. My Lord, they are expected every hour.

Ham. Then we can soon determine what to do.
If they are now too great a weight for us,
What will they be when they have this supply?

Xan. It Is true, therefore to day I Will to the Scale,
And I have hope, for I perceive of late,
In my brave Enemy some levity.
He Is wanton with success and plays with you,
As if he were ashamed of being grave
In such a trifling thing, as fighting me.
I hope to make good use of this to day.
Mean while, my Lord, pray make this Town your care,
Your Province is as dangerous as mine.
For you must deal with treacherous Enemies.

Ham. My Lord, I Will take what Post you please to give me.
For our Republic, ay and Nature too,
Have made you my superior.

Xan. How my Lord?
Are not you Father of my fair Elisa?
And in her love the maker of my Fortunes?
And shortly you will be my Father too.
Oh! what a noble Friend you have been to me?
To oblige me you have exposed your life.
I was so bold for your fair Daughters love,
To Rival Asdrubal, a mighty Prince;
And you as bold gave me the preference.
And by that means have brought his rage upon you.
How brave is this? and oh! how generous!
For I Am a Subject to the Spartan State,
Where Kings are poor; and he is a Prince in Carthage,
Where Subjects have more Riches than some Kings.
But see the lovely Elisa comes this way,
Have I your leave to talk with her a while?

Ham. You need not ask it, she is more yours than mine.
For I have given you all my right in her;
And now retire to give you liberty.
Exit.
Spy. Your Lordship has no more commands for me?

Xan. Only to hide with care from every man,
That I employ you to the Roman Camp.
For if the factious men should come to know,
They Would put a false malicious sense upon it;
And from it work much mischief.

Spy. I Will conceal it.
Exit. Enter Elisa, and her Woman.
El. Oh! here is my Lord.

Xan. My Love! thou tremblest, Dear!

El. Have I not cause?
All Carthage has been shaken with the shouts
Of the vast Crowds that follow Asdrubal.
They say he will be King; well if he be,
I Will be a Ghost; he hunts me eagerly:
But I abhor him; I had rather be
The ashes of your Wife, in a cold Urn,
Than in Golden Bed his living Queen.

Xan. Oh! my kind Love! how shall I answer thee?
We Spartans shun all lux'ry, even in words.
We plainly dress our bodies, and our thoughts.
I can but say, I love.

El. And that is enough.
They who buy Plate by weight, regard the Metal,
And not the Art about it; words receive
A higher price from truth, than art or wit.
I know thou love me, for thou have for me
Despised a hundred shining beauties here,
Who languish for thee.

Xan. Thou have shunned for me,
Not only wealthy Youth, but Wealth it self,
I have no Gold, nay more, I must have none.
Our Sparta abhors riches as a Pest.
We will not suffer the least Symptom there
Of Wealth or Luxury to show it self.
I dare no more show fair Elisa's breast
Covered with Rubies, than infectious heats.
Nor her white slender Fingers hid in Rings,
Than with foul Tumors. Finery we loath,
And think the breaking out of a rank mind.
Yet thou art willing, Dear, to go with me,
And leave thy Robes and Jewels.

El. What are those?
The Liveries we Slaves to Fashions wear.
Alas! I have not seen 'em many a day.
Since I Have seen thee, I have seen nothing else.
My eyes and thoughts have all been upon thee.

Xant. My Dear! yet we in Sparta are not poor,
There Is no one there without a great Estate.
For every one owns the whole Commonwealth,
Which must provide him every thing he wants.
The Law takes measure of us all for Clothes,
Diets us all, and in the sight of all,
To keep us from all private Leagues with Wealth.
There every Town seems but one Family,
Where all attired alike, and modestly,
Do at one common Table eat plain Food.

El. Why say you Sparta forbids Luxury?
You live in all the Luxury of Heaven.
Love, Peace and Virtue are the Joys of Gods.

Xan. Indeed we have not much domestic strife;
We measure all things equally to all.
So none like Billows rise to make a Storm.
Even Priests and Lawyers live in quiet there.

El. Have you no Titles and Distinctions there?

Xan. Only what Merit makes; we mind not Blood,
Nor a vain Title floating on that Stream.
Only great Actions there beget great Sounds.
Your high-sprung Blood in Sparta will be lost:
I mean all your Precedencies of Birth.
You must give place to aged Matrons there,
Whose greatest Riches are their silver Hairs.

El. Let me have the Precedence in your Heart,
And let who will take all the World beside.

Xan. Oh! we shall be luxurious in Love;
But that will be no breach of Spartan Laws.

El. Well, when shall we enjoy this happy Life,
And leave our Carthaginian Prison here?
So the victorious Romans make this Town.

Xan. I do not know, I Will try my Fate this day,
This day shall be the last deciding Battle.
I Will be a Conqueror, a Slave, or Ghost.

Elis. A Ghost? a damp evapo'rates from the word
Which sickens me to death.

Xan. Ha! ha! ha!

El. Do You laugh at me?

Xan. My Dear! thou put'st me in mind of Novices*
Who when they first meet danger, duck at Arrows,
But when their maid'nly terrors are all over,
Laugh at themselves, as thou will do in time.

El. Sure when your life's exposed, I shall not laugh.

Xan. A Soldiers life lies wholly in his honor;
And that lives best in danger. If thou hear'st
My honor's lost, shed pitying tears for me;
And think thou art a widow though I live:
But if my honor lives, though I am killed,
Triumph; and shed no tears but those of Joy,
For that is the manner of a Spartan Wife.
And so farewell.

El. Thou shall not go.

Xan. Away.
[He rushes out.
El. Then can you cast me off? Oh! cruel man!
Lead, lead me to my bed and bind my hands,
Or I shall do some violence to my self.
Shall I be thus when I am married?
I do not find all Soldiers wives are thus:
Marriage perhaps may teach me wit, and I
May learn to let my Husband fight, and dye.
Exit.
ACT II.
SCENE Continues.
Enter Spy and Batto at several Doors. Bat. OH! how do thou do? when wast
thou with our Chapmen the Romans?


Spy. I just came from 'em.


Bat. How went off our Commodities?


Spy. Our Swords went off but dully; there having not been a Battle a good
while, they have not lost many Swords. But they have shot away a abundance of
Arrows against the Town; and were in great want of Arrows. So they gave us any
thing for our Arrows.


Bat. That Is well.


Spy. We are a couple of pure Rogues. We sell Arms to the Romans, to cut the
Throats of our own Countrymen, the Carthaginians.


Bat. Ay, but we sell our Arms so dear, we cut the Throats of the Romans too.
What News of Italian Wine? Could you meet with a Bargain?


Spy. A rare Bargain. You must know Regulus is a severe man; he will not suffer
any man in his Army to drink Wine, unless he be sick. So, Sir, there came the
other day a Ship from Italy, laden with Wine, and thought to come to a great
Market here, because all the Vineyards here are cut down and spoiled. E'gad,
Regulus having Wine enough to serve sick men on occasion, would not suffer a
drop of it to be sold to his Army, so I bought it for a Song.


Bat. That Is well; it comes in rare season; Wine is very scarce among us, and
our Countrymen will have Wine. Drunkenness is an honorable Quality amongst us.
Wine they will have, and have no stoppage of Wine here, give my Trade the
Strangury. In what Condition did you find the Roman Army?


Spy. A very good one.


Bat, I am glad of it. Then the Blockade will continue, and so Corn must rise.
It Is true, thanks be to the Gods, there is a pretty good convenient Famine
amongst us, which makes Corn a good Commodity; and I have a large stock. But
I Will keep my Corn a while longer, and make the best of the Famine.


Spy. Oh! you inhumane Rogue! your Corn already grinds all the Town, have thou
no Conscience?


Bat. I don't see any body has any Conscience, after they come to years of
Discretion. Most People have it when they are young, as they have the Small
Pox; but when they are once cured of it, they are seldom troubled with it any
more.


Spy. If thou have no regard to the Gods, thou may have a little to the
Commonwealth.


Bat. Hang the Commonwealth. Does not every body cheat the Commonwealth as much
as he can? why should I be honest all alone by my self?


Spy. Does your Priest of Hercules teach you no better?


Bat. He has no more Religion than myself. Drinking has cup'd the humor out of
him. Well, is this all you have to say to me?


Spy No, I have News for you worth a Talent every Syllable.


Bat. What is it? what is it?


Spy. I Will trust you with it, for I know how to make my Pen'orths out of you.
If you be false to me, I Will get my own Pardon, and hang you. Apply your self to
my Lord Hamilcar.


Bat. To him? The People are ready to knock out his Brains, and have set up
Asdrubal.


Spy. The People are Asses, and meddle with that they do not understand, State
Affairs. A Roman Tribune has engaged to put Regulus into the Spartan General's
hands. 'Twill be done to day, and then the People will knock out Asdrubals
Brains, and set up Hamilcar.


Bat. Nay if the Romans begin to sell one another, we'll deal with 'em. I Will to
my Lord Hamilcar presently; but for fear this business should not succeed, I Will
to my Lord Asdrubal too.


Spy. Well, Sir, remember I have you by the Neck. If you get into business,
put me in, or I Will hang you.

Ex.
SCENE Asdrubals Palace.
Enter Asdrubal, Hiarbas, Gisgon. Gisg. Oh! Sir! how rarely your Highness
dissembled to day?


Asd. What did I dissemble?


Gis. Your desire to the Crown.


Asd. Who told you I desire the Crown?


Gis. Did you take all this trouble for a parcel of Fellows, they call the
Country? You are of more worth than a Thousand such Countries! I love a Court,
and Pomp, and Gallantry. I hate a Nation where the People are adored.


Hiar. Adore the People, they are Antigods, nothing they make, but every thing
they mar.


Asd. They made too much in Carthage; a great man is only Clay, till they
breath life in him.


Gis. Oh! Sir, I am glad to hear so much come from you, we shall have more
shortly! I Would feign see you a King, great as the Persian King, as absolute Head,
Hang, Starve whom you will! Ah that is great! that is right!


Asd. Would you like it?


Gis. Ay! why not Sir? You should never have my Head I warrant you. Why should
you? I Will do whatever you please.


Asd. And would your Reverence like it too?


Hiar. I have more reason to like it than he has, because I shall have more share
of power than he. He can have no Power but what his Prince gives him; but I
shall give my Prince Power, and therefore he will take none from me.


Asd. And will you do what I please?


Hiar. You shall be pleased with what I do, and that is all one. I will give you
this world to do what you will with, when you are alive, and heaven when y're
dead, what would you have more? And I being so useful to you, you will for your
own sake be as useful to me. And we thus sharing Power, are by consequence to
help one another to as much as we can.


Gis. Sir, this is a very fine Gentleman, and a Wise man.


Hiar. I know what is what. Some half-witted men will throw away this World to
get Heaven, and some will throw away Heaven to get this World; for my part I am
for 'em both. What good Manners do we show to Heaven by slighting the good
Creatures, which Heaven has made? I take Prayers and Liquor both down
Supernaculum, I leave not a Tittle of one, nor a Drop of the other.


Gis. This Gentleman, Sir, will make a rare Companion and Counselor both.
Well, Sir, I beseech you promise us to be King. If you will not Sir, I Will
humbly take my leave of you; and be gone to my Tenants and Vassals, where I Will
be a little King myself. There if a man asks me the reason why I do a thing, I
cut his Pate; there is my reason, Sirrah, says I.


Hiar. Indeed, Sir, your Friends will have no heart to stand by you, if your
Enemies the Senate will reap the Benefit of all your Friends do.


Asd. I will unbosome my self to you. I go to lodge a secret in your Breast,
will be your deaths if ever you reveal it. Know then, I Have tried all Pleasures
but Reigning, and I will Reign because it is a new Pleasure.


Gis. Huzza! now things will go right, Sir, if you reign for pleasure, then
pleasure will reign; and I am a man of Pleasure. I know you will do no business
in your own Person; you will not go to bed on your own legs; you will ride on
Necks of Slaves to bed to Concubines.


Hiar. Oh! sie! Senator! The Prince will make a virtuous King.


Gis. Not over virtuous, you know it.


Hiar. I don't know it, I never see any fault in a Person of Quality; I have
more manners.


Asd. I shall make bold with a little lewdness.


Hiar. Well, if you shall, Heaven bless you, Sir, that is all I say. Truth is, I
would not have a man have too much Virtue; for a man all Virtue, like a Pie all
Spice, will not please.


Asd. He is not fit to rule, whom Virtue reigns,
He Is fit to rule, who has at his Command
Virtue or Vice, as needs of State require.

Hiar. A notable wise Maxim, and has much truth in it.


Gis. We shall have rare times. Pray, Sir, lets have no Soldiering. If we must
be Soldiers, let us be Soldiers of wit and pleasure here about the Town; see no
Fight, but a Cock-fight, or so.


Asd. I can and will fight, if need require.


Gis. Now we talk of new Pleasures, Sir, pray give me a Command at Sea. I Would
fain have a Command at Sea, because I never was at Sea in my life.


Asd. You Would have me Reign, how should I get the Crown?
The People follow me for their own Ends;
That I should guard 'em all from being enslaved.

Hiar. I Will undertake, Sir, be Rome's humble Servant,
She Will make you Master of this Commonwealth.
I Will recommend to you a cunning Rogue,
Who trafficks with the Romans privately,
And shall help you to correspond with 'em.
It Is the rich Batto.

Asd. How? I put my Head
Into a mercenary Rascal's power?

Hiar. Come, Sir, I Will put my Head into his power.
He will not sell it, it will yield him little.
I Will venture to talk with him.

Gis. Have a care,
For he once served Hamilcar.

Hiar. Ay, for Gain.
Profit will make him serve Man or Fury.
Enter a Gentleman.
Genesis Batto desires Admission to your Highness.

Asd. Let him come in.
[Enter Batto. How now, your business Batto?

Bat. Only to wish your Highness prosperity and glory; and to tender my humble
service to you, who (though I say it) am able to serve you, Sir; I Have been in
public Business all my life.


Gis. Come, you are an ill Man, who so great as you, but the other day, with my
Lord Hamilcar?


Bat. Sir, I found him a good Man.


Asd. How? do you call an Enemy to the Commonwealth a good Man?


Bat. An't please your Highness, ours is a trading Town, and we trading Men,
account a Man a good Man, if his Bond be good, and his Security for Money good,
we look for no other goodness. He was once a very thriving Man, and I confess I
have a great respect for thriving Men. But when once a Man gives over thriving,
I have done with him.


Asd. Ours is a trading City, and the Trade
Fills us with dirty Streets, and dirty Souls;
Our Sea brings Mud up to our very Souls.
When I command the Town, I Will make it trade
With Honor, Virtue and Piety, something more.

Gis. Here Is a Prince! your Reverence bred him;
He is an honor to you.

Hiar. Indeed I have much comfort from him.

Bat. But suppose I be a Knave, (as I hope I am not) I Am sure I say my Prayers
often, and go to Temples at all idle hours I can spare.


Hiar. Idle hours! you are an idle Fellow.


Bat. I beg your Reverences pardon, I mean I go as often as I can, for I Am a
Man of great business. But suppose I be a Knave, I Am fitter to serve your
Highness in the Revenues than any Man else, be he never so honest, because I
have been more employed in 'em than any Man has. It Is true, an honest Man will not
cheat you, but if he be ignorant, he will let a thousand cheat you. Employ me,
Sir, and if I let you be cheated by any Man but my self, I Will be hanged. And I Will
take care to enrich you, that I may cheat you insensibly, and you never discern
it.


Asd. The Fellow talks Sense; nay, if I let Business lie still till I meet with
an honest Man, I may wait long enough.


Gis. Do You hear? his Highness is thinking to employ a Knave, there is hopes for
you.


Hiar. Hark you a word -- You traffic with the Romans.

Bat. Oh dear! who tells your Reverence such a Falshoo'd?

Hiar. Deny it not, I know it, and can hang you,
But on the contrary I will encourage you.
The Romans are a godly Nation,
And our's a vile; I, and more godly Men
Have a design, by help of the good Romans,
To give bad Carthage a Religious Master,
That is this Prince. Though he was wild of late,
He Is now reformed, and is a heavenly Man.
Help you to make him King, when he is King,
You may be sure of a very rich Reward.

Bat. Well, I will serve his Highness.
That is, if he succeeds -- I Will stay till then --
[Aside. If he does not succeed, I will inform
The Senate, and help them to hang up him.
If he gets all the Town into his power,
I Will help him to be King, and hang the Senate.
[A Shout.
Asd. See, what is the meaning of that Shout.
Enter Gentleman.
Genesis The Spartan General, and Hamilcar, have treated with Regulus about
delivering the Town.

Asd. Now the truth comes to light.


Genesis A Roman Tribune was privately conveyed under ground to Lord Hamilcar's
house about that design. The People have learnt the Story, thousands are run to
the Lord Hamilcar's house to pull it down, thousands are come to your Palace to
beg you to protect 'em against the Romans and Hamilcar both.


Hiar. Where Is the Spartan General?


Genesis Gone out of Town, to bring Regulus in.

The people have shut the Gates, and are resolved to kill him if ever he comes
near the walls.


Asd. I Will among the good people, and serve 'em.

[Ex.
SCENE the Roman Camp.
Enter Fulvia and her Women, a Song sung to her. The SONG.
Ah me! to many Deaths decreed,
My Love to War goes every day.
In every Wound of his I bleed,
I die the hour he goes away,
Yet I would hate him should he stay.
Ah me! to many Deaths decreed,
By Love or War I hourly die;
If I see not my Love I bleed,
Yet when I have him in my Eye,
He kills me with excess of Joy.
Full. Go bid the Music cease, I find it vain.
Dark thoughts of late have my mind their haunt.
I thought to lay the ill Spirits by sweet Sounds,
But 'twill not do, who is that Commander there?

Wom. Lepidus, Madam.


Full. Oh! a gallant Man --

And one I love, because he loves the Consul.
Go call him hither, I would speak with him.
Enter Lepidus. Good morning, Lepidus, what news to day?

Lep. Oh! Madam! joyful News! the gracious Gods
Have stooped to be our Pioneers to night,
And undermined the Carthaginian Wall;
Thrown to the ground no little part of it.
We have an open passage into Town,
And we will accept the invitation.
The Consul will in person view the Breach,
Then order an Assault.

Full. Oh! Lepidus!
I taste no Joy in this.

Lep. Good Madam, why?

Full. I am distempered with oppressing Fears,
Which deaden all delight to me -- I Have none
Even in my loved, my adored Regulus.

Lep. How? none in Regulus?

Full. None even in him.
My Sorrow comes from him.

Lep. What is his Fault?

Full. He has no Fault, from thence my Fears arise.
We always find, Men have a check by death,
When they approach near Gods in excellence.
If they will be adored, they must ascend,
And put off mortal Natures. Had he Faults,
To moderate my Bliss, and make it fit
For humane Creature, I should have more hope.
But nothing mortal, must presume to reach
At perfect happiness, the lot of Heaven.

Lep. You hunt out Griefs; as they were hard to find;
And study Arts how to perplex your self.
Consider, Madam, how beloved he seems
By Fortune, how she fondly clings to him,
Caresses him with strange extravagance.
At his first landing here, she tore in two
This Empire, and gave him the fairest piece.
Now she has torn yon' Wall, as she were mad,
To have him nearer, faster in her Arms.
And the truth is, he has her now so fast,
She cannot if she would break from him now.

Full. I know his Fortunes are like his Deserts.
In great Excess, but all Excess destroys.
Excessive Luster, like excessive Heat,
Frail Man bears not. We very rarely find,
Men in intemp'rate Glories are long-lived.
Oh! he is near his end.

Lep. Nay, this is strange!

Full. I must lament his death before he dies,
For when he is dead, I shall run mad with grief;
And the dear Man will fall unmourn'd by me.

Lep. Misery deserves not sure this great Respect;
That you should run to meet it e're it comes.

Full. You make me mad; have I more fear than you,
Or any in the Camp? did not this Morn
Spread Terrors through you all?

Lep. Then have you heard? --

Full. I could hear Thunder sure;
Thunder, which seemed to burst the Firmament.
And I could see the ruddy Face of Morn
Turned of the sudden black; one would have thought
The Night had wheeled about, and strangled her.
Night never was clad in such thick woven Blacks,
As were of late, spread like a Funeral Pall
Over day, as day were dead.

Lep. 'T was wonderful.

Full. Why do you abuse me then, and hide the truth,
As I were the only Woman in your Camp?
The boldest of you all, was turned this Morn
To things, like heartless Women at the least.
And by a Woman too, by something less
The shadow of a Woman. I Have heard all --

Lep. I Am sorry for it.

Full. Day turned away its Face,
That a dead Beauty boldly might appear
In all the wretched nakedness of Death,
To the great Man, to whom she once was fair,
The Consul. Did not his late beautiful
Chaste modest Wife, the dead Apamin,
Appear to him this Morning in his Tent?
Ay, and to you, and many more great Officers
Assembled there.

Lep. She did, if we dreamt not.

Full. Oh! you were far from such repose as sleep.
The Fantom whiter than the Shroud she wore
Dissolved you all into a thin cold dew,
You lay all vanishing beneath her eye,
Which brightly shone through the dim mists of death.
She was the firmest substance of you all,
Bating the Consul; he remained the same,
And was the only living person there;
Whom yet she seemed to say, with speaking looks,
She pitied much, she pierced his eyes with hers,
As with their points she would upon his Soul
Engrave her pitying thoughts.

Lep. 'Twas so indeed.
But they were much to blame who told you this,
And frightened you; I would no more have don't
Than thrown a poisoned Dart into your breast.

Full. Why should you hide from me what is my own?
I Have in this dismal story too much share,
More than my understanding can dispose,
'Twill make me mad. Ah! may I lose my wits,
E're I lose him; that I may have no sense
When the Blow comes.

Lep. Why do you think 'twill come?

Full. What else should move the dead Apamia
To bear the light, which living beauties shun,
But to have him? Oh! that is her Errant here!

Lep. I Will not presume to combat with your fear;
One will soon do it, who can conquer it,
He conquers all things, it is your. Regulus,
Your griefs and fears have reached his ear and heart,
And he will come to ease your soul and his.
[Trumpets. He Is come; I see his Guards, I see himself.
I s^^ ^our Father the Proconsul too.

Enter Regellus, Metellus, an Augur. Reg. Most beautiful reward of all my
Labors,
In whose kind Love I am before hand paid,
And overpaid for all my Sword can do;
Permit me to be careful of my Treasure,
And lodge you safely in the Fort of Clypea.
The Enemy have met with some Recruits,
And make a show of fighting us to day.
If fighting will oblige them, I will serve them.
Retire my Love from danger, for the sake
Of me and Rome, else I shall fight to day
Greatly disordered by my fears for you.

Full. I know the pleasure which you take in Glory.
That a brave Enemy who fights you well,
Does entertain you well. I would not dare
To call you from the Glory you pursue
With so much ardor, were I not compelled
By many Thousand Omens and Presages,
Which seem to me the Messengers of Heaven.
I beg you for the sake of Rome and me,
You Will stay till some few threatening days are past.

Reg. Stay till those days bring all the ills they threat,
Succor to Carthage, infamy to me.

Met. To join in consort with a woman's fears.
And beg a Consul to forsake his Post.
To please a Woman, and to cure her frights,
Would not suit well with a Proconsuls voice:
Yet Consul for my Daughter this I Will say,
Her fears are all for you. She has no sense
Of her own dangers. I have seen her often
In bloody Fields gaze on your Victories
With the same unconcern she would see a Masque.
Yet I must counsel you to what she prays,
That you would let some frowning hours go by.
I do not second her, let her fear on,
It suits her Sex, and is a proof of Love,
I plead for one more excellent than she,
I mean Religion. I beseech you Sir,
Give her those rights which are her due by Law,
You know our Laws give her the casting Voice,
In all our Councils both of Peace and War,
No Roman dares start a great Enterprise
Till she has given the sign, and she has marked
This day for bad, by many a black Portent,
And charged you not to interfere with it,
Lest it should drop some horrors on your head;
As this learned Augur better can inform.

Aug. It Is true, Sir, all the flights of birds to day,
And all the entrails of the victim'd Beasts
Threaten much ill.

Reg. In reverence
To our own Laws, Augur, I reverence you.
You are our Scout to discern coming ills,
Our Spy on Heaven, and I Will be ruled by you
When I am not otherwise advised by reason,
Which I think soars higher than birds can do,
And can discover more of Heaven's will.
[A Noise of a Storm.]
Lep. Ha! all the Heavens are troubled once again.

Reg. Let 'em be troubled.

Lep. And it thunders loud.
[Thunder.]
Reg. Well, let it thunder.

Met. Would you take advice.

Reg. Of Thunder? it is no Counselor of mine.
[The Ghost of Apamia rises.]
Lep. Oh! Sir! I see another Counselor.
Look there, in you dark cave, so dark the night
Seems to skulk there in day to rob the day,
Apamia stands.

Reg. Let her stand there, I see her.

Full. What do you see?

Reg. Nothing, Love, you frighten Fulvia.

Full. I heard you name the dead Apamia,
What should make her leave Heaven, but for you?
She has some knowledge you are hasting to her,
And rushes through the bars of death to meet you.
But I Have more right to you, than she has now,
Her death has cancelled all your bonds to her.
But those you made to me are new and firm,
I Will keep my right, I will not let you go.

Reg. Must I give such a fatal proof of Love,
To leap from Honor into wanton Ease,
And be no more a Consul? well I Will do it.
Consul and Shame suit not.
Now come my Dear, let us to private shades,
For darkness and dishonor best agree.
My noble Friends eternally farewell,
For after this I must not show my face.
I pray conceal what has befallen me;
Report you saw me like great Romulus
Assumed to Heaven, is not this a Heaven?
(Pointing to Fulvia. It Is like one, it resembles Fulvia,
It Is not that warlike Virgin I confess,
But it is her Image; and my Love is such
To Fulvia's Image I will sacrifice
A Roman Consul.

Full. I will strive no more
Since it is your pleasure. Go; but I believe
After this fatal day we shall not meet,
Except in Fetters, or in Blood, or Death.

Met. Something within my heart divines the same.

Reg. Your fears are against reason, the Recruits
Come to the Enemy are few and heartless,
Dispirited, and cowed by fear of us,
And if we baffle them Carthage is lost;
At our next meeting Fortune shall be fettered,
And this short parting shall be all the Death
Your fears have boded.

Full. No, we will not part.

Reg. Yes, you must to the Fort, I to the Field.

Full. I Will to the Field, so was I wooed and won.
Your Battles were the Courtship of my Love.
And so will I return your glorious Love.
Nor Enemies, nor worlds shall part us long.
Stars show your selves worthy to shine in Heaven
By guarding this great man, but if you must
Resign him up to death, (I shake to think of it)
If among all the doors Nature has made
To let us into death, I can find one,
My Ghost within few hours shall be with his.

Met. Thou have well vowed, daughter, perform thy vow.

Reg. Could we not meet elsewhere, there were enough
To make me rush on death, but our next meeting
Shall be attended with unequalled Glory.

Full. Nay we'll be great and blessed befall what will
We will so dye, if Death must be our doom,
We'll triumph over all ages in our Tomb.
Ex.
ACT III.
SCENE A Field.
Enter Regulus, Metellus, Lepidus, Roman Guard.] Reg. THE Spartan General is a
Soldier,
He manages with skill the advantages
I let him have.

Met. I do not think it safe
To give so great a man advantages.

Reg. The chief advantage I bestow upon him
Is opportunity to perish bravely.
He has Recruits indeed, but what are they?
African Slaves whose Lords I Have often beat,
I blush to fight so base an Enemy.

Met. You would blush more should you be beaten by them.

Lep. You let 'em have a Chance for Victory,
Which, Sir, you may deny 'em if you please.

Reg. Yes we may lodge our selves on yonder hill,
Like frighted Birds on Trees to keep from danger,
And be the mockery of the Enemy.
Which of you can endure the Shame an hour?
See he comes bravely on and tempts you all.
Who Is not fired by that alluring sight;
And finds not in his blood a lust to fight?
[Ex.
SCENE Carthage, an Alarm.
Enter Asdrubal, Hiarbas, Gisgon. Gis. Sir, we beseech you, do not venture your
self.


Hiar. We beg you, Sir.


Gis. What should you venture for?


Asd. You know for what, a Crown.


Gis. Sir, you may have a Crown without venturing. Do not yonder men fight for
you?


Asd. If I do not fight, I shall have an inglorious Crown, I must fight for
Glory.


Gis. You may have Glory without fighting too. The great Persian King has got
much Glory by wall, and never saw a fight in his Life.


Hiar. A great Prince, Sir, like a great Palace, will ring with the blows
others give. Your Name will have a noble sound, from all the blows which make
many a Coxcomb ache, though you never strike stroke.


Asd. This is prate, I must not lose mine Honor.


Gis. Sir, if you will go, I beseech you kill me. Your danger will put me in
such torment, I shall not be able to bear it. I would not follow you for all
the world, and see an Arrow come near you.


Hiar. Sir, you are going to be a King, keep State. Do not let every paltry
Sword be familiar with your Person.


Gis. Sir, I, who am but a Gentleman, scorn as much to let a base Fellow fight
with me, as eat with me.

[A Shout.] Enter an Officer.
Off. Good news, Sir, your Enemies are beaten. Lord Hamilcar is taken Prisoner.


Gis. Huzza! well Sir, you are a glorious Prince. What Soldiership you have
shown to day?


Asd. Do you laugh at me? You would not let me discover Soldiership.


Gis. We would not let you play the common Soldier, and run your self into
danger; but you showed such Generalship as I never saw, and I have seen many a
General, and many a General in my time. They may talk of their Reguluses, and
their Reguluses; Sir, if you ben't a better Soldier than Regulus, I Will hang
for it.


Asd. Oh! prithee!


Gis. Come, Sir, I know Generalship when I see it. Now, Sir, the Crown is
within your reach, send me to Sea; I Will do you Honor there, I Will keep you such
a Table --


Hiar. Shall I humbly offer you my advice, Sir? Make all Persons depend upon
you. Crush them that will not. Advance them that will. But above all, favor
those upon whom you depend, that is to say, us Priests.


Asd. Go, fetch my Lord Hamilcar. [to an Officer.] now he is mine.
[aside. His Daughter will be mine. I have hold of her
By a strong tie, Affection to her Father,
I love her beauty, though herself I hate,
For the disgrace and scorn she has thrown on me.
If I can ever get her in my power,
She first shall please my Lust, then my Revenge.
Enter Hamilcar a Prisoner. So, so, here comes the noble Criminal.
Dear Countrymen you see the power of truth.
I charged this Lord with Treason against the State;
Great was his power and policy, but truth,
Greater than both, breaks out in spite of 'em.

Ham. Dear Countrymen, y're all out of your way;
And it is no wonder men in darkness rove,
What light have you in mysteries of State?
What business there? could you come by a light?
I pray who made you Privy Counselors?
The Senate never did. A Roman Tribune
Was i'my house to day; know you for what?
No, when you do, you will be ashamed of this.

Asd. My Lord y're of a Noble Family;
But the more great you are, the greater bonds
Lie on you to be faithful to the Public,
From whence you have such great advantages,
Truth is a Debt you owe the Commonwealth,
A man of Honor ought to pay his Debts.
I should be glad you would fairly discharge yours,
For my own sake, that I might come off cheaply
Without the torment of tormenting you;
For I can pain no man, and escape my self.

Hiar. Here Is a sweet Gentleman.

Gis. A lovely creature.

Ham. My Lord you wrack me now, by showing me
Such shameful baseness in a Nobleman.

Asd. Is it possible? have you no tenderness
Nor for the Commonwealth, nor for your self?
He Will force me to inflict those torments on him,
Which I can never suffer tho he can.

Hiar. Was ever such a noble soul, to have such a concern for his Enemies?

Gis. Oh! Countrymen! you will have a delicate Magistrate!
Enter Batto.
Asd. Oh! here comes one I hope, can ease us all.
Batto you have had great dealings with this Lord,
And must know very much of his designs;
If you would discover to us, what they are,
You Would greatly serve your Country and your self.

Bat. How? I turn Evidence when the trade comes to nothing? no such matter, I
never like the trade when 'twas at best. Besides I have nothing to evidence. I
could make a Story, but what should I make of the story? it may be a Rope for
my self. A great man, if an unmanageable thing, I don't care to deal with him.
Though he is down now, he may get up again, and knock my brains out. (aside.)
An't please your Honor, I only dealt with his Lordship about money matters; if
he had any treasonable designs, he had more wit than to tell me, he knew I
abhorred them, and would discover them. Therefore I had a pretty good opinion
of him, because he employed me. So I can say nothing against him, I Am sorry for
it.


Asd. I must be forced to fly to violence,
Most unexpressibly against my nature.

Gis. Good Gentlemen!

Asd. Ha! what I wish! I see his Daughter come.
[aside. Enter Elisa, and her Women.
El. Oh! where is my Father? Oh! my Lord! my Lord!

Ham. Daughter, away! away! you ruin me.
I was not half undone before you came,
For you my better half was then secure.

El. I could not hold from venturing my own life
To preserve yours.

Ham. Prithee what can thou do
To preserve me that will not ruin me?
Will thou give up thy honor?

El. Heaven forbid!

Ham. That thou will do only by marrying him,
Since thou art promised to a Nobler Man.

El. I Will try to fool him into clemency.

Ham. Oh! he will not be fooled.

El. Yes by a woman.

Asd. Madam, I hope you are laboring to preserve
Your Father, both from death and suffering.
I seek to do it; whose ruin he has sought,
Can you prevail with him to own the truth?

El. My Lord, you know he is innocent, at least
You do not know of any guilt he has.

Asd. We do not know, what is needful to be known,
We know so much that I shall deserve death,
If I consent to smother all the rest.
Madam I have much tenderness for you.
Indeed I Am very unwilling to let fall
Your Fathers heavy doom in your soft ear,
Therefore I pray retire out of harms way.
Attend the Lady out.

El. Oh! hold my Lord.
Can you destroy the Father of a Woman
Whom you once dearly loved? You swore you did.

Asd. To save the State, I could destroy my self.

El. My Lord, the World knows well, you love a Woman
Above the Commonwealth, above your self.
And if you can be cruel to a Woman,
What must the Men expect when at your mercy?
They must all please your Lust, or be destroyed.
For, oh! my Father did refuse me to you,
From thence arises all your Rage against him.

Asd. Madam! I am so far from private Piques,
Let any Man discover me a way
How public Safety, and your Father's Life
May stand together, and with all my heart
I Will pardon him, what e're he did to me.
Nay more, I Will lay my Life under his Feet.

Ham. How good are you? for I Will never pardon you
The Mischiefs you have done the Commonwealth.

El. Oh! hold, my Lord! you will undo your self.

Asd. No Madam, no, this Provocation
Defends him from me; I Will forbear him now,
Because I will not show private Revenge.

Hiar. Oh! Generous!

Gis. What a brave Spirit is here?

Bat. I have been much mistaken in this Lord.

El. There appears something very great in him.
[Aside. Had he been always thus, I should have loved him.

Asd. Dear Fellow Citizens! I am accused
Of Cruelty, Revenge and Treachery.
I ought to clear my self of all these Vices
Before I enter on Authority.
Then how revengeful I am, pray observe.
My Lord Hamilcar has been long, and yet
Continues my most cruel Enemy.
I have considered, Sirs, and do believe
The Public may be safe in honest hands
Though my Lord lives, therefore I beg his Life.

Gis. Here is a noble temper.

Asd. More to engage you to bestow his Life,
I Will wrap my Life in his, and with your leave
I Will wed his beautiful and virtuous Daughter.

El. Ha! Are you thereabout?
[Aside.
Ham. You ask the Peoples leave to wed my Daughter,
Sure I Have most Title to dispose my Child.
I Will never give my consent, if she gives hers,
May she be punished as she does deserve.

Asd. My Lord, my Lord; you show so bad a heart,
The Public is not safe while you are alive.
Madam, once more, I beg you retire.
Attend the Lady hence.

El. Oh! hold, my Lord!

Asd. What would you have me do?

El. I know not what.

Asd. You see your Father will not save himself.
But, Madam, you may save him if you please.

El. I must consent, or he will rack my Father.
[Aside. Well, Sir, I yield.

Asd. To be my Wife?

El. I do.

Asd. Then I am happy, and your Father safe.

Ham. Daughter, be gone I charge you.

El. And leave you to the Rack?
[Aside.
Ham. You are a Rack.
Your shameful Falsehood to the gallant Spartan
Tortures me more, than any Rack can do.
Whilst he is defending us, we betray him.

El. I Will to this Traitor give nothing o'mine
[Aside. Except this Dagger; this shall to his heart,
[Shews a Daggor. Even at the Altar.

Ham. Oh! 'twill be foul Play!
You Will stab your Honor and Integrity:
'Twere better both of us should lose our Lives.

El. My Lord, I had much rather grieve your heart,
Than let Racks tear it out -- I will proceed.
My Lord, I Am yours.
[To Asd.
Asd. My Dear!
[Embraces her.
Bat. There goes the Game. Now I know where to make my Court. I Will get some
fine Pendants for her. I think I have gold Tweezers in my Pocket.

[Aside.
Hiar. Oh! Blessing on you, Madam; you make the Prince a happy Man.

Gis. Oh! pretty Creature! what sweet work will be here to night between 'em? I
shall not sleep for thinking of it. Well, much good may do you both; in good
Faith, and Troth, I wish it with all my heart.


Asd. Gisgon, Will you assist this pleasant work?

Gis. Assist it, Sir? Ay, Sir, with all my Soul.
What part shall I have in it, Sir?

Asd. Prepare
A Bridal Entertainment, and my Bed.

Gis. With all my heart.
[Sh^^^ Enter a Gentleman.
Genesis Sir, you are undone! here is Regulus in Town.

Asd. Here Is Villainy.

Hiar. What, is the Town delivered up to him?

Genesis No, Sir, he is taken Prisoner by the Spartan General, assisted by the
Roman Tribune, who was at the Lord Hamilcar's house to day, and came thither
for the great design they have now brought about. Now, Sir, your own Friends
the common People join with your Enemies against you, and threaten to tear you
in pieces for abusing 'em.

Enter Xantippus and the Spartans, they seize Asdrubal, Hiarbas, Gisgon.
Xan. Secure 'em all, my Love --
[Runs to El.
El. My Lord!
[El. runs to Xan.
Asd. Right Woman!

El. Oh! you are come in season, to preserve
My Honor, and my most dear Father's life.

Xan. I have heard all. I Am told Lord Asdrubal
You have prepared a Bridal Entertainment,
Pray will you lend it me.

Asd. With all my heart!
I Will never refuse my Enemy any thing
May help him to a Wife, and a false Wife.

El. My Lord, I had prepared
A scurvy Bridal Entertainment for you.
'Twas this, my Lord --
[Shews her Dagger.
Asd. Madam, you have not deceived me.
You had deceived me, if you had been faithful;
For from a Woman no Man looks for Faith.
[Aside.
Asd. I fear I Am lost.
[Exit.
Hiar. I thought --

Ham. Can you read Books without a light?

Hiar. No.

Ham. Yet you would read our Councels in the dark;
And know without doors, what we do within.
To Prison with the Priest, and Gisgon too.

Gis. I Am a dead Coxcomb! I Am troubled for my honorable Family.
[Ex.
Bat. I wish your Honor Joy with all my heart,
[To Ham. And your Excellence, and your Ladyship. I am so glad of this turn.

Ham. Why? what shall you get by it?

Bat. The satisfaction to see honest Gentlemen in power, and Knaves punished.


Ham. Well said; you shall get something by this turn.
I Will give you a Lift.

Bat. I humbly thank your Honor,
You were always my good Friend.

Ham. I Will help you to a hanging.

Bat. To a hanging?

Ham. Yes, yo've traffiqu'd with the Romans,
And sold 'em Arms.

Bat. Oh! I Am hanged, I Am hanged!
[Ex.
Ham. Now, Sirs, I hope you will learn modesty.
[To the People. And no more censure things above your reach.
We do not know the mysteries of your Trades,
Because we never were instructed in 'em.
Pray who taught you the mysteries of State?
What strange conceits Men have of governing?
Men must serve Years to know a Handicraft;
Yet all pretend to skill in Government,
By natural light and instinct, as Birds build.
Men will pretend to it who want common Sense,
Yet are not laughed at neither; every Man
Willingly lets the Frolic go about,
So he has leave to take it in his turn.
[Ex. Rabble. Now my brave Friend --
[To Xan.
Xan. My Lord, you will lose your words.
I can hear nothing but Elisa's voice.

El. My Joy's too great for words.

Xan. And mine for thoughts.

El. Alas! what makes me weep?

Ham. Excess of Joy.
Which I am pleased to see -- Well, General,
Where left you Regulus?

Xan. I know not where.
I saw Elisa, and Joy hurried me
Out of my Wits I think to meet her Arms.

Ham. Oh! now I see him in yon gaping Throng,
Well, I Will conduct him to the Senate House.

Xan. Do what you please, but do not trouble Love.
Oh! it is new a busy time with me;
And in the sweetest best affair in Love.
For Heavens sake release me now to love.

Ham. I will, I will, then go together, go.

Xan. My Dear!

El. My Heart.

Xan. My Soul, more than my Soul.
[Ex. Xan. El. embracing. Enter Regulus, as a Prisoner, guarded; followed by
the Rabble.
Ham. Here comes the glorious, though unhappy Man.
Most noble Consul.

Reg. Do you mock me, Sir?

Ham. The Gods forbid.

Reg. I Am Consul now no more.

Ham. You may be, Sir, you have at your dispose
The destinies of Carthage, and of Rome,
Shall I attend you to the Senate house?

Reg. Whither you please, to death if you think good.

Ham. With how much greatness he o're-looks his Fate?
[Ex. Omn.
SCENE the Roman Camp.
Enter Metellus, Lepidus. Met. The Consul's lost! dreadful reverse of Fate!
It overturns my Reason, makes me doubt
If Virtue ought to have regard from Men,
Since it has none from Heaven.

Lep. What will become
Of his poor Children he has left at Rome,
And your fair Daughter here?

Met. I dare not think.

Lep. I have charged all to hide the News from her.

Met. Oh! she will quickly find it in our Looks,
And universal Consternation.
Oh! Gods! how will her Sorrows pierce my heart?
But those of Rome will give me deeper wounds.

Lep. See, Sir, your Daughter comes; retire with speed,
Or your confusion will discover all.

Met. Too late! but if I can, I Will rule my self.
[Lep. goes off weeping. Enter Fulvia and her Women.
Full. Oh! Sir! what means this terror in your Camp?
Some unseen mischief, like a Pestilence
Strikes your Men pale and mute; their only Proofs
Of breath are Sighs, but words I can have none.
Oh! something with the Consul is amiss.
Where is he, Sir?

Met. Do not retard me now.

Full. Oh! do you shun me too? he is killed! he is killed!

Met. He lives, let that suffice.

Full. Then why de'e shake,
And look so sad? Oh! he is near his death.
Wounded to death.

Met. Not so, he is in health.

Full. Oh! let me see him then.

Met. In fitting time.
But Rome must be served first, in her Affairs
He Is now engaged; longer I cannot stay,
Follow me not, nor be inquisitive.

Full. Stay, Sir, I humbly beg.

Met. What would thou say?
Be quick, for I Have much business to dispatch.

Full. Sir, I fought near the Consul as I could.
But crowds of Enemies, and clouds of dust
Soon took him from my sight, and since that time
I Have heard no news of him. All is not well.
You hide some dreadful Secret in your Breast,
Because you are fearful it should do me harm.
You would have all the Sorrows to your self.
I thank you for your generous tender Love.
But am I worthy of his Love and yours,
If I Am no more than other Women are?
If ill has happened to the Man I love,
I Will grieve, but show my grief some noble way.
I Will not be pitied for my womanish tears,
But do some glorious thing in his revenge,
Shall make us all be envied.

Met. Nobly spoke! --
I Will trust thy courage -- know he is surpised,
And led to Town a Captive.

Full. Horror! horror!

Met. Is this your promised bravery?

Full. Did I say
I would not grieve? yes, Sir, I ought to grieve;
But every tear I shed, and pang I feel,
I Will put to the account of cursed Carthage.
Now I consider I may spare my tears;
This mercenary Town much prizes Gold,
For this we need but make our treasure weep.

Met. No, I Am afraid they will prize him above Gold,
But shortly we will free him with our Swords.
Though by strange Fate he is fallen into their hands;
We have not with the Consul lost the day.
No, their great purchase they have dearly bought,
Some hundreds of brave Spartans are cut off.
I do not find our Army much impaired.
And shortly we expect two Legions more.
The Wind is fair, I Will see if they be come.
[Ex.
Full. So now my sinking heart is raised again,
Yet the brave Captive shall enslave the Town;
We Are here a Conqueror's, I a Bridal Crown.
And we'll make burning Carthage, when we wed,
Our Nuptial Flame, and light us both to Bed.

ACT IV.
SCENE Carthage. A Room in Hamilcars House.
Enter Xantippus and Elisa. Xan. DArling of Heaven, it is to you, to you
Carthage owes all the Fortune of this day.
The Gods would never have ruined Regulus,
To preserve Carthage had not you been here.

Eli. If Heaven loves me it is for loving you?
Oh! fie! I show my self too fond, I spoil you.
With how much cruelty you tore your self
Away from me, when I was all in tears
I shed for you? yet you could laugh at me;
I Will manage Love as all wise women do.
The best and finest shall not come abroad,
But on great solemn times to make a show:
Mean while you shall have course and homespun love
I swear I will not give you a good look.
This --

Xan. This -- how long? come say it if you dare.

Eli. I will not say how long because I Will cross you.

Han. You will not say it lest you should cross your self.

Eli. Well it is in vain to hide my love from you.
It is too great for any covering;
I Will trust thee generously with my heart.

Xan. Now thou appear'st in thy own beauteous form
All kind and sweet; I knew 'twou'd soon be so,
For Nature always is too hard for Art.
Do not believe my heart barren of Love,
If thou perceiv'st in me a dearth of words,
That I abound not in professions.
We Spartans weed from talk superfluous words,
Let time declare how I will use thy heart.

Eli. I doubt this pleasure is too great to last.
A shout within. Enter a Gentleman.
Xan. How now? what new disturbance in the Town.

Genesis My Lord your glorious Captive Regulus
Is sent in Fetters to the Dungeon,
And the rude Rabble triumph over him.

Xan. How came this Climate, Love, to produce you?
Since it is as opposite to Excellence,
As others are to Poison; I confess
Valor and Wit here is, those noble Fires
Your damps of Luxury have not yet choked.
But as they are used 'twere to be wished they had.
Wit here is all employed in knavish Craft;
The valiant glory in oppression.
Give speedy orders to the Guard from me,
The Consul to the Senate be returned.
I Will hasten thither, and if possible
Prevail with 'em better to treat themselves:
If not he is mine, and I will force him from 'em.

El. Just as I thought you must be gone again,
It Is a sad thing to be a Soldiers wife,
One has but half a Husband of a Soldier.
Wars and Campaigns have half of him and more
And Wounds have a large share of the other half:
And yet this noble parcel of a man,
Is better than a wanton soft Gallant
Who is no man, but makes Summer Campaigns
In Gardens, Groves, at Springs, or Bowling-greens,
Or with a Whore, as much a man as he.
But go I Am pleased thou should do gallant things,
Because in all thy glory I have share.

Xan. That Is like a Spartans wife, for she prefers
Her Husbands honor far above his life;
Weeps if his Bucklers lost, though he be safe.
But she rejoices though he be brought home
Dead on his Buckler; and the greater Love
She had for him; the greater is her joy.

El. Now I believe that joy is not sincere,
Widows I find are artful every where:
In Sparta for their poor departed Dears
Joy they Dissemble, and in Carthage tears.
Exit.
SCENE The Senate House. The Senate sitting. Hamilcar in the Chair.
Ham. I knew the General would be displeased

1. Sen. What if he be, my Lord? do our decrees
Depend upon his will? when he subdued
This Roman Consul, did he conquer us?
I thought he fought to guard, not seize our freedom.

Ham. That we have freedom we may thank his Sword;
But no man can have freedom, to do ought
Which honor and humanity forbids.

1. Sen. He and his Spartan Friend are dangerous men,
And the more dangerous for their deserts;
We must let no man grow too great for us.
(aside to a Senator.
2. Sen. It Is true; but now let us not show our selves.
Enter an Officer.
Offi. My Lords, the General's here.

Ham. Attend him in.
[Enter Xantippus.
Xan. My Lords, I Am told you have doomed the bravest man
To what the vilest scarcely can deserve,
To Chains, a Dungeon, stench, and want of bread.

Ham. My Lord, it is true the Senate has decreed
The Roman Consul shall be treated roughly
Unless he will comply with their desires.
I hope the Senate only threaten him.

2. Sen. No more I hope, most noble General
We much commend your generous tenderness
Of this fallen gallant man; we'd pity him too
Would he show pity to our Countrymen,
And grant us peace, which you know how we need,
But he refuses us all our desires.

Xan. Bring him to me.
[Regulus is brought in fettered. He Is chained! tormenting sight!
I beg you noble Consul credit me,
Those Chains are no impieties of mine;
Rather my sufferings and imposed on me.

Reg. Sir, I believe you, for I Have found you brave.

Xan. What is it you desire of this great man?

1. Sen. That he and all his Troops quit Africa.
Yield every Town and Prisoner he has got.

Reg. I will not give you the least Village back.
And this I speak from reason, not vain pride.
Our power is dwarfish here compared with yours,
Yet now we have you down, blow upon blow
May bring you in short time to your last gasp.
But if we give you the least breathing while
To gather strength, you will rise and drive us hence:
Nay we shall see you at the Gates of Rome.
Rather than I will give you back one Fort,
I will pull all the Towers on my head.

1. Sen. Have to the Dungeon, nay the wrack with him,
We'll frighten bold invaders from our Coast.

Xan. The Dungeon? stead of that strike off his Chains.
He is my right, the purchase of my blood,
And I Will dispose my own.

1. Sen. So we are mastered
In our own Senate House.

Xan. And with good reason.
I do not find that you can rule your selves,
And therefore I have brought a force to rule you.
Govern your selves, and we will be your Servants.

2. Sen. How General?
Are you our Enemy?

Xan. I am your Friend.
And hinder you from Crimes, may bring on you
Curses from men, and vengeance from the Gods.

2. Sen. You hinder us from honorable peace?

Xan. Can shameful ways get honorable Peace.

1. Sen. There is no shame in justice, he brought war
Into the bowels of the Commonwealth,
Hunger shall war upon his Bowess now.
Go to the Dungeon with him, and there starve him.

2. Sen. Senator, let the General play the fool.
(aside. We owe him much, and this will quit all Scores.

Ham. I Will mediate, let the Consul be confined,
And let it be reported he is ill used,
He has weak parts which may that way be bent;
Children, Relations, Friends; and one soft part,
His beloved Fulvia.

Xan. Ha! that startles him.

Reg. Fulvia, was made that I might feel some pain,
I wish I could forget, and be forgot
By her I love; I fear this Policy.
aside.
Xan. My Lord, you have found a way to touch his heart,
Which with the Senates leave I will improve.
Sir, can your Camp make peace?

Reg. Yes Sir, they can.

Xan. Sir, I Am a Servant to this Commonwealth,
Her Faults and Passions I Am not bound to serve;
I am her Rights and Interests to promote;
I think it is fit she should regain her own.
And I Have one way to force peace out of you.
Sir, by that right we have in you by war
We will employ you as our Ambassador
To your own Camp, there to negotiate
With your Friends Tears. You smile, for you believe
I fool my self, and give you all you want
To fortify your glorious Victories,
By strengthening that weak side; but I believe
You Will not be there the Regulus you are here.
Your mutual greifs will master all of you.

Reg. You show more art, and understanding Sir,
Of a great mind, than all the Senate does.
I shall but harden more under their usage;
None but vile Slaves are mastered by a Rod,
But I believe the sorrows of my Friends
Will melt my heart, and I shall yield a while.
Y'entice me into a dangerous Ambuscade,
The only place where I can be subdued.
But I shall overcome and win more glory,
Therefore accept the Embassy with thanks.

Xan. What say your Lordships?

Senate. Ay, ay, ay.

Xan. Consul, you have the leave of all the Senate,
Now go, and if you can persuade your Friends
To give you up to Death.

1. Sen. Hold e're you go,
Give us good hostages for your return.

Xan. I Will be a hostage for him.

Ham. So will I.

1. Sen. You are both priviledg'd by your deserts
We cannot touch you, we'll have other persons.

2. Sen. Come we'll oblige the Consul to be friend us.
We'll take his word.

1. Sen. No, we will have his Oath.

Reg. You have my solemn Oath.

Xan. It Is more than needs.
Great men, were there no Gods, would keep their words
In reverence to themselves; but Gods there are,
Whom none needs rouse by Oaths to witness Truth.
Now let me tell you, (if I can for grief
For I much honor you) if you return
Without a lasting Peace, which frees these Lands
From all those seeds of War, your Garrisons,
You will return to a tormenting Death,
And all my power cannot save you, Sir.

Reg Of all the torments I shall suffer here,
The Griefs of such a noble Heart as yours
Will most afflict me; if you would spare me,
Be sparing of your self; pity me not
Till I Am become a pitiful poor wretch,
Despoiled of all my resolution,
And made indeed a Captive by base fear.

Xan. The good Gods graciously direct you, Sir.

Reg. And you most noble Spartan; of all men
I e're encountered, the most generous.

SCENE A Prison.
Enter Asdrubal, Hiarbas, Giscon, Batto. Bat. Oh! I Am afraid our head's lost,
oh! if they take my head, what shall I do.


Hiar. The Rabble are fine fellows to trust to.


Gis. Well I can say for my honor, I ever hated the vulgar. I have undone
thousands of 'em, and I never did one of 'em good in my life.


Bat. Nor I.


Gis. Sir you have had the impudence to cheat Persons of Quality. If you had
only cheated poor fellows, you should have had a friend of me.


Asd. My ruin would be great delight to me,
If by my fall Carthage were overwhelmed.

Hiar. That it may be spite of this great success.
Though Regulus is taken Rome is not.

Gis. I Will tell your Highness very excellent news,
The Romans burnt this day in our own Ports,
Above threescore of our best men of war. ha! ha!

Asd. Ha! art thou sure of that?

Gis. I Am very sure.
(all laugh. The Romans now may land what men they will;
If they don't take the Town I'gad I Will hang.

Bat. But will they take the Town before we hang?

Gis. That I cannot say.

Bat. Nay if we hang, let who will have the Town. Well, I am horridly afraid to
dye. I Would go to Prayers if I thought to would signify any thing.


Gis. Whom would thou pray to? thou have no Friends in Heaven, thou never
made the least acquaintance there: thou have traded to all parts but Heaven.


Bat. I doubt none of us have any great store of Friends in Heaven; if we had,
they would never have suffered us to come to this.


Asd. Right, therefore Heaven has no great Friend of me.
Ha! I Am a fool to open thus my heart
To fools; who though they should have honesty
May be outwitted into knavery.
But now it is in vain to look my heart,
For all the dangerous secrets are gone out.
(aside. -- Well, Sirs, what do you think? are we in danger?
I do not think we are; what have we done?
Much have we talked indeed, in merriment,
About I know not what, of this and that,
Of altering some Forms of Government.
But that was only matter of discourse,
We could not be in earnest, for we know
'Twas wholly impracticable.

Gis. Do you hear.
(aside to Hiar.
Hiar. That shall not bring him off, he was in earnest.

Gis. Were not you so?

Hiar. No, I abhor the thought.

Gis. you moved him to it.

Hiar. A trick to try him.

Gis. Pox of your tricks, you have noos'd me,
To save my neck I have been forced to make
Shameful Confessions.

Hiar. Well, you are served right, why would you be a knave
And plot to take your Countries liberty.

Gis. A knave? how could I choose but be a knave,
Keeping such knavish company as yours.

Hiar. It Is very well.

Asd. Ha! wrangling Gentlemen?
What, I believe you are discomposed by fear?
Fear nothing, for I say, what have we done?
Showed our Affection to the Commonwealth
In a mistaken way? will they put men
To death, for being subject to mistakes?
Then it will be a fault to be a man.
But do not fear, for I have one sure Friend,
Money I mean, which shall buy all our pardons?

Bat. Oh! dear, Sir, will your Highness buy my pardon?

Asd. Thine? what art thou to me? these are my Friends
And Gentlemen: thou art a barterer
Can traffic for thy self; buy thy own head.

Bat. And so I would at reasonable rates.

Gis. De'e hear? de'e hear? we have been silly knaves,
I would I had all my confession back.
(aside.
Hiar. W'ave been too hasty, I am sorry for it.
(aside.
Asd. I must keep up the spirits of these fools.
(aside. Be merry Sirs; I warrant you your lives.
Who Is there?
(Enter Keeper.
Keep. My Lord.

Asd. Bring in my Wine and Music
Enter Wine and Singers. Here is sincere Wine.

Gis. And here are sophisticated Knaves, pity they should be put together.

Asd. Come, sing us a Catch.
A SONG.
Chorus.
Down with your sprightly Wine, boys,
Down with your sprightly Wine, boys,
For a Traveller bound,
To the Stygian Lake,
A Brimmer Crowned
With sparkling Sack,
Is the best, is the best Divine, boys.
I.
If the Wine be not sound,
No Falsehood is found
In a Bowl well crowned;
And it drowns all our Sorrow and Sin:
And by the help of a Bowl,
From the World we may roll,
More merrily than we came in.
II.
With his Flames and his Flams,
And his horrible Shams,
How the Churchman damns
The little poor Villains and Whores;
But the great who by Power,
Whole Nations devour,
He merrily crowns and adorns.
III.
If your Sense you will resign,
Give it up to good Wine,
But to no Divine,
For his Visions are frightful and sad;
But the Visions in Bowls,
Make jovials Souls,
More merrily, merrily mad.
IV.
To what Regious we fly,
None know when they die,
Any more than I,
To be certain of heavenly Bliss;
The few Moments I stay,
I by Night and by Day,
Will merrily revel and kiss.
Down with your sprightly Wine, boys etc.
Enough, be gone.

Asd. I wonder Gisgon your fine Persian Wife
Comes not to visit you.

Gis. I wonder more
She does not come to kiss your Highness Hands.
For she has brought with her from Persia
Her Country Adoration of all Princes.

Lady within. Where Is my Husband?

Gis. Hark! I hear her voice.
Enter a Persian Lady supported by her Women.
Lad. Oh! Princely Sir, I humbly kiss the Earth
You Are pleased to honor, with your sacred Feet.

Asd. Oh! Madam, you are not in Persia.

Lady. No Sir, I would you were, your Royal Blood
Would not there meet this profanation.
Now Sir, shall I implore your Princely leave
To have some Conference with your Slave my Husband?
Oh! are you there Sir.
(to Gis.
Gis. Ha! I am afraid
She has been told I Am turning an informer.
(aside.
Lady. You are a worthy person.

Gis. Ha! it is so.
(aside.
Lady. Did not I bring much Honor to your Bed?

Gis. Madam you did.

Lady. Much Fortune too?

Gis. You did.

Lady. Have not I kept the Honor which I brought?

Gis. Madam you have.

Lady. Have not I managed too
Your Fortune with the utmost care and wisdom?

Gis. Exquisite Wisdom.

Lady. Of your person too
Have I not been most tender?

Gis. Most obliging:

Lady. Then why have you been a base man to me?

Gis. It Is so, (aside) in what respect most noble Madam?

Lady. In such an odious way I loath to name it.
This Valiant Gentleman, this Noble Spark,
Has sold his Honor, for vile shameful life.
He has submitted cowardly to confess
Your Highness plotted to be Monarch here.

Asd. Oh! dog! can I not get him near the wall,
That I may brain him? (aside) have you done this Gisg^n?

Gis. Yes, Sir, I have, and Sir you know it is true.

Lady. Say it be true; have you not told me, Sir, he has a right to reign? that
he is descended from King Strato.


Gis. Well, let him be descended from fifty Kings, I don't care. I Will not be a
slave to him, nor to any Prince upon earth.


Asd. Oh! Madam, it was all but railery.
And he was one that started first the jest;
Now by his fooling I lose life and honor.

Lady. His fooling, Sir? his cowardly treachery.
What e're you were, he was in earnest Sir.
He has a thousand times boasted to me,
What Honors he should have, when you were King.
Then, though your Highness be most innocent,
And will escape (I hope and beg the Gods)
He shall dye; I Will swear he is a Traitor,
Double, false, both to the Prince and People.

Gis. Oh! Whore!
(aside.
Lady. So is that Reverend person too.

Asd. And has the Priest been dabbling.

Lady. Deeply Sir.
He has been at his Revelations;
His Commentaries, Sir, on your dark Text.

Asd. I Will take him by the beard, and wring his head off

Hiar. Well, Sir, I did as I was bound in conscience.
I Will not betray my Countries Liberty.

Asd. No -- then thou't not a Priest.

Lady. Ah! foolish men, they might have lived and died
With glory, and have got a thousand Friends.

Hia. They Would have done us much good when we were hanged.

Lady. More good than infamous base life will do.
Now all will spit upon you. I abhor you,
Who lately adored you, and resolved to do
The greatest things for you.

Gis. What could you do?

Bat. Oh! Madam can you do us any kindness?
Oh! if you can I will present your Honor,
I will give any thing for my head in reason.

Lady. Hold thy tongue fool, I think not of such fellows.
But for my Husband and his Reverence too,
I would have done what had amazed the world;
If they had done as great men ought to do.
I Would have conveyed 'em through the Town in pomp,
In spite of all the Senate.

Gis. Through the Town?

Lady. Yes when your glorious Martrydom was past,
I would have crowned you such Funerals --

Gis. Pox of your Funerals.

Hiar. Mind your own Funerals;
Vex not your head with ours.

Asd. Oh! Madam bury 'em dead or alive,
Or the corrupted Rogues will breed a pest.

Lady. I cannot serve his Reverence as I would
And he deserves; but it is in my power
To do my Husband justice, I Will right him.

Gis. She Will be the death of me.
I must retard her while I get my Pardon.
(Aside. I have considered on it -- I would retract
My confession, and rather dye than live
In all the shame I Have brought upon my self,
But I Am afraid they will torture me to death.

Lady. Oh! I Have so much Power with the great men.
Be you a noble valiant Gentleman
One I may own and love. Dye like a Hero
For this great highborn Prince, I Will undertake
The State shall not torment a man I love.

Gis. She is a whore to the whole Commonwealth.

Lady. I Will get you any kind of death you fancy.
And for his Reverence too, if he desire it.

Hiar. I do not fancy any kind of death.
If you do Madam take your fill of it.
Poison or hang your self, and if you like it
Come tell us so, and Madam we'll be hanged.

Lady. It Is well -- great Sir, I humbly take my leave
With infinite concernment for your danger.
I would have sacrificed my Husband for you,
With all my heart.

Asd. I do believe it Madam.

Lady. Or my own life.

Asd. You much oblige me, Madam.

Lady. I take my leave in great confusion.

Gis. She Would have sacrificed me.

Hiar. These women tamper here with State affairs,
And hang their Husbands, I Will be hanged by no body.
I Am Heavenly metal and belong to Gods,
And I will keep their Plate from batterry.
Troth Batto, I have done your business too.
I Have let the Council know your villainy.
Not only trade with Romans, but conspire
To set a King over the Commonwealth,
And take away our Liberties and Laws?

Bat. Oh! horrible! did you not move me to it?

Hiar. Only to try you; I had heard of you.
I Am watchman for the Public; it is my Office
To have my Eye and Ear in every place,
And knock at every door. When I moved you,
I knocked, and found a Knave within your bosom.

Bat. And so you would hang me?

Hiar. I Have endeavored it.

Bat. Well, and I Have endeavored to hang you.
I Have let the Council know your Villainy.

Hiar. Ha! have you so? Well see who shall have most credit.

Gis. Nay none of us I think will have much credit.

Asd. So, so, the Rogues are hanging one another.
If ever a turn comes, I Will hang you all.

Hiar. Let a turn come; I fear not you or death,
For death will only change my vehicle.
Enter Keeper.
Keep. My Lord, here are some Senators from the Senate,
To speak with your Highness

Asd. To take my head; I Am lost. Wait on 'em in
Enter Senators.
1. Sen. My Lord, the Senate sends to beg your Highness
To be Protector of the Commonwealth.

Asd. Protector, Sir?

1. Sen. The Spartan General
Usurps upon the State, he forced the Senate
To release Regulus on his Parole.
The Common People think they are betrayed,
And have required the Senate to free you,
And give you power, that you may punish him.

Asd. Sir, I Am unfit for Power, these Gentlemen
Have accused me of very horrid Treasons.

2. Sen. They Are not believed but looked on as defamers;
And ordered to be kept in close confinement.

Gis. Oh! brave! oh! brave!

Hiar. Oh! curse on evidencing!

Asd. Now Rascals! -- Keeper, put these men in setters.
Now Noble Senators, I Will wait on you,
To my most honorable Lords the Senate.
(Ex.
SCENE the Roman Camp.
Enter on one side of the Stage Metellus, Lepidus, and other Roman Commanders,
on the other side Regulus. Met. Oh! Consul!

Reg. Brave Metellus! brave friends all!
De'e weep? nay then it seems you are subdued.

Met. Who ever saw such an amazing change?

Reg. Does it amaze you to see fortune change?
The wonder would be greater should she fix.
She takes my freedom to maintain her own.
Remove your Eye from fortune my dark part,
And fix it on my self, who still remain
Not only unconquered, but invincible.
Yet over victorious Carthage I Will triumph.

Met. Oh! Sir! then have you terms for liberty?

Reg. My liberty depends not on their will,
It Is true, the freedom of my body does.
But that is born a slave, by nature bound
To serve the mind, a time prefixed by fate
And then turned over to new bonds in death.
Of this poor vassal I take little care.
How free my mind is, you shall soon perceive.

Met. I tremble for him.

Reg. Carthage to release
This Body, (which can never be released
From vassallage to sufferings, and death)
Asks the refunding all our Victories.

Lep. Agreed! one Regulus is worth 'em all.
For he will regain 'em all.

Reg. You shall not give
The smallest link out of that golden Chain.
It setters Carthage now, but if once broke
Carthage may escape, arise, nay enslave Rome.
I come to rule your dangerous love to me,
Which I fear more than Carthaginian Racks;
For these can give me but some painful hours
Which glory will allay, and death will end.
But you would torture me with lingering shame,
Got by a treacherous and cowardly peace.
Then as your Consul, I command you all,
Give Carthage no more peace, than this short truce.

Met. And what becomes of you?

Reg. I must return.

Man. Oh! joyful news.
(Aside.
Lep. Sir, you return to dye.

Reg. It may be so.

Lep. To a tormenting death.

Reg. It may be so, my word and oath are past,
And nothing do I fear, like breach of faith.

Met. A glorious man.
(Aside.
Lep. Will you forsake your friends,
To perish by your barbarous enemies?

Reg. I do not perish, if my honor lives;
But if I stay shall not my body dye?
Then shall I lose the honor I can keep,
To preserve life, which is not in my power?
By keeping faith, over Carthage I triumph,
A Roman Ghost will triumph over her.
Not by short pomp which blazes but some hours;
My triumph shall go on, from age to age,
While Rome shall stand, which shall the longer stand
For my example of unshaken Faith,
For what Foundation to a State like Faith?

Met. Sir, I Am the less amazed at what I hear,
For all your life has been with wonders filled.
But I have not so great a heart as yours
I cannot let you go.

Lep. He shall not go;
I will bring all the Army to his feet.

Reg. Is It possible? I do command you stay.
Perform your duties both to Rome and me,
Let Rome have Carthage, and leave me to Heaven.
Metellus why de'e wrong your self and me?
Your Spirit equals mine, and for the World,
You would not have me leave this glorious path.
Like Romans now receive my last adieus.

Lep. He shall not go, his Troops shall stop his way.
(Aside. Now take your leaves.
[Ex. Lep. Man. Commanders.
Met. Oh! Sir! what you resolve
Has so much glory in it, I envy you.
But I must pity those, whom you forsake,
My self, your Children, my poor Fulvia.

Reg. Metellus be assured, those you have named,
Are dear to me, as they can be to you,
But Generals must discipline their thoughts.
The honor of the Gods and good of Rome
Must first command; next them I rank my friends,
These have over me so great authority
I Am jealous of my weakness, and their power;
And dare not trust my self with seeing 'em.
I Will never see Fulvia more.

Met. Not see her, Sir?

Reg. Oh! no, an enterview will raise our griefs
To such a tumult, 'twill not become me
To be seen in it. I Will serenely part,
And so retain my greatness to the last;
And this may less harm her.

Met. Oh! Sir, she comes.

Reg. Then I must fly, I cannot stay with her.
(Ex. Enter Fulvia and her women.
Full. The Consul! Sir, the Consul! where is he?
A minutes absence more I cannot bear.

Met. Oh! my unruly griefs will betray all.
(Aside.
Full. You sigh, nay more you strive to smother tears.

Met. No you mistake.

Full. I do not; Sir, I see it.

Met. Your fears impose on you.

Full. Convince me of it,
And let me see the Consul.

Met. Wait awhile.

Full. I perish then.

Met. Y' are rash, command your self.

Full. I cannot do it.

Met. You must, he is busied now in a great work,
The greatest that was e're designed by Man.

Full. Oh! what? and where?

Met. Be not inquisitive.

Fulv. Oh! why Sir, why? shall I not have a share
In all his Fortunes?

Met. Ay, too much poor Girl.
(aside. Let it suffice to know, his aims are now
Above what mortal Man ever attained.
And he will reach his aims now, seek no more.
(Exit)
Full. I must, I must enquire, I cannot rest;
This is all darkness and confusion.
Enter Lepidus.
Lep. Oh! Madam! Madam! save the Consul's Life.

Full. Now the dire Mystery begins to unvail.
I Am dying, speak whilst I have Life to hear.

Lep. He cannot make an honorable peace,
So he is only come to command war;
Now to keep faith with faithless enemies,
Returns to dye.

Full. You Have struck me to the heart.

Lep. Fly, Madam, or you will never see him more.
His Army at the present bar his way,
But all their force will, without you, be vain.

Full. My reason, sense and life, before me fly;
The Consul will enjoy his cruel wish,
Nothing of mine will ever reach him more,
Unless my shreiks cut through the wounded air,
Or Winds hurl to him my torn scattered hair.

ACT V.
SCENE Continues. Regulus appears beset by Lepidus, an Augur, all the Army; who
in suppliant Postures surround him. Reg. WHO has betrayed me thus, and brought
my Troops
To besiege me?

Lep. Sir, I confess, 'twas I.

Reg. Y' are grateful Lepidus, I advanced you
To honor, you would sink me to the lowest shame;
Make me appear a Coward, and be forsworn.

Lep. Well, Sir, we have not sworn you shall return,
We are not perjured if we hinder you.

Reg. Yes but you are, y' are sworn to obey me.

Lep. We may oppose you without Perjury,
If you destroy your self.

Reg. I save myself,
When I am false, I Am Regulus no more,
But a foul Spectre, which in little time
You Will hate and loath, whatever you think now.

Lep. Sir, this perhaps might force you from our hands,
If y' only went to die, for then you went
To the good Gods; you go to Furies now,
Who will torment you.

Reg. Not beyond my strength.
I Have got this profit by calamity,
That I have learnt to bear calamity.
I never did believe it was an evil,
But now I do not think it troublesome.
Misery by use into our nature grows.
I by enduring pains will torture them,
And burn them with their own infernal rage.

Lep. But, Sir, you will also torture your dear Friends,
We dare not let you go.

Reg. How shall I escape?
Enter Metellus. But the Proconsul comes, he will do me right.
Sir, set me free from my distracted Friends,
Who would take from me more than Carthage can,
My Honor, Innocence, and their own Love;
For will they love me when I Am infamous?

Met. Sir, something so divine appears in you,
I prostrate even my reason to your will.
Sir, if you would resolve to stay with us,
No earthly power shall take you from our hands;
But if you will return, I offer up
My self, my Child, as Victims to your will,
For be assured we perish, Sir, with you.

Reg. I perish if I stay, then set me free.

Met. I Will do you then this dismal service, Sir,
If I am able; but I doubt it much:
I hardly can believe the Legions,
Which oppose your commands, will obey mine.

Reg. I Have thought upon a way -- a word -- give out,
Carthage has given me my mortal bane;
And in a sense it has.
aside.
Met. A fatal truth!
I will do it, Sir, Pray Gentlemen draw near.
Follow no longer your mistaken Love,
It leads you to no purpose from your way.
The Carthaginians have the Consul fast,
They Have given him his death.

Lep. What? poisoned him?

Met. They have his life, it is theirs do what you can;
They Have torn it to a wretched Remnant now,
Not worth his keeping, therefore give it 'em,
It is the price of their Damnation:
And let him have the glory he desires.

Lep. Oh! treacherous Murderers!

Met. Nay you trouble him.
Take hence your griefs, the Consul has enough,
Go, throw 'em on his bloody Enemies.

Lep. The Villains are too few for revenge.
And, oh! too vile to recompense our loss;
The Carthaginian Nation cannot do it.
Oh! Consul! since we must not hope for you,
And your stay here reprieves your Murderers,
We will release you, to release our selves
To our just vengeance.

Reg. Now I know you all.
I was afraid I had lost all my Friends;
That Punick air breathed Punick souls in you,
And that you slighted Faith; which I believe
No Roman does, except a Roman Priest.
Mourn not for me, for that implys I Am fallen,
Rather calamity falls under me.
Applaud my happy fortunes, for I go
In triumph to a higher Capitol,
And more magnificent than that in Rome;
One in the Heavens, where living Jove resides.
True, I must first put off my flesh by death,
But that I with as small concern can do,
As men do Sandals at a Temple gate.
Now Friends farewell, thank you for all your Love,
And when I am in Carthage, storm the Town.
[Ex. Lep. and Army. Now, Sir, thank you for an immortal life,
For you have opened me the way to it;
And at no small expenses to your heart.
Oh! Fulvia! there is my last great agony.

Met. Sir, I have eased you of some part of it;
I met her flying to you, and stopped her way;
But might have spared the labor, for, alas!
Her sorrow often flung her dead on earth.
I left her senceless in her women's arms,
You may escape her now. Oh! no! she comes,
Comes like a Torrent, there is no stopping her.

Reg. Nay then, what sufferings have I to bear?
I fear my strength, and dare not meet her Eyes.
Enter Fulvia.
Full. Oh! Consul! Consul! what have you decreed?

Met. Daughter, away.

Full. I cannot, cannot, Sir.
Pray pardon me, I Am not in my own power.
Oh! Consul! will y' abandon all your friends
For Slavery and Death, tormenting Death?

Met. He Is bound by Oath.

Full. Was he not so to me?
And by a Thousand Oaths, he had no right
To give himself away without my leave:
He Is true to Murderers, and false to me.

Reg. Dear Fulvia, calm your self, and use your reason,
You Will find I Have acted as became a Man,
Who durst pretend to such a heart as yours.
Should such a Man betray the Rights of Rome
To save his life?

Full. Your death will ruin Rome,
And me, and all the World.

Reg. No, Fulvia;
By dying I preserve the Rights of Rome,
Advance her Glory, and mine, and therefore yours.
Now Rome will be my lofty Monument,
'Twill stand upon my Tomb, where I shall rest,
In a Bed fit for him whom Fulvia loves.

Full. Where shall I rest when Regulus is dead?
You take no care for me.

Reg Will you not rest
In my repose? can our united hearts
Have any joys, or griefs, both do not feel?

Full. I do not know your heart, but I believe
Your griefs afflict me more, than they do you.

Reg. Too much, too much.
More than a Slave, as I am, can deserve.

Full. You are my Lord; more dear (if possible)
To me than ever: by your fall my heart
Is greatly bruised, and tend'rer than before;
More sensible of Sorrow, and of Love.
Then pity me, for my sake, go with me.

Reg. I dare not do it, because I love you more,
Than to permit your sorrow to deceive you.
You seek to take with you, a Slave, a Coward,
A Thief, a Murderer; all this I must be,
If I return not. I shall break my Oath,
To steal my Freedom from the gallant Spartan
Who trusted me; and if I break my trust
I expose him to all my Sufferings,
And perhaps prove his bloody Murderer.
Would you have such a Villain as this with you?

Full. Oh! these are arts to hide your want of Love,
You love me not, never loved, you have deceived me.

Met. Now Daughter you are too importunate.

Full. Oh! by my Love, I know he does not love,
I for no Joy on Earth could part with him;
He flies from me to Torments, and the Grave.

Met. No, no, to Justice, Piety, Renown.

Full He is unjust, I have a right in him,
I never did, I never will renounce.
To take himself from me is Robbery
And cruel Murder, it will be my death,
And this he knows; but he regards not me,
He can be tender of his Enemies,
And not of me.

Reg. Oh! Madam! say not so.

Full. Go, go to Carthage, let her have her right,
And I Will have mine.
I Have title to partake whatever is yours.
It seems Chains, Misery and Death are yours,
And all the forrune you have left your self.
Well I Will to Carthage wi' you, and have my share.

Reg. To Carthage?

Full. Do you think I dare not do it?
Yes valiant Consul, I in some respects,
In resolution will transcend even you.
You are divine, above all sense of ill;
I Am a weak Woman, I have tender sense,
I can feel torments, yet I Will rush upon 'em.

Reg. Sweet Fulvia, hear me.

Full. Oh! I love too much
To hear and see you; would I loved it less,
My misery and misfortune would be less.
Would I had never lent an Ear to you.
Yet you would now be heard. What should I hear,
Bloody Decrees against yourself and me?
Oh! I have heard too much, too much o'them.
And why should you expect I should hear you?
You regard not my Love, my Tears, my Blood.

Met. Hold Fulvia, hold! you harm a dying Friend,
Who dies for you and me, and for all Rome.
Why say you Misery is all the fortune
Of this great Man? is Glory of no price?
Are you a Roman, and want sense of glory?
All Ages will adore this wondrous Man,
Whom you wrong heavily. See, see, I swear,
Sh' as wrung Tears from him; now but that I know,
What thou have said proceeds from raving Love,
For this great Sacrilege I Would strike thee dead.

Reg. Oh! Sir! you now commit the cruelty
You charge her with, you wound a wounded heart.
I know her heart is bleeding now for me,
And what she says comes from her pain, not her;
She is most kind in what she seems unkind.

Full. Inndeed I am, and though your Love were lost.

Reg. Oh say it not.

Full. I do not think it is;
But if it were, yet I must love you still,
Nay in calm thoughts adore you, and believe
You are too excellent, that is all your fault,
And my misfortune was, I loved too high.

Met. Now Daughter you judge well, and do him right,

Full. Oh! 'twas my madness wronged him, and not I.

Reg. I know it sweet Fulvia, and can I be false
To so much love! before I knew you loved,
I loved you so, that you were my chief aim.
In seeking Glory I sought chiefly you.
I fought for you, and now I dye for you,
By glorious Death more to deserve your Love;
And therefore be more loved; for if I dye
To keep my Faith with mortal Enemies,
Oh! think how firm my heart must be to you.
But should I poorly live by breach of faith,
I should for ever lose you in both worlds;
You Would shun me here with scorn, and after death,
I for my Perjury should shine in shades,
While you would shine in Heaven; there is a Heaven.
This shred of Life cannot be all the Web,
Nature has wrought to cover divine Spirits;
There is a Heaven because there is misery.
The divine Power ever blessed and good,
Made not the World for an ill natured jest,
To sport himself in pains of those he made.

Full. True, but for Heaven what must you endure?

Reg. No more than what you could endure for me.

Full. Oh! that I might, I Would run to it with joy.

Reg. Then cannot I for you, sweet Fulvia?

Met. So, you have prepared balm for the parting blow;
And that you may the better bear it to.
Take from each other your entangling Eyes.
I Will interpose and hide 'em -- now, my Lord.
[Metellus goes between, Regulus offers to go. Fulvia holds him.]
Full. Hold, hold, I cannot, will not let you go.
I Will lose my arms before I Will lose my hold.
I know what you resolve is glorious;
But I Am a Woman, and my Love prevails;
And the more brave you are, the more I love,
And the less able am to part with you.

Reg. Oh! I am in a tempting dangerous snare.

Full. Nay do not grieve, you cannot escape from me,
I shall release you soon, my heart will break.
[The Ghost of Apamia rises, Fulvia shreiks, and falls in her Women's Arms.
Met. She shreiks and dies! her heart is broke indeed,
Poor Girl!

Reg. Oh! now I see what made her shriek,
A frightful Messenger is come for me.

Met. From Carthage?

Reg. From the dead; it is my dead Wife.
[Ghost sinks.
Met. I perceive nothing dead, but my poor Child;
I hope she is dead, life would afflict her now.

Reg. Take notice Heaven, what we all endure
Only for Virtue. This one sweet last touch
Of this fair hand is the only recompense,
I shall receive for all I lose on Earth.

Met. I Will see you to the Lines then take my leave.
[Ex. [Fulvia recovers.]
Full. Oh! he is gone! he is for ever gone.
Fond tears be gone, such vain and vulgar sorrow
Does not become the grave of Regulus.
I Will strew his Tomb with Carthaginian Ruins.
And this whole Nation for his bloody death,
Shall weep to death in blood -- Ho, Lepidus.
Enter Lepidus. Where is your Consul?

Lep. He is near the Walls.
Where Thousands of us will be presently;
We are preparing for him a revenge.

Full. Come follow me --
I Am now your Consul, his Soul lives in me.
We'll bury Carthage so, that where it stood,
In future ages shall to few be known;
Some shall believe here never was a Town.
Ex.
SCENE Carthage.
Enter Asdrubal, Senators, and Attendants. Asd. Most noble Senators, will you
be pleased
To tell my honorable Lords, the Senate,
I Will only give some necessary orders
About their Service, then attend their Pleasures.

Sen. We shall, my Lord.
(Ex. Senators.
Asd. I fee the Senates craft;
I Am only used like Physic for a need;
With loathing forced upon 'em, and the wished
Effect once wrought, I shall be flung away.
For Commonwealths cannot bear glorious men,
By the confessions of the Priest and Gisgon
I am in danger, but I Will try to quash 'em.
I ordered the confessing Gentlemen
[To his Attend. Should be brought to me.
1. They are come, my Lord.
Enter Hiarbas, Gisgon, Batto, guarded.
Asd. How the Rogues look and tremble, for my sport?
(aside. I Will let their terrors worry 'em a while.

Gisg. What will he do with us?

Hiar. I do not know.
I Am under dreadful consternation.

Gisg. How? are y' afraid of death, now it is come?
I Have heard you crow over death on your own Dunghill.

Bat. Oh! no profaneness in affliction, pray.

Gis. Oh! now the wind sits there, you have a sore Throat;
At other times your swallow's large enough.

Asd. The Rascals wrangle; and how pale they look?
The Priest there, has a face just like a Goose,
White every where, except about his Bill.
His Nose is faithful to the dye, Wine gave it.
Well, now my grave, my cheating face goes on.
(aside. Oh! Gentlemen! I love and honor you.
Come to my arms.

Hiar. What Is this? come to his arms?
(aside.
Gis. Has he not got an engine there to flash us?
(aside.
Asd. You loved the Commonwealth above my life,
Or your own credit; you are honest men.
You played the part of Spies, oh, you did well.
To tell you truth, it was a part I played.
I was a Spy on you.

Gisg. Indeed, my Lord?

Asd. Indeed. But you had one great quality
Most fit for Spies, of which I had no share.
You scorn those scorns which always are the vales
Of that unlucky Office. I confess,
I was kept under by the fear of shame,
And partly by some tenderness for you:
I love you Gentlemen.

Gisg. Your humble Servant.

Hiar. Your Excellencies very humble Servant.

Gisg. A noble Gentleman!

Bat. A gallant Man!

Asd. Besides I found no great necessity
To do you harm; when I had power enough
To hinder you from doing the State harm.
But that I never meant to wrong the State,
I swear before the Gods. Do not I know,
It is impossible to be King here?
Speak your minds Gentlemen, you never thought
I was so foolish as to be in earnest;
And stake my life at a sure losing game?

Hiar. We knew not what to think of your Highness,
We acted as our Consciences directed.

Asd. Oh! You did very well, y' are honest men.

Bat. I can swear for your Highness, you never said one word to me, of being
King.


Asd. Thou Have done me right, so must these Gentlemen,
Or they will bring great guilt upon themselves:
For Gentlemen, had you thought me in earnest,
You Would have informed, when first you knew my guilt.
Instead o'that, you never let it go,
Till you could purchase your own lives by it:
For, Sirs, can you deny the fear of death
Had not a mighty hand in this great work?

Gisg. It had a little finger in it indeed.

Asd. Well Gentlemen, you have served the Senate well.
Now he that is an entire honest Man
Does right to all Men; clear my innocence,
Then both the Senate and myself must love you,
For having served us both most honestly.
And let me tell you, it is in my power
To raise or ruin you; which I shall do,
According as I find you good or bad.

Hiar. We had best stick to him, he is a great man
aside to Gis.
Gis. Ay, and a very devilish cunning Man.
(aside.
Bat. Ay, and an honest man for ought I know,
He never said a word to me of being King.
(aside.
Hiar. This Fellows evidence too will mischief us.
-- We'll serve your Highness.

Asd. You are honest men.
Come we will to the Senate, they are sat.
(Ex.
SCENE The Senate House. The Senate sitting, the Praetor in the Chair.
Enter Asdrubal, Hiarbas, Gisgon, Batto. Asd. Most Honorable, Venerable Lords;
I have an infinite desire to serve you.
It is my sole ambition, whatsoever
Some Men may tell you: but, alas! my arm
Is withered by a blast, these Gentlemen
Have blown upon me; I must do 'em right.
They have informed, I talked of being King.
It Is true, I did; they started first the Talk.
The Apparition, of so great a Treason,
So scared me, that I knew not what to answer.
I soon reflected, I should better serve
The State by humoring these Gentlemen,
To find how far they would dug in such a Mine;
Then I should do, by making 'em in fri^^ts
Conceal their works. But that I ever went
One step with 'em, or gave 'em cause to think,
I aimed at being King, I do deny;
And they have proved by hiding long the Treason.
But I commend 'em that they e're discovered it,
And humbly beg noble Rewards for 'em.

Pret. What say you Gentlemen? do you think my Lord
Meant to be King?

Gis. We know not what he meant.
We did discover it for fear he meant it;
But were not hasty in discovery,
Because it was not plain to us he meant it.

Pret. It seems he would, and he would not be King.
Why, Sir, you baffle your own evidence.
What says your Reverence to this affair?

Hiar. I do desire, as it becomes my Coat,
To have my name and conscience without spot.
I feared his Highness was ambitious;
To feel his pulse, I moved him to be King.
His Highness did accept the tempting proffer.
To do my Duty to the State I told it.
But I must do his Highness right;
He never advanced one step in the affair,
Or gave us cause to think he did approve it.
So I have conscientiously discharged
My Duty to the Senate, and his Highness.

Pret. That is to say, you have played the Knave with both;
And with yourself the Fool, as you shall find.
What says, that Citizen?

Bat. An't please your Honor,
His Highness never said one word to me
Of being King. All I know of the affair
Was from his Reverence; he told me indeed,
His Highness had a fancy to be King:
And also said, if I would help his Highness
To keep a correspondence with the Romans,
If by the Romans help he got the Crown,
I should be sure of very rich rewards.

1. Sen. So, so, they have been disposing all our Money.

Pret. And all our Lives; the Romans must have come.
By all you have said, you have fairly cleared my Lord,
And charged yourselves. I think it is fit they die.
What says your Lordships?

Sen. Ay, ay, hang 'em, hang 'em.

Gisg. How? hang us?

Sen. Go, away with 'em, and hang 'em.

Gisg. My Lord, my Lord, will you let us be hanged?
(To Asd.
Asd. What would you have me do? oppose the Senate?

Gisg. We are all fop'd here, fop'd out of our lives.

Bat. Oh! dear! I cannot dye! I cannot dye!

Pret. Thou can do nothing else, thou dyest with fear.

Bat. I am not prepared to dye!

Gisg. No, Sir, nor I.

Bat. I have my Religion yet to choose.

Gisg. I have my hanging Equipage to make.
I desire to hang like a Man of Quality.

Pret. Dye piously, that is the best Equipage.

1. Sen. They Are not content with hanging; torture 'em.

Gis. Hold, hold! my Lords! we beg we may be hanged.

Bat. That Is a sad thing! must we entreat a hanging?

2. Sen. Away with 'em, and hang 'em presently.
Hiarbas, Gisgon, and Batto are guarded off.
Asd. So Traitors now will have a care of me.
aside. For I out-match 'em all at their own art.
Now venerable Lords my hands are free
To guard you.

Pret. To destroy us all, we know you.
aside. [A Noise of a Multitude, crying Justice, Justice.] Enter Offloer.
Offi. My Lords, the Traitors are all executed;
And at their deaths conjured the Multitude,
If any thing they had was precious to 'em,
With utmost speed to quell Lord Asdrubal,
Or he would be King, and they would be all undone*
So all the Town are at your gates, to beg.
You Will fling him to their mercy.

Pret. We will do it.
Guards seize Lord Asdrubal, and carry him out
To be disposed as the good People please.

Asd. As the base Rabble please, your dirty Lords.
You take my life for what you ought to thank me.
I should have honored you by being your King.
Had I been King, y'ad served a high born Prince.
Now you are Vassals to a nasty Rout.
Confound your Commonwealth! Confound it* no.
Continue it Heaven! that there may never live
A great Man here. In a base Commonwealth,
Merit is Treason; a great Man oppresses!
His little Masters, by out-shining 'em.
I Am your Oppressor now, your Tyrant now,
Fear of me tortures you; I give you Laws.
Shake and look pale! you do -- Obedient Cowards!
While I have Life, I Have Empire in my frown,
And in my courage a bright awful Crown.
(Ex.
Pret. Why? what a thundering Tyrant had this been
Upon a Throne, when he is thus in Fetters?

1. Sen. It Is well we are rid of him; would with this ease
We could be freed from the bold dangerous Spartan.
The Traitor Asdrubal has told some truth.
A Commonwealth bears no imparity.
A great Man is a Tumor, is a Disease.
Enter an Officer.
Offi. My Lords, the Roman Consul is returned.
The Spartan General attends,
With his great Prisoner, to know your pleasures.

Pret. Go bring 'em in.
Enter Xantippus sad and dejected, Regulus bold and lively. Ha! What means
this? our General is sad.
Which is the Conqueror, and which the Captive?

Reg. Have you forgotten me so soon my Lords?

Pret. No, but you come with the air of a Triumpher.
Your Conqueror there comes like a mournful Prisoner.
Has he subdued you General since he went?

Xant. Yes, and your Lordships too, he has overcome,
In a more dreadful battle with his Friends,
Than e're he fought with your most valiant Troops;
Their griefs had sharper edges than your Swords:
He has overcome 'em all, and now returns
To triumph here, and if I might prevail,
He should triumph, and be led round the Town;
With Laurels crowned; to encourage all your Subjects
To do for Carthage what he did for Rome;
For if you honor virtue in a Foe,
What may a great deserving Friend expect?

Pret. Is this true, Regulus? have you brought war?

Reg. I have done Justice both to Rome and you.
What Roman Valor got, I have preserved,
And hither brought myself your right by war.

1. Sen. Be crowned with Laurels? torn with red hot Pincers.

Xant. Be torn!

2. Sen. Be torn. Go fetch the Torturers.

Xant. Touch him that dares, he is my right.

Pret. Once more,
Out-brave us all in our own Senate House?
Xantippus know we are provided for you.
Our fond confiding in your faith and honor,
Exposed us lately to your insolence.
Now we have fifty Thousand Men in arms,
Affront us now, no Spartan shall escape.

Xant. Behave yourselves like Men, and we'll obey you.
But if you will be Lions, and devour
A valiant Man, only in love to blood;
We'll do our best to scowre your filthy den,
Happen what will to us.

Reg. Gallant Xantippus.
No more, no more of this, if y' are my Friend;
You torture me more than these Men can do,
For I shall glory in what they inflict.
But I sink down under your griefs and dangers*
I would not for the world lose this occasion
Of winning Glory to myself and Rome.

Pret. Go, carry him away, and torture him.

Xan. E're I will bear it, I Will be tortured with him.
(Ex.
Pret. Was ever such amazing insolence?

1 Sen. It Is well we are behind hand with his pay.

Pret. He puts a bloody cross on his accounts.

2 Sen. It Is the best piece of service he e're did us.
After a Fight within, enter an Officer.
Off. My Lords, take speedy course to save yourselves
And the whole City, or it will be lost.
The Spartan General has beat your Guards,
And finding he wants strength to fight the Town,
He has let in part of the Roman Troops,
Commanded by a warlike Roman Virgin,
Contracted as they say to Regulus.
And she is come hither to revenge her Lover.

1 Sen. Why, what a bold black Traitor is this Spartan?

Pret. My Lord, I doubt we are the Traitors now,
The beaten Party always are the Traitors.

2 Sen. The beaten Party? has he got all Carthage!

Off. Oh! no! he is only Master of one Gate,
Which I believe he keeps for his retreat.
But he has strength enough to do great mischief,
Unless prevented.

Pret. We will put a stop to it.
Where Is Regulus?

Off. He Is forced out of our hands.

Pret. Before he was tormented?

Off. No, my Lord.

Pret. Well, all the better, he cannot harm us.
Go to the Spartan General, and tell him,
We say, he has committed a high fault,
His King and Country would severely punish,
Should we complain of him; but for the sake
Of his past services we greatly love him.
If he will quickly leave the Town in peace,
And return home, all this shall be forgot;
We will provide him every thing he wants,
Money and Shipping.

Off. I will let him know it.
(Ex.
Pret. I will take care the Shipping shall be rotten,
And he shall sink, perhaps in sight of Carthage.
(Ex.
SCENE A Street in Carthage.
Enter Xantippus, Fulvia, and her Women. Xant. Oh! noble Virgin, in whose
sacred breast,
The heart of the great Regulus is lodged.
Can you forgive the cruel Sacrilege
I have committed against him and you?
But I repent and have made some atonement.

Fulv. I am not able, Sir, to answer you.
My Soul is torn with tortured Regulus,
For I am told, we come too late to save him.

Xant. It is too true.

Fulv. Is he alive or dead?

Xan. He lives, and has the joy to know y're here.
I told it him, I did not think it safe
To bring you to him, e're he was prepared,
Lest the surprise should scatter all his Spirits.
And still I am afraid the enterview
Will harm you both.

Fulv. Sir, this short enterview,
Is all the wealth we hope for in this world;
And to be hindered of it, all the harm
That can befall us now: if you repent
The ill you have done us, heap no more upon us.

Xant. The Heavens forbid. Well you shall have your will.
He Is nearer than you think, open the door.

The SCENE is drawn, and Regulus is discovered fitting in a Chair bloody.
Fulv. Oh! here is my Lord, all over wounds and blood.

Reg. And have I lived to see my Fulvia?
Thou bringst me joy, can heal a thousand wounds,
Would thou not weep; but if thou weep'st, my Dear,
Thou will set all my wounds bleeding afresh.

Fulv. Can any eye see this, and not burst out
In tears and blood? your barbarous Murderers
Have found a luxury in torturing you;
You are all over wounds.

Reg. Oh! no, my Love!
My Soul's all over pleasure. Had I wounds
In Conscience or in Honor, I indeed
Were a poor creaturre fit to be lamented;
But as I am, I Am to be envied.
I have a Conscience which I would not change,
For all the Crowns on earth; and I have Honor,
Will live unrivaled to Eternity;
And in my arms I Have my dear Fulvia.

Xant. And at your feet your weeping enemy,
Asking your pardon, and adoring you.

Reg. Can there be then a happier man than I?
I have some wounds, it is no wonder sure,
A Soldier should have wounds, and these I sought.
They give eternal life to my renown;
To me but a few pains, which now methinks,
Are gone, my Fulvia has healed 'em all.

Full. No, no, you say this to deceive my sorrow
I see your Agonies, Convulsions,
And feel 'em too; they tear my veins and nerves,
And I shall die without revenging you.
I did not doubt but to have offered up
This Town, a burning Victim to your Ghost;
A glory to which I had greatest right,
For by your sufferings I have highest wrong.
Now all this wealth I must bequeath to others.
But for my sufferings I have great rewards,
Since I in life have Regulus's love,
And in Elysium shall possess himself.

Reg. For ever dear -- But do not hasten thither
By dangerous ways; harm not thy beauteous self,
Lest I should lose thee too, in the next world.
Dark is the passage to it, the clearest paths,
Are Virtue and Obedience to the Gods,
If it is their pleasure, suffer life a while.
A little time in this short life is much,
But it is nothing in eternity.
Some days cut off from thence, will not be missed.
I Will wait the coming of thy lovely shade,
At the entrance of Elysium, which to me,
Will not be an Elysium till thou come.
I Am going, weep not, Fulvia, for no man
Can live with greater pleasure than I dye.
(Dies.
Fulv. He Is gone! he is gone! oh! thou accursed Carthage!
May thou abhor and scorn all Honor, Virtue,
Piety, Faith, till thou art scorned by all.
May thou do Villainies may deserve hanging,
And then be fond of Tyrants that shall hang thee.
Ha! I Am not well, I burn, and my brain's sick;
All nature's sick, the frightened day starts back;
Abortive night is born before its time.
Some horrid thing is done, what is the news?

Xan. Alas! she raves! sorrow has hurt her sense!

Fulv. I Am told the Consuls murdered, is it true?
I saw him lately, what is become of him?

Xant. It Is so alas, here is a great Spirit broke.

Fulv. I Am to be married to him, I Will have him,
Though he be dead! Dead? no, he is but asleep.
The Bridegroom sleep before the Brides, abed,
Oh! fie upon it! I Will make him blush to morrow.
Undress, undress me Ladies, quickly, softly,
I Will steal to him, and never waken him,
Then in the morning I will rise a Virgin,
And we'll all laugh him out of countenance, ha, ha.

Xan. How does she mix together grief and mirth?
Ah? what confusion's in this noble mind?

Full. How pale and cold he is? like a Moon beam
In a clear frosty night, oh! he will starve me.

Xant. Remove from hence the body, it disturbs her.
Regulus is carried off.
Fulv. Warm, warm him some body. Ha! he is gone!
Then he is taken Prisoner once again,
When he had paid his Ransom with his blood.
Oh! treacherous insatiable Villains!
Can nothing satisfy your thirst of blood.
I Will after 'em, my Sword, my Bow, my Horse;
Pursue, pursue, e're they are got to Carthage.
Ex. She runs after Regulus.
Xan. Follow, and hold her, lest she harm herself.
Enter Elisa.
El. Away, away, my Lord, the Winds blow fair.
Both from the Heavens, and the Senate House.
The Senate give you leave to return home,
Order you Money, and all things you need.
They sent this Officer, to express their pleasure*
Enter an Officer, who gives Xantippus Papers.
Xant. I thankfully accept the Senates savor,
And will not give 'em trouble many days.
Will thou go with me?

El. Will I stay behind?
If thou should sink in Seas, I Would follow thee;
Mount to the Heavens, if I stay behind,
It shall not be my fault; I will shake off
The luggage of this body to be with thee.
I Have more good news, my Father will go with us.
And is providing shipping.

Xant. Excellent Man!

El. His care is needful, for he has discovered
A horrible contrivance of ill men,
To sink thee and thy Troops, in rotten Ships.

Xan. Oh! wicked place! well I will sink this Town;
I Will take thy Father and thyself away,
Whose Piety binds up the hands of Heaven;
Then Vengeance will have liberty to strike.
And I, my Love, shall need your Piety,
To guard me from the anger of the Gods.
I Have ruined a most noble pair of Lovers,
The divine Regulus and Fulvia.
I greatly fear her sorrow and his blood.

Fulv. You did not shed his blood but fought to save it.

Xant. It Is true, I did; and I will save his body
From any farther barbarous violence;
I will convey it to his Camp with Honor.
And lovely Fulvia, dear, shall be your care.
Alas, she needs it, for her sense is gone.

Elis. I will my Love.

Xant. And then we will to Sparta,
And take up all our joy in Love and Virtue.
In these thou will find happiness enough.
Regulus found it so in spite of torments.
Virtue! thy joys no fortune can oppress;
Vice! thou art wretched spite of all success.
The aid of fortune is to Virtue vain;
To Vice a curse, and more augments the bane.
Ex.
FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed for J. Knapton, viz.
MR. Tho. Shadwells Works, late Poet I aureat, containing these Plays
following, to be had bound up, or single
1 Sullen Lovers, 2 Humorist, 3 Royal Shepherdess, 4 Virtuoso, 5 Psyche, 6
Libertine, 7 Epsome Wells, 8 Timon of Athens, 9 Miser, 10 True Widow, 11
Lancashire Witches, 12 Woman Captain, 13 Squire of Alsatia, 14 Buty Fair, 15
Amorous Biggotte, 16 Scowners, 17 Volunteers.
All Mr. Dryden 's Works in four Volumes, Mr. Lee 's, and Mr. Otway 's, in one
Volume each; or the Play single.
Spanish Friar, Marriage Alamode, Maiden Queen, Oedipus, Kind Keeper, Don
Sebastia, Mock Astrologer, Amboyna, All for Love, Assignation, State of
Innocence, Sir Martin Mar^all, Aurenzebe, Fortune Hunters, Widow R^nter, Forced
Marriage, Sir Patient Fancy, Feigned Courtizans, English Friar, Female Prelate,
Mr. Anthony, Devil of a Wife, Don Carlos, Friendship in Fashion, Titus and
Berenice, Circe, Lucius Junius Brutus, Seige of Babylon, Scicllian Usurper.
Edgar, Cytherea, Old Bachelor, Richmond Heiress, Disappointment, Edward the
Third, Plain Dealer, City Politician, Dame Dobson, Orphan, Theodosius,
Sophoni^ba, Bussy d' Amboise, Titus Andronicus, Alcibiades, Royalist, Win her
and take her, Rival Queens, Band^^^s, Ingratitude of a Commonwealth, Mistakes,
Soldiers Fortune, Venice Preserved, Windsor Castle, London Cuckolds, Sir
Courtly Nice, Greenwich Park, The History of the Inquisition of G^a.
FINIS.

