JULIANA OR THE Princess of Poland.

A TRAGICOMEDY.

As it is Acted at His Royal Highness the Duke of York's Theater.

By J. Crown, Gent.

Presto, e been, dirado riesce been. Licenced,

Sept. 8. 1671. Roger L'Estrange.

London, Printed for Will. Cademan at the Pope's Head in the lower Walk in the
New-Exchange, and Will. Birch at the lower end of Cheapside, 1671.

To the Right Honorable ROGER Earl of OR RORY, etc.
MY LORD,
WHat has introduced the Custom, I cannot tell, whether the extraordinary
Favor and Indulgence that Drammatique Poetry has found amongst persons of the
greatest Wit and Honor; or the overmuch Confidence of those of our Scribbling
Tribe, who are willing to assume to our selves the utmost liberty any will give
us, or we can with any modesty pretend to; But so it is, that of late, nothing
of this kind, though never so inconsiderable, appears in Public, without some
Great and Illustrious Name fixed before it; like a Gigantique Statue at the
Portal of some trirling Building; Whether they design by it, that the mighty
Name to whom their little Follies are consecrated, should like the Relics of
Saints, work Miracles on the unbelieving Critiques of our Age, make 'um
distrust their own understandings, and have an Implicit Faith in every little
Priest of Apollo, I cannot resolve; But since it is grown a Custom, I shall
not be so much a Fanatic as not to conform to it; or rather shall approve my
self one, in Conforming to a Custom against my Judgment, for interest sake;
None of my Fraternity ever having more occasion to creep under the shelter of
some Noble Patronage than my self. For, first, (my Lord) this unworthy Poem,
which I humbly prostrate here at your Lordships feet, was the Offspring of
many confused, raw, indigested and Immature thoughts, penned in a crow'd and
hurry of business and travel; interrupted and disordered by many importunate,
not to say insolent affairs, of a quite different nature; and lastly, the
firstborn of this kind that my thoughts ever labored with to perfection. And
though I will not undertake here to reflect any thing upon Elder Brothers,
whose usual misfortune is (if the observation of some be true) not to inherit
all the Wit, as well as all the Estate, but leave that as a threadbare portion
to the Cadels; yet I will be bold to affirm it true in these matters; and I
think the experience of all that ever attempted any thing in this kind will
second me. The firstborn of some most Florid, and after most successful wits,
having been so rude and unshapen, as that they have been kept like witless
Elder Brothers, out of company, for fear of shaming their Parents. And though
others have been more fortunate in their early Productions, yet few but have
had those Slips from their Prune, which their riper thoughts either were, or at
least had reason to be ashamed of. And now (my Lord) I have told you the faults
of this Play, give me leave also to tell you the misfortunes of it (for those
two commonly go together.) It had the misfortune to be brought into the world
in a time, when the Dog Star was near his Reign, and my Judges sat in a hot
Bath, rather than a Theater, and were doubly persecuted, by the heat of the
weather, and the impertinence of the Poet; and which was the worst mishap; when
the most candid, as well as the most Illustrious Judges (I mean the Court) were
absent, and (excepting the presence of some Great and Noble persons) this
unhappy Poem left (for the most part) to the mercy of a common Audience; in
which unguarded condition it might well expect to receive some wounds, and so
it did; though much fewer than either I expected, yet such, as it deserved;
whether it will survive or no, I know not, nor am concerned at; if it will not,
then it gives me good occasion to Apologize for this Dedcaition, and to tell
your Lordship, that it receiving its first Life and Being in the World from
your Lordships favor, and now dying in the corporeal part of it, (I mean the
action) the Spiritual and Surviving part of it, ought like its Parent the Soul,
to return to him that gave it. And if I may have leave from our rigid
Religionists, to prosecute the Metaphor, as in that abstracted State, the Soul
is infinitely more happy han in any it could attain to whilst immersed in flesh
and blood; so (my Lord) to have any the least residence in your Lordships
thoughts, will be a state of more felicity and honor, than any this Poem,
whilst embodied in action, could arrive to by the private or general Applause
of the Wits of the World. But now I am fallen upon the consideration of your
Lordship, I am plunged methinks into a vast Ocean, where I have nothing to
determinate my sight, but a bright and Serene Sky full of light, at a vast
distance from me, and as vast a height above me, and no shore but that from
whence I came, and to which I must retire again, to take a safe and pleasant
prospect of that which I can neither fathom, nor describe. It is indeed the
common practice of Dedications, to stuff their Epistles full of Panegyricks,
not perhaps so much to describe their Patrons, who sometimes are as obscure as
themselves, as to show their own skill in writing Characters and Essays: But
the case is not the same with me; and what may be tolerable enough with them,
would be absurd in me; and I should fall into the impertinence of those that
would write large Encomiums on the Sun, who certainly commends himself to us by
his own light and influence, much better than any man can do by his wit. Not so
say any thing (my Lord) of the Soldier, and Statesman in you, which have
rendered you both Known and Famous to all the valiant and politic part of
Mankind; that of your Poetry is a large Theme, in which perhaps I could
expatiate with more success than on any of the former; yet I shall not dare to
do it for want of Art; and if I could take your Lordships height, I should but
discover the vast distance I am situate in from so bright an Orb; as
Navigators that take the height of the Sun, only to find what Degree of
Latitude themselves are in. If there be any part of the World so obscure as not
to have heard your Lordships Fame in that, as well as other respects, I shall
refer them to a Character of your Lordship; not to the praises and applauses of
the world in general, nor the Panegyricks of lesser Pens, which have always
waited on the Tryumphs of yours, as the common Soldiers in the Roman Tryumphs
did on their Generals; but to the incomparable issues of your own thoughts,
wherein they will see not only a Character of your Lordship, but of the present
improved Genius of England, which by the assistance of your Lordship, and many
Sublime Wits in other Arts, begins to be as famous in Arts, as formerly it was
in Arms; witness those new Academies and Societies Erected amongstus for
Philosophical Commerce, and the improvement of Language, Wit, and Arts;
Commodities which Foreign Vertuosoes would have engrossed to themselves, and
till of late denied to be the native growth of this (now in all respects) most
happy, and most fertile Island. It is from your Lordships Pen, that Solomon may
be truly styled Magnificent, and you have made him succeed to the Civility and
Gallantry of the Greeks, as well as to their Empire; nor was Mustapha ever so
much the hopes of his Barbarous Nation, as in his Image and the generous
Character you have given him, he is the delight of England, who weep the Fate,
not of Mustapha, but of Murdered Virtue. And indeed what Pen but your Lordships
could have refined and softened a Story so Barbarous, and made a people so
remote from Friendship, Honor, and Religion, walk disguised in the Highest
Characters of them all? It is your Lordships Pen that has assisted Henry the
fifth in a second conquest of France, and in the noblest Characters of Valor,
Love, and Friendship, has made the English Wit and Language as tryumphant as
their Arms: nor could a story acted with so much glory and success, be
attempted by any Pen beneath your Lordship's. In fine, it is your Lordship that
has Charmed up the Ghosts of many Noble Heroes, who otherwise would have lain
unlamented in their Tombs; And they have walked on the Stage in Brighter Shapes
than ever they lived, and have been conducted to their Fates, with more sorrow
of the Spectators, then perhaps they had when they dyed. And all this your
Lordship has done, not in the pleasure of Shade, Ease, and Retirement, and
with the Advantages and Assistances that meaner Spirits are forced to make use
of for their Compositions; but they are only the Sallyes of your Pen, and that
during the uneasy intervals which pain sometimes borrows from State Affairs;
and what a fit of the Gout snatches from the use and benefit, your Lordship
takes care to employ to the delight and pleasure of the World; and if your
Lordship can do all this, upon the rack of pain, and with some glances of your
thoughts, whilst the rest like scattered Rays of Light, are dispersed on
various Objects; what would you do with all the Freedom and Ease of other men,
and with the united force of your Soul? But I am sinking again out of my depth,
and must retreat once more to that shore from whence I am insensibly wandered; I
mean (my Lord) to the consideration of my self, and of this worthless Present
which I make to your Lordship: Which (my Lord) I cannot but look with much
contempt upon, as being conscious to my self, in what have and confusion it was
composed, and of what ex-tempore thoughts the greatest part of it consists: Nor
should I have presumed to have ushered it into the world, under so great a
Patronage, had not I first obtained your leave. And now I hope your Lordship,
that at the hearing of it whilst it was in loose sheets, was pleased to
forgive the faults of the Poem, will now in this address pardon those of the
Author, whose chief design is not to gain the name of Poet, Author, Wit, or
Critic, but that of

Octo. 4. 1671. My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient servant.
JOHN CROWN.

The Names of the Persons.
CArdinal, Governor of Poland, ex Officio, during the Interregnum. Mr. Harris.
Ladislaus, Duke of Curland, a Sovereign Prince Foedatory to the Crown of
Poland, often General of their Armies, contracted to Juliana in her Fathers
lifetime, and in an Expedition against the Muscovite, was taken prisoner, and
carried to Moscow. Mr. Betterton. Demetrius, a young Prince of the Imperial
House of Muscovy, in love with Paulina, and privately married to her by deceit,
she supposing him the Duke. Mr. Young. Sharnofsky, a Count Palatine, friend to
the Duke. Mr. Smith. Ossolinsky, Lord Grand Marshal of Poland, and of the
Cardinals Faction. Mr. Bamsield. Cassonofsky, Lubomirsky, Count Palatines of
the Cardinals Faction. Mr. Sandford. Colimsky, A Count Palatine, friend to
Sharnofsky, and of the Princesses Faction. Mr. Norris. Landlord of the house in
Warsow, where the Duke lay concealed. Mr. Angel. Theodore, Servant to the Duke.
M. Metburn. Alexey, A Russian Lord that assists and accompanies Paulina in her
flight. Mr. Crosby. Battista, Servant to Demetrius. Mr. Westwood. Juliana,
Daughter of the deceased King of Poland in love with the Duke of Curland, and
contracted to him before her Fathers death. Mrs. Btetterton Paulina, Daughter
of the great Tzar of Muscovy, in love with the Duke, and upon a supposed
marriage with him, assists him in his escape, and pursues him to Poland in the
habit of a man. Mrs. Long. Joanna, Maid of Honor to Paulina. Mrs. Shadwel.
Francisca, Emilia, Maids of Honor to Juliana. Soldiers, Servants, Guards,
etc.


The Scene Warsow in Poland, at the meeting of the Ban, and Arreer Ban, armed
in the field for the Election of a King.

The PROLOGUE.
YOu Judges, Critics, Wits, and Poets too,
And whatsoever Titles are your due;
As pretty Features, each in proper place,
Put altogether, make a pretty face;
So you good Wits, and you that would be so,
You all together make a pretty show;
And when you thus in general Council sit,
You are the body Politic of Wit:
Unto you all our Poet bid me say,
Good faith you are kindly welcome to his Play.
It Is a plain Complement, to speak the truth,
But you must know he is a modest youth;
Like Country Gallant just, whom Courtier brings
To see fine dainty Mis -- who plays and sings.
Approaching to'r, poor Gallant falls a mumping,
Scraping of legs, and feign he would say something;
And round about the room he slings and skips,
Whilst tongue lies still in the scabbard of his lips.
Just so our Poet ushered to the door
To court coy Wits h'ad never seen before,
Wits that have all the sparkish Gallants known,
And tried the abilities of all the Town;
Poor bashful Poet, faith, h'ad got his Play
Under his arm, and had run quite away,
^ad not we promised him to use our skill
And in'trest w'e'e to gain him your good will:
Then faith for ence, since he is so eager for it,
Seem kind and coming, though it be for sport;
Then like some Cully on his wedding night,
Thinking his Bride lies ravished with delight,
Bestirs his simple self whilst she lies still,
Laughs at the Fool, and lets him work his will.
So will our Poet to it, and work his brain
To try to entertain you once again;
And if he mends, you that delight to range
With every Youth, may use him then for chang;
If not, even huff the Fool, and give him over,
Then he perhaps will trouble you no more.
JULIANA, OR THE Princess of Poland.
ACT THE FIRST.
Paulina sleeping under a Tree; Joanna sitting by and singing -- The Scene a
Grove and Gardens. The Song.
LO, behind a Scene of Seas,
Under a Canopy of Trees,
The fair new Golden World was laid;
Sleeping like a naked Maid,
Till alas! she was betrayed:
In such shades Urania lay,
Till Love discovered out a way:
And now she cries some Power above,
Save me from this Tyrant Love.
Her poor heart had no defense,
But its Maiden Innocence;
In each sweet retiring Eye,
You might easily descry
Troops of yielding Beauties fly,
Leaving Rare unguarded Treasure
To the Conquerors will and pleasure:
And now she cries, -- etc.
Now and then a straggling frown,
Through the shades skipt up and down;
Shooting such a piercing Dart,
As would make the Tyrant smart,
And preserve her Lips, and Heart.
But, alas! her Empire's gone,
Thrones and Temples all undone:
And now she cries -- etc.
Charm aloft the stormy Winds,
That may keep these Golden Mines,
And let Spaniard Love be tore
On some cruel Rocky Shore,
Where he will put to Sea no more;
Lest poor conquered Beauty cry.
Oh! I Am wounded! oh! I dye!
And there is no power above
Saves me from this Tyrant love.

Jo. Oh cursed Duke! Africa never bred
A Monster like thee, to forsake my Princess
After the a'dst married her, and thus enticed her
From all the Glories of her Fathers Court,
To follow thee, vanquished, wandering exile,
Unhappy Victory, that brought thee captive
To Muscovy, and more unhappy she
To sacrifice her heart, her life, her honor,
To one so false. But I shall wake her, see,
She starts! --
Her soul is walking in a Grove of dreams,
And there some mournful Vision entertains
Her sad despairing thoughts: See! see! a Poniard,
How came she by that fatal Instrument?
She stabbs at something; oh! she makes me tremble,
I Will snatch it from her! --

Paul. Oh! ungrateful man! --
And do thou then deride at my misfortunes?
Is this the recompense of my too fond
Unfortunate love? dye in thy Mistress arms.
Bleed I fall! Ha! gone! whither? where am I?
Was it a dream?

Jo. She Is had some frightful dream
I see. --

Paul. Joanna, did nothing pass that way?
Yes, sure there did; 'twas Curland and his Mistress,
They embraced, and smiled at me, and then they vanished;
See I there he stands all wrapped in white, that, that;

Jo. Oh! the good heavens, she is grown distracted.
Madam, what is it you see?

Paul. Look there! there!
Is not that he? that tall and shining thing?
He Is dead, and I have wrongfully accused him.

Jo. That, that is the Moonshine, nothing else in deed,
A stream of light that glances through the Trees.

Paul. see, now it vanishes.

Jo. And now a Cloud
Covers the Moon; it is no more. Come Madam,
The dewey Vapors of the night are cold;
The shade is melancholy, and the air unwholesome:
Pray to your chamber Madam.

Paul. Ah! never, never
Was any so unfortunate as I,
weeps. What shall I do? and whither shall I go?

Jo. Oh! do not weep thus, you will break my heart;
I hope the Duke will prove a man of honor yet,
You do not know what accidents have happened.

Paul. No, no, he is hid in his fair Princess arms:
But perjured man, I Will chase thee from thy bowers
Of love, I Will steep, I Will steep thy joys in blood,
In thy heart-blood, I Will stab it till the poisonous
Serpentine dew, drops weeping at my feet;
Oh! me unfortunate, what shall I do?
weeps. Enter Alexey running.
Jo. Poor Lady --

Alex. Madam;

Jo. Whose that?

Alex. It Is I, the Princess, is she there?

Jo. The Princess, blunderheaded old Soldier!
Thou will betray us:

Paul. Who, Count Alexey!

Alex. Oh! Madam, I Am out of breath with running;
The Duke's come.

Paul. What is it thou say? the Duke:

Alex. Madam, for certain he was seen this evening,
To fling a Letter in Count Sharnofskyes Coach,
And upon this, the Troops are all alarmed;
The Cardinal sits close in his Caball.
Orders are issued out to secure his friends,
Chiefly, Count Sharnofsky, and the Princess,
The Guards are drawing up, about the Palace:
In the interim, five thousand crowns are proffered
To any one, that will discover him.

Paul. Did I not say, that I should hear some news?
I thought my dream was a forerunner of him,
This news congeals my blood; what shall we do?

Jo. Had we not best go in?

Alex. No, no, the Guards
Are searching every house, and we being strangers
Perhaps may meet with incivility.
Enter Guards with lights, and drawn swords, followed by Landlord. Hark, they are
in the house already, see, they come
To search the Gardens; Madam, take no notice.

Guard. Come Sir, now we must catechife your Garden.

Land. I, I, do Sir, my Garden's a good boy, he can say his Catechize.


Guard. Nay ben't so joculary Sir, we have power
To carry you before the Cardinal if we please.

Land. Carry me, and my house too before the Cardinal if you please Sir, set us
but here again where you found us, and I am contented.


Guard. Here are people; who are you Sir?
To Paul.
Paul. A stranger Sir:

Guard. A stranger Sir, what stranger Sir?

Paul. A Russian Sir; a Pristaffe's son of Archangelo.

Guard. Your name Sir!

Paul. Basiliwich.

Jo. I see, my Princess has a quick invention,

Guard. And who are these?

Paul. My servants* Sir.

Guard. It Is well, keep in your Lodgings Sir, there must be account given of
you, come to the next house.

Ex. Guards.
Land. Go, and a good riddance on you, here is a pudder, ho! see if none of my
Cups, or Silver Spoons be missing.


Paul. Now all is over, I Will retire to my chamber,
Revenge appears to me in shapes so horrid,
It fright's my soul, call for a light.

Jo. A light for my Master's Landlord,

Land. Ho, there a light for the Gentleman,
Exit Paul. Jo. Alex. Well, how bravely were I made now, could I but light upon
the Duke! five thousand crowns! that is to say, five times ten hundred crowns!
most monstrous, prodigious, Gigantique, Pedantique, unarithmetical Sum; why,
this would make me a Duke, well, I Will go to a Conjurer to find him; but hold
then, the Rogue will find him for himself. But then I Will make him believe, I am
a Conjurer as well as himself, and make him be glad to go half shares. But
hark, I hear talking.

Enter Demetrius and Battista, a Porter with a Cloakbag.
Them. Never was any thing so fortunate,
To hear of him just at my arrival.
I^le into the town and search for him immediately.

Bat. Hold, my Lord, are ye mad? whether do you go?
To rush into a Town thronged with armed men
So late at night, and all the Guards about,
And you a stranger too? come Sir, it is time
We rather went somewhere to seek a lodging:
All Inns, and public houses are taken up,
And for ought I see we are like to lie in the streets to night.

Them. I care not where I lie,
For I cannot rest in body or soul,
Until I find this most ungrateful Duke.

Land. What do these people babbling in my Garden
All this while, and say never a word to me?
This it is to let it lie unfenc't;

Them. Look, I see a man!
And I am got into a Garden here:
Whose there?

Land. Nay, who is there, an' you go to that?
Here Is one that has authority to be here.

Bat. The Master of the house I do perceive,
And by his tone a kind of Letter of Lodgings;
I Will ask the Question;
Sir, we are strangers, newly come to Town,
Could you afford us any room in your house?

Land. I cannot tell Sir whether I can or no;
According as I like you; Bring a light here.

Them. Nay then we are well enough, take up my rooms,
Never stand agreeing with him, give him twenty
Thirty, forty, a hundred crowns a week, what he
Has a mind to,
I Will into Town -- I grow impatient.
Exit.
Bat. Oh! heavens, Sir, whether do you go
To rush in armed crowdes so late, a stranger;
Curse on all rashness, I must follow him,
For fear some mischief happens to him.
Landlord, look to the things, provide our rooms;
We Will return within this half hour, or never.
Ex.
Land. Ha! gone and left their Cloak-bags with me;
What kind of fellows are these? some Highway men
I know by their have:
But sure I Am in a dream; is this a Cloak bag?
Let Us see what weather it is; it does not rain Cloak-bags?
Come I Will go see what is in it, ho! a light there.

Ser. Here Sir: --
Enter a servant with a Candle.
Land. Nay here Sir.
Here Is a Cloakbag dropped in my mouth,
Come let us see the Entrails of this beast.
A rich Chesticore with Diamond buttons;
Enough, enough, I Am satisfied,
These are stolen goods as sure as I am here.
And now what shall I do with this Cloakbag?
Shall I keep the Cloakbag? or shall I cry the Cloakbag? or shall I sell the
Cloakbag; nay, then I may chance to stretch for the Cloakbag; so I may if I
should keep the Cloakbag, if the right owner should come with an Officer, and
find the Cloakbag; why then the Devil take the Cloakbag, for never was any one
so plagued with a Cloakbag, well, if no body comes to claim the Cloakbag, I Will
sell the Cloakbag, buy Land, and marry a Lady with the Cloakbag, and then be
Dubbed a Knight of the Order of the Cloakbag.

Ex. Enter Ladislaus and Theodore. The Scene continues.
Lad. Ungrateful men! and do they thus reward me,
For all the blood I Have shed in their defense,
To set my head to sale,
That head which once these flattering Poles would cry
Their State could live no more without then I.

Theo. I wish your Highness had not flung that Letter,
It seems you were discovered -- I Am amazed
Which way.

Lad Sharnofsky has betrayed me?
Thus had he done, had I exposed my person
Instead of a trifling paper, or had sent thee,
He would have wrackt thee to discover me.

Theo. But I Would have been torn limb from limb first.

Lad. I doubt not thy fidelity good Theodore;
I Have ever found thee generous and faithful;
More generous then those, whose birth and Grandeur,
Obliges them to higher pretense of Honor.
Good heavens, what is this world! I should have sooner
Suspected Angels then the Count or Princess:

Theod. Good Sir, do not discompose your Soul
With these suspicions of your noble friends
'Till you know more.

Lad. My noble friends! ah, Theodore,
I have no friends, my fortune, fame, and honor,
Heaven, and Earth, and she whom I adore
Above 'um all deserts me; nothing adheres to me
But my own courage. I see the Count and she
Convert the news of my escape from Moscow,
By the generous kindness of the Russian Princess,
Into pretenses to disguise their falsehood;
To ruin my interests, and unite their own,
To marry, and to aspire to the Crown.
All Poland sees it; and the Card'nal dreads u'm
Much more then me? and all this great alarm
You Will find, aims at their lives, as well as mine.

The. Ah! do not credit Sir the common Vogue.

Lad. Come Theodore, it is true; but that I Have learnt
How to command my passions as well as Armies;
And owe more reverence to my own memory,
Then after death to have my head placed aloft
On some old Tower, to feed the greedy eyes
Of my proud Enemies, this very instant
Shanofsky's soul or mine, should fleet in air.

The. Well Sir, I say no more, I only beg you
Take into some house, you see what danger
You Are in; the Guards are searching all about,
And here we wander up and down in the dark,
Only what sickly light the Moon will lend us.
But Sir, I think we are got into a Garden.

Lad. On the backside of a house; knock, Theodore.
Knocks, and enter Landlord with a light.
Land. Who Is there? well, this is not to be endured;
Every one gets into my backside:
If my Landlord will not fence it, I Will promise him
I Will do it, and stop it in his Rent, well, what is the
Business with you, now? more Cloakbags?

Theo. Sir, we are strangers -- newly come to Town
And are in great want of Lodgings,
If you could furnish us, name your own price,
By this Gold we will not refuse it you.
Gives him money.
Land. Let Us look on you, according as I like you:
By this Gold you have good honest faces,
I have a room for you.

Theo. Thank you Sir, pray, what other Lodgers have you?
We ask you, 'cause we would be very private.

Land. I have none at present but some fidling women, that come from Cracow, to
see the choosing of the new King, a young Gentleman and a Cloakbag.


Lad. What does this fellow mean by this Cloakbag?

Theo. Your Highness has happened very fortunately.
Aside to Lad.
Land. Well, but how did you pass the Guards so late?
For here is a heavy pudder about the Duke of Curland;
He Is come to Town it seems in disguize;
And here is five thousand crowns bid for his head.
Happy man be his dole that catches him;
For my part, I don't expect so good luck,
Five thousand Crowns and a Cloakbag are too much for one night.

The. I perceive this fellow's none of the honestest,
Aside I! here is a great alarm, what is the matter?

Land. Why Sir, the Duke of Curland, look ye, you must know,
Was a great favorite of the last Kings,
And he contracted him to his Daughter,
And intended to marry him to her, but then it happened
The Muscoviters invaded us with a great army;
The Duke, Sir, upon a simple quibble of Honor,
Goes General of our Army against 'um,
I was a Corporal under him at the same time.

Tho. De'e hear, my Lord? pray keep your disguize close.

Land. And thought forsooth to have come back in triumph,
And married the Lady, and he was taken prisoner,
And never comes back at all.

Lad. That was unfortunate.

Land. Now Sir it seems he has given 'um the slip out of Muscovy, by the help
of the Russian Princess, and they are run away together; and here he lies
lurking in Poland to fit his business; and now all the Ban and the Arrierban,
are met armed in the field, to choose a King, he is come to Town in disguise,
and so there is a heavy bussle, the Cardinal on one side, and the Princesson the
the other, and between u'm both he is got into Lobbs pound, and I am very glad
on it; he is but a kind of a pitiful whiffling small-beer Duke; I never was
drunk thrice in his house, all the time he was here. I can go into the
Cardinals Cellar, and tie my nose to one barrel, and my horse to another, and
tope who shall tope most for a wager; and he a sneaking hide-bound Duke of a
Duke, hates the sight of us true Spaniels, that will take water at any time,
dive over head and ears in Liquor, and he would smell a red nose, as far as a
Teale would Gunpowder.


Lad. How am I tormented with this fellow?
Aside
The. He Is not to be endured.

Land. And now he is come to Town, to be King, yes he shall be King, when I am
Emperor of Morocco, or Muster-Master General of Bautam: we will have no such
thin-gut Kings, that shall in half a year dye of the Gripes, and whilst he
lives, shall starve the English Beer Merchants, set a Tax upon the Tap, and an
Excise upon Rednoses: and there is one Count Sharnofsky, too, such another
ambitious dry-chops, he has not the grace to love good drink, and yet he has
the impudence to aim at the Crown. It Is true, he does not goggle at it so
plain, as Mr. Mumpsimus of Curland does; but he does as I do now, he squints at
it fearfully, and he has an Landlordsquints, and makes grim-faces. itch at the
Princess too; but I hope the Cardinal will feage 'um all; I hate such ambitious
tantalizing Rascals; a loyal boy I have been from my cradle.


The. This Villain, I could kill him.
aside
Lad. Shall I be for ever tortured with this fellow?
aside. You Are not at leisure then to show us our Chambers Landlord.

Land. Yes, yes; come, come:

Ser. Ser! here is the Gentleman about the Cloakbag
Enter a servant.
Land. Oh! Mr. Cloakbag you are welcome Sir;
Enter Demetrius, and Battista*
Bat. Come Landlord will you show us our chambers?

Lad. One of my fellow lodgers, see if you know him Theodore.

Them. No news.
Theo. looks upon Them.
Bat. What news can you expect Sir?

Them. That heaven would be so just to direct me to him.

Theo. I do not know him Sir,
aside to Lad. And yet me thinks I Have seen a face like his In Muscovy.

Lad. Come let us to our chambers.
Landlord we will follow you.

Land. Stay behind some body
And light the Cloakbag.
Ex. Land. Lad. and Theo.
Bat. Come good Sir, conquer your impatience,
You Will find him soon enough, perhaps on a Throne;
And speedily, he who in passion now
Is proclaimed Traitor, shall shortly with applause
Be proclaimed King; this is a Feavourish fit
Of the State-sick Cardinal; nor does the Duke
Come hither in disguise, on no design.

Them. But hark thee; when they make him King of Poland,
They will not make him God of Poland,
And Immortal; will they?

Bat. No Sir, he will be Mortal
No doubt.

Them. If he will be mortal, I am satisfied.
Go, I am weary, light me to my chamber:
I shall dream of the Duke!
Ex. Enter Francisca. The Scene a Room in the Palace.
Fran. Treason. Treason, the Princess will be murdered.

Em. Oh Francisca, what is the matter?
Enter Emilia. Here Is a noise of Soldiers about the Palace,
And every one runs shrieking up and down:
Oh! my heart aches.

Fran. Oh! there is the strangest news.
The Duke's come, and sent a Letter to the Princess
By Count Sharnofsky, and all the Towns alarmed,
The Guards they say are come to search the Palace,
And we are afraid the wicked Cardinal
Designs the Princess death.

Em. Oh horrid Tyrant!
But see, she comes.
Enter Juliana in her nightgear, with a flaming paper in her hand, followed by
Hypolita, and Sharnofsky with his sword drawn.
Jul. Ha! must I dye, for being abused, affronted
By that false man? has he betrayed my honor,
And does he now throw in his hand Granado's
To blow my life up too? thus in the flames
Thy Scrawle shall dye; and as it pines to ashes,
Then wanders in the wind, so dies for ever
Thy memory in my soul; and if thy image
Appear but to my thoughts, but in a dream,
I Will hate that dream, and I will stab that thought
As I Will do thee, if e're thou do approach me.
Now call up all my scryants, bid 'um arm.

Sh. Ha! fling a Letter, and disguise himself,
aside: What means this mighty caution of the Dukes?
Do thou mistrust my honor? if thou do,
I may in just revenge distrust thine;
And let me tell thee, if thou do design
To wrong the Princess, and surprise the Crown,
I in this tempest will not fall alone,
Thou shall destroy my fortunes and thy own.
Enter a Gentleman running.
Gent. Madam, the Guards are broke into the Palace, the Common Hall glitters
with naked swords, and hither they are running in confusion; escape, or you will
be murdered; hark they 'r come, they have overtaken me; Madam you are lost.


Jul. And let 'um come, I Will look the Villains dead,
And let me see who dare's assassinate
The yet surviving Majesty of their dead King,

Sh. Who dares, shall fall as victimes to his shade.
But see, the Count Colimsky, ha! our friends
Betray us.
Enter Colimsky with his sword drawn.
Col. Madam, for heavens sake retire
With all the speed you can, your life's designed;
My Lord Grand Marshal has Orders from the Council
To seize you both, the Troops are drawing up;
News of the Dukes arrival haunts each ear,
Just like a frightful Spectre; Letters
Are intercepted by the Cardinal
Written by you my Lord, of horrid consequence.

Sh. By me!

Col. By you, to Dorosensko General of the Tartars
To assist you with fifty thousand men,
Ten thousand Cassacques should be sure to second him,
That y'ad decreed upon a time prefixed
To fire the City, kill the Cardinal,
Dissolve the General Diett in the Tumult,
Seize the Crown.

Sh. Monster of Villainy,
Thou Scarlet prodigy, Polands glaring Comet,
Barbarous Idol, not content with blood,
But must have Kingdoms victim'd at thy Altars!
Almighty powers, I kneel, I kneel, if ever, ever
One thought;

Col. No more I do believe your innocence,
And therefore stole away from the Cabal
To give you intelligence, what horrid Spells
Are made, what Spirits conjured up
Against you, in our Magicians Grotto,
And here I Have brought a hundred resolute
Young Gentlemen, whose swords shall cut the Charm,
And yet secure the Princesses retreat
And yours; if you will accept their generous kindness,
Then Madam hasten, let us loose no time,
Each minute now is precious as the Indies.

Jul. Pious Cardinal, my Guardian Angel,
Heavenly Tyrant, little thinks my Royal Father
How he has left me to the Guardianship
Of Dragons that devour me.

Col. Oh undone!
We have lost time, all, all to arms.
Noise of arms without.
Sh. Call up the Princesses servants, arm, arm.
Enter Ossolinsky, Cassonossky, and Lubo, and Guard.
Wom. Murder, murder.

Casso. Now the long wished for time of my revenge
On the old Tyrant that affronted me,
Is come; but ha? Colimsky here.

Osso. Are you there Traitor?

Col. Are you here, cheated bubbles?

Cosso. This too honest fellow has prevented us:
aside. You Will answer for this Treason to the General Diett.

Col. With my sword in hand in the interim
My Princess shall not fall an Indian Martyr
Under the Chariot wheels of your great Pagod;
Your I dol shall not have such noble victimes.

Shar. Let us not stand disputing.

Osso. Lub. Seize the Traitors.

Casso. I, you may say, seize the Traitors, long enough you might have had the
wit to have come with a stronger party.

[All fight, Osso. Casso. Lub. retreat pursued by Sh. and Col.
Wom. Murder, Murder.

Jul. Oh! bloody Cardinal. Royal shade
Of my great Father, hide thy glorious head,
And see not my oppressions.
Enter Col. and Sh. as from victory.
Col. Now all is clear:
My Lord conveigh the Princess by a private way
To the Monastery of Sancta Clara; there is a Vault
Where you may lie secure for an hour or two;
In the interim I Will go place a Guard in my house,
And then conduct you thither: my Gardens
Lie just opposite to the Monastery,
And there is a private way, where you may pass secure;
And then for our greater preparations.
Ex.
Sh. Come Madam,
The tempest is begun, let us bravely through.

Jul. Lead on my Lord,
I Am none of those, who when the storm prevails,
Creep to the winds, and humbly strike the Sails.

The Second ACT.
Enter Cardinal, Ossolinsky, Cassonofsky, Lubomirsky. Card. Escaped!

Osso. All betrayed by Count Colimsky.

Card. I feared as much.

Casso. My Lord, you may remember
He gave us warning with mysterious words
He dropped at Council; I might have had the wit
To have seen it, but I am grown both fool and knave
With keeping knaves and fools company.
aside.
Lub. With mysterious words!
In plain terms he talked both saucily
And like a Traitor.

Casso. Well said wisdom:
aside.
Card. I observed him;
And do repent we did not then secure him:
But I was unwilling to create
Too many enemies. Well, this news is bad,
The Duke arrived, the Count and Princess fled
To arms, Colimsky turned a Partizan:
I now foresee a dreadful strom of blood.

Casso. A storm of thy own creating; but yet I love thee,
Because thou love mischief, 'though these simple Lords
Have not the wit to see it.
aside.
Osso. My Lord, all places shall be strictly searched,
Houses, Vaults, Churches, Monasteries,
And then by break of day we will be ready
To bring our Slaves armed into the field.
Then let the tempest blow, this storm of Fate
Shall overset the Pirates of the State.
Ex. Osso. Lub.
Car. Brave Patriots! may heaven succeed your Loyalty.

Casso. Oh! most noble Cardinal; I am almost as cunning
A Knave as thy self, and I have one knack more,
aside. To appear, what I am not, one of thy bubbles.
Ex.
Card. Good men, how easily they swallow down
The bait; such honest men are the soft moulds
Wherein wise men do cast their great designs.
Still crossed! what ill-natured star envies my glory?
Often have I built my great designs so high,
That they have dazzled each spectators eye:
When to the highest story I should come,
Even just to have a prospect into Rome,
To view the Conclave, and o'retop them all,
And catch the golden fruit, when it should fall,
Then some unhappy ball, at one rebound,
Has thrown down all my projects to the ground,
And now, as all my policies were ripe,
And each thing fitted as I had designed,
The Duke a captive, and his friends confined;
And I had stole an interest in the State,
Enough to sell the Crown at my own rate;
Just on the sudden they are all got free,
And the whole storm is like to ^all on me:
Such things as these would puzzle humane sense,
And make one half believe a providence;
And I confess it staggers me, to find*
My Engines broke, by one that stands behind.
But all this shall not my designs defeat,
It is a wise man's duty to be great
To save the helpless World.
For they above affect to show their powers,
And haughty wisdom, by confounding ours.
Then heaven we bow; but if that will not do.
The sword shall give, what I demand from you.
When Beads and Altars no relief afford,
The best devotion then is in the Sword.
Ex. The Scene the Town. A noise within of breaking doors. Break down the
doors, I care not for never a City Cuckold of 'em all.

Within. Murder, murder, call up all our neighbors.

Within.
Guard. Hold your babbling, or I Will set a pellet in the throat of you, I Have
authority to search your house for the Princess.

Within.
Land. A Princess Sir, I Would have you to know I keep no such house, I keep no
Princesses, and so get you from my doors.

Woman within. Do I pay Tax and Contribution, and the Devil and all, to have my
doors broken open at midnight to search for Princesses, I^le complain to the
Council.

Man within. Some scalding water there.
Woman within. How do you threaten? fire upon 'um.
Officer within. Murder, murder.
Within. Enter Landlord striking fire with a S^^^* The Scene the Common Hall in
Landlords house.
Land. Murder! murder! there is murder cried in the streets, we shall be all
killed in our beds; ho! where are you all? light a candle; call up all our
Lodgers; ho, murder.

Enter Paulina and Joanna.
Paul. Oh! we shall be murdered:


Land. Here Is a Steel has as much fire in it as is in my tooth:

Enter Alexey.
Alex. Oh! Madam, Madam; I have seen the softly to Paul. Duke, he lies in this
very house: coming by a Chamber that had a light burning in it, I had a
curiosity to look through the Keyhole, and I saw the Duke walking without any
disguise, and talking to a Gentleman, his servant I suppose; and instantly
hearing a noise, slips on a disguize, took his sword, and here he is coming.


Paul. Oh! thou have surpised me;

I faint.


Jo. Strange, what a fortunes, this?


Al. See this is he.

Enter at one door Ladislaus and Theodore, at another Demetrius and Battista,
with drawn swords:
Land. Why ho, will you bring a light here? sleepy Rascals, are you all dead?


Om. Where is this murder?


Land. Nay what know I? all the Guards are about, Horse and Foot, this is about
the Duke of Curland; I would I had him by the nose with a pox to him, I Would hold
him as strong as Mustard; he might smell to a crust long enough I faith, nor
should it be four thousand nine hundred ninety-nine crowns should excuse his
head:


Theo. Do You hear my Lord? this fellow's a Rogue.

aside to Lad.
Lad. I hear him.


Paul. A damp strikes to my heart at fight of him.

aside.
Them. Where are these murders done?


Bat. In the Landlords pate.

No other we shall meet withal to night.

Ser. Master:

Enter a servant.
Land. Master, you Rogue, where is a light? shall we be all killed in the dark
here?


Ser. All Is over Sir.


Land. Over or under, I Will have a light Sir, I will not loose my life in the dark,
a light I say, whilst I go call up all my people.

Ex.
Them. What an impertinent cowardly follow is this?


Bat. Fear Sir, is natural to vulgar spirits.


Them. What people are those in the room here?


Bat. Your fellow lodgers Sir!


Lad. I do suppose the Guards are searching for me;
aside to Theo. Perhaps they may break into the house.
It Is safer being abroad; call for the key of the Garden door; I Will go walk in
the Grove.
Ex.
Alex. Follow, follow, Madam, he is going out.


Bat. Come, my Lord, you have slept but little, will you to your Chamber? or walk
abroad?


Them. It Is too early yet, hardly day, and I feel my eyes a little heavy, I care
not if I take the the other slumber, and finish the remainder of my dream.


Bat. Had you a dream? I thought you slept so little, you had no time to dream.


Them. 'Twas a confused one: of the Duke, and my Princess, methoughts I met 'um
in a Grove; and in a house I wounded him; she fainted, and they both vanished:
and a thousand such wild things.


Bat. This busy soul of ours cannot be idle;

It must be doing, and does it knows not what.


Them. Come I Will to my Chamber, take the other flumber, and then in chase of the
Duke, and I Will find him if all the arts of hell can discover him.

Enter Ladislaus, Theodore, and Landlord. The Scene the Gardens. Followed by
Paulina, Joanna, Alexey.
Land. Now you may venture to walk in the Garden, all is over; beshrew me, I
tremble like a quaking pudding.


Lad. How comes your Grove and Gardens to lie open?


Land. How comes a Wench to lie open, and common? when no body will fence her?
Your Grandfather: you wonder to hear me say, your Grandfather, I warrant. You
must know, I call all my lodgers my sons; and so I being your Father, my
Landlord is your Grandfather Now Sir, your Grandfather is in Law about it, with
the Monastery of Santa Clara? and did you never see a couple of Hectors fight
for a Wench, here I tickle thee, and there I tickle thee; so, sa, sa, Co' your
Grandfather, a homethrust Co' the Monastery! and so they fetch one another with
whiscum, whascums, and I know not what; and neither of 'um will suffer it to be
fenced, and so my Garden lies stark naked, without ever a rag to her back; but
I keep the poor Jade as private as I can, and suffer none to pass, but those
that go between the Counts Gardens and the Monasteries.


Paul. There is no speaking whilst this fellow's here.

aside
Lad. What Gardens are those, yonder?


Land. One Count Colimsky's Gardens;

A very brave man, he has a gallant house at the the other end; ah! many sousing
soakings have I had in his Cellar: There have I sailed, top and top gallant,
all Sails aloft, and bravely boarded the Frenchman, the high Dutcher, the
Spaniard, the Grecian; then Sir, there has made up to me, a Fleet of
Algerines, Tunis, and Salley men (for so I call the drunken dogs.) A Sail, a
Sail quoth I; strike for Algier quoth they, strike for Dantzick quoth I; then
to it we go, and board one another with small shot, pint glasses, and the like;
from them we go to Cuddy-guns, and so to Demy-cannon, whole Cannon, and all our
lower Teer, Romers of an Ell; and then there is bloody work; here sinks a
Galley, there a Galleass; there a stout Frigot turns up his Keel, then high for
the main boys cry I.


The. What a tedious impertinent fellow is this?


Lad. And what high wall is that, that faces to the Counts Gardens?


Land. That Is the Monastery wall I told you of.


Paul. Will this fellow never have done?


Lad. You don't know who those young Gentlemen are, that lodge in your house,
do you?


Land. Not I, they are pretty youths, strangers, speak but bad Polish; I asked
'um when they came, Rosmepopolsky said I, no Rosmepopolsky quoth they; but one
may make a shift to understand 'um.


Lad. How came you to have any room in your house, at so great a concourse as
this, of all the Nobility and Gentry of Poland with their Trains, for the
election of a King?


Land. How came my neighbors wife to have any room in her? she was delivered
of a boy, and my big-bellied house of a man; and both were brought to bed
yesterday morning; the great Count Palatine of Smolensko (if you know him)
lodged here; and he whipped out of town upon some bickerings betwixt him and the
Cardinal: he told the Cardinal his own, he made a most brave mutinous speech in
the Diett, which is highly applauded, I have a Copy on it in my pocket.


Lad. No matter for the Copy Landlord.


The. This fellow's tongue has the perpetual motion;

Good my Lord, rid your self of him?

aside to Lad.
Lad. Well Landlord, I have a little business with my servant, you will excuse me.


Land. I think I have lost the Copy of this same Speech, I must run in to find
it I Will be back presently.

Ex.
Theo. Heaven be praised!


Paul. So now I Will venture to him.


Jo. Do, and we will stay behind.

Ex. Jo. Al.
Theo. Ha! who is this follows the Duke?

My Lord, retire, here is some one follows you.

to Lad.
Lad. Some of the lodgers for the morning air.


Theo. No, no, my Lord, he makes directly to you.


Lad. I think he does, as if he would speak with me.


Paul. My Lord.

(goes up to the Duke.
Lad. To me Sir?


Paul. Yes, to you my Lord;

Come make it not so strange, I know you well enough.


Lad. Oh! heaven's, betrayed.


Paul. Nay, be not startled Sir;

I Have no defign but what is honorable.


Lad. Surely you do mistake your person Sir;

I Am but a stranger here.


Paul. I know you are not Sir,

You lately came out of Muscovy;

You were a prisoner there Sir, were you not? yes Sir, I Am sure you were, and
your name is Ladislaus Duke of Curland.


Lad. Ha! he names my name,

How came I thus discovered?


Paul. So it is he;

Now I have born him down with confidence.


Lad. I know him not, but since he names my name,

Let him be Man or Devil, Friend or Enemy,

I Will not disown it Sir, I am Ladislaus

Duke of Curland; what is your business with me?


Paul. That Letter Sir, that Letter will tell you.

Gives the Duke a letter
Lad. Whence is this?


Paul. Read, and you will see.


Lad. Ha! subscribed Demetrius:

peruses it. What, is this from Muscovy? where is the Prince?


Paul. The Letter Sir, will tell you.


Lad. (Reads) I am now at the Frontiers of Poland; my Errand you your self may
conjecture, and I had rather tell you with my Sword then my Pen; which I had
done, if an unhappy accident had not confined me to a small Village, and my
Chamber; and enforced me to make use of the kindness of the bearer, my Cosen,
the Duke of Novogrod, to seek you. The acquaintance you have had of my temper,
will easily give you to believe, that I had rather fight ten battles, then
write six lines, and therefore you must not expect long Epistles from me. Then
in short you have abused me with dissembled friendship; affronted and ruined
me, by stealing away my Princess; your crimes are unexpiable by any thing but
your life, which I expect you tender me on the point of your sword. The
circumstance, as of time, place, and weapon, I refer to your self; and you may
acquaint my Cosen the Duke, whose return from you, I expect with impatience:
Demetrius.


Lad. The Prince is very severe, and his charge is high.


Paul. Sir, I suppose he has reason.


Lad. That he ought to' have been assured of, e're he had condemned his friend.


Paul. Well Sir, in short, your answer.


Lad. My answer is Sir, that the Prince has wronged me,
I Have not abused him with dissembled friendship,
Nor stole his Princess; she remains with him
For ought I know, so may my friendship too,
If It pleases him; --

Paul. Oh heavens! how unfortunate
Am I in my love? see, he disowns my flight*
And he will disown the marriage too, and I
Shall pass for some base prostrate thing.
aside
Lad. You seem disordered Sir.


Paul. I am disordered Sir at what you have said, I only thought before the
Princess lost to all her friends and fortunes; but now it is worse, I see she is
lost to honor, and fallen into the hands of one that basely disowns her.


Lad. You are too quick and fierce in your assertions Sir.


Paul. No fiercer Sir,
Then the case merits: Had you owned her flight,
And owned a marriage too, it had been honorable;
For upon other terms she would not fly;
But let me tell you Sir, in the same breath
In which you disown her flight, you little less
Then call her Strumpet.

Lad. Do you come here young Duke, to talk or fight?


Paul. Sir, which you please,
To fight; now that I had a Furies whip
Totear thy heart, and scourgethy perjured soul.
draws aside
Lad. Must it be so?


Jo. Oh! murder, murder.

Enter Joanna, and Alexey.
Alex. Hold, hold your hand Sir, save that tender life,

Here is an enemy more fit for thee.


The. What Villains are these?

draws
Lad. Ha! an ambush.


Paul. Begone, what mean you to betray me thus,
aside to Jo. Al. I am but humouring my part, retire;
These are my servants Sir, regard 'um not,
to Lad. I Will play you no foul play; retire I say.
to Jo. Al. Come, come my Lord, let us put up our anger;
This time and place are not convenient
puts up For this; besides I exceed my Commission in it.
I should displease the Prince to take your life,
And grieve him to loose my own; come let us talk:
By all that is good I honor you:
And do believe you will tell me sacred truth,
Then tell me truly, by the faith and honor
Of a brave man, do you know where the Princess
Is fled: and are you married to her, or no?

Lad. Then by those sacred things, by which you conjure me, by any thing that is
more Divine then they, I know not of her flight, nor am I married to her.

Paul. Walks up and down in a passion and disorder.
Paul. Oh! horrid, horrid; I shall sink and die.

aside
Lad. Sir, you look pale, how do you?


Paul. I could find in my heart to stab him.

aside
Lad. Your countenance changes Sir, I fear you are ill, and but dissemble it in
complaisance -- pray let me wait upon you to your Chamber.


Paul. No, good my Lord, no Ceremony pray,

Sweetnatur'd Devil.

aside. Enter Sharnofsky conducting Juliana, followed by Hypolita, Emilia,
Francisca, the Women all Vizarded.
Lad. Ha! what is it I see? It is a Vision; Count Sharnofsky conducting a Lady
out of yonder Monastery, she and her Train all Mask't, what should it mean? my
Lord, I beg your pardon, I Will wait on you instantly.


Paul. Oh! my sweet Lord;

Ironice Ho there!


Jo. Al. Madam, the news.

to her Joanna, Alexy.
Paul. Curland's a Monster.


Al. I Will run and kill him.


Paul. No, let me alone, I Will kill him, but it shall be with torments; Steel,
Poison, Fire, Racks, Scorpions, Hell; oh me unfortunate!


Jo. She Is grown distracted.


Paul. Lead me, I faint.


Jo. She swounes, help, help.

they carry her out.
Al. Who should these be?


The. Who 're these my Lord is gazing on so earnestly? ha, it should be his
friend the Count; but what is that Vizard Lady? see, she unmasques.


Jul. Where are we now my Lord?


Shar. I Am sure, not far from Count Colimskyes Gardens.


The. It is the Princess.


Lad. Heavens! it is my Princess;
It Is she, it is she, my guilty soul retires
At the apparition of that bright Divinity
Which my soul whispers I have now offended.
Just so a suffering Saint that long had bin
Triumphant over all the Arts of Sin;
And in all combats made a brave defend,
And still preserved entire his innocence;
But yet at last, before he is aware
Begins to slide into some pleasing snare:
By heaven surpised his soul, is then afraid
Of joys for which he had endured and prayed.

Sh. I see the Garden gate, this, this way Madam.
Ex. Sh. Jul. etc.
Lad. Ha! vanquished thus, heavens unsold this Mystery;
It is too dark for me, and I must follow
To see the opening of this cloudy Scene.
Ex.
The. See, my Lord chases 'um, I dread the event,
I wish some Mist had screen'd this horrid Vision from his sight.
Ex. Enter Sharnofsky, Juliana, Hyp. Em. Fran. The Scene a Garden, at the one
end a Palace.
Jul. Heavens! in what shady path's my fortunes leads me? And must I hide my
head in Natures Nunnery, among these Virgin flowers to save my self

From him, who now though he so proud can be,
Has often for his safety fled to me?
Nor would it grieve me, if I did but know
For what it is, he persecutes me so;
Or how I ever did offend this proud
Aspiring Man, that he should seek my blood.

Shar. The Tyrant, Madam, thinks the Duke and you,
Do all his towering policies undo;
And then his active brain wants no design,
The strongest innocence to undermine:
Then for the State, he does bewitch their sense
With the love-powder of his eloquence:
His sliding tongue does with its charming strains,
Like a smooth Serpent coil about their brains,
And with its sting not only taints the blood
Of fools and bigotts, but the wise and good;
But yet in spite of all such arts as these,
We Will darken his proud Stars, and on his knees
Yet make him (er'e w' have done this fatal strife)
At these fair hands, thus humbly ask his life.
At the instant that Shar. kneels to kiss her hand, Lad and Theo. enter.
Lad. Heaven blast my eyes, rather then see this sight,
I Am abused; Villain.
draws;
Theo. Oh my Lord, what mean you?
holds the Duke
Lad. Loose me Theodore, or thou die.

The. I die, ah Sir, it will be a fate too glorious to die by your hand, thus
saving of your friend.


Shar. Hark, I hear a noise.

Hyp. See, see, the Guard.

Jul. Fly, I command you fly? we are betrayed.
Jul. pulls Shar. who retreats with his sword in hand; the women run off
shrieking.
Lad. See, she entices him, and the Coward flies,
And have thou lost thy courage with thy honesty?
This man was valiant once, I Have now done more
Then I have seen whole Armies do before:
But guilt now so unman's him, that he flies
What once he had the courage to despise:
But I Will pursue thee to thy base retreats.
Ha! the Gates fastened, are they barricadoed?
Fetch me a Torch, I Will fire my way to 'um,
And kill him in the arms of that false woman:
Yea rage perhaps, may tempt me to destroy
Her, whom I once thought heaven to enjoy.

The. Oh! how his passion, like a clap of Thunder, rends her great soul; but
ha, they fire upon us, my Lord, you will be shot, a shower of bullets flies
from each corner, see some Musketeers upon the Battlements, the fatal Hail
falls thick.


Lad. Poor men, how dangerously they stand against so numerous an Army? how
bloudily they wound the drooping flowers?


The. A flight of arrows
Covers the Garden with a poisoned shade;
And one just glanc't your side, you are shot, you bleed.

Lad. I feel it not.

The. It Is fallen at your foot;
Shot from some Tartars bow, curse on the slave,
The horse-fed dog; oh, let me suck the wound,
For fear the Dart was venomed.

Lad. Ha, I bleed;
Indeed these are Juliana's Darts of love,
Thank you kind Princess: Come then Theodore,
I will retire, I ought not to resign,
T'each common shaft, a life so great as mine;
No, perjured woman, I will live to have
Such a revenge as shall be great and brave;
Suiting thy birth, and mine, and be above
My injured honor, and affronted love:
And when I Have done, I Will make my last retreat
To her, that never has deceived me yet,
Honor, a Mistress worthy of my mind,
Both fair and great, as thou, and far more kind.
Ex. Enter Juliana, Sharnofsky, Hypolita. The Scene a room in Colimskyes
Palace.
Jul. Fire on 'um still.

Sh. I can descry but two from the Terrace walk.

Jul. They 'r hid behind the trees.
But see the affrighted Maids.
Enter Francisca and Emilia running.
Em. Oh! out of breath, w'ave been pursued by such a crew of Rogues!

Fran. I indeed Madam, there was Horse and Foot,
I was pursued at least by twenty Pikemen.

Em. And sixteen Musketeers ran after me.

Jul. The Count -- my Lord, did you not meet the Guards?
Enter Colimsky.
Col. Not I.

Jul. Then sure we'are pursued by fantomes.

Col. Well Madam, I Have had fortunate success,
And raised a Force very considerable
For the small time I had to do it in;
I find the young Nobles, and many Commons,
And almost all the Ladies, highly sensible
Of your great wrongs, and ready to engage with you:
Madam, in short, fear not the Cardinals threats;
But above all things trust not his promises.
Hell's not so false Madam; you can but die,
And you had better bravely give your life,
Then be deluded out on 't; but I hope
You Will be constrained to neither, if a wall
Of fifty thousand bucklers can protect you.

Jul. Blessed news! let us arm; I will have Poland see,
My Fathers Royal Soul survives in me.
Ex.
The Third ACT.
Enter Paulina, Joanna. Paul. MArry a Lady of my quality, and then deny the
marriage! oh perfidious ungrateful man! and was it then for this trampled on my
self, my Honors, Fortunes, run on the pikes of my great Fathers anger, bestowed
thy life, when all thy friends abandoned thee, and for thy sake am now become a
poor and wandering Exile; and thou thus reward me, basely abandon me? oh horrid,
horrid, weep, bleed, die, fall at my feet thou Tyrant, quick, quick, or see
this Steel is in thy heart.


Jo. How wild she looks, and talks; oh my poor Princess, how deadly pale she
is? now weeps again.


Paul. What shall I do? in a strange Country here
Exposed to shame, yet strangled if I return,
Death waits me at home, disgrace and ruin here;
Like a poor Ship thus laboring in a storm,
I view the angry Ocean, over and over,
And see a thousand Waves, but not one Shore.

Jo. Oh, that I were a Witch to torture him*

Paul To night he dies: where is Alexey gone?

Jo. Gone out to see what means these strange confusions, shouts, clamours,
cries, billows and tides of people flowing in the streets, calling to arms, to
arms.


Paul. Alexey knows his Chamber: then to night,
When weariness betrays him to his rest,
And he lies Coffined in the Vaults of sleep,
Haunted with mournful dreams; Iile to his bed,
Unwrap his breast, Anatomize his heart;
Here runs a vein of courage, there of falsehood,
This Fiber shows him man, but that a Devil;
Then if he groans, or else with cast up eyes,
Shall sigh a prayer, I Will stab it as it flies,
And beg of heaven both soul and prayer may
To those blessed Regions, never find their way
But then lest heaven should deny my prayer,
I Will kill my self, even to torment him there.
Enter Alexey.
Alex. Oh Madam; there is the strangest news abroad,
The Princess and the Count are up in arms,
Poland's in a blaze, all is in confusion,
The General Diett's equally divided,
And millions of reports fly to and fro:
Some say they design to Crown the Duke;
Others to murder him, and Crown themselves.
The Duke lies sick of an invenoin'd wound,
But more of jealousy; I listened at his Chamber, and heard him groan of both;
his soul is bubling, a little heat would boil him to a height,


Paul. I Will go, I Will go I Will sting his poisoned soul,
Put fire under his heart, I Will boil him, boil him,
Till in his rage, he runs and kills his friend,
His Mistress and himself, then we will be merry,
Be jolly, carouze, drink health in their blood.

Jo. Our Landlord too 's a talking News-monger, I Will go and stuff the fools
Cranny with all the rascally news I can invent.


Paul. Do, all tools shall help; there is nothing now
So base, I would not do to have revenge:
Revenge to me, does even seem above
Celestial joys, or the delights of love.
Ye Powers! --
Let but revenge give me one minutes ease,
And cast your other joys to whom you please.
Enter Ossolinsky, Cassonofsky, Lubomirsky, and their Trains, at several doors
running in confusion. Two Gentlemen. The Scene the Town.
Om. To arms, to arms!


Osso. Not mounted yet my Lords; the Cardinal is ready to march into the field.


Casso. Heaven speed his Eminence, I hope he is in his Coach; for if he was a
horseback, and his horse trotted as high as his designs, he would jolt the old
man's bones.

aside
Lub. I thought what would become of these violent proceedings.


Casso. So here is Machiavel, Policy in the abstract; the wind of the other party
blows a little dust in's teeth, and he wheels about.

aside
Osso. You thought, were not you as forward as any one?


Casso. So Blunderbuss, my Lord Grand Lubber; be sure if there be any simple
knavery, thou will be forward enough in it, but thou want wit to be an
ingenious knave; and yet this fool got the Marshal Batton from me, thank the
good King.

aside
Lub. As forward as any one? no, I was not as forward as any one Sir.


Osso. I hate this.


Lub. Well, and I hate Sir.


Osso. Nay Sir, ben't so passionate, farewell to you; I Will stand by the Cardinal
my self.


Casso. So, these Lords will go to cuffs about State you shall see; come my
Lords, no dissentions, we have enemies enough.


Lub. Sir, I am as ready to draw my sword in the Cardinals defense, as he can be.


Casso. No doubt, no doubt my sweet noble Lord, all the world knows you are
Royal, Wise, and Valiant. My sweet Count Simpleton, all the world knows you to
be a Coxcomb, and so do I: well, I am so out of humor, I could hate all
mankind.


Osso. Then what need all this quarrelling among our selves?


Casso. Enough of this my Lord; I must reconcile 'um for my own ends, or else
they might fight and hang. [aside] Well, what shall we do with these
impertinent women that are engaged against us?


Lub. Is your Lady amongst 'um my Lord?


Casso. I, I have an impertinent Hen amongst 'um, that would crow over all the
Cocks in the Kingdom, if she could.


1. Gent. Sha's reason, for half the Cocks in the Kingdom have crowed 'ore her.

aside
Osso. They Will have the wit to keep out of dander. By this time the Cardinal is
ready, bid 'um sound to horse.

Ex. Osso. Lub.
Casso. So, thus am I forced to soader 'um together to keep our rotten building
from falling in pieces, till I requite the kindness of the King upon his
Daughter, for opposing me in all the Offices of State, I stood candidate for,
Great Seal, Gold Key, preferring these, and every Phlegmatic fellow before me;
and now it is I have raised all this storm, and the overwise Cardinal thinks to
make me a Tool in his Design, and I make him an Instrument in mine.

Ex.
2. Gent. This is pretty, the women in arms; ha, ha! is thy Mistress amongst
'um, she with the high Roman Nose?


1. Gent. I, and thine too, she with the low flat French Nose.


2. Gent. Ha, ha, how I shall laugh to see the little pretty uptails come to
make a home-thrust at a man; prithee let us follow our Lords, and see this
desperate Camp.


1. Gent. But first let us arm, back and breast, bodkin proof.

Enter Juliana, Hypolita, Emilia, Francisca, and Ladies in Hats, Feathers,
Vests; etc. with gilded Pole-axes in their hands followed by Sharnofsky,
Colimsky, and Guard at a distance, Demetrius and Battista, as among the crowd.
The Scene a large Pavilion.
Them. Not one face here that does resemble his.


Bat. My Lord, you will be observed.


Them; Stand back Battista? I Will view 'um all; and if thou do provoke me, I Will
fight 'um all.


Jul. Let all the gazing crowds withdraw, and place strict Guards about the
Tents.


Bat. Come let us withdraw in time among the crowd.


Them. I Will not withdraw, Curland is among 'um,
And I will make their close Cabal deliver him.

Bat. Yes, yes, be cut in pieces by the Guards.

Guard. Avoid the Tent all, all.

Them. Slave, who do you speak to?
draws
Guard. Ha Sir, who are you?

2. Guard. Cleave his head.

Bat. Hold Sir, for heaven's sake.
interposes
Shar. Col. What Mutiny's that?

Guard. A Traitor, comes to murder the Princess.

Jul. A Traitor?

Them. A Traitor, you Mercenary slaves.


Bat. Oh Gods, what work is here?


Shar. Deliver, Sir!

disarms Them.
Jul. Who employed you Sir, on so wise an errrand?


Them. A thing, which I Am afraid Poland never heard of yet, called Honor; it is
to seek a person hid in your false Cabals, as false as they.


Jul. The youth's distracted.


Bat. This generous person is but a stranger, one of high quality, and only
comes in curiosity to see the election.


Them. Sirrah, you lie; I come to seek the Duke, and I will have him here, or
fire their Tents about their ears.


Jul. He is a little crazed, he has his liberty, conveigh him home, and send
for one of my Physicians to him.


Bat. I humbly thank your Highness.


Them. Am I your Buffoone then? send your Physicians to me.


Sh. Go young Sir, another time you shall be welcome hither, at present Sir,
indeed you must excuse us.


Them. Take notice Sir, I will revenge th'affront when you are a King, at present
you are all beneath my anger.

Ex. Them. Bat.
Col. What a mad fiery youth is this?


Jul. And now must I with humble patience wait
Upon this Scarlet Minister of Fate,
Who comes with slow and a Majestic pace
To speak a Princes doom with greater grace,
And with a specious gravity to hide
His Traiterous design, and haughty pride?
Yes: -- To his Grandeur, I owe more esteem,
I at his own Cabals should visit him:
And if he stays, perhaps I shall prevent
With fifty thousand swords his complement.
In th'interim I Will divertize my self and these noble Ladies; Command my Music
to sing a song of Triumph:

Fierce and Heroic tempers cannot stay,
To Court a Victory with long delay,
Like a dull Bridegroom for his wedding night,
But conquer and triumph, and then they fight.
The Song.
Awake, awake, thou warlike Genius of our State,
who once did glorious things;
But have of late
Lain sleeping under drouzy Kings;
Arise, and on triumphant beauty wait:
See, see, he comes,
Rowz'd with the noise of Trumpets and of Drums,
The Air all flaming whereso'ere he went,
And now he hovers over our Prin^ses Tent.
2.
Fair Amazon, the day's thine own,
Thine enemies look pale to see thy warriors stand
Impatient for thy great command,
Whose looks do make the fainting villains groan;
And by and by
Shall on the Altar of the field
Ten thousand Victimes lie.
Then Church and State
Shall on thy Triumphs wait,
Mitre and Crown
Shall at thy feet lie down
To flatter thy Victorious charms;
Away to Arms, to Arms.
Enter an Officer.
Off. Madam, the Cardinal's come into the Field, and all the Lords that join
with him.


Jul. The Lords, and does his piety distrust
Heaven's protection of a cause so just?
But he good man, though he is armed with prayer,
And has Battalions Marshalled in the air,
Yet will make use of other Guards beside,
And rather will in temp'ral Arms confide:
My Lord Sharnofsky, draw up the Squadrons of horse into Battalia, I Will head
'um my self in person.

Col. We have a braver appearance then could b' expected on so little warning.

Enter another Officer.
Off. Madam, the Cardinal desires to treat in person with you, and demands
caution, for the security of himself and those that shall attend him.


Jul. Let sufficient caution be given.


Sh. Open to the right and left to make way for the Cardinal.

Enter Cardinal, Ossolinfsky, Cassonosky, Lubormisky, and Train. The Cardinal
looks about and smiles.
Card. The women armed! then sure we are all mistaken;
This preparation's only made
For some great Masquerade.

Jul. A Play, it is only to divert you, Sir,
And called, The downfall of the Cardinal.

Card. And was it this, you and your Mighty Poets
Have so long studied on? The Plot's too mean
For such great wits, and such a mighty Scene:
An usurped Crown a better plot would be
For armed Tragedians, such as here I see;
And if we make inquiry, we shall find
It Was such a Plot your Poetry designed:
And to deny it Madam, is in vain,
For we have searched your Vaults, and found your Train:
And 'twill but set you higher on the score
To justify your ills, by doing more;
But if in this contempt you will proceed,
Then thank your own ambition if you bleed;
You are an Orphan, so is the Kingdom too,
And no less trusted to my care then you.

Jul. How blessed am I, with this great State to share
In such a holy Guardians pious care,
Whose thoughts are busied for me night and day,
That my good Angel may have leave to play:
Whose love to that Romantique height is flown,
That he to save my soul would lose his own:
For though in complement he seemed to approve
The little youthful vanities of love;
And did my Marriage with the Duke advance,
To show the King and me his complaizance;
Nay more did to my dying Father swear,
Our mutual loves should be his chiefest care:
He had a far more heavenly intent,
And swore in Courtship what he never meant;
For he, who from his youth has understood
The pleasing Mysteries of flesh and blood,
And knows how seldom those that are in love
In their embraces think of joys above:
He therefore charitably breaks his oath,
And becomes perjured to preserve us both.

Card. I am not ignorant what you design,
By Ironyes like these, so sharp, so fine;
It Is true, I promised I would ever bear,
Even of your loves, a most Religious care;
And that I would endeavor to redeem
The captive you did then so much esteem,
And faithfully engaged when that was done,
I would complete the vows you had begun;
Things good and just like these I vowed to do,
But not to uphold you in all evil too;
I did not swear if you should both combine
TO oreturn the State to share in the design;
Though with my honor you so pleasant be,
And think to laugh me into perjury;
Sport with me, Madam, as your scorn thinks fit,
We can distinguish innocence from Wit;
And if I Am perjured, Poland then shall know
Their safety did require it to be so:
For know my Lords, the ambitious Duke and she
turning to the Lords. Whom I have injured, as she charges me,
Have sought this Crown by Treason to obtain,
Which by just ways they did despair to gain;
And to all Princes have addresses made
The Commonwealth by fire and sword t'invade,
Seeking that Throne which they despair to enjoy
By mean revenge and envy to destroy;
And here their Partisans do seek by stealth
To gain upon the sleeping Commonwealth.
And now to stop so evil a design,
Stepping to take the Actours in the Mine;
Enraged their enterprise should hindered be,
They strive to blow up both themselves and me.

Shar. No more (proud Priest) how dare thou at this rate
Sport with a Princes, and a Kingdoms Fate:
And charge us boldly with this black intent,
When as thy conscience knows we are innocent?
But thou whose valiant conscience never fears
To rifle Urns, and sell an Orphans tears,
To break thy Oaths made to a dying King,
Must have a soul debauched for any thing.
Alas poor man! here are ten thousand eyes
That see thy plots through all their vain disguize:
Poor vulgar spectacles can fit at home,
And read thy darkest policies at Rome;
At Rome, the Market for thy Royal ware,
Thou chaffer'st Poland for the Papal Chair,
And here thou striv'st to beat that Interest down,
Which spoils thy trading for the tripple Crown:
Nay more, for fear thy Chapmen there should fail,
Thou to all Princes set'st this Crown to sale.
It Is placed upon thy private Stalls,
And cheapned in thy dark Caballs:
No Pacquets come, nor envy does resort,
But brings thee pelf from every Christian Court:
And not a Princely Suitor sends to woe,
But thy good will must first be courted too,
Each Royal youth of Europe panting lies,
For fear the Cardinal his consent denies.
And now because some cannot bear to see
A Priest make Merchandise of Royalty;
That Money should the Throne invade,
And turn the Crown into a Trade;
He all impending evils to prevent,
Accuses us, to be thought innocent.

Car. Well Sir, then since you have so good a cause,
Repose your life and honor in the Laws,
Deliver your self unto the State, and I
Will lay my Maces and my Scarlets by,
And from my Office, waving all pretense,
Will to the State submit my innocence:
Then let the Diett freely try
Which is the Traitor, you or I.
Card. party shout.
Osso. It Is bravely spoken.

Lub. Greatly like himself!

Casso. Knavishly like himself.
aside
Sh. Agreed, here bind my hands?

Jul. My Lord, you shall not?

Shar. His Proposition's fair; the Cardinal
Never preached any thing so much Divine,
And let no blood be shed, but his or mine.

Jul. It Is all deceit, through you he aims at me,
That he my Fathers Throne might freely invade,
And proudly triumph over his Royal Shade;
But that he shall not do whilst I Have a hand
To hold a Spear, and Armies to command.

Card. And Madam, do you think that fate is amorou?
Or to find any Courtship from a bullet?
They like raw travelers court all they meet;
Nor can we send a Guide to give advice
Whom to respect, but let 'um take their choice.

Jul. Their rugged Courtship Sir I shall not deny,
Send them abroad, and give them all supply,
That may defray the charges of their flight,
Draw bills of death, they shall be paid on sight;
I will your faithful correspondent be,
And pay as fast as you can draw on me.

Card. Madam, I Am sorry you resolve to expose
Your self, and such a lovely Guard as those,
To all the sad uncertainties of Fate,
To try your skill in fencing with the State;
For justice at a Traitors life does fly;
And when it makes a pass, you put it by;
But if the sword does hap to run astray,
Then thank your self for standing in the way.
Ex. Card. Osso. Casso Lub. shouting, and waving their Fauchions.
Jul. Come valiant friends; the talking Prologue's done;
The Curtain's drawn, the mighty Play's begun:
The Music of the field in Martial rage
Calls us to enter on this fatal Stage,
Where each brave man shall doubly have applause,
Crowned by his courage, and his glorious Cause;
A Cause more glorious there cannot be,
I for the Kingdom die, and you for me.
Ex. Jul. and Train shouting and waving their Poleaxes. Enter Theodore, and a
Surgeon. The Scene the Dukes Chamber.
The. Offer to let my Master go out in this condition?


Surg. I could not hold him Sir, he would go out whether I would or no; but
there is no danger, his wound's not great, nor was the arrow venomed, as first
you feared.


The. Oh! he will hear all the news,
aside And then I tremble at the consequence.
Now comes this babbling rascal.
Enter Landlord.
Land. Nay, I thought 't would be as I said, the Count is to be King, and marry
the Princess: How now, where is your Master? I Have news for him.


The. Get you gone with your news you prating bufflehead, or I Will set you down
stairs; come here with your news?


Land. Prating Bafflehead; and you will set me down stairs? do you know who you
speak to, Sirrah? come, come, you lie, you lie, you don't know who you speak
to, and you are drunk Sirrah, you would not talk to me at this rate else Sirrah;
get me down stairs with my news Sirrah? I Would have to know, the best men in the
Kingdom are glad of my intelligence, you drunken rascal you.


The. Yes, no doubt you have all the intelligence -- pray Mr.
Corantoe-Master-General, what may your Envoyes and Spies in Foreign Courts
cost you yearly?


Land. What may they cost me Sir? pray what may your Envoyes and Spi^s which
you maintain with the Duke of Gally-pots, Count Palatine of Glister-pipes,
Marquess of Mouth-glue, and Baron of Bathingtubs, for the support of your
rotten body politic, cost you yearly? ha, Sir-Ragmanners, my intelligence
comes from better men then you or your Master either. I met no less now
(because you prate) then six Lords of my old acquaintance coming out of the
field together all of a knot.


The. What knot? a bow-knot?


Land. A bow knot saucy-chops; when did you see six Lords tied of a bow-knot?
ha! can you tie your nose of a bow knot? you had not best provoke me sirrah;
but so, here comes my man, now it shall be seen whether I am a liar or no.

Enter Joanna and Alexey peeping.
Jo. How, not here! where did we loose her?


Al. I Will hold a wager the person we met in the Cloak was the Duke, and she
went after him somewhere, and is lost in the crowd.


Land. Come, come Sir, you Mr. Peagoose that stand peeping there, pray Sir
thrust in your nose a little further, I have some employment for you.

pulls in Jo
Jo. The Rogue will discover all my design, and render us suspicious to the
Duke's servant, I am afraid, come in Alexey and help me to outface the fool.

aside to Al.
Land. Come Sir, did not you hear in the field, as much as to say, as if the
Count was to be made King, and to marry the Princess? come answer directly to
the point; why don't you speak Sir?


Jo. Who, me do you mean?


Land. I, you sir, who should I mean else?


Jo. I hear it, how should I hear it? was I in the field to day?


Land. Why, you impudent stinking lying Rascal, you will not tell me such a lie,
will you?


Alex. You mistake me Landlord, and have met some body like him.


Land. No sir, I don't mistake; I can see, when I see, surely, I don't carry my
eyes in a Hand-basket, and more then that, 'cause he goes to it, he is the very
man, and no other, from whom I Would all this news now.


The. Is this your six Lords of a knot you Ninny? I see you can invent for a
need.


Jo. Oh, a most grievous impertinent lying fellow, I Am so plagued with him
sometimes!


Alex. Hark you Landlord, are not you troubled with a dizziness in your Noddle,
a Megrim sometimes; I am afraid you eat too much mustard, and such hot things.


Jo. Some snush would purge your simple brain.


Land. A little more would make me run distracted, don't you tell me,of your
Megrims, your Snush, and your Mustard, a company of Rascals: Sirrah, did not I
meet you coming out of the field, and I ask't you what news, 'cause I was loath
to go farther, 'cause I was to go buy a pole o'Ling for the women's dinner that
lie in my house here; and you told me all this bibble babble, and bid me go no
farther, but go to my Lodgers with it, deny't if you dare sirrah, I Will promise
you if you do, I Will churn those Buttermilk-chops of yours, and let your Master
take it off; I care not if you and your Master both get out (...) my house, I
can have customers for my rooms.


Alex. Come, enough of this Landlord.


Land. I have not enough Sir, I will not be made a liar on


The. Why, what a troublesome fellow art thou?


Land. And what a troublesome fellow art thou? I will not be born down by a
company of saucy Valets that are good for nothing but to twirle a whisker, and
a shave the crown of some Sir Nicolas Emptipate his Master, and be kicked thrice
a day for a cast suit, and Bread and Cheese.


Alex. Come Landlord, I perceive you are abusive; this is not to be endured,
you must be corrected out of this humor, it will be for your good another day;
and now our Masters backs are turned, we will make bold to give you a taste of our
Parmesau.


The. And I^le give him one lick for the sake of his Corantoes: Come Sir, since
you 'r so good at Corantoes, pray let us see how you can dance a Coranto, come;
up with your news quikcly.


Land. Rogues, you will not murder me, will you?


Theo. On the fourteenth instant, at the Port of Hucklebone, was drove in by
storm a Vessel called the Royal Cudgel bound for back, bum, belly, noddle, or
any part of the Kingdom of Coxcomb.


Jo. And near the same Port another.


Alex. And another laden with Snush, for the cure of the Megrim.


Surg. They Will kill their Landlord.


Land. Rogues, Rascals, Thieves, will you murder me?
Why Surgeon, will thou stand by and see me
Murdered? I Will lay my death to thee.

Surg. Pray Gentlemen --


Alex. How now Sirrah? do you prate, shaver of shin-bones, Drawer of
Gum-stakes, Grafter of broken Stilts, Trapanner of cracked Coxcombs, I Will teach
you more manners.


Land. Murder, murder.

Ex. They beat Landlord and Surgeon off of the Stage; Andenter Ladislaus and
Paulina.
The. See our Lords.


Lad. And is it thus? come Theodore, my Sword.


The. Oh heavens, what is it I hear?


Land. Come Sir, I know they are wronged, by the fond talking world: they are
constant, generous, they are Angels, Angel's, not a pound of flesh about 'um Sir;
and does it sting thy soul? crawl, crawl about aside his heart (thou Serpent
jealousy) until he foames with poison.


Lad. Heavens! I fear something is strangely amiss with aside with the young
Duke, he has talked all day at this distracted rate. What should the reason
be? some secret sorrow sets heavy on him; but I Will take no notice. Come
Theodore.


Theo. My Lord, upon my knees --


Lad. No more, I Am wronged, abused, by my false friends,
And I will in, and dye in their defense,
Since they have lost their guard of innocence:
If in a cause so bad my blood is spilt,
I have revenge by adding to their guilt*
My noble Lord farewell, a thousand blessings
Lad. turns to Paul. Crown your sweet youth; and when you see the Prince,
Do me the right to inform him of my story,
And recommend me to his noble thoughts;
Tell him the dying Duke of Curland begs
A place, a Monument in his fair soul;
And so heaven bless you both.

Paul. Oh! oh, I faint.
she swoones
Lad. Now Theodore --
Farewell to thee, if I never see thee more,
Here take these Jewels, they are all I have
At present, to reward thy love and faithfulness;
And now dear Theodore, when the day is done;
And with it me, seek out my lifeless carcass
Among the dead, and give it a private Monument:
Let not my Princesses insulting eye,
Find out where injured Curland's ashes lie;
Lest she in scorn should visit him, and there
Profane my Tomb with a dissembled tear.
Ex.
The. My Lord, be sure I shall do this and more,
Ten thousand times, if I Am not dead before.
Ex.
Paul. Ha, is he gone? and has he left me thus?
Never was false Lady so beloved as she,
Nor any so unfortunate as me!
But see he is not gone, there there he stands,
Come here my kindest Lord, and kiss me once,
But once before I die, for I am going
Where poor Paulina 'l trouble you no more.

Jo. Oh heavens! her grief mislayes her noble reason, what shall we do

Alex. I Will run and kill the Villain.

Paul. Alexey see what shadow's that?
Is It not a Coffin? it is; come lock me in,
I know not whether I am dead or no,
But if I am not, I would feign be so.

Alex. Oh, I shall run my sword into my self.

Jo. And I shall break my heart.

Paul. Sirs, lead me in.
Well, since thou art gone, brave Ladislaus adieu,
I Would not have dealt thus cruelly by you;
But I forgive thee, and when no one's by,
I Will pray for thee, then fetch a groan and dye.

The Fourth ACT.
Enter Ossolinsky, Cassonossky, Lubomirsky: After, shouts and acclamations
without. The Scene an open field covered with Tents. Osso. Casso. All Is our
own, victory, victory.
Come, for the plunder of the Princess Tent.
Enter Demetrius and Battista.
Lub. But see Prince Radzevile, Commander of the Transilvanian horse; what news
from the dead? did not I see thee fall under thy horse feet?


Casso. Come, for the plunder of the Tent, brave Prince.

Osso. Move slow Devils.
Ex. Osso. Casso. Lub. shouting.
Them. Never did such a gale of fortune blow, I Will sail in tides of blood up to
their Tents, and take the Duke of Curlands Mistress prisoner, carry her to
Moscow, and keep her captive till Poland ransomes her with Curlands blood;
follow brave men.

Ex.
Bat. Go, it is in vain to hinder thee
When honor calls, nor will I stop thee now,
Although he fights, he knows not where, nor how.
Ex. Enter Colimsky; the Seen continued.
Col. Must we not only fight with men, but Devils? Radzevile Commander of the
Transilvanian horse, who fell by my sword, is mounted afresh, has broke
through all our Troops, and Stands of Pikes, and flies like lightning to the
Princes Tent, and does greater things, now dead, then living. Pursue the
Warlike Ghost; all, all to the Princes Tent -- But see whole Troops of flame;
(A flame flashes through the Tents) a thousand fiery Spears pierce every way,
and a bright Cloud of fire breaks from the Town; what should it mean?

Enter an Officer running.
Off. My Lord, to the Princes Tent, or she is lost.

Col. Teach me my duty you slave;
Strikes him with his Sword. What means this flame?

Off. It is some valiant stranger, but who I know not, that has flown about
just like a Fire-ship in Seas of blood to grapple with whole Fleets; and seeing
the enemy flow all in Tides up to the Princes Tent, has set the Tents and all
the Town on fire; and here with five hundred resolute Cavalry he comes to force
his passage.


Col. Brave men, I Will lead the way to glory; all, all to the Princes Tent.

Ex. Enter Ladislaus, Theodore, and followers with Flambaux in their hands.
Lad. Come valiant men, let us give 'um brave diversion,
Lets set their Tents afloat in blood and flames,
And fill the Air with Clouds of humane ashes;
Set all on fire, the Town, the Tents, the Temple;
Spare not the very houses of Religion.
Ex.
The. Brave Prince, how generous thy actions are!
Unseen he changes all the Scenes of war,
And with a noble scorn he fights for them
Who both his courage and his love contemn;
These Glories must at last themselves betray,
And through all gloomy Clouds must pierce a way.
Ex. The Scene is changed to the Princesses Pavilion; A noise of arms, The
women shrieke within: And enter Hypolita, Emilia, Francisca running.
Hyp. Em. Fran. Murder, murder, the Princess will be murdered.

Enter Sharnofsky defending the Princess, pursued by Demetrius, Ossolinsky,
Cassonossky, Lubomirsky, Battista, and Guard; the Women run about shrieking and
crying murder.
Jul. Stand by Sharnofsky, I Will defend my self.

Shar. Madam, for heavens sake do not deprive me in the last moment of my life,
of that which I have lived and fought for all this while;

For if without defending you I Am slain,
I loose my honor, and I die in vain.

Jul. That honor you shall have, but not alone,
Nor rob my courage Sir, to crown your own.

Shar. Oh! whether does she rush? for shame ye cowards set not your swords
against a Ladies breast, your Princess too: she bleeds; you saucy Villains,
you have wounded a Divinity, the Americans would have kneeled and prayed to; ye
Powers, what are ye all asleep above the Clouds? if ye are, lend me your
thunder: oh! she is lost.


Osso. You are my prisoner Sir.

to Shar.
Them. You Princess, are mine.

to Jul.
Casso. So now shall I have a full draught of revenge.


Them. Now know fond Poles, I have deluded you; I am not Radzevile, but
Demetrius, a Prince of the Imperial house of Muscovy; a mortal, an eternal
enemy to you all; I come to search your General, the Duke of Curland, who like
a treacherous Pole, after I had took him prisoner, showed him kindness, has
stole my Princess, and I Will enslave his, and the next time I come, enslave you
all: And now stand by me valiant Transilvanians, I Will give you all a hundred
crowns a man.


Bat. Oh! the good heavens, he betrays himself.


Osso. Casso. Lub. Ha! what says Radzevile?


Shar. This is distraction.


Jul. Must I be carried then a slave to Moscow?


Hyp. Em. Fran. Oh, the Princess! oh, this Russian slave!

Them. drags her along.
Osso. Casso. Lub. He Is mad, he raves.


Casso. Hold Sir, cleave the Rebels head, slaves.


Fran. Heaven! what stupid Lethargy has seized thee? assist, unbind me, or
else strike me dead, rather then torture me with such a sight.


Osso. Casso. Lub. Hold Rebel, Villain.


Osso. My Lords, command all your men, Horse and Foot, to surround the
Transilvanian Troops, and make 'um fling down their Arms, or dye.

Ex.
Lub. Let all the Cossacques wheel.


Them. Fire, give fire; a hundred of you stay, and guard the prisoners.


Bat. Oh! the unruly fire that governs thee, Where will it lead thee?

Ex.
Casso. Now to guard the Prisoners shall be my work:


Jul. How am I made the sport and scorn of Fortune, abused by Curland, trampled
on by slaves; and now led bound to follow the Triumphant Chariot of Scarlet
perjury?


Sh. My soul is torn with grief and rage.


Casso. Come then, I Will ease you both; alas I pity you; but chiefly you, good
Princess: your kind Father I thank him eased me of many a burden some
employment; and I in gratitude will ease your shoulders of such a weighty head
laden with sorrow.

Call Oss. Them. Bat. bound.
Hyp. Em. Fran. Oh bloody Villain!


Jul. Insolent slave; dares such a thing as thee threaten a Princess life?


Shar. Barbarous Dog, bring me but to him, I le kick his dirty soul out of his
body.


Casso. I Will snap thy saucy head from off thy shoulders first. Guards kill the
prisoners, I Will not allow the formality of praying; and he that asks what
Orders I have for it, let 'um know, I wear my Orders by my side; this is my
Cardinal, Senate, and my King, off with their heads, his crooked Majesty
commands it.

shows his naked Faulchion.
Shar. Thou Monster of mankind, have thou no sense of pity or humanity, nor of
thy own, nor of thy Countries honor, which such a horrid act will render
infamous to all the world? here quench thy barbarous thirst of blood with mine,
open all my veins, take my life, my fortune, honor, all I have, but spare, oh
spare the Daughter of thy King.


Jul. No more my Lord, swell not the Villains pride by falling prostrate to it;
Quick Hypolita, give me a Poniard.


Casso. Fetch a Wrack, an Engine, I Will torter him to death: But ha! more sport,
de'e come to put affronts upon the Kingdoms.

(Enter Ossolimsky and Guard, with Demetrius, and Battista bound.
Osso. In the face of the whole Army Sir, I Will cool your fiery insolence.


Them. Yes, murder me you slaves,
I do deserve this punishment, and more,
That my revenge should be so low and poor;
I ought to have set it at no lower rate
Then the whole ruin of your Polish State,
All of you hudled in one common doom,
Curland the Cipher to make up the sum.

Casso. Tame the proud Rebel; Guards, off with his head.

Osso. Hold, strike who dares, till I give the command!

Them. Come Villains, level me right against the Clouds,
And then give fire, discharge my flaming soul
Against such saucy Destinies as those
As dare thus basely of my life dispose;
Then from the Clouds rebounding I will fall,
And like a clap of thunder tear you all.

Osso. Well then Sir, since your spirit is so high,
Your head shall be as lofty by and by,
Yes, you are exalted thoughts shall have their due,
Your head shall stand in both the Armies view.

Casso. Guards, are you asleep? cleave all their heads at once.

Osso. Casso. Strike.
All the Women give a shriek, and at that instant enter Lubomirsky running.
Lub. Hold.

Osso. Casso. Count Lubomirsky, the news?

Lub. All Is lost; I am in such a confusion I cannot speak, some Devil in humane
shape has quite turned all the fortune of the day, has fired the Town, the
Tents, and here he is coming on waves of blood and flame.

Lasso. Hell take thee for thy news; where is this Devil?

Casso. Osso. The Gurads retire; stand Villains, or you die.

Lub. Stand, cowardly slaves.

Them. Is Fortune penitent? Battista loose me.

Bat. I am bound too, Sir.

Them. Are your teeth bound too, Sir?

Shar. Ha! is the Scale a turning?
A thousand crowns but for one hand loose.

Jul. Deliverance swift like lightning! Heaven, I thank thee.
Enter Ladislaus driving the Gaurds before him, followed by Theodore, and
Cavaliers.
Lad. Stay flying Cowards; disparage not my sword,
Let it be said at least I fought with men.

Osso. Casso. Lub. We are lost.
they are taken prisoners.
Them. And must I stand to be a thing of pity,
To receive the charity of this man's sword?

Shar. I blush at our own chains, and this man's glory.

Lad. Secure the Lords, Madam, the Scene is changed,
You Are all at liberty;
And now my next great deed shall be
aside To set my heart at liberty from thee.
Ex.
The. My noble Lord,
Thus through the field with unseen triumphs flies,
As souls make their Entradoes in the skies;
Sure Heaven some mighty glory has designed,
At last to crown such an Illustrious mind.
Ex.
Jul. What Prodigy's this?

Hyp. It Is your Angel, Madam.

Jul. A thousand Crowns to know him.

Shar. A Warlike Fantome.
By heaven created for this exigence.

Them. His haughty Valor has affronted me,
I^le out and kill him for his insolence,
And when he is dead, I Will hug him for his bravery.
Exit.
Bat. To arms again; thus does his active soul
Leap from one danger to another;
Here we destroy, and there we save,
As Vessels tossed from Wave to Wave.
Ex.
Shar. Let Us out, and help to reap this glorious Harvest;
But hark, a loud Volley of Martial shouts.

All within. Long live Juliana, our Queen.

Shar. Blessed noise; your name is bandied in the Clouds,
There Is a victorious Tempest in the Air,
And see a thousand lights approach the Tent.

Casso. Oh cursed sight! and cursed noise.
Enter Colimsky.
Col. Now Madam, all is our own; your enemies have all flung down their arms,
some come to crave your pardon, others fly in multitudes to the Cardinals
Tent; the Cardinal in transports of rage for his misfortune, confessed his horrid
villainies, and fled: I sent an Officer to conduct him to a private Grotto in a
neighboring Grove, pretendingly for his security; In the interim the croudes
rifled his Tent, and found the Crown concealed, and here they are coming sailing
along with shouts and acclamations, resolving to repose it on your brow.

Jul. The weight's too great for me.

All within. Secure the distracted State.

Col. The people grow impatient.

Jul. I Will sacrifice my self to appease the croudes;
Heavens! never was such a turn of fortune known,
From a Scaffold to a Throne,
In one moment to be seen,
A dying Captive and a Queen.
Ex.
Col. So now my good Lords you may be all at leisure for holy contemplations:

Shar. Guards, see especially
To that malicious Count.
Ex. Shar. Col.
Casso. I know your kindness, I need not go to an Astrologer to know my doom:
What a long neck shall I have when my head's set upon a Pole on one of the City
Gates.

Osso. Lub. This is the giddiness of Fortune.
Lead away with Guard as prisoners. Enter Demetrius and Battista.
Them. This way the Spirit went, and as it walked I saw a kind of shape
resembling Curland.

Bat. My Lord, your fancy in the heat of passion forges a thousand Images.

Them. If 'twas his Ghost, I Will find out his abode; let it be Air, Earth, or
Fire.

Ba. If it walks any where, it is there amongst the Queens tryumphant Train

Them. I hear 'um shout, I Will amongst 'um.

Bat. Hold Sir, pray let 'um not discover you for fear the Poles revenge the
affront you did their Princess.

Them. Then I Will revenge the affront the Poles did me.
Ex.
Bat. Heavens! what a task have I? It is the same,
To bridle a tempest, or to steer a flame.
Ex. Enter the Cardinal conducted by an Officer. The Scene a hollow Rock in a
Grove.
Card. Heaven! have mercy! whither do thou lead me?

Off. I was commanded to conduct you hither;
The Count will come to you here, and bring the news.

Card. He is a worthy friend.

Off. It Is dark and private,
Here you may lie with safety.

Card. Thus in a moment is my Sun gone down.
Enter a Gentleman running.
Gent. My Lord, convey your self away with speed, All Is lost; your men are
fled, your Tent is plundered; the Princess Crowned, and all your friends betray
you; my Lord Grand Marshal's ^oming with a Guard from the Queen to secure you.


Card. Then there is no trust in man.

Gent. This way Sir; hasten.

Off. Hold Sir, not so fast.

Card. Art thou set here to betray me too?

Off. To guard you Sir.

Card. To guard me as a Victim for Sacrifice; I am at last outwitted in Villainy.


Gent. Oh heavens! Sir, you are lost,
shout The Queen approaches; hark the dreadful shouts,
A thousand streaming lights flow all this way.

Card. And let 'um come, I have a friend in private will not betray me.

pulls out a Handkerchif
Gent. A poisoned Handkerchief I fear.

Card. The little winding sheet of all my glories;
Ah! had I studied but as much to gain
Heaven, as this world, I had not sweat in vain:
Instead of horrors that pursue me now,
Immortal Crowns had waited for my brow;
But my amazing miseries now are
Beyond the aid of Penitence and Prayer:
To my own Idols I too long did bow,
To put that fawning cheat on heaven now;
For he has my Religion understood
To be but craft, and my devotion blood.
My heaven was t'ascend the Papal Throne,
Where to save others souls, I Have lost my own.
And now, alas! 'twere folly to deny
My self the pleasure to despair and die.
May all great men learn by my wretched Fate,
Never to stake their souls at games of State;
For though a while perhaps they seem to win,
They Will find at last there is no cheat like sin.
dies
Gent. He Is gone; irrecoverably gone; his great souls fled,
And see a thousand lights usher the Queen;
She comes to see her mighty enemy
The Scene shuts upon the Card. etc. Lie a cold Statue prostrate at her feet.
Enter Juliana Crowned, Hypolita, Emilia, Francisca, Sharnofsky, Colimsky, and
Guards, at one end of the Theater, Paulina as mixed with the crowd.
Om. Long live Juliana Queen of Poland.

Jul. My Lords, I thank you for all this great honor.

Paul. I Have stole from Count Alexey and Joanna,
aside To seek my Lord, and I Am afraid to find him,
Or with my Rival here, or with the dead;
If here I find him, I Am resolved he dies,
Only to spoil the tryumphs of her eyes;
But see, my servants come, I Will get away.
Ex: Enter Alexey, Joanna, and Landlord.
Jo. Heavens! where is she wandered; and how came we to lose her?


Al. What do thou do crowding in here? idle body, come help us to look our
Master.


Land. I look your Master, go hang your self with your Master.


Jul. What murmurings that?


Col. See Guards, what means that noise?


Land. No Rascals, I remember your Megrim, your Snush, and your Mustard; I Will
make you pay dear for that Mustard, it shall be costly Mustard.


Guard. Oh! is it you Sir?

lays hold on Landlord
Col. Guards keep off the Rabble; take that rude fellow, clap him neck and
heels.


Ale. Jo. Begone, quick, quick, and leave the Rogue in the Bilboes.

(Ex.
Land. Oh, good your Honor, I beseech your sweet Honor.

(Al. Jo.
Col. Sirrah, what is your business here?


Land. Nothing an't like your honor, but a couple of idle quarrelsome Rascals
that lie at my house, have lost their Master, and they would make me look for their
Master; Now if they have lost their Master, I Am not bound to make good their
Master by no Law in Poland; I refer it to your Honor.


Col. Get you about your business Sirrah, and make no references to me.


Land. I thank your Honor, I believe your Honor knows me, don't you remember
where you lay when your Honor kept the fat Lady, the Lady Clumsky? you could
make references to her for all your pride.

[aside
Col. B^gone Sirrah.


Land. I thought I should put you in mind of a reference; I Have done an't like
your Honor.

aside
Jul. Now my Lords, what news of the Cardinal.


Col. Nigh to this part of the field is the Grotto where I commanded him to be
conveyed, and see the Officer I sent to guard him.

Enter an Officer.
Off. My Lord the Cardinal.


Osso. Where is he?


Off. Dead.


Om. Dead.


Off. He lies so near, Torches may show him you.

The Scene is drawn, the Cardinal presented dead in a Grotto, a Gentleman
waiting by him.
Land. Oh, bominable! killed? and is the Council of Trent, and Pope Paul come to
this? thou must know honest Guard I Am a merry man, and I used to visit this
good man's back Cellar of Rhenish, and then I called it the Council of Trent,
and there was a great Tun, great Grandfather, or Gossip at least to the great
Tun of Heydelburgh, and that I used to call Pope Paul the third, and there did
the Beef-eaters of the Guard and I --


Guard. Beef-eaters you Rascal!


Land. Sit in Council about the good of Christendom, till at parting we did our
reverences to Pope Paul, fall down and kiss his great Toe, the Spigot, and let
the heavenly Benediction drop into our mouths.


Guard. You Would have my Halbeard drop into your mouths, would you Beef-eater,
you saucy Cur?


Jul. A mournful spectacle; how died the Cardinal?


Off. Proudly as he lived; he would not stoop to pray,
Or if he prayed, 'twas so, as he would seem
He expected heaven should first pray to him;
He gave up's glory, but with such a pride,
He scorned to keep it, since he was denied;
And though with death he found some little strife,
Rather then ask, he would resign his life.

Land. What a wicked fellow was this? oh, sye upon him! not say his Prayers
when he died! how does he ever think to come to good; my Lord, he was as arrant
a --


Col. Guard --


Land. I have done, an't like your Honor.


Guard. Sirrah, I could find in my heart to Beef-eat you.


Jul. I Am sorry for his soul, but heaven's merciful! ah! had this great man's
piety been equal to's wisdom, and his many other Noble Virtue he had been a man
too glorious.


Land. Nay truly, he had as good a Study of Books I Will say for that him, good
old Authors, Sack and Claret, Rhenish and old Hock; come said I to the Library
keeper, tap me St. Gregory, or that good old Father a tilt that looks like St.
George a Horse back; take his Nag by the Spigot, and give our brains a leap,
said I.


Guard. Thou have a mind to be laid by the heels with thy Pope Paul.


Land. I have done honest Guard.


Shar. He was too self admiring, and conceited
The Church and we did but his wisdom owe
All honors Rome or Poland could bestow.

Land. He was something self-conceited indeed, that is the truth on it.


Col. He had a soaring spirit.


Shar. Reaching wisdom.


Col. Unsatiably ambitious, and inexorable.


Land. He was a notable man.


Jul. No more my Lords; what he has done, he is gone to answer for; then for
the reverence we owe Religion, let him be Interred with decency.

they take up the Car.
Land. And for the reverence I owe burnt Claret, I Will be at's Funeral.


Jul. Now all the Storms are past, the Winds are down,
The Waves transport me gently to a Crown:
Kind heaven smiles, and I am got above
All other Tempests but the World and Love:
And now I Will seek Religions flowery shore,
And be exposed to all these storms no more.
My Lords attend me, and you all shall know
How I Will my person, and the Crown bestow.
Ex.
Land. Well, I swear this is a delicate woman, I Would give all I Am worth in the
world I were a young Prince for her sake, I Would so jumble her and tumble her,
I Would set her upon her head, and her heels, and kiss this end, and that end, and
all in an honest way too.


Col. These words are of dubious and mysterious sense.


Shar. To a Cloister I fear.


Hyp. My Lords prevail with her,
I can assure you she designs a Cloister.

Col. Let Us attend her to the Palace, and then meet in Council.

Ex. Om. Ma. Land.
Land. Well, it is a lovely Creature; I love her so well, I could be contented
to be a little Shock ^or her sake, that I might lie in het lap, lick her lips,
and be stroak't, but hanged it would but puff me up, I should be too proud and
self-conceited: But here is a devilish fall in my wishes, now I think on it,
from a Prince to a Puppy-Dog, but love is humble. Well now, there is a Harvest a
coming, a Coronation; oh, what a crop of Dollars will I reap for my windows,
and Belcony: I Will have a Rix Dollar for every quarry in my window, and a
hundred for my Belcony; that is to say, fifty for my Bell, and fifty for my
Coney.

In all I Will have in current Polish money,
A hundred Rix Dollers for my Bell-coney.
Ex. Enter Battista.
Bat. Heavens! I Have lost him, whither is he wandered?
What new Fury has transported him?
But ha! the glittering of a naked Sword;
A person tall, and of my Princes stature,
Walking about, and hark I hear a voice!
Enter Paulina.
Paul. Heavens! I walk about here in the dark,
And hear the labors of departing souls;
A thousand aerie forms fly round about me,
And fan me into cold and dewey sweats:
Oh! if my Lord be dead, would I were with him.

Bat. The place is inchaunted.
Enter Demetrius with his naked sword.
Them. There the dying voice fainted away, by that old wall -- no liar, that was
an echo.


Bat. My Prince, some frightful Apparition leads him about.

Them. What art thou that usurp'st the sacred name of my divinity?
Speak, or I Will turn a Ghost as thin as thee,
And torture thee. --

Paul. Hark, the Guards are near, I will avoid 'um, and go fetch a Torch, and
seek my Lord among the dead, in those pale Groves he is unkindly wandered,
to avoid his poor Paulina.

Ex.
Bat. Hark, the voice cries Paulina.

Them. Paulina still; what faucy Spirit mocks me with that name? could I but
find thee, I Would tear thy aerial body into Atoms; and I Will have light, or I Will
fire this Grove, I, and set thee on a Rack of flame to make thee confess, who,
and what thou art? and a light comes from behind that wall, a youth with a
Torch, I Will run and fetch it.


Bat. He Is grown distracted, I must speak to him Sir.


Them. And do appear at last!

runs at Battista
Bat. It Is I; Battista Sir.


Them. I know I might have killed thee so; I Am led about with voices, groans,
illusions; fetch me that Torch.


Bat. A fair and lovely youth walking among the dead; sure it is some Spectre.


Them. Fetch me that Torch!
Joanna and Alexey run over the Stage.
Jo. There she is all alone walking with a Torch.

Al. Where?

Jo. Under that Tree.

Al. I see her, let us run, let us run to her?

Them. Hark, a consort of voices.

Bat. Let Us leave this dismal place? there is a Cabal of melancholy Spirits
that haunt it; see two flying shapes come toward this youth.


Them. I think the dead hold here their Rendesvouze; hark, there are more come
from yonder Grove? I Am tortured, plagued; fetch me the Torch I say?

Bat. Ex. and enter Lad. and Theo.
Lad. Now Theodore, press me no more,
I now renounce her, and her Sex for ever.
And now I Have steered her safely to a Throne,
I Will leave her in her Ports, and to my own,
From whence the war she has on me begun,
Shall now on all the world be carried on;
And captive Monarchs shall of her complain,
And curse my injuries and her disdain,
Whilst I shall still by blood and slaughter prove
The scorn and hate I bear to her, and love.

Them. Ho! stand, what are you? Battista, come with a Torch!

Lad. Hark, the Perdues call to the Guard; I Will in my Chariot to Town; do you
ride before, Theodore, and get Posthorses ready this night, I Will onward on my
way to Curland.

Ex. Lad. Theo.
Them. To Curland! Ye Powers, stand, stand, come with the Torch you slave.

Enter Battista running, and lays hold on Them.
Bat. Sir, Sir.

Them. I see a Chariot, Villain stand by or I Will kill thee.

Bat. Are you distracted Sir? yonder is your Princess; I Have overheard their talk.


Them. Yonder Is Curlands Chariot, and the slave holds me.


Bat. Ha! I see a Chariot, I Will after it, do you go to your Princess: here,
here Sir.

Enter Paulina, Joanna, Alexcy with a Torch.
Paul. Hark, I hear a voice.

Al. It is the Guards.

Bat. Here Sir, by all that is good, this is your Princess.

Them. After the Chariot then, fly; Sir, a word with you.
to Paul*
Paul. The Guards call to us, out with the Torch Alex.

Paul. Jo. Run, run; murder, murder.
Jo. Paul. run off. The Torch is put out.

Al. Fly Madam, I Will make good your retreat.
draws
Them. Curse on my folly, I Have lost 'um in the dark.


Bat. Ha, lost them and the Chariot both? curse on this rashness; here, here
they flee.

Both run confusedly crossing each other, and know not which way to take.
Them. Here, here is a path.


Bat. I see the Chariot going straight to Town.


Them. I see the shape flying on the wind before me.

both run off.
The Last ACT.
Enter Battista. The Scene a Hall. Bat. WIth much ado I Have overtaken the
Chariot, and I Am so out of breath I cannot speak; ha, stopped her, by that
Belcony! this is our Lodging, it is, and see the persons coming out of the
house with a light, where do they go, I Will watch 'um.

Ex. Enter Paulina, and Joanna.
Paul. Oh! I am faint with running, and the fright; where is Alexey?


Jo. He stayed behind to guard us, but see he has been here before us.

Enter Alexey.
Al. Oh! Madam, the Duke is newly alighted at the door, and on some news I know
not what it is; He Is gone straight to the Palace.


Paul. Heavens! what should it be?


Ale. They talk the Queen is gone into a Cloister, some say to marry.


Paul. Oh! what comes into my head? Joanna slip to my Chamber, and get a
Feather and a better Perriwig, and follow the Duke with all the speed you can.


Jo. I run, I run.

Ex. Enter Demetrius.
Them. 'Twas here they came; this was the house I Am sure: ho, ho, the house!

Enter Landlord beating his Servant.
Them. Ha! my Landlord, what, am I at home?


Land. You Rogue, you Dog, I Will kill you Sirrah, I^le murder you; would not you
tell me this before.


Ser. Murder, murder.


Them. Hold, come along with me quickly, show me all your rooms, here is a
Princess lodges here.


Land. Don't tell me of Princesses? the Rogue has undone me.


Them. Sirrah, come along, or I Will send your Soul before me.


Land. Sirrah, hold your prating, I Have lost more then thee and all thy
generation are worth; I Have lost five thousand Crowns, and I Will stop it out of
his wages, I Will not pay one of 'um a farthing. But what will that do? that is
some fifty Dollars; what is that to five thousand Crowns? undone, undone.


Them. Dog, I Will set fire on's house.


Land. Will you so Sirrah? a brave amends for my loss; but Sirrah, I Will keep
you fast enough for that, go quickly boy, run and fetch a Constable.


Them. A Constable, Rascal.

draws
Land. Murder, murder; ho! there Sirrah, come back again, I shall be killed: you
bloody Rogue, will you murder me?


Ser. Good Sir, don't kill my Master.

holds Them.
Land. Hold him whilst I go run and fetch a Constable and secure his Cloakbag,
and then I must to the Palace after this base cheating Duke. I Have a pack of
brave Lodgers: here is one young blade, that I Am much mistaken if he or his man
be n't a Whore; and the Duke's run away and paid me no Rent; and this vapouring
Jack would kill me, and then set fire on my house; brave doings, is it not? but
I Will feage you all.

Ex.
Them. What Duke's that?


Ser. The Duke of Curland's an't please you Sir.


Them. Curland, where, where, quickly slave.


Ser. I chanced to spy him, and came and told my Master, and for this he would
have killed me.


Them. Where I say, Villain?


Ser. Sir, he is just gone to the Palace; a young Gentleman that lodges here
brought a Courtier that told him the Queen was to be married to night, and they
are all run to the Palace together.


Them. I Will make one of the company, his soul shall dance Levoltoes in the Air
at the Queens wedding.

Ex.
Ser. Well, I was a fool he did not let this Gentleman kill my Master, or fire
his house, I would he had, -- teach him to be labor me for my good will.

Ex. Enter Ladislaus, Paulina, Joanna dressed like a Courtier, Alexey, Theodore,
at a distance -- Battista. The Scene a Palace to the Street.
Bat. So, I have overtaken 'um,

aside And here is some great mysterious thing in hand,

The Duke has some design about the Crown.


Lad. Knock at the Gate Theodore.


The. Indeed my Lord, this Courtier is mistaken; all say positively the Queen's
resolved t'resign the Crown, and go into a Cloister, and that she spends this
night among her Priests, and women in devotion to prepare for it; and now all
the Lords of the Council are gone in to dissuade her.


Lad. Knock when I bid you.


Paul. Come good my Lord, do not expose your self to so much danger; the
Gentleman's misinformed.


Jo. Perhaps so Sir, I only told you what my sister, who is a Maid of Honor to
the Queen, told me.


Theo. Your Sister!


Lad. My Lord, let it be true or false, I am resolved to be concealed no longer:

Thus to the sinful world revenge divine,
aside Moves gen^ly on with paces slow as mine;
And Heaven stands behind the Clouds awhile,
And let us deluded man himself beguile;
And seems as if his Law he did not own,
But with brave scorn to let the World alone,
Till man grown impudent, begins to play
His Villainies in open Scenes of day;
Then strikes, strikes home, and then his arm does fall
With such a weight, one blow may serve for all:
Thus my revenge I do a while retain,
That when I strike, I may not strike in vain.
Why do not knock, Theodore?

Theo. I do my Lord, and none will answer within, h^ there, open the Gate!


Porter within What would you have there? here can none come in.


Lad. Give the fellow forty crowns.


Theo. Here are persons of great quality, you shall have forty crowns to open
the Gate.


Porter within. Bear back there, Guard keep off the crowd.


People within. Oh, pray Mr. Porter.


Paul. I dread the event, I wish I had not done this.

Ex.
The. Take notice Sir, if any mischief befalls my Lord, you and your Dukes
lives shall answer for it.

to Jo. Ex. Theo.
Jo. Do you threaten Sir -- Alexey.


Ale. I hear the slave, let him have a care I don't cut his throat, and his
Masters the worthy Duke.

Ex. Jo. Alex.
Bat. I Will after you all to see the meaning of this.

Ex. Enter Landlord. The Scene continued.
Land. Now I warrant shall I have much ado to get into the Gate after this
cheating Knave the Duke, I must speak 'um fair; Porter: honest old Crony,
friend and fellow Soldier in the Wars of Bacchus, open the door, my drunken
Bulley.


Porter within What saucy fellow's that? get you from the Gate, Sirrah, or the
Guard shall lay you by the heels.


Land. Oh, the Rogue, he pretends not to know me, he knows me well enough; why
honest Bulley Cerberus, Corporal-turnkey, Squire of the house, 'Nointer of
Page-bums, Engineer General of double Locks, Spring-locks, Pad-locks, and
Mouse-traps, open the Placket of the house, called the Wicket, and let us in
boy. Do not remember the Council of Trent, and Pope Paul the third.


Porter within. Prating Rascal! you 've a mind to be laid by the heels.


Land. Oth' cunning Rascal! he thinks I have company with me now, he is as
cunning! but here comes my slaves, what have you set fire on my house yet?

Enter Demetrius.
Them. How now, the Gate barred? open the door here.


Land. Nay, if I cannot get in, I believe you will hardly get in, for all your
brave Cloakbag.


Them. Open the door, or I Will set fire on it.


Porter within De'e threaten Sirrah! Guard, out quickly, here is a Traitor
threatens to fire the Palace Gate.


Guard Bear back there, let us come out;


People within. Oh, you crowd me.


Land. So, so, you have done finely, we shall have our brains knocked out;
come, come, a spell quickly before they come, I know the Rogues as well as if I
were in the bottom of their bellies; come half a Doller or so --


Them. Open the door fellow, thou shall have fifty Dollars.


Porter within If I do let you in, you ca'nt get into the Presence -- the
Guard-rooms are all crowded; I let in a Gentleman just now, and he stands in
the crow'd still.


Land. The Rogue begins to be pliable.


Them. Open the door I say, here is thy money.


Porter within. Bear back there, keep off the crowds.

Ex. Them.
Land. Now you can bear back with a pox to you, now you hear of money; well, I
see this money will make every thing bear back, and fly open.

Ex.
One within. Ah Mr. Porter, we will give a Rix-Dollar, betwixt four of us.


Porter within. A Rope between four of you.

Enter Juliana, Hypolita, Emilia, Francisca, Colimsky, Sharnofsky, and a
Priest. The Scene a Room in the Palace; a Table with the Crown, Scepter, and
Regalia at one end, and Beads, and Books at the other.
Col. Well Madam, since we must despair t'obtain,
We Will cease those prayers, which we thus make in vain;
For to our sorrow we confess it true,
This Kingdom has not glory 'enough for you.
In those Celestial Crowns you will only find
Exalted glories equal to your mind:
We only beg you will help the shrinking Throne,
And save ten thousand souls besides your own:
For, Madam, whatsoever your Priests pretend,
You may by Crowns, to Crowns ascend:
And Cells on Earth, will Cells in heaven find,
Large Crowns for mighty bounties are designed.

Shar. And Madam, I but one thing will implore,
That when you address your self to the Sacred Altarr
You Will please to recollect upon what score,
You at those Altars have stood once before.
When Vows with Vows, Altars with Altars jars,
It seems to breed in heaven a civil war;
It is not for the Duke I intercede,
I now in the behalf of Honor plead:
Though to the sacred Church I freely bow,
No doubt they can absolve you from your Vow;
Yet with the reverence to their power is due,
Methinks I would have Honor do it too:
In other worlds Devotion may have bliss,
I Am sure it is Honor that must save in this;
And generous Honor passes doom on none,
Till first their crimes are clearer than the Sun.

Jul. My Lords, on either side I Have heard your pleas,
And very much resent your kindnesses:
But now my souls employed on things above,
Concerns of Empire, and much more of love.
As for the Duke I cannot censured be,
I quit not him, but he renounces me;
Nor for the Throne, I found it in distress,
And mildly leave it in the calmes of peace:
And now eternally I bid adieu
To Love, and Empire, to the Duke and you:
And here my Lords, I do your Crown restore,
And now retreat to what I was before.

Confessor. Great Victory; you Saints above make room,
A mighty Spirit does in triumph come.

Col. Hold Madam, e're you fall so great a weight,
And break in pieces our disjoynted State;
Rather then we will rush again once more
In the wild Chaos we were in before;
It Is voted by us all, that you alone
Shall fix some person in our shaking Throne.
We swear Allegiance to whomsoe're you choose,
Yea, and the death of him that shall refuse:
It Is all our votes.

Om. All, all.

Jul. The trust is high, and great, and needs many solemn thoughts, and you
must give me some time to pause.


Confess. Madam, the better to compose your mind,
And fortify your soul in these last conflicts
With earthly glory; please to rest a while,
We Will use the devout Ars of holy Church.

The Queen seats her self in a The One; the Ladies stand in order on her right
hand, and the Lords on her left, whilst a Chorus of voices sing. The Song.
How nobly heaven does receive
what 're a pious mind
Is in Devotion pleased to give,
as if he Crowns resigned;
The sacred Vaults with joy resound.
The Altars all with Roses Crowned,
And the poor Saint in triumph brought
To offer up one holy thought.
And if to that such honor's due,
What glorie's wait, (great Queen) for you*
Chorus. And if to, etc.
If heaven thinks an humble bow
to him devoutly meant,
Then we whole Hecatombes bestow
in one devout intent;
When Queens lay youth and glory by,
To seek out Crowns of chastity:
Some brighter Stars must sure compound,
The Wreath wherewith her head is Crowned:
For more then common Honor's due
To Royal Saints, Great Queen, like you:
Chorus. For more, etc,
Then blessed be all my storms of love,
(though they discourteous were)
That on our peaceful shore has drove
a Saint, so Great, so Fair:
Now let the Boy with all his train
of griefs, go weeping back again;
Whilst you set Sail before the wind,
And leave this floating world behind.
Till spooning gently on, and fair,
You turn an Angel unaware.
Chorus. Till spooning, etc.

Confess. Now that your royal soul is flown ^oft
Upon the wings of Divine Harmony;
We Will keep it there by holy representation,
First of the vanishing glories of the world,
Its splendid entrances, its shady Exits.
Enter two Queens followed by two Ghosts, they pass slowly over the Stage. Soft
Music.
Confess. Saw you those Royal Shadows pass the round
With all the charms of Power and beauty Crowned:
Would not the glory which they did display,
Make the world think none are so blessed as they?
Alas, had they but looked on either side,
They might have seen what would have damp't their pride:
Two pining Spirits that wer'e once as fair,
Showing with sighs where they must all repair:
Such are the unseen shadows that attend
All earthly glory, and in those they end.
Now the next thing that we shall represent,
Is chaste Devotion, recluse Piety,
It Is humble entrances, its glorious Exits.
Enter two Nuns clad in white, followed by two Angels Crowned, They pass as the
former.
Confess. Saw you those Virgins pass in holy state?
Observe how Angels on their Triumphs wait:
Their Souls are as their Beauties fair and bright;
Their thoughts are as their garments pure and white:
Their dreams are Visions, and their breath is Prayer;
They Are fasted into Spirits thin as Air;
Nor can you them from holy Angels know,
Since these are Nuns above, and they below.
And now you in a solemn dance shall see,
How all these move to Divine Harmony;
Confusedly mixed each in their several States,
VValking around the changes of their Fates;
The world is a great dance in which we find
The good and bad have various turns assigned;
But when the have ended the great Masquerade,
One goes to glory, to'ther to a Shade.
They all dance.
Colim. What tumults that?
Enter a Gentleman
2 Gentle. My Lords, here is a person of unknown quality desires admission;
by's habit we conjecture it is the same that fought to day in the head of all our
Troops, and saved the Count and Princess in the field.


Osso. He Is highly welcome; let him have admission.
Enter Ladislaus disguised, followed by Paulina, Joanna, Alexey, Theodore, at a
distance, Battista, all the Lords bow to Lad.
Lad. It seems the Bridal Masque is done.
aside
Bat. So, I have crowded in among the rest,
aside To see the event of this mysterious business.

Jul. I have considerd on it, my Lord Sharnofsky, heaven and your own merits
design you for the Crown.

She takes the Crown off the Table, and presents it to Shar. who seems to
refuse it, and the Lords to constrain him.
Lad. Ye Powers!
aside
The. What Tragedies will here be straight?
aside
Paul. She Is false indeed.
aside
Shar. Great Madam.
seems to refuse
Lords. Kneel, and receive the Crown. Shar. kneels

Lad. aside Ha! is it so?
Then now I see, I have not been deceived,
Sharnofsky, as thy glory, so thy fate,
Is very near, and thus succesful villainy;
Heaven let us it to the top of glory come,
Then (draws) thus strikes it dead with unexpected doom.
Sharnofsky draw, there is one obstruction more lies in your way to all your
glories; the Duke of Curlands Sword.


Om. The Duke of Curland!

Lad. draws and discovers.
Jul. Ye Powers! the Dukel I faint Hypolita, Emilia hold me?

swoons in her woman's arms
Hyp. Help the Princess.

Shar. The Duke of Curlands Sword; and can that Sword
Be set against my breast? for what is this?

Lad. That shall afford us talk in the other world.

Shar. I fall.
Shar. falls: The Guards cali Treason, and run at the Duke: Colimsky
interposes.
Col. Hold Villains! it is the Duke your General; what cursed Devil poisoned the
Dukes soul with jealousy of his brave friend?


Theo. What fatal work is here?

Paul. Oh heavens! Joanna, what have we done?

Bat. What should this Tragical confusion mean?

Jul. What Vision have I seen? where am I?
Am I awake? or is it a Martial dream?
See, the Count bleeding? who has done this deed?

Lad. And do thou then lament him to my face?
Oh thou Apostate shame of Royal blood;
Is this thy gratitude for all the Martyrdoms
I Have suffered for thy love? It Is I have done it and done it
To revenge my injured love. -- And I but just should be,
Now I have punished him, to punish thee;
But that, alas, 'twould be so poor a deed,
My very Sword would scorn to make thee bleed;
And if my passion should the thing request,
'Twould turn in rage against his Masters breast.
No, I shall leave thee to a higher doom,
And now go wait thy lover to his Tomb.

Jul. Ha! does he go? and leave me thus in scorn, (proffers to go Guards, stop
the Traitors! I le revenge my honor, and the Counts blood; in the interim,
carry him out, and use your utmost skill and care about him


Col. Madam, he breathes, and whil^st there is life, there is hope, Guards stop
the Duke.

They carry out Shar.
The. She Will kill the Duke; but I Will not long survive him.

Jul. Curland, thou dyest; but first thou must explain
The Mysteries of this thy proud disdain;
Say then, what Fury did thee hither send,
To wound my honor, and destroy thy friend;
For none in Poland has this treason wrought,
Nor dare they wound my honor with a thought,

Lad. None dare, 'twere Sacrilege to make it bleed,
None but your valiant self dare do the deed;
And you are grown to that insulting height;
You scorn the modest whispers of the night:
Trumpets must speak, and Banners must display,
And to your Lovers arms you fight your way.

Jul. This is distraction.

Col. His Russian bondage has mislaid his reason.

Jul. He Is mad.
I once to punish him had an intent,
And now I pity him; and those thoughts repent:
And yet it may be those distractions are
Only the effect of pride, and wild despair:
The sinner finds he is damned, and prays in vain,
And now by blasphemy would case his pain.

Lad. Yes, as a man damned by a false Religion,
When he finds all his piety in vain,
Does curse his gods, and wish he had lived profane;
So all my merits lost, I now repent,
That I have been so fondly innocent,
That I in Muscovy so vain should prove,
In seeking Crowns and Armies for thy love;
And cruelly my heart refused to give,
To one who wanted it, that she might live.

Jul. What then it seems thy killing eyes have there
Done many murders too, as well as here;
And what If I thy tryumphs should disgrace,
And in a grave should hide thy conquering face,
Where Ladies hearts it might no more surprise,
Nor women be in danger of thine eyes?
Sharnofsky's blood forbids to let thee live:
Yes, Curland thou shall dye, it shall be seen
In this one glorious act, I am a Queen;
And let thy Sovereign title plead thy cause,
Let Poland talk of privilege, or Laws,
In this great doom I uncontrolled will be,
And trample on the State, their Laws, and thee:
And let the glory of thy Fate contain,
And sum up all the glory of my reign.
Guards, kill the Duke; hold, but kill him so,
That he may live within an hour or two: aside
Methinks I now a little weakness find,
And my heart tells me, I would seign be kind:
Fool that I am; I weeping melt away
Even all the Crowns, and Tryumphs of the day:
The Conqueror does quit the field and fly,
Whilst the proud captive stands insulting by;
That ever I should play so weak a part,
To be entic't thus to refign my heart?
A heart, designed for things so far above
The petty troubles and concerns of love:
Yet now led captive, can so prostrate be,
To worship him, who ought to worship me:
But for these follies I Will my self dethrone,
Forgive his sins, but will chastise my own:
Lead to the Chapel; I Will to night --

Con. Hold Madam, your soul's disordered, it must be calmed with penitence and
prayer, before you can be fit.


Jul. I cannot help it, I am but woman.
weeps
Lad. Ha! and have I wronged her?
What cursed charm has lead me in this maze?
Surely I have been abused, young Duke of Novogrod,
to Paul Have you not told me lies? I fear you have,
And done it to revenge your friend the Prince.

Bat. Hark, he calls my Princess Duke of Novogrod.
aside
Jo. Discover to him --

Al. Madam, undisguize; and let the Duke affront you if he dares.

Paul. Yes Sir, I Have led you in this maze of jealousy;
And done it to revenge my injured honor.
discovers
Om. A woman!

Jul. A woman!

Paul. Yes, and a Princess Madam,
Great as your self by birth, greater in misfortunes;
The daughter of the mighty Czar of Muscovy,
Become a wandering Pilgrim, hidden lies
In the poor Hermitage of this disguize;
By Curlands treachery, now brought so low,
I even am ashamed my self to know.
weeps aside.
Bat. Now I perceive the Mystery.

Lad. The Princess Paulina.

Paul. And dare thou mention then Paulina's name,
And proudly stand without remorse or shame?
Because in war thou have a captive been,
Will thou in spite, thy victories begin
On Virtue, on Religion, Love, and me,
And hate my name, because I pitied thee?
When all the world forsook thee, I alone
Bestowed thy life, and made thy chains my own,
Yea more, so fondly I betrayed my flame,
At thy petition, I thy wife became.
When Crowns lay at my feet, I married thee,
Who had no Armies, Crowns, nor liberty;
Yet promised one, but meant in that above,
A Crown of Martyrdom, for injured love.
Yet after all, (perfidious man;) to fly
And leave me in thy Chains condemned to die?
And when I found thee, basely to disclaim
Thou had relation to Paulina's name?
Know Duke, I do abhor thee, and to day,
This Hand, this Steel, had ta^ne thy life away,
But that some power did the blow withstand,
And when I proffered, did withhold my hand;
But my revenge now alters its design,
The death it aimed at thee, now shall be mine,
Not that I dye, because I grieve to part,
But thus to punish my rebellious heart.

Jo. Al. Oh, she has hurt her self; Oh, Madam; Madam:
Offers to skil^ her self, but Jo. Al. snatch the Dagger.
Paul. What means this cruelty? oh, let me die:

Bat. I now perceive the maze in which they wander;
Oh, I have been too slow in my discovery.

Jul. And have I wept and bled for this?

Lad. What cursed Fantome did abuse my shape?
As ever, heaven, thou'st regard to truth
Or innocence* now by thy thunder show
If it was I, that wronged this Lady so.

Jo. Oh horrid, horrid!

Al. Oh immortal Powers! and can you suffer this?

Jul. Prodigy!

Con. Oh! Madam, rule your haughty passions,
There is a Ring of Angels made about you,
To see how you will come off in this great combat.

Jul. And let 'um make a Ring -- they to themselves
The pleasure of revenge would not deny,
Were they but flesh and blood as well as I.

Bat. I must reveal in time, before more mischief ensues. --
Royal Madam --

Jul. Ha? what art thou?

Bat. I Am one, whom if you please
Can in one word rectify all mistakes.
It Is a deceitful marriage then breeds this
Confusion; the Princess was not married
To the Duke, but to my Prince Demetrius,
He who to day was (Madam!) in your Tent
to Jul. Condemned to die --

Lad. My innocence is cleared by Miracle.

Paul. Is Prince Demetrius here? and did he abuse me so?

Bat. Madam, he ventured on so grand an enterprise,
Partly to allay the torment of his love,
And partly for revenge upon your Father,
Who having promised you, as a reward to him,
For taking the Duke prisoner, slighted his Royal word,
Upon the news of the King of Polands death,
And proffers you to the Duke, with a great army,
Only in hopes to make you Queen of Poland;
The Duke indeed did nobly slight the proffers.

Jul. So Count Sharnofsky said.
What have I done to wound that gallant man?

Bat. My fiery Prince resenting the affront,
As proudly as the Emperor did his,
'Twixt rage and love, did by a wile entice you
Unto the Castle where the Duke was prisoner,
Pretending danger; penitence and love,
And (if you if you remember) married you in the dark,
Because he would not trust (as he pretended)
The Priest himself with such a dangerous secret.

Om. Amazement!

Bat. And e're you could discover the mistake,
You fled away in a fright, and ere you went,
Bribed the Cipier for the Dukes liberty;
Then he in innocence forsaking you,
And you as innocent in pursuing him,
Occasioned this unhappiness.

Col. Heavens, 'twas this the Cardinal took advanage on to breed all this
disorder.


Om. Now all is come to light.

Paul. How have I been abused? unhappy I, born to misfortunes.

Bat. See, my Prince is here!
Enter Demetius and Landlord struggling with the Guard.
Lad. I think my Landlord, the Prince perhaps was the other strange lodged in
the same house: petty humor of fortune!


Land. Come honest Cardinal Bembo, do thou not remember
to the Guard I made thee a Cardinal at the Council of Trent,
Have thou forgot Pope Paul's great Toe, boy?

Them. Slave, shall I stay here all night?

Guard. Well what would you see? all is done.

Land. Nay, I told you Id'e get you in, if any body could; the Rogues all know
me as well as a beggar knows his Clap-dish.


Them. Curland, have I found thee? it is not thy friends,
draws Nor the Queens Guards that shall protect thee.

Bat. Hold Sir, all is well.
holds Them.
Them. Not till Curland or I fall.

Land. Why, what a mad fellow's this? draw in the presence; why Sirrrah, do you
know where you are, you malapert lad you? I shall be hanged for bringing in a
quarrelsome Jackanapes, if I had known, I would have kept him at home, I warrant
him.


Bat. O! hold, and turn your eyes on that sad object that there lies weeping,
bleeding for your crimes.


Them. My Princess, I Am in a trance; oh bloody Vision! what cursed hand has
done this wretched deed?


Paul. It Is you have done it, oh Demetrius,
How have you injured me? what horrid dangers
And miseries have you exposed me to?

Land. This young man has been in a scuffle, I see.

Paul. I Would lost my life under my Fathers anger,
Had it not been for this good Count Alexey,
Who had the charge of me, and helped me away;
And now in passion I have chased the Duke,
Thinking him guilty of forsaking me
His lawful Wife, and made him kill his friend,
Injure his Princess; and had fallen himself
By my revenge, this Steel had pierced his breast;
But heaven to whom his innocence was known,
Thus made me turn the blow against my own.

Land. What Is the meaning of all this blind story?

Them. And have I injured thus the Duke, and you?
What miseries, what torments are my due?
First by some slave, or Villain, let me dye,
And when I Am dead, then stab my memory.
By my own hand, or yours, to dye, would be
A death too brave for such a Fiend as me:
And when I Am buried, to my Grave repair,
And throw in scorn my ashes in the air:
But lest you prove unjust, and pardon all
My horrid crimes, thus at your feet I fall.
profers to fall an his sword, and is prevented by Ladisl Paul. Bat.
Land. What art mad? will thou kill thy self, sweetheart? bless me, he makes my
heart ache; take the sword from him, fie upon it, who lets such young fools have
swords, that don't know how to use 'um?


Paul. Hold Prince Demetrius! live, your wife Paulina does beg it of you.


Land. Your wife Paulina; what, I warrant this young man is that young man's
wife; why sure my house was enchanted to day, lodged Princes, and Dukes, like
Mummers and Masqueraders; and Women and Wenches in men's clothes, and
Cloakbags, and scufflings, and they kill one another* and they are alive again,
and this, and that, and I know not what; here is work indeed.


Them. And can you pardon me my kindest Princess?

Paul. Yes, my dear Demetrius, I have charity enough to pardon you, and virtue
enough to love you.


Them. Blessed minute; I shall dye with happiness.

Al. And I with joy.
Al. weeps
Them. Now generous Ladislaus, can you forgive me?

Lad. My Princely friend.

Land. I, -- hug, -- but you are but a couple of Knaves both on yo^

Paul. Great Madam, may not we embrace, as well as our (...)

Jul. Yes Madam, and perhaps with an affection as generous as theirs


Om. Celestial sight!


Col. The Charm that raised this 'o tempest confusion
Is now undone, the horrid Spectre's vanished;
All ends in friendship, let it end in glory;
Love now is Crowned, let honor be so too;
Let Us place the Crown upon the head of him
Who in a thousand fields has purchased it.

Land. With all my heart truly, though I must tell you, you are none of
th'honestest to run away and pay me no rent.

aside
Col. Great Duke, it is decreed you are our King,
And you our Queen.
to Jul.
Om. Long live Ladislaus King of Poland, and Duke of Curland.


Om. Long live Juliana Queen of Poland, and Duchess of Curland.


Lad. Jul. My Lords, we thank you all for this great honor, And shall
endeavor still to make this Crown Rather the Kingdoms glory than our own.


Land. Your humble servant; no body questions it; well now an't please your
Majesty --


Lad. Go, I forgive thee.


Land. Forgive me; thank you heartily: I come to dun him for money, and he
cries he forgives me; right Courtier In Faith; but if you forgive me, I will not
forgive you: in the first place, for cheating me of five thousand Crowns, but
that I Will take no notice of (aside Why Sir, for my Rent, and several other
courtesies, as procuring, conniving, angling for Trouts; no courtesy in this
age; come, come Sir, a feeling, a feeling, and I Will take no notice, otherwise
my tongue does naturally hang so loose, -- but nothing is better for it than a
little Aurum Potabile.


Lad. This fellow is strangely impertinent.


Land. Besides, do I deserve nothing for my honesty for concealing you? I knew
you well enough.


Lad. I doubt Landlord, if you had, my head had not stuck fast upon my
shoulders.


Land. It may be Sir, if I had been put to a great straight indeed, I might
have borrowed a little money upon your Nose, or so --


Lad Rid me Theodore of this fellow, and give him a hundred Dollars.


Land. Thank your Mijesty.

Enter one of the Guard who whispers Colimsky.
Col. Sir, the Grand Marshal and the other Lords desire to have admission to
your Majesty to implore your Grace and pardon. to the King.


Lad. Bring them in.

Enter Guard with Ossolinsky, Cassonofsky, and Lubomi^sky as prisoners.
Osso. Casso. Heaven Crown your Majesty with a long and happy Reign.


Jul. Oh my good Lords; what have you changed your tunes?

But you poor men sung but the Card'nals Notes:
My Lord, forgive'um. Thou malicious Count
That would have murdered me in my Tent to day
And mixed my blood with my great Fathers ashes,
Know slave, some of my Guards should strike thee dead,
But that thy very baseness saves thy head.
Who merits my revenge and hate, must prove
As brave and great, as he who gains my love.
I pardon thee, retire out of my sight --
And now go home, repent thy crimes and see
If heaven will be generous like me.

Lad. My Lords, you have your pardons; your Lives and Fortunes we shall not
touch, your Offices and Governments we must bestow on men of better maxims:
Count Colimsky, the Batton of Grand Marshal we confer on you: Their Governments
and Palatinates we shall consider of.


Paul. I Will beg a command of the King for you, good Count Alexey.


Alex. No Madam, I Will serve none but your Highness; let me but live in your
favor, it is all the glory I am ambitious of.


Casso. Now will I go home and hang one half of my Slaves, starve the other;
kick my wife out o'doors, be drunk nine and fifty hours together, breed a
mutiny at home, and a Rebellion in the Kingdom; and at last loose my head for
my pains, and there is an end of good Count Cass^nofsky.


Lad. Now let us all go visit my brave friend.

Enter a Gentleman
Gentle. Great Sir, I now came from him, his wound is searched, and is found
not so dangerous as first was feared; at his return to sense, he seemed amazed,
as having lost all memory, how he came wounded so, nor was he concerned, but
only inquired about the Queens health.


Lad. Brave friend!


Jul. The Count was ever generous.


Om. Lights for the King and Queen.


Lad. Thus do our Fortunes lead us blindly on,
And to be happy we are first undone;
And thus the mighty storms have all combined,
To cast thee on the shore which I designed.
And now I Am blessed with happiness above,
My own ambition with a Crown and Love.

FINIS.
The EPILOGVE spoken by Paulina, and Landlord.
Land. NOw Gentlemen, a word.

Paul. How now, you Lout,
What are you speaking?

Land. Now thou have put me out,
I know not what it was.

Paul. Oh, I can tell!
The Epilogue; yet it becomes you well,
You Gentlemen! and why I pray to them,
What do the Ladies merit no esteem?
Good Sirs! I know not whether it is your due,
But Poets still direct themselves to you:
turning to the Audience. Don't the Foppes know in this and every age,
It Is beauty rules the World, much more the Stage.
When you have done your best, the Seribling Clowns
Lie at the mercy of the Ladies frowns:
And not a Critic of you all but knows,
No reparties are half so sharp as those.

Land. Why prithee, 'twas the women wits I meant,
It Is not the men I Am sure that pay my Rent;
For they are grown so Hect'ring now adays
They kick my Customers, and damn their Plays,
That I am ruined by your Critic Blades;
What dee think I keep Fiddlers, Men, and Maids
For nothing? and besides that dreadful charge,
I Am building a new house that is brave and large;
If you are so curious as you have been before,
I must even lay the Key under the Door.

Paul. Prithee have done?

Land. No Sir, I Have more to say
Then if the Liquor I ha br^ach't to day
B^ good, commend it, but if it be dull,
In Faith even da^m, and ramm your belly full.

Paul. Away rude Fool! fair English Diett then,
Senate of Ladies, lower House of Men,
I bumbly pray decree before you go
If Marriage like mine be right or no,
At least resolve in pity of my pain,
To sit to morrow on the same again.

FINIS.

