AN ELEGY Upon the Right Honorable The late EARL of OSSORY.
IF all perfections that accomplish Man,
With Piety and Prudence in the Van;
If generosity of Birth and Mind,
A Soul next to Divinity refined;
If Magnanimity by Sea and Land,
Which all force, less than Thunder, durst withstand;
If Faith to Heaven, to Prince, to Parents, Wife,
Friends, Enemies; to all concerns but Life;
If a Kings love, who Merit well defines,
And justly on great Ormonds Merit shines:
Might all this, with Three Nations have reprieved
One precious Life, then Ossory had lived;
Dear Ossory? Loved and Admired by all:
But greatest things under the Sun must fall,
And Sun too, when his fatal night is come;
When Heavens own light shall show the day of Doom.
His Soul seemed (like that Sun) prepared and dressed
For common good, shined to himself the least:
Pregnant in Council, Valiant in the Field,
His Honor flexible, his Heart was Steeled:
So clear and single was his ^udgments Eye,
Wise SHAFTESBURY in itt, no Mote could spy,
Though Learned and Critical on every Theme,
Can magnify a Mote into a Beam.
How! great and good, yet undisturbed still?
Where Is then the Probate of just Vertu's Will?
Where is the Touchstone of Illustrious Actions,
Envy, that Viper of corroding Factions.
Unharm'd and quiet? both alive and dead?
It Is strange! he had no Paralytick Head.
This was the glory of his matchless Fame,
Always to Do well, and to Hear the same.
Let MONS preserve the Echo of his praise,
Not to be silenced by an Age of days:
Where he midst flaming Swords undaunted stood,
Till Scarlet died French Lillies into Blood.
Now Bullets threaten (from all quarters hurled)
The consummation not of War but World:
While the bold Britains are resolved to see
A Conquest of Impossibility.
When (like their Friends the Moors) our wary French
Were lodged (they thought) safe in a Daring Trench.
Safe as great Jove, when he Grenades throws
On Mortals, too weak to award his blows.
Yet in despite of natural Strength and Art,
Attacked by OSSORIES brave Hand and Heart.
While the amazed Foe loosing Ground and Breath
Instead of fighting gazed themselves to Death.
Mean time Swords, Muskets, Cannon never cease,
Till they proclaimed a good, but ill-timed Peace;
A Peace (may France not envy that proud word)
Great Britain purchased by her Pen and Sword.
Mourn England, mourn over this thy broken Staff:
None (except Moors and French) have cause to laugh
A Life too short measured by Months and Years;
By Virtue older than his gravest Peers:
A short life Mathematically spent,
Like Their vast Punctum, large without extent.
Heaven on his Heir more numerous days advance,
To fix his Honor and Inheritance.
This fair paternal Copy if he can
Transcribe, 'twill make him more than Lord or Man
Our pious Soldier briskly parted hence,
Stormed Heaven (like MONS) with holy violence
So heavenly Envoys to some Martyr sent,
With one brisk motion stem the Firmament.
Serene and free from dis-harmonious Jars,
Of untuned Conscience or tumultuous Wars.
What if the greatness of his Spirit might
His Fever mount to an Immortal hight?
Farewell (blessed Saint) may thy Example prove
As Soverain to England as thy Love;
When thou at Sea did more than wonders do,
Was It civil to the Dutch and beat them too.
Act high (great ORMOND) as You still have done
Fill up the absence of your shaded Son.
To whom is owing this Immortal pride,
Was great, yet without Envy lived and died.
Brave LUXENBURG when You his Name do hear,
Confess his Courage, and the English fear.
And let the Name of OSSORY be spread
Through th'Universe, to Conquer now he is dead:
To convert Heathens by his Saint like Name,
And moralize fallen Christians by his Fame.
No wonder our great Hero died so soon,
Too bright a Star to shine below the Moon.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for the Author. 1680. 124.

J: Crouch:


