THE Country Wit.

A COMEDY: ACTED at the Dukes Theater.

Written by Mr. CROWN.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for James Magnes, and Richard Bentley, at the
Post Office in Russel Street, in Covent Garden, 1675.

TO THE Right HONORABLE CHARLES, Earl of MIDDLESEX, one of the Gentlemen of
His Majesty's Bedchamber.
My Lord,
IT is a bold Expedition which a Writer undertakes, when he sends his Forces
abroad into the World; he is to encounter Enemies of all kinds; not only, vast
populous Provinces of effeminate understanding, who often defeat with their
numbers; but Bold, Barbarous, Hardy, and invincible Fools who will dye upon the
Turfe, rather than yield: nay, and his friends too often break their League,
and send secret supplies to his Enemies. All Reputations look on themselves as
invaded, and every one pretends to Reputation. Fame is a great Common, where
every Cottager thinks he has a right, and will rather suffer it all to lie
waste, than any part to be enclosed. Every man thinks himself by Birth, a Wit,
as every Spaniard thinks himself a Gentleman; he has as good Blood in his
veins, as Persons of the greatest Dignities, only wants their Titles; that is
to say, every Man would be a Wit, if he had it. Yet as much value, as they have
for it in themselves, they hate no man more, than he who about ^s in that, for
which they would have themselves esteemed. But the enmity of poor vulgar Heads
were nothing, if Men of the first rank of Wit, had not Feudes among themselves;
It Is a strange Lunacy that possesses 'em: a man that has the largest Habitation
in Fame, will yet think all his Windows darkened, if another soars over him.
Men have not the same Phrensies in other things. The greatest lover of Music
in the World, does not think he shares one Note less of it, for a crowd of
Listners; what ever quarrels there have been among Trading Nations, about
engrossing Commerce, none ever fought to ingross the Winds, because no Ship had
the less for another having his Sails full: and yet Wit-Adventurers,
perpetually contend for the breath of the multitude, and think themselves
becalmed, if any one has a gale. In short, a Writer is looked upon as an Invader
of the World; and all Mankind are in Arms against him. In such a desperate
condition, he must implore, of some potent Person, either his Conduct, or at
least leave to awe the World with his name; and I know no greater Name, nor
more able to afford me protection than your Lordships. It is but pretending
your Lordship favors this Play, and that shall give it safe Conduct through
understandings of every Degree and Climate; it can pass through no Region,
where your Lordship has not an absolute Command. The Traders to the hot
Southern Climes of Wit, find in your Lordship the Golden Coast, vast heaps of
that Wit, which passes current in the World, and bears the Images of others,
are known to be coined out of your Lordships Oar; but nothing can be richer,
than that of your own Refining. More temperate Heads which ache under the
oppression of that Heat, delight themselves in your Lordships Courtesy,
Generosity, Integrity, Honor, and all the more familiar Virtues: no part of
Mankind, but may find some particular Excellence or other in your Lordship, to
please them. The Virtues of this age, methinks converse with one another, like
the Wits of it, in parties and factions; seldom uniting together; every Virtue
takes a House by it self, and there debauches with a thousand Vices. How often
do we see Wit, inseparably associating with that Rascal, Ill Nature; and those
Fopps, Conceits, and Selfishness, and not one virtue in his company? as often
do we find courage blustering by it self, and Wit, not daring to come near him.
Integrity, Friendship, and Honesty, are so miserably under the hatches, one
knows not where to find those poor Creatures; they never in any age, lived in
much height, they are not born to great fortune, and seldom acquire one;
Knavery has the only Dutch Genius, to get an Estate, but yet they never were so
down as now, they now scarce at all appear, or if they do, we find Wit not
often in their company. And thus I might discourse, should I go round to all
the Moral Virtues; But they are not all so unsociable, as never to meet, they
can come together when they like the place, and they are so fond of your
Lordships Soul, not one of 'em fails of resorting thither. And as people use to
dress themselves well, when they are to appear in great Assemblies; so those
excellent qualities, which we often find slovenly Habited in private Lodgings,
by themselves, do now in so much good company, shine in your Lordships Breast,
in their richest Equipage: That repairing to your Lordships Protection, I march
not so much under the Conduct of one, as of many Great Men, united in one. But
far be it from me, to sacrifice such a Hecatomb, to the multitude; no, rather
let me offer this, and all their applause to your Lordship; for after all, that
is my real design. It is true, my Lord, I have not much of it to lay at your
Feet. The Play I present you, cannot boast of extraordinary Merit; it is not of
the first kind of Plays, a thing may be good in its kind, and yet an ill thing,
because the kind is ill; those who do not like low Comedy, will not be pleased
with this, because a great part of it consists of Comedy, almost sunk into
Farce; yet, if they will allow it well in its kind, I shall desire no more
favor from 'em; any may perceive, I never intended to build high, by the poor
foundation I laid, and yet, as it happened, the Building stood firmer than I
expected, and withstood the battery of a whole party, who did me the Honor to
profess themselves my enemies, and made me appear more considerable than ever I
thought my self, by showing, that no less than a confederacy was necessary to
ruin my Reputation; had they overturned this, they could not have hurt me,
since I had long before parted from it, as a trifle, where I never intended to
repose; but as it happened, I had the diversion to see the Play stand, and them
choakt with the dust they made about it: if they would have done me the favor
to have taken me into their society, I would have joined with them in damning a
great part of it; for I designed it for Damnation; but if they had done so, I
fear we should not have agreed in what part: for as if we were designed for
enmity, with all that I loathed, they seemed extremely diverted. All this, I
say, my Lord, only to offer your Lordship my Present, as clean as I can make
it, which I take the more pains about, because I offer it not as a Bribe, but
purely a Present. The common declared design of Dedication, like the concealed
one of Devotion, is in other terms Bribery; Men do not pray to serve Heaven,
but pray that Heaven may serve them; so Dedicators, who trouble great Men, only
to gain their Protection, sacrifice not to their Patrons, but sacrifice their
Patrons to themselves. I declare, I beg not your Lordships Protection, but
Acceptance of this Play, and then let it perish if it will -- Victims ought to
dye, nor does it come to your Altars, without a Crown, and one received from a
Royal Hand; a Fortune more Glorious than I could expect I designed it, (as any
one may see by the low Characters) only to serve an Apprentiship to the City,
but being honored with the Kings favor, I thought I ought to treat it with
Respect, and I could not do it greater Honor, than to put it in your Lordships
service; and so I discharged my self of a double Debt, and paid all under one,
the duty I owed, to what the King favored, and the much greater Duty and Honor
I owe to a person, whom Heaven has favored with Qualities admired by all the
World, but by none more than

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble, And Obedient Servant, JOHN CROWN.

PROLOGUE.
OH, Sirs, this is a monstrous witty Age
Wit grown a drugg, has quite undone the Stage.
The mighty Wits now come to a new Play.
Only to taste the scraps they flung away.
Poets new Treat you at your own expense,
All but the Poets now, abound in Sense;
City and Country is with Wit o'rflown,
Weeds grow not faster there, than Wits in Town:
New Wits and Poets every day are bred,
Each hour, some budding Criticque shows his Head.
Plays are so common, they ere little prized,
And to be but a Poet, is despised.
The saucy Tongue, much boldness would display,
That durst in spite of all this plenty, say
Poets and Criticques too, are very rare,
Yes, Sirs, we to our sorrow find they are;
More to the making of a Wit there goes,
Than niggard Nature commonly bestows.
A Writer at the least, it is not a Grain,
Only to season, and preserve the Brain;
From favoring of the Fool, nor at the best
To spice Discourse with an insipid Jest.
Writing, like Roman Gloves, should scent a room,
Each thought should have in it, a strong perfume.
But oh, few smell of Wit, so very rank,
Nature of Late is turned a Mountebank,
A Winter, or a Daffy, and puts off
For Wit and Sense, some foolish Chymick Stuff.
A Quintessence, but not of Wit, Heaven knows,
Which she to all most liberally throws.
Noise in the Cit, and noise upon the Stage,
Who would not think it were a witty Age
Never more noise and talk of Wit was known,
The triflingst wretch, himself a Judge will own,
And on his Bench of Judgment, frowning fit,
And Dubb the Poet which he likes, a Wit.
Oh, would these quacking tricks, but Nature have,
And not the poor unhappy World deceive
With Heat which seems like Wit, but is not so,
Then real Wit, into esteem would grow;
Men would not foolishly then take in hand,
To Judge, or Write but first would understand;
Then he, who has but little Wit, would know it,
And not presume to be a Judge, or Poet.
The Persons Represented by SIR Thomas Rash, Father to Christina. -- Mr.
Sandford. Ramble, a wild young Gentleman of the Town, in love with Christina.
-- Mr. Batterton. Merry, -- his Man -- Mr. Harris. Sir Mannerly Shallow, a
foolish Country Knight. -- Mr. Nooks. Booby, a dull Country Clown, Servant to
Sir Mannerly. -- Mr. Underhill. Lord Drybone, an old debauched Lord, that keeps
a Wench, and is abused, and jilted by her. Mr. Medbourn. Rash, a Porter. -- Mr.
Leigh. Women. Lady Faddle -- Aunt to Sir Mannerly. -- Mrs. Batterton.
Christina, Daughter to Sir Thomas Rash, in love with Ramble. -- Mrs. Leigh.
Betty Frisque, -- a young jilting Wench, kept by Lord Drybone. -- Mrs. Currer.
Siss, her Maid. -- Goody Rash, an Herb-Woman, the Porters Wife. -- Mrs. Norris.
Winnifrid Rash, her Daughter. -- Isabella, Cbristina's Maid. -- Mrs. Leigh.
Constable, Watch, Fiddles, Servants, Attendants.

SCENE, The Pall Mall. -- in the year, 1675.

THE Country Wit.
ACT. I.
SCENE, Sir Thomas Rash 's House.
Enter Sir Thomas Rash, Christina, and Isbella. Chris. MArry to morrow Sir!


Sir Tho. Ay, to morrow Sir; why not to morrow Sir? what great affairs have you
to do that you cannot marry to morrow, as well as to morrow come twelvemonth?


Isab. What a rash giddy old man is this; he will (aside. compel my Lady to
marry one she never saw, and to a marriage he has not thought on above these
ten days.


Chris. If I must marry Sir, I think marriage is a great affair; and so great a
one, that I ought to consider of it more weeks and months, then there are hours
betwixt this and to morrow.


Sir Tho. Oh pray do you throw Considering-caps aside, they are not for your
wear: No Considering-cap was ever made fit for a woman's head yet.


Isab. How! no Considering-cap fit a woman's --


Sir Tho. Why hussy who bid you prate? -- I say the Marrying, Loving,
Embracing part is yours; (turn (...) the Considering part is mine: I have
Considered enough of it.


Chris. I doubt not, Sir, but you have prudently co(...) it: but whether enough
or no, perhaps may be a que(...) please to remember Sir, but few days are past
since you first thought of it; and almost the same hour you first thought of
it, you resolved of it; and though I doubt not but you considered of it as well
as possible for so short a time, yet certainly you did not allow your self time
enough for so weighty an affair.


Sir Tho. Not time enough! why what had I to consider of that required time?
Here Is my daughter Christina and 5000, l. Portion; there is Sir Mannerly
Shallow, a young Baronet, and 2000 l. a year. In short, I Will have no more
Considering; the affair is concluded, Articles are drawn up betwixt the Lady
Faddle and me, by the consent of her Nephew Sir Mannerly Shallow, and Sir
Mannerly will be in Town to morrow; and to morrow he shall marry you, before he
sleeps, nay before his Boots are off, nay before he lights off his Horse, he
shall marry you a Horseback but he shall marry you to morrow.


Isab. And he shall bed her a Horseback too, shall he?


Sir Tho. Why hussy will you be interrupting still? -- get you out of doors.


Isab. I have done Sir.


Sir Tho. I say, get you out of doors.


Chris. Prithee Isabella let him alone.


Isab. What flesh and blood can endure to see such a Fools match? -- by a Fool,
to a Fool; if reports be true.


Sir Tho. Your flesh and blood, Sawce-box, -- or I Will set you out of the Room.


Chris. Give over, Isabella, when I forbid you. Well Sir, but suppose Sir
Mannerly upon his arrival should not like me.


Sir Tho. Not like you! he shall like you, or I Will try it out at Law with him:
I have it under black and white, and my black and white, shall make him like
your red and white, in spite on's teeth; No, no, there is no such clause in our
Articles, there is no such proviso, he is to marry you absolutely Bona fide, and
with a Notwithstanding.


Isab. Marry her with a Bona fide, and a Notwithstanding!

(...)ff's this? what is his Bona fide?

(...) What Is that to you, hussy? will you never have done?

(...)y Cane over your Bona fide, I Will make you repent (...)ng.


Chris. Have you no respect, Isabella, to my Commands? don't you see that your
talking does but inrage him?


Isab. Who can endure to have you thus rashly thrown away on a Fool, as all the
world says Sir Mannerly is?


Chris. Let me alone with the management of my own affairs. Well Sir, but
supposing Fortune should flatter me with inclinations to Sir Mannerly.


Isab. A worthy piece of flattery! -- I have done.

(Sir Tho. looks angerly.
Chris If I should be so unfortunate, not to have the same inclinations for
him; I hope Sir you will not compel me to marry one I cannot love, and
consequently to be the most miserable of women.


Sir Tho. One you cannot love! Maid, you shall love him, I Will make you love
him; what cannot you love 2000 l. a year, and a fair Mansion House, and all
conveniences as fine as any in all Cumberland?


Chris. No doubt Sir but I shall like his Estate, and his House, and his
Movables well enough. --


Isab. But the main Movable, the Man, there is the question!


Sir Tho. Well, sawciness; you talk very boldly, pretty box of a Baronet of
2000 l. a year, to call him a Movable: -- but I will make her love the main
Movable. --


Isab. I there is the thing: -- if she will like the main Movable; if the main
Movable will please her.


Sir Tho. Well, well, it shall please her: I Will make it please her.


Isab. Pray Sir lay aside Passion, and let us Reason the case a little.


Chris. Isabella, don't you see that you provoke my Father?


Sir Tho. How, would you Reason? Come then, have at you; let her alone, I Will
give her free leave to plead what she can: since she would Reason, I will
Reason with her: come.


Isab. You will own Sir, that Sir Mannerly Shallow is a Country Gentleman.


Sir Tho. And so I would have him.


Isab. One that never so much as saw London.


Sir Tho. As I would have him.


Isab. One that never had any thing but Country breeding.


Sir Tho. As I would have him.


Isab. One that knows nothing but what belongs to Dogs and Horses; that never
saw a better Assembly, then what meet at Fairs, Cock-fights, and Horse-races.


Sir Tho. Just as I would have him.


Isab. Well then, is it possible for a Lady (such a one as my Lady) that has
never breathed out of the Air of the Town;


Sir Tho. And by consequence never in wholesome Air.


Isab. Who has always lived to the height and Gallantry of it;


Sir Tho. To the height of the Foppery of it.


Isab. And conversed with the most Refined Wits of the times;


Sir Tho. With the most debauched Rascals of the times.


Isab. Should ever endure a dull Country Clown, and a melancholy Country life?


Sir Tho. Ay hussy, better then a lewd, fantastical, debauched Town-Fop, and a
scandalous Town-life.


Isab. You are scandalized at debauchery Sir: I will prove the
Country-Gentlemen are full as debauched, as the very lewdest men of the Town:
Nay their debaucheries are the more rude, and brutish of the two, and are only
thought innocent, because they are insipid.


Sir Tho. How! more debauched then the Town-Rascals! the very Rake-hells and
scum of Iniquity! that run up and down from Tavern to Tavern, and from
Bawdy House to Bawdy House, and get so many Poxes, and Claps, that half their
Estates scarce pay for the Cure of them.


Isab. And is that worse then running from Alehouse to Alehouse, and Farm to
Farm, and getting so many Bastards, that half their Estates will scarce pay for
the maintaining of them?


Sir Tho. Men that are always quarrelling, and fighting, and duelling.


Isab. Men that are always quarrelling, and never fighting nor duelling.


Sir Tho. Men that turn away their Wives, and keep Whores in their houses.


Isab. Men that beat their Wives, and keep Whores in their houses to boot.


Sir Tho. Do Country Gentlemen keep Whores in their houses?


Isab. Yes, what are their Housekeepers, and Nurses, and Servants, I Would fain
know? --


Sir Tho. Are they their Whores? You lie, hussy, you lie.


Isab. You lie.


Chris. Pray Father.

(Sir Tho. with his Cane runs after Isab.
Isab. Sir Thomas -- to beat her, but is held by Christina. Oh Sir Thomas, I do
but argue; did you not give me free le^ve to say what I could in Argument?


Sir Tho. Is giving the lie an Argument? hussy, you saucy --


Isab. I have done, I have done Sir; I Will dispute no more.


Sir Tho. You had not best, hussy. -- And for you, Madam, who began the
Argument, that are at your Likes, and your Not Likes; and your Inclinations,
and your Compulsions, and I know not what; know that I expect an entire
submission to my Commands: prepare without more Logic, and Syllogism, to marry
Sir Mannerly the minute he comes to Town, or in plain terms to get out of my
doors: If you refuse him for your Husband, know I will disown you for my
Daughter; and see how you will live to the height and Gallantry of the Town then:
see if the Refined Wits will maintain you; go to the Refined Wits, go; --
Refined Wits with a Pox! Unrefin'd, lewd, debauched Fops, that scarce ever read
a Book in their lives, except it were a Play; that understand nothing but
writing Lampoons upon civil people; breaking of Jests on all things, turning
all things Civil and Sacred into Ridicule, as they call it; Ridicule, there is a
pretty Bastard word; a Son of a whore of the Times, Ridicule: No more ado but
prepare to marry Sir Mannerly, or I Will turn you into Ridicule.


Chris Good Sir, what need all this Tempest of Passion? I do not refuse your
Commands.


Sir Tho. Tempest of Passion; Oh, you are at your Metaphors are you? -- Tempest
of Passion; -- Virgin my Tempest of Passion is, to drive you a Ground upon the
Shallows; there is a Trope, for your Trope: to show you a broad Jacobus or a
Carolus Wit of the last age, is (I take it) of as much value, as a little
Guiney Wit of this. -- But you forsooth, and your Refined Wits, think there
were never any Wits but your selves; that your Fathers were all a Pack of
honest marrying Fools, that had no more wit then to bestow all their Love upon
their Wives, and all their Estates upon their Children; to starve themselves of
all pleasure, in a Conjugal Pound, that so the young Filleys may wince, and
neigh, amongst the Mares in the fat Meadows: I must confess we were all Fools
in the event; for had we known we should have gotten such an age of Rakeshames
as we have, we should rather have conspired together to have unpeopled the
Land; we have a great deal to Answer for lying with our Wives: -- But though we
were Wits, we were no Prophets, we could not foresee what the age would prove;
for if we had, In Faith we had mump'd your Refined Wits; they should never have
known what Lampoon and Ridicule was.


Chris. Dear Sir, what need you continue in this anger, and discompose your
self? I shall endeavor to submit to your Commands. -- But pray Sir give me
leave to say one thing, and be not angry.


Sir Tho. Well, come, come.


Chris. Nay but promise me not to be angry.


Sir Tho. Well, come, come.


Chris. Have you forgot already, Sir, you have as good as engaged me to Mr.
Ramble; that all his Friends daily expect when the Match shall be concluded.


Sir Tho. Oh are you there about! I thought it would break out at last: -- I
have pumpt you now In Faith: -- And have you so little wit, or honor in you, so
little of the pride of the House of Rash, to love a wild, lewd, debauched
Fellow, who never sought any thing but to abuse you; who pretended honorable
Articles, on no design but to get within your Sconces and Half-moons, and then
seize on your Garrison, and deceive you.


Chris. How do you know, Sir, his purposes were ill? did he ever reveal 'em to
you? I am sure he never did, nor durst to me.


Sir Tho. How do I know! do not I see how he behaves himself to all women? he
has not been come from France above three months, and here he has debauched
four Women, and fought five Duels; not a Keeper in the Town can preserve his
Do from him; and does not he come every Night here in the Pall Mall, under our
own Noses, Serenading with his Fiddles, and Fools, and at every Bush, where he
thinks there is a Hare for his Game, setting up a hollow? --


Isab. Nay indeed Madam there is too much truth in this; I must needs say, I do
not think him a man worthy of you: and though I would not have you married to a
Fool you cannot love, neither would I have you married to a false man, that
does not love you, at least, not half so much as you merit.


Chris. Do thou conspire with my Father too, to make me wretched?


Isab. I cannot but join with him in the truth.


Sir Tho. O ho! are you convinced? then I perceive, hussy, you disputed only
for the sake of disputing.


Chris. All is not truth that is reported; he may love the conversation of
women, out of the Ayriness and Gayetie of his temper, and yet have no ill
design.


Sir Tho. Ayriness and Gayetie of his temper! Leudness and Debauchery of his
temper; and, Maid, I know what you mean by your pleading for him: you mean to
run away with him, do you?


Chris. I scorn the thought Sir.


Sir Tho. I shall not trust your scorn; I will have better security: -- I will
make you fast enough to Sir Mannerly, as soon as ever he comes, I assure you:
and for Ramble, if ever he approaches my doors, I will fight him, nay I Will
fight him where e're I meet him: and so get you to your Chamber, and prepare
all things for to morrow. -- A light here, a light; who waits there? -- no
body; where are my people?

[Sir Tho. goes out.
Isab. I see Sir Thomas is resolved --

There Is no avoiding, Madam.


Chris. What shall I do? I am almost distracted.


Isab. There is nothing to be done, but to call in your heart as soon as you
can; you see it is in a public Banquers hands that deals with so many, that it
is impossible but he must break with some: some will scarce ever get their
Interest, and few the Principal.


Chris. Ah Isabella, what would I give to be assured of that? Oh how much ease
it would afford my heart: I then could with as much delight and pleasure hate
him, as now I love him.


Isab. Heaven! -- Assurance! -- what assurance Madam do you expect? would you
fain see him a bed with some woman? will no assurance serve you but that? to be
plain, he is false to you, and I dare swear you make but one of the fifty in
the Catalogue of women he makes Love to: To satisfy your self, do but inquire.


Chris. Inquire! was I till now never informed of this? have I not often been
vexed with these Reports? and have I not as often accused him too? -- and has he
not denied 'em still with Oaths, such Oaths that if he thinks he has a Soul, he
must believe it damned, if he be false: Do you not know that all I say is truth?


Isab. I do: and do you not as well remember, I told you all was falsehood he
affirmed? he think he has a Soul! alas good man, he seldom sets his thoughts
on those affairs: he loves his Soul, but as he loves his Bawd, only to Pimp for
pleasures for the Body, and then Bawd-like it may be damned, he cares not.


Chris. He is beholding to you for this Character.


Isab. The scurvy Picture is too like the Life.


Chris. He gives me too much cause to fear it is.

Heaven! for the future comforts of my life
Grant me but one, but one discovery;
If after that blessed hour I do not hate him,
Hate him with perfect hatred; nay contemn him,
Contemn him, as the abject'st thing in Nature;
Let me be doomed to eternal Infamy,
To live the scorn and scandal of my Sex:
And dye for love of him consumed to Ashes,
By some new flaming, Pestilential Fever;
And let those Ashes serve to dry the billet doux
He writes to Common, and Abandon^d Wenches.

Isab. What an unheard of Curse have you invented?

And may he flea off all my skin for Paper,
If I employ not all my wit to trace him;
And women's wits have always edge, and point,
In these affairs: -- I Will to his Lodging presently,
And hunt him dry-foot thence: -- would odds were laid me,
I did not rouse my wild, out-lying Buck,
This hour, and catch him brousing on some Common,
Where he perhaps little suspects a Hunter. --
-- But, Sir Thomas --
Enter Sir Thomas, with two Servants with Lights.
Sir Tho. Come, come, to your Chamber Maiden, --

And fit your accoutrements against to morrow.

Enter a Servant.
Ser. Sir, my Lady Faddle is coming to speak with you.


Sir Tho. My Lady Faddle! news I warrant from her Nephew Sir Mannerly; -- her
Ladyship is welcome: -- where is she? -- wait on her in. --


Isab. Now we shall have a mess of fine stuff: bragging and praising her self
and her Nephew, in conceited fantastical language; making Court to her self, in
such an absurd manner, that it would make Pride humble, to see it self appear
so ridiculous.


Chris. Ay; and still railing against the bad women of the Town; only because
they get all the men from her: because she can get no Lovers, she would fain
have Love out of fashion.


Isab. Ay; -- and still most severely censuring all that are young, and
handsome, to be naught: though she at the same time does all she can to seem
handsome, that she may be naught.


Chris. That is like her railing against Painted women, at the same minute she
is Painting her self: -- But -- 'st, she is a coming.

Enter Lady Faddle and Bridget, Lady Faddle with a Letter.
Sir Tho. My Lady Faddle! your Ladyships very humble Servant: what kind
occasion gives me the honor of your Ladyships visit thus late?


La. Fad. Sir Thomas, how do thou do? dear Sir Thomas, I have received a
Letter this instant, which tells me news which I am persuaded will not be
undelightfull: -- Chritty, how do thou do sweet Chritty? Thou have a very
passionate Adorer posting to thy Altars: Thy Lover is flying to thee on the
wings of Love and Honor, as the Poets say in their Plays.


Chris. What stuff's here?


Sir Tho. News I warrant from your Nephew Sir Mannerly.


La. Fad. Exactly conjectured, I Will assure thee Sir Thomas: he writes me word
he intends, out of a piece of Gallantry, to ride Post all night, that he may
visit his Mistress by break of day; he is unwilling the Sun should see her
before him.


Sir Tho. A very fine expression; I Will give him a thousand pound more with her
for that expression: -- He Is unwilling the Sun should see her before him. -- I
protest I have not heard a wittier and a finer passage.


Chris. Oh most delicate! here is one glimpse of the Fool's Picture I am to
marry already: I shall see it more at large presently.

(aside to Isabella.
La. Fad. Nay, I assure you Sirs you will find him a notable youth: -- Chritty,
thou must look over thy Academy of Complements to night, Chritty, against he
comes; or on my Honor he will be too hard for thee: he will run thee down: he
puts the Country Gentlemen to such Non-plusses, that they do not know what to
say to him: he is called the very wit and spark of Cumberland; and is indeed
the very flower and ornament of the North.


Chris. I Will warrant you his wit and sparkship lies in being an infinite
babbler, and a most expert fool at Questions and Commands, Carrying of Counsel,
Cross-purposes, and some such ingenious sports.

(aside to Isab.
Isab. Ay; and I warrant writes Anagrams, and Acrosticks.

(aside.
Sir Tho. Is it possible that one can be so finely bred in Cumberland?


La. Fad. Oh you will wonder at it, when you see him, to see how finely bred he
is, how Juntee and Complaisant.


Sir Tho. Marvel! -- what and has never seen the Town!


La. Fad. Never seen any Town, almost: you must know his Father the old Baronet
was a man that had mortal enmities to the Town, and to all sorts of
Town-vanity; and would never suffer him to wear a Gentile Suit, to read any
Book, except a Law-Book, nor to stir from home, but in his Company; and that
was seldom any whither but to his Farms, and Tenants, to see his Grounds, and
Woods, or overlook his Quarries, and Cole-mines: and then his Mother, my
Sister Shallow, on the other side, was the fondest creature of him, and would
never suffer him to be out of sight, except when he was with his Father: and
both these having not been dead above a Twelvemonth, and the affairs of his
Estate employing him much at home, I am persuaded the bounds of his Land have
been the utmost extents of his travel; except since his Parents death, he has
given himself a swinge to some Race, or Fair.


Chris. He is like to be a most accomplished person.

(aside.
Sir Tho. Your Ladyship puts me in admiration: -- Good Madam, which way could
he come by this fine breeding?


La. Fad. Oh Sir Thomas, you will put me on a piece of vanity.


Isab. And that needs not, on my word.

(aside.
Sir Tho. Oh your Ladyships humble servant.


La. Fad. If I must answer you the truth, Sir Thomas, I must say in spite of
my modesty, he is indebted to me for the most of his accomplishments.


Chris. Then they are most accomplished accomplishments.

(aside.
Sir Tho. Oh I beg your Ladisips pardon, I did not conceive that before.


La. Fad. Oh good Sir Thomas, it is easily granted; you must know I accustomed
my self in my Sisters lifetime, to bestow my company on her every Summer.


Chris. Indeed if I had been she, I would never have thanked you for the Gift:
I would rather you had bestowed your absence on me.


La. Fad. And you may imagine for the Honor of my Family neglect ^^ occasion
of instructing my Nephew, in all things tha(...) to a well-bred Gentlemen; and
truly I found hi(...) docible Scholar.


Sir Tho. (...) if your Ladyship had the forming of him, he is the most perfe^^
of Gentlemen; the Pattern of breeding and virtue: for no Common Excellencies
could be derived from such a noble Instructress.


La. Fad. Oh Sir Thomas, you overrun me with too great a flood of language.


Sir Tho. Oh it is your Ladyship only is the Governess of that Province.


La. Fad. Oh Sir Thomas, it is you are the Inheritor, it is you have the
learning, and the parts.


Si^ Tho. Oh it is your Ladyship has the Phrase, and the Mine.


La. Fad. Oh Sir Thomas, it is you have all.


Sir. Tho. Oh the Sovereignty is your Ladyships.


La. Fad. Oh Sir Thomas, you depose your self from your Rights.


Sir Tho. Oh it is your Ladyship dethrones your self.


La. Fad. Oh Sir Thomas.


Sir Tho. Oh Madam.


La. Fad. Intolerable presumption it were --


Sir Tho. I beseech your Ladyship.


La. Fad. I protest Sir Thomas --

falls a Coughing.
Chris. Oh how seasonably this Cough comes to deliver my poor Father.

(aside.
La. Fad. Fie upon this tickling rhume.


Sir Tho. Oh your Ladyship strains your self too much, to be obliging.


La. Fad. Oh Sir Thomas.


Sir Tho. Oh no more, I beseech your Ladyship: I will not presume to enter any
more into the Lists and Tournaments of the Tongue with your Ladyship: I yield
the Laurel to your Ladyship. -- But to return to the discourse from which we
wandered, of Sir Mannerly: I am infinitely glad to hear of his accomplishments
and perfections; for now I hope I shall convince my Daughter, when he appears,
that there grow finer things in the Country then Pinks and Daisies: -- the
Country is able also to produce a fine Gentleman; yes Daughter, and (I hope) as
fine a man as your adored Ramble too: she thinks him, Madam, the very top of
the Creation, the flower and quintessence of Gallantry, the wit of Nature, a
mere Poem.


La. Fad. Oh fie upon thee, Chritty; do thou debauch thy affections with that
le (...) still?


Sir Tho. Ay, Madam; (...) ^hide her.


La. Fad. Strange! did I never tell you how he courts a young wench that lives
over against my Lodging in the Pall Mall, one Betty Frisque?


Isab. This is the wench I told you of.

(aside to Christina.
Chris. I give never the more credit to the story from her Authority.

(aside to Isab.
La. Fad. This wench you must know is kept by that filthy old fellow my Lord
Drybone, an old harassed fellow of the Town; one that has been an eminent
sinner these 30 years; was a great Comrade of Prince Griffins in the beginning
of the War.


Sir Tho. I am more happy then to know him.


Chris. If the truth were known, he was some quondam Gallant of her Ladyships.

(aside.
La. Fad. And she being exceeding pretty, (as I must needs say she is) some say
she bears some little resemblance of me? I think indeed she has a little of the
Air of my face.


Sir Tho. Then she wants for no beauty.


La. Fad. Oh Sir Thomas, I did not lay a plot for that Complement.


Sir Tho. Oh Madam.


Chris. Ridiculous!

(aside.
La. Fad. She being, as I said, wonderful pretty, he is fond of her to
distraction; and so jealous, that he locks her up closer then a Nun, will
scarce let her stir so far as the Balcony; will not let her see any man, though
but through the Casement.


Sir Tho. And to be brief, this wild fellow Ramble plays tricks to deceive the
Lord Drybone of his beloved Prize.


La. Fad. Most certain.


Sir Tho. And your Ladyship has seen these passages.


La. Fad. Not I: I know not the fellow when I see him: I hate fellows that run
after such Creatures. -- I know such fellows! -- Foh: -- I have 'em from the
Wenches own mouth: You must know, out of pity to her, because I know her
Friends, I give my self the trouble to sit with her sometimes, to endeavor to
draw her from that vile course of life, and to return to Virtue, of which she
has yet some few sparks remaining.


Sir Tho. Well, I heartily thank your Ladyship for this story; now I am
confirmed what a fellow this Ramble is: and does he rank my Daughter with his
Betty Frisques, and his Trulls? let him but come near my doors if he dares. --
Now Maid, you will importune me for Ramble again, will you? yes, Betty Frisque
and you shall try a Frisquin for him, -- you shall Duel it, you shall. -- Well
Madam, Sir Mannerly will be in Town to morrow you say.


La. Fad. Before the Sun's up.


Sir Tho. My money is ready, Madam; we must not delay this business, lest any
inconveniency should arise, if Ramble comes to have any intelligence of it.


La. Fad. They shall marry on sight.


Sir Tho. I could wish Sir Mannerly had kept to the letter of the Articles, and
been in Town as he was obliged, four days ago.


La. Fad. You know I gave you the reason, and two or three days can break no
square: I know, Sir Thomas, you are a person of that Honor, as not to take any
advantage.


Sir Tho. Not in case no damage arises by delay.


La. Fad. There shall none, I warrant thee, Sir Thomas.


Sir Tho. Well, it grows late: I am your Ladyships most humble servant: -- I
beseech you let me wait on your Ladyship to your Chair.


La. Fad. It needs (...), Sir Thomas.


Chris. I love my Father for this; -- he very civilly and Complementally turns
her out of doors.

(aside.
Sir Tho. Oh Madam, what do you take me to be? do you think I will be so rude?
Take Lights here; -- Christina, pay your duty to your Lady-Aunt that must be,
-- and see her in her Chair.

Sir Tho. ushers Lady Faddle out, Isab. carries Lights. Music plays.
Chris. Oh now I am alone, my heart would break, But that I scorn to let so
false a man, Plant Trophies on my Grave. --

Music without. Enter Isabella running.
Isab. Oh Madam, Madam, Mr. Rambles Fiddles are just now going by the door;
your Father in a rage calls for his Sword, and will go fight him: if you please
I will dog him, and discover his Intrigue.


Chris. Where are they? which way went they? My Scarf, and my Vizard Masque,
quickly.

Exit running.
SCENE, The Pall Mall.
Merry goes over the Stage, followed by Music. Enter Lady Faddle holding Sir
Tho. Rash, followed by a Chair and Flambaux. Sir Tho. Fear not, Madam, there
shall no mischief come of it.


La. Fad. At my request, Sir Thomas.


Sir Tho. Your Authority over me is so absolute: -- I will pawn my Honor to
your Ladyship there shall no mischief be done, I will only send him further
from my doors.


Footm. The Music goes near your Ladyships door.


La. Fad. Near my door! he will not have the impudence to Serenade me sure.

(goes into the Chair. I am afraid the Fellow will pester me with his Amors:
-- Go home quickly.

(to the Chair-men. Sir Thomas, Goodnight.

Exit.
Sir Tho. Boy, my Buff-Coat and my Tuck.

Exit. The Music goes over the Stage. Enter Christina and Isabella vizarded,
following it.
Chris. Now I shall discover my Gentleman; --
I thank Heaven for the ease this will give me:
But oh how wretched is a Lovers fate,
When those we love, we study arts to hate.
Exeunt.
ACT. II.
SCENE, The Street.
Enter Merry and the Fiddles, followed by Christina and Isabella. [Lady Faddle
and Bridget in the Balcony.] Merry. SO, stand here, this is the place; it will
not be long e're my Master comes.


Isab. This is as my Lady Faddle said, my Lord Drybone's house.


Chris. That foolish woman was in the right I see.


Isab. Oh I will believe her Intelligence about these matters, as soon as any
ones: she that plies in all places so diligently as she does, to get the
reversion of some Intrigue, never fails of true Intelligence in these affairs.


Chris. And yet railing against Love is the perpetual subject of her eternal
Tongue.


Isab. Oh she has reason, for Love uses her very scurvily, considering how much
she Courts it.


Chris. Hark, -- I think I hear babbling in her Balcony.


Isab. I warrant she is lending her foolish ear to the Music.


La. Fad. Not Ramble's Fiddles!


Bridge. No, Madam; -- I saw the Gentleman's face as a Link passed by.


La. Fad. Then the Serenade is to me; and I will know who dares be so bold.


Bridge. To your Ladyship! why should you think it is to you, Madam? it is over at
my Lord Drybone's house.


La. Fad. What if it be? why may it not be directed to me? is my Person secure
from the trouble of Amors? thou speak this out of contempt to me; I take it
for an affront.


Bridge. I beseech your Ladyship think not so.


La. Fad. I do not think so; my Person is not yet --


Bridge. I do not talk of your Person, Madam: -- Lord what diligent watching and
scouting have we to (aside. get a forlorn Lover into our weak ambush, and
cannot! -- Madam, I only say it is over the way at my Lord Drybone's.


La. Fad. Still continue in contradiction to me! dispute no more, but go and
command the person from me, whoever he is, to come over to me; and if he has a
passion, let him express it in a decent manner: in such a manner as I may with
honor receive it.


Bridge. If he has a passion, -- that is the thing she would be at.

(aside.
La. Fad. And let all my Servants appear, that he may know of what quality she
is whom he pretends to Serenade.


Bridge. That he may know what a kind Coming Lady she is who would fain be
Serenaded.

(aside. Ex. La. Fad. and Bridge.
Chris. It was her voice.


Isab. She was standing there I warrant in a fit of envy; repining at the
plenteous feasts of other Beauties, whilst she would be glad of the Crumbs that
fall from their Table.


Chris. What Is the reason Ramble's Fiddles are so long silent? I am resolved
I Will stay here till I see the event: whether the thing he Serenades will come
to him or no.


Mer. It Is a very dark night, there is not light enough to show me the end of my
Nose: what stays this Master of mine so long? some new Love-adventure, I Will lay
my life on it; for nothing else could stay him I Am sure: Oh it is a brave
Universal Lover! what pity it is such a large spacious soul, that holds such
vast prodigious quantities of Love, should have but one body to vent it at: the
vent is too narrow: all the convenience is, that it is never empty. -- But see
here is a pretty woman coming out of that house.

Enter Bridget.
Isab. Here Is my Lady Faddles woman coming.


Mer. Like Master, like Man: my Master is a Leviathan in Love, and I am a very
Grampois; all but my Master are Porpusses to me: some neighboring She-vessel
afraid of me, has thrown this Vessel overboard for me to play withal: and see
she swims toward me.


Chris. They meet.


Isab. It Is Merry, Mr. Ramble's man.


Chris. What design should they have together.


Mer. To me, Madam!


Bridge. Yes Sir, a Lady of quality over the way has something of concern to
discourse with you, and desires you will oblige her so far as to come over.


Mer. A Lady of quality have concerns with me! --

(aside. Some blessing thrown on me from Love, I hope, to reward my diligent
labors in his service: No adventure with a woman can be ill: I Will hazard my
person: -- wait you at that corner; -- (to the Fiddles.) That way my Master
will come: if he ask for me, tell him I am called out in the service.

Ex. Merry and Bridge.
Chris. Gone in with my Lady Faddles woman! does Ramble hold secret
correspondence with his public enemy my Lady Faddle? is he come to that piece
of treachery?


Isab. Only secret love; correspondence between Merry and Bridget: my Lady
Faddle cannot be guilty of so cunning a plot: you honor her understanding too
much, to accuse her of it.


Chris. Well, why do I submit to such baseness, to creep after a false fellow
who deserves not my meanest thought? -- Mr. Ramble, farewell; your Fiddles have
cured me of the Tarantula of Love, and the paltry Animal shall set his little
venomous teeth in me no more, I warrant it.


Isab. Come, come, hang it, forgive a little extravagance for once; he loves
you well in the main, I think in my Conscience: besides, all men are as bad;
the whole Nation is infected with the same disease: there is not a
sound-hearted wholesome Lover in it, except it be such a one as your Country
fool; and a thousand to one but he brings to Town some Country Itch too; a
passion for a Dairy Maid: -- Oh the invincible charms of a Sillibub!


Chris. Dispute not: -- I hate him, and the hour when first I saw him, and my
self that ever I loved him: Nay, I hate the Passion of Love for his sake, and
with this blast of Rage goes out that flame which his false fires enkindled:
and now I will never spend one thought more of him: all my vexation is, that I
must suffer for his crimes; because he has been false, I must be condemned to
pine away my life in the embraces of a Clown: -- a reasonable piece of Justice.


Isab. Come, Madam, never conspire to your own unhappiness: hearken not to
pride; pride is a huffing vapouring Ass, pretends to conquer Love, and do
greater matters then he is able: Love is not to be Hectored by such a Coxcomb:
hearken to Love, and make your self as happy as you can, if you cannot be as
happy as you would, or as you deserve.


Chris. Leave thy Politiques, and thy idle discourse, or leave me: my
Resolution is fixed: I know when I do examine Ramble about it, he will have the
impudence to deny it all; but I will circumvent him: -- have you borrowed my
Cosens Lodgings. for our plot.


Isab. Yes, Madam, the whole House is at your service.


Chris I Will go thither with speed: do thou watch thy opportunity to speak to
Ramble.

Exit. Enter Bridget laughing.
Bridge. What sport have I had! -- Now the amorous Star whom my Lady has so long
Courted, has shed his Influence: she has gained a Lover, now her heart will be
at rest; and her tongue too will have many a minutes repose, which was before
continually railing against Intrigues, and wanton women, and lewd men, and I
know not what: But the way of gaining him was pleasant; she plainly frighted
the man into Love, faced him down he Serenaded her, and she would right her
Honor, that the poor man is forced to pretend an extraordinary Passion for
fear of being Cudgelled: -- But see he was coming away already, I believe he
suspects a beating still.

Enter Lady Faddle and Merry.
Mer. Oh Madam, what do you mean to give your sweet beauteous self this trouble?


La. Fad. What should I mean Sir, but to express my civilities.


Mer. The air is damp, Madam, and you may catch one of these scurvie reigning
Colds, that possess almost all the Lungs and Noses of the Town; and you are now
in more danger then any, because a Cold will be ambitious to inhabit your fair
person.


La. Fad. Oh Sir, you are very ingenious: I may well endure a minutes cold air
for you, who have sighed so many cold Evenings (as you say you have) under my
window.


Mer. That I have indeed, Madam.


La. Fad. Well Sir, to tell you truth, I dare not be unkind to you: for as some
men have unlucky hands, where they strike they kill; so I have unlucky eyes,
where I wound I swear I very often kill: I swear so many have died for me, that
I began to have a little regret in my mind, and resolve to bring no more
Innocent blood on my head.


Mer. Oh blessed be that pious Resolution! -- but for this comfort my fate had
been the same: my soul might have gone to the Music of the Spheres, but never
to the Fiddles that wait for me in the Street.

Enter a Fiddler running.
Fidl. Where is he? -- Jack, Jack Merry, your Master is come; come away quickly.


Mer. You saucy Rascal, whither do you press.

(strikes him
Fidl. How now, you puppy, what is this for? I Will make your Master Cudgel you.

Exit Fiddler.
Mer. Dog, I Will run him through.


La. Fad. Hold, hold Sir, what is the meaning of this?


Mer. A rude fellow to press into a Ladies presence; because we Jest with one
another in the Streets, he must come and play his Horse-play here.


La. Fad. What does the fellow mean, Sir?


Mer. You must know there is a Gentleman in this Town, one Mr. Ramble, that is
a great Comrade of mine; we live together, and are sworn Brothers, and call one
another out of Railery Master and Man; sometimes I am his Man, and sometimes he
is my Man: and indeed we are inseparable; join hearts, join secrets, join
Fiddles together; he knows of my Love, and I know of his Love; and both our
Mistresses living so directly opposite one to the other, we bring our Fiddles
and Serenade both under one: and this wild fellow you saw, is a Gentleman that
we admit in our Company, because he plays his part on the Violin: -- and he has
no more Manners then to press after me into a Lady of Quality's presence, like
an ill-bred Scraper as he is: -- I swear I Will --


La. Fad. Oh Sir, let there be no quarrels. --


Mer. No, no, Madam, I Will warrant you.


La. Fad. Nay, but promise me; it will make me public, and dishonor me.


Mer. I will engage my Honor there shall not: -- Well, most dear, dear Madam,
we are now each others for ever; to morrow the formalities of the Church shall
conclude what is so happily begun.


La. Fad. Farewell, dear Sir.


Mer. Farewell, most dear Madam: Oh happy night! Oh happy hour! Oh happy me!


La. Fad. Well, I swear this was unexpected.

Ex. Enter Ramble and Music at one door: Ramble meets Merry.
Ramb. Who Is there, Merry?


Mer. Who should it be else? who walks the Streets of this time of nights but
you or I, Sir?


Ramb. I have been staid by the bravest adventure.


Mer. I have not been idle, Sir; I dare compare adventures with you for what
you please.


Ramb. I Will tell thee mine anon.


Mer. And I Will tell you mine, when you have a mind to laugh: Well, Sir, my
comfort is you nor I shall not have much to answer for, for neglecting the
talents Nature has given us: we have no loss of time lies on our Consciences:
while other lazy people sleep and take their ease, we are conscientiously
laboring in the Cause; and yet these wicked people censure us, and say we turn
day into night, and night into day, and invert the order of Nature.


Ramb. The order of Nature! the order of Coxcombs; the order of Nature is to
follow my appetite: am I to eat at Noon, because it is Noon, or because I am a
hungry? to eat because a Clock strikes, were to feed a Clock, or the Sun, and
not my self: let dull grave Rogues observe distinction of seasons; eat because
the Sun shines, and when he departs lie drowned some nine hours in their own
Phlegm; I will pay no such homage to the Sun, and time, which are things below
me: I am a Superior being to them, and will make 'em attend my pleasure.


Mer. Most nobly resolved: how proud shall I be to have the Sun my fellow
Servant.


Ramb. The World is Nature's house of entertainment, where men of wit and
pleasure are her free Guests, tied to no rules, and orders; Fools indeed are
her Household Stuff, which she locks up and brings forth at seasons; handsome
Fools are her Pictures; studious, plotting, engineering Fools, are her
Mechanic Implements; strong laborious Fools, are her Common Utensils; valiant
bold Fools, are her Armoury; and dull insignificant Fools, are her Lumber:
which by Wars, Plagues, and other conveniences, she often throws and sweeps
out of the World.


Mer. Very well, Sir: -- and pray what Fool am I?


Ramb. An amphibious Creature, that live in both Elements of Wit and Fool:
the major part of thee is Fool; but that part of thee that is Wit, is true Wit;
and so thou art a nobler Animal then many of those poor Creatures that thou
see swim after men of wit and sense, for the scraps and orts of wit that fall
from them: they leap and play out of the water, as high as they can, but they
are but Fish still: Folly is their Element, and there they must stay: I pity
the poor Poets; these Creatures do but spoil our mirth, but they ruin the
Poets labors; they are to them, as the Fox is to the Badger, when the Badger
has with great pains scratched himself a hole, the Fox comes and stinks him out
of it: But enough of this. -- Come, to the business in hand; however it is in
other affairs, I am for reducing Love to the state of Nature: I am for no
propriety, but every man get what he can: however Invasion in this case I am
sure is lawful; when a pretty young woman lies in the possession of an old
Fellow, like a fair fertile Province under the Dominion of the Turk,
uncultivated and unenjoy'd, no good Christian but ought to make War upon him:
-- that mine is a kind of Holy War, and I deserve a Benediction: And so my
Musical Pilgrims, to your Arms.


Mer. Sir, you will make the jealous old Lord cut the pretty Creatures throat.


Ramb. Oh Sir, he loves his divertisement too well for that: like an old Cat
that has been a good Mouser in his time, he loves his prey, though it be but to
Mew over it: -- but look, I see a light.


Mer. I here her voice too; -- I am sure it is hers.


Ramb. She Is coming to the window: --

Rogues, run and light your Flambaux, or call (to his Footmen. a Link, that she
may see me.


Mer. Up so late!


Ramb. Ay, poor creature, she like the rest of her Sex can have no rest in this
world, neither with a man, nor without a man; not with a man, for if he be
young, he lets her have no rest; if he be old, she lets him have no rest: and
without a man, to rest is impossible: So poor souls they have no rest in this
life: -- Hark, they are loud; let us listen.

Lord Drybone, Betty Frisque, and Ciss, come to the window.
Lord Dr. What do you come to the window for? come to bed, I say.


Betty. I will not come to bed.


Lord Dr. Will you still be thus humoursome?


Betty. Yes that I will.


Lord Dr. Come, you are a proud, silly, whimsical, inconsiderable, fantastical
Jilt.


Betty. Come, you are a weak trifling old no-man.


Ramb. Oh admirable! this is a Serenade to me.


Lord Dr. How dare you talk thus to a man of my Quality?


Betty. What care I for your Quality: do you think I am in love with a Patent?
it is a man, and not a piece of Parchment, that I value.


Ramb. A very wit, as I live.


Cis. Pray Madam do not anger my Lord so.


Lord Dr. Do you know who I am, that you dare say this?


Betty. Yes, I know you to be a thing with a Title; or rather nothing with a
Title: your Lordship is Titular, your Manhood is Titular, and every thing
Titular but you Money; and your substantial Money compounds for your Titular
Person.


Lord Dr. Do you twit me in the teeth with my bounty to you? forgive the fault,
Mrs. Elizabeth Frisque, I shall be penitent and reform.


Betty. I doubt not your penitence and reformation: I shall have some
Ambassadors from Guiney to morrow to treat of a Peace; the Kings Image in Gold,
must make satisfaction for the faults committed by the Image of a Subject.


Ramb. The most admirable Tongue-fencer I have heard, he cannot get a hit of
her.


Lord Dr. You are very civil, Mrs. Elizabeth: -- To show how damnably I shall
frustrate your expectations, I this night put an end to your reign: your way of
livelihood is much after the mode of the Tartars; when you have grazed all you
can in one Province, you seek out a new one: and so prepare to morrow for fresh
Forage.


Betty. My way of living with you has been much after the mode of the Tartars,
for I have tasted since I came nothing but Horseflesh; and fresh Forage I
will seek to morrow.


Lord Dr. And so you shall.

Ex. Lord Dr.
Mer. Do you hear, Sir? the fair Faulcon will have her Hood and her Bells
pulled off tomorrow, and set to fly at liberty.


Ramb. I hear: I want but a light to Lure her down on my fist: where stay my
loytering Rogues?


Mer. I am afraid it is so late there is not a light to be got.


Betty. Come Sis, I Will go lie with thee.


Sis. Why do you vex my Lord so, Madam?


Betty. This is the discipline I keep him under: not a syllable he speaks to
night, but shall cost him dearer than printing a Book in Folio: he shall be
glad tomorrow to tie me and all my things in my Chamber with Point de Venice,
and barricado me with Stones as rich as the Philosophers-Stone, and Mortar of
Ambergreese.


Sis. Well, I swear it is a rare thing to be an absolute Prince, and have rich
Subjects; Oh how one may Pill 'em and Poll 'em.

Exeunt.
Ramb. Oh dull Rogue that I am! I have staid till she is gone; gone, as I live,
the window is shut and all dark: strike up, you Rogues, and retrieve her; never
stay for Tuning. -- She does not come yet: -- scrape as loud as you can, make
your Catguts squeek as loud as a Consort of Catterwaulers would at the roasting
of one: -- she is gone to bed, I Am ruined: -- Sing, join all your throats and
bawl; beat a Travalley on the Drums of their ears. -- I hear some body at the
window, it is she I hope: now be more melodious, lest you fright her hence.

(Lord Drybone peeps out of the window.
Lord Dr. Music at my door at this time of night! Now I shall discover my
Gentlewomans Intrigues: 'twas for this she came to the window: I Will listen to
try if I can find out any mystery by their Song, and then steal to the door,
and see who they are.

SONG.
A Pox of impertinent Age,
The pleasures of Youth to invade;
The Cheat who has long been broke,
Has impudence still to Trade.
Awaken fair Celia betimes,
Before thy sweet Youth's undone;
Come sow thy delights in a breast
Will yield thee a hundred for one.
I bring thee hot Youth and Love,
Come mingle thy fires with mine;
We Will serve to the night for Stars,
And make 'em ashamed to shine.
Come down to my plentiful feast,
Lie picking o'bones no more,
The scraps of a dish ill dressed,
And the leavings of many a Whore.
As they have done singing, enter Sir Thomas Rash in a Buff-coat, with a long
Sword by his side, followed by two or three Footmen with long Swords.
Sir Tho. Where is this Ramble and his Fiddles?


1 Footm. I heard 'em, an't like your worship, but just now hereabouts.


Sir Tho. How shall I know they are his? -- a company of Rogues, to lay my
Buff-coat out of the way, that I have lost Ramble while I have been looking my
Coat: -- and you, Sirrah, to let your Torch go out.

(to one of the Footmen.
Ramb. What an unlucky Puppy am I? she does not look out yet.


1 Footm. Sir, Sir, an't like your worship I see a heap of men at yonder door,
I believe they are they.


Sir Tho. How shall I know that, Sirrah? -- come along, I Will listen, and hear
what they talk of: if it be Ramble, I Will Ramble him, I Will teach him to come
Rambling and Rumbling after my daughter.


2 Footm. Of My conscience it is he, Sir; for I heard the Fiddles hereabout.


Sir Tho. Hold your tongue, you Puppy.

(listens. Enter Lord Drybone in his Nightgown, with a Sword in his hand.
Lord Dr. So, they are here still: I was afraid they were gone: now shall I
discover who they are.

(goes behind them and peeps.
Mer. She is gone to bed, Sir; she will not come out no more to night.


Ramb. How unlucky was this?


Sir Tho. I have found him, In Faith; -- that is Ramble's voice, and that is my
daughter they talk of: she has promised to come out to him, it seems: -- here is
brave doings, I Will make some body smart: -- Rogues, be ready when I give the
word: -- Let me peep whereabouts he is.

(Sir Tho. peeps.
Lord Dr. So, so, they expect her to streal out: -- Oh brave whore! -- who can
this be? -- let me peep: -- a fellow in a Buff-coat; -- and by what I can
per-ceive and old fellow too: -- What has she Intrigues with Hectors, and old
Hectors! methinks an old Rich Lord, should be as good as an old poor Hector.

Peeps about Sir Tho. and Sir Tho. about Lord Dr.
Sir Tho. Ha! in his Nightgown! just ready to chop to bed to her when she
comes: they have made a match to lie together here to Night: Oh sweet virtuous
Madam Christina! I have bred you up to fine purpose! I Will stay till you come,
to give my blessing on you both together.


Mer. Come, Sir, you had as good go to your repose; the jealous old Coxcomb
does so watch her water, that she cannot get out.


Lord Dr. The jealous old Coxcomb! Oh brave! what Rogue is this?


Sir Tho. The jealous old Coxcomb! Sirrah, your throat shall be cut for this.


Ramb. Pox on him for me, he has made me lose a Night-fatigue.


Lord Dr. Pox on him!


Sir Tho. Pox on him! yes, I Will give you five thousand pound with my daughter
to bid a Pox on me, -- I will.


Mer. Sir, Sir, whatever the business is, the door is open: if you will I Will
enter softly, and see what it means.


Ramb. Do, oh do, prithee dear Merry! Oh Heaven grant --


Lord Dr. Stealing to the door!

(Lord Drybone gets betwixt Merry and the door. Who Is there?

(He gives Merry a box oth' ear.
Mer. A Friend.

(Merry strikes him again.
Lord Dr. Ho, Peter, George, ho, my people, ho!


Sir Tho. Are you quarrelling amongst your selves? I Will make one among you: --
Ramble, -- where are you, Ramble? I Will Ramble you: -- Fall on.


Ramb. Sir Thomas Rash's voice, I Am ruined, Retreat, Retreat.

(Ramble and Merry retreat, followed by Sir Tho. Rash 's men: the Fiddlers run
several ways.


Sir Tho. Ramble is my man: -- and here he is: -- are you running into your
Castle, Sir?

(Lays hold on Lord Dryb.
Lord Dr. George, Peter, George!


Sir Tho. Oh, you change your voice, Sir, now I am come, do you? it is not
George, not St. George shall help you now, Sir: I Will teach you to make a whore
of my daughter, Sir.


Lord Dr. How! her Father here! is this old Hector her Father! -- make a whore
of your daughter, Sir! your daughter was a whore before I had any thing to do
with her.


Sir Tho. Oh horrid, she is Common! however I will have my penny worths out of
you.


Lord Dr. Murder, murder; George, Peter, Thomas, Rogues, come help me!

Enter Lord Drybone 's men.
(...) Footm. My Lord assaulted!


Sir Tho. Murder, murder; Andrew, Nicholas, Will, Rogues, come help me!

Enter Ramble and Merry fighting with Sir Tho. 's men.
Ramb. Sir Thomas calls out murder.


Sir Th. Foot. My Master thereabouts!

(Sir Tho. 's men run away from Ramble, and fall on Lord Drybone.
Lord Dr. Ho, the Watch! a Constable, a Constable!

(Lord Drybone runs in calling Constable, whilst all the rest fight helter
skelter. Enter Constable and Watch.
Constable. Knock 'em down, knock 'em down; --

(The Watch knock the Servants down. Seize that man, and that man, and bring
'em before me.

(Watch seizes Sir Tho. and Ramble. Who are you? what are you? come before me:
-- Sir Thomas Rash! and Squire Ramble! -- I know you both: What Is the meaning
of this, Gentlemen? a man of your worship, Sir Thomas, to be a fighting in the
Streets of this time of night! fie upon it: and Squire, you use to be more
civil.


Ramb. Sir Thomas, I am glad to see you so well: I hope you have got no hurt:
-- who was it quarreled with you?


Sir Tho. Oh fine fellow! he has got his Clothes on already, to put a cheat
upon me; and the better to promote it, pretends he knows nothing of the
quarrel: -- No, Sir, no, I have got no hurt.


Ramb. I am glad of it with all my heart.


Sir Tho. To make a whore of my daughter, is no hurt to me.

(aside.
Ramb. I was very fortunate to pass by.


Sir Tho. And so was I to discover this Roguery.

(aside.
Constable. This is like Gentlemen; now I commend you: Come Gentlemen, you are both
my Friends; I will convey you safe home with my Fleet of Lanthorns, and let us
be merry as we go: the man in the Moon and I are Dukes of Midnight: give a
spill to my Watch, and my Grace shall drink your health in Claret.


Sir Tho. Less of your wit, and more of your office, Mr. Constable; I will have
Revenge, though I put my daughter in Bridewell: seize that Gentleman, Mr.
Constable.


Ramb. Me, Sir, for what? you are in some mistake: I came to your assistance.


Sir Tho. Seize him, I say.


Ramb. What Is the meaning of this?


Sir Tho. You shall know the meaning presently.


Constable. Come, come Gentlemen, pray let us make you Friends.


Ramb. Sir, there was never any enmity betwixt us: there is no man in the world
that I am more Servant to then Sir Thomas Rash.


Sir Tho. Yes, Sir, I know what service you do me: and you shall have your
wages: seize us both, I say, and carry us before the next Justice of Peace.


Constable. I am sorry for this, In Faith Gentlemen.


Ramb. Sir Thomas, there need be no seizing, I Will wait upon you: Mr. Constable,
if you please you may let me walk at liberty, I will engage my Honor to you, I
will wait on Sir Thomas Rash wherever he pleases to command me.


Sir Tho. No thanks to you, Sir, I Will make you do it: I Will try if there be Law
against such lewd doings as these are: bring him along here.

(walks before in have.
Constable. What have you done, Squire, to Sir Thomas? he is a hasty choleric man.


Ramb. I have only hindered him from having his throat cut; if he be angry at
that, I cannot help it.


Mer. What Devil brought this old Fellow hit her? and what ayls him?

A noise within of drunken Eullies, who enter with their Swords drawn, roaring.
Om. Eul. Hay, hay, scour! scour!


1 Bull. An honest Gentleman going to prison.


Om. Bull. Rogues, Rogues.

(The Bullies fight, and beat the Watch; all go off scuffling and roaring.
ACT. III.
SCENE, The Street.
Enter Ramble. Ramb. I Am beholden to the honest drunken Bullies, that procured
my liberty from these Night-Corsairs and Algerines called the Watch, that
Pickaroon up and down in the Streets, and will not let an honest Christian
Vessel, laden with Burgundy, sail by: but I was little beholden to Fortune, to
stand in need of their help: I do not like the adventure with this choleric
old Father-in-law of mine; a Pox of the formal Coxcombs for me, that invented
the Rules of Manners and Civility, and Foolery: -- I must endure the humors of
this old fellow, only because he club'd to the Production of the fair
Christina; as if a man were bound in civility to stand under the droppings of a
Conduit all days on's life, because once at a Coronation it ran Claret, and he
was drunk with it.

Enter Merry and Isabella vizarded.
Mer. Sir, Sir, I have the most glorious news for you!


Ramb. Ha! quick, quick; thou fir'st me, -- what is it?


Mer. A most delicate young Lady, wife to a person of very great Quality, has
been sick for you these six months; and her Husband happening this night to be
out of Town, she has sent her woman for you.


Isab. O why did you say so, Sir? I told you I stole out of my own head, out of
pity to her: she knows nothing of it.


Ramb. No, no, she knows nothing of it to my knowledge.


Isab. I know when I bring him she will kill me: but I had rather she should
kill me, then Love should kill her.


Ramb. I will save both your lives, dear creature, lead me quickly to her
before her disease grows desperate.


Isab. Well Sir, you must send your man away; nor must you know whither you go:
-- dear, what am I going to do?


Ramb. Come along, sweet Rogue: -- Merry, to your own affairs.

Exit Ramble and Isabella.
Mer. I have a cursed itch to be following 'em, and see whither they go: --
they are gotten into Chairs, and the Rogues are in their Trot: -- Now they have
turned the corner: -- Let 'em go, I Will to my own honest conscientious
Matrimonial affairs.

Exit. Enter two Chairs; The Scene a Room: The Chairs are set down, and Ramble
and Isabella vizarded come out of them.
Isab. I have brought you thus far, Sir; but Heaven knows how to lead you any
further: my wit is here at an end: I dare not for my life introduce you: --
Cannot you pretend some mistake or other?


Ramb. A thousand, a thousand: -- I will pretend some Mistress of mine had
newly changed her Lodging, and I mistook this for it.


Isab. That will be excellent: I see you want no wit upon these occasions: --
But will you be faithful to my Ladies honor, Sir, and not trust your Man, nor
any Friend you have, with a secret of such importance?


Ramb. I will cut out my tongue if I talk of it but in a dream.


Isab. Dear Sir, do: well, stay but a little bit of a minute, whilst I run in
and see in what humor my Lady is, and I will come back and show her Chamber.

Exit Isab.
Ramb. Ten thousand thanks, my dear, dear Providore. -- Sent for by a young
handsome Lady, (so her Instrument says she is) to supply not only the absence,
but defects of a Husband: Let me see, what ready Love have I about me? I should
come off blewly now, if I should not have enough, but be forced to cheat her of
one half of the reckoning: -- No matter, she is rightly served to surprise me
so; she ought to have given me fair warning, and not have drawn so great a Bill
as this on me, to be paid at sight: she might well think, I that am such a
constant Trader, cannot have much money in Bank: Ay, but she is in Love; and
Love is blind, one may put a false piece of Coin on him now and then,
especially after I have paid him a great sum, he will not be so scrupulous. --
Well, I am a Catholic man of strange universal use, I ought to have a Pension
for the public service I do the State; but though I am an excellent Subject, I
am a traiterous Lover; how like a barbarous villain do I use that divine
Creature Mrs. Christina? if I were fifty Rambles bound together, I had not
merit enough for her Love; and I, though I am but one, yet parcel my self out
every minute to fifty women: yet it is not for want of love to her, for the
enjoyment of other women, give me not so much delight as a smile from her: and
yet, I gad, the enjoyment of her would not keep me from the chase of other
women: -- Here am I raving mad after a woman, only tickled with an Image in my
own fancy, of a young, pretty, melting, twining, burning Creature, who for
ought I know may be only an old, ugly, leacherous Succuba, like a burning Hill,
with snow on her top, and fire in her guts; and has enchanted me to her
embraces with a delicate young amorous Picture, put in my head: No, no, it
cannot be; if she were ugly, she would not have the impudence to send for me;
nay she would not have the impudence to Love: No, no, she must be handsome, ay
and extremely handsome too: -- Let me see, what kind of woman may she be? she
has a large rouling smiling black eye, full of fire; a round sweet juicy
melting lip, full of blood; even small Ivory teeth; full, round, white, hard
breasts; a small straight delicate shape; a white little hand, inclining to be
moist; a little neat foot; her stature middling: -- Ay, this is she, I know her
as well as if I were married to her; I am sure it is she, -- I gad I am
passionately in Love with her. -- Oh my dear Envoy, come back quickly with full
Commission from thy Lady, or I shall fall into a Fever: -- Come, come, come:
-- here she is, here she is; -- my dear, let us go, let us go, let us go; -- show
me the way, show me the way, my dear Scout, for my forces are all up in arms,
and they will charge in spite of my teeth, I cannot hold 'em in.

Enter Isabella.
Isab. Ah Sir, be gone, be gone, or I shall be ruined, be killed; I gave my
Lady (to try what she would say) but a little hint, not of your being here, but
only said, what if I could bring you hither? or so; and she ran distracted: --
I thought she would have died: I never saw one in such a passion in my life: Oh
Sir, there is no hope; she is so tender of her honor, that it is impossible to
come at her.


Ramb. What do thou say? thou tortur'st me! wrack'st me! kill'st me! -- it is
impossible to come at her! -- it is impossible not to come at her: -- I am all
of fire; and I must go, will go. --


Isab. Oh Sir, what do you mean? do you bear me malice? have you a mind I
should be killd?

(holds him.
Ramb. I love thee, next thy Lady, above all the creatures in the world: -- I
will take all upon my self, and pretend I came in by mistake; and no creature
shall know any thing.


Isab. Oh Sir, she will know it all to be a mere invented story, a flam, for I
have the keys of all the doors, and no body can come in but by my consent.


Ramb. Oh but you left open the door to night by accident.


Isab. Oh no, no, Sir, I shut 'em, and told her I shut 'em; and was more
careful then ordinary to night, because of his Lordships being abroad, and few
Servants in the house.


Ramb. A Pox o^ the doors -- I must go in, -- I will go in, -- I cannot but go
in.


Isab. Have you a mind I should be killed? -- do you thirst after my blood?


Ramb. I will protect both thy life and honor.


Isab. But Sir, you cannot, my Lady will call up all the Footmen in the house.


Ramb. Then I will call up one of my seet, and kick 'em all down stairs.


Isab. Oh I beseech you, -- I entreat you.

(falls down and holds his leg, he drags her.
Ramb. Dear creature, I cannot forbear: I am a certain Steed that am used to
leap into other men's grounds; and I must leap, though with a Clog at my foot.


Isab. Oh Sir, Sir, let me but go in and settle my countenance, that I may
appear as if I knew nothing of the Plot; do but do that for me.


Ramb. Ay with all my heart, dear Rogue: -- I will do any thing that is Reason:
--

(Isabella runs in. In what a heat am I! this looks like a trick in this Slut
to make me so fierce and ravenous, that like a hungry Lion I shall prey at last
on her my keeper.

Enter Isabella. Now, my dear!


Isab. Oh Sir, ruined, ruined, my Lady has overheard all our talk, and is
ready to fall into fits: I am undone, undone.


Ramb. Is she in fits? -- I am the only man at fits in the world.


Isab. Oh Sir, you cannot get to her, she has locked her self in her Chamber;
and if you offer any violence, she will call out to the Neighbors.


Ramb. A Pox on her for falling in Love with me, and of thee for telling me:
find out some way of making an Interview betwixt us, or open wars will break
out, and I will march to her Frontiers.


Isab. I cannot find out one, though I should break my brain with study.


Ramb. Then keep thy brain whole, and I will break the door.


Isab. Hold Sir, hold Sir, since it must be so, I have thought of one: say
after me as loud as she may hear you, for her Chamber is but hard by, and we
will see what that will do: -- Excuse me, Mrs. Andrews, for forcing my self so
rudely into your Ladies house.

(she speaks softly.
Ramb. Excuse me, Mrs. Andrews, for forcing my self so rudely into your Ladies
house.

(he speaks loud.
Isab. It is an invincible passion which I have for your Lady.


Ramb. It is an invincible passion which I have for your Lady.


Isab. I must speak with her now my Lord's abroad.


Ramb. I must speak with her now my Lord's abroad.


Isab. If she will ruin her reputation and be obstinate she may.


Ramb. If she will ruin her reputation and be obstinate she may.


Isab. For I dye if I do not see her.


Ramb. For I dye if I do not see her.


Isab. Now let me run and see how this has wrought: I must call to her through
the keyhole.

(Exit Isabella, calls within Madam.
Ramb. This Jade has heated me till I am all in a foam.

Enter Isabella.
Isab. This has done good: -- since her Honor would be wholly ruined if there
should be any hubbub made, to preserve her Honor, my Lady consents to admit
you.


Ramb. Oh sweet Rogue!


Isab. Not so fast, Sir; you must swear not to divulge any thing.


Ramb. Ay, ay, I swear! what else?


Isab. I must run and tell her: --

(she goes out, and comes in immediately.) And you must swear not to see her,
or call for a light, or draw the windows or Curtains.


Ramb. I swear, I swear.


Isab. I Will run and tell her: --

(Exit, and enter immediately.) And you must swear not to talk to her, or at
least compel her to talk, to guess who she is by her voice.


Ramb. I swear I will not give her leisure to talk; I will employ her tongue
otherwise.

(Exit Isabella, and enters.)
Isab. And you must swear not to touch her.


Ramb. Nay then I shall be articl'd out of all: I will keep my past Articles,
but I will not make one Article more.


Isab. Well then, since it must be so, follow me, -- follow me softly; --
softly, that none of the Servants may hear. -- Hold Sir, to let you see what an
extraordinary esteem my Lady has of you, she will trust you with her Honor,
and discover the beautiful Empire which your victorious charms have conquered:
-- See, Sir, this is the wounded Lady.


The Scene is drawn, and discovers Christina. Ramb. Christina! am I betrayed?
Oh for an art to walk away invisible.


Chris. Whither, whither, cruel Sir, are you conveying my felicity away, now I
have taken such pains to attain it? Oh use not that Empire Nature has given you
over poor women's hearts too tyrannically! consider we are poor soft loving
things, and a little cruelty will kill us; have pity on a poor Lady that dies
for you, and is forced to descend from the modesty of her Sex, to Court you to
a minutes conversation, at an hour when the rest of the happy world enjoy some
their Loves, some their Repose, and all are at ease but poor me.


Ramb. Jade, you will pay for this: --

(to Isab. Nothing can help me now but impudence: -- So, Madam, you think you
have put a fine trick on me now, you think you have caught me.


Chris. I warrant you knew of the plot.


Ramb. I warrant you think I did not.


Chris. Why did you?


Ramb. Did I! a likely matter that I should not know Isabella's voice.


Chris. Why thou prodigy of impudence, dare thou impose such a falsehood as
this on me? I believed thee against the Reports of the whole world, which long
since assured me of thy baseness; but do thou think I will believe thee
against the testimony of my eyes too? know I this minute tear thee out of my
heart, and after this never see me more.


Ramb. Ha, ha, what shall we jest till we quarrel?

Enter a Servant running.
Serve. Madam, Madam, here is your Father a coming; it seems he missed you out of
your Lodging, and is coming in a great rage to see if you be here.


Ramb. Ah what will he say if he catch me here? let me be gone, make room, make
room.

Ramble creeps away at one door, enter at another Sir Tho. Rash.
Sir Tho. So, Maid, have I found you out o'doors? go.


Chris. Who do you speak to, Sir?


Sir Tho. To the corruption of my blood, to the disease of my soul, to the
filth of my house, to the putrefaction of my honor; a blot which my Sword
should this instant scrape out of being, if the rent could be hid from the eyes
of the world, or all the dust of the Grave conceal thee.


Chris. Oh heaven!


Sir Tho. Speak not, thy voice is more horrid to me then the groans of a
Mandrake; thy sight more odious then a Monster; no sense of mine will endure to
hold communication with thee.


Isab. Hey, hey! all this for an innocent frolic.


Sir Tho. For a Frolic! and an innocent Frolic! Oh the incomprehensible
Impudence of the Age! Lewdness is a Frolic, and abomination Innocence! Oh
sweet world, how art thou set with thy heels upwards since I knew thee! --
Virtue and honesty were Innocence, when I first came into thee; but now
filthiness is Innocence, and Hell and the Devil a Frolic! Oh that the Gout or
a Greenland Frost had seized the fingers of the Destinies, e're they had spun
out my thread to such a Frolicksome Age.


Chris. Good Sir, why do you disorder your self, and afflict me, with these
causeless transports? I know not the sense of your discourse; your language has
to me no meaning; they are words never entered into my ears before; it is all
distraction to me.


Sir Tho. Oh you are for the substance, and not the Picture in words and
phrases: -- I Will tell you my meaning more plainly: Then know, Mrs. Innocence,
you are naught, you have been naught with Ramble; he owned it, confessed it,
boasted it to me, to my face, to my throat, with his tongue, with his Sword; he
said you had been lewd with him, and that you had been lewd before ever he
touched you.


Chris. Oh --

(she swounds.
Isab. She swounds, she swounds, help, help!


Sir Tho. Let her dye; would she had died in the Cradle, in the womb, that she
might never have brought this shame and vexation to me.


Isab. She has not, she did not; none can say it, none did say it, none dare
say it; or if they did, they lie, Ramble lies, and you lie, and you are all
liars, and should an Angel from Heaven say it, I would say he were a liar, and
that she has more Innocence then he.


Sir Tho. You are her procurer, and now will be her maintainer, will you? --
out o'doors.


Isab. In this condition! -- you are a natural Father.


Sir Tho. She Is none of my daughter; her whole mass o'blood, her whole body,
her whole soul is changed.


Isab. She is thy honor, thy glory.


Sir Tho. Then Infamy follow me henceforward! -- Go, I say.


Isab. She shall not go, I will defend her whilst I have a nail, or a tooth.


Sir Tho. Nay then drag 'em hence; he that (to his Footmen. refuses I Will drag
to the Devil: -- Go, to (they thrust them out. Ramble with her, -- and after
six months iniquity, when his beastly Appetite is galloped to his Journeys end,
and is tired with whipping and spurring so long in the dirt, then to the
Bawdy-houses, and Common shops of Lewdness with her, and so to the Pox and
Beggary, and so to Rottenness and the Grave, and so to the Devil; -- an
admirable Journey, -- go. -- Now will I with all speed to the Writ-office, and
take a Writ to arrest my Lady Faddle in an Action of a Thousand Pound, for
breach of Articles: Sir Mannerly was by Covenant to be in Town, and the
Marriage to be completed, four days ago; he is not come, my daughter is
debauched, my Family dishonored, and all by means of their breach of Articles:
it is not a Thousand Pound can make me Reparation, I will not abate one
farthing of what the Law will give me; and I will also have a pluck with that
worthy Gentleman Mr. Ramble, I will try if there be no Law against inveigling
young women to lewdness and naughtiness: it is more then break of day; I Will go
get the Writ and Bailiffs, and see it served my self in person, before she is
up, my Bummers shall have her in bed.

Exit.
SCENE, Lord Drybone 's House.
Enter the Lord Drybone. Lord Dr. Get my Coach ready, quickly.

(speaks within. How now, what rumbling's that? -- Sis.

(a noise within. Enter Sis.
Sis. My Lord.


Lord Dr. What Is the rumbling within?


Sis. Nothing, my Lord, but my Lady's packing up her things to be gone, as you
warned her last night.


Lord Dr. I had forgot it; is she so capricious with me? I Will stay her, if it
be but to cross her.

(Goes out and reenters immediately, pulling in Betty Frisque, followed by a
Porter with a Trunk.) Sirrah, set down the Trunk.

(to the Porter.
Betty. Sirrah, carry down the Trunk.


Lord Dr. Sirrah, set it down, or I Will kick you down stairs.


Betty. Sirrah, carry it down, or I Will break your neck down stairs.


Lord Dr. Sirrah, stay a while, or I Will run my Sword into you: -- since you are
so humoursome, Gentlewoman, take your choice, your Trunks shall go and you
shall stay, or you shall go and your Trunks shall stay: if I have not paid dear
enough for you to have you be mine, I am sure I have bought and paid enough for
all that is in the Trunks, to dispose of them.


Betty. Well, and I think I have paid dear enough for those things, in enduring
all your cross jealous peevish humors.


Lord Dr. What jealous humors? I love you too well, that is my fault.


Betty. Yes, indeed you love me very well, not to let me breathe so much as a
mouthfull of fresh air once in a month, and at home not to enjoy an hour of
quiet.


Lord Dr. Yes indeed, I should do wisely to let you take the fresh air, as you
call it; you never go to a Play, but you fall in Love with some young fellow;
you never go to Hide-Park, but you are enamored with some rich gilt Coach; you
never go to the Exchange, but you have a violent passion for some rich Point of
forty or fifty pounds value; that the Air is a dear Element to me: your fresh
Air costs me all my Earth almost.


Betty. I fall in Love with some young fellow! I deny your words, I defy you
or any one in England to prove the least falsehood in me to you, since I have
known you: and for the gilt Coaches and Points, I have no more then what is
convenient and necessary; I am sure other women cost other men twice as much as
I cost you: here are some that I can name, come to visit me in a morning
sometimes with the richest Points, and the gloriousest Petticoats, would dazzle
ones eyes to see 'em: I am sure the faces of some of 'em, had need of 'em;
their beauties are like those of a Peacock, all in their shining tails.


Lord Dr. Well, there is none of 'em all should outshine you, if you would be
good-humored.


Betty. I do not know what you call good-humored; if I had not the patience of
a Saint, I am sure I could not bear with your humors.


Lord Dr. Well, well, say no more, I hate this wrangling: have you any business
at the Exchange this morning? I am sending George thither.


Betty. No, not I.


Lord Dr. Prithee give over these frumps, and fooleries; now I think on it, that
Point you was offered for forty pound was a good penniworth, I Will send for it.


Betty. You may and you will, but I Will have none on it.


Lord Dr. Shall he call at the Jewelers as he goes by, for the Locket you had a
mind to.


Betty. What you will: not for me.


Lord Dr. And well remembered, I will make him bring Mr. Draw-well the Limner
along with him; I take it ill of him, he has promised me to come any time this
fortnight, and put me off from time to time, and yesterday he promised to be
here this morning: I will make him come and draw thee in these frumpish
humors, that thou may see how ill they become thee.


Betty. He may come if he will, but I will not sit.


Lord Dr. Nor have any occasion for the Point, or the Jewels.


Betty. No.


Lord Dr. Then George may spare his labor: -- well, good morrow.


Betty. Good morrow.

(he offers to go, and she stops him. Well, the duce take you, what ails me to
be so fond of nine and fifty? what have you done to bewitch me?

she claps him on the cheek.
Lord Dr. Ah Cokes!


Betty. You have given me some Love potion, I am sure.


Lord Dr. Yes, yes, Assa-fotida, -- and Garlic.


Betty. Confess, confess, -- I could never be thus fond thus --


Lord Dr. Ah --


Betty. Blind! I am perfectly blind! I don't see a wrinkle; you appear a very
Boy to me, a very Cupid.


Lord Dr. Oh thou notorious wheedling slut, shall I still put up such impudent
abuses as these?


Betty. Yes, and be glad of 'em too.


Lord Dr. Well, Age is an abominable thing, it makes one pay dearer for the
Lees, the dregs, the Vinegar of Love, then Youth does for the sweetest,
briskest Juice of the Grape: Well hussy, George shall go: -- I will pay the
Tax you lay upon me; but it is hard a man should pay such devilish high
Chimneymoney, and never have any fire.


Betty. That Is none of my fault, I am sure I blow often enough.

Exeunt.
SCENE, The Street.
Enter Sir Mannerly Shallow and Booby. Sir Man. Well, did one ever see the
like? what a brave place is this London? it is, as the Song says, the finest
City-Town that ever I saw in my life.


Boo. Oh it is a brave place! -- it is not a City, it is a great Country, all of
houses. --


Sir Man. It is, as the Poet says, the habitation of the Gods, Hominumque
Deumque.


Boo. What is that numque umque, an't like your worship?


Sir Man. Hominumque Deumque, Deumque for Deorumque, that is, of Gods and men.


Boo. I never heard London called numque dumque before: it is a brave thing to
be a Schollard; how chance your worship never came to numque dumque till now,
but live in the Country all this while?


Sir Man. Thou talk like an Ignoramus; but I shall not trouble my self to
instruct thee: -- Well, if I had known what a Gentile, what a Gallant place
London was, my honorable Father should not have stayed me in the Country,
though he would have married me to the finest Gentlewoman all round about,
given me his Mannor-house, his Park, his Fox-dogs, and the best Hunting-Nags in
the Stable: neither Dogs nor Nags, no nor my Lady Mother, should have persuaded
me to stay.


Boo. Both his and her worship were too blame, an't like your worship, for
staying your worship.


Sir Man. For that trick as soon as ever I have married the fine Gentlewoman I
come to Town to marry, for she is but a Gentlewoman till I have married her,
and then she is a Lady; I say, as soon as ever I have married her, I Will stay
here as long as I live, and never go into the Country again.


Boo. I thought your worship said you would go into the Country to sell
Lubbertown Woods.


Sir Man. Yes, I do intend to go into the Country for that; but I Will stay here
as long as I live.


Boo. What a brave life shall we live here in this brave place, where all the
houses are as big as your worships Manor, and all over nothing but folks!


Sir Man. Ay, and all Gentlefolks! -- and the civil'st Gentlefolks that ever I
saw in my life: I no sooner came into Town, and asked for an Inn, but an
ancient grave Gentleman, that I am sure must be an Officer in the Militia,
Mayor of some Town, or a Knight, for he had a long great linen Scarf tied over
cross his shoulders, by that I thought him a Major, or a Colonel in the
Militia; but he had over that a great Silver Chain, like our Mayors Chain, by
that he should be the Mayor of some Town.


Boo. May be he is Mayor of a part of this City, an't like your worship, for
this is too big to have but one Mayor.


Sir Man. Ay, but then he had on his breast a great round Silver thing, as big
as the bottom of our great Silver Sugardish, with his Coat of Arms upon it, by
that he should be some London Knight: -- but one of these three I am sure he
must be; and of his own accord he came to my very horse-side, showed me an
Inn, and held my Stirrup in spite of my teeth whilst I lighted; I never saw
such a civil person since I was born: -- he made me so ashamed, that all I
could say was to entreat him to do me the honor to accept of a poor Supper
with me at my Inn: and Anthony Boody, do you see to find him.


Boo. I spoke to his worship, and he promised he would come without fail.


Sir Man. See that the Mutton-broath have white-bread Sippets in it, and all
things be ordered handsome, as our Cook-Maid used.


Boo. I shall, an't like your worship.


Sir Man. But this was not all: I had no sooner taken my leave of the ancient
Gentleman, and gone to the Street-gate, but a Coachman of his own accord came
and civilly tendered me a Coach to carry me.


Boo. The Horses were something lean, an't like your worship.


Sir Man. I suppose it is some Complementing-Coach kept of purpose to Complement
Strangers; and abundance of Strangers coming to Town, the Horses might be worn
out with much Complementing: for I perceive it is the custom here to Complement
Strangers so; for I had no sooner thanked the Coachman, given him something for
his civility, and presented my service to his Master, but at least half a dozen
more Complementing Coaches came up to me as hard as they could drive, to
proffer their services.


Boo. I believe the Gentry has been told how ready your worship is at any time
to lend your best Team to any Neighbor.


Sir Man. No, no, I saw 'em do the same to twenty more as well as my self: --
well, it is the civil'st place that ever I came in days of my birth: for I Will
tell thee more, Booby, after I had gone a little way in a great broad Street, I
turned into a Tavern, hard by a place they call a Park; and just as our Park is
all Trees, that Park is all Houses, you cannot see so far as you can spit: --
and I asked if they had any Deer in it; and they told me, Yes, but not half so
many as they used to have; they used to have the best Deer in all the Town, and
scarce a Venison Pasty was formerly made, that had not the Venison out of their
Park: But they said the Park was now quite spoiled, and the best Deer were all
gone to the other end of the Town, and those that stayed were poor Rascal Deer,
not worth baking.


Boo. I don't wonder they are poor, an't like your worship, for I did not see a
bit of Grass, except some sprinklings among the Stones, and a little mouthfull
here and there on the tops of houses.


Sir Man. I warrant the Deer here a kind of Goats, and climb on houses to
brouse: I had a great mind to taste 'em, and spoke for a Pasty; and they told me
the strangest thing, they said their Rooms were full of cold Pasties, so big
two people might sleep in one; and that if I had a mind to a Do, they would
put me in a Pasty, and put a Do to me.


Boo. Oh strange! and did your worship go into a Pasty!


Sir Man. No, I Will tell you what happened: just as I asked for the Do, in
comes a couple of young Gentlewomen, the handsomest, finest Gentlewomen that
ever I beheld, Mrs. Anne Lackwit the great Beauty of Lubbertown is nothing to
'em; and they were all over Lace, and had the finest, reddest Cheeks and Lips,
that ever I saw: no ripe Cherry is so red; they were so red, that the blood
came off the very outside of their Lips, and as I kissed 'em left a redness on
mine.


Boo. Is It possible! I warrant your worship kissed 'em too hard, you made their
teeth bleed, and that was the business.


Sir Man. No, no, it was the very blood of their Lips, that was dried on.


Boo. Well, I never saw the like!


Sir Man. No, nor I neither; for I had no sooner saluted 'em, to show my
breeding, but they of their own accord took me about the neck, and kissed me as
if they had been my Sisters, or as if they had known me these twenty years,
that I fell so in Love with them, that in my conscience if I had not been
engaged already, I had married the handsomest of 'em before I came away.


Boo. Is It possible! but did not your worship ask for the great Pasty.


Sir Man. I should ask for victuals before Gentlewomen, should I? that were
fine breeding: No, but they of their own accord were so civil as to invite me
up stairs to a Pasty; and just as I was going up with them, I chanced to put my
hands in my pockets, and as if the Devil had been there, my money was all flown
out of my pocket, I know not how, nor whither.


Boo. Flown out of your worships pocket!


Sir Man. I, flown out of my pocket.


Boo. What of it self!


Sir Man. I, of it self.


Boo. And no body to help it!


Sir Man. There was no body near to help it.


Boo. What all!

Sir Man All but one Sixpence, that was in a corner of my pocket.


Boo. There must be witchcraft in this, and if I was your worship I would make
that Sixpence find out all the rest.


Sir Man. How like a fool thou talk; how can that Sixpence find it out,
when I could not find it my self, though I looked up and down in every corner
oth' house; nay the Gentlewomen were so very civil as to help me, nay would
have come out to help me look it in the Streets, if I would have let them.


Boo. Well, this was old Goody Wrinkle-noses doings, that lives on the side of
your worships Woods by Lubbertown; if I were your worship I would write down
into the Country, and have her hanged.


Sir Man. Nay I am sure it was the Devil, for I remember as the Gentlewomen
were kissing me, I felt a thing scratch in my pocket just like a Rat.


Boo. Nay then it was Goody Wrinkle-nose, and the Devil has brought her to Town
before us: if I were your worship I would make her an example.


Sir Man. Nay I do intend to trounce her, for this is demonstration: -- Well,
but now what shall I do to find my Aunt, my Lady Faddle, for I have lost my
directions; all I can remember is, that she lives in a place they call the
Pall Mall: and the Pall Mall I find, but cannot find my Aunts house: and she is
to help me to find out my Baronet Father-in-Law, Sir Thomas Rash; where I shall
find his daughter Mrs. Christina, whom I am bound in a Bond of a Thousand
Pounds, with my Aunt my Lady Faddle, to marry four days ago: and my Lady Aunt
writ me word, that my Baronet Father-in-Law was very angry for my not coming;
and if I did not marry Mrs. Christina, and come up to day, he would take the
forfeiture of the Bond.

Enter to them a Porter.
Boo. See, an't like your worship, here comes the ancient Gentleman that you
invited to Supper, that held your Horse; if he be Mayor of any part of the
Town, as he looks to be, it may be he can tell whereabout your Lady Aunt lives.


Por. Bud, here are the Complementing people, let me get away from them.


Sir Man. Hold, worthy Sir; noble Sir, I do not know how to return the great
favors and honors you were pleased to confer on me, who am but a Peregrine: I
commanded my man Booby to entreat you to accept of a small Supper with me, not
as a return, for I know you have a better Supper at home, but as it were to
show how much I am obliged for all your Noble favors: Now, worthy Sir, I make
bold to request you to add one favor more to all your past favors, to
acquaint me if you have any acquaintance with a Lady and Aunt of mine, by name
Lady Faddle.


Por. Well, I have plied here these forty years, and never met with such an
odd sort of a Blade in my life: -- who is it you ask for?


Boo. An Aunt of his worships, one Lady Faddle.


Por. I do not know her, Master, I cannot direct you.


Sir Man. This is strange, that no body can tell where my Lady Aunt should be.


Boo. I think in my conscience, an't like your worship, I have asked above a
hundred folks for her, and not one knows where she should be; no nor so much as
knows her worship: nay I asked all about the Neighborhood, and the very
Neighborhood did not so much as know her worship.


Por. You must not think you are in the Country: People do not know one another
here, that live in the same Street, nay in the same House, nay sometimes that
lie in the same Bed together.


Sir Man. Hey day! why I know all the Gentry round me in the Country, for above
Twenty mile.


Por. Ay, but it is not so here.


Boo. How do they do not to know one another? do they do it on purpose?


Por. People never mind one another here, unless they have business together;
but let them go as they come, and come as they go.


Sir Man. Hey day! why I know all the Dogs and Horses in the Country that are
eminent, whether I have any business with them or no.


Por. Ay, but you may be a Dog, or a Horse, or a Man here, no body will mind
you, unless they have some concern or other with you.


Sir Man. Hey day, I never heard the like!


Boo. Nor I in my life.


Sir Man. Then if I ask a thousand people for my Lady Aunt, there is no body
knows her.


Por. You may ask ten thousand before you meet with one that knows her.


Sir Man. Hey day! then I shall forfeit my Bond, for. I shall not find her to
help me to find Mrs. Christina, before the Sun is set; what shall I do?


Boo. Your worship can prove you were come to Town, and so if you cannot find
'em, the fault is none of your worships.


Sir Man. Ay, but I did not think I could not find 'em, and so there is no such
clause in the Bond; for I am bound to marry Mrs. Christina whether I can find
her or no.


Boo. Then I Will tell you what your worship shall do; send for a Vicar, and say
over your worships part, and then you can prove you have done all that belongs
to your worship.


Sir Man. I swear that is very well thought of; for now I think on it, I sealed
and delivered the Bond in the Country to my Baronet Father-in-law's use,
without his being present, or ever seeing of him in my life: so I will send for
a Parson, and marry my self to one of you two, for Mrs. Christina's use, and
this will be as good in Law as if she were present.


Boo. Right; for if the Marriage be not good, then how is the Bond, since they
are both made after the same manner?


Sir Man. Right.


Por. Do these men Jest, or are they as errant Fools as they seem? I believe
they are Fools; for I never heard such a deal of simple stuff and
complementing, as I have had with them to day, since I was born.


Sir Man. I swear this was the best thing that ever was thought on: now do not
I care whether I find my Aunt or no.


Boo. This old Gentleman's worship having been with you ever since your coming
to Town, your worship had best ask his worship to be a witness, and see you
married to me.


Sir Man. I can have no better witness, for he can prove all: Noble and
obliging Sir, --


Per. Now he falls a Complementing again: I wonder he stayed so long from it: I
would the Devil had his Complements, he has made my head ache: -- Hold, hold,
Master, spare me for Heaven's sake; I remember my Lady Faddle, she once sent me
of an Errand; your Complements buzzl'd me, and put it out of my head: I know
where she lives, I Will lead you to her house.


Sir Man. Oh Sir, what favors do you confer upon me! -- But Sir, you shall not
go a' foot; Booby, fetch my horses.


Por. Horses! my feet are my Pad-nags.


Sir Man. Oh Sir, you will swell your high obligations to such a --


Por. Swell my thighs with hobbling! no, no, hobbling is my Trade.


Sir Man. Well, to Cumberland commend me for Gentility, But to London for good
Breeding and Civility.

Exeunt.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. The Street.
Enter Sir Mannerly, Booby, and Porter. Por. LOok you, Sir? you are now at the
door?

he knocks.
Sir Man. Oh Sir, why do you condescend to give your self the trouble of
knocking.

Enter a Servant.
Por. Is my Lady Faddle within?


Ser. Who would speak with her?


Boob. Her Nephews-Worship, Sir Mannerly Shallow and I, are come to Town, tell
her.


Sir Man. Presume to speak before me? where is your Manners? Sir, I am her
humble Servant, Nephew, and Baronet, Sir Mannerly Shallow.


Ser. Oh dear Sir? are you Sir Mannerly Shallow? my Lady expected you this
morning early; she will be mighty glad you are come: she is within, please to
walk in, Sir, whilst I run in, and acquaint her of your coming?

Exit Servant.
Sir Man. This is good luck? Noble Sir, I beseech you, honor me so far, as to
walk in with me.


Porter. Oh Master what do you mean?


Sir Man. I beseech you, Sir.


Boob. Come, pray your Worship, walk in.


Por. What do these People mean?


Sir Man. Nay, but Sir, I am to be married to night, and I swear I will not
Marry, if you will not Grace my Nuptials with your Presence; therefore, Sir, if
your affairs call you away now, yet promise me, on your Honor, that the joys
of my Marriage, shall be increased with the happiness of your company; your
Presence will be the Principal Dish at my Feast.


Por. He means to dish me up, well Master, if you want any body to wait, and go
of Errands, I Will promise you I Will come.


Sir Man. Your most humble Servant, I will not rest, till I requite your
Civilities.


Por. What odd kind of contrived Men are these.

Ex. Por.
Sir Man. Booby, Do you carry your self well now, before my Lady Aunt, and do
not disparage me, observe what I do, and then you will do finely.

Exeunt. Enter Lady Faddle, Bridget, and Servant. Scene, Lady Faddles House.
La. Fad. My Nephew come? this is good news, where is he? introduce him
speedily.

Exit Ser. Enter Sir Mannerly, and Booby. Sweet Nephew:

She runs forward to salute him, he still goes backward, and Compliments.
Sir Man. Honorable Aunt! The extreme Joys and Felicities of your Society,
which a long Parenthesis of time has interrupted, but now Time, as it were
penitent --

Still runs back.
Lady Fad. Why do not salute me, Nephew?


Sir Man. Yes Madam, as soon as ever I have done my Compliments.


La. Fad. Oh, thou should salute the first thing thou do.


Sir Man. Yes Madam, but a Salute being a kind of a Present, or rather Tribute
to a Lady, and as one would not present an empty Purse for Tribute to a
Princess, so neither an empty Mouth to a Lady, but as full of Rich and Golden
Compliments, as it could hold.


La. Fad. This is witty to extremity, I swear; Salute me, that I may be at
leisure to praise thee.


Sir Man. Your most Humble Servant, Aunt.

(He salutes her.
Boob. Your Worships most Humble Servant.

Offers to salute La. Fad.
Sir Man. How now Saucebox, kiss my Aunt?


Boob. Did not your Worship bid me observe what you did?


Sir Man. Did I bid you kiss Ladies of quality?


La. Fad. What rude fellow's this?


Sir Man. Forgive him Aunt -- it is his want of breeding.


La. Fad. Well, Bridget.


Bridge. Madam?


La. Fad. Bid John run with all speed, to Sir Thomas Rash; and acquaint him my
Nephew is come, and run to my Milleners, for my Gloves, and Essences, and run
to the Exchange, and run to my Coach-makers for my new Harness, and run for my
new Tower, and run --


Bridge. I shall run, Madam, to bid him run, or otherwise the poor fellow will
be made to run all over the Town.


La. Fad. Well Nephew, thou will enjoy to night, a delicate Lady, I have so
exalted thee to her, with exuberant praises, that it will require a great
expense of Wit and Breeding, to maintain the Glorious Character I have given
thee: Come, give me an account how thou have spent thy time? how have thou
improved those Documents, and Rudiments of good Breeding, which I instilled
into thee. --


Sir Man. Oh Madam, I have improved every Document, not a slip of a Rudiment
your Ladyship Set, but is grown up to a Flower. Indeed, my Father did all he
could to spoil me; he would let me read nothing in his lifetime, but
Law Books, Cook upon Littleton, and Books of Reports, and Judges Reports, and I
read Reports and Reports so long, till it was reported I was a Fool.


Boob. Ay, but your Worship now reads Comedy Books, and Prodigy Books.


Sir Man. Tragedy Books thou meanst, ay, and Songs, and Verses, and Drolleries,
Covent Garden Drollery, Westminster Drollery, and Windsor Drollery.


La. Fad. Very well, This is as to the accomplishment of the Mind; but now to
the External Ornaments of the Body, as Dancing, Singing.


Sir Man. Oh, I have had Dancing-Masters, Fencing-Masters, and Singing-Masters.


La. Fad. Ay, those Masters must make thee fit to be a Servant to Lady's.


Sir Man. I can Dance Corantoes and Jiggs, and Sarabands.


Boob. And Hornpipes.


La. Fad. Can thou Rise well?


Sir Man. In a morning, Madam.


Boob. His Worship gets up by break of day.


La. Fad. No, Rise high in Dancing, if you will rise high in Ladies favors
here, you must rise high in Dancing, that is to say, Dance loftily.


Sir Man. Oh, I can Dance very loftily.


Boob. The country says, his worship carries himself too loftily.


La. Fad. Make an Essay of a lofty Dance.

(Sir Mannerly Sings and Jumps. Very Graceful, I swear, and very lofty.


Boob. Oh; his Worship will jump like any Jack-Daw, that has but one wing cut.


Sir Man. Jack-Daw, firrah? don't you make such saucy comparisons.


La. Fad. Well Nephew, thou will kill a great many Ladies this Winter, those
Heels will advance thee, thou will jump into Preferment; I see a witty Man is
good for any thing; one would wonder thou should jump so high, with such a
weighty Brain in thy Head.


Boob. As heavy as a Pail of Milk.


La. Fad. Thou art ingenious at both ends, both thy Head and thy Heels; its
rare for one to be witty, more than at one end; well Nephew, thou will dance
away all thy Country Elesh this Winter; thy Heels will be invited to show
their parts to Dance, in every fine Entry, in the Masks and Plays, and --


Sir Man. Why do they Dance in Entries here? we Dance in the Country in our
Halls and Dining Rooms, because the Entries are too narrow:


La. Fad. Oh fie, thou do not understand the terms of thy own Art yet; to
Dance in an Entry, that is to say, in an Entry, an Entry of any thing --


Sir Man. Of Freestone or Brick?


Boob. Your Worship's are all Freestone.


La. Fad. No, no, fie fie, expert in the Science, and ignorant in the Terms, in
an Entry of Shepherds or Gods, and Goddesses.


Sir Man. I can Dance in any Entry in England.


La. Fad. Strange, that thou should not apprehend me; but to let that pass --
well, but how is thy singing?


Boob. Oh, his Worship out-sings all our Parish, at Church, the Clark is
ashamed to set the Psalm before him.


Sir Man. Sing a Psalm, I have sung my part in a Recitattivo (as they call it)
I had a Recitattivo acted at my own House: and I acted in it, and sung, I was
London, or Augusta, and I had a high crowned Hat, to signify Paul's Steeple, and
I had one acted the River Thames I had a great Nose made on purpose to signify
London Bridge, and the River Thames swom under my Nose, I have my Nose in my
Portmantua, if I had it on, you should see Booby, and I would Act.


La. Fad. Then thou can Act Nephew.


Boob. And so can I too.


Sir Man. Oh, I have all the new Comedy Books, and Tragedy Books, sent me, as
fast as ever they are made; oh, I love them that huffe the gods, they make no
more of a god, then we do of a Constable.


Boob. Your Worship and I acted a Tragedy Book, you know.


Sir Man. Yes, and I was an Hero, and I remember two of the bravest lines.

If saucy Jove, my Enemy appears,
I Will pull him out of Heaven by the Ears.
There Is ramping for you.


La. Fad. Saucy Jove, that is very great, that took mightily here.


Boob. Oh that Rumm-Dumm, Derry Dumm, oh, but the two Knocking Verses, an't
like your Worship.


Sir Man. Oh, ay, you must know, my Part, Aunt, was to beat an Army, and so
when I had beaten an Army, and two Armies more that came to their relief, and
won four Kingdoms in three hours; I cried, Let me see, it is a little out of my
Head; I cried, I Will, I Will, Booby, thou can think of it.


Boob. O yes, an't like your Worship, I can remember it perfectly, I Will, I Will,
Mackings, I ha forgot it, I ha dropped it upon the Road somewhere.


Sir Man. What a Noddle have thou, thou actedst with me.


Boob. Ay, but your Worship killed me, before you spoke the Speech: the Butler,
the Ploughman, and I, was the Army.


Sir Man. I did not kill thee in earnest did I? Let me see, I Will.


Boob. Oh, now I remember, single, it begins with single --


Sir Man. Oh single, single, it begins with single.
My single Sword, both men and gods shall maull,
Oh but the next is the bravest.

I will kill all the World, nay more than all.

Boob. There Is your Rowzers.

Sir Man. There Is your Thumpers.

Lad. Fad. Oh, they have a brave ingenious way of Writing now.


Sir Man. Oh, but then the fine tender things that would make one cry, you must
know, Aunt, my Part, was to be in Love with my Dary-Maid, and her name was
Celemena, and mine was Philaster, and I cried.

How does my fairest Celemena do?
And she cried

Thank you my dear Philaster, how do you?

La. Fad. Very natural and soft.


Boob. Oh, the Dary-Maid is very soft.


Sir Man. Oh, but then the two next are tender, -- I cried,

Does my Sweetheart me any kindness bear?
And she cried,

I love you dearly, now, I vow and swear.

La. Fad. Very Tender.


Boob. Oh, Mary is a very tender good natured Maid.


Sir Man. Tender as an over-boil'd Chick.


La. Fad. Very wittily comparison'd, the Sense is ready to drop in pieces, it is
very fit for Women's weak Stomachs.


Sir Man. Oh, but when my Maid and I came to die, I don't know why we were to
dye, but we died mighty mournfully, and then I having learnt to sing, I groaned
so Musically, I died in effaut flat, Oh, cried I!


La. Fad. Oh, that was sweet.


Sir Man. Oh, but then the Similies, I love the Similies dearly, to see two
Heroes, or two Armies go to it as formerly, with Sword and Buckler, so now with
Sword and Simile, Simele and Sword; Hack-slash, Slash-hack, for you must know,
a Simile serves instead of a Buckler, for if a Man be ready to strike another,
if the other up's with a Simile, he cannot strike till the Simile's gone.


La. Fad. Oh, they have a fine way.


Sir Man. Ay, and then they have such plenty of Similies you shall have a Play
stuck as full of Similies, as a Country Garden, of Flowers, you may gather
Posies o'Similies.


La. Fad. Wittily said again, stuck full o'Similes, and Poesies of Similies: I
swear, thy Head is as full of Similies, as the Plays are.


Sir Man. Oh Sir, a witty man's Head is a Similies Bed, and breeds Similies as
fast as an Oysterbed breeds Oysters.


La. Fad. Witty again, he has strange parts.


Sir Man. And then they have the finest odd, out of the way Similies, Similies
that are most commonly no Similies at all, as now, speaking of a Ladies bright
Eyes, says one,

How do the nimble Glories of her Eye,
Frisk, and Curvett, and swifily gallop by.
There Is a fine comparison, to compare a Ladies Eye to a Horse.


La. Fad. Ay, and Nimble is a fine odd, out of the way, Epithete for Glories,
Nimble Glories. Well, dear Chuck, how came thou by all this admirable, and,
as I may say, Nimble Knowledge.


Sir Man. You must know, I had a couple of gallant Gentile Blades lay at my
House, that were Great Men in London, here they are called Critwiques, and they
taught me the finest things.


La. Fad. Oh, the Critiques are Great Men indeed, they make Poets as fraid of
them, as a Lion is of a Cock.


Sir Man. Some say, that is not at all.


La Fad. An old Lion, it may be, is not, nor an old Poet, of a Critique, but
your new Poets are so afraid of them, that if a Critique Crows, they are ready
to faint away.


Sir Man. Is It possible? could not one buy a Critics Place?


Boob. Pray your Worship do, and let me be your Clark.


La. Fad. Buy, alas thou may Judge and Critic for thy half Crown, as much
as thou will.


Sir Man. That Is a pitiful Place, if one can buy it for half a Crown.


Boob. Oh, but the Clark may get Money though.


La. Fad. It Is not Money, but Wit makes a Man a Critique.


Sir Man. Then I am a Critique already.


Boob. Oh brave, then I am a Clark?


La. Fad. Well, dear Flesh and Blood o'mine, let me embrace thee, that I may
say, I have my Arm full of Wit, thou art a Bridgroom for a Princess; how will thou honor my Education? well, have thou brought up any Clothes to be Married
in?


Sir Man. My Portmantle full.


La. Fad. Go and adorn thy self with all speed, whilst I prepare for the same
affair, for I am to be Married, as well as thy self.


Sir Man. Is It possible?

Enter Bridget.
Bridge. Andrew, Madam, has been at Sir Thomas Rash's, and can hear no tidings,
neither of Sir Thomas, nor Madam Christina; Madam Christina lay out all night,
and is not come home since; Sir Thomas is gone somewhere in a great combustion,
and the Servants can give no account of either of 'em.


La. Fad. That Is strange, oh, I Will warrant you, they will be heard on, Nephew, go
and dress thy self, mean while I Will step to the Exchange, for some things I
want, and after that, I Will go over and invite Betty Frisque to my Wedding, I
have much kindness for that poor Creature.


Sir Man. So you see, Madam.

I bring to Town, a Mind, and Wit in fashion,

And doubt not but to grace your Education.

Exeunt.
The Scene changes to the Street. Enter Ramble. Ramb. Into what a villainous
Trap am I fallen, dull Rogue that I was, not to know Isabella's voice, where
were my Ears, my Senses? they were all in my Pocket, I was tickled with my
ravishing expectations, into a perfect numness to death, now am I discovered in
all my Rogueries, and Intrigues, and Falsehoods; and must never hope to enjoy
the sweet pleasure of Lying and Forswearing any more; I must now either repent,
and become a down right plodding Lover to Christina, or in plain terms lose
her: I must either forsake all the World for her, or her for all the World:
well, if I do forsake her, she has this to boast, I do not forsake her for any
one Woman, I forsake her for Ten thousand. But what do I talk of forsaking her,
will not she forsake me, after this discovery? and besides her own Anger, will
not Sir Thomas compel her? for he is horribly provoked against me, what ever
the matter is. Well, I cannot bear the loss of Mrs. Christina, I had rather
endure Marriage with her, than enjoy any other Woman at pleasure -- I must, and
will Repent, and Reform, and now should an Angel appear in Female shape, he
should not tempt me to revolt any more.

Oh Merry I am ruined

Enter Merry.
Mer. O^, Sir, you are a happy Man, I have not time to ask you the success of
your last Adventure, I am so transported with the pleasure of the Present;
cannot you Limne, Sir?


Ramb. Limne, what do thou mean?


Mer. Why Limne, Sir, draw Pictures in little.


Ramb. I, draw Pictures?


Mer. Yes, Sir you can, Sir.


Ramb. But I cannot, Sir.


Mer. But you can, Sir; you can Limne, and you must Limne, and you shall Limne,
Sir. Coming along by Charing Cross, who should it be my fortune to meet with,
but Mr. Draw-well the Limner, going in all haste to my Lord Dry-bones, to draw
Mrs. Frisques Picture -- and what comes into my Head, Sir, but to beg of him to
write an Apology for not coming, and send you with it, to perform the Work in
his stead; and to prevail with him, I promised him the gain of the Picture,
without the trouble.


Ramb. Thou have undone me, seduced me from the ways of Virtue and Constancy.
Just as I was entering into 'em, I am not able to resist the temptation of this
Plot, but how shall I manage it? for I can no more make the Picture of a Face,
than I can make a Face; I have not so much skill, as a Man may learn out of The
Complete Gentleman, and other elaborate Pieces that teach that Faculty.


Mer. No, Sir, Did not I hear you the other day in a Mercers Shop, promise his
Wife her Picture, in the Presence of several Ladies, and the Good Man scraped
you many Legs, to express his extraordinary Sense of so great a favor, and
said, he would wait upon you, with his Wife, at your Chamber.


Ramb. Thou say right, glowing with extreme appetite to her, my Tongue and
Brain overheated with Motion, in the Stream and Whirlpool of thought and
babble, I very impudently invited her to sit to me for her Picture, and the
foolish Cuckold her Husband did accordingly bring her, and leave her with me;
where, when I had squeezed his Orange, I gave him the Rin'd again; and requited
him with the shadow of it, Drawn by one that could perform it.


Mer. Can you not draw then, Sir, what shall we do? our Plot is spoiled.


Ramb, Not at all, Sir, I can Draw well enough for my purpose, by this Plot, I
may Draw her, as I did the Mercers Wife, that is, I may Draw her to my Chamber,
that is enough.


Mer. That Is very well thought on, and to continue the quibble, this Plot will
give you a color to visit her.


Ramb. Well quibled again, where is the Apology, is that as witty.


Mer. A good honest, plain Country Apology.

Gives him a Letter.
Ramb. Come along Merry, thou must help in this business; well, I must turn
thee away, before thy wicked Councils have undone me.


Mer. Indeed Sir, it is ill done of me, but it is done out of pure pity, like a
good Natured Nurse, that cannot forbear giving a Feavorish Creature, that is
ready to dye of Thirst, what Drink they crave; I cannot for my life, hear you
groan aft era Wench, night and day, so pitifully, and not help you.

Exeunt. Enter Lord Drybone, and Betty Frisque. The Scene a Chamber.
L. Dry. Go, go, Hussy, you are an unkind naughty Girl, to make me pay thus
dear for every smile and smirk I get from you; I dare safely say, not a dimple
you make, when you smile, that does not cost me, one with another, Forty pound
a Dimple.


Betty. It Is your own fault, my dear Lord, you will be chiding of one, and
quarrelling with one.


L. Dry. Chiding of one, and quarrelling with one; ay, and I had better quarrel
on, I am a fool to buy Peace so dear, considering what a poor Trade I have, and
how little I get by it.


Betty. People that cannot barter Commodity for Commodity, must send Money in
specie, you know they do it all the World over.


L. Dry. But that is a very ruinous Trade, one had better War with such a
Country, and forbid all traffic with it, my dear Frisky.


Betty. Ay, if one can live without it, my dear Lord, you.


L. Dry. Come, no more of this, prepare to sit, Mr. Draw-well's a coming, I am
glad you like your Point, and Jewel, it puts you in good humor, and makes you
the fitter to sit.

Enter Siss.
Siss. There Is one below from Mr. Draw-well, desires to speak with your
Lordship.


L. Dry. How, has he failed me again? what an unworthy fellow it is, he shall
never draw it now, though he will do it for nothing.


Betty. May be he has not failed you, my Lord, send for the Man up, and know
his Message.


L. Dry. Let the Man come up:

(Exit Siss. These sort of Fellows, if they grow any thing famous, they grow so
saucy with it, that they are not to be endured.

Enter Ramble, disguised.
Ramb. I come from Mr. Draw-well, my Lord -- he sends this Letter by me to your
Lordship.

(Gives him a Letter. (L. Drybone opens the Letter, and Reads. My Noble Lord,
-- Fortune maliciously, just as I was upon the -- way a coming, I have, by much
importunacy, obtained the extraordinary kindness of this Gentleman, to come in
my room, one of the first Men in the World, -- formerly my Scholar; -- have a
care (I beseech your Lordship) not to speak to him of any recompense, for he is
a Gentleman of quality, and draws only for his own divertisement.

Your Lordships humble Servant

DRAW-WELL.


Betty. This Gentleman come to Draw my Picture? I know him, I love him for this
Piece of Ingenuity, I swear.

(Aside.
L. Dry. Sir, this is a great favor, indeed, I will aslure you, Sir, I take it
for a great Honor, see, Sir, This is the Person whom I recommend to your skill

(Ramble salutes her.
Betty. I receive this favor, with a great deal of satisfaction, this is an
honor beyond expectation, I could not hope for such an Illustrious Limner.


Ramb. If I had no skill at all, so beautiful a Person would inspire me.


Betty. Oh Sir, I rather need all the Favor your Pencil can afford; your
excellent Skill must hide the faults and defects of Nature.


Ramb. Nature, Madam, has not committed one, the Pencil must for ever despair
of.


L. Dry. Come, enough of this, if you please, Sir, let alone these Compliments,
and to your business, this is not at all to the purpose.


Betty. If pour Pencil, Sir, flatters, as much as your Tongue, the Picture you
will draw, will not at all resemble me.


Ramb. Heaven that made the Original, has taken away all means of Flattery.


Betty. Heaven that made? --


L. Dry. I say, I will have no more Compliments, come, Sir, if you please,
begin your Work.


Ramb. I am ready.

(Pulls out his Pencils, Colors, and Palate.
Betty. Where shall I place my self, Sir.


Ramb. Here Madam, this place receives the Light, best of any we shall find.


Betty. Do I sit right?

(She sits.
Ramb. Indifferent, Madam, a little more upright, if you please, a little more
this way, your Body turned thus, lift up your Head, that the Beauty of your
Neck may appear -- your Breast bare, thus -- (Goes, and feels her Breast. very
well, a little more -- more yet --


L. Dry. What a Pudder is here? I do not like all this, cannot you sit as you
should.


Betty. This is all new to me, I never sat before, it is the Gentleman's
business to place me, let him set me how he will.


Ramb. You sit admirable well, Madam, keep your self thus.


L. Dry. So, Sir, pray to your Seat.


Ramb. A little more toward me, Madam? your Eye's always on me, I beseech you,
Madam, your Looks fixed to me.


Betty: Now, Sir, pray do not flatter me, I am none of those Women, who, if
Pictures be but handsome, they care not whether they be like or no; one fine
handsome Picture might serve 'em all, for all demand the same things, fine
Features, and delicate Complexion; for my part, I desire no Charity at all, let
my Picture be but like, and I desire no more.


Ramb. You are so rich in Beauty, that the Pencil can add nothing to you, it
may possibly detract, it cannot flatter; ah, what sweetness is there? what
Charms, I undertake a bold Work, to represent those Perfections. (Talks and
Paints: I remember a story of Apelles, Apelles once drew the Picture of a
Mistress of Alexander the Great, and as he was Painting her, fell so
passionately in Love with her, that he was ready to dye Alexander, out of pure
Generosity, bestowed her upon him; I could not do as Apelles did, but ay, my
Lord, I am afraid your Lordship will not prove an Alexander the Great.


L. Dry. Come, Sir, I pray proceed in your Painting, we have neither of us any
business with Alexander the Great, that I know of.


Ramb. If Alexander the Great were by, he should not hinder me from saying, I
never saw any thing so charming, so --


L. Dry. Sir, in plain terms, you talk too much, in my opinion, and do not at
all mind your Pencil.


Ramb. My Lord, on the contrary, I discourse out of regard to my Pencil? to
quicken the Spirits, and put a Briskness and Gaiety in the Face.

Enter Merry, running dressed like an Attorney, with a Green Bag under his Arm.
L. Dry. How now, what would this fellow have? who let him in without my
acquaintance?


Merry. I beg your Lordships pardon for my rude pressing in, I am unknown to
your Lordship, but I have business of extraordinary concern, to your Lordship,
which I must acquaint you of, with all speed.


L. Dry. Business of extraordinary concern to me, what is it?


Merry. I must impart it to your Lordship in private.


L. Dry. We are private enough here, I wont go out of the Room, for I don't
like this Picture-Drawer.

(Aside.
Merry. Look you my Lord; ay, this Draws him aside, and whispers, and produces
several long scrowls. is it, no; this is not it; ay, this is it, no, no, ay,
now I come to it.

Ramble starts from his seat, and falls on his knees before Betty, watching L.
Drybone still.
L. Dry. I would thou were come to it once.


Ramb. Oh, charming Creature, if you have any pity in your Soul, save the life
of a poor languishing Lover, that has been dying for you these two months, I
have expressed my Love to you by Signs, and you have regarded them, and now I
have studied this way, to tell you in more intelligible manner; how much I
Love, Admire, Adore you, above all the Creatures of the World above all I can
express, and shall, as long as I live; but that life will not exceed this
minute, if you put me not instantly out of despair.


Betty. I know you, Sir, I have observed you, (I confess) and do further
acknowledge, your Love is not unpleasing to me, but it is impossible for me to
give you any satisfaction.


Ramb. If you say the word, it is, and shall be possible, nay, it shall be
impossible to hinder it.


Betty. But, Sir, I am a close Prisoner: and cannot stir out to save my own
life, and much less yours.


Ramb. Now you speak unkindly for I have seen you abroad.


Betty. It may be so, but like a Prisoner in the Kings Bench, never without my
Keeper.


Ramb. You can shake off your Keeper, if you please.


Betty. My Lord and I now, are upon pretty good terms; where do you lodge?


Ramb. At the Braziers in the Mall.


Betty. Be within about Two in the afternoon.


Ramb. Divine Creature.


Betty, But hope for nothing but a Visit, for there will be more words to a
bargain, than these; I will have a farther trial of Love, and I will have a
better Love, than perhaps you intend.


Ramb. Oh, Heavenly Creature, you shall have as much as you can hold.


L. Dry. How now Mr. Painter, what are you doing there?


Ramb. Is this a Mole, Madam, or a little speck of Dirt.


L. Dry. A Mole, Madam, I Gad, this same Picture-Drawer.


Merry. Now my Lord, if the Conveighances be Drawn thus.


L. Dry. Prithee ha done with thy Conveighances, for I do not understand one
word thou say.


Merry. No my Lord, look you, I Will make it plain.


L. Dry. Well, if thou make it never so plain, what is all this to me?


Merry. Not to you, my Lord, why are not you my Lord Buck?


L. Dry. No, nor my Lord Do neither.


Merry. What a Raskal was the Porter, to tell me, this wa^ the Lord Bucks.


L. Dry. What a Raskal was you, sirrah, to come to troubl^


Betty. Begone, my Lord's jealous. (Exit Merry. and grows into Choler; if he
grows out of humor, our Plot's spoiled.

(To Ramble.
Ramb. Well Madam, enough for once.


L. Dry. Yes Sir, and too much.


Ramb. To morrow I will wait on you again.


L. Dry. I shall desire your Pardon, you have done enough, too much at this
time, to come here any more.


Betty, How, no more; what shall he not finish my Picture?


L. Dry. You mean my Picture, it is you that sit, but it is my Picture that must
be Drawn, and in an ugly shape too.

Enter Lady Faddle.
La. Fad. How now, what is this noise, fie, my Lord Drybone, out upon thee,
will thou never let this poor Creature have any rest; I swear, I wonder she
will live with thee; what is the matter, Frisky?


Betty. Here Is a noble Gentleman, has done me the honor to begin my Picture,
and my Lord turns him away uncivilly, and will not let him complete his Work.


L. Dry. I know what Work you would have him complete; stay, let me see; I will
make an experiment, show me your Work before you go, let me see how I like it.


Ramb. Alas, my Lord, at present it is but rude, you can see nothing; four
days hence, something will appear.


L. Dry. Let me see it as it is, Sir; Ramble gives him the Picture. what a
Devil of a Face is this?


Ramb. Alas, it is but -- but -- a Pox on me for not looking on some Book, to
get the terms -- (Aside. it is but departed Colors.


L. Dry. Departed Colors, what are those? dead Colors, you would say, I
believe.


Ramb. Ay, dead Colors, the other is a term Gentlemen use.


L. Dry Ay, such a Gentleman as you are; but Sir, can this ever be a Face?


Ram. A most beautiful one, when my Pencil has lickt it.


L. Dry. Lickt it, ay indeed, it is more like a Bears Cubb, than a Face.


Ramb. It is a way of Drawing I have.


L. Dry. Is it, Sir, pray if you please, let that door be your way at present,
and pray let my House be never in your way of Drawing any more; -- come in
Betty, I Will talk with Draw-well for this trick.

Exit Lord Drybone and Betty.
La. Fad. This Gentleman a Picture-Drawer? I swear he is the handsomest
Picture-Drawer that ever I saw. Hold, Sir, pray, a word with you.


Ramb. Madam, I am commanded hence.


La. Fad. Sir, I have Empire enough here, to Reprieve you, at least for a
moment, and you shall stay, Sir, I understand, you Draw Pictures, and so
handsome a Picture-Drawer, must needs draw very handsome Pictures, what ever my
Lord Drybone says.


Ramble. When I Draw yours, Madam, I cannot do otherwise.


La. Fad. I swear, an incomparable well bred Man; Noble Sir, you have Drawn
your own Portraicture, in most Gentile Colors, that I am extremely ambitious;
to have mine Drawn, by so delicate a hand.


Ramb. Madam, my Hand is unworthy of that Honor, your Picture deserves rather,
to be Drawn in a Coach and Six Horses, in Triumph round the Town.


La. Fad. I swear, that is very witty, and surprising -- Sir, you now more and
more inflame me, with an Ardent desire to taste of your skill; I will not rest,
till obtain the Felicity.


Ramb. My Pencil will be proud of the Glory -- how shall I be rid of this
impertinent Woman?

Aside. Enter Siss, whispers Ramble.
Siss. Sir, my Lady is extremely troubled, and ashamed, my Lord has Treated you
thus uncivilly; by good luck, my Lord is just now called out, about an
extraordinary affair, and will not be back these three hours: she so extremely
desires to have her Picture drawn. by you, that if you will step down, she will
meet you at the door, and go and sit for an hour in any place, you shall think
convenient.


Ramb. Most excellent Creature, I adore thee for thy Message, were I on a
Precipiece, I would leap down to such an invitation; I will disintangle my
self, from Madam Impertinence, that hooks her self to me, and be at the door in
an instant, Madam, an affair of consequence calls me away, Exit Siss. my
Pencils, my Oistershells, my brightest Colors, the exactest motion of my Hand,
and the best of my skill, shall always attend your fair Phisiognomy; Your
Ladyships most humble Servant, and Picture-Drawer.

Exit Ramble:
La. Fad. The Top, the Cream, the Flower, the Quintescence, of Wit and
Ingenuity; his harmonious Tongue, has left a tang, a relish of a Passion behind
it; I swear, I feel a little Palpitation, I shall not be at repose, till I
commence my Intrigue; and oh my brutish and obtuse memory, I have forgot to ask
him, what happy place he honors with his abode; but now I think on it, Frisky
can lend me the knowledge, I will run with speed, and borrow it of her.

Exit La. Fad. Enter Ramble, and Betty Frisque, Vizarded. The Scene, the
Street, before Rambles Lodging.
Ramb. Heaven be praised, we are safe at the place of Battle; this is my
Lodging, in, in my Dear -- my Sweet --


Betty. Hold, Sir, I have honorably walked with you into the Field, but now
I Will Article with you.


Ramb. I abhor the word, it has been lately mischievous to me, and I will not
hear it.

Enter a Woman Vizarded, as out of Ramb. Lodgings.
Woman. Oh, Mr. Ramble; are you come, I have been waiting for my Picture this
hour.


Ramb. Oh curse on my memory, I forgot this Assignation; I have such bundles of
Billets, Doux, that I must keep a Clark to enter them in a Journal, Dear Madam,
I beg your pardon, I was pre-ingag'd to a Person of Honor, and I quite forgot,
come an hour hence, and I will not fail you.

Exit. Enter to them a Second Woman.
Se. Woe. So Mr. Ramble, you serve me finely, I have been staying for my Picture
these two hours, and here you promise 'em to Flirts, here is a Flirt newly gone
out, has kept me prisoner in a Closet this hour, I was so fraid to be seen, for
fear of my Honor.


Ramb. Oh, dear Madam.


2 Woe. No, Sir, I scorn to fit, if you draw the Pictures of every Flirt.


Betty. So, Sir, but oh, I am ruined, my Lady Faddle's coming, whither shall I
run, she will know me by my Clothes.


Ramb. In -- in -- dear Madam, Betty and Ramble strive to run in, Betty gets
in, but La. Faddle catches Ramble. this Disease has fastened on me; how shall I
be cured of her? what an unlucky Rogue am I in my Amors?


La. Fad. Have I found you, Sir? this is fortunate, I will not part with you,
till I obtain the Glory to be deciphered by your ingenious hand.


Ramb. Oh, Madam, what Apelles is fit for so great a Work? you are so admirably
Painted.


La. Fad. Not at all, Sir, you are misinformed, I only use a little Red, Fo,
Painted, I swear, I hate a Painted Woman in my heart, I suspect their Virtue,
besides, it is nasty! Painted Fo.


Ramb. I mean, by Natures Hand.


La. Fad. I beg your Pardon, I misunderstood you.


Ramb. That Art were saucy to contend.


La. Fad. Oh, Sir, you put me in a longing expectation; I beseech you, let us
to some convenient place, where you may begin your Work; put me in any posture
you please, sweet Sir, and let me taste plentifully of your skill.


Ramb. Madam, I want some Poet to assist my Fancy, you shall be Drawn in a
Triumphant Posture, with all the Gods and Goddesses attending, Venus crying for
not being so handsome, Juno scolding for jealousy of you; blind Cupid
borrowing Glass-Eyes, to stare on you; Jupiter transforming himself into a
Lap-Dog, to kiss you; Mars lying naked under your Feet, in the shape of a
Backsword.


La. Fad. Oh, admirable, when shall this most rare Piece be begun?


Ramb. That, Madam, I do not know.


La. Fad. Not know, Sir, Why? Sir, is it not your own Noble Hand performs it?


Ramb. My Hand will not have the Glory.


La. Fad. Whose then, Sir?


Ramb. I do not know, Madam.


La. Fad. Fie, fie, Sir, this is Superlative Modesty; Come, come, Sir.

(She pulls him. Enter Merry.
Merry. Master, Sir -- how, my Wife that must be, here?


La. Fad. Oh, dear, my Servant here, I shall be dishonored, this is
unfortunate!


Merry. Does my Master deal with stale Flesh too? and is he making me a Cuckold
before I am married? I do not much care, he cannot cuckold me of her Money, how
shall I do to outface him now -- how now, Jack Ramble, engross all the Ladies.

(Winks, and nods on Ramble.
La. Fad. What shall I Reply, what shall I Invent? this is Infernal

(Aside.
Ramb. How now, sirrah, how came you and I so familiar? what, is this thy
Rogues Plot?

(Merry winks, and nods on Ramble.
Merry. So Madam, this is fine.


La. Fad. I swear, Sir, -- I swear -- I don't know what to swear I am, in such
confusion.


Merry. Very well, Madam; this is a good beginning.


Ramb. This Rogue is intimate with her. -- This is some Plot, that I cannot
discover. But ha, here is Sir Thomas coming this way in haste.


La. Fad. Sir Thomas Rash catch me here? this is dishonor upon dishonor.

Enter Sir Thomas Rash, and four Bailiffs.
Sir Tho. So, have I found you? that is the Lady, I Command you, take her.


1 Bay. Lady Faddle, I Arrest you in the Kings name, in an Action of a Thousand
pounds, at the Suit of Sir Thomas Rash, here present.


Sir Tho. Come, put in substantial Bayl, or go to Jayl.


Ramb. An Arrest at my Lodging?


Merry. My Wife that must be, Arrested?


La. Fad. Arrested?

Ramble and Merry offer to Draw, and the Bailiffs step in, and disarm them.
Sir Tho. Hold, Sir, be not too forward, your turn will come soon enough.


La. Fad. Is this done, Sir Thomas, like a Civil Person, and a Person of Honor?


Merry. What is the business, Madam?


La. Fad. I will declare before all these Gentlemen; Know then, that a Nephew
of mine; a Baronet in the Country, was bound in a Bond of a thousand pounds to
come up to Town, and Marry Mrs. Christina, Sir Thomas's Daughter, four days
ago, and I was bound in the same Bond.


Ramb. What Is this?


La. Fad. And my Nephw failing to come up, Sir Thomas, like an uncivil person,
takes the forfeiture of the Bond.


Ramb. How, Sir Thomas, have you engaged your Daughter to any one, after you
have promised her to me.


Sir Tho. I promised her to you, to be your Strumpet, did I?


Ramb. My Strumpet! sure, Sir Thomas you are crazed, I know not what you mean,
nor do you know your own meaning.


Sir Tho. That shall be tried.


Merry. Is this all the business?


Sir Tho, Come Bailiffs, with your Prisoner to the Jayl.


Merry. Hold, hold, Sir, I Will release her; Madam, we will have a trick for his
trick, say you are my Wife, and plead Covert-Bearn.


Ramb. Was this the Rogues Plot? he has gulled this simple Lady into Matrimony.

(Aside.
Merry. Yes, Sir, she is the Wife of me, John Merry, Esquire, of Merry-Hall, now,
meddle with her, Sir, if you dare.


Sir Tho. Say you so, Sir, are you come over me so? very well; then I shall
speedily take out a Writ to Arrest John Merry, Esquire, in an Action of a Thousand
pounds, and he shall pay it me every farthing, if all the Estate, the said John
Merry and his Wife, the late Dame Faddle, have in the World, can pay it.


La. Fad. Sir Thomas, I would have you to know that, do your worst, my Estate
is able to pay twice that sum, yet I have enough remaining.


Merry, I am glad to hear of that, 3 or 4 thousand pounds will be good Sauce to
make the old Goose go down.

(Aside. Enter Christina and Isabella vizarded.
Chri. Hold! before this noble Company part I have something of great
importance to say to Mr. Ramble, in the Presence of you all, Sir, do you know
me?


Ramb. Madam?

(Discovers her self to be Christina
Chr. Sir, I am your unfortunate Daughter. (Kneels to Sir Tho. who, in
obedience to your Commands, am going to remove so great a misfortune as my
self, for ever from your Family; but ever I depart, I beg of you, by all your
past Fatherly Love, by the secret remains of it still in your Breast; by the
Remembrance of my dear Mother, in Heaven, to give me leave to vindicate my
self, and challenge this base Villain, in the Presence of Heaven, who knows my
Innocence in your own Presence, to whom he has wronged me, in the Presence of
all these, to affirm, if he dares, if there be any truth, or shadow of truth,
in any Word or Tittle, of what he spoke, in prejudice of my Honor.


Ramb. Hey, what Mystery? what Riddle? what Dream is this?


Sir Tho. Yes, Sir, now affirm to her face, what you said of her last night;
that she had been naught with you before, that she had made an appointment then
to be naught with you, and that she had been naught before ever you touched her.


Ramb. Oh horrid! what Devil has forged such an abominable falsehood, of me; May
Heaven strike me dead with Thunder; may the Earth sink and swallow me; may all
the Curses of injured Innocence pursue me; if ever such an impious thought came
into my soul.


Sir Tho. Oh Impudence, Impudence.


Ramb. And to show my Words and Thoughts are the same, I here declare her, as
pure and spotless, as a Soul in Heaven. I desire no greater happiness in the
World, than to possess her with all those misfortunes; which I am accused to
have brought upon her.


Sir Tho. Was ever the like impudence heard? he said all this, I charge him
with, to my face, and fought with me to maintain his words.


La. Fad. Very well, I shall have nothing to do with you, or your disputes;
know my Nephew is come to Town; but he shall go back again, and break off the
Match, and so take your course.


Sir Tho. Sir Mannerly, come? hold, Madam, one word more with your Ladyship,
and I Will end all controversies: Well, Mr. Ramble, you declare in the Presence
of my Lady Faddle, and us all, that you never meant the words you said.


Ramb. That I never said or thought any thing of this Lady, but what a Votary
might say of the Saint he prays to.


Sir Tho. That you acknowledge her entirely innocent of --


Ramb. That her Innocence is equal with her Beauty; and that her Beauty can be
equaled by nothing, but her own Innocence; and that she can be compared with
none, but her self.


Sir Tho. And that you will marry her, when ever I please. and leave her
Fortune to my discretion.


Ramb. That I will marry her, without any consideration of a Fortune, rather
than any other Woman in the World, with a Kingdom.


Sir Tho. Very well, then take notice, I will marry her to Sir Mannerly
Shallow; and so my Lady Faddle, I release your Ladyship, and now our Contest is
ended.


Ramb. What Is this?


Chri. Hold, Mr. Ramble, do not dare to interpose, my Father has declared his
Pleasure, and I declare my ready obedience; however, I will never have you of
all Men.


Ramb. Oh my torment!


La. Fad. Well, Sir Thomas, you have dealt (let me tell you) ungentilely with
me; but however, to put an end to controversies, I forgive you, and so let the
Match proceed.

(Exit Sir Tho. Rash, La. Fad. Chr. and Isab.
Ramb. Merry, a word, is this Lady your Wife?


Merry. Yes, in earnest, Sir.


Ramb. Then, sirrah, make her break off this Match, or I Will cut your Throat,
how dear soever I pay for it.


Merry. Well, Sir, a word to the wise is enough, you may be sure, I Will do what
-- lies in my power. --

Exit Merry. Enter Betty Frisque.
Betty. So so, Mr. Ramble, you are a very fine Man, some Women come to you for
their Pictures, and others for promise of Marriage; I have heard all passages,
this is you that Loved, Admired, Adored me above all Creatures in the World;
above all you could express; that you could have no Rest, day nor night, for
thinking and sighing after me: poor loving Man; I had been sweetly served, if I
had been such a fool, as to have believed you, and fallen a loving you, as hard
as ever I could drive: well, I thank you, you have done me a kindness, I shall
endure my confinement a little better after this: nay, I shall thank my old
Lord, for keeping me out of the Temptations of such false dissembling
insinuating Men.

Exit.
Ramb. So, so, forsaken, and hated by every one, all Afflictions come together;
I am justly served for my liquorish, greedy, insatiable, ridiculous Temper;
that like Adam, could not be contented in Paradise, but must be tasting all
sorts of Fruit, lawful or unlawful, though I had pleasures enough in Christinas
Love, to satisfy a Demy-God, and more than any mere creature could merit; well,
despair shall be damned, before he shall have the fingering of me yet, --
opportunity has not so turned his bald Crown on me; but I can have hold enough
of his Ears yet, at least, I will have hold of my Rival's Ears, who ever he be;
this shall give him to understand; (Shows his Sword.) what Portion he shall
have with his Lady; nay, what Lady he shall have, for this fair slender
Creature shall enjoy his Body, and speedily

Exit.
ACT V.
SCENE The Street, Sir Mannerly dressed in a fine Countrey-fashion'd Suit.
Enter Sir Mannerly, Shallow, and Booby. Sir Man. HOW do my Clothes become me,
Booby.


Boob. Bravely, an't like your Worship.


Sir Man. And am I pretty handsome.


Boob. I never see a handsomer Man peep out of a Suit of Clothes.


Sir Man. Well, I long for my Bride, oh how gentilely could I salute her now?
Madam, what a Spring, a Source, a Fountain, a River of Love and Beauty flows
from your eyes; a Nilus of Beauty overflows the Egypt of your Face.

Enter a Servant.
Serve. Sir Thomas Rash, nor Madam Christina, are no where to be found, Sir.


Sir Man. Hey, not to be found? well, then there is knavery in this, they do it
on purpose to make me forfeit my Bond. Oh dear, here comes the person of
Quality Enter the Porter. I invited to my Wedding, what shall I say to excuse
my self to him? -- Noble Sir, I swear I am so out of Aspect -- I know not how
to demean my self, I was so bold as to crave the honor of your company, at my
Wedding Supper to night, and I swear, Sir, I cannot find my Bride --


Por. Not find your Bride, Sir? that is strange; it is a common thing here in
London for Women to run away from their Husbands after they are Married, but I
never knew a Woman run from her Husband before she was Married, till now, well
Sir, there is no hurt done.


Sir Man. Hold, noble Sir, I have received so many noble Favors from you to
day, that I will not let you stir, till I know to whom I am so much obliged --
that I may know to whom to repay; I beseech you, Sir, to let me know your
Honorable name, for I am sure you are of Noble Quality.


Por. Ay, Sir, I am a Knight, -- I was dubbed (...) Lord Mayors show. --


Sir Man. Look you there, Booby, did not I say he was a Knight? I beseech you,
Sir, of what Order? for by your Silver Chain, and noble Silver Plate, you must
be of some Order, that I have not read of in Heraldry.


Por. I am of a very old Order, Sir, of the Order of Isacher. I stoop under my
burden, and my Crest is an Ass Couchant.


Sir Man. Look you there, Booby; I beseech you, Sir, your Name.


Por. My Name is Rash, Sir, at your service.


Sir Man. What -- not Sir Thomas Rash?


Por. Old Tom Rash, -- Sir Thomas, if you will have it so.


Sir Man. Oh strange, Booby.


Boob. Sir Thomas Rash's Worship.


Sir Man. Did one ever see the like? here have I been Angling and Trowling for
my Father-in-law, and have had him at my Hook all day.


Boob. This is just as your Worship and I, looked up and down for your Boots one
day, and you had 'em on your Legs.


Sir Man. Just so for all the World.


Por. What have I done now, I am afraid I have brought more Compliments on my
Head -- they come -- they come full swinge -- oh, what will become of me? oh,
Sir, have mercy on me.


Sir Man. Noble Father-in-law.

(Sir Man. and Booby, run and embrace him.)
Boob. His Worships Father-in-law's Worship.


Por. What do they call me Father-in-law?


Boob. Your Worship, Sir Thomas, I believe, does not know my Masters Worship;
my Masters Worship, is Sir Mannerly Shallow; that is come to Town, according to
his Bond, to marry your Daughter.


Por. Come to Town to marry my Daughter? I begin to think 'em merry Men again;
let me be hanged if I can guess, whether they be fools, or no, for my life; --
I facks, I rather think they make a fool of me.


Sir Man. I am the same Sir Mannerly Shallow, on my Honor Sir.


Por. Sir Mannerly Shallow, ha-ha, what comes in my Head (Laughs.) I heard my
Master, and Namesake, Sir Thomas Rash, talk of one Sir Mannerly Shallow; that
is to Marry my young Lady, and I warrant, this simple Gentleman is he; and he
hearing my name to be Thomas Rash, and calling my self in waggery, Sir Thomas,
-- he takes me to be my Master: ha -- ha -- ha. --

(Laughs. Hark you Master, are not you Sir Mannerly Shallow?


Sir Man. I am, on my Honor, Sir Thomas.


Por. Ha-ha-ha. --

(Laughs.
Sir Man. Ay, the same; ha-ha-ha. --

(Laughs.
Boob. It is his Worship. --

(Laughs. They all three laugh, and the Porter laughs the more, to see them
laugh.
Por. I have laughed my Heart sore; what a knavish prank could I play now, to
pass for Sir Thomas Rash, and pop my Daughter on this silly Knight: well, Sir,
I will not cheat you, I am honest Tom Rash, a poor Porter, and Servant, to that
very Sir Thomas Rash you want, and come along, I Will lead you to him.


Sir Man. Come, Father-in-Law, this is not gentile; now you have owned your
self, to deny your self again; you do it, now you see who I am, to make me
forfeit my Bond -- but what have I discovered? Let me compare the very same
Coat of Arms: I swear, this was well thought Pulls out a Letter, and compares
the Seal with the Arms of the Porters Badge. on; I Will take my Oath; now if you
deny your self, I Will go to Law with you, for I know you by your Arms.


Por. This is better and better, ha-ha-ha, --

(Laughs.
Sir Man. My Father-in-Law, I see is a merry Man --

(Laughs.
Boob, Sir Thomas, his Worship did but jest.

(ha-ha- (Laughs.
Por. Well, I^ll own my self to be Sir Thomas Rash, carry him to my Cellar, and
there let my Wife look to him, whilst I call my Master -- Come, Son-in-Law, I
am your Father-in-Law; and I am heartily glad to see you; I Will conduct you to
my Offspring, and your Bed-Mate, that must be -- what sport is here?


Sir Man. Did not I say 'twas he?

(Exit Porter.
Boob. What luck was this to find him, just as your Bond was forfeited.


Sir Man. Ay, and by the Coat of Arms, -- you must know, I am very well skilled
in Coats of Arms -- I can tell all our own Coats, and all the Quarterings, ever
since King Cadwallader. Oh, but Booby, was it not pretty, that I should invite
my Father-in-law, to his own Daughters Wedding.


Boob. I warrant, that made his Worship laugh so heartily.


Sir Man. Well thought on, I swear, now run to my Cloakbag, and fetch my bag of
Money, to pay for my Wedding Dinner.

(Exit.
Boob. I shall, an't like your Worship. --

Exit. Enter Ramble and Merry.
Merry. Sir, am not I a loving Servant, that forsake the Wife of my Bosom; now
Love has Cooked, and Dish'd her up, and leave her piping hot, to run after your
Appetite.


Ramb. Thou art an honest fellow, Merry; but all things considered, the
kindness is as great to thy self, as me, however, I accept it -- but have thou
hunted out my Rival?


Merry. I saw him here about, not a quarter of an hour ago.


Ramb. What a kind of fellow is he.


Merry. Oh, it is such a Cumberland Piece, he is much farther from
understanding, than his Country is from London; and has such a living Log
follows him, as you never saw: -- many a wiser Block has suffered Martyrdom for
Christmas, in his Masters Hall Chimney.


Ramb. Prithee lets inquire here about for them, by thy description, they are
so Remarkable, every body that has seen 'em, will inform us of them.

Exeunt.
The SCENE, An Apple Shop.
Enter Rash and his Wife. Wife. How, are you mad, Thomas, loose such a Fortune
for my Daughter?


Rash. What, shall I play the knave o'that fashion?


Wife. Is it knavery to own your Christendom? is not your name Rash? and were
not you Christened Thomas?


Rash, But I was not Christened Sir Thomas, was I?


Wife. Well, if the Knight will Christen you Sir Thomas, what is that to any one?


Rash. What, I shall ha my Master, Sir Thomas, ha me up, coram nobis, for
Forgery.


Wife. Well let him him coram nobis you as much as he dares; there is no Law
against owning ones own name; let him take his Silver Badge again, and he will,
we can live without his Chain, we shall be as good as he now.


Rash. I tell you, I wont do it.


Wife. Will Not you? then let my Goods rot and they will, I Will never sell
pennyworth of Apples or Gingerbread more, whilst I live.


Rash. These Women will rule the Roast -- well, I Will be Sir Thomas then, but if
I look through a Scotch Casement for this, that is to say, a Pillory; I Will
lodge a Cudgel in your middle Story backward.


Wife. Let them do what they dare, they shall find a Mess of hot Codlings of me,
I warrant them; give me my clean Kercher, and my Hat, and run quickly, an fetch
Winny from School.


Rash. There, there, Don 'em quickly, our Son-in-Law comes.

Enter Sir Mannerly and Booby, with a bag of Money under his Arm, a
Beggar-woman with a Child begging of Sir Mannerly.
Sir Man. Well, I never saw such a fine street in my life.


Beg. Woe. Pray your Worship, give a poor Woman something.


Sir Man. Begone, Beggar-woman.


Rash. Son-in-law, you are heartily welcome; see, this is your Mother-in-law.


Wife. For want of a better, Sir.


Sir Man. Madam, your most humble Servant.


Rash. Well, Son, I Will run and fetch your Bride, she is but two doors off, at a
Boarding-School, where I keep her for good Breeding; you wonder to see so many
Apples here; my Wife and I, you must know, are great lovers of Apples, and we
are laying in our Winter Store, into our Cellar; that is my Cellar, but that
great House is my Habitation.


Sir Man. Oh Stately, that is like the Palace of Sol-sublimibus, Alta Columnis:
-- And Gold on the top too, Clara micante Auro.


Rash. I, to show I love Apples, I have a Golden Apple, a Golden Pippin on the
top; well, I Will leave you with my Wife, I Will be back presently: --

Exit Rash.
Sir Man. Is your Ladyship so great a lover of Apples? I shall agree with you
then mightily in Diet, for I love Apples, as well as ever Adam did, and here
are as many fine Apples, as ever I saw in all my life.


Boob. Curious Apples indeed.


Wife. Pray Son-in-law, be pleased to eat one, there is a Pippin as good a one,
as ever Tooth was put in -- and as sound as my self.


Boob. A pure Pippin.


Sir Man. Your Ladyships most humble Servant; my Lady's a plain Woman, Booby.


Boob. She seems a very hearty Woman, an't like your Worship.

Enter Rash and Winnifride.
Rash. See, Son, here is your young Yoke Fellow, that must into the Noose with
you.


Sir Man. A most transcendent Beauty?


Rash. A plain Girl.


Sir Man. Not at all, she is the Epitome of Perfection; I am enamored above the
capacity of expression; I deserve to forfeit a thousand Bonds of a thousand
pound, for staying the thousandth part of a minute, from her Embraces; I will
pay the forfeiture of my Bond in Love and Kisses; -- I will number up:


Beg. Woe. Pray good your Worship.


Sir Man, What a troublesome Woman art thou? do not see I am busy a
Complimenting? -- I say, I will number up by Art Arithmetical


Beg. Woe. Pray your Worship,


Sir Man. Did one ever see the like?


Boob. Woman, do not trouble his Worship.


Wife. Begone, or I Will send for the Beadle.


Sir Man. I say, I will number up -- I will number up -- this scurvy
Beggar-Woman has broke off my Speech, that I vow and swear, I do not know what
I was going to say -- I had better ha given her a shilling, than have lost such
a Speech.


Boob. I could find in my heart, Beggar-Woman to kick you, for spoiling his
Worships Speech -- no matter -- your Worship -- has twenty more as good.


Rash. No matter for Compliments, come Son-in-law, to Church, if you please,
and there let the Parson complement you both into Man and Wife, and that is the
Compliment of Compliments.


Sir Man. With all my heart, and may a thousand Cupids hover over every Pue, to
fill your heart as full of Love, as mine is of Love and Admiration.


Boob. Did you ever hear such pure Compliments?


Rash. Never in all my days.

(As they are going off, Enter Ramble and Merry.
Merry. That Is he.


Ramb. Is that he, it is so ridiculous a fellow, I cannot be angry with him?


Merry. Go, Sir, Manage him -- whilst I handle Log, the Second King of Frogs,
that follows him.

Ramble takes Sir Mannerly, and Merry, Booby, aside.
Ramb. Sir, one word with you in private. -- To Sir Man.


Merry. Sir, one word with you in private. -- To Booby.


Sir Man. With me, Sir?


Boob. With me forfooth?


Ramb. Ay, Sir, it must be very private.


Merry. Ay, Sir.


Ramb. Is not your name Sir Mannerly Shallow?


Sir Man. It is, Sir, what then, Sir?


Ramb. Are not you come to Town to marry Sir Thomas Rash's Daughter?


Sir Man. I am, Sir, what then, Sir?


Boob. Four Oxen to run for a Wager, Sir, do you say?


Merry. From Tweed to Newcastle.


Ramb. Then you must not have her, Sir.


Sir Man. How, not have her, Sir?


Ramb. No stirring, Sir, if you do, this runs into your Guts.


Sir Man. Into my Guts, Sir?


Ramb. Ay, into your Guts, Sir.


Boob. My Masters Py'd Ox to be one.


Merry. For a wager of Fourscore Load of Hay --


Sir Man. Booby. --


Ramb. No Booby, Sir --


Sir Man. No Booby, Sir? --


Ram. No Booby, Sir. --


Boob. To be eat all with Mustard.


Merry. All with Mustard?


Boob. An Ox eat Mustard!


Merry. All with Mustard!


Ramb. I shall be very brief with you, I shall propound but two things to you,
take your choice, either to go out immediately, and fight me, and he of us too,
that comes alive out of the Field, shall have the Lady; or else this minute to
take Post for Cumberland, and not to come up, till I am married to her.


Sir Man. To go out and fight with you, Sir!


Ramb. Ay, Sir, till one of us fall dead, or ride Post for Cumberland; take
your choice.


Sir Man. Ride Post for Cumberland, Sir?


Ramb. Ay, Sir, choose instantly, or this goes into your Guts, Sir.


Sir Man. My Guts, Sir?


Ramb. Ay, Sir.


Sir Man. Booby. --


Ramb. No Booby, Sir; speak quickly what you will do:


Boob. And the Ox that wins, to be Knighted.


Merry. To be Knighted?


Boob. I never heard the like; let me tell his Worship --


Merry. Presently, when I ha done: -- I have not half done.


Ramb. Say what you will do, and that instantly.


Sir Man. Sir, I Will. --


Ramb. What will you do, Sir?


Sir Man. Sir, I Will. --


Ramb. Dispatch, Sir.


Sir Man. Sir, I Will -- Sir, I will not, Sir! What ha you to do to make me
fight? or ride Post either? whether I will or no, Sir?


Ramb. No questioning my Authority, speak instantly, I say instantly.


Sir Man. I never met with such a fellow in my life.


Ramb. You will not speak, Sir.


Sir Man. Sir, I Will. --


Ramb. What, Sir? --


Sir Man. Sir, I Will ride Post, Sir.


Ramb. Then come along, Sir; -- I Will see you mounted -- and attend you, or one
shall for me; one forty or fifty miles on the way, no looking o'r your
Shoulder, Sir.


Wife. Mr. Booby, Mr. Booby. there is a Gentleman runs away with your Master,
call a Constable, Thomas, a Constable, come along with me Winny to call a
Constable.

Drags him out, Sir Mannerly looks back, and offers to speak, Ramble stops his
mouth.
Rash. Is the Woman mad to make a Hubbub? -- hold your tongue.


Wife. I will not, he carries away our Son-in-law by force.

Ex.
Boob. One steal my Master!

(Rash follows her.
Mrery. No stirring, Sir.


Boob. No stirring -- What you help to steal him, do you? here Beggar-woman,
hold my Bag of Money a little, and I Will try a friskin with him, thou shall not
come at thy Sword, Man.

Gives the Beggar woman, the Bag of Money to hold. (Merry and Booby fight off
the Stage. A noise of a Hubbub within, and mean while the Beggar-Woman watches
her opportunity, lays down the Child, and runs away with the Money. Enter
Ramble and Merry.
Ramb. This is good, the Constable and the Rabble have seized our Foes; and we
the Aggressors have escaped, whilst the two Clowns stick fast in the Mudd of
the dirty Crowd; Let Us pursue our fortunes, overtake Sir Thomas, and the
company, be very impudent and obstinate, and see what that will do.


Merry. With all my heart, Sir, -- for I do not care for coming within the
reach of that heavy fisted fool any more.

Exeunt. Enter Constable, Sir Mannerly, Booby, Rash, Wife, and Winnifrid.
Sir Man. You have let go the Thieves that would have stolen me, and here you
hold my Man and me.


Constable. Stolen you, Sir? I found this man in actual Battery.


Boob. He battered me as much.


Rash. Come, come, Son-in-law, never make a bustle on your Wedding Day, give
the Constable a spill.


Sir Man. There Is a spill, but I take my Oath he would have stolen me.


Constable. No more words on it, come -- there, go about your business.


Sir Man. Come, Madam, as the Poet says -- Per varios casus per tot discrimina
rerum. Exeunt. Sir Man. Rash, Wife, and Win.


Boob. I think I plough'd his chops for him; an he had cuff'd a little longer,
I would ha pulled up his Nose by the Roots -- but where is the Beggar-woman with
my bag of Money? look if she has not laid it in the Street, like a baggage, a
thousand to one, but it might have been stolen -- hey, my bag of Money is
alive? a Bastard, a Bastard, (Takes up the Child. stop Thief, stop Thief? a
Beggar-woman has run away with a bag of Money, and has left a Bastard in the
room; stop Thief, Thief.

(Lays down the Child, and offers to run away.
Watch-m. Mr. Constable, Mr. Constable, here is a fellow has lain a Child in the
Street.


Constable. Stop him, stop him, knock him down; how now, sirrah, lay a Bastard in
the Street!


Boob. Is it my Bastard? is it not the Beggar-womans Bastard, that was a
begging here? and has run away with all my Money?


Constable. She was your Whore, was she, sirrah? here is a fine Plot of a Rogue,
neighbors; to make a bustle in the Streets, that his Whore might have an
opportunity to lay a Bastard to the Parish: yes, sirrah, the Parish shall
maintain such a lusty Rogue as you in Lechery? -- come, sirrah, to the House of
Correction.


Watch-m. Ay, Mr. Constable, whip him, whip him, this way the Parish-money
goes; I have been sess'd above Fifteen shillings this year, for such Rogues
unlawful Lecheries.


Boob. Whip me! I never saw the Woman before in my life.


Constable. Then you lay with her in the dark, did you sirrah?


Boob. I am but newly come to Town.


Constable. Then you shall be whipped as soon as you come; a Whipping-Post shall be
your welcome.


Boob. Whip me if you dare, since you go to that, for I belong to a Critique.


Constable. A Critique, What Is that?


Boob. A great Judge, that was he that was here just now.


Constable. He a Judge? he looks like a Man fit to hold the Scale of Justice
indeed; he is more fit to hold a Grocers Scale; and weigh Plums and Comfits,
then Causes.


Constable. Come, sirrah, I Will let out your hot Blood, I Will Plant a Grove o'Birch
in your Arse o'peak.


Boob. Oh, Mr. Constable, my Master is a Northern Judge, indeed, and a Baronet,
I can prove it.


Constable. I care not what he is, sirrah; will he put in security to keep the
Child, and buy off your Whipping?


Boob. Why must he? or must I be whipped?


Constable. That, Time shall try.


Boob. Oh, Mr. Constable, come along; my Masters Worship shall be bound, and
give you any content.


Constable. Well, let us see what he will do.

Exeunt. Enter Sir Tho. Rash, Merry, Christina, La. Faddle, Isabella, Bridget,
and Ramble.
La. Fad. Where have you been Mr. Merry?


Merry, Only settling some things about my Estate.


Sir Tho. Do not follow, and Tantany us, Mr. Ramble, for I declare positively,
thou shall never have my Daughter.


Chr. Mr. Ramble, my Father is engaged to another, but whether he was, or no,
the words you said, are never to be forgiven, neither Extravagance, Railery,
Drink, nor nothing can excuse 'em, they have fixed you in my Eternal Hatred;
and you are the only thing of all Heavens Creatures, I abhor.


Ramb. Then I am the only wretched thing of the whole Creation, and the more
wretched, since I suffer Innocently; for what ever have been my other sins,
from that unpardonable one, of Blaspheming your Honor, I am wholly innocent,
consider why I should say it, what should move me to it; what did provoke me;
and what should I gain by it, when said?


Chr. That foppish vain Glory, which possesses all your Sex, of defaming those
Women, whose Honors you cannot otherwise abuse.


Sir Tho. Why, Sir, what should move me? what provoke me? and what should I
gain by telling a lie, Sir?


Isab. I swear, Madam, I begin to pity him, and think there is some mistake.


La. Fad. I dare not interpose, for fear of discovering the affair, about my
Picture --


Mer. Come, Sweetheart, you are the chief Person concerned; you must resign
your claim to this Lady -- for Jack Ramble is my friend, and though I know
nothing of the business, I know he is Innocent, because I know him to be an
honest fellow; but whether innocent or no, I will have Matters made up; for in
plain terms, if my friend may not Bed the Woman, he loves, I will not Bed the
Woman I love; I will never be happy, while my friend is miserable.


La. Fad. How, Mr. Merry?


Sir Tho. Let me alone with him, Madam; Sir, what have you to do to intermeddle
in my affairs; Bed who you will, Sir, and what you will, Sir; but if you say,
he did not say these words, I give you the Lie, and there is my Glove.


Merry. Take your Glove, Sir, your Hand is old, and will catch cold.


Ramb. Some Devil has appeared to him in my shape, and said this.

Enter Betty Frisk. and Siss.
Betty. Oh dear, have I met with your Ladyship? (To La. Fad.) this is lucky, if
ever you will be kind to me in your life, Madam, take me into your company -- I
have been abroad but two hours, and my Lord has been to seek me in such a rage,
that if you do not excuse me, it will be a parting quarrel.


Ramb. Betty Frisque here? how do my sins follow me? what shall I do? now I
think on it, she dares no more own the knowledge of me, then I dare of her: my
standing virtue, Impudence, must aid me


La. Fad Why do thou do this, Betty?

Enter Lord Drybone.
L. Dry. So Gentlewoman, are you hearded? -- ha, what do I see here, her
Father? that is he I saw last night; I Am sure on it; I remember his Face again,
though I saw him in the dark, very well, Sir, take your Daughter again, I am
very glad it is you she runs to, I thought to have found her in worse company;
there, Sir, take her, take her, and make the best of her.

(To Sir Thomas.
Sir Tho. My Daughter, Sir; to whom do you speak, Sir?


Ramb. What, more mistakes?


L. Dry. To you, Sir?


Sir Tho. To me, Sir? I am as good a man as your self, Sir.


L. Dry. As good a man, Sir.


Merry. Hold, hold, Gentlemen.


L. Dry. Sir, I am a person of Honor, Sir.


Sir Tho. And I am a person of Quality, Sir.


L. Dry. Well, Sir, be of what quality you will, Sir, you came last night to my
door with Fiddles, and challenged me for debauching your Daughter, Sir, then
you could own her in the dark, for your own pleasure, Sir; and now I will make
you own her for mine; and as I told you last night, she had been debauched,
before I touched her; so I tell you again, if she had not, perhaps I would have
considered her.


Ramb. The mistake comes out.


Sir Tho. Hold, my Lord, was not you in your Nightgown and Drawers?


L. Dry. Yes, Sir, and you was in a Buff Coat.


Sir Tho. Mr. Ramble, where art thou, will thou forgive me? can thou forgive
me? honest Mr. Ramble forgive me.


Ramb. Now Madam.


Sir Tho. My Lord, I thank you heartily for this discovery, you have cleared up
a mistake, in which I persisted to the injury of an honest Gentleman; but now I
will do my self and him right; know then, this Gentleman is a Servant to my
Daughter, and this is my Daughter I challenged you about, and finding him
something Airy and Wild, was desirous to hinder the Match and he passing by my
door with Fiddles last night I, in a rage, pursued him to your Lordships, and
mistaking your Lordship for him, in the dark, I challenged you with intentions
of debauching my Daughter, and your Reply entangled us in difficulties, which
now are vanished.


L. Dry. Then this is the Lady, it seems, was Serenaded.

To Christina.
Ramb. The same, my Lord, the Playing at your door was but a blind. --


Betty. No, no, 'twas to me.


Chr. He brings himself off wittily.


L. Dry, But hold, Sir, now I remember, you came to draw her Picture to day.


Chr. Has he that trick too?


Ramb. I did so.


Betty. Ay, ay, I have an Intrigue with him.


Ramb. But it was only for divertisement, I never saw her before in my life.


Betty. Why do you say so? 'twas an appointment, well, my Lord, you and I must
part, you see how false I am.


L. Dry. Dear Betty, forgive me, I see thou have more Virtue and Goodness, than
I have Estate to Reward; live with me again, and I will become a new Creature.


Betty. That must be by some very strange miracle indeed, that an old Man
should become a new Creature -- but however, mend as much as you will, I shall
never mend, I shall continue my Intrigues with Picture-Drawers, and Pages, and
Hackney-Coachmen -- and every Man I can come near. --


L. Dry. Oh, do not Treat me thus severely, I have injured thy Virtue, but I
will make thee recompense for my life, and all the pleasure of it lies in thy
Favor.


Betty. No, no, this keeping of old Women, by you old Sinners, is but done out
of a scurvy custom, not any need you have: like old Snuff-takers, that cannot
live without Snuff, though it never makes 'em sneeze; do but break your self of
the custom for one month, and you will find no want: but come, since you are
humbled, I make a proposal; Promise before all this noble Company, to make a
settlement of 500 l. a year, on me for life, that if we ever quarrel, I may
have something to trust to, and I will return to my Dominion again, and govern
you as formerly.


L. Dry. I engage it, and you shall have it drawn by what Lawyers you please.


Betty. Then I am yours in the new-fashion'd Matrimony for ever.


L. Dry. I am as formerly, your most obsequious Keeper.


Sir Tho. Oh, these are fine doings, but I say nothing.


Ramb. Now Madam, it is my turn to quarrel, and be unkind.


Chr. Yes indeed, you had need boast of your Innocence; witness the Importunate
Temptations of a young Lady, which you manfully resisted last night, and could
by no means be brought to her embraces, witness this Creature, whose Picture it
seems you drew, an Excellence I never knew you had till now.


Ramb. Oh, forgive me, I acknowledge my faults with grief and penitence, I am
amazed, how it was possible for me to think of any thing but you, but hopes of
Love, are like the prospect of a fair Street, a great way off, and you cannot
blame a poor thirsty Traveller, if he takes a sip here and there by the way --

(Kneels.
Sir Tho. How on thy Knees Mr. Ramble? I swear, we rather ought to kneel to
thee. Rise, rise, Man, were I not to forfeit a thousand pound Bond, thou
should have my Daughter before any Man.


Ramb. Say you so, Sir, Dirt shall never be laid in the Scale with Beauty, I
will pay the forfeiture.


Isab. This is brave, I swear, now Madam, you are bound in Honor and Gratitude
to forgive him.


Sir Tho. Mr, Ramble, this is so generous a Proposition, that I will pay the
forfeiture of the Bond, give thee my Daughter, and a Thousand pound more, with
her, than ever I designed for her Portion, with any Man -- take her -- she is
thine.


Chr. Well, Sir, I hope you will give over your Picture-Drawing.


Ramb. Now I am in Heaven, and all my sins forgiven, upbraid me not with them;
I will Draw no Pictures but my own, and those never without your help.


La. Fad. How, Sir Thomas, will you use my Nephew thus scurvily?


Merry. How, will you oppose my desire? Resist my Virgin authority.


La. Fad. Mr. Merry, I will not have my Nephew thus abused:

(Enter Sir Mannerly, Winnifrid, Porter, and Wife) See, he has found us.


Sir Man. My Lady Aunt, wish me joy.


La. Fad. Wish thee joy, Sweetheart, for what? for loosing thy Bride? here is
Sir Thomas Rash, after all our Articles, is going unworthily, to bestow his
Daughter upon another.


Sir Man. How, Aunt? you do not know Sir Thomas Rash when you see him, nor his
Daughter neither -- sure I have her fast enough, I am married to her already,
and here she is.


Chr. This the Creature that was designed for me? bless me! what a deliverance
have I had?


Sir Man. This Sir Mannerly.


La. Fad. What do thou say; art thou Married to that Girl?


Sir Tho. Married to my Porters Daughter? this fellow is my Porter, Madam, and
his Wife is my Apple-woman.


Sir Man. Your Porter, What Is that?


La. Fad. He goes of Errands for Groats and Testors, and Pence, this is Sir
Thomas Rash, and this is his Daughter.


Sir Man. How! am I cozened so? is this Sir Thomas Rash? and is this his
Daughter? -- are you no Sir Thomas, and you no my Lady, and do you go of
Errands for Groats, and Pence? and do you sell Apples?


Por. Faith Son, it is a folly to disown it, now all is done; these are our
Occupations, I am no Knight, but of your dubbing; you would dubb me a Knight,
whether I would or no -- I was not ambitious of the Honor.


Wife. Well, though we are poor folks, we are Honest and True.


Sir Man. Honest and True; sirrah come back and Un-marry me again.

(Beats the Porter.
Sir Tho. Hold, hold, Sir Mannerly, now it is too late; how came this mistake,
Tom?


Por. My being your worships Namesake, caused it, he would needs bear me down,
I was your Honor, and Marry my Daughter, in spite of my Teeth.


La. Fad. Oh, how have thou dishonored our Family?


Sir Man. Fear not, Aunt, I Will Feague 'em; Porter, I Will make it a scurvy Errand
to you; and Apple-woman, your Daughter shall be a costly Pippin to you.


Wife. Do your worst.

Enter Constable and Booby, with a Child in his Arms.
Boob. Here Is his Worship; oh an't like your Worship, shall if you will not be
bound to maintain this Child for me, I to prison, and be whipped presently.


Sir Man. Maintain that Child? what ha you got a Bastard since you came to Town
already?


Boob. It Is a Beggar-womans Bastard, I never saw in my days before.


Sir Man. Get a Bastard of a Beggar-woman in a days time? do they breed so fast
in London? that is faster than our tame Coneys do; no wonder, London is so full
of People.


Boob. An't like your Worship, I never saw, or touched the Woman, or any Woman
I never lay with any Woman in my life; give me a Book, I Will kiss it upon it.


Sir Man. How could you come by this Bastard then?


Boob. I did not come by it, it came by me; I gave a Beggar-woman the bag of
Money to hold, whilst I cufft with the Thief's Man that would have stole you,
and she lays down the Bastard, and runs away with the bag of Money.


Sir Man. How, lost my bag of Money; then be whipped, I Will keep none of the
Bastard.


Constable. Then come along, Sir.


Sir Tho. Have pity on the poor fellow.


Sir Man, No, since he would not keep my bag of Money, I will not keep his Bastard.


Boob. Oh, an't like your Worship, be but bound for me; I Will keep it my self --
I Will serve it out.


Sir Man. Well then Applewoman, since I am Married, do you keep my Man Booby's
Bastard for nothing; that shall be for a Portion with your Daughter.


Wife. I don't care if I do, the Child is a fine likely Child.


Sir Man. Well, I scorn to be beholden to you, I will pay for the keeping of
it; but Booby, I will send you down quickly into the Country, if you get
Bastards thus fast,


Sir Tho. Mr. Constable, discharge the Man, I Will see that the Gentleman, his
Master, perform his word.


Constable. Well then, of your word, Sir Thomas, I release him.


Sir Man. So, I have come up to London to a very fine purpose; I ha lost my
Mistress, lost my Money, am Married to an Apple-womans Daughter, and must keep
a Beggar-womans Bastard; whereas, I thought to have lived in London, and never
seen the Country more: I will now do down into the Country, and spend all my
time in railing against London: I will never see London more, so much as in a
Map, I will burn my Map of London that hangs in my Parlour-


Sir Tho. A very Honest, and as the times are, Pious and Wholesome Resolution,
Sir Mannerly; better live in the Country, and burn your Map of London, than
live in London, and spoil your Map of Humanity, with Drinking and Wenching.


Port. I, Son-in-Law, better go into the Country, and live lovingly with my
Daughter, than stay in Town, and turn her away, and keep a Wench in her stead,
as Gentry do that Marry, and live here.


Sir Man. Why, do they?


Wife. Ay, the more shame for 'em.


Sir Man. Then I Am resolved I Will stay in London, and Booby, you can find
Bastards; do you find a Wench for me.


Wife. Keep a Wench under my Winny's Nose, I Will tear her Eyes out.


Sir Tho. I will dissuade him, well, Sir Mannerly, I am very sorry for the
misfortune you have met with in coming to Town for my Alliance; I will cancel
the Bond to make you some recompense; and since my Daughter is not so happy to
enjoy you, let my House have the Honor to entertain you; whither I also invite
the rest of this Noble Company: my Lady Faddle and her Husband, my Lord
Drybone, and his Settlement; and Tom Rash, and thy Wife, be of our Society now;
this Noble Alliance has advanced thee; be a Knight to day, and Prince of
Porters for ever, and thy Wife, Lady of Apple-women: I will have both your
Statues made in Ginger-bread, and set up in Costermongers-Hall, and Noble
Brides and Bridegrooms all walk in,

And Love apace, as fast as you can drive,
And may the Trade of Love for ever Thrive.
Exeunt.
FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Sir Mannerly Shallow, the Countrey-Wit.
BRothers, I Am newly come to Town from Cumber-Land, to be one of your ingenious
Number.
I am afraid, I shall disgrace you all,
But I Am resolved; I will a damning fall;
Since you have ten ill Plays, for one good Play,
I think to damn 'em all, the safest way.
But I in all things, Sirs, shall copy you,
And save or damn, as you great Judges do.
As for the Poet, who is tried to day,
I know him not, and so can little say;
If all in his Petition here, be true
He did not write this Play (Great Wits) for you.
He says, long since, you mighty Judges swore,
That you would never ride this Circuit more;
That you have taken the Malefactor napping,
He writ for Wits of London Bridge and Wapping.
Who hate to see a Muse in Buskings strut,
As much as in gilt Coach, a gaudy Slut,
That his defense, he is unprepared to make,
Yet for an Honor does your Presence take,
(...)ayes, he does it more Renown esteem,
(...) by you, than to be saved by them.
(...) for my sake, let all his faults be waved,
(...) not the first damned Poet I have saved.

