Certain Prayers and Graces, newly added, to be used of Scholars, both before
and after noon.
Compiled by R. C.
NOw that the day star does appear,
to God devoutly let us call,
That in the deeds of daylight clear,
he keeps us from misfortunes all.
Let him temper our tatling tongues,
by bridling them after his will,
Lest horror vile break us among,
with words of strife, that sound full ill.
Let him cover our sight also,
feeding it as he knows best,
Lest we delight in vain things tho,
and so draw them into our breast.
Let all the secrets of our hearts
be pure and clean from filthiness;
Let slothful sluggishness depart
from us that study do profess.
Let mean diet of drink and meat
beat down pride of filthy flesh,
Lest raging in that filthy heat,
we lose of youth the flowers fresh.
These things we crave that when the day
by course of kind away shall pass,
And night shall come, then sing we may
in praise of him, to our solace.
And that we may still bear in mind,
in what works we the day shall spend,
Let us record what words we find
in Books that were made to that end.
In Exodus, and other more,
that written were by God's Elect,
We find Gods Precepts written so
as after follows in effect.
When Jacob's Seed in Wilderness
could not abide Gods voice to hear,
Then Moses did himself address,
for them before God to appear.
And at the Lords Commandment
he took to him his Servant true:
Up to Mount Horeb then they went,
to learn this Law which does ensue.
Which Law God writ in Tables twain.
of stone so hard which might last long,
And would the same should still remain
among his folks both old and young.
And first, to make their mind attend,
he said (O Israel give ear)
I am the Lord omnipotent,
whom thou must serve, obey and fear.
For I thee brought from careful thrall,
wherein thou wast in Egypt long,
And there could find no ease at all,
but were enforced to suffer wrong.
Thou shall have therefore in my sight
none other Gods but only me:
For I alone have power and might,
And all the rest vain Idols be.
Thou shall not cast out, paint or draw,
for thee, the Form of any thing
In heaven or earth, or stand in awe,
of ought that is of man's making.
For why? I am a jealous God,
and will my honor to no one give:
I beat the Children with sharp Rod,
that like their wicked Parents live:
And that to three or four discents,
in such of them as do hate me,
And keep not my Commandments,
but in their doings wicked be.
But such as love even as they should
me and my Laws, and them observe,
I show mercy a thousand fold,
and them from evil I preserve.
Take not in vain Gods holy Name,
but use it with all reverence:
For why? the Lord does all such blame
as herein does commit offense.
Remember that thou holy keep
the day of rest, as God does will.
Six days thou shall apply thy work,
and do all things that be not ill.
But the seventh day is the Lords rest,
wherein no vile work may be done,
By thee, thy Child, thy slave or beast,
or stranger that with thee does won.
For in six days the Lord did frame
the heaven, the earth, the creatures all.
The seventh he ceast, and blessed the same,
as time for his on him to call.
All these Precepts the Lord did write
on the first Table made of stone,
And would they should in him delight,
that for his love, serve him alone.
The second Table follows then,
wherein the Lord instructs us,
How to behave us toward all men,
and in the same is written thus.
Unto thy Parents honor give
as Gods Commandments will thee,
That thou long days and good may live
on earth where thine abode shall be.
Murder no man by word or deed,
with tongue or sword or other thing:
Do naught from whence hate may proceed,
for Murder out of hate does spring.
Avoid all foul Adultery,
and all things that thereto belong,
All filthy thoughts and lusts of eye,
and all unchaste talk of the tongue.
Take not by fraud nor by rapine
the things that others do possess:
For so to take what is not thine,
before God is great wickedness.
Against no man false witness be,
but testify the truth always:
For God thy secret thoughts does see,
and will thee judge at the last day.
Thou shall not in thy heart desire
thy Neighbors Wife at will to have:
His house nor field don't thou require,
no nor his servant, nor his slave.
Be not desirous to receive
his Ox, or Ass, or any Beast,
That he is not willing to leave,
nor ought that by him is possessed.
These be the Laws that God did give
to Jacobs seed in Wilderness,
And would that they therein should live,
that will an endless life possess.
But such that will this Law neglect,
and walk after fleshly desire,
The Lord at last will them reject,
to dwell in everlasting fire.
The Lord God for his mercies sake
guide us in his most perfect way,
That we may escape the fiery Lake
and live with him in Bliss for aye.
That these things may be granted us,
at this time henceforth always.
In the name of our Lord Jesus,
to God the Father let us pray.
OUR Father which in Heaven art,
and do reign over all,
Thy holy Name be sanctified
amongst both great and small.
Thy Kingdom come, wherein we may
no wicked thing abide,
Nor ought that does set up it self,
or is puffed up with pride.
Thy will be done upon the carth,
like as in Heaven above;
Where all the Creatures work thy will,
because they do thee love.
Give us this day, our daily Bread,
which need does make us crave:
For why? our souls and bodies both
of thee their food must have.
To ask forgiveness of our sins,
dear Father we are bold,
As we forgive wrongs as are done
among us manifold.
Do thou not us to trial bring,
for we are weak indeed:
But when that sin shall us assault,
deliver us with speed.
For why? the Kingdom, and the power,
and glory every whit,
Is thine, and shall be evermore:
all Souls say, So be it.
O Lord, preserve our King and Queen
with all his Royal Train:
But chiefly such as zealous be
the Gospel to maintain:
Which grant, O God, till day of Doom,
in Britain may remain.
Prayers for Midday.
NOw that we have the morning spent
in Learning honest exercise,
Lest Natures Bow being over bent,
our bodies let us not despise:
Let us therefore take at God's hand
such nourishment as he does give
To feed his folk by Sea and Land,
without the which we cannot live.
And that we may avoid excess,
to him for grace now let us call:
For surfeit does the wit oppress,
and drowneth good things natural:
And more besides, the gift of God
if we abuse, unto our shame,
We worthy are to feel the Rod,
for such dishonor to his Name.
That we therefore may hold the mean,
to him that made us let us pray:
And to his promise let us lean,
that willed us in his name to say.
Our Father which art, etc.
Prayer for Evening.
BEfore the clear light of the day,
by course of kind draws to an end,
To God devoutly let us pray,
that he will keep and us defend:
And that all dreams filthy and vain,
with fantasies that night does bring,
May fly far from our heavy Brain,
while we by fleep seek refreshing.
And that he will our foes suppress,
who still do seek us to beguile,
So that no manner of wickedness
have power our bodies to defile.
And more besides, that when we sleep,
he will vouchsafe us wished ease:
So shall we when the day does peep,
his Majesty with praises please.
Now that the Father of all might
will grant this for his dear Sons sake,
Let Us now be humble in his sight,
as he has taught, our Prayers make:
Saying, Our Father, as before.
Grace before Meat.
THe Lord that did all things create,
for man to serve him at his need,
Bless all that we do drink or eat,
And give it strength our flesh to feed.
For whatsoever shall nourish indeed,
Whether it be good for man or beast,
Must by his great power be blessed.
And since we have an inward man,
That must with in ward food be fed,
Which by no means obtain we can,
But by him that is heavenly bread,
And of all spiritual things the head,
Let us still feed on him in mind,
That gave us flesh to feed mankind.
Thus doing we shall run our race
Without the want of any food;
And at the last come to the place
That proms'd was to Abraham's brood,
And by faith washed in Christ his Blood,
Where evermore we shall him see,
That is one God in Persons Three.
O Lord preserve in health and peace
King Charles, our most gracious King,
Thy holy Spirit in him increase,
That he may be as he has been,
A Sword to cut off Popery clean,
That he and we may hold that truth
Which he has loved from his youth.
Amen.
Grace after Meat.
NOw that you have your bodies fed,
with food that feeble flesh must have,
Remember that you break your bread,
To such as need compels to crave:
For God that to us good gifts gave,
Would that you should therewith refresh
Such as do lack, and are your flesh.
You are not Lords of that you have,
But must account of each thing make
To him that gives, when you ask
Abundance for his mercies sake,
And would not you should see them lack.
Be diligent always therefore,
To help the needy with your store:
And if you doubt what sort they be
That should relief find at your hand,
Among all men look whom you see
That of your help in need does stand,
To be relieved and loosed from band.
Them must you know to be that sort
That at your hands must have comfort.
But chiefly such as do profess
The name of Christ unfeignedly,
For in them Christ is in distress,
And craveth help in misery,
And will repay with usury
All that to him you give or lend,
And that in life which shall not end.
Grace before Meat.
AS to the sick all pleasant things
have still unsavory taste:
So shall Gods gifts be unto us,
if vainly we them waste.
Take heed therefore, says Christ our Lord
that surfeiting ye shun:
Let not your hearts with banqueting
be drowned and overcome.
Receive Gods gifts with giving thanks,
and natures weakness feed:
When you have done, remember those
which want and stand in need.
So shall God bless and eke increase
your basket and your store,
And give you life in Christ our Lord,
which lives for evermore.
Grace after meat.
Man's life preserved is by food;
as God has well decreed:
But on Gods grace and holy word
our souls must daily feed.
Through want of food material,
the body soon will pine:
So will the soul, if long it lack
the spiritual food divine.
To thee be praise (O Father dear)
which at this time has sent
Both for our souls and bodies food,
thy Children to content. Amen.
Grace after Meat.
THanks be to God in heaven above,
for he has fed us well:
And we beseech his gracious love
to feed our souls as well.
Repentance with the fruits thereof
that we never forget.
Tender (O Lord) thy holy Church,
good Rulers in it set,
And evermore upon England
thy heavenly grace down send,
That we may by thy word and truth
our sinful lives amend.
And finally, all such as be
afflicted for thy word,
Comfort them by the Holy Ghost,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.
O Lord preserve in peace and wealth.
Our noble King, and send him health. Amen.
Grace before Meat.
TO eat and drink does small avail,
the World is all but vain:
Except the Lord our hearts do guide,
our pleasures are but pain:
Grant us therefore, O Christ, that we
may all with one accord,
Not live to eat, but eat to live,
and live to praise the Lord. Amen.
Grace before Meat.
THe eyes of all things do look up and trust in thee (O Lord,) thou give them
meat in due season: thou openest thy hand, and fillest with thy blessing every
living creature. Good Lord, bless us and all the gifts that we receive of thy
bounteous liberality, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
THe God of all power, who has called from death the great Pastor of his
Sheep, the Lord Jesus, comfort and defend the flock which he has redeemed by
the Blood of his eternal Testament: increase the number of true Preachers:
repress and mitigate the malice of obstinate Tyrants: enlighten the hearts of
the ignorant: release the pains of such as be afflicted, but especially those
that suffer for the Testimony of the Truth; and finally confound Satan by the
power of our Lord Jesus Christ. So be it.

Grace before Meat.
CHrist which at his last Supper gave himself unto us, promising his body to be
crucified, and his blood to be shed for our sins, bless us and our meat. Amen.

The God of peace and love vouchsafe always to dwell with us, and thou Lord
have mercy upon us.

Grace before Meat.
GLory, Honor and Praise be given to thee, O Lord, which has fed us from our
tender age, and give sustenance to every living thing replenish our hearts
with joy and gladness, that we (always having sufficient, may be rich and
plentiful in all good Works; through our Lord Jesus Christ. So be it.

Our King and Queen, O Lord defend.
And bless them both, World without end.
A Prayer.
GOD preserve our Realm, the Kings Majesty, with his Royal Oueen, the
honorable Council, and the Nobility and Commons of the same: God assist the
Clergy with his Holy Spirit, in setting forth his truth: God defend the
Favorers of the Gospel, and make us all faithful and zealous in the same: God
change the hearts of our Enemies: The mighty power of God destroy Antichrist
with his wicked Kingdom: God send the Gospel a joyful and free passage through
the whole World, that every one of us may live godly and uprightly in our
vocation and calling, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
BOoks Printed for George Conyers, where Country Chapmen may be furnished with
all sorts of Books and Ballads.
Ornatus and Artesia. Seven Champions. Seven Wise Masters. Seven Wise
Mistresses. Long Meg. Mad Men of Gotam. Parliament of Women. Ball's Catechism.
Don Quixote. Book of Riddles. Dorastus and Faunia. Garland of Good Will. Gesta
Romanorum. Great Assize. David's Repentance. Gakers Arithmetic. David's
Blessed Man. Mothers Blessing. Plain Man's Pathway to Heaven. Help to
Discourse. York's Arithmetic. Garden of Spiritual Flowers.

