THE PROLOGUE TO CALISTHO, WITH THE CHORUS'S BETWEEN THE ACTS.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXV.

PROLOGUE. The Curtain is drawn up, and there appears a Nymph leaning on an
Vrne, representing the River Thames, attended by two Nymphs, representing Peace
and Plenty: Near her are the four Parts of the World seeming to make offerings
to Her: On the opening of the Scene, lamenting voices are heard on both sides
of the Theater, at which, the Nymph of the River seems affrigtned.
Voices within. Fly, Fly, Help, Oh! Help or we dye.


Tha. WHat mournful cries are these on every side!
The Winds wast nothing to this Island over
But the complainings of some Neighbr'ing Shore,
And all the Echoes are in groans employed.
The fair London anciently so called.
Augusta too, I weeping see,
Though none so fair, so rich, so great as She;
Alas! my Fears increase:
You gentle Nymphs of Plenty and of Peace,
Shall now go seek some other Shore.
And you that with your Presents wait,
Shall bring your gifts no more.

Plen. I to no other Dwelling will betake,

Pea. Thy beauteous Streams I never will forsake,

Euro. And we our Presents still will make.

Om. We our presents still will make.

Ple. Thy stores with all my Plenty shall be filled.

Pea. My Halcion on thy Banks her Nest shall build.

Eur. Thou shall in all my noblest Arts be skilled.

Asi. My Jewels shall adorn no Brow but Thine.

Amer. Thy Lovers in my Gold shall shine.

Afri. Thou for thy Slaves, shall have these
Scorched Sons of mine.

Pea. Pleu. Thy beauteous streams we never will forsake.

Euro. Asi. Afr. Amer. And we our presents still will make.

Om. We our presents still will make.

Pea. What should so much Beauty fear,
Round this Isle the Heavens appear
Like your own streams, all undisturbed and clear:

Tha. These beauteous Nymphs unfrightned too,
Not minding what on other Shores they do,
Their innocent delights pursue.

Pea. See, They (void of grief or fear)
Come to entertain you here.

Enter Nymphs, who Dance, and go off. Tha. Oh! now my Spirits I recover,
I Have waked the Genius of this Isle, my Warlike Lover.

Enter the Genius of England. Genesis What cries are these disturb my pleasing
Rest?

Tha. It Is I, (my Love) it is I, thy aid request.

Genesis Is it my Nymph, what do thou fear?

Tha. Does not my Love sad cries round him hear?

Genesis Will thou thy fear at every shriek proclaim?

Tha. Am I alone to blame?
Do you not see Augusta, rich and fair,
(Though to her Lap, I all my Treasure bear)
Will for no comfort stay her Tears?
Augusta is inclined to fears.
Be she full, or be she wayning,
Still Augusta is complaining.
Give her all you can to ease Her,
You shall never, never please Her.

Genesis These fears do not belong to Her nor You;
Europe only should lament,
The Nymphs of his fair Continent.
Some Giants now pursue. But this sweet Isle no Monster can invade.

Tha. Oh send those poor distressed Nymphs some Aid.

Eur. From the mild power of this happy place.
Who is inclined,
To make the World as peaceful as his mind,
They have already gained the grace:
Two Heroes of his own celestial Race
Are sent; the one to Triumph over the Seas,
And all the watery Divinities.
The other, Monsters of the Land to quell,
And make the Nymphs in safety dwell.

Genesis The first, in War has all perfections gained,
That can by humane nature be attained:
The second promises, to be
All that in the first we see.

Eur. Mars to the first does all his glory lend:
The second Beauty, Youth, and Love attend.

Genesis Both in high perfections shine:
Valor, Glory, race Divine:
Wait a while, and you shall see
Both return with Victory.

Pea. Hark, hark; the Triumph's near,
And see! they both already crowned appear.

Enter One crowned with a Naval Crown, attended by Sea-gods and Tritons.
Rejoice you watery Deities:
The mighty Monsters of the Seas,
This valiant Prince has slain.
The God of this fair Isle shall now,
Command (as all his Right allow)
The Empire of the Main.

Enter one Crowned with a Mural Crown, attended by Warriors. Ye Gods and
Nymphs of Plains and Groves;
Of Springs and Streams, enjoy your Loves:
This youthful Hero has subdued,
The Satyrs now of every Wood:
Has killed or ta'n them all for Slaves,
And chased the Giants from their Caves.
Cho. of all. Let us both their praises sing,
Whilst we both in Triumph bring,
Let us all contend to grace them
With our loud, and joyfull'st thanks,
Whilst upon the flowery banks,
Of this beauteous Nymph we place them.

Two Entries are Danced: One of Sea-gods and the other of Warriors. Genesis Now
welcome Heroes to my blessed abode,
And to my Nymph beloved by every God.

Tha. Welcome to my Love and me,
Now we all shall happy be.

Cho. Now we all shall happy be.

A Temple of Fame appears. Ple. Now you whose valor gives the World repose,
See what Fame on you bestows.
Her shining Temple shall preserve your names,
And thence her Trumpet your renown proclaims.

Genesis To our Divinity now let us go,
And at his Feet your Crowns and Trophies throw.

Eur. I will my thanks in Offerings proclaim.

Asi. I Will lend you Spice.

Amer. I Gold.

Afr. And I the same.

Tha. I Will be your Guide.
My Streams beneath his Palace slide.
There it is not far before you,
Pleasure, Arts, Religion, Glory,
Warmed by his propitious Smile,
Flourish there, and bless this Isle.

Genesis But stay! Turning to the King and Queen.
what wonder does my Spirit seize?
See! here are both the great Divinities.

Tha. The God and Goddess too of this blessed Isle!
Chaste Beauty in her aspect shines,
And Love in his does smile.

Genesis Quickly (Heroes) as it is meet,
Throw your Trophies at their Feet.
Fall down, and adore them.
Whilst with speed we hither call,
The Gods of neighbr'ing Groves, and all
Their Nymphs to dance before them.

Enter Rural Gods and Nymphs, and Dance. When the Prologue is done, and all
gone off the Stage, Enter Two, who sing this Song. Now for the Play, the
Prologue is done,
The Dancing is over, and the Singers are gone.
The Ladies so fine, and so fair it surpasses,
Are dressed, and have all taken leave of their glasses.
Where are the Slaves should make ready the Stage?
Here, here are the slaves should make ready the Stage.
An Entry of Carpenters.
The Song to the Minovet, Danced in the Prologue, to be sung by Shepherds.
Happy we Swains, who are young and have leisure,
And but the wit our advantage to know.
We do not need either Fortune or Treasure,
Love and Delight with the youthful will go.
Coyest of Nymphs may be won to the pleasure,
By Shepherds who love, and have youth to bestow.
Then whilst we are young, let us to pleasure betake us,
Each Swain with his Nymph, and each Nymph with her Swain
Embrace, and be happy as Loving can make us,
And so make the most of our youth that we can.
Chorus after the First Act.
Enter Strephon, Corydon, Daphne, Sylvia. Cho. of Shepherds. Str. Hark, hark,
I hear the merry Hunters Horn,

Cory. The sound from yonder Hill by winds is born.

Daph. Diana, and her Nymphs are all that way A Hunting gone

Syl. So soon e're break of day.
Let them let them go.

Chor. Lovers, better pleasures know.

Stre. Let the cold Nymphs run dabling in the Dew,
Kind Love to warmer pleasures us invites

Daph. I do not envy their delights,
Whilst my dear Strephon does continue true.

Cor. Whilst thus severe my Sylvia does remain,
I envy not the Hunters, but the slain.

Sylv. Poor Corydon, thy flame remove,
I pity thee, but cannot love.
Yet I own, I have something in every Vein;
Which moves me to Love, could I meet with a Swain,
Who were to my mind, and would love me again.

Str. See Shepherds the day is begun:
Come, with our sports let us welcome the Sun.

Shepherds Dance to this following Song. Sylv. Kind Lovers, Love on,
Least the World be undone,
And Mankind be lost by Degrees.
For if all from their Loves,
Should go wander in Groves,
There soon would be nothing but Trees.

Exeunt omnes. Chorus after the Second Act.
Enter Strephon, Corydon, Daphne, Sylvia, Chorus of Shepherds. The Scene near
the Vale, whither the Winds carried Calistho. Cho. Come Shepherds, quickly
hasten to the shades,
The Sun with all his force the Air invades.

Sylv. The open plains let us forsake,
Here is a Grove will pity of us take.
The Trees in gentle whisperings invite us,
Here are all things to delight us.

Str. These pleasures none can well improve,
But we (my Shepherdess) who love.

Daph. These pleasures none can well improve,
But we (my dearest Swain) who love.

Corid. Oh happy Shepherd, and kind Shepherdess,
Whom all the Gods, above expression bless.
Here Sylvia cruel, I forlorn,
Torment our selves each day.
Whilst I with grief, and she with scorn,
Wast all our youth away.

Sylv. Alas poor Shepherd! the fault is not mine,
That to thy passion I do not incline,
I wish thy love and desert were more moving,
For I confess I fain would be loving.

She pawses and starts. What (on the sudden) do I ayle?
Gentle winds from yonder Vale,
On the sudden warm my Heart.

Sylv. Oh! I Am wounded: Oh! I smart.

Enter Cupids. Sire. Sure some God is here descended,
With a Train of Loves attended.

Sylv. Oh! I Am wounded: Oh! I Love.
This is some enchanted Grove.

Cho. This is some enchanted Grove.

Cupids Dance, and go off. Stre. Oh! my Soul is in a flame.

Daph. I must fly or lose my Fame,

Cor. O what raging Passions fill me!
Love me Sylvia now, or kill me.

Sylv. Oh! I love, and long to show it,
But my Shepherd shall not know it.

Stre. Oh! my Daphne! now, or never,

Daph. Strephon, fly my sight for ever.

Corid. I can no longer Sylvia wait thee,

Sylv. Corydon, be gone, I hate thee.

Chor. Curse on this enchanted Grove.
We are all undone with Love.
We are all undone with Love.
Fly from this enchanted Grove.

Exeunt omnes. Chorus after the Third Act.
Sylv. Corydon is a noble Swain,
And too long has felt disdain.
But since scorn I once did show,
My Love I Am too proud to let him know.

Daph Ah Sylvia! Sylvia! my Heart (like yours)
Pain from foolish Pride endures.
I angry with Strephon to day did appear,
And now long to reconcile:
Yet in pride for a time will seem severe,
Though it breaks my Heart the while.

Enter Strephon, Corydon, Chorus of Shepherds. Daphne and Sylvia offer to go
as they Enter. Stre. Oh whither does my lovely Daphne fly?

Cory. How long will Sylvia Corydon deny?

Daph. It is will my kindness to remove:

Sylv. And I shall never, never Love.

Daphne and Sylvia Exeunt. Stre. Oh! what has changed my Daphne's mind?

Cho. Oh false, and cruel Womankind!

1 Shep. Come Shepherds do not complain.
See, see yonder a merry Train,
Of Gypsies dancing over the Plain.
Call them straight, call them straight to comfort these poor Swains.

An Entry of Gypsies. No longer complain,
If your Loves show disdain,
Be proud, and disdain them again.
The Fools you will find
Will be glad to be kind,
When they once are despised by the Men.
Gypsies go off. 1 Shep. Hark, hark! in yonder woods the Satyrs play,
The Echoes bring their laughs this way.
They with some pleasant sport are pleased.
The wanton Demy-beasts some Nymphs have seized.

Enter two Shepherds. Laugh Shepherds, Laugh and sing.
Joyful Tidings now we bring.
The fair Calistho is disgraced;
Gods and Mortals hate the Chaste.

An Entry of Satyrs. Stre. All this to me but little ease does give,

Coryd. All joys are dead to me, why do I live?

Stre. In death alone we ease shall find.

Coryd. In death alone we ease shall find.

Chor. of all. Oh false and cruel Womankind!

Exeunt omnes. Chorus in the Fourth Act.
Enter Daphne and Sylvia. Daph. Oh! whither are our poor despairing Lover, gone?
I fear I have my Strephon slain,

Sylv. And I my Corydon.

Daph. Oh my sorrow! Oh my pain!
Could I my Strephon find:
Could I my dearest Strephon find
I Would never be unkind.
I Would never be unkind to him again.

Sylv. And I, my Love would passionately own,
Could I find my Corydon.

Daph. Do I Dream? Do I Rave?
Look toward yonder Cave.

Sylv. Our Shepherds come from yonder Cave.

Daph. Our Shepherds come from yonder Cave.

Sylv. Our Shepherds come from yonder Cave.

Sylv. From empty pride I Will be free,
It shall bring no more mischief upon me,
Since I Love as well as he,
I Will not hazard my joy,
In being foolishly coy,
It had like to have undone me.

Daphne and Sylvia go and meet Strephon and Corydon: each brings in her
Shepherd. Daph. Dear Strephon, give despairing over,
Unkindnesses are gone,
I never will be cruel to thee more.

Sylv. Nor I to Corydon.

Cory. O what kind God does Sylvia's hate remove?

Str. And made at length my Daphne grateful prove?

Sylv. The God of Love.

Daph. The God of Love.

Sylv. The gentle God of Love.

Daph. The gentle God of Love.

Coryd. Oh happy Tidings!

Stre. Blessed hour!
Ever kind and gentle Power.

Cory. Ever kind and gentle Power.

Enter Chorus of Shepherds, followed by Bacchusses. Chor. Joy Shepherds Joy!
Diana's disgraced,
Love has had to day Revenge on the Chaste.
The Bacchusses here our mirth to improve,
Come hither to follow the Triumphs of Love.
No mirth without Bacchus, nor joy without Love.

An Entry of Bacchusses. After the Dance. Cor. Since all our grief thus
joyfully ends,
Let each Shepheardess make her Shepherd amends
To the Temple let us go,
And then we will show,
What every Lover, by Loving intends.

Exeunt omnes. Chorus after the Fifth Act.
Enter Strephon, Corydon, Daphne, Sylvia, Chorus of Shepherds, as from the
Temple. Cho. Happy Lovers! happy Live,
And all the Gods their blessings give.

Cor. Lead along, and with Delight,
Let us hasten on the Night.

Enter two African Women. Stre. What Vision's this is come to greet us?

Cory. See! the Night is come to meet us.

1 Afr. Stay gentle Swains be not afraid,
To see our Faces hid in shade.
We, but lately, were as fair,
As your Shepheardesses are.
Did not a frantic youth of late,
O'reset the Chariot of the Sun?

Cory. He did, and his deserved Fate
He met when he had done.

1 Afr. It is he that has undone us:
He powered whole streams
Of melting Beams,
Red, and glowing hot upon us.
And now we range the World around,
To see if our lost Beauty can be found.

Enter a Third African Woman. 3 Afr. Rejoice, Rejoice: our Beauty's found,
Our lovely White and Red,
To two chaste Nymphs of Cynthia's Train is fled.
And they must Stars be crowned:
And now instead of what we sought,
Our black with us must fair be thought.

All three. This happy Fate, who could Divine?
Our Beauty then in Heaven must shine.

1 Afr. No losers we shall prove,
By parting with our Red and White;
If Black will serve the turn of Love;
For Beauty's made for Loves delight.

4 Afr. See! See! the Nymphs are coming here.

Sylv. But Oh! what glorious Apparition's near?
The Clouds amazing Glories gild:
All the Clouds with Gods are filled.
And all the Gods appear.

Calistho and Nyphe enter under a Canopy, supported by Africans; Immediately
upon their entrante a Heaven is discovered, filled with Gods and Goddesses. The
whole, concludes with an Entry of Africans, and this Song. Daph. Must these be
Stars? and to Heaven remove,
Before they have tasted the pleasures of Love.
That the Gods so ill, such Beauty should use!
What mighty Cost must Nature loose?

Syl. I cannot so much Beauty show,
But what I have, I Will better bestow.
Not upon Gods, or Glories above,
Or empty Renown, but Pleasure and Love.
All pleasure but Love, from our Hearts we will be chacing,
We Will kindle our selves into Stars with embracing,
We Will every moment our pleasures renew,
Our Loves shall be flaming, and lasting and true.

FINIS.

