Hisstorical Remarques
London, in Flames


London, in Glory


Historical Remarques, AND OBSERVATIONS Of the Ancient and Present State of
LONDON and WESTMINSTER. Showing

The Foundation, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges, Churches, Rivers, Wards,
Palaces, Halls, Companies, Inns of Court and Chancery, Hospitals, Schools,
Government, Charters, Courts and Privileges thereof.

With an Account of the most Remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues,
and other Occurrences which have happened therein for above Nine Hundred Years
past, till the Year 1681.

Illustrated with Pictures of the most considerable Matters curiously Engraven
on Copper Plates; With the Arms of the Sixty Six Companies of London, and the
time of their Incorporating.

By RICHARD BURTON, Author of the History of the Wars of England.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell next to Kemps Coffee house in
Exchange Alley, over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1681.

TO THE READER.
AN Ingenious Historian who was a great Traveller, writing concerning this
famous City about Thirty years since, ventured to compare it as to Situation,
Government, Trade, Artists, and all other Accommodations to the greatest Cities
in Europe, yea all things considered, to the Greatest in the World, and if at
that time it deserved such high Encomiums, then certainly since its Rise out of
those Ruins that unhappily befell a great part thereof by the dreadful fire in
1666, it does even excel it self; and the Beauty thereof is very much
increased, especially as to Uniformity and Curiosity of Buildings, largeness of
Streets, and many other Excellencies which that fiery Purgation has
occasioned; So that we may invert what was formerly said of Solomon's Temple in
Ezra's time, That the Glory of the former City is not to be compared with the
Glory of the latter.

There needs then no Apology for making this short Collection concerning this
great Subject, especially since there are few Books now extant that Treat of
the Antiquities thereof, and none that I know of, who have written of the
particular Accidents that happened thereunto; It cannot therefore be
unacceptable to have a short Manunual of so many particulars, for so long time
past at so small a price as this is, The serious perusal whereof will very much
confirm the Truth of what the wise Solomon writ so long since, Eccl. 1.9. The
thing that has been, it is that which shall be, and that which is done is that
which shall be done, and there is no new thing under the Sun.

Richard Burton.

Historical Remarques. OF LONDON, etc.
CHAP. I. The Original and Foundation of the Famous City of London.
THough it may seem difficult to discover the Original of some Nations and
Cities, yet it is no hard matter to find out the Foundation of this Honorable
and Famous City of London.

But as the Roman Writers to magnify the City of Rome, drew its Original from
Gods, and Demy-Gods, by the race of the Trojans, so Jeffery of Monmouth our
Welsh Historian, for the greater Glory of this Renowned City, deduceth it from
the same Original, relating that Bruce who descended from the Demy-God Aeneas,
the Son of Venus, Daughter of Jupiter, about the year of the World 2855, and
1108 years before the Nativity of our blessed Savior built this City near the
River now called Thames, and named it Troynovant, or Trenovant; but this
Account has no great Authority.

The same Historian tells us, that K. Lud afterward repaired and increased this
City with fair Buildings, Towers, and Walls, and called it after his own name
Caire Lud or Luds Town, and the Gate which he built in the West part thereof,
he likewise for his own Honor named Ludgate. He adds, That this Lud had two
Sons, Androgeus and Theomantius, who being not of Age to Govern at the Death of
their Father, their Uncle Cassibelan took upon him the Crown; in the eight year
of whose Reign, Julius Caesar arrived in England with a formidable Army to
Conquer it, and obliged the Britains to pay a yearly Tribute to Rome. Caesar
calls London the City of the Trinobantes, which sounds somewhat like Troy Nova,
though learned men think that Trinobantes signifies the State or Signiory of
the Trinobantes.

But in those days, the Cities of the Britains were not artificially built
with Stone or Timber, but were only thick, and Troublesome Woods plashed
together, and entrenched round, like to those which the Irish at this day call
Fastnesses; Some are of Opinion that whence London had her Fame, from thence
she had also a Name, that is from Ships, which the Britains call Lough, and
Dinan a Town, so that London is no other than Shipton, a Town of Ships; which
Title no City has more Right to assume than this, being situated upon the
gentle Ascent of an Hill, near a gallant Navigable River, which swelling at
certain times with the Ocean Tides, she is able by her deep and safe Channel to
entertain the greatest Ships, which bring in all the richest Commodities the
World can afford.

Some would have Llwndian the Welsh name of London, to be derived from Llhwn
which signifies a fenced Town, made of Trees cast down and barricadoed
together, as aforementioned, for so the Poet sings.

-- Their Houses were the Thicks,
And bushy queachy hollow Caves
And Hurdles made of Sticks.
And it is probable, that in the Place where St. Paul's Church now stands, there
was a Wood or Grove, and a Temple dedicated to Diana, which was usually set up
in the Woods; and in a place about St. Paul's, there were the Heads and Bones of
Oxen lately found, which is supposed were offered in Sacrifice to her.

Now though it be not certainly known, who was the Founder of London, yet
whoever it was, he showed much Prudence in the Choice of Situation; for she
seems to have been built in an happy hour, having continued for so many Ages;
Amianus Marcellinus who wrote near thirteen hundred years ago, calls her then,
an Ancient City.

When the Romans had reduced the hither parts of Britain into the form of a
Province, and had sown the seeds of Civility here, as well as over all Europe,
this City began to be renowned and famous for Wealth, Riches, and Prosperity,
yea she continued always the same under the Romans, Saxons, and Normans, being
seldom or never afflicted with any great Calamities. In the Reign of Nero, when
the Britains had conspired to recover their lost Liberty, under the Conduct of
Boadicia, the Londoners could not with all their weeping and Lamentations, keep
Suetonius Paulinus in the City, but after he had raised a Power of the
Citizens, he would needs go from thence, leaving the City naked to the Enemy,
who presently surprised it, and slew those whom either weakness, feebleness, or
sweetness of the place, had detained there. Nor was London in less danger by
the Gauls or French, if she had not been wonderfully preserved, for when Caius
Alectus, had Treacherously destroyed Carausius, he kept to himself the Revenues
of Britain and Holland, and called himself Augustus Emperor, as his Coins
often found here do demonstrate; But when Marcus Asclepiodotus had slain him in
Battle, those French who remained alive after the Fight, hastening to London,
would have plundered the City, had not the River Thames, (who never failed to
help the Londoners at need) very happily brought the Roman Legions to their
Assistance, who put the Barbarians to the Sword all the City over. About which
time it is Recorded, that Lucius Gallus was slain by a Brookside which ran
almost through the City, and of him was called by the Britains, Wantgall, in
English, Walbrook, which name remains to this day, under which there is a Sewer
within the ground, to carry the Kennel water of the City into the Thames. This
is not far from London-stone, which is thought to be a Milemark, or Miliary,
such as were in the Market Places of Rome, from which were taken dimensions of
Journeys every way, which seems the more probable, because this Stone is near
the midst of the City as it lies in length.

After this Julius Agricola the Roman Lieutenant persuaded the Britains to
build Houses for themselves, and Temples for their Gods, to bring up their
Children in Learning, and to Apparel themselves like Romans; so that in a few
years after our Saviors Nativity she became famous, but especially for the
multitude of Merchants, Provision and Trade thereof, as Cornelius Tacitus
notes, and was then called by some Authors Londinum, by others Augusta, under
which name her Fame is celebrated by an Ancient Author, which is thus
Translated by Philemon Holland; This City was Augusta called
To which (a truth to say)
Air, Land. Sea, and all Elements
Show favor every way.
The Weather no where milder is,
The Ground most rich to see,
Which yields all sorts of useful Fruit
That never spent will be.
The Ocean that with Thames her Streams
His flowing Tide does blend,
Conveys to it Commodities
All that the World can send.
The Noble Seat of Kings it is;
For State and Royalty
Of all the Realm, the Fence, the Heart,
The Life, the Light, the Eye.
The People Ancient, Valorous,
Expert in Chivalry,
Enriched with all sorts of Goods,
Of Art, or Mystery.
Take a strict view of every thing
And then say thus in brief,
This either is a World it self
Or of the World the Chief.


CHAP. II. The Ancient, and present Walls and Gates of the City.
HIstorians report, That about the year after Christ 306, Constantine the
Great, at the desire of his Mother Helena, did first build a Wall about this
City, which may seem more probable, considering that the Britains did
understand how to build Walls with Stone, as may appear by the following
Relation.

About the Year of Christ 399, when the Empire of Rome was invaded, and that
City destroyed by the Goths, the Romans called away all their Forces from
Britain for the Defense of their own Country; After which the Britains being
not able to defend themselves, were for many years oppressed by two cruel
Nations, that is, the Scots and Picts, whereupon they sent Ambassadors, with
Letters full of Lamentable Supplications and Complaints to Rome, to desire
their assistance, promising constant Obedience to them. The Romans sent them a
Legion of Soldiers, who fought with their Enemies and drove them out of the
Country; And leaving the Britains at Liberty they advised them to make a Wall
cross the Country from one Sea to the other, for their defense against their
troublesome Neighbors; and then the Romans returned home in Triumph.

The Britains built this Wall in the North of England, but wanting Masons,
they did not make it of Stone as the Romans directed, but of Turf, which was so
weak, that it was little Security to them. For their Enemies perceiving the
Romans were gone, they presently came in Boats, and invaded their Country,
ruining and wasting all before them. Upon which Ambassadors were again sent
with fresh Lamentations to Rome, beseeching them not to suffer their miserable
Country to be wholly destroyed; The Romans then sent them another Legion, who
coming suddenly, surprised their Enemies and made a great slaughter among them,
chasing them back again even to their own Country.

The Romans departing home again, told the Britains plainly, that the Journey
hither was long and troublesome, and therefore they must expect no further help
from them; but must learn to use Armor, and weapons themselves, thereby to be
able to resist their Enemies, who were encouraged to invade them because of
their Cowardice and Faintheartedness; However for the encouragement of their
Tributary Friends, whom they were now forced to forsake the Romans made them a
Wall of hard Stone from the West Sea to the East Sea, and built two Cities at
each end thereof, the Britains laboring therein also. This Wall was built
Eight Foot thick, and twelve Foot high, directly East and West, as appears by
the ruins to be seen at this day. The work being finished; the Romans gave them
a strict charge to look to themselves, and to instruct their People in the use
of Arms, and Millitary Discipline, and least the Enemy should come by Sea,
Southward, they made diverse Bulwarks at some distance from each other by the
Seaside; And then bid the Britains farewell, as intending to return no more;
This happened in the Reign of Theodosius the younger; near 500 years after the
first Arrival of the Romans here, and about the year of our Lord 434.

The Britains after this had several Skirmishes with the Picts and Scots, and
made Choice of Vortiger to be their King and Leader, who is said to have been
neither Wise nor Valiant, being wholly given up to Lust and Debauchery; And the
People likewise having some rest from their Enemies, ran into Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Pride, Contention, Envy, and all manner of Vice, to the great
scandal of their Christian Profession. At which time a dreadful Pestilence fell
upon them, which destroyed such a multitude of them, that the quick were not
sufficient to bury the dead, and yet those that remained alive continued so
impenitent, that neither the death of their Friends, nor fear of their Enemies
had any Effect upon them, whereupon Divine Justice pursued them even almost to
the Destruction of the whole sinful Nation

For being now again in danger of utter ruin from their old Neighbors the
Scots and Picts, they consult with their King Vortiger what to do, and at last
conclude to call in the Saxons, who soon after arrived in Britain; where
(says Bid) they were received as Friends, For having driven out the Picts and
Scots, they likewise drove out the Britains, forcing some of them to fly over
the Seas, and others into the barren and waste Mountains of Wales and Cornwall.

The Saxons were likewise ignorant of building with Stone till the year 680.
for it is affirmed that Bennet Abbot of Werral, and Master to Reverend Bid,
first brought in Artificers for Stone houses, and Glass Windows, unknown before
to the Saxons, who built only with Wood. And to this Polychronicon agrees; who
speaking of those times, says, Then had ye wooden Churches, nay wooden
Chalices, but Golden Priests; but now you have Golden Chalices, and Wooden
Priests. And to conclude this Argument, King Edgar in his Charter to the Abbey
of Malmsbury, dated the year of Christ 974, writes to this Effect; All the
Monasteries in my Realm to the outward sight are nothing but wormeaten and
rotten Timber, and Boards, and which is worse, within they are almost empty,
and void of Divine Worship.

Thus much as to Walls in General, now to return to London; This City was
destroyed and burnt by the Danes, and other Pagan Enemies, about the year of
our Lord 839, and was nobly rebuilt, and repaired in the year 886 by Alfred
King of the West Saxons, so that it lay waste, and uninhabited for almost fifty
years; Alfred committed the custody of this new built City to his Son in Law
Etheldred Earl of Mercia, to whom he had before married his Daughter Ethelsted;
And that this City was then strongly Walled may appear by diverse Accidents;
William of Malmsbury writes, that about the year 994 the Londoners shut up
their Gates and defended their King Etheldred within their Walls against the
Danes. In the year 1016, Canutus the Dane made War against Edmond Ironside,
King of the West Saxons, and brought his Navy to the West part of the Bridge,
casting a Trench about the City of London, and attempted to have won it by
assault, but the Citizens repulsed him, and drove him from their Walls.
Likewise in the year 1052, Earl Godwin with his Navy, Sailed up by the South
end of the Bridge, and assailed the Walls of this City.

William Fitz Stephen in the Reign of Henry 2. writes thus, The Wall of London
is High and Great, well Towered on the North side, with due distance between
the Towers. On the South side also the City was Walled and Towered, but the
Fishful River of Thames by his ebbing and flowing has long since subverted
them. Where by the Northside he means from the River in the East to the River
of Thames in the West, for so the Wall stretched in his time, and the City
being far longer from East to West, than in breadth from South to North, and
also narrower at both ends than in the midst, is therefore compassed with the
Wall on the Landside in the form of a Bow, except where it is indented in
betwixt Cripplegate and Aldersgate. But the Wall on the Southside along the
River of Thames was straight as the string of a Bow and fortified with Towers
or Bulwarks (as we now term them) in due distance from each other, as our
Author says, and we our selves may observe at this day, this demonstrates that
the Walls of this City are of great Antiquity.

Now for repairing and maintaining this Wall, we find, That in the year 1215
and the 6th of King John. The Barons entering the City by Aldgate, first took
Assurance of the City, and then broke into the Jews houses, and seizing their
Money and Goods for their own uses, they with great diligence repaired the
Walls, and Gates of this City, with Stones taken from the Jews broken Houses.
In the year 1257, Henry 3. ordered the Walls of this City which were much
decayed and without Towers to be handsomely repaired, and beautified at the
common Charge of the City.

In the 17th of Edward 4. Ralph Joceline Mayor caused part of the Wall of the
City of London to be repaired between Aldgate, and Aldersgate; He also caused
Morefields to be searched for Clay to make brick for that purpose. The Skinners
made that part of the Wall between Aldgate, and Buvies Marks, (commonly called
Bevis Marks) toward Bishopsgate, as may appear by their Arms fixed in three
places there; The Lord Mayor, and his Company of Drapers made all that part
between Bishopsgate and Alhallows Church in the Wall, and from Alhallows toward
the Postern called Moregate. A great part of the same Wall was repaired by the
Executors of Sir John Crosby Alderman, his Arms being in 2 places; and other
Companies repaired the rest of the Wall to Cripplegate, the Goldsmiths repaired
from Cripplegate to Aldersgate, and there the work ceased.

The Circuit of the Wall of London on the Lands side, that is from the Tower
of London in the East to Aldgate is 82 Perches; From Aldgate to Bishopsgate 86
Perchees; From Bishopsgate to Cripplegate 162 Perches; From Cripplegate to
Aldersgate 75 Perches; From Aldersgate to Newgate 66 Perches; From Newgate to
Ludgate 42 Perches; in all 513 Perches of Assize. From Ludgate to Fleet Ditch
60 Perches; From Fleetbridge to the River of Thames about 70 Perches. So that
the total of these Perches amounts to 643; and every Perch being 5 Yards and
an half, makes 3536 Yards and an half, containing 10608 Foot, which is two
English Miles and 608 Foot more.

In former time there were but four Gates in the Wall of this City, that is
Aldgate for the East; Aldersgate for the North; Ludgate for the West; and
Bridgate over London Bridge for the South, but of late days for the Convenience
of Passengers, diverse other Gates and Posterns have been made.

Fitz Stephen says, that in the Reign of Henry 2 there were seven Double Gates
in the Wall of this City, but names them not, we may therefore suppose them to
be, 1. The Gate next the Tower of London, called the Postern. 2. Aldgate. 3.
Bishopsgate. 4. Aldersgate. 5. Newgate. 6. Ludgate. 7. Bridge-gate. Since which
there has been built Moregate, now a Famous Gate and several other smaller
Posterns, as one between Bishopsgate and Moregate, and two between Moregate and
Cripplegate; besides other in other Places.

As to the first called the Postern near the Tower (which was destroyed by the
dreadful Fire in 1666 of which you have a particular Account in this Treatise
and never since rebuilt or like to be) by that which remained of it before, it
seemed to have been a fair strong Arched Gate, built of hard Stone. In the year
1190, and the 2. of Richard 1. William Longshamp, Bishop of Ely Chancellor,
caused part of the City Wall from that Gate to the White Tower to be broken
down, for enlarging the Tower, round which he made a Wall imbattelled, which
is now the outermost Wall; He likewise made a broad deep Ditch without the
Wall, to let in the Tide from the Thames; But the Southside of this Gate was
by undermining the Foundation much weakened, and about two Hundred years after,
that is 1440, the 18 Hen. 6. it fell down, and was never since rebuilt.

The next in the East, is ALDGATE, or Oldgate of the Antiquity thereof, having
been one of the four Principal Gates, and also one of the seven Double Gates
aforementioned; It had two pair of Gates and Portcullises, though now but one;
yet the hooks of the other Gate, and the place of letting down the other
Portcullice are yet to be seen. This Gate appears to be very Ancient, being
named in a Charter in King Edgars time; and likewise in K. Edward 1. And in the
Civil Wars between K. John, and his Barons 1215. the Londoners were on the
Barons part, who then besieged Northampton, and after came to Bedford Castle,
where they were well received by William Beauchamp Captain thereof; and having
then secret Notice, that if they pleased they might enter the City, they
removed their Camp to Ware, and from thence coming to London in the Night, they
entered by Aldgate, and placing Guards at the Gates, they disposed of all things
at their pleasure.

They spoiled the Friars Houses, and searched their Coffers; after which Robert
Fitzwater, Jeffery Magnaville, the Earl of Essex, and the Earl of Gloucester
chief Commander in the Army applied themselves to repair the Gates and VValls
of the City, with stones taken from the Jews Houses as aforesaid; and Aldgate
being most ruinous, and having given them an easy entrance, they repaired, or
rather new built it, after the manner of the Normans, with strong Arches, and
Bulwarks of Stone, small brick, and Flanders Tile.

In the 11 of Edw. 4. 1471, Thomas Bastard Fauconbridge, having Assembled a
Riotous Company of Seamen and others in Essex, and Kent, came with a great Navy
of Ships up to the Tower of London; whereupon the L. Mayor and Aldermen with
consent of the Common Council fortified the Thames sides with Armed Men, Guns,
and other warlike weapons, from Baynards Castle to the Tower, to prevent their
Landing; But the Rebels being denied passage that way, they fell upon Aldgate,
Bishopsgate, Cripplegate, Aldersgate, London Bridge, and along the Bankside,
shooting Arrows, and Guns into the City, and burning above threescore houses in
the Suburbs.

And upon Sunday May 11, 1471. Five thousand of them assaulting Aldgate, won
the Bulwarks, and entered the City, but the Portcullice being let down, those
that were in were slain? And Robert Basset Alderman of that Ward, commanded
them in the name of God to draw up the Portcullice, which being done, the
Londoners issued out of the Gate, and courageously beat back their Enemies to
St. Buttolphs Church, by which time, the Earl Rivers and the Lieutenant of the
Tower coming with fresh Forces, joined them, and then they soon routed the
Rebels, and made them fly, Alderman Basset and other Citizens chasing them to
Miland, and from thence, pursued some of them to Poplar, and others to
Stratford, killing many, and taking diverse Prisoners. In the mean time,
Fauconbridge their Commander, having in vain assaulted other Places on the
Waterside, fled to his Ships. Thus much of Aldgate as it was of old, we shall
speak of the rebuilding when we come to Aldgate Ward.

The third Gate toward the North, is BISHOPSGATE; supposed to be built by some
Bishop of London, though now unknown; But the occasion thereof was for the ease
of Passengers, especially to Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgshire, etc. who before
were forced to go much about; yet it is somewhat Ancient, for we read that in
the year 1210, some Land was sold to the Procurators or Wardens of London
Bridge, situate in the Parish of St. Buttolph without Bishopsgate. And in a
Charter dated 1235. It is writ, That Walter Brume and Rosia his Wife, having
founded the Priory, or New Hospital of our Blessed Lady, ( since called St.
Mary Spittle ( without Bishopsgate, have confirmed the same to the Honor of
God, and our Blessed Lady for Canons Regular. Also in 1247, Simeon Fitz Mary,
Sheriff of London, the 29 Hen. 3. founded the Hospital of St. Mary called
Bethlem without Bishopsgate:

And for repairing this Gate, Hen. 3. confirmed certain Liberties to the
Merchants of the Haunce to keep it in repair, which they did for many years;
But in the year 1551, having prepared Stone and a new Gate to be set up, at the
Complaint of the English Merchants their Charter was taken from them, so that
the Old Gate remained.

Next to this upon the Northside of the City, is MOREGATE; of which we read,
that in the 3d of Hen. 5. 1415, Thomas Faulconer Mayor, caused the Wall of the
City to be broken through near Colemanstreet, and there builded a Postern, now
called Moregate, of a Moory ground hard by, which is now drained, and made fair
and firm, and turned into several Feilds and delightful VValks, with Trees set
in curious Order for the Accommodation of the Citizens; This Gate since the
dreadful Fire of London in 1666 has been new built and is made very Noble with
a great Arch and two Posterns, so that it now equals, if not excels any other
Gate of the City.

Between this Gate and Cripplegate there have been lately made two Posterns
through the Wall, for the better ease of Passengers, and several new Houses
built near them.

CRIPPLEGATE is next, which is of great Antiquity being so called before the
Conquest, for we read that in 1010, the Danes spoiling the Kingdom of the
East Angles, Alwyn Bishop of Helinham, caused the body of King Edmund the
Martyr to be brought from Bredisworth (now called St. Edmunds Bury) through the
Kingdom of the East Saxons, and so to London in at Cripplegate. Some say it was
so named from Cripples begging there, and that when the body of St. Edmund
passed through it, many Miracles were wrought thereby, as that some of the Lame
were cured, praising God, etc. This Body continued three years in St. Gregory's
Church near St. Paul's. And further, William the Conqueror in his Charter for
Confirming the Foundation of the College in London, called St. Martins le
Grand, says thus, I do give and grant to the same Church, and Canons serving
God therein, all the Lands, and the Moor without the Postern which is called
Cripplegate, on either part of the Postern. We read likewise, That Alfune
builded the Parish Church of St. Giles nigh a Gate of the City called Porta
Contractorum or Cripplesgate, about the year 1090.

This Gate was formerly a Prison for Citizens for Debt or otherwise, like one
of the Counters; It was new built in 1244 by the Brewers of London; and Edmund
Shaw Goldsmith in 1483. gave by his Will 400 Marks, and the stuff of the the
old Gate called Cripplegate, to build the same again, which was accordingly
done in 1491.

ALDERSGATE or Aeldersgate is next, not so called from Aldwich, or of Elders,
or Ancient men building the same, nor of Elder Trees growing more plentifully
there than in other places, as some have fancied; but only from the Antiquity
thereof, it being one of the four first Gates of this City, serving for the
Northern, as Aldgate does for the Eastern Parts, and being both Old Gates, for
distinction, one is called Aldersgate, and the other Aldgate; This Gate has
had several Additional buildings to it, as on the Southside, where several
large Rooms and Lodgings of Timber have been made; And on the Eastside a Great
Timber building with one large Room paved with Stone or Tile) there is likewise
a well curbed with Stone, and of a great depth, which rises into that Room
though two Stories high from the Ground, which is very remarkable; John Day a
famous Printer, dwelt in this Gate, and built many Houses upon the City wall
toward St. Anns Church. You may read more of the new building this Gate in
Aldersgate Ward.

In the sixth year of Edw. 6. Three was a Postern Gate made through the City
Wall on the Northside of the late dissolved Cloister of Friars Minors,
commonly called Gray Friars; Now Christ Church, and Hospital; this was done to
make a Passage from Christ Church Hospital, to St. Bartholomews Hospital in
Smithfield, and License was given to Sir Richard Dobbs, Lord Mayor to do it, by
Virtue of an Act of Common Council, Aug. 1. in the 6 of Edw. 6.

The next Gate is on the Northwest, and is called NEWGATE, and is the fifth
Principal Gate, though built later than the rest, being erected about the Reign
of Hen. 1. or K. Stephen upon this occasion. The Cathedral of St. Paul's being
burnt down in the Reign of William the Conqueror 1086. Mauritius then Bishop
of London, did not repair the Old Church as some have thought, but laid the
Foundation of a new one, which it was judged would hardly ever have been
finished, it was so wonderful for length, breadth, and height; and likewise
because it was raised upon Vaults or Arches, after the Norman fashion, and
never known in England before.

After Mauritius, Richard Beumore did very much advance the building of this
Church purchasing the large Streets and Lanes round about, which ground he
encompassed with a strong Stone Wall and Gates: By reason of this enclosure
for so large a Churchyard, the High Street from Aldgate in the East, to
Ludgate in the West, was made so straight and narrow, that the Carriage through
the City was by Paternoster-Row, down Ave-Mary Lane, and so through Bouger Row
(now called Ludgatestreet) to Ludgate; or else by Cheapside through
Watlingstreet, and so through Carter-lane, and up Creedlane to Ludgate, which
Passage by reason of the often turning was very Inconvenient.

VVhereupon a New Gate was made to pass through Cheapside (North of St. Paul's)
St. Nicholas Shambles, and Newgate-street to Newgate, and from thence westward
to Holbourn Bridge; or Turning without the Gate, to Smithfield, and Islington,
(or Iseldon) or to any place North, or West. This Gate has for many years
been a Prison for Felons, Murderers, Highwaymen and other Trespassers, as
appears by the Records of King John and others; and among the rest in the 3.
of Hen. 3. 1218. That King writ to the Sheriffs of London, commanding them to
repair the Goal of Newgate, for the safe keeping of his Prisoners, promising
that the Charges thereof should be allowed them upon their Account in the
Exchequer.

In the year 1241. The Jews of Norwich were hanged being accused for
Circumcising a Christian Child; their House (called the Thor) was pulled down
and destroyed; Aaron the Son of Abraham a Jew, and other Jews in London, were
constrained to pay twenty thousand Marks, at two Terms in the year, or else to
be kept perpetual Prisoners in Newgate at London, and in other Prisons.

In 1255, King Henry 3. lodged in the Tower, and upon some displeasure against
the City of London, for the escape of John Offrem a Clerk Convict, Prisoner in
Newgate, for killing a Prior who was Cousin to the Queen, He sent for the Lord
Mayor, who laid the fault on the Sheriffs to whose Custody the Prisoners are
committed; the Mayor was discharged, but the Sheriffs were imprisoned above a
month, though they alleged the fault was in the Bishops Officers, who though
he was imprisoned in Newgate, yet they were to see that he was kept safe. But
however the King required three thousand Marks of the City for a Fine.

In the third year of Edw. 3. 1326. Robert Baldock the Kings Chancellor was put
into Newgate. In 1237, Sir John Pouitney gave four Marks a year for releif of
the Prisoners in Newgate. In 1358, William Walworth gave likewise toward their
relief, and so have many others since. In 1414, the Jaylors in Ludgate and
Newgate died, and 64 Prisoners. In 1418, the Parson of Wertham in Kent was
Imprisoned in Newgate. In the first of Henry 6, 1412. The Executors of Richard
Whittington repaired Newgate. And Thomas Knowles Grocer, sometimes L. Mayor,
brought the wast water from the Cestern near St. Nicholas Chapel, by St.
Bartholomews Hospital to Newgate and Ludgate for the Accommodation of the
Prisoners. In 1431, all the Prisoners in Ludgate were conveyed to Newgate, by
the Sheriffs of London; And soon after they fetched from thence 18 Persons,
Freemen of the City, who were led pinioned to the Counters like Felons, by the
false suggestion of the Jailer of Newgate; But Ludgate was a while after again
appointed for Freemen who were Debtors; and they were all carried back again
thither.

In 1427. There was a great Skirmish in the North Country between Sir Thomas
Percie, Lord Egremond, and the Earl of Salisburies Sons, whereby many were
wounded and slain, but the Lord Egremond being taken was found to give the
occasion, and was thereupon condemned by the Kings Council, to pay a
considerable Sum of Money to the Earl of Salisbury, and in the mean time was
committed to Newgate; and a while after both he, and his Brother Sir Richard
Percie brake out by night, and went to the King. The other Prisoners got upon
the Leads over the Gate, and defended it against the Sheriffs, and all their
Officers a great while, till they were forced to call more Citizens to their
Aid, who at last subdued them, and laid them in Irons; Thus much of Newgate.

LUDGATE is the next in the West, and the Sixth Principal Gate of this City,
and Historians say, was built by King Lud, near 66 years before our Saviors
Nativity; which shows its great Antiquity; This being built for the West, as
Aldgate for the East.

In the year 1215. aforementioned, being the 17th. of King John, when the
Barons who were in Arms against the King, entered this City, and pulled down the
Jews Houses, repairing the VValls and Gates of the City with the Stones
thereof; It appears that they then repaired or rather new built this Gate;
For in 1586 when this Gate was pulled down in order to its being repaired,
there was a stone found within the wall, which seems to have been taken from
one of the Jews Houses, there being several Hebrew Characters engraven thereon,
which being interpreted are thus in English; This is the Station or Ward of
Rabbi Moses, the Son of the Honorable Rabbi Isaac. This it is thought had been
fixed upon one of the Jews Houses, as a sign he lived there.

In 1260, Ludgate was repaired, and beautified with the Images of Lud and other
Kings, but in the Reign of Edw. 6. these Images of the Kings had their Heads
smitten off, and were defaced, by such as judged every Image to be an Idol; In
the Reign of Q. Mary they were repaired and new heads set upon their old
Bodies, which remained so, till the 28 of Q. Elizabeth 1586. When this Gate
was quite taken down and nobly Rebuilt, with the Images of K. Lud and others on
the East Side, and Q. Elizabeth on the West, which was done at the City Charge
being above 1500 pounds.

In 1463. Stephen Foster Fishmonger, and Dame Agnes his Wife, added several
large Rooms to Ludgate, and gave other releif to the Prisoners, who are only
such Citizens as are Debtors; All Persons for Treasons, Felonies, and other
Criminal Offenses being committed to Newgate. In one of these rooms, there was
a Copper Plate hanging with the following Rhimes engraven thereon.

Devout Souls that pass this way,
For Stephen Forster late Mayor, heartily pray;
And Dame Agnes his Spouse, to God Consecrate,
That of pity this House made of London in Ludgate
So that for lodging and water, Prisoners here naught pay
As their keepers shall all answer at dreadful Doomsday.
This Gate (as well as Newgate) in the late dismal Fire in 1666, was burnt
down, but since they are both repaired and very curiously Beautified having a
new. Postern for Foot Passengers added thereto; with several other
Conveniences. Thus much for Ludgate.

Next to this before the late Fire, there was only a breach in the Wall of the
City and a Bridge of Timber over Fleet Ditch; directly against Bridewell
Hospital; but since, it is all laid open, and a handsome Bridge of Stone built
in that Place, the Ditch being very much enlarged, and a VVharf made of Stone,
and cleared from all Houses on each side up to Holborn Bridge. The Bridge
likewise at the lower end of Ludgate Hill being nobly rebuilt, or rather new
built and made much broader, and another Gallant Bridge is built upon the same
Ditch almost over against the Fleet Prison. All this has been done since the
dismal Fire, to the very great Charge of the City. And so much for the Gates in
the Wall.

Now for the VVatergates on the Banks of the River Thames, which formerly have
been many, though most, or all of them have been ruined by the late Fire,
however take a brief Account of what they were. Black Friars Stairs is a free
landing place now gallantly rebuilt with a useful Bridge by Sir Tho. Fitch, who
has built a very curious house upon the VVharf, and cleared it, so that now the
Lord Mayor when he comes from Westminster to be sworn Lands there, instead of
Paul's Wharf, as being much more convenient. Then there is Puddle Wharf, Paul's
Wharf, Broken Wharf, besides diverse others all along the River which are made
by the Citizens for their Private use. Next is Ripa Regina, the Queens Bank, or
Queen Hyth, which was accounted the Chief and Principal VVatergate of this
City, far exceeding Billings-Gate, as it appears in Queen-hithe Ward.

Next hereunto is Downgate or Dowgate, so called of the sudden descending or
going down of the way, scene from London history Wat Tyler killed by ye Lord
Mayor.
scene from London history K Richard 2. Resigns his Crown.
scene from London history King Richard 2. Murdered.
from St. John Baptists Church upon Walbrook, into the River of Thames, whereby
the water in the Channel runs so strong, that in 1574 after a great shower of
rain, a young man of about 18 years, intending to leap over the stream tript up
his Heels, and he was carried with such great swiftness, that no man could stop
him till he came against a Cartwheel in the Watergate, by which time he was
stark dead; This was sometimes a large Watergate, frequented by Ships and
Vessels of Burden like Queen-Hyth; but now it is utterly decayed.

The next was called Wolfes Gate in the Ropary, afterward called Wolfes lane,
but now out of use. The next was called Ebgate of old time, as appears by
Ancient Records, and stood near St. Lawrence Pountneys Church, it is now a
narrow Lane, and called Ebgate lane, but usually the Old Swan. There was
another Gate at the Bridgfoot called Oyster Gate, of Oysters that were there
sold, that being the Marketplace for them, and other small Fish; But now there
stands an Engine to carry up the water into the City in the place thereof.

Then there is the BRIDG-GATE, so called of London Bridge whereon it stands;
This long before the Conquest was one of the four first, or Principal Gates of
the City, where there was only a Bridge of Timber, and is the seventh and last
Principal Gate mentioned by Fitz Stephen; when the Bridge was new built of
Stone, this Gate was rebuilt again; In the year 1436, this Gate with the Tower
upon it fell down, and two of the furthest Arches of the Bridge, Southward fell
therewith, yet none were killed, or hurt thereby; to the repairing whereof
several Citizens gave very Liberally. When the Bastard Fauconbridg aforenamed
came with the Kentish Mariners into this City, they burnt this Gate, and
thirteen Houses besides on the Bridge, and likewise the Brewhouses at St.
Katherines and many others in the Suburbs.

Next hereunto was a Gate, commonly called Buttolphs Gate, of the Parish Church
adjoining, This was given; or confirmed by William the Conqueror to the Monks
of Westminster. Then there is Billingsgate, which is much used by small Ships
and Barges, so that Queen Hyth is almost forsaken. It is somewhat uncertain why
this Gate was so named, only Jeffry of Monmouth writes, that Belin a King of
the Britains about 400 years before Christ's Nativity, built this Gate, and
called it after his own name, and that when he was dead his Body was burned,
and the Ashes were put into a vessel of Brass, and set over that Gate upon an
High Pinnacle of Stone; yet it does not seem to be so Ancient, but rather to
have taken the name from some late Owner, called (it may be) Beling, or
Billing, as Summers Key, Smarts Key, Fresh Warf and others have done; Then there
was a Watergate on the South-end of Water-lane by the Custom-house Key, but of
all these more hereafter. One other Watergate there was more by the Bulwark of
the Tower, and this is the last, and farthest Gate Eastward on the River of
Thames as far as the City of London extends within the Walls.

Besides these Common Water Gates, there were formerly diverse private Wharfs,
and Keys all along from the East to the West of this City, on the Thames side,
where Merchants of all Nations landed their Goods, and had Warehouses, Cellars,
and Stowage form them. And in the 42 of Hen. 3. 1258. it was appointed that the
Ports of England should be strongly Guarded and the Gates of London should be
newly repaired and diligently kept in the night for fear of French deceits.

CHAP. III. Of the Tower of London, (and other Ancient Towers and Castles of
this City) with several Remarkable Accidents happening therein.
THe City of London (says Fitz Stephen) has in the East a very Great, and
most Strong Palatine Tower, whose Turrets and Walls do rise from a deep
Foundation, the Mortar thereof being tempered with the Blood of Beasts.

It is the Common Opinion that Julius Caesar the first Conqueror, or indeed
Discoverer of Britain was the Original Founder thereof and of many other
Towers Castles and Great Houses. But there is little Reason for it, in regard
of his short stay here, having other things to think on, designing only to
dispatch his Conquest over this Barbarous Country, and then to perform greater
Enterprises; Neither do the Roman Historians mention any such Buildings erected
by him here.

The more probable Opinion therefore is, That William the Conqueror built the
Great white and square Tower there about the year of our Lord 1078, as appears
by Ancient Records, and that made Gundulph Bishop of Rochester Principal
Surveyor of the work. The Wall of the City of London (as it is aforementioned)
was furnished formerly with Towers, and Bulwarks in due distance from each
other; and the River of Thames with its Ebbing and Flowing had overthrown the
Walls and Towers on the Banks thereof, whereupon William the Conqueror for the
defense of the City which lay open to the Enemy, having taken down the second
Bulwark in the East part of the Wall toward the Thames, built the Great White
Tower, which has been since enlarged at several times with buildings adjoining
thereto; This Tower in the 4th. of William Rufus, 1092. was much shaken and
defaced by a great Tempest of Wind; but was again repaired by William Rufus,
and Henry the first, who likewise built a Castle on the South Side thereof
toward the Thames, intrenching the same round about. Historians say of this
William Rufus, That he challenged the Investiture of Prelates, He pilled, and
shared the People with Tribute, especially to spend about the Tower of London,
and the Great Hall at Westminster.

The four first Constables or Keepers of the Tower were Othowerus, Acolinillus,
Otto, and Jeffry Magnaville Earl of Essex, who was also Sheriff of London,
Middlesex, Essex and Hertfordshire; He fortified the Tower of London against K.
Stephen, but the King seizing him at his Court at St. Albans would not
discharge him, till he had delivered it up, together with the Castles of
Walden, and Plashey in Essex. In 1153, the Tower of London, and Castle of
Windsor were delivered by the King to Richard de Lucie, to be safely kept. In
1155, Thomas Becket, Chancellor to Hen. 2. caused the Flemings to be banished
out of England, their Castles lately built to be demolished, and the Tower of
London to be repaired.

In the 2. of Rich. first, 1190. William Longshamp Bishop of Ely, Lord
Chancellor (by reason of some difference between him, and Earl John the Kings
Brother, who was in Rebellion) enclosed the Tower and Castle of London with an
outward Wall of Stone embatailed; and likewise caused a deep ditch to be made
about the same, designing (as is aforementioned) to have environed it with the
River of Thames. This enclosure and Ditch took away some ground from Trinity
Church in London, which King Edward recompensed. And a great quantity of Ground
likewise was taken from the City upon this Account, yet the Citizens had no
recompense, nor were offended thereat, since it was done with their liking, as
being for the defense of the City.

But another Historian says, that in 1239, Hen. 3. Fortified the Tower of
London to another Purpose, and the Citizens fearing it was intended to their
detriment, complained to the King; who answered, That he had not done it to
their hurt, but (says he) I will do from henceforth as my Brother does, (in
building and fortifying Castles) who bears the name of being wiser than I.
But the next year, all these Noble Buildings of the Stone Gate and Bulwark,
were shaken as with an Earthquake, and fell down; which the King commanded to
be again built better than before. And in the year 1241. Though the King had
bestowed above 12000 Marks in the work, yet the Wall and Bulwarks irrecoverably
fell down; at which the Citizens were very well pleased; for they were
threatened, that when this Wall and Bulwarks were built, if any of them should
contend for the Liberties of the City they should be Imprisoned therein.

Yet were they again rebuilt and finished by Edward the 1. and the Bulwark at
the West-gate, now called the Lion Tower, added; the Original of which name,
and of Lions in England, we read was thus. Henry the 1. built the Manor of
Woodflock, and walled the Park about with stone, seven Miles in compass,
destroying to that purpose diverse Villages, Churches and Chapels, and this was
the first Park in England, and as the Record says; He appointed therein
(besides great store of Deer) diverse strange beasts to be kept and nourished,
such as were brought to him from far Countries, as Lions, Leopards, Linxes,
Porpentines, and such other, for such was his Estimation among Outlandish
Princes, that few would willingly offend him.

In the year 1235, we read, that Frederick the Emperor, sent Henry 3. three
Leopards in token of his Regal shield of Arms, wherein they were pictured;
since which time, the Lions, and other Creatures have been kept in a part of
this Bulwark now called the Lions Tower. In the 16 of Edward 3. One Lion, One
Lyonefs, One Leopard and two Cattes Lions were committed to the custody of
Robert Boure. Edw. 4. Fortified the Tower of London, and enclosed a piece of
Ground (West from the Lion Tower) upon Towerbill with brick, now called the
Bulwark. And in the 6th. year of his Reign, he ordered a Scaffold and Gallows
to be set upon the Hill for the Execution of Offenders upon which the L. Mayor
and Aldermen complained to the King, but were answered, That it was not done in
Derogation of the Cities Liberties, and caused Proclamation to be made thereof
accordingly.

Richard the 3. and Henry the 8. repaired this Tower; but in the 2. of Edward
6, 1548. Nov. 22. A Frenchman lodging in the round Bulwark, between the
Westgate, and the Postern, by setting fire to a Barrel of Gunpowder in the
night, blew up that Bulwark, yet burnt none but himself; this Bulwark was soon
rebuilt again. This west Gate of the Tower is the Principal Gate, for
receiving, and delivering all manner of Carriages, and without it, there are
diverse Bulwarks and Gates turning to the North; within this Gate to the South
is a strong Postern for Passengers, by the VVard-house, over a Drawbridge,
which is let down, and pulled up at pleasure.

Next to this on the South side Eastward, is a large VVater-gate (commonly
called Traitors Gate, because some have been carried in that way) this Gate is
partly under a strong Stone Bridge from the River of Thames. Beyond which was a
small Postern with a Drawbridge seldom let down but for receiving in some Great
Persons Prisoners; Further to the East was a Great and strong Gate called the
Iron Gate, but not usually opened. And so much for the Foundation, building and
repairing of the Tower, with the Gates and Posterns. There are many Fair Houses
within the walls of the Tower, wherein the Officers belonging thereto, and
other Inhabitants live, there is also a Chapel.

In the year 1196, William Fitz Ozbet a Citizen, seditiously moving the People
to stand up for their Liberties, and not to be subject to the Rich and Mighty,
was taken, and brought before the Archbishop of Canterbury in the Tower where
he was condemned by the Judges, and being drawn thence by the Heels to the Elms
in East-Smithfield, he was there hanged. In 1214. King John writ to Jeffery
Magnaville to deliver the Tower of London with the Prisoners, Armor, and all
other things found therein belonging to the King, to William Archdeacon of
Huntington. In the first of Henry 3. 1216. the Tower was delivered to Jews of
Franse, and the Barons of England. In 1206 Pleas of the Crown were pleaded in
the Tower, and diverse times afterward. In 1222, the Citizens having made a
Tumult against the Abbot of Westminster, Hubbert of Burg, Chief Justice of
England, sent for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen to the Tower of London to enquire
who were Principal Authors thereof. Amongst whom, one named Constantine Fitz
Aelufe boldly avowed, That he was the man, and had done much less than he
thought to have done; whereupon the Chief Justice sent him, with two others to
Falks de Brent, who with armed men brought them to the Gallows, and hanged them.

In 1244, Griffith Prince of Wales, being a Prisoner in the Tower, attempted an
escape, and having in the night tied the Sheets, and hangings together he
endeavored thereby to slide from the top of the High Tower, but being a Fat
man the weight of his Body brake the Rope, and he fell; The next morning he was
found dead, his head and neck being driven into his Breast between the
Shoulders. In 1253, K. Hen. 3. imprisoned the Sheriffs of London in the Tower
above a Month, about the escape of a Prisoner out of Newgate, as is
aforementioned. In 1260, this King with his Queen (for fear of the Barons)
lodged in the Tower; And the next year he sent for his Lords, and held his
Parliament there.

In 1263, As the Queen was going by water from the Tower toward Windsor,
several Citizens got together upon London Bridge, under which she was to pass,
who not only used reproachful words against her, but threw stones and dirt at
her, forcing her to go back again, but in 1265. they were forced to submit
themselves to the King for it, and the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs were
sent to several Prisons; Othon, Constable of the Tower, being made Custos, or
keeper of the City.

About this time, Leoline Prince of Wales came down from the Mountain of
Snowdon to Montgomery, and was taken at Bluith Castle, where using reproachful
words against the English, Roger le Strange fell upon him, and with his own
sword cut off his head, leaving his dead body on the Ground; Sir Roger Mortimer
caused this Head to be set upon the Tower of London, crowned with a wreath of
Ivy; And this was the end of Leoline, who was betrayed by the Men of Bluith,
and was the last Prince of the British blood who Ruled in Wales.

In 1290, Several Judges as well of the Kings Bench as the Assize, were sent
Prisoners to the Tower, and with great Sums of Money obtained their Liberty;
Sir Thomas Weyland had all his Estate confiscated, and himself banished; Sir
Ralph Hengham Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench; paid 7000 Marks; Sir John
Lovet Chief Justice of the Lower Bench 3000 Marks. Sir William Brompton 6000
Marks; Yea their Clerks were fined also, as being confederate with their
Masters in Bribery and Injustice; Robert Littlebury Clerk paid 1000 Marks; and
Roger Leicester as much. But a certain Clerk of the Courts, called Adam de
Straton paid thirty two thousand Marks of Old and new Money, besides Jewels
without number, and precious vessels of Silver, which were found in his House,
together with a Kings Crown, which some said was King John's. After this the
King constrained the Judges to swear; That for the future they should take no
Pension, Fee, or Gift of any man, except a breakfast, or some such small
kindness.

In the 14 of Edw. 2. The King allowed to the Prisoners in the Tower, two pence
a day to a Knight; and a penny a day to an Esquire for their Diet. In 1320. The
Kings Justices sat in the Tower, for Trial of diverse matters, at which time
John Gissors, late Lord Mayor of London, and several others fled to the City,
for fear of being charged with things they had presumptuously done. The next
year the Mortimers yiedling themselves to King Edw. 2. he sent them Prisoners
to the Tower, where they were condemned to be drawn, and hanged. But Roger
Mortimer of Wigmore, by giving his Keepers sleepy drink; made his escape, but
his Uncle Mortimer died there, above 5 years afterward.

In 1326. The Citizens of London took possession of the Tower, and taking away
the keys from the Constable, they discharged all the Prisoners, and kept both
the City and Tower for the use of Queen Isabel and her son Edward, (who was
afterward Edw. the III.)

In 1330, Roger Mortimer Earl of March, was taken, and committed to the Tower,
from whence he was drawn to the Elmes, and their hanged on the Common Gallows,
where he hung two days and two nights by the Kings Command, and was then buried
in the Gray Friars Church; This Earl was condemned by his Peers, and yet was
never brought to make his Defense before them. He himself having procured a Law
to that purpose, by which the Earls of Lancaster, Winchester, Gloucester, and
Kent were put to death, and now he himself suffered by the same Law.

In the 3. of Edw. 3. 1344. The King commanded Florences of Gold to be coined
in the Tower; Perceval de Port, of Lake, being then Master of the Mint, and
this is the first coining we read of there; we read likewise that the same year
the King appointed his Exchange of Money to be kept in Sernes Tower, being part
of the Kings House in Buckles (or Bucklers) Bury. And we find that in former
times all great Sums were paid by weight, that is, so many pounds or Marks of
Gold or Silver cut into blank pieces without any stamp upon them, and smaller
Sums were paid in Starlings which were pence so called, for they had no other
Moneys; This Starling, or Easterling money, took its name, as it is judged,
from the Easterlings which first made it in England in the Reign of Hen. 2.
though others imagine it so called from a Star stamped in the Ring or Edge of
the Penny; or of a Bird called a Starling stamped on it; others yet more
unlikely, of being coined at Striveling or Sterling, a Town in Scotland, but
the first Opinion seems the most probable:

In 1360. A Peace being concluded between England and France, Edward the 3d.
came back into England, and went to the Tower to visit the French King, who was
Prisoner there, setting his Ransom at three Millions of Florences, which being
paid, he was discharged from his Imprisonment and the King conducted him with
Honor to the Seaside.

In the 4th. of Rich. 2. 1381. A grievous Tax was laid upon the Subjects, which
caused much Trouble. For the Courtiers, greedy to enrich themselves, informed
the King that the Tax was not so carefully gathered as it ought; And therefore
they would pay a great Sum of Money to Farm it, which they would raise above
what it was before, by being more severe in gathering it. This Proposition was
soon accepted, so that having the Kings Authority, and Letters, these Farmers
or Commissioners, met in several Places in Kent and Essex, where they levied
this Tax of Groats, or Polemoney, with all manner of severity, which so
discontented the People, that they combined together, and resisted the
Collectors, killing some, wounding others, and making the rest fly.

The Tumult began first in Kent, upon this occasion, (as it is related in the
Chronicles of St. Albans) One of these Exactors coming to the House of John
(others say) Wat Tyler, living at Dartford in Kent, demanded of Tylers Wife, a
Groat a piece for her Husband, her self, and Servants, and likewise for a young
Maiden her Daughter; The woman paid for all but her daughter, alleging she was
a Child, and underage to pay; That will I soon know, (quoth the Collector) and
shamefully turned the young Maids Coats up, to see whether she were come to
ripeness of Age; (these Villains having in diverse other Places made the like
base; and uncivil Trials.) Hereupon the Mother crying out, diverse of the
Neighbors came in, and her Husband being at work in the Town, tyling a house
hearing of it, taking his Lathing-staff in his hand, ran home, and finding the
Collector, asked him, who made him so bold? the Collector returned ill Language
and struck at Tyler, who avoiding the blow, gave the Collector such a home-blow
with his Lathing-staff, that his Brains flew out of his head; which made a
great uproar in the Streets, and the People being glad at what had happened,
they prepared to defend and stand by Tyler.

And thereupon a great number of them being got together, they went from thence
to Maidstone, and then to Black Heath, persuading, and Exhorting all the People
as they marched along to join with them in this common Cause, and setting
Guards upon all the ways to Canterbury, they stopped all Passengers, compelling
them to swear; That they would keep Allegiance to King Richard, and to the
Commons; That they would accept of no King whose name was John, (because of the
hatred they had to John Duke of Lancaster, who called himself King of Castile)
And that they should be ready when they were called, and should agree to no Tax
to be levied from thenceforth in the Kingdom, nor consent to any, except it
were a Fifteenth.

There joined with them one John Ball a factious Clergyman, who took occasion
to rip up the grounds of the Mis-government, telling the People, That this
difference of Men's Estates, where some were Potentates, and others Bondmen, was
against Christian Liberty, taking for his Text this old Rhyme, When Adam Delv'd
and Eve Span,
Who was then a Gentleman.


This so incensed the Commons that their Number daily increased, so that when
they were come as far as Blackheath, they were esteemed to be an Hundred
Thousand, so that fearing no resistance, they began to commit all manner of
Violence, sparing none whom they thought to be learned especially if they found
a pen or Inkhorn about him, for then they pulled off his Hood, and with one
Voice cried out, Hale him out, and cut off his head. The King sent some Knights
to them to know the cause of their Assembling, To whom they answered, That for
certain Causes they were come together, and desired to talk with the King, and
therefore willed the Knights to tell him, That he must needs come to them, that
he might understand the desire of their Hearts. The King was advised by some to
go presently to them, but Simon Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord
Chancellor, and Robert Hales of St. John's, Treasurer, affirmed, That it was not
fit for the King to go to such a rude Company, but rather to take Order to
suppress them.

This the Commons hearing, were so enraged, that they swore, They would go seek
the Kings Traitors, and cut off their beads; And thereupon they marched into
Southwark, and ruined the Archbishops Palace at Lambeth, out of spite to him.
The Lord Mayor and Aldermen fearing they would do the like to the City, ordered
the Gates to be shut, but the Commoners of the City, especially the Poorer
sort, favoring the Commoners of the Country, threatened death to all that
should attempt it; So that the Rebels had free Egress, and Regress in and out
of London, and daily encouraged the Citizens to favor their Cause, declaring,
Their Purpose was only to bring the Traitors of the Land to Justice, and then
they would lay down their Arms; And hereby they won them to stand by them.

The first thing they did when they came to London was to send for one Richard
Lion a Grave Citizen, who had been Tylers Master, and having struck off his
head, they carried it upon a Pole in Triumph before them. The next day they
came to the Savoy, the Duke of Lancasters House, which they set on fire,
burning all his rich Furniture, breaking in pieces all his Plate and Jewels,
and throwing them into the Thames, saying, They were men of Justice, and would
not like Robbers enrich themselves with any man's Goods, for they only were for
destroying Traitors; And when one of their Fellows was espied to thrust a fair
piece of Silver into his bosom, they took him, and cast both him and it into
the Fire; neither took they any thing from any man but at the just price. Two
and thirty of them were got into the Dukes Wine-cellar, where they stayed
drinking so long, till the Rafters of the House, which was on Fire, fell upon
them, and so covered them, that not able to get out, they were heard cry seven
days after, and then perished.

From the Savoy they went to the Temple where they burnt the Lawyers Chambers,
with their Books, and Writings, and all they could lay hands on. Also the Noble
House of St. John's, by Smithfield they set on Fire, which burnt for seven days
together, not suffering any to quench it, And likewise the Manor of Highbury,
and other Places belonging to St. John's. After this they came to the Tower,
where King Richard lodged, and sent to command him, To come to them, without
delay, unarmed, and without any Guard, which if he refused, they would pull
down the Tower, and be should not escape alive. The King finding no other
Remedy though he had 600 Armed Men, and as many Archers about him, yet durst
not but suffer them to enter, so that in great fear the King went toward them
on Horseback, his own Guards standing as men amazed. Being come into the Tower,
these Rusticks presumed to enter into the King, and his Mothers Chambers with
their Weapons, and laid themselves on the Kings bed, sporting and playing
thereon, yea they abused the Kings Mother, offering to kiss her in such a rude
manner that she fell into a Swound.

They then proceeded with Rage and Fury to search for the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and finding one of his Servants, charged him to bring them to the
Traitor his Master; the Servant being afraid brought them to the Chapel where
his Master was at Prayers, who being aware of their coming had continued there
all night; and when he heard they were come, he said with great constancy to
his Servants, Let us now go, surely it is best to dye, when it is no pleasure
to live; Upon which the Rabble cried, Where is the Traitor? who answered, I am
the Archbishop whom you seek, not a Traitor. Whereupon they dragged him out of
the Chapel to Tower Hill, where being encompassed with many Thousands, and
seeing many drawn swords about his head he said,

What is it (dear Brethren) you purpose to do? what is mine offense committed
against you, for which you will kill me? you were best take heed, that if I be
killed, who am your Pastor, there come not on you the Indignation of the just
Revenger, or at least for such a fact all England be not put under
Interdiction, or the Popes Curse. But they cried out with a great noise, That
they did not fear the Interdiction, neither did allow the Pope to be above
them. The Archbishop seeing death at hand, spoke them fairly, and granting
forgiveness to the Executioner, he kneeled down and offered his Head to be cut
off; The Hangman struck him on the neck but not deadly, he putting up his hand,
said, Aha, it is the hand of God; and being struck again before he removed his
hand, his fingers ends were cut off, and part of the Arteries; with which he
fell down, but died not, till they had mangled him with eight several strokes
in the Neck and Head. His body lay two days unburied, none daring to do it; His
Head they cut off, and nailing his hood thereon, fixed it upon a Pole on London
Bridge. This Simon Sudbury was eighteen years Bishop of London, and being
translated to Canterbury, he in 1375. repaired the Walls of London from the
West-gate, (which he built) to the North-gate, which had been destroyed by the
Danes, before the Conquest of William the Bastard. He was at last buried in the
Cathedral at Canterbury.

Sir Robert Hales Lord Treasurer of England, suffered with him at the same
time, a most Valiant Knight, and Lord of St. John's; together with John Leg, one
of the Sergeants at Arms, and William Apledore a Franciscan Friar who was the
Kings Confessor; Many more were beheaded daily, for no cause but the pleasure
of the Commons, for it was pastime to them, to take any who were not sworn of
their Party, and pulling off their Hoods, behead them; They took 13 Flemings
out of the Augustine Friars, 17 out of another Church, and 32 in the Vintry,
and beheaded them all; And to make a distinction of Flemings, they put them to
pronounce, Bread, and Cheese; and if they spoke it like, Brot, and Cawse, off
went their Heads, as a sure sign that they were Flemings.

The King coming according as he was required, to Mile-end, was much astonished
at the madness of the People, who with frowning Countenances made the following
demands which they presented in writing, and would have them confirmed by the
Kings Letters Patents.

1. That all men should be free from Servitude or Bondage, so that from
thenceforth there should be no Bondmen. 2. That he should Pardon all men of
what Estate soever all manner of Actions, and Insurrections committed, and all
Treasons, Felonies, Transgressions, and Extortions by any of them done, and to
grant them Peace. 3. That all men henceforth might be infranchised, or made
free, to buy and sell in every County, City, Borough, Town, Fair, Market and
other Places within the Realm of England. 4. That no Acre of Land holden in
Bondage or Service, should be holden but for four pence, and if it had been
held for less in former time, it should not now be inhanced.
These and many other things they required telling the King, That he had been
ill Governed to that day, but for the time forward, he must be otherwise
governed. The King finding himself in danger, yielded hereunto, and so desiring
a Truce, the Essex men returned home. Next day the King went to Westminster, to
visit St. Edwards Shrine, and coming back by Westsmithfield, he found the place
full of Kentishmen, to whom he sent word, That their Fellows the Essex men were
gone home, and that if they desired it he would grant them the same Conditions
of Peace; But their Chief Captain named John, or as others say, Walter
Hilliard, alias Tyler, being a cunning Fellow, answered, He desired Peace, but
upon his own Conditions; intending by fair words to have delayed the business
till the next day; for he designed that Night to have killed the King and the
Nobility about him, and then to have p^^ndred the City, and burnt it.

But he was wonderfully disappointed in his Pride, having refused Conditions of
Peace which were sent him in three several Charters three times. Upon which the
King at last sent Sir John Newton, not to Command, but to Entreat him to come
and discourse with him concerning what he demanded; among which one particular
was, That Wat Tyler desired a Commission to behead all Lawyers, Escheators, and
others whatsoever that were learned in the Law, conceiving that afterward all
would be managed according to the Humor of the Common People; And it is
reported that the day before, putting his hand to his Lips he had said, That
before four days came to an end, all the Laws of England should proceed from
his mouth.

When Sir John Newton desired Tyler to dispatch him, he scornfully answered; If
thou art so hasty thou may go to thy Master, for I will come when I please.
However Sir John Newton followed him slowly on Horseback, and by the way a
Doublet-maker brought threescore Doublets to the Commons, and demanded thirty
Marks for them, but could have no Money; Upon which Wat Tyler told him, Friend
be quiet, thou shall be well paid before this day be ended, keep nigh me and I
will be thy Creditor.

Wat Tyler then set Spurs to his Horse and rid up toward the King, coming so
near that his Horse touched the Crouper of the Kings, to whom he said, Sir
King, see thou all yonder People? Yes truly (said the King), but why do
thou ask? Because (said Ty^er) they are all at my Command, and have sworn their
Truth and Faith to me, to do whatever I bid them. In good time (replied the
King) I believe it well. Then said Tyler, Believe thou King, that these
People, and as many more that are in London will depart from thee thus without
having thy Letters? No (said the King) you shall have them, they are ready and
shall be delivered to them all.

Wat Tyler observing Sir John Newton to be near him bearing the Kings Sword,
was offended, saying, The it became him better to be afoot in his presence; The
Knight answered stoutly, That surely there was no ha^^ in it, since he himself
was on Horseback. This so i^ raged Wat, that he drew his Dagger, and offered
(...) strike the Knight, calling him Traitor, Sir John to^^ him he lied, and
drew his Dagger likewise; Wat Tyl^ seeming much disturbed at this Indignity,
attempte^ before his Rustic Companions to have run upon the Knight, whom the
King to preserve from the dange^ commanded to alight from his Horse, and
deliver hi^ Dagger to Wat Tyler; But his haughty mind would no be so pacified,
for he demanded his Sword also, (...) which Sir John Newton answered, It is the
Kings Sword and thou art not worthy to have it, neither durst thou (...) it of
me, if there were no more here but thou and I. (...) my Faith (said Wat Tyler)
I will never eat till I ha^ thy Head; and would thereupon have fallen upon him.

But at that very Instant William Walworth Lo^^ Mayor of London (a stout
Courageous Person) acco^^ panied with diverse Knights and Esquires came (...)
assist the King, to whom he said, My Liege, it were great shame, and such as
had never before been heard (...) if in such a presence, they should permit a
Noble Knight (...) be shamefully Murdered, and that before the face of th^^
Severaign, therefore he ought to be rescued, and Tyler t^ Rebel to be Arrested.

The Lord Mayor had no sooner spoke thus, but the King though he were very
young, yet began to tak^ Courage, and commanded him to lay hands upon him
Walworth being a man of an incomparable Spirit an^ Courage, immediately
arrested Tyler with his Mac upon his Head, and that in such a manner as he se^
down at the feet of his Horse, and those who attended the King presently
encompassed him round, the his Companions could not see him; and John Cave^
dish, an Esquire of the Kings, alighting from his Horse, rust his Sword into
Tylers Belly; Although some ^ite that the Lord Mayor did it with his Dagger,
many ^hers followed and wounded him in diverse places to ^ath, and then they
drew his body from among the ^ople into St. Bartholomews Hospital.

The Commons perceiving their Captain to be slain, ^yed out, Their Captain was
Traitorously murdered, ^d encouraged one another to fight, and revenge his
^eath, and bent their Bows; Upon which the King (...) to them, and said, What
work is this my Men? what (...) you mean to do? Will you shoot at your King, Be
not ^^tinous nor concerned for the death of a Traitor and Ri^ld, I am your
King, I will be your Captain, and Lea^r, follow me into the Field, and there
you shall have ^hatsoever you desire, This the King said, for fear in ^eir fury
they should fire the Houses in Smithfield ^here there Captain was slain; They
thereupon followed him intothe open Field, though the Soldiers ^^at were with
him, were uncertain whether they ^ould kill the King, or whether they would be
^iet, and depart peaceably home with the Kings ^harter.

In the mean time William Walworth, the ever re^owned Lord Mayor, to prosecute
his first worthy ^ct, which had succeeded so happily, went only with ^^e man,
with all speed into the City, and there be^^n to cry out, You good Citizens,
come to help your ^ing, who is in danger to be murdered, and succor me ^ur
Mayor who am in the same danger; or if you will not ^^lp me, yet leave not the
King destitute.

The Citizens who had a great Esteem and Affection or the King, no sooner heard
this, but with a Noble and Loyal forwardness they immediately raised a thou^nd
Men, who being completely armed, stayed in ^^e streets for some Commander, who
with the Lord ^ayor might lead them to the Assistance of the King (...) this
his great distress, when by good chance Sir Robert Knowls a Freeman of the City
came at that instant, whom they all desired to be their Leader, which he
willingly accepted, and so with the Lord Mayor and some other Knights, they
were led to the King, who with all his Company rejoiced very much at this
unexpected Assistance from these brave armed Citizens, who all on a sudden
encompassed the whole Body of the Commons.

And here in an instant was a very strange and Remarkable Alteration, for the
Commons presently threw down their Arms, and falling on their knees begged
Pardon, and they who just before boasted that they had the Kings Life in their
power, were now glad to hide themselves in Caves, Ditches and Cornfields; The
Knights being desirous of revenge, entreated the King, that they might be
permitted to take off the heads of an hundred or two of them; but the King
would not grant it, but commanded the Charter which they demanded written, and
sealed, to be delivered to them at that time, for preventing further mischief,
as doubting if they were not satisfied, the Commons of Essex and Kent might
rise again. Having got their Charter they departed home.

The Commons being thus dispersed and gone, the King called for the worthy Lord
Mayor, and with great Honor deservedly Knighted him in the Field, and gave him
a hundred pound a year in Fee, he also Knighted five Aldermen his Brethren,
girding them about the waste with the Girdle of Knighthood, as the manner was
in those days; but Stow says, it was thus, To cause the Person to put a
Basenet on his Head, and then the King with a Sword in both his Hands to strike
him strongly on the Neck. And for an Eternal Remembrance of this happy day, the
King for the Honor of the City granted that a Dagger should be added to the
Arms of the City, in the right Quarter of the Shield, they before this time
bearing only a Cross without the Dagger.

After this the King marched into the City with great Joy, and went to His
Mother, who lodged in the Tower Royal, called then the Queens Wardrobe, where
she had continued two days, and nights in great fear, and trouble; But when she
saw the King she was extremely comforted, saying, Ah fair Son, what great
sorrow have I suffered for you this day; To whom the King answered, Certainly,
Madam, I know it well, but now rejoice, and thank God, for I have this day
recovered mine Inheritance, and the Realm of England, which I had almost lost.
Then the Archbishops Head was taken off London Bridge, and Wat Tylers set up
in the Place.

Now since some Writers have reported that the Rebel so Valiantly struck down
by Sir William Walworth was named Jack Straw, and not Wat Tyler, it may be
necessary to give an Account of the Principal Leaders, and Captains of the
Commons; of whom Wat Tyler was the Chief, as being the first man who judged
himself offended, there were likewise Jack Straw, John Kirkby, Allen Thredder,
Thomas Scot, and Ralph Rugg; these and diverse others were Commanders of the
Kentish and Essex men.

And at the same time there were gathered together to the number of fifty
thousand in Suffolk, by the incitement of John Wraw a lewd Priest, who made one
Robert Westbrome take upon him the name of King, these fell to destroying
Houses, but especially those of Lawyers, and seizing Sir John Cavendish Lord
Chief Justice of England, they beheaded him and set his Head upon the Pillory
in St. Edmundsbury. The like Commotion of the Commons was at the same time also
in Cambridgshire, the Isle of Ely, and Norfolk, conducted by John Litester a
Dyer; and to countenance their proceedings the more, they designed to have
brought William Ufford Earl of Suffolk into their Fellowship, but he having
notice of their intent, suddenly rose from supper and got away.

Yet they compelled many other Lords, and Knights to be sworn to them, and to
ride with them, as the Lord Scales, the Lord Morley, Sir John Brewis, Sir
Stephen Hales, and Sir Robert Salle, the last of whom not enduring their
Insolences, had his Brains dashed out by a Countryman that was his Bondsman;
The rest terrified by his Example were glad to carry themselves submissively to
their Commander, John Littester, who named himself King of the Commons, and
counted it a Preferment for any to serve him at his Table, in taking Assay of
his Meats and Drinks, with kneeling humbly before him as he sat at Meat.

And now these Fellows upon Consultation send two Choice Men, namely the Lord
Morley, and Sir John Brewis, with three of their Chief Commons to the King for
their Charter of Manumission, and freedom from Bondage; who being on their way,
they were met near Newmarket by Henry Spenser Bishop of Norwich, who examining
if there were any of the Rebels in their Company, and finding three of the
Chief present, he instantly caused their Heads to be struck off, and then
pursued on toward Northwalsham in Norfolk, where the Commons stayed for an
Answer from the King, and though he had at first but eight Lances, and a small
number of Archers in his Company, yet they so increased, as to become a
complete Army, with which he set upon the Rebels, and routed them, taking John
Littester and other Principal Ringleaders, whom he caused all to be Executed,
and by this means the Country was quieted.

After this the Lord Mayor of London sat in Judgment upon Offenders, where
many were found guilty and lost their Heads, among others Jack Straw, John
Kirkby, Alane Tredder, and John Sterling, who gloried that he was the man who
had slain the Archbishop. Sir Robert Tresilian Chief Justice was likewise
appointed to sit in Judgment against the Offenders, before whom above fifteen
hundred were found guilty, an^ in diverse places put to death; and among them
John Ball their Priest, and Incendiary, of whom it is not impertinent to relate
a Letter he wrote to his Fellow Rebels in Essex, by which we may see how fit an
Orator he was for such an Auditory, and what strength of persuasion there was
in Nonsense.

John Sheep St. Mary Priest of York, and now of Colchester, greeteth well John
Nameless and John the Miller and John Carter, and bids them that they beware
of Guile in Borough and stand together in Gods name, and bids Pierce
Plowman go to his work, and chastize well Hob the Robber, and take with you
John Trueman, and all his Fellows and no more, John the Miller ye ground small,
small, small; The Kings Son of Heaven shall pay for all, Beware, or ye be woe;
know your Friend from your Foe; Have enough and say Hoe, and do well and
better; Elee Sin, and seek Peace and hold you therein, and so bids John
Trueman, and all his Fellows.

Neither may it be amiss to declare the Confession of Jack Straw at his
Execution; The Lord Mayor being present spoke thus to him, John, Behold thy
death is at hand without remedy, and there is no way left for thy escape,
therefore for thy Souls health, without making any lie, tell us what your
Intentions were, and to what end you Assembled the Commons. After some pause,
John seeming doubtful what to say, the Lord Mayor added, Surely John thou
know that if thou perform what I require of thee it will redound to thy
Souls Health. Being hereupon encouraged he made his Confession to this purpose.

It is now to no purpose to lie, neither is it lawful to utter any untruth,
especially knowing that my Soul must suffer more bitter Torments if I do so;
And because I hope for two advantage by speaking Truth, First that what I shall
say may profit the Commonwealth, and Secondly, That after my death I trust by
your Suffrages to be helped, and succored according to your promises, by your
Prayers, I will therefore speak Faithfully, and without deceit.

At the same time when we were Assembled upon Black Heath, and had sent to the
King to come to us, our purpose was to have slain all such Knights, Esquires
and Gentlemen as attended him; And for the King, we would have kept him amongst
us, that the People might have more boldly repaired to us, since they would
have thought that whatever we did, was by his Authority; Finally when we had
got strength enough, so as not to fear any attempt made against us, we would
have slain all such Noblemen, as should either have given Counsel, or made
Resistance against us, but especially we would have slain all the Knights of
the Rhodes or St. John of Jerusalem; and lastly we would have killed the King
himself, and all men of Estates, with Bishops, Monks, Canons, and Parsons of
Churches; Only we would have saved Friars Mendicants for Ministering the
Sacraments to us.

When we had been rid of all these, we would have devised Laws, according to
which the Subjects of this Realm should have lived; For we would have created
Kings, as Wat Tyler in Kent, and others in other Countries; But because this
our purpose was disappointed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, who would not
permit the King to come to us, we sought by all means to dispatch him out of
the way, as at length we did; And further, the same Evening that Wat Tyler was
killed, we were resolved (having the greatest part of the Commons of the City
inclined to join with us) to have set Fire in four corners of the City and so
to have divided among our selves the Spoil of the chiefest Riches that could
have been found; And this (said he) was our purpose, as God may help me now at
my last end.

After this Confession he was beheaded and his head was set on London Bridge by
Wat Tylers; And thus by the happy and prosperous success at London, this
dangerous Rebellion was fully quieted.

In 1392. and the Fifteenth of Richard II. there happened some difference
between that King and the Londoners; One occasion was, that the King would have
borrowed of them a thousand pound, but they feeling much and fearing more the
Kings daily Exactions, not only refused it, but abused a certain Italian
Merchant who would have laid down the Money. Another occasion was, That one of
the Bishop of Salisburies Servants named Walter Roman taking an House Loaf out
of a Bakers basket in the Streets, ran with it into the Bishops House; The
Citizens demanded the delivery of the Offender, but the Bishops men shut the
Gates, and would not suffer the Constable to enter, upon which many people got
together, threatening to break open the Gates, and Fire the House unless Roman
were brought forth; What (said they) are the Bishops men Privileged? or is his
house a Sanctuary? or will he protect those whom he ought to punish? if we may
be abused in this manner, not only our Streets, but our Shops and Houses shall
never be free from violence, and wrong, this we neither will, nor can endure,
for it does not become us.

And hereupon they approached the Gates with great Fury; But the Lord Mayor,
and Sheriffs having notice hereof, came to them and told them; That this ^as
not Courage but Outrage which they showed, whereby they would procure both
danger to themselves, and displeasure against the whole City, and that though
wrong had been done, yet they were not the Persons, neither was this the way to
redress the same.

Thus partly by persuasion, and partly by their Presence and Authority, they
suppressed the Riot and sent every man home, with strict charge to keep the
Peace. Hitherto there was no great mischief done, and the quarrel might have
been ended without any further trouble, had not the Bishops stirred in it, and
kindled the Coals of Contention afresh. For the Londoners were at that time not
only secretly suspected, but openly noted to be Favorers and Followers of
Wickliffs Opinions, (which were contrary to the Pope and Church of Rome) and
upon that account the Bishops were malicious against them, and most of their
Actions were interpreted to proceed from other Causes, and to tend to worse
Purposes than they outwardly seemed to bear, yea many accidental matters were
charged upon them to be done out of Design, and on purpose.

Whereupon John Waltham Bishop of Salisbury, and Lord Treasurer of England,
made a grievous Complaint against them for this last Attempt to Thomas Arundel
Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor; alleging, That if upon every slight
pretense, the Citizens should be suffered in this manner, to affront the
Bishops without reproof, or punishment, they would endanger not only the
Dignity and State, but the Liberty of the whole Church also; For (said he) did
they not lately take upon them the punishment of Adulteries, and other Crimes
appertaining to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, maliciously alleging, That either
the Bishops and their Officers were infamous for those Vices themselves, and
did therefore Connive at the same in others; Or else by Covetous Commutation
and taking of Money, did rather set those sins to Sale, than endeavor
carefully to suppress them. Did they not (said he) rudely, and irreverently
break open the doors upon the Archbishop of Canterbury, and interrupt his
Proceedings against John Aston, an open Disciple of Wickliff, and do we imagine
that this is the last Indignity they will offer? no certainly, nor yet the
least, for if this boldness, and Insolence be not suppressed. our Authority will
soon fall into Contempt and Scorn, and will be made a Common Football for every
base and unworthy Citizen to kick at.

Armed with these furious Arguments, they went together to King Richard, and so
incensed him against the Londoners, (his Mind being before prepared by former
Provocations) that he was once resolved to have utterly ruined, and destroyed
the whole City; But being persuaded to use more Moderation, he in Revenge,
first caused the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, and many of the Principal Citizens to be
committed to several Prisons, the Lord Mayor to Windsor Castle, and others to
other Places; and then seized the Liberties of the City into his hands
declaring, that no Lord Mayor should for the future be Elected any more, but
that the King should at his Pleasure appoint a Warden, or Governor over the
City. And this Office was first committed to Sir Edward Darlington, who for his
kindness toward the City was soon removed, and Sir Baldwin Radington put in his
place.

The King was likewise persuaded by Arundel Archbishop of York to remove the
Terms and Courts, that is, the Chancery, Exchequer, Kings Bench, the Hamper
Office and the Common Pleas from London to York, where they continued from
Midsummer 1393. till Christmas next following, to the great damage, and loss
of the City of London; But at last upon the earnest entreaty of the Dukes of
Lancaster and Gloucester his Uncles, the King sent for the Londoners before him
to Windsor, where having first terrified them with the sight of a great Number
of Soldiers, he caused all the Privileges and Charters of the City, both old,
and new to be produced, some of which he restored to them, and detained others.
Yet were not the Citizens received fully into favor, neither did they recover
the Person or Dignity of their Lord Mayor at that time.

Shortly after the King went to London, at whose coming the Citizens turned all
their Grief into Joy (the Vulgar being without measure in both) entertaining
him with such joyful Triumphs, and Rich Presents, as if it had been the day of
his Coronation, thinking by all these costly preparations, to have pacified all
former Anger, and displeasure against them, but they found themselves much
deceived, there being no Reconciliation to be made without Money; for they were
not absolutely restored to their Liberties till they had paid Ten Thousand
pound to the King as a Fine. Thus did the Londoners show a strange diversity of
Disposition, in rashly committing an Offense, and patiently enduring
punishment, yet upon this Account, as soon as the first occasion was offered
against King Richard they showed themselves either his earnest Enemies, or
faint Friends, as by the sequel appears.

In 1387. King Richard II. held his Feast of Christmas in the Tower of London;
And in the year 1399, the same King was sent Prisoner to the Tower, which being
a very remarkable Transaction, it may be necessary to give a brief Account
thereof.

Richard the II. was the only Son of a Renowned Father, Edward Surnamed the
Black Prince, who died before his Father, Edward III. and thereupon Richard,
was by his Grandfather in his Lifetime, declared to be his Heir and lawful
Successor, and accordingly after his Death was Crowned King of England at
Westminster, July 16. 1377. But being of tender age, only eleven years old,
several Persons were commissioned to be his Protectors, or Guardians; and soon
after a Parliament was called at Westminster, wherein Alice Pierce the late
Kings Concubine, was banished, and all her Goods Confiscate; and two Tenths of
the Clergy, and two Fifteenths of the Temporality were granted, but so as that
two Citizens of London, William Walworth, and John Philpot should receive, and
keep it, to see it bestowed for defense of the Realm. At which time Sir Hugh
Calverly Deputy of Callice, burnt 26 French Ships in the Haven of Bulloigne;
But one Mercer, a Scottish Pyrate came to Scarborough, and took diverse Ships,
committing likewise many Outrages, and no Order being taken to repel them, John
Philpot set out a Fleet at his own Charge, and encountering him in his own
Person, took Mercer and all his Ships, and returning home, instead of being
rewarded for his Service, he was questioned for presuming to fit out a Navy
without Advice of the Kings Council.

While the King was in his Minority matters were carried indifferent well, but
in the year 1387, King Richard begins to enter, as we may say, upon the
Confines of his Destiny; His Gracing of undeserving Men, and Disgracing of Men
deserving, if they were not the Causes, were at least the occasions of his own
Disgracing; He was now come to be of full Age to do all himself, which was
indeed to be of full Age to undo himself, for the Errors of his younger years
might be excused by inexperience, but the faults of the Age he was now of,
admit of no Apology, nor defense; And to hasten his destiny the sooner, the
Evil Counsel which was formerly but whispered in his Ear, they now had the
Confidence to give him aloud; For it was told him, That he was under Tuition no
longer, and therefore not to be controlled as formerly he had been; That to be
crossed of his will by his Subjects, was to be their Subject; That he is no
Sovereign, if he be not Absolute.

By the instigation of such Counselors as these, the King in a Parliament then
Assembled fell to expostulate with the Lords, asking them, What years they
thought him to be of; who answering, That he was somewhat more than one and
Twenty; Well then, (said he) I am out of your Wardship, and expect to enjoy my
Kingdom as freely as you your selves at the like years enjoy your Patrimonies.
But (says our Author) his flattering Favorites should have remembered, that
though the King may not be controlled where he can command, yet he may be
opposed where he can but demand; as now indeed he was, For when he demanded a
Subsidy toward his Wars, He was answered, That he needed no Subsidy from his
Subjects, if he would but call in the debts that the Chancellor owed him; and
if he were so tender, that he could not do that work himself, they would do it
for him; And thereupon charged him with such Crimes, that all his Goods were
Confiscate, and himself adjudged to dye if the King pleased. Though others
write, his Sentence was only to pay twenty Thousand Marks as a Fine, and a
Thousand pound besides yearly.

This Chancellor was Michael de la Pool a Merchants Son, who was lately made
Earl of Suffolk and Lord Chancellor of England, who with Robert Vere Earl of
Oxford and Marquess of Dublin, and some others, were King Richards bosom
Favorites; And upon this Provocation given them, they presently study Revenge;
And thereupon contrive, that the Duke of Gloucester (the Kings Uncle) as
Principal, and other Lords who crossed the Kings Courses, should be invited to
a supper in London, and be there Murdered; In the Execution of which Plot, the
late Lord Mayor, Sir Nicholas Brember, was deeply concerned, but the present
Lord Mayor, Richard Exton, though moved thereto by the King himself, utterly
refused to do it, and thereupon this Design miscarried.

But notwithstanding these heats, and many more, which passed in this
Parliament, yet a Subsidy was at last granted to the King of half a Tenth, and
half a Fifteenth, but with this express Condition, that it should not be paid
out, but by order from the Lords, and the Earl of Arundel was to receive it;
But before this time, it was absolutely agreed between both Houses of
Parliament, That unless the Chancellor were removed they would proceed no
further;

The King having notice hereof, sent a Message to the House of Commons that
they should send to Eltham, where he then lay, Forty of their House, to declare
their Minds to him; But upon a Conference between both Houses, it was agreed,
That the Duke of Gloucester, and Thomas Arundel Bishop of Ely should in the name
of the Parliament go to him; who coming to the King, declared. That by an old
Statute the King once a year might lawfully summon his Court of Parliament for
Reformation of all Enormities and Corruptions within the Realm; and further
declared, That by an Old Ordinance it was likewise Enacted, That if the King
should absent himself Forty days not being sick, the Houses might lawfully
break up, and return home; At which it is reported the King should say, Well,
we perceive our People go about to rise against us, and therefore we think we
cannot do better, then to ask aid of our Cosen the King of France, and rather
submit our selves to him, than to our own Subjects.

To which the Lords answered, They wondered at his Majesty's Opinion, since the
French King was the Ancient Enemy of the Kingdom, and he might remember what
mischiefs were brought upon the Realm in King John's time by such Courses. By
these and the like persuasions the King was induced to come to his Parliament,
wherein John Fordham, Bishop of Durham is discharged of his Office of
Treasurer, and Michael de la Pool of being Chancellor, and others by consent of
Parliament put in their places; Likewise by Order of Parliament, thirteen Lords
were appointed under the King to have oversight of the whole Government of the
Realm, that is the Bishop of Ely Lord Chancellor; Bishop of Hereford Lord
Treasurer, the Abbot of Waltham Lord Privy Seal, the Archbishops of Canterbury
and York, the Dukes of York, and Gloucester, with others; but this division of
the Government was soon found inconvenient; This Parliament also granted to
Robert de Vere (lately created Duke of Ireland) thirty Thousand Marks (which
the Frenchmen were to give to the heirs of Charles de Bloys) upon Condition
that before Easter following he should go over into Ireland; So desirous were
the Lords, and Commons to have him removed from the Kings presence.

But though the King gave way to this Torrent of the Parliament at present, yet
as soon as they were Dissolved, he dissolved likewise all they had done against
his Favorites, and received them into more Favor than before. A while after
the Duke of Ireland puts away his lawful Wife who was near a Kin to the Duke of
Gloucester, and married one of the Queens Maids a Vintners Daughter, at which
the Duke of Gloucester was very much offended; which the Duke of Ireland
understanding studied how by any means he might dispatch the Duke of Gloucester;
and Easter being now past which was the time appointed for the Duke to go into
Ireland, the King pretending to go with him to the Seaside, went with him unto
Wales, being attended likewise with Michael de la Pool, Robert Tresillian a
prime Favorite, who was Lord Chief Justice, and diverse others, where they
consulted how to dispatch the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel, Warwick,
Darby, Nottingham, with diverse others of that Party.

The King having remained some time in those Parts had quite forgotten the
Voyage of the Duke of Ireland, and so brought him back with him again to
Nottingham Castle. About the same time Robert Tresillian Lord Chief Justice
came to Coventry, and there Indicted two Thousand Persons; The King then called
all the High Sheriffs of the Counties before him, and demanded what strength
they could make for him against the Lords, if there should be occasion; To
which they returned answer, That the Common People did so favor the Lords, as
believing them to be Loyal and true to the King, that it was not in their power
to raise any great force against them; They were then commanded to take care,
That no Knights nor Burgesses should afterward he chosen to any Parliament, but
those whom the King and his Council should name; They replied, It was a hard
matter in those times of Jealousy and suspicion, to deprive the People of their
Ancient Liberties in choosing their Representatives; after which they were
dismissed.

And some of the Judges of the Realm being called, that is Robert Tresillian
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Ben^^, Robert Belknap, Chief Justice of the
Commonpleas, John Holt, Roger Fulthorpe, and William Borough Knights, and
Judges, men learned chiefly in one point, that is, without considering Truth or
Falsehood to please those in high Place; These were charged upon their
Allegiance to give True and full Answers to the following Questions.

I. Whether the Statute and Commission in the last Parliament, (that is against
Michael de la Pool) were against the Kings Prerogative or not. To which they
all answered, It was. II. How they were to be punished who procured that
Statute, etc. or who moved, or compelled the King to consent thereunto. They
Unanimously answered, They ought to be put to death as Traitors unless the King
would please to pardon them. III. When a Parliament is Assembled, and the Cause
of their Meeting declared, and common Articles limited by the King upon which
the Lords, and Commons in that Parliament should proceed, if the Lords and
Commons will go upon other Articles, and not these appointed by the King, till
the King has first answered their desires, though enjoined by the King to the
contrary, whether the King in this Case ought not to command the Parliament,
and oblige them to do his pleasure before they proceed further; They answered,
That in this Case, the King should overruled, and if any presumed to do
contrary, he was to be punished as a Traitor. IV. Whether the King may at his
pleasure dissolve the Parliament, and Command the Lords, and Commons to depart?
They answered, That the King at his Pleasure may dissolve the Parliament, and
whoever shall after proceed against the Kings Mind as in a Parliament, he is
worthy to be punished as a Traitor. V. Since the King may at his pleasure
remove any of his Officers and Justices, and punish them for their Offenses,
whether may the Lords, and Commons without the Kings Will, accuse them in
Parliament, They replied, They cannot, and whosoever does the contrary
deserves to be punished as a Traitor. VI. What punishment they deserve who
moved in Parliament that the Statute whereby. K. Edward of Carnarvan was
deposed in Parliament should be produced, whereby a new Statute should be made,
It was answered, That as well he that moved it as he that brought the Statute
into the House were to be punished as Traitors. Lastly, Whether the Judgment
given in Parliament against Michael de la Pool were erroneous and revocable,
They answered, It was Erroneous and Revocable, and that if the Judgment were
now to be given the Justices would not give the same.
At this time the Londoners incurred much obloquy, for having before been
pardoned by the King of some Crimes laid to their Charge, they were now ready
to comply with his desires, and a Jury of them being Impanneled, they indicted
some Lords of many crimes laid to their Charge; And now the King, and the Duke
of Ireland sent into all parts of the Realm to raise men in this Quarrel
against the Lords; And required the Mayor of London to give an Account how many
able men he could raise in the City, who answered, That he thought they could
make fifty Thousand men at an hours warning; Well, said the King, go and try
what may be done, But when the Mayor went about it, the Citizens answered, That
they would never fight against the Kings Friends, and the Defenders of the
Realm; About this time the King intended to have apprehended the Duke of
Gloucester, but he made his escape, and with other Lords had got together a
great power of men at Harringey Park; Upon which the King commanded that no
Citizen of London should sell to the D. of Gloucester, the E. of Arundel, or any
of the Lords any Armor or Furniture of War under a great penalty.

After this the King is persuaded to send to the Lords to come to him to
Westminster, upon Oath given by the Archbishop of Canterbury and the
Chancellor that no fraud nor evil practice should be used against them, which
the Lords were content to do, but when they were ready to come, they understood
there was an Ambush laid to entrap them of a Thousand men in the Mews; which
the King absolutely denied he had any knowledge of; yet the Lords after this
receiving a safe Conduct from the King, came to Westminster, of whose coming
when the King heard, he apparelled himself in his Royal Robes, and with his
Scepter in his hand came into the Great Hall, before whom the Lords upon their
Knees presented themselves, the King bidding them welcome, and taking each of
them by the hand.

Then the Lord Chancellor made a Speech wherein he blamed them for raising
Arms, desiring to know the Cause; who answered, They had done it for the good
of the Kingdom, and to remove the Traitors about the King; Upon which the King
himself spoke and asked them whether they thought to compel him by strong hand?
Have not I (says he) sufficient power to beat you down? truly in this behalf,
I make no more account of you than of the basest Skullion in my Kitchen. Yet
after these great words, he lift up the Duke of Gloucester who all this while
was kneeling, and commanded the rest also to rise, and then led them
Courteously to his Chamber, where they sat and drank together, and at last it
was concluded they should all meet again, as well these Lords, as those they
accused at the next Parliament, which the King promised he would speedily call,
and each party to receive there according to Justice, and in the mean while all
Parties should be under the Kings Protection.

But when the Favorite Lords heard this, they told the King plainly they
neither durst nor would put themselves to the hazard of such a Meeting, and
therefore the Duke of Ireland, and the rest of that Faction left the Court to
be out of the way; but the King not enduring their absence appointed Thomas
Molineux, Constable of the Castle of Chester to raise an Army, and to safe
conduct the Duke of Ireland to his presence; But they being come as far as
Radcoat Bridge, were encountered by the Earl of Derby, and the Duke of Ireland
not daring to join battle with him fled, and being to pass a River, cast away
his Gauntlets and sword to be more nimble, and spurring his Horse lept into the
River and so escaped; though it was reported he was drowned, till news came he
was got into Holland, where being no welcome Guest he wandered up and down two
or three years, like a Fugitive, and at Lorain in Brabant ended his life.

By this time the Lords had got matter enough against the King, at least to
justify their Arms, and thereupon with an Army of Forty thousand men they came
to London, where after some debate, they were received, and some of them went
to the Tower to the King, to whom after humble Salutations, they showed the
Letter which he had written to the Duke of Ireland to levy an Army for their
destruction; likewise the Letters which the French King had written to him,
containing a safe Conduct for him to come into France, there to do Acts to his
own dishonor, and the Kingdoms.

After which upon the Kings Promise that he would come the next day to
Westminster to treat further of these matters, the Lords departed, only at the
Kings desire the Earls of Nottingham and Derby stayed all Night, but before the
King went to bed, his Mind was quite altered as to keeping promise with the
Lords, which they understanding, sent peremptorily to him, That if be came not
according to his Word, they would choose another King who should hearken to the
faithful Counsel of his Lords. This touched the King to the quick, so that the
next morning he went and met them, and they declared to him how much it
concerned the good of the Kingdom that those Traitors so often spoken of,
should be removed from the Court; To which the King, though much against his
Will, at last condescended, and thereupon the Archbishop of York, and the
Bishop of Chichester fled no man knew whether; the Bishop of Durham Lord
Treasurer, Lord Zouch, Lord Burrel, Lord Beumont and others were expelled the
Court, and constrained to put in Bail to appear the next Parliament; Also
cer^ain Ladies were expelled the Court, as the Lady Poynings, the Lady Mouling
and others; Several other Knights with three of the Kings Chaplains, and the
Dean of his Chapel, were likewise committed to Prison.

Shortly after the Parliament began, called afterward the Parliament that
wrought wonders; On the first day whereof, all the Judges but one, were
arrested as they sat upon the Bench, and sent to the Tower, and several Lords
and Bishops were impeached; But the Lord Chief Justice Tresillian having made
his escape, was afterward taken and hanged at Tyburn; Sir Nicholas Brember was
Beheaded with an Axe which he had prepared for the beheading of others, after
this diverse Lords and Knights, and among the rest the Steward of the Kings
Household, were Beheaded on Tower Hill. Also all the Judges were condemned to
dye, but by the Queens Intercession, they were only banished the Realm, and all
their Lands and Estates Confiscated, only a small Sallery was allowed them for
their support. Finally, in this Parliament an Oath was required, and obtained
of the King, that he would perform such things as the Lords should Order, and
this Oath was likewise required of all the People of the Kingdom.

After this the Duke of Gloucester and some other Lords upon discontent,
conspire to seize upon the King, the Dukes of Lancaster (...) York, and commit
them to Prison, and all the other Lords of the Kings Council they determined
should be drawn, and hanged, but the King having notice thereof, by a Wile he
seizes upon the Duke of Gloucester, and sends him presently to Callice, where
he soon after lost his life, being smothered with Pillows as some write, and
diverse other Lords are committed to the Tower, and soon after the Earl of
Arundel is beheaded on Towerhill; and a Parliament being called, the King
brought it so about, that he obtained the whole Power of the Parliament to be
conferred upon certain Persons, or to any seven or eight of them, and these by
virtue of this Grant proceeded to conclude upon many things which concerned the
whole Parliament to the great prejudice of the State, and a dangerous Example
in time to come. A General Pardon was also granted for all the Kings Subjects
but only to Fifty; whose names he would not Express, but reserved them to
himself, that when any of the Nobility offended him, he might at his Pleasure
name him to be one of the number excepted, and so keep them still within his
danger. Also in this Parliament the Judges gave their Opinious, That when
Articles are propounded by the King to be handled in Parliament, if other
Articles be handled before those be first determined, that it is Treason in
them that do it. And for the more strengthening the Acts of this Parliament the
King purchased the Popes Bulls, containing grievous Censures, and Curses to
those that should break them.

And now the Heads of the Opposite Faction having lost their Heads, and all
things as well settled as could be desired, the King was secure as thinking
himself safe, and he had been indeed safe, if Time and Fortune were not Actors
in Revenge as well as men, or rather if a Superior Power did not interpose,
whose ways are as secret as himself is invincible. About this time it happened
that Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk and Henry Duke of Hereford, accused each
other for speaking words sounding highly to the Kings dishonor, whereupon a
Combat is agreed upon between them, which being ready to be begun, the King
interposeth, and banisheth the Duke of Norfolk for ever, and the D of Hereford
for six years; But soon after several discontented Lords solicit the D. of
Hereford to return into England, and take the Government upon him, and they
would be ready to assist him; who thereupon without much deliberation prepares
to come over, and landing at Ravenspur in Yorkshire, where many Lords,
Gentlemen, and Common people repaired to him, to whom he solemnly protests,
That though some of them had invited him to come to take the Government, yet he
came only to take possession of the Inheritance descended to him from his
Father, which King Richard unjustly and contrary to his promise had seized into
his hands.

Hereupon many more Lords join with him, and all the Kings Castles are
surrendered to him, and the Lord Scroop Treasurer of England, Sir Henry Bushy
and Sir Henry Green being seized, were condemned, and beheaded, for
Misgoverning the King, and the Realm. King Richard was at that time in Ireland
busy in suppressing the Rebels, and had no notice of the Dukes Arrival in
England till six weeks after; but hearing of it, he sends the Earl of Salisbury
before to raise an Army, and promises to come himself within six days; the
Earl provides an Army of Forty Thousand men, but when the King came not at his
time, they all disbanded and went away; The King coming over, and finding how
it was, fell into despair, and secretly the next night gets into Conway Castle.

The Duke of Hereford, (now Duke of Lancaster by his Fathers Death) sends the
Earl of Northumberland to the King, that if his Grace would undertake there
should be a Parliament called, wherein Justice might be done, and himself
pardoned all Offenses, he would be ready to come to him on his knees, and as an
humble Subject to obey him; Yet upon this Conference with the Earl some say,
the King required only, that himself and eight more whom he would name, might
have honorable allowance, with assurance of a private quiet Life, and that
then he would resign his Crown, and that upon the Earls Oath that this should
be performed the King agreed to go with the Earl to meet the Duke, but after
four miles riding coming to the place where they had laid an Ambush, the King
was seized, and carried Prisoner to Flint Castle, where the Duke of Lancaster
came to him, and bowing the knee thrice came toward him, whom the King took by
the hand, and lifted up, saying, Dear Cousin you are welcome, the Duke humbly
thanking him said, My Sovereign Lord, and King, the Cause of my coming at this
present is (your honor saved) to have restitution of my Person, my Lands and
Heritage; whereto the King answered, Dear Cousin, I am ready to accomplish your
Will, so that you enjoy all that is yours without exception.

After this coming out of the Castle, the King called for Wine and then mounted
on Horseback, and by easy Journeys came to London, and the next day he was
committed to the Tower. As the King was carried toward London, diverse Citizens
conspired to lie in wait by the way, and suddenly slay him, partly for private
Grievances, and partly for the Severity, he had used toward the whole City; But
the Mayor having notice thereof, prevented it, and rid forth with a
Considerable Company to conduct him safely to the Tower, and soon after a
Parliament was called by the Duke of Lancaster, but in the name of King
Richard, where many heinous points of Misgovernment were laid to his Charge,
and were drawn up into three and thirty Articles, the Chief whereof were.

That be had wastefully spent the Treasure of the Realm upon unworthy Persons,
whereby great Taxes were laid upon the People; That he had borrowed great sums
of Money, and given his Letters Patents to repay the same, and yet not one penny
ever paid. That he had taxed men at the pleasure of himself and his unhappy
Council, and had spent the money in folly and not in paying poor men for their
victual and viand. That he said the Laws of the Realm were in his Head, and
Breast, by reason of which fantastical Opinion he destroyed Noblemen and
Impoverished the Commons; That he most Tyranously, and unprincely said, that
the Lives and Goods of all his Subjects were in his hands and at his
disposition; That when diverse Lords as well spiritual, as Temporal were
appointed by Parliament to Treat of matters concerning the good of the Kingdom,
while they are busy therein, he and others of his Party, went about to impeach
them of Treason; and that the King caused all the Rolls and Records to be kept
from them contrary to his promise made in Parliament, and to his open
dishonor. That he had private Spies in every place, and if any discoursed of
his Lascivious living, or his Illegal Actings, he presently apprehended them,
and grievously fined them. That he changed Knights and Burgesses of Parliament
at his Pleasure, putting out diverse Persons, and placing others in their Room
to serve his Will and Appetite. That when diverse Lords and Justices were sworn
to speak the truth in many things which concerned the honor and profit of the
Realm; the King so threatened them that they durst not speak what was right.
That by force and threats he compelled the Judges of the Realm to condescend to
him, for destruction of diverse of the Lords. That he caused his Fathers own
Brother, the Duke of Gloucester without Law to be Attached, and sent to Callice,
and there without Cause to be secretly Murdered. That contrary to the Great
Charter of England he caused several lusty young men to Challenge diverse old
men, upon matters determinable at Common Law in the Court Martial where Trial
is only by battle, which old men fearing submitted themselves to his mercy,
whom he fined unreasonably at his pleasure. That in all his Leagues with
Foreign Princes, his way of Writing was so subtle and dark that no other
Prince, nor his own Subjects could believe or trust him; That he craftily
devised certain private Oaths contrary to Law, causing several to swear the
same to the utter undoing of many honest men. That he assembled certain
Lancashire and Cheshire-men to make War upon the Lords, and suffered them to
rob and spoil without prohibition; That notwithstanding his pardon granted
them, he enforced diverse of those who joined with the Lords to be again
Intollerably fined to their utter undoing.

Upon these and some other Articles which were read it was demanded of the
Nobility and the Commons, what they judged both of the Truth and desert of
these Articles, who all agreed that the Crimes were Notorious, and King Richard
was worthy for the same to be deposed from all Princely Honor and Kingly
Government. The Duke of York who a little before had been Governor of the
Realm for the King, and directed him much, thought it best, that King Richard
should both Voluntarily Resign, and also be Solemnly deposed by consent of all
the States of the Realm, for Resignation only would be imputed to fear, and
deprivation to force; and therefore this being concluded on, there came Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Hereford, the
Duke of Lancaster, and several other Lords and Abbots to King Richard in the
Tower of London.

When all were set in their places, King Richard was brought forth apparelled
in his Royal Robes, the Crown on his head and the Scepter in his hand, and was
placed among them in a Chair of State; Never was Prince so Gorgeous with less
Glory, and greater Grief, to whom it was not disgrace sufficient to lose both
the honor and Ornaments of a King, but he must openly do even in great scorn
renounce the one, and deliver up the other. After a little Pause and
expectation, the King rose from his Seat, and spoke to the Assembly these
words, or to this effect;

I assure my self that some at this present, and many hereafter will account my
Case lamentable, either that I have deserved this Dejection if it be just, or
if it be wrongful, that I could not avoid it; Indeed I do confess, that many
times I have showed my self both less Provident, and less painful for the
benefit of the Commonwealth than I should, or might, or intended to do
hereafter; and have in my Actions more respected the satisfying of my own
particular humor than either Justice to some private persons, or the Common
Good of all, yet I did not at any time omit duty, or Commit Grievance upon
natural dullness, or set malice, but partly by abuse of Corrupt Counselors,
partly by Error of my Youthful Judgment, and now the remembrance of these
oversights is not more unpleasant to any man than my self, and the rather,
because I have no means left either to recompense the injuries which I have
done, or to testify to the World my reformed Affections, which experience, and
stayedness of years had already corrected, and would daily have framed to more
perfection.

But whether all the Imputations wherewith I am charged be True, either in
Substance, or in such Quality as they are laid, or whether being True, they are
so heinous as to force these Extremities, or whether any other Prince,
especially in the heat of Youth, and in the space of twenty two years, the time
of my unfortunate Reign, does not sometimes either for advantage, or upon
displeasure in as deep manner grieve some particular Subject, I will not now
examine; It helps not to use any Defense, neither is it to any purpose to
complain, there is left no room for the one, nor pity for the other, and
therefore I refer it to the Judgment of God, and your less distempered
Considerations.

I accuse no man, I blame no Fortune, I complain of nothing, I have no pleasure
in such vain, and needless comforts, if I had minded to have stood upon Terms,
I know I have Great Favorers abroad, and I hope some Friends at home, who
would have been ready, yea very forward on my behalf to have begun a bloody and
doubtful War, but I esteem not my Dignity at so high a Rate, or Value, as to
venture the loss of so much English Blood, and the wasting and desolation of
such a flourishing Kingdom as this might have occasioned; Therefore that the
Commonwealth may rather rise by my fall, than I stand by the ruin thereof, I
willingly yield to your desires, and am here come to dispossess my self of all
public Authority and Title, and to make it free, and lawful for you to create
for your King Henry Duke of Lancaster my Cosen German, whom I know to be as
worthy to take that Place, as I see you willing to give it to him.

Then he read openly the form of his Resignation, which discharged his Subjects
from all Oaths and Fealty, etc. to which the King subscribed, and was sworn;
After which he delivered with his own hands the Crown, the Scepter, and the
Robe to the Duke of Lancaster, wishing him more happiness therewith than ever
he enjoyed, desiring him and the rest to permit him to live safely in a private
and obscure life, and not altogether forget he had been their King.

Upon October 13. following the Duke of Lancaster was Crowned King by the Name
of Henry the Fourth, and King Richard was removed to Pomfret Castle, but some
of the Lords being discontented with Henry used many endeavors to restore
Richard again, which caused great Wars, and Rebellions, and occasioned such
Melancholy in King Henry, that sitting one time at his Table, he sighing said,
Have I no faithful Friend who will deliver me from him that will be my Death.
This Speech was especially noted by one Sir Piers of Exton who presently with
eight Persons in his Company, came to Pomfret, commanding the Esquire who was
Taster to King Richard to be so no more, whereat the King marvelling, asked him
the Reason; Sir, said he, I am otherwise commanded by Sir Piers of Exton, who
is newly come from King Henry, when King Richard heard that word he took the
Carving-knife in his hand, and struck the Esquire lightly on the head saying;
The Devil take Henry of Lancaster, and thee together; and with that word Sir
Piers entered the Chamber with eight armed men, every one having a Bill in his
hand; King Richard perceiving this, put the Table from him, and stepping to the
foremost man, wrested the Bill out of his hands and slew four of those that
thus came to assault him; Sir Piers lept to the Chair where King Richard used
to sit, whilst the rest chased him about the Chamber, at last being forced to
the place where Sir Piers was, he with a stroke of his Pole-Ax upon his head
felled him down, and so ended his miserable life. It is said, that at the point
of his death the King gathered some Spirit and with a faint and feeble voice
groaned forth these words.

My Great Grandfnther King Edward the II. was in this manner deposed,
imprisoned and Murdered, by which means my Granfather King Edward the III.
obtained the Crown, and now is the punishment of that injnry poured upon his
next Successor; well, this may be just for me to suffer, but not Right for you
to do. Your King for a time may rejoice at my Death, and enjoy his desire, but
let him qualify his pleasures with Expectation of the same Justice, for God
who measures all our Actions by the malice of our Minds will not suffer this
to go unpunished.

Sir Piers having thus slain the King, wept bitterly, and a great part of this
prophetical Speech came to pass in a short time after; King Richard thus dead
his Body was imbalmed and covered with Lead all save his Face, and then brought
to London where it lay in St. Paul's Church three days unburied, that all might
see he was dead. And this was the end of this unfortunate Prince, in which
there was a wonderful Concurrence of Fortune in behalf of King Henry, and
against Richard, but when all is done, there is no resisting the Decree of
Heaven, but since that is unknown to us, and perhaps but Conditional, we shall
be manifest Traitors to our selves if we use not our uttermost endeavors to
divert it; so that it may be truly said Richard lost his Crown more by his own
fault, than the Treason of any other. After this long diversion let us now
return to the Tower of London.

In 1458 there were Justs and Tournaments in the Tower; In 1478. The Duke of
Clarence was drowned in a Butt of Malmsey within the Tower; Elizabeth Wife to
King Henry 7. Dyed in the Tower in Childbed 1502. In the year 1512, the Chapel
in the High White Tower was burnt; Queen Ann Bullein was beheaded in the Tower
1541, and a little after Katherine Howard both Wives to Henry the Eight. In the
year 1546 a strange accident happened in the Tower, for one Foxly who was
Potmaker for the Mint, falling a sleep could not be awakened by pinching,
beating or burning, for fourteen days; at which time he awaked as fresh as the
first day he began to sleep.

In King Henry the Eights time, the Tower was often full of Prisoners, and
among others Sir Thomas More Lord Chancellor of England, who was kept close
Prisoner, and at last they took from him all his Books, whereupon he shut up
his Prison Windows, and lived in Darkness; and being asked the reason, he
answered, it is time to shut up Shop when the Wares are all gone; At his first
entrance into the Tower, the Gentleman Porter demanded his Fee, which is the
upper Garment, whereupon Sr. Thomas pulled off his Cap to give it him, but that
not sufficing, he pulled out an handful of Angels, and gave him a good many, a
Knight that was in his Company telling him, that he was glad to see him have so
many Angels, Yes (answered he,) I love to carry my Friends always about me. Not
long after the Lady Jane was beheaded there, and upon the Scaffold, she made a
most ingenious Speech full of Pity, That she came thither to serve for an
Example to Posterity, that Innocence cannot be any Protection against
Greatness; and that she was come thither not for aspiring to a Crown, but for
refusing one when it was offered her.

In King James his time, there was no Blood spilt in the Tower, or upon
Towerhill, only Sir Gervase Elways was hanged there when he was Lieutenant
about the Murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, and one remarkable passage there was
in his Speech upon the Ladder, That being in the Low Countries, and much
addicted to Gaming, he made a serious wish that if ever he played more above
such a sum, he might be hanged, but he Violated the Oath, and so the just
Judgment of Heaven fell upon him according to his words. The Earl of Castle
haven in the year 1631, was brought from the Tower to be Executed for Horrid
Crimes; and diverse others since, have been Executed there, as the Earl of
Strafford, Archbishop Laud, and many more.

This stately Tower serves not only for a Goal to detain Prisoners, but for
many other uses, it is a strong Fort, or Citadel, which secures both City and
River. It is the Treasury of the Jewels and Ornaments of the Crown; It
conserves all the Old Records of the Courts of Justice at Westminster, it is
the place for the Royal Mint, and the Coynage of Gold and Silver, it is the
chief Magazine and Armory of the whole Land for Martial Engines and Provision,
and there only is the Brahe or Rack, usually called the Duke of Exeters
Daughter, because he was the first Inventor of it, and Lastly it is a great
Ornament, by the situation of it, both to the River and City.

This City has had diverse other Towns besides; one at the North End of
London Bridge, which is now utterly demolished, and the other at the South End,
which has suffered many Accidents of Fireing, and otherwise, and was still
repaired at the charge of the City. Upon this Gate the Heads of Traitors are
commonly placed, and some there are thereon at this day. Historians mention two
Castles that were built in the West part of the City, one called the Castle of
Montfiquet, built by a Lord of that name, which is now demolished, and the
Black Friars rose up instead of it, the other called Baynards Castle from one
Baynard, whose Family long enjoyed it, and after that Robert Fitz-Walter who
was called Banner Bearer of the City of London, and had great Privileges. This
Castle fell afterward to the Earl of March, who was Crowned there by the Title
of Edward the Fourth, to whom this City always stuck very close, but in the
Seventh Year of his Reign many of the greatest men in London were accused of
High Treason, and diverse Aldermen, whereof they were acquitted, yet did they
forfeit their Goods to the value of Forty Thousand Marks, and among them Sr.
Thomas Cook formerly Lord Mayor, without Hawkins were committed to the Tower,
neither could be discharged without paying Eight Thousand Marks to the King.
Henry the Seventh repaired Baynards Castle, and rid through the City in State
with all the Knights of the Garter, from the Tower to St. Paul's Church, where
they heard Mass, and Lodged that Night at Baynards Castle, Queen Mary was
likewise proclaimed at Baynards Castle, though the Lady Jane had been
proclaimed a little before.

There was also another Tower or Castle near Baynards Castle, but there is now
no sign of it remaining; And another in the place where Bridewell now stands,
which being demolished, yet there was a Royal Palace left where the Kings of
England kept their Courts, and King John summoned a Parliament there; and
afterward Henry the Eight repaired it, and made it much more stately for the
entertainment of his Nephew Charles the Fifth Emperor, and King of Spain, who
in the year 1522 was Magnificently Treated there.

There was another Tower called the Tower Royal, where King Stephen kept his
Court; Barbican was likewise another Tower; There was another called Sernes
Tower in Bucklersbury, where we read Edward the III. kept his Court, and gave
it afterward to his free Chapel of St. Stephens in Westminster, now called
Henry the sevenths Chapel, who spent fourteen thousand pound in building of
it, and about the same time he built a Great Ship which cost just so much. Thus
much for the Towers and Castles of London.

CHAP. IV. The Rivers, Wells, Conduits, Ditches and Bridges, etc. in and about
this City.
IN former times before William the Conqueror, and long after, the City was
watered (besides the famous River of Thames in the South) with the River of
Wells, as it was then called; and in the West with a water called Walbrook,
running through the midst of the City into the River of Thames; There was also
another Water which ran within the City through Langbourn Ward, watering that
part in the East; There were three Principal Fountains or Wells in the other
Suburbs, that is Holywell, Clements Well, and Clerks Well; and near to the
last were diverse other Wells; as Skinners Well, Fogs Well, Todewell, and
Radwell, all which flowing into the River aforementioned, much increased the
stream, and gave it the name of Wells.

It is recorded that in West-Smithfield there was a Pool called Horse-pool, and
another in the Parish of St. Giles; Besides which they had in diverse streets
and Lanes of the City fair Wells, and fresh Springs, by which the City was
served with sweet Water; and many Conduits were built in diverse Streets, which
continued till the dreadful Fire in 1666. Since which time for the Convenience
and enlargement of the Streets, and likewise by reason of the new River Water,
contrived by Sir Hugh Middleton, most of these Conduits are taken down, and
removed.

For Queen Elizabeth having before granted to the Citizens of London by Act of
Parliament Liberty for cutting and conveying a River from any part of Middlesex
or Hertfordshire to the City of London with a limitation of Ten years time, her
life ended before any would undertake it; whereupon the like Act was passed by
King James, but without Date of time, and when all others refused it, Sir Hugh
Middleton undertook to bring a River from Chadwell and Amwell, to the Northside
of London near Islington, where he built a large Cistern to receive it. This
work was begun Feb. 20. 1608 and in the five years space was fully
accomplished, though with great difficulty by reason of the difference and
unevenness of the Ground, the depth of the River in some places being Thirty
Foot, and in other places the water is carried through a Wooden Trough, and
advanced above the Valley near Three and Twenty Foot.

When the Water was brought to the Cistern, but not as yet let in, upon
Michaelmas Day 1613. in the afternoon, Sir Thomas Middleton brother to Sir
Hugh, being that day Elected Lord Mayor for the year ensusuing, he together
with the present Lord Mayor, Sir John Swinerton, Sir Thomas and Sir Henry
Montague, the Recorder, with diverse other Aldermen and Citizens rid to see the
Cistern, and the Water first issuing therein; at which time a Troop of about.
Three score Laborers, well apparel'd, and wearing gree^ Monmouth Caps all
alike, Armed with Spades, Shovels, pick-axes, and such Instruments of Labor,
marched twice or thrice round the Cistern, the Drums beating before them, and
then presented themselves before the Mount, where the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
stood to behold them, and after one of them had made a handsome Speech upon the
occasion, the Flood Gates flew open, and the stream ran cheerfully into the
Cistern, Drums and Trumpets sounding all the while in a Triumphant manner, and
a brave peal of Muskets concluded the entertainment.

But above all the City owns its Glory and Riches, and many other Blessings to
the excellent River of Thames, whose head or first stream issues out of the
side of a Hill upon Cotswold Downs, about a Mile from Tethury, near to Fosse a
High Road so called in former times, and was sometimes named Isis or the Ouse,
from hence it runs to the East, as all good Rivers should, though not without
some turnings, and meets with the Cirne or Chiurn, a brook whereof Cirencester
which is near it, is supposed to take the name. From hence it hastes to
Creeklade, Lechlade, Radcotbridge, Newbridge, and Evesham, receiving by the way
abundance of small Streams, Brooks, and Rivulets; And on this side the Town
devideth it self into two Streams, the one goes directly to Hinckly and Botly,
and the other to Godstow; this latter spreads it self for a while into diverse
small streams, which run not far before they meet again; and then encompassing
diverse Fruitful Meadows, it passes at length by Oxford, which some imagine
should rather be called Ouseford of this River, and there it meets with the
River Charnel, a little from whence the Original Branches Join again, and keep
Company to Abington, though no part of it did formerly come so near the Town as
now it does, till a branch thereof was led thither by the main stream, through
the Industry of the Monks, as also by the decay of Caerdoure, now called
Dorchester, sometimes the high Road from from Wales and the West Country to
London.

From thence it goes to Dorchester, and so into Them, where joining to a
River of that name, it is called no more Ouse but Thames; from thence it goes
to Wallingford and so to Reading, which was formerly called Pontium, because of
the number of Bridges. There it joins with the River Kenet, which comes from
the Hills West of Marleborough, and soon after with the Thetis commonly called
the Tide which comes from Thetisford; It goes from thence to Sudlington, or
Maidenhead, and so to Windlestore or Windsor, Eaton, Chertsey, Stanes, and
there receiving another Stream by the way called Cole, where Colebrook stands,
it proceeds to Kingston, Richmond, Sheen, Sion, and Brentford, where it meets
with another stream called the Brene coming from Edgworth; It runs then by
Moreclack, Putney, Falham, Battersey, Chelsey, Lambeth, Westminster, and so to
London.

And passing through the Bridge the first water that fall into it is Brom,
West of Greenwich, whose spring comes from Bromley in Kent. The next is River
on Essex side over against Woolwich which is called Lee, and falls into it; and
a while after the River Derwent on Kent side falls therein, having its rise
from Tunbridg; The next water that falls into the Thames is a Rivulet of no
great note, West of the Wain Isles; Last of all the River of Thames mingleth
with the River Medway, which comes out of Kent by Rochester, Chatham, and
diverse other Places, and waters all the South parts of Kent.

This Noble River for its breadth, depth, gentle straight even Course,
extraordinary wholesome Waters and Tides, is more commodious for Navigation than
perhaps any other River in the World; The Sea flows gently up this River
fourscore Miles, that is almost to Kingston, twelve miles above London by Land,
and twenty by Water, bringing the greater Vessels to London, and the smaller
beyond, and then Boats are drawn to Oxford against the Stream, and many miles
higher.

As often as the Moon comes to the Northeast, and Southwest Points of Heaven, it
is high Water at the City, the one Point in our Hemisphere, and the other in
the other. The Highest Tides are upon a Landfloud, the Wind Northwest at the
Equinoctial, and the Moon at full, when these four Causes concur, which is very
rare, than the Thames overflows its Banks in some places, and Westminster is
somewhat endamaged in their Cellars, but not in their upper Rooms; This River
opening Eastward toward France and Germany is much more advantageous for
Traffic then any other River in England; wherein there is contained variety of
Excellent Fish, and on both sides thereof lies a Fruitful Fat Soil, pleasant
rich Meadows, and innumerable Stately Palaces. So that the Thames seems to be
the radical Moisture of the City and in some sense the Natural heat too, for
almost all the Fuel for Firing is brought up this River from Newcastle,
Scotland, Kent, Essex and other parts; From this River the City by water
Engines is in many Places supplied with excellent wholesome water, and also from
almost twenty Conduits which are yet remaining of pure spring Water, as well as
by the New River aforementioned of which River we shall add, That it comes from
Amwell and Chadwell two Springs near Ware in Hertfordshire from whence in a
turning and winding Course it runs threescore Miles, before it reaches
Islington; Over this River are made 800 Bridges, some of Stone, some of brick
and some of Wood, 600 men were at once employed in this Great work It is
carried in Pipes of wood under gronnd into most Streets of this City, and from
thence with Pipes of Lead into Houses, it serves the highest parts of London in
their lower Rooms, and the lower parts in their highest room. This City
likewise is so Situated, that in all parts, though in the highest ground it is
abundantly served with Pump Water, and these Pumps in many places not six foot
deep in the ground.

The vast Traffic and Commerce whereby this City does flourish may be guessed
at chiefly by the cu^io^^s which are paid for all Merchandise Imported or
Exported, which in the Port of London only, amounts to above Three Hundred
Thousand Pounds a Year; and by the vast number of Ships, which by their Masts
resemble a Forest, as they lie along the stream, besides many that are sent
forth every year to carry and fetch Commodities to, and from all parts of the
known world, now for the preservation of the River Thames, there is a Court of
conservacy kept by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, (under whom is a
Water Bailiff and other Officers,) they commonly fish eight times every year
in the four Counties of Middlesx, Surrey, Kent and Essex, where they have power
to Impanel Juries, and to make Inquisition into, and punish all Offenses
committed upon the River within their Jurisdiction and Extent; which begins at
a place called Colny Ditch, a little above Stanes-bridge Westward; and from
thence all along through London Bridge to a place called Yendal, alias Yenleet,
and the waters of Medway near Chatham in Kent Eastward.

This River as we have said, is full of all sorts of Excellent Fish, as sweet
Salmons after the time of the Smelt is past, wherein no River in Europe exceeds
it; It has likewise store of Barbels, Trouts, Chevins, Pearches, Smelts,
Breams, Roches, Daces, Gudgeons, Flounders, Shrimps, Eels, etc. only it seems
not to be so stored with Carps, except that by Land-Flonds, they are sometimes
brought out of Gentlemen's Ponds; There are great numbers of Swans daily seen
upon this River, and above Two Thousand Wherries and small Boats, whereby Three
Thousand poor Watermen are maintained, by carrying Goods and Passengers
thereon, besides those large Tilt-boats, Tyde-boats and Barges, which either
carry People, or bring Provision from all parts of the Counties of Oxford,
Berks, Buchingham, Bedford, Hertford, Middlesex, Essex, Surry and Kent to the
City of London,

To conclude this famous River of Thames, taking all her advantages together,
surpasses all others that pay Tribute to the Ocean, if we consider the
streightness of its course, the stilness of its streams, considering its
breadth, as also its length, running above Ninescore Miles before it comes into
the Sea, and the convenience of its situation being toward the middle of
England; It has likewise one peculiar property more, that the entrance into
this River is safe, and easy to Englishmen, and Natives, but difficult and
hazardous to Strangers, either to go in and out without a Pilot; insomuch that
in the whole, the Thames may be said to be Londons best Friend, as may appear
by a passage in the Reign of King James, who being displeased with the City,
because they would not lend him a sum of money which he required, and the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen attending him one day, being somewhat transported with
Anger, the King said, He would remove his own Court, with all the Records of
the Tower, and the Courts of Westminster Hall to another place, with further
expressions of his Indignation. The Lord Mayor calmly heard all, and at last
Answered, Your Majesty has power to do what you please, and your City of
London will obey accordingly, but she humbly desires that when your Majesty
shall remove your Courts, you would please to leave the River of Thames behind
you, having been thus long upon the Water, it is now time to Land and take a
view of the great and stupendous Bridge, which if the situation and structure
thereof be well considered, may be said to be one of the Wonders of the World;
of which an Ingenious Gentleman deceased made this Poem;

When Neptune from his Billows London spied,
Brought proud'y thither by a High Spring Tide;
As through a floating Wood he steered along,
And danc^^g Castles clustered in a Throng;
When he beheld a mighty Bridge give Law,
Unto his Surges, and their Fury awe,
When such a Shelf of Cataracts did roar,
As if the Thames with Nyle had changed her Shore;
When he such Massy Walls, such Towers did eye,
Such Posts, such Irons. on his back to lie;
When such vast Arches he observed that might,
Nineteen Rialto's make for depth and height,
When the Cerulean God these things surveyed,
He shook his Trident, and astonished said;
Let the whole world now all her wonders count,
This Bridge of wonders is the Paramount.
At first there was only a Ferry kept where the Bridge now is, and the
Ferry-man and his Wife dying, left it to their only Daughter a Maiden named
Mary, who with the profits thereof, and money left her by her Parents, built a
House for Nuns in the place where the East part of St. Mary Overies Church now
stands, above the Quire where she was buried; and unto those Nuns she
bequeathed the benefit, and oversight of the Ferry, but that being afterward
turned to a House of Priests, they built a Bridge of Timber, which they kept in
good repair, till at length considering the vast charge thereof by the
contribution of the Citizens and others, a Bridge was built of Stone.

Several Accidents have happened concerning this Bridge, of which we shall
mention some hereafter in the Reign of the several Kings. In the first year of
King Stephen a Fire began near London-stone, and burnt stands in the Quire where
of she was buried; to those Nuns she bequeathed the benefit, and oversight of
the Ferry, but that being afterward turned to a House of Priests, they built a
bridge of Timber, which they kept in good repair, till at length considering
the vast charge thereof by the contribution of the Citizens and others, a
Bridge was built of Stone.

Several Accidents have happened to this Bridge. In the first year of King
Stephen a Fire began near London Stone, and burnt East to Algate, and West to
St. Paul's Church; the Bridge of Timber upon the Thames was also burnt, but
afterward repaired. In 1163 it was rebuilt all of new Timber, by Peter of
Cole-Church a Priest, which shows, that there was a Timber Bridge 215 years
before the Bridge of Stone was erected, which was maintained partly by Gifts,
and partly by Taxes in every Shire. In 1176 the Foundation of the Stone Bridge
was laid by the aforesaid Peter near the place of the Timber-Bridge, but
somewhat more to the West; for we read that Buttolph's Wharf was at the end of
London Bridge; the King assisted in the work; to perform which, the course of
the River Thames was turned another way about, by a Trench cast up for that
purpose, beginning in the East about Rotherhith, and ending in the West at
Battersea.

This Bridge with the Arches Chapel, etc. was 33 years in building, and
finished in 1209 by the worthy Citizens, W. Serle Mercer W. Alman, and Senedict
Botecorite, who were Overseers of it, for Peter of Cole-Church died four years
before, and as he principal Benefactor being buried in the Chapel on
London Bridge, a Mason who was Master-workman of the Bridge, built this large
Chapel from the Foundation, at his own Charge, was which endowed for two
Priests, and four Clerks; after the finishing the Chapel, which was the first
building on those Arches, diverse Mansion Houses were erected, and many Lands,
Tenements, and sums of Money were given toward the maintenance of the Bridge,
all which were ^ormerly registered in a Table for Posterity, and bung up in the
Chapel, till it was turned into a dwelling House, and was then removed to the
Bridge-house; and it is recorded that all the Revenues belonging to to
London Bridge in King Henry VII time, amounted to 8 15 l. 17 s. 2d. a year, by
which we may partly guess at the Incomes of this Bridge, and what vast increase
is made of it by this time.

But this noble Bridge like other earthly things has suffered many disasters
since, for some years after the finishing thereof, that is, 1212. on the 10th.
of July at Night the Borough of Southwark and St. Mary Overies Church being on
fire, and a multitude of People passing the Bridge, either to quench or gaze
upon it, on a sudden the North part of it, by the blowing of the South wind,
was set on fire, and when the People would have returned, they were stopped by
the Fire, and as they stayed in a consternation the South end of the Bridge
sell on fire, so that the People thronging between two raging Fires expected
present death, whereupon there came many Boats and Vessels to save them, into
which the multitude rushed so unadvisedly, that the boats being thereby sunk,
they were all drowned; above Three thousand Persons being destroyed by the Fire
and Water, part of whose Bodies were found half burned, besides those burnt to
Ashes, which could not be found.

In 1282. after a great Frost and deep Snow, five Arches of London Bridge were
carried away. In 1289. the Bridge was so much decayed that People were afraid
to go over it, but by a subsidy granted it was repaired. In 1595. on St.
George's Day there was a great Justing on London Bridge, between David Earl of
Crawford of Scotland. and the Lord Wells of England, which shows that the
Bridge was then only coaped in, but not built with Houses as it is now. The
next year Novem. 30. the young Queen Isabel Wife to Richard II. commonly called
the little Queen, for she was but 8 years old, was brought from Kenington over
the Bridge to the Tower of London, and such a mu^^itude of People went upon the
Bridge to see her, that nine Persons were crowded to death, among the rest the
P^^or of Tiptree in Essex, and an ancient Matron in Cornhill. In 1633 there
happened a great Fire on London Bridge, but was again repaired. In the dreadful
Fire 1666 a great part of the North Buildings of the Bridge were burnt down,
but are wholly rebuilt with much Advantage.

To conclude, this Bridge for admirable Workmanship, vastness of Foundation,
and Dimensions, and for stately Houses, and rich Shops built thereon,
surpasses all others in Europe; it has nineteen Arches founded in a deep
River, made of square Stone, sixty Foot in height, and Thirty in breadth,
distant 20 foot one from another, joined together with Vaults and Cellars, and
built as some say upon Ozy soft ground, being Eight hundred Foot in length and
30 foot broad, and a Drawbridge almost in the middle, Besides this noble
Bridge there are others belong to the City, as three stately Bridges of Stone
built since 1666 over Fleet Ditch, and also Holborn Bridge, the Ditch being
enlarged, cleansed, and fenced of each side with Stone and Rails, and
Storehouses for Coals on each side; it is likewise freed from Houses for
twenty Foot on each side, and made exceeding handsome, to the great charge of
this City, there were likewise some small Bridges over the Town Ditch, but now
it is arched over with Brick, and does no where appear, being paved even with
the Street.

CHAP. V. The Government of the City of London.
THE Civil Government of this City is not as it is in Rome, Paris, Madrid,
Vienna, and other Cities, by a chief Magistrate, or some noble Man set over it,
as it was here in the time of the Romans, when the chief Magistrate was called
the Prefect of London, or in the time of the Saxons, when he was called the
Portrieve, Custos or Guardian, and sometimes Provost of London, but after the
coming in of the Normans the chief Magistrate was called Bailive from the
French, or Commissarie, one that has a Commission to govern, and there were
sometimes two Bailiffs of London, till Rich. I. 1189. changed the name of
Bailiff into Mayor, which has held ever since.

The Mayor is a Citizen chosen every year by the Citizens, evcept when their
Privileges and Franchises have been taken from them, as in the time of Henry
III. Edward I. and King Charles II. The Mayor, though always a Citizen or
Tradesman, has been of such high repute, that in writing and speaking to him
the Title of Lord is prefixed, as to Noble Men, Bishops or Judges, and of late
to the Mayor of York, or some of the highest Officers of the Realm; he is
likewise usually Knighted; his Table, (and also the two Sheriffs is open to all
that are of any Quality, but so well furnished that it is always fit to receive
the greatest Subject in England; nay it is recorded that a Lord Mayor of London
feasted four Kings at once at his Table.

His Officers are eight of them Esquires by their places, that is, the
Sword Bearer, the Common Hunt, (who keeps a Kennel of Hounds for the Lord
Mayor's Recreation) the Common Crier, and four Water-Bailiffs; there is also
the Coroner, three Sergeants Carvers, three Sergeants of the Chamber, a
Sergeant of the Channel, four Yeomen of the Waterside, one Under Bailiff, two
Yeomen of the Chamber, three Meal Weighers, two Yeomen of the Wood Wharfs, most
of which have their Servants allowed them, and Liveries for themselves.

The State of the Lord Mayor appears when he goes abroad, which is usually on
Horseback, with rich Caparisons, himself always in long Robes either of Scarlet
richly surred. People or Puke with a Chain of Gold about his Neck, many
Officers walking before, and on all sides of him; but esp^cially on the 29th of
October, when he goes (...) Westminster in his Barge, with the Aldermen,
attended by all his Officers, and the Liverymen of the several Companies, in
their stately Barges with their Arms, Colors and Streamers; and having in the
Exchequer Chamber before the Judges, taken his Oath to be true to the King and
Government, he returns in like manner to Guildhall, that is, the Great Hall of
Guilds, o^ Incorporated Confraternities, where is prepared a sumptuous Dinner,
and the Kings, Queens, Noblemen, and Persons of Honor have of late years been
pleased to dine there with him; with the Foreign Ambassadors and all the
Judges.

This great Magistrate upon the Death of the King is said to be the Prime
Person in England, and therefore when King James was invited to come and take
the Crown of England, Robert Lo then Lord Mayor of London, subscribed in the
first place, before the great Officers of the Crown and the Nobility; he is
usually chosen on Michaelmas day out of 26 Aldermen, all Wealthy Men. His
Authority reaches over all this great City, part of the Suburbs, and likewise
to the River of Thames, with power to punish all that annoy the Stream, Banks
or Fish; only the safety of the River against an Invasion, and securing
Merchandising, and Navigation by Block-Houses, Forts or (...)

There are diverse Courts of Judicature belonging to the Lord Mayor and City of
London; the highest and most ancient Court is called the Hustings, which
preserves the Laws, Rights, Franchises and Customs of the City. There is a
Court of Requests or Conscience; the Court of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen,
where also the Recorder and Sheriffs sit; two Courts of the Sheriffs, one for
each Counter; the Court of the City Orphans, whereof the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen have the Care. The Court of Common Council consisting (as the
Parliament of England) of two Houses one of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and
the other of Commoners, but they fit all together. In which Court are made all
B.-Laws, which bind all the Citizens of London, for every man either by himself
or by his Representative gives his assent thereto, wherein consists the
happiness of the English above all other Sub^^cts in the world, that neither in
Laws, By Laws, Taxes nor Imposts, no man is obliged to pay any thing but by his
own consent. There is another Court of the Chamberlain of the City, to whom
belong the Receipts of the Rents, and Revenues thereof, and likewise the
Inrolling and making Free Apprentices, over whom he has great Authority. Also
the Courts of Coroner, and Escheator, and another Court for the conservation of
the River of Thames; lastly, the Court of Goal Delivery at Newgate, held
usually, eight times a ^ear at the Old Baily both for the City and Middlesex,
for the Trial of Criminals, whereof the Lord May or is chief Judge. There are
other Courts called Wardmote or the meeting of Wards, whereof there are 26 in
the whole City, every Alderman having a several Ward. In this Court Inquiry is
made into all things that conduce to the Regulating and well Governing of the
City. Also the Court of Hallmote or Assembly of every Guild and Fraternity, for
Regulating what belongs to every company in particular. There are two Sheriff
belonging to this City, which like the Lord Mayor are only for a year and are
elected generally upon Midsummerday. The name is thought to be Saxon from
Shire, or Country, and Rive Governor. His Office is to serve the King's Writs
of Attachment, to return indifferent Juries, to see that the public Peace be
kept and that condemned Persons be executed, etc. Newgate, Ludgate, and the two
Counters are put into the Custody of the Sheriffs.

For the Ecclesiastical Government, there is a Bishop, and the present is Dr.
Henry Compton; and to the Cathedral of St, Paul's, belongs a Dean, a Chapter, a
Treasurer and (...) Prehends. A Rector or Vicar is placed in every Parish for
the Cure of S^uls, and there is in most Parishes a Parsonage or Vicarage-House
for the Minister, and a Competent Allowance of Tithes.

CHAP. VI. The several Companies or Corporations of the City of London, with
the Arms of each Company, and the time of their Incorporating.
THE Traders of the City of London are divided into Companies or Corporations,
and are so many Bodies Politic, enjoying large Privileges by the Charters of
diverse Kings granted to them, and have Halls to meet in, some like Palaces
(with Arms belonging to each Company) The Arms of this famous City of London
are Argent Cross Gules, with the Sword of St. Paul (say some) and not the
Dagger of William Walworth, for they say it is recorded this Coat did belong to
the City long before Wat Tyler's Rebellion.

London coat of arms The ARMS of London.


The ARMS of the rest of the Companies follow.

guild coat of arms Merchant Adventurers.
Incorporated by Ed. 4. consirmed by Q. Eliz.



guild coat of arms Turkey Merchants.
Incorporated by Q. E. their Charter enlarged by K. James 1.



guild coat of arms East India Company.
They were first Incorporated by Q. E. 1600.



guild coat of arms 1. Mercers.
They were Incorporat. 17 Rich. 2. 1393.



guild coat of arms 2. Grocers.
First called Pepperers, Incorporated 28 E. 3.



guild coat of arms 3. Drapers.
They were Incorpor^^^ in the 17 H. 6.



guild coat of arms 4. Fishmongers.
The Stock and Salt Incorporated 28 H. 8.



guild coat of arms 5. Goldsmiths.
They were made a Company 16 R. 2.



guild coat of arms 6. Skinners.
Incorporated first by Edw. 3. confirmed 18 Rich 2.



guild coat of arms 7. Merchant Tailors.
They were completely Incorporated by Hen. 7. 1531.



guild coat of arms 8. Haberdashers.
Incorporat. 17 Hen. 7. called St. Kath. Society.



guild coat of arms 9. Salters.
Had their Arms 22 Hen. 8. Crest and Supporters by Q. Eliz.



guild coat of arms 10. Iro^mongers.
They were made a Company the 3d of Edward 4.



guild coat of arms 11. Vintners.
Incorpor. by Edw. 3. and confirmed by Hen. 6.



guild coat of arms 12. Clothworkers.
Grew to be a Company the 22 of Henry 8.



guild coat of arms 13. Dyers.
Incorporated first by a Charter from Henry 6.



guild coat of arms 14. Brewers.
Incorporated by Hen. 6. confirmed by Q. Eliz.



guild coat of arms 15. Leathersellers.
First Incorporated in the 6th of Richard 2.



guild coat of arms 16. Prwterers.
They were made a Society by K. Edw. 4.



guild coat of arms 17. Barber-Chirurgeons.
First Incorporated by Edw. 4. and confirmed by every Prince since.



guild coat of arms 18. Armorers.
Incorporated by Hen. 6. himself being of the Company.



guild coat of arms 19. White Bakers
They are Ancient being Incorporat. 1 Edw. 2.



guild coat of arms 20. Wax Chandlers.
In great credit in the times of Popery, Incorporat. 2 Rich. 3. 1484.



guild coat of arms 21. Tallow Chandlers.
Incorporated 2 Edw. 4. and confirmed by King James 1.



guild coat of arms 22. Cutlers.
They were made a Company by Henry 5. and others since.



guild coat of arms 23. Girdlees.
They were made a Company 27 Henry 6.



guild coat of arms 24 Butchers.
They were not Incorporated till 3 of King James 1.



guild coat of arms 25. Sadlers.
They are Ancient from Edw. 1. 300 years ago.



guild coat of arms 26. Carpenters.
They were Incorporated 7 July, 17 Edw. 4.



guild coat of arms 27. Cordwinders or
Shoemakers were Incorporated 17 Hen. 6. and confirmed since.



guild coat of arms 28. Painters or
Painter Stainers were Incorgor. 23 Q. E. 1580.



guild coat of arms 29. Curriers.
They are ancient but not Incorporated till 12 Jnne, 3 of King James.



guild coat of arms 30. Masons, or
Free Masons were made (...) Company 12 Hen. 4.



guild coat of arms 31. Plumbers.
They were made a Corporation 9 K. James 1.



guild coat of arms 32. Inholders
They were made a Company 6 Henry 8.



guild coat of arms 33. Founderes,
Incorporated the 18 Sept. 12 K. James 1.



guild coat of arms 34. Embroiderers.
They were Incorporated in the 4 of Q. Eliz.



guild coat of arms 35. Poulterers.
Incorporat. by Henry 7. and confirmed. 33 Q. E.



guild coat of arms 36. Cooks.
Indorpor. 12 E. 4. and confir. by Q. E. and K. J. 1.



guild coat of arms 37. Coopers.
They were made a Company the 18 H. 7.



guild coat of arms 38. Bricklayers, or
Tylers, Incorporated by Q. E. confirm. 2 K. J. 1.



guild coat of arms 39. Bowyers.
The of their Incorporated was 21 K. J. 1.



guild coat of arms 40. Fletchers.
They are also a Corporation, but when made is uncertain.



guild coat of arms 41. Blacksmiths.
Incorporated 20 Q. E. confirmed 2 K. Ja. 1.



guild coat of arms 42. Joyners.
Incorporated 13 Q. E.



guild coat of arms 43. Plaisterers.
They were Incorporain the Reign of King Henry the 7.



guild coat of arms 44. Weavers, now
Silk Weavers, very ancient, having 3 Societies.



guild coat of arms 45. Fruiterers.
Incorporated 3 K. J. 1.



guild coat of arms 49. Scriveners.
Ancient, yet not Incorporated till 14 K. J. 1.



guild coat of arms 50. Bottlemakers.
Horners, are of great Antiquity, but not Incor.



guild coat of arms 51. Stationers.
Of great Antiquity before Printing, and Incorporated 3 Phil. and M.



guild coat of arms 52. Marblers.
Not Incorporat. unless joined with the Masons.



guild coat of arms 53. Wool-packers
They flou^^^hed in the time of the Wo^^staple.



guild coat of arms 54. Farriers.
They rise from Henry de Ferraris, Master of the Horse to W. Conqueror.



guild coat of arms 55. (...)
They have kept friendship together many ye.



guild coat of arms 56. Lovimers.
They have a Hall in Colemanstreet Ward, upon London Wall.



guild coat of arms 57 Brown Babers.
They are or long stand(...) Incor. 10 K.J.^.



guild coat of arms 58. ^^^^^ongers.
Incor. 3 K. J. 1. have lost their Charter.



guild coat of arms 59. V^h^lsterers.
Formerly much esteemed, but we do not find when Incorporat.



guild coat of arms 60. Turners
They were made a Comp. 2 K. J. 1.



guild coat of arms 61. Glasiers
Of ancient Friendship, but their Incor. unkn.



guild coat of arms 62 Clerks called
Parish ^lerks, were Incorporated 17 Henry 3.



guild coat of arms 63. Watermen.
They are a Brotherhood regulated by the ^



guild coat of arms 64. ^^oth^^ wies.
Divided from the Grocers. In or. 15 K. J. 1.



guild coat of arms 65. Silk Throwers.
They were Incor. 1. April in the 5 K. Char.



Out of the 12 first of these Companies, is the Lord Mayor chosen, or at least
he is made Free of one of them after he is Elected. The Livery men of all these
Companies meet together at Cuildha^l for choosing Lord Mayor, Sheriffs,
Parliament Men, (whereof there are four for this City) and their Officers which
is called a Common Hall. They are Elected by the Majority of Voices.

CHAP. VII. The Wards and Precincts of the City of London.
THE General Division of the Wards of this City since their purchasing the
Liberties of Southwark in the County of Surrey, consists of twenty six parts,
which have twenty six Aldermen to govern them; the names of which are as follow.

1. Towerstreet Ward, so called from the Tower of London; it contains Sydon, or
Seething lane, part of Mark-lane, Mincing lane, and Beer lane, in which is
Bakers-Hal; two Lanes called Church-lanes, and next to them Fowl lane, the
Church of St. Dunstans in the East, and the Custom-house where are paid all the
Impositions laid on Merchand ses, imported or exported; which is so
considerable, that all the Customs of England, being divided into three parts,
the Port of London pays two Thirds, that is, above 330000 Pound yearly. This
House being destroyed by the Fire, 1666, is now rebuilt in a more magnificen:
Uniform and commodius Manner, by the King, and cost 10000 l. the building. In
this Ward are, the Tower of London, two Halls of Companies, the Clothworkers,
and the Bakers. It has an Alderman, a Deputy. 11 Common Council Men, and 3
Parish Churches, Alhallows Barking, St. Olave Hartstreet, and St. Dunstans in
the East; the last of which, with great part of the Ward was burnt down by the
Fire, but is lately rebuilt, and an Organ placed therein; It has 13
Constables, 12 Scavengers, 13 of the Wardmote Inquest, and a Beadle.

2. Portsoaken Ward, contains the East part of the Tower, the Hospital of St.
Katharines, East-Smithfield and Tower Hill, where there is a Storehouse for
Provisions for the Navy Royal, called the Slaughter House; the Merchant Tailors
have in this Ward Almshouses for 14 Women; next is the Minories, then Hog-lane
near Goodmans Fields, and ends at Petticoat-lane. This Ward has an Aldermen
and his Deputy, six Common Council Men, two Parish Churches, Trinity Minories
and St. Buttolphs Aldgate; 4 Constables; 4 Scavengers; 18 of the Wardmote
Inquest, and a Beadle.

3. Aldgate Ward, so named from the Gate; the chief Street begins between the
Gate and Limestreet, and goes again to Billeter-Lane, and Fenchurch-Street, to
Culver Alley, from thence to Crutched Friars, Woodroof-Lane, Hart-Street, and
the North end of Mark-Lane where the Ward ends. Wherein there are 3 Parish
Churches, St. Katharine-Cree-Church, St. Andrew Undershaft, and St. Katharine
Coleman; and there were 3 Halls of Companies, that is, Bricklayers, Fletchers,
and Ironmongers Hall. It has an Alderman, Deputy, and six Common Council Men,
6 Constables 9 Scavengers, Wardmote Inquest 18, and a Beadle.

4. Lime-Street Ward, bath no Parish Church in it, nor any one whole Parish,
but small Portions only of two Parshes; it has an Alderman, his Deputy, and
four Common Council Men, 4 Constables, 2 Scavengers, Wardmote Inquest Men 16,
and a Berdle.

5. Bishopsgate Ward, part of which is without the Gate from St. Mary Spittle
to Bishopsgate, and almost half Hounsditch, and Old Bethlem East of the New
Postern to Morefields; in this Ward is Fishers Folly (now called Devonshire
House, and lately made into a square with stately Buildings) the Old Artillery
Ground, Spittle Fields, now built into Streets; and the Church of St. Buttolphs
Pishopsgate-gate: within the Gate it contains Bishopsgate Street, to the East
end of St. Martins Outwich Church, and then winding by Leadenhall down Leaden
Hall Street, Great St. Hellens, and Little St. Hellens. In this Ward there was
Bethlem now removed to Morefields, St. Mauy Spittle, where Sermons were
formerly preached Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday in Easter week yearly. Also the
Church of St. Buttelphs Bshopsgate, the small Church of St. Ethelborough, and
the fair Church of St. Helen; near this Church a Child was found buried in the
Sea-coal Ashes by his unnatural Mother, with his Face upward, yet found alive,
without any ragg about it, but all bloody because the Navel string was untied,
and the body crusted over with Sea-coal Durst, yet being made clean, it was
found to be a handsome Manchild, without any harm, but only by sucking in the
Ashes; he was Christened and named Job Cinere Extractus, Job taken out of the
Ashes; he lived three days, and lies buried in that Churchyard. This Ward has
an Alderman and two Deputies, one within, and another without the Gate, eight
Common Council Men within, and three without the Gate, seven Constables, seven
Scavengers, 13 Wardmote Inquest Men and a Beadle

6. Broadstreet Ward, so called from the Street, wherein is Throgmorton-Street,
Threadneedle-Street, half Finch-Lane and an Alley; and to the East end of St.
Margaret Lothbury, and to a Pump formerly against St. Bennet Fink's Church. In
this Ward is part of Gresham College, and eight Almshouses; the Church of St.
Peter's Poor in Broadstreet, Augustine Friars, now the Dutch Church, the Church
of St. Martins Outwich, St. Bennet Fink, St. Bartholomew, Exchange, and St.
Christophers Parish; also Carpenters Hall, Drapers Hall, and Merchant Tailors
Hall. Then there was St. Anthonies College or Hospital, which is now a Church
for French Calvinists; Scalding Ally is the farthest part of this Ward; wherein
there is an Alderman, his Deputy and nine Common Council Men, ten Constables,
eight Scavengers; of the Ward note Inquest thirteen, and a Beadle.

7. Cornhil Ward, so called from a Corn-Market, anciently kept there; It Is
chief Ornament is the Royal Exchange formerly called the Burse, which was
erected in 1566 and burnt down 100 years after, in 1666. It was built by Sir
Thomas Gresham a noble Merchant, and by Command of Q. Eliz. proclaimed and
named the Royal Exchange. The Merchants before met in Lumbarddreet; after the
Fire, it was rebuilt most part with Stone, with such curious Architecture,
especially the Front, Turret, and Archwork, that it surpasses all other
Burses. It is Quadrangular, with a large Court, wherein the Merchants may
assemble, and the greatest part in case of Rain, or Sunshine, may be sheltred
in side Porti co's; the whole Fabric cost above 50000 Pound, one half paid by
the Chamber of London, and the other by the Company of Mercers. There are 160
Shops above, let at 20 l. Rent each, and 30 l. Fine, and several Shops below on
every side, and large Vaults underneath which yield considerable Rents, so that
it is the richest piece of ground perhaps in the World, the ground whereon this
goodly Fabric is erected, being but 171 foot from North to South, and 203 foot
from East to West, very little more than three quatters of an Acre, and
products 4000 Pound yearly Rent. Cornhill Ward begins at the West end of
Leadenhall, and so down to Finch-lane on one side, and Birchin lane on the
other; half of which are in this Ward, and so to the Stocks-Market. In this
Ward is the Church of St. Peter's Cornhill, counted the oldest in London, and
the Church of St. Michael; both which with the greatest part of this Ward, were
burnt down, but are since nobly rebuilt, as well as the rest of the Streets;
St. Michael's Church had ten Bells formerly, and John Stow writes thus, I have
heard my Father say, says he, that upon St. James's night, certain Men ringing
the Bells in the Loft, a Tempest of Thunder and Lightning did arise, and a
thing of an ugly Shape was seen to come in at the South Window, which lighted
on the North, for fear whereof all the Ringers sell down as dead for a time,
letting the Bells cease of their own accord; when they came to themselves, they
found certain Stones of the North Window razed and scratcht as if they had been
so much Butter printed with a Lions Claw; the same Stones were fastened there
again when it was repaired, and remain so to this day; He adds, That one
William Rus or Rous, gave a Bell to this Church to be rung nightly at 8 a
Clock, and for Knels, and Peals, which was rung by one Man for 160 years
together, In this Ward there is an Alderman, his Deputy and five Common Council
Men; four Constables, four Scavengers; Wardmote Inquest sixteen, and a Beadle.

8. Langbourn Ward, so called, of a long Bourn of Water running out of
Fenchurch-street, down to the end of St. Mary VVoolnoth Church in Lumbard
street, and then dividing into small Streams, it left the name of
Sherebourn-lane. In this Ward is Fenchurch street, Lumbard-street, half
Lime-street, half Birchin-lane, St. Clements-Lane down to St. Clements-Church,
St. Nicholas-Lane beyond St. Nicholas-Church, Abchurch-Lane, and part of
Bearbinder-Lane. Formerly St. Gabriel's Church stood in the middle of
Fenchurch-street, but was taken away since the Fire; likewise St. Dionis
Backchurch, Alhallows Lumbard-street, St. Edmund Lumbard-street, St. Nicholas
Acons, and St. Mary VVoolnoth Church. In it are six Parish Churches, and
Pewterers Hall in Lime-street; there is an Alderman, his Deputy and nine Commoa
Council Men; 15 Constables, 9 Scavengers, Wardmote Inquest 17, and a Beadle in
this Ward. The Post Office is kept in Sir Robert Vyners House in this Ward;
most of which was burnt down and all the Churches, but since rebuilt.

9. Billingsgate Ward, contains part of Thamestreet, Rood land, Puding lane,
Love lane, Buttolph lane, St. Margaret Fattons lane, Billingsgate, Summers Key,
Smarts Key, Boss Alley, St. Mary Hill-lane; likewife five Charches, St.
Buttolph Billingsgate, St. Mary Hill, St. Margaret Pattons, St. Andrew Hubbert,
and Saint George Buttolphs Lane. This Ward was all burnt in 1666, but now
rebuilt, with most of the Churches; There is an Alderman, his Deputy, and nine
Common Council Men; 11 Constables, 6 Scavengers, Wardmote Inquest 14 and a
Beadle.

10. Bridge-Ward within (so called from London Bridge) begins at the South end,
and comes over the Bridge up Fish-street hill to the North corner of
Grace-Church. In which were 4 Churches, St. Magnus at the Bridge-Foot, St.
Margaret new Fish-street, St. Leonard Eastcheap, and St. Bennet Grace Church;
all these Churches, and all the Ward except part of London Bridge was burnt
down; two of which are rebuilt, but upon the place where St. Margaret's Church
stood, there is erected by Act of Parliament, a Pillar in perpetual Memory of
the dreadful Fire in 1666, which first began in Pudding-Lane behind that
Church. This Monument is built after the Dorick Order, 170 foot high, all of
solid Portland Stone with a Staircase in the middle of Stone, coped with Iron,
with an Iron Balcony on the Top, not unlike those two ancient white Pillars at
Rome, erected in honor of those two Excellent Emperors, Trajan and Antoninus,
which though they were built above 1500 years ago, are still standing entire;
the Pedestal of this Pillar is 43 foot square. In the Bridge Ward are an
Alderman, his Deputy, and 14 Common Council Men, 15 Constables, 6 Scavengers,
Wardmote Inquest 16, and a Beadle.

11. Candlewick Ward, begins at the East end of Great Eastcheap, and passes
West through little Eastcheap, into Cannon-street, and so to the North end
thereof, and thence to the West end of St. Laurence Pountneys Churchyard; part
of St. Clements-Lane, most part of St. Nicholas-Lane, almost all Abchurch-Lane,
and most part of St. Martins-Lane are in this Ward. It was wholly burnt down in
1666, but handsomely rebuilt. There were in this Ward 5 Churches, that is, St.
Clements-Eastcheap, St. Mary Abchurch, St. Michael Crooked-Lane (where was the
Monument of Sir William VValworth Lord Mayor, who killed VVat Tyler) St.
Martins Orgars and St. Laurence Poultney, which were all burnt down, the three
sirst are rebuilt, and St. Martins is now a French Church. This Ward has an
Alderman, his Deputy, and 7 Common Council Men, 8 Constables, 5 Scavengers,
Wardmote Inquest 12 and a Beadle.

12, VValbrook Ward, begins at the West end of Canon-street by Budge-row,
where is St. Swithins lane, VValbrook, the Stocks-Market, four or five Houses
in Lumbard-street, Bearbinder lane, and part of Bucklersbury. This Ward was
wholly destroyed by the Fire, and six Churches, that is, St. Swithins in
Canon-street, St. Mary VVoolchurch, St. Stephens VVallbrook, St. John
Evangelist, and St. Mary Bothaw; St. Swithins, and St. Stephens VValbrook are
handsomely rebuilt, but St. Mary VVoolchurch, the Churchyard, and
Stocks-Market are pulled down, and made a handsome Market place; in the Front
whereof toward the Street is a Conduit, and a Statue of King Charles II, on
Horseback, with a Turk or Enemy under his Feet; erected by Sir Robert Vyner,
This Ward has an Alderman, his Deputy, and 7 Common Council Men, 9. Constables
six Scavengers, Wardmote Inquest 15 and a Beadle. In this Ward is Salters Hall.

13. Dowgate Ward begins at the South end of VValbrook Ward, over against the
East corner of St. John Baptist's Church, and goes on both sides the way to
Dowgate, wherein there were Elbow-lane, Chequer-Alley, Fryer-lane,
Grantham-lane, the Stilyard, Church-lane, Alhollows-lane, Cole-Harbour,
Ebgate-lane, Bush-lane; and Suffolk-lane. This Ward was wholly consumed by the
Fire, and three Churches. Alhallows the Great, Alhollows the Less, and St.
Laurence-Poultney, the first of which is again rebuilt. In this Ward were five
Halls, Skinners, Dyers, Tallow-Chandlers, Innholders, and Joyners, and likewise
Merchanr-Taylors School. It has an Alderman, his Deputy, and 5 Common Council
Men, 8 Constables, 5 Scavengers, Wardmote Inquest 14, and a Beadle,

14. Vintrey Ward, stretches from the Vintrey North to Tower. Royal, in which
were Stodies-lane, Cranes lane, Church-lane, and diverse others. This Ward was
consumed by the Fire, and four Churches, St. Michael-Royal, St.
Thomas-Apostles, St. Martins Vintrey, and St. James Garlick-Hithe; the first
only is rebuilt. This Ward has an Alderman, his Deputy, and 6 Common Council
Men, 9 Constables 4 Scavengers, Wardmote Inquest 14, and a Beadle. In which
were 5 Halls, Vintners, Cutlers, Fruiterers, Plummers, and Parish-Clerks.

15. Cordwayners Ward, wherein there were Budge-Row, Turnbase-lane, part of
VVingmen-lane, Cordwayner-street, Bow-lane, Basing-lane, and St. Syths lane,
the South end of Needlers-lane, the South end of Soperlane, part of Bow-lane,
and VVatling-street. This Ward was burnt down, and three Churches, St.
Antholines, Aldermary Church, and St Mary le Bow, all rebuilt with magnificent
Steeples, This Ward has an Alderman, his Deputy 8 Common Council Men, 8
Constables, 8 Scavengers, Wardmote Inquest 14, and a Beadle.

16. Cheapside Ward, wherein is the Poultrey, and the Counter, Cony-hoop lane,
part of the Old-Jury, Bucklers-bury, Neelders-lane, part of Soper-lane, now
called Queenstreet, Ironmonger-lane, and Cateaten-street. This Ward was
consumed by the Fire, and 7 Churches, St. Mildred-Poultrey, St. Mary
Cole-Church, St. Bennet-Sherehog, St. Pancras Soper-lane, St. Martins
Ironmongers-lane, St. Laurence-Jury, and Guildhall-Chappel, some are since
finely rebuilt, as well as the Hall and the rest of the Ward. It has an
Alderman, Deputy, and 11 Common Cou^cil Men, 11 Constables, 9 Scavengers,
Wardmote Inquest 12, a Beadle, and Grocers and Mercers Hall.

17. Coleman-street Ward, wherein is part of the Old-Jury, Lothbury,
Coleman-street. and the Alleys thereabout; it was in part consumed by the Fire,
with three Churches, St. Margaret's Lothbury St. Stephens Coleman-street, and
St. Olaves Jury, all rebuilt, with the rest of the Ward; It has two Halls,
Armourers and Founders, an Alderman, his Deputy, 5 Common Council Men, 4
Constables, 4 Scavengers, VVardmote Inquest 13, and a Beadle.

18. Bassishaw, or Basing-hall Ward, wherein are Basing hall street, part of
London Wall and several other Alleys; most of it was burnt down 1666, and
therein Basing-hall, and St. Michael Bassishaw Church, with Coopers, Masons,
Weavers, and Girdlers Hall. There are an Alderman, his Deputy, and 4 Common
Council Men, 2 Constables, 2 Scavengers, Wardmote Inquest 17 and a Beadle.

19 Cripplegate Ward, has these Streets, Aldermanbary, Milk-street, Gayspur
lane, part of VVestcheap, Love-lane,, Lad-lane, VVood-street, Addle-street,
Philip-lane, Huggen-lane, Maiden-lane, the East end of Guthorn-lane, Staining
lane, Silver-street, the North end of Mugwel-street, all within the walls;
without are More-lane, with all the Alleys, little Morefields, more than half
Grub-street, White Cross street, to ^eech-lane, Red Cross-street, part of
Golden-lane, and Barbican, more than half toward Aldersgate, Sim College, in
which is a stately Library, and Almshouses for 24 People founded by Dr. Thomas
White. Part of this Ward was consumed by the Fire, and among the rest
Aldermanbury Church, St. Maudlin Milk-street, St. Albans VVood-street, St.
Michael VVood-street, but St. Alphage, and Cripplegate escaped; In this Ward
were Bowyers and Scriveners Hall. It is of ^ great extent, divided into
Cripplegate within and without; within it has an Alderman, his Deputy, and 8
Common Council Men, 9 Constables, 12 Scavengers, VVardmote Inquest 15, and a
Beadle; without the Gate a Deputy, and three Common Council Men, 4 Constables,
4 Scavengers, VVardmote Inquest 17, and a Beadle.

20. Aldersgate Ward, contains Lillipot-lane, the west side of Guthorns-lane,
Cary-lane, St. Martins, Aldersgate Street without the Gate, and
Little-Brittain; some part of this Ward was burnt, and the Churches of St.
John Zachary, St. Olave Silver street, St. Ann Aldersgate, and St. Mary
Staining; but St. Buttolphs without the Gate escaped. There are in this Ward,
Peter-house, no^ the Seat of the Lord Bishop of London, Thanet-House, and
Goldsmiths Hall. It has an Alderman, his Deputy, 4 Common Council Men, without
the Gate, and 4 within, 8. Constables, 9 Scavengers, VVardmote Inquest 14, and
a Beadle.

21. Farringdon Ward, within contains Foster-lane, Mugwelwell-street,
Pentecost-lane, Butcherhall-lane, the west side of Fryday-street, the
Old-Change, the north Churchyard of St. Paul's, St. Paul's-School,
Paternoster Row, the west side of Avemary-lane, Greed-lane, Blackfriars,
Pannier-Alley, Ivy lane, Blow Bladderstreet, Newgate Market, and
Newgate-street. most of it was burnt in 1666. and the Churches of St. Peter's
Cheap at VVood-street Corner, St. Fosters in Fosterlane, Christ Church and
Hospital, St. Mathews Friday-street, St. Austins in VVatling-street, St.
Martins Ludgate, St. Ann Blackfriars, St. Faiths under St. Paul's, and St.
Paul's Church it self. St. Paul's is the only Cathedral of that Name in
Christendom, seated on the-highest part of all the City, and was more
perspicuous perhaps than any Cathedral in the World It was a structure for
length, height, and antiquity, surpassing all other Churches, the length
thereof was 670 Foot, (therein exceeding by 20 Foot, St. Peter's Church in Rome,
which for Beauty, Proportion, and diverse other things excells all other
Temples.) It was in height 102 Foot, and in breadth 130. This Church was built
(as other Cathedrals) in a perfect Cross, and in the midst of the Cross upon
mighty high Arches, was a Tower, or Steeple of Stone, 360 foot high, and on
that a Spire of Timber, covered with Lead in height 260 foot more; in all from
the ground 520 foot, above which was a Bole of Copper gilt of 9 foot in
compass, whereon stood the Cross 15 foot and an half high, and almost 6 foot
across, made of Oak, covered with Lead, and another cover of Copper over the
Lead; above all stood the Eagle or Cock of Copper gilt, 4 foot long, and the
breadth over the wings 3 foot and an half. In 1561, part of this magnificent
Pile was much wasted, and the rest endangered by Fire in that stately Spire, by
the Negligence of a Plummer, who left his Pan of Fire there while he went to
Dinner, as he confessed on his Deathbed; This was repaired in 5 years;
Archbishop Laud much repaired it with Portland Stone, in 1640. It was again
ruined by the dreadful Fire, 1666, but the Quire is now rebuit, with great part
of the rest of the Cathedral in a noble and sumptuous manner. In this Ward of
Farringdon, were the Halls of several Companies, as Embroiderers, Sadlers,
Barber Surgeons, Butchers, Stationers, and likewise the College of
Physicians in Warwick Lane. It has an Alderman, his Deputy, and 14 Common
Council Men, 17 Constables, 18 Scavengers, Wardmote Inquest 18, and a Beadle.

22. Breadstreet Ward, wherein are Breadstreet, the East part of Friedaystreet,
Watlingstreet, part of Knight Riderstreet, and Distafflane; This Ward was
wholly laid wast by the Fire, and therein the Churches of Alhallows
Breadstreet, St. Mildred Breadstreet, St. John Evangelist, and St. Margaret
Moses; also Cordwainers, Salters and Gerrards Hall. This Ward has an Alderman,
his Deputy, and 11 Common Council Men, 10 Constables, 8 Scavengers, Wardmote
Inquest 13 and a Beadle.

23. Queen Hythe Ward, comprehends Tainity lane, Breadstreet hill, Fyfoot
lane, Disbourn lane, Little Trinity lane, Old Fishstreet, Lambeth hill, Pie
lane, Townsend lane, Queen Hythe, Salt VVharf, Stew lane, Broof VVharf, Broken
wharf, Trig lane, and Bull wharf. The whole Ward was consumed in 1666, with
these Churches, Trinity Church, St. Nicholas Cole Abbey, St. Nicholas Olaves,
St. Maudlins Old Fishstreet, Saint Mary Mounthaw, St. Mary Somerset, St.
Michael Queen Hythe, and St. Peter's Paul's wharf. It has an Alderman, his
Deputy,, and 6 Common Council Men, 9 Constables, 8. Scavengers, Wardmote
Inquest 13, and a Beadle. In it is Painter Stainers Hall.

24. Castle Baynard Ward, contains part of Creed lane, the Last part of Avemary
lane, part of Pater noster Row, the East side of Warwick lane, Peter's hill
lane, Paul's Wharf, Addle hill, Carter lane, Dolittle lane, Sermon lane, St.
Paul's Chain, and part of the South Churchyard, St. Peter's Paul's Wharf, and
Baynards Castle. It was wholly burnt down by the Fire, and therein Baynards
Castle, St. Bennets Church near Paul's Wharf, St. Andrew Wardrobe, St. Mary
Magdalen, and St. Gregory's by St. Paul's. It has an Alderman, his Deputy, and
6 Common Council Men, 10 Constables, 7 Scavengers, VVardmote Inquest 14, and a
Beadle.

25. Farringdon Ward without is very large, and contains Giltspur street, Pie
Corner, Cock lane, Holbourn Conduit, St. Bartholomews Hospital, Duck lane,
Saint Bartholomews Close, part of Long lane, part of Chicklane, Smithfield, Cow
lane, Snow hill, to the Bishop of Elies House, Furnivals Inn, Staples Inn,
Bernards Inn, Fetter-lane, Thavies Inn, Shoe lane, the Churches of St.
Sepulchers, and St. Andrews Holborn, the Old Baity where the Sessions is kept
for London and Middlesex, Fleet Ditch, Holborn Bridge, the Streets on each side
the Fleet Prison, Fleet lane, St. Dunstaus Church in the west, Cliffords Inn,
the south end of Chancery lane, Sergeants Inn, even to the Rolls Liberty,
Jackanapes lane, part of Sheer lane, the two Temples, White Friars, Water lane,
Salisbury Court, St. Brides Church, Bridewel lane, and Bridewel. There is now a
new Street out of Chancery lane, to Little Lincoln's Inn. Some part of this
Ward was burnt, and also Newgate. It has an Alderman, Deputy and 16 Common
Council Men, 14 Constables, 15 Scavengers, VVardmote Inquest 44 and 3 Beadles.

26. Bridge Ward without, contains long Southwark, St. Georges Church, St.
Olaves Church Barnaby street, Kent street, Blackman street, St. Mary Overies,
formerly a Priory of Canon Regulars, St. Thomas Church and Hospital for the
Sick and Lame, and the Lock a Lazer House in Kent street; in which were five
Prisons, the Clink, the Compter, the Marshalsea, the Kings Bench, the White
Lion, also Winchester house, Battle bridge, the Bridge house, and Bermondsey
Abbey. It has an Alderman, 3 Deputies, a Bailiff, no Common Council Men, 16
Constables, 6 Scavengers, and VVardmote Inquest 20.

Every Ward has a peculiar Alderman, as an Overseer or Guardian, who has
greater Power than any ordinary Justice of Peace.

CHAP. VIII. The Inns of Court and Chancery, Colleges, Schools, and Hospitals
in and about the City of London.
THE famous City of London may not unfitly be styled an University, for therein
are taught all Liberal Arts and Sciences, for not only Divinity, Civil Law, and
Physic (which are usual in Universities) are read hear, but also the Municipal
or Common Law of the Nation is here taught, and Degrees taken therein, which
can be said of no other City; moreover all sorts of Sciences, as Geography,
Hydrography, the Arts of Navigation and Fortification, Anatomy, Chyrurgery,
Chemistry, Calligraphy, Brachygraphy or Shorthand; the Arts of Riding,
Fencing, Dancing, Art Military, Fireworks, Limning, Painting, Enamelling,
Sculpture, Architecture, Heraldry, all sorts of Music, Arithmetic, Geometry,
Astronomy, Grammar, Rhetoric, Poetry, and any other Science that may
contribute to the accomplishment of an Ingenuous Noble Man, or Gentleman.

The Colleges of Municipal or Common Law, for Professors and Students are
Fourteen, and are still called Inns, the old English word for the Houses of
Noble Men or Bishops. There are 2 Inns of Sergeants, 4 Inns of Court. and 8
Inns of Chancery; the Inns of Chancery were probably so named because there
dwelt such Clerks as did chiefly study the forming of Writs; their Names are
Thavies Inn, begun in the Reign of Edward III. Furnivals Inn, Bernards Inn, New
Inn, Clements Inn, Cliffords Inn, anciently the House of the Lord Clifford,
Staple Inn; belonging to the Merchants of the Staple, and Lyons-Inn, anciently
a common Inn with the sign of the Lion. These were preparatory Colleges for
younger. Students, many being entered here before admitted into the Inns of
Court; now they are generally taken by Attorneys, Sollicitors, and Clerks, who
have Chambers apart, and their Diet in an Hall together, where they are obliged
to appear in long Robes, and black round knit Caps; these Colleges belong all
to some Inns of Court, who send yearly some of their Barristers to read to
these. In each of these Inns of Chancery may be about threescore Persons.

The Inns of Court were so named (as some think) because the Students therein
are to serve the Courts of Judicature; of these there are 4. First the (...)
Temples, heretofore the dwelling of the Knights Templars, and purchased by some
Professors of the Common Law, above 300 years ago; they are called the Inner,
and middle Temple in elation to Essex house, which was a part of the Knights
Templars, Lodgings and called utter or outer Temple, because it is seated
without Temple Bar; the 2 other Inns of Court are Lincoln's Inn, and Greys-Inn,
belonging to the Noble Family of the Greys; In the Reign of K. Henry VI. there
were in each of these above 200 Students.

These Societies are no Corporations, nor have any Judicial Power over their
Members, only certain Orders among themselves, which have by consent the force
of Laws; for lighter Offenses they are only excommoned, or put out of Commons,
not to eat with the rest, and for greater they lose their Chambers. There are
no Lands or Revenues belong to these Societies, nor have they any thing for
defraying the Charges of the House, but what is paid at Admittance, and quit
Rents for their Chambers; the whole Company in each Society may be divided into
4 parts Benchers, Utter Barristers, Inner Barristers and Students. In the 4
Inns of Court there now are reckoned 800 Students. There are 2 more Colleges
called Sergeants Inn where the Common Law Student, when he has arrived to the
highest Degree, has his Lodging and Diet, and are as Doctors in the Civil Law;
out of these are chosen all the Judges of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas.
There is likewise the College of Civilians called Doctors-Commons near St.
Paul's, for the Professors of the Civil Law, where commonly the Judges of the
Arches, Admiralty and Prerogative Court reside, whose Office is not far off;
They judges of Estates fallen by Will, or by Intestates, and are under the
Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canterbury. There is also the College of
Physicians, curiously rebuilt in Warwick lane; and likewise a College of
Heralds who are Messengers of War, and Peace, and skilful in Descents,
Pedigrees, and Coats of Arms.

Gresham College in Bishopsgate-street is another, built by Sir Tho. Gresham,
and a Revenue left to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, for maintaining four Persons
to read within this College, Divinity, Geometry, Astronomy, and Music, with an
allowance to each (besides Lodging) of 50 l. a year; and other Rents are left
to the Mercers Company to find three able Men more, to read Civil Law, Physic,
and Rhetoric, with the same allowance; these several Lectures should be read
in Term time, every day in the Week except Sundays, beginning at nine in the
Morning, and at two Afternoon, to give notice whereof, the Bell in the Steeple
of the Royal Exchange is to ring at those times; they are to read Forenoon in
Latin, and Afternoon in English. The Music Lecture to be read only in English.

There is also Sion College founded by Dr. White near Cripplegate, for the use
of the Clergy of London, and of the Liberties thereof, and some Almshouses for
24 poor People; to perform all which he gave 3000 l. and for the maintenance of
these poor People 120 l. a year for ever, and 40 l. a year for a Sermon in
Latin at the beginning of every Quarter, and a plentiful Dinner for all the
Clergy that shall then meet there. In this College is a fine Library, built by
John Symson, well furnished with Books for Divines. This College felt the rage
of the Fire, but is since rebuilt, A little without the Walls stands another
College or Collegiate House, called the Charter House, formerly a Convent of
Carthusian Monks, called also Suttons Hospital. It consists of a Master or
Governor, a Chaplain, with a Master and Usher to instruct 44 Scholars, besides
80 decayed Gentlemen, Soldiers, or Merchants, who have all a plentiful
maintenance of Diet, Lodging, Clothes, Physic, etc. and live all together in a
Collegiate manner; and the 44 Scholars have all Necessaries whilst they are
here taught, and when fit for the University, there is allowed to each, out of
the Revenues of this College 20 l. yearly for 3 years after they come to the
University; and to others sit for Trades, a considerable sum to bind them
Apprentices. There are all sorts of Officers fit for such a Society, as
Minster, Physician, Apothecary, Steward, Cook, Butler, etc. who have all
competent Salaries. This vast Revenue and Princely Foundation was the sole Gift
of an ordinary Gentleman, Mr. Thomas Sutton born in Lincolnshire, and is of
such, account that by the Kings Letters Patents under the great Seal, diverse
Persons of the highest Dignity and Quality in Church and State, are always the
Overseers, and Regulators of this Society, as the Arch bishop of Canterbury,
the L. Keeper or Chancellor, L. Treasurer, and 13 more.

There are likewise diverse public Schools endowed, as St. Paul's, a Free School
founded by Dr. Collet Dean of St. Paul's for 153 Children to be taught gratis;
for which there was appointed a Master, a Submaster or Usher, and a Chaplain,
with large ^^^pends paid by the Mercers Company. This famous School was also
burnt down, but is now reedified in a more magnificent and commodious Manner.
In 1553. after the crecting of Christ's Hospital out of the Ruins of the Gray
Friars, a great number of poor Children were taken in, and a School appointed
at the charge of the City There are in London diverse other endowed or Free
Schools, as Merchant Tailors, Mercers, etc.

There are likewise several famous Hospitals in this City, as Christ's Hospital,
given by King Edward VI. from whence Children are put forth Apprentices every
year, some of them being instructed in Arithmetic and Navigation, are placed
with Commanders of Ships out of the Mathematical School, founded by K. Charles
H. Then there is St. Bartholomews Hospital for maimed Soldiers, Seamen and
other diseased Persons. St. Thomas's Hospital in Southwark, for sick and
wounded Persons. Also Pridewell Hospital for Vagrants and Indigent Persons. The
Hospital o^ Bethlem for curing Lunaticks and mad Men, has been lately removed,
because of the inconveniency of the Place; and a stately and magnificent
Hospital built for them in Morefields, which cost above 17000 Pound.

CHAP. IX. The Strand, Westminster and Part Adjacent.
IT would too much enlarge this small Volume to give an exact Account of the
City of Westminster and other Parts; we shall therefore only remark some
Particulars; Westminister was formerly called Dorney or Thorney, and was an
Island encompassed by the Thames, overgrown with Friars and Thorns, but now
graced with sltately Houses and Palaces, both public and private. The chief
are the two Palaces of White hall, but the former was lately burnt down by a
sudden Fire, and St. James's to which is adjoined a delightful Park, in which
is a Mall, said to be the best in Europe, it is now the Palace of our Gracious
Queen Anne.

Then there is Westminster Hall, where the Courts of Justice are kept, as the
High Court of Parliament, consisting of the King, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons. The Court of Kings Bench, wherein the King sometimes
sat in Person, in which are handled all the Pleas of the Crown, all things
that concern loss of Life or Member, for them the K. or Qu. is concerned,
because the Life, and Limbs of the Subject belong only to them, so that the
Pleas are here between the King and the Subject. As all Treasons, Felonies,
Breach of Peace, Oppression, Misgovernment, etc. In this Court sit four Judges.
Then there is the Court of Common Pleas, so called (say some) because there are
debated the usual Pleas between one Subject and another; in this Court there
are likewise four Judges. Next is the Court of Exchequer, so called (some
think) from a Checquer wrought Carpet covering the great Table in that Court;
wherein are tried all Causes concerning the Kings Revenue. There is another
called the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster, which takes Cognizance of all
Causes that concern the Reve^ues of that Duchy. Also the high Court of
Chan^ery, which is placed next the King's Bench, as mitigating the Rigor
thereof; this Court is the Womb ^f all our Fundamental Laws; it is called
Chancery as ^ome imagine, because the Judge of this Court sat ^nciently inter
Cancellos, or within Lattices, as the East end of our Churches being separated
per Cancel^os from the Body of the Church, as peculiarly belonging to the
Priest, were thence called Chancels; this Court grants Writs according to
Equity or Consci^nce. Out of which issue Summons for Parliaments, ^dicts,
Proclamations, Letters Patents, Treaties, ^eagues with Foreign Princes, etc.
There is likewise ^he Court of Admiralty, wherein all matters concern^ng the
Sea are determined by the Civil Law, because ^he Sea is without the Limits of
the Common Law, ^ow kept at Wallingford-House.

The next thing considerable is the Collegiate Church called Westminster-Abby,
or St. Peter's. It was ^aised out of the ruins of a Temple formerly dedicated to
Apollo; wherein there is King Henry VII's Chapel, a magnificent and curious
Edifice; beautified with the stately Tombs of the Kings and Queens of England,
and many other Persons of Honor and Renown are buried in this Church; and here
the Kings of England are commonly crowned.

Then there is Somerset House, a large and stately ^tructure belonging to the
King, Northumberland house York-house now turned into Streets and Buildings,
the new Exchange stored with variety of Shops and Goods; the Statue of K.
Charles I. lately erected at Charing cross, Salisbury-house now a fine Street,
the Savoy, Arundel-house, Bedford-house, and diverse other Places worth
observing. The Limits of Westminster end at Temple Bar and there the bounds of
London begin. Westminfter is so mightily enlarged by the building of St.
James's Fields and the adjaceat Places into stately large Streets, that it is
thought to be as big again as formerly.

To conclude, London is the Epitome of England, the Seat of the British
Empire, the Chamber of the King, the chiefest Emporium or Town of Trade in the
World, and to describe all things in it worthy to be known, would make a
Volume. The City of London with the Suburbs and parts adjacent is from
Lime-house to the end of Tothill street in Westminster, East and West above
7500 Geometrical Paces, or 7 English Miles and an half, and from the further
end of Blackman-street in Southwark to the end of Shoreditch North and South,
2500 Paces or two Miles and an half.

Historical Remarks OF LONDON and WESTMINSTER. PART II.
ENgland, in the time of the Saxons, was divided into an Heptarchy, or seven
Kingdoms, in the year of Christ 527. One of these Kingdoms contained Essex and
Middlesex, and continued about 281 years, during the Reign of 14 Kings. The
third of whom was Sebert, who built the Cathedral of St. Paul, which had
formerly been the Temple of Diana. The ninth King was Sebba, who after thirty
years peaceable Reign relinquished the Crown, and took upon him a Religions
Habit in the Monastery of St. Paul, where dying, his Body was intombed in a
Coffi^ of Gray Marble, and stood in the North Wall of the Chancel of the
Church, till the Fire in 1666.

About 872. the Danes invaded this Kingdom, and got into London, making great
spoil; upon which King Elfred, who then reigned, compounded with them, allowing
them a great quantity of Land to secure the rest from Plunder and Ruin; for we
find these words in the end of the Laws published by this King, Let the Bounds
of our Dominion stretch from the River Thames, and from thence to the Vale of
Lea, even unto the head of the same Water, and so forth straight unto Bedford,
and finally going along by the River of Ouse, let them end at Watling-street.
But the Danes ufurped daily upon other places, so that King Elfred was many
times forced to hide himself in the Fens and Marshes, and with his small
Company to live by Fishing, Fowling, and Hunting Wild Beasts for Food; and
being one time entertained alone in a Country man's house, disguised in very
mean attire, as he was sitting by the Fire, a Cake was baking on the Hearth
before him, but the King being intent in trimming his Bow and Arrows, the
Country woman coming in, and seeing the Cake burn, she furiously took the Bow
from him, and checking him as her Slave, said, Thou Fellow, do thou see the
Bread burn before thy Face, and will thou not turn it, and yet may be glad
to eat it before it be half baked? Little suspecting him to be the man that
used to be treated with more dainty Food.

This King, more minding the Benefit of his Subjects than the Majesty of State
disguised himself in the habit of a common Fiddler, and went in Person to the
Danes Camp, who lay wallowing in Wantonuess and Security; and being a skilful
Musician, and a Poet he addded his Voice thereto; singing Songs of the Valor
of the Danes, whereby he had admittance to the Company and Banquets of their
chief Commanders and Princes; and observing their carelessness, and
understanding their Designs, he returns to his poor disconsolate Soldiers, and
tells them how easy it was to surprise their Enemies, and thereby recover
their ruined Country: who immediately fell upon the Danes in their Camp, and
made a very great slaughter; and pursuing their Victory, they beat them in all
Places; and at last followed them to London, from whence, all the Danes fled.
The Inhabitants were very glad to see the Face of their King, and he restored
the City to its former Liberty and Splendour again, the Danes making their
escape by shipping into France.

In 982 the Danes again invade England, and destroy all Places near the Shore.
Etheldred was then King, whose elder Brother (called the Martyr) was
treacherously murdered by his Mother-in-Law; for the King being a hunting in
the Isle of Purbeck, went alone out of kindness to (...) his Mother-in-Law and
Brother, who dwelt hard by, where this cruel Woman, out of ambition to bring
her Son to the Crown, caused one to run him into the back with a Knife, as he
was drinking a Glass of Wine on Horseback at his departing, who feeling himself
hurt, set spurs to his Horse, thinking to get to his Company, but the Wound
being mortal, and he fainting through loss of Blood fell from his Horse; and
one Foot being entangled in the Stirrup, he was dragged up and down through the
Woods, and afterward found dead, and was buried at the Minster in Shaftsbury.
Etheldred was then crowned King by Dunstan Arch Bishop of Canterbury, who at
his Coronation, denounced the wrath of God against him in these Words; Because,
says he, thou have aspired to the Crown by the death of thy Brother, whom thy
Mother has murdered, therefore hear the Word of the Lord; The Sword shall not
depart from thy House, but shall furiously rage all the days of thy Life,
killing all thy Seed, till such time as thy Kingdom shall be given to a People,
whose Customs and Language the Nation thou now governest, know not. Neither
shall thy sin, the sin of thy Mother, nor the sins of those men who were
Partakers of her Councils, and Instruments of her wicked Designs, be expiated
and appeased, but by long and most severe Vengeance. Which Prediction was
seconded by Prodigies; for it is said that a Cloud of Blood and Fire appeared
after his Coronation, and miserable Calamities fell upon him and his House.
This King was neither forward nor fortunate in any of his undertakings, so that
he was called, The Vuready; he spent his Youth in debauchery, his middle Age in
carelessness, and neglect of his Government, maintaining Dissentions amongst his
own Subjects, and his latter end in resisting the blood thirsty Danes, who made
continual Destruction of his People and Country, who had been quiet for 22
years before, so all these calamities were imputed to the Misgovernment of this
unhappy Prince.

The Danes perceiving the Hearts of the Subjects to be drawn from their
Sovereign, landed in Ker^ with seven Ships, spoiling the Country for eleven
years together, till at last the King, by advice of his Lords, paid them ten
thousand Pounds, to depart the Realm. This served for the present, but they
returned year after year, and still obliged the King to give them more Money,
till at last it came to forty thousand Pound a year, which emptied the Land of
all the Coin, and the English were forced to plough, and sow while the Danes
sat idle, and eat the fruit of their Labors, abusing also their Wives and
Daughters, whereupon they were called Lord Danes, (now Lurdains, signifying a
Lazy Lubber.)

In this distressed State, the King thought of this expedient to be rid of
them: He sent out Commissions into every City in his Dominions that at an
appointed time they should Massacre all the Danes that were amongst them. The
Day was Novem. 13, 1002 his Command was accordingly performed, and that with
such Rigor, that in Oxford the fearful Danes for refuge, took into the Church
of St. Frideswide, as a Sanctuary of venerable Antiquity; but they in their
fury, regarding neither Place nor Person, set the Church on fire, wherein many
Danes were burnt, with diverse rich Ornaments, and the Library utterly defaced.

At which time, it is said, King Etheldred himself was in Oxford, and had
summoned a Parliament both of English and Danes to meet there, and afterward
repaired the Ruins the fire had made. In this Masfacre the Lady Gunhild Sister
to the King of Denmark, and a continual Friend to the English, with her Husband
and Son were slain. Upon the News of this Massacre King Swain with a great Navy
of Danes, lands in several parts in England, and carries all before him: and
other Danes with 94 ships, sailed up the River of Thames, and besieged London,
but the Citizens made such valiant Resistance, that they forced them to retire:
however they fell severely upon Essex, Kent, Sussex, and Hampshire. These
Calamities were seconded with others as fearful; for about this time the City
was destroyed by Fire, whose beauty then chiefly extended from Ludgate
Westward; for that within the Walls, where the heart of the City now is, was
then neither beautiful nor orderly built. To add to these Miseries a dreadful
Sickness raged in London, and most parts of England, hitherto anknown in this
Kingdom, being a burning Fever, and the bloody Flux; there was also great
scarcity, by reason of the Murrain, and Death of all sorts of Cattle. All these
Judgments were imputed to the King, and his Abettors, Dunstan prophesying
further woes to the Land after his death, though the King made great
lamentation for the Murder of his Brother K. Edward, for which his Mother beat
him so violently with a wax Taper, which stood before her, that he could never
after well endure the sight of a Taper.

In 1013 K. Swain came again from Denmark, landing a great number of Men in the
River Humber, and conquered all before him till he came to London, and
presently besieged King Etheldred within it, Swain doubted not of carrying the
City, but the Citizens considering they had their King with them, and that
London was the Eye of the Land, grew very courageous, beating the Danes from
the Walls, and then sallying out slew them on heaps, so that King Swain himself
was in great danger, had he not desperately ran through the midst of his
Enemies Swords, and by flight escaped, marching day and night in great fear,
till he had got to Bath; where Ethelmere Earl of Devonshire, and his people
submitted to him; but this last overthrow, and want of Victuals, caused him
after he had received a sum of Money, to hasten into Denmark, but returning
with greater Strength, he met with the English again, and utterly defeated
them, by reason of the treachery of some English who revolted to the Danes. So
that the whole Kingdom, yea Loudon it self, was forced to comply with the
calamity of the Times, wherewith Etheldred, being utterly dejected, he sent his
Wife Emma, and his two Sons to his Brother Richard Duke of Normandy; and went
himself in one of his Ships to the Isle of Wight, and afterward to Normandy to
his Brother, leaving the Danes sole Lords and Masters of the Realm.

A while after King Swain coming to St. Edmundbury in Suffolk, threatened to
burn down the Church, unless they would give him a sum of Money (having done
the like in several other Places) which the Iuhabitants refusing to pay, he
went to disturb the Bones of St. Edmund, so called; which while he was doing,
he suddenly cried out (says the Historian) that, He was struck by St. Edmund
with a Sword, being then in the midst of his Nobles, and no man seeing from
whose hand it came; and so with great Horror he died three days after, and the
Danes advanced Ganutus his Son to the Throne.

Soon after King Etheldred died also, and his third Son called Edmund Ironside
(of his enduring Labor) succeeded: A great part of the English both feared and
favored Canutus, especially the Clergy, who at Southampton swore fealty to
him. But the Londoners stood firm to Prince Edmund, and elected him King. In
revenge whereof Canutus, who had besieged the City before the death of King
Etheldred, caused his Ships to be towed up the Thames to the East side of the
Bridge, and from the River with a deep Trench encompassed the City, shutting up
all the Passages in or out of it. But the coming of their new King Edmund to
their assistance did much encourage them, and disheartened the Danes, so that
they brake up the Seige, King Edmnnd having sent a Challenge to Canutus to
fight him in single Combat; which he neither accepted, nor staid at London, but
sailed down the Thames to the Isle of Sh^ppey, where he wintred with his Navy.
and in the Spring assailed the West of England, where the Danes were routed.
After this, at a place called Sherostan in Worcestershire, another Battle was
fought, where the Danes were like again to have been discomfited; which Edrick
an English Man perceiving, he cut off the Head of a Soldier, whose name was
Osmearus, who was like King Edmund both in Hair and Countenance, and shaking
his bloody Sword with the gasping Head, cried out to the English Army, Fly
wrethes, fly, and get away, for your King is slain, behold here is his Head,
therefore seek now to save your own Lives. Edmund having notice of this
treacherous Stratagem, hastened to show himself, whose sight so encouraged his
Men, that they had got a total Victory, if night had not prevented them The
Soldiers bent their Bows against Dake Edrick, and had shot him to death, had he
not excused the Fact, as being mistaken in the Countenance of the Man, and
desirous to save the blood of the English: upon which false Pretense he was
taken into favor again.

Three days after both Armies prepared again for Battle, yet stood still
without skirmishing, only refreshing their tired Bodies, and burying those that
were slain in the two days before. The night following nutus brake up his Camp,
and marched toward London, he having great displeasure against the Citizens,
and desiring to conquer that place, which was already besieged by the Danish
Ships. Next morning the Sentinels gave notice to King Edm^nd, who was preparing
to Battle, that his Enemies were marched away: Who followed them with all speed
to London, where with little difficulty he raised the Siege, and entered the
City triumphantly.

The Danes being thus discomfited, Edmund taking advantage of their fear,
routed them two days after at Brainford, though in passing the Thames many of
his Men were drowned. Upon this Ioss, the Traitor Edrick fearing the Ruin of
the Danes persuaded his Brother in Law King Edmund to come to a Truce with
Canutus, who kept it but till he had increased his Forces, and then another
Battle was fought, wherein it is reported Canutus lost 4500 Men, and King
Edmund only 600. But Canutus a while after recruiting his Army, Edmund marched
toward him, who lay at Ashdown 3 Miles from Saffron Walden in Essex, where at
first the Victory seemed doubtful, till the Danes began to retreat; which the
ever traitorous Edrick perceiving, he with all his Forces revolted to the
Danes, whereby they got the day, and the poor betrayed English were utterly
overthrown. There were slain of Edmund's Nobility, Duke Alfred, Duke Godwin,
Duke Athelward, Duke Athelwin, and Earl, Vrchil, with Cadnoth Bishop of
Lincoln, and Wolsey Abbot of Ramsey, and several other of the Clergy, who came
thither to pray for the good success of King Edm^nd and his Army. There are
some signs of this Battle in that Field to this very day, diverse small hills
still ^emaining there, from whence have been dug the Bones of Men, Armor,
and he chains of Horses Bridles.

King Edmund being thus treacherbusly forced to quit the Field, went on Foot to
Gloucester with a very small Army, leaving Canutus flushed with Victory, who
marched to London, and forced the City to submit to him, with many other great
Towns. After which he followed Edmund into the West, who had again raised a
considerable Army, resolving at once to try the utmost of his fortune. The
Armies met with a full Resolution to establish the Title of the one, by the
ruin of the other. But a Captain in King Edmund's Army proposed, that for
preventing Bloodshed, the two Kings only should fight in single Combat, it
chiefly concerning them; or else divide the Kingdom between them. This was
agreed to and the two Kings, in sight of both Armies, went into a small Island
called, Alney near Gloucester, encompassed with the River Severn being
completely armed, they first assaulted each other very stoutly on Horseback'
and afterward on foot. But Edmund was strong and fought for a Kingdom^ Canutus
for Honor; And the Combat seemed equal, till Canutus having received a
dangerous Wound, and finding himself over matched, desired to treat, and spoke
thus to Edmund, What necessity is there (most valiant Prince) that we for
obtaining a Title, should thus endanger our Lives; it were better to lay Malice
and our Armor aside, and condescend to a loving Agreement; let us therefore
become sworn Brothers, and divide the Kingdom between us, and keep such Amity,
that we may both use the others share as his own, so shall this Land be
peaceably governed, and we jointly assist each other in necessity. Upon this
Speech they both cast down their Swords, and embraced as Friends to the great
joy of both Armies, who stood w^vering before, betwixt hope and fear, expecting
their own fortunes according to the success of their Champions. Thus was the
Kingdom divided betwixt these two Princes. Edmund enjoying the West part toward
the Coast of France and Canutus the rest And thus was the Saxon Monarchy come
to its ^^st Period, and the tottering Crown was soon Severn, and being
completely armed, they first assaulted each other very stoutly on Horseback,
and afterward on Foot. But Edmund was strong, and fought for a Kingdom, Canutus
for Honor: and the Combat seemed indifferent equal, till Canutus having
received a dangerous wound, and finding himself overmatched in strength,
desired to treat, and spoke thus to Edmund.

What necessity is there (most valiant Prince) that we, for obtaining a title,
should thus endanger our lives. It were better to lay Malice and our Armor
aside, and condescend to a loving Agreement, let us now therefore become Sworn
Brothers, and divide the Kingdom between us, and keep such amity, that we may
both use the others share as if it were his own, so shall this Land be
peaceably governed, and we jointly assist each others necessity.

Upon this Speech they both cast down their Swords, and embraced as Friends, to
the great joy, and rejoicing of both Armies, who stood doubtfully wavering
before, betwixt hope and fear, as expecting their own fortunes according to the
success of their Champions. Thus was the kingdom divided between these two
Princes, Edmund enjoying the West part toward the Coast of France, and Canutus
the rest. And thus was the Saxon Monarchy come to its last period, and the
tottering Crown was soon after torn from Edmunds head: For Duke Edrick, a
Traitor in grain, being much in favor with both Kings, yet to oblige Canutus,
contrived the death of renowned Edmund, who going into a place of casement, was
suddenly thrust from under the Vault into the body with a sharp Spear; which
being done, the Villain Edrick cut off his Sovereigns head, and presented it to
Canutus with this flattering salutation, All hail thou now sole Monarch of
England, for here behold the head of thy Copartner, which for thy sake I have
adventured to cut off.

Canutus, though ambitious enough of Sovereignty, yet being of a Princely
temper, he was much astonished at this base and treacherous Act, and vowed,
That in reward of that Service the Bringers own head should be advanced above
all the Peers of his Kingdom. Which high honor, while this prodigious wretch
greedily expected (and indeed for some time, says our Author, he had some show
of favor from the King) he suddenly by the Kings command had his head struck
off, and placed upon the highest Gate of London, to overlook that great City.

Canutus being possessed of half the Kingdom by composition with Edmund, now
after his death seized the whole, and that all things, as was pretended, might
proceed with Justice and Concord, he called a Council of the English Nobility
at London, wherein it was demanded, whether in the Agreement between Edmund and
him, any Claim or Title to the Crown had been reserved for King Edmunds
Brethren, or his Sons. The English, who had paid dear for resisting the Dane
hitherto, and being afraid to provoke him, absolutely answered, No. And knowing
that Princes are generally appeased with flattery, they offered their Swords
against any such Claims, and took themselves the Oath of Allegiance to Canutus,
who being a very wise and Politic Prince, had never the better opinion of them
for their fawning; rightfully judging, that those who were false to their
natural Prince, would never be true to him, nor his posterity, who were
Foreigners.

Canutus being thus freed from all his Opposites, was Crowned King of England
at London, in 1017. by Elstane Archbishop of Canterbury, being the second King
of Denmark of that name, and the first of England, and the 34. Monarch of this
Land.

King Canutus dying, left the Kingdom of Norway to his eldest Son Swain, and
England to his youngest, called Hardyknute, who being at that time in Denmark,
Harold his elder Brother by a former wife, taking advantage of his absence,
laid claim to the Crown, and enjoyed it four years, having neither wife nor
child.

After his death the English as well as Danes who had been for Harold, thought
best to send for Hardyknute and offer him the Crown; who soon after came to
London in great state, and was there proclaimed King of England, and crowned.
He spent his Reign in doing nothing but doing ill. For no sooner had he power
to command, but he ordered the body of his Brother the deceased King Harold to
be taken out of his Grave, and disgracefully thrown into the River Thames,
where it remained till a Fisherman found it, and buried it in the Churchyard of
S. Clement, commonly called St. Clement Danes, because, say some, it was the
burying-place for that Nation.

This Hardyknute altogether neglected his Government, delighting in nothing but
eating and drinking to excess, having his Tables spread with fresh Victuals
four times every day, which caused all manner of Debauchery to reign among his
Subjects by his evil example, since it is natural for people to imitate the
Vices of their Sovereign. He died suddenly at the celebration of a Marriage at
Lambeth near London: for while he was revelling and carousing in the midst of
his Cups, he suddenly fell down, without speech or breath: whose loss was
little lamented by reason of his Riot and Excess, and the severe Taxes he laid
upon the People for maintaining his extravagancies; yea, so far were any from
bewailing him, that in remembrance of their Freedom from the Danish yoke, he
being the last King of the Danes, the common people for a long time after,
celebrated the day of his death, which was the eighth of June, with open
Pastimes in the Streets (as the Romans formerly kept their Fugalia, for chasing
out their Kings) which time is called Hocktide, or Heuxtide, signifying a time
of Scorning and Contempt, which fell upon the Danes by his death.

Edward the third of that name before the Conquest, half-brother to the
deceased Hardy-Canute, and Son to King Ethelred by Queen Emma his wife,
succeeded him, and was called Edward the Confessor, between whom and Godwin
Earl of Kent, there happened such differences, that they raised Forces against
each other, and fitted out diverse Ships. King Edward appointed sixty Ships for
a Guard to the Thames mouth: but Godwin being a man of very great Authority,
solicited the People of Kent, Sussex, and Surrey to his aid, and entering the
Thames with his Ships, invited the Londoners to join with him, which they
accordingly did, though King Edward were in the City; so that without
resistance, his Navy came up with the Tide to the South end of London Bridge,
and a very great Army attended to aid him on Southwark side. The Nobility
observing the People to be divided into Parties, and one English man ready to
destroy another, they so prevailed with King Edward and Godwin, that they made
a Reconciliation between them, and Pledges were delivered for the true
performance of the Agreement.

About this time, that is, in 1047. there fell a very great Snow in January,
which covered the ground to the middle of March, so that most of the Cattle and
Fowl perished; and the Year following a strange and terrible Earthquake
happened, which seemed to rend the earth asunder, and such Lightnings withal,
as burnt up the Corn ^rowing in the Fields, whereby an extraordinary Dearth and
Fa^ine followed.

In the Year 1066. William the Conqueror landed at Pemsey in Sussex, and
immediately sent a Messenger to King Harold at London, whereby he claimed no
less than the Crown of England, upon pretense of a Donation from King Edward
deceased: and required that Harold should be a Vassal to him. The Messenger
urged the same with so much confidence, that Harold in his fury could hardly
forbear (though against the Law of Arms) to lay violent hands on the
Ambassador. And thereupon he returns a threatening Message to William to depart
immediately back into Normandy at his utmost peril. He then proceeds to muster
his Forces, which were not so many as he expected, though diverse Noblemen,
Gentlemen, and others, who were inflamed with the love of the Rights and
Liberties of their Native Country, joined with him to keep out this dangerous
Foreigner.

However King Harold with an undaunted courage led his men into Sussex, against
the earnest entreaty of his Mother, who endeavored to hinder him, and pitching
his Tents in a large fair Plain, not above seven miles from the Enemy, he sent
forth his Spies for discovery, who being taken by Duke William, he ordered that
they should view all his Tents, and then sent them safely back to Harold. They
commended Williams clemency, and his great strength, but told Harold, that they
thought all his Army were Priests, for their Beards were all shaved, whereas
the use of the English was then to reserve the hair of the upper lip without
cutting.

King Harold replied, they were no Priests, but men of great courage and
valor, to his knowledge^ he having been formerly in that Country. Harold was
thereupon persuaded not to venture himself in the Battle, but to go on to levy
more Soldiers. And his Brother told him that William charged him that he had
taken an Oath to settle him in the Throne; and, said he, Thou know what Oath
thine own mouth has made unto William, if it were lawful, and thou tookest it
willingly, withdraw thy self out of the Field, lest for thy great sin, the
whole Army be destroyed, for there is no power that can resist God. But Harold
reproved his Brother for his freedom, and disdainfully undervalued the strength
of the Normans, and seemed to conceive that nothing which he did being a
private man, could now bind him when he was a Prince.

Duke William being now come into the Field, and both Armies facing each other,
as ready for Battle; to spare the effusion of Christian blood, he sent a Monk
as a Mediator for Peace, offering Harold either to resign the Kingdom to
himself, and acknowledge him his Sovereign, or to try the quarrel in single
Battle, in the sight of both Armies: or lastly, to stand to the Arbitrament of
the Pope, who should wear the English Crown. But Harold being destinated to
destruction, would neither accept the counsels of his Friends, nor the offers
of his Enemies, but referred the decision to Heaven, saying, That it should be
tried the next day with more Swords than one.

Next day was the 14 of October, which upon a credulous Error he always held
to be fortunate to him, it being his Birthday, and therefore he greatly
desired to engage in fight. His Soldiers likewise dreaming of nothing but
Spoil, and Victory, and that their heads should be crowned with Laurel, spent
the preceding night in all manner of Jollity, Banqueting, Revelling, and
Noise: whereas on the contrary, the Normans wisely and seriously considering
the great importance of the work they were to engage in, applied themselves to
their Prayers and Vows for the safety of their Army, and its victorious
suc^ess. And in the morning as soon as it was light, they were all in Battle
Array, and ready prepared to fight.

Harold likewise with all expedition marshalled his Soldiers, placing the
Kentish men in the Van (according to an ancient custom) with their heavy Axes
and Halberts, the Londoners and the Middlesex men were in that Squadron which
he himself and his Brother led.

The Normans advancing forward, discharged a fierce Volley of Arrows like a
Tempestuous Hail, which was a kind of Weapon the English never understood, and
therefore thought their Enemies had been in the midst of them already. Soon
after the Battle began in earnest. King Harold, like an expert General, had
placed his men in so firm a Body, that no force of the Normans could disorder
their Ranks, till Duke William used a stratagem, commanding his men to sound a
Retreat, and counterfeit flight, though he still kept them in good order. The
English supposing the Normans to have been fled, and themselves Masters of the
Field, carelessly broke their ranks, when suddenly the Normans came on again,
and fell upon them before they could put themselves in a posture of defense,
whereby multitudes of them were slain on every side, not being able to make
head again.

Yet did not the English leave the Field, but resolved rather to maintain their
honor in Arms, and casting themselves into a Round, they preferred dying for
their Country, rather than to forsake the Standard of their King, and thereupon
encouraging one another, they made resistance for a long time, but showers of
Arrows, like a mighty storm, falling among them, one of them most fatally, and
unhappily for the English Nation, wounded King Harold into the Brains through
the left Eye; so that falling from his Horse, he was slain under his own
Standard, and an Ambush of Horsemen cut many others to pieces.

Duke William fought so valiantly, that he had this day three Horses slain
under him, and King Harold showed no less courage, in killing many Normans with
his own hands. The Mother of Harold named Thyra, offered a great sum of money
for the Kings body, which falling among such a multitude (it being reckoned
that there died about threescore thousand men that day) it could by no means be
found, for it was despoiled of all its Royal Ornaments by the plundering
Soldiers: so that King Harold lying stripped, wounded, bemangled, and gored in
his blood, could not be known from another man, till a Lady named Editha was
sent for, who for her extraordinary beauty was called Swans Neck; she having
been very familiar with him before he was King, knew some secret mark in his
body, by which she discovered him. After which the Duke freely delivered it to
his Mother, and it was buried in Waltham Abbey.

This Battle was fought October 14. 1066. a doleful day of destruction to the
English, when the Royal blood of the Saxons perished, who first divided this
Land into seven Kingdoms, and afterward made of them one glorious Monarchy,
not inferior to any in Europe; and whose Kings for Valor and Magnanimity,
were ranked with the greatest in the World. But the overruling providence of
Heaven, which sets up and pulls down at pleasure, was pleased at this time, for
the sins of the English, or some other cause unknown to us, to put the Scepter
into the hands of another Family, and another Nation.

Morcar and Edwin, Brethren to the unfortunate Queen, escaped by night out of
the R^^le, and came to London, where consulting with the rest of the Lords,
they began to revive their hopes, and posted Messengers from thence to raise
new Forces. And because the English were struck into a dreadful astonishment at
the news of this great ^oss, they to keep them from despair, sent them Word,
That the chance of War was uncertain, the number of the English yet many, and
there were Commanders enough left to try another Battle. Alfred Archbishop of
York being President of the Assembly, very courageously and prudently advised,
that they should immediately proclaim and crown Edgar Atheling the true Heir
for their King; to which the Londoners and diverse Sea Captains agreed. But the
Queens brethren, and likewise the Earls of Yorkshire and Cheshire, being
themselves ^mbitious of the Crown, though their Country was in such a
deplorable condition, hindered this wise and noble design.

In the twentieth Year of William the Conque^our, there happened so great a
Fire in London, that from the West Gate to the East, it consumed Houses and
Churches all the way, and among the ^est St. Paul's, as much as was combustible,
was ^urnt to ashes, and most of the principal Cities in England were much
damaged by Fire. Other great calamities likewise happened, as Burning Fevers,
Murrains upon Cattle, abundance of Rain, and Water-flouds, insomuch that the
Hills seemed to ^e softened to the very foundation, and with their ^all
overwhelmed many Villages; there was likewise such a dearth in London and
England that ^en eat Horses, Cats, Dogs, and man's flesh.

In 1077. upon Palm Sunday about Noon a bla^ing Star appeared nigh the Sun;
yea, which is ^^range, tame Fowls, such as Hens, Geese, Pea^cks, and the like,
fled into Forests, and Woods, beca^^^ wild. There was likewise a great Forced,
which lasted from the middle of November to the midst of March. There was also
a great Wind on Christmas day, accompanied with a terrible Earthquake.

This King William seized all the Lands between Barnee and London-stone, which
belonged to the Abbey of St. Albans; and also all the Treasure, Chalices, and
Shrines of all the Abbeys and Monasteries in England. He likewise laid great
Taxes upon the Land, and caused an exact Survey to be taken of the whole
Kingdom: so that he knew the value of all the Rents and Profits of the Lands,
and likewise of all Cities, Towns, Villages, Hamlets, Monasteries, and
Religious Houses causing all the People in England to be numbered and their
names taken, with an account what every one could spend in the Year. After
which be exacted fix shillings upon every hide of Land which amounted to a vast
sum of money. The Book which contained this Actual Survey was called by the
English Doomsday-book, and is kep^ to this day in the Kings Exchequer at
Westminster. Yet he was kind to the Londoners, suffering then to enjoy their
Rights and Privileges which the had in Edward the Confessors time, by the
procurement of William Bishop of London, who wa^ buried in St. Paul's Church,
and this Epitaph p^^ upon his Gravestone in Latin and English.

To William, a man famous in wisdom, and holiness of life, who first with St.
Edward the King and Confessor being familiar, of late preferred to be Bishop of
London, and not long after (for his prudence an^ sincere fidelity) admitted to
be of Council with (...) most victorious Prince William King of England of that
name the first, who obtained of the same, gre^ and large Privileges to this
famous City. The Sen^ and Citizens of London, of him having well deser^ave made
this. He continued Bishop twenty Years, and died in the Year after Christ's
Nativity. 1070.

These Marble Monuments to thee
Thy Citizens assign,
Rewards, O Father, far unfit
To those deserts of thine;
Thee unto them a faithful Friend
Thy London People found,
And to this Town (of no small weight)
A stay both sure and sound,
Their Liberties restored to them,
By means of thee have been.
Their public weal by means of thee
Large Gifts have felt and found,
The Riches, Stock, and Beauty brave,
One hour has them suppressed,
Yet these thy Virtues and good deeds,
With us for ever rest.
The Lord Mayor of London, and Aldermen, upon the day of his coming into his
Office, used ^ll of late days, to walk round the Gravestone ^f this Bishop, in
remembrance of their former Privileges obtained by him. And there was ^n
Inscription fastened to a Pillar near his Grave, ^ntituled, The Recital of a
most worthy Prelates Re^embrance, which was erected at the charge of Sir Edward
Barkham Lord Mayor, 1622. which speaks thus to the Walkers in S. Paul's.

Walkers, whosoever you be.
If it prove your chance to see,
Upon a solemn Scarlet day,
The City Senate pass this way,
Their grateful memory to show,
Which they the Reverend ashes owe,
Of Bishop Norman, here inhum'd,
By which this City has assumed
Large Privileges; those obtained
By him when Conqueror William reigned.
This being by Barkhams thank full mind renewed,
Call it The Monument of Gratitude.
King William brought with him from Roan in Normandy, certain Jews whose
posterity inhabiting in London, and several other chief Cities; they were
accused that they used to steal Christian male children from their Neighbors,
which they would circumcise, crown with thorns, whip, torture, and crucify, in
mockery, despite, and scor^ of our Lord Jesus Christ.

William Rufus his Son appointed a Disputation to be held in London between the
Christians, and the Jews,; but before the day came the Jew^ brought the King a
present, to the end they might be heard impartially; The K. received their
gift, encouraging them to quit themselves like men^ and swore by S. Lukes face
(his usual Oath) The^ of they prevailed in Disputation, he would himself tur^
Jew and be of their Religion. A young Jew was as that time converted to the
Christian Faith, whose father being much troubled at it, he presented the King
with threescore Marks entreating him t^ persuade his son to return to his
Judaisin, where upon the King sent for his son, and commande^ him without more
ado to return to the Religion of his Nation. But the young man answered, H^
wondered His Majesty would use such words, for being a Christian, he should
rather persuade him to Christi^nity, with which answer the King was so
confour^ded that he commanded the young man out of h^ presence; But his father
finding the King could do no good upon his son, required his money a^ gain; Nay
(says the King) I have taken pains enough for it, and yet that thou may see
how kindly I will deal, you shall have one half, and you cannot in conscience
deny me the other half, and so dismissed him; And now we are Treating of the
Jews, it may not be amiss to add all at once, what we read concerning them in
this City.

In the year 1235. the 19 of H. 3. seven Jews were brought before the King at
Westminster, who had stolen a Boy, and kept him private from the sight of any,
but their own Nation for a whole year, and had circumcised him; intending also
to have crucified him at the solemnity of Easter, as they themselves confessed
before the K. upon which they were convicted, and their bodies and goods
remained at the Kings pleasure. In the 39 of this K. Nov. 22. 102 Jews were
brought from Lincoln to Westminster, and there accused for crucifying a child
of 8 years old, named Hugh. These Jews were upon examination sent to the Tower
of London; the murder being discovered by the diligent search of the Mother of
the child; Upon which eighteen of them were hanged and the other remained long
in Prison.

In the Reign of Henry 2. the number of the Jews throughout England was very
great, yet whereforever they dwelt, they were commanded not to bury their dead
any where but in London, which being many times inconvenient to bring dead
bodies from remote Places, the K. gave them liberty to bury in the same place
where they lived. In 1189. at the Coronation of R. 1. Son of H. 2. at
Westminster, a great disaster befell the Jews, for King Richard not favoring
them as his Father had done; had given a strict charge that no Jew should be
spectator of the solemnity, yet several Jews (as though it had been the
Crowning of King Herod) would needs be pressing in; and the Officers appointed
refusing they should enter; there arose a Quarrel which proceeded from words to
blows, whereby many Jews were hurt, and some slain; and thereupon a report was
suddenly spread abroad, that the King had commanded to have all the Jews
destroyed; upon which it is incredible what rifling there was in an instant, of
the Jews Houses, and cutting their throats, and though the King fignified by
public Declaration, that he was highly displeased with what was done, yet
there was no quieting of the multitude till next day; and many of the Mutineers
were afterward punished by the Law.

In the Reign of King John 1202. Great sums of money were exacted, and gathered
from the Jews, among whom there was one who would not pay the money charged
upon him till the King caused one of his great Teeth to be pulled out every day
for seven days together, upon which he was at last compelled to give the King
Ten Thousand Marks of silver, that no more might, be pulled out since he had
but one left in his head.

K. Henry 3. being very profuse, was brought so low for want of money that he
was forced to borrow, nay almost beg it of his Subjects; but the Jews who were
ever exposed to his will, felt the weight of his necessities; and one Abraham a
Jew in London, being found a Delinquent, was constrained to redeem himself for
700 Marks. And Aaron another Jew protested, the K since his last being in
France had taken from him at several times 30000 Marks of Silven, beside 200
Marks of Gold given to the Queen.

At another time this King Henry squeezed a sum out of the Jews, and then let
them out to farm to his brother Richard, for a considerable sum which he paid
him, and he was to make what more of them he could; He likewise built a Church
for Converted Jews in London; It happened about this time that a Jew fell into
an House of Office, upon Saturday, and would not be taken out that day because
it was the Jews Sabbath; Whereupon the Earl of Gloucester said, He should not
then be taken out on the Sunday, because it was the Christian Sabbath; So that
when Monday came, he was taken out dead.

In the 7. of Edward the First, the Jews at Northampton, crucified a Christian
Boy upon Goodfryday, but did not thoroughly kill him; for which fact many Jews
at London, were, after Easter, drawn at the horse tails, and hanged; The same
year King Edward called in all the old money, and coined new, because it had
been much clipped and defaced by the Jews, for which 297 were at one time
executed in London. And in the eighteenth year of his Reign all the Jews were
banished out of London and England, there being at that time above fifteen
thousand in the kingdom, who had all their Goods seized and confiscate to the
Kings use, and only so much money left them as would bear their charges out of
the kingdom. But before this he ordained that the Jews should wear a Mark or
Cognizance upon their upper Garments, whereby to be known, and restrained their
excessive taking of Usury.

In the Year 1656. several Proposals were made to Oliver Cromwell by Manasseh
Ben Israel a Jewish Merchant, in behalf of the Hebrew Nation, for their free
admission to trade, and exercise their Religion in England; and a Conference
was held about it several days at Whitehall by diverse Members of the Council,
and certain Ministers of the most eminent then in esteem, and many arguments
were urged, some for, and others against their admission; but those that were
against it, so far prevailed, that the Proposals took no effect.

And so much concerning the Jews. To return now to the series of the Story,
King William Rufus was taxed with great Prodigality, because when his
Chamberlain brought him a new pair of Hose, he asked what they cost, and was
told three shillings: Away base Fellow, quoth he, are these beseeming a King?
Bring me a pair of a Mark. His Chamberlain went, and bringing him another pair,
not so good as the former, and telling him they cost a Mark, I marry, (says
the King) these are something like; and was better satisfied with hearing what
they cost, than with seeing what they were worth, and yet this was no disrepute
to his wisdom; for to say truth, it is no defect of wisdom in a King, not to
know what his clothes are worth.

And though the Monks that writ in those times, charge this King with
covetousness, yet by the following instance it does not appear. For when two
Monks came to Court, and offered large gifts to outvie each other, in
obtaining an Abbots place lately dead, a third Monk, who was very sober, and
mean in attire, came with them and stood by; whom the King asked, what he would
give to be Abbot: Nothing (said the Monk) for I entered my Profession to be
poor, and have hitherto little esteemed the Pomp and Riches of the World. Then
thou art the man (replied the King) and art more worthy to he their Abbot for
thy Poverty, than they for their Presents; and conferring the place upon him,
checked the others.

But however there arose a great difference between him and Anselm Archbishop
of Canterbury, because he required the Bishop to give him a Thousand Marks for
preferring him to that See, which Anselm refused to give, as judging it no less
Simony to give after the preferment than before; but yet afterward offering
five hundred pound, the King refused to accept it, as being worth (he said)
five times as much. Whereupon Anselm told him, Your Grace may have me, and all
that is mine, to serve your turn in a friendly manner; but in the way of
servitude and bondage, you shall neither have me nor mine. Which-words so
angered the King, that they could never after be reconciled. And Anselm often
threatening to go to Rome, the King told him plainly, He would not thrust him
out of the Realm, but if he would go without his leave, he would keep him out
during his pleasure: and besides he should carry nothing out of the Kingdom
with him. Yet Anselm ventured it, and the King performed it; for William
Walwerst was sent to rifle him of all he had in his passage to Sea; neither was
he suffered to return as long as the King lived: during all which time the King
took the Profits of his Bishopric to his own use.

This King enlarged the Tower of London, and compassed it with new Walls; he
also built the great Hall at Westminster, being 270 foot in length, and 74 in
breadth; but thinking it too little, he intended to have built another Hall,
which should have reached from the Thames to Kingstreet.

In the fourth Year of his Reign, on St. Lukes day, so great a Tempest of Wind
happened, that above six hundred Houses in London were thrown down therewith,
and the Roof of S. Mary le Bow Church in Cheapside was blown off, which with
the Beams were carried into the Air a great height, and in the fall six of the
Beams being 27 foot long, were driven so deep into the Ground (the streets not
being then paved with stone) that not above four foot remained in sight, and
yet stood in such rank and order as the Workman had placed them on the Church.

In the ninth Year of his Reign, a blazing Star appeared with two Bushes or
Tails, and other Stars seemed to shoot darts at each other. The last of his
Reign, the Sea breaking over its Banks, destroyed a multitude of People, and
overwhelmed the lands sometime of Earl Goodwin in Kent which are yet called
Goodwins Sands; There was likewise a Well that cast out blood instead of water
for 15 days together, and great flames of fire were seen at diverse times and
places.

All which Prodigies seemed to foretell the Kings death approaching for having
kept his Christmas at Gloucester, his Easter at Winchester, and his Whitsuntide
at Westminster, notwithstanding he was forewarned by many signs of some great
disaster, as his own dream the night before, wherein it seemed to him that the
Veins of his arms were burst, and abundance of blood streaming on the floor.
And of a certain Monk who dreamed that he saw the King gnaw the Image of a
Crucifix with his Teeth, and that as he was about to bite away the Legs of it,
the Crucifix with his feet spurned him down to the Ground, and that as he lay
on the ground there came out of his Mouth a flame of fire with abundance of
smoke; this last being told the King, he made a jest of it saying, Well a Monk
he is, and he can dream only as Monks do, that is for gain, Go, give him an
hundred shillings, lest he think he has dreamed unprofitably.

But though he had these warnings, yet the day after Lammas he would needs go a
hunting in the New Forest, yet something resenting the many Presages, he stayed
within all the forenoon; About dinner time an Artificer came, and brought him
six Crossbow Arrows very strong and sharp, four whereof he kept himself and the
other Two he delivered to S. Walter Tyrell a Knight of Normandy his Bow-bearer;
saying, Here Tyrell take you two, for you know how to shoot them to purpose;
And so having at dinner drank more berally than his custom, as it were in
contempt of Prodigies, and Presages, he rides out in the New Forest, where S.
Walter Tyrell shooting at a Deer, the arrow glanced against a Tree, or as some
say grazed upon the back of the Deer, and flying forward struck the King in the
breast, who hastily breaking off so much as stuck in his body, with one only
groan fell down, and dyed; of which sudden mischance his followers having
notice, most of them went away and those that remained, with much ado got his
body put into a Colliers Cart, which being drawn with one lean Horse through a
very foul dirty way, the Cart broke, and there lay the Spectacle of worldly
Glory all besmeared with his own blood, and filthyly bedaubed with mire, till
he was conveyed to Winchester where he was buried under a plain Marble stone in
the Cathedral.

King Henry the 1. his brother, and the youngest son of William the Conqueror
succeeded him, though his elder brother Robert Duke of Normandy was living;
which caused great Wars, and disturbance. In his time Anse^m Archbishop of
Canterbury being returned, called a Council of the Bishops at London, wherein
he offended both the King and Clergy, for he excommunicated all married
Priests, half the Clergy of England at that time being either married, or the
Sons of Married Priests; and depending upon the Popes assistance, he deprived
many great Prelates of their Promotions because they were invested in them by
the King, but they refused to resign them, since they had them by the donation
of their Sovereign, upon which Anselm thinking himself much wronged appealed to
the Pope, and went to Rome in Person soon after.

The King likewise sent Herbere Bishop of Norwich and Robert Bishop of
Litchfield Privy Counselors and William Warwast his Procurator, as Ambassadors
to Rome, and the last being a Clergyman of a bold and daring Spirit, He in
debating his Sovereigns cause before the Pope, and Cardinals, with threatening
Language, and Countenance avouched That the King his Master would not lose his
Right in the Investitures of the Church though he lost his Kingdom Whereto Pope
Paschal being upon his own dunghill, as stoutly answered. If thou say the
King will not lose his donation of Churches for the loss of his Kingdom, Know
thou for certain that before God, I will not suffer him to to enjoy them
without punishment, and will venture my head thereupon. But notwithstanding
these great words against the King, yet the degraded Abbots were restored again
through the Clemency of the Papal See, which is never wanting to any, as long
as The White and Red make intercession for them: as the Monks own words were at
that time.

A while after Cardinal Cremensis came into England from the Pope, and calling
a Council in London upon the Birth day of the Blessed Virgin, he made a solemn
Oration in praise of Virginity and Chastity and a terrible Invective against
the Married Priests, affirming it to be no less than professed Adultery. And to
amplify their sin the more, he showed what great Impiety it was to rise from
the Bed of unlawful Lust (for so he termed chaste Marriage) and with polluted
hands to touch the Sacrament of the Body of Christ; yet but the very night
following, this holy Cardinal was found in Bed with a common Whore, having
himself consecrated the Host that very day; so that he returned to Rome with
much shame and but little success in the intended matter. Yea, Anselm himself,
the most earnest in favor of single life, did not it seems die a Virgin, for
else he would never in his writings make such lamentations for the loss
thereof. Yet Anselm afterward called another Council at Westminster, where it
was ordained, That Priests should no longer be suffered to have Wives, and that
there should be no more selling and buying men in England; they being then sold
like Horses or Oxen. Yet King Henry afterward suffered Priests to have Wives
for Fines, or rather took Fines of them, whether they had Wives or no, because
they might have them if they would.

Duke Robert his Brother having sound that force would not prevail to settle
him in his Right to the Kingdom, he himself comes over to King Henry referring
both his Dukedom and himself, and all differences and debates to his will and
pleasure; but King Henry scarce vouchsafed to speak to him, or at least, to
make him an answer, but in a sullen humor turned away, and so left him. Which
scornful usage put the Duke into such Indignation, that he resolved upon
Revenge; and returning into Normandy raises a great Army. But Henry knowing
Robert to be a Soldier, and considering his own Estate, called his Lords
together to London, and there tickled their cars with this pleasing Speech.

My Friends, faithful Counselors, and Native Country men, You know all
undoubtedly, that my Brother Robert was elected and called by God himself to be
the fortunate King of Jerusalem, and how unfortunately, or rather insolently,
he refused that sacred Estate, whereby he is now most justly reprobated of God.
You also know by many other experiments, his Pride and Arrogance, for being a
man of a war like bumour, he is not only impatient of Peace, but also
earnestly desires to trample upon you, as men of object and contemptible
dispositions, and upbraid you for idle Drones, Belly-gods, and what not? But I,
your King, am naturally inclined to be both humble, and peaceable, and take
delight in nothing more than in doing, you good, and to maintain your
Tranquillity, and ancient Liberty (as I have often sworn unto you) and meekly
and willingly to yield my self to your advices, whereby I may circumspectly
govern you as a clement Prince. And to that end, even now will I confirm (if
your Wisdoms think fit) your over-worn and undermined Charters, and will
corroborate them most firmly with a new Oath and Ratification. In the mean time
all the Laws which the holy King Edward, by Gods inspiring did establish, I do
here command to be inviolably observed, hereby to move you to adhere steadfastly
unto me, in cheerfully, willingly, and powerfully repulsing the wrongs offered
me; by my Brother shall I say? Nay, by the most deadly Enemy both to me, to
you, and the whole Nation. For if I be guarded with the Valor and Affections
of Englishmen, I shall scorn the threats of him and his Normans, and count them
vain, and not to be regarded.

With these fair promises (which yet he afterward quite neglected) he so won
the hearts of the Lords and the Londoners, that they engaged to die with him,
or for him, against any opposition whatsoever. Duke Robert being gone, and
Henry thus settled in the affection of the People, he raised a very great Army,
and, accompanied with diverse of the Nobility, sailed to Normandy, where falling
upon Robert before he was half ready to fight, he obtained a complete Victory
over him, and won Normandy with the slaughter of ten thousand men, taking
Robert himself prisoner; whom he brought over and committed to Cardiff Castle
in Wales, where he remained a prisoner till he died: yet had liberty of walking
in the Kings Meadows and Pastures. But being weary of this Confinement, he
endeavored to make his escape, which the King being afraid of, ordered his
eyes to be put out, which to avoid the deformity of breaking the Eye-bals, was
done by causing, his head to be held to a burning Basin till the Glassie
Tunicles had lost the Office of retaining the Light

This, though it increased his misery, yet did not shorten his life, for he
lived long after; in all, from the time of his Imprisonment, twenty eight
years. And thus this great Duke, who in his Birth was the joy of Nature, in his
Life was the scorn of Fortune. And it is worth observing, that the English won
Normandy the very same day fortieth year the Normans had won England. Such
Revolutions of Fortune there are in kingdoms, and so unstable is the state of
all wordly Greatness. This Robert died 1134 and lies buried at Gloucester. One
Author writes, That King Henry sent him according to his Custom a Robe of
Scarlet; and putting it first on himself, found that the Capouch, or Hood, (as
the Fashion was then) was somewhat too little; whereupon he said, Carry this to
my Brother, his head is less than mine. The Messenger delivering the Robe, Duke
Robert demanded if any had worn it; and being told the King had first tried it
on, and what words he had said. The Duke replied, I have too long protracted a
miserable life, since my Brother is so injurious to me, that he sends me his
old Clothes to wear. And from that time he would never taste any food, nor
receive any comfort.

This King Henry first instituted the Form of the High Court of Parliament: for
before his time, only certain of the Nobility and Prelates of the Realm were
called to consultation about the most important Affairs of State, but he caused
the Commons also to be assembled, by Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of their
own electing, and made that Court to consist of three Estates, the Nobility,
the Clergy, and the Commons, represeming the whole Body of the Realm, and
appointed them to fit in several Chambers; the King, the Lords, and the Bishops
in one, and the Commons in another; and to consult together by themselves. He
established likewise several other Orders, as they are used to this day. The
first Parliament that was so held, met at Salisbury upon the 19 of April in the
16 Year of his Reign, 1019. He forbid wearing of long hair, which at that time
was frequent, according to the French Mode. He commanded Robers on the Highway
to be hanged without Redemption. He punished Counterfeiters of Money with
pulling out their eyes, or cutting off their privy members; a punishment both
less than Death, and greater.

In this Kings time Guymond one of his Chaplains, observing that unlearned, and
unworthy men were generally preferred to the best dignities in the Church, as he
celebrated Divine Service before him, and was to read these words out of S.
James, It rained not upon the earth III years and VI Months, he read it thus,
It rained not upon the Earth 1.1.1. years, and 5.1. Months; The King observed
his Reading, and afterward blamed him for it, but Guymond answered, That he
did it on purpose since such Readers were sconest advanced by His Majesty; The
King smiled, and afterward promoted him. About this time, Thomas Archb. of
York falling sick, his Physicians told him, that nothing would do him good but
to company with a woman; to whom he answered, That the Remedy was worse than
the disease; And so it is said, died a Virgin.

Upon the Tenth of October, the River of Medway, that runs by Rochester, failed
so of water for many miles together; that in the midst of the Channel the
smallest Vessels could not pass; and the same day also in the Thames, between
the Tower and London Bridge men waded over on foot for the space of two days. A
great fire happened in London which consumed a long Tract of buildings from
Westcheap to Aldgate; and several other great Cities in England were likewise
burnt down about this time; In the thirteenth of this King many Prodigies were
seen, a Pig was farrowed with a face like a child; a Chicken was hatched with
four legs, and the Sun was so deeply eclipsed, that by reason of the darkness,
many Stars did plainly appear.

This King left behind him only one daughter named Maud, who could never come
to be Queen, though born to a Kingdom. She was married at six years old to the
Emperor Henry the Fourth, and after his death, she was again married to Fulk
Duke of Anjou. Yet her Father took much care to establish the Succession in her
and her issue, and therefore he called his Nobility together, and among them
David King of Scots, and made them take their Oaths of Allegiance to her, and
her Heirs. This he did three years one after another, wherein nothing pleased
him so much, as that Stephen Earl of Blois was the first man that took the
Oath, because he was known to be, or it was known at least, that he might be a
pretender to the Crown. But the King should have considered, that no Oath is
binding when the getting a Kingdom is the price of breaking it, and especially
to Stephen who was so deeply interested. Yet Providence could do no more, and
the King was well satisfied with it, especially when he saw his daughter Mother
of two Sons; for this, though it gave him no assurance, yet it gave him assured
hope to have the Crown perpetuated in his Posterity.

Yet after King Henry was dead, Stephen ascends the Throne, as being Earl of
Bulleign, Son to Stephen Earl of Beis, by Adela daughter of King William the
Conqueror, and though there were two before him, that is, Maud the Empress,
and Theobald his elder Brother, yet taking hold of opportunity, while the other
lingered about smaller Affairs, he solicites all the Orders of the Realm,
Bishops, and Lords, and People to receive him for their Sovereign: and so upon
St. Stephens day 1135. he was crowned King at Westminster. and to ingratiate
himself, be eased the People of diverse Taxes and Impositions. Yet Stephen was
no sooner set in his Chair of State, but David King of Scots enters England
with an Army to defend the right of Maud, but he was soon compounded with, and
so was Geoffrey Duke of Anjou, Mauds husband.

Soon after Maud her self comes into England, and was received by some Persons
for Queen; and Stephen hearing that some of her Forces had besieged Lincoln,
goes thither, where his Army was overthrown, and himself taken Prisoner, and
carried to Maud, who committed him to Bristol Castle. And being flusht with
this success, she takes her journey toward London, and was there received
joyfully, as well as in other places, where Matilda wife of King Stephen made
humble suit to her for the Liberty of her Husband, and that he might be
suffered only to live a private life. The Londoners likewise having received
her into the City as their Queen, thought now (as Subjects usually do with new
Princes) they might have what they would reasonably ask; and therefore humbly
besought her, that the severe Laws imposed upon them by her Father, might be
remitted, and those of King Edward might wholly be in force. But she rejected
both these Petitions, some say out of Pride, others out of mistaken Policy, as
thinking it most safe to act matters of importance, not upon entreaty but
freely, and to govern the Subject with severity rather than mildness.

But those harsh and insulting Answers she gave them, were at that time very
unseasonable, and though they might have been more proper in a settled
Government, yet in this her green and unstable estate, they gave a stop to the
Current of all her Fortunes. For Matilda finding by this how high the Empresses
pulses beat, sent to her son Eustace to raise Forces in Kent, since their suits
must be only obtained by the Sword. The Nobles likewise, who set up King
Stephen, finding themselves slighted, and the Londoners being as much
discontented as they, join with them, and contrive how to seize upon the
Empress in the City, and so redeem King Stephen, to whom their affections were
firm. Of which Maud having notice, fled secretly out of London and went to
Oxford; and from thence sent strict command that King Stephen should be laid in
Irons, and narrowly watched, and fed with very mean Commons; and sending to
David King of Scots for assistance, they laid fiege to Winchester.

Matilda, King Stephens wife, hearing of this, she with her Son Eustace, and
the assistance of the Londoners came presently to the relief of the place,
where a fierce Battle was fought, and Matilda's Party prevailed, and the
Empress Maud to make her escape, was fain to be laid upon a Horse back like a
dead Corpse, and so conveyed to Gloucester. But Earl Robert her Brother,
disdaining to fly, was taken Prisoner, and used more hardly by Queen Matilda
for her Husband King Stephens sake; but a while after, whether by agreement, or
connivance, both Stephen and Robert also made their escape out of Prison.

King Stephen being at liberty, seeks out the Empress, to requite the kindness
she had she wed him in Prison, and hearing her to be at Oxford, he follows her
thither, and lays siege to the Town, and brought the Empress to such distress,
that she had now no way to save her self but by flight. But being a Woman
(whose Sex has often deceived wise men) she resolved once more to overreach
her Enemy by Craft, since she could not do it by Force. For it being a very
cold Winter, the River Thames that runs by the Walls of Oxford, was very hard
frozen, and at the same time a deep Snow covered the ground; Maud takes the
advantage thereof, and clothing her self and four of her company in white linen
garments to deceive the eyes of the Sentinel, she goes secretly in the night
out of a Postern Gate, and passing the frozen River, ran on foot through Ice
and Snow, Ditches, and Valleys for five miles together, till she came to
Abington, the falling Snow beating in their faces all the way, and there taking
Horse, the same night got into Wallingford Castle. But though Maud escaped this
present danger, vet it left such an Impression of fear upon her, that she never
after had a mind to appear upon the Stage of War, but left the prosecution of
it to her son Henry, who was now about sixteen years of Age.

And not long after, Eustace, King Stephens only son died, and being left
destitute of Issue to succeed him, he was the more easily drawn to conditions
of Peace: and so it was at last concluded that Stephen should hold the kingdom
of England, and adopt Henry as his Heir to succeed him. This Agreement thus
made and confirmed by Parliament, Henry accounted King Stephen ever after as
his Father, and Stephen, Henry as his son; and well he might if it be true
which some write, that Maud his Mother, when a Battle was to be fought between
King Stephen and her son, went privately to him, asking him, How he could find
in his heart to fight against him that was his own Son? Could he forget the
familiarity he had with her in her Widowhood. But however it was, King Stephen
and Henry continued in mutual love and concord, as long as they lived together.

In the eighth year of King Stephen, a Synod was held in London by Henry Bishop
of Winchester: where it was decreed, that whosoever should lay violent hands
upon any Clergyman, should not be forgiven, but by the Pope himself: and from
this time forward, Clergymen were exempt from the power of the Civil
Magistrate. In this Kings time there appeared two Children, a Boy and a Girl,
clad in Green, in a Stuff unknown, of a strange Language, and of a strange
Diet; the Boy being baptized, died shortly after, but the Girl lived to be an
old Woman: and being asked from whence they were, she answered, They were of
the Land of St. Martin, where there are Christian Churches erected, but that no
Sun did ever rise unto them: but where that Land is, or how she came hither she
her self knew not. This Story is related by many very credible Historians, and
if true, we may thereby learn, that there are other parts of the World than
those which to us are known. In the fifteenth year of this King the River of
Thames was so frozen at London, that Horse and Cart passed over upon the Ice.
In his time likewise lived Johannes (...) Temporibus, of whom it is recorded,
that he lived Three hundred Sixty one years; he was one of Charlemain the
Emperors Guard, and died in the Reign of Conradus the Third, 1139.

After the death of King Stephen, Henry Duke of Anfou succeeded, according to
Agreement, by the Title of King Henry the Second, and was crowned at
Westminster in the Year 1155. This King had very much vexation from Thomas
Becket, that proud and insolent Archbishop of Canterbury, a Londoner by birth.
The King requiring to have it ordained, That the Clergy who were malefactors,
should be tried before the Secular Magistrate. This Becket opposed it,
alleging it was against the Liberty of the Church; and therefore against the
honor of God. Many Bishops stood with the King, and some few with Becket: the
Contention grew long and hot, so that the King being extremely disturbed, said
on a time, Shall I never be at quiet for this Priest? If I had any about me
that loved me, they would find some way or other to rid me of this trouble.
Which complaint four of his Knights that stood by, hearing, they presently went
to Canterbury, and finding Becket in the Cathedral, they struck him on the
head, and felling him down, killed him in the place. But this created more
trouble, for though with much Intercession the Pope pardoned the four Knights,
being only enjoined Penance to go on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. Yet the Kings
was more severe; for going to Canterbury, as soon as he came in sight of
Beckets Church, alighting off his Horse, and putting off his Hose and Shoes, he
went barefoot to the Tomb; and for a further Penance, suffered himself to be
beaten with rods upon his bare skin, by every Monk in the Cloister.

This King Henry first ordained that the Lions should be kept in the Tower of
^^ndon. In the tenth Year of his Reign London Bridge was new built with Timber
by Peter of Colechurch, a Priest. And in his twenty second Year, after the
foundation of St. Mary Overies Church in Southwark, the Stone Bridge began to
be founded, toward which, a Cardinal and an Archbishop of Canterbury gave a
thousand Marks. This King had many Concubines, and among the rest Rosamond,
daughter of Walter Lord Clifford, whom he kept at Woodstock, in Lodgings so
cunningly contrived, (...) ^o Stranger could find the way in. Yet Queen Eleanor
did, by a clew of silk fallen from Rosamonds ^ap, as she sat to take the Air,
who suddenly flying from the sight of her Pursuer, the end of the silk fastened
to her foot, and the Clew still unwinding, remained behind; which the Queen
followed, till the found her whom she sought for, in her Labyrinth. So much is
the Eye of Jealousy ^uicker in finding out, than the Eye of Care is in hiding.
What the Queen did to Rosamond when she came to her, is uncertain; but this is
certain, that Rosamond lived but a short time after. King Henry had two sons by
her, William called Long-Sword, Earl of Salisbury, and Jeffery Archbishop of
York.

In the sixteenth year of his Reign, King Henry caused his eldest son Henry to
be crowned at Westminster, by the hands of Roger Archbishop of York, and caused
all the Lords to swear Allegiance to him, as having found by Experience, That
Oaths for Succession are commonly eluded, but Oaths for present Allegiance can
have no evasion. At the Feast of this Solemnity, King Henry, to honor his son,
would needs carry up the first dish to his Table. Whereupon Archbishop Roger
standing by, and saying merrily to the new King, What an honor is this to you,
to have such a Waiter at your Table: He briskly replied, Why what a matter is
it for him that was but the son of a Duke to do service to me that am the son
of a King and a Queen. Which the old King hearing, began to repent of what he
had done; yet he passed it over, and set the best side outward.

This young King died before his Father, so that Richard the First, the eldest
son then living, succeeded his Father in the Throne, and was crowned at
Westminster 1189. He drained great sums of money from the Londoners, and made
them recompense in Franchises and Liberties. And indeed the Laws and Ordinances
in his time were chiefly made for the Meridian of London. For whereas before
his time the City was governed by Portgraves, this King granted them to be
governed by two Sheriffs and a Mayor, as it is now. And to give the first of
these Magistrates the honor to be remembered, the names of the Sherifts were
Henry Cornhill, and Richard Reyner, and the name of the first Lord Mayor was
Henry Fitz-Alwin, who continued Mayor during his life, which was four and
twenty Years. But Fabian who was himself Sheriff of London, and therefore most
likely to know the truth, affirms, That the Officers ordained now by K. Rich.
were but only 2 Bailiffs, and that there was no Mayor nor Sheriffs till the
tenth of King John. But however the City now began first to receive the Form
and State of a Commonwealth (says the Historian) and to be divided into
Fellowships and Corporations, as at this day: and this Privilege was granted
the first of Richard 1. 1189.

This King left no Children behind him, that we have any certain account of,
unless we reckon as a Popish Priest did, who coming to King Richard told him,
that he had three very wicked Daughters which he desired him to bestow, or else
Gods wrath would attend him. But the King denying he had any Daughters at all,
Yes (says the Priest) thou cherishest three Daughters, Pride, Covetousness,
and Lechery. The King apprehended his meaning, and smiling thereat, called his
Lords attending, and said, My Lords, this Hypocritical Priest has descovered,
that I maintain three Daughters, Pride, Covetousness, and Lechery, which he
would have me bestow in Marriage; and therefore if I have any such, I have
found out very fit Husband for them all. My Pride I bequeath to the haughty
Templers and Hospitallers, who are as proud as Lucifer himself: my Covetousness
I give to the White Monks of the Cistercian Order, for they covet the Devil and
all: but for my Lechery, I can bestow it no where better than on the Priests,
and Bishops of our times, for therein they place their greatest felicity and
happiness.

In this Kings time, for three or four years together, there happened so great
a drougth, that a Quarter of Wheat was sold for eighteen shillings eight pence;
and thereupon followed so great a Mortality of People, that the living scarce
sufficed to bury the dead.

King Richard being dead, the Right of Succession remained in Arthur son of
Jeffery Duke of Anjou, elder brother to E. John; but John thinking Arthurs
Title but a Criticism of State, and not so plain to common capacities as his
own, who was Son of a King and Brother to a King, ascended the Throne as
confidently as if he had no Competitor, only Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury,
made an Oration on his behalf, wherein waving the Right of Succession, he
insisted wholly upon the Right of Election by the People, whereby it would
follow, that those who brought him in, might throw him out. Of which the Bishop
being told, said, He did it on purpose to cause King John to be more careful of
his Government, by making him sensible upon what an uncertain foundation his
Regality stood. King John took notice of this, but since it would serve his
present purpose, he let it pass, knowing that his turn once served, he could
afterward carve out what Title he pleased, and so upon Ascension day 1199. he
was crowned King at Westminster.

But Constantia, the Mother of Arthur, applies her self to Lewis the French
King on behalf of her son, who promised his assistance; but yet afterward a
Peace was made between King John and Lewis. After which, King John being at
leisure, gave himself wholly up to pleasure, and committed many extravagancies,
which so far disobliged some of his Lords, that they joined with the French
King to assist Prince Arthur; but King John coming upon them unawares, routed
their Forces and took Arthur Prisoner, who died soon after. The Death of whom,
and also of Geoffry Fitz-Peter, who while the King lived, kept him in some awe,
left the King at full liberty to his own wild desires. For at the first hearing
of Geoffries death, he swore, By the Feet of God, that now at length he was
King of England: and with great rejoicing said to some Lords about him, Now
when this man comes into Hell, let him salute the Archbishop Hubert, whom
certainly he shall find there.

After this the Lords of the Realm having often required their Ancient Rights
and Liberties, and finding nothing but delusions, they would no longer endure
to be abused: but meeting together, they consider of some remedy, and conclude
to go to the King themselves in person, and make their demands, producing
likewise a Charter, which had been granted in Henry the First's time. Whereupon
coming to the King after Christmas, lying then in the New Temple in London, and
acquainting him with their demands, he answers, That within a few days he will
give them satisfaction; and causes the Bishops of Canterbury and Ely, and
William Ma^sha! Earl of Gloucester to pass their words for him that it should be
performed.

But the King never intending to do as he said, falls presently to raise
Soldiers; which the Lords understanding, they all did the like: and going to
the Bishop of Canterbury, they deliver him a Copy of their demands, and require
the Kings Answer; who showed it to the King, with a Message of their
Resolutions, That if he did not presently seal the Charter then delivered to
him, they would compel him thereto with forcible entrance into all his
Possessions.

The King being highly offended, asked, Why they did not also require his
Kingdom, these their demands being grounded on no color of Reason; and then
swore a great Oath, That be would die before he would enslave himself to them
by such Concessions. The Lords by this answer knowing what they must trust to,
appointed Robert Fitzwater to be their General, whom they styled, The Marshal
of Gods Army, and Holy Church. Then they besieged Northampton and Bedford, and
the Governor of the last being a Confederate, delivered it up to them. But the
Londoners displeased with the King for burthening them with Taxes, not only
admitted them, but invited them to enter the City by night.

The Lords having now this key of the Land at their dispose, sent such
threatening Letters and Messages abroad, that they drew most of the Nobility
from the King, who being at Windsor providing an Army; And having notice
thereof, and that the Londoners were joined with them, he thought good to
proceed rather by Fraud than Force; and thereupon sends to the Lords, That if
they would come to him to Windsor, he would grant their demands. The Lords
coming thither, but in a Military manner, for they durst not trust his word;
the King saluted them all kindly, and promised to give them satisfaction in all
they demanded. And so in a Meadow between Windsor and Stanes, called Running
Mead, and afterward Council Mead, he freely consented to confirm their former
Liberties contained in Magna Charta, and Charta Forestae, and likewise that
there should be Twenty five Peers Elected, who should have a sway in the
Government, and whose commands all the rest of the Barons were bound by Oath to
obey, and he was contented some grave Personages should be chosen to see it
performed.

But the next day, when it should be done the King goes privately the night
before to Southampton., and from thence to the Isle of Wight where advising
with his Council, It was concluded he should send to the Pope to acquaint him
with this Mutiny of the Lords, and require his help, while the King in the mean
time lived skulking up and down in corners that no man might know where to find
him, or which is worse (as some write) roving about and Practicing pyracy. And
now the Lords begin to suspect fraud, when shortly after the Kings Messengers
who were Walter and John Bishops of Worcester and Norwich, return with the
Popes Decree, whereby the Barons Charter was by definitive Sentence cancelled
and made void, and the King and Barons accursed, if either of them observed the
Composition. This Decree the King, after he had staid three Months in the Isle
of Wight, coming back to Windsor, acquaints the Lords with; but they accusing
the Messenger for falsely informing the Pope, and the Pope also for making a
Decree without hearing of both sides, betake themselves to Arms, and swear by
the holy Altar to be revenged for this injurious dealing.

The Ting finding the Lords nothing moved upon the Popes Decree, sends again to
him, to acquaint him with it; who being mightily incensed to have his Decree so
slighted, adjudgeth the Lords to be Enemies of Religion, and gives power to
Peter Bishop of Winchester, and the Abbot (...) R^dding to Excommunicate them.
Whereby a

scene from London history (...) a Child in England.


scene from London history K. Willi Rufus Killed in Hunting


(...)k to Wind(...) they ac(...) the Pope, (...) without (...) to Arms, (...)
for (...).

(...) moved up(...), to ac(...) incensed (...) the (...) power (...) Abbot o^
(...) hereby al^ (...) with the City of (...) (...) still stand on these (...)
London, scorning and defying the Popes (...) and Decreeing that neither
themselves (...) Londoners should observe them, nor the (...) dare to denounce
them, alleging, That it (...) to the Pope to deal in Temporal Affairs, (...)
Peter received power of our Savior only in (...) matters: and why should the
Roman (...) coverousness extend it self hither to us? (...) have Bishops to do
to intermedale in Wars? (...) are Constantines Successors, not St. Peter's: ^^om
as they represent not in good actions, so neither do they in authority. Fie
upon such mercenary Rascals, who having little knowledge of Ingenuity or Art,
being (...) wretched Usurers and Simoniacks; that they would dare by their
Excommunications to domineer (...) the World. O how unlike they are to St.
Peter, (...) have usurped St. Peter's Chair.

With these Remonstrances the Lords went on ^olvedly in their course. In the
mean time King (...), with the assistance of some Forces which (...) had hired
beyond Sea, had within half a year (...), all the Castles of the Barons into
his hands as far as the Borders of Scotland; and then he divides his Army,
committing one part to his Brother William Earl of Salisbury, who was ordered
to fall upon London; and with the other he himself goes into Yorkshire, where
most of the Lords had Estates, which he miserably destroys with Fire and Sword.

The Lords being distressed on every side, resolved upon a course neither
honorable nor safe, yet such as Necessity made appear to be both: For they
send to Philip K. of France, requiring him (...) send over his Son Lewis to
their aid, and promis^ they would submit themselves to be governed (...) him,
and to take him for their Sovereign. (...) this mention of the Lords, King
Philip was as forward as themselves; which King John understanding, sends again
to the Pope, requiring him to use (...) Authority to stay the King of France
from coming. Who accordingly sent Cardinal Wallo his Legate, who threatened the
Great Curse in the Council, on all who should join with those Excommunicate
persons, against King John, or should enter upon St. Peter's Patrimony.

But King Philip replied, That England was no part of St. Peter's Patrimony, no
King having power of himself to alienate his Kingdom, and John especially, who
being never lawful King, had no power to dispose thereof; and that it was an
Error, and a pernicious Example in the Pope, and an itching lust and desire
after a new and lawless Dominion. His Peers likewise, swore by Christ's death,
That they would lose their lives, rather than suffer a King of himself, or with
the consent of a few base Flatterers, to give away his Crown, and enslave his
Nobles, especially to the Pope, who ought to follow St. Peter's steps to win
souls, and not to meddle with Wars, and murdering of men's bodies.

Now the reason of the Popes claiming England as St. Peter's Patrimony, was upon
the account of the Resignation of King John. And though the Pope seemed now so
zealous for the Interest of King John, yet not above five years before, he was
as much his Enemy: For the King being incensed against the Clergy, and
endeavoring to rectify some miscarriages about electing Bishops, etc. the
Pope fearing he would entrench upon his Privileges, used his utmost power
against him; forbidding Mass to be said for some years, Excom^^unicating and
Cursing him, and giving his King(...) to the French King, and stirring up his
^wn Nobility against him, freeing them and all the People from their Allegiance
to him. So that King John being encompassed with Troubles on every side, was
compelled to submit to whatever the Pope would command him: Nay, he was for^ed
to take off his Crown, and kneeling on his knees in the midst of his Barons, he
surrendered it into the hands of Pandulphus the Legate, for the Popes use;
saying, Here I resign up the Crown of the Realm of England to the hands of Pope
Innocent the Third, and lay myself wholly at his mercy and appointment. At
whose feet he also laid his Scepter, Robes, Sword, Ring, and all the Ensigns of
Royalty. Pandulphus took the Crown from King John, and kept it five days: and
the King giving then all his Kingdoms to the Pope to be held in Farm from him,
and his Heirs for evermore, the Crown was restored; King John engaging to pay
700 Marks a year for England, and 300 for Ireland; half of it at Easter, and
half at Whitsuntide, as Rent for the said kingdoms.

But this being done out of force and necessity, King Philip it seems (no more
than his own People) did not think it of any value. Yea, Prince Lewis himself,
beseeched his Father, not to hinder him from that which was none of his gift,
and for which he was now resolved to spend his blood, and would choose rather to
be excommunicated by the Pope, than falsify his promise to the English Barons.
For upon their sending their Letters of Allegiance, confirmed with the Hands
and Seals of all the Lords, to implore King Philips favor, and to send his
Son, and desiring his Son to accept of the Crown, they received a present
supply of French Soldiers, upon their delivering up fifty English Gentlemen,
as Hostages for the true performance of the Contract.

King Philip therefore having received his Holi^^ Message with such scorn and
contempt, so a^^righted the Legate with his stern countenance, that he made all
possible haste to be gone, as fearing some mischief should be done him. And
Lew^ as speedily set forth for England with his Flee^ of six hundred Ships, and
fourscore Boats, where^ with arriving first in the Isle of Thanet, and
afterward going to Sandwich, the Barons came thither to him, and joined with
him. King John's great Navy wherewith he intended to oppose him, was driven
Southward by a sudden Tempest; and his Soldiers were generally Mercenaries,
and more inclined (as it appeared afterward) to Lewis a Foreign Prince than to
him; whereupon King John thought fit for the present to forbear Battle, and
went toward Winchester.

In the mean time Lewis had liberty to take all places thereabout, except Dover
Castle, which John had committed to the valiant Hubert de Burg. Yet Lewis
marches forward to London, where entering with a solemn Procession, and with
the incredible applause of all, he went into St. Paul's Church, and there the
Citizens of London took their Oaths of Allegiance to him. From whence he passed
to Westminister; and there the Lords and Barons likewise swore to be true to
him; he himself likewise swearing, to restore to all men their Rights, and to
recover to the Crown whatsoever had been lost by King John. Then he chose Simon
Langton, who had been lately disgraced by the Pope, for his Lord Chancello, by
whose preaching the Citizens of London, and the Lords, though they were
excommunicated, and under the Popes curse, did yet celebrate Divine Service,
and drew on Prince Lewis to do the like. Whereupon Wallo the Popes Legate (who
was now with King John) denounced heavy and solemn Curses throughout the
kingdom, against the Londoners, and especially against Lewis and his
Chancellor by name.

But Lewis went from London, and passes over (...) the Country without
resistance, but not without infinite outrages committed by his Soldiers, which
was not in his power to hinder. In the ^ean time King John finding his Enemies
employed in the Siege of Dover Castle, and likewise ^t Odiam Castle, (wherein
13 English men only braved Lewis and his whole Army for 15 days together; nay,
sallied out upon them, and taking every man a Prisoner to the great admiration
of the French, they returned safely back again, and afterward delivered up the
place upon honorable conditions. King John thereupon gathers a Rabble of
Rascally people about him, with which he over-runs all the Country, to the
ruining of the Barons Castles and Estates in all places. And then marching from
Lyn in Norfolk, on which place he bestowed his own Sword, a gilt Bole, and
diverse large Privileges in testification of their Loyalty to him, King John
went with a full Resolution (having now got a very great Army together) to give
present Battle to Lewis; but as he was passing the Washes of Lincolnshire,
which are always dangerous, all his Carriages, Treasure, and Provision were
irrecoverably lost in the the Sands, himself and his Army hardly escaping.

The kingdom was now made the Stage of all manner of Rapine and Cruelty, having
two Armies in it at once, each of them seeking to prey upon the other, and both
of them upon the Country. Which the Lords seriously reflecting upon, and
finding likewise their faithful Services to Lewis little regarded, since he
bestowed all places that were conquered, upon French men only, they began to
consider how they might free themselves from these Calamities.

But that which startled them most, was, that a Noble French man, called
Viscount de Melun, wh^ was very much in esteem with Lewis, being upon his
deathbed in London, desired to have some private conference with those English
Lords and Londoners to whom Lewis had committed the Custody of that City, to
whom he discovered,

That lamentable desolation, and secret and unsuspected ruin and destruction
hung over their heads since Lewis with sixteen others of his chief Earls and
Lords, of whom himself was one, had taken an Oath, that if ever the Crown of
England were settled on his head, they would condemn to perpetual banishment,
all such as now adhered to him against King John, as being Traitors to their
own Sovereign; and that all their Kindred and Relations should be utterly
rooted out of the Land.

This he affirmed to be true, as he hoped for the salvation of his now
departing soul, and thereupon counselling them timely to prevent their
approaching miseries; and in the mean while to lock up his words under the Seal
of Secrecy, he soon after departed this life.

These dreadful Tidings strangely amazed the Auditors, and though many of the
Lords doubted whether if they returned to their Allegiance toward King John, he
would ever accept of their Repentance, since they had so highly provoked him.
Yet forty of them immediately sent submissive Letters to the King, therein
expressing their sorrow, and hoping that true Royal Blood would be ever ready
to yield mercy to such as were ready to yield themselves prostrate to entreat
for it.

But these solicitors for mercy came too late, for King John, through vexation
of mind for the loss of his Carriages, fell into a high Fever, whereof within
few days he died. Though the manner of his death is otherwise reported by other
Authors, one of whom says he was poisoned at Swinshead Abbey, by a Monk of that
Covent, upon the following account; The King being told that Corn was very
cheap, said, That it should be dearer ere long, for he would make a penny loaf
to be sold for a shilling. At which Speech the Monk was so offended, that he
put the poison of a Toad into a Cup of Wine, and brought it to the King,
telling him, There was such a cup of Wine as he had never drank in all his
life; and therewithal drank first of it himself, which made the King drink more
boldly of it: but finding himself very ill upon (...) he asked for the Monk,
and when it was told him that he was fallen down dead, Then (says the King)
God have mercy upon me: I doubted as much. Others say, Poison was given him in
a dish of Pears; and add, that this was judged such a meritorious act, that the
Monk had a Mass appointed to be said for his soul for ever after, by his
Fellow-Monks.

This King is charged with Irreligion by the Monks of those times, who did not
love him, and therefore we know not how far they are to be believed. And among
other Speeches, That having been a little before reconciled to the Pope, and
afterward receiving a great overthrow from the French, he in great anger cried
out, That nothing had prospered with him since he was reconciled to God and the
Pope. And that at another time being a hunting, ^e merrily said at the opening
of a fat Buck, See how this Deer has prospered, and how fat he is, and yet I
dare swear, he never heard M^ss. He is likewise charged, that being in some
distress, he sent Thomas Hardington, and Ralph Fitz-Nichols Knights,
Ambassadors to Miram^malim King of Africa and Morocco, with offer of his
kingdom to him, if he would assist him, and that if he prevailed, he himself
would become a Turk and renounce the Christian Religion.

To this time the City of London had been governed by two Bailiffs, but the
King in his tenth Year, taking displeasure against them for denying his
Purveyors Wheat, he imprisoned them till 35 of the chief Citizens repaired to
him, and acquainted him with what small store the City had, and how the Commons
were ready to make an Insurrection about it, he was then satisfied; and
likewise at their suit he by a New Charter granted ^o the Citizens to elect a
new Mayor and 2 Sheriffs to be chosen yearly nine days before Michaelmas, which
Order has continued to this day, though with some alteration as to time. In
this Kings time likewise, five and thirty of the most substantial Citizens were
chosen out, and called the Common Council of the City.

In this Kings time there fell Hail as big as Goose eggs, with great Thunder
and Lightning, so that many Men, Women, and Cattle were destroyed, Houses
overthrown and burned, and Corn in the Fields beaten down. In 1202. and the 4.
of King John, there began a Frost the 14. of January, which continued to the
22. of March, that the Ground could not be tilled, so that in the Summer
following a Quarter of Wheat was sold for a Mark, which in the days of Henry
the second was sold for twelve pence, and a Quarter of Beans or Oats for a
Groat; and why the disproportion in the prices is now so great, (since the
price of Silver is much less altered, for an ounce of Silver was then valued at
twenty pence, which is now valued at five shillings) must be left to
Philosophers to give the reason: for since scarcity makes things dear, why
should not plenty make them cheap?

About this time Fishes of strange shape were taken, armed with Helmets and
Shields, like armed men, only they were much bigger. A certain Monster was
likewise found, stricken with Lightning not far from London, which had an head
like an Ass, a belly like a Man, and all other parts far differing from any
other Creature. And in another place, a Fish was taken alive in the form of a
Man, and was kept six Months upon Land with raw flesh and fish, and then
because they could not make it speak, they cast it into the Sea again.

In the ninth of King John the Arches and Stone bridge over the Thames at
London was quite finished by Serle Mercer, and William Alman then Procurators,
and Masters of the Bridge-house: and soon after a great Fire happened there, of
which you have already an account.

After the death of King John, his eldest Son Henry, being not above ten years
old, succeeded him, and was therefore very unfit to govern in such a distracted
time, when a great part of the kingdom had sworn Allegiance to Prince Lewis.
However upon October 8. 1216. he was crowned at Gloucester by the name of Henry
the Third, where besides the usual Oath taken by all Kings, he did Homage also
to the Church of Rome, and to Pope Innocent, for the kingdoms of England and
Ireland, and promised the true payment of the Thousand Marks a year, which his
Father had granted to the Church of Rome.

And then William Marshal Earl of Pembroke was by general consent made
Protector of the Realm, during the Kings Minority. In the mean time Lewis, who
thought himself sure of the kingdom by the death of King John, now hearing of
the solemn Crowning of the young King with such unanimous consent, he begins to
grow jealous of the English Lords, who indeed had some conflicts in their minds
whom they should obey; they thought it great ingratitude to forsake Prince
Lewis, whom they themselves had invited to come, and yet it seemed extreme
disloyalty to stand in opposition to Henry their innocent natural Sovereign;
but the discovery of Viscount Melun, that Lewis intended to extirpate all the
English Nobility, and the curse of Wallo the Popes Legate against all who
should join with Lewis, with diverse other reasons, caused the principal of them
to shrink from Lewis and join with King Henry, as thinking no obligation so
great as Allegiance; many others staid with Lewis, as thinking none greater
than an Oath.

And now Prince Lewis fearing that his enemies having gotten an head, should
likewise gather a head, and draw more Forces together, staying himself in
London, sent his Lieutenant with an Army of Twenty thousand to take in what
Towns he could get, some of which they took with small resistance; but William
Earl of Pembroke the Protector, coming against them with an Army, utterly
routed Lewis, and took most of the Lords that adhered to him Prisoners; and
though his Father Philip sent him more Forces, yet they were defeated at Sea,
so that Lewis upon payment of some moneys, and other conditions, returned into
France, and King Henry took an Oath, and for him, the Popes Legate Wallo, and
the Protector, That he would restore to the Barons of the Realm, and other his
Subjects, all their Rights and Privileges for which the discord began between
the late King and his People. And afterward he confirmed the two Charters of
Magna Charta, and Charta Forestae, granted by his Father King John.

In the Tenth year of King Henry's Reign, and the nineteenth of his Age, he
claimed to take the Government upon himself, and no longer to be under a
Protector, after which there presently appeared the difference between a Prince
that is ruled by good counsel, and one that will do all of his own will, and
take no Advice. For thirteen years he was ruled by a Protector, and then all
passed as it were in a calm without noise, or clamor; but as soon as he took
upon him the Government, storms and tumults presently arose, neither was there
any quietness with the Subject, nor himself, nothing but Grievances all the
long time of his Reign.

For as soon as he was crowned again, he presently cancels and annuls the
Charter of the Forests, as granted in his Nonage, and therefore not bound to
observe it, and then makes a new Seal, forcing all that had Grants by the
former, to renew them, whereby he got abundance of money. After which he goes
over into France to recover his Rights there: to which purpose he raises great
sums of money from the Londoners for Redemption of their Liberties. About which
time Constantine Fitz-Arnulf a Citizen of London, (upon a tumult which arose in
the City at a Wrestling, which he purposely appointed) endeavored to set up
Lewis again, and in the heat of the disturbance he traitorously cried out
Mountjoy, Mountjoy, God for us and our Lord Lewis.

And though the Lord Mayor, who was a very discreet person, earnestly persuaded
them to be quiet, yet Constantine by his seditious Orations, had made the
people incapable of good counsel; so that there was little hope of appeasing
them. The Lord Chief Justice having notice hereof, presently raised Forces and
entered the Tower of London, and sent for the principal men of the City to come
before him, who all disclaimed their being concerned therein, and charged Fitz
Arnulph to be the chief Author thereof. But he resolutely answered, That he had
not done so much therein as he ought. Whereupon he was condemned to die,
together with the Crier who published the Proclamation, and his Nephew; and was
accordingly executed, though when he saw the Halter about his neck, he offered
Fifteen thousand Marks for the saving of his life. This Execution being done
without noise, or the knowledge of the Londoners, the Lord Chief Justice comes
into the City, and apprehending several who where guilty of this Tumult, he
causes their hands and feet to be cut off, for a terror to the rest, and then
set them at liberty. The King likewise deposed several of the Magistrates, but
afterward finding that the baser sort of People only were concerned in the
Disorder, he thereupon was reconciled to the City.

About this time an Execrable Impostor was brought before the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who observing how easily the People were deluded in those times of
Darkness and Superstition, he impudently caused himself to be wounded in his
hands, feet, and sides, that by the resemblance of these bloody Impressions, he
might be acknowledged for their very Savior: who was thereupon deservedly
immured up between four Walls; and with him a wretched Woman, who pretended to
be Mary the Mother of this Christ; and some say another who called her self
Mary Magdalene, this punishment being thought fittest for such Miscreants, as
Monsters too impious, and unworthy to die by Humane hands; though it is very
remarkable, that this man should have such a severe judgment at Oxford, and yet
St. Francis, who was guilty of the same Imposture, as to the wounds of Christ,
though not the name, should soon after be canonized at Rome for the chief of
Saints; and perhaps if this Monster had been at Rome, he had been likewise
Sainted; and if Saint Francis had been at Oxford he had been immured.

King Henry returning from France, brought over many French men with him, which
he puts in places of Trust and Profit, and removes and fines his old Officers.
The Lords could no longer endure so many indignities, to see themselves
slighted and Strangers advanced, their Persons likewise exposed to danger, and
their Estates to ruin, for which they could find no remedy but the Kings
confirming their Charter of Liberties, wherein it is strange to see upon what
different grounds the King and the Lords went. It seems the King thought, that
to confirm their Charter, was to make himself less than a King; and the Lords
thought, as long as that was denied, they were no better than Slaves; and as
the King could endure no Diminution, so the Lords could endure no Slavery. But
the King might keep his own with sitting still; the Lords could not recover
their own but by motion.

And hereupon they confederated together, the chief among them being Richard
the Brother of William late Protector, and now Earl Marshal, who repair to the
King and boldly tell him of his faults, and require satisfaction. Whereupon the
King presently sends for whole Legions of French men over, and withal summons a
Parliament at Oxford, whither the Lords refuse to come. After this a Parliament
is called at Westminster, whither they likewise refuse to come, unless the King
would remove the Bishop of Winchester, and the French from the Court: and more
than this, they send him word, that unless he did this, they would expel both
himself, and his evil Counselors out of the Land, and create a new King.

Upon this threatening, Pledges are required of the Nobility for securing their
Allegiance: and Writs are sent out to all who held by Knights Service to repair
to the King by a certain day which the Earl Marshal and his Associates
refusing, the King, without the Judgment of the Cou^^ and his Peers, causes
them to be proclaimed Outlaws, and seizes upon all their Lands, which he gives
to the French men, and directs out Writs to attach their Bodies wherever
found. Upon which some of the Confederate Lords went over to the King, and the
Earl Marshal is persuaded to do the same; which he refusing, a design is laid
to draw him over into Ireland to defend his Estate there, which was seized upon
by the King: where being circumvented by Treachery, he lost his life. Yet the
King disavows being concerned therein, and lays the fault upon his Officers. An
easy way (says the Historian) for Princes never to be found in any fault.

After this the Lords went into Wales, and joined with Prince Lewellin: whither
also came Hube^t de Burg Earl of Kent. Hereupon the King is advised to go
himself thither; who complained, That he was not able in regard of his wants,
saying, that his Treasurers told him, all the Rents of his Exchequer would
scarce maintain him in Clothes, Victuals and Alms. Whereupon some of his Lords
answered, That he might thank himself, if he were poor, since he gave so much
of his Revenue to his Favorites, and had so far alienated his Lands, that he
was only a King in name, rather than for his Estate; though his Ancestors were
magnificent Princes, who abounded in all worldly glory and wealth, and had
heaped up vast Treasures, only by the Rents and Profits of the Kingdom. The
King being stung with this just Reprehension, began by their advice, to call
his Sheriffs Bailiffs, and other Officers to a strict account, and squeezed
great sums of money out of them, forcing Ralph Briton his Lord Treasurer, to
pay him a thousand pound, and others very considerable sums, whereby he at this
time filled his Coffers.

After two years affliction a Parliament is called at Westminster, wherein the
Bishops admonish the King, by his Fathers Example to be at peace and unity with
his People, and remove from him Strangers, and to govern the Kingdom by Natives
of the Realm, and by the Laws, otherwise they would proceed by Ecclesiastical
Censure both against himself, and his Counselors. The King ^^ing no way to
subsist, but by temporizing, removes all Strangers from about him, calls his
new Officers to account, and restores the Lords to their places and possessions.

Soon after another Parliament is called, which the King would have to sit in
the Tower, whither the Lords refusing to come, a place of more freedom is
appointed, in which Parliament the Sheriffs are removed for corruption; and the
King would have taken the Great Seal from the Bishop of Chichester, who refused
to deliver it, as having received it from the Common Council of the kingdom.

In the 21 Year of this Kings Reign another Parliament is called at London,
where the King requires a great sum of money, which being directly opposed, the
King promises by Oath never more to injure the Nobility, so they would but
relieve him at present, and that he would use only the Counsel of his Natural
Subjects, and freely grant the inviolable observation of their Liberties.
Whereupon a Subsidy was granted him, but with this condition, that four Knights
in every County be appointed to receive and pay in the same, either to some
Abbey or or Castle where it may be safely kept, that if the King fail of
performing his Oaths and Promises, it may be restored to the Country from
whence it was collected.

About this time the King, to please the Lords, ordered Peter de Rivalis and
some other of his French Favorites, to appear in Westminster Hall as
Delinquents, and he him self coming thither, sat in person upon the Bench
among his Judges. And Peter de Rivalis being first called, the King looking
sternly upon him, spoke thus to him:

O thou Traitor, by thy wicked advice I was drawn to set my Seal to those
treacherous Letters for the destruction of the Earl Marshal in Ireland, the
C^tents whereof, were to me unknown. And by thine, and such like wicked
counsel, I banished my natural Subjects, and turned their minds and hearts from
me. By the bad counsel of thee and thy Accomplices, I was stirred up to make
War upon them, to my exceeding loss, and the dishonor of my Realm: for thereby
I wasted my Treasure, and lost many worthy persons, together with much of my
former honor and respect. I therefore require of thee an exact account as well
of my Treasure as the Custody of the Wards, together with many other
Perquisites and Profits belonging to the Crown.

To whom Rivalis, denying nothing whereof he was charged, but falling to the
ground, thus answered: My Sovereign Lord and King, I have been raised up and
enriched with worldly goods only by you, confound not therefore your own
Creature, but please to grant me some time to make my defense against what I am
charged with. Thou shall (said the King) be carried to the Tower of London,
there to deliberate of it, till I am satisfied. And he was sent accordingly.
But Stephen de Seagrave Lord Chief Justice, whom the King likewise called most
wicked Traitor, had time till Michaelmas to make up his accounts, and so had
others. But afterward by Mediation, and paying very great Fines to the King,
they obtained their Liberty, and were a while after again taken into grace and
favor.

In the midst of these distractions and troubles, it pleased God to inflict
upon this City, and the Kingdom the Plague of Famine, as well as the Sword,
whereby the Poor miserably perished for want of Bread. The Authors of those
Times relate this Story very credibly, to show how displeasing Unmercifulness
and want of Charity is in the sigh^ of God. Several poor people plucked the
ears of Corn while they were green in the common Fields, merely to keep
themselves from starving; at which the Owners being much offended, desired the
Priest of the Parish to curse and excommunicate them all the next Sunday; but
one in the Company adjured the Priest in the Name of God, to exempt his Corn
from the Sentence, saying, That it pleased him well that the Poor being pinched
with Famine, had taken his Corn; and so commended what was left to the blessing
of God. The Priest being compelled by the importunity of the others, had no
sooner begun the Sentence, but a sudden Tempest of Thunder, Lightning, Wind,
Hail, and Rain, interrupted him, whereby all the Cornfieldsd thereabout were
laid waste and destroyed, as if they had been trodden under foot with Cart and
Horses; yea, no kind of Fowl nor Beast would feed upon it. But this honest
tenderhearted man found all his Corn and Ground, though mingled among theirs,
altogether untouched, and without the least harm.

Awhile after the K calls another Parl. at London, in order to the raising of
more money, having tried before to borrow of the Londoners, and found them to
incline to the Lords. To this Parliament the Lords come, armed for their own
defense, and make Richard the Kings Brother Spokesman; wherein they aggravate
his breach of promise, since neither were Strangers removed from about him, but
taken more into favor than before. Nor was the former money disposed of
according to appointment, but the King made bold to make use of it at his own
pleasure, the Earl of Provence the Young Queens Father, and Simon Montford, a
new Favorite, and a French man born, now made Earl of Leicester, having a good
share of the money collected; they acquaint him also with all the rest of the
disorders of the kingdom.

The King was so moved at this their Remonstrance, that taking his Oath to
refer the matter to diverse grave men of the kingdom, Articles were drawn,
sealed, and publicly set up to the view of all. And soon after the Earl of
March solicites the King to make another journey into France, whereupon he
calls a Parliament at London, and demands Aid; which was not only opposed, but
an account required of all the Taxations hitherto given, with an absolute
denial of any more. Upon which the King comes to the Parliament in Person,
earnestly, and indeed humbly craving their Aid, for this once. But all
prevailed not for they had made a Vow to the contrary; and the King is driven
to get what he can of particular men, of whom partly by Gift, and partly by
Loan, he gets so much that he carries over with him thirty Barrels of Sterling
money. This Expedition had no better success than the former; for after a whole
years stay, the King was forced to make a dishonorable Truce with the French,
and upon his return home, he laid new Exactions on the Jews, and the Londoners.

In the next Parliament at Westminster, enquiry was made how much money the
Pope had yearly out of England; and it was found to be annually threescore
thousand Marks, which was more than the Revenue of the Crown: which the King
ordered an account to be taken of, and sent it to the Council at Lions. This so
vexed the Pope, that he said, It is time to make an end with the Emperor (with
whom he was then at variance) that we may crush these petty Kings, for the
Dragon once appeased or destroyed, these lesser Snakes will soon be trodden
down. Upon which it was absolutely ordained, that the Pope should have no more
money out of England. But the King being of an irresolute and wavering nature,
and afraid of Threats, soon gave over, and the Pope continued his former Rapine.

The King had now abundance of Grandees come to see him from Foreign parts, and
having called a Parliament at London, he is sharply taxed for his Expenses, and
severely reprehended for his breach of promise; having vowed and declared in
his Charter, never more to injure the State again; also for his violent taking
up Provisions of Wax, Silk, Robes, and especially of Wine, contrary to the will
of the Seller, and many other Grievances they complain of. All which the King
hears patiently, in hope of obtaining Supplies, which yet they would not give,
and thereupon the Parliament is prorogued till Midsummer following, and the
King growing more furious than before, it was then dissolved in discontent. But
the Parliament not supplying him, he is advised to supply his wants with sale
of his Plate, and Jewels of the Crown, being told, That though they were sold,
yet they would revert again to him, And having with great loss received money
for them, he asked who had bought them? Answer is made, The City of London.
That City (said he) is an inexhaustible Gulf, if Octavius Treasure were to
besold, they would surely buy it.

In his two and fortieth year another Parliament is held, which by some was
called Insanum Parliamentum, the Mad Parliament; because at this Parliament the
Lords came with great Retinues of armed men, and many things were enacted
contrary to the Kings Prerogative. And now to vex the City, the King commands a
Fair to be kept at Westminster, forbidding under great penalties, all exercise
of Merchandise within London, for fifteen days. But this Novelty came to
nothing, for the inconvenience of the place, as it was then, and the foulness
of the Weather, brought more damage to the Traders than benefit.

At Christmas likewise he demands New-yearsgifts of the Londoners; and shortly
after writes unto them his Letters, imperiously commanding them to aid him with
money, and thereby gets twenty thousand pound of them, for which the next year
he craves pardon of them. But notwithstanding his continual taking up of all
Provisions for his house without money, yet he lessens his Housekeeping in no
honorable manner. Now seeing he could get nothing of the States assembled in
Parliament, he sends or writes to every Nobleman in particular, declaring his
Poverty, and how he was bound by Charter in a debt of thirty thousand pound to
those of Bordeaux and Gascoign, who otherwise would not have suffered him to
come back to England. But failing of any relief from the Temporal Lords, he
addresseth his Letters to the Bishops, of whom he finds as little relief; yet
by much importunity and his own presence, he got an hundred pound of the Abbot
of Ramsey, but the Abbot of Borough had the confidence to deny him, though the
King told him, It was more charity to give money to him, than to a Beggar that
went from door to door. The Abbot of St. Albans was yet more kind, and gave him
threescore Marks; to such lowness did did the profuseness of this indigent King
bring him.

But now the Lords assemble again at London, and press him with his promise,
that the Lord Chief Justice, Ch^ncellor and Treasurer should be appointed by
the General Council of the Kingdom, but they go home again frustrate of their
desi^es. Not long after a Parliament is assembled at London, and Henry de Bath
one of the Judges, and Counselor to the King, who by corruption had got a
vast Est^te, is accused by Philip Darcy; and Bath thereupon appears strongly
guarded with his Friends* The Accusations were many, but especially two; That
he troubled the whole Realm, and stirred up all the Lords thereof against the
King, and that for reward he had discharged a Malefactor out of Prison. The
King was so enraged to see him with so many men, that mounting into an high
place, he cries out aloud, Whosoever kills Henry de Bath, shall be pardoned for
his death, and I do here acquit him, and so departs. But Sir John Mansel, one
of his Council spoke thus to some who was ready to execute his will:

Gentlemen and Friends, It is not necessary for us to put that presently in
execution which the King commands in his anger; for it may be when his wrath
is over, he will be sorry for what he has said. Besides if any violence be
offered to Bath, here are his friends ready to revenge it to the utmost. And so
Sir Henry Bath escaped the present danger, and afterward with money and
friends made his peace.

About this time the King by Proclamation calls the Londoners to Westminster,
and there causes the Bishops of Worcester and Chichester to declare his
intentions, and to exhort the People to undertake the recovery of the Holy Land
from the Saracens, the King being persuaded thereto by the Pope, who usually
sent Princes abro^d to recover Palestine, on purpose that he might fleece the
Subjects of some, and seize the Lands of others at home in their absence.

But the Londoners had no mind to this Pilgrimage, and therefore all the
Bishops Arguments prevailed only upon three poor Knights, whom the King
thereupon in open view, embraces, kisseth, and calls his Brethren; but checks
the Londoners as ignoble Mercenaries, and there himself takes his Oath for
performing this Journey, and to set forth upon Midsummer day next. In taking
his Oath he lays his right hand upon his Breast, according to the manner of a
Priest; and after on the Book, and kissed it as a Layman.

Now for money to carry on this, the King demands a Tenth of the Estates of the
Clergy and Laiety for three years together. To which end a Parliament is called
at London, where the Bishops are first dealt withal, as being a work of Piety;
but they absolutely refuse it, then the Temporal Lords are set upon, and they
answer as the Bishops; which put the King into so great a rage, that he drove
out all that were in his Chamber, as if he had been mad. Then he falls to
persuade them apart, sending first for the Bishop of Ely, and tells him, how
kindly he had formerly been to him; the Bishop dissuades him from the Journey
by the example of the French King, and uses many other Arguments; which the
King hearing, commanded the Bishop in great passion to be thrust out of doors,
and perceiving by this what he might expect from others, he falls upon his
former violent courses, and the City of London, is compelled to contribute a
thousand Marks. Gascoign is likewise ready to revolt, unless speedy succor be
sent them; and general Musters are made, which occasions another Parliament at
London, who it seems began to consider that the Kings turn must be served one
way for other, and therefore they agreed to relieve him the usual way, rather
than force him to those extravagant courses which he took: Yet so as the
Reformation of the Government. and the Ratification of their Laws and Liberties
might once again be solemnly confirmed.

After fifteen days consultation a Tenth is granted for this holy expedition;
and thereupon those often confirmed Charters called Magna Charta, and Charta de
Forestae are again ratified, and that in the most solemn and ceremonious
manner, that State and Religion could possibly devise. The King with all the
chief Nobility of the Realm in their Robes, and the Bishops in their Vestments
with burning Candles in their hands, assemble to hear the terrible Sentence of
Excommunication against the Infringers of the same; and at the lighting of
those Candles, the King having received one in his hand, gives it to the
Prelate that stood by, saying, It becomes not me who am no Priest to hold this
Candle, my heart shall be a greater testimony; and withal laid his hand spread
upon his breast during the reading the Sentence. Which done, he caused the
Charter of King John his Father, granted by his free Consent, to be openly
read. And then having thrown down their Candles, which lay smoking on the
ground, they cried out, So let them who incur this Sentence be extinct, and
have no better savor than these snuffs. And the King with a loud voice said,
As God help me, I will, as I am a man, a Christian, a Knight, a King crowned
and anointed, inviolably observe all these things. And therewithal the Bells
rung out, and the People shouted for Joy.

Yet was not all quieted by this Grant, for Si^^^ M^^tford Earl of ^ercester, a
while after char^^g the King with breach of promise; the King in great rage
replied, No promise was to be kept with an unworthy (...). At which words
Montford rises up, and protested, That the King lied, and were he not or (...)
by his Royal Dignity he he would make (...) ^^pent his words. The King,
commanded his Attendants to lay hold of him, but the Lords would not suffer it;
Yet after this great affront, Montford is again sent to Gascoun with a great
Fleet by the King, who goes also himself into France, and there spends a vast
deal of money, but it is the Londoners must pay for all for returning home
about Christmas, they presented him with an hundred pound in Money and two
hundred pound in plate, which was so slighted, and so ill taken, that advantage
was soon found against them about the escape of a Prisoner, which cost them
Three Thousand Marks and commonly he had every year one quarrel or other with
the Citizens which they are sure to make satisfaction for.

Soon after another Parliament is called at London, wherein the Lords again
expostulate about their former Liberties, requiring that the Lord Chief
Justice, etc. should be chosen by Parliament. They likewise require twenty four
Conservators should be elected, twelve by the King, and twelve by themselves,
to see to the due execution of these Charters, which the King, knowing their
strength, yielded to, and both he and his Son the Prince, swear to confirm the
same. A while before the King sent to some Monasteries to borrow money, his
Officers alleging, that the King was Lord of all they had; who answered, they
acknowledged that; but yet so as to defend it, and not to destroy it, or take
it illegally away from them.

scene from London history K Henry 6 Murdered in ye Tower


scene from London history K. Edward 5.4 his brother Murdered.


scene from London history Q. Elizabeth Prisoner in the Tower


The Lords having thus got the Government into their hands, obliege the King to
free them from all Obedience and Allegiance whenever he infringed their
Charter. Yet soon after the King sends to R^me to be freed from his Oath; which
he obtained. Whereupon the Lords put themselves into arms, and Moniford Earl of
Leicester their General, takes many Castles. The King likewise raises Forces.
The Barons march toward London, under a Banner richly and beautifully
flourished with the Kings Arms. And as they passed by the Houses or Possessions
of those that favored the Popes Bulls (whereby the King himself, and all
others who had formerly sworn to observe and maintain those new Ordinances and
Laws, and to support the Authority of the twenty four Peers, were fully
absolved from their Oaths) they robbed and wasted them, as Enemies to the King
and kingdom.

They then approached the City of London, and by their Letters desired the Lord
Mayor and Citizens to send them word whether they resolved to support the
Authority of the Peers or not; protesting before God, themselves intended
nothing else; and that if any thing were defective in those Laws, they should
be reformed.

The Lord Mayor sends these Letters with all speed to the King, who desired
likewise to know, whether they would support the Laws of the twenty four Peers
or not: they stoutly answered, that they would, since by the Kings command they
had all sworn so to do. The King was extremely enraged at this answer, but he
could get no other; and the same answer they sent to the Lords, who thereupon
proceeded in their march, and were with much joy and kindness received into
London, and soon after routed the Prince, who came against them with a
considerable Army.

But some of the meaner sort of the City, intending under the pretense of these
disturbances, to do mischief, elected two ambitious Fellows, whom they called
the two Constables of London; and agreed, that at the tolling of a great Bell
in St. Paul's Church, as many as would join with them, should be ready to act
whatever the two Constables commanded them; and though all endeavors were used
to prevent them, yet their desire of plunder so furiously transported them,
that upon the tolling that Bell, a great number met together; and marching
about eight miles Westward from London, they ruined and destroyed the House and
Possessions of the Kings Brother Richard King of the Romans, carrying away all
his Goods with them. Which insolent outrage much furthered the succeeding Wars,
for whereas before Richard being of a mild and virtuous disposition had used
all his endeavors to make peace upon all occasions, he now became a professed
Enemy both to the Barons, and the City of London.

After this the Lords sent a Letter to the King, and protested with all
humility and submission that they intended nothing but the performance of their
Oaths, by defending those Laws and Ordinances which had been established in
Parliament for the benefit of the King and the Realm. But the King, his Brother
Richard, and Edward the young Prince, thinking nothing more disdainful than
that Subjects should rule and command their Sovereign, resolved to revenge it,
and bid utter defiance to the Lords; and both Armies met near a Town called
Lewis in Sussex, where a cruel Battle was fought, and the King, his Brother,
and the Prince, were all taken prisoners, with many other great Commanders, and
twenty thousand men slain. Yet a while after, upon some Conditions, they were
all three set at Liberty, and the former Laws and Ordinances were confirmed in
Parliament, and the King took an Oath for confirming the power of the twelve
Peers.

After which the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester, the two Generals of the
Lords Party, fell into a great difference; which Prince Edward taking advantage
of, raises an Army, and persuading the Earl of Gloucester to join with him,
they fell upon the Earl of Leicesters Army, and utterly routed them, himself,
his eldest Son, and many others being slain. Which overthrow utterly defeated
the Barons, and revived the Melancholy King: who calling a Parliament, all the
former Decrees were made void, together with the power of the twelve Peers, and
the King regained his former Liberty and Authority.

When this Parliament was ended, the King (perhaps by the instigation of his
Brother Richard, who was so horridly abused without cause, by the baser sort of
the Inhabitants of the City) resolved utterly to destroy and consume the City
of London by Fire, because he said the Magistrates and Inhabitants had always
hated him, and taken part with the Lords against him. Whereupon those of the
Nobility, who were most in favor with the King, humbly besought him, By no
means to do such an execrable deed, which would not only weaken his own
Kingdom and Government, but would likewise make him infamous throughout the
World to all Generations.

They were very earnest in their suit, and their Reasons were unanswerable: yet
the King prorested, That he was resolved to do it, and his determination should
be unchangeable, and his Justice upon such Rebellious Villains, should be a
President to deter all perverse and obstinate Rebels and Traitors in time to
come. This severe Resolution made the Citizens tremble, at the indignation of
their angry King; so that perceiving his rage and fury not to be mitigated,
they caused an instrument to be drawn in writing, which was confirmed with
their Common Seal, wherein they confessed their Rebellion, and humbly craved
pardon for the same; and without any exception or reservation, they wholly
submitted their Lands, Goods, and Lives, together with the whole City, to the
Kings Grace and Mercy.

This Instrument they sent to Windsor to the King, by some of the chiefest of
the Citizens, who were ordered to present it on their knees; but so furious was
the Kings wrath against them, and so implacable was his anger, that he reputed
none to be his Friends, who interposed as Mediators on their behalf: neither
would he admit any of them into his presence, but commanded them immediately to
be thrown into prison, and five of the principal of them he gave to the Prince,
together with all their Lands and Goods; and all the rest he bestowed among his
Attendants, who made them Slaves, and suffered them to enjoy the least part of
their own.

But when the King had thus a little revenged himself, and time had cooled his
mighty passion, he began to hearken to the importunate intercession of Prince
Edward his Son, and soon after received the City and all its Inhabitants into
favor again, and laying only a Fine upon them of a thousand Marks, he
restored to them all their Charters, Liberties, and Customs, which for their
transgressions he had seized into his hands.

And now though these Intestine Troubles and Civil Wars, which like an
outrageous Fire dispersed into the midst of a well compacted City, had end
angered the whole State of the kingdom, were thus appeased; and though the Earl
of Gloucester by his revolt from the Barons, and joining with the Prince, had
greatly furthered this good work, and had caused the King to enjoy a happy
peace; yet was this Earl so little trusted, that he found neither favor nor
reward; but was much slighted, and had but cold entertainment at Court, which
he highly resented, and meditated revenge.

In this fury he came headlong into the City of London, and complaining of his
ill usage, the common people flockt in Troops about him, and daringly committed
many notorious outrages within the City, forgetting the great Calamity they had
lately suffered, and what favors they had received. From thence they went to
the Kings Palace at Westminster, which they most barbarously rifled, spoiled,
and ransacked. This might have produced another Civil War, but the Tumult was
in a little time dispersed, and the Prince again interposed himself an earnest
Mediator between the King and all the Offenders, and procured a large and free
pardon for the Earl of Gloucester, whereby all things were again appeased and
quieted.

After which the Earl of Gloucester and Prince Edward went into the Holy Land,
where he continued till after the death of his Father.

It is observed of this King Henry the third, that he was never constant in his
love nor his hate; for he never had so great a Favorite but he cast him off
with disgrace, nor so great an Enemy whom he received not into favor. An
example of both which Qualities was seen in his carriage to Hubert de Burgh,
who was for a time the greatest Favorite, yet cast out afterward in miserable
disgrace; and then no man held in greater hatred, yet received afterward into
Grace again. And it is strange to read what Crimes this Hubert was charged with
at his Arraignment, and especially one;

That to dissuade a great Lady from marrying with the King, he had said, The
King was a squint-eyed Fool, and a kind of Leper, deceitful, perjured, more
faint-hearted than a Woman, and utterly unfit for any Ladies Company. For
which, and other crimes laid to his charge in the Kings Bench, where the King
himself was present, he was adjudged to have his Lands Confiscate, and to be
deprived of his Title of Earl, yet after all, he was restored to his Estate
again, and suffered to live quiet.

There is likewise an instance of his Timorousness in the following passage.
The King being in his Barge on the Thames, on a sudden the Air grew dark, and
there followed a terrible Shower with Thunder and Lightning, of which the King
being impatient, commanded himself to be put to Land at the next Stairs, which
was Durham-house, where Simon Montford Earl of Leicester lived; which the Earl
having notice of, came to wait on the King, saying, Sir, Why are you afraid,
the Tempest is now past. Whereunto the King with a stern look, replied, I fear
Thunder and Lightning extremely, but by the head of God, I fear thee more than
all the Thunder and Lightning in the World. Whereto the Earl answered, My Liege
it is injurious and incredible that you should stand so much in fear of me, who
have been always loyal both to you and your Kingdom; whereas you ought to fear
your Enemies, even those that destroy the Realm, and abuse your Majesty with
bad Counsels.

In this Kings Reign the two great Charters of Magna Charta and Charta de
Forestae were ratified and confirmed. The Pleas of the Crown were likewise
pleaded in the Tower of London. All Wears in the Thames, were in this Kings
time ordered to be pulled up and destroyed. Also the Citizens of London were
allowed by Charter to pass Toll-free through England, and to have free liberty
of Hunting about London: they had likewise license to have and use a Common
Seal. It was also ordained that no Sheriff of London should continue in his
Office longer than one Year^, whereas before they continued many; and the City
were allowed to present their Mayor to the Barons of the Exchequer to be sworn,
who before was presented to the King wherever he were. In the 32 year of his
Reign, the Wharf in London called Queen-Hith was farmed to the Citizens for
fifty pounds a year: which is scarce now worth fifteen.

This King caused a Chest of Gold to be made for laying up the Relics of King
Edward the Confessor, in the Church of Westminster. Hubert de Burgh Earl of
Kent was buried in the Church of the Friars Preachers in London; to which
Church he gave his Palace at Westminster, which afterward the Archbishop of
York bought and made it his Inn, then commonly called York Place, and now
Whitchall.

In the thirteenth year of this King, there were great Thunders and Lightnings,
which burnt many houses, and slew both Men and Beasts. In his 15. year, upon S.
Paul's day, when Roger Wiger Bishop of London, was at Mass at S. Paul's, the Sky
suddenly grew dark, and such a terrible Thunderclap sell upon the Church, that
it was shaken as if it would have fallen; and so great a flash of Lightning
came out of a dark Cloud, that all the Church seemed to be on fire, so that all
the people ran out of the Church and fell on the ground with astonishment. In
1233. five Suns were seen at one time together: after which followed so great a
Dearth, that people were forced to eat Horseflesh, and Barks of Trees: and in
London twenty thousand were starved for want of Bread.

In 1236. the River of Thames overflowed the Banks, so that in the great
Palace at Westminster, men rowed with Boats in the midst of the Hall. In 1240.
many strange Fishes came ashore, and among others forty Sea Bulls, and one of a
huge bigness passed through London Bridge unhurt, till he came to the Kings
House at Moreclack, where he was killed. In 1263. the Thames again overflowed
the Banks about Lambeth, and drowned Houses and Fields for the space of six
Miles. And the same Year there was a Blazing Star seen for three Months. In
1264. seven hundred Jews were slain in London, their Goods spoiled, and their
Synagogue defaced, because one Jew would have forced a Christian to have paid
above two pence a Week for the use of twenty shillings.

In 1268. there happened a great quarrel between the Goldsmiths and Tailors of
London, which occasioned much mischief to be done, and many men were slain; for
which Riot twelve of the Ringleaders were hanged. In 1269. the River of Thames
was so hard frozen from the last of November to Gandlemas, that men and Beasts
passed over from Lambeth to Westminster, and Goods were brought from Sandwich
and other Port Towns by Land. In 1271. the Steeple of Bow in Cheapside fell
down, and slew many people both Men and Women. About the same time a Child was
born near London, who is reported at two years old to have cured all Diseases.
And at Greenwich near London, a Lamb was yeaned which had two perfect bodies,
and but one head.

King Henry the third died Nov. 16. 1272. when he had reigned 56 years and 28
days, and was buried at Westminster, having built a great part of that Church.
As soon as he was dead, the great Lords of the Realm caused his eldest Son
Prince Edward (the first of that name) to be proclaimed King; and assembling at
the New Temple in London, they there took order for the quiet Governing of the
Realm till he came; for he was at this time in the Holy Land, and had been
there above a year when his Father died, and performed many great Actions;
after which, out of Envy to his valor, a desperate Saracen, who had been often
employed to him from their General, being one time upon pretense of some secret
Message admitted alone into his Chamber, gave him three wounds with a poisoned
knife, two in the Arm, and one near the Armpit, which were thought to be
mortal, and perhaps had been so, if out of unspeakable love, the Lady Eleanor
his wife had not sucked out the poison of his wounds with her mouth, thereby
effecting a Cure, which else had been incurable: and it is no wonder that Love
should do Wonders, since it is it self a Wonder.

When Edward heard of his Fathers death, he took it far more heavily, than he
did that of his young Son Henry, of whose death he had heard a little before,
at which when Chartes King of Sicily (where he then was) wondered, he answered,
He might have more Sons, but he could never have another Father.

After his return to London, he was crowned at Westminster, August 15. 1274.
and soon after called a Parliament, wherein he would admit no Churchmen to
sit, And a while after he makes War against Baliol King of Scots, whom he takes
prisoner with the loss of twenty five thousand Scots, and commits him prisoner
to the Tower of London. He likewise brings from Scotland the fatal Chair
wherein the Kings of Scotland used to be Crowned, which now seems to recover
that secret operation, according to the ancient Prophecy, That whithersoever
that Chair should be removed, the Kingdom should be removed with it: and this
Chair King Edward caused to be brought out of Scotland, and to be placed at
Westminster among the Monuments, where it still continues.

This King restored to the Citizens of London their Liberties, which for some
misdemeanors they had forfeited. In the sixteenth year of his Reign, the Sun
was so exceeding hot, that many men died with the extremity thereof; and yet
Wheat was sold for three shillings four pence a Quarter at London. This King by
Proclamation forbid the use of Sea-coal in London and the Suburbs, for avoiding
the noisome Smoke. In his time the Bakers of London were first drawn upon
Hurdles, by Henry Wallis Mayor, and Corn was then first sold by weight.

In a Synod held in his time, it was Ordained according to the Constitution of
the General Council, That no Ecclesiastical person shall have more than one
Benefice, with the Cure of Souls. About this time the new work of the Church at
Westminster was finished; and the Foundation of the Black-Fryars near Ludgate,
was laid by Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury. And Queen Margaret began to
build the Quire of the Gray Friars in London, now called Christchurch. In his
time was begun to be made the great Conduit, formerly at the lower end of
Cheapside. And Henry Wall is Mayor, made the Tun in Cornhil a Prison for
Nightwalkers, and likewise built a House at the Stocks Market for Fish and
Flesh, which since the fatal Fire in 1666. is demolished and laid into the
Street.

In the ninth year of his Reign, there was such a great Frost, that five Arches
of London Bridge, and all Rochester Bridge was carried down, and born away. On
St. Nicholas day in the Even, were great Earthquakes, Lightning, and Thunder,
with a great Dragon, and a Blazing Star, which extremely terrified the People.
In his two and twentieth year, three men had their right hands cut off for
rescuing a Prisoner from an Officer of the City of London: and about that time
the River of Thames overflowing the Banks, made a breach at Redriff near
London, and the lower Grounds thereabout were all laid under Water. In his
twenty seventh year, a Fire being kindled in the lesser Hall of the Palace of
Westminster, the flame thereof being driven by the wind, fired the Monastery
next adjoining: which with the Palace were both consumed. The same year by an
Act of Common Council in London, with the Kings consent, it was Ordained, that
a fat Cock should be sold for three half pence, two Pallets for three half
pence, a fat Capon for two pence half penny, a Goose for four pence, a Mallard
three half pence, a Partridge three half pence, a Pheasant four pence, a Heron
six pence, a Plover one penny, a Swan three shillings, a Crane twelve pence,
two Woodcocks three half pence, a fat Lamb from Christmas to Shrovetide sixteen
pence, and all the year after for four pence; and Wheat was this year so
plentiful, that a Quarter was sold for ten Groats.

In his thirty second year William Wallace, who had often caused great trouble
in Scotland, was taken and hanged, beheaded, and quartered in London.

After King Edward had reigned thirty four years and seven months, he died,
and was buried at Westminster, leaving his Son Edward the second, called
Carnarvan to succeed him: Of whom the People had at first great expectation,
but he soon brake all his Fathers admonitions, especially that he should banish
for ever Pierce Gaveston, who had been his Companion in many Irregularities in
his Youth. He married Isabel, the daughter of Philip the Fair, of France, and
makes Gaveston his chiefest Favorite; which so incensed the Lords, that they
threaten, unless he would banish him his Court and Kingdom, they would hinder
his Coronation. Which he promises to do, but does not perform; but on the
contrary, bestows so much of his Treasury upon him, that he scarce left means
to sustain himself, or to maintain his Queen.

This put the Lords into a new discontent, who thereupon went again to the
King, and told him plainly, That unless he would put Gaveston out of the Court
and Kingdom, they would rise up in Arms against him as a perjured King.
Whereupon out of fear, the King sends him to France, where finding no
entertainment more than in other places, he soon returns again, and is received
into as much favor as before. Whereupon the whole Nobility join together
(except Gilbert Earl of Gloucester) and raising Forces send to the King, either
to deliver Gaveston into their hands, or else to banish him immediately out of
the kingdom. But the King, led by evil Counsel, still refused. Whereupon the
Lords hearing where he was, seized him, and cut off his head.

The King being much concerned at his death, to vex the Nobility, takes into
his nearest familiarity and Council, the two Spencers, Sir Hugh the Father, and
Sir Hugh the Son, men as debaucht and odious to the Lords and the People, as
the other was; for they inclined the King to a lewd and wanton course of life
among Whores and Concubines, and to forsake the company of his modest and
virtuous Queen, which made him a Scorn to Foreign Princes, and hateful in the
sight of all honest men; yet the King, in despite of his Lords, supported the
Spencers in whatever they did. Whereupon the Lords rise in Arms, and the King
likewise raises Forces, where a great Battle was fought, and the Barons were
overthrown, and after the Fight, two and twenty of the Lords were beheaded:
which increased the pride and insolence of the Spencers.

Yet the Queen who fled to Germany, soon after returned, accompanied with 300
Knights and select men at Arms, with whom the Lords and the Londoners joined;
and seizing upon the Spencers, the Father, who was fourscore and ten years old,
was cruelly executed, having his heart pulled out, and his body left hanging on
the Gallows while he was alive; and the Son, with the King himself were
imprisoned: and soon after young Spencer was drawn, hanged and quartered, his
Head set upon London Bridge, and his four Quarters bestowed in several Cities.
Then was a Parliament called, wherein it was agreed to depose the King, and set
up his Son, which he (because they threatened to exclude both him and his Son,
and set up a King of another Race) consented to. And thereupon the Bishop of
Hereford, and other Commissioners, came and sat at a place appointed to take
his Resignation, and the King coming forth in mourning Robes, upon a sudden
fell down in a swound, and could hardly be recovered. After which the Bishop of
Hereford declared the cause of their coming. To which the King answered, That
as he much grieved his People should be so hardened against him, as utterly to
reject him, so i^ was some comfort to him, that they would yet receive his Son
to be their Sovereign.

Whereupon Sir William Trussel Speaker of the Parliament, in the name of the
whole kingdom, renounced Homage to the King, in these words:

I William Trussel, in the name of all the Men of the Land of England, and of
all the Parliament Procurator, do resign to thee Edward the Homage that was
made to thee sometimes, and from this time forward now following, I defy thee,
and deprive thee of all Royal Power, and I shall never be tendant to thee as
for King, after this time.

Not long after, this King was murdered by Sir John Matravers and Thomas
Gourney, by thrusting an hot Spit up his Fundament into his Bowels, after he
had reigned nineteen Years and 6 months. 1327. In the eighth year of his reign,
was so great a Dearth, that Horses and Dogs were eaten, and Thieves in Prison
pulled in pieces, those that were newly brought in amongst them, and eat them
half alive. Which continuing three years, in the end brought such a Pestilence,
that the living scarce sufficed to bury the dead. In this Kings time, digging
the Foundation of a Work about St. Paul's, were found above an hundred Heads of
Oxen and Kine, which confirmed the opinions, that of old time it had been the
Temple of Jupiter, and that there was the Sacrifice of Beasts.

Edward of Windsor, eldest Son of King Edward the second, by the order of
Parliament upon his Fathers Resignation, was proclaimed King of England, Jan.
25. 1327. and soon after a Parliament was called, wherein Edmund Earl of Kent,
the Kings Uncle, is accused for intending to restore his Brother; upon which he
was condemned, and brought to the Scaffold, but was so generally beloved of the
People, that he stood there from one of the Clock till five in the Afternoon,
before any Executioner could be found to do the Office, till at last a silly
Wretch in the Marshalsey was gotten to cut off his head. But the authors of his
death escaped not long themselves: for in the third year of the Kings Reign,
another Parliament is holden, wherein the Queen has all her great Jointure
taken from her, and is put to her Pension of a thousand pound a Year, and her
self confined to a Castle, where she remained the rest of her days, no fewer
than thirty years. Time long enough to convince her, that her being the
daughter of a King, the wife of a King, and the mother of a King, were glorious
Titles, but all not worth the Liberty of a mean Estate.

And Roger Mortimer her great Minion and Favorite, lately created Earl of the
Marches of Wales, was seized on this manner. The King taking others with him,
went secretly one night by Torch-light, through a private way under ground,
till they came to the Queens chamber, where leaving the King without, some of
them went in, and found the Queen with Mortimer ready to go to bed; and laying
hands on him, they brought him out, after whom the Queen followed, crying, Good
Son, good Son, take pity upon the gentle Mortimer; suspecting her Son had been
amongst them. This way was taken to apprehend him, to prevent Tumult, he having
no less than ninescore Knights and Gentlemen, besides other meaner Servants
about him continually. Being thus seized, he is committed to the Tower, and
accused of diverse crimes, and amongst the rest, that he had been too familiar
with the Queen, by whom she was thought to be with child. Of which Articles he
was found guilty, and condemned, and thereupon is drawn and hanged at the
common Gallows at the Elms, now called Tyburn, where his body remained two days
an opprobrious spectacle to all beholders.

This King Edward the third was a victorious Prince, and with the assistance of
his Son Edward, called the Black Prince, won many considerable Victories
against the French and Scetch, taking both their Kings prisoners, who were
committed to the Tower of London. This King instituted the Order of the Garter,
upon what cause is uncertain; the common opinion is, that a Garter of his own
Queen, or as some say, of the Countess of Salisbury slipping off in a dance,
King Edward stooped and took it up, whereat some of his Lords that were present
smiling, as at an amorous action, he seriously said, It should not be long ere
sovereign honor were done to that Garter. Whereupon he added that French
Motto, Honi soit qui maly pense, Evil to him that evil thinks, therein checking
his Lords sinister suspicion.

In the fourth year of his Reign the Sea Banks were overflown through all
England, but especially in the River Thames, so that all the Cattle and Beasts
near thereunto were drowned. There was likewise found a Serpent having two
heads, and two faces like a Woman, one face dressed after the new fashion, and
another like the old, with Wings like a Bat, and men and women perished in
diverse places by Lightning and Thunder; Fiends, Devils, and Apparitions were
likewise seen by men, and spoke to them as they traveled. At this time upon
the Petition of the Londoners, an Act was made that no common Whore should wear
any Hood, except striped with diverse colors, nor Furs, but Garments turned the
wrong side outward. This King confirmed the Liberties of the City of London,
and ordained that the L. Mayor should sit in all places of Judgment within the
Liberty of the same as chief Justice, the Kings person only excepted; and that
every Alderman that had been Mayor, should be Justice of Peace in all London
and Middlesex, and every Alderman that had not been Mayor, should be Justice of
Peace in his own Ward. Also he granted to the Citizens of London, that they
should not be forced without their own consent, to go out of the City to fight,
or defend the Land: and likewise that after that day, the Charter and
Franchises of the City should not be seized into the Kings hands, but only for
Treason and Rebellion done by the whole City. Likewise that Southwark should be
under the Government of the City, and the Lord Mayor to choose a Bailiff there
as he pleased. He also granted to the Citizens of London, that the Officers of
the Mayor and Sheriffs should from that day forward use Maces of silver parcel
gilt.

In the twenty second year of his Reign, a contagious Pestilence arose in the
East and South parts of the World, and coming at last into England, it so
wasted the people, that scarce the tenth person of all sorts were left alive.
There died in London (some say in Norwich) between the first of January and the
first of July 57374 persons. This Plague lasted nine Years. In the thirty fifth
year of his Reign another Plague happened which was called the second
Pestilence; in which died many Lords and Bishops. In this Kings time a Frost
lasted from the midst of September to the Month of April. In the fourth year
of his Reign a solemn Just or Turnament was held in Cheapside, London, between
the great Cross and the great Conduit. In the eleventh year of his Reign was so
great plenty, that a Quarter of Wheat was sold at London for 2 s. a fat Ox for
a noble, a fat Goose for 2 d. a Pig for a penny, and other things after that
rate. But in his 27 year there was a great scarcity, by reason there fell
little or no Rain from the end of March to the end of July, and was therefore
called the Dry Summer. John Barns Mayor of London gave a chest with three Locks
and a thousand Marks to be lent to young men upon security, and for the Use of
it, if learned, they were to say the Psalm De Profundis, etc. for the soul of
John Barns; if otherwise, to say a Pater Noster: but however the money is lent,
the cheft stood long after in the Chamber of London without money, or security.
In the time of the Princes sickness the King calls a Parliament at Westminster,
and demands supplies; upon which they demand redress of the Grievances of the
Subjects, and among the rest, that John Duke of Law after, and Alice Perice the
Kings Concubine, with others, might be removed from the Court; this Woman
presuming so much upon the Kings favor, that she grew very insolent, and
intermedled with Courts of Justice, and other Offices, where she her self would
sit to countenance her Causes. And this was so vehemently urged by the Speaker
of the House of Commons, that the King rather than want Supplies, gave way to
it, and so they were all presently put from Court. But the Prince dying soon
after, they were all recalled to Court again, and restored to their former
pl^ces: and Sir Peter de la More the Speaker, was at the s^^t of Alice Perice
confined to perpetual Imprisonment, though by making great Friends, he got his
Liborty in two years.

About this time John Wickliff brings in a new Doctrine, inveighing against
the abuses of Churchmen, Monks, and other Religious Orders, whom the Duke of
Lancaster favored. Whereupon a great contention arose between him and the
Bishop of London, the Londoners take the Bishops part, and set upon the Duke of
Lancasters house at the Savoy: upon which the Duke, after the Tumult, caused
the Mayor and Aldermen to be displaced, and others put in their rooms, and
Wickliff is banished to Bohemia, where his Doctrine continues in great
veneration to this day among that People.

King Edward died in the 64 year of his age, and fiftieth of his Reign, and his
Grandchild Richard the second succeeded; of whose unfortunate Reign and
Deposition, you have heard before: we shall therefore only add a few
particulars more. In his thirteenth year, a Royal Just or Turnament was
proclaimed to be holden in Smithfield London, and at the day appointed, about
three of the clock in the Afternoon, there issued out of the Tower threescore
fine Horses apparelled for the Justs, and upon every one an Esquire of Honor
riding a soft pace; after them came four and thirty Ladies of Honor, mounted
on Palfreys, and every Lady led a Knight with a chain of gold: These Knights
being on the Kings side, had their armor and apparel garnished with white
Hearts and Crowns of gold upon their heads, and so they came riding through the
streets of London to Smithfield. This Just lasted twenty four days; all which
time the King and Queen lay at the Bishops Palace by S. Paul's Church, and kept
open house to all comers.

In the year 1^89. whilst the King was at Sheen near London, there swarmed in
his Court such a multitude of Flies and Gnats skirmishing one with another,
that they were swept away with Brooms by heaps, and Bushels were filled with
them. In the one and wentieth year of his Reign, King Richard caused the great
Hall at Westminster to be repaired both with Walls, Windows and Roofs. In his
twelfth year in March there were terrible Winds, and afterward a great
Mortality and Dearth. A Dolphin was likewise taken at London Bridge, being ten
foot long, and very big.

Also in Parliament time an Image made by Necromancy in Wax, as it is said, at
an hour appointed, uttered these words, The Head shall be cut off, the Head
shall be lifted up aloft, the Feet shall be lift up above the head. This happened
in that called the Mavelous Parliament, not long before that called, the
Parliament that wrought wonders.

Henry IV. his Uncle, succeeded K. Rich. against whom several Rebellions were
raised; especially one Henry Piercy called Hotspur, and others, who were
overthrown, King Henry himself killing thirty six with his own hands, the Earl
of Worcester among the rest, was taken and beheaded, with many others, whose
Heads were set on London Bridge. In his time a Parliament was called at
Westminster, in which the Commons presented a Petition to the King and the
House of Peers, desiring that the King might have the Temporal Possessions of
the Bishops and Clergy; affirming that they would maintain 150 Earls, 1500
Knights, 6200 Esquires, and 100 Hospitals for maimed Soldiers. They desired
likewise that Clerks Convict should not be delivered into the Bishops Prison,
and that the Statute in the second year of his Reign against Lollards, or the
Followers of John Wickliff might be repealed. But the King denied their
Petition, and in person commanded them from thenceforth not to trouble their
brains about any such business, since he was resolved to leave the Church in as
good state as he found it.

In the third year of this King a Blazing Star appeared first at the East, and
then sent out fiery streams toward the North, foreshewing perhaps the effusion
of blood that followed after in those parts. In the same year the Devil
appeared (says our Author) in the likeness of a Gray Friar, who entering the
Church, put the people in great fear, and the same hour the top of the Steeple
was broken down, and half the Chancel scattered abroad by a Tempest of
Whirlwind and Thunder. In his eighth year Richard Whittington Lord Mayor of
London erected Whittington College, with Lodgings and Weekly Allowance for
several poor People. He also built Newga^e, half of St. Bartholomews Hospital
in Smithfield, and a bountiful Library in Christchurch, and likewise the East
end of Guild Hall, and a Chapel adjoining to it, with a Library of Stone for
keeping the Records of the City. The Grocers in London purchased their Hall in
Coney hoop Lane for 320 Marks. In his twelfth year Guild Hall was begun to be
rebuilt, and of a little Cottage, made a famous Building, as now it is. John
Gover the famous Poet, new built a great part of S. Mary Overies Church, where
he lies buried. In a Parliament holden the ninth year of his Reign, the King
moved to have allowed him every year, wherein no Parliament met, a Tenth of the
Clergy, and a Fifteenth of the Laity; to which demand the Bishops consented,
but the Commons would not. In his seventh year a Parliament began at
Westminster, which lasted almost a whole year, wherein a Subsidy was granted,
which was so severe, that even Priests and Friars who lived of Alms, were
forced every one to pay a Noble.

In the forty sixth year of his Age, having peace at home and abroad, and being
too active to be idle, King Henry resolved to go to the Holy Land, and great
provision was made for his Journey to Jerusalem; but he needed no such
preparations: for being at Prayers at S. Edwards Shrine in Westminster Abbey,
he was suddenly raken with an Apoplexy, and thereupon removed to the Abbot of
Westminsters house, when recovering himself, he asked where he was; and being
told that it was the Abbots house, in a Chamber called Jerusalem, Well then
(said he) the Lord have mercy upon me, for this is the Jerusalem, where an
Astrologer told me I should die. And here he died indeed March 20. 1413. aged
46 years; of which he reigned 13.

It is worth remembering that all ^he time of his Sickness he would have his
Crown set upon his Bolster by him, and one of his Fits being so strong upon
him, that all men thought him to be d^^ectly dead, the Prince his Son coming
in, took away the Crown; when the King suddenly recovering his senses, missed
it, and asking for it, was told the Prince had taken it; whereupon the Prince
being called, came back with the Crown, and kneeling down said, Sir, to all our
Judgments, and to all our Griefs, you seemed directly dead, and therefore I
took the Crown as being my Right; but seeing to all our comforts you live, I
here deliver it much more joyfully than I took it, and I pray God you may long
live to wear it your self. Well, (said the King ^ighing) what Right I had to it
God knows; but (says the Prince) if you die, my Sword shall maintain it to
be my Right, against all opposers. Well, (says the King) I refer all to God;
but I charge thee on my blessing, that thou administer the Laws justly, and
equally, avoid Flatterers, defer not to do Justice, neither be sparing of
Mercy. And then turning about said, God bless thee, and have mercy upon thee:
and with these words gave up the Ghost. In this Kings Reign there died of the
Pestilence in London, above thirty thousand in a short time, and a Frost lasted
fifteen Weeks.

Henry the fifth succeeded his Father, and proved a very wise and valiant King,
though the People much doubted of it, because when he was Prince he followed
such disorderly courses. For getting into company with some lewd Fellows, it is
said, he lay in wait for the Receivers of his Fathers Rents, and in the person
of a Thief, set upon them, and Robbed them. Another time when one of his
Companions was arraigned for Felony before the Lord Chief Justice in
Westminster Hall, he went to the Kings Bench Bar, and offered to take the
Prisoner away by force, but being withstood by the Lord Chief Justice, he
stepped to him, and struck him over the Face; whereat the Judge nothing
disturbed, rose up and told him, that he did not this affront to him, but to
the King his Father, in whose place he sat; and therefore to make him sensible
of his fault, he committed him Prisoner to the Fleet.

It was wonderful how calm the Prince was in his own cause, who had been so
violent in his Companions: for he pariently obeyed the Judges Sentence and
suffered himself quietly to be led to Prison. This passage was very pleasing to
the King his Father, to think he had a Judge of such courage, and a Son of such
submission. But yet for these and some other Frolicks, the King displaced him
from being President of the Council, and placed therein his third Son John.
This made the Prince so sensible of his Fathers displeasure, that he
endeavored to recover his good opinion, by as strange a way as he lost it: for
attiring himself in a Garment of blue Satin, wrought all with Oylet holes of
black Silk, the Needle hanging thereto, and about his Arm a thing like a Dogs
Collar, studded with SS of Gold, he came to the Court at Westminster, to whom
the King, though not well in health, caused himself to be brought in a Chair
into his Privy Chamber, where in the presence of three or four only of his
Privy Council, he demanded of the Prince the cause of his unwonted Habit and
coming; who answered, That being not only his Subject, but his Son, and a Son
always so tenderly beloved by him, he were worthy of a thousand deaths, if he
should but intend or imagine the least offense to his Majesty, and had
therefore prepared himself to be made a Sacrifice: and thereupon reached his
Digger, and holding it by the point he said; Sir, I desire not to live longer
then that I may be thought to be what I am, and shall ever be, Your faithful
and obedient Vassal.

With this or the like answer, the King was so moved, that he fell upon his
Sons neck, and with many tears embracing him, confessed, That his ears had been
too open to receive Reports against him, and promising faithfully, that from
thenceforth no reports should cause any disaffection toward him. But as soon as
this young King was Crowned at Westminster he like king Saul seemed to have a
new heart given him, and became another man than he was before. For calling his
old Companions and brethren in evil before him, he strictly charged them not to
come within Ten miles of the Court till they had given proof of their
Reformation, And to prevent their proceeding in ill courses, he gave every one
of them a sufficient allowance.

Immediately after a Parliament was called at Westminster, where a Subsidy was
granted without asking, and the Commons began to harp upon the old string of
taking away the Lands of the Clergy, which the Bishops, fearing the Kings
inclination, endeavored to divert, by showing him the great Right he had to
the Crown of France: which they made so plainly appear, that he alters his
Arms, and quarters the Flower de Luces like the King of France; But to do it
fairly, he sends Ambassadors to Charles the sixth King of France, Requiring him
in a Peacable manner to surrender the Crown of France. The Ambassadors had five
hundred Horse to attend them, and were at first honorably received and Treated
by the Court of France; but when their Message was known their Entertainment
was soon altered and the Dauphin (who managed the Affairs of State during the
Kings sickness) about this time sent a Tun of Tennis Balls to K. Henry in
derision of his Youth, as fitter to play with them than to manage Arms. Which
King Henry took in such scorn, that he promised with an Oath, It should not be
long before he would toss such iron Balls among them, that the best Arms of
France should not be able to hold a Racket to return them.

And accordingly he went with an Army into France, and utterly routed the
French Army at Agincourt, though they were 6 times as many as the English,
killing about nine thousand of them, and taking fifteen hundred prisoners; and
on the English part not above six hundred were slain in all.

In the beginning of his Reign, the followers of Wickliff greatly increased, of
whom Sir John Old-Castle was chief, who by marriage came to be Lord Cobham, and
in great favor with the King. But being accused in a Synod of London for
maintaining Wickliffs Doctrine, the King sent for him, and persuaded him to
submit to the censure of the Church; who told the King he only owed subjection
to his Majesty, and for others, he would stand for the Truth against them with
his life. Upon which he was cited to appear in the Bishops Court, which he
refusing was condemned by a Synod for an Heretic; in which Synod the
Archbishop of Canterbury caused it to be ordained, That the Holy Scriptures
ought not to be translated into the English Tongue. But mark the Judgment of
God that fell upon his own Tongue, whose roots and blade shortly after (as it
is recorded) grew so big in his mouth and throat, that he could neither speak
nor swallow down meat, but in horror lay languishing, till at last starved by
Famine, so died.

After this Sir John Oldcastle was taken, and he, Sir Roger Acton, and twenty
eight more, were executed at S. Giles in the Fields, and in Smithfield, for
Heresy: and all the Prisons in and about London, were filled with his
Followers.

In the third year of this Kings Reign, on Candlemas day, seven Dolphins came
up the River of Thames, whereof four were taken. This King had such command in
France, that their own Chronicles testify in the Court of Chancery in Paris,
all things were sealed with the Seal of King Henry of England. In the second
year of his Reign, Moregate near Colemanstreet was first made by Thomas
Fawkener Mayor of London, who caused the Water of this City to be turned into
the Thames in Walbrook, by making Grates in diverse places.

King Henry the fifth died the thirty fifth year of his age, and the ninth of
his Reign, leaving his Son Henry to enjoy his Crown, who was but eight months
old when his Father died, yet by the Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, is
proclaimed King of England and France at Paris, and at nine years old was
crowned King there, receiving the Oaths and Fealty of all the French Nobility.

This King was very weak in Judgment, and was ruled only by his Queen, which
occasioned him very great trouble: for they used his Authority for the
destruction of the Duke of Gloucester, and several other persons, who were much
beloved of the People. About which time the Duke of York began to whisper his
Right to the Crown, as descended from Philippa, Daughter and Heir to Lionel
Duke of Clarence, Elder Brother to John of Gaunt, and Great Grandfather to the
present King Henry the sixth, and it was privately discoursed, That King Henry
was of a weak capacity, and easily abused, and the Queen, who was near to the
French Queen, was of a malignant spirit, and bloudily ambitious, the Privy
Council is wise enough, yet not honest enough, regarding more their own pravate
profit than the public good, and that through their neglect, all France was
lost, and that God would not bless the usurped Possession of King Henry. With
these suggestions the Kentish men seemed to be taken; which being observed by
an Instrument of the Duke of York one Mortimer, he takes opportunity to tell
the People, That if they will be ruled by him, he will show them the way to
make a thorough Reformation, and prevent the Taxes that are upon every slight
occasion laid upon them.

These promises of Reformation and Freedom, so wrought with the People, that
they drew to a Head, and make Mortimer, otherwise called Jack Cade, their
Leader, who styled himself Captain Mendall: with whom they came to Black Heath,
and lay thereabout a Month, sending for whom, and what he pleased. He then
presents the complaint of the Commons to the Parliament, who sent them to the
Privy Council; but they explode them as frivolous, and charge the Authors to be
presumptuous Rebels: and thereupon the King raises an Army, and brings them to
Greenwich; but the Lords could get no Followers to fight against them, who
fought only for Reformation of Abuses, and for punishment of such Traitors as
they said the Lord Say was. The Lord Say is hereupon committed to the Tower,
and the King and Queen retire to London, whom Cade follows, and comes to
Southwark, where he Quarters his men; and next morning marches to London
Bridge, where he caused his Followers to cut the Rope of the Drawbridge, no
resistance being made against him, and so in good order marched up to
London-Stone, upon which he struck his Sword, saying, Now is Mortimer Lord of
London. He then sent for the Lord Say out of the Tower, and cut off his head at
the Standard in Cheapside, and also the head of Sir James Cromer High Sheriff
of Kent; but upon the Kings General Pardon, his Followers leave him, and he is
soon after slain, and with the execution of eight more, though five hundred
were found guilty, this Insurrection is suppressed.

It was a custom that upon St. Bartholomews day the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of
London, should go to the Wrestling-place near More-fields, where at this time
the Prior of St. John's likewise was to see the sport; and a Servant of his
being ashamed to be foiled before his Master, desired to Wrestle again,
contrary to custom, which the Lord Mayor denied: whereupon the Prior fetched
Bowmen from Clerkenwel against the Mayor, and some slaughter was made; the
Mayors Cap was shot through with an Arrow, yet he would have the sport go on,
but no Wrestlers came: whereupon he said, He would stay a while to make Trial
of the Citizens respect to him; and presently after a great party of them came
with Banners displaid, and fetched him home in triumph. Soon after another
Quarrel happened in Holborn between the Gentlemen of the Inns of Chancery, and
some Citizens, in appeasing whereof, the Queens Attorney and three more were
slain. The year after the Apprentices of London, upon a very slight occasion
fall upon the Foreign Merchants, rifling and robbing their houses, but the Lord
Mayor by his discretion appeased the Tumult, punishing some of the Offenders
with Death, and others by Fine, and all things are quieted and appeased.

In the Year 1460. the Duke of York comes from Ireland to London, and in the
Name of King Henry the sixth, calls a Parliament; which being assembled, he
in the presence of the Lords in the Upper House, places himself in the
Imperial Seat, and with great boldness scene from London history The Kings
Resloration 1660.
scene from London history The Regicides of Exec: at Charingcross
scene from London history The Insurection of Venner etc. 1660.
lays open his Claim to the Crown of England. And then relating the many
miseries that had befallen the Realm since this Usurpation of the present King,
his Father, and Grandfather, he concluded that he would not expect, nor desire
possession of the Crown, except his descent were indisputable, and his Title
thereto without exception. This being a business of Importance, required
deliberation: but in conclusion, the Duke having beforehand prepared the Lords
Spiritual, and few of the Nobility being present that were not of his side, the
House of Commons were easily persuaded, and it was resolved, and accordingly an
Act of Parliament was made, That King Henry, during his life, should retain the
name and honor of a King, and that the Duke of York should be proclaimed Heir
apparent to the Crown, and Protector of the Kings Person, his Lands and
Dominions. And that if at any time any of King Henry's Friends, Allies, or
Favorites, should on his behalf attempt the disanulling of this Act, that then
the Duke should have present possession of the Crown: It was observed that
while the Duke of York was declaring his Title in the Upper House, it happened
that a Crown which hung in the middle of the House of Commons, without any
touch or wind, fell down; and at the same time the Crown which stood upon Dover
Castle, fell down likewise: a sign as some thought, that the Crown of the Realm
should be changed.

As soon as this Parliament was dissolved, the Duke sends for the Queen and
some others, to come out of Scotland. But they had raised an Army there, and
the Duke of York met them with another; and at Wakefield Green the Duke is
flain, with the loss of three thousand of his men, and leing dead, had his head
crowned with a Paper Crown, together with many other Circumstances of disgrace.
However his Son Edward Earl of March prosecutes the Quarrel, and puts the
Queens Forces to flight, which she endeavored to recruit; but some of her
Northern Army having robbed the People as they came along the Country, saying,
It was their Bargain to have all the Spoil in every place. The Londoners would
not suffer any Provision to be sent to them, the Commons rising about
Cripplegate, and stopping the Carts which the Lord Mayor was sending to the
Army.

In the mean time the Earls of March and Warwick having got a considerable
Army, march to London, and were joyfully received there. And soon after the
Earl of Warwick drawing all his Forces into St. John's Field by Clerkenwel, and
having cast them in a Ring, he read to them the Agreement of the last
Parliament, and then demanded, Whether they would have King Henry to reign
still? Who all cried out, No, No. Then he asked them, Whether they would have
the Earl of March, Eldest Son of the Duke of York, (by that Parliament
proclaimed King) to reign over them. Who with great shouting answered, Yes,
Yes. Then several Captains and others of the City, went to the Earl of March at
Baynards Castle, to acquaint him what had passed; who at first seemed to excuse
himself, as unable to execute so great a charge: but encouraged by the
Archbishop of York, the Bishops of London and Exeter, and the Earl of Warwick,
he at laft consented to take it upon him; and soon after he was generally
proclaimed King. And here Writers end the Reign of King Henry the sixth, though
there were several changes. For sometimes he was a King, and sometimes none,
yet he was never well settled, though he lived twelve years after.

King Henry was then in the North, and raise an Army to oppose Edward, but is
defeated by the Lord Falconbridge. Upon which Henry and his Queen go to
Scotland, and raise more Forces, but are again beaten. And now King Edward sits
three days together in the Kings Bench in Westminster Hall to hear Causes and
regulate Disorders. And the Earl of Warwick is sent into France to treat of a
Marriage with that Kings daughter^ but in the mean while the King marries the
Lady Elizabeth Gray. At which Warwick grows discontented, and joins against
King Edward, and surprising him, takes him Prisoner, but he soon made his
escape. King Henry was taken in disguise and sent to the Tower of London some
years before. And now Warwick going to France, brought a great Army over, and
proclaimed Edward an Usurper; who thereupon endeavored to raise an Army but
could not, and therefore fled out of England into the Duke of Burgundies
Country, and King Henry is taken out of Prison, where he had been nine years,
and again proclaimed King.

But King Edward, by the assistance of the Duke of Burgundy, lands an Army in
Yorkshire, and marches toward London, where he was joyfully received. And in
the year 1471, and the 11 year of his Reign, K. Edward made his entry into the
City, and had King Henry delivered into his hands. The Earl of Warwick having
notice thereof, marches with his Army toward St. Albans, and King Edward
follows him, carrying King Henry along with him; where the Earl of Warwick and
many others are slain, and Henry's Parry utterly routed.

And now was the time for King Henry to be delivered out of all his Troubles;
for the bloody Duke of Gloucester entering the Tower of London, where he sound
King Henry nothing at all troubled for all his Crosses, struck him into the
heart with his Dagger, and there slew him. And now within half a years space,
we find one Parliament proclaimed Edward an Usurper, and Henry a lawful King;
and another proclaiming Edward a lawful King, and Henry an Usurper; that we may
know there is nothing certain in humane Affairs, but uncertainty.

In the fifth year of King Henry the sixth, it rained almost continually from
Easter to Michaelmas: In his seventh year the Duke of Norfolk was like to have
been drowned passing through London Bridge, his Barge being set upon the Piles
so overwhelmed, that thirty persons were drowned, and the Duke with others that
escaped, were fain to be drawn up with Ropes. In his seventeenth year was so
great a Dearth of Corn, that people were glad to make Bread of Fearn roots.
Next year all the Lions in the Tower died. In the thirty third year of his
Reign, there was a great Blazing Star, and there happened a strange sight, a
monstrous Cock came out of the Sea, and in the presence of a multitude of
people, made a hideous crowing three times, beckening toward the North, South,
and West. There were also many prodigious Births, and in some places it rained
blood.

About this time the Drawbridge on London Bridge was made, and Leaden Hall was
built to be a Storehouse of Grain and Fuel for the poor of the City. In the
first year of this Kings Reign a Parliament was held at London, where the
Queen Mother, with the young King in her lap, came and sat in the House of
Lords. In this Kings Reign Printing was first brought into England by William
Caxton of London Mercer, who first practiced the same in the Abbey of
Westminstor 1471. This King Henry lost his Kingdom when he had reigned thirty
eight years six months and odd days. The day after he was murdered he was
brought to St. Paul's Church in an open Coffin barefaced, where he bled; and
from thence carried to Black Friars, where he also bled, and lastly was buried
at Windsor.

In the first year of King Edward the fourth Walter Walker Grocer, living in
Cheapside, was beheaded for speaking some words against King Edward. In his
fourth year there was a great Pestilence, and the Thames was frozen over. In
his 14 year John Gross was burnt on Tower Hill for Religion. The same year King
Edward in his Progress hunting in Sir Thomas Burdels Park, slew many Deer, and
among the rest a white Buck, which Sir Thomas hearing of, wished the Bucks
head, horns and all in his belly who moved the King to kill him. Upon which
words he was condemned to die, and being drawn from the Tower of London to
Tyburn, was there beheaded. Next year George D. of Clarence K. Ed. Brother, was
drowned in the Tower in a But of Malmsey. In his twenty second year some
Thieves for Robbery in St. Martins le Grand, were drawn to Tower Hill and there
hanged and burnt, and others were pressed to death.

In this Kings time Richard Rawson, one of the Sheriffs of London, caused a
House to be built at St. Mary Spittle for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen to hear
Sermons in the Easter Holy Days.

King Edward the fourth being dead, his eldest Son Edward, not above eleven
years old, was proclaimed King, but never crowned; for the Duke of Gloucester
hearing of his Brothers death, comes to London, and having gotten the King and
his Brother the Duke of York into his hands, sends them to the Tower, and
murders the Lord Hatings who was true to Edward, and then endeavors to prove
the two children of Edward Illegitimate, whereby he at last attained the Crown
by the name of Richard the third, and afterward persuades Sir James Tyril to
murder the two young Princes in the Tower, who getting two other Villains as
bad as himself, they come to the childrens chamber in the night, and suddenly
wrapping them up in their cloths, and keeping down by force the Feather-bed and
Pillows hard upon their mouths, so stifled them that their breath being gone,
they surrendered up their innocent souls; and when the Murderers perceived
first by their struggling with the pains of death, and then by their long lying
still, that they were thoroughly dead, they laid their bodies out, and then
called Sir James Tyril to see them, who presently caused their bodies to be
buried under the Stairs. But these Murderers came all to miserable ends; and
King Richard himself, after this abominable Fact, never had a quiet mind, but
was troubled with fearful dreams, and would sometimes start out of his bed and
run about the chamber in a great fright, as if all the Furies in Hell were
about him, as he did the night before the Battle at Bosworth Field, where he
was slain by King Henry the seventh, who succeeded to the Crown.

King Richard took away from Jane Shore one of King Edwards Concubines, all her
Goods, to the value of above 3000 Marks; and afterward caused her to do
Penance before the Cross for her Incontinency, with a Taper in her hand: when,
though undressed, yet she appeared so fair, and lovely, and likewise so modest,
that many who hated her course of life, yet pitied her course usage, since she
used all the favor she had with King Edward to the good of many, but never to
the hurt of any. And truly she had cause to complain against Richard for being
so severe for her offending against the seventh Commandment only, when he did
no penance for offending heavily against all Ten. But perhaps he got some Good
Fellow to be his Confessor.

After Richard (called Crook-back) was slain, Henry the seventh was proclaimed
King. In whose time were made several general Laws: as that for admitting poor
people to sue in Forma Pauperis, without paying Fees to Attorney, Counselor,
or Clerk. Another, that no person that shall assist by Arms, or otherwise, the
King in being, shall ever after be impeached thereof, or attainted by course of
Law, or act of Parliament; and that if any such Act of Attainder did happen to
(...) made, it should be void and of none effect. In his fifth year it was
ordained by Parliament that the Mayor of London should have the conservation o^
the River of Thames, from Stanes-bridge to the Waters of Yeudale and Medway. In
his seventeenth year John Shaw Lord Mayor of London, caused his Brethren the
Aldermen to ride from Guildhall to the Waterside when he went to Westminster
to be presented to the Exchequer. He also cause^ Kitchins and other
Conveniences to be built it Guild Hall. This King was the first that ordain a
Company of tall proper men to be Yeomen (...) the Guard, and to attend the
person of the King to whom he appointed a Livery and a Capta^^ over them. In
his eighteenth year King He^^^ himself being Free of the Tailors Company, (...)
diverse Kings before had been, namely Richard t^ second, Henry the fourth,
fifth, and sixth, Edwar^ the fourth, and Richard the third, as also eleve^
Dukes, twenty eight Earls, and forty eight Lord* He therefore now gave them the
name of M^^chant-Taylors, as an honorable Title to end (...) for ever.

The 22 of August 1485. the very day King Hen^ got the Victory over King
Richard, a great Fi^ happened in Bredstreet London, in which was burnt the
Parson of St. Mildreds, and one person more. In his tenth year, in digging a
new Foundation in the Church of St. Mary-hill in London, the body of Alice
Hackny, who had been buried 175 years before, was found whole of skin, and the
joints of her arms pliable: the Corpse was kept above ground four days without
annoyance, and then buried again. In his twelfth year on St. Bartholomews day,
there fell Hailstones measured twelve Inches about. The great Tempest which
drove King Philip of Spain into England, blew down the Golden Eagle from the
Spire of St. Paul's, and in the fall, it fell upon the sign of the Black Eagle
in St. Paul's Churchyard, where the School-house now is, and broke it down.
This King was frugal from his Youth, the City of London was his Paradise, for
what good fortune soever befell him, he thought he enjoyed it nor, till he
acquainted them with it. His Parliament was his Oracle, for in all matters of
Importance he would ask their advice; yea, he put his Prerogative many times
into their hands. After he had lived fifty two years, and reigned twenty three
years, he died April 22. 1508.

Henry the eighth, his only Son, succeeded him. In the ninth year of his reign
on May Eve, there was an Insurrection of the Young men and Apprentices of
London against Foreigners; for which Riot several of them were hanged, and the
^est, to the number of 400 men, and 11 women, ^yed in Ropes one to another, and
in their shirts name to Westminster Hall with Halters about their necks, and
were pardoned. In his twenty third ^ear Richard Price a Cook was boiled to
death in Smithfield, for poisoning diverse persons in the Bishop of Winchesters
House. One Cartnel the Hangman of London, and two others, were hanged near
Clerkenwel, for robbing a Booth in Bartholomew Fair. About this time Queen Anne
of Bullen was beheaded in the Tower, with her Brother, and diverse other
Gentlemen. In his fifteenth year, after great Rains and Winds, there followed
so sharp a Frost that many died for cold, some lost their fingers, some toes,
and many their nails. In his twentieth year there was a great Sweating
Sickness, which infected all places in the Realm. In his thirty sixth year a
great Plague was in London, so that Michaelmas Term was kept at St. Albans. A
Priest was set in the Pillory in Cheapside, and burnt in both the cheeks with F
and A for false Accusing. In his thirty fourth year Margaret Dary a
Maidservant, was boiled to death in Smithfield for poisoning three Households
where she lived. This year there were four Eclipses of the Sun, and three of
the Moon. King Henry deceased when he had reigned thirty seven years, and lived
fifty six.

King Edward the sixth succeeded, being but nine years old. In his time the
Reformation began, which King Henry had made way for, by renouncing the Popes
Supremacy, though himself died a Papist. Edward was an excellent Religious
Prince, and ordered the pulling down of all Popish Images and Pictures; and it
was observed, that the very same day that Images were pulled down at London,
the English obtained a great Victory over the Scots at Muscleborough. This King
upon a Sermon preached by Bishop Ridley concerning Charity, gave three Houses
in London to the relief of the Poor. For the Fatherless, and Beggars children
he gave the Gray Friars, now called Christ Church: to the lame and diseased
persons, St. Thomas Hospital in Southwark, and St. Bartholomews in
West-Smithfield: and for vagrant idle persons, he gave his house of Bridewell.
In the second (...) of his Reign there was a great Plague in (...). St. Anns
Church within Aldersgate was (...). In his third year Thomas Seymo^^. Lord
(...), and Brother to the Lord Protector, (...) beheaded on Tower Hill. King
Edward (...) reigned seven years, died, being but sixte^ (...) of age. And the
Lady Jane Gray Daughter of the Duke of Suffolk, was proclaimed Queen by the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, as being made Heir to the Crown by the last
Will of King Edward; upon which the Lady Mary flies to Farmingham Castle in
Suffolk, and there, upon her solemn promise and engagement not to alter the
Religion established, nor to bring in Popery, the Gentlemen of that Country and
Norfolk joined with her, and soon after she obtained the Crown.

But Queen Mary quickly forgot her Obligation for as soon as she was settled in
the Throne, she presently removed all the Protestant Bishops, and put others in
their room, and persecuted the Protestants with all manner of cruelty: so that
in her short Reign of five years and four months, there suffered, upon the
account of Religion only, 277 persons of all sorts and ages; for there
perished by the cruel flames, 5 Bishops, 21 Divines, 8 Gentlemen, 84
Artificers, 100 Husbandmen, Servants and Laborers, 26 Wives, 20 Widows, 9
Virgins, 2 Boys, and 2 Infants, one sprung out of the Mothers Womb as she was
burning at the Stake, and most unmercifully flung into the fire at the very
Birth: 64 more in those furious times were persecuted in the Faith, whereof 7
were whipped, 16 perished in Prison 12 buried in Dunghills, and many more lay in
captivity condemned, who were happily delivered by the glorious entrance of Q.
Elizabeth, though she her self hardly escaped, being imprisoned in the Tower of
London, every day expecting the tidings of her death, her Servants were kept
from her, and none but Rustical Soldiers about her: Nay because a little Boy
did but bring her Flowers sometimes in the Tower, he was threatened to be whipped
if he went any more, her Goalers pretending the child brought Letters to her.
Yea, bloody Bishop Gardener invented and contrived a Warrant under Queen Mary's
hand for her Execution, which was sent to the Lieutenant of the Tower; but the
Queen hearing of it, denied her having any knowledge of it, and threatened
Gardener and some others, for their inhumane usage of her Sister, whereby she
happily escaped.

In the first year of Queen Mary's Reign, one Sir Thomas Wiat of Kent put
himself into Arms, to prevent her marriage with Philip King of Spain, as
tending to bring England under the Yoke of Spain, and to make the Country a
Slave to Strangers. And diverse other Knights and Gentlemen joining with him, he
marches toward London, and coming to Charing Cross he was encountered by the
Lord Chamberlain and Sir John Gage, whom he put to flight; but coming to
Ludgate he is denied entrance, and thinking to retire, he heard the Earl of
Pembroke with his Forces was behind him at Cha^ing Cross, upon which being
amazed, after a little musing, he returned toward Temple Bar, and yielded
himself to Sir Maurice Berkley, and getting upon his Horse behind him, went to
the Court, where expecting the Queens mercy, but he was sent to the Tower, and
soon after beheaded at Tower Hill.

About this time the Lord Guilford Dudley the Husband of Queen Jane, the Duke
of Northumberland his Father, and likewise Queen Jane and her Father the Duke
of Suffolk were beheaded on Tower Hill. In her fourth year hot burning Agues
and other strange diseases, took away many people, so as between October. 20. and
the last of December, there died seven Aldermen of London. In her fifth year,
on the last of September, fell so great store of Rain, that Westminster Hall
was full of Water, and Boats rowed over Westminster Bridge into Kings street.
About which time a Blazing Star was seen all times of the night from the sixth
to the tenth of March.

Queen Mary being dead, Queen Elizabeth is proclaimed, and brought from
Hatfield in Hartfordshire to London, where she was received with great Joy. She
restored and settled the Protestant Reformation, though great offers were made
her by the Pope, if she would become Papist. In her first year William Geoffry
was whipped from the Marshalsey to Bedlam, for publishing that one John More was
Jesus Christ; which More after he had been well whipped, confessed himself to be
a couzening knave. A terrible tempest of Thunder and Lightning happened at
London, which fired the lofty Spire of St. Paul's Steeple, beginning about the
top thereof, which was two hundred foot high from the top of the stone
Battlements, and burnt down to the roof of the Church, consuming all the Bells,
Lead, and Timber work. In 1564. was a great Frost, so that great numbers of
people went over the Thames, and played thereon from London Bridge to
Westminster. On the third of January it begun to thaw, and on the fifth no Ice
was to be seen. In the twentieth year of her Reign a Blazing Star was seen with
a long stream. About this time one Simon Pembroke of Southwark being suspected
to be a Conjurer, was ordered to appear in St. Mary Overies Church, which he
did, and leaning his head against a Pew, the Proctor lifted up his head, and
found him dead, and rattling in the throat: and being searched, several Devilish
Books of Conjuration were found about him. In her thirty fifth year there was
so great a drougth, that not only the Fields but the Springs themselves were
dried up, and many Cattle died every where for want of water. The River of
Thames likewise failed, so that a Horseman might ride over at London Bridge.
In her thirty sixth year was a great Plague in London and the Suburbs, whereof
died 17890. besides the Lord Mayor and three Aldermen.

About this time Edmund Coppinger and Henry Arthington Gentlemen, came into
Cheapside, and there in a Cart proclaimed (as they said) News from Heaven, that
one William Hacket represented Christ, by partaking of his glorified Body, and
that they were the two Prophets, one of Mercy, the other of Judgment, sent of
God to help him in this great work. These men were apprehended, and Hacket was
arraigned, and found guilty of speaking diverse false and traitorous words
against the Queen, and to have raced and defaced her Pictures, thrusting an
iron Instrument into the place of the heart and breast; for which he was brought
from Newgate to Cheapside, and being moved to ask God and their Queen
forgiveness, he fell to cursing and railing against the Queen, and made a
blasphemous Prayer against the divine Majesty of God, and was therefore hanged
and quartered. Coppinger starved himself wilfully in Bridewel, and Arthington
made a Recantation.

In the forty third year of her Reign Robert Devereux Earl of Essex, assisted
by diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen, entered the City of London in Warlike manner
at Temple Bar, crying For the Queen, till they came to the Sheriffs House in
Fanchurch-street, who finding himself not Master of his own house, escaped out
at a Backdoor, and went to the Lord Mayor. And Essex finding the Citizens in
Arms against him, endeavored to fortify his own House: but hearing that some
great Guns were sent for to beat it down, he surrendered himself, and was sent
to the Tower, where he was afterward beheaded; but might have kept his head
longer on, had he not been betrayed by the Lady Walsingham; to whom after his
condemnation he sent a Ring, which the Queen had given him in token that she
would stand by him in any danger: the Lady delivered not this Ring, but being a
little after upon her Deathbed, she desired to speak with the Queen, to whom
having disburthened her conscience, the Queen flung away in extreme rage and
fury, and never enjoyed her self well after that time, but would often break
out into a passion, and wring her hands, crying, O Essex, Essex, and died not
long after.

After her death King James succeeded, in the third year of whose Reign, was
contrived the Powder Treason Plot, for which Sir Edward Digby, Robert Winter,
Grant, and Bates were drawn, hanged, and quartered at the West end of St.
Paul's, and Winter, Keys, Rookwood, and Fawks, at the Parliament Yard at
Westminster. A while after, the King attended with diverse Lords, dined with the
Lord Mayor Sir John Watts, who after dinner presented his Majesty with a Purse
of Gold, desiring he would please to be made Free of the Company of
Clothworkers, to which the King consented, and calling to the Master of the
Company, he said, Stone, Give me thy hand, I am now a Clothworker, and in token
of my special favor to this Fraternity, I do here give to this Company a Brace
of Bueks yearly for ever, at the Election of Master and Wardens. And a Month
after the King and the Prince dined at Merchant Tailors Hall, where the Prince
was made Free of that Company, and had likewise a Purse of Gold presented him
by the Master.

In 1609. the New Exchange being newly finished, was first opened and named by
King James, Britains Burse. In 1612. Edward Wightman was burnt for an
Heretic, and one Legate burnt in Smithfield for an Arian. In 1615. Sir Thomas
Overbury was poisoned in the Tower, for which the the Earl of Somerset and his
Lady were arraigned and condemned, and Sir Gervase Elvis Lieutenant of the
Tower, Mistress Turner, and diverse others executed. In 1618. the famous Sir
Walter Rawleigh was beheaded in the New Palace Yard Westminster. Next year
Queen Anne died at Hampton Court. In 1623. a Popish Priest being at Mass in
Black Friars in an Upper Room, it fell down, and many were killed and hurt. In
1625. King James died, having reigned 22. years.

King Charles his Son succeeded him, and was married to Henrietta Maria of
France. In his first year was a great Plague, whereof there died in London
35417. In 1628. Doctor Lamb was murdered in the streets of London, for which
the City was fined six thousand pound; the same year John Felton was hanged at
Tyburn for murdering the Duke of Buckingham. In 1633. the King and Queen were
magnificently entertained at Guild Hall. In 1640 the Long Parliament began, and
in 1642. Posts and Chains were ordered to be set up in the City.

But having already given a particular account of all Passages in this Kings
Reign, and till the Restoration of his present Majesty King Charles the second,
in a little Book called The Wars of England, Scotland, and Ireland, I shall
omit repeating any thing here, but shall only add:

That in the year 1659. General Monk marching from Scotland came to London, and
after having pulled down the Gates and Portcullises of the City by Order of the
Remnant of the Long Parliament, he afterward grew dissatisfied at their
proceedings, and going into the City was received with Bonfires, and soon after
that Parliament was dissolved, and his Majesty happily restored May 29. 1660.
In October following, several of the Regicides of the late King were executed
at Charing Cross, that is, Harrison, Carew, Cook, Scot, Hugh Peter's, Clement
Scroop, Jones; and Hacket and Axtel at Tyburn. In January one Venner a Wine
Cooper, and some others of Enthusiastic Principles, made an Insurrection in
London, their Leader persuading them that one should chase a thousand. They
first marched to St. Thomas Apostles, and from thence to Bishopsgate,
Whitecross-street, and from thence they went to Highgate and Canewood. And
three days after they came again into the City, being not above thirty or forty
in number, but armed with Blunderbusses and Headpieces; and the Trained-bands
and some of the Kings Guards fell upon them and routed them; about five or six
of them were killed, others fled, and the rest were taken Prisoners. Their
Word, it is said, was, THE QVARTERS UPON THE GATES, meaning of those Regicides
that were executed a while before, whose Quarters were put upon the Gates of
the City. Venner and nineteen of his Accomplices were arraigned and condemned,
and he and several of them executed in diverse parts of the City.

In 1661. his Majesty proceeded magnificently from the Tower to Whitehall, and
was next day crowned at Westminster. And soon after there was a General Muster
of the Forces of the City of London at Hide Park; consisting of two Regiments
of Horse, and twelve Regiments of Foot. In scene from London history The Trial
of the L. Stafford in W. Hall.
scene from London history His Execution on Tower hill.
A La high Steward

BB The Peer^m ye Rabes

CC The commons

D The Judges

E The Prisoner

E The KJ Box

G ye Managers of (...)

H. ye Eviden^^.

1662. Sir Henry Vane was beheaded on Tower Hill, and Corbet, Barksted, and
Okey, three of the Regicides, sent from Holland, were executed at Tyburn. In
the year 1665. there was a great Plague, whereof there died in London in one
year 68596 persons. In 1666. September 2. about one of the clock in the morning
a sudden Fire broke out in Pudding-lane near London Bridge, which in four days
burnt down 13200. houses. In 1678. Doctor Oats and Doctor Tongue discovered an
horrid Popish Plot against his Majesty, the Protestant Religion, and Government
established. And October 10. Sir Edmundbury Godfrey who took the Examinations,
was murdered. William Staley a Papist executed for Treason, Edward Coleman,
Ireland, Grove and Pickering, executed for the Plot; Green, Berry, and Hill,
for the murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. In 1679. the Lords Powis, Stafford,
Arundel, Peter's and Bellasis, were committed to the Tower for High Treason, and
soon after, the Earl of Danby was committed thither. The King dissolves his
Privy Council, and calls another consisting of thirty. Langhorn the Counselor
was executed. The Parliament is dissolved, having sat about 18 years: another
called, and dissolved. Upon the thirtieth of November 1680. William Lord
Viscount Stafford was arraigned before his Peers in Westminster Hall, the House
of Commons managing the Impeachment against him: the Trial continued till the
seventh of December following, and he was then found guilty of High Treason, by
the surplusage of twenty four Voices more against him than for ^im: and upon
Wednesday December 29. about ^en in the morning, the Sheriff of London received
the Prisoner from the Lieutenant of the ^ower, and conducted him to the
Scaffold pre^red for that purpose upon Tower Hill, and there was beheaded. Upon
Wednesday June 15. 1681. Oliver Plunket titular Primate of Ireland, and
Archbishop of Dublin, was brought to the Kings Bench Bar, and there received
Sentence to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered for High Treason, in conspiring the
death of the King, and designing to bring in a French Army, and introduce
Popery into the Kingdom of Ireland, he having been convicted for it, some few
days before, at the same place; together with Edward Fitz-Harris, for
contriving a treasonable and malicious Libel to stir up the People to Rebellion
against the King and Government; who likewise received the same Sentence of
Death at the same time.

Not many days before, the Lord Howard of Escrick was committed prisoner to the
Tower of London, upon an Information of High Treason; and upon June 20. he was
brought up to the Kings Bench Bar, and by his Counsel moved that he might put
in Bail for his Appearance, but it was denied him, and he remanded back to
Prison.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
^e are lately published two very useful and necessary Books, both which are
sold by Nath. Crouch at the Bell next to Kemps Coffee House in Exchange Alley,
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.

I. The Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland, or AN impartial account of all
the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable Transactions, Revolutions and
Accidents which have happened from the beginning of the Reign of K. Charles I.
in 1625. to his Majesty's happy Restoration, 1660. And among other particulars,
the Debates and Proceedings in the four first Parliaments of K. Charles I. with
their Dissolutions. The Siege of Rochel, the Petition of Right. The Muther of
the D. of Buckingham by Felton. The Tumults at Edinburgh in Scotland, upon
Reading the Common Prayer. The Et caetera Oath. The cursed Plots and Designs of
the Jesuits and other Papists, for imbroiling these three Kingdoms. The
Insurrection of the Apprentices and Seamen, and their assaulting Archbishop
Lauds house at Lambeth. Remarques on the Trial of the E. of Strafford, and his
last Speech. The horrid and bloody Rebellion of the Papists in Ireland, and
their murdering above two hundred thousand Protestants in 1641. The
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, with the Kings Answer thereunto. The
proceedings about the five impeached Members. An account of the Parliament at
Oxford, January 22. 1643. with their Proceedings and Dissolution. An Abstract
of the Fights between the King and Parliament. The death of A. B. Laud, Mr.
Chaloner and Tomkins, Sir John Hotham, Sir Alexander Carew, D. Hamilton, E. of
Holland, L. Capel and others. The Illegal Trial of K. Charles I. at large, with
his last Speech at his Suffering, Jan. 30. 1648. Together with the most
considerable matters which happened till the Year 1660. Illustrated with
Pictures of several remarkable Accidents, curiously engraven on Copper Plates.
By R. Burton. Price 1 s.

II. THe Protestant Instructed, wherein (...) derable Errors of the Papists are
(...) (...) Protestant Religion is vindicated from (...) Novelty. 2. The Image
of Antichrist, or the Vsur^^ ^^on of the Pope and Church of Rome over Kings
Emperors, in several Examples of the Tyranny (...) Pope over K. Henry II. K.
John and others. 3. T^ Cruelties and Persecutions of the Papists against the
Waldenses, in Piedmont, Bohemia, Germany, Poland, Lithuania, and France, with
an account of the bloody Massacre at Paris, and the terrible Sieges of Sancerre
and Rochel. 4. The Cruelties of the Papists in Italy, Spain, Portugal, and the
Low Countries, with a Relation of the Original practices and cruel tortures of
the Spanish Inquisition. 5. The persecution of the Protestants in Scotland, and
the bloody Maslacre in Ireland in the year 1641. with a Prophecy thereof by
James Usher Archbishop of Armagh, forty years before it came to pass, which
exactly fell out. 6. The Persecutions of the Protestants in England, for near
six hundred years with their Plots and Conspiracies against the Life of Queen
Elisabeth: likewise the Spanish Invasion; the Gunpowder-Treason: the Burning of
London, the late Horrid Popish Plot, and the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey 7
Plain and easy Directions for Spelling and Reading of English, with all
necessary Rules for Reading the English Tongue more useful than any other Book
of this kind. 8. Gods Judgments upon (...) Persecutors discovered in some
eminent Exexamples. 9 A Prayer of king Edward VI. a while ^fore his death,
against Popery. 10 A Speech (...) Elizabeth to her Army at Tilbury-Camp (...)
Spanish Invasion, 1588. Concluding with (...) and Graces. The whole being
illustrated with (...) Pictures curiously engraven in Copper, descri^^^^
variety of torments and cruelties exercised (...) Protestants in most Countries
in (...) B.D. Price 1 s.


