HENRY the Sixth, The First PART.

WITH THE MURDER OF HUMPHREY Duke of Gloucester.

As it was Acted at the Dukes Theater.

Written by Mr. CROWN.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes, in Russel Street, in
Covent Garden. 1681.

The Prologue.
WIth much ado a Prologue we obtained,
From the Author who this good old Play did mend.
He said a Prologue was a Painted Clout,
Only to tell the Show within, hung out,
And he no pains would on the Clout bestow,
When very few would come to see the Show.
The Comet that last Summer flamed obove,
Has dropped his Pitch in every Dish you love.
Poor slighted Wit is flung among the Swine,
Like Grapes in France, now you forbid their Wine.
Play Houses like forsaken Barns are grown,
The lusty Threshers of both ends of Town.
Let the Corn rot, and give their Labor over,
And so the Vizards cackle here no more:
Or if they hither come it is but for fear,
Lest zealous Constables find 'em elsewhere,
And their torn Coats for Romish Relics seize,
And the poor Girls for Painted Images.
Thus all your Pleasures wither and decay,
You 've sucked the Globe, and flung the shell away.
As for our wretched selves we are forced still,
To chaw down Poetry against our will,
But little Pleasure it to us does give,
We swallow it as Sick-Men eat, to live.
And to preserve your Stomachs we make bold,
To Cram you every day with New or Old.
To day we bring old gathered Herbs, it is true,
But such as in sweet Shakespears Garden grew.
And all his Plants immortal you esteem,
Your Mouths are never out of taste with him.
However to make your Appetites more keen,
Not only oily Words are sprinkled in;
But what to please you gives us better hop^,
A little Vinegar against the Pope.
The Persons Represented in the PLAY.
King Henry the Sixth, By Mr. Jos. Williams. Humphry Duke of Gloucester, Lord
Protector of the Kingdom, and Uncle to the King, being Brother to King Henry
the 5th, By Mr. Batterton. The Cardinal -- a Bastard Son of John of Gaunt, and
so Uncle to Duke Humphry. By Mr. Harris. Richard Plantagenet, Heir of the House
of York, pretender to the Crown. By Mr. D. Williams. Duke of Buckingham. Earl
of Warwick. Earl of Salisbury. Duke of Suffolk, a Lover of the Queen. By Mr.
Smith. Queen Margaret, Wife of King Henry the 6th, in Love with the Duke of
Suffolk. By my La. Slingsby. Elianor, Duchess of Gloucester, Wife to the Lord
Protector. By Mrs. Batterton. Sheriff of London, Sir John Stanly. Attendants.
SCENE, The Court at Westminster.

TO Sir CHARLES SIDLEY BARONET.
SIR,
I Am afraid I shall displease you, by setting your Name, before so scandalous
a thing as a Pamphlet of mine; but when I have told you the reason, I believe
you will pardon me. I make not use of your Name to add a luster to mine; I am
not so much concerned for it. Fame built on Poetry is like a Castle in the Air,
which the next Wind demolishes. I have heard of great Armies Mustered in the
Air, but never of any thing they Conquered. Such are the Forces of Poetry, I
have had my Ears torn with the noise of a Poets Drums and Trumpets, of the
Bellowing of his Actors, and the clapping of his Audience, but I never heard of
one inch of firm Land he gained. All he fought for was Enchanted Ground, which
now he seems to possess, and anon it vanishes, has nothing real in it but the
vexation of obscene Birds, which disturb him with their croaking, whilst he
wakes, and defile him by muting upon him if ever he sleeps. No wise Man can
much regard what his share is in such a barren and floating Place.

My concernment is for some little Truth and good Sense, Commodities which no
one will expect to find aboard such a Paper Boat, as a Play, were it not
convoyed by so flourishing and great Reputation as yours. I speak not my own,
but the opinion of some of the wisest Men of this Age, this Play is no
indifferent Satyr upon the most p^mpous fortunate and potent Folly, that ever
reigned over the minds of men, called Popery. My Lord Bacon says, good Books
ought to have no other Patrons but Truth and Reason. Many other things ought to
be, that never will. If Truth and Reason were things so potent, how came Folly
and Error to prevail over them in all Ages and Nations? How came Wisdom to live
among the Ancients in Porches and Tubs, and Fools to shine in Palaces whilst
living, and in Temples when dead? How came Truth among Christians to be trodden
under foot, for several hundreds of Years, whilst Error and Folly rode on men's
Shoulders, and trod on Princes Necks? Men's Shoulders had never been so ill
used, if their Heads had been good. And when a Germane Friar discovered Trutb,
by an accident as strange as another did Gunpowder, how come the latter
mischievous invention, to have fifty times the success of the former, and to
pierce a hundred times as many Heads and Hearts? If Truth in Schools and
Churches meet so much contempt, what must it expect in so wretched a thing as a
Play is now esteemed? The wisest Men among the Ancients indeed, thought
themselves scarce wise enough to judge Drammatique Poetry, but ours think
themselves much too Wise, and throw it off as a Trifle for Women and Fools to
play with; and by that means it pines more and more into a Trifle. For what
vigor soever is necessary to please Ladies elsewhere, Impotence best delights
them upon the Stage. The Poets that will hit the right Mark, must aim at the
Boxes, and what Arrows they shoot over them are all lost, nor are our Male
Judges of a more Masculine Spirit. I have always observed when an Actor talks
Sense, the Audience begins to sleep, but when an unnatural passion sets him a
grimacing and howling as if he were in a fit of the Stone, they immediately
waken, listen, and stare, as if some rare Operator were about to Cut him: In
short, Sense is so great a stranger to the most, that it is never welcome to
Company for its own sake, but the sake of the Introducer. For this reason I use
your Name to guide that share of it is in this Play through the Press, as I did
Shakespeare's to support it on the Stage. I called it in the Prologue
Shakespeare's Play, though he has no Title to the 40th part of it. The Text I
took out of his Second Part of Henry the Sixth, but as most Texts are served, I
left it as soon as I could. For though Shakespeare be generally very delightful,
h is not so always. His Volumn is all up-hill and down, Paradise was never more
pleasant than some parts of it, nor Ireland and Greenland colder, and more
uninhabitable then others. And I have undertaken to cultivate one of the most
barren Places in it. The Trees are all Shrubs, and the Men Pigmies, nothing has
any Spirit, or shape; the Cardinal is duller then ever Priest was. And he has
hudled up the Murder of Duke Humphry, as if he had been guilty of himself, and
was afraid to show how it was done: But I have been more bold, to the great
displeasure of some, who are it seems ashamed of their own mysteries, for there
is not a Tool used in the murder of Duke Humphry in this Play, but what is
taken out of their own Church Armory, nor a word put into the mouth of the
Cardinal and his foolish Instruments, but what first dropped from the Heads that
adorn their own Church Battlements. I could be large in Quotations did I not
nauseate Pedantry. I shall only show that what serves here to make the Comical
part of a Play, does in the Popish Countries compose the gravest part of their
Devotion. I make the foolish Murderer complain that he could not thrive, though
he kept every Day a Holy Day in honor of some Saint. Now nothing is more known
then that in those Countries, the great Trafique between them and their Saints,
almost ruin all other Trades. The People are forced to keep so many Holy Days,
that they have not Working-days enough to keep themselves; when they should be
laboring to fill their Bellies, they are cramming Latin into their Mouths, in
the honor of some Saint, who perhaps understands not a word of the Language,
unless he learnt it since he died, which is a great doubt. And they have so
many Saints, that the People in Heaven starve those upon Earth, and contrary to
what is done in other Famines, the Dead devour the Living. No Manufactury
thrives like that of Saint-making, all others must contribute to that, and even
the Workmanship of God must grow poor to enrich that of the Priests. When all
the Saints had disappointed this poor Fellow, I make him go to a Priest for
advice, who instead of bidding him follow his calling, sets him a mumbling a
Prayer, which he tells him is of that efficacy, that if he says it over Thirty
Days together, it will procure him in the end what ever he asks for. What
appears too ridiculous here for the mouth of a Stage-fool, in a Country no less
polished then France, is recommended to the Faith and Devotion of no less a
Prince then the Dauphin, in a little Book entitled, HEVRES Dedidees a
Monsiegneur le Dauphin, contenant L' Office qui se dit en L' Eglise, ave l'
Exercice du Matin, and en soir, and le Catechism dress par les Peers de la
Mission. The Prayer is to the Virgin Mary, in the 229th Page, in the middle of
the Prayer it is said, -- Here demand what ever you please.

When this Prayer would not do, I make the Priest give him another, Conveyed by
an Angel as he says into the Grave of a Germane Lady, who had her Head cut off,
and lived after it two and twenty Hours, not being able to die, till she had
Confessed and Communicated. And the Prayer had this miraculous power annexed to
it, that whosoever did but carry it about him, should never suffer by Sea or by
Land, etc. This I found in a little French Book of Devotion to the Virgin Mary,
Licenced by the Fathers of the Augustine Friars, as containing nothing in it
contrary to Catholic Faith, and recommended to the People with an
extraordinary Approbation; by what Charter these Prayers claim such great
Privileges, is not said, yet must be believed. Some think me very profane, for
bringing what belongs to the Church upon the Stage; but they may allow me that,
since they have carried many things that belong to the Stage into the Church.
To expose these Follies to the People is the business of this Play, and I
believe you will pardon me that I borrow some assistance from your Reputation,
since you your self have of late to your very great Honor, employed your
Interest and excellent Understanding in the same design. And though you can do
it better in common Conversation, then I by all my Study and Premeditation, It
follows not, because Lightning sometimes shoots through all the Heavens, and
rends the Oaks, a Man may not light a Candle in the Night: To hinder this Rush
light from being blown out, is the reason why I place your Name before it. I
have a mind the Play should be read, and every one will read it, if they think
you like it. I know few Understandings so universally esteemed as yours, and
for so good Reason. It would be foolish in me to lash out into unnecessary
praises of a Wit that has been so long the delight and ornament of the Nation,
and is now become the Defense of what is very dear to it, Truth, Liberty, and
Property. I have so deeply felt, what the loss of Property is, that I cannot
but honor the Defenders of it, though their defense comes too late to me. I
may appear vain in my complaint, but People will Groan when they are in pain;
my Father, and by consequence my self, his Heir, was stripped long since (by the
advice of some ill great Men, who sacrifice both private and public Interest
to their own) of the Moity of a Province so considerable, the French Crown
thought it worth contending for, many Years. And if that fortunate Kingdom
strove for it, you may imagine they got it. I have great hopes of a speedy
reparation from the great Justice Clemency and Goodness of his Majesty. But
this loss made me run into that Madness, called Poetry, and inhabit that
Bedlam, called a Stage. I have been so happy, that for several Years, certain
Gentlemen unknown to me, have fallen on me, and endeavored to Bleed me when
ever I appeared. I wish I knew 'em, that I might thank 'em for the Kindness
they have done me, though they designed me nothing but Mischief. The grounds of
their Antipathy I know not. Fools I confess may be very well moved to bark at
Poets, from the same cause, that they say all kind of Dogs do at Skinners, from
a natural instinct that gives 'em notice their own Hides are in danger. But I
have no great scent of Blood upon me, and therefore must impute their Aversions
to those Occult Qualities that puzle Philosophers. This convinces me, it is
necessary for me to fly to some Wise Man's protection; and I cannot be safer
than under yours. Poets are too poor to be begged, it is well if they can get
Guardians for begging. I am confident you will be entreated to take upon you
the Guardianship of this little parcel of a Mad-mans Estate, now I have told
you for what good uses it it is designed. And if so, this will do well, and I
shall live at ease, for those who will behave themselves very rudely to me as a
Poet, and to this as a thing for public entertainment, will be very civil to
this when it is under your care, and to me when I am received by you: For

SIR, Your very humble Servant, JOHN CROWN.

Henry the Sixth; OR, THE MURDER OF THE Duke of Gloucester. The FIRST PART.
ACT. I.
Enter Humphry Duke of Gloucester, Duke of York, Cardinal Beauford, Duke of
Somerset, Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Warwick. Glo. MY
Lords, you cannot but have seen of late
Much discontent sit always on my Brow.
All Men that know me well, must know, no private
Petty concernment can unfix my mind.
No; (some will think perhaps I speak too proudly,
I care not what they think, I Will speak my Mind)
Nothing has weight enough to press my spirits
Less than the great Misfortunes of the Kingdom.

Card. So! how my Lord Protector gracefully -- aside.
Ushers himself into these Lords esteem?
What bosom here now will not bid him welcome?
I hate him, but I will not let him know it,
Till I can let him know it to his ruin.

Glo. Ah! my Lords, Did my valiant glorious Brother,
Henry the Fifth, erect the Law of England
Above the Roman, or the Macedonian?
Do things, that made the Continent all tremble,
When e're the favorable Winds unlockt
The floating Gates of this our little World,
To let out that our brave Warriors to invade it,
That France not only did confess it self
A Vassal to his Royal English Blood;
But the whole Empire of the World did seem
To own it self the Birth right of his Valor?

Yo. Eternity shall never wear out the Characters
Of his Renown, which his keen Sword engraved.

Glo. Ay, yes his fame shall last; but not his Empire:
He Is dead, and with him his great Empire dies:
All that hi^ Valor got, all that the vigilance
And wisdom of my Brother Bedford kept:
All that your selves and I, have early and late
Studied to keep, and kept some years with glory,
Crowning our King in Paris in his Infancy,
Making Proud France bow to an English Child.
All, all these Labors, Victories and Glories,
Are melting down in a soft beauteous bosom,
Given away to purchase a Fair Face.
A fatal Marriage in one fatal minute
Has spoyld the Work of many glorious years.

Card. Nephew, you are more passionate than needs;
Erance is not gone, nor shall it go so easily.

Glo. No, it is not gone indeed, but all the sluices
Are pulling up, and it is going fast.
It Is pouring out apace in Provinces;
The new made Duke of Suffolk gives whole Provinces
To buy the King a Wife, Anjou and Maine
Are frankly given to the Queen's poor Father
King ^eignier, whose high and flowing style
Dwells far above the Banks of his low Purse,
But he must have these Provinces to fill it.
Of such low value, in this Duke's esteem,
Is all the purchase of our Blood, that he
Will give it all away for Blushing Cheeks.

Sal. Those Dukedoms were the Keys of Normandy.
My Lord of Warwick Weeps -- Why weeps my Son?

War. Who would not weep to see his own Blood cheapned
And sold before his Face at a low rate?
I won those Provinces, and what got
With Wounds, is given away with peaceful words.

Glo. Yes, and to make it even ridiculous,
The Duke of Suffolk Asks a whole Fifteenth
For Charges, to Transport the Queen to England.
What? Was there never a Beauty in the World
Besides the Queen? yes, sure there was in England;
Had the King so much doted upon Beauty,
He might have Married one of His fair Subjects,
And had more Beauty at a cheaper rate.

Card. My Lord of Gloucester, this is hot discourse,
And, as I think, to very little purpose;
Since what is done, now cannot be recalled;
And what is done, was done to please the King.

Glo. My Lord of Winchester I understand you;
It Is not my hot Discourse, but Presence warms you.
You have a Fester'd Mind, and 'twill break out;
I saw it in your Face; if I stay longer
We shall begin our ancient Bickerings:
But such small matters shall not trouble me,
I will be gone; but e're I go I Will Prophesy,
France will be lost: but I desire to prove
As False a Prophet, as you are a Priest -- Exeunt.

Card. Affronted thus? 'Pox of these fumbling Robes!
(aside.) How came my Warlike Spirit wrapped in these
Formalities, that hold my hands from Blood?
I Am fitter for a Sword, and I will use one --
Did you not hear the good Protector, Lords?
Expect what usage you will have; when I
His Uncle, and a Priest, am thus abused.
You see how well his Enmity is healed;
And he has much the same ki^dness for you,
And indeed for the King. He makes great show
Of Zeal for England, and he has great zeal for it
That is to enjoy it; he is heir apparent;
And the King cannot please him by a Marriage,
Unless he would Wed an Altar, or a Cell.
Be not, my Lords, cheated with his smooth words.
What though the foolish common people dote on him,
Clapping their hands, and shouting when they see him,
Crying, Heaven save your Ro^al Excellence,
And call him always the good Duke of Gloucester?
They are Fools, and know not Men, nor what they love;
Uncheat them; but however save the King,
Protect him from his dangerous Protector.

Buck. Why should the King, my Lords, have a Protector?
He is of age (I think) to rule himself.
My Lord of Somerset join you with me,
We, with the Duke of Suffolks aid, will hoyse
Duke Humphry from his Seat.

Card. This weighty business
Brooks no delay; I Will to the Duke of Suffolk -- Exit.

Some. Though the Protector's Pride and Greatness vex us,
The Cardinal's Ins^lence is more intolerable;
If Gloucester be displaced he will be Protector.

Buck. If Gloucester falls, or you or I Will succeed -- Ex. Buck. and Sal.

Sal. So! so! the Kingdom will thrive well no doubt,
When all will rend her for their private ends.
I never saw but the good Duke of Gloucester
Bore himself like a Noble Gentleman;
But I have seen the Cardinal demean himself
More like a Soldier than a Priest; he will often
Swear like a Ruffian, quarrel like a Hector,
Trample on all, as he were Lord of all:
My worthy Son, and you my Lord of York,
My val^a^t Brother, let us join together,
And show the Kingdom has some good Men in it,
Who faithfully will serve their King and Country,
And aid all others who promote that work,
And among those I reckon the Protector.

War. So heaven help me, as I love my Country. -- Ex. Sal. and War.

Yo. And so say I, for I have greatest cause,
Anjou and Main are given to the French.
Two Dukedoms given for a Dukes fair Daughter.
Henry, I blame thee not: What is it to thee?
Thou do not give away thine own, but mine.
Pirates may make cheap penny-worths of their Pillage.
Whilst the poor injured owner stands aloof,
And shakes his head, and weeps, and wrings his hands,
And sees his Goods all borne away, and dares
Not touch his own, or scarcely call it his.
England, and France, and Ireland, are my Kingdoms
One day I may both claim and seize my own,
And from weak Henry's Head may pull the Crown:
These high fierce Tempests methinks make it shake.
What opportunity they give, I Will take. Exit.

Enter Duke of Gloucester, and his Duchess Elianor. Eli. Why droops my Lord,
and on the sullen Earth
Fixes his Eyes? What do thou there behold
King Henry's Diadem fallen from his Head,
Too feeble to support the m^ghty weight?
If it be that thou look on, gaze thy fill,
Put forth thy hand, and reach the glorious Gold.

Glo. Oh Nell! sweet Nell! if thou do love thy self,
Banish the Canker of Ambitious thoughts,
They will devour thy Peace, thy Life, thy Soul.
May the cursed hour, when I imagine ill
Against my Royal Nephew, virtuous Henry,
Be my last breathing in this mortal World.

Eli. I wish the same to me; but, Is it ill
To the good Pious King, to take from him
A heavy Weight that presses him to Earth,
An Element his heavenly mind abhors?
His thoughts are all above, and Royal cares
Tear them, and pull them down to earth in spite of him,
And, What a torment to him must that be?
It is unjust to let so good a Prince
So cruelly be tortured with a Crown.

Gloc. Oh Elianour! away with thy fond words,
Thou may deceive thy self, thou can not me:
Have thou in my Embraces layn so long,
And am I yet wholly a stranger to thee?
I find thy high aspiring thoughts did study
My honor, and my offices, not me.
Thou know them well, thou have weighed them exactly,
But me thou art an utter stranger to,
Or thou would never tempt me to disloyalty.

Eli. He is the loyal Subject seeks to please
His King, and not himself: It Is more disloyalty
T'impose a Crown upon Religious Henry,
Than it is to Usurp one from another King.
But you are only Loyal to your self,
And your own fame; because to take the Crown
The World would call Disloyalty and Treason;
You wrong the King, to save your own renown.

Glo. Away, away fond Elianor! -- as Nature
Has given you Women thinner skins than Men,
Through which your working blood is easier seen;
So thinner Arts to hide your laboring thoughts.
Do not I know your thoughts, designs, and soul,
And all you would work me ^o as well as you?
You would have me throw my self down to Villainy,
To exalt you in place above the Queen.
Blast my Renown and Soul to all eternity,
To please your haughtiness for some few years.
Oh Elianor! now I must Chide outright;
Presumptuous, unkind, ill-minded Elianor!
Are you not the second Woman in the Kingdom?
H ve you not Worldly Pleasure at command?
A greater circle of delight, than all
Thy Soul can range about in thy whole Life?
Yet not content with these, Will thou be forging
New impious honors, till pil'd heap on heap
They fall, and overwhelm thy self and me?

E^i. I must confess I mortally abhor,
And scorn that Woman, which is now my Queen.
Oh! hateful thought! she! she! my Queen -- a Vassal
Of France subdued by us into a Province;
And she a Beggar in that Conquered Province,
Become the Queen, and Mistress of her Conquerors;
I the first Woman of Victorious England,
Bow to the last of low dejected France?
Preposterous! ignominious! base! contemptible!
Had you the spirit of an English Conqueror,
You would not bear it -- but you have it not.
The mighty fire, that burnt so bright and hot
In the brave English Souls of the last Age,
Is blazing now its last in me a Woman;
Who can no more than greatly think and talk;
A shrewd sign heaven is taking from us France,
Since he takes from us spirits that should rule it.
And yet were I but Queen of England once,
I would not doubt but to keep Conquered France.
Though Kings, and Lord Protectors cannot do it.

Glo. Talk not of ruling Kingdoms, rule your self.
That I lament the King's most fatal Marriage,
The Queen her self, and all the Kingdom knows:
But I abhor it not for Womanish causes,
Because my Wive's inferior goes before her;
But because France, England's inferior,
Will by this Match ascend above her Conqueror:
We give two Provinces to buy a Wife,
Who brings naught with her but a shameful Peace,
And this is that causes my present sadness.

Eli. And sadness will redress your Country's Griefs.

Gl. Yes! He shall dye that wrought them, traiterous Suffolk.

Eli. If Suffolk dies for bringing such a Curse on us,
What should be done to her who is that Curse?
Let her not live, or rather let her live,
But live no Queen --

Glo. But subject to your self --

Eli. I almost scorn to have so poor a Subject.

Glo. Ah, Elianor! thy Pride, and my fond Love
To thee, will bring destruction on us both.
Have I not Griefs enough already on me,
And Enemies enough that plot my ruin?
But you must be among the number of them?

Eli. I'em Enemy to nothing but the Queen;
And I Will to her be an implacable
And Devilish Enemy, whilst she is a Queen:
Let her be poor Dame Margaret, and my Subject,
And I will Sign her then an Act of Grace.

Glo. You will comply in nothing to please me.

Eli. I will comply in every thing I can;
But I must hate the Queen in spite of me.

Glo. If thou must hate her, do; but yet love me.

Eli. I hope you doubt not that, my Lord.

Glo. I do not.

Enter a Messenger. Messen. My Lord Protector, it is His Majesty's pleasure
You prepare to ride to S. Albans,
Where both the King and Queen are a going to Hawke.

Glo. I go! -- Come Nell -- Will thou along with us? -- Ex.

Eli. Yes, my good Lord, I Will follow presently.
Follow -- I that is the Word -- follow I must,
Whilst Gloucester bears this base and humble mind.
My Spirit cries, go first; the Duke says, follow:
Shall I obey my Husband, or my Soul?
My Soul is my self, he but my other self;
And by his humble mind my weaker self:
Well, I will play my part in Fortune; Pageant
Where are you there? Sir John -- nay, fear not Man,
We are alone, here is none but thee and I.

Enter Humes. Hume. Heaven preserve your Majesty.

Eli. My Majesty?

Hume. Yes, that will be your Title very shortly.

Eli. Has my infernal friend the Devil said this,
By his Priest and Priestess the Conjurer and Witch?
Have thou conferred with them?

Hume. Madam I have.

Eli. And Will they undertake to do me service?

Hume They have promised from the infernal deeps to dragge
One of the Spirits that of old gave Oracles,
Whose fiery eye, by its own Native Light,
Sees all that is hidden in Fates dark Abyss,
As plain as we Mortals when they come to light:
This Spirit shall make Answer to all Questions,
That it shall please your Grace to pose him with.

Eli. It is enough. I Will think upon the Questions.
Here, Hume, take this reward, make merry Man
With thy Confederates in this weighty business.

Hume. I humbly thank your Grace -- Exit.

Enter the Duke of Suffolk talking with the Queen. Eli See, here comes she
That blasts my eyes worse than the Spirit can do
The Witch will raise out of the Infernal deep;
And with her, her damned Minion, Traiterous Suffolk.
That I were now a Pestilence to cover her
From head to foot with torturing deadly sores.
I will throw scorn on her as I pass by,
A thing a Woman hates worse than the Plague.
And I will undermine her Royal Glories,
If digging deep as lowest Hell will do it.
I Will climb the Throne, or else to Hell I Will fall;
If Heaven will not make me great, the Devil shall.

Qu. Ha! Did you not observe, my Lord of Suffolk,
With what contempt that Woman looked upon me,
As she past by?

Suff. I saw it, and I laughed at it.

Qu. Ho! call her back, and fling her at my feet.

Suff. She shall fall shortly there, and lower too,
If my Plots fail not. --

Enter Petitioners, Peter the Armorers Man being one. 1. Pet. May it please
your Grace.

Suff. What would thou have with me?

1. Pet. I think you be my Lord Protectors Grace,
If you be, pray your Grace see my Petition.

2. Pet. And mine.

3 Pet. And mine -- an't please your Grace,

Qu. So, All Petitions to the Protector's Grace,
The Kingdoms supplications all to him,
And all the Ladies follow his Wives Train:
The King and I are only Royal Ciphers,
Flourished and gilded only with fine Titles.
Come, What are your Petitions? let me see them.

1. Pet. Mine is, an't please you Madam, against John Goodman, my Lord
Cardinall's Man, for keeping my House, and my Lands, and my Wife from me.


Suff. How? thy Wife from thee too? that is very hard.

1. Pet. Nay, an't please your Grace, let him give me my House and my Lands,
and let him keep my Wife an' he will, I do not care, now he has had her so long.


Suff. What Is yours? What Is here? Against the Duke of Suffolk, for
Enclosing the Commons of Melford? How now you Rascal?

2. Pet. An't please your Grace I am but a poor Petitioner of our whole
Township.


Pet. Mine is against my Master Thomas Horner, for saying, the Duke of York is
lawful Heir to the Crown.


Qu. How?

Pet. Yes, and that the King is but an Usurper.

Qu. There Is a Villain indeed.

Suff. Who is there?
Enter a Servant. Take this Fellow in, and send for a Pursuivant presently,
We Will hear more of this Matter before the King.

Qu. You, here; who shroud your selves under the Protector,
Begin your Suits anew, and sue to him. Tears their Petition^
This is the Duke of Suffolk, I Am your Queen.

2 Pet. The Duke of Suffolk! oh! I am undone!

Qu. Away you Slaves! ho! turn these Fellows out.
Is this the Fashion in the Court of England?
Is this the Royalty of the English King,
To be a Pupil to a Governor?
Am I a Queen, yet Subject to a Duke?
Oh my La Poole! when in the City Tours
Thou rann'st a tilt in honor of my Love,
And stol'st away the Ladies hearts of France;
I from thy Graces copyed in my Mind
A charming glorious Picture of King Henry;
I thought thy Courage, Courtship, and Proportion,
Had been brave Shadows, of thy braver King.
But oh! there never was Woman so deceived
At the first sight of the Kings sad grave Look;
The golden Image of him in my mind
Fell down upon my heart, and almost broke it.
My heavy heart sunk in a Royal shadow,
And greater was the fall, because before
It stood on high and golden expectations.
Ah! never was so sad a fall, as that
From glorious Suffolk, down to soft King Henry.

Suff. Madam, be patient, for I Married you,
Not to the poor weak King, but to the brave Kingdom,
And that I Will make a glorious Husband to you.

Qu* Indeed the Marriage 'tween the King and me
Is but a strange one; for to speak the truth,
I Am Wedded to the Throne more than to him,
And he is Married more to Heaven than me.
His Soul is Married to all the Saints in Heaven;
Heaven is the King's spacious Seraglio:
There his heart lives; that which he leaves below
With me, and with the Kingdom, is a shadow.

Suff. He is indeed no more but a King's Ghost,
That walks in night; it has been night in England
Ever since that Glorious Sun, his Father, set.
And France and England, like two metled Steeds
Bound, startle, break their reins, and run away,
At sight of this pale Ghost; nor will be Governed.

Qu. 'Twere night with England, I am sure with me,
If 'twere not for my glorious La Poole.
If 'twere not for thee, England, were Hell to me,
And I tormented with Infernal pains,
Under the Arrogance of the Protector,
Of Cardinal Beauford, that imperious Church Man,
Of Somerset, Buckingham, and grumbling York,
For each of these is greater than the King.

Suff. And Salisbury, and Warwick are as great as they.

Qu. Indeed, for any thing that I can see,
The King's the only Subject i^ the Kingdom.
He obeys all, and no one obeys him.
But all this does not vex me half so much,
As the intolerable insolence
Of that proud Dame, the Lord Protectors Wife.
She invades the Court each day, with Troops of Ladies,
And vanquishes my Glory so entirely,
That I appear a little falling Star,
And she a Comet upon whom all gaze.
Her very Habit does exceed in cost
The expenses of a little Princes Court.
She Swim's along the Court, like a Guilt Ship;
New come from India, laden all with Jewels,
And then she scorns to strike her Sail to me,
But over-looks me, like a little Pinke
Laden with Toys and Fripperies from France.
This slave to Pride, that should be slave to me,
Vaunted amongst her Minions the other day,
The very Train of her worst wearing Gown,
Was better worth then all my Fathers Lands,
Till Suffolk gave two Dukedoms for his Daughter.

Suff. Laugh at her Pride; for, Madam, it shall shortly
Be your Divertisement, and her Destruction.
I Have dug a Pit for the fierce Lyoness.
Who, greedy of Honor, ranges to the very
Suburbs of Hell for it; and I Have turned loose
Jackalls to tempt her to the Pit in show,
Of guiding her to her desired Prey.
See here comes one of my Jackalls -- Sir John
What News?

Enter Humes. Humes. Good News, my Lord, I have been with the Duchess,
And did Salute her in the Devil's Name,
With the Title of Majesty.

Suff. Ha! ha! ha!
(Laughs.)
Qu. What do you mean?

Suff. Madam, the Story will make you Laugh; the Duchess
Is going to the Devil for Preferment.

Qu. How? To the Devil?

Suff. Yes; and bribes this Gentleman,
To find out some of the Devil's Spies and Agents,
To aid her in a Correspondence with him.

Humes. Madam, it is most true, and I Have found out
One Margery Jordan, an experienced Witch,
And Roger Bullingbrook a Conjurer,
And they pretend they will raise from Hell a Spirit
Shall tell her all she will ask.

Qu. Sure they are Cheats.

Suff. They shall be Cheats to her, and her Duke Humphry.
Two mortal Devils, called York and Buckingham,
Shall send their Devil to Hell, and carry her
To what she more than Hell abhors, to shame
And ruin, and her Duke shall quickly follow:
He must have share of it in spite of him.

Qu. Oh! my La Poole, that I were now in private aside.
To Kiss thee for this Plot! Oh! it is a rare one!
Humes, carry on this Plot, here is Gold for thee,
Thou shall have more.

Humes. So, the Gold tumbles in
On every side of me, but it is no wonder. aside.
I serve the Master of the Mines of the Devil,
And how in Hell he uses Slaves I know not:
He is an excellent Master in this World. Exit.

Qu. Oh! Suffolk! thou did never look so lovely
In all thy Life as now; nor did I ever
Feel such transporting pleasure in my Soul.
Now I shall be a Queen.

Suff. A glorious one.
I Am sure the fairest England ever saw.

Qu. Oh! Suffolk! bravest, loveliest of Men!
I Am trebly blessed by thee, thou do delight
My Love, and my Revenge, and my Ambition.
Now all the Ladies that in scorn of me,
Flattered and waited on proud Gloster's Wife,
Shall suddenly repent their saucy follies.

Suff. The Duke's of Somerset, and Buckingham,
With the Insolent Cardinal, shall all fall too.
As for the Duke of York, this late Complaint
Will make but little for his benefit;
So one by one we will tumble them all down.

Qu. And on the Ruins of 'em all, we will revel.

Suff. And England at the Queen's command shall be.

Qu. I Will Govern that, and thou shall govern me.

ACT II.
The King and Queen sat in State, Duke Humphry, Cardinal, Buckingham, York,
Salisbury, Warwick, and the Duchess attending. King. FOr my own part, my Lords,
I care not whether
Rules France, the Duke of Somerset, or York,
All Is one to me, they are both fitting Men.

York. Sir, if I ill demeaned my self in France,
Then let me be denied the Regentship.

Some. Sir, if I be unworthy of the place,
Then give the Duke of York the Regentship.

War. Whether your Grace, my Lord, be worthy or not;
Dispute not that, the Duke of York is worthier.

Car. Ambitious Warwick! let your betters speak.

War. The Cardinal's not my betters in the Field.

Buck. My Lord, all in this Presence are your betters.

War. In Title, not in Fortune, or in Courage.

Sal. Peace, Son!

King. Oh! peace my Lords! Do not you know
What little pleasure I have in my Crown,
And Do you strive to make me wearier of it?
You take it ill if I refuse you Governments,
Yet you deny to let me Rule in quiet.
I wonder what you see in this vile World
Worth the contending for. Heaven has entrusted me
With Three Great Kingdoms, England, France and Ireland,
And I must give Account of 'em to Heaven,
And not throw up my Charge for my own ease,
Else I would gladly give them all to buy
The holy Peace, any of you may have.
Yet you disturb your selves and me for Rule,
Which I account a Penance for my sins.

Qu. Is this a King that speaks? or some poor Pilgrim,
That having lost his way, seats himself ignorantly
Down in a Throne, and does not know it is one.
And falls a Preaching to the gaping Multitude.
Oh! What a Prince is this to sway three Kingdoms? Aside.
And what a Husband's this for a young Queen?

Yo. Most Gracious Sovereign! our chief contention
Is to give you that ease which you delight in,
To lay the burden of your Government
On Men whose Loyalty and great Abilities
May bear them up, both to your ease and glory.

Sal. And for the Government of France, my Lord
Of York, no Man so fitting as your self.
And pray my Lord of Buckingham, show reason
Why you prefer the Duke of Somerset?

Qu. Because it is the King's Will to have it so.

Glou. Madam, the King is old enough himself
To speak his Mind; these are no Women's matters.

Qu. If he be old enough, What needs your Grace
To be Protector of His Majesty?

Glou. Madam, I am Protector of the Kingdom,
And at His pleasure will resign my Place.

Suff. Resign it then, and leave your Insolence;
Since you were King, (As who is King but you?)
The Commonwealth has daily run to ruin.
The Dauphin seized our Provinces in France,
And you our Liberties and Honors here.

Car. The Commons you have Racked, the Clergies Bags
Are lank and lean with your Extortions.

Some. You spend the Public Treasure most profusely
On Sumptuous Buildings for your Luxury,
And costly Attire for your Wive's Vanity.

Elia. So! so! my Dress becomes a Crime of State;
Shortly I do believe you will Arraign
My Necklaces and Bodkins of High Treason;
You cannot do it by the Law of England,
'Cause they have not their Equals here to try 'em by.

Buck. We may extort the Law as often your Husband
Has done, to punish beyond bounds of Law.

Qu. And not content to waste the Public Treasure,
Both on his own, and his Wive's foolish Pride.
He has, as the Suspition's very strong,
Made Sale of Offices and Towns in France,
Which if 'twere proved, should make him lose his Head.

Glo. How am I baited beyond Human sufferance?
I will go out and cool, lest I be tempted
To act or speak any thing
Unworthy of my self, and of this Presence Exit.

King. My Lords, my Lords, I see, and grieve to see
Too much Ill-mindedness in all this Fury.
We often by Lightning read in darkest Night,
And by your Passions I read all your Natures,
Though you at other times can keep them dark;
But I have Read them when you thought it not,
And I my self scarce minded what I did.
I, like the musing Hermit in the Desert,
Feel the cold nipping blasts of the rough Wind,
And hear the Howles of Wolves, and Yelpes of Foxes,
Though I regard them not, nor mind at all
To shun them, or to fortify against them.

Card. I hope the King ranks not among the Wolves
One of the Shepherds of the Sacred Flock.

King. I should be glad I had no cause at all.

Suff. I hope there is none of us has spoken any thing
But from deep sense of Loyalty and Honor
Against a Traitor to the King and Kingdom.

King. I Will Judge so honorably of you all,
To think, you only echo Public Rumor;
And Echoes that miscall the Passenger
Injure him not, but they that set them talking.
Public Report then wrongs the Duke, not you;
For if you know him false, Why don't you prove it?
Then you do ill, to do no more then Talk.

Qu. Sir, subtle Men don't use to act their Wickedness
In Roades, in Markets, or on Steeple tops;
But closely hid; so hid, that often the Devil
Who did employ them, scarce knows what they mean.

Elia. Come, Sir, all this is spoken out of envy,
Low crawling envy, envy that is chok'd
With the great Dust the Train of my Robes make.
Whence came this beggarly Spirit into England?
It never can be of the English growth.
The late great Conquerors of Towns and Provinces
Fallen to envy a Lady's Clothes? Oh! beggarly!
Some poor French Peddler brought this Spirit hither,
Amongst the small Wares, they sell so dear to us.

Qu. Oh! how she taunts me! -- this is meant to me! Aside.
I will take an occasion to affront her. Lets fall her Fan.
Give me my Fan! -- What, Minion, Can you not?
She gives the Duchess a Box of the ^^re. I cry you Mercy, Madam, Was it you?

Elia. Yes, it was I, proud Daughter of a Beggar.
Strike me thy betters, many times thy betters,
Bating the Dignity thc King bestows on thee.
No mar'le thou look with envy on my Jewels;
Thy Father could not give thee Gold enough
Only to Guild one of the Kings Prayer-Books.
The King was forced to give him two great Provinces,
That so it might not shamefully be said,
The Father of the Queen of England starves.

Qu. So! so!

King. Fie Madam! Fie! this is too much:
Pray Rule your self, it was against her will.

Elia. Against her will? no! Sir! 'twas with her will,
And shortly she will do as much to you.
But she shall never strike me unrevenged -- Exit. Elia.

Buck. I will follow her my Lord Cardinal,
And listen after the Duke, how he proceeds.
The Duchess Fury now will need no spurs,
She Will gallop fast enough to her destruction.

Card. And let her gallop, and the Devil speed her -- Ex. Buck.

Enter Duke Humphry. Glo. My Lords, I Have walked away from all that passion,
Which your false spiteful Accusations
Had kindled in my breast; and now I come
In a cold candid temper to advise you
To spare your selves, for me you cannot hurt.
Bring any Proofs of what you have accused me,
And I lie open to the Law as any Man,
At least I will do so; for if you think
My Office fences me, I Will throw it down.
But to the matters that we have in hand,
I say the Duke of York's the fittest person
To be your Regent Sir in France.

Suff. Before Election's made, let me show reason why
The Duke of York is most unfit of any Man.

York. My Lord of Suffolk, I will tell you why,
Because I scorn to be your Flatterer.
Next, if I be appointed for the place,
Such is my Lord of Somersets ambition
And hate to me, that he will keep me here,
Without Discharge, Money, or Furniture,
Till France be wonn; he had rather it were lost,
Than any one should rule it but himself.
Last time I danced Attendance on his will,
Till Paris was besieged, famished, and lost.

War. That I can witness, and a blacker Treason
Was never committed --

Suff. Peace, my Lord of Warwick!
Here Is one shall silence you, and him you plead for.

Enter Armorer and his Man Peter. York. How? Silence me?

Suff. Yes; here is a Man accused
Of Treason, that relates to you my Lord.

York. Does any one accuse me for a Traitor?

King. What do you mean, my Lord? What Men are these?

Suff. An't please your Majesty, this is the Man
That does Accuse his Master of High Treason.
His words were these; That Richard Duke of York
Was the true lawful heir to the Crown of England:
And that your Majesty was an Usurper.

King. Say Man, Were these thy words?

Arm. An't please your Majesty,
I never said, nor thought any such matter:
Heaven is my witness I am falsely accused.

Pet. By these ten bones, he spoke them to me one night, my Lord in the Garret,
when we were scow'ring the Duke of York's Armor.


York. Base Villain! I will have thee hanged for this
Most Trayt'rous Speech.
I do beseech your Majesty,
Let him find all the rigor of the Law.

Ar. Hang me, my Lord, if ever I spoke these words;
My Accuser is my Prentice, and I correcting him
For his Fault the other day, he Vowed on's knees
He Would be revenged on me, I have good witness;
Therefore I beseech your Majesty, cast not away
An Honest Man, for a Rogues Accusation.
One that has been a Rogue, Sir, all his Life,
A most notorious Rogue, Sir, I beseech you.

King. Uncle, What shall we say to this in Law?

Glo. If I may Judge, Sir, let the Duke of Somerset
Be Regent o'r the French, because the Duke
Of York lies under violent suspicion.
And let these have a day appointed them
For single Combat, 'cause the Armourer
Has Witness of his Servants Threats and Malice.
This is the Law, and this is, Sir, my Sentence.

King. Let it be so.

Some. I humbly thank your Majesty.

Armo. And I accept the Combat willingly.

Pet. Alas! my Lord, I cannot fight! oh! pity me!
Oh Heaven have mercy on me! I shall never
Be able to strike a blow! -- oh! Lord! my heart! Why the
Devil must I fight? Is this my Reward for Witnessing? I cannot fight.

Glo. Sirrah! you must fight, or be hanged.

King. Away with them to Prison! till the Combat.
Come, my Lord Duke, I will dispatch you to France.

All go out but the Cardinal. Card. I will not rest till I Have the Blood of
Gloucester:
He must be Lord Protector of the Kingdom,
And Lord it over me. He thinks he is
A better Man, 'cause he is a King's Son,
And I but Son of the Duke of Lancaster.
He is the Son of Henry the Fourth,
And I of Henry's Father John of Gaunt.
But at my making there it seems did want
Some Holy Ceremonies, for want of which
I Am that the Rude Ill-manar'd Law calls Bastard.
And 'cause the Law has thrust me from Succession
To the great Temporal Glories of my Father,
They wrapped me up in a Priest's Robe, and lay me
Out of the World; and in the way of Heaven.
They should have dressed poor Henry in this Child's Coat,
And laid him in the Cradle of the Church,
And hum'd him fast asleep with Holy Stories;
His little Soul was fitter for those things.
Well, I will go to Heaven; but in my way
I at the Lord Protectorship will bayt,
Or I will lie abroad in storms of Blood.
My Cosins themselves Legitimate may call;
Their Souls compared with mine are Bastards all. Exit.

Enter Elianor, Humes; the Scene a Room in the Conjurer's House. Elia. Where
are your Instruments?

Humes. They are both ready,
Preparing their dire Charms and Exorcisms.

Elia. Call them.

Enter Bullingbrook and the Witch. Humes. Come in; this, Madam, is Roger
Bullingbrook,
A Man of wonderful and dreadful Art;
He has a Key to the Infernal deep,
And let us abroad what Spirit he will, and when:
And when he will he Chains him up again.
This Woman equals him in Power and Art,
Her Name is Jordan.

Elia. Come, begin your Charms.

Bull. Dare you be present, Madam?

Elia. Dare the Devil
Come in my presence? for I dare meet him.

Bull. Madam, you may, for Heaven fetters him,
And gives us Mortal Creatures Power to do so:
I gained my Art by Prayer, and profound Study;
Then nothing fear.

Elia. I never knew what fear was.

Bull. Go, Mother Jordan, get the Incense ready. The Witch goes out.

Elia. Well said, my Masters, come, begin, begin.

Bull. Pray Patience, Madam, for we know our times.
Our time is in the Deep, and Silent Night;
The time when Cities often are set on fire;
When R^bberies and Murders are committed;
When Bandogs Howl, and Shreich-Owles Warn the Dying;
When Spir ts Walk, and Ghosts break up their Graves;
Then Devils come abroad to meet their Friends,
And that is the time best fit's our present Work:
But, Madam, sit, and fear not, whom we raise
We will make fast within a hallowed Verge.

Enter the Witch with a Pan of Coals. Bull. Fling Incense in, then grovel on
the Earth.

The Witch fling's something on the Coals, and then the Conjurer immediately
falls* prostrate, makes a Circle with his Wand, then takes a Book and Reads.
Bull. Thou mighty Spirit, one of the chief Powers
And Potentates in the Infernal Kingdom,
Whose Empire extends wide in Night and Chaos,
Whose Provinces are Peopled thick with damned;
By that Authority he gives me o'r thee,
Who hurled thee down into these doleful Regions,
I chargee thee to obey my dread Commands,
And at my calling to appear -- Appear! --
Asmath appear!

Bull. Asmath -- Appear! -- appear! --

Witch. Asmath -- Appear! -- appear! --

Thunder and Lightning, a Sprit rises. Spirit. I Am here! --

Bull. I charge thee by the eternal being,
Whose name and power thou ever tremblest at:
To Answer that I Ask; for till thou speak
Thou shall not stir from hence.

Spirit. Ask what thou will --
But prithee do not keep me with thee long.

Bull. First of the King: What shall become of him?

Spirit. The Duke now lives, that Henry shall Depose;
But him outlive, and dye a violent Death.

Bull. Now say, What fate attends the Duke of Suffolk?

Spirit. By Water shall he meet his latest Breath.

Bull. What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?

Spirit. Let him shun Castles;
Safer shall he be on the Sandy Plains,
Then where Castles mounted stand.
H'a done, for more I hardly can endure.

Bull. Descend to darkness, and the Burning Lake.
Be gone! be gone! --

The Spirit descends with Thunder and Lightning. Enter the Dukes of York and
Buckingham with a Guard, and seize them. Yo. Lay hands upon these Traitors, and
their Trash.

Elia. Ha!

Yo. Madam, yes, I think we have watched you narrowly;
The King and Kingdom are indebted to you
For this fine piece of Work: my Lord Protector,
Who, no doubt, set you a Work, will see you rewarded.

Elia. What mighty Mischief have I done, my Lords?
Talked with a Devil? I every day converse
With worse then Devils with your selves, my Lords.
But I Have it seems disturbed the Peace of Hell;
What, you have Interest there? and many Friends!
Forgive me, Lords, but yet you can disturb
The King and Kingdom's Peace; Is that no Crime?

Buck. You have committed, Madam, then no crime
It seems -- away with those, and Guard them close;
Keep them asunder; see that all their Trinkets
Be forthcoming -- Madam, you must with us.

Guard lead out Elia. Witch and Conjurer. Yo This was an excellent Plot, well
chose to build on.
Now pray my Lord let us see the Devil's Writ.
The Duke yet lives, that Henry shall Depose; Reads.
But him outlive, and dye a violent death.

Buck. This is just Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse.

Yo. The Devil still keeps to his old trade of Quibling.

Buck. He is the Father of all Liars and Quiblers.

Yo. Well to the rest.
What Fate attends the Duke of Suffolk? Reads.
By Water shall he meet his latest breath.
What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?
Let him shun Castles:
Safer shall he be on Sandy Plains,
Then where Castles mounted stand.
Fine stuff -- The Devil I see is grown old and dull.
The King is now in Progress toward St. Albans,
With him the Husband of this lowly Lady.
Whether go all these Cloudy Oracles
As fast as Horse can carry them --
A sorry Breakfast for my Lord Protector.

Buck. Your Grace shall give me leave my Lord of York
To be the Post.

Yo. My Lord, at your own pleasure.
Within there ho!
Enter a Servant. Entreat my Lords of Salisbury and Warwick
To take a short Collation at my House
This Afternoon, away: My Lord your Servant -- Ex.

Enter the King, Queen, Protector, Cardi^al, Suffolk, as from Hawking.
Attendants, Somerset, Salisbury, Warwick. Qu. Believe me, Lords, for flying at
the Brook
I never had better sport in all my life.
Yet by your leave the Wind was very high.

King. But what a Point, my Lord, your Falcon made?
And what a pitch she flew above the rest.

Suff. My Lord Protector's Hawks tower like their Master,
Above their Fellows.

Glo. It Is an humble Mind
That mounts, my Lord, no higher than a Bird.

Card. I thought he soon would be above the Clouds.

Gl. Ay, my Lord Cardinal, how think you by that?
Would not your Grace be glad to mount toward Heaven?

K. The Treasury of Everlasting Joy.

Card. Your Heaven is on Earth, your eyes and thoughts
Beat on a Crown, the Treasure of your Heart,
Pernicious, haughty, treacherous Protector!
Who smooth it thus both with the King and Kingdom.

Gl. How, Cardinal!
Tantaeve animis Coelestibus irae! Churchmen so hot?
Uncle, for shame let your Robe hide your Malice.

Suff. No Malice, my Lord, but Zeal, that which becomes
So good a Quarrel, with so bad a Lord.

Gl. As who?

Suff. Why, as your Self, my Lord Protector.

Gl. My Lord of Suffolk, England knows your Insolence.

Qu. And your Ambition, my Lord of Gloucester.

K. How, Madam! You a Stirrer of Debate?
These are the pleasant Sounds that follow me
Wherever I go: I Am an Enchanted Isle,
Surrounded with Eternal raging Storms,
Whoever approaches me, hazards a Wreck:
These Winds and Waves beat on my Lord Protector,
Because he is a Rock that Guards my Coast.

Card. Good Heaven, what Arts has the Protector used
To charm you, Sir, that you can see all Loyalty
In him who means you hurt? and none in us,
Who show our Loyal Zeal to guard you from him?
Were it but one of us that showed this Zeal,
It might be thought an Envy to his Greatness,
And a design to get into his Office:
But since we all unite our Accusations,
We can have no design but Loyalty,
Since all of us cannot be Lord Protectors.

K. But all may hope, though only one can be so.
But come, my Lords, do not I know you all?
I mind you often, when you think I do not.
You think I Am fast asleep to all this World,
I would be so, but you disturb my rest,
And break my slumbers with your furious Broils,
And make me mind you whether I will or no.
Alas, I pity you, you wrong your selves
Much more than me; and yet you trouble me,
Trouble my Counsels, trouble my Devotions,
Trouble my Sports; but, Sirs, I thank you for it,
For by these Tempests you stir up the Mud
That lodges in the bottom of this World,
And make all Pleasures here a Puddle to me,
And make me long for the pure Joys above,
To do me good, though you design me none.

Qu. Here I am tired with everlasting Preaching. Aside.

Card. The King and I ought to change Offices, Aside.
He is more fit to be a Priest than I,
And I Am more fit to be a King than he:
Thus Crowns and Mitres are at random thrown,
And very seldom light on Heads that fit 'em.

Enter one crying a Miracle. Gl. What means this noise?

One. A Miracle! A Miracle!

Car. What Miracle? An Usurer made charitable?
A Lawyer honest, or a Courtier faithful,
A Woman constant, or a Soldier godly?

Suff. Come to the King, and tell him, Friend, what Miracle.

One. Forsooth a Blind Man at St. Albans Shrine,
Within this half hour has received his sight,
A Man that never saw in his life before.

Suff. That Is a strange Miracle indeed, my Friend.

K. The Eternal Goodness, and Omnipotence,
Be praised, for all thy wondrous Works to Men;
He has not only given this poor man sight,
But by this miracle given light to truth.

Card. I will be hanged, if this be not some damned cheat Aside.
Played by the Friars: I who wait at the Altar,
Know well what tricks are played behind the Altar,
Yet I must countenance it with a grave look,
But it is strange truth that stands in need of lies.
Well, Heaven be praised, Sir, for this miracle; To the K.
Here come the Friars and Townsmen on Procession,
To present your Majesty with the man.

Enter Abbot, Friars, Mayor of St. Albans, and his Brethren, bearing the Man in
a Chair, his Wife with him. Gl. Stand by, my Masters, bring him near the King,
It is his Majesty's pleasure to talk with him.

K. Good Fellow, tell us all the circumstances,
That all of us may glorify Heaven for thee.
Were thou born blind?

Simp. Born blind, an't please your Grace.

Wife. I indeed was he forsooth.

Suff. What Woman's this?

Wife. His Wife, an't like your Worship.

Gl. If thou had been his Mother, thou could better
Have told.

Suff. What thinks your Majesty of this? To the Qu.

Qu. Some trick of the Friars to cheat the silly people: Aside.
They are all a pack of Rogues.

Suff. Oh! damned Rogues all. Aside.

K. Where were thou born?

Simp. At Berwick, an't please your Grace.

Suff. So far in the North, and come hither for Cure?
What, was there never a Northern Saint to help thee?
No Saint in Scotland?

Simp. Not that I ever heard of:
I never heard of any Saint in Scotland,
An't like your Worship.

Suff. Truly nor I neither.

Qu. There is a Saint in Wales, Saint Winifrid,
Many miles nearer Berwick than Saint Albans,
Why did not go to her? She Is a good Saint,
And does abundance of good Offices.

Simp. She is so, an't please you forsooth Madam,
I Have heard of her, but she is so full of business,
Does so many Cures for English, Welsh, and Irish,
That I was loath to trouble the good Lady:
Besides, I was afraid she would not be
At leisure a great while to look to me,
And I did long to get a little sight forsooth.

K. Poor Soul, Heaven's goodness has been great to thee,
Heaven has opened a new gate of comforts to thee,
Showed thee the richest brightest half of time,
Turned over the gilded leaves of Natures Book,
Where thou shall read things thou could never imagine,
Coin all this golden time in praise and prayer,
And thou shall find too at this gate of sight,
Armies of new temptations enter in,
Therefore stand more than ever upon thy Watch.

Card. How this tale sinks into the King's soft Soul! Aside.
A Cannon could not shoot it into mine;
Yet I must face this fable with my Scarlet,
To make it pass for the Honor of the Church.
Upon such Legs as these the poor Church halts,
Though we conceive it is halting with our Robes.

Qu. Tell me, good Fellow, came thou here by chance,
Or out of pure Devotion to this Shrine?

Simp. Indeed forsooth out of most pure Devotion,
Being called I Am confident a hundred times,
And oftener in my sleep by good Saint Albans.

Suff. How did thou know it was Saint Albans called thee?

Simp. He said he was Saint Albans, if it please you.

Suff. He told thee in thy sleep so?

Simp. Yes, an't please you.

Suff. What said Saint Albans?

Simp. He said, Saunder, an't please your Worship,
Come, offer at my Shrine, and I will help thee:
Come, Saunder, come.

Wife. Indeed it is true forsooth,
For many a time and often my self have heard
A voice to call him so.

Suff. What in thy sleep?

Wife. No forsooth, waking, as I Am now forsooth.

Suff. Friend, thou were much in good Saint Albans favor.

Simp. I truly, I am much beholding to him.

Card. What, art thou lame?

Simp. Yes, Heaven help me, Sir.

Suff. How came thou so?

Simp. By a fall from a Tree.

Wife. Yes, he fell down from a high Plum tree, Master.

Gl. Were thou born blind, and yet would climb a tree?

Simp. Never but once, and then my Wife desired me
To get some Damsons for her, and I could not
Deny her any thing, I loved her dearly, she is a good Wife forsooth.

Card. Alas, good Couple.

Gl. This is a Rogue, and I Will discover him: Aside.
Let me see thine eyes: -- wink now; now open 'em:
In my opinion yet thou see not well.

Simp. Yes, Master, clear as day, I thank St. Albans.

Gl. Say thou me so? What color is that Gown?

Simp. Red, Master, Red as Blood.

Gl. Why, that is well said.
What color is my Hat?

Simp. Black, Black forsooth, Coal-black as Jet forsooth.

K. Why, then thou know what color Jet is of?

Suff. And yet he never saw Jet in all his life.

Gl. But Gowns and Hats before this day good store.

Wife. Never before this day in all his life.

Gl. What Is my Name, Sirrah?

Simp. Master, I know not.

Gl. What is his Name?

Simp. Indeed I know not, Master.

Glo. No?

Simp. No indeed.

Glo. Nor his?

Simp. No truly Master.

Glo What Is thy own Name? Can thou tell that?

Simp. My Name is Saunder Sympcox, if it please you Master.

Glo. Then Saunder Sympcox, you are a Cheating Rogue.
If you had be^n born blind, you might as well
Have known our Names, as all the Names of Colors.
Sight may distinguish Colors, but not Name 'em.
St. Albans here, my Lords, has done a Miracle;
What if I do one, and restore this Cripple
To his Legs again?

Simp. Oh! Master! that you could.

Suff. How came St. Albans did not cure thy Lameness
As well as Blindness?

Simp. Nay, I know not, Master.

Suff. Has he not Skill in Legs as well as eyes?

Simp. Yes, surely, Master, they are all one to him.

Suff. What he forgot them then?

Simp. I know not, Master;
If it had pleased him to have Cured my Legs,
I should have been most mightily behold to him.

Glo. I Will ease him of that trouble, I will Cure thee.

Simpl. Ah, Master, that you could.

Glo. I Will do it I say:
Have you no Beadles Mr. Mayor? and things called Whips?

Mayor. Here is the Beadle, please your Grace.

Glo. I see a Stool there, bring it hither quickly.
Now, Sirrah, if you mean to save your self
From Whipping, leap o'r this Stool and run away.

Simp. Alas! Master, I am not able to stand alone;
You go about to Torture me in vain.

Glo. Well, Sirrah, I must have you find your Legs:
Whip him till he leap o'r that same Stool.

Simp. Master, What shall I do? I cannot stand.

Glo. Leap Sirrah! Leap!

Simp. Oh! oh! --

Beadle Whips him, he leaps over the Stool, and runs away, and they cry a
Miracle, follow. King. Do thou behold their Heaven? and bear thus long?

Glo. Bring back the Rogue, and take this Drabbe away.

Wife. Alas! we did it for pure need, forsooth.

Glo. Let them be Whipped through every Market Town,
Till they come to Berwick, from whence they came.

Car. Hark you, Are not you a Company of Damned Fools
To employ such a Silly Rogue as this? Softly to a Friar.
That has shown all your Cheats to the whole World?

Fry. My Lord, they were known to all Wise Men before*
And such a Fool will serve to Cousen Fools:
And Fools are those that we must hope to stand by. Exit.

Enter Buckingham. King. What Tidings brings my Lord of Buckingham?

Buc. Such as my heart does temble to relate:
My Lord Protector's Wife has practiced horridly,
And dangerously against your Majesty's Life --
H'as dealt with Hellish Conjurers and Witches
To raise up wicked Spirits from under Ground
To acquaint her with your destiny, and Council her
How she may aid your Fate, and hasten it.
She Is inquired too of the Infernal Oracle
The Fates of several of your Majesty's Council;
We apprehended them all in the Fact.

Car. Ha! Is she fallen into our Trap? that is well! -- Aside.
And she shall soon pluck her Duke Humphrey after.
My Lord Protector, your good Lady finding
She governs you, thinks she can rule the Devil,
And have the infernal Powers at her Command.
Heaven be Praised, England's Protected well.
Your Grace is Lord Protector of the Kingdom,
Your Wife rules you, the Devil is her Protector,
And so the Devil is England's Lord Protector;
I hope we shall displace his Devilship.

Glo. And put a worse Devil in if you succeed.
But these good Churchmen are the heavenly comforts
You give your Kinsman in affliction.
You may insult, for sorrow has so vanquished me,
The basest Groom may trample on me now.

King. What horrid things are practiced in this World?
How vile ones heap confusion on their heads?

Qu My Lord, my Lord, you see your nest is tainted;
Look that your self be faultless you had best.

Glo. Madam, I will not answer for a Woman:
For my own self, to heaven I appeal,
Who knows how I have loved my King and Country.
And for my Wife, I know not how it stands,
Sorry I am to hear what I have heard.
Noble she is, but if she have forgot
Honor and Virtue, I will forget her,
And banish her my Bed, and my Acquaintance;
And give her up to the just punishment
Which ^he deserves for so much wickedness,
And so dishonouring my honest Name.

King. I will to London with what haste I can,
To look into this business thoroughly,
And call these foul offenders to their Answers.

Ex. Om. prae. Suff. and the Qu. Qu. My dear, dear Suffolk, how thou every
moment
Heap'st new delights on me? when thou did get for me
The English Crown, thou did not please me more,
Then now in getting me revenge on Elianor.
Treading on her, methinks I walk in Triumph
To a second and more pleasing Coronation.

Suff. I told you, Madam, I had snares for her.
You were impatient and could not stay
Till things could ripen.

Qu. Oh! thou art my Sun:
My joys and glories ripen, grow and flourish
Under thy beautiful and glorious beams.
Come lets go see Dame Elianor in her shame,
The pleasing'st sight in the whole World, next thee.

Suff. Next sight I Will show you, shall be Gloster's fall;
The good fond Husband will be loath to stay
Behind his Wife, though she goes to destruction.

Qu. Sure thou were made of purpose for my Love;
Had heaven bid me ask for some great Merit,
A Gift that might have showed bounty divine,
I would have said, Let Suffolk heaven be mine. -- Ex.

ACT III.
Enter York, Salisbury, and Warwick. The SCENE the Duke of York's House, long
Scrowles lying on a Table.
York. NOw my good Lords of Salisbury and Warwick,
You have perused my Title to the Crown,
I pray deliver me both your opinions.

War. My Lord, it is very plain, the Right is yours;
King Henry claims the Crown from John of Gaunt,
Fourth Son of Edward the Third; Your Grace claims it
From Lyonell Duke of Clarence the Third Son:
Till Lyonell's Issue fails, his should not Reign.
It fails not yet, but flourishes in you,
and in your Sons, fair Branches of your Stock.
My Lord of Salisbury kneel we together,
And in this private Room be we the first
That shall Salute our Lawful Sovereign,
With the honor of his Birthright to the Crown.

Both. Long live our Sovereign, Richard King of England.

York. My Lords, I give you both my hearty thanks;
But I am not your King till I be Crowned,
And my Sword slayn'd in the heart blood of all
The House of Lancaster; and that is not suddenly,
Nor very easily to be performed:
We must use Counsel, Secresy, and Courage:
Do you as I do in these dangerous days,
Wink at the Duke of Suffolk's Insolence;
At Beauford's Pride; at Somerset's Ambition;
At Buckingham, and all the Crew of them,
Till they have snared the good and wise Duke Humphry,
Whose Virtues are so many Guardian Angels
Both to the King and Kingdom; his destruction
These ill Men seek, and they in seeking that
Shall find their own, if I can Prophecy.

Sal. My Lord, let us break off, we know your Mind.

War. There Is something great within my breast that tells me,
The Day is coming, when the Earl of Warwick
Shall make the Duke of York the King of England.

Yo. And I shall live to make the Earl of Warwick
The greatest Man in England but the King -- Exit.

The SCENE the Court.
Enter King and Queen, Duke of Suffolk, Duke of Gloucester, Cardinal, Elianor a
Prisoner. King. Madam, stand forth, and hear your Sentence from me:
In sight of heaven and me your guilt is great;
A Crime, to which heavens Book adjudges Death:
Your Fellow Criminals shall suffer Death;
and it is notorious false reasoning
^ou should be spared, because you are great and Noble;
he World is used to such false Reasonings,
and that is the cause there is so little Truth in it.
But I observe but few of the World's Customs,
Nor will I now be lead away in this.
Then hear my Sentence; since to your great Spirit
There is no pain like shame; I Sentence you
To bear the torturing shame of open Penance:
And since to live deposed of all your Honors
In some remote sad desolate obscurity,
Is to you pain like burying alive,
I Sentence you to spend your days in Banishment
With Sir John Stanley in the Isle of Man.

Elia. Welcome my Banishment; for I am sure
My doleful days will not be many there.

Glo. Oh Wife! What have thou brought upon thy self?
Did not I timely warn thee of Ambition;
And say, one day 'twou'd do some dismal deed?
The King has past a righteous Sentence on thee;
And none have reason to complain but I,
Who innocently suffer in thy shame:
My honor shares in all thy sad reproach,
And my love suffers in thy Banishment,
That I am punished equally with thee,
Though I am innocent; and yet the King
Does me no wrong at all: no Elianor,
I Have reason to complain of none but thee,
Who would not take the Counsels that I gave thee,
Out of dear Love to thee.

Elia. I see my folly.

Glo. Now have thou brought dishonor on my age,
And shame and grief will sink me to my Grave.

Qu. My Lord, my Lord, you can be sensible
Of your Wive's shame; but not of the dishonor
The King and I both suffered by her Insolence.
You weep, 'cause she must suffer an hou^s Penance;
But she has made me suffer horrid Penance
Ever since I was her Queen, both to my own,
And the King's shame and grief, that you never wept for.
She must walk barefoot now upon the stones:
Time was, she trod on me, I was her way;
Which I endured to the King's shame and mine:
And you for that had very small regret.

Gl. Madam, if for her Crimes, her too great Crimes,
The punishment the King has doomed her ^o
Be not enough, pray Sentence her to more:
But let her know an end of punishment.
But if the Scale be full enough already,
As the just King, who poised it well, conceives;
Do not be heaping till it grows injustice.

Qu. My Lord, she deserves more then she shall suffer;
Only for the intolerable rudeness
Wherewith she treated me her Queen to day;
To call me to my Face a Beggars Daughter?
Suppose I were that miserable Beggar,
Is it well done to tread on Poverty?
But when by Birth heaven made me a great Princess,
And the King's Love made me a great Queen, her Queen*
For her to treat me so? Was that well done?

Suff. Yes, Madam, 'twas well done for his Designs
Of making her your Queen, your Majesty her subject:
That they had such Designs, her present Crimes
Are a sufficient proof; and they did well
To bring you to subjection by degrees.

Car. All the reflection I shall make is this;
He who was Governed by so ill a Woman,
Is very unfit to be the Kingdoms Governor;
She was his Counselor, the Devil hers;
Conjecture then what his Designs must be.

Glo. Lord Cardinal, I am sure of your good Word;
I see what all of you thirst for, my ruin.
I had long since removed out of your way,
If duty to my King had not detained me:
I was afraid to trust him in your hands,
But I perceive my stay occasions him
Perpetual trouble; and the heavenly power
Has an especial eye to Sacred Kings.
To his Protection then I Will leave the King,
If the King will permit me, and retire
To bear the heavy burden of my griefs.

Qu. Pray do, my Lord, we will take you at your word.
I see no reason, why a King of years
Should be Protected like a little Child:
Resign your Staff, and give the King his Kingdom,
The King by heaven's help may Govern it.

King. Do, do my Lord, since they will all have it so,
I shall not want a Counsel, or Protection,
For heaven is my hope, my stay, my guide.
And go in peace, less powerful, less great;
No less beloved, by me, and all good Men.

Enter York. Glo. Then here, most Sacred Sovereign, is my Staff;
As willingly do I resign it to you,
As e're your glorious Father made it mine.
As willingly I lay it at your feet,
As others would ambitiously receive it*
Farewell, good King, may you, when I am dead,
Never have cause to shed one tear for me.
When is your Royal Pleasure that my Wife
Shall do her Penance?

King. Now, immediately.

Glo. Come, Elianor, let us support our Sorrows;
Sorrow is natural to this Vale of Tears.
My fall will rather pleasure to me bring,
If it shall cause no sorrow to the King.

Exit Gloucester, Elianor with a Guard. King Oh Lords, you have made me part
with a good Man!
I wish I may never have need of him.

York. How? Has the Duke resigned the Government?

Qu. Yes; Henry now is King; and I am Queen;
And Humphry Duke of Gloucester scarce himself:
Two of his stately Branches are lopt from him;
His Wife is Banished, and his Staff resigned,
And he will shortly wither with the Mayme.

Yo. As I would wish: How have these haughty Lords asid^
Most subtly wrought their own destruction?
For now the King lies open to my Sword;
But they shall perish with him for their Villainies.

A Shout: Enter Buckingham. King. Now! What Is the News?

Buck. May it please your Majesty,
The Combat 'tween the Armourer and his Man,
The Appellant, and Defendant has been fought,
According as your Majesty appointed:
Truth has prevailed; the Guilty Armourer,
Worsted by his Servant, has confessed the Treason.

King. Where is the Fellow?

Buc. They are both without.
Come in --

Enter Armorer and his Man with a Guard. King. What, Fellow, did you speak the
words?

Arm. Yes, please your Majesty.

King. Yet you denied 'em.

Ar. I was unwilling to be hanged an't please you.

King. But not unwilling to destroy thy Soul,
By spilling of an innocent Fellows blood,
As thou have done, if right had not prevailed.

Buck. Sir, it was right indeed that did prevail;
I never saw poor Fellow so afraid,
As the Armorer's Servant was in all my life,
And yet he beat his Master by his Innocence.

Arm. It was my Conscience beat me, and not he;
If my own Conscience had not fought against me,
I could have beaten twenty such as he.

Pet. I do not know that, for though I was afraid
E're I came to it, now I know what it is,
I do not care if I have the other bout.

King. There Is mischief in this Business, I discern it; Aside.
The Common People have been tampered with,
To try how they will like a change of Princes;
And to make way for it, my right is questioned,
And my good Lord Protector sent away from me.
Oh! heaven, if I be useful to my People,
Preserve me, for their sakes, from wicked Men;
If I be not, extend thy Providence
To them, and let what will become of me.
-- Go lead that Traitor to the Death he merits,
Thou honest man, whose truth and innocence
Heaven has revealed, by me shall be rewarded.

Exit Omnes prae. Suffolk and the Queen. Qu. Now it goes excellently well
indeed!
This haughty Woman tumbled in the dirt,
So far beneath my feet I cannot tread upon her.
Duke Humphrey's charming Rod broken in pieces;
Wherewith he kept, as in a Conjurers Circle,
The King and Kingdom both out of our reach.

Suff. Did not I promise you there should be nothing
In England, Madam, that your Soul could wish for
I Would not make yours?

Qu. And thou have kept thy Word.

Suff. I think I promised you, that wonderful,
That ravishing moment, when I first beheld you,
When Fortune prodigally propitious to me,
With Laurels crowned my Sword, my Arms with Beauty.
Flung Captive in my Arms such wondrous Beauty,
That when I saw it, I cried out amazed,
Our thundering Canons sure, has tore the Heavens,
And through the Crystal breach, an Angel's dropped.

Qu. And I, when first I saw brave Suffolk shining
In Armor Victory, but most of all
In his own Charms! Oh! said I to my self,
I Will wonder now no more the English Conquerors,
They are Angels all, or Angels fight for 'em.

Suff. I most unworthy to support so bright
A Heaven of Beauty, did retire to gaze,
Whilst all my Soul came crowding to my eyes,
And thrusted till it almost cracked the Windows;
Then like a laden Thief, that stole more Wealth
Than he could spend in all his Life, runs back
And locked it up secure in every Room.

Qu. In vain is this rich guilding of that hour,
Which only was the portal of our Loves.
Since we are entered, and possess the Palace,
How I then wondered, and how since I loved,
Let all the Gardens, Groves, and happy Rooms,
That have been aiding to our Pleasures, tell.
So full of Life and Soul our Joys have been,
We have almost scattered Life to all things round us.
A thousand times I Have thought the wanton Pictures,
Have striven to leap out of their Golden Frames
That held 'em Captive, and come share with us.
A thousand times, methought, I Have seen their Mouths
Striving to break the painted shadows Bonds,
That held 'em bound in everlasting silence,
And burst into a Laughter, and a Rapture.

Suff. I never minded Pictures, when a Substance
Of so much Beauty lay in my embraces;
Nor Venus's Picture, no nor Venus's self,
Could have extracted a regard from me.

Qu. How often has our Love in Groves and Gardens
Filled every Creature near us with such Spirit,
That they have danced to Death as they were stung;
The Birds have chirp'd their little souls away,
The Turtles bill'd till they have no breath;
The Winds have sported wantonly around us,
Till they have swoun'd away into a Calm.

Suff. Yet all this Love and Beauty which could make
The sapless trunk of a dead Tree to bud,
Can put no warmth into the frozen King.

Qu. Oh! to my Arms! He comes like depth of Winter,
With Cheeks all moist with Penitential Tears,
And Lips so cold, each kiss gives me an Ague.

Suff. Alas! How should you expect them otherwise?
He comes from kissing Brazen Images,
And Bones, and Sculs of Saints, that were more cold
When they were living, than you will be when dead.

Qu. Well, next to Love, Revenge has sweetest taste,
Let us go take some private stand, and see
Dame Elianor in her ridiculous Pomp
Walking the Streets, in her White Garment barefoot,
Holding a burning Torch to light her shame;
A gaping Crowd, and throng of hooting Boys.
Following her Train, and the Belconies filled
With laughing Ladies, whom she onc'd contemned. A shout.
Hark! they are coming, let us not loose the Pleasure. Exit.

The SCENE a Street.
Enter Duke Humphry, and his Men in Mourning Cloaks. Gl. Oh! What a Change is
here in my condition?
Fallen from the highest Pinnacle of Glory,
Down to the lowest depth of Shame and Ruin.
From being Ruler of the King and Kingdom,
To be the Scorn and Sport of common Fellows.
Oh! Elianor! I Have wronged my self and thee
By doting on thee, beyond bounds of Reason.
Thy Errors did appear to me all Excellencies.
But thou poor Nell, have punishment enough,
I Will not heap more on thee by my Complaints.
Alas! how will thy tender Feet endure
To kiss the rugged face of cutting Flints?
How hardly will thy noble Spirit brook
The abject People gazing on thy Face,
With scornful looks deriding thy Disgrace,
Who lately followed thy proud shining Chariot;
And did not care what dirt the Wheels flung on 'em,
Might they be blessed out with a look from thee. A shout.
But soft! I think she come's! and I Will prepare
My Tear-stain'd Eyes, to see her Miseries.

Serve. So, please your Grace, we'll force her from the Sheriff.

Gl. No, stir not for your lives, she shall submit
To what the King was pleased to inflict upon her.

Enter the Duchess in a White Sheet, a Taper burning in her Hand, Sheriff, and
Officers. El. Come you, my Lord, to see my open shame?
Can you endure it? If you have no sense
Of my great Sufferings, pity your self,
For you in seeing my shame do Penance with me.
See how the gaping Multitude all point
And nod their Heads, and throw their Eyes on you.
Ah! my Lord! hide you from their odious looks,
And shut up in your Closet, mourn my shame,
And curse mine Enemies, both mine and yours.

Gl. Be patient gentle Nell, forget this grief.

El. First teach me to forget my self and you;
For whilst I think I am your Wife, and you
A Prince, and Lord Protector of the Kingdom,
Methinks this should not be my Garb, and Pomp,
I should not thus be lead along the Streets
Wrapped up in shame, with Papers on my Back,
And followed by a Rabble, that rejoice
To see my Tears, and hear my deep-fetch'd Groans.
The pitiless Flints gash deep my tender Feet,
And when I start, the envious People laugh,
And bid me be advised how I tread.

Gl. What if they do, my Love? What matter is it?
They do but show their low degenerate natures.
Were thou condemned into a Wilderness,
Would thou expect to have the Tigers court thee,
The Lions flatter thee, wild Beasts adore thee;
These Crowds are little better, little gentler.

El. Oh! I cannot endure this heavy shame,
My Soul boyls under it, and my Heart breaks.
I never will behold the Sun again;
Nor face of Humane Creature! Dark obscurity,
Where never eye of Man, nor voice of Fear
Can penetrate, shall cover me for ever,
Out of the sight and memory of the World,
And bury all the World too out of mind.
Nay, if Love will not be too hard for me,
I will not let thee come into my mind.
For, oh! what deadly sorrow will it breed,
To think I am the Duke of Glocester's Wife.
And he a Prince and Governor of England:
Yet so he Ruled, and such a Prince he was,
As he stood by, whilst his forlorn Duchess
Was made a Wonder and a Pointing-stock
To every idle rascal follower.

Gl. What would thou have me do?

El. Nay, nothing, nothing,
Be mild, and tame, and blush not at my shame.
Be stirred at nothing, 'till the Ax of Death
Fall on thy self, as shortly sure it will.
For Suffolk, he that can do all in all
With that vile Woman, who abhors us all;
And York, and impious Beauford, that false Priest,
Have all laid Snares, which thou shall never escape.
But fear not thou, until thy Foot be snared,
Nor ever seek prevention of thy Enemies,
Till thou art fallen lower than I am now.

Gl. Ah! Nell, forbear, for now thou aim'st awry,
I must offend before I can be hurt;
And had I twenty times so many Enemies,
And each of them had twenty times their power,
Not all of them could work me any damage
So long as I am Loyal, True, and Faultless:
But thou wou'd'st have me rescue thee from shame;
I cannot do it, from these Officers
If I should force thee, I can never redeem thee
From the everlasting Scandal that will follow thee.
Thy greatest help is quiet, then sweet Nell;
I pray thee sort thy heart with patience.

Enter a Herald. Her. I summon your Grace to his Majesty's Parliament
Holden at Bury, the first of this next Month.

Gl. And my consent never asked herein before?
This is close dealing. Well, I will be there. Ex. Herald.

El. Lo you my Lord! What think you now?

Gl. I think
My Love as thou do, Mischief is designed me.
But if my Innocence will not protect me,
Guilt shall not do it; I will keep my Loyalty
Whilst I can keep my Life.

El. Oh! that I fear
Will not be long.

Gl. Well, Heaven's will be done.
Love, I must take my leave; and Master Sheriff,
Let not her Penance exceed the King's Commission.

Sher. An't please your Grace, here my Commission stay's:
And Sir John Stanly is appointed now,
To take her with him to the Isle of Man.

Stanly. So am I given in charge, an't please your Grace.

Gl. Pray use her well, the World may smile again,
And I may live to return any Kindness
You do to her; and so dear Love farewell.

El. Oh! stay! and do not make our farewell short,
For this is the last time I e're shall see thee.

Gl. Do not say so, my Love.

El. I know it is.
Thy Enemies are powerful, and many,
And thy own Innocence will betray thee to them.

Gl. I hope not so, I doubt not but to escape
From all their Snares; and if I do, I Will come
And find thee out in thy poor barren Island,
There we will be all the World to one another.
In that most desolate mournful abode
We will be happier, then e're we were
In the high stately building of our Greatness,
Whose walls were Vanity, foundations Rottenness.
Oh! I can speak no more to thee for Tears.
Once more farewell. -- Exit.

El. All comfort go with thee,
For none abides with me, my Joy is death,
Death, at whose name I often have been afraid,
Because I wished this World's eternity;
But now I wish the World were at an end.
Stanly, I prethy go, and take me hence,
I care not whether, for I beg no favor.
I care not what becomes of wretched me,
My Honor is for ever sunk in shame,
And my Lord lost among his Enemies;
For I am sure they will murder him amongst them,
And I shall never never see him more.
Prithee conveigh me where thou art commanded.

Stan. Why, Madam, that is to the Isle of Man,
There to be used according to your State.

El. According to my State? How Is that? Reproachfully?
For now my State is vilest Infamy.

Stan. Like to a Duchess, and Duke Humphry's Lady,
According to that state you shall be used.

El. Sheriff, farewell, I wish no harm to thee,
Though thou have been conductor of my shame.

Sher. It is my Office, Madam pardon me.

El. I, I, farewell, thy Office is discharged.
Come, Stanly, let us go.

Stan. Your Penance done;
Now, Madam, if you please, throw off your sheet*

El. My shame will not be thrown off with my sheet.
No, it will hang upon my richest Robes.
All Sin will meet dishonor, first or last,
I hope my Crown's to come, and my shame past. Exit.

ACT IV.
Enter King, Queen, Cardinal, Suffolk, York, Buckingham. King. I Admire my Lord
of Gloucester is not come,
It Is not his wont to be the hindmost Man,
What e're occasion keeps him from us now.

Queen. Do you not see his altered Countenance?
With what a Majesty he bears himself?
How proud, how peremptory, how unlike himself?
We know the time when he was mi^d and affable,
And if we did but glance a far-off look,
Immediately he was upon his Knee,
That all the Court admired his great humility.
But now he frowns, and passes stiffly by,
Scorning to show us any regard at all.

Suff. Madam, most true, Has not the King observed
This carriage in him?

Qu. He will see no ill in him.
Come, Sir, he is a Man exceeding dangerous,
He is no inconsiderable Person.
First, he is next the Crown, if you should fall
He is the next that Mounts; that it is ill policy
To trust him with your Royal Person and Councels,
Whose rancorous mind is now prepared for mischief,
And whose advantage is the King's destruction,
Who else will gain by it? We shall be sad loosers;
But he will compass all his heart can wish,
Your Kingdoms, and revenge upon his Enemies.

Card. The two great Idols of a proud man's heart.

Suff. Oh! his Soul swell's with rancour as 'twere poisoned,
He foams with Gall, and his Eyes flash with fury.
I saw him the other day pass by the King,
And Queen, as they were walking in the Garden.
He measured often the King from Head to Foot
With a disdainful eye, as who should say,
Henry, Thou art too little for thy Throne,
Then would he ca^ a down-look on the King,
And press him with his eye to the Earth, and look on him
As if he lay under his Feet already,
Nay, under the Earth; and then he stamped, and pointed
Toward Paul's, where his Wife lately did Penance,
As who should say, Oh! Henry, very shortly
My Wife shall tread on thy cold Monument
With as much pride, as thou have made her tread
With her bare feet, you cutting Flints with shame.
In short, all his demeanor is of late
So raging, haughty, frantique and intolerable,
That I believe the Devil which his Wife
Conjured from Hell, is gotten into his Breast.

Card. He was a great frequenter of the Chapel,
No Man so constant, no Man so devout,
The lowest bower to the Altar there,
The highest lifter up of eyes to Heaven,
The humblest kneeler on the Marble Floor.
But now, as if he had gained all the Heaven,
He aimed at by devotion, the Kingdom;
He Knees no more lick up the Chapel Dust
To blind the People's eyes, they are blind enough
He takes no more the Chapel in his way,
He thinks he is at his journeys end, the Throne.

Qu. That Is the next thing, Sir, makes him dangerous:
He has, by his Hypocrisy and Flattery,
So gulled the credulous Commons of their hearts,
They Will venture Hanging at any time to Crown him,
And think it Martyrdom to die for him.

King. These things are very bad, if they be true.

Suff. True, Sir? His Wive's crime prove them; what do you think
Did instigate that Bedlam brainsick Woman
To her foul fault* but his foul subornation?
Or if he were not privy to her wickedness,
At least high vaunts of his Succession.
And letting fall some words to please her pride,
To show what high designs he had near Birth,
Made the proud frantique Woman run immediately.
To fetch a cursed Midwife out of Hell.

King. Indeed, that was a very wicked Fact.

Suff. Oh! Sir, the Duke of Gloucester is a Man
Unsounded yet, and full of deep deceit.

Card. Sir, he appears to you to be a Man
Of great Humanity, Mildness, and Gentleness,
There Is not a greater Tyrant upon Earth.
If any small Offenses had at any time
Tript up the heels of any of his Enemies,
And thrown them in his power, he tortured them
Beyond all bounds either of Law or Manhood.
He has torn their Bodies so by horrid Deaths,
As if to put affronts upon that peaceful
Christianity which forbids all Revenge,
He Would put a cheat upon the Resurrection,
And tear that Article out of our Creed.

King. Can this be true? How chance I never heard of it?

Card. Who ever durst acquaint you this before?

Suff. Who ever had your Ear but he till now?

King. The meanest poorest Subject in my Kingdom
Had it, and shall, as much as he or any Man.

Card. Ay! you like Heaven, Sir, gave access to all,
But he was that eternal Persecution,
All suffered that devoutly would approach you.

King. If this this be true, what a vile thing is Man?

Yo. Sir, his insatiable Avarice
Makes two great Crowns sit loosely on your Head.
He squeezed the English Purses till Blood followed,
Upon pretense to pay your Troops in France,
So almost tore this Kingdom from its Loyalty,
Then by not sending any of that Money;
He starved your Troops, and almost lost you France.

Buck. Oh! there are horrid Crimes lie hid in smooth
Duke Humphrey, which the time will bring to light.

King. My Lords, you seem to take great care of me
If it be real, it deserves great praise;
But shall I speak my Conscience freely to you?
No Man, I Am sure, no Monarch should dissemble,
I do not, cannot think the Duke of Gloucester
That horrid thing you represent him to me.

Card. Then what are we, Sir?

King. My Lord Cardinal,
I Will tell you what my Father said you were,
His Reason was as piercing as his Sword;
And he from depth of Knowledge, not from Prophecy,
Said, That if e're you were a Cardinal.
You Would make your Cap vye with your Prince's Crown.
As for these Lords, I wo'ld entreat of them
To think that I have Eyes as well as they.
If my Lord Duke of Gloucester had such Sores
Break out of him as these, I should have seen them
Some time or other, sure, as well as they.
If he had played such Proteus tricks as these,
Some time or other, sure, I should have caught him.
But if he be the Monster they have painted him,
Then what a horrid villainous thing is Man?
Who would not rather live with Wolves than Men?
For a Wolf shows his nature, but a Man
Appears a Lamb, when he is most a Wolf.
If so, then I must fly from all of you;
For now when you seem Lambs, you may be Tigers.

Qu. Sir, on my knees I humbly fall before you.
(Kneels.) And beg with Tears, do not give up your self
And all of us to Death by incredulity.
I am a poor weak Woman, and a Stranger,
And of a Nation for whom your Subjects
By Nature, have an inbred scorn and hate,
Which great successes, greatly have improved.
And, Sir, my banished Enemy the Duchess,
Will in the Rocks of her poor barren Island,
Sit brooding Vengeance, and when you are dead,
The Eagles she has hatched shall tear my Soul out,
And who in England can or will protect me?

Suff. And all of us are in the same condition. All kneel.

Qu. Then if you think these Lords, Sir, have no Loyalty,
Nor I the consort of your Youth no love,
Yet think we have some kindness for our selves,
And in your preservation seek our own.

King. Rise my dear Love; rise all of you my Lords;
If I have injured you by my suspicions,
I pray forgive me, you perhaps have seen
More in the Duke of Gloucester, than I have.
I must confess I Am of a temper framed
Wakeful to holy thinks, drowzy to earthly;
I Am as unfit for Earth, as some for Heaven.
Yet knowing I Am the Shepherd of my Flock,
I rouse my self to attend upon my Duty,
But often I charm my self asleep again
With the Caelestial Music of Religion,
And then a Wolf may steal upon my sleep
And I not see him, which perhaps you may.
That, Sirs, I thank you, all for your kind care.

Card. Sir, we have faithfully discharged our Consciences.

King. You have done well, I thank you all; but pray
Give me good proofs of what you have alleged.
It Is not enough to say, in such a Bush
There lies a Thief, in such a Cave a Beast,
But you must show him to me e're I shoot,
Else I may kill one of my straggling Sheep,
I Am fond of no man's Person but his Virtue.
Prove that the Duke and Loyalty are strangers.
And he and I will be as far asunder
As Life and Death, the Grave shall be betwixt us.

Suff. Oh! Sir, we shall not want sufficient proofs.

Enter the Duke of Gloucester, they all start as soon as he comes in. Card. See!
see! the Duke is here.

King. Ha! they all start
At the first sight of him, I like not that. --
(Aside.)
Gl. All happiness attend my Lord the King.
Pardon, Royal Sir, that I have stayed so long.

Suff. My Lord of Gloucester, you are come too soon,
Unless you were more Loyal than you are.
My Lord, I here Arrest you of high Treason.

Gl. My Lord of Suffolk, you shall not see me blush,
Nor change my Countenance at this Arrest.

King. As they to see him did; he twits them well. -- Aside.

Gl. Innocence is not very easily daunted.
Who can accuse me? Wherein am I guilty?

Yo. It Is thought, my Lord, that you took Bribes from France,
And being Protector, staid the Soldiers Pay,
By means whereof all France is almost lost.

Gl. Is it but thought so? What are they that think so?

King. Ha! Is it come but to a thought already?
(Aside.)
Gl. I never robbed the Soldiers of their Pay.
Nor ever had one penny Bribe from France.
But I have robbed my self both day and night
Of all my rest, to study good for England.
The Farthing that e're I wrested from the King,
Or hoarded up for my own private use,
I wish may canker all, I can call mine;
But I have wrested from my own Revenues
Many a Pound, and given among the Garrisons,
Because I would not Tax the needy Commons,
And never asked for Restitution.

Card. It serves you well, my Lord, to say so much.

Gl. I say no more than truth, so help me Heaven.

Yo. In your Protectorship, you did invent
Strange and unheard of Tortures for Offenders,
That England was defamed by Tyranny.

Gl. It is well known, Pity was all my fault;
For I should melt at an Offenders tears,
And humble words were Ransom often for Faults.
I never gave condign Punishment,
Unless the Offender were a bloody Murderer,
Or ravenous Thief, that fleaec'd poor Passengers.

Suff. My Lord, these Faults are easy, quickly answered:
But mightier Crimes shall be laid to your Charge,
From which you cannot easily purge your self.
I then Arrest you in his Majesty's Name,
And here Commit you to my Lord Cardinal,
To keep you safely till your time of Trial.

King. So, they scarce know what to accuse him of
(Aside.) And yet Arrest him, now I find them out.
My Lord of Gloucester, it is my special hope,
That you will clear your self from all Suspicion;
My Conscience tells me you are Innocent.

Gl. Ah! Gracious Prince, these Days are dangerous:
Virtue never saw good Times, but one would think
If ever it should find them 'twou'd be now,
Under the Reign of such a Saintlike King.
But now the Devil rages more than ever,
'Cause from the Angel-vertues of the King,
He almost fears the downfall of his Kingdom.
Under the Reigns of wicked Kings he sleeps,
Because he knows they do his Business for him;
But now he let us out all his fiercest Fiends,
And bids them do his worst, or all is lost.
Rancour, Ambition, and foul Subornation,
Are all at work to take away my Life,
The Devil will not be content without it.
If I by Death could serve my King and Country,
I Would freelier give my Life, than these Lords take it.

King. My Lord, my Lord I do believe you.

Gl. Sir, I humbly thank you for your Royal Charity,
All these Lords know what you believe, my innocence.
Sad were my case, if there were proofs as strong
Of their foul Charge, as their foul Hate and rancour.
Their very looks are witnesses against them.
Beauford's red sparkling eyes tell his hearts malice,
And Sufollk's cloudy brow his stormy hate.
Sharp Buckingham unburden's with his Tongue,
The envious load that lies upon his heart.
And dogged York that reaches at the Moon,
Because I have plucked back his roaming Arm,
Endeavors to pull Vengeance on my Head,
Nay, my Queen has with the rest conspired,
And with her best endeavor has stirred up
My Gracious King to be my Enemy:
Ay, all of you have laid your Heads together,
I had notice of your Plots and Conventicles,
And all to take away my guiltless Life.
I shall not want false Witness to condemn me,
Nor store of Treason to augment my Guilt.

Card. His railing, Sir, is most intolerable.
If those that watch to keep your Royal Person
From Treason's secret Knife, and Traytor's rage,
Be thus upbraided, chid, and rated at,
And the Offender granted scope of speech,
'Twill cool Men's zeal to serve your Majesty.

Suff. Has he not twit our Sovereign Lady here
With ignominious words, though subtly coucht?
As if she had suborned Villains to swear
False Allegations, to destroy his Life?

Qu. But I can give the looser leave to rail.
Beshrew the Winners, for they play me false,
And well such Loosers may have leave to speak.

Buck. He Will wrest the sense, and hold us here all day.
Pray, my Lord Cardinal, look to your Prisoner.

Card. Sirs, take away the Duke, and guard him sure.

Gl. Ah! thus King Henry throws away his Crutch
Before his Legs be firm to bear his Body.
Farewell most gracious Sovereign, Heaven protect you,
You never stood more in need of his Protection,
For I Am afraid if Heaven does not save you,
Man will not; Oh! that all my fears were groundless.

King. Stay Uncle, let me embrace you e're I go!
I wish, (I speak it here before their faces)
I wish my Enemies had but thy innocence.
I in thy face behold, what I never saw,
Or in their looks, or any of their actions,
A map of Honor, Truth, and Loyalty.

Card. Oh! Sir! and do you thus --? --

King. Nay, Sirs, permit me,
You from my Bosom tear my best of Friends,
My wisest Councellor, my faithful'st Servant,
And the great torment forces me to speak.
Ah! yet, good Uncle, is the hour yet to come
That e're I found you false, or feared your Faith.
But there are louring Stars envy your state.
For these great Lords, and Margaret your Queen,
Do seek subversion of your harmless life,
And I your King want power to save you from them.

Gl. Ah, gracious Sovereign, send me quickly hence,
What ever innocence I had before,
I Am growing a great Criminal, my stay
Does make me guilty of your Royal Sorrows.

King. Thou need'st not beg to be sent hence, thy Enemies
Will quickly send thee hence in spite of me.

Gl. Oh! what a World is this, when such a King
Has little Power, because he has too much Goodness.

Card. The Duke sure bears about him some Enchantment,
Wherewith he does bewitch the King! -- Away with him.

Gl. I will away; and from the World and you
Could part, with greater joy than e're man left
A howling Desert full of Savage Beasts,
Did I not leave my Sovereign behind.
But, Oh! the joy of my escape is dashed,
When I remember I have left him there
Bewildred, and no one to be his guide,
Begirt by Wolves, and none to be his guard.

Card. What, are we Wolves? He does improve in railing.

Gl. Prove your selves otherwise, I shall be glad;
Let all your wickedness end at my death,
And I Will forgive you that with all my heart.
I will thank Heaven for my destiny,
If as the Roman Curtius, stopped the Plague
By leaping down into the gaping Earth;
So I by being thrown into the Grave,
Could stop the plague of your Ambition.
But I Am afraid I shall do no such miracle.

Suff. This is intolerable! My Lord Cardinal,
Why do you stand so tamely, and permit him
To wound both yours, and all our Honors thus?

Card. I will endure no more, away with him.

King. Farewell, good Man.

Gl. Farewell, oh! best of Kings. (Exit with a Guard.)

King. So the inhumane Soldier from the panting
Breass of his trembling Mother tears an Infant,
And carries it away before her face
Upon his bloody Spear; whilst she looks on
And swoons, and falls, and dares not call for help.
Even so remorseless have they born him hence,
Whilst I with as unhelpless tears bewail
The good Man's injuries, and with dimmed eyes
Look after him, and cannot do him good,
So mighty are his vowed Enemies;
Whom he I Am sure never wronged, he never wronged any Man. Exit.

Qu. Do you see, my Lords, in what a case we are?
The King will hear nothing against the Duke.
The King is cold, full of foolish pity,
And Glocester's show beguiles his easy mind,
Just as a Snake roul'd in a flowery Bank,
Which shining checkered slough does sting a Child,
That for the beauty thinks it excellent.
Believe me, Lords, were none more wise than I,
And I believe my self not dull in this,
This Gloucester should be quickly rid of the World,
To free the King from danger, us from fear.

Card. That he should die, is worthy Policy;
But yet we want some Color for his death,
And it is meet he die by course of Law.

Suff. That were a worthy policy indeed,
To bring him to the Bar, and there for want
Of good substantial Arguments against him,
Shall openly arreign our selves of Malice;
And so instead of bringing him to death,
Expose our selves to all the People's fury.
True, we have Jealousy backed with strong Reasons,
But Reason cannot enter into their minds;
Mud Walls, you know, resist all Battery.
And then from those Mud Walls, the People's fury
Will salley out, and make slaughter on us.

Yo. I Am of your mind, it is distraction
To sail with him into his own safe Harbor
The People's rage, and not be well coyl'd round
With proofs, that will resist small shot at least.

Qu. What shall we do then? Must we let him live?
If so, let us find some way our selves to die;
For I had rather perish once for all,
Than die each hour a lingering death of fear.

Suff. No, Madam, no, the imperious Duke shall die,
We will not to his pride and rage expose
The King, the Kingdom, and our selves, and do
Substantial wrong to all, because we cannot
Do against him a formal piece of Justice.
Must Justice starve, because we want a Lawyers
Forked distinctions to feed her neatly with;
And bright keen proofs to carve him up withal?
No, let us examine into her hungry Stomach
The morsel any way, no matter how.
Nor will the Duke have any injury,
It is an honest, and a good deceit
To deceive him who first intends deceit.

Qu. Most gallant Suffolk, resolutely spoke.

Suff. Not resolute except so much were done,
For things are often spoke, and never meant.
To show my Heart and Tongue fully agree,
Say but the word, I Will be the Executioner;
And think I do a meritorious deed.
I know the Duke means Treason to the King,
Why should I stay for proofs of what I know?
Does any one refuse to kill a Wolf,
Till he has stained his Chops, with Crimson Blood?
No, it is enough he knows him for a Wolf,
His nature's Crime enough to deserve death.
He then does best, that does dispatch him soonest.
What do you say Lord Cardinal? Speak your mind,
You see how free we are, why are you close?
Is it a meritorious deed, or no?

Card. My Lords, I only staid to feel your Pulses.
That I might know the temper of your minds,
How vigorous their constitutions were.
Religion has a body and a spirit,
The body is like Water, weak and tasteless,
And that we fling among the Common People;
The extracted Spirit is intoxicating,
And that we drink our selves, and give our Friends.
And as wise Men do always in their pleasures
Select Companions of their own Humor,
Those that are rude and quarrelsome in Drink,
They shun with care; those that are kind and pleasant,
Witty and good natured, gladly they Consort withal,
So we never drink the spirit of Religion,
With any Men but those of our own minds,
Or Men of melting maudling piety,
Who when they are drunk with it, will kiss our feet,
And weep, and do whatever we command them.

Suff. And pray, what is this Spirit? let us taste it.

Card. This! Did some ask me if this deed were lawful,
I would say no, it is a horrid Murder.
If any Man offend's against the Public,
He to the Public must give satisfaction;
That private Man that kills him is a Murderer,
And a bold Robber of the public Right.
But now to you I say, cut the Duke's Throat,
It Is lawful, necessary, meritorious.
And so 'twere in another, but perhaps
If I should say so he would not believe it,
So he might wound the Church with its own Weapons:
I Would pronounce all such damned, should kill the Duke,
But I Will pronounce you damned if you refuse it,
Because you are capable of these great mysteries.

Suff. Most excellent! this deed which I before
Only thought needful, now I find Religious.

Card. A most religious, meritorious deed.
You know the Churches Power is called the Keys;
The Keys are given us, not one single Key,
As if there were only one Door to Heaven.
Oh! there are many entrances! There Is one
Great common Gate of common Honesty,
At that we let in common understandings;
Then there are private Wickets, but the Stairs
That lead up to them, are most steep and dangerous,
And none dare venture up but bold brave Spirits;
But these back Stairs lead up to Heaven's best Rooms.
This Murder then is one of Heaven's back Stairs.
Kill him, his Blood will oil the Churches Keys,
That you shall choose what Room in Heaven you please.

Yo. I never heard any thing that pleased me better.

Card. My Lords, my Lords, Reason and Law allow
You Layicks to carry Swords for your defense,
Religion suffers us to carry none.
Is it because Priests Altars and Religion
Does not deserve defense as well as you?
Yes, but we Priests have always Weapons ready,
A kind of two-edge Knives, called Subtilties,
That are most keenly whetted at the Altars,
And nothing cuts so as one of them.
In short then, kill the Duke, kill him to night,
Before he hurt the King, the Church, or you.

Suff. Here is my hand, my Lord, I Will see it done.

Qu. I give consent.

Yo. I Will join; and now we four
Agree in it, who dares oppose a Censure?

Suff. We must get fitting People to assist us.

Card. I Will find you such, I Will mould them for the purpose.
When we have killed the Duke, we will give out
He killed himself to prevent public shame,
Or his heart broke because he was discovered.

Suff. But will not those be Lies?

Card. Most sacred truths.
Do not his actions bring his death upon him?

Qu. True.

Card. Then it is true, I hope he kills himself.

Suff. Right.

Card. Or suppose we report the discovery
Of his foul treacherous actions broke his heart:
I pray, is that false, when the discovery
Of his foul actions make us break his Neck?

Suff. No, certainly, for that will break his heart.

Card. Then every way you see, we spread no falsehoods.
My Lords, the Church has several kind of Garments,
Course homespun Clothes for Fools, fine Robes for Wits.
Now though a Fool may be let into Heaven
With his course Coat on, they will never admit him
To Rooms of State, among the Saints of quality.

Enter a Gentleman. Gent. My Lords, I am sent Post to you from Ireland.
The Irish Rebels are all up in Arms,
And put the English to the Sword, send Succors
With all the speed you can, and stop the rage
Betimes, or else the Wound may grow incurable.

Card. A Breach that craves a very speedy stop.
What counsel give you in this weighty Business?

Suff. That speedy Force be raised. My Lord of York,
Pray do you Head them, and go try your Fortune.

Yo. I will, my Lord, so please his Majesty.

Suff. Why, our Authority is his consent,
And what we do establish he confirms.
Then pray, my Lord, take you this task in hand.

Yo. Content, my Lords, do you provide me Soldiers,
Whilst I take orders for my own Affairs.

Suff. To raise you men, my Lord, shall be my business.
And now return we to the false Duke Humphry.

Card. Let us about the work immediately.
Things of great weight must not be carried long
For fear we should tire under them; and now
The gaudy blabbing, and remorseful day
Is crept into the bosom of the Sea,
And in the room more fitting for our purpose,
The silent pitiless stern-night is risen,
And beck^ns us methinks with her black hand,
To do that gallant work under her Wings,
Will make her famed in the Records of Time,
Who else will like a drop fall in the Sea
Of black Oblivion, and be lost for ever.

Suff. Come then, I slame with fury to be at it,
That I shall need no Flambeau but my self.

Card. We two, my Lord, will be the chief performers,
But yet we must have some trusty assistants,
And I will go and fashion some immediately;
I always have store of soft Clay prepared,
Which I can mould into what shape I please.

Suff. Madam, please you to go to your Repose,
And dream of Crowns and Scepters, the high Wall
That kept you from them, shall fall down to Night,
And your way opened to the Royal Seat.

Qu. And thou shall happy be when I am great: Aside to him.

Yo. So Lords, I thank you, you have done my business, Ex. S.Q.C.
I wanted men and you will give them me;
I wanted Glocester's death, you give me that too.
Now lies the King as open to destruction,
As a poor Ship tossed on the open Sea,
With Masts all broken, and the Sailers mad.
I have seduced one Cado, a headstrong Kentishman,
To take on him the name of Mortimer,
And make Commotion. I have seen in Ireland
That Fellow fight, till his thighs full of Darts,
Were almost like two sharp-quill'd Porcupines.
Then have I seen him dance like a Morisco,
Shaking the bloody Darts, as he his Bells.
In Face, and Gate, and Speech; he is like dead Mortimer.
Thus shall I try how men affect our Title.
If he be taken and Racked, he will never confess.
And if he thrives, I Will reap the Rascal's harvest.
Then pious Henry to a Covent gone,
And Humphry to his Tomb, I Will climb the Throne. Exit.

Enter the Cardinal, Suffolk, and three Murderers. Suff. Are you provided, my
Lord Cardinal?

Card. Of three brave Fellows.

Suff. What? old hardened Villains?

Card. Of better instruments, of soft Church Tools
Which I have heated with the fire of Zeal,
And I can bow them any way I please.
These are the honest men! -- Come honest men!
You are designed to be most glorious men;
Glorious on Earth, and glorious in Heaven.

Suff I will provide for them on Earth, my Lord,
The other place do you look after, for them.

Card. How? I provide for them in Heaven, my Lord?
They Will have more share in Heaven than my self.

1. Mur. Oh! my good Lord!

Card. Nay, it is true, my Friends.

Suff. My Lord, you will instruct them what to do.

Card. I have instructed, and encouraged them,
Told them their business, and the nature of it,
That it is a charity to the whole Church.
I Have told them, stopping of a Heretick's Windpipe,
Is stopping a wide Leak sprung in the Church,
Where streams of Heresy flow in to drown it;
Which if they will not stop, especially
When I a Pilot in the Church command them,
They will not only cast away their own
Poor ruined Souls, but many thousands more.

Suff. Sure, nothing is more plain.

1. Mur. Nothing, my Lord.

2. Mur. Oh! may it please your Grace, it is very plain.

3. Mur. Pshaw! pshaw! it is not so plain, and I do'nt like it.
It Is not so plain, I Am sure, as I want Money. Aside.

Card. Well, I need say no more, I Will only give them
An Oath of secrecy; come to me presently
About that Business.

1. Mur. 2. Mur. We Will attend your Grace. Ex. Card. Suff.

3. Mur. I don't know what to think of this damned business.

1. Mur. What should you think! It Is stopping of a Leak.

3. Mur. Do not talk to me of stopping of a Leak!
It is a cursed Murder.

2. Mur. How, a Murder!
The Cardinal said it is a work of charity.

3. Mur. It is so, to my starving Wife and Children,
I shall stop Leaks in their poor empty Bellies,
And that is the thing that satisfies my Conscience.

1. Mur. That Is not enough, you may get Money otherwise.

3. Mur. I cannot, I take pains, and pray, and fast,
And am so fearful to displease a Saint,
That I keep every day a Holy Day,
And yet I cannot thrive.

2. Mur. That Is very strange.

3. Mur. I got a little Money the other day,
And went, and gave half of it to a Priest,
To pray for me, and give me a little counsel,
What course I had best take to get some Money.
He gave me a heavenly Prayer, and bid me say it
For thirty days together, and after that
He said I should obtain what e're I asked for.
I did, and at the end of thirty days,
I prayed to Heaven to give me thirty pounds;
Then I watched night and day, almost a Week,
To see if any thing would bring the Money;
The devil of any one brought me a farthing.

1. Mur. That Is very strange.

3. Mur. I went and told the Priest
What luck I had; he bad me go to Canterbury,
And pray devoutly to St. Thomas Becket.
I went and prayed to St. Thomas, and St. Thomas,
But might as well have prayed to St. Tom Thumb,
For any thing I got.

2. Mur. That Is very strange.

3. Mur. I went again, and told the Priest my luck,
And then he gave me a miraculous Prayer,
Said, if that would not do, then nothing would.
He said, the other day in Germany,
A high dutch Lady had her Head cut off,
And yet lived after it, two and twenty hours.

2. Mur. After her Head was off?

3. Mur. After 'twas off.

1. Mur. Good-lack, is it possible?

3. Mur. She could not die
Till she Confessed, and had Communicated,
And then her Head and Body agreed to die,
And in her Grave it seems this prayer was found.

2. Mur. And did you say it?

3. Mur. Ay, forty times a day,
For forty days.

1. Mur. And was you e're the richer?

3. Mur. The devil a farthing.

2. Mur. Oh! Good-lack! good-lack!

3. Mur. On this I went and told the Cardinal all.

1. Mur. And what said he to you?

3. Mur. He made me kneel,
And thank St. Thomas, and the high dutch Lady,
For they had heard my Prayers, and sent me to him,
To do a work would gain me Heaven and Earth.

2. Mur. Why look you there now!

1. Mur. Look you, look you there now.

3. Mur. But that same work, was this same scurvy business.

2. Mur. A scurvy business? Do you call a blessing
Sent from St. Thomas, and the high dutch Lady,
A scurvy business?

3. Mur. Why should I believe
It came from them? for both their Throats were cut;
Why should I think that they love cutting Throats?
They could not find it such a pleasant business.

1. Mur. They love to cut the throat of a vile Heretic.

3. Mur. How do I know Duke Humphry is a Heretic?

2. Mur. The Cardinal says he is one.

3. Mur. How if the Cardinal
Should be mistaken?

1. Mur. He will answer for it.

3. Mur. And so he shall, for I Am an honest Fellow,
And if to kill Duke Humphry be a sin,
I Will either lay it at the Cardinal's door,
Or put it on the high dutch Lady's score. -- Ex. Mur.

Enter Cardinal and three Murderers. Card. So, you have all sworn at the holy
Altars;
Now have a care, don't let your Consciences
Fool you, to flinch with fear e're it is done,
Or to repent and tell it when it is done;
If so you are trebly Damned.

1. Mur. I warrant your Grace.

Card. Believe your Priests, and not your Consciences,
For Priests are to direct your Consciences;
Your Consciences are silly, false, corrupt.

2 Mur. Oh! hang my Conscience, Sir, I never regarded it.

3 Mur. May I be bold to ask your Grace one question?

Card. Ay, prithee do.

3 Mur. Suppose a Priest, an't please you,
Mistake, and I should sin by his command,
Will he be damned for me? and shall I escape?

Card. A Priest mistake? Sirrah, were you never catechis'd,
That you are ignorant of First Principles?

1 Mur. Why, look you now, you will be asking questions.

Card. The Church cannot mistake, the Church is infallible.

3 Mur. Pray Sir, an't please you, how shall I know that?

Card. How shall you know it, Sirrah? The Church tells you so.

2 Mur. Prithee give over, don't stand asking questions.

3 Mur. How shall I know the Church tells true, an't please you?

Card. The Church, I say, Sirrah, is Infallible.

3 Mur. How shall I know the Church is so Infallible?

Card. Why I say, Sirrah, the Church tells you so.

3 Mur. But how shall I be certain it tells true?

1 Mur. What a strange man is this? we must dismiss him?

Car. Be certain, this is a damned Rogue! -- a Heretic!
Sirrah, don't you believe the Church? I Will burn you.

2 Mur. So, so, you have brought your self into a fine pickle.

3 Mur. Oh! yes, Sir, I believe!

1 Mur. Oh! do you so.

2 Mur. It Is time you should.

3 Mur. I only did make bold to ask some questions,
To know some things, that I was ignorant of

Card. Why there was your mistake, you are not to Know,
You are only to do what a Priest bids you;
Priests only are to know, you are to know nothing
Except your duty, and the reward that follows it.
Your duty now is to destroy a Traitor,
Yes, and a Heretic.

3 Mur. I Will do it, an't please you.

1 Mur. Your Grace may trust him, he is an honest Fellow,
Only a little troublesome with scruples.

2 Mur. Which way, Sir, had we best to kill the Duke?

Card. Which way it shall please Heaven to inspire you.
Stay, let me see! -- Strangling I think were best.
Ay strangling! strangling! 'twill give least suspicion,
And make the World believe, Grief broke his heart;
For so we will give out.

1 Mur. We Will do it an't please you.
I have a Handkerchief fit for the purpose.

Card. Open the door, go to him, go, go, quickly.

The Scene is drawn, the Duke of Gloucester sitting and reading in his
Nightgown. Card. Ha! he is awake, and up; you two go hold him Softly to the Mur.
And get him down, whilst the other strangles him.

Gl. Ha! Who is that opens the door?

2 Mur. The Cardinal's
Servants, an't please your Grace.

Gl. And what is your business?

1 Mur. The Cardinal saw your Light burning so late,
And was afraid your Grace was indisposed;
And sent to know if your Grace wanted any thing,
And gave us strict command to wait upon you.

Gl. He is grown wondrous kind; I am afraid
He Is ill, for this is not his natural temper.
He guesses right of me, I Am ill indeed;
A heaviness like Death oppresses me.
I cannot get my thoughts out of a Grave:
I fear not Death it self, why should a dream
And empty shadow of it then oppress me?

Card. So, get behind him now whilst he is musing. Aside.

Gl. If wicked men be digging now my Grave,
And these cold Terrors be fore-running damps,
Oh! Heaven prepare me for it.

3 Mur. How he prays! Aside.

2 Mur. What if he does? What are a Heretics prayers? Aside.

Gl. Let all my sins drop from me in these Tears.

3 Mur. How penitent he is! -- my Soul relents,
The Devil take this cursed want of Money. Aside.

Gl. If e're my Person, Greatness, or Authority,
Did injure any one, forgive the fault,
And in the bosom of the injured person,
Pour down a thousand blessings. -- Above all things
Preserve the King from all his Enemies.
If I by Wickedness and Falsehood perish,
Oh! give my bloody Enemies repentance,
And let my Death be an occasion
Of good to them, but ruin to their wickedness.

3 Mur. Hark, how he prays for us that are his murderers! Aside

1 Mur. What if he does? he is a Heretic.
His Prayers are Curses, we are the worse for them. Aside.

Card. Why don't you do your work? Aside.

3 Mur. We will; we will. Aside.

Gl. So shall I do more good in Death than Life,
And by my innocent Death procure a Blessing
To my good King, my Country, all my Enemies.

They lay hold on the Duke and strangle him. Card. So! Is he dead yet?

2 Mur. Yes! he does not stir.

Enter the Duke of Suffolk. Suff. Ho! What Is the News?

Card. The deed is done, my Lord.

Suff. Have you dispatched the thing?

1 Mur. We have done his business.

Suff. Thou art a gallant Rogue! there is Gold for thee.
And for you all.

Card. A Rogue, my Lord, you wrong him;
He is a Saint, and so are they all.

3 Mur. A Saint: Aside.
Devil take such Saints.
I would this deed were to be done again,
My Family should starve e're I would do it.

Card. I hear a noise without.

3 Mur. A noise without!
I Am sure I hear a cursed noise within me,
A bawling Conscience.

Card. Place the Body some way
As may give least suspicion, and be gone,
And come another time for your rewards.

They place the Body in a Chair, shut the Scene, -- and Ex. Enter the King and
Queen, Attendants. Qu. What brings your Majesty abroad so early?
You ^o not use to finish your Devotion
So soon as this.

King. Oh! Love, I am not well,
My Uncle is always walking in my mind,
And shakes the melancholy Room with fear;
Methinks he tells me I have not done well,
To give him up to his too cruel Enemies,
To men who are not such as they should be.

Qu. Why, Sir, have you so great mistrust of them?

King. I wish I had no cause; I Have sent Commands to them,
To bring my Uncle to me presently.
Enter the Cardinal. Had you my message, my Lord Cardinal?

Card. Yes, Royal Sir, the Duke of Suffolk instantly
Will bring the Duke of Gloucester; I have lodged
My noble Prisoner but in the next Rooms.

King. Methinks he should not be the man you make him.

Card. Your Majesty has your eyes always fixed
On shining Heaven, that when you look below,
The World is in a mist and dark to you.

Enter Suffolk. King. How now? Why look thou pale? why do thou shake?
Where is my Uncle? What Is the matter? Speak.

Suff. The Duke is dead.

Card. How! Dead?

Suff. Dead in his Chair.

Qu. Oh! Heaven forbid!

Suff. It Is true.

Card. Heaven's secret Judgments.
I feared some dreadful judgment would overtake him.

The King Swoons. Qu. How is my Lord? Help, help, the King is dying.

Suff. Rear up his Body, fetch some Water quickly.

Qu. Oh! Help, help, help.

Suff. See, he revives again.
Madam, be comforted.

Qu. How does my Lord?

King. Oh! heavenly God! -- Sighs deeply.

Suff. Take comfort, Gracious Sir.

King. Ah! Woe is me for Gloucester! wretched man!

Qu. Is all your comfort shut up in his Tomb?
And can you find no joy in me at all?
Why do you turn away and hide your Face?
I am no loathsome Leaper, look on me.
Ah! woe is me, more wretched than he is.
Did I for this expose my self to Winds,
And Rocks, and Seas, and twice was almost wracked,
And twice was driven back, as if the Winds
Forewarned me landing on this unkind Shore!
The vaulting Sea danced with me to and fro,
As it were loath to bring me to this Coast.
The Rocks covered in the Waves, and hid themselves,
As shaming to owe kindred to an Island,
Whose cruel King would thus reward my Love.
Ah! see if he will speak to me, or look on me!
How hateful am I grown! Ah! wretched me!

Card. I see the King loves this dead Traitor better
Than all his living Friends! Farewell, -- I Am sorry Sir,
To see you hate your Friends, and love your Enemies. Ex.

King. Where is my dead Friend? I Will see him -- lead me to him.

Suff. In the next Room, Sir: Ho, open these doors.

The Scene is drawn, and the Duke of Gloucester is shown dead in a Chair. King.
Oh! thou good man! And have thou thus been used?
And is this all of thee that is left to me?
Oh! to how little, and how poor a pittance
Are all my Comforts in this life now brought!

Enter Warwick. War. Oh! Sir, Reports are spread among the People,
The good Duke Humphry treacherously is murdered,
By Suffolk's and the Cardinal Beauford's means.

Suff. By mine?

War. By yours.

Suff. I did expect as much.

War. The Commons, like a Hive of angry Bees,
That want their Leader, scatter up and down,
And care not whom they sting in their revenge.
I have endeavored to allay their rage,
Until they are satisfied about his death.

King. Ah! my Lord he is dead, it is true! too true!
See here: -- But how he died, God knows, not I.
I fear foul play was played him for his Life.
Oh Heaven! to whom Judgment alone belongs,
Forgive me if I injure any one
With false suspicions.

War. Sir, as certainly,
As I believe that Heaven was his Maker,
I believe Treachery was his destroyer.

Suff. Do you know it, that so dreadfully you swear it?

War. I swear that I believe it.

Suff. What Is your reason?

War. I see already above a thousand proofs,
That he was basely strangled.

Suff. Strangled!

War. Strangled.
His Face is black and swelled with settled Blood,
Which shows the passage to the Heart was stopped,
Whether the Blood in natural deaths descends,
To aid the laboring Heart in his last conflict;
And failing, freezes with the cold of Death,
And never returns, but leaves the face all pale.
His eyes stand ghastly from his Head, and almost
Come out to meet us to complain of strangling.
His gaping nostrils are stretched out with striving,
His hands are spread abroad, as one that grasped
And tugged for Life, but was by strength o're-master'd.
His well proportioned Beard, is rugged made
Like Summer's Corn, by furious tempest lodged.
See a blew Ring encompasses his Neck.
Oh! Murder here has danced her fairy round.
If the Duke was not strangled, never was man.

Suff. Why, who should do it, my Lord? none but my self
And Cardinal Beauford, had him in protection.

War. Who finds the Heifer dead, and bleeding fresh,
And sees a Butcher with his Ax stand by,
May easily suspect who made the Slaughter.

Qu. The Cardinal, and you, my Lord, are Murderers!
For shame, my Lord of Warwick, rule your arrogance.

War. Pray, Madam, let me with due reverence tell you,
Each word you speak for him, slanders your Honor.

Suff. Blunt-witted Lord, thy evil manners say,
Thy Mother took into her blameful Bed
Some rough untutour'd Churl, and grafted there
On N^vil's noble race a rugged Clown.

War. Did not my Sovereign's presence check my fury,
I Would make thee kneel for pardon for this speech,
And say, 'twas thy own Mother that thou mean,
And after this low homage, I would kill thee,
Thou treacherous murderer of sleeping men.

Suff. Thou shall be waking when I shed thy blood;
If er'e I meet thee from this royal presence.

War. Away, or I will drag thee! -- though I scorn thee,
I Will fight with thee, to appease Duke Humphry's Ghost.

King. Forbear my Lords, for shame! stay, I command you.

A Noise, Enter Salisbury. Sal. Great Sir, the Commons humbly implore by me,
The Duke of Suffolk may be put to death,
Or Banished instantly; for else they threaten,
They Will tear him hence by violence and Torture him.
Free from bold contradiction to your liking,
But out of Loyalty they drive him from you.
They say, If you desired to sleep, and charged
No one on pain of Death should dare to wake you;
Yet if they saw a Serpent in your Bosom,
They with the hazard of their lives would wake you,
And drive him from you whether you would or no.
They say the Duke of Suffolk is that Serpent,
By whose envenomed sting your Uncle perished;
A Prince a thousand times of Suffolk's value,
From him they also fear your Majesty's Death.

Suff. They durst not send this message to their King,
My noble Lord Ambassador from Weavers.

King. My Lord of Salisbury, Tell them from me,
I thank them for their Loyal care of me;
That I have been awake long e're they roused me,
And seen the dangerous Serpent I have cherished
To my great danger, and my Friends destruction.
For oh! the slimy paths the Serpent crawled
To sting my Friend to Death, shine in my eyes.

Suff. Sir, will you judge me e're you know my innocnece?

King. Go tell them, By that Heavenly Majesty,
Whose most unworthy Deputy I am,
I vow most solemnly, the English Air
Shall not receive three days infection more
From this most wicked man; for if it does
The fourth shall end his wickedness and him. Exit Salis.

Suff. Sir, this is hard to doom m^'re I Am tried.

Qu. Oh! let me plead, Sir, for this injured Lord.

King. Oh fie, forbear! forbear! your pleading for him
Will add but very little to your Honor,
But to my anger much; 'twill make me pass
Censure on you, and heavier Doom on him.
Had I but said it, nothing should ha changed me;
But having sworn it, you may easier
Remove the Kingdom than stay that man in it.
Then let him hear his Sentence once again:
If after three days space he shall be found
On any Ground that I am Ruler of,
The World shall not be Ransom for his Life. Exit.

Qu. Oh wretched! wretched me! Oh! I could turn
My Breath and Spirits all, all into Curses,
Curse all thy Enemies, and all the World.
I prithee join with me, and let us Curse them.

Suff. A Plague upon them! Wherefore should I curse them?
Were Curses killing as the groans of Mandrakes.
I Would stay to curse them were the Palace burning,
And every word I said were half on it fire,
And I, my Curses ended, should be Ashes.
For what is the difference 'tween being Ashes,
Or Water, as I soon shall be with Sorrow?

Qu. I must betake my self now to my Tears,
The last poor refuge of a wretched Woman.

Suff. Must I see this? And can I not revenge it?
Like one of the fallen Spirits banished Heaven.
I stand upon the shining Precipice,
And look with grief on all the Joys I Am leaving;
Then down with Terror on my desperate fall,
Then grin with rage because I cannot help my self;
And amidst all these Passions, I Am more tortured
In Heaven, than I shall be when fallen to Hell.

Qu. My griefs no flesh can bear, no soul can guess.
Oh! that the moment when thou took'st me Prisoner,
Thy Sword had separated my Soul and Body,
Then had I been at ease; but now thy Banishment
Divides them, and I live to feel the torment.

Suff. I Will stay with you, what ever shall befall me.

Qu. What should befall but Death to both of us?
The strong convulsions of my griefs have tired,
Wasted, and weakened so my vanquished Spirits,
That I am fainting now into a calm.

Suff. And in this calm the current of my Sorrows,
Shall bear my drowning Spirits to thy Bosom,
And lay it there as on a Bank of Lillies,
Where I will Die as in a pleasing slumber.

Qu. This must not be, we must not stay together,
No we must part, or staying thou must Die.
I rather will endure a lingering Death
Of a long parting, than by Death to lose thee.
Whilst we are living we may meet again.

Suff. We may, we shall, the King is not Immortal,
Or if he were, his Anger is not so.
But both will have an end, so will our Sorrows.
The longest life has still an utmost point:
No Creature is infinite.

Qu. Except my Love.

Suff. In hopes then once to meet again, -- Farewell!

Qu. Oh! sad heartbreaking word! -- Where e're thou wandrest
Send to me often.

Suff. What joy shall I have else?
All Places will be desolate, and I
Shall live no longer than I hear you live.

Qu. My Fit returns again! unhappy we!
Why are we two so nearly joined in Love,
And yet by Fortune kept so wide asunder,
First by thy Marriage, and now by thy Banishment?
My Love was thrown as soon as it was Born
On cold Despair, hearing thou had a Wife.
Had thou had none, and only been a Shepherd,
And known no other wealth than a small Flock,
No other Title than the charming Swain,
(For so would every Shepherdess have called thee)
I would have rather been thy humble Wife,
Than Queen to Henry.

Suff. If I should stay here
Till I told over the Wealth I would have given,
For such a happiness, we never should part.

Qu. Oh! must we part! Heaven made us for each other,
And then did set us two, of all the World,
Farthest asunder; a Wife first did part us,
But now whole Kingdoms, and whole Worlds must part us.
These Miseries I might have well expected;
My Love was born under Captivity,
I was thy Prisoner, e're my heart was so:
Chains lay at the entrance of the gate of Love,
And pa^l Despair forbad me entering in;
Yet such sweet Prospects drew my heart along,
It entered in, and now is lost for ever.

Suff. Say not for ever; Do not cruelly
Put out the eyes of our Prophetic hopes,
Which like so many Angel-guides, will lead
Our Souls to pleasant Prospects of delight,
Where we may gaze till Fate is tired with frowning,
And Time with holding two so bent to meet,
Shall loose his hold, and let us fly together.
Till then farewell.

Qu. Take with thee my poor heart.

Suff. A Jewel locked into the wofull'st Cabinet
That ever did contain so great a Treasure.
Just like a splitted Bark, so sunder we.
This way sink I to ruin.

Qu. This way I. -- Exeunt several ways.

The SCENE the Cardinals Apartment.
Enter the Cardinal. Card. I Am vexed! I Am more, I Am wracked! By what? who
knows?
By a thing within me called a Conscience.
A Trick, -- a Spring, that catches us, and pinches,
If we but point at an ill Action.
Why is it an ill thing to kill a man?
He is the Plague and Sickness of the World.
It Is a kind honest thing to kill a man,
You cure the Worl^ of one Disease, you free
Thousands from Mischief, and you ease the man.
Yet if one do a man so great a kindness,
The damned ungrateful Rogue torments one's Conscience.
Men are ungrateful Rogues, living or dead.
I know not what to do; I must have ease.
Ho there!

Enter a Servant. Ser. My Lord.

Card. Call my Physician.
Stay there! -- What should I do with a Physician?
No Physic can give me any ease, but Poison.
The gravel of the Grave is the best scowring
For such fierce Hawks as I am, after feeding.
Go, now I think on it, call my Confessor.
Let him alone! -- What should I do with him too?
My Soul is sick, and it can have no ease,
I grow sick. --
Unless it purge (forsooth) in a Priest's ear.
Fetch me a Glass of Wine, run quickly, -- run.
I tremble! -- a cold sweat comes over me,
All the Air tastes of an infernal damp.

The Ghost of Duke Humphry appears and goes out, the Cardinal falls into a
Swoon. Enter the Servant with Wine. 1 Ser. Help, help, my Lord is fallen! my
Lord is dead!

2 Ser. Oh! Heaven! What Is the matter with my Lord?

3 Ser. He opens now his eyes!

4 Ser. He foams at the mouth.

1 Ser. Let Us set him in the Chair and give him air.

3 Ser. I Will run for his Physicians. Ex.

4 Ser. I Will give notice
To all the Court. Ex.

Enter the three Murderers. Card. Stand off, and let the Duke of Gloucester
speak to me.
Speak, speak, I say! What would thou have with me?

2 Mur. He names the Duke of Gloucester.

1 Mur. Oh! Does he so?
Is his Infallibility come to that? A Pox of his Doctrines,
He has damned himself and me too.

Card. Who is the Grave-maker?
He is a Villain, he digs Graves so shallow,
The dead break Prison, and come plague the Living.
Why this is fine, the Living cannot eat
Nor drink, nor sleep in quiet for the Dead;
The Dead that can do none of them, must plague us.
Thou envious Ghost, get to thy own abode,
I know not where it is, in Heaven or Hell,
Oh! Hell! Hell! Hell! I am tormented: Oh!

1 Mur. Oh! gallant, brave Infallibility!

Enter the King, Salisbury, Warwick. King. How does the Cardinal?

2 Mur. Sir, of a sudden
He Is fallen into a fit of Infallible Madness.

Card. Ha! who are these? Stand off, stand off, who are you?

Sal. This is your King.

Card. What King? The King of Terrors?
Death! is it he? If thou be'st Death, I Will give thee
Treasure enough to purchase all this Kingdom,
So thou will let me live, and feel no pain.

King. Ah! What a sign it is of evil life
When Death's approach appears so terrible?

War. My Lord, my Lord! Do you know your King?

Car. What King? what King?

War. King Henry.

Car. Ha! King Henry!
Sir, bring me to my Trial when you will,
I am prepared, died he not in his Bed?
Can I make men live whether they will no?
Oh! do not torture me! I will confess! -- Oh!

King. Poor wretch!

War. What think you, Sir? Are not these signs
Of horrid Guilt?

King. Let us not Censure him.

Car. Alive again, do you say? Ha! show him me!
I Will give a Thousand Pound to look on him.
Stand by and let me see him, -- there he is,
He has no Eyes, the dust has blinded them,
Comb down his hair! -- look! -- look! it stands upright
Like Limetwigs, set to catch my flying Soul.
I prithee do not carry me along with thee,
And I Will do cruel Penance all my life;
Hunger shall tear my Entrals, Whips my Flesh,
Thorns my bare Feet; my habit shall be Hair-cloth,
The Rock my Bed, hard Roots my only food,
Foul Puddle all my drink; if this suffice not,
I Will sell my self a Slave among the Turks:
What do thou say? will thou consent to this?

King. Oh! thou eternal Mercy, cast an eye
Of pity on this Wretch! Oh! drive away from him
The hungry Fiend, that strives to gripe his Soul.

Card. Ha! Will thou not consent? and must I die?
Oh! let me live, and be a Slave, a Dog!
What must I die? Oh! this is very cruel!

War. See how he grins, Sir, with the pangs of Death.

Sal. Disturb him not, let him pass peaceably.

King. Peace to his Soul, if it be Heavens good pleasure.
Lord Cardinal, If you have any hopes of Heaven,
Hold up your hand, and give a joyful signal.

Sal. He gives us none.

King. Oh! Heaven have mercy on him.

War. He gives a dreadful signal of his Guilt.

King. Forbear to judge him, we are sinners all.
He Is dead! -- close up his eyes, -- and let us all
To sad and devout Meditation. Exeunt.

The Scene is drawn. The Queen weeping. -- A Lady attending. Qu. How am I
robbed of all my joys in Youth?
That now my doleful Years will hang on me,
Like a great Family on a poor Bankrupt.
My hope is, Destiny will never be able,
With this great weight of Misery upon me,
To drag me to the Prison of old Age,
Where we lie cold and dark as in the Grave,
And have as great a load of Earth upon us;
Where melancholy thoughts about us crawl,
Like Toads in Dungeons about Malefactors:
That Prison, where through gates of Horror wrinkled
Fate feeds us with the Water of our Tears,
But enough to quench the thirst of Sorrow,
For the old Well is then almost dried up.

Lady. Oh! Madam! you will bring Age on you in Youth,
If you weep thus.

Qu. I would if I could, bring on me
The only joy of Age to be near Death.
But I have a long Life to travel through,
Barren and comfortless as any Desert,
And I am spoiled of all just at the entrance.

Enter another Lady. 2 Lady. Madam, there is a Gentleman without
Come from aboard a Vessel, where the Duke
Of Suffolk lately was. --

Qu. Oh! bring him!
Enter a Gentleman. Oh! saw you lately, Sir, the Duke of Suffolk?

Gent. Yes, Madam.

Qu. Oh! How does he?

Gent. Well, I doubt not;
He is at the end of an unhappy Journey. --

Qu. In France already?

Gent In a better Country. --
Madam, forgive my zeal to my dear Lord.
I had the honor to be once his Servant,
And knowing well your Majesty did bear
A very great respect to his great Merit.
Came to entreat you to revenge his Blood!

Qu. His Blood!

Gent. His Blood: See Madam, this was once,
The beauteous manly Visage of my Lord.

Shows the Duke of Suffolk 's Head. 1 Lady. She faints! she dies! Oh! help for
Heaven's sake.

2 Lady. She stirs; she is coming to her self again.

Qu. Why have you waked me from this pleasing slumber,
In which I had forgotten my vast misery?
Where is the bloody Spectacle you showed me?

1 Lady. Away with it!

Qu. Show it me again, I say.
Oh! barbarous and bloody Spectacle!
Is this the Noble Duke? Is this the man
That was the pride of Nature, England's Ornament,
But now is England's everlasting shame.
Oh! my dear murdered Duke! Is this the meeting
Which we at parting promised to each other?
Love promised more than Destiny could pay.
Who did this cursed deed?

Gent. A cursed Pyrate,
Who in the Rivers Mouth clapped him aboard,
And took the Duke and all of us his Prisoners.
The Duke they knew not till they spied his George,
And then he owned himself, and for his Ransom,
Offered what sums of Gold they would demand;
He chanced to be one Walter Whitmore's Prize,
Who lost in Fight his eye.

Qu. And to revenge it,
He would put out the Sun.

Gent. Yes, kill the Duke.
And he was stirred to greater insolence.
By that damned Villain, which they called their Captain,
Who said the Duke had murdered good Duke Humphry,
Beggered the King, lost France, and ruined England.
Nay, his foul Tongue did not refuse to spit
Dishonor on your Sacred Majesty,
And said the Duke had injured the King's Bed.

Qu. Impudent Villain!

Gent. For all which foul Crimes,
He said he would revenge the King and Kingdom.

Qu. Bold bloody Villain.

Gent. The brave Duke on this,
Calling to mind his Birth was Calculated,
And it was told him he should die by Water,
He thought at first the Fiend had quibbled with him,
And he should die by one who was called Water;
But then remembering that he was at Sea,
He found the Devil had two strings to his Bow,
So Saw himself encompast round with Destiny.
Then lifting up his Eyes to Heaven he smiled,
As if he in his noble thoughts derided
The sport Fate makes with great men's Lives and Fortunes.
Then looking down with scorn on his base Enemies,
He gave a sigh, at which he named Queen Margaret,
And with that grace he acted every thing,
He bowed his Head, and had it stricken off.

Qu. Oh! execrable Villains! could this face
Which governed me, not strike an awe in you?
Who were not worthy once to look up it?
And thou unfortunate gallant man!
Thy Wit, thy Valor, and thy delicate Form,
Were mighty faults, which the World could not bear.
No wonder the vile envy of the base
Pursued thee, when the Noble could not bear thee,
They cursed thee as the Negroes do the Sun,
Because thy shining Glories blackned them.
For which, Oh England! thus I pray for thee!
May thou never breed brave Man, or if thou do,
Oh! let him be thy Ruin, or thou his.
May all thy Witty men be sadly Vicious,
Let sloth devour their Fortunes, Fools their Fame,
Lewdness their Souls, their Bodies Foul Disease.
May thy Wise Men be Factious, and head Fools,
If they be honest let them loose their Heads.
Let thy Brave Men against thy self be bravest,
Be Men at foreign, Devils at Civil War.
Let all thy Pious Sons with zeal run mad,
And make Religion thy Reproach and Curse.
May thou have all Religions to confound thee,
And none to save thee. -- Here a bloody Altar,
Oh! cruel England! have thou made for me,
Therefore these bloody Prayers I make for thee.

2 Lady. The King is coming, Madam.

Enter the King. King. Oh! my Lord,
I bring thee frightful News, the Kentishmen
Are up in Arms, headed by one Jack Cade,
A Fellow who proclaims himself Lord Mortimer,
Descended from the Duke of Clarence Line.
He is marching toward London, in the head
Of a rude rugged merciless crowd of Peasants;
And all the way he proclaims me Usurper,
And vows to Crown himself at Westminster.
And in this great distress, to comfort me,
The tray'trous Duke of York, with a great Power,
Is marching hither too, and he proclaims
He comes but to remove the Duke of Sommerset,
But most believe he secretly intends
To reap the benefit of Cade's Rebellion.
That I am like a Ship beset with danger,
Threatened with Wracking by the Kentish Storm,
Or to be Boarded by that Pyrate, York.

Qu. So! so my Curse on England springs already. Aside.
Oh! this were Music to me, were it not
Allayed by the sad weeping of my Son,
Heir of these Noble Kingdoms; who, methinks,
Sighs in my Ear, Ah, Mother, for my sake
Pity the helpless King my unfortunate Father!
He was Crowned King when he was nine Months old;
But if you do not aid him, his Misfortune
Will never suffer me to be a King.
For thy sake Princely Boy, I will assist him,
And something for his own, he is a good Man,
Though a weak King; and it was my ambition
Made Suffolk stain his hands in innocent Blood.
Which Crime forgive me Heaven, and let the Duke
Of Suffolk's Blood be all my Punishment.

Enter Sommerset and Buckingham. Buck. Oh! fly Sir, fly, the Rebels are in
Southwark;
The Citizens through fear forsake their Houses.
The Rascal People all join with the Traitors,
Threatening to spoil the City, and your Court.

Some. Take comfort, Royal Sir, we'll all stand by you.

King. Pray let as little Blood be shed as possible.
I Will send a holy Bishop to entreat them
To spare their Souls and Bodies; I will promise them
To mend my Government, for I confess,
England may yet Curse my unfortuate Reign.

Qu. Come, Sir, take Spirit in you; Men like Buildings
Fall to the Ground, if never Fire burn in them
To harden them; King's a Royal Building,
That should have no soft Clay in it at all.
Adversity has always reigned upon you,
And made you soft; but yield not, Sir, to Rebels.
Royalty like great Beauty, must be chaste,
Rogues will have all, if once they get a taste. Exeunt.

Epilogue.
NOw some fine things perhaps you think to bear,
But he who did reform this Play does swear
He Will not bestow rich Trappings on a Horse,
That will want Breath to run a Three-days Course;
And be turned off by Gallants of the Town,
For Citizens and their Wives to Hackney on.
Not that a Barb that is come of Shackspears breed,
Can e're want Mettle, Courage, Shape, or Speed;
But you have Poetry so long rides Post,
That your delight in Riding now is lost.
And there is Reason for it I must own,
^'ave Foundred all the Poets in the Town.
Alas, their Strength and Courage may abate,
Under the Critique's Spur, and the Fools Weight.
And Destiny is playing wanton Tricks,
Turning the Nation round to Politiques;
The Romish Beast has feared her from her Wits,
And thrown her in her old Convulsion Fits.
The same she had many Years since, it is said,
Then Poetry was a miserable Jade.
The Pulpit then Men fiercely did bestride,
And Musketeers that Wooden Horse did ride.
Those damned Diseases by time purged away,
The Nation straight grew Young again and Gay.
Balls assigned, as Masquerades and Plays,
Were all the Business of those happy Days.
You flocked to Plays as if they Jubilees were,
Things to be seen but once in Fifty Year.
Boxes in the Morning did with Beauty shine,
And Citizens then in the Pit did Dine.
The Wife with her good Husband did prevail,
To bring the Sucking Bottle full of Ale.
Then on her Knees cold Capon-legs were seen,
Her Husbands Capon-legs I do not mean.
Then we were precious things, purchased it is known,
By Clothes and Suppers, but these Days are done.
Yet they will come again, Times cannot hold,
But whilst they mend, Curse on it we grow old;
Then we may all who once were your delight,
Su^ with Duke Humphry as you have done to Night.
FINIS.
HENRY the Sixth. The Second Part.

OR THE MISERY OF CIVIL WAR, As it was Acted at the Dukes Theater.

Written by Mr. CROWN.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes, in Russel Street, in
Covent Garden. 1681.

PROLOGUE.
REligious Broils to such a height are grown,
All the sweet sound of Poetry they drown.
Were Orpheus here, his Lute might charm our Beasts,
Our Mastiffs, not our Rabble, or our Priests.
Good Heaven! Sirs! are there no other ways
To damn the Pope, but damning all our Plays?
To our Religion it is no Praise at all,
That, if our Wit must stand, our Faith must fall.
All parties in a Playhouse may agree,
The Stage is priviledg'd from Piety.
It Is pleasant, Sirs, to see you fight and brawl
About Religion, but have none at all.
Most fiercely for the Road to Heaven contend,
But never care to reach the Journeys end.
Though you lose Heaven, you will keep the Way,
The Pope sha'n't have you, though the Devil may.
These things such business for the Critics find,
They Are not at leisure Poetry to mind,
Well for the Poet it is they are so employed;
Else this poor Work of his would be destroyed.
For by his feeble Skill it is built alone,
The Divine Shakespeare did not lay one Stone.
Besides this Tragedy a Rod will prove,
To whip us for a Fault, we too much Love,
And have for ages lived, called Civil Strife.
The English Nation, like a Russian Wife,
Is to a gentle Husband always cursed,
And loves him best, who uses her the worst.
This Poet, (though perhaps in Colors faint)
Those scurvy Joys does in all Postures Paint
Fools take in pelting out each others Brains:
A joy, for which this Nation often takes pains.
If any like the Ills he shows to day,
Let them be damned and let them damn the Play.
The Persons Represented in the Tragedy.
KIng Henry the Sixth, Prince Edward, King Henry's Son. By Mr. Joseph Williams.
Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, By Mr. David Williams. Edward, eldest Son of
Richard Plantagenet, and after his Fathers death King of England, By Mr. Smith.
George, Duke of Clarence, second Son of the Duke of York, By Mr. Bowman.
Richard, the third Son, called Crook-back. By Mr. Gillow. Rutland a Child, the
youngest Son. The Great Earl of Warwick By Mr. Batterton. Old Lord Clifford, By
Mr. Pearcival. Young Clifford, his Son, By Mr. Wiltshire. Queen Margaret, Wife
of King Henry, Mrs. Leigh. Lady Gray, the Widow of Sir John Gray, beloved and
at length married by King Edward the fourth, By Mrs. Batterton. Lady Elianor
Butler, a young Lady of great quality, that was one of King Edward's
Mistresses, By Mrs. Currer.
SCENE, ENGLAND.

THE MISERIES OF Civil-War.
ACT. I.
SCENE. I.
A Noise of Fighting; a Shout for Victory. Enter Cade and his Rabble. Cade.
FLing all my dead Subjects into the Thames.
Now say, what place is this?

Butch. It Is London-Stone.


Cade. Then am I Mortimer, Lord of this City;
And here, I, sitting upon London-Stone,
Declare, this is the first day of our Reign.
So I command the Conduits all Piss Claret:
And I proclaim it Treason now for any man
To call me other than Lord Mortimer.

Enter a Soldier running. Sold. Jack Cade, Jack! Jack!


Cade. Knock down that saucy Fellow.


A Butcher kill's him. Butch. If he has wit, he will never call thy Honor Jack
Cade again.


Cade. I think he has fair warning.

Enter a Cobbler, with a Scrivener. Cob. My Lord! my Lord!

Cade. Well said, a mannerly Fellow.

Cob. I have caught a Scrivener here, setting Boys Copies.

Cade. Oh! there is a Villain! a corrupter of Youth.

Cob. He has a Book in's pocket with red Letters in it.

Cade. Then he is a Conjurer.

Cob. He can write Bills, and Bonds, and Obligations, to bind People to undo
themselves, and pay Money, whether they Can or no; such a Rogue is enough to
undo a Nation.


Cade. I Am sorry for it, for on my honor he is a proper fellow:
He shall not dye unless I find him Guilty.

Cob. He shall die, Guilty or not Guilty; I brought him to be
Hanged, and I will not lose my labor. I love hanging, there is
Never any hanging, but I leave my Stall to go see it.
Hanging-day is my holy day, and I will keep Cobblers holy day.

Cade. We'll hang him, but we'll examine him first.

Cob. No hang him first, for now no man will confess,
Till after he is hanged.

Cade. I will examine him. -- Sirrah! what is thy Name!

Scriv. Emanuel.

Cob. Emanuel!
That Is a strange Name, Friend 'twill go very hard with you.

Cade. Let me alone! Friend, do thou write thy Name,
Or use a mark like a plain honest man?

Scriv. Sir. I thank Heaven, I have been so well bred,
That I can write my name.

All. He has confessed,
He Is a stranger, and a Villain, hang him.

Cade. Hang him with his Pen and Ink about his Neck.
Enter others with the Lord Say Prisoner. My Lord, my Lord, a prize an't like
thy Ho^^r (...)
Here Is the Lord Say, who sold the Towns in France,
And made us pay one and twenty Fifteens
And a shilling to the pound, last Subsidy.

Cade. I will behead him one and twenty times.
Come scurvy Lord, what can thou say
To our Mightiness, for giving up our Towns
To Monsieur Basimecu, the Dolphin of France?
Be it known unto thee, Traitor, by these presents,
Even by the presence of my self, Lord Mortimer,
That I will sweep the world clean of such filth.
Thou Traitorously have built a Grammar School,
To debauch all the youth, and whereas formerly
Our Grandsiers used no Book, but Score and Tally,
Thou have caused wicked Printing to be used,
And contrary to the King, his Crown and Dignity,
Have built a Paper-Mill. It will be proved,
That thou have Servants talk of Nouns and Verbs,
And such vile Words no Christian er'e can here.
Thou have appointed Justices of Peace,
To call poor men before 'em, about matters
They could not answer; yes, and thou have hanged 'em,
Because they could not read.

Cob. There was a Villain!

Cade. Thou rid'st upon a foot-cloth, do thou not?

Say. Well what of that?

Cade. Why is it not a shame
Thy Horse should wear a Cloak, when honest men
Go in their Hose and Doublets?

Say. Well, I find
You men of Kent --

All. What of us men of Kent?

Say. That Kent is, bona terra mala gens.

Cade. Bold Traitor, he speaks Latin in my presence.
Go hang him, hang him.

Say. Hear me, Countrymen.

Cade. Hear Latin! Villain? hang him.

All. Hang him, hang him. -- They drag him away.

Butch. We'll hang up every man that can speak Latin.

Cade. Well counseled Butcher, counseled like a Butcher.
We will, and more, for they are but few.

Tay. We'll hang up any man that can speak French.
For I Am a Taylour, and there is no man
That can speak French will let me work a stitch for 'em.

Cob. We'll hang up all the Lords and Gentlemen.
Spare none but such as go in clouted shoes;
For I Am a Cobbler, and live by those.

Tail. But by your favor, Sir, I am a Tailor
And, Sir, I live by Lords and Gentlemen;
I only would hang those that owe me money,
And will not pay me.

Cade. Why, thou stiching Coxcomb!
We will be Lords and Gentlemen our selves.

Tail. Oh! that is another thing.

Cade. Another thing!
What do we fight for else, you silly Rascal?

Cob. It Is true, my Lord, we ought to be Great-men,
For it is said, Labor in thy Vocation:
That is, let Magistrates be labouring-men,
Therefore we laboring men ought to be Magistrates;
And I will be Lord Cobbler, and a Counselor.

Carp. I Will be Lord Carpenter, for it is a shame
That none of the Kings Council are good Workmen.

Cob. The Lords, forsooth scorn to wear leather Aprons.

Cade. We'll make 'em glad to go in leather Aprons.

Butch. We'll stick 'em all, and we'll be Lords our selves.

Tail. I Will be contented to be but a Knight.

Cob. Shall we not spare the Lords that are our friends,
Such as thy Cousin Plantagenet, and others?

Cade. No Lord is our Friend, you Fool, they merely chouse us.

Butch. How! merely chouse us?

Cade. I say merely chouse us.
All the fine words and money that they give us
Is nothing else but buying of Calves-heads.

Butch. My Cleaver then shall chouse 'em of their Brains.

Cade. When they have done with us, they will turn us off.

Butch. Here are brave Knaves.

Tail. His Honor understands 'em.

Cob. I Gad, my Lord's a devilish parlous Fellow.
Prithee, my Lord, what ail's these plaguey Lords
To keep this coyl, when they have a power of money,
Brave Lands, and gallant Wenches to their Wives?

Cade. I Will tell thee Tom the Cobbler, here is my shoe;
Do thou believe my shoe, if it had wit,
Would carry me up and down all day in the dirt;
Or do thou think my Breeches would be sat on,
Or Doublet cloth my Back, and by that means
Be often cudgelled, if they had any wit;
No, if they had any wit, they would be Caps.

Cob. True, but thy worship's Cap is sometimes cudgelled:
I have known thy Honor have a broken pate.

Cade. Ay but pride feels no hurt; so some great Lords
Are trodden under foot like dirty shoes,
Some hang like Doublets on the Nations back,
And some like Breeches only on the tail.
But by their good wills they would all be Caps,
And so would you my friends if you be wise.

Cob. We'll all be Caps.

All. All Caps, all Caps, all Caps.

Cade If you will be Caps, hang all Lords and Gentlemen,
And all rich Citizens.

Butch. How, all rich Citizens?
Prithee my Lord, they are my particular Friends,
They buy more Meat, than all the Lords in England.
And then they promise they will do great things for us,
If we will help 'em to redress their Grievances.

Cad. Butcher, those promises are but a mere cheat,
These men puff thee, just as thou blowst thy Veal,
Only to make thee swell for their own ends.

Butch. Are they such Knaves?

Cade. Oh they are notorious Knaves,
They cheat the Town, their Wives, themselves, and us.
They sit up nightly a Plotting, and Caballing,
So cheat their Wives of due benevolence,
They leave their Shops adays, for State Affairs,
So cheat themselves of money they might get,
And cheat the Town of Trade that it might have,
And last they mean to cheat us of our Necks,
Put us on Plots for them, then have us hanged.
Now my good subjects we are bound in Conscience,
To take their Wives and give 'em due Benevolence,
To take their Shops, and give the Town it is due,
To hang the men, and give the Rope it is due,
And so we shall be very honest fellows.

All. Ay, Ay, we shall be very honest fellows.

Cob. In short we'll have no Trades but Eating, and Drinking. We'll have seven
halfpenny Loaves For a Farthing, and a Pint-pot shall hold a Gallon; and so
let us about our hanging work.


Cade. Go, Subjects, go, but pray remember one thing,
To hang the Lawyers when your hand is in.

Cob. I warrant thee, my Lord, we'll hang the Lawyers
But now I think on it they wear out
Abundance of Shoo-leather in going to West-Minster-Hall, and employ Cobblers
much.
Besides they help to undo Lords, and Gentlemen.
But now I think on it we can undo 'em
Fast enough our selves, by burning their Houses,
And taking their Lands. The Lawyers
Have a sure way of undoing 'em, but it is more tedious,
Ours is most quick, and as sure;
So we shall have no use of the Lawyers,
And so lets hang 'em.
And for that reason too
Let Us hang the Doctors and Pothecaries.
For though they do kill Gentry pretty well,
Yet we have a better, quicker way;
By knocking 'em of the head.

Cade. Subjects, hang the Doctors and Pothecaries, but
Hang the Lawyers first, for fear they
Hang you -- for when you have had
A thousand broken heads, and settled all things,
As right as you would wish, a Roguy Lawyer
Will ruin all again with a mere quirk.

Cob. A quirk! what is a quirk?

Cade. -- A quirk -- why it is a quirk --

Cob. Well, but what is a quirk?

Butch. What Is matter what a quirk is? I know
What my Lord means by quirk.

Cob. Do you so, Sir: Then you are a Scholar are
You? Sir, as little learning as this has made
Many a man a Priest, you deserve to have
Your brains beaten out.

Butch. My brains?

Cade. Hold Cobbler and Butcher! Civil Wars
Among our selves.

Cob. I hate Scholars, I will have no man live
Among us that knows more than I.
But I would know what a quirk is.

Cade. Do know what an Awl is?

Cob. I think I do.

Cade. Then as thou borest holes in shoes with
Thy Awl to mend 'em, Lawyers with quirks bore
Holes in Estates to mar 'em.

Cob. Oh! Oh!

Cade. For this, and other reasons hang the Lawyers.
They strive to make the Subjects break the Law,
And then they make the Law break all the Subjects,
And cunningly they make such rotten Laws,
That men must break 'em all spite of their Teeth,
We send (you know) sometimes men to make Laws,
And there these men sit hatching Laws and Laws,
And as they think hatch found and wholesome Laws*
A plaguey Lawyer gets his finger in,
And put's such scurvy quirks into the Law,
That when it is hatched, I Gad the rotten Law
Falls all to pieces like a pocky Child.

Butch. There are pure Knaves for you, since they
Are for quirks,
We'll go and put such quirks in the Inns of Court
Shall tumble them all down about their ears.

Cade. Do, honest subjects, do.

Cob. We will, my Lord.
And prithee let thy mouth be all the Law.

Cade. Cobbler well said, my mouth shall be the Law,
For all the Law of England is but mouth;
When you are at law, it is not the best cause,
But the best mouth that always carries it.

Cob. Prithee let thy mouth be Westminster Hall,
And my mouth shall be Paul's:
For we have no use of Churches, nor Steeples,
Nor Priests, the chief use of Priests is to eat
Pig, we can eat Pig as well as they.

Cade. We have no use of the Inns of Court, or Tower,
Pluck down the Tower, and burn all the Records,
Why should we keep
Moldy Records of what our Grandsiers did?
For we do what we will for all our Grandsiers
On London bridge hang Traitors heads, and quarters.
These are Records too, but who minds Records?
Burn all Records -- Records?

All. Burn all Records.

Cade. Who sounds a parley there?

Enter a Soldier. Soul. One from the King.

Cade. Well let him come, I don't care if I speak with him.
Enter Old Lord Clifford. Well what is thy business with me?

Old Cl. Thou vile Rebel,
Why do thou thus disturb the King, and Kingdom?

Cade. Thou Fool, to have my own, I Am heir to the Crown.

Old Cl. Impudent Slave, thy Father was a Plaisterer.

Cob. Yes, and his Mother was a Midwife, what is that?

Cade. Well, Adam was a Gardener, what is that?
^ay, did not Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March
Marry the Daughter of the Duke of Clarence?

Old Cl. He did, Sir Clown, and what is that to you?

Cade. By her he had two Children at a Birth;
The Elder of 'em being put to Nurse,
Was stole away by a stinking Beggar-woman,
(Like a damned cursed jade) and by that means
The Princely Infant was bred up a Brick-layer,
And I Am the Princely Offspring of that Infant.

Old Cl. Plantagenet invented this fine story.

Cade. You lie, for I invented it my self.

Old Cl. I am sent by the King to offer pardon
To all that will forsake thee, and go home.
What say you Countrymen, will you be happy
And leave this Rogue, or follow him and be hanged?

All. I don't know what to think on it? All mutter.

Cade. Are you muttering?
Why, you damned fools, will you believe a Lord?
Do they not often run into your Debts,
And promise payment, and never keep their words?
Do they not often with fine promises
Delude your Daughters, and when they have enjoyed them,
Do they e're keep their words? Then follow me.

All. A Cade, a Cade! we'll follow thee, Jack Cade.

Old. Cl. You Will follow Cade? pray whither, to the Gallows?
He has no other home to lead you to.
He knows not how to live but by the spoil;
But say that whilst you robb and kill your Countrymen,
The fearful French whom you but lately vanquished,
Should make a start over Seas and vanquish you;
Had you not better go and spoil the French,
And the King pay you too for your good service,
Than here Rebel, and the King hang you all
For Rogues, or worse, the French come make you slaves?

All. I don't know what to think on it --

All mutter. Cade. Again muttering?
VVho'll ever trust such cursed whifling Rascals?

Enter young Clifford and Followers. Yo. Cl. What are you doing, my Lord?
treating with Rascals?
It were too vile an Office for a Scavenger,
To sweep such dirt into the Common shore?
And are you treating with 'em? Nay, and treating
In the Kings name too? very fine indeed,
The King must barter for his Crown with Rascals,
What ever price the Villains make him pay,
Though his Crown should be dear, himself is cheap,
I with no Tongue but this will talk to Rebels.

Draws, all fight on the Stage. Ex. The Scene a Tent. Enter King Henry. Hen.
Never had King less joy in Throne than I,
Nor more misfortune. Heaven was pleased to set
My Cradle on the top of humane Glory,
Where I lay helpless, open to all Storms.
My Childish hand, not able to support
My Fathers Sword, dropped the victorious point,
And let fall all the Laurels that adorned it,
And French and English fell a scrambling for 'em,
So lost I France; now am I threatened too
By wicked Rebels, with the loss of England.
Cade and his Rebels drive me from my City,
Plantagenet seek's to drive me from my Kingdom.

Enter the Queen, and her Train. Qu. Take comfort, Sir, I bring you happy
tidings.
The Villain Cade is killed by brave young Clifford.

Hen. Killed!

Qu. Killed, and all the Rebels beg your mercy.

Hen. Oh! Heaven accept my vows of thanks and praise.
But ha! here comes his gallant Father weeping.

Enter Old Clifford. Ol. Cl. Yes Sir, I weep, but I weep tears of Joy,
For I am crushed between two mighty Joys;
Your Royal safety, and my Sons success.
But here he is, to tell you his own story.

Enter Young Clifford. Yo. Cl. Sir, I most humbly here present your Majesty
The Head of the notorious Rebel Cade.

Hen. Oh! Gallant Clifford, how shall I reward thee?

Yo. Cl. I fought not for rewards, or if I did,
I ought to end my work, e're I be paid,
I have only now pulled down a paltry Scaffold,
On which Plantagenet designed to climb,
To build his Trayt'rous Projects.

Hen. True indeed,
He is approaching me with a great Army;
But he gives out he only does intend
To drive away from me some wicked Ministers.

Yo. Cl. The constant vizard of Rebellion.
Rebellion is so foul and grim a Monster,
That those that mount the horrid Beast, are forced
To cover it all over with gaudy Trappings.
They mark it in the Forehead with white stars,
Pretenses Heavenly, and Innocent.

Qu. Sir, he has told you a most excellent truth.

Hen. I must confess I like not to have Subjects
Present their Kings Petitions upon Pikes.

Old Cl. Sir, let the Rebels come, we are prepared.

Enter an Officer. Offi. A Trumpet from Plantagenet craves audience.

Hen. Admit him.

Enter the Trumpet. Trum. Royal Sir, the Duke my master
Does beg admission to your Kingly presence,
To give you the true Reason of his arming,
And prove his Loyalty.

Qu. Just as we thought.

Hen. Go tell my Cousin, since he speaks so fair,
He shall have free access and all kind usage. Exit. Trum.

Old Cl. What do you mean Sir?

Hen. To throw far from my self
The guilt of all the ill that may ensue.
He shall not say that I refused to hear,
Or to redress any just grievances.

Y. Cl. Sir, you will find your self will be the grievance.
The Tricks of these ambitious men are, first
To poison all the People with disloyalty,
And when they have made 'em sick, they tell 'em nothing
Can cure 'em but some flowers out of the Crown;
And so they set the rabble raving for 'em.

Qu. Lord Clifford when the haughty rebel come's
Arrest him of High Treason.

Old. Cl. I will do it, Madam.

Enter Plantagenet, Edward, Richard, George: Plant. kneels, and kisses the
Kings Hand. Hen. Welcome dear Cousin. Pray acquaint me faithfully,
What do you mean by all the Troops you bring?

Pl. Only to drive some Traitors from your presence.

Qu. I know no greater Traitors than your self.

Old Cl. And therefore I arrest thee of High Treason.

Pl. Arrest me! ha! Shall it be thus King Henry?

Hen. It shall not be, I promised him safe Conduct.

Edw. My Lord, we'll be your Bail.

Pl. See, I have Bail.
Lord Clifford, in whose name do you Arrest me?

Old Cl. In the Kings Name.

Pl. Then I Will unfold my self.
Know hitherto I Have been like a dark Cloud,
Where scorching heat has been ingendring Thunder:
The grumbling and the rolling you have heard,
But now the deadly bolt shall light among you.
I am your King.

Hen. Ha!

Pl. Yes, I am Your King.
I Am sprung out of the Royal house of Clarence,
Whom three usurpers of the house of Lancaster
Successively have trodden under feet,
Whilst they have glittered in our Royal Glory,
Shone like false Diamonds in our royal Robes.

Q. Now, Sir, are we convinced we told you truth.

Pl. And my next Title is the only Claim;
Duke Henry, (for I Will call him now no otherwise.)
Duke Henry borrows from his bloody Grand Father
Henry the Fourth, I Have twenty thousand men,
But with this difference, Henry's Troops were Villains
Deposers of their lawful Sovereign Richard,
Mine are defenders of their true King Richard,
I mean my self.

Hen. Was ever such Ambitious
Frenzy as this?

Y. Cl. Did not we tell you this?

Ed. And we will tell you more, obey your King
I mean my Royal Father, or our Swords
Shall turn the Arrest of Treason on your-selves.

Old Cl. Surely you think you are among your Beauties,
Amorous Edward, there your Vigor lies.

Q. Let them admire thy boasts, here thou art scorned.

Ed. It Is said when the brave Duke of Suffolk lived,
Queen Margaret would not contemn a Lover.
I Am young, and love, but yet I am not stricken
So blind with beauty, but I can discern
Both the fair Kingdom, and the fair Queen lie
Sick of the impotence of a Weak King.

Qu. Ill manner'd insolence!

Rich. Why do you talk
To this poor wretched Neapolitan?
She and her Husband are fit for each other;
He has no heart, and she no heart for him.
Fortune loathed him as soon as e're she saw him,
Nor from his Cradle never would endure him,
And her she never did think worth her care.

Qu. Why! well said ugly Crook-back! spoken like
Thy hideous horrid self:
I will not do thee so much good to kill thee.
Thy Soul cannot be worse than where it is.

Hen. He bears about him what is more deformed
Than humane shape can be, his wickedness.

Pl. I Have showed my right, and here are my three Sons
To plead it with their Swords, now I Will produce
My last and strongest Title to the Crown,
The sword of the victorious Earl of Warwick.
Call in the Earl of Warwick.

Enter Warwick. War. I am here

Pl. Inform the ignorant world who is King of England,

War. Whom my sword pleases.

Hen. Thou against me Warwick!
What did thou never swear Allegiance to me?

War. 'Cause I adored an idol once in ignorance,
Must I still do so, now I see my error?
Know Duke of Lancaster (for you are no more)
Henry your Grand Father murdered his King
^ichard the second, not content with that,
^e trampled on the rights of the next heirs.
^our Father warlick Henry, I confess,
^ad in desert what he did want in Title.
^ut merit makes no lawful claim to Crowns,
^r if it did, I would be King of England.
But I will tell you to your face, Duke Henry;
That you have neither Title nor Desert:

Qu. Most impudent of Traitors.

Old Cl. Most impudent of Traitors.

Y. Cl. Most impudent of Traitors.

War. I Will speak truth,
And value not the fury of you all.
Your Father Henry was a Wall of steel
Through which there was no passing to the throne,
But you are only a soft silken Curtain,
Which with my hand or breath I Will put aside,
And seat your self King Richard in the Throne,
For it is empty though the Duke be there,
The Duke is nothing, or such poor thin soft stuff
The Crown sinks down in him, and is not seen.

Yo. Cl. What, have these Traitors conquered us already,
They talk at this bold rate? Thou Traitor Warwick! --
Warwick? no! -- when thou did unking thy King
Thou made thy self a Groom; by the same law,
Thou tramplest on thy King, a saucy Groom
May set his dirty foot upon thy jaws,
And tell thee they were made both of one Clay.

War. The duke of Lancaster's no King of mine.

Y. Cl. Whence have thou this? from Lawyers, and from Scriblers?
Say, the King's Grandfather Murdered his King
And damned his Soul for it, what is that to thee?
Say, our prosterity should wrong each other,
What must their Servants cudgel 'em to honesty?
Oh! But old stories censure the King's Title;
Are royal Robes made of such rags as Pamphlets?
Yes, when a beggar feign would put 'em on,
One that would beg the Kingdom from the people,
And such a beggar is Plantagenet.
Oh! but the lawyers like not the Kings Title:
What shall the lawyers be the Kingdoms Oracles,
And judge their Kings, who speak but as inspired
By the Kings Image stamped upon his Gold?
Let the King give 'em store of golden Pictures
And they will give him a substantial title.
And then the Noblemen must be the Bailiffs
To execute the sentence of the Coyfe.
Damn thy pedantick Treason; thou art as far
From wit as honor, and that is far enough.
Who stopps a River's head up, drie's the stream;
Thou have divided thy self from thy King,
The spring of honor, so thou have no honor.
But art a heap of dirty pesantry,
Fit only to manure a brave man's fortune;
A straying Beast, with the Devil's mark upon thee,
Rebellion, and I Will send thee to thy owner.

Ed. What a fierce talker's this?

War. I laugh at him;
All this loud noise and fury you have heard,
Is but the crackling of some burning thorns,
That hedge the Duke, and they will soon be ashes.

Pl. No more Duke Henry, will you yield my Crown,
Or shall we fall upon you?

Hen. Must it be so?
Let us not bloodily Butcher one another;
But fairly to the field, and there in Battle
Make an Appeal to Heaven.

Pl. With all my heart.

Y. Cl. Then royal Henry, fixed on loyal Clifford,
Stand like a Cedar on a Mountain top
Securely rooted, and despise all storms.

Hen. My cause is fixed on Heaven, for it is just.

War. Then sound to Arms.

All. To Arms, to Arms, to Arms. -- Exit

ACT II.
An Alarm. Enter Warwick and Soldiers chasing others over the Stage. Enter
Plantagenet, and Old Clifford fighting. -- Old Clifford falls. P FArewell, old
valiant Clifford, I should now
Be sorry for thee, were thou not my Enemy. Ex.

Old Cl. Be sorry for thy self, thou art a Traitor,
And I for loyalty die honorably.

Enter Young Clifford. Y. Cl. Shame and Confusion, all is on the rout.
My men are fled or killed, and I alone
Stand like a lofty Mast, showing my head
Above the Waves, when all the Ship is sunk,
I cannot find my Father nor my King.

Old. Cl. Son!

Yo. Cl. I heard a voice resembling much
My Fathers, very weak and faint it seemed,
As he were far from me, or near to death.

Old Cl. Son!

Yo. Cl. Ha! again he calls! Oh! there he lies!
All weltring in his gore, gasping for life.
Oh! Father! Father! if thou have breath enough,
Leave with me but the name of him that wounded thee
That I may give thee and my self revenge,
And I Will prefer that glorious Legacy,
Before the Estate and Honor which thou leave me

Ol. Cl. Plantagenet gave me my death! -- Farewell -- Dies.

Y. Cl. Plantagenet gave thee thy death -- Plantagenet
Then gave himself and all his race destruction.
He kills our old men, and I Will kill his Children.
Henceforth I will not have to do with pity,
Tears shall be to me as the dew to fire,
I will be famous for inhumane cruelty,
My Father hear's me not, he is dead! he is gone.
Come thou new ruin of Old Clifford's house,
I Will bear thee on my shouldiers as Aeneas
Did old Anchises, but with this sad difference,
He bore a living Father, mine is dead,
And so my burden and my grief is heavier.

He takes his Father on his back, and going out meets the King, Queen, and
Soldiers. Q. Away, away, Sir, what do you mean to stay?
All Is lost, you have no safety but in flight.

Hen. My heart's so heavy that I cannot fly.

Q. Ha! who goes there? Clifford thou art, I think.

Yo. Cl. I am.

Qu. What burden have thou on thy shoulders.

Yo. Cl. I carry vengeance for Plantagenet.

Hen. Plantagenet dead?

Yo. Cl. A braver honester man,
My valiant loyal Father.

Hen. Clifford dead?

Yo. Cl. Killed by Plantagenet.

Qu. Take comfort, Clifford.
We'll straight to London, where we have power enough
To revenge our selves and thee, and to assist us.
The Parliament shall meet and raise the Kingdom.

Yo. Cl. For your revenge raise Kingdoms and for mine,
I Will raise my self, and I Will have bloody Vegeance,
I Will kill Plantagenet, and all his Sons
That when he is dead he may not have a Son.
To bear him to the grave, as I my Father;
And so cut off his memory from the Earth,
Meet I but any Infants of his House,
Into as many gobbits will I cut 'em
As wild Medea did the young Absyrtis,
And I will starve my men that they may eat 'em,
And so let us about our several business. Exit.

A Shout of Victory. Enter at one door Warwick, at another Plantagenet, Edward,
Richard, Soldiers. Plantagenet embraces Warwick. Pl. Let me embrace the
greatest man that breaths.

War. Pray cease, my Lord, you know this does not please me.

Edw. England will learn again to Fight and Conquer,
A glorious science we have almost lost,
Under the reign of this tame bookish Henry.

War. What is become of the young boasting Clifford?
Fate as if tender of him, did to day,
When e're I met him, thrust a crowd betwixt us.

Pl. I met his Father in the field; and there
I put the brave old man to his last bed.
The stout old winter Lion, that had long
Endured the brush of time, fought with that heat,
As he had been but in the spring of youth.
Like arras-hangings in a homely house,
So was his gallant Spirit in his body.

Edw. Whilst we pursued the horsemen of the North,
With too much heat, the King escaped our hands;
But he has left behind some of his friends,
I fell upon the gallant Duke of Buckingham,
And with one fortunate substantial blow,
I cleft his good steel Helmet, and his Scull,
And see, his Brains are yet upon my Sword.

Rich. To speak the truth, my Brother Edward fought
To day, as if he had fought for a Mistress.

Ed. I must confess, I fought with more dispatch;
'Cause had the Battle lasted, 'twou'd have spoiled
An assignation that I have to night.

Rich. Did not I say as much?

Pl. Thou, good Son Richard,
Do not disturb thy heart with cares of love.

Rich. The hill upon my back fence's my heart;
The women love not me, so I hate them.

War. We have all cut our names deep on the Pillars
Of Fame's high Temple, where shall be for ever
Written this glorious Battle at S. Albons.
Now, my Lord, post away with speed to London,
For thither I am told the King is Fled,
And there he will repair this day's wide breaches.
Citizens always love Tame Godly Princes,
And such as abhor fighting like themselves.
Then, if you can, enter the Town before 'em,
And fill it with your Troops; and then to morrow
Get very early into the Parliament House,
And guarded well, openly claim the Crown.
My Tongue and Sword shall both assert your Title.
Then let me see, what Peer dare be so bold,
Or Common so saucy, to oppose it.

Pl. Thou Soul of valor, Wisdom, and Nobility,
I Will take thy Counsel.

War. Go then march with speed,
I Will tarry for a moment to take care
For any of quality that are dead or wounded.

Ex. Plantagenet, Richard one way, Warwick another: Edw. I well approve this
speedy March to London,
For there to Night I hope to meet my Mistress. Ex. Edward,

Enter two bearing a Body, Warwick meets 'em. War. Whose Body is that?
It Is Sir John Gray of Grooby.

War. A fierce bigot for the Lancastrian Faction.
I Have heard of him, and whither do you carry him?

2. To his fair Widow; she had only news
He had some wounds, and so came in her Chariot
To carry him away with her, but all
Her care is now too late; see here she is.

Enter Lady Gray attended. La. Gr. Where is my Husband? I am impatient for him.

1. We have found him, Madam, in a state too bad
For you to look on.

L. Gr. Oh! he is dead! he is dead!

2. Help! help! she is falling on him dead as he.

War. I never saw so beautiful a Creature.

1. She is come to her self,

War. But I Am so lost,
That I shall never be my self again.

La. Gr. Oh! my dear Husband!

War. See! see! she embalmes
His Body with her precious Tears and Kisses.
I know not to what place his Soul is fled;
But I am sure his Body is in Heaven.
Forms, Ceremonies, Civil Fooleries,
Insects engendered of corrupt false Wit.
I will ride over you in my way to joy;
Though this is the first time I ever saw her,
And she lies drowned in Tears over her dead Husband
Drowned in his blood, shed may be by my self;
Yet here, and now I Will tell her that I Love;
And here, and now resolve to make her mine.
Madam, your pardon that I interrupt you.

La. Gr. Who are you, Sir?

War, You, Madam, best can tell,
When I came hither I was Earl of Warwick;
But you have changed me to I know not what.

La. Gr. The Earl of Warwick! Oh! my Lord I beg you,
Conjure you by the Honor of a Nobleman,
That you permit a miserable Woman
To give her Husbands Body decent Burial.

War. Madam, with all my heart; and I could wish
He had been buried when he first saw light,
And never lived to do Prodigious mischiefs.

La. Gr. What wondrous mischiefs dying for his King?

War. Oh! he has done more ill, than Frantic Alexander
When he set fair Persepolis of Fire,
Or him that burnt the famed Ephesian Temple.

La. Gr. Who did all this?

War. He, whom Heaven there has punished,
And did it, Madam, by enjoying you,
By kindling in your heart love for himself,
He fired a stately Palace, only fit
For hearts of mighty Kings, He burnt a Temple
The master piece of Nature, the Worlds wonder.

La. Gr. Is this fit talk to one in my condition?

War. I know old Tyrant Custom does command
You Widows to be stretched on the long rack
Of twelve months mournful abstinence from love.
And, which methinks is an immodest fashion,
You must wear black the color of the night,
To put you in remembrance of the pleasure.
Night for your service pays you no more Wages,
Yet you in gratitude must wear Nights livery.
And you must sigh and weep to tell the World
What skill you have in man, for who e're weeps
For loss of that whose value they never knew?
Fie! what ill woman brought up those ill Customs?

La. Gr. What horrid insolence you treat me with?

Enter one running. 1. My Lord, the Enemy begins to rally.

War. Go fight 'em, for I Am busily employed.

Enter a Second. 2. Mount, mount, my Lord, or you will be taken Prisoner.

War. I am a Prisoner, nor can stir from hence;
Unless this beauty with a smile release me.

La. Gr. Grief, Horror, and Confusion put me again
Into a deadly Fainting.

War. I perceive
Formality the Governess of Women,
And Custom the great Tyrant of the World
Are married in the Temple of this beauty.
Take with you then your pale Companion,
And pay to it the Tax of some Months tears,
And lock your self in solitude and darkness,
But after that by my renown and fortune,
By this days victory, by that great power,
By which I to the King say, be a Subject;
And to a Subject I say, be a King.
I swear I shortly will say to my self,
Warwick, be thou Possessour of this beauty.
I Will have you, though you hate, and Heaven envy me,
And the first joy I reap cost me my life.

La. Gr. In spite of me I am compelled to speak,
I swear by the dead body of my Husband,
By my unspotted fame most sacred to me,
I rather will choose death than any man,
But I Will choose Hell e're you.

War. Cruelly sworn;
But yet such Oaths are heriots, which Widows
To custom always pay, when a life falls.
The world expects to have 'em pay such fines,
E're they renew another life in love.
Then, Madam, take your fallen tenement,
And pay all custom'd dues, you have your freedom.
And for your safety all my guard shall wait you.

La. Gr. Though paying rights of burial to my husband
Be all that I desire to do on Earth,
E're I will be obliged to you for any thing,
I Will dye upon him and be all his monument.

War. Oh Beauteous Monument! all men would d^e
To be so buried! -- envy will not suffer me
To let the dead have so much happiness,
Therefore I Will take my leave.

La. Gr. The only favor
I will receive, or can endure from you.

War. Take it, one kindness often begets another,
Farewell, most cruel, but most beauteous creature.

La. Gr. Farewell most rude and most abhorred of men.

War. [Softly to his men.] Guard her safe hence, but do not let her know it,
Lest she refuse it, and should meet with injury. Ex.

Scene a Room in London, Table, Lights.
Enter Edward pulling in Lady Ellanor Butler. L. El. Oh! do not tempt me, for I
know
You will be false.

Ed. Well but I know I shall not.

L. El. Oh! to how many women have you sworn
As much as you have done to me to night?

Ed. Oh is there not great difference among VVom^n?
Some Women are but petty Inns to lodge at,
And though perhaps rather than want a lodging,
We would pay all they ask, though most unreasonable:
But if they would pay me, I would not dwell with 'em;
But your sweet beauty is my journey's end.

L. El. Oh! yes till you begin another journey.

Ed. Besides the many thousand Charms about you,
From which it is impossible to 'scape,
Your Birth and Quality will not permit me
To trifle with you as with trifling women,
I dare not but regard Lady Elianor Butler.

L. El. But when you have enjoyed Lady Elianour Butler,
She Will seem as very a trisle as the rest.

Ed. Then what a perjured Villain must I be?

L. El. When you are Prince of Wales, perhaps you will think
The Prince of Wales is not obliged to keep
Lord Edwards Oaths, and when I follow you,
You will cry, Madam, I am Prince of Wales,
And I must marry for the Nation's good;
I Am very sorry I am forced to lose you,
But pardon me, it is the Nation's fault.
So, Madam, I Am your very humble Servant,
If I can serve you any way, command you;
Then instead of being made Princess of Wales
I sneak away poor cheated Elianor Butler.

Ed. Well this is very unkind to make me throw
So sweet a Night so foolishly away.
I thought you would have given me a clear draught
Of Love without the dreggs of Oaths and Vows.

L. El. Oh! you are too charming not to be beloved,
And when once loved, not to be loved for ever.
I know I Have not desert to keep you constant;
And it is enough for me that you once loved me,
To blame you that you will not love me always,
as a beggar blamed a Prince, for giving him
Only one Jewel. No one Woman merit's
Your Love, so you divide it among all.
But oh! methinks I feign would have it all
And have it always.

Ed. So I swear you shall.
Then come away, for night is stealing from us,
Weary with holding up her sable Robe,
To hide two loytring lovers to no purpose.
Then come away.

L. El. Oh swear to me once more.

Ed. I Will swear no more, whilst we by foolish Oaths*
Secure delights to come, we lose the present.
Then come away, for else I shall be called.
Oh Heaven's! see! the day is broke already.
The vast and heavy business of a Kingdom
Heave up the scale of Morn before it is time.
Oh! come away for fear I be undone.

L. El. Oh! do not ask for fear I be undone. Knocking

Ed. Hark! I hear knocking! I am called, I Am ruined.

Enter the waiting Woman. Woe. My Lord! here is your Brother my Lord Richard
Is come to fetch you to the Parliament,
He says, your Father's going thither already.

Ed. Did not I tell you, Love, what you would do?
Confound my Lord Richard, tell him I Am not here.

Woe. He says you are here, and he will not part with you.

Ed. So, we have managed our occasion finely.
Was this well done of you?

L. El. You may forgive me,
Since I Am almost as sorry as you are.

Ed. Then will you mend the fault another time?

L. El. I fancy I shall do my weak endeavor.

Rich. within. Why, Brother! --

Ed. Hark he calls! I must be gone,
Farewell, my dear, remember what you have promised.

L. El. Remember you your Vows of constancy.

Rich. within. Brother, what do you mean? leave your damned Women,
For I Am sure it is some damned Woman stays you.
But for my part I Will stay no longer for you.
For I will not be chidden for your faults,
My Father, and his Friends shall know how it is.

Ed. Thank thee, good natured honest virtuous Brother;
How proud this Leper is of one sound place?
Though he has all the vices in the world,
Yet he insults over me, because he is free
From my one fault, my almost faultless fault.
He is a Hell at whose foul front appears,
Ill manners, and ill nature, and ill shape,
Like a three-headed Dog, that barks at all things
That dare come near him, specially at beauty;
But has within a thousand ugly Haggs
His Soul embraces, bloody cruelty,
Lean envy, and insatiable Ambition.
And he has this advantage over me,
His Mistresses are Devils, and so invisible.
Some time or other I Will descend like Hercules
Into this Hell, and dragg to humane sight
The Monster that so barks at my delight. Ex.

Scene the Parliament House, a Throne, Canopy, Seats for the Lords.
Enter Plantagenet, George, Richard, Warwick, Clarence, Rutland, Guard all with
drawn Swords. War, This is the palace of the fearful King,
And this the Regal Seat; Richard Plantagenet,
Sit down, and from this hour be King of England.

Pl. I think if mighty Warwick said, be Emperor
Of the whole world, the Genii of all Kingdoms
Would vanish and give place to his great spirit.
Assisted then by thee, I here sit down, Sits in the Throne.
And take possession of my Royal Right.

War. I plant you here, now Root you up who dares.

Enter Edward, Pl. Where Is my Son Edward? 'S'wound's! why loiter you?

War. Sir, why do you neglect your Father thus?

Ed. Reproved by Warwick? what does Warwick cheat us? Aside.
Give us a Crown to cheat us of our liberty?
Hire us to be his slaves? so soon so arrogant?
This humor I must quell, I cannot bear it.

Pl. Sons, I here take possession of my right,
And will be Crowned or killed: -- if I should fall,
Son Edward, claim the Crown, if you fall with me,
Then, George, the Crown is thine, if both you dye,
Then, Richard, thou art King.

War. Three goodly Pillars,

Pl. And last in birth but not in my Affection.
Here is my little pretty darling Rutland,
Look to him, Guard, for if his brothers Perish,
He is your King; fear not my pretty Boy.
We'll be too hard for wretched timorous Henry.

Rut. Sir, let him come, and all his Soldiers with him.
If you will beat his Soldiers, I Will beat him.

Pl. Well said my boy; and hark; I think he comes.

Enter King Henry in his Robes, his Crown on his head, the Sword born before
him, Attended by Clifford, Northumberland, Westmorland, Exeter, in their Robes.
Hen. My Lords, look where the sturdy Rebel sits.

War. Look where your King is seated, Duke of Lancaster,
What say you will you? resign in peace the Crown
To him whose right it is, Richard Plantagenet?
Or shall we force it from you by our Swords?

Rich. Let Us tear the Crown from the Usurpers head.

Ed. Sound but the Trumpets and the King will fly.

Pl. Peace, Sons.

Hen Peace all of you, and hear your King.
Rebels, I fear all danger less than you do,
For I am better armed with innocence.
But I confess I do fear Civil War;
Not for my own, but for my peoples sake,
I am afraid to shed the blood of English men,
But you indeed are bold in cruelty.
By which (oh Heaven!) judge whose is the Child
His who desires to have it cut in pieces,
Or mine, who strive in tenderness to save it.
For my own part I fear no power, but Heaven,
Rebels may be successful for a time,
And overturn all order, right, and justice,
But Heaven does not let the world stand long
In that unnatural uneasy posture,
But soon put's all things in their proper places.

Pl. Thy own mouth, Henry, has pronounced thy doom.
Successful Murder, and Rebellion,
Swelled for two Generations of thy race
Over all right, and all that durst oppose 'em;
But Heaven in thee has dried up the black stream,
And made it such a Brook all trample over it.

Hen. I Have often been told by thee, my Grandfather
Deposed his King.

Pl. And I did tell thee truth.

Hen. Cannot a King adopt an Heir?

Pl. What then?

Hen. Did not King Richard to my Grandfather
Resign the Crown in open Parliament?

Pl. Did not thy Grandfather compel him to it
By force of Arms? and then the Parliament,
To their eternal shame, if not Damnation,
Flattered the wicked fortunate Usurper.

War. But say, the King had done it unconstrained,
He could not give away another's right.
Henry usurped the right of the next Heirs.

Hen. My Conscience tells me that my Title is weak.

Cl. How, Sir, will you revolt from your own self?
Who will stand by you then?

War. Clifford, thou dyest,
If thou permit'st not Henry to resign.

Cl. Let Henry give his Title to the Crown,
He shall not give my Title to revenge.
May the ground gape and swallow me alive,
When e're I kneel to him who killed my Father.

War. Ho! there within. --

Cl. I am prepared for you.

War. stamps, and enter Soldiers of his side. Cl. does the same and enter
Soldiers on his side; as they are going to fight, King Henry interposes. Hen.
Hold! hold! my Lords: Oh! let not Blood be shed;
Let us not make a Shambles of this place.
Pray hear me all; I find my Title's weak,
And to defend it were to fight with Justice.
Besides, there lies already on my head
The Blood of Richard, murdered by my Grandfather,
And I Would be loath to add my peoples Blood;
For saving which, hear this proposal from me,
I have been King these eight and thirty years,
And many Interests must grow to mine
That you can never tear me from the Throne,
But you will set a thousand Veins a bleeding,
Then let me reign in quiet all my life,
And when I Am dead, Plantagenet be King

Pl. I approve of it, and on that condition Kneels and kisses Hen's hand.
I swear to be King Henry's faithful Vassal.

Hen. And not to seek the Throne by Arms or Treason?

Pl. Never whilst King Henry lives.

Hen. Then I entail
The Crown to thee and to thy Heirs for ever.

Cl. The Devil to him, and to his Heirs for ever.
What have you done?

War. Good to himself and England.

Cl. VVrong to his Son, his Subjects, and himself.

Ex. Why sigh you, Sir? King Hen. sight.

Hen. For my poor Son I Have wronged.

War. You have not wronged him, you have wholly freed him
From all the Vengeance due to Usurpation.

Cl. Oh! Henry, if thy Father's Soul did see
Thy baseness, it would torture him in Heaven
Plantagenet, when that great Monarch lived,
Thou durst have sooner let into thy Soul
Ten thousand Devils than a Traytrous Thought:
Farewell degenerate faint-hearted King,
May thou be beat in War, and scorned in Peace. Exit.

Pl. Sons, head the Troops before the Palace Gate,
Lest furious Clifford should do some rash thing.
Ex. Ed. and Rich. and George. Enter the Queen and Prince.
Pl. Here comes the Queen.

Hen. And with her my poor Son.

War. She appears big with Thunder and with Lightning:
Expect a Tempest quickly, Sir, but slight it.

Qu. Are the news true? can it be possible
That you have disinherited your Son?
And given your Crown to Traiterous Plantagenet?

Hen. The Crown is his, I have no Title to it,
But what is founded on Rebellion,
The murder and usurpation of a King.

Qu. Then have thou not the spirit of a King,
Nor of a Father, timorous mean Wretch,
To let a Crew of Rebels hector thee
Out of a Crown, nay out of thy own Son?
For thou must think thou have no Title to him,
Or thou would not disinherit him unnaturally.

Hen. My Love, I do not disinherit him;
For what I give away is not his right;
And if I should entail another's right on him,
I should entail Heaven's Vengeance on his head.

Qu. Who says the Crown's not yours?

Hen. I am convinced
By powerful Arguments.

Qu. By Pikes and Swords.
Had I been here when thou made this Agreement,
The Soldiers should have tossed me on their Pikes,
E're I Would have stooped to such unnatural baseness.
Oh! how came thee and I in Marriage joined?
For I am Fire, thou art weak floating Water.
Driven by the breath of Rebels any way.
Would I had died a Maid, and never seen thee;
At least had never born thee such a Son.
Oh! my sweet Son, thou art no more a Prince,
Because thy Father is no more a King.
He has undone himself, and thee, and all of us.

Pr. I am a Prince, and I will be a King.
Father, you cannot disinherit me;
You may bestow your Kingdom whilst you live;
But when you are dead it is not yours, but mine.

Qu. My Son, he shall not disinherit thee.
I have men here to guard me from these Rebels,
And Troops elsewhere to conquer 'em, and punish 'em.
And I will make my Son a Glorious Prince;
Whilst thou, tame Prince, shall be a slave to Traitors:
Made to assist in conquering thy self,
And then in digging thy own Sepulcher;
For Rebels will not do their work by halves.
Though thou art but the shadow of a King,
Rebels will tremble at a Royal Shadow,
And they will be forced to kill thee, if it is possible,
To make thee a more dead thing than thou art.

Hen. Oh! my dear Love, talk not so harshly to me.

Qu. I will be harsher in my deeds than words.
For from this moment I divorce my self
For ever from thy Bed, thou art no King,
And thou shall have no Sons of me to ruin;
I scorn to have a Slave get on my Body. Ex. Qu. and Pr.

Hen. Poor Queen, how love and pity for my Son
Set her a-raging, as they set me grieving?

War. Add her ambition to her love and pity,
For that has no small share in her disturbance.

Pl. I know she is raising Forces in the North,
My Lord of Warwick, do you keep the King,
And stay to raise what Force you can in London,
Whilst I will to the North, and so between us
We Will wall her in, and keep that fire from spreading.

Hen. Pray, my Lords, do, I will assist you both
Against my self, I Will do to others right,
Though on my self I sure destruction bring,
I're I Will be wicked, I will be no King. Ex. omnes.

ACT. III.
Scene a Castle.
Enter Plantagenet, Edward, Richard. Pl. HOW has this Woman charmed these men
together,
No less than twenty thousand? a vast Army!
All my Troops here will scarcely make five thousand,
Then she is gotten between me and London;
That I can no way join the Earl of Warwick,
Nor can he possibly come time enough
To my assistance; I am in a strait.

Ed. I think not, Sir, brave men are never in a strait
When they have Arms and Liberty to fight.

Pl. I should slight odds, if the Enemy were French,
But now our present Enemies are English,
Made of the same brave stuff as we our selves.

Rich. But such brave stuff as we have soundly beaten,
And such as are conducted by a Woman.
And men never think of fighting under Petticoats.

Pl. I Have sent your Brother George to raise some Troops,
I hoped he might have been with me er'e now;
But I must take my fortune now, the Enemy
Approaches us -- bring in my dear Boy Rutland.
Enter Rutland, and a Priest his Tutor. My Darling, let me kiss thee e're I go,
I know not if I 'ere shall see thee more;
If I should fall under the numerous Enemy,
I leave thee to the care of thy three Brothers,
All valiant men, and some of 'em I hope
Will be great men, be Kings; I charge 'em all
On my last blessing to take cares of thee,
My precious Darling, as of their own Souls.

Rut. Why do you talk thus, Sir? you make me weep,
If you must dye, I hope I shall dye with you;
I had rather dye with you than live a King.

Pl. Sweet Boy, farewell my Soul, here take the Boy
And guard him safely in the strong dark Vault,
And if things prove worse than I hope they will,
Convey him safely to our next Garrison,
And give his Brothers notice of his flight.

Ex. Pl. Ed. Rich. one way, another Rutl. with a Guard. An Allarm, shouts of
Victory, the Scene continues. Enter Clifford and his Soldiers. Cl. Pursue,
pursue, pursue, and give no quarter, charge you do not spare Man, Woman, or
Child. Ex.


An Allarm, Enter Rutland. Rut. Oh! whither shall I fly? how shall I escape?
Ah! Clifford comes! and no one's here to guard me.

Cl. Ha! have I found one of Plantagenot's Brats?

Rut. Oh! now I shall be murdered hold, my Lord,
Hear me but speak one word before I dye.

Cl. What can thou say, fond Boy, that is worth my hearing?

Rut. I Would only beg you to regard your self;
You are a valiant man, I am a Boy;
Stain not your fame by killing a poor Boy,
I would not for your own sake you should do it;
For I love gallant men, and I love you;
Though you are my Enemy, because you are gallant.

Cl. Away you insinuating, flattering boy,
Who taught you this Hypocrisy? your Priest?
Give over, give over! for were there in thy Voice
Celestial Harmony, my Father's Blood
Has stopped the passage where the sound should enter.

Rut. I did not shed his Blood.

Cl. Thy Father did.

Rut. Then fight my Father, that will get you honor.

Cl. Should I kill thee, thy Father, all thy Brothers,
Nay should I dig up thy Fore-father's Graves,
And hang their rotten Coffins up in Chains,
My rage would not be quenched.

Rut. That Is very strange;
Why should your fury burn against the innocent?

Cl. I kill thee out of hatred to thy kind,
As I would do a Toad, or a young Serpent.

Rut. Hear me but one word more, dear, brave, Lord Clifford;
You have a Son, for his sake pity me,
Lest as you kill me for my Father's faults,
Just Heaven should destroy your Son for yours,
And he be miserably killed as I am.
Then, Oh! for your Son's sake give me my life,
And for my Father's faults keep me in Prison,
And kill me whenever I offend you.

Cl. Thou will be an offense to me in living.
Whilst any of thy cursed Fathers race
Live upon Earth, I live on Earth? -- then dye --

Rut. Oh! shall I have no pity at your hands?

Cl. Such pity as my Rapiers point affords! Wounds him.

Rut. May thou never get more fame than by this deed;
Oh my poor Father! Oh! my death will kill him. Dies.

Cl. Ho! take the body up, and carry it after me,
I Will make a present of it to his Father. Exit.
Enter Plantagenet.
Pl. All Is lost, my men by numbers are devoured,
Or fly like Ships before the stormy wind.
My Sons have bravely fought, but all in vain,
They only swim like Swans against the Tide,
And are born down by over-matching Waves,
And I am very faint and cannot fly;
But had I strength, I Am on all sides enclosed,
The Sands are numbered that make up my life,
See! the bloody Clifford comes! then here I fall!
Enter Clifford and Soldiers.
Cl. Ha! have I found thee proud Plantagenet.
What tumbled Phaethon from thy shining Chariot,
And made an Evening at thy highest Noon?
Oh Father! from the joys above descend,
And share with me the pleasure of Revenge,
Or else by high revenge I Will climb to thee.

Pl. Thou bloody raging Clifford, do thy worst;
I Would scorn to ask thee mercy had thou any,
But thou have none, then come with all thy Multitudes.

Cl. So Cowards fight when they can fly no farther,
So Pigeons peck the Falcon's piercing Talons,
So desperate Thieves breathe curses at the Officers.

Pl. Have thou the impudence to charge a Prince
With cowardice, who made thee basely fly?
Call to thy memory S. Albans Battle.

Cl. I do, then did thou kill my brave old Father.

Pl. And now would thee, were thou not backed with multitudes.

Cl. I will try that; stand of, and do not touch him,
Unless I fall; then cut him all to pieces.
I will not lose revenge; yet I will give him
So much revenge to kill me if he can.

Pl. I thank thee for the kindness, it is a great one.
They Fight, Plantagenet is disarmed and thrown.
Cl. Now will thou yield that I have fairly conquered thee?
As Cl. is lifting up his arm to kill him, Enter the Queen.
Q. Hold valiant Clifford! hold! -- I would prolong
The Traitors life to scorn him, trample on him:
Are you the man that would be King of England?
Are you the man that revell'd in the Parliament?
Sat in your Sovereign's Throne, and did believe
Your breath could blow his Crown from off his head?
Where are your Mess of Sons to back you now?
Your wanton Edward, and your lusty George,
Your ugly valiant Dick, that crookback Prodigy?
And with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?

Pl. My heart misgives me, where is he indeed?

Qu. Ask Clifford.

Pl. Oh! thou have not butchered, Clifford,
The innocent Boy?

Cl. On that young tender morsel
My greedy vengeance staid a while it is stomach,
Till it could dine on thee, and all thy Sons.

Qu. See! I have stained a Napkin in the blood,
That valiant Clifford with his Rapier's point
Made issue from the bosom of thy darling,
And bring it thee to wipe away thy tears.

Pl. She-wolf of France! or rather cruel Tygress,
For woman thou art none; women are soft,
Gentle and pitiful, but thou art cruel,
Oh! ten times more than an Hyrcanian Tygress.
There is a Boy that thinks thou art his Mother;
But surely thou did never bear a Child,
For thou would something know a Parents love,
And have some natural touch of pity in thee,
And not have drained the lifeblood of a Child
To bid his Father wipe his eyes withal.

Qu. I therefore did it to increase thy sorrow:
I know a Parent's love, and thy fond love,
And all the mysteries of thy haughty heart;
I knew that thou would Barricado it
Against the losses of a Crown and Life,
With Iron-barrs of stubborness and pride,
But oh! this blood like Oil will sink into it;
These Crimson threads will lead tormenting grief
Into the inmost lodgings of thy Soul,
And lest this Napkin be too soft a thing
I have within an Engine that shall squeeze
Thy soul into thy eyes. Bring Rutland's Body.
Now thou have drunk the liquour, take the cup.
Enter some with dead Rutland.
Pl. Oh! my sweet Boy!

Qu. Ah! this is Music to me!
This is the part thou mean I should have played,
If thy accursed Treasons had succeeded.
But that my Tragedy must have been deeper,
And bloodier far; thou mean I shoud have wept
For a lost Kingdom, Husband, and a Son.

Pl. Yes, and I do not doubt but my three Sons,
Heaven's vengeance, and the curses of all England
Shortly will make thee weep for loss of all 'em.

Qu. I Will spoil thy prophesying; give me a sword.

Cl. I Will pierce him first, there is for my Fathers blood.

Qu. There for the horrid ills thou threatnest to me.

Cl. There for the ills he brought upon the Kingdom,

Pl. Open thy gate of mercy gracious Heaven! -- Dies.

Qu. Now take his head once filled with lofty thoughts,
And set it on a lofty pinnacle. -- Ex.
Scene the Field. Enter Edward.
Ed. No tidings of my Father? I am troubled!
Enter Richard.
Ric. Brother, I Have news!

Ed. what of our valiant Father?

Ric. Oh no! I cannot hear what is become of him.

Ed. What are your news then?

Ric. They are not very good;
A Messenger is come from the Earl of Warwick,
Who tell's us he is marching to our aid,
But leaving a strong party with Lord Cobham,
To guard the King, and all the Southern parts,
They chanced to meet with some of the Queen's Troops.
And whether the Kings Coldness numm'd his keepers,
Or whether terror of the Warlike Queen,
Whose armies and success each hour increase
Or of the inexorable cruel Clifford,
It is not known, but my Lord Cobham's men
Looked on the shining Valor of the Enemy,
Like sleepy Owls on day, and fell beneath it.
That they were all destroyed, and Henry fled,
With the Victorious Troops to join the Queen;
That the Earl of Warwick now wants strength to fight her.

Ed. This is ill news indeed! what shall we do?

Ric. He desires you to haste away with speed,
To meet ten thousand men marching from Wales,
Raised by your interest there to whom he sent
To join his Troops if possible to morrow.
Which they may do, if you will hasten 'em.

Ed. They shall not want for that, I Will go this instant.

Ric. Pray do not fail, for all our Lives, and Fortunes
Are set on this one cast.

Ed. I Will spur away.
Which way go you?

Ric. I Will to the Earl of Warwick. Exit.

Ed. My Horse, my Horse, I must ride for a Kingdom.
Enter Lady Eleanor Butler in a riding dress.
La. El. My Lord!

Ed. My Love! -- or a fair Vision! if a Vision
Tell me, lest I embrace thee into a Dew.

La. El. Yes, I am that fond she who gave Lord Edward
The lovelyest, bravest, but the most inconstant
Of all mankind my hand and heart for ever.

Ed. Then I am that fond he, will lose a Kingdom
Rather than one hours pleasure with my Love,
And so farewell a Kingdom for an hour.

La. El. I heard you were surrounded by the Queens
Numerous Troops, and in exceeding danger;
And I could have no quiet, till I came
And shared your destiny what e're it was.

Ed. Oh! it was kindly charitably done,
To speak the truth, mine is a scurvy destiny,
The Enemy is in my Father's Castle,
And I Have no Beds of Down, on Golden Bed-steads
Under plumed Canopies, to embrace my Love in;
My Destiny will be to lie to night
On some Straw-bed, under some low thatched Roof,
And thou shall share it; what if the chil wind
Blow on us? it will make us lie the closer;
Or what if we should lie on the cold Earth?
It was our Grandsire Adam's Bridal Bed,
'Twas there he gave the start to all mankind.

La. El. Fie, Fie, such thoughts as these at such a time?
When you have a Life and Kingdom to look after.

Ed. A thousand Lives and Kingdoms are in thee,
Whilst the Enemies tall fortune stalks about
In darkness, like a blinded Polyphem;
We will creep under it into a Cottage
Of some of my own faithful Tenants here,
And safely steal delight, like cunning Mariners,
Pilfring the hold out of the reach of shot.

La. El. Have you a mind then to be killed or taken?
The Woods are all full of the Enemy.

Ed. Should all the Trees turn men, and the Grass Pikes,
I will not stir from hence, till I Have enjoyed thee.
My crooked Brother Richard like a Hook
Pulled me away from thee the other night,
For which I Will lay a double Tax on this.

La. El. Though I am but your Wife in hopes and promises,
So great an Empire have you over me,
My heart would not refuse you any Tax,
Did not your self run danger in the gathering.

Ed. There is no danger, every Cottager
In all these parts will hang e're he will betray me;
Then let the loss of the last opportunity
Make us so wise, to use this whilst we have it.

La. El. Pray do not ask me.

Ed. Pray do not deny me.

La. El. You will be taken.

Ed. No, I Will warrant you.

La. El. But if you should?

Ed. No matter if Thieves come,
When we have put our Money out to use.

La. El. You are a strange man.

Ed. And you are a sweet woman.
Come, come away.

La. El. Well now, if mischief happen
Do not blame me.

Ed. There can no mischief happen,
Like losing this most blessed opportunity,
Then come along, -- along --

La. El. Oh! that I could not.

Ed. Away, away, I say.

La. El. Well -- since I must -- Ex.
Enter Soldiers dragging Countrymen. Scene a Cottage.
1 Soul. Where is your Money, Rogues? confess, you Rogues.

1 Coun. Indeed, Sir, I am a very poor man,
I get my living by my labor, Sir,
And I have nothing but from hand to mouth.

1 Soul. You lie, you Rogue, you lie, I know the tricks
Of all you Rogues; when e're your King wants Money,
Then you are poor, you cannot pay your Taxes;
But if the Swords of Rebels plow the Nation
Then you have Bags, and you can bring 'em out
Like Baggs of Seed, and sow 'em all for Crops
To maintain Rogues that fight against your King;
Nay for that use can pawn your Pots and Kettels,
But now for us you cannot find a Farthing.

2 Coun. Indeed, Sir, you should have it, if I had it,
With all my heart.

2 Soul. You lie, you Rogue, you lie.
I know this Rogue, he is one of the damned Rebels,
Plantagenet's chief Tenants, a rich Fellow;
You have no Money for the King's Soldiers,
But you had Money to fit out your Son
A Trooper, Sirrah, to fight for Rebellion.

3 Soul. Oh Rogue!

2 Soul. I knew his Son, and killed the Dog.

2. Co. Oh! wretched me! he was my only Son.

1. So. Come take the Rogue and hang him on that tree,
Unless he presently confess his Money.

2. Cou. Oh! Sir, I will confess! I will confess.

3. Sou. Then you have money, Sirrah?

2 Coun. Yes, a little.

1 Sou. A little! Oh! you Rogue! just now you had none.
You have a little too?

1 Coun. Yes, Sir, a little.

2 So. And where is your little Money? quickly! quickly!

2 Cou. Mine is buried here, under my Hearth.

1 So. Come digg and find it.

2 Co. Oh! undone!

1 Soul. Digg, Digg. 2 Countryman diggs.

2 Soul. Where is your Money, Sirrah?

1 Cou. In my Cow-house
Under the Dung.

2 Soul. Go, Sirrah! go and fetch it. Exit. 1 Countryman.

2 Cou. Here Is all my money! Sir.

2 Soul. Here all, you Rogue?
Sirrah! you lie! you have ten times as much.
Do not I know you a fat Bacon Rogue,
That have been smoking in Plantagenet's Chimney,
These forty years? Sirrah! I know your purse
Cut's a foot thick, of Reechy golden fat.

2 Cou. Indeed here is every penny, that I have.

1 So. Do you think, Sirrah, we'll be choused of this fashion?
We have hanged half the people in your Country,
For offering to put such tricks upon us;
And therefore have a care.

2 Coun. Oh! I Will confess!
I Am an old man, and my only Son is killed.
And now I care not what becomes of me.
I Will show you all I have; there it lies buried
Under yon Oak.

1 Soul. Go, Sirrah, go and fetch it.

Enter the first Countryman. 1. Cou. Here Is all I have been getting forty years.
Pray spare me a little for my two poor Daughters.

1. So. How has he Daughters? we shall have more sport.

All 3. So. Hay! for the Daughters! Hay for the Daughters. Ex.

1 Co. Ah! my poor Daughters! Ex.

Enter the Soldiers chasing two Country Girls, who cry, help! help! their
Father runns after 'em weeping: they all run over the Stage. After cries
within. Enter the Soldiers with Money baggs, dragging the Countrymen. Scene
continues. 2 Soul. So now you Rogues, how do you like Rebellion
You were a Couple of seditious Rogues,
That used at Alehouses to pay for all
That railed against the King, and Government.
Now had not you better have Plowed, and Carted,
And paid your Taxes honestly and quietly,
Then have your Money seized, your Daughters ravished,
Your Sons knocked of the head, and your selves hanged,
As you shall be?

1 Coun. Oh! Sir! I hope not so,
Now you have promised us.

1 Soul. You impudent Dogs,
Did not you swear Allegiance to your King?
Yet break your Oaths to him? and do you expect,
We should keep Verbal promises with you?

2. Soul. This Country belongs, Sirrah, to your Landlord;
And we have orders to take all the Money,
Burn all the Houses, and hang all the people.
We have obeyed our orders yet, and will.

The Scene is drawn, and there appears Houses and Towns burning, Men and Women
hanged upon Trees, and Children on the tops of Pikes. 1 Coun. Oh Heaven! have
mercy on us! have mercy on us!

2 Coun. Oh Heaven! have mercy on us! have mercy on us!

1 Soul. Now Rogues, how do you like Rebellion?

2. Soul. Come hang 'em whilst there is a Tree to spare,
They are almost all bespoke. Drumb beats.

Enter a Scout. Scout. To Arms, to Arms, Warwick is coming.

All 3. Warwick! Arm, Arm, Arm. Ex.

Enter Richard, Warwick, Soldiers. Ric. Oh horrid spectacle! See here, my Lord!

War. The Queen is planting in your Fathers Lands
An Orchard for the Devil.

Ric. I will dung this Orchard
With the blood of those that planted it,
I have a Spirit in this crooked Trunck
Stands like a keeper in a hollow Tree,
Ready with bended bow to shoot fat Deer,
And down goe's thou, thy Henry, all thy Race.
I Will not leave killing, 'till I Have built my Father
A monument of Bones and Sculls of Enemies
That shall o'relook the Egyptian Pyramids.
Oh that my Brother Edward now were come!

War. Till his Troops come we cannot fight the Enemy,
For they are above thirty thousand strong,
And we scarce twelve.

Enter Edward, a Woman. Ric. What do I see! I think
I see him there! pray look, my Lord, and tell me.
Now I am sure it is he! for there is a Woman:
Oh! we are ruined! for I will be damned,
If he has not been with her all this Night.

War. He durst not do it, durst not serve me so.

Ed. I see my Brother and my Lord of Warwick,
Retire. Ex. Wom.

War. My Lord.

Ed. My Lord of Warwick.

War. Yes my Lord;
Where are your men?

Ed. My Lord, I must confess,
I Have been to night a happy, but great sinner.
Starting to gallop for the Crown, my destiny
I sung in my way brighter temptations,
Than were all Atalanta's Golden Balls,
That had it cost a Kingdom and my life,
I could not but have stooped to take 'em up.

Ric. It Is well, must all the glory we have dived for
In Seas of blood, be melted in a kiss,
And swallowed down like Cleopatra's pear
In one sweet draught?

War. So you have served me well.

Ric. And do you thus revenge our Fathers blood?

War. But what revenge shall I have for the ruin,
That I am like to suffer in your service?

Ed. Fear not.

War. I do not fear, I know which way
I can repair my self; in Henry's service
I can have greatness with less pains, and dangr,
Than I must take in yours to be undone.

Ed. You will not leave me?

War. You first left your self,
And left me too.

Ed. I beg your pardon for it,
Who, now my Fathers murderd, am your King.

War. You are my King, but King of my own making,
And I, like Heaven, repent I Have made a Creature'
Who for the Apple of a rolling Eye,
Will lose a World: But I Will secure my share of it.
I will go make Henry a King again,
And tumble you again into a subject.

Ed. You will not sure, my Lord!

War. I swear I will.

Ed. Oh but you cannot do it.

War. I Will try that.

Ed. You can at most but make Henry a Tyrant,
For I am lawful King.

War. Oh! I Will give Henry
My Sword, and do you keep your lawfulness,
Then try which of you will be King of England.
I never found Conscience or in Priest, or Layman
So firm at anchor, but a golden Ax
Would cut the Cable, or success could weigh it,
And set the Conscience swimming with the Tide.

Ric. Oh! I could tear my flesh! must we be ruined
For a fair Toy? -- but I will not be ruined.
For I will seek the Kingdom for my self.

Ed. Brother, it is well.

Rich. Brother, it shall be ill,
Exceeding ill with you, and very quickly.

Ed. Hold! I command you both hear me one word.
Know I have only made a Trial of you,
For I have brought the Troops that you desired,
I marched 'em hither with such expedition,
Their front encountered here the front of day.
Nay more, I Have brought my Brother and his Troops,
Both Armies are not half a mile from hence;
And here my Brother is: Brother, come hither.

Enter George. Geo. I heard of our great Fathers sad misfortunes
And came to his revenge with all the speed
A hungry wretch would do to a great feast,
Where there were many guests, and he far off.

Ed. Now my good faithful Friends, what think you both?
Now, Warwick, will you make Henry a King?
And, Brother, will you make your self a King?
I was informed of what I have discovered
That you, good Brother, sought to be a King;
And Warwick to command him, who is King;
And him you cannot Govern, you will ruin.
Henry is governed by the Queen and Clifford
And so because there is no room for Rule,
You fight for us to make us all your Vassals.

War. Who durst say this of me?

Ric. And what bold Villain
Durst give you such a Character of me?

Ed. Oh! you are angry, I Am informed the truth.
If they be Villains, who durst tell me this,
Then what are you, who durst to my own face
Threaten to do all this?

War. It was all passion.

Ric. Nothing but passion.

Ed. Brother, you are wronged,
Or in cold blood you are as bad as this;
You act the undermining Politician,
A King is a strong Tower on a high Rock,
And it is dangerous to storm him openly;
So at a mighty distance they break ground
And cast up earth, that is by subtle tricks
They raise the dirty crow'd, and behind them
They lie secure from Royal battery.
There if they find any unguarded place,
About the King, they use it most unmercifully.
My heart to beauty always lies too open,
And that infirmity thou give no quarter;
Though thou who censurest me, because sometimes,
I shed some vacant hours among fair Women,
Would shed the blood, or of thy Friend or King,
Or if thy Father, were he now alive,
To gain a Crown, for there is thy chief Lust.

Ric. That is a Cruel censure.

Ed. But a true one,
Who stabbs my Name, would stab my Person too,
Did not the Hangman's Ax lie in his way,
And no man care's to stumble upon that.

War. Well, Sir, I have so long gone clad in Steel,
I have forgot to kneel; but yet my Spirit,
More stubborn than my sinews, bonds to you.
And beggs your pardon for my too rash passion,
For 'twas no more, and there appeared occasion;
Though you it seems kindled the fire o'purpose
To show us by the light of it our faults.

Ed. Nay, I will own after the days Fatigues,
I fell into an ambuscade of beauty,
Where ignorant of what befell my Father,
And deep in Love, I lay some hours last night;
And which of you would not have done the same?

War. All of us would, and, Sir, I humbly beg you
Think my wild passion was the Woman in me,
And I Have enjoyed my Woman, as you yours.

Ed. My Lord, I know you would enjoy your Woman,
I mean your Mistress, for you have a Mistress,
And you, who threatened to revolt from me;
Because some moments, which were due to business,
I gave away to Beauty, and to Love,
Had almost at S. Albans given away
Our victory, to a Woman that abhorred you.

War. Ha!

Ed. Yes, my Lord, I was informed the story.
You wooed her, over her dead Husband's Body,
Till you were almost taken by the Enemy.
I do not know her Name, I never pry
Into your pleasures, though you censure mine.
But thou in Chastity, would seem a Scipio.
Know, that the Woman that thou saw me with,
Was thy own Whore.

Ric. Ha!

Ed. Yes, thy own poor Whore,
A Peasant's dirty Daughter, whom thou keep'st,
By whom thou have a little tawny Bastard,
Whom I of purpose brought to show thy Faults,
In the eyes, where thou have often seen thy face.
This is the Lady.

Enter Woman. Ric. Cursed treacherous jade! Aside.

Ed. Now, Sirs, what think you?

Ge. Pray, Sir, give me leave
To intercede for 'em, I see shame covers 'em,
And to great minds no punishment like shame.

Rich. Sir, not for mine, but for my Father's sake
Pardon my Errors and accept my Service, Kneels both.
That I may aid you to revenge his Blood.

War. Sir, not for mine, but for the Kingdoms sake,
Pardon my Errors and accept my service,
For I by placing you in the English Throne
Shall place the English Throne above the World.

Ed. Rise both of you, I freely pardon you,
And yet methinks it is unequal usage
A King should pardon all the faults of Subjects,
And Subjects pardon nothing in their King;
When a King's crowned, he is not deifyed,
When he puts on the Royal Robes, he does not
Therefore put of the Infirmities of man.
I own I have my faults, and so have you,
You see I have convinced you; and I did it
That you might leave your faults and pardon mine;
Or if you kept your faults to part with me;
For if my Lord of Warwick does design
By all his Service only to enslave me,
I shall lose nothing by his leaving me,
I can but be a Slave when I am conquered,
And if my Brother Richard has worse ends --

Ric. Oh! Sir, no more, unless you do design
I should rip up my Breast to show my heart --

War. Sir, I Will desire no farther pardon of you,
Till I have writ it in your Enemies Blood,
And pawned my Life and Fortune for my Loyalty.

Ed. Our Friendship then is stronger for this breach,
Now let us bend our talk to our Affairs,
On the sad tidings of my Father's death,
Which I but lately heard, I sent Commissioners
To Henry to demand the Crown of him
According to the Oath he made in Parliament.
They are here! -- what tidings? Peace, or War?

Enter Commissioners. Com. War.

All. War.

1 Com. The Amazon Queen drags Henry to the Battle.
He fain would keep his Oath, but she will not suffer him.

Ric. I Am glad of it, I would not for a Kingdom
Peace should chain up that Bloody Mastiff Clifford,
And keep him safe from the edge of our keen Swords.

War. You wrong the Beast to give that name to Clifford,
An English Mastiff scorns to bite a Child.

Ed. Now let us march to meet the Enemy,
This day decides who shall be King of England,
The right is ours.

War. And Justice will prevail,
Since Right and Merit both are in the Scale. Exeunt.

ACT. IV.
An Alarm. Enter King Henry, the Queen, Prince, Clifford. Cl. DAmn your unlucky
Planets, pray, Sir, get you
Out of the Battle, it is impossible
For men to fight the malice of your Planets.

Qu. He tells you true, Sir, Victory will never
Come where you are.

Hen. Victory will not come
Where Perjury is, you make me break my Oath.

Cl. You ought not to have sworn so ill an Oath.

Pr. Father, you cannot give away my Right,
I Will rather lose my life than my Inheritance.

Cl. Spoke like a Prince.

Hen. Oh! Boy, if thou did know
What a Crown was, thou would be more content,
If I should leave thee no Inheritance,
But the Example of my virtuous deeds;
I wish my Father had left me no more.

Cl. Oh! damn all this! -- come, let us to the Battle.

Ex. Cl. Qu. Pr. Hen. Oh! how this Fellow curses? he accuses
My Stars for my misfortunes, when his Curses
Wound all my Men, and poison the Enemies shot.
Would I were dead if it were Heavens good will! Lies down
For I am very weary of this World.
Troublesome folly governs all this World.
Men live her Vassals, and they dye her Martyrs.
Oh! happy he who in an humble state
Only attends on Nature's easy business,
And brings white heirs down to a quiet Grave,
Falling to earth, as gently as the Snow.
Alarm! Enter a Son bearing his Father. Here comes a wretch laden, as he
believes,
With happy Fortune, it is with bloody folly,
And Heaven has carved Fool on his breast with wounds.

Son. Who e're thou art thy life has cost me dear,
But I Will repay my self out of thy Gold;
If thou have any; with the hopes of that
I took such pains to kill thee. And yet I
Who plunder thee, may be compelled e're Night,
To give my life, and plunder to another.
What Is this? Oh! Heaven! I have killed my Father.
Oh Father pardon me, I did not know thee.
I was in London pressed to serve the King,
And thou the Earl of Warwick's servant pressed,
To fight on the other side, and so unknown
We met and Fought; and so unknown I killed thee.
Oh from thy Bosom I will wash away,
With tears, the marks of this unnatural Crime.

Hen. Oh piteous spectacle! Oh sad confusions!
What horrid errors, and unnatural ills
Our horrid and unnatural war produces!
Poor wretch, did thou want tears I could supply thee.

Enter a Father bearing his Son. Fath. Thou that so stoutly have resisted me;
Give me thy gold, if thou have any gold,
For I have bought it with a hundred blows.
Ha! let me see, is this my Enemy?
Ah no, my Son, I Have killed my only Son.

Hen. Ah woe on woe, Heaven stop these bloody mischiefs,
Though by the Death of me and all my Race.

Son. Oh I have taken his life who gave me mine.

Fath. Oh! I Have killed him for whom I would have dyed.

Son. How will my Mother for my Fathers death
Take on with me?

Fath How will my mourning Wife,
Accuse me of the slaughter of my Son?

Hen. How will my people charge all this on me?

Son. I Will bear thee hence and weep, but fight no more. Ex.

Fath. I Will bear thee hence and weep; but kill no more,
Except my self with sorrow. Ex.

Hen. Oh! poor men!
Here is a King more woeful than you all;
For you grieve for your selves, I for you all.
Oh you, who when you suffer by your Kings,
Think to mend all by War, and by Rebellion!
See here, your sad mistakes! how dreadfully
You scourge your selves! learn here the greatest Tyrant
Is to be chose before the least Rebellion.
And Oh you Kings, who let your people rule,
Till they have run themselves into confusion,
See here your gentleness is greatest Tyranny!

Enter Prince, and Queen. Pr. Fly, Father fly, all is lost, your Friends are
fled,

Qu. The day is lost, and with the day, the Kingdom.

Hen. Where Is Clifford?

Qu. I believe he is dead by this time,
I met him bleeding with a hundred wounds.
He all the day rolled like a fiery meteor,
About the field, and burnt up men like reeds;
But now in lakes of blood his fire is quenched.
Post you to Scotland with all haste you can;
I will to France, to beg that Kings assistance. Ex. Qu. Pr.

Hen. I go, but care not what becomes of me. Ex.

Enter Clifford wounded. Cl. Here burns my Candle out, that lighted Henry.
Warwick, and all Plantagenets three Sons.
And all King Henry's malicious Planets
With much ado to day have killed one man.
Henry's Stars ruin me and my fall him.
But his soft sway made way for his destruction:
Oh! Henry, had thou ruled as Kings should do,
Or as thy Father, or his Father did,
These Summer flies had never sprung to sting thee,
Rebels you thrive, and may Rebellion thrive
That Rogues may cut your throats as you do ours.
The Air has got into my deadly wounds;
I am too faint to Fight or Fly; and Mercy,
I deserve none, and will have none from Rebels,
I scorn to live by them who deserve death.
Fate Guards the Scaffold, but she hates the Office,
And will e're long let Rebels have their own.
I Am going! All you of Plantagenets Race --
My comfort is in death: I killed your Father. Falls

Enter Edward, George, Richard, Warwick. Ed. Now the great cause is come to its
decision:
Are any Troops gone to pursue the Queen?
On her tame Henry's fortune does depend
As the Seas ebb and flow does on the Moon.

War. Yes, I took care of that.

Rich: My chief care was,
To hunt the bloody Clifford, but I could not
Find him among the living, or the dead.

War. I thought you set death's mark so deep upon him,
Death could not miss him.

Geo. Fortune at us all
Played him to day, but when he was in danger,
Snatched him away again, as who should say,
When I have lost this card my game is gone.

Cl. Oh! --
(Groans)
Ed. What Soul is that, that takes her heavy leave?
See who it is, and be he Friend or Enemy
Use him with mercy.

Ric. No -- it is bloody Clifford.

Ed. Clifford? --

War. Clifford? --

Geo. Clifford? --

Rich. He Is dead! oh that he had but life,
And sense enough to see and hear, and know us!
That we might scoff him as he did our Father.

Ric. Damn him, he counterfeits to shun our taunts.
Clifford, you know me, ask me mercy, Clifford;
I am the Son of your dear Friend, Plantagenet,
I Will pity you, for you did pity Rutland.

Geo. No answer? prithee swear as thou wast wont.

War. He Is dead I Am certain, if he does not swear.

Cl. Damnation on you all --

Ed. He Curses! he Curses!

War. Then there is hopes of him.

Ed. 'Twas his last Prayer:
Off with his Head, and place it on the pinnacle,
Where the bold bloody Slave durst place our Fathers.

War. Now let the Trumpets proclaim Edward King.

A Flourish of Trumpets. Trum. Long live Edward the fourth, King of England and
France,
And Lord of Ireland. (a Shout.)

War. Now march to London, Sir, I will to France,
About the Marriage you so much approved of
With the fair Lady Bona that Queens Sister.

Ed. Oh! thou have made me much in love with her
And all Relations have increased my Passion.

War. Sir, She Is the fairest Creature in the Woorld;
And in that Marriage you will not only
Have a fair bedfellow for your delight,
But that great King your friend for your security.

Ed. I cannot marry better; haste away.

War. I Am glad of this, I have secured my Mistress. Aside.
Some days ago (as you commanded me)
I did dispatch an Envoy to King Lewis,
To make the offer, and he seemed unwilling,
Not knowing what the event of War would be.
But now I with the Sword, that conquered Henry,
Will go my self Ambassador, and try,
If a French King dare's deny any thing
To an English conquering Sword.

Ed. Oh! thou have given me
A Crown, give me this Beauty, and thou art
A God to me, thy gifts are all divine.

Geo. My life too on his bounty does depend.

War. Is it in me to give you happiness?

Geo. Yes, if a Father can bestow a Daughter.

War. I shall be very proud, you will accept her.

Geo. I shall be very happy to attain her.

War. She shall be yours, if the King give consent.

Ed. My Brother could not have obliged me more
Than in this choice.

War. Then she is at his devotion.

Geo. Then I Am a happy man.

Ed. The Earl of Warwick
Is the good Angel of our Family.

Ric. Of what strange stuff so different from my Brothers
Am I made? they are all-over love;
I have appetite, but not one grain of Love.

Ed. Thou art not of a mould for love to grow in;
Men plant not flowers in a Kitchen garden.
Well, Brother, I create you Duke of Clarence.
You, Brother Richard, I make Duke of Gloucester.

Ric. I do not like the Title, it is ominous.

Ed. A foolish observation! --

War. Royal Sir,
I Will take my leave. --

Ed. Success attend thy Embassy. Ex.

Geo. I Will take my leave. --

Ed. Success attend your love -- Ex.

Scene a Chamber.
Enter Lady Gray, and her Woman. La. Gr. King Henry beaten? poor unfortunate
King!
I and my Children are all ruined with him;
The conquerors will seize my Husbands lands.

War. Madam, the greatest Conqueror is your Friend,
The Earl of Warwick, he will preserve your Fortune,
Yes, and advance 'em, if you will give him leave.

La. Gr. Name not that insolent great man, I hate him.

Enter a Page. Pa, Madam, the Earl of Warwick's coming up.

La. Gr. He coming up? how knows he I am here?

Pa. His Servants learnt it accidentally.

Enter Earl of Warwick. War. So near fair Widow, and my beating pulses,
And quivering flesh give me no notice of it?
For the kind needle never fails to tremble
When it approaches it is beloved Pole.
What have you paid formality her wages,
And turned off that old Governess of Women?
Have you yet dried your eyes, and drawn your Curtains?
Is the Son good enough to be admitted o you?
If so I hope his humble kindred may,
For I am near akin to him in heat.
In short you shall be mine, if I can give
Others a Crown, I Will give my self a wife.

La. Gr. If you were serious, as I think you are not,
You give me a brave occasion to revenge
My Husbands blood and your affronts to me,
By making you unhappy in a Wife.

War. Were you the first of Widows that talked thus,
I must confess I think 'twou'd damp my courage,
But when this is the constant language spoke
In the dark shady Land of Vailes and mourning,
Should I be scared, I were as rank a fool
As the dull Hero that should leave a pleasant
Country he conquered, 'cause the people speak
A strange odd Language; you are a conquered Province
And you may keep your Language and your Customs;
But I will have the Government and Tribute.

La. Gr. My Lord, I have affairs of greater consequence
Then this fond talk, and so your humble Servant.

War So have not I, and therefore you shall stay.

La. Gr. What do you mean my Lord?

War. I mean, my Lady,
To marry you this day, enjoy you this night.

La. Gr. My Lord, I tell you plainly I do not love you.

War. All Is one, I tell you plainly I will have you*
I know you are a woman of great virtue,
And time will file away these rugged humors.
But if it do not, though your soul be rough,
Your body will be smooth, your Cheeks be soft,
Your eyes be sparkling, and your lips be tempting:
And more perhaps might make me mad with love.
Ho! call a Parson!

La. Gr. Now my Lord?

War. Ay! now.

La. Gr. What, and my Husband dyed so very lately?

War. What then? what has the dead to do with us?

La. Gr. I Will rather go a begging with my Children.

War. Come leave this fooling! -- by this kiss you shall.

La. Gr. I Will dye e're suffer all this barbarous rudeness.

War. Well thou art a most beauteous Creature,
I Am going now Ambassador for France,
I Will let thee keep thy humor one month more;
But then at my return be sure I find thee
Divorced from sorrow and the dead for ever;
Give not one sigh or to the dead or living.
Sigh thou for any Man alive but me
And though a King he had better be a slave,
Sigh for the dead, I Will tear him from his Grave. -- Ex

La. Gr. What shall I do? for I abhor this man.
What comes into my thoughts? is it not said
King Edward (for we now must call him so)
Lodges to night at his own Neighboring Castle?

Wom. Yes, Madam.

La. Gr. I Am informed he is a Prince
Of a most noble Nature; I Am resolved
To fling my self in sorrow at his Feet,
And beg him to have pity on my Children,
What e're their Father was, they are not his Enemies;
And if I can obtain their Father's Lands,
Then I shall 'scape this man, I so much hate. Ex.

Scene a Room of State.
Enter Edward, Richard, Guards. Ed. The Situation of this Castle pleases me.

Rich. But, Sir, not me, for I Am afraid it stands
Too near a Beauty that once stopped your way,
And I Am afraid will do it once again.

Ed. Women are moving Creatures, and may follow us.

Rich. Pardon my confidence, I love to serve
My Friends as boldly as I fight my Enemies.

Ed. You say well, Brother, and I Will promise you,
Nothing shall stay me here, beyond this night.

Enter a Lord. Lord. A Lady, Sir, desires to kiss your hands.

Ric. A Lady? Pox of Ladies; he is tinder
To every Lady, and will catch new fire.

Enter Lady Gray, and her Women: She kneels, kisses King Edward's hand, he
raises her, and Salutes her. Rich. A very lovely woman! he is ruined!

Ed. I never had Eyes, or my eyes never saw beauty,
Till this amazing minute.

Ric. So! he is gone:
Any one may have London now that will.

La. Gr. Sir, I present you humbly the petition
Kneels again, and the King gazes. Of a poor Widow, and her little Orphans:
I am the Widow of one Sir John Gray,
Who in S. Alban's Battle lost his life,
In the defense of him we thought our King.
If my poor Husband's Loyalty did err,
He dearly for that fatal error paid.
My humble prayer is, that my poor Orphans
May not be punished for their Fathers Faults,
If erring Loyalty can be a fault.

Ed. I am so rapt, I mind not what she say;
Nor that she is all this while upon her knees:
Pray, Madam, rise, -- leave us -- To the Attendants.

Ric. So she (I find)
Must grant a thing, before her thing be granted. Ex.

Ed. Had you a Husband, Madam, did you say?

La. Gr. Yes, Sir, I had one at S. Alban's Battle;
His Name was Sir John Gray.

Ed. Oh happy man!
What excellence had he above mankind,
That he should be more blessed than all mankind?
And have you Children?

La. Gr. Many poor young Orphans.

Ed. Oh! wondrous happy man to enjoy this Woman!
I must inquire about her, I was never,
(Aside.) Never so charmed before. My Lord, come hither,
Pray do you know this Lady?

Lord. Yes, Sir, well.
She is the Widow of Sir John Gray of Grooby,
A man of Quality, and great Estate.
But a most vehement Lancastrian.

Ed. No matter: of what Family is she?

Lord. Her quality does far exceed her Husbands;
And yet her Virtue does exceed her quality.
She is the Daughter of Sir Richard Woodvile,
Her Mother was sometimes Duchess of Bedford.

Ed. Duchess of Bedford? Ha!

Lord. Duchess of Bedford.
And Daughter of the Earl of S. Pool.

Ed. Of noble birth, and by her Mothers side
Related to the house of Lancaster.

Lord. She is by Marriage, Sir; that was the cause
That Sir John Gray was such a fierce Lancastrian.

Ed. She has Beauty, she has Virtue, she has Birth:
(Aside) Why may not this fair Lady be a Queen?
But she is a Subject, England will not like it.
And the English Nation, like the Sea it governs,
Is bold and turbulent, and easily moved,
And always beats against the shore, that bounds it.
What? is the people free, and not the King?
Not free where every Slave is free, his bed?
Yes, so it is, it seems, and English fury
Will easily with any wind be raised,
To dash the Palaces, and Beds of Kings.
Come what come will, this Lady shall be mine.
She shall be, or my Mistress, or my Wife.
What was it, Madam, you desired of me?

La. Gr. To give poor Orphans, Sir, their Father's Lands.

Ed. Heaven forbid I should retain 'em from 'em!

La. Gr. Then, Sir, with humble thanks I take my leave.

Ed. Hold, Madam, for I must have one word more,
I must impose a Tax upon this Land.

La. Gr. It shall be thankfully, and gladly paid.

Ed. It will I Am sure more gladly be received.
It is an easy Tax, no more but Love.

La. Gr. No Loyal Subjects, Sir, but love their King.

Ed. But this is love, that none but you can grant.

La. Gr. I do not understand your meaning, Sir.

Ed. Truly, I scarcely understand my self,
For I have gazed my self out of my Reason.

La. Gr. With your permission, Sir, I Will take my leave.

Ed. Oh! you shall never, never part from me.

La. Gr. What do you mean, Sir?

Ed. I mean all the Love,
E're was or can be in the heart of man.

La. Gr. Love, Sir?

Ed. Ay Love.

La. Gr. I dare not understand you,
Because I dare not think ill of my Prince.

Ed. Can there be ill in Love? there will be all
The happiness to me, glory to you,
Your heart and mine can possibly desire.
Why do you tremble, and draw back your hand?
You must not, shall not stir till you have granted,
What all this languishing, and pressing means.

La. Gr. Oh! I shall swoon! would I had never come here!
Sir, I thus low most humbly beg of you,
Let it suffice your conquering arms have seized
My Husbands life, your laws have seized his Lands,
Seek not to take my honor, and my Virtue.
I never fought against you, never opposed you.

Ed. I wrong her beauty, it deserves a Crown, Asid^
^very look claims a Kingdom as it is due;
and I, who gained my right, should not wrong others.
^adam, I mean nothing but honor to you,
^ am resolved to make you Queen of England.

La. Gr. Now, Sir, you mean dishonor to your self.
^ am as much unworthy to be Queen,
^s I Am above serving an ill design.

Ed. Rather the crown's unworthy of your Beauty.

La. Gr. It is impossible, you should descend
^o such mean thoughts.

Ed. It is impossible,
^ should have happiness without your Love.
^ had rather with your Love be your dead Husband,
Than with your hatred be a living King.

La. Gr. I lately wished I never had come here
^or my own sake, I wish it now for yours:
^h! think Sir, what will all your Subjects say?

Ed. They Will say, I am in Love.

La. Gr. But will they not
^e much displeased, their Prince should love so low?

Ed. I give them leave to choose where they like best;
^hy should I be the only man imposed on?

La. Gr. But I Am a Widow, and have many Children.

Ed. And I have Children too, though I Am a Batchelour;
(...) we are tried, and shall be sure of Heirs.

La. Gr. But you have sent to Court a foreign Princess,
^ay bring your Kingdom great advantages.

Ed. Then set my Kingdom go and marry her.

La. Gr. Consider, you may enrage the Earl of Warwick.

Ed. He is my Friend, and Servant, not my Guardian.

La. Gr. But, Sir, they say you are promised to another.

Ed. When I Am a priest I will do penance for it.

La. Gr. I am afraid you will lose your Subjects love.

Ed. Why should I lose their love, by loving Subjects?

La. Gr. But you have many Subjects of more Beauty.

Ed. My Subjects if they please may marry 'em.
^ give them freedom, and I Will take my own,
^ take it too this minute.

La. Gr. At first sight?
^ou'l think me, Sir, immodest, should I grant.

Ed. A King is above forms; I Will have it so.
^^en come away.

La. Gr. What in this Mourning habit?

Ed. I marry not your habit, but your self.

La. Gr. The world will much condemn you, Sir.

Ed. I care not,
I had rather live a minute in your Arms,
Than many ages in the praise of Fools.

Enter a Gentleman. Gent. Most happy tidings, Sir! Henry your Enemy,
Wandering alone, disguised in homely habit,
Was taken by the Keepers of the Forest,
As he was reading in shady Covert.

Ed. Good news indeed! where is he? bring him to me.

Enter King Henry in a poor habit, brought in by a Couple of Forresters. Why
how now Henry? in this humble dress?
Hen. Insult not, Edward, over my misfortunes,
But from this garb, in which thou scarce can know me,
Learn thou to know thy self; for in my fall
Heaven humbles every King as well as me.

Ed. Henry, I pity thee, thou do not suffer
For thy own Crimes, but those of thy usurping
And traiterous Ancestors. To London with him.
And keep him a close Prisoner in the Tower.
But let him there command all things but Liberty. Ex. Hen. with a guard.
How all my happinesses flow together:
A Crown upon my Head, my chiefest Enemy
Under my Feet, and Beauty in my Arms. Ex.

Enter Richard. Ric. What Is this? a Chaplain called for? he is mad --.
He Will marry her, and marry at first sight.
Marry a Subject, nay, and a mean Subject,
Nay, the poor wretched leavings of a Subject,
A Widow, and the Widow of a Knight!
I fear this Marriage will enrage the Kingdom,
But I fear more the furious Warwick's Rage,
Whose haughty temper will not bear the affront
Of being sent on a mock-Embassy.
Now, though I Would have him fight him, have him kill him,
Kill both my Brothers, if he would set up me:
But that he cannot do, for he must fight
In Henry's Name, and so must set up Henry.
He Is not far from hence, I Will after him,
And for my own sake I will pacify him;
And let the King mean while finish his marriage.
For I would have him finish it, because
I Am told he has another Wife, if so,
The Children of this Marriage must be Bastards,
Then when I Have killed Henry, and his Son,
And by some Arts destroyed my Brother Clarence,
The King once dead, I Will Bastardize his Children;
Then am I King, but some will say by Villainy:
That Is Villainy, that by it is ill success
Betray's a man and into ruin throws;
When once it gains a Crown, it virtue grows. Ex.

The Scene a Chapel
Edward, and Lady Gray, A Priest, Attendants. The solemnity ended. Enter Lady
Elianor Butler. La. El. Ha! is it so? and can the news be true?
It cannot be, I Will not believe my Eyes,
I Will know the truth -- King Edward.

Ed. Lady Elianor? --

La. El. My heart's so full I cannot speak to him.
Ha! is he shunning me? Nay, then he is guilty.
What is the cause, King Edward, you would shun me?
Am I so strangely changed since I last saw you,
You cannot bear my sight?

Ed. No surely, Madam,
You are not altered for the worse, I Am certain,
And for the better it is impossible.

La. El. Oh! Sir, your passion's dead, and you are weaving
Garlands of fine expressions for it is Funeral.
If my small beauty were extremely improved,
I were a horrid sight to thee; an Angel
Is a most dreadful Vision to a sinner.

La. Gr. Who is this?

Ed. One your beauty Triumphs over.

La. El. Come to the Bar, and answer me, great sinner,
What do thou with this wretched Woman here?
How far have thou undone thy Soul and her?
I Am told, thou have sinned with her even to Marriage.
Thou durst not do it sure! -- say, is it true?

Ed. Madam, I must confess, it is very true.

La. El. How? is it true?

Ed. Yes, Madam, it is true.

La. El. What after all the Oaths thou have sworn to me?

Ed. Beauties, like palaces, have several ways
Of access to 'em; I believed those Oaths
A form of speaking, which did please you best.
What form of damning in do you expect?
The lowest place in Hell?

Ed. Rather a place
Among the Saints of the Old Testament.

La. El. Yes, Jewish Saints; but pray, will Christian Saintship
Admit such things?

Ed. Oh! yes! I, when I please,
Can have a dispensation from his Holiness.

La El. What then his Holiness will be your pardon?
A very excellent office for a Pope!
To be the Universal Bawd of Christendom!
A very excellent Shepherd, that will give
His sheep a dispensation to be rotten!

Ed. Well, you shall be my fair Confessor then,
I Will own my sins to you, and ask your pardon.

La. El. And do thou hope to have it?

Ed. I will give you
Any other satisfaction.

La. El. What? thy blood?
Do, kill thy self I swear I Will pardon thee.

Ed. I would do much for that; but I would live
A little while to mend and to repent.

La. El. Would thou repent? oh! I will pray thou may.
Oh may heaven lash thee with so many plagues,
May fill thee, and surround thee with repentance!
I will not curse this most unhappy Woman;
For she alas! is cursed enough in thee.
Poor Woman, he has gulled thee horridly,
For he has only picked the name of wife
Out of my Marriage sheet's, to hide thy shame with.
As for his love in which thou think thee happy,
It Is like a Green-land-Summer, short and hot,
And whilst it lasts it is day, all smiling day,
But soon he goes to visit other provinces,
But oh! he never like the Sun returns.
Farewell, poor wretch, pitied not envied by me,
Thou think we part with very different fortunes,
I go to sorrow, and thou stay'st with joy;
Alas! I leave thee but in a fools paradise, Ex
And very shortly we shall meet in Bedlam.

La. Gr. Oh, Sir, I like not this! this is an ill
Beginning of this day.

Ed. Why so, my Love?
That Is well begun, that is begun with sacrifice,
She is thy sacrifice.

A Cry within, Arm, Arm. Treason, Warwick! Warwick! Then Enter Warwick and
his Soldiers, and seize Edward, and Lady Gray. Ed. Why how now Warwick? What
do mean by this?

War. What mean thou Duke to put this scorn upon me?

Ed. Duke! when we parted thou did call me King.

War. Then I disgraced the Title, and I gave it
To one, who merit's not the name of Friend.
Were I a King, I Would hang that common Fellow,
That should abuse a Friend, as thou have me,
And such a friend as I have been to thee.

Ed. Thou do abuse thy self, in talking thus.

War. Then it is no abuse to me, to make me
The scorn of every French Page, and waiting Woman.
The Marriage is agreed on, nothing wanting
To complete all, but my arrival there,
And all my Equipage and Train are gone.
Now, when instead of me, this news arrives,
I shall have all my Servants hist from France,
My self be made a Common public jest,
I shall be called the great Ambassador,
That goe's with splendor to negotiate nothing.
But my Embassage is but like my conquest,
For I have fought for thee, that is, for nothing.
I Have stole the Royal Robes to adorn nothing,
And help it to another nothing -- Woman.

La. Gr. I Will tell you, Sir, whence all this fury spring's;
This haughty Lord, who thinks his Sword has given
Chains to our Sex, as well as to the men,
Did strive to drag me to his marriage bed.
And using many threats, I out of fear,
Made some faint yieldings, but he finding now
I Am placed above his reach, his burning envy
Seek's to destroy what he cannot attain;
Then calls his fury his revenge of honor.

Ed. Is that the mystery indeed?

War. Yes, Duke;
Thou with a Crown have bought a Widow from me;
And bought her with the Kingdom which I gave thee.

Ed. Come thou to ruin me for love of beauty,
And thou thy self rebel for love of it?

War. I come to punish thy ingratitude.

Ed. I did not know thy Love, but say I did,
If I commit a fault to take a Woman,
To whom thou have no right, then what do thou,
Who plunder'st thy Kings Right, thy Countries peace?

War. Thy glory's mine, my Sword created it.
My Crime is thine, thy wrongs to me created it.

Ed. I Am a great Criminal to wrong a Subject,
Thou none, to ruin both the King and Kingdom.
Thus men, like Bears, devour the young of others;
But strive to lick their own fowl Cubs to shape.

War. I do no wrong in ruining you all,
I but restore to every thing it is own.
I to the Kingdom shall restore the damned
Confusion, which my Sword took away from it.
I shall resto^e this Woman to her tears.
I found her weeping over her dead Husband:
I Will leave her weeping over thy dead fortunes.
I will restore thee, and all thy Family
To the subjection from which I advanced it.
Thy fortunes to their proper state I Will bring,
Beauty shallbe thy plague, thy foe thy King. Ex.

ACT. V.
Scene London.
Enter King Henry in a rich Robe, under a Canopy: The Queen and Prince followed
by Warwick, and Guards, with their Swords drawn. Shouts, and Acclamations. They
pass over the Stage. The Scene changes to the Palace. Enter King Henry, Queen,
Prince, Warwick. Qu. NOw, Sir, you are King again, this valiant Lord
Has left the horrid deserts of Rebellion;
Where he, and all his glorious deeds were lost,
And found the Road of Honor.

War. I confess,
Fortune did mislead me, and I the Kingdom,
To give your Royal Rights to a false Prince,
Who has the Royal blood, no Royal Virtues;
So has no right to Crowns those virtues gained.

Hen. I give you thanks, my Lord, for your great gifts;
Life, Freedom, and a Crown; I call 'em gifts,
'Cause you can take 'em from me, or let me keep 'em.
To Life, and Freedom, I have a clear Title;
Because I never did any ill, to forfeit 'em.
But oh! I am afraid to wear the Crown
For fear I share the murder that procured it.

Qu. Oh! Spiritless Prince! born for a Chain, a Prison:
What if your Grandfather murdered his King?
Must you take Physic for his sicknesses?
Nay, must you dye? for a Kings Crown and Life
Go both together; So King Richard found it.

Pr. Sir, all our lives wholly depend on yours.
And for one fault of my dead Grandfather,
Which he perhaps repented, will you punish
Thousands? You will sin to lose a Crown,
More than my Grandfather did do to gain one.

Qu. If you will doom your self to be deposed,
Because the Crown was gotten by ill means;
By the same law
You may hang half your Kingdom:
If men by inheriting their Fathers Fortunes,
Inherit the Crimes, by which their Fathers gained 'em,
Where is the Nation would not deserve hanging?

War. Sir, talk no more; you are, and shall be King.
All power is from Heaven, Earth, or Hell.
Heaven send's you his consent in my sucess,
The People send you all their votes in me;

Hen. My Lord, I have a Conscience I Will not part with
For this and many Kingdoms; but you tell me,
That Royal Virtue first gave royal Power;
Now I have Royal Virtue, Edward none;
And therefore I must Reign, and he be ruined.
Oh! my Lord, this is a confounding principle.
If Kings may lose their Rights for want of Virtue,
And Subjects are the Judges of that Virtue;
Then Kings are Subjects, and all Subjects Kings:
And by that Law that Subjects may destroy
Their Kings for want of Virtue, other Subjects
May think those Subjects Rogues, and cut their throats.
Thus Babel might be builded, but no Kingdom.

Pr. Sir, if you be no King, we are all Rebels,
And ought to dye.

War. And you shall reign or dye;
If you refuse the Crown, I Will carry it back;
And with it both your heads, to ransom mine.
I Will quench your lives, as Mariners would do
False lights, that lead their Vessels to destruction.

Qu. Why do you pause, Sir, will you rather dye,
And let your Son dye too, e're be a King?

Hen. Powerful Nature is too hard for me.
Will it not cost more blood, if I should Reign?

War. The War is at an end, Edward's my Prisoner;
Not only doomed by Heaven unfit to Reign;
But by his flesh and blood, his Brother Clarence,
Who has revolted from him, and brought all
His Troops to mine, and to create between us
A lasting league, marries my youngest Daughter.

Pr. And I have given my heart, Sir, to her sister.
Oh! do not make me wretched every way.

Hen. Oh! Nature conquer's me!

Qu. Oh! happy conquest.

Pr. Upon my knees, Sir, I return you thanks.

Enter George. War. See, here come's he, who gallantly to serve
His King and Country will forsake his Brother.

Geo. I thought my blood derived a Crown to us,
But now I find it derives only Treason,
To clear the taint, I come to set it boiling
Over a flaming zeal for the Kings service.

War. What think you now, Sir? do you judge your title
Good, when your very Enemies proclaim it?

Hen. I find it is Heavens will, that I should Reign.
My noble Friends, let me embrace you both.
My Lord of Warwick you are fortunate,
I must beg you to rule, for I Am afraid,
My thwarting Stars will blast this blessed Land.

War. Your Majesty is wise, to foresee evils,
And good, that you would save your people from 'em.
Here stands a Prince most worthy of command.

Geo. The world has not more worth, than the Earl of Warwick.

Hen. Give me your hands, I join you both together.
I make you both Protectors of the Kingdom,
Rule you, while I wait only on devotion.

Qu. So, now, my Son, thy inheritance is safe.

Pr. May I be happy in my Mistress too?

Qu. Yes, if the King consent.

Hen. With all my heart.

War. The Marriages shall then be both this minute.

Hen. With whom is Edward trusted?

War. With my Brother,
The Archbishop of York.

Geo. I Am told he gives him liberty
To hunt; and let us him go out slender guarded.

War. I will have that reformed; in the mean while,
We openly will proclaim Edward a Traitor,
And seize his Lands.

Geo. Let Us guard this City well;
He has friends here, chiefly among the Women;
And they rule men.

Scene London.
Enter Edward, Richard, disguised. Ed. Usurping Henry, and false changing
Warwick
Little think certain ruin is so near 'em.

Ric. I cannot tell what absolution
The Priest of York may give his Brother Warwick,
For all his horrid perjury's and Treason's,
Warwick will give him none for your escape.

Ed. I should be sorry if mine host, the Archbishop,
For all his civil entertainment of me,
Should have his reckoning paid him with an Ax.

Ric. So 'shou'd I too, for if instead of giving you
The public Freedom, which you had to hunt;
He had confined you to Domitians chase,
Only to hunt flies in a bedchamber,
You had not now been here to hunt his Brother.
Well, Sir, Go you to all your City Friends,
I Will to the Court; I have intelligence,
How I may easily surprise your Enemies,
If it be feazible, I Will venture on it. -- Ex

The Scene a Chapel.
Prince, George, their Brides, and a Priest at the Altar; near 'em King Henry,
Queen, Warwick, Guards, Attendants. A Shout; Enter an Officer. Off. Arm! Arm!
Arm! Lord Edward's in the City.

War. Thou art mad.

Off. I wish I were. I say, Lord Edward
Is in the City.

War. In the Women's hearts?

Off. No, in the head of Troops of men and Women.
There Is nothing that can get a Pike or Spit,
But cry they will live and dye by brave King Edward.
Richard is with him; they are all marching hither.

War. Oh! good Archbishop,
You are a faithful Brother,
We are very wise to trust our souls with priests,
When their own Brothers cannot trust their heads with 'em:
I know this Trayt'rous Priest has sold my head
To Edward, for the Archbishopric of Canterbury.

Hen. Do not too rashly censure an Archbishop.
Edward might 'scape by wiles.

War. How? cheat a Priest?
Then he deserves the Kingdom for his cunning.
Do you think it is easy to cheat priests,
Who by the help, but of some barbarous words;
As, Entity, Unity, Verity, Bonity,
Quiddity, Quantity, Quality, Causality,
Have conjured all you Kings out of their Kingdoms?
And Edward cheat a Priest,
Who let a VVidow cheat him of his Kingdom?
Oh! but you will say, a Woman cheated Adam.
But Priests cheat women, cheat 'em too of things
Dear to 'em as their lives, their bawdy secrets.
They make S. Peter's Keys
Open all Italian locks -- enough of prating.
I Will go beat Edward, and then hang my Brother.
My Lord,
Draw up your Troops; you, Sir, stay here: To K. Hen.
You are unfortunate,
I do not care,
To have your cursed Stars among my men. Ex.

Qu. I Will follow, and do you, Son, leave your Bride,
And go with us, for I Am resolved to see thee
Heir to the Crown, or dying at my Feet. Ex.

Pr. Fear nothing, Love, I shall return victorious
Your Royal blessing! -- Kneels to the King.

Hen. What sad divining thoughts are these within me?

Pr. Oh Sir, why do you weep?

Hen. For thee, my Son.
I Am bound in duty to thy soul to tell thee,
Something from Heaven suggests our deaths are near.
Thou first must dye, I must behold the loss
Of all that is dear to me, and then must dye.

Pr. Oh Sir! --

Hen. It Is so! we never in this world
Must meet again.

Pr. Oh how shall I be able
To fight, when e're I see the enemy,
My King and Father wounds me to the heart?
See, my Love's weeping too, I Am shot of both sides;
And in my heart the deadly Arrows meet:
I Will rather run among the Enemies Swords,
Than here be killed with sorrow by my Friends. Ex.

Geo. So, now will I go join my Brother Edward:
(Aside.) I am secure of Warwick's beauteous daughter.
Now let the Devil take Warwick and his Treason,
He made me take that brass Coin with his Daughter;
But I will pay him the damned portion back again.
He made me swear he will say, but war's a game,
And so is Love, and Gamesters Oaths are nothing.
My Brothers Soldiers are got in the palace, An Alarm.
They seek their Enemies, but shall find Friends. Ex.

An Alarm. Enter Richard, George, Soldiers, and seize Henry and the Women.
Ric. How now! thou Traitor! thou unnatural Traitor!

Geo. Thou wrong'st me, I am as Loyal as thy self.
What I have done, was only in design
To gain this beauty, and now she is mine
My Loyalty is mine.

Ric. Can this be true?

Geo. Thou saw it true, thou saw I fought for thee.

Ric. Thou did; but I believed it was thy Cowardice,
That made thee now betray thy Friend, as lust
Made thee betray thy Brother.

Geo. It is false.
And if I don't appear to day in Battle,
As valiant, and as Loyal as thy self,
I Will kill my self.

Ric. Do that, and I Will embrace thee.
But let us away: our Royal Brother wants us. -- Ex.

The Scene the Field.
Enter Warwick, Queen, Prince, guards. Qu. Oh! cursed Traitor! why would you
e're trust
One that was always false?

War. I was bewitched,
To trust a man, who had betrayed his Brother.

Pr. My Fathers words now sink into my breast;
He said at parting, we should never meet
On Earth again.

War. Well if the Villains murder him,
I will revenge his blood, and make you King.
When e're I went to work to make a King,
I never yet failed, whatever stuff I had;
But hark the Traitors come! let us fall on. Ex. Trumpets.

An Alarm. Enter Edward, Enter Lady Elianor in man's habit. La. El. Turn this
way, Edward; here is an Enemy,
Thirsts for thy blood.

La. El. and Ed. Fight, La. El. falls. Ed. What bold young man is this?
Thou art dispatched, I wonder who thou art.

La. El. Look on me well -- see if thou do not know me.

Ed. May I believe my eyes!

La. El. Thou may, King Edward,
They speak more truth, than e're thou did to me.

Ed. Oh! killing sight!

La. El. Would thou had never seen me,
The cold Earth had not been my Deathbed then,
Nor had I needed (as I do) two graves,
One for my self, the other for my name.

Ed. Oh Heaven!
How have I wronged this beauteous Creature!
First robbed her of her Fame, now of her Life!

La. El. Ah! Monarch, do I merit this for Love?

Ed. Oh no, but I deserve a thousand plagues;
And I have here with my own hand broke open
A fair Pandora's box to let 'em out,
To fly about my head.

La. El. Indeed, King Edward,
My injuries have already found thee out,
Have driven thee from thy throne, how far will drive thee,
I cannot tell, I will not curse thee now:
Cursing is not a language spoke in Heaven,
And I am very near that glorious Kingdom,
Therefore I Will speak the language that is blessing.
May this be the last day of all thy Troubles!
And I be the last woman thou shall wrong!
May Heaven forgive thy broken Vows, as I do,
And quicklier forget 'em all than thou did!
And this one poor request I beg of thee:
Since I was all the stain of my great Family,
And I have made thy self, who were the cause of it,
With thy own Sword, cut out the ruined piece,
Oh hide it, where it may no more be seen,
But be forgot by all, as 'twill by thee! Dies.

Ed. She Is gone! She Is gone!
Oh! thou sweet injured beauty,
I never shall forget thee whilst I live,
Thy wrongs I fear will haunt my mind and fortune,
In this sweet spot of Earth I fear I Have planted
Much mischief for my self; I gathered all
The Sweets, and now Thorns will spring up to tear me.

Enter an Officer. Offi. Oh Sir, the Earl of Warwick ranges over
The Field, with so much fury, and success
Your Troops are just upon the point of flying.

Ed. My punishment so soon pursue my Crime!
This beauties wrongs steel that proud Rebels Sword,
And give it all the kneenness that it has.
Oh Heaven hide thy eyes from this sweet Creature,
At least for this one hour; and here I vow,
I will give over robbing such spicy Isles,
And take an honest dwelling at my own,
Lest sailing to a fro a Tempest fall,
That shall revenge the injuries of 'em all. Ex.

Enter Edward and Warwick Fighting, War. falls. Ed. Now I am King of England;
and I owe,
My Crown to my own Sword, and not to thine.

War. Insult not, Edward. for I am not killed
By thee, but Henry's cursed Destiny.
I Am crushed under the wheels of his damned fortune,
I am ground all to pieces by his Stars.
My fortune sickned when I first came under 'em;
Truth is, my Spirit led her such a dance,
She could not keep me company, but tired,
Now sit's her down, and like a poor cast Whore,
Is glad to be picked up by any body.
Now thou may banish fear, for I am dying;
Who, when I lived, could frown thee into a Subject,
Bury thee in the wrinckle of my brow.

Ed. Talk not of burying Kings, but rather think
Of burying all thy Crimes in penitence.

War. My greatest Crime is, that I e're served thee,
Whose base ingratitude has ruined me;
I gave thee Kingdoms, and thou giv'st me death. Dies.

Ed. I never wronged thee, nor did thou e're serve me,
Thou have been wronged by nothing, but my ignorance,
And have served nothing, but thy vanity;
And nothing else I fear will e're reward thee.

Enter George, Richard, and Guards. Geo. Now, Sir, I hope you will forgive my
errors
For Beauties sake, for Beauty drew me in,
And you have felt the mighty power of Beauty.

Ed, Brother, your errors are all buried under
Heaps of my Enemies, you have killed today.
I have dispatched my greatest Enemy;
Warwick will make, and unmake no more Kings.

Ric. And the bold Amazon Queen, and insolent Boy,
Her fierce Son Edward, are both taken Prisoners.
I Have ordered, Sir, they shall attend you here.
And here they are.

Enter Queen, Prince, Guarded as Prisoners. Ed. So, Madam! -- and young Edward,
What satisfaction will you make to me,
For all the Mischief you have done my Kingdom,
And all the Trouble you have given me?

Pr. What satisfaction will thou make my Father,
Me, and the Kingdom, for thy bold usurping
My Fathers Crown, and my inheritance,
Ruining us, and slaughtering our people?

Qu. Oh! that thy Father had been so resolved!

Ric. That so your Distaff might have been our Scepter.

Pr. Why, how now Aesop? Nay, mistake me not,
Aesop I mean in Body not in mind.

Ric. Brat! -- I will crush thy brains out.

Ed. Hold, forbear --
He is a Boy.

Ric. Why, then to School with him,
To learn him manners,

Pr. If I learn thy manners,
The Devil must be my Tutour.

Ed. Hold your peace,
You foolish Child.

Geo. The Boy's too malapert.

Pr. The man is too perjured, I mean perjured George,
And you are all Traitors to me your Prince.

Ed. How now, proud Boy? take that.

Strikes him with his hand. Ric. Nay, then take that --

Geo. And that for twitting me with Perjury.

Rich. and Geo. draw, and kill him. Qu. Oh! they have killed my Son -- oh
murderers!
Oh! kill me too.

Ric. Marry with all my heart!

The Qu. swoons upon the Prince. Ed. Hold, Brother, we have done too much
already.
Why would you cruelly kill the poor Boy?
I struck him in my Choler, but I meant him
No farther harm.

Ric. Who could forbear? -- besides,
Should we have let him live to cut our Throats?

Geo. What would have grown up with him but Rebelion?
Why should a Sprig grow up to be a Tree,
That would breed nothing else but Caterpillars?

Ed. His Mother Swoon's, use means for her recovery.

Qu. Oh, my dear Son is killed! my Son is killed!
Speak to thy Mother, Son! can thou not speak?
Oh murd'rers, Butchers, Traitors, Cannibals.

Ric. Hence with this railing Woman.

Qu. Ay hence with me,
Out of the world; I prithee, Richard, kill me:
Murder is all the Alms thou give the miserable;
Bestow thy bloody Charity upon me;
Have pity on a Queen that begs it of thee.

Ric. We pity not those that are born to beggary;
If thou do beg, it is but thy native poverty.

Ed. Insult not over a miserable Woman;
Madam, I pray go hence, you shall be used
With all respect.

Qu. All the respect of Murderers
Is death; Oh! bloody George do thou bestow it.

Geo. I swear I will not do thee so much kindness.

Qu. Ay, but thou usest to forswear thy self.

Ed. Madam, pray go --

Qu. Oh! Edward, Richard, George,
Be it to you, and yours, as to this Prince,
For 'twere a shame the Sons of Executioners
Should e're be Kings.

Ric. Away, with her! -- away with her.
The Guard lead out the Qu and carry out the Pr. Now I will to the Tower to
dispatch Henry, Aside.
Till he be killed our work is done by halves. Ex.

Geo. Sir, If you please, I Will visit my young Bride. Ex.

Ed. I have a Beauteous Bride to visit too -- Ex.

Scene, a Room in the Tower, Henry Sleeping. Enter the Ghost of Richard the
Second. Gh. Wake, Henry, wake to weep, then sleep for ever;
Thy Kingdom's gone, thy only son is killed,
A Dagger is preparing for thy Bosom;
And when thy blood is shed, my blood will sleep.
I Am that King Richard, whom thy Grandfather
Deposed, and murdered; and both long and loud
My blood for vengeance called, and vengeance had,
First in the wounded Conscience of thy Grandfather,
Whom all the Royal Ointment could not heal.
He lived in trouble, and he died with horror.
And next on the short life of thy great Father;
Who lived no longer than to beget thee,
Who have lost all the glories of thy Father,
And do inherit nothing but the curses,
Due to thy Grandfather; nor does the storm
Of vengeance only fall on the Usurpers,
But on the Souls, and miserable Race
Of all the Traitors, and the Fools, that Flattered
Thy Grandfather's successful Villainy;
Who did not know, Kings cannot dye alone.
And now their names are rotting, Children dying,
Their Houses burnt on Earth, their Souls in Hell.
Grin at your Grandfathers, you dying wretches
Covered all over with shame, and dust, and blood:
For this Estate their Villainy conveyed you,
The ascending dirty Vapors of the Earth
Breed all the storms in the Air. When e're Oh! England,
Thou have a mind to see thy Cities fired,
Thy people slaughtered, and thy Country desolate,
Send all the dirty Traitors in the Kingdom
To climb the Royal Rights, and Throne invade,
Then a high road for vast destruction's made.

The Ghost goes out, and enters with soft Music one clad in a white Robe.
Spir. Let not this frightful Vision, pious Henry,
Disturb thy gentle Soul; it is not raised,
To breed a storm, now thou art near thy Haven;
Rather to calm the Tempest in thy mind,
By pointing to thee, on what dismal Rock
Thy Kingdom, and thy life are cast away,
The bloody usurpation of thy Grandfather.
The Crown of England is not made of Clay
The Common people, so can never be crumbled
Into that dirt, it is not composed if it:
Nor made of Iron, the Sword, so cannot rust;
But of unmingled solid lasting Gold,
Of Ancient Rights, and it is the gift of Heaven,
Therefore to Heaven only can be forfeited,
Therefore it is called Imperial and Sacred,
And therefore carefully railed in by Laws;
And torn will be his sacrilegious hand,
Who has no Right to it, and yet dares reach it,
And dares presumptuously pretend a Right,
Because he stands upon the peoples heads,
Such was the bold Ambition of thy Grandfather,
And heaven frowns upon his Sins, not thee:
Then do not think thy self unkindly used,
Religious Henry, that Heaven takes away,
What is not thine; all that is truly thine
Thou shall not part with, but for great advantages,
Thy Son is taken from thee here; to live with thee
Above for ever; thou shall lose thy life,
Only to exchange it for Eternity;
Lose humble quiet, for exalted Joy;
A taste of which wafted in Heavenly Harmony,
Pure as this lower drossy air admits,
I bring thee down to raise thy Spirits high.

A SONG Sung by Spirits to King Henry as he lies asleep.
COme, Heavenly Spirits, comforts bring,
To the most miserable thing,
Can be on Earth, a Ruined King.
As all the Joys on Earth Unite,
To make his prosperous Fortune bright;
So every woe, to shade his Night.
He has but one poor Joy, the Grave,
A thing that is free to every Slave,
And that with ease he cannot have.
For Daggers, Swords, and Poison lie
To guard his Tomb, and make him buy
With pain the wretched ease to dye.
But comfort, Prince, thy death is near,
For Dead thou have no more to fear,
A fallen Monarchs Hell is here.
To Fortune he can nothing owe,
For all that e're she did bestow,
He pays again in heavy woe.
They Vanish; and Henry wakes. Hen. What have I seen and heard? -- Oh! come my
murderers,
And set me forwards on my way to Heaven,
Whilst I Have such rich provisions for my journey.
Enter Richard and the Keeper. Here comes my murderer, less horrid to me
In bringing Death, than bringing to my sight
The horrid Author of my sweet Son's de^
For so in dream it was revealed to me*
My bloody Grandfather destroyed King Richard,
And now a bloody Richard destroys me.

Ric. Go, leave us to our selves, we must confer.

Hen. What bloody Scene has Roscius now to Act?

Ric. Do you suspect me? fear haunt's guilty minds;
The Thief thinks every bush an Officer.

Hen. The Bird that sees the Bush where once it self
Was lim'd, and it is sweet young lim'd caught and killed,
Cannot but hover round it with misdoubt.

Ric. What an aspiring Fool was he of Creet,
Who taught his Son the office of a Fowl?
And drowned the Boy by teaching him to fly.

Hen. Indeed my Boy was Icarus, thy Brother
Edward the Sun that did dissolve his wings,
And thou the gulf that swallowed up his life.
But many a thousand wretched Father more,
And many an Orphans water-standing eye,
And many a Widows Groan, and old man's Sigh
Shall rue the Hour that ever thou wast born.
When thou wast born, nature by horrid signs
Gave notice to the world of coming Mischief;
The Birds of night did shrieke and cry to tell,
That Hour there was a Child of darkness born.
Winds blew down Trees as hell were making gallowses,
Thy mother had a kind of Hellish pain
As She had been in labor of a Devil.
Thy legs came first, and thou were born with Teeth,
And came to bite --

Ric. I Will hear no more -- dye Prophet, Stabs. Hen.
For this (among the rest) I was ordained!

Hen. I, and for much more slaughter after this.
Heaven forgive me my sins, and thee this murder!

Ric. Thou did say truth, I came with my legs forward
Into the World, but 'twas to over take thee,
And all that stand between the Crown and me.

Enter the Lieutenant. Ric. What noise is that?

Lieu. The King is coming, Sir,
And all the Court with him, to see the Prisoner,
And comfort him; the King intends to keep
His Court here till his Coronation.

Rich. Nay, then I must be gone, he will be angry
At what I Have done -- Ex.

Enter Edward, George, ^^^^n, Guard. Ed. Where is your prisoner?

Lieu. He Is murdered.

Ed. Murdered? Oh! thou bl^^dy Villain
Durst thou do this, when I commanded thee
To give him all Princely respect and usage?

Lieu. Sir, on my knees I do beseech you hear me:
Your Brother, my Lord Richard, came to visit him,
And was left with him by his own command,
And now he is fled; that none but he co^'d do this deed.

Geo. Sir, I believe him; this is like my Brother.

Ed. Heaven to his crooked shape has bent his soul.
He was designed for mischief, and thrust forward
Unfinished in the World to lose no time
And I believe if we don't watch him narrowly,
He Will make no scruple to use us as rudely,
For crowding rudely into the world before him;
But I believe I Am safe, England, by this time,
Has had enough of Rebels, and Usurpers.
I fancy now the Sons of those poor Gentlemen,
Those honest foolish cheated Gentlemen,
Who did turn Rebels but they meant no harm,
Who fought their King, slaughtered their Friends, and Kinsmen,
Destroyed their Country, but they meant no harm,
And for reward had all their houses burned.
Their Wives and Daughters ravished, their lands seized,
And themselves knocked of the head, but meant no harm.
I say, I fancy their unhappy Offspring
Will prove exceeding honest Loyal Subjects,
For by their Fathers Ruin they have learnt Wit.

Geo. That Is all a Nation gets by Civil War.

Ed. Yes, with the Prodigal the ^^rn, it is better
Obeying their Kings, the Fathers of their Country,
Than run and wast their Fortune and their Liberties,
And do the drudgeries of proud Usurpers,
Who will perhaps set 'em to keep their Swine.
And after a long beggary and slavery
Return with shame and sorrow to their Loyalty.
Take up the Body of that unfortunate Prince,
I will bestow Royal interrement on it.
His, and the Kingdom's dreadful Ruins prove,
A Monarch's Right is an unshaken Rock,
No storms of War nor time can wear away,
And Wracks those Pirates that come there for prey. Ex.

EPILOGUE.
TO (...)
How palled (...)
He (...)
Damn (...)
So naustous (...)
All the delights (...)
No ^on (...)
^hen sinners ^ow devout, they (...)
The Nation, of (...)
That in vile (...)
The aid of Rascals for (...)
Is in a malady (...)
As the young Spark, who (...) scorned*
Grown deadly sick, is a Fanatic turned*
And beg in his of Paper (...) and down*
The Prayers of all the (...)
Oh! we are sick, at least our (...)
England, is never, devout (...)
Our Fathers to their cost (...)
And small things will make mad men fight, you know,
Oh! what a Bedlam o^ (...) this sweet place,
When graceless Rogues did ^ight about free grace?
And wilful Fool would (...)
His blood, who durst say (...) had a free will?
Of all our Civil (...) shown
To day, our Nation with least (...) may own.
For Subjects then for loyalty did ^ight,
And Princes to maintain (...)
Ye^ ^hos^ rich Ornaments (...)
From gracing that fowl (...)
How ugly then (...)
With (...) before, but (...)
Such a poor Nation (...)
Those two would ride (...) Devil
Learn then, by what (...)
To keep your wit, (...)
Better at Dice to throw away your (...)
Your time at (...)
Than by dam^^ (...) bloody strife (...)
No one knows (...) by the Rent*
Have your (...) plundered, and your brains bear (...)
And dye like J^suites to by the (...)
FINIS

