THE Dutch Embargo, Upon their State FLEET; OR, Nevvs from Holland. A POEM. By
John Crouch, Gent.

The second Impression, Improved.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Crowch, dwelling on Snow-hill. 1665

THE Dutch Embargo, Upon their State-Fleet; OR, Nevvs from Holland.
WHere are our Mighty Dutch? still Weather-bound*
Although the Wind has moved the Compass round?
Are the scared Foxes lurking in their Holes,
Or working underground, like politic Moles?
Appear, and open your usurious Baggs,
Pluck up your Breeches, or pull down your Flaggs.
Come with your Giant too, you sent of late
To mince our coin, and magnify your State.
Is old Trumps broom (hung up to sweep the Seas)
Employed to brush off swarms of Belgic fleas?
Are you asleep? or has our floating Wood
Damned up the Channells of your Seas, and Blood?
When the warm season calls you out to meet,
Has your cold Terrors frozen in your Fleet?
If you have any right, or courage, come,
We shall allow you Mare liberum.
We Will release all our glorious Seldom writ,
And wave the weighty moments of his Wit:
The Sea (made by our Cause, and Valor, wide)
Is narrow'd by your Cowardice, and Pride,
You make a Mare clausum, what? must we
Break up your Banks to set the Ocean free?
Let Us to that Controversy put an end:
Justice, or War; be Eenemy or Friend:
Ye know what pains your learned Grotius took
De jure belli; fight, or burn his Book.
Are the States General dumb by consent,
At one Vote of a loyal Parliament?
Amazed that our State Chemists can afford
Such vast supplies, coin Millians with a word:
Is Amsterdam, which used to be so crank,
(Boasting the rich Mines of her moun'tenous Bank)
Fal'ne sick (not of her Pestilence) but guilt,
Having no innocent blood left to be spilt?
Or (what is worse) is the transplanted Plague
Removed from Amsterdam unto the Hague?
Where the great Tradesmen all their Plots disburse,
Unite the People, and divide their Purse.
All Artless grown? no Pilot fit to steer?
Where are your souls, neither in Heau'ne nor here?
Do Gunpowder and Brandee mix in vain
To thaw the frozen Region of your brain?
Are ye afraid the British Oaks ye bought
(Thinking to break our Ribs before we fought)
Should with your Guilt sink, or your Judgment burn,
Or by instinct of Simpathy return?
As once our Phoenix (which a fatal hour
Had captivated by unequal power)
From midst of all your Screech-Owles took her wing,
And flew home, to enjoy a kinder Spring:
An act rare as the Bird, the English will
(Though sometimes Rebels) yet be English still:
The wiser sound this dis-harmonious pause.
Your Ships are strong, your hearts weak like your Cause,
Where is that fury sunk your Sovereigns Fleets
Wrapped all in flameing Sails for Winding sheets?
While (friend to both) the amazed British shore,
Trembled to see her locks bedewed with Gore.
None to succeed the generous Vantrump,
Who fiercely grappl'd with the omnipotent Rump?
(For so deluded Wights, they thought to have bin,
But Heaven is more omnipotent than Sin)
That both were stout, is no prodigious thing,
Rebels will fight with Rebels, or a King.
Restore what ye have gained by Fraud and Stealth;
Pirates and Robbers of both Indias wealth,
Hire not the Blacks your Neighbors to betray,
Whites in your face, in soul more Blacks than they;
Nor catch the Guiny natives with your Ginnes,
Reformed more Heathen by your Christian sins.
When will a Dutchman in one vessel hold
His Honesty and Trade, his Faith, and Gold?
While man has memory, may that hellish Plott
Of cursed Amboyna never be forgott:
Where you pretend a treacherous surprise,
First to betray, and then to tyrannize,
Racks, Flames, and Tortures, all so exquisit;
Seemed not to show your Malice but your Wit:
By tedious Torments, forcing us confess
What we never thought, Made guilty by distress:
For after strict search (and a Dutch man's Eye
Rubbed with revenge is quick as Jealousy)
Envy could find no weapons of offense;
Nothing to storm your walls but Innocence!
But you that Jnnocent blood in peace have spilt,
Doubtless delight to sacrifice to Guilt!
Are all the Men and Ships destroyed last War?
Sunk in your mem'ries too, no warning scarre?
Could a poor Epileptick Body (dead
Without the living infleuence of a Head)
Your numerous, and experienced Navies beat,
Or force them to the shame of a Retreat?
And shall not Britains Monarchy do more
Then it is sick Anarchie had done before?
Convince us why Republics Priviledg'd are
T'vsurpe the wide Sea, and the wider Air?
Is the whole Eastern World your propper due,
Which Rome never had, when she had Us, and you?
Yet your Republic is a diverse Thing,
The Romans had two Consuls though no King,
They durst not start too far, resolved to be
Within the prospect of a Monarchy:
The prudence of those sober Ages knew
Greater the Monster was, the more heads grew.
Two Persons Ruled, with one misterious Will;
The Roman State was thus Monarchik still:
Two Consuls Reigned, One the whole Work did do*
Ruled both the Public, and his fellow too.
When dire Confusions must in time restore
You to the Thraldomes ye bewailed before.
Did the communicative Sun create
All Spices, to make Insence for one State?
Your Pride, and Auerice will work your bane;
Where no satiety is, there is little Gain!
Graspe what ye well may hold, It Is they extend
Too far, who reach their Ruin, not their End:
Though you hold forth a single joynted Hand,
Your fingers start, and disunited stand.
We all admire Divinity in One,
But not in every Concrete Union.
You think the Narrow Seas for us too much,
Yet the whole Globe too little for the Dutch.
Good Friends Print Books, and let the Mapps alone,
Accoumpt not what you Sell, but buy, your own.
Thus, while fair Liberty you give, and crave,
You would be Free, to make the World a Slave.
Tell me (then Low Dutch) when you were as bigg
With Commonwealth, as ever Sow with Pigg,
Who your blessed Midwife was; I trow, a Queen,
Or you had never High, and Mighty been.
Who was it raised you to this monstrous Height?
Taught ye at first, not to Rebel, but Fight?
You have forgot our Sydnies, and our Veres,
Our Monc^, and Oxford, Commoners and Peers;
Who shed their rich blood for your Infant State;
First to procure your Freedom, than your Hate.
Do not so far degenerate, to conclude
Your utmost Period with Ingratitude.
Ingratitude? O Heavens! Has not that word,
An edge as sharp as your old Generals sword;
Does not that brave heroic Prince's Ghost?
Stare in your faces? tell you all is lost?
If you with England fight or shall invade
Her Royal Rights, or check her Popular Trade;
If you by Spannish Gabells shall annoy
Your Fellow Merchants; and divest his Boy.
Tell me ye Men of breeding is it meet
Or pleasant for the Head to kiss the feet?
Does that new Blood quartered in every vein,
His or the High and mighties honor stain?
Know the young Prince is more than Orange, now,
He may remit, Great Britain must not bow,
Be just to Him, and Us, the Quarrel ends,
Silver will soder all, and make us friends.
May never Pest from Amsterdam remove,
Till ye restore him to your Faith and Love!
Mean time our Loyal Duke does kindly wait,
To know the pleasures of the Mighty State,
Hopeing this favor you will retaliate too,
To send him word what Amsterdam will do
FINIS.

