Choice EMBLEMS Divine and Moral


Delights for the INGENIOUS, In above Fifty Select and Choice EMBLEMS, Divine
and Moral, Ancient and Modern.

Curiously Engraven upon Copper Plates.

With Fifty Delightful Poems and Lots for the more Lively Illustration of each
Emblem, whereby Instruction and Good Counsel may be promoted and furthered by
an honest and pleasant Recreation.

To which is prefixed

An Incomparable Poem, Entitled Majesty in Misery, or An Imploration to the
King of Kings.

Written by His Late Majesty K. Charles the First, with his own hand, during
his Captivity in Carisbrook Castle, in the Isle of Wight, 1648. With an Emblem.

Collected by R. B. Author of the History of The Wars of England, Remarks of
London, and Admirable Curiosities, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch, at his Shop at the Sign of the Bell in the
Poultry. 1684.

THE AUTHOR UPON THE EMBLEM IN THE FRONTISPIECE
THis BOOk containing EMBLEMS, 'twas thought fit,
A Title Page should stand to usher it,
That Is Emblematicall: And to that end,
Our AUTHOR, to the Graver did commend
A plain Invention; that it might be wrought,
According as his Fancy had forethought.
Instead thereof, the Workman brought to light,
What, here you see; therein mistaking quite
The true Design: And so (with pains, and cost)
The first intended FRONTISPIECE, is lost.
The AUTHOR, was as much displeased, as He
In such Adventures is inclined to be;
And half resolved to cast this PIECE aside,
As nothing worth: but having better eyed
Those Errors, and Confusions, which may there,
Blameworthy (at the first aspect) appear;
He saw, they fitted many Fantasies
Much better, then what Reason can devise;
And that the Graver (by mere Chance) had hit
On what, so much transcends the reach of Wit,
As made it seem, an Object of Delight,
To look on what MISFORTUNE brought to light:
And here it stands, to try his Wit, who lists
To pump the secrets, out of Cabalists.
If any think this Page will now declare
The meaning of those Figures, which are there,
They are deceived. For Destiny denies
The utt'ring of such hidden Mysteries.
In these respects: First, This contains naught
Which (in a proper sense) concerns ought,
The present-Age: Moreover, it is ordained
That none must know the Secrecies contained
Within this PIECE; but they who are so wise
To find them out, by their own prudencies;
And he that can unriddle them, to us,
Shall styled be, the second OEDIPUS.
It Is likewise thought expedient, now and then,
To make some Work, for those All-knowing men,
(To exercise upon) who think they see
The secret-meanings, of all things that be.
And lastly, since we find, that some there are,
Who best affect Inventions, which appear
Beyond their understandings; This we knew
A Representment, worthy of their view;
And here we placed it, to be to these,
A FRONTISPIECE, in any sense they please.
TO THE READER
IT is probable, that if some books had not been composed pleasantly, and
suitable to mean Capacities, many Persons had not been so delighted in reading,
and thereby in time have attained to more useful knowledge. Therefore, though I
can say no more to dissuade from vice, or to encourage men to virtue, than has
already been done by many learned Authors, yet these lively Emblems may Chance
to bring that oftener to Remembrance, which they have more learnedly expressed,
and perhaps by such Circumstances as they would not descend unto, may insinuate
farther into some understandings then more applauded Discourses, by stirring up
the Affections, winning the Attention, or helping the Memory.

And since the World is grown so very airy that the Printing of solid and
serious Treatises has many times undone the Bookseller, to advance their
Profits, I was moved to invent somewhat which might be likely to please the
Populace, and have therefore added Lotteries to these Emblems, to occasion the
more frequent notice of the Morals and good Counsels tendered in their
Illustrations; hoping that some time or other, some Persons may draw those
Lots, which may make them more wise and happy as long as they live.

Possibly this device may be censured, and reputed as great an Indecorum as
erecting an Alehouse at the Churchstile, yet perhaps if the Wisest would
sometimes take up this book, and without any Superstitious conceit make Trial
what their Lots would remember or give them cause to think on, it might now and
then either occasion better Proceedings, or prevent worse mischiefs.

Some Games were ever in use; and I think ever will be; And for ought I know
ever may be without exception; And I believe this Recreation may be as harmless
as any, if they be used as they are intended; For my meaning is not, that any
one should use it as an Oracle, which can infallibly signify what is divinely
allotted, but to serve only for a Moral Pastime; And that I may by no means
encourage the secret entertainment of such a Fancy, I do here previously affirm
and declare, that none but Children or Idiots may be tolerated to be so
foolish without being laughed at.

Yet if any shall draw those Lots wherein their secret vices are reproved, and
some good Instructions proposed, which in their own understandings are
conducible and pertinent to their welfare, let not such as those pass them over
as mere casualties to them, for whatsoever these Lots are to others, or in
themselves, they ought to be particularly regarded and applied by them to their
own concerns.

Some perhaps will think that this Game is purposely invented as a means to
reprove men's vices without being suspected to aim at particular Persons; For if
any who are Notoriously guilty, by drawing these Chances shall be so fitted,
that those vices be thereby intimated to the bystanders, of which the world
knows them guilty, they do therein make their own Libels, and may I hope be
laughed at without blame; If not, I do here warn all such as are justly
suspected of heinous Crimes and Scandalous Conversations, either to forbear
these Lotteries; or to excuse me if they be justly shamed by their own act.

Having thus declared the reason of this Invention, and made these
Anticipations every man has his own Choice whether he will make use of these
Lotteries or no, he that will is left to his Chance, of which how he may make
Trial, direction is given at the latter end of this Book.

B^na agere and maia^^^i Regium est.


Majesty in Misery; OR An Imploration to the King of Kings.
Written by his late Majesty King Charles the First with his own hand, during
his Captivity in Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of Wight. 1648.

1.
GReat Monarch of the World, from whose Power springs
The Potency and Power of Kings,
Record the Royal woe my suffering sings.
2.
And teach my Tongue that ever did confine,
Its faculties in truths Seraphick Line,
To track the Treasons of thy Foes and mine.
3.
Nature and Law by thy Divine Decree,
The only Root of Righteous Royalty,
With this dim Diadem invested me.
4.
With it, the sacred Scepter, Purple Robe,
The Holy Unction, and the Royal Globe;
Yet I am levelled with the life of Job.
5.
The fiercest furies that do daily tread
Upon my Grief, my Gray Discrowned Head,
Are those that owe my Bounty, for their Bread.
6.
They raise a War, and Christen it, The cause,
Whilst Sacrilegious hands have best applause,
Plunder and Murder are the Kingdoms Laws.
7.
Tyranny bears the Title of Taxation,
Revenge and Robbery are Reformation,
Oppression gains the name of Sequestration.
8.
My Loyal Subjects who in this bad season,
Attend me (By the Law of God and Reason)
They dare impeach and punish for High Treason.
9.
Next at the Clergy do their Furies frown,
Pious Episcopacy must go down,
They will destroy the Crozier and the Crown.
10.
Churchmen are chained, and Schismatics are freed
Mechanics preach, and Holy Fathers bleed,
The Crown is Crucified with the Creed.
11.
The Church of England does all Faction foster,
The Pulpit is usurpt by each Impostor,
Extempore excludes the Pater noster.
12.
The Presbyter and Independent seed,
Springs with broad blades, to make Religion bleed,
Herod and Pontius Pilate are agreed.
13.
The Corner stone's misplaced by every Pavier;
With such a Bloody Method and Behavior,
Their Ancestors did crucify our Savior.
14.
My Royal Consort from whose fruitful womb,
So many Princes Legally have come,
Is forced in Pilgrimage to seek a Tomb,
15.
Great Britains Heir is forced into France,
Whilst on his Fathers head his Foes advance;
Poor Child! he weeps out his Inheritance.
16.
With my own Power my Majesty they wound,
In the kings name the king himself's uncrown'd;
So does the dust destroy the Diamond.
17.
With Propositions daily they Enchant,
My Peoples ears, such as do Reason daunt,
And the Almighty will not let me Grant.
18.
They promise to erect my Royal stem,
To make me Great, to advance my Diadem,
If I will first fall down and worship them.
19.
But for refusal they devour my Thrones,
Distress my Children, and destroy my Bones,
I fear they will force me to make Bread of Stones.
20.
My life they prize at such a slender rate,
And in my absence they draw Bills of hate,
To prove the King a Traitor to the State.
21.
Felons obtain more Privilege than I,
They are allowed to answer ere they dye,
It Is Death for me to ask the Reason, why.
22.
But sacred Savior, with thy words I woo
Thee to forgive, and not be bitter to
Such, as thou know, do not know what they do.
23
But since they from their Lord are so disjointed,
As to contemn those Edicts he appointed.
How can they prize the power of his Anointed?
24.
Augment my Patience; Nullify my hate,
Preserve my Issue, and Inspire my Mate.
Yet, though we perish, Bless this Church and state
Vota dabunt quae Bella negarunt.
The Explanation of the Emblem In Latin and English.
Ponderibus genus omne mali, probrique gravatus,
Vixque ferenda ferens, Palma ut Depressa, resurgo
Ac velut undarum Fluctus Ventique, furorem
Irati Populi Rupes immota repello.
Clarior e Tenebris, Coelestis Stella, corusco,
Victor and aeternum felici pace Triumpho.
Auro Fulgentem rutilo gemmisque Micantem,
At curis Gravidam Spernendo Calco Coronam.
Spinosam, at ferri facilem, quo spes mea, Christi
Auxilio, nobis non est tractare molestum;
Aeternam, fixis fidei, Semperque beatam,
In Coelos oculis specto, Nobisque paratam.
Quod Vanum est Sperno, quod Christi Gratia praebet
Amplecti Studium est; Virtutis Gloria merces.
In English.
THough clogged with weights of Miseries,
Palm-like Depressed I higher rise.
And as the unmoved Rock out-braves
The boistrous Winds, and raging Waves;
So Triumph I, and shine more bright
In sad Afflictions Darksom night.
That Splendid, but yet Toilsom Crown,
Regardlesly I trample down.
With Joy I take this Crown of Thorn,
Though Sharp, yet easy to be born.
That Heavenly Crown already mine,
I view with Eyes of Faith Divine.
I slight vain things; and do embrace,
Glory the just reward of Grace.
An Epitaph upon King Charles the first.
SO falls the stately Cedar, while it stood,
That was the only Glory of the Wood.
Great Charles, Terrest rial God, Celestial Man,
Whose life, like others, though it were a span,
Yet in that span was comprehended more,
Than Earth has waters, or the Ocean shore.
Thy Heavenly Virtues Angels should rehearse,
It is a Theme too high for Human Verse.
He that would know thee right then, let him look
Upon thy rare Incomparable Book,
And read it over; and over which if he do,
He Will find thee King, and Priest, and Prophet too,
And sadly see our loss, and though in vain,
With fruitless wishes call thee back again.
Nor shall oblivion sit upon thy Hearse,
Though there were neither Monument nor Verse.
Thy Sufferings and thy Death let no man name,
It was thy Glory, but the Kingdoms shame.
Another.
STay Passenger; behold and see,
The widdow'd Grave of Majesty.
Why tremblest not? here is that will make
The most stupid, Soul to shake,
Here lies entombed the sacred Dust.
Of Peace and Piety, Right and Just.
The blood (O stait'st thou not to hear!)
Of a blessed King 'twixt hope and fear,
Shed, and hurried hence to be
The Miracle of Misery.
The Lawgiver amongst his own,
Sentenced by a Law unknown;
Voted Monarchy to Death,
By the course Plebeian breath
The Sovereign of all Comma
Suffering by a Common hand.
A Prince (to make the Odium more)
Martyred at his very door.
The Head cut off! Oh, Death to see it,
In Obedience to the Feet!
And that by Justice you must know,
If thou have faith to think it so;
We'll stir no further than this sacred clay,
But let it slumber till the Judgment day.
Of all the Kings on Earth, it is not denied,
Here lies the first that for Religion died.
Another.
WRitten by the Magnanimous James Marquis of Montross with the point of his
Sword.

Great, Good, and Just could I but rate
My, Grief, and thy so rigid Fate.
I Would weep the world to such a strain,
That it should deluge once again.
But since thy loud-tongu'd blood demands supplies
More from Briareus hands then Argus Eyes;
I Will sing thy Elegy with Trumpets sounds,
And write thy Epitaph in Blood and Wounds,
Emblem I. Finis ab Origin pendet.

THE First Emblem Illustrated.
As soon as we to Be begun,
We did begin to be undone.
WHen some, in former Ages, had a meaning
An Emblem, of Mortality, to make,
They formed an Infant, on a Deaths-head leaning,
And round about, encircled with a Snake:
The Child so pictured, was to signify,
That from our very Birth, our Dying springs:
The Snake, her Tail devouring, does imply
The Revolution, of all Earthly things.
For, whatsoever has beginning, here,
Begins, immediately, to vary from
The same it was; and, does at last appear
What very few did think it should become.
The solid Stone does molder into Earth
That Earth, e're long, to Water, rarifies;
That Water gives an Airy Vapor birth,
And, thence, a Fiery-Comet does arise:
That moves, until it self it so impair,
That from a burning-Meteor, back again,
It sinketh down, and thickens into Air;
That Air becomes a Cloud; then Drops of Rain
Those Drops, descending on a Rocky Ground,
There settle into Earth, which more and more
Does harden, still; so, running out the round,
It grows to be the Stone it was before.
Thus, All things wheel about; and each Beginning
Made entrance to its own Destruction has.
The Life of Nature enters in with Sinning;
And is, for ever, waited on by Death:
The Life of Grace, is formed by Death to Sin
And, there, does Life-eternal, straight begin.
Lot 1.
When thou have changes good or bad,
O'rejoy'd thou art, or oversad:
As if it seemed very strange,
To see the wind or Weather change.
^o therefore to remember thee
How Changeable things Mortal be,
Thou art assisted by this Lot,
How, let it be no more forgot.
Emblem II. Quo me vertam nescio.

THE Second Emblem Illustrated.
When Vice and Virtue Youth shall woo,
It Is hard to say which way 'twill go.
MY hopeful Friends at thrice five years and three
Without a Guide (into the World alone)
To seek my Fortune, did adventure me;
And, many hazards, I alighted on.
First Englands greatest Rendevouz I sought,
Where VICE and VIRTUE at the highest sit;
And, thither, both a Mind and Body brought,
For neither of their Services unfit.
Both, wooed my Youth: And, both persuaded so,
That (like the Young man in our Emblem here)
I stood, and cried, Ah! which way shall I go?
To me so pleasing both their Offers were.
VICE Pleasures best Contentments promised me
And what the wanton Flesh desires to have:
Quoth VIRTUE, I will Wisdom give to thee,
And those brave things, which noblest Minds do crave
Serve me said VICE and thou shall soon acquire
All hose Achievements which my Service brings
Serve me said VIRTUE, and I Will raise thee higher
Then VICES can, and teach thee better things.
Whilst thus they strove to gain me, I espyd
Grim Death attending VICE; and, that her Face
Was but a painted Vizard, which did hide
The foul'st Deformity that ever was.
LORD, grant me grace for evermore to view
Her Ugliness: And, that I viewing it,
Her Falsehoods and allurements may eschew;
And on fair VIRTUE my Affection set;
Her Beauties contemplate, her Love embrace,
And by her safe Direction, run my Race.
Lot 2.
WIth Mary thou art one of those,
By whom the better part is chose:
And though thou tempted art astray,
Continu'st in a lawful way.
Give God the praise with heart unfeigned,
That he such grace to thee has deigned.
And rein thy Lot where thou shall see,
What hag has laid a Trap for thee.
Emblem III. Vivitur Ingenio, caetera mortis erunt.

THE Third Emblem. Illustrated.
By knowledge only Life we gain,
All other things to Death pertain.
HOw Fond are they, who spend their precious Time
In still pursuing their deceiving Pleasures?
And they, that unto airy Titles clime
Or tire themselves in hording up of Treasures?
For, these are Death's, who, when with weariness
They have acquired most, sweeps all away;
And leaves them, for their Labors, to possess
Naught but a raw-bon'd Carcass lapt in clay.
Of twenty hundred thousands, who this hour
Vaunt much of those Possessions they have got;
Of their new purchased Honors, or, the Power,
By which, they seem to have advanced their Lot:
Of this great Multitude, there shall not Three
Remain, for any Future-age to know;
But perish quite, and quite forgotten be,
As Beasts, devoured twice ten years ago.
Thou, therefore, who desir'st for ay to live,
And to possess thy Labors maugre Death,
To needful Arts and honest Actions, give
Thy Span of Time, and thy short blast of Breath.
In holy Studies, exercise thy Mind;
In works of Charity, thy Hands employ;
That Knowledge, and that Treasure, seek to find,
Which may enrich thy Heart with perfect Joy.
So though obscured thou appear, a while,
Despised, poor or born to Fortunes low,
Thy Virtue shall acquire a nobler style,
Then greatest Kings are able to bestow:
And, gain thee those Possessions, which, nor They,
Nor Time, nor Death, have power to take away
Lot 3.
THou do overmuch respect,
That which will thy harm effect.
But some other things there be;
Which will more advantage thee.
Search thy heart and thou shall there
Soon discover what they are.
Yea thine Emblem shows thee too
What to shun, and what to do.
Emblem IV. (...)

THE Fourth Emblem Illustrated.
As to the World I Naked came,
So naked stripped I leave the same.
THrice happy is that Man whose Thoughts do rear
His Mind above that pitch the Worldling flies
And by his Contemplations, hovers where
He views things mortal, with unbleared eyes.
What Trifles then do Villages and Towns
Large Fields or Flocks of fruitful Cattle seem.
Nay, what poor things are Miters, Scepters, Crowns,
And all those Glories which men most esteem.
Though he that has among them, his Delight
Brave things imagines them (because they blind
With some false Luster his beguiled sight) (find.
He that is above them, their mean-Worth may
Lord, to that Blessea-Station me convey
Where I may view the World, and view her so,
That I her true Condition may survey;
And all her Imperfections rightly know.
Remember me, that once there was a Day,
When thou did wean me from them with content,
Even when shut up within those Gates I lay
Through which the Plague-inflicting Angel went.
And, let me still remember, that an Hour
Is hourly coming on, wherein I shall
(Though I had all the World within my power)
Be naked stripped, and turned out of all.
But mind me, chiefly, that I never cleave
Too closely to my Self; and cause thou me
Not other Earthly things alone to leave,
But to forsake my Self for love of Thee:
That I may say, now I have all things left,
Before that I of all things, am bereft.
Lot 4.
BE not angry if I tell,
That you love the World too well,
For this Lot, perhaps you drew;
That such faults you might eschew.
Mark to what their Souls aspire
Who True Blessedness desire;
For if you can do like those,
Heaven you gain when Earth you lose.
Emblem V. Ad Scopum, licet Aegre, and frustra.

THE Fifth Emblem Illustrated.
A Fool in Folly takes Pain,
Although he labor still in vain.
A Massy Mil-stone up a tedious Hill,
With mighty Labor, Sisyphus does roll;
Which being raised aloft, down-tumbleth, still,
To keep employed his afflicted Soul.
On him, this tedious Labor is imposed;
And (though in vain) it must be still assayd:
But, some, by no Necessity enclosed,
Upon themselves, such needless Tasks have laid.
Yea, knowing not (or caring not to know)
That they are worn and wearied out in vain,
They madly toil to plung themselves in Woe;
And, seek uncertain Ease, in certain Pain.
Such Fools are they, who dream they can acquire
A Mind-content, by Laboring still for more:
For, Wealth increasing does increase Desire,
And makes Contentment lesser then before.
Such Fools are they, whose Hopes do vainly stretch
To climb by Titles, to a happy Height:
For, having gotten one Ambitious-Reach,
Another comes perpetually in sight.
And, their stupidity is nothing less,
Who dream that Flesh and Blood may raised be
Up to the Mount of perfect Holiness:
For (at our best) corrupt and vile are we.
Yet, we are bound by Faith, with Live, and Hope,
To roll the Stone of Good Endeavor, still,
As near as may be, to Perfections top,
Though back again it tumble down the Hill.
So; What Our Works had never power to do,
God's Grace, at last, shall freely bring us to,
Lot 5.
M.
DOubtless thou art either wooing,
Or some other business doing,
Which you shall attempt in vain,
Or much hazard all your pain.
Yet if good your meanings are,
Do not honest means forbear.
For where things are well begun,
God often works when man has done.
Emblem VI. Pedetentim.

THE Sixth Emblem Illustrated.
His Pace must wary be and slow,
That has a slippery way to go.
A Travailer, when he must undertake
To seek his passage, over some Frozen Lake,
With leisure, and with care, he will assay
The glassy smoothness of that Icy-way,
Lest he may slip, by walking over-fast;
Or, break the crackling Pavement, by his have:
And, so (for want of better taking heed)
Incur the mischiefs of Unwary-speed.
We are all Travelers; and, all of us
Have many passages, as dangerous,
As Frozen-lakes; and Slipery-ways, we tread,
In which our lives may soon be forfeited,
(With all our hopes of Life-Eternal, too)
Unless, we well consider what we do.
There is no private Way or public Path
But rubs, or holes, or slipp'riness it has,
Whereby, we shall with Mischiefs meet; unless
We walk it, with a steadfast-wariness.
The steps to Honor, are on Pinacles
Composed of melting Snow, and Isicles;
And, they who tread not nicely on their tops,
Shall on a sudden slip from all their hopes.
Yea, even that way which is both sure and holy,
And leads the mind from Vanities and Folly,
Is with so many other Path-ways crossed,
As that, by Rashness, it may soon be lost;
Unless, we well deliberate, upon
Those Tracts, in which our Ancestors have gone:
And, they who with more haste, then heed, will run,
May lose the way, in which they well begun.
Lot. 6.
IN slippery Paths you are to go,
yea, they are full of danger too.
And if you heedful should not grow
they will hazard much your overthrow.
But you the mischief may eschew,
If wholesome Counsel you pursue;
Look therefore, what you may be taught,
By that, which this your chance has brought.
Emblem VII. Pro Lege and pro Grege.

THE Seventh Emblem Illustrated.
Our Pelican by bleeding thus,
Fulfilled the Law, and cured us.
LOok here, and mark (her sickly birds to feed)
How freely this kind Pelican does bleed.
See, how (when other Salves could not be found)
To cure their sorrows, she her self does wound;
And when this holy Emblem thou shall see,
Lift up thy soul to him, who died for thee.
For this our Hieroglyphick would express
That Pelican, which in the Wilderness
Of this vast World, was left (as all alone)
Our miserable Nature to bemone;
And in whose eyes, the tears of pity stood,
When he beheld his own unthankful Brood
His Favors and his Mercies, then contemn,
When with his wings he would have brooded them:
And sought their endless peace to have confirmed,
Though to procure his ruin, they were armed.
To be their Food, himself he freely gave;
His Heart was pierced, that he their Souls might save,
Because, they disobeyed the Sacred-will,
He did the Law of Righteousness fulfill;
And to that end (though guiltless he had bin)
Was offered, for our Universal-sin.
Let me, Oh God! for ever fix mine eyes
Upon the Merit of that Sacrifice:
Let me retain a due commemoration
Of those dear Mercies, and that bloody Passion,
Which here is meant; and by true Faith, still feed
Upon the drops, this Pelican did bleed;
Yea, let me firm unto thy Law abide,
And ever love that Flock, for which he died.
Lot 7.
THis present Lot concerns full near,
Not you alone but all men here.
For all of us too little heed;
His Love who for our sakes did bleed.
It Is true, that means he left behind him
which better teaches how to mind him.
Yet if we both by that, and this,
Remember him, it is not amiss.
Emblem VIII. Quid si sic?

THE Eighth Emblem Illustrated.
Though he endeavor all he can,
An Ape will never be a man.
WHat though an Apish-Pigmy, in attire,
His Dwarfish Body Gyant-like, array?
Turn Brave, and get him Stilts to seem the higher?
What would so doing, handsome him I pray?
Now, surely, such a Mimick sight as that,
Would with excessive Laughter move your Spleen,
Till you had made the little Dandiprat,
To lie within some Auger-hole, unseen.
I must confess I cannot choose but smile,
When I perceive, how Men that worthless are,
Piece out their Imperfections, to beguile,
By making shows, of what they never were.
For, in their borrow'd-Shapes, I know those Men,
And (through their Masks) such insight of them have;
That I can oftentimes disclose (even then)
How much they favor of the Fool or Knave.
A Pigmey spirit, and an Earthly-Mind,
Whose look is only fixed on Objects vain;
In my esteem, so mean a place does find,
That every such a one, I much refrain.
But, when in honored Robes I see it put,
Betrimm'd, as if some thing of Worth it were,
Look big, and on the Stilts of Greatness, strut
From scorning it, I cannot then for bear.
For, when to gross Unworthiness Men add
Those Dues, which to the Truest-worth pertain;
It Is like an Ape, in Humane Vestments clad,
Which, when most fine, deserves most disdain:
And more absurd, those Men appear to me,
Then this Fantastick-Monkey seems to thee.
Lot 8.
M.
Thy chance is doubtful and as yet,
I know not what to make of it.
But this I know a Foe thou art;
To what thine Emblem, has in part,
Expressed by a Mimick Shape;
Or thou they self art such an ape.
Now which of these pertains to thee,
Let them that know the Judges be.
Emblem IX. Fures Privati in Nervo, Publici in Auro.

THE Ninth Emblem Illustrated.
Poor Thieves in Fetters we behold,
And Great Thieves in their Chains of Gold.
IF you this Emblem, well have looked upon,
Although you cannot help it, yet, bemone
The Worlds black Impudence; and if you can
Continue (or become) an honest man.
The poor, and petty Pilferers, you see
On Wheels, on Gibbets, and the Gallow tree
Trust up; when they that far more guilty are,
Pearl, Silk, and costly Cloth of Tissue, wear.
Good God! how many has each Land of those,
Who neither limb, nor life, nor credit lose,
(But, rather live befriended, and applauded)
Yet, have of all their livelihoods defrauded
The helpless Widows, in their great distress?
And of their Portions, robbed the Fatherless?
Yet, censured other's Errors, as if none
Had cause to say, that they amiss have done?
How many, have assisted to condemn
Poor souls, for what was never stolen by them?
And persecuted others, for that Sin,
Which they themselves, had more transgressed in?
How many worthless men, are great become,
By that, which they have stolen, or cheated from
Their Lords? or (by some practices unjust)
From those, by whom they had been put in trust?
How many Lawyers, wealthy men are grown,
By taking Fees for Causes overthrown
By their defaults? How many, without fear,
Do rob the King, and God, yet blameless are?
God knows how many! would I did so, too,
So I had power to make them better do.
Lot 9.
We hope no Person here believes,
That you are of those wealthy Thieves.
Who Chains of Gold and Pearl do wear;
And of those Thieves that none you are,
Which wear a Rope we plainly see,
For you as yet unhanged be.
But unto God for Mercy cry;
Else hanged you may be e're you die.
Emblem X. Fulcrum Tutissimum.

THE Tenth Emblem. Illustrated.
We then have got the surest Prop,
When Heaven alone becomes our hope.
I Should not care how hard my Fortunes were,
Might still my Hopes be such, as now they are,
Of helps divine; nor fear, how poor I be,
If thoughts, yet present, still may bide in me.
For, they have left assurance of such aid,
That, I am of no dangers, now afraid.
Yea, now I see, methinks, what weak and vain
Supporters I have sought, to help, sustain
My fainting heart; when some injurious hand,
Would undermine the Station where I stand.
Methinks, I see how scurvy, and how base,
It is to scrap for favors, and for grace,
To men of earthly minds; and unto those,
Who may, perhaps, before to morrow lose
Their wealth, (or their abused Authority)
And stand as much in want of help as I.
Me thinks, in this New-rapture I do see
The hand of God from heaven supporting me,
Without those rotten-Aids, for which I whin'd,
When I was of my the other vulgar-mind:
And if in some one part of me it lay,
I'now, could cut that Limb of mine away.
Still might I keep this mind, there were enough
Within my self, (beside that cumbring stuff
We seek without) which, husbanded aright,
Would make me Rich, in all the worlds despite.
And I have hopes, that had she quite bereft me,
Of those few rags and toys, which yet are left me;
I should on God, alone, so much depend,
That, I should need, nor Wealth, nor other Friend.
Lot 10.
BEcause her Aid makes goodly shows,
You on the world your Trust repose;
And his dependence you despise,
Who clearly on Heavens help relies.
That therefore you may come to see,
How pleased and safe those men may be.
Who have no Aid but God alone;
This Emblem you have lighted on.
Emblem XI. Serva Modum.

THE Eleventh Emblem Illustrated.
Do not the Golden Mean exceed
In word, in Passion, nor in deed.
AS is the headstrong Horse, and blockish Mule,
Even such, without the Bridle, and the Rule,
Our Nature grows; and is an mischievous,
Till Grace and Reason, come to govern us.
The Square, and Bridle, therefore let us heed,
And thereby learn to know, what helps we need;
Lest, else, (they failing, timely, to be had)
Quite out of Order, we at length, be made.
The Square, (which is an useful Instrument,
To shape for senseless Forms) may represent
The Law: Because Mankind, (which is by Nature,
Almost as dull, as is the senseless-creature,)
Is thereby, from the native-rudeness, wrought;
And in the Way of honest-living taught.
The Bridle, (which Invention did contrive,
To rule, and guide the Creature-sensitive)
May type forth Discipline; which when the Law
Has schooled the Wit, must keep the Will in awe.
And he that can by these, his Passions bound,
This Emblems meaning, usefully, has found.
Lord, let thy sacred Law, at all times, be
A rule a Master, and a Glass to me;
(A Bridle, and a Light) that I may, still,
Both know my Duty, and obey thy Will.
Direct my Feet; my Hands instruct thou so,
That I may neither wander, nor mis-do.
My Looks, my Hearing, and my Words confine,
To keep still firm, to every Word of thine.
On thee, let also my Desires attend,
And let me hold this Temper, till mine end.
Lot 11.
YOur wits, your wishes, and your Tongue
Have run the wild-Goose chase too long.
And (lest all Reason you exceed)
You now of Rule, and Reins have need.
A Bridle therefore and a square,
Chief Figures in your Emblem are.
Observe their Moral, and always,
Be wise and sober as you may.
Emblem XII. Paupertate premor, Sublevor Ingenio.

THE Twelfth Emblem Illustrated.
My wit got wings, and high had flown,
But Poverty did keep me down.
YOu little think, what plague it is to be,
In plight like him, whom pictured here you see.
His winged-Arm, and his up lifted-eyes,
Declare, that he has Wit, and Will, to rise:
The Stone, which clogs his other hand, may show
That Poverty and Fortune, keep him low:
And 'twixt these two, the Body and the Mind,
Such labors, and such great vexations find,
That, if you did not such men's wants contemn,
You could not choose but help, or pity them.
All Ages had (and this I know has some)
Such men as to this misery, do come:
And many of them, at their Lot, so grieve,
As if they knew, (or did at least believe)
That, had their Wealth sufficed them to aspire
(To what their Wits deserve, and they desire)
The present Age, and future Ages too,
Might gain have had, from what they though to do.
Perhaps I dreamed so once: But, God be praised
The Clog which kept me down, from being raised
Was chained so fast, that (if such Dreams I had)
My thoughts, and longings, are not now so mad
For, plain I see, that had my Fortunes brought
Such Wealth, at first, as my small Wit has sought,
I might my self, and others, have undone;
Instead of Courses, which I thought to run:
I find my Poverty, for me was fit;
Yea, and a Blessing, greater than my Wit:
And whether, now I rich or poor become,
It Is nor much pleasing, nor much troublesome.
Lot 12.
THou think thy wit had made thee Great,
Had Poverty not been some lot.
^ut had thy wealth as ample been,
^s thou did think thy wit so fine;
Instead of thy desired hight,
Perhaps thou had been ruined quite.
Hereafter therefore be content,
With whatsoever Heaven has sent.
Emblem XIII. Stultorum Adjumenta Nocumenta.

THE Thirteenth Emblem Illustrated.
The best good turns that Fools can do us.
Prove disadvantages unto us.
A Fool, sent forth to fetch the Goslings home,
When they unto a Rivers brink were come,
(Through which their passage lay) conceived a fear,
His Dames best Brood might have been drowned there;
Which, to avoid, he thus did show his wit,
And his good nature, in preventing it.
He, underneath his girdle, thrusts their heads,
And then the Coxcomb through the water wades.
Here learn, that when a Fool his help intend
It rather does a mischief, then befriends;
And think, if there be danger in his love,
How harmful his Maliciousness may prove:
For, from his kindness, though no profit rise,
To do thee spite, his Malice may suffice.
I could not from a Prince beseech a boon
By suing to his Jester or Buffoon:
Nor any Fools vain humor sooth or serve,
To get my bread, though I were like to starve
For to be poor, I should not blush so much,
As if a Fool should raise me to be rich.
Lord, though of such a kind my faults may be
That sharp Affliction still must tutor me,
(And give me due Correction in her Schools)
Yet, oh preserve me from the scorn of Fools.
Those wicked Fools, that in their hearts have said
There is no God; and rather give me Bread
By Ravens, LORD, or in a Lions Den,
Then by the Favors of such foolish men:
Lest, if their dainties I should swallow down,
Their smile might more undo, me then their frown.
Lot 13.
THou do not greatly care by whom
Thy wealth, or thy Preferments come,
^o thou may get them, Fool or knave,
Thy Prayers, and thy Praise may have.
Because thou do not fear or dream
What disadvantage comes by them;
But by thine Emblem, thou may see,
Fools favors mischievous may be.
Emblem XIV. Pueros castigo, virosque.

THE Fourteenth Emblem Illustrated.
Behold and mark the Picture here,
Of what keeps Man and Child in fear.
THese are the greatest Afflictions, most men have,
Even from their Nursing-cradle to their Grave:
Yet, both so needful are, I cannot see,
How either of them, may well spared be.
The Rod is that, which most our Childhood fears;
And seems the great'st Affliction that it bears:
That, which to Manhood, is a plague, as common
(And more unsufferable) is a Woman.
Yet, blush not Ladies; neither frown, I pray,
That thus of Women I presume to say;
Nor number me, as yet, among your foes;
For, I am more your friend, then you suppose
Nor smile ye Men, as if, from hence, ye had
An Argument, that Womankind were bad.
The Birch, is blameless (yea, by nature, sweet,
And gentle) till, with stubborn Boys, it meet
But, then it smarts. So, Women, will be kind,
Until, with froward Husbands, they are joined:
And then indeed (perhaps) like Birchen boughs,
(Which, else, had been a trimming, to their House)
They sometimes prove, sharp whips, and Rods, to them,
That Wisdom, and Instruction do contemn.
A Woman, was not given for Correction;
But, rather for a furtherance to Perfection:
A precious Balm of love, to cure Man's grief;
And of his Pleasures, to become the chief.
If, therefore, she occasion any smart,
The blame, he merits, wholly, or in part:
For, like sweet Honey, she good Stomachs, pleases;
But pains the Body, subject to Diseases.
Lot 14.
M.
THe time has been that of the Rod
Thou were more fearful then of God.
But now unless thou prudent grow,
More cause thou have to fear a Shrow.
For from the Rod now thou art free,
A Woman shall thy Torment be.
Yet do not thou at her repine;
For all the Fault is only thine.
Emblem XV. Concordia Insuperabilis.

THE Fifteenth Emblem Illustrated.
Where many Forces joined are,
Unconquerable Power is there.
AN Emblem's meaning, here, I thought to conster;
And this does rather fashion out a Monster,
Then form an Hieroglyphick: but, I had
These Figures (as you see them) ready made
By others; and I mean to morallize
Their Fancies; not to mend what they devise,
Yet, peradventure with some vulgar praise,
This Picture (though I like it not) displays
The Moral, which the Motto does imply;
And thus it may be said to signify.
He, that has many Faculties, or Friends,
To keep him safe (or to acquire his ends)
And fits them so; and keeps them so together,
That, still, as readily, they aid each other,
As if so many Hands, they had been made;
And in One-body, useful being had:
That man, by their Assistance, may, at length,
Attain to an unconquerable strength;
And crown his honest Hopes, with whatsoever
He seeks for, by a warranted Endeavor.
Or, else, it might be said; that, when we may
Make our Affections, and our Sense, obey
The will of Reason, (and so well agree,
That we may find them, still at peace to be)
They Will guard us, like so many Armed bands;
And safely keep us, whatsoever withstands.
If others think this Figure, here, infers
A better sense; let those Interpreters
Unriddle it; and preach it where they please:
Their Meanings may be good, and so are these.
Lot 15.
IF all your Powers you should unite
In your desires prevail you might;
And sooner should effect your ends
If you should muster up your friends.
But since your best friends do suspect,
That you such Policy neglect.
Your Lot presents to your view
An Emblem which instructs you.
Emblem XVI. Non Sceptro sed Plectro ducitur.

THE Sixteenth Emblem Illustrated.
A Fickle Woman wanton grown,
Prefers a Fiddle before a Crown.
FOol! Do thou hope, thine Honors, or thy Gold,
Shall gain thee Love? Or, that thou have her heart,
Whose hand upon thy tempting Bait lays hold?
Alas! fond Lover, thou deceived art.
She that with Wealth, and Titles, can be won,
Or wooed with Vanities, will wavering be;
And when her Love, thou most dependest on,
A Fiddle-stick shall win her heart from thee.
To Youth and Music, Venus leans most;
And (though her hand she on the Scepter lay)
Let Greatness of her Favors never boast:
For, Heart and Eye are bent another way.
And lo, no glorious Purchase that Man gets,
Who has with such poor Trifles, wooed, and won:
Her footing, on a Ball, his Mistress sets,
Which in a moment slips, and she is gone.
A Woman, merely with an Outside caught,
Or tempted with a Galliard or a Song,
Will him forsake (whom she most lovely thought)
For Players and for Tumblers, ere't be long.
You, then that wish your Love should ever last,
(And would enjoy Affection without changing)
Love where your Loves may worthily be placed;
And keep your own Affection, still from ranging.
Use noble means, your Longings to attain;
Seek equal Minds, and well beseeming Years:
They are (at best) vain Fools, whom Folly gain;
But, there is Bliss, where Virtue most endears:
And wheresoe'r, Affection she procures,
In spite of all Temptations, it endures.
Lot 16.
M.
IF some here present this had got,
They would have blushed at their Lot,
Since very fit the same does prove,
For one unconstant in his Love.
Or one that has a frickle Mate;
If you enjoy a better state,
Yet hearken what your Lot does say,
Lest you hereafter want it may,
Emblem XVII. Non obest Virtuti Sors.

THE Seventeenth Emblem Illustrated.
Though Fortune prove true Virtues Foe,
It cannot work her overthrow.
UNhappy men are they, whose Ignorance
So slaves them to the Fortunes of the Time,
That they (attending on the Lot of Chance)
Neglect by Virtue, and Deserts, to clime.
Poor Heights they be which Fortune rears unto;
And fickle is the Favor she bestows:
Today, she makes; to morrow does undo;
Builds up, and in an instant overthrows.
On easy Wheels, to Wealth and Honors high,
She winds men often, before they be aware;
And when they dream of most Prosperity,
Down, headlong, throws them lower then they were.
You, then, that seek a more assured estate,
On good, and honest Objects, fix your Mind,
And follow Virtue, that you may a Fate
Exempt from fear of Change, or Dangers, find.
For, he that is Virtuous, whether high or low
His Fortune seems (or whether foul or fair
His Path he finds) or whether friend or foe,
The World does prove; regards it not a hair.
His Loss is Gain; his Poverty is Wealth;
The Worlds Contempt, he makes his Diadem;
In Sickness, he rejoices, as in Health;
Yea, Death it self becomes Life, to him.
He fears no disrespect, no bitter scorn,
Nor subtle plottings, nor Oppressions force;
Nay, though the World should topsie-turvie turn
It cannot fright him, nor divert his Course.
Above all Earthly powers his Virtue rears him,
And up with Eglets wings, to Heaven it bears him.
Lot 17.
M.
THis Man whatever he may seem,
Is worthy of an high esteem.
Though Fortune may his Person grind,
She cannot yet disturb his mind.
Yea blessed and happy should we be,
Were all of us but such as he.
Read but his Motto which you drew,
For that in part the same will show.
Emblem XVIII. Noli Altum Sapere.

THE Eighteenth Emblem Illustrated.
Above thy Knowledge do not rise.
But with Sobriety be wise.
EXalt thou not thy self, though placed thou be,
Upon the top of that old Olive Tree,
From whence the natural branches pruned have bin,
That, thou, the better, might be grafted in.
Be not so over-wise, as to presume
The Gara'ner, for thy goodness, did assume
Thy small Crab Olive, to insert it there,
Where, once, the sweetest-berries growing were.
Nor let thy Pride those few old-boughts contemn
Which, yet, remain upon their ancient Stem;
Because, thy new-incorporated Sprayes,
Do more enjoy the Suns refreshing rays:
But humbled rather and more awful be;
Lest he that cut off them do break down thee.
Be wise, in what may to thy good belong;
But, seek not Knowledge, to thy neighbors wrong:
Be thankful for the Grace thou have received,
But, judge not those, who seem thereof bereaved;
Nor into those forbidden secrets peep.
Which God-Almighty, to himself does keep.
Remember what our Father Adam found,
When he for Knowledge, sought beyond his bound.
For doubtless, ever since, both good and ill
Are left with Knowledge, intermingled still;
And (if we be not humble, meek, and wary)
We are in daily danger to miscarry.
Large proves the fruit which on the Earth does lie;
Winds break the twig, that is grafted over-high;
And he that will, beyond his bounds, be wise,
Becomes a very Fool, before he dies.
Lot 18.
THis Lot those Persons always finds,
That have high Thoughts, and lofty minds:
Or such as have an itch to learn,
That which does nothing them concern.
Or love to peep with daring eyes,
Into forbidden Mysteries.
If any one of these thou be;
Thine Emblem better teaches thee.
Emblem XIX. Tractant Fabrilia Fabri.

THE Nineteenth Emblem Illustrated.
When each man keeps unto his Trade,
Then all things better will be made.
WE more should thrive, and err the seldomer,
If we were like this honest Carpenter,
Whose Emblem, in reproof of those, is made,
That love to meddle farther then their Trade.
But, most are now exceeding cunning grown
In every man's affairs, except their own:
Yea, Cobblers think themselves not only able,
To censure; but, to mend Apelles Table.
Great-men, sometime, will gravely undertake
To teach, how Brooms and Mortar, we should make.
Their Indiscretions, Peasants imitate,
And boldly meddle with affairs of State.
Some Houswives teach their Teachers how to pray,
Some Clarks have showed themselves, as wise as they;
And in their Callings, as discreet have bin,
As if they taught their Grandames how to spin:
And if these Customs last a few more Ages,
All Countries will be nothing else, but Stages
Of evil-acted, and mistaken parts;
Or, Gallemaufries of imperfect Arts.
But, I my self (you will say) have medlings made
In things, that are improper to my Trade.
No; for, the MUSES are in all things free;
Fit subject of their Verse, all Creatures be;
And there is nothing named so mean, or great,
Whereof they have not liberty to treat.
Both Earth and Heaven, are open unto these,
And (when to take more liberty they please)
They Worlds, and things, create, which never were;
And when they list they play, and meddle there.
Lot 19.
IF all be true these Lots do tell us,
Thou should be of those prating Fellows,
Who better practiced are grown,
In others matters then their own.
Or one that covets to be thought
A man that is ignorant of naught.
If it be so, thy Moral shows
Thy folly, and from whence it flows.
Emblem XX. Constante Fiducia.

THE Twentieth Emblem Illustrated.
They after suffering shall be crowned,
In whom a Constant Faith is found.
MArk well this Emblem; and observe you thence
The nature of true Christian-confidence.
Her Foot is fixed on a squared-Stone,
Which, whether side soever you turn it on,
Stands fast; and is that Cornerstone, which props,
And firmly knits the structure of our Hopes.
She, always, bears a Cross; to signify,
That there was never any Constancy
Without her Trials: and that, her perfection
Shall never be attained, without Affliction.
A Cup she has moreover in her hand;
And by that Figure, thou may understand,
That she has draughts of Comfort, always near her,
(At every brunt) to strengthen, and to cheer her.
And lo, her head is crowned; that, we may see
How great, her Glories, and Rewards, will be.
Hereby, this Virtue's nature may be known:
Now, practice how to make the same thine own.
Discouraged be not though thou art pursued
With many wrongs, which cannot be eschew'd,
Nor yield thou to Despairing, though thou have
A Cross (which threatens death) to be embraced;
Or, though thou be compelled to swallow up,
The very dregs, of Sorrows bitter Cup:
For, whenever griefs, or torments, pain thee,
Thou have the same Foundation to sustain thee:
The self same Cup of Comfort, is prepared,
To give thee strength, when fainting fits are feared.
And when thy time of trial, is expired,
Thou shall obtain the Crown, thou have desired.
Lot. 20.
THy Fortunes have been very bad,
For many Sufferings thou have had;
And Trials too, which are unknown,
To any but thy self alone.
Yet not loss, nor harm nor smart,
From Constant hopes remove thy heart.
For see thine Emblem does foreshew;
A good Conclusion will ensue.
Emblem XXI. Furor fit laesa saepius Patientia.

THE 21st Emblem Illustrated.
Who Patience tempt beyond its strength,
Will turn't to Fury at the length.
ALthough we know not a more patient creature
Than is the Lamb, (or, of less harmfull nature)
Yet, as this Emblem shows, when childish wrong
Has troubled, and provoked him overlong,
He grows enraged; and makes the wanton Boys
Be glad to leave their sports, and run their ways.
Thus have I seen it with some Children fare,
Who, when their Parents too indulgent were,
Have urged them, till their Doting grew to Rage,
And shut them wholly from their Heritage.
Thus, many times, a foolish man does lose
His faithful Friends, and justly makes them foes.
Thus, froward Husbands, and thus, peevish Wives,
Do fool away the comfort of their lives;
And by abusing of a patient-mate,
Turn dearest Love, into the deadliest Hate:
For, any wrong may better be excused,
Than Kindness, long, and wilfully abused.
But, as an injured Lamb, provoked, thus,
Well typifies how much it moves us,
To find our Patience wronged: So, let us make
An Emblem of our selves, thereby to take
More heed, how God is moved toward them,
That, his long-suffering, and his Love contemn.
For, as we somewhat have of every creature,
So, we in us, have somewhat of his Nature:
Or, if it be not said the same to be,
His Pictures, and his Images are we.
Let, therefore, his long-suffering well be weighed,
And keep us, to provoke him, still afraid.
Lot 21.
THou have provoked overlong;
Their Patience who neglect the wrong;
And thou do little seem to heed,
what hurt it threats if thou proceed.
To thee thy Emblem therefore shows,
To what abused Patience grows.
Observe it well, and make thy Peace,
Before to fury wrath increase.
Emblem XXII. In Spe and Labor transigo vitam.

THE 22d Emblem Illustrated.
Our days, until our Life has end,
In Labor and in Hopes we spend.
AS soon as our first Parents disobeyed,
Forth with a Curse, for their offense, was laid,
Enforcing them, and their succeeding race,
To get their Food, with sweatings of the Face.
But afterward, this Doom to mitigate,
(And ease the miseries of their estate)
God gave them Hope, that she might help them bear
The burdens of their Travail, and their care.
A Woman with an Anchor, and a Spade,
An Emblem of that Mystery is made:
And this Estate, we all continue in,
By God's free Mercy, and our proper Sin.
By Sin, the Labor is on us entailed;
By Grace, it is, that Hoping has not failed;
And if in Hope, our Labors we attend,
That Curse will prove a Blessing, in the end,
My Lot is Hope and Labor; and between
These Two, my Lifetime has prolonged been:
Yet hitherto, the best of all my Pain
With most of all my Hopes have been in vain;
And to the World-ward, I am like to wast
My time in fruitless labors, till the last.
However, I have still my Hopes as fair
As he that has no temptings to Despair;
And change I will not, my last houers for theirs,
Whose Fortune, more desirable appears;
Nor cease to Hope and Labor, though of most,
My Hope and Labor be adjudged lost:
For, though I lose the shadow of my Pains,
The substance of it, still in God remains.
Lot 22.
IN secret thou do often complain,
That thou have hoped and wrought in vain.
And think thy Lot, is far more hard,
Than what for others is prepared.
An Emblem therefore thou have got,
Which shows, it is our Common Lot,
To Work and hope, and that thou have
A Blessing by it at the last.
Emblem XXIII. Tamen discam.

THE 23d Emblem Illustrated.
To Learning I a love should have,
Although one Foot were in the Grave.
HEre, we an Aged man described have,
That has one foot, already, in the Grave:
And if you mark it (though the Sun decline,
And horned Cynthia does begin to shine)
With open book, and with attentive eyes,
Himself, to compass Knowledge, he applies:
And though that Evening end his last of days,
Yet, I will study, more to learn, he says.
From this, we gather, that, while time does last,
The time of learning, never will be past;
And that, each hour till we our life lay down,
Still something, touching life is to be known,
When he was old, wise Cato learned Greek:
But, we have aged-folks, that are to seek
Of that, which they have much more cause to learn;
Yet, no such mind in them we shall discern.
For that, which they should study in their prime,
Is, often, deferred till their latter-time:
And then, old age, unfit for learning, makes them,
Or, else, that common dullness overtakes them,
Which makes ashamed, that it should be thought,
They need, like little-children, to be taught.
And so, out of this world, they do return
As wise, as in that week, when they were born.
God, grant me grace, to spend my life time so,
That I my duty still may seek to know;
And that, I never, may so far proceed,
To think, that I more Knowledge do not need:
But, in Experience, may continue growing,
Till I am filled with fruits of pious-knowing.
Lot 23.
BY this your Emblem we discern,
That you are yet of Age to learn.
And that when elder you shall grow,
There will be more for you to know.
Presume not therefore of your wit;
But strive that you may better it,
For of your Age we many view,
That far more wisdom have then you.
Emblem XXIV. Transitus Celerest, and avolamus.

THE 24th Emblem Illustrated.
Where e're we are the Heavens are near,
Let us but fly and we are there.
WHy, with a trembling faintness, should we fear
The face of Death? and fondly linger here,
As if we thought the Voyage to be gone
Lay through the shades of Styx or Acheron?
Or, that we either were to travel down
To uncouth Depths, or up some heights unknown?
Or, to some place remote, whose nearest end
Is farther then Earths limits do extend?
It is not by one half that distance, thither
Where Death lets in, as it is any whither:
No not by half so far, as to your bed;
Or, to that place, where you should rest your head,
If on the ground you laid your self (even there)
Where at this moment you abiding are.
This Emblem shows (if well you look thereon)
That, from your Glass of life, which is to run,
There Is but one step to Death; and that you tread
At once, among the Living, and the Dead.
In whatsoever Land, we live or die,
God is the same; And Heaven is there as nigh
As in that place, wherein we most desire
Our Souls, with our last breathing, to expire.
Which things, well heeding; let us not delay
Our Journey, when we summoned are away,
(As those enforced Pilgrims use to do,
That know not whither, nor, how far they go)
Nor let us dream that we in Time or Place,
Are far from ending our uncertain Race.
But, let us fix on Heaven, a faithful eye,
And still, be flying thither, till we die.
Lot 24.
TO your Long-Home you nearer are,
Than you it may be are aware.
Yea and more easy is the way,
Then you perhaps conceive it may.
Lest therefore death should grim appear,
And put you in a causeless fear.
Or out of minding wholly pass,
This Chance to you allotted was.
Emblem XXV. Transe at.

THE Twenty fifth Emblem Illustrated.
A Sieve of Shelter makes show,
But every Storm will through it go.
SOme Men, when for their Actions they procure
A likely color, (be it never so vain)
Proceed as if their Projects were as sure,
As when Sound Reason did their Course maintain:
And these not much unlike those Children are,
Who through a Storm advent'ring desp'rately,
Had rather on their Heads a Sive to bear,
Then Cov'rings, that may serve to keep them dry.
For, at a distance that perchance is thought
A helpful Shelter; and yet, proves to those
Who need the same a Toy, which profits naught;
Because, each drop of Rain quite through it, goes.
So they, whose foolish Projects, for a while,
Do promise their Projectors hopeful ends,
Shall find them, in the Trial, to beguile;
And that both Shame and Want on them attends.
Such like is their estate who, (to appear
Rich men to others) do, with inward-pain,
A gladsome out-ward Port desire to bear;
Though they at last nor Wealth nor Credit gain.
And such are all those Hypocrites, who strive
False Hearts beneath Fair spoken Words to hide:
For, they o'revail themselves but with a Sive,
Through which, their purposes at length are spied.
And then, they either woefully lament
Their Brutish-folly, or so hardened grow
In Sinning, that they never can repent,
Nay, jest and scoff at their own Overthrow.
But no false Vail can serve (when God will smite)
To save a Scorner, or an Hypocrite.
Lot 25.
TAke heed you do not quite forget,
That you are dancing in a Net.
Many there are your Ways do see,
Although you think unseen you be.
Your Faults we will no nearer touch,
Methinks your Emblem blabs too much,
But if you mend what is amiss,
You shall be never the worse for this.
Emblem XXVI. Gaudet Patientia duris.

THE Twenty sixth Emblem Illustrated.
He that enjoys a quiet mind,
Can pleasure in Affliction find.
WHat means this Country peasant, skipping here
Through prickling Thistles with such joyful cheer?
And plucking off their tops, as though for Posies
He gathered Violets, or toothless Roses?
What means it, but only to express
How great a joy, well grounded Patientness
Retains in Sufferings? and what sport she makes,
When she her Journey through Affliction takes?
I often have said (and have as often been thought
To speak a Paradox, that savours naught
Of likely truth) that some Afflictions bring
A Honey bag, which cures every Sting,
(That wounds the Flesh) by giving to the Mind,
A pleasing taste of Sweetnesses refined.
Nor can it other be, except in those,
Whose Better part, quiet stupifyed grows,
By being cauterized in the Fires
Of childish Fears, or temporal Desires.
For, as the Valiant (when the Coward swounds)
With gladness lets the Surgeon search his Wounds;
And though they smart, yet cheerfully indures
The Plasters, and the Probe, in hope of Cures:
So, Men, assured that Afflictions pain
Comes not for vengeance to them, nor in vain;
But, to prepare, and fit them for the place,
To which, they willingly direct their pace;
In troubles, are so far from being sad,
That, of their Suffering, they are truly glad.
What ever others think, I thus believe;
And therefore, joy, when they suppose I grieve.
Lot 26.
AT your Afflictions you repine,
And in all troubles cry and whine.
As if to suffer, brought no Joy,
But quite did all content destroy.
That you may therefore Patient grow,
And learn this Virtues power to know
This Lot unto your view is brought,
Peruse and Practice what is taught.
Emblem XXVII. Bella in Vista, Dentro Trista.

THE Twentyseventh Emblem Illustrated.
Deformity within may be,
where outward Beauty we do see.
LOok well, I pray, upon this Beldam, here,
For, in her habit, though she gay appear,
You, through her youthful vizard, may espy
She Is of an old Edition, by her Eye:
And by her wainscot face, it may be seen,
She might your Grandams first dry nurse have been.
This is an Emblem, fitly shaddowing those,
Who making fair, and honest outward shows,
Are inwardly deformed; and nothing such,
As they to be supposed, have strived much.
They choose their words, and play well-acted parts,
But hide most loathsome projects in their hearts
And when you think sweet Friendship to embrace,
Some ugly Treason meets you in the face.
I hate a bainted Brow; I much dislike
A maiden-blush, daubed on a furrowed Cheek:
And I abhor to see old Wantons play,
And suit themselves, like Ladies of the May.
But more (yea, most of all) my soul despises
A Heart, that in Religious forms disguiseth
Profane intentions; and arays in white
The coal-black conscience of an Hypocrite.
Take heed of such as these; and (if you may)
Before you trust them, tract them in their way.
Observe their footsteps, in their private path:
For these (as it is believed, the Devil has)
Have cloven feet; that is, two ways they go;
One for their ends, and the other for a show.
Now, you thus warned are, advice embrace;
And trust nor gaudy Clothes, nor painted Face.
Lot 27.
FIne Clothes, fair words, enticing Face,
With Masks of Piety and Grace,
Often cheat you with an outward show,
Of that which proves nothing so.
Therefore your Emblems Moral read,
And ere too far you do proceed.
Think whom you deal withal to day,
Who by fair Shows deceive you may.
Emblem XXVIII. Captivum impune Lacessunt.

THE Twenty eighth Emblem Illustrated.
When wicked Men confined are,
They revel who were kept in fear.
A Tyrannous, or wicked Magistrate,
Is fitly represented by a Cat:
For, though the Mice, a harmfull vermin be,
And Cats the remedy; yet, often we see,
That, by the Mice, far less, some house-wives leese,
Then when they set the Cat to keep the Cheese.
A ravenous Cat, will punish in the Mouse,
The very same Offenses, in the house,
Which he himself commits; yea, for that Vice,
Which was his own (with praise) he kills the Mice,
And spoileth not another life alone,
Even for that very fault which was his own,
But feeds, and fattens, in the spoil of them,
Whom he, without compassion, did condemn.
Nay worse than so; he cannot be content,
To slaughter them, who are as innocent,
As he himself; but, he must also play,
And sport his woeful Prisoners lives away;
More torturing them, 'twixt fruitless hopes and fears,
Than when their bowels, with his teeth he tears:
For, by much terror, and much cruelty,
He kills them, ten times over, e're they die.
When, such like Magistrates have rule obtained
The best men wish their power might be restrained:
But, they who shun enormities, through Fear,
Are glad when good-men out of Office are.
Yea whether Governors be good or bad,
Of their displacings wicked-men are glad;
And when they see them brought into disgraces,
They boldly play the Knaves before their faces.
Lot 28.
M.
THou art, or else thou were of late,
Some Great or Petty Magistrate,
Or Fortune thereunto may chance,
In time to come thee to advance.
But by thine Emblem thou may see,
That when restrained thy Power shall be,
Offenders will thereof be glad,
And Scoff the Power which thou have had;
Observe it, and be so upright,
That thou may laugh at their despite.
Emblem XXIX. Persequar Extinctu.

THE Twenty ninth Emblem Illustrated.
True Lovers Lives in one heart lie,
Both Live, or both together Dye.
HE that shall say he Loves, and was again
So well-belov'd, that neither He nor She
Suspects each other, neither needs to gain
New proofs, that they in all Desires agree;
And yet, shall cool again in their Affection,
(And leave to Love) or live till they are Lovers
The second-time; It some gross Imperfection
In One (if not in Both) of them discovers.
It was not Love which did between them grow;
But, rather somewhat like unto the same;
Which (having made a fair deceiving Show)
Obtained, a while, that honorable Name.
For, False Affections will together play
So lovingly; and often, so act those Parts
Which real seem; that, for a time, they may
Appear the Children of Unfeigned-Hearts:
Yea, many-times, true Turtles are deceived
By counterfeited Passions, till their Love
Of her true Object finds her self bereaved;
And after it, is forced to remove:
But where True-Love begets, and enjoys
The proper Object, which she does desire,
Nor Time, nor Injury the same destroys;
But it continues a Perpetual Fire.
Like amorous Thisbe to her Pyramus,
On all occasions, it continues true:
Nor Night, nor Danger, makes it timorous;
But, through all Perils, it will him pursue.
Thus, both in Life, in Death, in all estates,
True Lovers will be true Associates.
Lot 29.
SOme think you Love; it is true you do,
And are as well beloved too.
But you (if we the truth may say)
Love not so truly as you may.
To make a perfect Love there goes,
Much more than every Lover knows,
Your Emblem therefore mind, and then,
Begin a new to love again.
Emblem XXX. Nequid Nimis.

THE Thirtieth Emblem Illustrated.
Since overmuch will overfill,
Pour out enough; but do not spill.
IT is this Emblems meaning, to advance
The love and practice, of true Temperance.
For, by this Figure (which does seem to fill,
Until the liquor overflow, and spill)
We are, as by example, taught to see
How fruitless our Intemperancies be:
Thus by the Rule of Contrarieties,
Some Virtues, best are shown to vulgar eyes.
To see a nastie Drunkard, reel and spew,
More moves to Soberness, than can the view
Of twenty civil men; and to behold
One Prodigal, (that goodly lands has sold)
Stand torn and louzie, begging at the door,
Would make Intemperance abhorred more,
(And manly Soberness, much better, each)
Than all that six Philosophers can preach:
So, by the Vessels overflowing, here,
True Moderation does more praised appear,
Than by the mean it self: And without sin,
That Is pictured, which to do, had wicked bit,
For, though to virtuous ends; we do deny
The Doing-ill, that Good may come thereby.
From hence, let us be taught, that careful heed
Whereby we should both Mind and Body fee^
Let us, of our own selves, observe the size;
How much we want, how little will suffize;
And our own longings, rather leave unfill'd,
Than suffer any portion to be spilled:
For, what we mar, shall to account be laid
And, what we wisely spend, shall be repaid
Lot 30.
IF truly temperate thou be,
Why should this Lot be drawn by thee?
Perhaps thou either do exceed,
^n clothes; Or high do drink or feed.
Beyond the mean; If this thou find,
Or know in any other kind.
How thou offendest by excess,
Now leave off thy Intemperatness.
Emblem XXXI. Legibus and Armis.

THE Thirtieth First Emblem Illustrated.
When Law and Arms together meet,
The world descends to kiss their feet.
THe Picture of a Crowned-king, here, stands
Upon a Globe; and with outstretched hands,
Holds forth, in view, a Law-book, and a Sword:
Which plain and modern Figures may afford
This meaning; that a King, who has regard
To Courts for pleading, and a Court of Guard,
And at all times, a due respect will carry,
To pious Laws, and Actions military;
Shall not be Monarch, only in those Lands,
That are by Birth right under his commands
But, also might (if just occasion were)
Make this whole Globe of earth, his power to fear
Advance his Favorites; and bring down all
His Opposites, below his pedestal.
His conquering Sword, in foreign Realms, he draws
As often, as there is just, or needful cause:
At home, in every Province of his Lands,
At all times, armed are his Trained Bands.
His Royal Fleets, are terrors to the Seas;
At all hours, rigged, for useful Voyages:
And often he his Navy does increase,
That Wars Provisions may prolong his Peace.
Nor, by the tenure of the Sword, alone,
Delights he to hold his awful Throne,
But, likewise, labors Mischiefs to prevent,
By wholesome Laws, and rightful Government.
For, where the Sword commands, without the Law,
A Tyrant keeps the Land in slavish awe:
And where good Laws do want an Armed power,
Rebellious Knaves their Princes, will devour.
Lot 31.
M.
SOme urge their Princes on to War,
And weary of sweet Peace soon are
Some seek to make them dote on Peace,
Till Public danger more increase.
As if the world were kept in awe,
By nothing else, but preaching Law.
The Moral is; If such thou art,
Then Act a Moderators part.
Emblem XXXII. Spes alit Agricolas.

THE Thirty second Emblem Illustrated.
The Husbandman does sow his seeds,
And then on Hope till Harvest feeds.
THe painful Husbandman, with sweaty brows,
Consumes in labor many a weary day:
To break the stubborn earth, he digs and ploughs,
And then, the Corn, he scatters on the clay:
When that is done, he harrows in the Seeds,
And by a well-cleans'd Furrow, lays it dry:
He frees it from the Worms, the Moles, the Weeds;
He, on the Fences, also has an eye.
And though he see the chilling Winter bring
Snows, Floods, and Frosts, his Labors to annoy;
Though blasting-winds do nip them in the Spring
And Sammers Mildews threaten, to destroy:
Yea, though not only Days, but Weeks, they a^
(Nay, many Weeks, and many Months beside)
In which he must with pain, prolong his care,
Yet, constant in his hopes he does abide.
For this respect, HOPE'S Emblem, here you, see
Attends the Plough, that men beholding it,
May be instructed, or else minded be,
What Hopes, continuing Labors, will befit.
Though, long thou toyled have, and long attended
About such workings as are necessary;
And oftentimes, ere fully they are ended,
Shall find thy pains in danger to miscarry:
Yet, be not out of hope, nor quite dejected:
For, buried Seeds will sprout when Winter's gone;
Unlikelier things are many times effected;
And God brings help, when men their best have done.
Yea, they that in Good-works their life employ;
Although they sow in tears, shall reap in joy.
Lot 32.
IN many things, the worse thou art,
By the despairing, fainting heart.
And often thy labor, and thy cost,
For want of Hopefulness is lost.
Thou therefore by thy Lot art sent,
This Indiscretion to prevent,
And by the Plow-mans hope to see
Thy fault, and now reformed to be.
Emblem XXXIII. Puris Manibus.

THE Thirty third Emblem Illustrated.
Let him that at Gods Altar stands,
In Innocence wash his hands.
WHen (Reader) thou have first of all survaid
That Reverend Priest which here engraven stands,
In all his Holy Vestiments arrayed,
Endeavoring for Purified-Hands;
Collect from hence, that, when thou do appear
To offer Sacrifice of Praise or Prayer,
Thou oughtst the Robes of Righteousness, to wear,
And by Repentance, thy defects repair.
For, thou, that with polluted Hands presum'st
Before Gods Altar to present thy Face;
Or, in the Rags of thine own Merits come,
Shall reap Displeasure, where thou look for Grace.
Then, if thou be of those that would aspire
A Priest, or Prelate, in Gods Church to be;
Be sure, thou first those Ornaments acquire,
Which may be suting to that High Degree.
Intrude not, as perhaps too many do,
With Gifts unfit, or by an Evil mean:
Desire it with a right Intention too;
And seek to keep thy Conversation clean.
For, they that have assumed this Holy-Calling,
With Hands impure, and Hearts unsanctify'd,
Defame the Truth; give others cause of Falling,
And scandalize their Brethren, too beside:
Yea, to themselves, their very Sacrifice
Becomes unhallowed; and their Thanks and Prayers,
The God of Purity, does so despise,
That all their Hopes, he turns to Despairs:
And all their best Endeavors, countermands,
Till they appear with unpolluted Hands.
Lot 33.
WHether merely Chance or no,
Brought this Lot, we do not know.
But received let it be,
As Divinely sent to thee.
For that merits thy regard,
Which thine Emblem has declared.
And the best that are have need
Such Advisements well to heed.
Emblem XXXIV. Fero.

THE Thirty fourth Emblem Illustrated.
Be wary whosoever thou be,
For from Loves Arrows none are free.
GAllants, beware; for here is a wanton Wagg,
Who, having Bows and Arrows, makes his brag
That he has some unhappy trick to play;
And vows to shoot at all he meets to day.
Pray be not careless; for the Boy is blind,
And sometimes strikes, where most he seems kind.
This rambling Archer spares nor one, nor other:
Yea, otherwhile, the Monkey shoots his Mother.
Though you be little Children, come not near;
For, I remember (though it be many a year
Now gone and past,) that, when I was a Lad,
My Heart, a prick, by this young wanton had,
That pained me seven years after: nor had I
The grace (thus warned) to escape his waggery;
But many times, even since I was a man,
He shot me, oftener then I tell you can:
And if I had not been the stronger-hearted,
I for my over-daring, might have smarted.
You laugh now, as if this were nothing so;
But, if you meet this Blinkard with his Bow,
You may unless you take the better care,
Receive a wound, before you be aware.
I fear him not; for I have learned how
To keep my heart strings from his Arrows now:
And so might you, and so might every one
That vain Occasions truly seeks to shun.
But if you slight my Counsels, you may chance
To blame at last, your wilful ignorance:
For, some, who thought, at first, his wounds but small,
Have dyed by them, in an Hospital.
Lot 34.
THis Lot of yours, does plainly show
That in some danger now you go,
But wounds by steel, yet fear you not,
No Pistolling nor Canon Shot,
But rather dread the Shafts that fly
From some deep wounding Wantons eye,
your greatest perils are from thence,
Get therefore Armor of Defense.
Emblem XXXV. Sapiens dominabitur Astris.

THE Thirty fifth Emblem Illustrated.
He over all the Stars does reign,
That unto wisdom can attain.
I Am not of their Mind, who think the Sun,
The Moon, the Planets, and those glorious Lights,
Which trim the Sphaeres, do in their Motions run
To no more purpose, then to please our Sights.
Nor for distinguishment of Nights and Days,
Or of the Seasons, and the Times, alone,
Can I suppose the Hand of God displays
Those many Stars we nightly gaze upon:
For, both by Reason, and by Common sense
We know (and often feel) that from above
The Planets have, on us, an Influence;
And that our Bodies vary, as they move.
Moreover, Holy Writ infers, that these
Have some such power; even in those Place^ where
It names Orion, and the Pleiades;
Which Stars of much inferior Nature are.
Yet, hence conclude not therefore, that the M^^
Is by the Stars constrained to obey
Their Influence; or, so by them inclined,
That, by no means resist the same we may.
For, though they form the Bodies temp'rature,
(And though the Mind inclines after that)
By Grace, another temper we procure,
Which guides the Motions of Supposed Fate.
The Soul of Man is nobler then the Sphaeres;
And if it gain the Place which may be had,
Not here alone on Earth, the Rule it bears,
But, is the Lord of all that God has made.
Be wise in him; and if just cause there be,
The Sun and Moon, shall stand and wait on the^
Lot. 35.
YOu seek a Lot which proving bad,
Would peradventure make you sad;
^t this may please; for you are taught,
^o mend your Fortune, when it is naught.
Being armed with such Counsel here,
That you no Destiny need fear;
Now if you come to hurt or shame,
Upon the Stars lay not the blame.
Emblem XXXVI. Non te, sed Nummos

THE Thirty sixth Emblem Illustrated.
Thy seeming Lovers false will be,
And love thy Money more than thee.
WHat may the reason be, so many wed,
And miss the blessings of a joyful-Bed,
But those ungodly, and improper ends,
For which, this Age most Marriages intends?
Some love plump-flesh; and those as kind will be
To any gamesome Wanton, as to thee.
^ome, dote on Honors; and all such will prize
Thy Person merely, for thy Dignities.
^ome fancy Pleasures; and such Flirts as they,
With every Hobbyhorse, will run away.
Some (like this Couple in our Emblem, here)
Woe hard for Wealth; and very kind appear,
Till they have won their prize: but then the^ sho^
On what their best Affections they bestow.
This Wealth, is that sweet Beauty, which prefer
So many to their Executioners.
This is that rare Perfection, for whose sake,
The Politician does his Marriage make.
Yea, most of those whom you shall married find
Were cous'ned, (or did cosen) in this kind;
And for some by-respects, they came together,
Much more, than for the sakes of one another
If this concerns thee, now, in any sense;
For thy instruction, take this warning hence
If thou have erred already, then lament
Thy passed crime, and bear thy punishment.
If thou, as yet, but tempted art to err;
Then, let this Emblem be thy Counselor:
For, I have said my mind; which if thou slight
Go, and repent it, on thy wedding night.
Lot 36.
THis Lot may make us all suspect,
That some wrong Object you affect.
And that where Dearness you pretend;
It is not for the noblest end.
What mischief from such falsehood flows,
Your Emblem very truly shows.
And may more happy make your Fate;
^f this advice come not too late.
Emblem XXXVII. Virtute ac Studio per Orbem Fama perpetua comparatur.

THE Thirty seventh Emblem Illustrated.
By Studiousness in Virtues ways,
Men gain an universal Praise.
WHen Emblems of too many parts consist,
Their Author was no choice Emblematist,
But is like those that waste whole hours, to tell
What, in three minutes, might be said as well.
Yet, when each member is interpreted,
Out of these vulgar Figures, you may read
A Moral, (altogether) not unfit
To be remembered, even by men of wit.
And if the Kernel prove to be of worth,
No matter from what shell we drew it forth.
The Square whereon the Globe is placed, here
Must Virtue be; That Globe upon the Square,
Must mean the World; The Figure, in the Round,
(Which in appearance does her Trumpet sound)
Was made for Fame; The Book she bears, may show,
What Breath it is, which makes her Trumpet blow:
The Wreath, enclosing all, was to intend
A glorious Praise, that never shall have end:
And these, in one summed up, do seem to say;
That, (if men study in a vertuous-way)
The Trumpet of a never-ceasing Fame,
Shall through the world proclaim their praisefull Name.
Now Reader, if large Fame, be thy ambition,
This Emblem does inform, on what condition
She may be gained. But, (herein, me believe)
Thy study for meer-praise, will thee deceive:
And if thy Virtues, be but only, those
For which the vulgar Fame, her Trumpet blows,
Thy Fame's a blast; Thy Virtues Vices be;
Thy Study's vain, and shame will follow thee
Lot 37.
THou seek'st for fame and now art shown,
For what her Trumpet shall be blown.
Thine Emblem also does declare,
What Fame they get who Virtuous are,
For Praise alone; And what reward,
For such like Studies is prepared.
Peruse it; And this Counsel take,
Be Virtuous for mere Virtues sake.
Emblem XXXVIII. Deus nobis haec Otia fecit.

THE Thirty eighth Emblem Illustrated.
The Gospel thankfully embrace,
For God vouchsafed us this Grace.
THis modern Emblem, is a mute expressing
Of Gods great Mercies, in a Modern-blessing;
And gives me, now, just cause to sing his praise,
For granting me, my being, in these days.
The much-desired Messages of Heaven,
For which, our Fathers would their lives have given,
And (in Groves, Caves, and Mountains, once a year)
Were glad, with hazard of their goods to hear;
Or, in less bloody times, at their own homes;
To hear, in private, and obscured rooms.
Lo; those, those Joyful-tydings, we do live,
Divulged, in every Village, to perceive;
And that the sounds of Gladness echo may,
Through all our goodly Temples, every day,
This was (Oh God) thy doing; unto thee,
Ascribed, for ever, let all Praises be.
Prolong this Mercy and vouchsafe the fruit,
May to thy Labor, on this Vineyard, suit:
Lest, for our fruitlesness, thy Light of grace,
Thou from our Golden candlestick, displace.
We do, me thinks, already, Lord, begin
To Wantonize, and let that loathing in,
Which makes thy Manna tastless; And I fear,
That, of those Christians, who, more often hear,
Then practice, what they know, we have too many
And, I suspect my self, as much as any.
Oh! mend me so, that, by amending me,
Amends in others, may increased be:
And, let all Graces, which thou have bestowed,
Return thee honor, from whom first they flowed
Lot 38.
BY this thy Lot thou do appear,
To be of those who love to hear
The Preachers voice; Or else of them,
That undervalue or Contemn
Those daily showers of wholesome words,
Which Heaven in these our times affords.
Now which soever of these thou be,
Thine Emblem something teaches thee.
Emblem XXXIX. Spernit Pericula Virtus.

THE Thirty ninth Emblem Illustrated.
An Innocent no danger fears,
How Great soever it appears.
WHen some did seek Arion to have drowned;
He, with a valiant heart, his Temples crowned;
And when to drench him in the Seas they meant,
He played on his molodious Instrument;
To show, that Innocence disdained Fear,
Though to be swallowed in the Deeps it were.
Nor did it perish: For, upon her Back
A Dolphin took him, for his Musick's sake:
To intimate that Virtue shall prevail
With Brutish Creatures, if with Men it fail.
Most vain is then their Hope, who dream they can
Make wretched, or undo, an Honest-Man:
For, he whom Virtuous Innocence adorns,
Insults over Cruelties; and Peril scorns.
Yea, that, by which Men purpose to undo him,
(In their despite) shall bring great Honors to him
Arion-like, the Malice of the World,
Has into Seas of Troubles often hurled
Deserving Men, although no Cause they had,
But that their Words and Works sweet Music made
Of all their outward Helps it has bereft them
Nor means, nor hopes of Comfort have been lef^ them,
But such, as in the House of Mourning are,
And what Good-Conscience can afford them there
Yet, Dolphin-like, their Innocence has reared
Their Heads above those Dangers that appeared
God has vouchsafed their harmless Cause to heed
And even in Thraldom, so their Hearts has freed
That, whilst they seemed oppressed and forlorn
The Joy'd, and Sung, and Laughed the World to scorn
Lot 39.
YOu have been wronged many ways,
Yet Patient are, and that is your Praise.
Your Actions also seemed upright,
Yet some there are that bear you spite.
Lest therefore you discouraged grow,
An Emblem you have drawn to show,
What other Innocents have born,
And how the Envious world to scorn.
Emblem XL. Non uno Sternitur Ictu.

THE Fortieth Emblem Illustrated.
By many strokes the Work is done,
Which cannot be performed by one.
DEspair not Man, in what thou oughtst to do,
Although thou fail when one Attempt is made;
But, add a New-Endeavour thereunto,
And then another, and another, add:
Yea, till thy Power and Life shall quite be spent,
Persist in seeking what thou should desire;
For, he that falls from a good Intent,
Deserves not that to which he did aspire.
Rich Treasures are by Nature placed deep;
And ere we gain them, we must pierce the Rocks:
Such Perils, also, them, as Guardians keep,
That none can win them without wounds and knocks.
Moreover, Glories, Thrones, are so sublime,
That whosoever thinks their Top to gain,
Till many thousand weary steps he clime,
Does fool himself, by Musings which are vain.
And yet, there is a Path way, which does lead
Above the highest things that Man can see;
And (though it be not known to all who tread
The Common-Tract) it may ascended be.
As therefore, none should greater things presume
Then well becomes their strength; So none should fear
Through Folly, Sloth, or Baseness) to assume
Such things upon them, which beseeming are
Since by Degrees we many things see wrought,
That seemed impossible to have been done,
When they were first conceived in the thought
And such as these, we may adventure on.
Mine Arm, I know, in time will fell an Oak;
But, I will never attempt it, at a Stroke.
Lot 40.
THis Lot befell thee for the nonce,
For if things come not all at once.
Thou to despairing soon do run,
Or leave thy work that is well begun.
Which to prevent regardful be,
Of what thine Emblem Counsels thee.
Emblem XLI. Ne tenear.

THE Forty first Emblem Illustrated.
Occasions past are sought in vain,
But often, they wheel about again.
UNwise are they that spend their youthful Prime
In Vanities; as if they did suppose
That men, at pleasure, might redeem the Time;
For, they a fair advantage fondly lose.
As ill-advis'd be those, who having lost
The first Occasions, to Despairing run:
For, Time has Revolutions; and the most,
For their Affairs, have Seasons more then one.
Nor is their Folly small, who much depend
On Transitory things, as if their Power
Could bring to pass what should not have an End
Or compass that which Time will not devour.
The first Occasions, therefore, see thou take
(Which offered are) to bring thy hopes about
And mind thou, still, what Haste away they make
Before thy swift-pac't hours are quite run out,
Yet, if an Opportunity be past,
Despair not thou, as they that hopeless be;
Since, Time may so revolve again, at last,
That New-Occasions may be offered thee.
And see, thou trust not on those fading things,
Which by thine own Endeavors thou acquir'st
For, Time (which her own Births to ruin brings
Will spare, nor thee, nor ought which thou desir'st
His Properties, and Uses, what they are,
In vain observed will be, when he is fled:
That, they in season, therefore may appear,
Our Emblem, thus has him deciphered;
Bald save before, and standing on a Wheel;
A Razor in his Hand, a Winged Heel.
Lot 41.
MUch Liberty thou have assumed,
And heretofore too much presumed.
On Time, which always rides post,
That for a while some hopes are crossed.
But see to keep thee from despair,
And thy Misfortune to repair.
Mark what to thee thy Lot does tell,
And Practice what is counseled well.
Emblem XLII. Viribus jungenda Sapientia.

THE Forty second Emblem Illustrated.
When Great Attempts are undergone,
Join Strength and Wisdom both in one.
IF (Reader) thou desirous be to know
What by the Centaure, seems here intended;
What, also by the Snake, and by the Bow,
Which in his hand, he bears always bended:
Learn, that this half-a man, and half-a horse,
Is ancient Hieroglyphick, teaching thee,
That, Wisdom should be joined with outward force,
If prosperous we desire our works to be.
His Upper Part, the shape of Man, does bear;
To teach, that Reason must become our guide.
The hinder-parts a Horses Members are;
To show, that we must also strength provide.
The Serpent, and the Bow, does signify
The same (or matter to the same effect)
And by two Types, one Moral to imply,
Is doubled a fore-warning of neglect.
When Knowledge wants Power, despised we grow
And know but how to aggravate our pain:
Great strength, will work its own sad overthrow,
Unless, it guided be with Wisdoms rein.
Therefore, Oh God, vouchsafe thou so to marry
The gifts of Soul and Body, both, in me,
That, I may still have all things necessary,
To work, as I commanded am, by thee.
And, let me not possess them, Lord, alone,
But, also know their use; and so well know it,
That, I may do each duty to be done;
And with upright Intentions, always do it.
If this be more, then yet obtain I may,
My will accept thou, for the deed, I pray.
Lot 42.
GReat things to do, thou have a mind,
But power thereto, thou can not find;
Sometimes thy Power does seem to fit,
But then thou failest in thy wit.
Such undertakings therefore choose,
(If thou thy Time wilt not abuse)
As to thy Power and wit agree,
And then let both employed be.
Emblem XLIII. In Silentio and spe.

THE Forty third Emblem Illustrated.
They that in Hope and Silence live,
The best Contentment may atchieve.
IF thou desire to cherish true Content,
And in a troublous time that course to take,
Which may be likely mischiefs to prevent,
Some use of this our Hieroglyphick, make.
The Friars Habit, seems to import,
That, thou (as ancient Monks and Friars did)
Should live remote, from places of resort,
And in retiredness, lie closely hid.
The clasped-Book, does warn thee to retain
Thy thoughts within the compass of thy breast;
And in a quiet silence to remain,
Until thy mind may safely be expressed.
That Anchor does inform thee, that thou mu^^
Walk on in Hope; and in thy Pilgrimage,
Bear up (without despairing or distrust)
Those wrongs, and sufferings, which attend thir^ Ag^
For, whensoe're Oppression grows rife,
Obscureness, is more safe than Eminence;
He that then keeps his Tongue, may keep his Life
Till times will better favor Innocence.
Truth spoken where untruth is more approved,
Will but enrage the malice of thy foes;
And, otherwhile, a wicked man is moved
To cease from wrong, if no man him oppose.
Let this our Emblem, therefore, counsel thee
Thy Life in safe Retiredness, to spend:
Let in thy breast, thy thoughts reserved be,
Till thou art laid, where none can thee offend.
And whilst most others, give their Fancy scope,
Enjoy thy self, in Silence, and in Hope.
Lot 43.
THou have in Public lived long,
And overfreely used thy Tongue.
But if thy safety thou desire,
Be silent and thy self retire;
And if thou will not be undone,
Possess thy Joys and Hopes alone.
For they that will from harm be free,
Must quiet and obscured be.
Emblem XLIV: Non est Mortale quod opto.

THE Forty fourth Emblem Illustrated.
Take wing my soul, and mount up higher,
For Earth fulfils not my desire.
WHen Ganymed, himself was purifying,
Great Jupiter, his naked beauty spying,
Sent forth his Eagle (from below to take him)
A blessed Inhabitant in Heaven to make him:
And there (as Poets feigned) he does still,
To Jove, and other God heads, Nectar fill.
Though this be but a Fable, of their feigning,
The Moral is a Real truth, pertaining
To every one (which harbors a desire
Above the Starry Circles, to aspire.)
By Ganymed the Soul is understood,
That Is washed in the Purifying flood
Of sacred Baptism (which does make her seem
Both pure and beautiful, in God's esteem.)
The Aegle means that Heavenly Contemplation,
Which, after Washings of Regeneration,
Lifts up the Mind, from things that earthly be,
To view those Objects, which Faith's Eyes do see.
The Nectar, which is filled out, and given
To all the blessed Inhabitants of Heaven,
Are those Delights, which (Christ has said) they have,
When some Repentant Soul begins to leave
Her foulness; by renewing of her birth,
And slighting all the Pleasures of the Earth.
I ask not, Lord, those Blessings to receive,
Which any Man has power to take, or give;
Nor what this World affords; for I contemn
Her Favors; and have seen the best of them;
Nay, Heaven it self, will unsufficient be,
Unless Thou also give Thy self to me.
Lot 44.
THis Lot pertains unto those,
(But who they be, God only knows)
Who to the world have no desire,
But up to Heavenly things aspire;
No doubt but you in some degree,
Indu'd with such Affections be,
And got this Emblem, that you might
Encouraged be in such a flight.
Emblem XLV. Dum Clavum rectum Teneam.

THE Forty fifth Emblem Illustrated.
He that his course directly steers,
Nor storms, nor windy Censures fears.
WE to the Sea this World may well compare;
For, every Man which lives in the same,
Is as a Pilot, to some Vessel there,
Of little size, or else of larger frame.
Some have the Boats of their own Life to guide,
Some, govern petty Town ships too beside
Some of whole Families row the Barge,
(To those compared, which of small Barks have charge)
Some others rule great Provinces; and they
Resemble Captains of huge Argoses:
But when of Kingdoms, any gain the Sway,
To Generals of Fleets we liken these.
Each has his proper Course to him assigned,
His Card, his Compass, his due Tacklings, too;
And if their Business, as they ought they mind,
They may accomplish all they have to do.
But most Men leave the Care of their own Course,
To judge or follow others, in their ways;
And when their Follies make their Fortunes worse,
They curse the Destiny, which they should praise.
For, Waves and Winds, and that oft-changing Weather,
Which many blame, as cause of all their Losses,
(Though they observe it not) helps bring together
Those Hopes, which their own Wisdom often crosses.
Regard not, therefore much, what those things be,
Which come, without thy fault, to thwart thy Way;
Nor, how, Rash-Lookers-on will censure thee;
But, faithfully, to do thy part, assay:
For, if thou shall not from this Counsel vary,
Let my Hopes fail me, if thy Hopes miscarry:
Lot 45.
THy hopes and Fears are always such,
That they afflict, and pain thee much,
Because thou giv'st too great a scope,
Unto thy Fear, and to thy Hope.
For they will vex, or pleasure thee,
As they enlarged, or curbed be.
But see, thine Emblem, if thou please,
Instructs thee how to manage these.
Emblem XLVI. Ubi Helena, ibi Troja.

THE Forty sixth Emblem Illustrated.
Where Helen is, there will be war,
For Death and Lust Companions are.
THeir foolish humor I could never affect,
Who dare, for any cause, the Stews frequent:
And thither, where I justly might suspect
A Strumpet lived, as yet, I never went.
For, when (as Fools pretend) they go to seek
Experience, where more Ill then Good, they see,
They venture for their Knowledge, Adam like;
And such as his, will their Achievements be.
Let, therefore those that would loose Truls detest,
Converse with none, but those that modest are;
For, they that can of Whoredom make a Jest,
Will entertain it ere they be aware.
Chast-Company, and Chast-Discourse, does make
The Mind more pleased with it, every day;
And Frequent views of Wantonness will take
The Sense and Hatred of the Vice away.
Some, I have known, by Harlots Wiles undone,
Who, but to see their Fashions, first pretended;
And they that went for Company, alone,
By sudden Quarrels, there their Days have ended.
For in the Lodgings of a Lustfull-Woman,
Immodest Impudence has still her Being;
There, Fury, Fraud, and Cruelties are common:
And there, is Want, and Shame, and Disagreeing.
Even Beauty, of it self, stirs loose Desires,
Occasioning both Jealousies, and Fears;
It kindles in the Breast, concealed Fires,
Which burn the Heart, before the Flame appears:
And every day, experienced are we;
That, there where Hellen is, Troys Fate will be.
Lot 46.
YOur Lot is, very much to blame,
Or else your Person, or your name,
Has injured been; Or may have wrong,
By some loose Wanton, cre't be long.
Therefore ere hence you go away,
Mark what your Emblem here does say;
Perhaps by drawing of this Lot,
Some Harms prevention may be got.
Emblem XLVII. Consequitur quodcunque petit.

THE Forty seventh Emblem Illustrated.
Who by Good Means Good things would gain,
Shall never seek nor ask in vain.
IN vain fair Cynthia never takes pains,
Nor faints in following her desired Game;
And when at any Mark her Bow she strains,
The winged Arrow surely hits the same.
Her Picture, therefore, in this place does show
The Nature of their Minds who Cynthia like,
With Constancy their Purposes pursue,
And faint not till they compass what they seek.
For, naught more God-like in this World is found
Then so Resolved a man, that nothing may
His Resolution alter or confound,
When any task of Worth, he does assay.
Nor, is there greater Baseness, then those Minds,
That from an Honest purpose can be wrought
By Threatenings, Bribes, Smooth-Gales or Boyst'rous, Winds,
Whatever color or excuse be brought.
You then, that would with Pleasure, Glory gain,
Diana like, those modest things require,
Which truly may beseem you to attain;
And stoutly follow that which you desire:
For, changing though the Moon to us appear,
She holds a firm Dependence on the Sun;
And by a Constant-Motion, in her Sphaere
With him, does in Conjunction often run:
So, Constant-men, still move their hopes to win
But never by a Motion-indirect;
Nor will they stop the Course that they are in,
Until they bring their purpose to effect.
For, whosoever Honest things requires,
A Promise has of all that he desires.
Lot 47.
IF any thing you do design,
Pursue it with a vigorous mind;
And if you hope to gather fruit,
Be constant in your hopes pursuit.
For by your Emblem you may find,
The Stars to you are well inclined.
Provided your attempts be good,
For that must still be understood.
Emblem XLVIII. Nusquam tuta fides.

THE Forty eighth Emblem Illustrated.
Use Caution wheresoever you be.
For from deceit no place is free.
SOme write (but, on what grounds, I cannot tell)
That they, who near unto the Deserts dwell,
Where Elephants are found, do notice take,
What trees they haunt, their sleeping stocks to make;
That, when they rest against an half-sawn stem
It (falling) may betray those Beasts to them.
Now, though the part Historical, may err,
The Moral, which this Emblem does infer,
Is over true; and seems to imply,
The World to be so full of Treachery,
As that no corner of it, found can be,
In which from Falsehoods Engines, we are free.
I have observed the City, and I find,
The Citizens, are civil, grave and kind;
Yet many are deluded by their shows,
And cheated, when they trust in them repose.
I have been often at Court; where I have spent,
Some idle time, to hear them Complement:
But I have seen in Courtiers such deceit.
That for their Favors, I could never wait.
I do frequent the Church; and I have heard
Gods judgments, by the Preachers, there declared,
Against men's falsehoods; and I gladly hear
Their zealous Prayers, and good Counsels there;
But as I live, I find some such as they,
Will watch to do a mischief, if they may.
Nay those poor sneaking Clowns, who seek their living,
As if they knew no manner of deceiving,
Even those, their wit, can (this way) so apply,
That they will soon cosen wiser men, than I.
Lot. 48.
SOme Foes for thee do lie in wait,
Where thou suspectest no deceit.
Yea many do thy hurt intend,
Who yet pretend the name of friend.
Be therefore careful whom you trust,
What ways thou walkst and what thou do,
For by thine Emblem thou may see,
That wariness will needful be.
Emblem XLIX. Omnis Caro Foenum.

THE Forty ninth Emblem Illustrated.
All flesh is like the withered Hay,
It springs, and grows, and fades away.
THis Infant, and this little Truss of Hay,
When they are moralized, seem to say,
That Flesh is but a tuft of Morning -Grass,
Both green, and withered, ere the daylight pass.
And such we truly find it; for behold,
As Soon as man is born, he waxes old,
In Griefs, in Sorrows, or Necessities;
And withers every hour, until he dies:
Now flourishing as Grass, when it is grown,
Straight perishing, as Grass, when it is mown.
If we with other things, man's Age compare,
His Life is but a Day (For equaled are
His Years with Hours: His Months will Minutes be
Fit parallels; and every breathing we
May term a Day) yet, some even at the Night
Of that short Day, are dead, and withered quite.
Before the Morning of our lives be done,
The Flesh often fades: Sometime, it grows till Noon:
But there is no mortal Flesh, that will abide
Unparched longer, than till Evening-tide.
For in it self it always carries that,
Which helps so it self to ruinate;
That though it feel, nor storm, nor scorching flame,
An inbred Canker, will consume the same.
Considering well, and well remembering this,
Account the Flesh no better than it is:
Wrong not thine everlasting Soul, to cherish
A Gourd, which in a moments time will perish.
Give it the tendance fit for fading Crops;
But for Hay-harvest, lose not better hopes.
Lot 49.
THy flesh thou Love, as if it were
The chiefest object of thy care;
And of such value as may seem,
Well meriting thy best esteem.
But now to banish that conceit,
Thy Lot an Emblem brings to sight.
Which without Flattery shows to thee,
Of what regard it ought to be.
Emblem L. Sic transit Gloria Mundi.

THE Fiftieth Emblem Illustrated.
Even as the smoke does pass away,
So shall all worldly pomp decay.
SOme better Arguments, then yet I see,
I must perceive; and better causes, why
To those gay things I should addicted be,
To which the vulgar their Affections tie.
I have considered Scepters, Miters, Crowns,
With each appurtenance to them belonging;
My heart, has searched their Glories, and Renowns,
And all the pleasant things about them thronging:
My Soul, has truly weighed, and took the measure
Of Riches (which the most have so desired)
I have distilled the Quintessence of Pleasure,
And seen those Objects, that are most admired.
I likewise feel all Passions, and Affections,
That help to cheat the Reason, and persuade
That those poor Vanities have some perfections,
Whereby their Owners, happy might be made.
Yet when that I have rouzed my understanding,
And cleans'd my Heart from some of that Corruption,
Which hinders in me Reason's free commanding,
And shows things without vails or interruption;
Then they, methinks, as fruitless do appear,
As Bubbles (wherewithal young-children play)
Or, as the Smoke, which in our Emblem, here,
Now makes a show, and straight consumes away.
Be pleased, Oh God, my value may be such
Of every Outward-blessing here below,
That I may neither love them overmuch,
Nor underprise the Gifts, thou shall bestow:
But know the use of all these fading Smokes:
And be refresht, by that which others chokes.
Lot 50.
IN outward Pomp thy Pleasures are,
Thy hope of Bliss is placed there.
And thou this folly wilt not leave,
Till of content it thee bereave:
Unless thou timely come to see
How vain all earthly Glories be
An Emblem therefore thou have gained,
By which this knowledge is obtained.
These six following Chances or Lots have no Emblems belonging to them, and
therefore you need look no further for them, but make the best of what you have
got, these being only added for sport and Recreation.
51.
THy Lot no answer will bestow
To that which thou desir'st to know:
Nor can thou here an Emblem find
Which to thy purpose is inclined.
Perhaps it is too late to crave
What thou desire now to have:
Or but in vain to mention that,
Which thy Ambition aims at:
Then take it not in evil part,
That with a Blank thou answered art.
52.
IT proves a Blank; For to what end,
Should we a serious Moral spend.
Where Teachings, Warnings and Advice,
Esteemed are of little price.
Your only purpose is to look
Upon the Pictures of this book;
When more discretion you have got,
An Emblem shall attend your Lot.
53.
THese Lots are almost five to one
Above the Blanks; yet thou have none,
If thus thy fortune still proceed;
It Is five to one, If well thou speed.
Yet if thou do not much neglect,
To do as wisdom shall direct,
It is a thousand unto five,
But thou in all thy Hopes wilt thrive:
54.
YOu may be glad you drew not that,
Which in your mind you guessed at.
For it so points out that condition,
Whereof you give a great suspicion,
That had it such an Emblem named,
As fits you right you had been shamed.
Since then your fault is unreveal'd,
Amend, and keep it still concealed.
55.
YOu in your secret thoughts despise,
To think an Emblem should advise,
Or give you cause to mind or heed,
Those things whereof you may have need.
And therefore when the Lot you tried,
An answer-justly was denied.
Yet (by your leave) there are but few,
Who need good Counsel more than you.
56.
THe Chance which thou obtained have,
Of all the Chances is the last.
And casting up the Total sums,
We find thy Gain to Nothing comes.
Yet if it well be understood,
This Chance may Chance to do thee good.
For it foretells what Portion shall,
To every one at last befall.
And warns while something is enjoyed,
That it be always well employed.
CONCLUSIONS.
1.
THe Glories of our Birth and state,
Are shadows, not substantial things.
There is no Armor against our fate,
Death lays his Icy hands on Kings.
Scepter and Crown
Must tumble down,
And in the dust be equal laid,
With the poor crooked Sithe and Spade.
2.
Some men with swords may reap the field,
And plant fresh Laurels where they kill.
But their strong Nerves at length must yield,
They tame but one another still.
Early or late,
They stoop to fate:
And must give up their murmuring breath,
Whilst the pale Captive creeps to Death.
3.
The Laurel withers on your Brow,
Then boast no more your mighty Deeds.
For on Deaths Purple Altar now,
See where the Victor, Victim bleeds.
All heads must come,
To the cold Tomb.
Only the Actions of the Just,
Smell sweet and blossom in the dust.
Directions for finding the Chances in the following Lottery.
TUrn about the Index, upon the following Lottery or figure, without casting
your eyes thereupon to observe where it stays, till your hand cease to give
it motion; and then look, upon what number it rests; Then look for the same
number among the Lots, which having read it directs you to the Emblem of the
same number likewise; If the Letter M be set before the Lot (as it is in three
or four places) then that Lot is proper only to a Man, and therefore if it
happen to a woman let her take the next Chance, whether it be Blank or Lot. If
it be any number above fifty, there being fifty six in all, it is a Blank
Chance, and you may look for your Lot at the latter end of the Book among the
six last Chances which are without Emblems. The Trial whereof is thus contrived
without Dice, lest by the Familiar use of them they might sometimes occasion
expensive and pernicious Gaming.

But

If King, Queen, Prince, or any one that springs
From Persons, known to be derived from King,
Shall seek, for Sport sake, hence todraw their Lots;
Our Author says, that he provided not
For such as those; Because it were too much
For him, to find out Fortunes fit for such,
Who, (as he thinks) should rather Aid supply
For him to mend his evil Fortunes by.
To them he therefore pleased is to give
This noble, and this large Prerogative;
That they shall choose from hence, what Lots they please
And make them better, if they like not these.
All other Personages, of High degree,
That will profess our Authors friends to be,
This Freedom, likewise have, that till they find
A Lot, which is agreeing to their mind,
They shall have liberty, anew to try
Their sought for Chance: And every time-apply
The Morals they disliked, unto those,
Which are, ill-qualifi'd, among their Foes.
All others who this Game, adventure will,
Must bear their Fortunes, be they Good or Ill.
Directions for the Lottery.
The Figure or Lottery.


THis Game occasions not the frequent crime
Of swearing, or mispending of our time,
Nor loss of money, for the Play is short,
And every Gamester wins by the sport,
We therefore Judge, it may as well become,
The Hall, the Parlor, or the Dining Roem,
As Chess or Tables; and we think the price
Will be as low, because it needs no Dice.
FINIS.
There are Lately Published Eleven very useful, pleasant, and necessary Books,
all sold by Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry, near Cheapside.
I. TWo Journies to Jerusalem, containing first, A strange and True Account of
the Travels of two English Pilgrims some years since, and what Admirable
Accidents befell them in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria,
etc. With the wonderful manner of hatching many Thousand Chickens at once in
Ovens. Secondly, The Travels of Fourteen Englishmen in 1669. from Scandaroon to
Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah, Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River Jordan, the
Lake of Sodem and Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo, By S. B. With the rare
Antiquities, Monuments, and memorable places and things, mentioned in the Holy
Scripture, and an exact description of the Old and New Jerusalem, to which is
added a Relation of the great Council of the Jews Assembled in the Plains of
Ajaday in Hungaria, 1650. to examine the Scriptures concerning Christ. By S. B.
an Englishman there present; With the notorious Delusion of the Jews by a
Counterfeit Messiah, or false Christ at Smyrna in 1666. and the Event thereof.
Lastly, the fatal and final Extirpation and Destruction of the Jews throughout
the Kingdom of Persia, whereby many Thousands of all Qualities and Ages were
cut off in 1666. and the Remarkable occasion thereof. Beautified with Pictures.

Price One Shilling.

II. Unparalled Varieties, Or the Marchless Actions and Passions of Mankind;
Displayed in near four hundred notable instances and examples; Discovering the
transcendent effects; 1. Of Love, Friendship, and Gratitude, 2. Of Magnanimity,
Courage and Fidelity, 3. Of Chastity, Temperance and Humility; and on the
contrary, the Tremendous Consequences, 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude,
5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treachery, 6. Of Unchastity, Intemperance and
Ambition. Imbellished with Proper Figures.

Price One Shilling.

III. SUrprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts, containing, 1. The
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful signs, and Prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; With an account of the most famous
Comets and other Prodigies since the Birth of our blessed Savior particularly
the dreadful Apparitions before the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple;
The terrible presages during the Wars and Desolations in Germany, as several
Suns appearing at once, the water in Ponds and Conduits turned to blood, and
blood rained from Heaven; Armies of Crows, Dogs, and other Creatures, fighting
and destroying each other. Intermixed with Remarks on the Life of the renowned
Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden. Also a particular Description of the five
Blazing Stars seen in England, since 1663. A Relation of the burning of Mount
Aetna, with the horrid River of Fire and Brimstone which issued thence in 1669.
burning near 20 Towns and Villages, with abundance of other unaccountable
Accidents and Productions of all kinds, to 1632. Likewise a true Account of the
Groaning Board. II. The Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent
Buildings, and other curious Inventions in all Ages, as the Seven Wonders of
the World, and many other excellent structures and rarities throughout the
Earth. Beautified with sculptures.

Price One Shilling.

IV. EXtraordinary Adventures of several famous Men; with the strange Events,
and signal Mutations and Changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious Places
and Persons in all Ages; Being an account of a Multitude of Stupendous
Revolutions, Accidents and Observable matters in States, and Provinces
throughout the whole world. Namely, the Adventures of Christ. Columbus, and the
manner of his Discovery of America, or the New World: The Cruelties used by the
Turks upon the Christians at Argiers, their manner of selling Slaves, etc. The
drcadful Mutiny in the City of Naples in 1647. and how Massanello a Fisher-boy
ruled there for 10 days, with greater power than any King or Emperor. An
Account of several Nations destroyed, or driven from their Habitations by
Gnats, Moles, Pismires, Sparrows, Locusts, Hares, Conies, Fleas, Frogs, Mice,
Grasshoppers, Serpents, Worms, and other inconsiderable Creatures; The Tragical
Deaths of John and Cornelius de Wit, at the Hague in Holland. Remarks on the
Life and Death of Sir W. Rawleigh, with his last Speech and Behavior on the
Seaffold; with Pictures.

Price One Shilling.

V. ADmirable curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, or, An account of many remarkable persons and places, and likewise of
the Battles, Sieges, Prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lighrnings, Fires, Murders, and other considerable occurrences, and accidents
for many hundred years past, and among others, the Battle of Bosworth, and the
miserable death of Crook-backt Richard. The beheading of the Lord Cromwell, and
the Earl of Essex, with their last Speeches. The Rebellion under Ket the
Tanner, and his Laws and Ordinances in the Oak of Reformation near Norwich. The
Lady riding naked through Coventry Together with the natural and artificial
rarities in every County in England, with several curious Sculptures.

Price One Shilling.

VI. Wonderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories, containing 1. Dreadful judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, perjured Villains, etc. As of several forsworn Wretches carried
away by the Devil, and how an horrid Blasphemer was turned into a black dog,
etc. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians, Witches, Conjurers, etc. with
diverse strange apparitions and illusions of the Devil; 3. Remarkable
predictions and presages of approaching death, and how the event has been
answerable, 4. The wicked lives, and woeful deaths of several Popes, with the
manner how King Henry 2. was whipped by the Popes Order by the Monks of
Canterbury; and how the Queen of Bohemia was swallowed up in the Earth alive,
with all her followers, etc. 5. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants,
Murderers, etc. also how Popiel King of Poland, (a Cruel Tyrant) his Queen and
Children were devoured by Rats; and how a Town near Tripoly in Barbary, with
the Men, women, Children, Beasts, Trees, Walls, Rooms, Cats, Dogs, Mice, and
all that belonged to the place were turned into perfect Stone, (to be seen at
this day) for the Horrid Crimes of the Inhabitants, etc. 6. Admirable
Deliverances from imminent Dangers, and Deplorable Distresses at Sea and Land.
Lastly, Divine Goodness to Penitents, with the Dying Thoughts of several famous
Men, concerning a future state after this Life, Imbellished with diverse
Pictures.

Price One Shilling.

VII. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present state of
London and Westminster; showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Court, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
Occurrences, for above Nine hundred years past, in and about these Cities; and
among other particulars, the Rebellion of Wat Tylor, who was slain by the Lord
Mayor in Smithfield, and the Speech of Jack Straw at his Execution. The Murder
of King Hen. 6. and likewise of Edw. 5. and his Brother, by Richard 3. called
Crook-back. The Insurrection in London in King Henry 8. time, and how 411 Men
and Women went through the City in their shifts, and Ropes about their Necks to
Westminster Hall, where they were pardoned by the King; with several other
Remarks to the Year 1681. and a description of the manner of the Trial of the
late Lord Stafford in Westminster Hall; Illustrated with Pictures, with the
Arms of the 65 Companies of London, and the time of their Incorporating.

Price One Shilling.

VIII. THe Fourth Edition of the Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland; being
near a third part enlarged with very considerable Additions, containing an
Impartial Account of all the Battles, Seiges and other Remarkable Transactions,
Revolutions and Accidents which have happened from the beginning of the Reign
of King Charles the First, 1625. to His Majesty's Happy Restoration, 1660. And
among other particulars, the Debates and Proceedings in the Four first
Parliaments of King Charles 1. The Murder of the Duke of Buckingham by Felton.
The Tumults at Edinburgh in Scotland. The Insurrection of the Apprentices and
Seamen, and their assaulting of A. B. Lauds House at Lambeth. Remarks on the
Life of the E. of Strafford, and his last Speech. The Death of Archbishop Laud,
Duke Hamilton, Lord Capel, Mr. Love, Dr. Hewet, and others. The illegal Trial
of King Charles 1. at large, with his last Speech, at his Suffering. And the
most considerable matters which happened till 1660. with Pictures of several
remarkable Accidents.

Price One Shilling,

IX. THE Young Man's Calling or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young Persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
Tongue Persons of both Sexes, as well ancient as modern, who have been famous
for Virtue, and Piety in their Generations; namely, on the Lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their youth. On the Martyrdom of seven Sons and their Mother; and of
Romanus a young Nobleman, with the invincible courage of a Child of seven years
old, who was martyred. On the Matyrdom of diverse holy Virgins and Martyrs. On
the Life of that blessed Prince, King Edw. 6. with his ingenious Letter to his
Godfather A. B. Cranmer, when but 8 years old, and his last words and Prayer.
On the Life and Death of Queen Jane, as her learned Dispute with Fecknam a
Priest, about the Sacrament, her Letters to her Father the Duke of Suffolk, to
her Sister, and others. On the Life of Queen Elizabeth in her Youth, with her
many Sufferings and Dangers from bloody Bonner and Gardener, and her joyful
Reception to the Crown. On the Religious Life and Death of the most Noble and
Heroic Prince Henry, eldest Son to King James; And also of the young Lord
Harrington, etc. with 12 curious Pictures, Illustrating the several Histories.

Price Eighteen pence.

X. A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, Brief Directions to all Christians how to
attain to Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts:
As 1. A short Directory for that necessary duty of Self-Examination, whereby a
serious Christian may every Evening Examine himself. 2. A Brief Dialogue
between a Learned Divine and a Beggar, discovering Man's True Happiness. 3.
Cordial Meditations or Beams of the spirit, Enlivening Enlightening and Gladding
the Soul. Lastly, Divine Hymns upon the Blessed Sacrament of the Lord's Supper;
with some others.

Price Six Pence.

XI. EXcellent Contemplations, Divine and Moral; Written by The Magnanimous and
truly Loyal Arthur Lord Capel, Baron of Hadham; Together with some Account of
his Life, and his Letters to several Persons, whilst he was Prisoner in the
Tower, vigorously asserting the Royal Cause against all the Enemies thereof,
and earnestly endeavoring to prevent the Horrid Regicide of K. Charles the
First: Likewise his Affectionate Letters to his Lady the day before his Death,
and his Courageous and Heroic Behavior and last Speech at his suffering in
the Palace Yard at Westminster, March. 9. 1648. Also the Speeches and Carriages
of Duke Hamilton, and the Earl of Holland, who suffered with him: With his
Pious Advice to his Son the Late Earl of Essex.

Price One Shilling.

All Eleven sold by Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry, near Cheapside.
1684.

FINIS.

