LONDINENSES LACRYMAE. LONDONS Second Tears mingled with her Ashes.

A POEM By John Crouch.

Non Priamus tanti, totaque Troja fuit.

CRONOGRAM. Vrbs LonDon CoMbVsta fVIt. M.DC.LXVI.

London, Printed for T. Palmer at the Crown in Westminster Hall. 1666.

Londinenses Lacrymae.
A POEM.
THou Queen of Cities, whose unbounded fame
Shadowed thy Country and thy Countries Name!
London! that word filled the vast Globe; Japan
Saluted Londoner for Englishman.
'Twas thy peculiar, and unrivaled pride
At greatest distance to be magnified.
When thy next [Paris.]
Christian Sister scarce does know
Whether there be another World or no:
When the false Dutch more known in Foreign parts,
Buy scorn with gold; Merchants of wealth not hearts.
Good Heavens, good in the most severe Decree!
Must London first burn in Epitomie,
And then in gross? Must, O sharp vengeance! must
The Glory of the World kiss her own dust?
Shall then this Molehill, and it is Ants expire
By parcels, some by water, some by fire?
Or do great things, like restless Circles, tend
From their first point, unto the last, their End?
When neither Foreign nor Domestic Wars,
The Distillations of malignant Stars,
Thunder from Heaven, nor it is Terrestial Ape
Gunpowder, could thy total ruin shape;
Nor the long smotherings of Fanatic heats,
Which when they broke out ended in cold sweats:
Shall Balls of Sulphur (Hells blew Tapers) light
Poor London to its funeral in one night?
Shall Britains great Metropolis become
Alike in both her Fortunes to old Rome?
Whose Seat (if we believe Antiquity)
Is full as old, though not so proud as she;
Survived the Cornucopia of her Hills:
Time, strongest Towns, as well as Bodies, kills!
But when her Life had drawn so long a breath,
Must she be mowed down by a sudden Death?
Three days undo three thousand years? O yes,
One day (when that one comes) shall more than this;
Shall make the World one fatal Hearth, That Day
The last that ever Hearth shall Tribute pay;
Though now as just as Law; (And they that Curse
This Duty, may they want both Hearth and Purse.)
But as in three days our Jerus'lem fell,
And gave the World an easy miracle:
So three (O golden Number) years being gone,
Shall spring old London's Resurrection.
Now (dearest City) let my Pencil trace
The scattered lines of thy dis-figur'd Face;
Dropping tears as I pass; tears shed too late
To quench thy Heats, and bribe thy stubborn fate!
This dreadful Fire first seized a narrow Lane,
As if the Dutch or French had laid a Train.
But grant they or that Boutifeu their Roy,
Formed this Cheval for Britain's envied Troy;
These might the stroke, did not the wound dispense,
Were but the Vulcans of Jove's Providence.
Sin was the Common Cause, no faction freed;
Here all dissenting Parties were agreed.
And let the Author of our welfare, be
The welcome Author of our Misery!
Rather than Enemies, who but fulfill
Heavens just decrees, more by Instinct then Skill!
The fierce flame gathering strength had warmed The Air
And chilled the people into cold despair:
With swift wing from it straightened Corner posts,
And forthwith Fish-street and fat East-cheap rosts.
Sunday (to scourge our guilty Rest with shame)
Had given, full dispensation to the flame.
Now London Bridge (expected to provide
Auxiliar forces from the other side)
Alarmed by the fall of Neighboring Bells
Takes fire, and sinks into its stony Cells;
Blocks up the way with rubbish, and dire flames,
Threatening to choke his undermining Thames.
Southwark, shut out, on it is own banks appeared
As once when fiery Cromwell domineered.
Thames Street hastens it ashes, to prevent
All aids and succors from the River sent.
The heated wind his flaming arrows cast,
Which snatched both ends, and burnt the middle last.
Now the proud flame had took the open field
And after hearts were vanquished, all things yield!
Rores thorough Cannon-street and Lombardie
Triumphing over the Cities Liberty.
This fiery Dragon, higher still it flies,
The more extends his wings, and louder cries.
Just so that spark of Treason, (first suppressed
In the dark angles of some private breast)
Breaks through the Mouth and Nostrills into Squibs,
And having fired the Author's reins and ribs,
Kindles from man to man by subtle Art,
Till Rebels are become the major part:
Thus late Fanatics in their Zeal of pride
March from close Wood-street into broad Cheap Side.
Now all in Coaches, Carrs, and Wagon fly,
London is sacked withour an Enemy.
All things of beauty, shattered lost and gone;
Little of London whole but London-stone.
As if those Bull-works of her Wall and Thames
Served but to Circle, and besiege her flames!
Such active Rams beat from each opposite Wall,
You would have judged the fire an Animal.
When (strangely) it from adverse Windows ror'd:
Neighbor his Neighbor kindled and devoured.
Houses the Churches, Churches Houses fired,
While profane Sparks against divine conspired.
This devastation makes one truth appear,
How sanctimonious our forefathers were;
How thick they built their Temples, long concealed
By lofty Buildings, now in flames revealed.
Then one small Church served many Priests, but they
The truth is, eat not roast meat every day.
Now the profane, not superstitious Rout
(Whose faith ascends no higher than to doubt)
May, without help of weekly papers, tell
Their Churches, to their Eyes made visible.
Our Non-conformists (if not hardened) may
Scatter some tears, where once they scorned to pray.
Now the Imperious Element did range
Without Control, kept a full Evening Change.
Where the religious Spices for some Hours,
Seemed to burn Incense to the incensed Powers.
At last the flame grown quite rebellious, calls
Our Sacred Monarchs to new Funerals.
The Conqueror here Conquered, tumbles down
As Conscious of the burden of a Crown.
Only the good old Founder, standing low,
His Station kept, and saw the dismal Show.
Though the Change broke, he is not one penny worse,
Stands firm resolved to visit his new Burse.
Which by her Mr. Hook.
Optics happily was saved,
And for the honor of the City paved.
Here a good sum of active Silver raised
The ingenious Beggar, and wise Donors praised.
All fall to work, assisted by the Guard,
To whom, and money, nothing seemed hard.
Here fires met fires, but industry reclaims
Lost hope, and quenched a Parliament of flames.
Mean time the Neighboring Steeple trembling stood,
Defended not by Stone, nor Brick, but Wood:
Yet was secure 'cause low; to let us see
What safety waits upon humility!
When Lawrence, Three-Cranes, Cornhill, lofty Bow,
Are all chastis'd, for making a proud show.
One Steeple lost its Church, but not one Bell;
Reserved by fate to Ring the City's Knell.
Now the Circumference from every part
The Center scalds; poor London pants at heart!
Cheapside the fair, is at a fatal loss
Wants the old blessing of her golden Cross.
Poor Paul the Aged has been sadly tossed,
Reformed, then after Reformation lost;
Placed in a Circle of Heaven's fiery wrath:
The Saint was tortured when he broke his Faith!
At the East End a spacious sheet of Lead
(Rent from the rest) his Altar canoped;
But from its Coal below strange fires did rise,
And the whole Temple proved the sacrifice.
Altars may others save, but cannot be
(When Heaven forsakes 'em) their own Sanctuary!
Then was their doleful Music as the Quire,
When the sweet Organs breath was turned to fire.
Was 't not enough the holy Church had been
Invaded in her Rites and Discipline?
Must her known Fundamentals be baptized
In purging flames, and Paul's School chatechiz'd?
She that had long her tardy Pupills stripped,
Is now her self with fiery Scorpions whipped.
But when I pass the sacred Martyrs West
I close my Eyes and smite my troubled Breast;
What shall we now for his dear Memory do
When fire un-carves, and Stones are mortal too?
Let it stand un-repair'd, for ever keep
Its mournful dress, thus for its Founder weep.
By this time Lud with the next Newgate smokes,
And their dry Prisoners in the Dungeon chokes;
Who left by Keepers to their own reprives
Broke Goal, not for their Liberty but Lives;
While good Eliza on the outside Arch
Fired into the old Mode, stands in Yellow Starch.
Though fancy makes not Pictnres live, or love,
Yet Pictures fancied may the fancy move:
Methinks the Queen on White Hall cast her Eye;
An Arrow could not more directly fly.
But when she saw her Palace safe, her fears
Vanish, one Eye drops smiles, the other tears.
Where (Christ-Church) is thy half-Cathedral now?
Fallen too? then all but Heaven to Fate must bow!
Where is thy famous Hospital? must still
The greatest good be recompensed with ill?
That House of Orphans clad in honest blew;
The World's Example, but no parallel knew.
Cold Charity has been a long Complaint,
Here she was too warm like a martyred Saint.
Where are those stately Fabrics of our Halls,
Founders of sumptuous Feasts and Hospitalls?
Where is the Guild, that place of grand resort
For Civil Rights, the Royal Cities Court?
Forced to take Sanctuary in the Tower,
To show, what safety is in Regal Power!
Not Gog or Magog could defend it; These
Had they had sense, had been in Little-Ease.
Chymnies and shattered VValls we gaze upon
Our Body Politics sad Skeleton!
Now was the dismal Conflagration stopped,
Having some branches of the Suburbs lopped.
Though most within the verge; As if the ad showed
Their mutual freedom was to be destroyed.
When after one days rest. The Temple smokes,
And with fresh fires and fears the Strand provokes
But with good Conduct all was slak'd that night
By one more valiant than a Templar Knight.
Here a brisk Rumor of affrighted Gold
Sent hundreds in; more Covetous than bold.
But a brave Seaman up the Tyles did skip
As nimbly as the Cordage of a Ship,
Bestrides the sings'd Hall on its highest ridge,
Moving as if he were on London Bridge,
Or on the Narrow of a Skullers Keel:
Feels neither head nor heart nor spirits reel.
Had some few Thousands been as bold as he,
And London, in her fiery Trial free;
Then (with submission to the highest will)
London now buried had been living still.
Thus Chant the people, who are seldom wise
Till things be past, beforehand have no Eyes.
But when I sigh my self into a pause,
I find another more determined cause:
Had Tyber swelled his monstrous Waves, and come
Over the seven Hills of our flaming Rome,
'T had been in vain: no less than Noah's flood.
Can quench flames kindled by a Martyr's blood.
Now Loyal London has full Ransom paid
For that Defection the Disloyal made:
Whose Ashes hatched by a kind Monarch's breath,
Shall rise a fairer Phoenix after Death.
FINIS.

