CITY POLITIQUES.

A COMEDY.

As it is ACTED BY HIS Majesty's Servants.

WRITTEN By Mr. CROWN.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bently in Covent Garden, and Joseph-Hindmarsh,
Bookseller to His Royal Highness. M.DC.LXXXIII.

To the READER.
THis PLAY, since its coming to light, has so cleared its Self and Me from
Aspersions, that I am (...) what I shall now, will appear Vanity, and a
flourishing the Colors after Victory; but I think it not prudent to lay down
Arms, when there is an Enemy in the Field: several Stories that once wounded my
Reputation, and half smothered this Play, still March up and down and do me
private Mischief, and every Day they get new Detachments of additional
Inventions; some of these I think my self bound to deal withal. It Is said, I
openly confessed, who I meant by the principal Characters in the Play,
particularly by that of Bartoline. That this is false, common sense, and the
Character it self will prove. Is it possible, I should be such a
Bartholomew-Cokes, to pull out my Purse in a Fair, and as soon as ever a Knave
tickled my Ear with a Sraw (a little silly Flattery) I should let go my
Discretion and perhaps my Fortune? (for Libels may prove costly things.) They
that made this Fool's Coat for me, should first have been sure it would fit me,
least it be turned on their Hands, and they made to wear it themselves. It Is
known, I am too guilty of the other, extreme of Reserv'dness, I do not often
expose my Writings, much less my Thoughts naked; And for the same reason that
Beggars keep out of the way, when they find the Officers severe, the Overseers
of the Folly of the Parish, have so often Whipped an undrest poor piece of mine
round the Town, when I brought it to beg a little Charitable Covering, that I
care not to come at 'em. If I had nothing to d^pend on, but the Collections of
Wit in the Play-Wardens-Box, I should be miserable. If therefore I find such
ill Entertainment, from those who pretend to provide for us, could I hope for
good from Strangers and Enemies? In the next place, is it probable, I should
make my self worse then I am, and accuse my self of Mischief I never intended?
That I never designed to persona^e any one, appears, because I have not done
it; for I who have drawn the general Corruption of Lawyers so well, as to
please considerable Judges, indeed the whole Town, could with as much ease have
Pictured any Man's particular qualities, which I would not hear of, though some
would have enticed me to it. That I have made my Lawyer old and Married to a
young Wife, is of no more concernment to any Gentleman in those Circumstances,
then the description of a Thief in a Gazette, by his Wigg and Coat, is to an
Honest Man directly so habited; He that finding his Friend^ Acco^^rements agree
in some thing with those in the Advertisement, shall think him a Thief, and
draw his Sword to defend him from every Constable, deserves to be laughed at
for an Ass. I had a more honorable Opinion of those who are said to be
personated, then to suspect any one, would Apprehend them by Two such Lewd
Characters as Barroline and Lucinda; to which they are so directly opposite in
all things, but what is innocent and common, Age and Marriage. If I must have
stripped my Characters of these for fear of giving offense, I must not bring'd
Villain on the Stage with a Nose, because many honest Men have Noses, and some
of 'em may be thought to be aimed at. Nor is any one old Man, more than
another, mimiqued by Mr. Lee's way of speaking, which all the Comedians can
witness was my own invention, and Mr. Lee was taught it by me; to prove this
farther, I have Printed Bartoline's part in that manner of spelling, by which I
taught it Mr. Lee. They who have no Teeth cannot pronounce many Letters plain,
but perpetually lisp, and break their words; and some words they cannot bring
out at all. As for instance; th, is pronounced by thrusting the Tongue hard to
the Teeth, therefore that sound they cannot make, but something like it. For
that reason you will often find in Bartoline's part, instead of th, a y, as yat
for that, yish for this, yosh for those, sometimes a t is left out, as houshand
for thousand, hirchy for thirty; s* they pronounce like sh, as Sher for Sir,
musht for must; t, they speak like ch; therefore you will find, chrue for true,
Chreason for Treason, cho for to, choo for two, chen for ten, chake for take.
And this ch is not to be pronounced like k, as it is in Christian but as in
Child, Church, Chest. I desire the Reader to observe these things, because
otherwise he will hardly understand much of the Lawyers part, which in the
opinion of all is the most divertising in the Comedy; but when this ridiculous
way of spelling is familiar with him, it will render the part more pleasant.

The next suspicious Character is that of the Doctor; some say I have abused an
Eminent Divine to whom this Nation is much oblieg'd, and are greatly offended:
Either that Divine is guilty of the faults I have exposed, or not; if he be
not, they abuse him by applying them to him; if he be, he is not wronged at
all. If a Divine's Coat be foul, is it Sacrilege to brush it, and make him fit
for Christian Society? strangely preposterous is the zeal of some Men, they
will burn the Picture of Christ wherever they find it, but defend the Picture
of the Devil if it be in the possession of one of their Friends. And St. Jude
tells us, A Railer and Despiser of Dignities, is not like a good Angel, for St.
Michael would not rayl at the Devil; but I charge no Man with these Crimes,
they who have a mind to bestow 'em on their Friends may. The other Characters I
shall not trouble my self withal, but leave 'em to be shared among the Party as
they please.

Having thus vindicated my Innocence, I must say something in behalf of my
Discretion. Suppose I have not injured particulars, yet in assaulting a whole
powerful Party, I appear little less than a Mad Man, at least in their opinion;
perhaps I was so, when I first wrote this Play, then half the Nation was mad,
and no Man that I saw had cause to be so but the Poets; our Trades and
Lib^^ties were actually sei^'d; all Professions broke in upon us, and made
themselves Free of the Company of Rhimers, without any Charter from Nature.
^ews-Mongers and Intelligencers took up the invention of Fables, and so clogged
the Market ours would not vend. Joyners, Carpenters, and Bricklayers, applied
themselves to the building of State-Projects, and in order to that, very often
took measure of Verse, but none of their own heads, which they (...) have found
very unfit for either Profession, of Poetry or Policy. (...) it is hard the
Authors of these Confusions should upbraid us with a Distemper themselves
occasioned, nay, encouraged in their Friends, whom they endeavored to make as
Mad as they could; and truly when I saw so many Mad Men, I thought it a Shame
for a Poet not to be as Mad as any one else. Tameness in a Poet is as great a
Disease as ^renzy in another, and when a Poet does not rave, his Wits are not
right. When all Men's brains were a Galloping, I could not hold in mine, and I
played but the same ^reaks others did; they read a tilt at Lawful, and I at
unlawful Powers; Mechaniques leapt over the Heads of Princes, and I over the
Heads of Mechaniques; and I was held in so long, till they were taken many
holes lower, that now I may be accounted a very sober Rider, and neither my
Neck nor Discretion in danger. I am threatened by a Parliament, but they have a
Childish opinion of that wise Assembly, who think they will concern themselves
for such Poppets as I have made sport with. No doubt they will endeavor to
tune the Nation, but not with such clattering Keys as mine; they will maintain
the Laws, but not the Knavery and corruption of Lawyers; they will defend the
Liberties of the Subject, but railing, faction and sawciness, are no part of
our Liberties that I know of; they will encourage the Evidences of the late
Popish Plot against our Religion, but neither them or others in a Plot against
good Manners. No doubt it is hateful to see Popes tread on the Necks of Princes,
but it is as odious to see a Rabble fling dirt in their Faces: they will
suppress the enemies of our Religion and Government, than they will encourage
this Comedy, for it promotes the same design. Any one that knows the dialect of
these times, must needs understand the true Protestants reflected on in this
Comedy, are a sort of Men who abuse that Honorable name by taking it to
themselves; and whilst they cry Protestant Religion. Protestant Religion, mean
as much another thing, as the Chimneyswe^per did that cried Mull'd-Sack. A
sturdy crew they are, that think to de^ie all Authority, and obtain what ever
they ask, by beging in numbers like Gypsies. They pretend also to
Fortune-telling, and exactly to know what shall be any Man's Destiny at the
Conjunction of such Heavenly Bodies as a Parliament; or it may be by
Phisiognomy, if your Eyes be not as good in seeing Plots as theirs, and by
twenty other marks in the Face or Hand: but they are so often mistaken in their
predictions, their Art is become ridiculous. The Lines in my hand I do not
understand, but I do perfectly those in my Comedy, and I am certain by them to
suffer no mischief from good Men; I may as I have done already, from Liars and
barbarous cowardly Assassinates. Thus much for the Innocence and Honesty of my
Self and the Play, the Wit and Poetry of it, I leave to shift for th^mselves. I
have heard nothing substantial objected against them, so I shall not fight with
Chirmeras. They who cannot find any Wit in it, perhaps would be as much at a
loss, if it were never so full, for it is probable Wit and they are so great
Strangers, they may meet and never know it. They who do not like the Plot, must
blame the Faction, who invented the Original, for mine is but a Copy.

The Prologue,
Spoken by Mr. Smith.
GOOD Heaven be Thankt, the Frenzy of the Nation
Begins to Cure, and Wit to grow in Fashion:
Long the Two Theaters did proudly jarr,
And for Chief Sway, like Two Republiques War;
When of the sudden, a Devouring Host
Of Dreadful Knights, (I say not of the Post)
But strange Tongue Warriors, overran the Town,
And Bl^w the Stage, almost the Kingdom down.
And with the Stage the P^ets must expire,
For Bells will melt, if Steeples be on Fire;
Then Coffee-Houses Th^atres were grown,
Where Zealots acted in a furious tone,
Oliver's Porter Damming Babylon.
But they more Mad; for he in his worst (...),
Was never so Mad as to Talk TREASON yet.
It Is strange those Men should wish the POPE such Evil,
Who are so kind to the POPE's Friend, the DEVILS.
They Drink, they Whore, and at their Rulers Rant,
And all is well in a True PROTESTANT.
These Follies have the Nation long Employed,
And almost all the POETS Trade destroyed.
That they may justly seek Reprisals now,
And Board those Pirates which brought them so low;
Seize on that Ware, by which some Men by stealth
Promote the Traffic of a Commonwealth*
Ware, some believe by Priests and Jesuits Spun,
They Weave the Cloth, FANATICS put in on.
But some will say, a POET mend the Age!
In these High Matters how dare they engage?
Why, SIRS, a Poets Reformation scorn;
Since the Reformers now all POETS turn?
And by their awkard jangling Rhimes proclaim,
Like Bells rung backward, that the Town's on Flame:
The City WHIGGS such cursed Poets choose,
For that alone they should their CHARTER lose.
He is a wretched Coxcomb, who believes
Muses, like JVRIES, will be packt by SHERIFFS.
But their ill Pallat no fine dressing needs,
All Stuff that any Whiggish Fancy breeds,
They swallow down, and live like Ducks on Weeds.
These things give all the Nations round delight,
Sure at our Fools to laugh we have most right.
Lets not our Mirth to Foreign Kingdoms send,
But here the growth of our own Country spend.
Heaven knows what sums the CAUSE has cost this Town!
Here You may have it all for Half-a-Crown.
Dramatis Personae.
Florio. A Debauch, who pretends to be Dying of the Diseases his Vices brought
upon him, and penitent, in love with Rosaura. Artali. A Debauch that follows
the Court, in love with Lucinda. Paulo Camillo. A Factious, proud, busy,
credulous, foolish, rich Citizen, chosen Chief Magistrate, or Lord Podesta of
Naples. Craffy. His Son, an impudent, amorous, pragmatical Fopp, that pretends
to Wit and Poetry, in love with his Fathers Wife. A Bricklayer. A bold, saucy,
Factious Fellow, that governs the Podesta. Doctor Panchy. An ignorant railing
Fellow, that pretends to Learning. Bartoline. An old Corrupt Lawyer. The
Governor of the City. A Man of Honor and Worth. A foolish mistaking Iris^
Witness Suborned by Bartoline. Rosaura. A Wanton beautiful Woman, Married to
the Podesta, and in love with Florio. Lucinda. An ignorant wanton Country Girl,
Married to Bartoline.
Scene NAPLES.

ACTUS 1. SCAENA 1.
Enter Florio in his Nightgown. Scene a Bedchamber. Enter Pietro. FLorio.
Pietro.


Pietro. Sir.


Flo. What News Pietro? Has the worthy Citizen, whom I have Elected to be my
Cuckold, attained the other Dignity of Podesta of Naples yet?


Piet. Not yet Sir, but he will attain it very speedily, all his Party are hard
at work, Voices and Elboes at it, and they exceed the other Forty for one.


Flo. I am glad of it Pietro for when he is chief Magistrate of Naples, I shall
be -- of his Wife, dispatch his Domestic Affairs, and receive all the Fees of
that sweet Office.


Piet. In troth you deserve it Sir, for you buy the Place dear.


Flo. Indeed I give a great deal for it Pietro, I give some scores of ready
Mistresses I have in bank for the reversion of one, which perhaps I may never
enjoy.


Piet. A great Price Sir.


Flo. It Is so Pietro, I give away a hundred other pleasures into the bargain;
as Drunkenness, a sweet sin Pietro, Wine is as necessary to a Man, as a
Navigable River to a City, it conveys to him many pleasant Commodities; without
it, he must depend upon his own growth.


Piet. It Is true Sir.


Flo. Then I part with all the society of my witty lewd Friends, to keep
company with dull lewd Saints.


Piet. Not Saints Sir, but Whigs.


Flo. That Is as bad, and so loose the Reputation of my Loyalty and good
Affection to my Prince.


Piet. You also part with the Reputation of being sound Sir, and of your
affection to Women: In short Sir, you pass for a poor, rotten dying Saint.


Flo. A dead Saint Pietro, at least a dead Sinner, for I appear the Ghost of
what I was, all my Vices mortified, and I am in a Would very different from that
I used to live in; I talk Godly, a strange Language to me Pietro; I Pray, hear
Sermons, live soberly, abstain from Wine, Women, and Wits, a strange life to
me; but this new World is a dismal Purgatory, for as yet I have not attained my
Heaven! my Rosaura, if I should never attain her Pietro --


Piet. ^Twill not be her fault Sir.


Flo. That Is true Pietro.


Piet. I suppose Sir she is not frightened by the Ghost you appear to be.


Flo. No Pietro, she knows me to be Flesh and Blood, sound Flesh and Blood,
whose only Disease is a troublesome watchful Cuckold, if I can be cured of
him, she will venture on me.


Piet. If you never attain her Sir, Heaven be praised, you will not loose your
sufferings, you will attain the States-man's Mistress, Popularity.


Flo. Popularity! Dam her! a lewd, inconstant, common Prostitute; so old she is
blind, and cannot distinguish an honest Man from a Knave, though she has a
hundred pair of Spectacles put on her Nose, that show the Knave never so clear,
she cries I cannot see him; Ignoramus, Ignora^us, that is all the sense she has.


Piet. It may be not Sir, she sees well enough, but is too cunning to lay open
the blemishes of her Stallion.


Flo. It may be so, but were she fairer then the most doting old Statesman
thinks her, she is not so charming as a Hundred beautiful Women which I loose
for her.


Piet. That Is true Sir.


Flo. Do not the Ladies give me for gone?


Piet. For a Dead Man Sir.


Flo. And do they lament me?


Piet. All, all, Sir, the virtuous Ladies sigh, and cry it is pity, the other
run distracted, the very common Whores abstain from Plays, and Bawds neglect
their Brandy-Bottles.


Flo. You see what it is, Pietro, to do good in a Man's Generation; Hark!

A Shout, Paulo, Paulo, Pietro goes out, and presently reenters. The News
Pietro?


Piet. Your Friend is Chosen Sir.


Flo. Is he? then shall I enter into my Employment speedily; now he is filled
with Authority, he will be drunk with Pride to the end of his Year, and I can
make him reel whether and when I please; Hark! somebody comes --


[Pietro looks out. Piet. Esquire Artall Sir.


Flo. That Rogue! my Patch upon my Nose, my Pillow and sick Equipage quickly.


Enter Artall. Art. Where Is this damned confounded Hypocrite? this religious,
sactious, dying Saint? I come to give you Thanks for the Legacy you leave the
Nation, a sweet Rogue you have helped into power; we shall have a sine time on it.


Flo. Sir, if I have committed any crime in it, let the Law punish me, but do
not Murder me with all this noise, I have mortal distempers enough upon me, I
need not your bawling.


Art. That you have not one sound part in your Soul or Body I ^irmly believe;
that the greatest part of your Body comes out of Shops, and every night goes
not into Bed but Boxes, I know; but that your Soul and Body, although they have
used one another, are upon parting, I no more believe, then that your Soul and
your Vices are parted.


Flo. I value not what you believe Sir, but why should it be incredible a Man
should part with any thing that uses him ill? say my Vices had not Murdered me,
it is sufficient they fooled and enslaved me.


Art. Ah poor Man!


Flo. I was a common Belman with my Rhimes to chime Fools asleep in their Sins,
a Beadle to Whip out of the Parish impudent Beggars, and such we esteem all
Church-Creeds and Principles.


Art. So you do still Sir, and are as little Charitable to 'em, whatever you
pretend, as to any other kind of Beggars, for you will give good words to any
handsome Beggar you hope to make a Whore of; And you have a worse design on
Religion, to make her a Bawd to carry on some lewd project.


Flo. Rail on, or Laugh on, or both, I care not, you and the rest of my
Atheistical Companions were Heaven-threat'ning, which stood long between me and
the Church; and though I dwelt among you, I confess, to my shame, I was afraid
of you; but now (Heaven be praised) I have traveled beyond you, and shall never
look back on those horrors and precipices more.


Art. And are now got within a Days Journey of Heaven; Are you not Sir?


Flo. What is that to you Sir? get you about your business, do not disturb me,
and make me waste my spirits to no purpose.


Art. I would only take my leave, wish you a good Journey, and a (...) you
when we shall see you again; for you will not stay long in Heaven I know,
there is no Company that you will like Sir.


Flo. None that I like so ill as yours Sir --

[This Fellow aside. vexes me so, I almost faint.


Art. There are none of your Club Sir, Wits that believe one Stet Divine before
all the Twelve Apostles Sir.


Flo. I am quite fainting.


Art. That count his Story true, and all their's a Shamm Sir.


Flo. This Fellow babbles me out of my senses.


Art. You would babble and scribble us out of our Estates.


Flo. Quite babbl'd me dead, I faint! give me a Cordial! if ever you let him in
again -- I Will -- Pooh -- I can hardly speak -- give me that Cordial quickly.


[Drinks. Art. A Plague on you.


Flo. Oh! he has startled me with his frightful Curse! made me spill my
Cordial, slabber my self, and almost choke my self; bless me! what work's here
with this Fellow?


Art. Have I almost choked thee with a Cordial? then thou art no right Saint,
for I have seen one of those they call the true Protestants, swallow another
Man's whole estate for a Cordial, and never choke himself: Choke thee, damn thee.


Flo. Mercy on me! what a cursing and swearing the Wretch keeps; to what
purpose is all this, thou silly Fellow? I warrant thou think those
sine-Mouth'd Jewels become thee, and art as proud of them as a Cannibal of a
Ring in his Nose: if to be one of the Devils Knights, called an Atheist, be a
sine thing, prithee wear a better Badge of thy Order then an Oath or a Curse,
for those are Porterly Badges.


Art. Confound thee, sink thee.


Flo. Take me away, take me away, I am not able to bear this!


[Exit, led out by his Servants.] Art. Ha! ha! ha! the dissemulation of these
Fellows is pleasant; but, a Pox on it, we pay too dear for these Jests, they
cost us confusion and almost ruin: these Fellows so love division, every one
of 'em has two Parties in himself.

There is in every true Protestant Breast
A Heraclitus Ridens, his Contest,
A Knave in Earnest, and a Saint in Jest.
The Saint looks up to Heaven, the Knave that while
Your Pocket picks, and at the Cheat does smile:
Catch him, he, like a Hedgehog, scrapes your ^ury
Under the Prickles of a sturdy Jury;
Then, looking out, he does the Hunters brave,
For squinting vilely between Saint and Knave:
He looks Ten ways at once, so they that watch him,
Cannot tell which he will take, and never Catch him.

[Exit. Enter Pietro peeping Piet. Sir, he is gone.


Enter Florio. Flo. Is he? that is well.


[Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, here is the new Lord Podesta's Son,

Mr. Craffy.


Flo. Oh! my Friend's Son! you must let him come in, though he be a very
troublesome Coxcomb.


Enter Craffy. Craf. Oh Friend Florio, are you here?


Flo. Ay Sir, thanks to my Distemper that keeps me prisoner.


Craf. Whoo! but are'nt you wi' my Father yonder?


Flo. No, I profess I am here Sir.


Craf. How are you able to be here?


Flo. I am not able to be any where else, I Am so ill.


Craf. Ill? you are dull Man, for if you were not dull, you would go to my
Father's Election; if you were giving up the Ghost, it is better then a thousand
Bear-baitings, stay! a Camillo! a Camillo! a Camillo! say our party, what do
you keep such a bawling for such a Fellow? says one of theirs? such a Fellow
say our Party, and set up a laughing and hissing, and a hissing and a laughing;
for all your laughing and hissing I Will speak my mind, says the Man; will ye so?
says one of our party, and gives him a thump with his Elbow under the small
Guts. Now will you speak your mind? says our Man; The Man is speechless.


Flo. A good way of silencing a Man.


Craf. The best we have, so upon that some of their party began to bear up, but
we never gave over till we had quite hiss'd'em, and hooted'em, and Rogued'em,
and Toryed'em out of the Hall.


Flo. I am glad of it.


Craf. But who do you think was the Captain of all our Party (...) to lead 'em
on wherever he saw an Enemy? and, I believe, discharged Rogue, Rogue, forty
times for any Man's once.


Flo. Who?


Craf. Your Chaplain Doctor Sanchy.


Flo. Oh! he is a zealous Man, where is he? for I want to go to my Prayers.


Craf. Pray? he cannot speak he is so hoarse, he is gone to drink a glass of Sack
to clear his pipes; the truth is, I had as live he should pray for me as any
body.


^lo. Why so.


Craf. Because no Saint in Heaven dare deny him any thing, for if he should
he would call him Rogue and Rascal. Well, but this is not the business I come to
thee about, what do think it is?


Flo. I cannot guess.


Craf. Guess! no, I Will give thee a thousand Guesses to guess it, I will give
thee ten thousand; come, I Will give till this time Twelvemonth, and thou shall
think of nothing else.


Flo. Really, I have a little other business to employ my thoughts about.


Craf. Well, I Will put thee out of thy pain, and tell thee the oddest thing that
ever thou heardest in thy life. Thou know my Father has lately Married the
most delicate, luscious -- luscious -- lus -- did^st ever see such a Woman in
thy life?


Flo. I cannot tell, I am past those studies now, the young Lady no doubt is
handsome enough, but what o'that?


Craf. I Am stark mad in love with her.


Flo. In love with your Father's Wife?


Craf. Ay, so mad for her, that I am quite out of my Wits; nay, I have not only
lost my Wits, but my Stomach.


Flo. The greater loss of the two.


Craf. I cannot eat nor drink, I cannot sleep neither; I was once a rare sleeper,
consta^^ly after Supper my Eyes used to call for their Evenings draught and I
was no sooner in bed, but they would tope off fourteen Hours at one go-down Now
I tumble and toss like a Child that has the Worms, Love and Poetry are
continually biteing me, I cannot pray neither when I fall to my Beads, instead
of crying Ave Maria, I cry Ave Mother-in-Law, I have given over all sorts of
pleasures, I read no News, go to no Coffee-house, frequent no Club, and take no
snuff.


Flo. Why you are come to a sad pass.


Craf. In Troth I am, thou wud'st say so if thou knew'st all, and I come to
thee, to beg of thee, as ever thou would save the life of an Honest young
Fellow of thy own party, and a true Whig as I hope to be saved, to lend me a
little of thy assistance, for thou art a rare Fellow at Wenching, know all
the tricks of Women, and have great power over my Mother.


Flo. And so I must procure her for you Sir?


Craf. Ay, prithee do now, prithee dear Rogue do now; Brother Whig, Brother
Whig, prithee dear Brother Whig do now.


Flo. Brother Whig! thou horrid Wretch, Brother to the Devil, art thou in
earnest.


Craf. Why thou horrid Fool, Brother to a Cha^gling, do think I come to hear
my self prate?


Flo. Then would thou Cuckold thy Father, thou Monster?


Craf. Would I not if I could, thou Monster? would any thing refuse to lie with
such a sweet Creature but a Monster?


Flo. Would any thing but the horrid'st Villain upon Earth, endeavor to
dishonor his Fathers Bed?


Craf. Would any thing but the horrid'st Ass upon Earth, say a lusty young
Fellow shall not honor his Fathers Bed more then an old fumbler that disgraces
it!


Flo. Then it is a thing of reputation with thee to commit Incest?


Craf. Incest? prithee don't trouble me with hard names, I don't think it is
any more Incest to lie with the same woman my Father does, then to drink in the
same Glass, or sit in the same Pue at Church.


Flo. Is there no difference between your Fathers Wife and his Pue?


Craf. He makes none, for they only both lay him to sleep. I would make a
difference, I confess, in the sweet use, not that I think his Wife more sacred
then his Pue, for the locking of a Man to a Woman in Marriage, or in a Pue in a
Church, are only a couple of Church-tricks to get Money, one for the Priest,
and the other for the Sexton; that is all.


Flo. You are a fine Fellow.


Craf. I would I were so fine a Fellow as to please my Mother-in-Law, and I
would not change to be thee, if thou were at thy best; And I do all I can to be
a fine Fellow, it costs me the Lord knows what in one Beauty-Water or another
to mend my Face, and a Pox on it, I Am never the handsomer; prithee have e're a
Looking-glass to see how I look?


Flo. Why, if thou look never so well, do thou think thou could charm
thy Mother into an Incestuous Strumpet?


Craf. What a robust word is there? look thee I understand Trap, and so does
she, I kissed her behind 'tother day, that is, I came behind and kissed her,
pretending I took her for the Waiting Woman, and she let me, pretending she
took me for my Father; a rank Sham o'both sides, we had both a mind to kiss,
and there is an end; And I swear she let me rumple those sweet Lips of hers as
patiently as a Mercer will let a good Customer do his Silks in hopes to put'em
off.


Flo. Ha! I Am glad you tell me this Sir, since she is so weak a piece, I Will
fortify her.


Craf. With Godly Counsels! putting forces into her Head will never fortify
her Tail, what signifies fortifying the Capital City, when the remote Provinces
rebel?


Flo. I shall bring down the Prince of the Country, your Father Sir, upon you,
who if he cannot quell the rebellion, shall deal with you.


Craf. Why thou wu't not betray me, wu't thou? I never knew a religious Fool
that was not a Rogue in my life; I tell thee what, if thou do tell my Father
I would lie with his Wife, Egad I Will swear to him thou do lie with her, and
I Will bring a hundred Witnesses to (...) it, besides Corroboraters.


Flo. How!


Craf. Yes that I will, I Will teach you to play the Knave, you stinking damned
Fellow you, I Am going now by my Fathers order to search the Cathedral for Arms
to affront the Clergy, and make 'em suspected for Plotters; now, instead of
Arms, I Will search for Swearers, and if they catch you by the back, they'I shake
you worse then an Ague, and be harder to cure then the Pox Sir.


Flo. There is a way to be cured Sir.


Craf. Ay, Twelve Protestant Consciences cleanly picked, not one or 'tother side
amongst 'em, are as certain a Cure of an Evidence, as Jesuits Powder of an
Ague, Probatum est.


Flo. Come back, thou art such a Villain, I know

[Is going off.] not what to do with thee.


Craf. And thou art such a Knave, I know not what to do with thee, Pox on me
for trusting thee.


Flo. If I should conceal thy wickedness, thou would proceed in it.


Craf. I will proceed, whether thou concealest it or no.


Flo. And ruin thy Soul.


Craf. I don't know whether I have a Soul or no.


Flo. If I tell thy Father --


Craf. Then I Will forswear it.


Flo. And hide your Roguery with perjury?


Craf. Ay, and be a true Protestant for all that.


Flo. And break your Fathers Heart?


Craf. I Will come the sooner to his Estate, and the easier to his Wife.


Flo. Oh fine Fellow! Well Sir, out of love to your good Father, whose Heart
this news would break; and out of love to the City, whose safety depends much
upon your wise Fathers Conduct, I will conce^l this; but I Will watch you.


Craf. Watch and be Hanged -- I would watch thee for my Mother, but that she
knows thou art such a foul rus^y Gun, if she should discharge thee, thou
would fly in pieces, and hazard her life too.


Flo. Away you Monster.


Craf. Away you Godly fa^se Puppy.


[Exit. Flo. I am glad the Fool gave me this notice. I do not know But my sair
love, like an o're-sertile Field,
May breed rank Weeds, if she be idly Til^'d;
Least Love for Fools should in her Bosom live,
She shall have all the Tillage I can give.



[Exit. Scene the Street.
Enter the Governor of the City, Artall, and Guard. Gov. This foolish
headstrong City will choose that factious troublesome Coxcomb Paulo Camillo for
their Podesta.


A Shout, A Paulo, a Paulo. Enter Podesta, Citizens, Brick-layer. Br. A brave
Paulo, we have carried thee Boy!


Go. Is this Gentleman Elected?


Br. Yes that he is, for all the tricks that were used to hinder it.


Go. I thought his Excellency the Viceroy had given you intimation another
person would be more pleasing to him, and in this juncture more sitting for the
Office.


Pod. Another Man more fit to be Podesta then me? then I shall think another
Man more fit to be Viceroy then he, and so I Will make bold humbly to acquaint
His Majesty.


[Aside. Br. Are we to follow the Viceroys pleasure, or our own consciences?


Art. Here Is saucy Rogue.


Go. What are you Sir, that undertake thus impudently for all the rest?


Br. It Is well known what I am, I am a Freeman of Naples, a Bricklayer by Trade.


Go. Oh I have heard of a busy pragmatical Fellow that calls himself the
Catholic Brick-layer, are you he Sir?


Br. I am not bound by Law to give an account what I am; if any one has any
thing to say to me, let him deal with me according to Law.


Go. But Sir, you might be so civil as to make me an Answer.


Br. I Will do nothing for no Man, but according to Law.


Pod. My Lord, the Man as to his occupation is but a mean Man, but as to his
abilities, he makes a very considerable Figure.


Art. He is a pretty Figure indeed.


Br. We have a Charter for the free Election of our Magistrate, and what we
have done, our Charter will justify.


Go. Have you a Charter to be sawey Sir?


Br. What I speak is according to Law, and I may speak Law in defense of our
proceedings.


Pod. Come, pray be silent, it is according to Law also for me to speak, His
Excellence the Viceroy has been pleased to oppose my Election, stimulated
thereunto by evil Men, Enemies to the City and Nation, they would betray and
sell us to the French, and they are angry so active a Man as I am put over the
City to prevent their wicked Machinations; for that reason I will be ten times
more active.


Art. A Pox of an active Rogue.


[aside. Go. Who are these evil Men you speak of, Indict 'em and prove 'em
Guilty, and I Will engage the Viceroy will severely punish 'em.


Pod. I don't know who they are, all is one for that, I Am sure there are such
Traitors, though I don't know who they are, and Frenchmen, though I don't know
where they are, and Plots, though I don't know what they are, and I Will make
work.


Go. May not you be deceived?


Pod. No, I Am never deceived; for the preservation therefore of the Town, I
will have four Regiments of the Train bands be upon the (...), during my whole
Year; and I, or my Officers, will every four and twenty Hours search every
House in the City.


Go. At this rate you will not let people be quiet in their Houses.


Pod. No* nor out of their Houses neither, I will have no Ranting, Rev^l^^ng,
Gameing, Drinking, no nor Eating immoderat^ly; I will have (...) eat and drink
according to Law, and I will have all Men's Tables examined to see if there be
no Letters cou^ey'd into their Dishes from the French, and if I find but the
least cause of suspicion, I Will take their dinners into custody; I will have all
persons be in bed at the ringing of the Nine-a-Clock Bell; and I, or my
Officers, will see 'em i'bed, and see who they have a bed with 'em too.


Art. Here Is a fine business, pox o'thee and thy Officers, shall we neither
eat, drink, nor lie a bed in quiet, for thee and thy Officers?


Pod. Poxo' me and my Officers? Pox of your Wenches Sir, I Will make you know I
am a Magistrate; Seize him.


Go. And have I no Authority, that you offer to Seize him in my presence?


Br. Yes, we know your Authority, know you are Military Governor of the City,
Captain of the Vice Roys Guards, a Lord, nay more then all this, a Justice of
Peace, and twenty things more; what do we care for all that, we are in the City
Liberties, and what we do is according to Law.


Go. Hold your prateing Si^rah.


Pod. He says truth.


Go. It may be according to Law, but it is unmannerly.


Br. All Is one, it is according to Law.


Go. But Sir, this Gentleman is an Officer under me, and you have not power
over him, therefore I advise you not to meddle with him.


Br. Have a care what you do, do nothing but according to Law.


Pod. Have you a care of advising me, I know what I do, I Will do nothing but
according to Law.


Go. Nor I neither, for I have Authority by Law to Protect my Officer by force,
if you use force; but because I Will make no disturbance, let him alone, and I Will
pass my word for him.


Br. If the Law will let him alone, do, otherwise not.


Go. Will you not take my Word?


Br. Advise with Counsel.


Pod. Advise me again! I know what I do, I will advise with Counsel!


Go. Advise with Counsel whether my Word's to be taken, or no; Guards, force
Artall out of their Hands, and take that Rascally Brick-layer into Custody,
[Brick layer is seized. and let me see who dares resist. Now Sirrah, though I
could punish you by Law for your insolence, since you are a Freeman, I will not
disturb the City-Festival with the punishment of the least o'their Members,
though they deserve it not; therefore Sirrah, if any of your great Friends here
will be bound for your good behavior, I Will release you.


Pod. It Is beneath my Dignity, though I respect the Man.


Go. Who else will be bound for him? Nobody? You see, Sirrah, for what special
Friends you leave you Trade and venture your Neck.


Br. Hang 'em, I knew the Rogues were of untemper'd Mortar: A word with you Sir
in private -- Procure me a Pention, I Will come over to your Party.


Go. A Pention! a Whip you Rascal; go Sirrah, I give you liberty, follow your
Trade, and mind all of you your own matters, leave State affairs to your
Governors, we have more to lose than any of you.


Pod. I don't know that I have a hundred thousand pound to lose, and that is
enough for one Man; but however my Lord, if you please to introduce me to His
Excellence the Viceroy --


Go. What to be --? I understand you my Lord.


Pod. How the Devil came he to understand my mind so well?


Go. Truly my Lord, I must tell you plainly, I don't care to do so ungrateful
an Office to His Excellency, for I know his mind very well, I know, till you
have a better introducer then my self, I mean your good management of affairs,
you will not be very welcome to him, nor receive any honor from him. And so
Farwell my Lord.


Exeunt Governor, Artall, and Guards. Pod. Say ye so, shall I not be welcome
to him? then he shan'not be Welcome to me; And since he will do me no Honor, I Will
do his Government not Honor. My Wife, for want of this Knighthood, will lead
me an ill life; and I for want of it will lead him an ill life, since he is so
huffy and stormy, I Will be a Storm.


Cat. Do my Lord.


Pod. A Whirlwind, that shall rumble and roar over his head, tear open Doors by
day and by night, toss his Friends out of their Coaches and Beds into Goals;
nor shall all the Preachings, and Pulpit-Charms (...) their Priests Dispossess
me, or fright me in the least,
A Whig's a Devil that can cast out a Priest.



[Exeunt. The End of the First Act.
ACT, the Second.
Enter Podesta, Citizens; Scene the Podesta's House. Pod. NOt Knight me? when
he knew I was a proud Man, very proud Man, opposed him out o'pride, and a
Knighthood might have bought me. He shall repent it.


Enter Rosaura attended. Ros. Welcome home my Lord, I wish you joy of your new
Honor.


Pod. Thank you Sweetheart, I am glad I Am in a capacity to do my Country
service, but I Am sorry I cannot do you the service you affect.


Ros. What Is that my Lord?


Pod. Give you lasting Honor, The Title I shall bestow on you will live no
longer then a Grasshopper or a Silkworm, 'twill dye at the end of the Year,
your present Title of Ladyship will then dye into an Aldermans Wife, for I am
not Knighted.


Ros. Not Knighted?


Pod. Not Knighted.


Ros. How dare they use you thus?


Pod. They are desperate.


Ros. I Am troubled.


Pod. I know it.


Ros. I was born well, and I affect Honor.


Pod. I know it, I know your spirit better then you do your self, and am
pleased with your affection to Honor, for Honor is an excellent guard to
Virtue, I know you are punctually just to me.


Ros. Am I? I think I am.


Pod. Out of a point of Honor I know it, scorning to appear what you are not;
not out of dullness and want of gayety you affect pleasures and follow 'em.


Ros. I do.


Pod. Out of a point of Honor, to appear what you are, I know you, know your
temper perfectly.


Ros. So perfectly you amaze me.


Pod. Oh! I have a penitrating judgment, know your passion for Honor, highly
commend it, and would gratify it if I could, but since I cannot, I will give
you a kind of Honor, Revenge. The methods you must leave to me.


Ros. Give me Greatness, and do you keep Policy.


Pod. Well carved.


Ros. So, I have nursed the Wenn of his Vanity, till it has blinded his Eyes,
and made him mistake his affection for mine; what I really affect, he is never
like to see, and that is only my dear Florio.


[aside. Enter the Brick-layer. Br. Your Servant Sir, I am much beholding to
you, and the rest of my Breth^ren of the City for the kindness you showed me to
day in refusing to be bound for me.


Pod. I Will answer you Sir, we resolved to go prudently to work, we did not know
but they might have laid Treason to your charge, so we resolved to see whether
they durst have Tried you, and if they had Tried you, whether they durst have
brought you in Guilty, and if they had brought you in Guilty, whether they
durst have Hanged you, and if they had Hanged you -- then let 'em look to
themselves.


Br. And who should have looked to me then? a very fine busines^, come, come,
this was scurvy, but I Will stick to the cause whilst I have drop of blood.


Enter Craffy. Craf. Ha^ there is my delicate Mother-in Law, that ever such a
curious Appendix should be bound up with such a Volum^ (...) covered with
Calves Leather, as that old Fellow is, I will t^a^her (...) him, I Will be hanged
if she loves him; and as for Marriage-promises, they are but Church-Mouth-Glue,
they will not hold a couple together Three Days.


Pod. Oh are you come Sir? well, what have you done Sir?


Craf. A delicate Woman!


[Aside] Sir. Pod. Sir? are you asleep Sir?


Craf. No, nor a ^ed Sir, would I were wi' your Wife Sir.


[aside. Pod. What are you ^^areing on Sir? why don't you give me an Account of
what I sent you about? did not I send you to search the Cathedral for Arms Sir?


Craf. Yes Sir.


Pod And what have you done Sir?


Craf. Sir, I have been searching -- searching -- searching -- Sir -- that
Mother-in-Law --


Pod Searching your Mother-in-Law Sir?


Craf. The Cathedral, the Cathedral I mean Sir.


Pod. S^rrah, you said Mother-in Law.


Craf. Why is not a Cathedral a Mother Church Sir?


Pod. S^rrah, you said Mother in-Law.


Craf. Why is not a Cathedral according to Law Sir? I spoke jeeringly, and you
k^ow we use to jeer the Church Sir.


Pod. That Is true.


Craf. Lord Sir, must I teach you the language of your own Family?


Pod. Well, did the Priests let you come in patiently?


Craf. Ay, ay, -- fiddle -- faddle -- a delicate Woman!


[aside. Pod. That Is very strange, then they are not afraid of me?


Craf. I hope shortly to leave never a Priest in Christendom, they call
themselves the Pillars of truth, they are rather the Whipping-Posts of truth,
and Sign-posts of Faction.


Pod. I Will handle greater people then they.


Craf. I must have this Woman, if Courtship won^t do, Love-powder shall.


[aside. Pod. Come Sir, I Will try your understanding.


Craf. I am resolved upon Love-powder.


[aside. Pod. I can put the City in Arms, upon pretense of a French Invasion,
but when they see no invasion, and the fright is over, how shall I keep up that
Army?


Craf. The best way will be by Love-powder.


Pod. How! keep up an Army by Love-powder? you impudent, illmanner'd unnatural
Rascal you, do you jeer your Father?


Craf. Sir, I don't jeer you.


Pod. Sirrah, you either jeer me, or which is almost as saucy, did not attend
to what I said.


Craf. Well, I confess my Wits were a Wool-gathering, and I beg your pardon Sir.


Pod. A Wool-gathering? a Whore-gathering by your story of Love-powder, you
saucy debauched Fop you, when your Father condescends to talk wisely to you of
State Affairs, must your brains be rambling after Wenches?


Craf. Wenches are ^itter for me then State Affairs Sir; what a Duce should
such a young Fellow as I trouble himself with State Affairs for?


Pod. Who used to trouble themselves and others too about State Affairs more
then you Sir? were you not such a tempestuous disputer in Coffee-houses, that
as soon as ever you appeared in one, both sides would run away, our Friends out
of envy, and our Enemies out of fear.


Br. It Is my case, no Man will sit by me in a Coffee-house.


Pod. Were not your Writings like so many Fire-drakes? no Printer would meddle
with 'em, no person come near 'em.


Br. His things are very near my Style, and I am forced to Print all my things
at my own charge.


Pod. And now Sirrah, all of the sudden, you are unfit for State Affairs; come,
come Sirrah, you are a Villain, have turned Cat in Pan; and are a Tory.


Craf. A Tory? that is a good one, when I Am now Writing an Answer to Absalom and
Achitophel.


Pod. How!


Ros. It Is true indeed, he read part of it to my Maid last night.


Wom. He did indeed Madam, and it is very fine.


Br. May be that puzzles his Head then.


Pod. Nay, if it be so, I shall not be angry with him, for of my Word* a good
Answer to that would do us service.


Br. And 'twill require pains.


Pod. It will do so, if he employs his time and thoughts so well as that* I
shall be very well satisfied; what do you call this Poem?


Craf. A^^riah and Hushai.


Pod. A very good subject.


Br. Well chosen.


Craf. Is not this a strange thing now, that you who are no Poet, not
understand Poetry no more then a Cat, should lie insulting over a Man of sense,
when he is breaking his brains for the service and honor of you and your party?


Pod. Well, well Craffy, I did not know it, I did not know it.


Craf. Not know it? then you should not meddle with that you do not understand,
I must break my sleep, and spoil my stomach in studying to do you service, and
be called a Villain and a Tory?


Pod. Well, well Child, I am sorry, I am sorry.


Craf. Sorry? what does your sorryness signify? suppose your vexing me should
make me Write but a sorry Poem, as twenty to one but it will, and so I Will go
burn what I have done, and there is an end.


Pod. Nay prithee Child.


Craf. I will.


Pod. Prithee dear Child.


Craf. Hay I will.


Pod. No, prithee Child, let me see what thou have done, and finish the
remainder.


Craf. I will not.


Pod. Prithee do now, 'twill joy my heart.


Craf. I say I will not.


Pod. This it is to breed our Sons Wiser then our selves, we are despised for
our pains.


Br. Look, if he has not made his good Father weep; are not you a cross-grained
ill-natured Fellow to make your old Father weep? what if he be not so good a
Poet and Scholar as you, he has as good natural parts, and better.


Pod. He is ungrateful to me, for what learning he has, my purse paid for; but
I always find overmuch wit and learning make people insolent, and when alls
done, a Fool's a better comfort to his Parents, then one of these great Wits.


Br. Go fetch the Poem, and be Whipped to you.


Ros. Do Mr. Craffy, 'twill obliege your Father and me both.


Craff. Will it obliege your Lor'ship Madam? to do that I Will run a Thousand
Miles upon my bea^ Head, Madam.


[Exit Craffy. Pod. I Am glad he pays so much respect to you, Sweetheart, though
he will pay none to me.


Ros. Yes, yes, he will, but great Wits are humor some.


Pod. Nay, the Boy has excellent parts, that is certain, but when all done, it is
but a folly to breed Boys up to this height, for it does but spoil them, and
all business, for they will be a top of business, riding upon old Men's backs,
and so the old Men go lamely, and the Boys ride madly, and the business goes
awkardly.


Ros. Now shall I be wedged in, between the old Fool and the young, by the
heavy Beetle of this Poem, and have no opportunity with my charming Florio,
when he comes I Will lay away the Beetle;


[aside. Maria. Wom. Madam.


Ros. Did not you say Craffy fell asleep last night in reading his own Verses,
and when he waked, forgot 'em in your Chamber?


Wom. Yes Madam.


Ros. Run quickly and bring 'em to me.


[Exit Woman. Enter Florio wrapped in his Cloak. Pod. Oh! how do you good Mr.
Florio?


Flo. Thank you good my Lord, the better to see things go so well, that you are
chosen.


Pod Oh! we carried clearly.


Flo. Ay, so my Chaplain Dr. Sanchy said, who I think labored for my Lord.


Br. Ay indeed, he took great pains, there was scarce a Man appeared against my
Lord, that he did not call Rogue and Rascal a hundred times.


Flo. He is a zealous Man, and so seldom calls any Man by his Christen name,
that he is suspected to be an Anabaptist, and against Christening -- Oh! dear
Madam, is your Ladyship here? when I came into the Room, I saw a Lady, and
turned my head aside, as my usual manners is when I see Women, for they have
been no good Friends of mine, and so I did not mind your Ladyship, I beg your
pardon.


Ros. Oh! it needs not Sir, I am very glad to see you look so well.


Pod. Ay truly, Mr. Florio looks very fine and fresh ruddy and plump, methinks
I have hopes of him; what says your Doctors Sir?


Flo. Alas! my Lord, they have given me over long since, all my trust is in an
incomparable Nurse.


Pod. Pray who is she?


Flo. As you came along my Lord, you might have seen her tied by a Rope to my
door.


Pod. Tied with a Rope? what is she a mad Woman?


Flo. No, no, my Lord, a Cow, my Lord, a Cow.


Pod. A Cow?


Flo. Ay my Lord, have not I managed my self well, to bring my self from one of
those they call one of the Wits of the Kingdom, to be one of the Calves, and
live upon the breasts of a poor Beast, for thence I have all my subsistence.


Pod. Alack! yet your Face says you are as well as ever you were in your life,
I protest it does.


Flo. My Face is as false as ever my heart was, it might have more innocence,
for it is scarce two Months old, I mean the Flesh of it.


Pod. Is it possible, I warrant if you were to begin the World again, you would
have none of the mad frolicks you had?


Flo. I think I should not, I laughed once at mad Fellows that in drunken
frolicks eat ^ire, but was not I more mad to belch Fire at Heaven it self, as I
have often done in my abominable talk? but what did I get by it? he threw it
all back again in my Face, and almost consumed me. Man is a shallow Animal, can
bear no excess, too much Wit makes him as mad as too much Wine, and a little
over sets him; yet he thinks his silly Scull contains all things, rules all
things, and Omnipotence it self is afraid of that pitiful Engine.


Pod. Very well.


Flo. When all that the most hot-brained Fellow in the world can do, is to make
a smoke to darken things, he cannot strike Fire enough out of himself to light
him into the nature of a Fly. But it is time we went to Prayers. Doctor Sanchy.


Enter Doctor Sanchy. Dr. I Am a coming.


Flo. Good Doctor give us a few Prayers.


Dr. Ay if you will.


Flo. My Lord being a Magistrate, I think Doctor you must read the Prayers of
the Church.


Dr. I Will see 'em burnt first, and all Priests hanged, before I read any of
their Prayers.


Flo. The Law commands i^.


Dr. Therefore I will not do it, I Will be commanded by nothing, and do nothing I Am
commanded.


Br. For matter of Law, we can easily come off, no body dare indict us.


Flo. But for matter of Conscience.


Dr. Hang Conscience, I do it out of matter of Honor, and matter of Revenge,
the Priests are Rascals and slight me, and I Will slight their Prayers.


Flo. We shoul'd not be humoursome in our Prayers Doctor.


Dr. I Will do what I please, or I Will do nothing.


Pod. Pray let him, for we are all oblieg'd to the Doctor for the assistance he
gave my Election.


Dr. He had need of it, there was a damned Company of Rogues appeared against
you, I hope to see 'em all hanged.


Br. There was one great Man.


Dr. A great Rogue, he deserves to be burnt.


Pod. There was a great lady very busy.


Dr. A great Whore, she deserves to be whipped, I hope to see all such Rogues and
Whores whipped out of the Kingdom; but come let us go to Prayers.


Enter Craffy. Craff. O the Devil, the Devil!


Pod. What Is the matter?


Craff. I have lost my Hushai, I cannot find it high nor low. Who saw my Hushai?


Dr. What the Poem that you read to me, that was an answer to Absalom?


Craf. Ay.


Dr. I had rather have lost ten pounds out of my own Pocket.


Pod. Then do you like it Doctor?


Dr. 'Twas an admirable thing! 'twould have made the Rogue that writ Absalom
hang himself; look about for this Hushai.


Flo. Will Not you go to Prayers first Doctor?


Dr. Hang Prayers! this is a thing of forty times the consequence we may pray
at any time, or if we never pray at all, it is no great matter, it is but a
thing of form to please the people; look for this Hushai. I Will look for it my
self.


[Exit Dr.] Craf. Who the Devil has got my Hushai?


Enter a Vintners Boy. Boy. Is Mr. Craffy here?


Craf. Well Sir, what would you have?


Boy. I come from the Club, they stay for you Sir.


Craf. The Club be damned, I cannot come, I have lost my Hushai.


Pod. What Club is it?


Craf. The Club of young pollitick Whigs, you know 'em.


Pod. Oh Craffy, you must go to 'em, they are all persons of Quality.


Craf. What care I for their quality, they are but a company of young Coxcombs,
I will not loose my Hushai for 'em.


Pod. Sirrah, you are a saucy fellow to call young Men of their parts and
quality, Coxcombs, they are admitted into better Company then yours Sir.


Craf. Ay, to help to pay reckonings, flatter an old Knaves vanity, and give a
Guinny to the burning of a Pope.


Pod. Sir, some of 'em have had the honor to sit in great Caballs.


Craf. I wonder they could.


Pod. Why so Sir?


Craf. Because some of 'em were so lately whipped at School for Blockheads. I
wonder they could sit any where, they have the marks of Fools both before and
behind, and if ever they speak, the mark's in their Mouths.


Br. I don't like this Fellow.


Pod. Sirrah, I now begin to suspect you again for a Tory, and get you to 'em,
or I Will not only Cudgel you, but disinherit you.


Craf. Take notice if I go to 'em, I shall be very drunk.


Pod. I care not if you be in such company as they are.


Craf. Your Wise's Honesty may pay for it, for I shall be very impudent when I
am drunk;

[aside. look all for my Hushai.


[Exit Craffy. Br. What else!


Ros. So, we are rid of one Fool, could we have as good luck with the rest!


[aside. Enter Doctor Sanchy. Dr. What is become of this Hushai, some concealed
Rogue has burnt it out of Envy.


Enter a Coffee-Boy. Coffee-Boy. Doctor you must come to the Coffee-house.


Dr. Must come?


Coffee-boy. Ay, to a person of quality.


Dr. That person of quality is a Coxcomb, and you are a saucy Rascal; must come?


Coffee-boy. It Is the lame Lord.


Dr. He is a Rascal.


Coffee-boy. Your Friend.


Dr. Oh! then I Will come, but look all about for this Hushai.


Pod. Do so, and let me have an account of it when I come home.


[Exeunt Dr. and Boy. Ros. Are you a going abroad my Lord?


Pod. Yes Sweetheart, and shall not come home these three hour,

Mr. Florio, you will excuse me, I leave you.


Flo. Oh! good my Lord!

Exeunt Podesta, Brick-layer, and Citizens. Ha! rid of all my diseases at once!

I mean my Fools, and left alone with my health! my Rosaura!


Ros. My life! my Florio!


They embrace, and Enter Podesta and Bricklayer. Flo. My Rosaura!


Ros. My Husband! faint, ^aint in my arms, help, help, help.


Pod. What Is the matter?


Ros. Mr. Florio is fallen into an Appopleptick Fit, and dies in my arms.


Pod. Alas poor Gentleman! who there? [Enter Pietro. help in with your Master,
and call a Doctor, I Am cruelly afraid he will go away in one of these Fits.


[Exit Pietro, Rosaura, and Florio. Enter a Servant. Serve. My Lord, here is an
old Counselor, Bartoline, lighted at your door, and is coming up to speak
with your Lordship.


Pod. This old Lawyer is a strange Fellow, he is very old, and very rich, and
yet follows the Term, as if he were to begin the World.


Br. He has lost all his Teeth that he can hardly speak, and he will be
pleading for his ^ee; but he is of our side, and so we must not speak against
him.


Lawyer. [Enter Bartoline, Lucinda, and (at a distance) Artall. Art. What
pretty Country Creature's this! I cannot but venture inafter her; the Podesta's
House is public, and so I shall not be taken notice of.


Bar. Where Is my Lord Poshta? hah! where ish he?


Pod. Here, here, old Friend, do not you see me?


Bar. No, said my eysh are none of the besht.


Pod. You follow the Term still?


Bar. Ay, and will ash long ash I live, yer'sh no caush wi'out me.


Br. How can you follow all Causes?


Bar. Ye'y follow me, ye'y will ha'me.


Pod. What young Gentlewoman have you brought with you here (...)


Bar. One I may be ashamed on -- shesh my folly, yat ish cho shay my Wife -- I
have played ye fool, and Married a young Garle.


Art. Thy Wife? if thou be her Husband, thou shall be my Cuckold.


[aside. Pod. Welcome to Town Madam.


Br. Welcome Mistress.


Bar. Ish she not pritchy? you she I have a shweet chooth in my head shtill.


Pod. Sweet Tooth? you have never a Tooth in your head.


Bar. Yatsh chrue, but I Will bite for all yet wr' my Wit.


Pod. Why would you Marry such a young thing as this?


Br. A Man of fourscore be so fond? he, (...).


Bar. A Man of foashco -- yersh no shuch thing, ye are Boysh or foashsco -- if
you will, after 'hreeshco we ought cho go in long coa^h, for breechesh are
imposh churesh and preechen^ cho that (...) I believe my Lord Poshta you are
behind-hand wi' your (...) ash I, I believe sho -- hah!


Pod. Though I be, I shall suffer no disgrace.


Bar. How do you know yat?


Pod. Because I married a virtuous Woman.


Bar. A vartuoush Woman? why sho did I for ought I kno may be bo'h mi^hchaken.


Pod. No, I am never mistaken.


Bar. Oh you are a happy Man, I ha'no shuch confidentsh in a Woman I declare it
before my Girlesh faish, I Will wash her wachersh.


Pod. Do if you please.


Bar. And for yat reashon I have brought her hither, deshire you though let her
be in your housh; yoursh is a shivil Family, and here she will have a great yeale
of good company, yat will chake off her fanshy from going abro^d and playing ye
fool.


Art. So, ^ow I shall know where to find her.


[aside. Pod. What would you h^' me keep a Boarding-house?


Bar. What do you shtand upon sheremonyesh with an old Friend fo^^ you and I
have known one anoyer fortchy years, and when you are in bed with your Wife,
yersh shome'hing about you dosh confesh you cho be old. Come, if you will let me
be here, I Will give your Wife a Jewel, and you a peish of Plate, and I Will pay a
good rate beshidesh; what chay you cho y'ish now, Huh?


Pod. With all my heart.


Bar. Will my Lady conshent? for I believe de Maresh de letcher hoish.


Pod. My Will is hers.


Bar. I would know 'yat of her.


Pod. She is busied now in a work of Charity, about a poor Gentleman, that is
fallen in an Appoplectick Fit, I don't know whether he^l recover it, if he does,
he cannot live long, he is in a deep Consumption, I should be sorry to loose him,
though in point of Money, I should be a gainer by his death, for he will leave
us a very good Legacy.


Bar. A Legashy? huh!


Pod. Yes, for he is a rich Bachelor.


Bar. What a Kinshman?


Pod. No kin at all, but he has a great Friendship for us because we are a
strict sober Family, and he is a mighty Religious Gentleman.


Art. Oh! I know this Religious Rogue, it is Florio.


[aside. Bar. Will he leave you money, becaush you are shober? huh!


Pod. You must know he was a great follower of naughty Women, and now he feels
the sad consequence, and has a great value for Virtue, and I believe will leave
my Wife a great part of his estate, because she is a virtuous Woman.


Bar. Do you hear Girl? you are fallen incho a brave housh, where you may get
money by Vartshow and Shobrietchy; Come, my Lord, what will you have, I Will pay
you any rate, Come.


Pod. You and I will not fall out.


Art. Ha! is he a providing a Florio for his Wife? I Will provide him a Florio.
By good luck I have an Indian-Gown and Cap at the door, just new out of the
Shop.


[Exit Artall. Bar. What ish yish Gentlemansh name?


Pod. Florio.


Bar. Oh! y're ish shuch a Man; I never shaw him, but I have heard of him, a
great debosh, wash he not? and a good witshy Fellow.


Pod. Oh! a very witty man, and a wicked man too once, but now the most
penitent creature in the world, and he had need be so, he is going out of it,
he cannot live many Months.


Bar. Alash poor man, and when he dyesh he will leave all hish money to Vartuoush
people will he? huh.


Pod. Yes, he says it is sowing Seed in good ground; well ^ha^ some occasions
call me away, you may be here if you will, old acquaintance.


Br. Ay, let him, let him, and come away about your business.


[Exeunt Podesta and Bricklayer. Bar. Hark you, hark you! Sho, yish wash very
lucky, Girl you mush make it your buyshnesh cho get iucho yish Genklemansh
favor by your Shobriechy, and you may mump my Lady Poshta of hish Eschate for
oughteh I know.


Enter Artall in a Nightgown and Cap, a Patch on his Nose, led by Two
Servants. Art. I grow weaker and weaker every day, my time draws on, Heaven
prepare me for my Change, yet I Will use the means to live. Give me my Milk.


Bar. I my Consciensh, yish ish de Genkleman!


Art. Give me my Milk I say you Rascals: what have I said? indeed I should not
call any thing out of it is name, I ask your pardon for it.


1 Ser. Ah Sir! ask your poor Servants pardon?


Art. Ay and thank you too, if you will give it me. I was so accustomed in the
days of my wickedness to Libell every thing, I cannot leave the ill habit still.


Bar. Ay, yish ish he, yish ish he sharchainly.


Art. Truth is, Atheism is nothing else but a Libell on the whole Creation,
calling it the Offspring of paltry Chance, when it is the Child of Heaven, that
I ought to ask pardon of every Dog for detracting from his descent; But give me
my Milk, and set me a Chair to repose my sel^, for I am very weak.


Bar. Alack! alack! yish ish de poor Gentleman; But what a 'hing it ish y'at
yish young Fellow should bring himshelush inchoshuch a shad condition: let me
she how he looksh!


Puts on his Spectacles, and looks on Artall, whilst Artall holds the Pot to
his Nose. Luc. Certainly this handsome sick Gentleman is the ^ine unhappy Mr.
Florio, I have heard so much talk of, a thousand pitties such a delicate
Gentleman should bring himself to this!


Bar. He looksh very white -- odsha' me -- 'twash the white potch -- ay 'twash
the potch, and he looks very rudgy, but men in yat g^^t will do sho, ay yey
will do sho.


Art. Oh! Florio, Florio!


Bar. Oh! now I am shachishfyed, 'tish he.


Art. How have thou brought on this Youth all the Infirmities of Age? my eyes
are dim, my breath is short, my Limbs are weak, Limbs did I say? I have none,
at least of Heaven's making: I have Imbezell'd all the Furniture of my Soul and
body in vice, though Heaven gave me an excellent Housekeeper to look to it
all, a careful wakeful Creature, called a Conscience, which never slept, never
let me sleep in ill, but I abused her, sought to turn her out of doors, nay,
Murder her, but could not.


Bar. I prochesht yish ish very shad.


Luc. Exceeding pitiful.


Art. Ashamed of her I was, and to all my Atheistical Companions denied her, at
the same time she star'd me in the face; It Is the Athiests trick to hide his
Conscience as the Tradesman does his Wench, for fear of spoiling his Credit,
and loosing his Traffic with those ill people, who will not come near him if
he owns so scandalous a thing as a Conscience.


Luc. I swear he almost makes me weep.


Bar. Why chruly I am chroubled, and I don't ushe cho be sho.


Art. But ala! let him hide her for a time, when diseases and death come and
shake the building in pieces, as now they do mine, the poor foul Conscience
will appear through all the Rubbish, and call out mercy, mercy, when it may be
it is too late; thank Heaven for the fair warning I have had; Is my Coffin ready?


2 Ser. Dear Sir, why does your Honor think of a Coffin? it is time enough to
talk of that forty years hence.


Art. Oh! prithee don't flatter my crazed body, I cannot live, I hang on the
Eves of life, like a trembling drop, ready every minute to fall and be seen no
more.


Bar. Alash, alash.


1 Ser. Oh! dear, and please your Honor, here is company, I doubt your Honor
intrenches on a Gentleman's Chamber?


Art. Heaven forbid! where is the Gentleman? I beg your pardon Sir a thousand
times; my good friend the new Lord Podesta, you know Sir, is a sober, discreet,
frugal person, hates the vanity and prodigality of splendid Housekeeping, and
so I suppo^e, may content himself with a part of this House, and oblige a
friend with the remainder; if you be the friend, I beg your pardon Sir, I would
have gone up higher, but truly I wanted breath.


Bar. Why chruly, you shay chrue Shir, my Lord yo'sh oblige me with part of
hish housh, which part, or the whole housh, if it were mine, should be at your
shervish, good Mr. Florio.


Art. Do you know me Sir?


Bar. No Shir, but I have heard mush of your great partsh, and my Lord Poshto
chellsh me what a good man you are, and I have heard it choo wi' my own earsh.


Art. May I crave your name Sir?


Bar. I am called Barcholine Shir, I am a Fellow pritchy well known among
Lawyersh..


Art. The famous Counselor Bartoline?


Bar. I have some Repuchation in y'at way Shir.


Art. I am glad to know your Sir, I think I see a young Woman there, very young
-- is she your Grandchild Sir?


Bar. Why chruly Shir, I am almosht ashamed cho chell you she is my Wife.


Art. Oh dear! would you Marry one so young Sir?


Bar. I wanched a comfort for my Age Shir.


Art. And she wants a comfort for her Youth, Heaven that made both Sexes, would
have both provided for, can pou provide for hers?


Bar. Whatch I want in Provisionsh I make up in a heartchy Welcome -- hah!


Art. But will that suffice her?


Bar. It may in chime, cushtome ish a great matcher, I have obsherved lushty
Sou'dies by custom got cho dine and shup very comforchably on a pipe of
Chobacco.


Art. But they steal many a good bit that no body knows of.


Bar. Why chruly she may Shir, but not if she be honesht.


Art. Many an honest Parishoner follows private Meetings, because he finds no
comfort from the Parson of the Parish, but she seems a virtuous, modest, young
Lady, and I would pay my respects to her in a salute, but I fear my breath may
offend her, pray excuse me to her Sir.


Bar. Oh! good Shir, well shir, she and I are cho chaken with the discourshesh
we have heard fall from you, y'at we are exshtreamly deshiroush to be
frequently wi' you Shir.


Art. Alas Sir! I am unfit for company, my good Lady Podesta indeed will fit by
me half a day here, as by a murmuring Brook that slides fast away, and soon
will be dried up for ever, and she is content to hear my little purlings.


Bar. Ay yey are very well ingeed Shir, very well, and you would much obliegsh
ush, my Wife wantsh shuch good company, shesh a ^oung creature, yat never in
Chown before, and yos'h not know the World Shir.


Art. Is it possible! sweet Madam, you are failed into a dangerous Gulf which
few young Ladies pass without casting away their Reputations, or Honestys, or
both; I have been an Admiral here, and you see to what I am brought!


Bar. Well Shir, affairsh call me away, I Will make bold cho leave you chogether
Shir.


Art. She will be weary of me Sir, for I am weary of my self.


Bar. No ingeed Shir, she chaksh great gelight in your dishcoursh, pray letch
her have it Shir, I Will rechurn presently, wheegle him, dee hear? wheegle him,
you may get a good Legashy.


[Exit. Bartoline. Art. Is he gone?


1 Ser. He Is gone Sir.


Art. My Perriwigg and Love Aquipage, quickly.


Luc. How now! what is this?


Art. An Adorer of yours fair creature, no unsound, false, wicked Florio, but a
sound, young, vigorous, passionate Lover, if you will not believe my tongue,
believe my Nose, the patch covers wholesome flesh, believe my Legs, which leap,
vault, and run, except from you sweet Creature.


Luc. I am betrayed! drawn into a Snare (but it is a sweet one (aside) help!
help! help!


Art. I need no help my Dear.


Luc. But I do, help! help! help!

Oh it is a lovely Gentleman! (aside.) help! help!

It Is a delicate Gentleman! (aside.) help! help!


Art. Why do you call so loud? I can help you to what you want.


Luc. Help, help! will you force me? (I cannot resist him, (aside.) help! help!


Art. All this is to no purpose.


Luc. Oh fie upon you, what a Man you are? A handsome Man I mean, (aside.) I am
out of breath with striving, help! help! Oh my heart pants! help! help! help!


[Artall carries her off. The End of the Second Act.
ACT, the Third.
Enter Artall and Lucinda; The scene continues. Luc. OH! Fie upon you! fie upon
you, was ever virtuous Gentlewoman served such a trick before?


Art. Oh! frequently, scores of 'em are served so, every Easter- Term.


Luc. What, Women that are as virtuous as my self?


Art. Ay, full as virtuous.


Luc. O Lord bless us! what a place is this! I did not think there had been
such a place, nor such a Man as you in the world, I shall never endure to see
you more.


Art. Do not say so.


Luc. No, never as long as I live.


Art. You Will change your mind.


Luc. Never whilst I breath.


Art. Yes when I come next, mean while I am your humble Servant.


Luc. Your Servant dear Sir.


Art. When shall I wait on you again, Madam?


Luc. When you please Sir, I shall at all times be glad of your good Company.


Art. Your Servant dear Madam.


Luc. Your Servant dear Sir.


[Exit. Artall. Enter Bartoline and his Clerk with Papers. Bar. Wher'sh my
Wife, and poo Mishte Florio? huh! where are yey?


Luc. Here Is your Wife, but poor Mr. Florio is gone away very ill.


Bar. Were you not weary of him? huh!


Luc. No indeed, I could have been with him all day and all night.


Bar. I doubt you dishemble.


Luc. Indeed I do not.


Bar. I doubch you had rather been at a Play, or shome other Diverchishment.


Luc. I swear I had more pleasure from him, then ever I had from any
Divertisement in my life.


Bar. Well, be good whilsht I live, 'twill be the betcher for you when I dye,
then I shall leave you Rich enough cho chake your choish of young handshome
Coxshcombes.


Luc. Do not tell me of young handsome Coxcombs.


Bar. You will not Marry I warrant when I am gead? no not you? a 'housand to one,
you will be Married before, nay, I dare hold chenne pound you are Conchracted
now?


Luc. How!


Bar. Nay, not by a Preish, but by looksh, and shmirkeh, etc. twisching of
Eye-beamsh, and making a Wedging-Ring of the fine round mou'h -- and yush, I
believe you have promish'd your shelfe cho a 'housand foolsh.


Luc. You wrong me extremely.


Bar. All ye betcher, I Am shure I shall disherve your kindness, for I am
labring cho make you a rich Widgow; The Term will not lasht a mouth, and I have
more breviatsh and Papersh putch incho my hand shince I went out, yen I can
read in 'hree monh'sh, I Am shure on it.


Luc. And what must become of your Clyents Causes?


Bar. I yont care, I know what will become of yeir Money; I Will lock it up
preshently, all for you, gi' me my Papersh, come let me she now -- let me she
-- whatsh her cho do? [Reads his Papers. Oh! among other 'hingsh heresh a buy
shnesh in which my Brothersh Neck'sh conshern'd; He ish 'hirchy years younger
yen I am, yet he ish old enough cho be Wiser; He has played de fool and killg
a man, and ye Widow bringsh an Appeal, in which it sheemsh year arishesh
matcher of Law -- my Brother shendsh me chenne poun' cho rechaine me, ye Widow
shendsh me twenchy, sho I follow ye poor Widyowsh buyshnesh, I am for ye poor
Widow, I.


Luc. Will you Hang your Brother for ten pound?


Bar. You should ashke me if I would hang him for chenne shillingsh, yen I
might conshiger it, but chenne ponn' ish a great yeale of money, tish a great
yeale of money, come let me she.


[Reads. Luc. Methinks it is a little against the Law of Nature.


Bar. Ye Law of Natchure belongsh cho Pchivilians Woman, we common Lawyeash
y'ont studgy ye Law of Nachure, tish none of our shtudgy -- no -- no -- But
come let me she -- whatsh here now? come.


[Exit. Lucinda Bartoline Reads, Drums beat without; Enter Podesta,
Brick-layer, and a Gentleman. Gent. My Lord.


Pod. What Is your business Sir?


Gent. I have a Message to you Lordship, from his Highness the Viceroy.


Pod. Very well Sir, I attend.


Gent. His Highness desires your Lordship not to disturb and frighten the City,
by raising the Town Forces to no purpose


Pod. He is of opinion, it is to no purpose, is he?


Gent. Yes my Lord.


Pod. I am of a contrary opinion, and I am seldom mistaken.


Gent. His Highness bid me tell you, that for the bare satisfaction of the
Poeple, (though danger requires it not) he is willing you should keep up half
you do.


Pod. He would have me keep but half?


Gent. No my Lord.


Pod. Then I will keep as many more.


Gent. Is that your Answer?


Br. Yes, and we will justify it by Law.


Gent. Well bred, good humored Gentlemen these, and fine Subjects


Pod. He shall shortly hear from us things that [Exit Gent. will vex him worse
then this, Articles that may cost him his Employment. We Will not only humbly
humbly address to His Majesty, but Impeach him; I Will teach him not to Knight me.


Br. Here is Counselor Bartoline, the greatest Lawyer in the Kingdom, and
one of our own Party, you cannot possibly advise with a better Man about 'em,
give him the Hundred pound Fee, the City allows you to retain some eminent
Lawyer.


Pod. I will, Counselor Bartoline, I must speak a word wi' you.


Bar. I Am not at leishure, I have Caushesh cho look over, yat are cho come on
cho Morrow.


Pod. But we have a Cause in which the whole City's concerned.


Bar. You must deferr it yen, for if I y'ont appear in yish Cause cho Morrow,
'twill be losht, it wholly dependsh upon me, and I cannot but in conshiensh
atchend it, I have a Fiftshe pound Fee.


Pod. We Will give you a Hundred pound, Mun.


Bar How? a Hundger'd poun? huh?


Pod. Ay, there it is.


Bar. Here, lay ashide yesh Papers,

[to his Clerk. Well, whatsh your buyshnesh now -- come -- huh!


Br. We are drawing up Articles against the Man of the Castle.


Bar. Yea Man at ye Cashtle, wosh yat?


Pod. He means the Viceroy.


Bar. Archiclsh against the Viceh-Roy -- huh?


Pod. Ay.


Bar. Gi me ye Papersh again, I will not meggle in it.


Br. How! not meddle?


Bar. No, I will not meggle, I will not meggle.


Br. Your reason?


Bar. I may loosh my Head mun, I will not meggle, no, no, come let me she.


[Reads his papers again. Br. No matter if you do loose your Head, if you have
no more honesty nor love for your Country, then to refuse to do your Countries
business, when you have received your Countries Money.


Bar. I yon't care whosh money 'tish, let it be ye Devilsh money I Will keep it,
now I have it, but I will not meggle in the buyshnesh -- no -- no -- come -- come.


[Reads. Br. Keep our Money? and not do our business?


Bar. Tish our way. 'Tish our way.


Pod. Sir, by your Favor, either do our business, or pay back our Fee.


Bar. Pay back your Fee -- 'twash never known mun, and I will not shet an ill
pregident; no, no, tish shufficient I will not be against you, yatsh enough. Come
let me she.


Br. Did one ever know such a Knave? what shall we do? for you and I must
account for this Money.


Pod. Let me alone with him, I understand Mankind; Counselor Bartoline, do
not play the Fool wi' your self, and loose a Thousand pound, which you may get
by this Cause.


Bar. A 'houshand Pound? huh!


Pod. Yes, this is a great Cause, and the City will go through with it,
whatever it costs 'em.


Bar. Come, I Will underchake ye buyshnesh -- come.


Pod. Did not I tell you I understand Mankind?


Bar. But I will not appea publicly -- dee hear -- I will not appea.


Br. Give us Councels will do the Man at the Castle's business, and we don't
care.


Bar. Let me alone.


Enter a second Gentleman. 2 Gent. Counselor Bartoline a word wi' you.


Bar. Your buyshnesh.


2 Gent. I am sent to you by his Highness the Viceroy.


Bar. Hish Highnesh the Vy'sh-Roy? shpeak shoftly.


2 Gent. His Highness is enform'd you are here, and very great with these Men.


Bar. I great with yesh Men? 'tish falsh, they are Knavsh, I haitch 'em, I
haitch 'em.


2 Gent. Nay, he believes you only assist 'em as a Lawyer for your ^ees, you
have too much Wisdom and Law to engage in their ill and dangerous designs.


Bar. Hang 'em, hang 'em.


2 Gent. And such they have, his Highness is well assured.


Bar. No doubeh on it, mosht sherchain.


2 Gent. And therefore he is resolved to punish 'em.


Bar. He musht do it! he musht.


2 Gent. To that end he intends to indict 'em of several Crimes.


Bar. I am glad of it.


2 Gent. How far they will extend in Law he knows not.


Bar. Very probable.


2 Gent. Therefore he sends you by me a hundred pieces.


Bar. He doesh very well -- very well -- hesh a wysh Man.


2 Gent. For your Advice.


Bar. I Will give it him, but not publicly -- I will not appea, but I Will give him
shuch advysh ash shall do yeir buyshn^sh.


2 Gent. I Will tell it him.


Bar. If he hash a fanshy cho hang'em he shall.


2 Gent. I Will tell him.


[Exit Gent. Br. Well, you will undertake our business?


Bar. Let me alone -- give me your Articlesh -- come -- now I Will go studgy,
come along.


[Exeunt Bartoline and Clerk. Br. So, this is a notable old Fellow, if he
undertakes the business, he l do it.


Pod. You need not inform me in Mankind.


Enter Florio wrapped in a Cloak, leaning on a Staff, led by Pietro. Flo. Where Is
my -- Where Is my -- every little thing puts me so out of breath -- Where Is my
Lord Podesta?


Pod. Here Mr. Florio.


Flo. I have great (pooh) blows) I am so faint with every little motion, and
little talk -- I have great News for you.


Pod. Great News, and I not know it? there is seldom any thing to be known
that I don't know.


Flo. I^ll tell it you, but I must open a Vein first that I may breath -- ^e^ch
a Surgeon -- I played the Fool -- uh! as I came -- uh! along, I saw a young
Woman with naked (pooh) Breasts -- going I Am certain to -- pooh -- to be
naught; ^o I reproved her, but she was very angry, and sed she was an honest
Woman; then I sed she was to blame to let those two Breasts come abroad, like
two Domestic Intelligences to slander her; so she said she did it to please
her -- pooh -- her Husband; so I sed her Husband was a wise Man to make his
Wife show her -- pooh -- her Breasts in such a Town as this, such Treasure
would invite Pickpockets enough to rob him of it. And thus with this wanton
Woman I wasted my -- pooh -- my Spirits.


Pod. So you have done now more then needs, you might have told us the News in
the time you have told the Story.


Flo. It Is true indeed -- Well, I Will tell you the News, you may see how things
go, for my part I am glad I have not long to live, to see the Nation Ruined.


Br. Why what is the business?


Flo. There Is a French Fleet upon the Coast, and six of the principal
Commanders lurk in the Disguise of Pilgrims about Mount Vesuvio, to burn the
Town by night, and let in their Friends.


Pod. I knew all this several Hours ago.


Flo. Is it possible my Lord? you have excellent Intelligence.


Pod. So I have.


Flo. I Am sure it is not half an Hour since I invented it.


[Aside. Pod. What do you think made me raise the Militia?


Br. Was it for that?


Pod. Do you think I raised 'em for nothing, I never do a foolish thing.


Br. And why would you not tell me?


Pod. I had some reasons of State.


Flo. And what will your Lordship do in it?


Pod. What else, but seize 'em?


Br. We must do it very privately, least they have notice, for they have Friends
in Town.


Pod. You need not teach me my business, nor that they have Friends in Town,
what meant the Order to put down Two Regiments of the Militia?


Flo. Was there such an Order?


Br. I was an ear-Witness.


Pod. You may see how things go: whereupon I smartly replied, Would they have
Two down, said I? then I will have four more up, said I, smartly.


Flo. That was very well.


Br. As well as I could have advised.


Pod. Sir, I know what I do.


Br. I protest I thought you had done it only to cross 'em.


Pod. Sir, I have deeper fetches in things then you are aware of.


Br. I see you have.


Pod. Now you shall see how I Will manage this business, I will leave my Hat,
Gown, and Perriwig here, put on your Hat, Coat, and Perriwig Bricklayer, and go
out so disguised, that my own Family shall not know what is become of me.


Flo. That will do very well.


Br. I cannot advise better.


Pod. Then I Will go to your House Bricklayer, and there send for Twenty Men such
as I can trust, and Arm them, and when that is done I will not trust them neither,
but take 'em along, and they themselves shall not know whether they go, What
say you to this?


Flo. Incomparable.


Br. Very well; but why would you not do this before, since you had
intelligence of these Men?


Pod. For good reasons you may be sure, I never do a foolish thing; come, give
me your things.


Br. What shall I wear my self?


Pod. Any Porters so far as your House,

[Podesta disguises himself. Now will not this deal with Pilgrims?


Mr. Florio, have you strength to go with us?


Armed with a Blunderbuss at his back. Flo. To mount Vesuvio? I may as well
hope to carry the Mountain on my back, but if I had strength I durst not
venture.


Br. Why, what are you afraid of?


Flo. Pride, Pride, I am mighty apt to be vain, formerly a little success in a
Jest or a Song, or Libell, would have made me a notorious Ass; imagine then, if
when I come from this great expedition, I should see my name in every
Intelligence, my Picture on every Wall, what an insufferable haughty Coxcomb I
should be? Lord, Lord, I should be so proud!


Br. For my part now, I go of purpose for these things, and intend to sit for
my Picture as soon as ever I come home, I was bid Money for my Face yesterday.


Flo. You who have but one infirmity, need not fear it. But my Vices like
Tories ride in troops, and if one gets into me, a hundred will follow: if now I
am sick I should love your praises, when I am well I shall love your Wives.


Pod. He speaks a great deal of reason, we will go without him.


Br. But who shall guide us?


Flo. My Lord needs no Guide.


Pod. No, I know where they are to a hairs breadth, Here comes my Wife, don't
let her know who I am; [Enter Rosaur^ I remember I read in Plutarchus, that
Brutus would not trust his Wife Portia with Affairs of State, I Will imitate his
Politiques.


Ros. No News of my Lord?


Flo. I suppose Madam he is busied about some great affair.


Ros. Mr. Florio, I have an humble address to make to you.


Flo. What is it good Madam.


Ros. I am a Woman more nice and careful of my honor, then any other Woman is
of her face or skin; in my Husbands presence I am secure from malice, but in
his absence I can never open my doors but slander will enter, even your
Religion and Virtue Sir cannot hinder her from following you in, and fastening
on us both.


Flo. Slander will have lean food in me Madam.


Ros. All Is one Sir, it is best to avoid her. I would therefore humbly beg you
at all times of my Husbands absence to bestow your excellent conversation
elsewhere.


Flo. 'Twill be very prudent Madam.


Ros. I hope you will not take it ill Sir.


Flo. By no means Madam.

Do you hear what an excellent Wife you have?


[aside. Pod. I know her Sir.


Flo. An Admirable Woman!


Pod. Sir, you need not inform me.


Ros. Who have you got wi' you there?


Flo. A very Honest Man Madam.


Ros. Are you sure of that? 'cause these are dark times, a Knave will shine in
'em like rotten Wood by night, And that Man has a notable outside, he
resembles much my Husband, who is one of the wisest men in this Age.


Flo. Do you hear?


Pod. Sir, she is a Woman of vast parts.


Ros. I have a great fancy to secure him.


Br. Pshaw, we shall have a fiddle faddle with her, and spoil our business --
Get you gone, go.


[Exit Podesta. Ros. How does he fly? that is suspicious. Seize him.


Br. Away, away Man, I Will follow you.


[Exit Bricklayer. Flo. No good Madam, I Will be bound for him. Ha! Ha! what a
Coxcomb is this? now is he gone he knows not whether, to catch he knows not
whom.


Ros. What an Excellent thing, and how Useful in the World is Credulity?


Flo. It Is so, to many excellent Trades, To the sparkish Fop, the Shopkeepers
large faith swells his Feather and garniture, To the Politician, the believing
empty-headed Rabble are his Bladders. But oh it is of excellent use to a Lover.


Ros. And to a Trade you have not named -- a Swearer.


Flo. A Lover is a Swearer, a private one, he is not a public Evidence, a
Swearer-General.


Ros. You were once Swearer-General to our whole Sex.


Flo. But I recant, and now will I kiss no Book but these sweet Lips.


Ros. Hold! not so fast.


Flo. Why, what is to do?


Ros. I must blush a while.


Flo. Blushes are for the Morning of Love, we have traveled many tedious hours
since that, and without any refreshment, except baiting now and then at a Kiss,
Those lips are delightful places, but not the end of the Journey.


Ros. You say you have traveled in Love, you say true, you have passed through
many hearts, and I fear have wasted all your love by the way.


Flo. I have only tri^led away some unnecessary traveling expenses, here will
I lay out my whole heart.


Ros. A mortgaged Heart!


Flo. Indeed it is not.


Ros. What security will you give me?


Flo. Have I not Pawned a Kingdom to you, I was King of Libertines, and I have
left my Dominions, and all my fair female subjects to be a slave to you and a
fool to the Priests. [Knocks. Knocking! we are undone! have talked away our
precious minutes, Heaven grant it be not the old Coxcomb.


Ros. Whoever it be, we are in an ill condition to [louder knocking. be thus
locked up together.


Flo. Venture to ask who it is.


Ros. Who Is there?


Craf. It Is I Madam.


[Craffy within. Ros. It Is the fool Craffy.


Flo. What shall we do with him?


Craf. Madam, I must speak with your Ladyship.


[Within Ros. Come some other time, I Am very busy now.


Craf. This business must be done now Madam.


[Within Ros. Dispatch it where you are then.


Craf. I cannot, this is private business Madam.


[Within. Ros. Then you must let it alone, for I neither can nor will speak wi'
you.


Craf. You must and shall speak with me, since you go to that, and if you will not
let me in at the Door, I Will climb in at the Window.


Ros. You are saucy Sirrah.


Craf. There is no business to be done without sawciness.


Flo. What shall we do with this Fellow?


Ros. Put on my Husbands Gown, Hat, and Perriwig, and lie upon the Couch as if
you slept.


Craf. Will you let me in or no?


Ros. You are in great haste Sir.


Craf. Yes that I am, my business is earnest.


Florio is disguised, and lies down, Rosaura opens the Door, Enter Craffy
Drunk. Craf. So, she is all alone, as I hope to be saved!


Ros. Well, what is your business Sir.


Craf. I have sweet business! delicate business, and I Will do it I Will Warrant me
-- Drunkenness has given me wit and impudence, if it don't dis^igure me, I
don't care, I am cursedly afraid 'twill put my features out of Rank and File,
they will not march even, and gracefully, and in Battalia.


[aside. Ros. Well, have thou given me all this trouble, and now have nothing
to say?


Craf. Yes, I have something to say, and now it shall out. I come -- I come --
most sweet --


Ros. Speak so^tly, for your Father's asleep on the Couch.


Craf. My Father there! the Devil take him for his pains, that Blo^khead never
did me any good, nor ever will; now he lies like a great Boome to hinder my
Vessel from coming into the Harbor when the wind is fair: Od I could find in
my heart to cut him!


Ros. Well Sir, you have no business it seems?


Craf. Od I Will do my business, and let the old Fool dispose his greasy Bags as
he has a mind; I care not, I Will pass the Rubicon, and be ant Casar, aut nullus
-- I come then to tell thee such a story, as no Age, nor History, can do the
like.


Ros. Ay, prithee let me hear that.


Craf. Ay, prithee let me hear that with a smile, many a Roman General has
fought a Battle upon the encouragement of Birds that have not chirp'd half so
prettily; Prithee let me hear that -- And thou sweet Rogue, thou shall --


Ros. The Bruit is drunk, and I never discerned it.


Craf. Then thou delicate Creature, I come to tell thee, I love and adore thee!


Ros. Love and adore me? what does the Coxcomb mean? but why should I consider
the meaning of a Fool in drink?


Craff. Nay, my News does come wet out of the Press, that is certain, it is
delicate News, is it not? what say thou? Have I no Darts nor Arrows in my
eye? prithee look upon me, nay, look if this Fantastic Woman will look upon
me? prithee look upon me, I Am newly Shaved, and a Man looks like a notable
smirk Rogue when he is Shaved, his face is like a Bowl new wiped, he may kiss
the Mistress if he has any skill, and I Will try.


Ros. Sirrah, attempt any R^deness to me, and I Will waken your Father, and ruin
ye; I am amazed he should sleep thus!


Craff. I believe there is a Proclamation come out against sleeping, and the
Rogue takes a nap to affront the Government, for nothing else could make a
Whigg quiet so long, that is certain.


Ros. So Sir, you are a Ran^ing Tory, begone you had best, before I waken your
Father, and you who are now so ^ull of Wine, be turned out of doors, and want
Bread, consider that Sir.


Craff. How! when I have thee before my eyes, do thou think I can consider a
Crust? what a pitiful hungry thought was there?


Ros. Dis-inheriting then and starving, are nothing to thee.


Craff. I starve now, Love has dis-inherited my stomach, which, before I fell
in love with thee, had as good a Title to meat as any stomach in Christendom,
that is, if meat be made for stomachs, and now if I were to go to Law with a
Chicken for Crumbs, he would Cast me, I should have nothing to show for 'em, so that
I must enjoy thee that I may eat again.


Ros. Enjoy me Sirrah! do you know who I am, you dare mention such (...) Word
before me?


Craff. Know thee! I, well enough.


Ros. Am not I your Father's Wife Sir?


Craff. And what of all that?


Ros. What of all that?


Craff. Thou think I warrant I Will be frightened with Incest? with fee, fa,
fum, I am not a Child to be scared from a Sack-Posset with a white fheet, if we
must meddle with nothing that is a Kin to us, we must not eat or drink, for we
are all near a Kin to our Victuals, but thou art no Kin to me, thou art only
tacked to my Father's side by a Priest, and art no more my Mother then his
Back-Sword is, for that is buckled to his side sometimes; Besides, I don't know
whether he be my Father or no, I Am sure he is not fit for it.


Ros. Whatever I am to him or thee, it is sufficient I am nearly related to
Virtue and Honor, and do not dare Sirrah, so much as to talk undecently before
me.


Craff. Why do thou talk undecently before me?


Ros. Who I?


Craff. Yes, thy eyes talk Bawdy, thou have the wanton'st eyes that ever I saw
in my life: Gi' me a Kiss, gi' me a Kiss I say -- the best you have in the
house, will not you? I Will come to the Vessel my self then.


Ros. Bless me! Husband! Husband!


Craff. Let him wake if he dares.


Craff. chaces her round Chairs, Florio Snorts. Ros. Oh Lord! what shall I do?


Craff. Ha! does he snort? let him snort again, he has neither Powder nor Shot
in his Nose.


Knocking at the door, Craffy starts, Rosaura opens it. Enter Pietro. Piet Oh
Madam! your Husband and the Bricklayer.


Ros. How! where are they?


Piet. Just coming into this Room.


Ros. Cannot your Master possibly get by?


Piet. Not possibly.


Ros. Oh misery! shame! death! what shall I do?


Craff. What Is the matter Madam?


Ros. Ha! what comes into my head! I Will make this fool beat his Father out;
(aside) Oh your Father will be Murdered, and I abused, here are Villains got
into the house in Arms, one of them they say has a design upon my Person.


Craff. Your Person?


Ros. Ay, help us for Heavens sake!


Craff. Where are they?


Ros. Just coming into this Room, beat 'em out of the house, as you value your
Fathers life, and my Honor.


Craff. I Will do it.


Ros. Here they come.


Enter Podesta and Bricklayer, with Muskets and Blunderbusses at their backs,
their Wastes stu^k round with Pistols, Craffy knocks his Father down, Pietro
gets down the Bricklayer, whilst they are Scuffling Rosaura conveys Florio
away, and lays the Hat, Gown, and Perriwigg upon the Couch, as if one slept
under 'em; after some rolling upon the Stage, Podesta gets Craffy undermost.
Pod. Some one help me to kill this unnatural Rogue.


Br. No, take him alive I charge you, that we may know who put him upon this
horrible damnable Plot, for this is as horrible a Plot as has been these
thousand years.


Pod. Sirrah, who put you upon this horrible wickedness?


Craff. Sirrah, who put you upon the horrible wickedness of attempting this
sweet Lady?


Pod. This Fellow's Drunk.


Ros. As Drunk as he is, he asks no impertinent Questions, nor has he committed
any great Error in the ill-favored Entertainment he has given you for entering
my Husbands house in this armed posture, in these dangerous times, without
giving me any notice what he has done, he did by my command, and i will justify
it.


Pod. This is a wise Woman.


Br. The Woman could not act wiser if she were my own Wife.


Pod. I Will reveal my self to her, Sweetheart I am your Husband.


Ros. Come Sir, lay aside your unseasonable and unmannerly mirth, these are no
Rallying times, or if they were, you are not my equal at Repartee with me: But
now I think on it, see what is become of my Husband some body, he has slept these
two hours upon that Couch, and this rude Scuffle has frighted him away.


Piet. Indeed Madam, I fancy this is my Lord.


Pod. Sweetheart, upon my Honor I left my Gown, Hat, and Perriwigg upon that
Couch, and there is no difference between the Lord Podesta and me but a Gown.


Craff. Then there is Roguery, for there lay a Fellow under that Gown. I Will
swear I heard his Nose go.


Ros. He says true.


Pod. Bless me! here is a Plot.


Ros. Some of the French Pilgrims to Murder you, and burn your House.


Pod. Most certain, fetch a Regiment of the Militia, I Will have a Centry at
every door in my House, two at every Post of my Bed, and one under my Bolster.


Br. Search all the Tubbs, Pots, Bottles, and Vessels in your House, for
Gunpowder.


Pod. Yes, and I Will unpave the streets to see if the Stones be not
Hand-Granadoes.


Ros. It Is necessary, and I hope your Lordship will not blame me for defending
your House, though you suffered something by it.


Pod. 'Twas admirably done.


Br. Wisely, very wisely.


Pod. Like a Woman that knows Mankind.


Craff. Well, and shall I no praises have, That beat the Knave?


Pod. O 'twas very well done Craffy.


Br. Very well indeed.


Pod. But are not these Unhappy times,
That I can take no Joy
In such a Wife, and great Estate,

Craf. And such a Son as I.


[Exeunt. ACT IV.
SCENE a Garden.
Enter Podesta, Bricklayer, Captain of the Militia, and two Soldiers. Pod.
COme, Captain, place those two Soldiers behind those two Doors, and then my
House will be too hot for a Knave.


Br. For the justification of our Proceedings, we will print a Narrative of the
Pilgrim under the Gown. As Paper, in Holland, passes for Money, Pamphlets with
us pass for Religion and Policy: a bit of Paper in Holland, from a Man of
Credit, takes up Goods here, pays Debts there; so a Pamphlet will take up Fools
here, make Fools there. A Pamphliteer is the best Fool-maker in the Nation. And
this Story well improved --


Pod. The Story's well enough, what need we lie to no purpose?


Br. By your favor, 'twill be to good purpose; a Lie will give it the stamp of
our Party. Lies are the Supporters of our Arms, and the Great Seal of our
Corporation.


Pod. If a Lie will do the Nation any Service, I shall not scruple.


Br. You would have no Reason; for that Lie that does as much good as Truth, is
as good as true; Ergo, it is true. Quicquid est idem, est idem, is a Rule in
Logic, but you know no Logic.


Pod. But I know a Rule in Divinity, that says, you are not to do Evil that
Good may come thereby.


Br. Ay, that Good may come, and not come: but the Evil that does Good, is a
Good Evil; but no Evil is Good, Ergo, it is no Evil at all: But there is no
talking Logic to you, you don't understand it.


Enter a Man with Prisoners Basket, and Beggars. Pod. How now, what would you
have?


Man. May it please your Honor, My Lord.


Br. Speak to me, I am my Lord, that is, I manage all


Man. It has always been a Custom for the new Lord Pod^st to send poor
Prisoners some relief.


Br. It has been a Custom you say?


Man. Yes, Master.


Br. Is there any Law for it?


Man. Law, Master?


Br. Ay, for we will do nothing but according to Law.


Alan. You would not have poor Prisoners starve, Master


Br. Sir, if they starve according to Law, no body has any thing to say.


Man. That Is hard, Master.


Br. Go, get you about your business.


Man. Pray Master.


2 Beg. I hope, Master, you will be kinder to us, Master.


Br. Why, what are you?


2 Beg. Honest, poor People, Master, that always used to have some broken
Meats from my Lord Podesta's Table, and now we have not had one bit.


Br. Is there any Law for it?


1 Beg. Law, Master?


Br. Ay, for in plain Terms, we will do nothing for any body, that is not of
our Party, but what we are forced to by Law.


1 Beg. We are all of your Party, Master.


All the Beggars, and Man with the Basket. Ay, Master, we are all Whiggs,
Master, we are all Whiggs.


2 Beg. Master, I poll'd for you.


3 Beg. I poll'd three times over, for my Lord; came in three several Coats,
and past for three men.


Pod. Say you so? who employed you?


3 Beg. The Doctor, Master.


Man. And several of our Prisoners poll'd for my Lord. Master.


Pod. Well, give 'em halfpence a piece.


Omnes. Halfpence! -- my Lord -- halfpence!


Pod. Well, when my Year's out, I Will consider farther.


1 Beg. We shall starve in that time, Master.


Pod. Go, go, begone, the Bricklayer and I are consulting about Affairs of
State, for the good of you all, how to secure your Religion and Property.


2 Beg. Our Property, Master?


Br. Go, go, you have no Property, nor, I think, Religion, you are idle Knaves
-- begone.


1 Beg. The Devil take you -- a halfpenny Lord, is the Podesta's place worth
but a halfpenny?


[Aside. 2 Beg. Plague rot you -- a halfpenny Lord, I Would have seen the Devil
have you, before I Would have chose you, if I had known.


[Aside. All. A half penny Lord -- confound 'em damned Rebel Rogues, I hope to
see 'em hanged.


[Exeunt Beg. and Man. Br. Now let us to Counselor Bartoline's Chamber, to
know his Opinion, concerning our Arming and Fortifying.


Pod. One Lawyer is positive against us.


Br. That Is a Tory Fellow, I don't mind Tory Law.


Pod. But he spoke a great deal of Reason.


Br. I care not a Farthing for Reason, Law, nor Scripture, if they side with
the Tories. I prefer Whigg-Nonsence, before Tory-Reason: But come.


[Exeunt. Enter a Gentleman; Bartoline and his Clark at a little distance
after. Gent. No body in the House here? O Sir, you are the Man I desire to
speak with. I suppose you remember me?


Bar. I remember you? How should I remember all the People gat come cho me?


Gent. It Is strange you should forget me, it is not long since I put just such
another Fee into your Hand, as this.


Bar. Od sha me! now you putch it incho my headge, I do remember you; you come
from ye Vish roy.


Gent. I do so.


Bar. He ish a worhy Genkleman, I shall be glad to sherve him.


Gent. The Business is, My Lord Podesta fortifies without his leave.


Bar. Doesh he? yen hesh a Yebel, shay I shay it.


Gent. But is there no Clause in their Charter will bear 'em out?


Bar. Shir, if year be shuch a claush, 'twill overthrow yeir Charcher, 'twill
argue the King was deshieved, so his Grant will be void; 'tish against ye
Peyogative, ash I Will prove outch Common Law, and clea shatchute Law; and if I
yon throw 'em on yeir backsh I Will hang for it, sho chell ye Vishroy -- But I Will
be privatsh.


Gent. I Will tell him.


[Exit Enter Podesta, and Bricklayer. Pod. O, here he is! come, Counselor, we
must speak with you.


Bar. You musht not, for I am very buishy.


Br. But these ten pieces must, and shall speak with you.


Bar. Why chruly, I have a great yeal of buishnesh; but I have alsho a great
kindnesh for boh you; for I hinke you are very honesht Men, and wish well to ye
Nation, and have very good yeshignsh. And I will do you what kindnesh I can, I
will ingeed. Well, come, your buishnesh -- huh --


Br. May the Subject -- Subject? I don't love that word Subject: But, come, may
the Subject Fortify by Law, without leave?


Bar. May he wear a Shword by hish shide without leave? a shimple Shtory.


Pod. But a Lawyer told me the contrary.


Bar. 'Twash not ye Lawyer, 'twash hish Fee; and Fees will shay any hing.


Pod. He said 'twas against clear Statutes.


Bar. Yersh no shuch hing ash a clea Shtachute, hant we Law yersh the penning
of 'em, and do you hink we will not make work for our shelu'sh? We hate a clea
Shtachute, as a Housebreaker yoesh a clea Night, I shpeak against my own
Profession; for I Am an honesht Fellow, I am worth but shix hou^and a year, and
I mightch have been worth twenchy, if I would have been a Knave; but I love cho
make a Consciensh of what I shay, and do, I do ingeed, ingeed I do.


Br. But we are told that it is so against Law, that if there should be any such
Power in our Charter 'twould argue the King was deceived, and overthrow the
Charter.


Bar. If such a Power in your Charcher should overthrow it, 'twou'd argue the
King had yeshieved you, mum, and who dares shay yat? yersh a chrick for you,
yey chalk like Foolsh and Knavsh, yey don't know what yey shay, let me alone wi
you buishnesh, dee hea? but privately, very privately. Come along, come.


[Exit Bar. and his Clark. Pod. This is a notable old Fellow.


Br. I was of his Opinion.


Enter Rosaura. Ros. My Lord, will you continue those Guards and Centries about
your House?


Pod. Sweet Heart, to ask my Wisdom questions, is to question my Wisdom.


Ros. I confess, you have reason to stand upon your Guard: 'twere well the
People knew it; and your Son Craffy has a Pen ^it for the purpose.


Pod. He shall meddle no more with his Pen, it has almost mop'd him. I would
give five hundred pound he had never seen a Pen in's Life; but I will take him
from it before he is too far gone, and enter him into business: Here he is
Powdered, a Feather in's Cap, and Chatechising [Enter Craffy. his Face in a
Glass; but it does not make him one wise answer, the Boy is spoiled.


Cra. Ay, this will do -- This will do -- Nature writ no good Hand when she
penned me, because she wrote after a damned Copy, the Fool my Father; but this
will mend some Letters. This will take my Mother.


Pod. Craffy.


Cra. Drunkenness, like a Hog in a Garden, rooted up my Flowers, but now the
Tulips in my Face begin to lift up their Heads.


Pod. Craffy.


Cra. They do in Faith.


Br. Why don't you come?


Pod. Let him alone, all this is not his folly, but mine, who have let him take
more Poetry than his Brains would bear, and have ruined my Child; and though I
say it, a delicate young Fellow.


Br. I fancy he is turned Amorous Fopp, for he is broke out into a Feather, and
all those Fooleries that trouble Lovesick People.


Ros. Indeed his Feather says some such thing.


Br. And I Will take the Feathers word.


Pod. Before mine? do not you teach me to know my own Boy, nor any thing. I Would
give you a hundred pound I were an Ass.


Ros. You may have it cheaper.


[Aside. Pod. I mean in this, that I mistook the Boys Distemper. Lord, that I
should let him spoil himself!


Ros. I have a mind to know his Contemplations. I Will go toward him.


Cra. Ha. my delicate Mother-in-law? I Am ready for her: I Will charge her with
Smiles, Wit, Impudence, Modesty, Humility, all sorts of Weapons. First, with
Humility upon my Knees. Most Sweet Dear -- ha! my Father behind -- That old
Fool is always in my way -- How shall I get from my Knees again! The Devil take
him. Most sweet dear, Madam, pray to Heaven to bless me -- Pray, my Lord, pray
to Heaven to bless me.


Pod. Bless thee?


Cra. Ay, to bless me.


Pod. What of this time of day.


Cra. A Blessing will do a Man no hurt at any time of day.


Pod. Well, the Lord bless thee, and deliver thee from Poetry, say I, it has
utterly spoiled thee: That ever I should let this Fellow tamper with Poetry. I
could have made him -- I don't know what -- I could have made him such a
Statesman, as these times could not have produced. These times, pitiful
Fellows, the Statesmen of these times were all starved at Nurse. Some of 'em
were Foundlings, one found under a Rump, another was a Maggot in English Noll's
Nose. A pack of strange Fellows they are all, in short, Craffy --


Cra. Most sweet Woman.


[Aside. Pod. You shall never Write nor Read more; but be a Man of Business.


Cra. Yes, Madam.


Pod. Madam?


Cra. Yes, my Lord, I mean --


Pod. Did you mind what I said to you?


Cra. No, Madam -- yes, Madam, -- Ay, my Lord, I mean.


Pod. Yes, Madam -- Ay, my Lord -- Sirrah, where are your Brains?


Cra. Brains Madam -- my Lord, I mean.


Pod. In your Ink-Pot, Sirrah?


Cra. I Am now answering the Meddal.


Pod. I thought as much, the Devil take thy Poetry. Sirrah, meddle with Pen and
Ink more if you dare.


Cra. Who must answer these things then? There Is never a man of Wit of our
Party, but my self, and my things are discommended. I know several People don't
like my Hushai: That I intend to call my Poem, The Meddal Reversed, Written by
him who was not the Author of Hushai, nor of any Pen writ of our side


Pod. Come, Poetry be hanged, and Prose too.


Br. Come, come, my Answer will be the best.


Pod. What Is that?


Br. A Flail -- if I meet with the Author in a convenient Place, I Will give him
an Answer.


Pod. Yes; and, Sirrah, you shall never meddle with Pen, Ink, nor Book more,
but be a Man o'business.


Cra. I shall be a pretty Man of business, never Write nor Read.


Pod. Sir, the greatest Politicians of our times, never Write nor Read, as you
may see by their Speeches.

Come, Sirrah, you have Wit enough, and Courage too, and we have Business, and
Enemies to employ both, insomuch I shall not dare to go to Bed to Night.


Cra. Sha'n't you? Then I Will dare to go thither in your stead: I have showed my
Mother my Wit, I never showed her my Skin yet. I Will tempt her with that.


[Aside. Pod. I Will have you in the Head of a Party, go to Mount Vesuvio.


Cra. I Am resolved to steal to her when she is a Bed.


[Aside. Pod. Get a Horseback presently, do you hear?


Cra. Ay, my Lord, in a rich Night Gown, Point de Venice Shirt, and Velvit
Slippers.


Pod. How, a Horseback in this Equipage? Do you know I bid you get your Horse?


Cra. Ay, my Lord, washed from head to Foot in Rose Water.


Pod. This is mockery, give me a Cane.


Cra. O good my Lord.


Br. Come, let him alone.


Pod. I will not.


Cra. What Is the matter? what is the Matter?


Pod. What Is the matter wi' your Brains, Sirrah? For when I come to one side of
your Head, they shift of the other, that you never mind what I say. Get you gone
you Rascal you.


Cra. Sweet Rogue, I Will be with thee at Night.


(Aside) [Exit. Pod. Would the Devil had had this Fellows Poetry: A Gentleman
may carry a little of it for an Ornament and Pleasure, as a Lady carries an
Orange in her hand, but to have a Fool carry a great Basket on his Head, like a
Costardmonger; and break his Brains.


Enter Florio panting, Pietro leading him. Flor. Clamb'ring up these Stairs,
has almost spent me; I Am ready to tumble down dead.


Pod. Poor Man, how bad he is!


Ros. I wonder he is come abroad!.


Br. It Is pity, he is a pretty Fellow.


Flo. My good Lord, I beg your Pardon a thousand times for the Liberty and
Confidence I take in your House.


Pod. You are very welcome, good Mr. Florio.


Ros. You may believe my Lord, Sir, he is your very humble Servant.


Flor. Your Servant, good Madam. Why truly, we sick People take upon us a
strange Authority, I know not by what Commission. I* think it is because
Sickness is Heavens Messenger, and when a Man is upon the Road in a Messengers
Hands, all People give way, and I am riding Post.


Enter Doctor Panchy. Doct. Where are you all? where are you all?


Pod. What Is the matter?


Doct. Who says there are no Plots?


Br. He that has a mind to be hanged.


Pod. As he shall be. He that will not believe in the Doctor, must expect no
Salvation in this Life.


Ros. What Is the Plot, good Doctor?


Dr. Only to cut your Husband's Throat, and all our Throats, that is all.


Ros. Oh, you ha struck me dead, some help, I faint.


Pod. Good Creature, she is swooning; who is there?


Enter Women. Wom. My Lord.


Pod. Your Lady swoons.


Dr. Carry her away, don't let us be troubled with Women.


Pod. Take her into the fresh Air, and give her some strong Water; and, do you
hear? bring me some privately.


[Ex. Women with Ros. Br. Come, the Plot.


Dr. What do you think the Tory Rogues have done? they have met with our Paper
of Association.


Br. What care we for that?


Dr. Ay, but they have drawn up one among themselves, in imitation of ours,
cast one in our own Mold, taken our own words, and discharge 'em upon us.


Br. The Devil!


Dr. As you shall hear: We, the Loyal, etc. finding to the grief our Hearts, a
certain sort of People, consisting of Hobb^sts, Atheists, Fanatics, and
Republicans, have for several years last past, pursued a pernicious Plot, to
root out the true Religion, subvert our ^aws and Liberties, and set up
Arbitrary Power.


Br. Well, and what of all this?


Flo. Pray hear.


Dr. And it being notorious, that they have been highly encouraged by the
countenance and protection given 'em by the Rabble, and by their expectations
of the said Rabble coming to the Government. It appears also to us, that for
these Designs, Ignoramus Garrisons have been established among us, by whose
assiance these Men have laid a Blockade before the Crown it self, denying it
all relief, unless 'twill own it self a dependence upon them.


Br. All this is true, and we are not ashamed of it.


Pod. Go on.


Dr. And we considering with heavy Hearts, how greatly the Reputation and
Honesty of the Kingdom has been wasted, in maintaining the said Garrisons: And
finding the same Counsels, after exemplary Justice upon some of the
Conspirators, to be still pursued with the utmost Devilish Malice, and desire
of Revenge, whereby his Majesty is in continual hazard, to be destroyed, to
make way for the said Rabbles advancement to the Crown.


Br. Well, and what of all this?


Pod. Have patience.


Dr. The whole Kingdom in such case, being destitute of all security of their
Religion, Laws, Estates, and Liberties: Sad experience in the Case, the Rump
Committee of Safety, Nol and Dick in England: And Massianello here, having
proved the wisest Laws to be of little force to keep out Tyranny under no
Prince, or no lawful Prince.


Br. I would we had 'em.


Dr. We have, therefore, several times endeavored in a legal way, by
Indictments, to bring the said Criminalts to condign Punishment; but being
utterly rejected, and brought almost to despair, we bind our selves one to
another, jointly and severally, in the Bond of one Firm and Loyal Society, and
Association: And do solemnly Vow, Promise, and Protest to demolish the said
Ignoramus Garrisons, which are kept up in and about this City, to the great
Terror and Amazement of all the good People in the Land.


Br. And shall be in spite of 'em.


Dr. And utterly destroy all that shall seek to set up the said Rabble's
pretended Title, or shall raise any War, Tumult, or Sedition in his behalf, or
by his Command, as public Enemies, to our Laws, King, Religion, and Country,
and this on penalty of being esteemed such our selves. Witness our Hands.


Pod. Are there any Names to it?


Dr. Only Nicknames to know one another by: As Loyal Domestic Absalom, and
Achitophel, Tory Coffee-house, Towzer, Heraclitus, and such Names, forty
thousand.


Br. Oh, we have six times their Number.


Dr. Pray hear the Postscript: Persons to be destroyed, Imprimis the Podesta.


Pod. Am I to be Murdered Imprimis? bloody Rogues.


Dr. Then the Doctor: And why after him, unmannerly Rascals?


Pod. Why after me? Sure, good Doctor, you will not dispute precedence with me.


Dr. But I will, good Podesta, with you, or any Man in Christendom; what the
Devil are you?


Pod. What am I?


Dr. Ay, if you compare your self with me, you are a Fop.


Pod. Fop! You are an unmannerly Fellow.


Dr. How! ho! call one of my Men some body. Serve. Sir.


[Enter a Servant. Dr. Go bid the Archbishop of Naples come to me, I Will make
his Fortunes.


Br. Nay, nay, Doctor, Doctor.


Pod. He means, bid the Archbishopric of Naples come to him, but it will not
come, Doctor.


Dr. You are a Rascal.


Pod. Call a Constable.


Flo. Gentlemen, Gentlemen, are you out of your Wits, to quarrel who should be
murdered first? I need care for it as little as you, I shall lose as few days;
for shame reconcile, pray reconcile.


Dr. Then let him not play the Coxcomb, if the Pope disparage me, I Would say he
were a Rascal.


Br. Well, well, the Podesta respects you, Doctor, give him your hand.


Dr. Give him my hand first? I Would scorn to do it if he were a Prince.


Br. Then give him your hand, Podesta.


Pod. Well come, Mr. Panchy.


Dr. Mr. Panchy?


Pod. Doctor I mean, come Doctor.


Dr. Then come Podesta.


Flo. So, this is well, now let us know whose Throat is to be cut next.


Dr. The Bricklayers and yours: Cum multis aliis quae nunc prescribere longum
est.


Flo. Will they cut mine? They may spare their pains: well we had more need go
to Prayers than Quarrel. Pray Doctor.


Dr. Pray, Fools Head! what should we pray for? That Is like your Papists, who
think to keep off Devils with Holy Water, as if a Devil were like a Cat, he
could not endure to wet his Foot: These Devils are best driven away with
Firelocks.


Br. You are in the right, Doctor.


Flo. I Am sure our Cause is in the right.


Br. We have a hundred thousand Men, and they are always in the right: Set me
in the Head of such a general Counsel, and I Will be Pope, the only infallible
Judge.


Pod. Ay, and have what forms of Worship you will; when a Canons the Preacher,
who dare shut up the Conventicle, and nothing opens and divides a Text like
Gunpowder.


Flo. Heaven turn these wicked Men, I love their Souls.


Br. Heaven turn 'em, out of the Kingdom, for I love their Lands; that is my way
of turning my Adversaries; and I Will set 'em part of their way to Night: I Will
shove the whole Town against 'em that shall be my business.


[Exit. Pod. I Will go arm my self, and then watch upon the Battlements.


Dr. I Will go with you.


[Exeunt Pod. Doct. Capt. of the Militia. Flo. I Will to my Devotions: That is to
your Wife -- if I knew where she was.


Enter Rosaura. Ros. Not far off.


Flo. I might have guessed it by the sudden gaeyty of all things, the whole Face
of Nature smiled on her sweet favorite.


Ros. Upon the ridiculous Cuckold, and his wise Companions, which you have
finely fooled; for was not this Paper yours, Sir?


Flo. It was.


Ros. What a Ghost every Shadow appears to a guilty Conscience: Therefore I
had not best consent to your Murder of my Honesty, for I shall never sleep for
fear of the discovery; and you Men commonly boast of those Murders, and cast a
brazen Image of the dead Creature in an impudent Libel.


Flo. If this be not privately buried, it shall be your own fault.


Ros. It shall be yours, for I have provided a Chapel fit for the Work, this
Garden-house.


Flo. Then will I be a second Ner^* I have put all my City in a Flame.

And now, with Harp in Hand, I will survey

My burning Rome, and whilst it burns I Will play.


Ros. Then Nero take thy Harp into thy Hand,

The tuneful Strings will follow thy Command:

Now equal Orpheus in thy Art Divine,

Make all things round thee Dance, with one sweet touch of thine,


[Exeunt. SCENE continues.
Enter Bartoline with Artall. Bar. Come, pray come in, Sir, ingeed I love your
Companey mighchily. Come, how isht wi' you, Shir?


Art. Better and better, Sir, that is to say, worse and worse, nearer my end,
which I hope will be the better for me.


Bar. Ay, yer'sh no doubt on it, Shir, you're a very good young Genkleman.


Art. Not so good, as I have been bad, Sir.


Bar. 'Tish no great matcher, Shir, we have all been bad; one chime or anoyer.


Art. Not so bad as I, Sir, the Devil is not, cannot be so bad as I, he cannot
drink, can he, Sir?


Bar. Why chruly, Sir, I believe notch, I yont know what he can goo, I yont
chrouble my self much wid him.


Art. I was one of the Devil's Low Countries, always under a Flood: the Devil
cannot Whore, Sir, neither, can he?


Bar. I yont know, Shir, in chroth, but I believe in general heisha great
Rashcal.


Art. I have not only debauched Women, but the whole Age, poisoned all its
Morals, murdered thousands of young Consciences, sung others asleep, pumped
others with Drunkenness, Sin I Honored and Priviledg'd as a Peer to the Devil,
Heaven I affronted, Libelled his Court, and in my drunken Altitudes have
endeavored to scour the whole Creation of Souls and Spirits, now is it fit I
should be saved?


Bar. Ay, why not, Shir, yo'nt chrouble your shelf wi' yosh mattchersh.


Art. I doubt I trouble you, Sir, with my tedious Discourses?


Bar. Oh no Shir ye'y are ve'y goodg ingeed: I never heardg a Parshon chalk sho
well in a Pulpet, and I hear 'em shomechimes.


Art. Don't you go always to Church, Sir?


Bar. Yesh, Shir, but we Law yesh are sho employed all th, Week, y'at we may be
excush'd if we chake a Nap a Shunday at a Shermon.


Art. You should not neglect the business of your Soul, Sir.


Bar. No chruly, Shir, but we have a great yeale of business, a great yeale of
business.


Art. I do believe so, Sir, therefore I don't know how I can with any
Confidence beg the favor of you to be one of my Executors.


Bar. O yesh shir, I Will find a chime for yat I wayant you, pray employ me, Shir.


Art. Thank you, good Sir, I will endeavor to reward your trouble.


Bar. O good Shir, what you pleash, I shall be glad of any ^hoken of you love.


Art. I have drawn up some Heads of a Will.


Bar. You have y'one mighchy wishly, Shir.


Art. Will you please to look over it, Sir, as also some deeds of my Estate,
whilst I lay me down? For I am very faint: Shall I borrow your Bed, Sir?


Bar. Ay, with all my Heart, Shir, Lushenda, Girl.


Luc. Husband.


[Enter Lucenda Bar. Why gee come wi'out a Godly Book in your Hand, when you
know how hesh inclined?


(Aside. Luc. I have none, you must lend me one out of your Study.


Bar. I have none in my Shtudy, ne've hadg one in my Life, we Lawyesh yead no
Yivinichy -- Buy one [Aside.] Come chake yish poo Genkleman, and lay him upon
our Bedg, and cover him warm, and shit by him, and gee hear, chalk Goly to
him; hesh making his Will, you yont know how you may win upon him.

[Aside. Pray Shir go in, and I Will go cho my Shtudy, and come chee in a minute.


Art. Pox of thy haste, [Aside. I Am in no haste, Sir, take your time.


Bar. No, no, I will not shtay shir, but pray let me lead you, for you are very
weak.


Art. Oh, no Sir.


Bar. Pray Shir, let me.


Exit. Art. led by Bar. and Luc. SCENE continues:
Enter Craffy. Cra. What new Larum's this? And I Am inquired after to be made an
Ass on; and sent on some silly Errant, and so shall not come at my Mother to
Night: Pox, I Will have none of these Foolish doings: I Will get out of the way; and
now I think on it, I Will hide my self in this Room; how now, the Doors shut,
there is somebody in the Room sure. I Will peep -- I Am shot -- I Am shot -- I Am
shot --


[Throws himself down and raves. Enter Podesta, Doctor, Captain of the Militia,
Soldiers, Bricklayer first. Br. What Is the matter? what is the matter? what is
the News?


Cra. I Am shot, I Am shot, I Am shot.


Br. Guard, Guard, Guard, Train-bands, Podesta, Podesta, come hither all
quickly.


Pod. Bless us, what is the matter?


Br. Your Son's killed.


Pod. My Son killed?


Cra. I Am shot -- I Am shot -- I Am shot.


Pod. Oh, where, where, where, poor Child -- poor Boy.


Cra. To the very Soul, to the very Soul.


Pod. Oh my poor Boy, my poor Boy! who shot thee, and where are the Murderers?


Dr. Who should, but the Associating Bully Tories.


Cra. Ay, ay, Associators, Associators.


Pod. Dr. Br. Oh, Rogues, Villains!


Car. A Whore and a Rascal are Associated in that Room, I mean your Wife and
Florio are there joined in one close abominable Bond of lewdness, and Cuckold
you, as if they were to be hanged if they did not dispatch it in a minute; the
sight has shot me to my Soul, my Soul.


Pod. How, Sirrah, have you invented such a notorious Sham as this, to set me
at variance with my Wife, and my Friend? and to buzz me wi' Domestic
Confusions, that I might not have my Brains at liberty, for the public? Is it
possible?


Dr. Sirrah, you are a Traytorly Rogue.


Cra. I Will call you as much out of your Name, Sirrah, you are a Doctor of
Divinity.


Br. Sirrah, you are an Associating Tory.


Cra. Sirrah, you are an Hermaphrodite, Compounded of to Sexes, Verse and
Prose, and engender with neither.


Br. Sirrah, I make better Verses than your self: and Verses is all that you
are good for: I make Officers and Jurymen, And Evidences, and Pictures, and
Poppetts, and as good Verses as you into the bargain. I made your Father what
he is. That you are an ungrateful Fellow to be thus saucy with me.


Pod. Come Sirrah, you are a notorious Parricide, and plot with Traitors
against your Own Father.


Cra. Father you are an abominable Cuckold, and plot with him that makes you
one, against your Own Son: I will swear Fl^rio is in that Room aboard your
Vessel and stealing all your Customs: And here you stand upon the Key and let
him.


Pod. I will break open the door to show thou art a Rascal.


Br. Are you mad. Is not this a plain Sham Plot? here are either Traitors or
Treasonable Papers, and they will be found and laid to your charge.


Pod. You speak with a great deal of Prudence; And I Will guard the door with my
life, for my Honor is Concerned.


Cra. Your honor is concerned, for you're made a Cuckold.


Pod. The Honor of my Loyalty is Concerned; for Sirrah you would make a
Traitor of me: that you might hang me and get my Estate.


Cra. I will call a Guard. Break open the door, and show that you are a
Cuckold, the Doctor Bricklayer, a Couple of Pimps. And I see a Guard go by:
Guard, Guard, Guard! Treason, Treason, Treason!


Pod. Nay then Militia, Militia, Militia, keep this door here, Treason, Treason.


Cra. Why who the Devil's able to bear this. Give me a P^ke I Will force my way
in.


Pod. Nay then Give me a Pike.


Cra. Oh Cuckold, Cuckold; Wittal, Wittal.


Pod. Oh unnatural Monster!


Doct. Villain.


Br. Tory.


Pod. Hold Gentlemen, I have considered of it: Because this Fellow is so
insolent; and potsiive and may report the worl^^ hinder Truth from coming to
light, to clear the Honor of my self, my Wife, and my Friend, I will open the
door in the presence of you all, and you shall see what is there: And so
Gentlemen all bear witness.


Br. You shall not open the door.


Pod. I will.


Br. You shall not.


Dr. He shall -- Break Open the door.


Pod. Break open the door.


Enter Bartoline. Bar. What are you all madg? are we in Beglam here? you a
Magishchrate, and shuffer shuch dishorgersh as yesh in you housh, you may be
ashamed: if you have no yegard cho your own cregit, ha shome pitchy on a poo
Genkleman almost murger'd by the Noish you make. your own friend Mishe Florio.


Pod. Florio! why where is he?


Bar. Upon my bedg, giving up the Ghosht.


Dr. So Sirrah, and you say he is in this room.


Cra. Giveing up the Ghost upon that old Follo'ws Bed?


Bar. Now the sham-plot's plain.


Cra. Then he has given up the Ghost, and I saw his Ghost in this Room.


Pod. And has Wife given up the Ghost too, Sir?


Cra. I don't know, but if they were Ghosts, they were the lewdest Ghosts that
ever I saw.


Br. Come, Sirrah, confess your Rogueries.


Cra. What Rogueries? Is it Treason to be mad? If he be there, my Wits are not
here; I Am cracked, and there is an end.


Bar. Sho, shcolding again? I shuppose he will conshiger your Shivilitiesh in
hish Will, which he is now a making.


[Exit. Pod. So, Sir, we shall loose all our Legacies through your Roguery;
come ask him pardon on your Knees.


Br. I Am cruel afraid he will dye before we come; let us go quickly, quickly.


[Exeunt Omnes. Florio and Rosaura coming out of the Room where they were hid.
Flo. Ha! gone! this was good Fortune, away to thy Chamber, my Dear.


Ros. And do you go home.


[Exeunt. Enter Artal. Art. Pox on it, my pretty Opportunity is cast away in a
Storm; I must make the other Voyage: I venture boldly into the Dominion of these
Arbitrary Rogues, who have a strange absolute Authority over their own
Consciences, in Lying and Swearing: But Love, Love, Love.


[Ex^^ Enter Podesta, Bricklayer, Doctor, Crafty, Barroline, Lucinda, Militia.
Bar. Gone away in dishconchent?


Luc. No, but in great pain, he said his Head was torn in pieces.


Bar. Well, I shall be no loosher, he knowsh 'twash not my fault. Come away
Girl.


[Exeunt Bar. and (...) Br. Now I Will see what is in this House; Fellow Souldier^
Guard me in, and have a care of me.


[Ex. Br. and Souldier^ Enter Waiting Woman. Wom. My Lord, my Lady's extremely
discomposed with the fright she had about your Lordship, and begs there may no^
be so much noise, it almost kills her.


Pod. Poor kind Heart, where is she?


Wom. In her Chamber upon her Bed.


Pod. So, Sir, and you said she was in this Room.


Cra. Well, I Am mad, and there is an end.


Pod. Tell her there shall be no noise made.


Enter Bricklayer and Soldiers. Br. There Is nothing in this Room.


Pod. Nothing?


Br. Nothing.


Dr. What do you say to this, Sirrah?


Cra. That thou art an Ass to talk to a Madman, for my Wits have given me the
slip all of the sudden; I don't know how, nor which way.


Pod. Truly I Am convinced he says true, and my Hearts ready to break.


Br. I am partly of that mind; for in the Room is no sign of a Sham-plot.


Dr. He does look wildly, that is the truth on it.


Pod. He Is mad, he is mad, and I have lost my Child, my dear child, my poor Child.


Cra. Well, well, poor Father, don't take on so, my Wits are not gone far, they
'l come again, I warrant 'em, for I don't know who the Devil will entertain
'em, they were mad sort of Wits, and they are as mad that entertain a Poets
Wits.


Pod. Oh curse, curse on Poetry, that ever I should let thee meddle with it, my
poor Boy.


Cra. Nay, prithee Father don't take on thus, thou wilt make me cry too.


Pod. I am so grieved, that I will eat and drink and sleep, and never mind what
becomes of the World.


Br. Fie, fie, you will not be so wicked as that.


Pod. Wherefore should I trouble my self, when I have no body to inherit my
Labors?


Br. You have Friends enough, the Doctor, and I another.


Pod. Puh, a Child's above all: don't we see old Politicians venture their
Necks for half a Child, a Changeling? And I have lost a Boy worth millions,
millions; and so I Will enjoy my self 'till my Heart breaks, and there is an end.


Br. Come, come, leave off this.


Pod. No, I remember a saying of a Wise man:
Who plays the Knave to enrich his Son, a Fool,
Is like a Fox that ventures for a Prey,
To bury it in some poor dirty hole,
And feed an Idle Dog, that trots that way:
The Beast is torn with fruitless pain and care,
And hanged at last to make his Foe his Heir.
I shall play the Knave, and be hanged for a mad Son, and so have a Tory; beg
my Estate, No, no, no.

Exit Br. Let Us after him, and get him out of this humor.


Exeunt. ACT V.
SCENE the House
Enter Artal. Art. I Am strangely taken with this sweet young Creature, it is so
pleasant to drink at such a fresh Spring, which never Brute de^^l'd, or
muddied: This old Fellow is but a withered Tree, that shades it; it is so much
wholesomer to love then the sophiistcated Beauties of this Town, which sicken
and kill an Intrigue in few days. Ha! where is my Gown and Cap^^ I came in such
amorous haste, I forgot my sick dress, and I shall never be able to act my sick
part without it; ^ut I have no patience to go back for it now -- Here she comes!
My Dear! where is the old Devil that would hinder our happiness? Old Tempter I
[Enter Lucinda will not call him.


Luc. I will not tell you.


Art. But you do.


Luc. What?


Art. That he is abroad, your Smiles say it; those Birds would be gone, if that
Winter were here. They say he will not come home a great while.


Luc. You are a Witch I think


Art. We Will lose no time.


Luc. Fie! Fie! you must not do such things as these.


Enter Bartoline, and his Clerk. Cler. O Sir! here is a Gentleman kissing my
Mistress.


Bar. How?


Luc. Oh dear, my Husband!


Art. Sirrah, you lie; unsay't again, or you are a dead Rogue.


Cler. No, no, Sir you did not indeed Sir, I mistook, this is the sick
Gentleman, Mr. Florio.


Bar. How? a shick man kish my Wife?


Art. No, no, I am not the sick man.


Bar. What are you, yen? call shomebody; cho sheize the Rogue.


Art. Yes, yes, I am the sick man -- I don't know what am, a pox.


Bar. Yesh, yesh, I know what you are, a Raschcal; and you choo have abu'sd
me, a yamn'd Rogue and Shlut.


Art. No, no Sir --


Bar. Why do you geny your shelf yen?


Art. Sir, I was afraid you might be jealous, because I was whispering in your
Ladies Ear, my Lungs being weak.


Bar. Your Lungsh weak, and huff, and rant like a Bully* ah! you are Rogue.


Art. That was only a sudden blast of Zeal for your good Ladies reputation and
mine, 'twill shorten my days. I have not above a Month to live, and I have spent
a fortnight's Breath before hand.


Bar. Oh you Rashcal! have I ca^ch'd you in your chricksh^ have you sherv'd me
shush.


Art. Why do you censure so rashly? I appeal to your Lat die.


Bar. Make a partchy Judge? no you have put choo goodg a Fee in you hand, cho
let her bechray your Caush.


Luc. You wrong me extremely.


Bar. I wronged my shell, cho entcher incho Bondsh of Marriage, and could not
perform Covenantsh, I might well hinke you would chake the for^eychure of the
Bond, and I never found equichy in a Bedg in my Life: But I Will trounce you boh,
I have paved Jaylsh wi' the Bonesh of honester People yen you are, yat neve'
did me nor any Man any wrong, but had Law of yeir shydsh, and right of yeir
shydsh, but cause yey had not me of yeir shydsh, I ha beggared 'em, 'hrown 'em
in Jaylsh, and got yeir Es^chatsh for my Clyentsh, yat had no more chytle to
'em yen Dogsh.


Art. And were you a good Man in that?


Bar. I wash a good Lawyer, and sho you shall find cho your cosht, we' in yish
twelvemonth you shall not be worth a groatch.


Art. Oh, I have too good a Title to what I have.


Bar. Chytle? I value not your Chytle: Beggarsh have not sho many chricksh, cho
make shorsh in yeir Bodyesh, ash we have cho make 'em in Chytlesh. But I Will
chell you what, I Will draw you up an exshellent Chytle cho the Jayl; and if you
have any Children, I Will shettle it upon you and your Heirsh for ever; a Jayl
shall be the Sheat of your Family. Od sha' me, if any brishke Rogue would cut
hish 'Hroat neatley, and privateley, yat nothing might appear against him but
Shircumshansesh, I Would bring him off, proviged it be not a shimple Rogue, yat
wantsh Money.


[Aside. Art. At this rate, your Wife shall be never the better for the
Settlement you have made upon her.


Bar. No, no more than I am the betcher for the Shettlement the Priesht hash
made of her upon me, the Devil chake him for hish painsh, would I could find a
slaw in it.


Art. Now thou make me angry, thou ungrateful Knave^ suppose she and I have
sinned, have thou got an Estate in the Devil's Service, and would thou hinder
his work.


Bar. Oh! you impugent Whoremashcher!


Art. Sirrah, you have made more Whores than ever I did.


Bar. I make Whorsh?


Art. Yes, thou have debauched whole Families by beggaring 'em, made Father and
Mothers Bawds to their own Daughters, to earn that Bread thou have cheated 'em
off.


Bar. You lie, you lie; but if I have, I only followed my chrade.


Art. Well, and it may be my Trade is Whoring, and I Will follow that*


Bar. Follow it wi' your own Commoditchyesh then, and don't meggle wi' mine.


Art. No more I have not, your Clerk is a lying Fellow, and your Lady a virtuous
young Woman* and my near Kinswoman; and since you abuse her, I Will take her into
my protection: Come, Cousin --


Bar. Oh brave Rogue! he chaksh away my Wife before my Faysh: Shirrah, I Will have
forty Actionsh on you back preshently.


Art. Then in a little time will I have forty Swords at your Throat, French
Swords, I Will let in the Enemy, and cut the Throats of such Rogues as you, who
abuse your Trade, and like so many Padders, make all People deliver their
Purse, that ride in the Road of Justice. Better be ruled by the Swords of
gallant Men, than the Mercinary Tougues of such Rascals as you are.


Bar. Bear witnesh, Chreashon, Chreashon, horrible Chreashon.


Art. I defy thee, do thy worst; I am Florio, Prince of Whigs, never without a
chosen Lifeguard of Jurymen, with brazen Consciences, proof against Oaths,
like Bucklers against Arrows. So, come away, Cousin -- Now will this Rogue fall
on Florio.


[ Exeunt Art. and Luc. Bar. Oh impugent yamn'd Rogue; Shirrah, be sure you
yemember all yish Chreashon, have you a good memory?


Cle. Yes, Sir.


Bar. I mean a ferchile memory, will a 'hing grow in it?


Cle. I Will remember enough to hang Florio, I Will warrant him I Will remember all
he said.


Bar. And more choo. And becaush the Rogue runsh away wi' my Wife, he will shay, I
proshecute him out of Malish; sho if no Body swearesh against him, but you and
I, the Rashcal may come off: yerefore we musht look out for an Evidensh or choo
more. Go cho shome able Atchurney, they are acquainched with 'em all, I Will look
out for shome my shelf, and run my for Lord Chief Jushchishesh Warrant, cho
apprehend yish Rash^all Go quickly, quickly.


[Exeunt Bar. Cle. SCENE continues.
Enter Podesta, Rosaura, Florio, Doctor, Bricklayer. Ros. Impudent, lying,
perjured Villain, accuse me of being a secret Strumpet?


Flo. And me of being your Gallant? I Am in a sine condition to be a Gallant to
a fair Lady.


Ros. All Is one, Malice will believe it, and I, though innocent, shall live in
reproach


Flo. Not long, Madam, not above a Week; my Doctor has confessed to me, I shall
dye some day next Week, and then I suppose this Story will dye too.


Pod. How! are you to dye next Week?


Flo. Yes, a great Lady will call for me, the only Lady in the World, I have an
Intrigue withal.


Pod. What Lady?


Flo. The Moon, my Lord, the Moon; she has an Intrigue with my Body, and never
puts on new Clothes, but at my Cost: she means to be very fine about Thursday
come sevennight* that is to say, in the Full; and then the World will see if my
bankrupt Body be able to carry on such a Trade.


Ros. All Is one, Sir, if you were dead, Malice would live and entertain Censure.


Pod. Well Sweet heart, as long as I don't entertain it, you need not troubled.


Ros. I confess, if I have the comfort of your Love --


Bri. You have, you have, Woman; don't make more fiddle faddle then needs, and
hinder us from business of consequence.


Pod. Sweetheart, no body takes a Degreein my University, but they perform
their Exercises, which you two have done, I have had experience of your
Virtues, and pronounce you both innocent. All the Shame and Grief is mine, that
my only Son, the Pillar of my Family is cracked or rotten, mad or a Knave: I
say he is mad.


Dr. I say he is a suborned Rascal:


Br. I Am of the Doctors mind.


Pod. I Will give you an unanswerable reason to the contrary.


Dr. What Is that?


Pod. I never discovered it, not so much as in the Boys Face, and I Will see
through such a Boy as he, as plain as through a new-laid Fgg. The oldest Face
shall no more cheat me, than old Coin does an Antiquary.


Dr. And what am I? an Owl.


Pod. I don't say you are.


Br. You two will kindle again.


Pod. No, the Boy shall decide the difference, I have sent for him; here he
comes.


Enter Servants with Crafty. Cra. This Woman is a Whore, and I was in the right.


[Aside. Pod. What say you now? does not the Madman peep through all his Looks
and Gestures?


Dr. I Will examine him -- Sirrah.


Cra. Hold your prating -- damned Whore.


[Aside. Pod. De'e see? stark mad.


Dr. Who subborn'd you to accuse your Mother of bei^ng Prostitute to Florio?


Cra. Who subborn'd you to accuse the Title of Doctor of Divinity, of being a
Prostitute to such an ignorant Ass?


Dr. Sirrah, I am a Scholar, and you are an ignorant, saucy, pragmattical
Rascal.


Cra. Nay, if Rogue and Rascal be Latin and Greek, thou art the best Scholar in
Christendom, for no Man living is so ver^^ in those Languages.


Dr. When I use those Languages, I, like Adam, give every Beast (...) proper
Name.


Cra. And when I call thee ignorant Coxcom^^, I give thee no other Name then
thy own Sermons do. That thou art an insolent Fool, is the only true Doctrine
thou preachest.


Pod. Is he mad, or no?


Bri. He is more Knave, than ^ool, Sarrah, don't you abuse the D^^tor.


Cra. How do I know (...) a Doctor, we have only his word for it, nor that
neither when he Preaches.


Dr. Sirrah, I Will hang you.


Cra. Ay, thou art a Doctor at that.


Dr. Ay, and of Divinity too, you impudent Rascal.


Cra. Where did you take your Degree in, Beargarden?


Dr. In a learned University, Sir.


Cra. I, the University of Coffee-houses, the University of Lies, where, if any
one speaks Truth, the University (...) it is Charter. ^here you are a Doctor,
and the Bricklayer principal Fellow of a College.


Bri. Don't you meddle wi' me, you malapert boy you, the greatest Lords and
Politicians of the Kingdom, of our Party, will not be so saucy wi' meas you are,
but Court me, and are proud of me, and depend upon my Counsel and Countenance.


Cra. Depend on thy Countenance! They have (...) dependence -- damned
confounded Woman? great with a Rascal [Aside. Gnawed with Diseases, 'till he is
as enomous as a chaw'd ^ullet* and refuse me -- Jilt* I Will make her great with
me.


Pod. You see what Sa^^eys of madness he has of Craffy! but to what purpose
should I speak to him? Craffy, if you have any understanding; say whether you
saw your Mother in the Garden house wi' Florio, or not?


Cra. Why I will swear that --


Pod. Look upon her.


Cra. She Is the handsom'st Woman in the World, what Breasts she has!


Pod. The handsom'st Woman? what is that to the business? Is not this
distraction, Gentlemen? Answer to the question, did you see her in the
Garden-house with Florio?


Cra. I Will see her there with me, or I Will -- [Aside. Hark you, Gentlewoman, you
know I saw you there; I have three Witnesses to swear it; meet me there, I Will
bring you often.


[Aside. Ros. Your Witnesses are perjured Rascals, and you are an Ass, who
abuse me just now I Am coming to have more inclination for you, than my
Conscience will admit of.


Cra. Say thou so -- [Aside. I did not see her there, I did not.


Pod. Then thou art mad.


Cra. Will you meet me there?


[Aside. Ros. Perhaps I may, if you will be civil.


Cra. Delicate Rogue.


[Aside. Now I swear I did not see her there, but that damned Rascal I did see
there; an impudent rotten Fellow, that has never a sound bit about him, of his
own, but is inlay'd like a Cabinet: that he should dare to kiss and embrace
such a delicate Woman as my Mother, there.

Pod. Why, did he?


Cra. Did he? ay, a hundred times, I saw him, a Rascal.


Pod. And yet just now, you said she was not there.


Ros. How now? was I there?


Cra. I forget my self -- (Aside.) No faith she was not there.


Pod. How could he embrace her then?


Cra. In his fancy, I saw her in his Fancy, as plain as could be, he has a huge
fancy for her.


Pod. Fancy, Lord help thee Boy, thou have strange fancies; take himaway, he is
a sad (...) -- take him away, or he will break my heart. Lock him up.


Cra. Lockme up? how shall I come at my Mother then? Pox take it.


[Ex. Serve. Cra. Flo. He Is far gone.


Pod. I think my Judgment is to be relied upon.


Flo. I wish in his madness he had not torn my good Reputation, the only Image
of a Man we ought to venerate.


Bri. I would have no body's Picture preserved but the Doctors.


Flo. Nor I. Well, I have news to tell you from another World, the very Devils
have more care of us, than our pretended Friends. A Spirit appeared to a
Country Maid, and told her, Naples would be burnt on this Night, if care was
not taken.


Pod. Is it possible! where is the Maid?


Flo. In the Country, she was coming to Town, fell ill by the way, so she has
sent the Story to the Viceroy, by the Post.


Pod. And what says he?


Flo. He laughs at it.


Dr. He Is a fine Fellow.


Br. He Is in the right, why the Devil would not the Spirit come Post himself,
but deliver a Message of this consequence to a silly Country Gossip? The Devil
never imployes any but Fopps of Spirits, he is not fit to be a Devil, I Will
justify it.


Pod. How do you know 'twas a Devil? May be 'twas the Soul of some of our
Friends.


Br. Let it be whose Soul it will, I say the Soul was a Fop. I think People,
when they are dead turn Tonies; they never say one wise word, nor ever come
into any wise Company.


Dr. The Viceroy is a pure Canary-Bird, I Will have him turned out of his place,
I Will prove he is a Mohammedan, he was Circumcised at Bar -- bar -- badoes.


Pod. I believe you mean Barbary, Doctor.


Dr. Why, ay, Barbados is the Latin name for Barbary. I love to swear like a
Scholar, and a Doctor, as I am.


Bri. Well, I Will go put all the Town in Arms.


[Exit. Bri. Dr. I Will go wi' you, I dare not stay in any House


[Exit. Doct. Pod. I dare not stir out of mine.


Enter a Servant conducting Pietro, who is disguised like a Spanyard o'Quality.
Serve. My Lord, here is a Great Gentleman lays he must n^eds speak with your
Lordship presently, about affairs that concern your self.


Pod. Look to me, for I know not what he is.


Pie. My Lord, I must beg leave to whisper you.


Pod. You may, Sir, but I must also beg leave to use (...) these are dangerous
times* some men have been almost whispered out of their Necks.


Pie. I come from the Viceroy; he is sensible of your great Parts and Intere^^,
and desires to speak wi' you presently; and if you will be his ^riend, he
offers you your own terms, (...) Honor, Profit, and Greatness.


Pod. Had is it come to this? I like this -- Sir, (...).


Pie. A Chair waits for you at the door; he desires (...) may be managed with
all secrecy 'till it is settled.


Pod. I will (...) a Wise Man. Mr. Florie I Am called away about matters of very
great Importance, I must take my leave.


Ros. OF this (...) Night, my Lord?


Pod. It must be.


Ros. Would (...) Nation were settled once, that we might en^^y one another.


Pod. It may (...) speedily. Good Night.


Flo. Good Night^ Madam.


Pod. (...) Mr. Florio! are you well enough?


Flo (...), my Lord, my good Name is the Child of a ^^ck Man. seldom sound,
never thought to be so. I must be ^ender of it: Good Night, Madam; come, my
Lord, I Will see you in your Chair.


Pod. No, no, I cannot stay for your dreaming pace: I Am in haste.


Flo. Pray, my Lord.


Pod. I cannot stay, I cannot stay; good Night, good Night.


[Exit. Pod. Pietro. Flo. Ha, ha, ha, how greedily this Fool swallows the
(...), ^s the room, that must pass with him for the Court, and secure him till
his Horns be grown, so dressed ^e cannot know it to be one in his own House?


Ros. That was my care.


Flo. You see my Man's new furniture has cheated him.


Ros. So shall the Room.


Flo. Then we may securely hoise Sail for (...). All the Mudd that barred it
up, we have con^eyed away, and I will come a Shore on these white Cliffs, and
plant my Heart there for ever.


Ros. Do so, and I Will promise thee the Happiness and Wealth I gain by the
Residence of my Prince, shall not make (...) ungratefully Factious. (...) true
to me, and I Will be most Loyal to thee.


Flo. Then we'll be the happiest pair in the whole World.


[Exeunt. SCENE Changes.
Enter Pietro conducting the Podesta with Ceremony. Pie. My Lord, you are very
welcome to Court.


Pod. Your most humble Servant, Sir.


Pie. Take not your private Reception ill, for f^w or none are entrusted with
this ^ntrigue; it is a great State (...) and great Honors, to my knowledge, are
designed you, no less than the High (...) of Lord Treasurer.


Pod. Lord Treasurer?


Pie. Sir, I speak what I know; 'twill be some time before you come to it; and
the Viceroy will expect you sacrifice to him the Doctor, Bricklayer, Florio --.


Pod. Ay, and my Father too, if he were alive, he should hang 'em all. Lord
Treasurer!


Pie. I hope, my Lord, you will not (...) some Oaths -- and --


Pod. Nothing, I Will refuse nothing, Sir, for such Honor as this: Lord
Treasurer!


Pie. I Will acquaint his Highness with your Arrival: you must be willing to
suffer some attendance, the common affliction of all Courtiers.


Pod. I Will do, or suffer any thing, for so much Glory as this. Lord Treasurer!


Pie. Your humble Servant, my Lord.


[Exit Pie. Pod. Your most humble Servant, Sir: Lord Treasurer! to what
Grandeur am I rising? Some of the Court are coming.


A noise of picking the Lock, and Enter Craffy. Cra. So, I have got out of my
Prison.


Pod. Craffy in Court!


Cra. So, I have shut back the Lock admirably, and got out of Prison: my
Father! but why should I be afraid of him? he thinks me mad, and will be afraid
of me.


Pod. What a notable Boy is this? I thought he was mad, and he has more Wit
than my self, h'as climbed to preferment before me; I always said this Boy had
nimble parts. Son.


Cra. My Lord.


Pod. You are surpised to see me in Court.


Cra. In Court!


Pod. I am as much surpised to see your Wit, which so subtly disguised your
Policy under pretended madness.


Cra. Policy! am I grown from a Madman to a Politician?


Pod. Well, I am proud of thee. Father and Son, both Favorites! of my word we
shall be a great Family. Well -- what says the Viceroy to thee of me?


Cra. Viceroy!


Pod. Ay, and how art thou in with the Vice-Queen?


Cra. Vice-Queen!


Pod. Ay, for Women have great power in all Courts. Did now come out of the
Vice-Queen's side?


Cra. Out of her side!


Pod. Her side, that is her part of the Court? -- her Apartments; thou think
I Am a raw Courtier; no, Sir, I know Court Phrases.


Cra. My dirty hole, the Vice-Queens Apartment!


Pod. Why art so shy to thy Brother Courtier? I Am thy Brother Courtier now.


Cra. Now would I give ten pound to know which of us two is mad; if I were sure
he were mad, I Would run and beg him presently; but the danger is, lest I be begged
my self.


Pod. Thou art close wi' me, but I Will be open with thee: I have sold all the
Whigs, and my self into the Bargain; and what do think the Court gave me?


Cra. I don't know.


Pod. The Lord Treasurer's place; I am to be Lord Treasurer. Boy.


Cra. Father!


Pod. Child.


Cra. The Lord bless thee, and deliver thee from Poetry, for thou art a sad
sight.


Pod. Ha! a noise! the Court assaulted! I am cruel afraid the Whigs have made
some attempt upon the Court, and got the better, then will they catch me in
Court, and hang me for a Turn-coat. -- hide Boy, hide.


Cra. Yet cannot I tell which of us is mad, or where I am.


[Ex. Pod. and Cra. Enter Governor, a Guard, Doctor and Bricklayer Prisoners*
Porter of the Podesta's House. Gov. Friend, you were best confess where your
Lord is, before I break open any more Doors, for if I find him in the House,
after your denial of him, I shall punish you.


Port. Indeed, if it please your Highness, he never came home since he went
abroad with a strange Gentleman.


Gov. Your Lady you says a Bed, and will not be disturbed?


Port. I must disturb her, if it be your pleasure, but she has forbid any
Person coming near her Chamber.


Enter Podesta and Craffy peeping. Pod. The Governor of the City here? then the
Whigs are worsted, and I Will show my self.


Cra. The Governor here! then this is the Court.


Pod. My Lord.


Gov. De'e see, Sirrah? your Master's in the First Room I come in.


Port. I did not know it, indeed, my Lord.


Gov. Secure the Podesta.


Pod. Secure me!


Gov. Ay, the Viceroy will endure your intolerable disorders no longer. Arm
the City at midnight, and send your Agitators abroad to disperse new minted
lies among 'em, the Com wherewith you pay all your Forces. I have order to
secure you all.


Dr. I fear you not.


Bri. (...)and my Habeas Corpus.


(...) How now brother, Courtier! is this your greatness


Pod. Ha! am I trapann'd? was this fair o'th Viceroy to entice me to Court with
promises of Honors and Preferments, and then secure me?


Gov. The Viceroy entice you to Court with Promises?


Pod. Yes, you had not seen me in Court else.


Gov. Why, when did I see you in Court?


Pod. When! that is a strange Question. Where am I now*


Gov. That Is a stranger Question. Do you not know where you are? do you not
know your own home?


Pod. My own home! why am I at home?


Gov. The man's mad.


Cra. Then the disputes at an end? my Lord, I beg to (...) his Guardian.


Pod. If I be at home, I have had a fine trick played me and by this Gentleman,
I am glad I have you Sir pray let him be secured, and examined Sir, where am I?


En(...) Pietro Pie. At home Sir.


Pod. At home! and wherefore did you entice me out o^ my house, and after you
had danced me to and fro, (...) me home again, pretending you brought me to
Court.


Gov. Confess. Sir.


Cra. His Periwig. and false Beard, confess 'twas that his Master might make my
Lord Treasurer a Cuckold -- for this is Florio's man --


Pod. Florio's man! then his Master is an Impostor, my Wife a Slut, and I Am a
Fool.


Dr. And a Knave, for I believe you went abroad with designs to betray us.


Pod. I shall not inform you Sir.


Bri. There Is not an honest man in the world.


Cra. Now am I to be believed, or no? Sirrah you Pimp, where have you pimp'd
this couple together?


Pie. In the next room.


Gov. Force open the door.


[The Scene is drawn, Florio and Rosaur^ are discovered sitting Arm in Arm,
they offer to fly, and are caught. Cra. You Villain -- [draws]


Gov. Disarm the fellow.


Pod. You Strumpet.


Cra. You Jilt.


Dr. You Rogue.


Bri. Tory in Masquerade.


Gov. Are you sick Sir? I Will know the state of your body.


Pod. My wife can tell.


Gov. There Is another Lady shall enquire a Rack.


Flo. That Lady's a scurvy bedfellow, I Will spare her pains.


Pod. Are you to dye a Thursday come-sennight?


Flo. I believe 'twill be put off a little longer now.


Cra. So, you are a healthy Rascal, are you?


Flo. Why truly I find my self very finely well, I thank heaven, very well.


Bri. Oh you shamming Rascal!


Ro^. How! have you abused me thus? and are you an Impostor.


Pod. And would you abuse us, Madam? and cheat us into a belief you did not
know it?


Ros. Do you believe I did?


Pod. Did not all our eyes see you Arm in Arm?


Ros. What of that? I invoke heaven to witness --


Pod. Away you Strumpet.


Ros. Is it possible --


Pod. Never come near my bed, or sight more.


Ros. I invoke heaven to witness --


Pod. What?


Ros. That thou shall never come near my bed, or sight more.


Pod. Oh Impudences!


Ros. The impudence is yours. I modestly concealed your shame and mine, and you
would force me impudently to confess.


Pod. Is it my shame that you are a Strumpet?


Flo. Yes, she is a true Whig, and has revolted from you, because you did not
pay her nightly Pension well.


Pod. I hope you have Sir.


Flo. I wonnot say whether I have, or no.


Pod. But I will say thou art a Rascal.


Flo. I Am an honester man than your self, and truer to my Principles, you
would have left 'em for Preferment. I retain 'em, our Principles are, he is not
to be regarded who has a right to Govern, but he who can best serve the ends of
Government* I can better serve the ends of your Lady* than you can, so I lay
claim to your Lady.


Res. And you have my consent.


Flo. So, I have the voice o^ the Subject too; then you are m^ wife, and I Will
keep you.


Pod. Oh brave! Sir, must this be?


Gov. Ask the Law, I must do all things according to Law.


Cra. Your Servant, My Lord Treasurer; these are a fine Crew, Sir, Here Is the
Bricklayer, Sir, a fine Privy Counselor, is he not? he expects also every day
to be a Colonel, he is already a Colonel Presumptive.


Bri. Very well.


Cra. Here Is the Doctor too, a fine Divine, Sir.


Dr. Si^rah don't meddle with me.


Cra. He applies himself very much to the Bible, I mean to kiss it. He Prays
much, so help him the Contents of the Book, and they have helped him to many a
pound, though they and he scarce ever saw one another. The Bible is the only
Benefice he has, Sir.


Dr. Si^rah, I Will have your Ears.


Cra. Never when you Preach, Doctor. They are all very good Men, never take
Heavens Name in vain, that is, Swear, and get nothing by it; but to get your
Estate, or command, they will Swear your Head off.


Gov. That I believe.


Cra. They are moderate Drinkers of Wine, but will Carrous^ Water abundantly,
for they will drink your Rivers, Fish and all, and put your Land into it for a
Toast, if you will let 'em. And yet sometimes they have very narrow Swallows, they
cannot down with a little Church Ceremony, but they will swallow Church Lands,
Hedges and Ditches.


Gov. Well, my Lord Pedesta, your Office the Victroy and the Council will order
be managed by a wiser Man.


Pod. I wonnot part wi' my Office but by Law. I have done nothing but by the
Advice of Able Council -- Here he comes.


Gov. That Knave.


Enter Bartoline, and two Witnesses. Pod. Counselor Bartoline, will our
Charter justify us?


Bar. In What? keeping a Bawdy housh? your Housh ha^li been made a Bawdy-housh,
notch by me, but by Florio, your shicke shaint -- a yam'd Rascal.


Pod. I know it to my sorrow. But the Question I ask is, will our Charter
justify our Arming without the Viceroy's leave?


Bar. I have chold you it will a hundred chymsh, and let the Vishroy do hish
worsht.


Gov. ^ow! bring that Knave to me.


Genesis Sir, the Governor ot'h City commands you to come to him


Bar. The Governor here ^od' shame, yen l'me ruined, I Am ruined.


Gov. Sir, did not the Viceroy retain you for his Lawyer, and did not you send
him the direct contrary Opinion?


Bar. Yesh and pleash your Lordship, and I sent his Highnesh chrue Law. I only
sheatcher'd Chas among these Fellowsh cho catch 'em, caush I found 'em arrant
Rashcalsh, and cho show my Loyalchy, I have drawn up Arti^lsh of High Chreason
against 'em, and you may hang 'em all.


Dr. What a Rogue's here?


Bri. This was you that understood Mankind.


Pod. I'l^ never pretend to it more.


Bar. There yey are Shir --


Gov. Articles of High Treason, with other High Crimes and Misdemeanors
against Don Pedro, Duke of Ossuna, Viceroy of Naples: How! Articles of Treason
against the Viceroy?


Bar. Oh, My Lord, My Lord, I have given you the wrong Paper, yat wash a Paper I
drew to delude yesh Rogush. Pray don't chake advanchage of an old fumbling
Fellow.


Gov. An old Blood-hound.


Bar. I beg you Lordships pardon on my kneesh.


Gov. Oh, Sir, if the Viceroy were at a Bar, you would bring him upon his Knees.


Bar. Ingeed I am Loyal Shir. I have discovered a horrible Plotch, one Flor^o
has Plotched cho open the Gatesh, and letch in the French.


Fle. How?


G^^. What* Florio*


Bar. A de^aush'd Fellow, yat prechends to be Sinck, (...) Godly, Preachesh up
and down for a Benefish. Yat ish (...) Mansh Wife he likesh.


Gov. Here Is the Man you speak of.


Bar. Then I desire he may be apprehenged for High (...) I have choo Witneshesh
will Shwear all yish upon (...)


Flo. what means the Rascal?


Bar. Yesh are the Men.


Gov. What C^untry-Men are they?


1. Wit. I am an Irish man, I Am not ashamed of my Country


Gov. What Religion are you of?


1 Wit. Hubbubbow! ask an Irish Man what Religion he (...) shertainly it I be
an Irish Man, I Am a good Catholic


Gov. Well, and what can you Swear against Florio^


1. Wit. I Will Shwear hesh a Knave and a Rascal, and a (...) and hash been in a
Plot.


Flo. What Plot?


1. Wit. To kill all the Town, and let in the French; yesh indeed.


Flo. Kill all the Town by my self.


1 Wit. No, I wash to have a toush and Cobs to help tee.


Flo. Cobs! what are those?


1. Wit. Pieshes of Eight -- and I wash to have ten hundred of 'em.


Flo. To do what?


Wit. To let in the French, and make a Fire in the Town, and cut all our
Troa^sh; yesh indeed.


Flo. All our troatsh? wast thou to cut thy own throat.


Dr. Sir, we wo^'t have our Evidence ba^led -- he means All our throats -- do
not?


Wit. Yesh indeed -- all our throatsh.


Flo. I Will swear I never saw this Fellows face before in my life.


Wit. Hubbubbow, tou hasht drunk above a tousand times ushqaebagh wi'me, to de
carrying on of tish plot.


F^o. Ushquebagh! what is that?


Wit. A brave Liquor tat we have in Ireland, tersh no such here, I never shaw
any here.


Flo. How could I drink (...) then?


Wit. I don't know how tou coud'st drink it, but tou hash drunk it above a
toushand times, and a toushand.


Gov. Come, come Sirrah, I doubt you are a Vill^in.


Wit. Hubbubbow! tou talk like an English (...), wilt tou be an English
Heretic, and not believe (...) Irishman.


Dr. Come, come, the Fellow's an honest simple Fellow


Wit. Ay, by Shaint Patrick am I.


Dr. H'as discovered a horrible plot, only wants expression. Is it possible you
Rogue you? was this the meaning of all your canting, and deluding us, to lull
us asleep whilst our Throats are cut?


Pod. Thou Monster^ not only Cuckold me, but Cut my Throat.


Flo. It Is false.


Dr. It Is true.


Flo. (...) say the ^ellow before.


Dr. I Will Swear, I have seen him with thee above ^orty times.


Cra. And so have I too I Will teach the Rogue to ly with my Mistress, I Will hang
him if I can.


[Aside. Bri. So the Plot's proved, plainly proved.


(...). A Plot to murder me ^s proved, but sure such a Ra^cal as this who has
sworn Contradictions shall not be believed.


Dr. He is a Rogue, and a Traitor that does not behave every Word he says.


Enter the Clerk and Officers, with Artal and Lucinda. Cle. Sir, I have caught
Mr. Florio here.


Bar. What Florio? art out of thy Wi^sh*


Cle. The Florio, that was to let in the Fren^^, and run away with my Mistress,
^ have caught 'em together, and brought 'em


Bar. Thou art Mad, our Evigensh has shworn again^^^ a noyer Man.


Cle. Then your Evidence is Mad, and don't know what they Swear.


Wit. Sir, I know what I Swear as well as you do, and know Mr. Florio as well
as any Man, I have known him this seven years, and know this Man to be the true
Florio, and a Traitor that plotted to let in the French.


Cle. Then thou art a Rascal, and bought off, for this is the true Florio, and
the Traitor that plotted to let in the French.


Gov. Then thou art a Rascal, and hired to be one; for I, and all the Town can
swear his Name is Artal.


Cra. Oh, the Devil! all our Plot's confounded.


Gov. You Irishman, which do you say is the true Florio?


Wit. Tish ish de Man I wash bid to shwear againsht.


Gov. Bid to swear against? who bid you? confess, or the Rrack shall make you.


Wit. Oh! preedee do not wrack me, and I will confess. Tish Knave and I had
shome acquaintansh, and sho I had shome occasionsh for Money, and I borrowed
shome of him, and he had shome occashionsh for Teshtimony, and sho I tought I
wash obliged in shivility to lend him shome Teshtimony, and sho he bed meshwear
againsht one Florio, and shaid tish was de Man, but if ^ou wilt forgive me,
I Will shwear him off again.


Cor. So, Sirrah; and who put you upon this?


Wit. An Attorney, Sir; employed, I suppose, by this Counselor.


Dr. O notorious mercinary Rogues! who will believe such Rogues as they are?


Bri. None but Rogues.


Gov. Just now you said he was a Rogue that would not believe 'em.


Dr. Ay, when they said the same things that I did: what I said was confirmed
by Craffy, a considerable young Man, Heir to a great Estate, and of a spotless
Reputation, no Man can say the least against him.


Gov. And what say you, Craffy? speak truth, if you mean to have any Fars.


Pod. Or any part of my Estate.


Gov. Did you ever see this Irishman with Florio?


Cra. I only spoke in a little Passion: I have some of the Doctors Infirmities,
I Am passionate, and apt to swear in my passion.


Flo Be perjured in a Passion?


Dr. This Fellow's the lyingst Rogue in the Nation, and has been so from his
Cradle.


Gov. Just now you said no Man could say the least against him.


Bri. Sham upon Sham.


Art. My Lord, I Will clear all. This young Woman is my Kinswoman, I hearing she
was Married to that Old Man, brought to Town, and lodged in House which Florio
frequented; she not knowi^g me, I took upon me Florio's Name, and made
addresses to her; partly to divertise my self, but chie^ly to make trial of her
Virtue. The Old Man caught me in the act of Courtship, grew Jealous, and would
have abused his Wife, which, to prevent, I took her from him, he, to be
revenged, hired Witnesses to hang me for Treason.


Bar. I Will shwear he shpoke Creashon, but 'tish to no purpose, for now 'twil
appear Malish.


Gov. To Prison with 'em all.


Art. I beg your Lordship to intercede with the Viceroy for the Old Man, for my
Cousins sake, and command him to use her kindly.


Gov. I shall consider of it.


Bar. I hanke your Lordship, but my Heartsh broken.


Bai. Hang me, if you will: I Will swear I Am murdered by Sulborners and
Shamplotters.


Dr. And Traytorly Rogues.


Art. Well said, Doctor, thou will give Titles in the last day of the Reign.


Gov. The last day it shall be. The Viceroy, and all of us will put an end to
his Absolute Negative Voice, his great power of degrading Lords and Dukes, into
Rogues and Rascals, if they will not purchase of him the Confirmation of their
Titles, by capping to him: Nay, of deposing Kings, if they slight his Councils.
We will also Dissolve all his Privy Council: And so Gentlemen, henceforward be
wise, leave off the new Trade you have taken up, of managing State Affairs, and
betake your selves to the Callings you were bred too, and understand. Be
honest, meddle not with other Men's, matters especially with Government, it is
none of your Right. In short, trouble not your selves more than needs.

Chiefly you Married Men, for all allow
You Married Men, have private Plagues enough.

FINIS*
The EPILOGUE (...) LEE in the Character of Bartoline the Old Lawyer*
Enter a (...) Bartoline. 1 Gent. SIR, I come to you (...) worthy Gentlemen,
the World is pleased to call Wh^


Bar. Whigs Sir, they are the Props and Pillars of the Nation.


1 Gent. Sir, There is a Poet has been so bold as to write a Play against 'em,
in which several of 'em think themselves abused; now, Sir, they desire to know
if they have not an Action of Slander against the Poet?


Bar. Ay, ay, Sir, ho's a Raico^l.


1 Gent. And may not have considerable Damages?


Bar. Oh! very considerable --


1 Gent. Here are two Pieces.


Bar. Two Pieces --? pretty indifferent damages -- I believe they may have some
Damages.


1 Gent. Here Is one great person thinks himself much abused, and has sent you
20 Pieces.


Bar. Sir, he shall have great Damages, he shall trounce the Poet, a Rascal to
abuse great persons.


1 Gent. I Will tell him -- Ex.


Enter a second Gent. 2. Sir, I come to you from a person that wants your
Council, but he is a swingeing Tory.


Bar. Well, he is never the worse man, provided he has a swingeing Purse.


2. Sir, he has writ a Play against Faction^ and some ^higs think themselves
hit home in it, and they are bringing Actions of Slander against him to punish
him.


Bar. Sir, if he has his the Whigs home, he is a good Ma^ks-man, for now they
are all upon the Wing.


2. Sir, he desires to know whether there lies an Action of Slander against hi^
or no? and so, whether he had best compound the business in time, or go through
with it?


B^r. Oh! let him go through with it.


2. And you will assist him?


B^r. Ay, ay, in private.


2. But he has no Money, he must Sue in Forma Pauperis.


Bar. Forma Pauperis? Oh! damned Rogue, does he abuse Great Men, and has he no
Money? Tell him have considered it, and I (...) defend a slanderous Rascal in
abusing honest men.


2. You said you would help him through with it.


Bar. Ay, through the Pillory. A Rascal without Money abuse Great Men, and then
Sue in Forma Pauperis! -- Come the Court is fat -- I must Plead for the
Plaintiff.


(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
From WHIGS* to whom by Custom it belongs,
WHIGS are all Freeholders of their Tongues,
And (...) too --
IN le prove it out of Janeway's Reports,
And the Decrees of several Coffee Courts.
The POET has no title then to rail,
Let him be seized, nor let Wit be his Bayl,
Wit is a Tory, never with us would join,
Wit never helped the Whigs to write one Line.
'T has been ^ccus'd, and in our Writings sought
But still the Co^oner Non inventus brought:
But Learned Judges, I leave all to you,
If you're for TORIES, I w^ll be so too.
Anoint Witches, they will fly, though never so old;
I Will be as nimble too, ^oint me with Gold:
I Will quickly to the Tory Party skip,
Greaze my Fist well, I Will let cur Faction slip.
FINIS.

