PANDION and AMPHIGENIA Or The History of the Coy Lady Adorned with Sculpture,

London Printed for Richard Milles.



PANDION AND AMPHIGENIA: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Coy Lady OF THESSALIA Adorned
with Sculptures. By J. CROWN.

LONDON, Printed by I. G. for R. Mills, at the sign of the Pestel and Mortar
without Temple-Barr, Anno, 1665.

To the Right Honorable ARTHUR Lord Viscount CHICHESTER, Earl of DONEGAL, And
one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council for the Kingdom of Ireland.
My Lord,
THis poor Offspring of my vacant hours, having slept awhile in the shades of
obscurity and silence, I knew not when it might better walk abroad, and take
the Air of popular censure, than in the Sunshine of your Lordship Patronage. I
am very sensible of the meanness of the Subject (being wholly fictitious) and
the poverty of its dress; and none can think more contemptibly of it than my
self: I was scarce twenty years of Age when I fancyed it, and therefore it must
needs want those masculine conceits as do violence to men's understandings. I am
not ignorant that things of this nature are only to ease and supple a Brain
that has long bin in the Rack of severer Studies: and I am afraid this will
hardly be preferred to so noble a use, since a lofty Intellect that has been
Airing its Wings in clear and sublime Meditations, will hardly stoop to Bath in
the puddle of these low and sordid Fancies. If throughout the whole Utopia,
there be an expression, or a person whose Character or Passion may deserve a
transient glance from your eye, it has commenced a degree of Honor above my
expectations. And I shall esteem my self highly and generously rewarded, if I
may hereby in any degree merit the title of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, and most obedient servant, John Crown.

To the Reader.
IT was on a day, that as Time rode by in the Chariot of the Sun, I resolved to
go in Pilgrimage to Parnassus; and borrowing some few idle hours of that old
bald-pated Usurer to bear my expenses, I weaved me a Hermits Gown of
Opportunities for clock, and took for a Staff a Sunbeam, and so accoutred I
went to do my devoire to the nine Patronesses of Poesy. Where after a long and
tedious peregrination I arrived; but no sooner arrived than I beheld to my
astonishment, the Widowed chanel that once had embraced the Castalian Springs
sweet off spring, destitute of its murmuring society, and of the delight it
once took in its moist kisses, and prostitute to a new black complexion'd
Lover; the bubling womb whence that progeny was extracted, being turned to a
Grave, where Oblivion lay entombed; that treasury of liquid Pearls that used of
yore to enrich old Poets Brains, wherewith they so often bespangled their Poems,
being quite exhausted. Some said it was thence conveyed into little Cisterns,
and so conducted thorough slender pipes into a vast Conduit. Others said the
thirsty throats of Lovers, parch't with Beauties Rays had swill'd it up. I as
an impartial Judge imputed it to both. Next I looked round to see if I could
espy the Muses; but Time it seemed had long ago ravished those sweet Virgins
from that solitary place. Some said they were dead and Coffined up in Poets
Souls. Others said, they served as Handmaids to fond Lovers Paramors. I as an
uninteressed Umpire imputed it to neither, but judged they were fled to heaven
to renew their Bankrupted stores. Thus grieved to see my journey frustrate, I
resolved however to Banquet my eyes with the sight of that forked mountain,
that once had been the pleasant Throne where the nine Virgin Queens were wont
to sit, Crowned with Laurel, on a green Carpet wrought with Fore's embroidery,
tuning their enchanting Lays to Ecch^es resounding Acc^nts; but turning to
behold it, I saw nothing but the Plain whose shoulders had once born that huge
pile of earth; when struck into a transport with admiration at this monstrous
product of Time, I was told by the standers by, that some Modern Giants of w^t
had born it thence, intending to scal Heaven, and plunder it of its choicest
rarities, wherewith to fill the heavenly Coffers of their minds. These words
were as an alarm to my murmuring thoughts, which now began to mutiny against
my repose; whom whilst I strove to appease, I heard from a confused Mass of
Rocks and Stones, the most soul-entrancing-melody that ever was begotten of the
Airs fluid womb; such as would have compelled a Stoic to sleep his mind in
those soft pleasures, whose every tone sounded like a Diapason, and all its
accents like the very relishes and closes of that heavenly Music, Angels and
beatified souls compose, when in their Silver Bowers, they join in Consort, and
make the Arches of that Empyreal Orb resound the Eulogies they sing in praise
of their immortal solace. No sooner were these Airs conveyed into the Labyrinth
of my ear, but I felt my self confounded with sudden ravishment; when demanding
of the Auditory, whether Melody it self lay interred under that Chaos? Reply
was made, that they were only some few Relics of those ravishing strains
Apollo used to charm souls withal, when playing on his Viol he made the Air
dance her rarest measures, in thousands of sweet forms, after his nimbly
quavering fingers, whose melody made the very senseless stones become Epicures,
who loath to part with their delight, hoorded up its Silver sound in their
obdurate, treasuries. Scarce had my mind lent attendance to the cadence of
their speech, ere I was snatched I knew not how, I knew not whither. Whilst I
lay extasied with this harmony, I saw in a Vision, a young Muse in tattered
habit, holding in her hand the pourtraiture of a man, drawn by the Pencil of
Nature so exquisitely, that it seemed the perfect Character of a Divine Idea,
for no humane fancy could devise such an excellent draught. His looks were the
Ensigns of some eminence in him, more than humane; so that he seemed the
Epitome of the whole worlds excellencies: The Princely Air of his countenance
seeming as a refracting medium of the beams of an illustrious Soul; that he
almost confirmed in me, that before doubted Platonism, That Angels are united
to bodies. As I was feeding my admiration with this admirable sight, I heard a
voice proclaim in my ears, Copy out this representation. Fain would I have made
my own inability the excuse of my neglect, and made answer, that such
superlative excellencies did transcend my comprehension, much more my
expressions; and that it sufficed that they were their own blazons, since none
could sufficiently emblazon them; and as for me, I would imitate the adorers of
the Sun, not being able to encircle his head in a Laurel Crown, I Would sacrifize
some few Poetic Flowers to his praise. These thoughts restored my revolted
senses to their Offices, when no sooner awaked, and that I had taken
acquaintance with my self, but I saw the Muse that appeared to me in my Vision,
who came running to me, and presently Midwived some conceits, that my Brain
was then in travail withal; which when born she wrapped up in some scattered
plumes that the Muses had left behind them, and so presented it to the Nursery
of wits the Press; which (Reader) here I devote unto thee. Who if thou be
one of those whose squeamish stomachs nauseat every thing, but what is of their
own dressing, I shall not wonder if thou can not empanch this
illdrest-garbage, since the rarities of a more curious fancy, Cook't by a
cleanlier Muse, offend thy palate. Doubtless Brains is the best sauce for this
sort of dishes, but Necessity is the best Apology. Want and sordidness are like
Aeneas and Achates inseparable coitinerants. As her youth may easily excuse her
want of skill to weave a fine-spun-webb wherein to array her Progeny. She is
not yet emancipata, and therefore no wonder if not so sinewy, vigorous and
sprightly, as those that have arrived to the third or fourth climacterical. The
way then for thee to banquet thy own Genius, is not to feed on these jejune
weak conceits, but rather on some more polite, accurate piece of thy own
composing, whose excellency may be set off by the foil of my deficiency; for so
men augment the Suns refulgency, by comparing them with the gloomy shades.
Again, if thou be one, who set up these few Pictures of my fancies
confused Ideaes, in the Gallery of thy thoughts, thinking to adorn it, with the
quaint allusions, acute Criticisms, high-flown raptures, and big-swollen words,
that may be expected to fall from a Pen that endeavors to limn out the
pourtraiture of Virtue; let me anticipate that wonder, a rational conjecture
tells me an unexspected delusion will create in thee, by telling thee before
hand, this Cabinet encloses no such treasure. I cannot tell which I was most
unhappy in, in my perambulation, whether to forget to pass thorough France, and
there to have adapted my tongue and pen to the moding complements wherewith
that Ceremonious Nation so neatly give the lie to themselves; or else that
during my abode in Thessaly, I could not procure some of the golden Fleece,
which Jason with the Argonautes brought from Colchis, of which to have spun my
Muse a glistering Vesture. I must confess, ambitious I was to strut it with the
most boystrous and Alla-mode Roysters of our times, and therefore sent my Wits
a Wool-gathering, to see if they could pick up some locks of it, and that's the
reason they come home so ragged. Some though they live in the frozen Zone of a
Plebeian stupidity, will yet apparel their minds in fustian, which sure is the
reason they Cough and spit out such Phlegmatic conceits; which oysterlike
dotes, they will (in despite of any) fancy to enshrine the richest Pearls. To
bolster up a crooked invention with fungous words, and putid phrases (methinks)
makes the deformity more apparent. Volumes filled with such empty inflations,
inherit the Office of a football. As I ever hated such barbarisms, so I never
delighted in complemental falsities: and as I am a stranger to Silken language,
so neither am I familiar with the expressions most in Vogue. My endeavors have
been rather to delineate humors and affections, than to affect humorous
delineations. Or again, if thou be a Lover, I marvail not if thou esteemest
this Poem relishless, if thy eye dazzled with the Rays of Beauty, can see no
luster in this shady representation of that Passion: for there wants that pure
Vestal fire, that should devout my thoughts, and distill my notions into a
quintessence.

Or lastly, to be brief, if thou be some Antic Mimick, that turning over
th^se Pages, do scoff and deride, probably not with so good reason, as if
every leaf were a Looking-glass, I despise thy severest censures, and value not
though thou make this little offspring of my Invention a Martyr to thy
Moroseness; as I used my liberty in fancying, so do thou in approving or
condemning.

To the benign Reader then do I principally dedicate these droppings of my Pen;
who as his clearey'd judgment will discern this Fiction to be an Hospital of
lame conceits, so his judicious candor will serve as a crutch to obscure their
haltings. If he meets not here with the most exquisite illustrations, let him
consider this is but the first essay. Natura non facit saltum. None but Angels
and pure spirits stripped from all union with matter work instantaneously, or
derive their notions from infused Species. Besides, had I such a vast
big-bellied Fancy, that the very boundaries of Nature would seem too
streight-lac't for it, yet whilst caged within the Universe, it must not think
to flutter out of the state of imperfection. Perfection is the array reserved
for Souls that have shaked of their clayie mantle. However, as all that is here
is mean, so all is Genuine; nothing stole, nothing strained. As my Muse is none
of the rare Phaenixes of our Age, who seem to arise out of the spicy nest of
Invention, from whence they perfume the world with odors more fragrant than
those wherein the Arabian Nunn expires; so neither is she any of those
dung-bread Scarabies, generated of the putrefaction of some dead Muse, whose
works are only glimmering lights, lightened at the Torches of some deceased
Poets, as Paper Urnes that contained nothing but his Ashes. In fine, she is no
Jay trickt up in others feathers, nor Popinjay to parrat others Wit: So I shall
conclude with a verse of sweet-tongued Draytons, Like me that list, my honest
Prose and Rimes
Nor care for Critic, nor Censorious times.


PANDION AND AMPHIGENIA.
NO sooner were Nights Sable Curtains drawn, and Aurora had opened her Rosy
Courts, but fair Cleodora arose, and dispossessed her downy Bed of those
perfections, which that Night had been a treasure of: And looking forth out of
the window, to see whether the season would permit her her usual Custom, which
was early (while others were fettered with Morpheus his Chains, and wrapped in
Sleeps care-charming Mantle) to walk forth, sometimes into the Gardens,
sometimes into the open Fields, and then into the shady Groves, feeding her
mournful meditations with those objects, which in others would breed delight;
and seeing each thing by displaying its beauty to invite her among them; the
Heavens painted with a Vermilion dye; the Rosy morn having flung her self
among the Clouds, as if on purpose to gaze on so sweet an object; the sky
intermixed with azure streaks, as endeavoring to imitate her Veins; the winged
Choristers chirping in each Tree their melodious Anthems, as in praise of so
many excellencies united in perfection, and the odoriferous Flowers perfuming
the Air, with fragrant odours, as if they strove to exceed the sweetness of her
breath; she slipped on her morning habit, and walked out to betake her self to
her accustomed Soliloquies, and entertain her mind with those thoughts, that
made her frequent unfrequented places, accounting them her most delicious
recreations; at first the abundance of delight, for a while overwhelmed her
Melancholic passions, but recovering her self, she thus began to complain,
What fatal Star is this whose Pestilential influence does afflict me with
succedaneous sorrows, and makes me daily fill the air with Complaints, as if my
soul were griefs Exchequer? Misery and despair has arrested all my powers,
that all my words and thoughts are steeped in brine sorrows, and not a part of
me, but is forced to bear a part in this Consort, to make a horrid harmony in
woe. My tongue, the Organ of my soul, blown by the sighing Bellows of my heart,
never cease its mournful tones, whilst the tears flow in such unmeasurable
measure, from the floud-gates of my Eyes, as if my very Soul would be disfused
out of those perpetual streaming sluices. Not a thought but is sacrificed to
him, on the Altar of a constant mind. And that that confounds me with endless
woe, and makes my woes endlesly profound, is not only an utter despair of ever
being blessed with the fruition of him (which alone were able to kill a lip-sick
Lover, who with quaint Rhetorications can paint his Mistress face, and curl her
hair with better art than she her self, and think her tears love philters, each
sentence a heart-charming Exorcism, and every frown to dart a death) but that
my affections should be insnated by one, for fading skin-thick beauty, whose
worth and valor, and all that might render him excellent, I am wholly ignorant
of. But Ah! my Soul, how dare thou entertain a dishonorable thought of one,
by externals, Natures Minion, and thy darling? would Nature have Compiled so
beautiful a fabric, to be a receptacle for a deformed soul? Certainly she
would not have made such a Cabinet, but to place a Jewel in it, and that of no
mean value neither; do we not see how she has framed the heavenly Orbs, of a
more pure quintessential nature, than these course-grained Elementary bodies,
set with glistring spangles, garnished with millions of golden Scutchions, and
all to be a fit Pavilion for the Sun, the worlds great General? And what is
this dull blockish earth, but for blind Moles, Dens of wild Beasts, graves of
dead putrisying Corpse, and at best for man to tread on? and as for Trees,
Plants, and Flowers, do we not see how they not enduring to be imprisoned
within its bowels, break forth, striving to ascend, and leave it; but that the
Earth as loath to part with them, fetters them by the roots; And wherefore has
she made this Microsm, Man, the Epitome and total sum of all the worlds
Excellencies, but that it may befit to contain such an Angelical Soul? And will
she now be so preposterous, as to make Pausanias excel all in beauty, but that
he excels all in virtue? But what is all this to me? I do but Tantalize my self
with these fond thoughts, since cruel Fortune separates me from him.

Thus she walked, regardless whither she went, until she was surprised with a
glimmering light, appearing through the leaves and boughs; the suddenness
whereof silenced her incomposed thoughts, so that now she be took her self to
see, what should cause these twinkling sparks of light; and having gone some
few paces forward, she came to a little Plain, at the foot of a Hill, where lay
the Relics of a stately Edifice, as might plainly appear by the ruins of it,
upon which there stood a Chapel defaced by Antiquity, so that it was rather
venerable than beautiful, only the situation of it made it seem one of the
sweetest places in the earth; near the Chapel, there was a Crystal Rivulet,
whose curled streams ran softly along, murmuring that their Envious pursuers
would crowd them thence so soon. And passing through a Grove she came to the
Chapel, and entering into it, she espied a Lamp, and an Inkhorn and Paper lying
upon a Table of Stone; she took the Paper, and looked into it, in which were
written these Verses: Then must I live, and will none pity lend,
By ending me, at once to put an end
To these my pains and tears, which never will cease
Until by death my Soul obtains release?
Then when (O Soul) wilt fly and leave these Chains,
Wherewith this Body cloggs thee, and these pains,
These never ceasing pains, tormenting fires,
Which daily burn, to feed some fond desires?
But (Ah!) poor Soul, long since the art fled and gone
To her, 'twixt whom there is such an union,
Made by affection, that although by death
I should this body to the grave bequeath,
Yet sooner can thy self dissolved be,
And loose that knot of immortality,
Which makes thy woes eternal, than be able,
To loose that Union, which Love makes so stable.
Passions are like the flame, which once being felt
Within the breast, the Soul like Wax both melt;
The Idea is the Impression, which received,
Of it the spirit never can be bereaved.
What then if thou above the Clouds were fled,
And left this clayie body, pale as Lead,
What wilt avail, if when thon do divest
Thy self of it, thou can not be at rest?
Though left this Prison, if these passions fly,
And still bereave thee of thy liberty?
If when this body's burnt, and in an Urn,
Yet then with greater endless fires do burn?
Only this hope remains, that though they may
Ascend great Natures dictates to obey;
When thou their flaming Center do attain,
They with that fiery Element will remain.
Mean while to all vain pleasures bid farewell,
Since thou art exiled from her that does excel
What Earths vast Womb, or Heavens influence,
Did e're produce, all other excellence
Is but an Empty name, if not in her,
She is the substance, others shadows are;
They Are wise, fair, virtuous, if like her, for she
Is Wit and Beauty, patience, chastity.
Then since by cruel fates, we parted are,
Henceforth I will be wedded to despair.


She read the Verses, and her own Experience made her to pity the Author, so
that more out of Compassion than desert, she commended them; considering also
they were the lines of one submerst in sorrows, and therefore unable to soar
aloft, on the wings of an airy fancy. And having paused a while, she heard a
sigh accompanied with a silent, but a deep-fetcht groan, which was echoed back
by another from her, being moved thereto by the thoughts of her own hard
fortune, which thoughts made her the more to pity him, whose condition so
nearly resembled hers, insomuch that a Pearl-like tear was ready to distill
from her Eyes; but her curiosity putting her upon a farther inquiry, she took
the Lamp, and went to the place whence the air conveyed those sad accents to
her ears. The first Species that presented it self to her view, was one in
black upon a bed, and seeing him possessed with Sleep, Deaths image, together
with his pale looks, sorrows continual concomitant, she almost thought he was a
Carcass, not a man, but that she remembered she heard him sigh. About his wrist
was a Bracelet of Hair, in which were wrought in Letters of Gold these verses,

Though cruel fortune makes us part,
Yet you remain within my Heart,
FLORINDA.



With her looking upon the Bracelet, by the dazeling Lamp, she waked him, which
she perceiving, Pity, a quality inseparable from the best Natures, made her
thus address her speech to him; Sir, whoever you are, that thus separate your
self from the World, by being Cloystered within these doleful walls, let not a
too passionate sorrow prevail over all the faculties of your Soul, and Reason
it self, which ought to be the helm whereby we steer our course through the
fluctuating billows of sorrow. Take advice of one, who though a stranger to
you, yet not to these passions wherewith I perceive you burn; do not lavish out
your self in a spontaneous grief, lest your tears prove Omens, and presage a
greater evil. Tears are too brackish to quench, and Sighs are but wind, and
more apt to excite than extinguish these flames; therefore leave this
retiredness, and who knows but Florinda may be yours, although hitherto some
Sinister frowns of Fortune has blasted your proceedings, which continually
attend those who by Virtue aspire to Honor and Happiness. -- Periander's
spirits (for such was his name) receiving so sweet an alarm, uttered in such a
compassionate manner, as made it plainly evident, her own passions bred that
sympathy, made him think she was some tutelary Angel sent from Heaven out of
pity to direct him; and as if the very name of Florinda had as it were by a
prophetic Enthusiasm thus derived to him, breathed new life into him, he
rouzed up his senses, and with a trembling, and as it were dying voice uttered
this reply; Who is it that thus by endeavors cruelly merciful, rips up my
wounds, fondly thinking thereby to cure them? Is that the way to ease a
grief-burthened soul, to deny all ease? sure the most Flagitious Villain the
Earth bears, whom the World abhorrs for his improbous actions, may not be
denied a leave to mourn; The most inhumane Tyrants that ever plagued the world
with their horrid immanity, when they strove to make a dying soul survive with
cruciating pain, would suffer them to bewail their State; souls laden with Woe,
though ballasted with Hope, will sink under Fortunes stormy frowns, unless they
pump out those griefs that threaten destruction. But ah! my heart is tossed
with the surges of despair, and charged with overwhelming sorrows, which unless
I seek to disburthen, will augment to my unrecoverable ruin. And what though I
should abandon all Corroding Passions, would that repair my irreparable State?
would that regain Florinda? Oh what more vain than such deluding thoughts?
Heaven justly thinks me unworthy of so much Bliss, and therefore interdicts me
its enjoyment. Oh, if there be any sparks of pity yet remaining, either put a
period to my miseries, by ending my life, that I may no longer contemplate in
my self a spectacle of woe, or else remove this light, that so no Object may be
presented to my eyes, that may divert my mind from the thoughts of despair, and
leave this pensive place to me alone, being fit for none but those devoted to
misery, that so I may take my fill of sorrow, since nothing without Florinda,
will give me contentment, but that wherein there is no content. And with that
he fetched a deep sigh from the Heart, which intimated where the distemper lay,
which Cleodora hearing, she was at first perplexed in her mind, not knowing what
course to steer; one while she despaired of ever framing consolation able to
appease such vehement sorrow, and therefore according to his desire thought to
leave him a prey to his passions; but then compassion would utterly forbid
that; at length the natural desire that is iucident to all humane spirits of
knowing others afflictions, with the hope of giving some ease by her advise
added, caused her thus to break silence; Sir (said she) though the black clouds
of Despair have so overspread your Soul, as that there is not the least ray or
glympse of hope, whose bright aspect might revive you, yet let it not cause you
to degenerate from Virtue, which makes the possessor inflexible under all
adversity, like the rock that remains unmoved, though assaulted with the
impetuous rage of the hoisterous Winds and roaring surges of the troubled Sea.
He in whose rich Soul Virtue has once taken up her residence, has always a
Halcion serenity within, whatever the tempestuous changes and chances of
Fortune may be without; such a one is placed in the mids of the variety of
Vicissitudes, as the Center in a Globe, which remains fixed, notwithstanding all
the Gyrations and successive Changes of posture in its adjacent parts. Hence
Virtue to a wise man is not only as a lofty mountain, on which he may overtop
the misty region where Fortune minteth and Contrives her various accidents, but
as wings, that transport his Spirit above the Stars, by which means he
overrules, controules, and bridles them at his pleasure, and has a greater
influence on his own felicity, than all the Constellations in the Heavens. And
though there are none have a Charter of Exemption from the enmities of cross
mischances, yet can they not infringe a wise man's happiness, since it depends
not either on Fortunes inconstant smiles, or the uncertain dispositions of men,
but on the constant and certain exercise of Virtue, which sad misfortunes can
no more impede, than the air can oppose the lights penetration. Virtue will
shine through the thickest clouds of adversity, nay, its luster will then most
appear; that rust which with too much ease is apt to contract, is scoured off
by the filing of adverse fortune, like the fire that lies hid in the bosom of a
slint, content with its own warmth, and never ventures forth out of its rocky
dwelling, nor appears to the view of others, unless roused by the Steels rude
knocks. Hence Calamities should be the exercise, not the overthrow of Virtue,
and therefore to be overcome with every infelicity argues rather too much of a
Feminine Spirit, whom Nature has not indulged with that Heroical power of
self-Conquest, which is indeed the greatest victory. Therefore forsake any
other retiredness than that into your own virtue, where you may Sanctuary your
self against Fortunes assaults, and impart a relation of your condition, and
who knows but these black lines of adversity may tend to a center of happiness,
which if my Fortunes can in any measure avail to produce, assure your self you
shall not be more ready to desire or command, than I shall be to obey, in what
I may have the happiness to serve you.

These words were as water cast upon those flames of Love, but as wind to those
sparks of Honor that lay buried in the ashes of sorrow, which it kindled to
such a dame, that Honor got the victory over Love, and rendered his reason
triumphant, which Cleodora conjectured by a Crimson blush that overspread
Perianders face, and dispossessed sorrows pale symptoms. At length Periander
returned her this reply. Madam, (said he) your Expressions speak you no less
rich in Virtue than Beauty, my grief must have pressed me a degree beneath
humanity, if such weighty reasons couched under such Eloquence could not have
counterpoised it. I should be more savage then the Beasts that Orpheus charmed
into civility, should I remain inexorable to the entreaties of so sweet an
Orator, whose perfections are such, that I cannot but account it as great a
glory to obey you, as it would make me sensible of shame to refuse any thing
you should command, though it were to sacrifice my life and honor, which are
the only Jewels I ever prized in my prosperity, and which is all that Fortune
has left to my disposal in my adversity. Therefore though it be to rip up my
wounds and make them bleed afresh, to acquaint you with my story, which cannot
be done without recollecting those thoughts, which are as the source of all
perplexing agonies, yet because it is in obedience to your command, I shall not
refuse. Know you then in the City of Corinth, there dwelt a Nobleman, by name
Eleutherius, who as he was equal to any, both for descent, being derived of an
ancient and honorable Family, as also for Wisdom and Valor, so he did excel
all in the place where he lived for liberality; He was both magnificently
expensive in his gifts and presents, to those whom Birth and Fortune had made
his equals and superiors, and almost prodigally liberal, in his supplying the
necessities too of his inferiors, and in neither exceeding the bounds of
mediocrity. But especially when public occasions required it, he was a
President to all, admired at by most, and envyed at by some, whose malice,
though it made them repine and carp at his actions, yet it could not stir the
spirits of others any farther than to retort those malicious detractings with
the greater disgrace upon themselves, so that the calumniating darts which they
with such peevish violence cast, thinking to wound his Honor, flew back with
the greater reproach upon themselves. Now as Corinth did reap the fruits of
Eleutherius his magnificence, so the City did repay him with respect and
honor; And as Fortune had heaped such favors upon him as made him seem her
darling, so Heavens blessed him with a Son and a Daughter, whose incomparable
excellencies were such, that as their Parents were an Honor to them, so they
were to their Parents, and both were happy in each other. But especially such
was the ravishing beauty of Florinda, as that it did attract the eyes and
hearts of all; All her Virtues, and Graces, and Deportments, were as so many
nets to inthrall each beholder. Among the rest, it was my unhappy fortune at a
feast, to view that beauty, which had captivated so many; As soon as ever she
came, I felt my self so strangely transported, as if my soul had been snatched
ont of my eyes, the sparkling glances that came from her eyes were as so many
Charms that enchanted me into a passionate Fever. The changing my color
sufficiently discovered the convulsions of my mind, one while blushing, seating
lest my stolen views should betray my distemper, and then despairing thoughts
would cause a paleness to overspread my countenance. Thus I continued one
while blaming my eyes for giving entrance to those desires that had wholly
stolen away my heart, then my mind for entertaining those thoughts which fed
those desires, and caused that torment. No delights could give me contentment,
whilst that delightful object was present. A faint qualm made me nauseat the
rarities which were provided, only my eyes fed upon Florinda's rare
perfections, which the more they fed, the more I pined, and remained the less
satisfied; and those melodious Consorts of Music made the greater discord in
those passions, which had so furiously agitated my spirits, and at the best
bred a melancholy, which as fuel did but foment the flames. The variety of
company did but abridge the freedom of conversing with my thoughts.

Thus did Florinda tyrannize over my affections, till at length Night, which
puts no difference between the rarest Beauty and the greatest deformity, and
causes all things to return to that Chaos, out of which they were created,
caused her to withdraw, and so separated us. But alas, though these beauteous
rays which had scorched my heart, were Eclipsed by Nights black veil, nothing
could restrain the Eyes of my thoughts from viewing that Picture which my fancy
had limned in my mind. But as the Moon is the cause of the various estuations
of the Sea, so her Idea caused such Ebbings and Flowings of passion, as would
not permit the least repose, which I termed an amorous Lunacy. Thus for a time
I strove to retain my passion a prisoner within my breast, till a convenient
opportunity tendering it self, being not able to endure the torment, I disclosed
the sincerity of my affections to her, which were no sooner discovered, but I
perceived alterations in her countenance, modesty and disdain seemed to contend
for priority; the former by rendering her the more amiable, increased my slames,
and the latter my despair; so that I stood like a prisoner at the Bar,
expecting the sentence to be past upon him. But Florinda which had by her Eyes
displayed the thoughts of her mind, did more evidence them by her expressions,
telling me how displeasing such discourses were to her; and that she could not
but look upon them as trials of her levity, and that she was none of those
whose over-fond Credulity made them yield to the allurements of men, whose
hearts and tongues seldom concur, but first with false persuasions ensnare,
and after desert them, and thereby cast such a blot of contempt upon them, as
no tears nor repentance can wipe away. That she rather thought my words
proceeded from an insolent desire of tyrannizing over her, than from any
sincerity in me, as I pretended. But my words could not be so displeasing to
her, as hers were to me; my looks had been an invincible Argument of my
integrity, if she had viewed them with an Eye less Cruel than Charitable; for
my spirits which before, sear had caused to retire to my heart, were now ready
to take wing, but that they were recalled by the sudden arrival of the waiting
woman, which gave me occasion to take leave of her, with whom it was death to
part. Home I went, fraught with a thousand perplexing agonies, fluttering about
my ears like birds of prey, devouring all those Cates of consolation that Hope
would set before me. Neither day nor night could give any ease to my torments;
sleep it self, that gives rest to the tired labourer, made me but the more
restless, by torturing my imaginations with the most extravagant Chymaeraes,
that could be fancyed. Frequent solicitations I made, which were not more
frequent, than vain. Till at length these storms were over-blown, by one sweet
blast, from her more sweet mouth, which was so much the more sweet, because it
assured me, not only that she was convinced of the honor and integrity of my
pretensions, but also, of the reality of her affections to me. Heavens^ to what
an ecstasy did these words raise me? that joy which had almost transported my
spirits, without the superficies of my body, cannot be contained within the
angust limits of expression. My self was too narrow to contain my self. I could
almost have imagined I had been in a dream, but that such dreams to me were
unusual. Excess of contentment stopped the passage of our speech, but kisses
and embraces were the language of our hearts, wherein we both strove to be most
eloquent, and each word or sentence from either struggling for birth, was
smothered with a kiss, and became abortive. Mutual promises and engagements
were made each to other. Nothing we wanted to the consummation of our joys, but
the joining of us in Marriage, who were inseparably linked in affection; but,
alas, this joy was too great to last long, the fates had otherwise decreed; and
who can divert its stream, or break the Iron Chains of necessity? for thus it
happened. Some two days before the day appointed, wherein a happy Hymen should
Crown our desires with success, and our love and delights with honor, the Kings
birthday was to be celebrated, with the greatest solemnity imaginable, such as
befitted the dignity of the Prince, and the love of the Subjects. All the
Gallants of the City did resort to the Court at that time, to be both Actors
and Spectators, who appeared like so many radiant Stars in that Sphere,
receiving from, and adding luster to it. And to avoid singularity, I also went,
to wait upon Florinda, not imagining the Kings birthday should be the death of
all my joy and happiness. Nothing but Tiltings and Tournaments, Maskings and
Dancings, Music, and all delights that the heart of men could either desire or
devise, the Court did abound in; so that it seemed an earthly Paradise. And
that which added the greatest glory to the day, was the dazzling train of
beauties that did attend upon the Queen, whose glory made every Eye greedy to
gaze upon them, amongst whom was Florinda, who appeared like Diana amongst her
Nymphs. Never did Eye vowed to Cupids service behold a more lovely face. A
Tinsell veil did shroud her locks, and strove to cover what it could not hide.
Her sparkling Eyes darted flames of love into each beholders heart, and seemed
to be like two Crystal thrones, where Cnpid sat triumphant; neither was the
King himself able to withstand these beautiful assaults, but of a King became
her Subject; and though the Queen had beauty enough to have quenched any such
disloyal flames, yet when the King compared her with Florinda, she seemed but
for a ^oyl of Florinda's beauty. Great enquiry he made after her, who and what
she was; and though every one was able to satisfy him in that, yet none was
able to give contentment but Florinda, whom the next day he sent for to the
Court, by a Gentleman of his own Bedchamber. Accordingly she went, little
thinking her loyalty to her Prince should contradict her fidelity to her Lover.
All she feared was, lest this unexpected accident might cause me to suspect her
constancy. But Kings as they cannot brook Competitors in rule and power, so
neither will they admit of Rivals in affection. So it was wi^h King Acastus,
who hearing not only how we affected each other, but also how deeply we were
contracted, it did at first startle him, and cause his love to degenerate into
jealousy. But remembering the sword he bare was sharp enough to cut in sunder
such Gordian Knots, and thereby able to make himself sole Monarch of her, who
ruled over so many hearts, he sentenced me to banishment, the better to secure
her to his possession, who already possessed his heart. But all the while this
tempest was gathering over my head, did I remain ignorant, till an Officer from
the King, came to acquaint me with his Majesty's command, how that upon pain of
death I must not be seen within any part of his dominions after ten days. He
had no sooner delivered his message, but if as the transforming influence which
was in Medusae's head to metamorphise all beholders into stone, had been in
him; So did I remain more like a lively statue, than a living man. At length
recovering my self, I told him that I would obey the Kings command, but I knew
not the reason of that sentence; He answered, neither did he, but the Kings
will. I was no sooner parted from him, but with all speed possible, I went to
Eleutherius house, thinking to acquaint Florinda with the Kings Decree, and the
hope of having her partaker with me in my exile, did for a while appease the
raging pains of sorrow; but when I came and found all my hopes blasted in their
blossoms, with the fatal tidings of Florinda's invitation to the Court, to what
degree of sorrow was I transported? my banishment from my Country, was worse
than death; but to be exiled from her, was worse than ten thousand deaths.
However, before my departure, I resolved to take my last farewell of her; and
to that end, with a heart swollen with grief, I went to the Court, but when I
came there, sooner might any one have committed a rape upon Danae, when she was
enclosed within the Brazen Tower, so that Jupiter was fain in a Golden shower
to descend into her lap, than have spoke with Florinda, imprisoned in the Kings
arms. Only thus far Fortune smiled upon me, that as I was passing by, thinking
to have bid adieu to those Walls, more happy than my self; Florinda chanced to
espy me thorough the window, she opened it, and flung down this Bracelet, as
the last pledge of her never-dying affection. When I saw her, how did I at once
bless and curse my happy unhappy fortune! happy to see her, but unhappy
Periander and Florinda page 16.

to see her in that sorrowful condition, more unhappy to think, that I must
never see her more; on the other side, the thoughts of our separation did as
much perplex her. The fear lest her Keepers who were present in the room should
discover this passage, did for a while imprison her sorrows within her Breast,
but at length being not able to conceal it any longer, it brake forth at the
windows of her eyes, and distilled in a Pearly shower (more precious than that
Golden one, in which Jove was transformed) upon her Lily cheeks.

Thus for a while, not being able to part, we tarried, but then not being able
to tarry, we parted. The Bracelet I took up, and with a thousand kisses tied it
about my arm, and with it home I went, where I took what I thought convenient,
and departed; and riding along, happening upon this place, where you find me, I
entered into it, and seeing it agreeable to my condition, and with a mournful
silence to sympathize with me, here I resolved to spend the residue of my days.

And thus you have my story, wherein I see no other crime I have committed,
either to merit the Kings heavy sentence, or your censure, than this ardent
affection, which may seem to relish of too much levity; but that may easily be
connived at by them, who are acquainted with the extremities wherewith they are
transported, who are touched with these passions that animate my sorrows.
Cleodora having all this while heard his relation with as much compassion as
attention, and remembering her words, wherein she promised to assist him what
she could, having acquainted him who she was, counseled him to accept of an
Invitation to her Fathers Palace, there to remain till Fortune should smile
upon him, or el^e to betake himself to feats of Arms, and thereby recover both
his Honor and his Love. Periander having not much time to poyse her words, yet
seeing such weighty arguments as Love and Honor at the end, it could not but
sink deep into him, and sway his judgment to the latter, to which he resolved,
and acquainting her with his resolution they parted, she to her home, and he to
his for^unes.

By this time Sols resplendent Rays had exhaled the Crystal drops of dew, that
hang like iiquid Pearls on the Grass tops, and ratified them into an Aereal
substance, when as Cleodora arriving at the Palace, retired her self to her
Chamber, where we leave her to her sweet contemplations, and return to
Periander to acquaint you with his Adventures, who had not traveled far,
musing upon his past happy condition, and present misfortune, but his thoughts
were interrupted with a sudden voice, which was not more sudden than
astonishing, and the more astonishing, because uttered in such a manner, and
that in these words. Oh! barbarous Villains, can such Treachery, and
Cowardice, and Cruelty harbor in the hearts of any, but those that have
renounced humanity? Periander hearing this, puts Spurs to his Horse, and as if
he had rode upon winged Pegasus, he in an in^^ant came to the place, where he
beheld at once a spectacle of pity and revenge, a young Knight beset with four
armed men, threatening him with the cruellest of death, both in words and looks.
His youth, beauty and valor would have moved any that had the least spark of
true nobleness in them to revenge his quarrel, against those villains who
discovered the horrid impiety of their minds by their deformed aspects, but
especially his condition, for though he had almost slain one, and dangerously
wounded the rest, yet through loss of blood began to faiut, and ready to yield
himself a prisoner unto death, less cruel then his enemies (as appeared by his
pale looks, which had no other redness, than what they received from his own
and enemies blood.) Which sight did so animate Perianders courage, as that with
a Lyon-like fury, he flew upon the first, and sheathed his sword in his bowels,
but ere he could recover his weapon he was wounded in the shoulder by another,
which Periander feeling, it so increased the flames of his fury within him, as
that it flew in sparks from his Eyes, and enraged he fell upon him, never
ceasing till he had separated his murderous Soul from his body, and made both
him and the other the Trophies of his Valor. Periander leaving them weltering
in their gore, turned to Athalus, for so was the young Knight named, thinking
to revive his dying Spirits, and to acquaint him with the death of his enemies.
But Athalus that before was fainting and sowning (and even at the confines of
death) with the presence of this strange Knight began to revive, as if he had
received life from him, as well as owed his life to him, after millions of
thanks returned, desired him to accompany him to his Castle, which was not far
distant from them, so that Periander accerting of the invitation, they in a
short time there arrived, which for its magnificence might more properly be
termed a Palace, being environed with a Wall of Stone, whose height enviously
seemed to hinder them from beholding the Fabric it did encompass. The Pillars
on which the Gate was hung, were made of purest Marble, on the top of which
were engraven Gilded Griffons, whose Wings spread with the shutting, and closed
with its opening, by the means of a secret Engine, as if they had been endued
with life, When they were entered in, they came into a stately Court, paved with
checquered Marble; through which they passed into a second, far surpassing the
former, in which there stood a T^w^^, embraced with wanton Ivy, spread with
fragrant ^^^lantine, entrailed with Roses, and supp^^^ed with Pillars
resembling Atlas. The Arched Roof was decked with Flowers, Arbors and Groves;
underneath there were engraven the Nine Muses, each holding a melodious
Instrument in her hand, wherein the Artificer seemed to excel himself, for
underneath the Pavement there was a secret bubling Spring, whose Streams were
through Pipes conveyed to each Statue, so that at the turning of a Silver Cock,
as if they had been inspired with life from Heaven, like Prometheus Image, all
the Instruments would sound with such melodious consent and harmony, as charmed
Periander into an ecstasy of admiration, so that with what he saw and heard, he
imagined himself in a Paradise, where the more he admired, the more he desired
to stay, to satisfy his Curiosity, and yet the longer he stayed, the more his
admiration was augmented. But Athalus faintness would not permit any long
delay, so that into the Castle they went, where the spacious Rooms were hung
with Arras, Tapestry, and Cloth of Tissue, and adorned with lively Pictures.

After Athalus had taken some repose, and repaired the bloody breaches the late
battery had made, Periander entreated him to relate the occasion of the
quarrel, at whose request Athalus thus began: Sir (said he) the obligements I
have received from you are of so high a nature, that I cannot but acknowledge
them above requital, there being nothing of an equal worth with Life, which I
must acknowledge, I have received from your Valor; and therefore I cannot but
account your desires as Commands, and my disobedience to them as Rebellion
against the Laws of Nature; therefore to satisfy them, know, that in the
Lordship of Parrhasia, where I dwell, there lives a young Nobleman, Son to the
Lord of the place, called Plivio, in whose friendship, I was once as happy, as
now unhappy in his hatred. Bred up we were together, and as our stature* so our
affection increased. Youth is tender, and readily receives the impressions of
education; but though it easily receives them, yet it difficultly p^rts with
them, so it was with us; that affection which was ingraffed when we were young,
grew and increased, until our mature Age; insomuch that once we thought, the
Stars should sooner have fell from Heaven, and sunk into the Ocean, there to
have extinct their light, Stones ascend and supply their places, the Sun rise
in the West, and the order wherein Nature has placed all things be perverted,
than our love dissolved; but as love conjoined us, so love parted us; for
happening once to espy A^ritesia and Matilda, the two beautiful daughters of
Pirotes, walking, dallying and discoursing in the Fields, our affections were
captivated with their Beauty, he with Arritesia the elder, I with Matilda; fain
we would have concealed our passions, but Love will not be hid, its nature is
such that it is most revealed, when most concealed, for sometimes we must be
commending one, and then the other; one while Arritesia was judged most
beautiful, and then Maltida would seem to carry it with the greater grace; one
while we compared them both together, and then singling out a Feature, as if
that had surpassed the rest in excellence, but then a second seemed to excel
that, and a third exceeding them both. In fine, Plivio was so deeply entangled
with Arritesia, as not being able to conquer it, he discovered it in frequent
sighs, and heart-betraying looks; often would he extol Matilda, but then when
he spoke of Arritesia, he would accent every sentence with a sigh; which I
perceiving, thinking to please him, would answer all his commendations with
compliance, and when he sighed, I could not but sigh too, he out of affection
to her, and I out of cordial love to him, but still he misconstrued all, and
there wherein I thought I most pleased him, I most offended him, he
interpreting all I did to him, was done to her, so that though his love to me
was not presently converted to raging jealousy, yet it soon begot suspicion,
which is jealousy in its infancy, which I as soon perceived, by the constant
watch his eyes kept. Home we returned to try what success Fortune would crown
our loves withal; but as if the Sta^s had conspired at once to cross our
affections and our happiness together, Matilda had placed her delight in
Plivio, and Arritesia, the object of Plivios delight, was pleased to esteem of
me, far above my deserts, and above Plivio; so that this was the spring and
source of all our future unhappiness; for Plivio's jealousy by this was daily
augmented, and begot hatred, and hatred made him put the worst construction
upon each thing I said or did. He took my visits to Matilda; to be only
pretenses, thereby the more securely to rob him of Arritesia, and the cold
entertainment, and slights he received of her, to proceed from thence (which
latter was truth) though I was both innocent and ignorant. All my vows and
protestations wherewith I labored to clear my self, did but the more confirm
him in his opinion, so that as our love increased, our love diminished. "Beauty
is like the Sun, whose Beams darting upon a fire, extinguishes it; so its rays
piercing the soul, enkindles the flames of love, and with their heat, expels
all other fires." For as the heat of his own affection to Arritesia daily did
augment, so it caused the flames of our former Friendship to languish. At
length unfortunately it happened that we both met at once at Pirotes his house.
As soon as ever we saw each other, anger and jealousy made our blood so boil
within us, as our passions were ready to overflow the banks of civility, and
make us commit an Act of the highest rudeness, to quarrel in our Mistresses
presence, which I fea^ing, (and also to avoid a future quarrel,) parted from
them; But Plivio who all this while viewed how Arritesia had fixed her eyes
upon me, as also how affectionately she desired my stay, not being able to
contain himself, followed me, and as I was mounting my Horse, made me this
challenge; Athalu^ (said he) now thy base unworthyness and unfaithfulness to
thy friend is apparent, which hitherto thou have masked with hypocritical
pretensions to Friendship; Falsely with oaths making me believe that which thy
actions contradict; therefore know, such injurious affronts, I cannot but
resent, neither can thou make me any satisfaction, but by meeting me in the
Field, which if thou have either worth or valor in thee thou will not refuse,
-- So I told him, that for the accusations wherewith he charged me they were as
false as dishonorable, and that I wore by my side wherewithal to give
satisfaction to him, since nothing else could. And so accordingly we appointed
the time, place and weapon; the plac^ was where you found me bese^; Now which
showed the least Worth, Valor, and Fidelity, I leave you to Judge.

By that time Athalus had finished his story, night had covered the Hemisphere
with her dusky Man^le, and all things look of an Ethiopian hue, when su^^er
being ended, they all retired to their lodgings. Periander having spent some
time with Athalus, his wounds being cured, he resolved to depart, whom Athalus
after many fruitless endeavors for his stay, accompanied some miles of his
way. Having traveled some distance from the Castle, riding thorough a wood, on
the sudden they heard behind them a noise of Horses trampling, and men
discoursing, that newly rushed from under the Trees, like men that had l^id in
Ambush; and looking behind them, they saw a Troop of Horsemen armed with Lances
and Spears, whom they took to be Huntsmen, as indeed they proved, but they were
the prey they sought after; for they were as soon taken as overtaken, and no
sooner overtaken but disa^med, and bound. Athalus and Periander amazed at this
unexpected accident, demanded what they meant? they answered that they came to
revenge the blood of their Friends whom they had murdered, and that nothing
should satisfy them but their lives; which they had no sooner spoken, but one
of them pierced Athalus body with a Spear, so that he fell down dead before
them.

Periander seeing this, wounded in his soul with heartbreaking grief, craved
of them the freedom to perform his last obsequies to his friend. I crave not
my life (said he) for that I scorn, now he is dead whom I prefer above it, I
only beg this small request which humanity cannot deny. After many entreaties
they granted. Periander perceiving his hands at liberty, suddenly snatched a
Sword out of the Villains Scabbard that stood next, and therewithal presently
procured a Lance, and then fiercely charging amongst them, killed two of them
with one shock. The rest amazed with this sudden accident, thought there had
been a mutiny, and were ready to oppose themselves against their enemies, but
who they were they knew not, until they were informed by Perianders blows, who
had no sooner made some understand who was their Antagonist but he put them
past all understanding. At length the survivers animated with fury, revenge,
and shame, unanimously assaulted him with such violence, that he no^ being able
to stand before such a torrent of fury, was re-taken. Valor it self may be
over-pressed with the weight of multitude. Now they resolve to execute upon him
the most savage cruelty, their inhumane minds (full of revenge) could devise.
Some counseled one thing, others another, all agreeing that he should dye a
horrid death, but all disagreeing in the manner of it: thus extremity of
cruelty was for a while a stop to their cruelty. But as these barbarous
Senators were thus sat in consultation, a Stag swiftly rushed through the
Woods, which put them all into such a fright, that disburthening themselves of
their Arms, they all fled, leaving their condemned Prisoner behind them, and
happy was he that was swiftest.

Thus guilt makes all things seem to menace danger, and like a false Medium
represents every thing as in an armed posture, ready to bid defiance to the
guilty.

Periander seeing himself thus miraculously released, arms himself, and
mounted, pursues his jaylers, and those whom he could overtake he sent to the
in^ernal prison, to answer for this their horrid barbarity. But long he could
not stay to satisfy himself with the slaughter of his blood thirsty enemies,
but he returned to pay his last debt to his friend, and to see whether the
wound was wholly mortal or not; but when he found the cruel Spaer had thrust
his Soul out of his Body, how did he fall down and embrace him, and kiss his
pale cheeks! how did he sigh, as if with those sighs he could breathe new life
into him! and groan, as if with those groans he could awake him out of his
endless sleep! At length he was so overcome with grief, that he fell down
senseless upon his more senseless friend. But he continued not long ere his
spirits returned to the performance of their natural function, and he thus
bewailed his condition. Hard hearted fate, (said he) that would suffer such
vile miscreants to dislodge so brave a Soul! what a spark of Honor has this
stream of Blood from his side extinguished? thus does Fortune make me a mark to
shoot her envenomed Arrows at, as if the separation from Florinda was not
enough to torment we (with endless and unsupportable torture) but I must be
robbed of my dear friend Athalus. Ah Athalus! can I sigh forth thy Death, and
not my Soul expire with the cadence of that deadly word? better had it been for
thee to have died before, courageously fighting, when thy enemies carcasses
would have been monuments of thy valor, than thus to be barbarously
assasinated by inhumane Villains, more savage than the Beasts that inhabit this
wilderness. Oh why did my Spirits return from that pleasing trance, to make me
thus sensible of my miseries? Fortune I see will compel me to survive the
Funerals of my own happiness.

As he was thus mourning and complaining, there came a youth tripping along
like the wind, and following the Stag, which passed not long before; his habit
and lovely shape made Periander almost think he was Diana, but that too much
virility appeared in his countenance. His Hair hung in waving Curles upon his
shoulders, which the wind, the better to display his comeliness, wantonly
tossed from his face. His looks were something wild, yet withal there was such
a mixture of Civility, as discovered his birth and merits did deserve a better
habit; for he was girt with a skin, his arm bare, and a Bow and Arrows in his
hand. He no sooner espied that heap of Carcasses* but he left his sport, and
fled homewards with all speed, affrighted with the spectacle. But as he was
going he checked himself for his foolish cowardice, to be afraid of he knew not
what, so he resolved to return, and returned to resolve himself what they were,
and coming back he met Periander, who was following this strange Periander
laments for Athalus page. 26. etc:

Youth, not willing to lose such a guide; but the Youth not knowing what he
was, bent his Bow, and was ready to shoot at Periander; which he seeing,
desired him to forbear, and told him he was one in distress, and that he was
dragged by Villains into this wood, whence he knew not how to return. The Youth
told him that he was as unacquainted as himself in those deserts, and therefore
could not direct him, but he would lead him to his Cave, where there dwelt an
old Hermit that would and could assist him. So following his Convoy, in a
short time he arrived at the Hermits Cell, whose sweet retiredness, and retired
sweetness would have persuaded any to solita^iness, and a contemplative life,
but those whose earthly Souls are involved in the Worlds cares, or drencht in
Epicurean delights, for Nature had carved his Mansion out of a Rock, with such
curiosity, as would have puzzled the greatest Artists to have imitated.
Underneath there crept a little Rivulet, which with its bubling streams bedewed
the Rock with Crystal drops, as though it wept ^or its imprisonment, and
sometimes with silent murmurs seemed to entreat for its enlargement. Round the
Caves mouth there grew a shady Grove of spreading Oaks, whose bushy tops
protected it from the Suns parching beams.

Periander, whose sobbing Breast was filled with sorrow for the death of
Athalus, little regarded those pretty pleasing delights, wherewith the place
did entertain him, and with a sweet, though silent El^quence seemed to bid him
welcome. But entering in, he saw the Hermit apparalled in a Gown of Gray,
kneeling upon his Knees, with his Eyes and Hands lifted up; Gravity was written
in his looks, Devotion in his Gestures, and Age in both, for his snowy Hairs,
and shaking Hands argued that the Summer of his Age was past.

Grave Father said Periander) my bleeding Wounds, sighing Heart, and sorrowful
Countenance are better able to apologize for my rude interruption of your
serious Devotions, than my tongue, which if it speak at all, it can be no other
than lamentations of my unhappy Fortune. And therefore read there what I would
say, which cannot, I hope, but be satisfactory. The Hermit answered him, that
he knew no error he had committed that needed an Apology, except it were for
making a groundless Apology, and that if he had committed any offense, it was
only against himself, offense being grounded upon injury, and it was himself
alone that he had injured, by deferting the healing of his wounds by his
discourse. With that the tears descended in showers upon Perianders cheeks. Ah
Athalus, that my Death could purchase thy Life, since I deserve not Life, that
have so neglected thy Death! A thousand times I beg thee pardon, but alas, thou
art not alive to give it; happy should I esteem my self in the midst of the
greatest misery, were thou but alive to sentence me to it.

This sudden sorrowful Rapture of sorrow, filled the Hermit with as much
Amazement, as Periander was with Grief; and as the suddenness of it bred
Astonishment, so the sadness bred Pity; so that he wept, as if the heat of
Perianders passion had thawed his frozen Age into Tears. At length his
compassion for Perianders passion was not converted, but increased to a desire
of knowing the cause of his sorrow. Alas (said he) what can I do that am thus
informed by the Ears one way, and by the Eyes another? you tell me Sacrifice
must give place to Mercy, and yet you Sacrifice your self to Cruelty; for what
greater Cruelty can there be than to be Unmerciful to those over whom Fortune
has exercised her greatest cruelty? do you not see how the Blood trickles down
in Streams, and your Armor seems to weep in tears of Blood for your cruelty to
your self, and your Wounds like so many mouths entreating for mercy? And with
that the Hermit was going to dress Perianders wounds, but he would not permit
him, until he had gone and conveyed Athalus's body into the Cave, where after
they had chafed his Limbs, the Hermit took down a little glass, within whose
transparent wall there was enclosed a Spirit of such a reviving Virtue, as it
was able to recall the revolted senses.

After they had transfused some few drops thereof into him, his panting Breast
faintly began to beat, his unclouded eyes that had been Eclipsed with a veil of
darkness, began weakly to struggle with the over-dazeling light. Periander
seeing this, began to faint with joy, but he was quickly revived with Athalus
his first saluting the light. Oh, said he, where am I? with him, said
Periander, who is hastening to dye with you, since it is worse than Death to
Live, while you are dead: No said he, I am hastening to live with you, since it
is the worst of deaths to dye while you are alive. But Athalus who had hardly
so much life in him as to perceive he had life, and yet so much as to discern
that he was enclosed within a dark place, which had only so much light in it,
as to let them see they were in darkness, (for so the Hermit had made it, to
keep out the intruding air, lest it should penetrate Athalus his wounds, and
cause relapse,) and finding that it was not enrolled in the Records of his
memory, how he came there, he more and more grew to a persuasion that the
former conceit, that he was alive, was but a deceit, that he and Periander
were but Ghosts, and remembering how that with his life he had lost Matilda,
more precious to him than ten thousand lives, he began to faint again, as
though he would dye to avoid Death, and his senses sensible of insensibility,
grew weary of being sensible, and as condemned, themselves fled as voluntary
exiles from their proper habitation. But the Hermit continuing his charitable
office, recovered him from the confines of Death. But yet so strongly was he
confirmed in that apprehension, that he imagined the Cave either his Tomb, or
else a dark entrance into that Region of darkness, the Hermit to be Charon, and
the River to be the Stygian lake; the Gloominess of the first, the Gravity of
the second, and the whispering Conspiracies of the last, seeming to combine
together to deceive him.

And as the Fancy is not only capable to receive and apprehend those species,
which the external Senses, as its Organs, convey into it from external Objects,
but also to create Phantasmes within it self, which never had a being in
Natnre, so did Athalus his fancy represent to his eyes Legions of Ghosts,
doomed to their eternal habitations.

But though his thoughts were thus filled with shadows, yet were they not able
to crowd Matilda thence, but remembering how that in losing his life he lost
her, and in losing her, he lost the life of his life, and which only made Life
precious, and Death miserable; he fell to a passionate lamenting his condition,
till he was convinced by Perianders persuasions, and a more liberal access of
light. And then the very joy of his sudden redemption from that Hell that
tortured his mind, was such a restorative, that it was not long ere by the
Hermits assistance, he had regained a great degree of strength, so that looking
about him, and observing the Hermits little solitary dwelling, he espied the
Youth that attended upon him, and that directed Periander to the Cave. And
taking notice of his Starry Eyes, and beauteous promising countenance, he
demanded of the Hermit, who he was; who to satisfy his curiosity, and to pass
away the time, which otherwise through the Melancholy loneliness of the place
might seem tedious, he told them this story.

This youth (said he) is P^ndion, Son to Agis King of Thessaly, a Prince of
such a melancholy constitution, both of body and mind, as that it was rare for
the most curious wits in his Court, ever to wrest a smile from him, or once to
discompose his countenance; always retiring himself within the Closet of his
thoughts, and those thoughts consisting most of horrid matters. And as
melancholy by reason of those sable fumes which ascend from that feculent
humor, and with a gloomy darkness overspread the mind is the cause of fear, so
fear is the mother of superstition, as is apparent in him who never thinks
himself secure, if the least more of danger flotes in the air of his
imagination; or while that fear, which his thoughts, ever musing upon
affrightful matters, does represent unto him, has the least possibility of
event. And therefore ever suspecting all men of evil, because he had not the
least ray of goodness in himself, to enable him to discern it in others. And
this timorousness begat such superstition, that each dream was an Oracle, and
the Screech of a Night Raven, an Omen and presage of some future dismal event.
This over-fond and contemptible fearfulness rendered him not only odious, but
despicable to his people, which he daily more and more perceiving, slighting
the former, resolved to countermine the latter, if not by honor, yet by terror;
and since they would not love him, they should fear him, and their dread of him
should counterpoise their hatted. In the one, as in all things else, showing
himself tyrannical, in the other, as in nothing else, truly Royal; there being
nothing more averse to a generous and noble spirit, especially if refined by
honor and advancement, than to be slighted; and this he absolutely determined
to free himself from, by punishing all in whom there was the appearance of a
crime, and where there was none, excellency became a fault, by being opposite
to him, into whom to have distilled any Virtue, had been to have destroyed the
very constitution and temperament of his nature.

And thus a more sensible servitude came insensibly upon that people, which
Hiarbas King of Caonia, his Son-in-law, by the marriage with Melana, daughter
to Formosa, a man both ambitious and politic, and a continued enemy to Agis
having intelligence of, and by means of his Spies, diving into the temper and
spirits of that people, who though they were lovers of loyalty and fidelity,
yet haters of tyranny, and were not able to brook such a servil subjection,
resolved now to improve his opportunity, and at once both to free himself of
jealousies and fears, and subvert the whole Kingdom of Thessaly, by diverting
the stream of the affections of the people, from the King, and of the King from
the people, and converting it into another Chanel, where they might flow more
safely for the working of his designs: And to that end, he had those in Agis
Court, who by nothing better, than accusing the people to him, could insinuate
themselves into his favor; and those in the Kingdom, who fomented divisions,
by condemning the King to the people, and emblazoning and pourtraying his
vices, and their slavery, the more to increase their hatred and contempt
toward him, and desire of ^iberty to themselves, by these means to make a gap
for him, when things were come to maturity, both to invade and surprise
Thessalia.

Agis, though he had many enemies, yet he wanted not some friends, who
acquainted him with these underminings. The least whisper of any danger, was
alarm loud enough, to arouse him out of any security, if it was possible for
him, ever to have been guilty of that, a thing so disagreeing to his temper.
And therefore he intercepts Hiarbas designs, by sending an Ambassador to
denounce War against him, and to tell him, that he would save him the labor of
so long a March into his Kingdom, for he would visit him ere long in his own.
Though umbrages and light fantastic jealousies created by cowardly timorous
fancies, are too narrow a Basis, to found a quarrel upon, yet a preventive War
is both just and honorable, and no way dissonant from all principles of Policy.

Accordingly he had scarce dispatched his Ambassador, ere he had raised his
Forces, and was upon his March to prosecute his intent, according to the tenor
of the Embassy; and to be brief, it was his Fortune to encampe near Dodona's
Grove, a place that had been long famous for uttering Oracles, whether some
enchanting spirit, by the virtue of its in^e^nal spells had inspired it with a
Prophetic fury, and converted the silent whispers of those muttering leaves
into a voice, and caused that voice to Echo ^orth the destinies of succeeding
Ages* Or rather, whether those unseen spirits had not vested themselves in
those shady boughs, which were so interlaced* as that night in daytime seemed
there to keep its residence, and therefore a fit place for those night-Owls to
hatch their dark contrive^ents in the darkness and shadiness of the place,
both* preserving them from the view of the great Eye of the world, the Sun, and
darting a reverend aw^ulness into men; Which of these, I say, is yet more
admired at, then known to the world? Agis, whose perpetually disturbed
thoughts, could not be hushed asleep by the lullabies of peace, could much less
by the thundrings of war, especially whilst the ratlings of that in the one
ear, and the whistling winds of popular murmurings in the other, seemed to
conspire to raise a storm of discontent within him, and therefore nothing could
appease their mutinous bra^lings, until he had inquired of the Oracle, whether
his undertakings would be successful or not, and to that end at Night, unseen,
unknown to all, he steals from his Guards, and hasts to the Grove, from which
he receives this Answer, If thou wilt preserve thy tottering Kingdoms fall,
Thy Sons own blood, then must Cement the wall.


This horrid Counsel, though it did both astonish and affright him, being
uttered in such a manner, at such a time, in such a place; yet notwithstanding,
that which did most perplex and pester his mind, was, how to expound this
intricate aenigma. One while he thought it could be meant of none but his
Son-in-law Hiarbas, in which he was partly confirmed, when he called to mind
Hiarbas proceedings, whereby he already seemed to fulfill it; but then
observing that term, thy Sons own blood, by transposition, he construed it, thy
own Sons blood; to which construction be more inclined, though upon less
groun^s, and with least security, as will after appear; and indeed upon this
only ground, that it is the Custom of Oracles, to wrap up truths, within a
cloud of ambiguities.

As he was thus revolving in his thoughts how to wind himself out of this
inextricable Labyrinth, he was interrupted by a sudden whispering noise, just
as if some vapor had ascended out of the Earths hollow pores, and whisked
through the leaves. But ere he had gone some few steps further, his attentive
ear might hear two earnest in discourse. My Lord, says one, can it possible
once enter into your thoughts, and not thence expel all reason, that you can
withstand his mighty force? Certainly, if that has once his free vote, it will
soon tell you, that a people who have been so long unacquainted with War as
yours, and have had their spirits debased, enfeebled, and unmasculined, by a
long luxurious and effeminate peace, cannot but account its rude knocks and
blows as harsh and unpleasing; whilst your enemies have not only been trained
up in Mars's School, but have had their spirits heightened by Victory and
Successes. What will your Army serve for else if you give him battle, but to
whet their swords upon, and make them the sharper to cut down all opposition,
that shall withstand his attaining your Kingdom? and the greatness of your
force will serve him but to erect the Pyramids of his renown, so much the
higher. And however, my Lord, you may ^latter your self with thoughts, that you
need engage against none but his person, conceiving that his death will put a
period to all your troubles, and be the only means to invest you with the
Sovereignty of Thessalia, as the Oracle fondly advises you; I tell you, if you
inquire of Reason the only Oracle, placed in the Soul, for man to follow, it
will inform you, that in stead of opening a Gap, to enter and possess his
Kingdom, it will open the floud-gates for a torrent of ruin to rush upon you;
but the best and only way to consummate all their misery and salve their State
sores; for whilst he lives, all those dissentions, divisions, and distractions,
which already have brought the Kingdom to a gasping condition (so that they are
fain to address themselves to you for redress) will be rather augmented than
diminished. For as in the Body Natural, so in the Body Politic, ill vapors are
not contented alone to distemper the head, but thence, as from a Limbeck
distilling, disperse themselves into the whole body, and there beget faction,
the mother of ruin, and that which above all things strikes at the vitals of a
Commonwealth, by endeavoring to clip asunder that bond of Union, which knits
Sovereigns, and Subjects together; and so if you view the present condition of
his estate with an impartial Eye, you will find that that Kingdom, which, while
all private concernments flowed in one stream of public good, was able to bear
down all opposition before it, is now cut into so many small rivulets of
private interests, as that if it obstruct not their course by War, but let each
stream flow in its own Chanel, the whole power of that Kingdom will soon be
dried up. Whereas were he dead, those who now out of contempt and hatred
forsake the Father, would, if not out of loyalty and fidelity, yet out of pity
adhere to the Son; and all those factions which like mists obscure the luster
of that Government, will then all vanish, before the rays of that rising Sun:
and if he be once seated in his Throne, you will find it a more than Herculean
labor, to crowd him out from thence, or to wrest the Scepter out of his tender
hands. Rather submit, and part with part, than be forced from all, which will
inevitably be the event, if you follow your intended resolutions.

Were ever thy Eyes spectators (said the other) or thy Ears, of any
dishonorable action of mine, that thou have such mean thoughts of me, that my
heart can s^oop to a servi^^ submission? either thou must imagine my worth very
little, and folly great, that I will hearken to thy persuasions, though
containing never so little reason and honor in them; or thy folly must be
great, to think, that after a twenty years illustrious Reign, in honor and
applau^e, I shall now begin to degenerate; and what though blind For^une has
hitherto c^owned him wi^h success? all his victories shall attend as Captives
at my triumphant Cha^iot, or else shall be as gemsm, to adorn my Crown, and
give it the greater luster. And if my Kingdom has ^urfetted by a long
continued peace, and contracted many malignant humors, what can there be
better, than to let them blood by War? where the sharper the Lance, the less is
the wound. Besides, think thou my presence nothing? if my men are so stupidly
base, that neither honor, victory, the preservation of their lives and
fortunes, which will be all at stake, will not stimulate them to the
performance of actions of a higher and more noble nature, than ordinary, yet
(add to all this, which is equal to all) to see me in the midst of the greatest
hazards, confronting and encountering the greatest dangers, surely will engage
them to act something worthy the name of my Subjects, and to be owned by me.
And if I dye, what then? better dye with honor, than live with shame; when if I
dye, it will be such a death as will give life to my name, and after death, I
shall survive by an ^^mortal fame. But if I submit, as you would have it, and
live, it will be such a life, as will be worse than death, to be buried alive
in the obscure Grave of In^amy. Besides, has Fortune Garlands for no Brows but
his? or is his Armor impenetrable, or his Sword Enchanted? if not, why is it
impossible for me to conquer? Submit must I? that were the ready way to be
trampled upon by all dominee^ing Princes superior in discipline of War, though
inferior in all other respects. Tell not me of such ignoble things, I hate to
hear the mention of any thing so unworthy, and infinitely beneath any, who are
endued with the smallest portion of a Royal spirit. No, though all Heavens
winged Heralds should proclaim my destruction, and accent each sentence with
thunder, yet would I undauntedly prosecute my resolutions; when if I am forced
at last to surrender, the world may rather commiserate me for want of Fortune,
th^n condemn me for want of Valor.

Pardon, My Lord, said the other, if I used an expression too ^ar below a
person of your Royal dignity, and Heroic spirit. I endeavored not to persuade
you to any dishonrable reconcilement, out of mistrust to your Valor, which
should I in any measure doubt of, I deserved to perish by it, and to give the
proof of it by mine own destruction, as I doubt not but Agis will. With that,
Agis that had so long sacrificed his ears to their discourse, and with such
greedy attention devoured each sentence, being now fully informed, by hearing
his own name mentioned, who was the subject of their discourse, resolved with
all secrecy and celerity, to return to his Army, and send a party to surprise
them* but as he was ri^ing to return, it was his unhappy Fortune to stumble,
and fall upon two boughs, which as it were out of revenge for their blow, with
a rushing noise betrayed him to his enemies; who having their discourse
interrupted by such a sudden noise, between fear and amazement, arose, and no
sooner risen, but as well as the Nights darkness would permit, they discerned
Agis newly recovered from his fall; whom though they knew not, yet thinking he
might be some S^ie from their enemies party, or one at least, who upon
examination could inform them, they apprehended him, and with speed conveyed
him to Megapolis, the Metropolitan City of Hiarba's dominions, which was not
far distant from thence; where they committed him to safe custody, until the
light should discover what the darkness concealed.

No sooner did the morning appear, and the light dispell the darkness, but this
Royal prisoner was called forth to give an account to Hiarbas who and what he
was. I should be guilty of too much profuseness both of words and time, if I
should stand to declare, what variety and contrariety of passions domineered
within them, when they saw, and in seeing knew each other. Hard it is to say,
whether joy or admiration had precedence in Hiarbas, whilst grief, fear and
shame contended for priority in Agis; This is certain, if any passion did
exceed another, when they all exceeded the bounds of moderation, it was joy in
Hiarbas, to think that in him he saw the Exit, and conclusion of all his
troubles, and grief in Agis to think that this was but the entrance and
exordium of his, and that now he did but enter upon the Stage to Act his
Tragedial part, in comparison of which, all his former Reign had been only
Comical. And indeed no wonder, if he who in the clearest Sunshine of
prosperity, when there was not the least shadow of a Cloud that might portend
any danger, but only the vapors in his own head, or any enemies to oppose,
but the inhabitants of his own brai^, could not stop the mouth of fear; I say,
no wonder then, if now when a black prodigious Cloud was impendent over his
head, ready to pour down, and with a deluge swallow up all, that fear should
fill his imagination with millions of perplexities.

But as fear is a greater evil, than the evil it fears, so it was with him, for
Hiarbas who sought not after the King but the Kingdom, nor the Sovereign but
the Sovereignty, above the hopes and expectations of Agis, showed all Princely
respect, and honor; and entertained him rather as a guest, than a Prisoner, but
yet not altogether forgetting his temper, he sometimes intermixed su^^rcilious
cariages, to the end, that what by alluring persuasions mixed with threatenings,
he might accomplish his ambitious ends; and indeed in a little time they took
such an impression upon him, as procured from him a total resignation of the
Crown and Dignity of Thessalia.

But to return to the Army, who when in the morning they found their King was
missing, and that after the most curious inquiry of all persons, and diligent
scrutiny into all places, no news could be heard of him, you would be amazed to
hear, what a medly of diversifyed opinions there was about him, which to avoid
the imputation of falsehood, I shall forbear to recite. But for their confusions
they were innumerable, being divided into as many factions, as interests, and
interests as persons; some were for none to govern, some were for all to
govern, as in a Democracy, some for themselves to govern* each regarding what
he followed, but none what might follow thereof; and amongst those who were
most serious about the public good, some we^e for the young Pandion, and some
for Hiarbas. In fine, they could agree upon no certain thing, but its certain
they could agree upon nothing. This mad mixture of conceits brought it at
length to a dangerous (...), which had been more dangerous, had they no^ been
so divided into parts, as none knew whom to oppose themselves against, which
yet notwithstanding prevented not such a broil, as had increased to a war, had
not all these compositions of differences been composed by the sudden coming of
Hiarba^, who what by the terror of a potent Army, which he then marched in the
head of, together with a prevailing faction among the Thessalians, presently
put an end to all their discords, and caused them all to Center in an unanimous
submission to his power, so that within some few days, he had the Crown set
upon his head, by Agis himself, in the chief City of the Realm, whom for that
day, he brought forth, and to the admiration of all the people declared unto
them, by what happy Fortune he thus unhappily fell into his hands. But Agis not
being able to survive the loss of his Kingdom, and having his heart broken with
extremity of grief, he in a short time exchanged his Throne for a Grave, his
Purple Robe, the Ensign of Royal power and Majesty, for a Winding sheet, his
Courtiers, for the Worms, and infernal shades: And thus as Fortune put an end
to his happiness, so Death to his misery.

But Hiarbas though thus carried aloft upon the wings of a prosperous Fortune,
yet he soared not so high, but that he was able to look down and see, upon what
a tottering Basis his Government was founded; for though for the present the
people were taken with it, as indeed what n^^eity is not pleasing to the palate
of the vulgar? yet in a short time its staleness would cause them to disrelish
it, especally if imbittered with the least grain of tyranny and insolence,
which no Government can avoid that is acquired by force and violence. And as a
Tower, whose parts may be sound and strong, yet, if held together only by
force, is nothing but a ruinous mass, and subject to fall with the least
assault; so the best Government, that has no other support but the sword, and
is not cemented by the peoples affection, is subject to dissolution, upon the
least popular motion and disturbance, much more that, where there can be other
right pretended, but what is carved out by the sword. And therefore that he
might gild over his sudden intrusion, with some glittering pretenses of right,
by which he thought to dazzle the dim eyes of the vulgar, he caused himself to
be proclaimed throughout all the Thessalian dominions, heir and successor to
Agis deceased, by virtue of that resignation which he enforced from him in the
time of his imprisonment. And that he might for ever remove away all grounds
for Pandions hopes, when he came to age, to attain, or his own fears to lose
the Kingdom, he sent him to a Forester to be educated as his own, that thus by
causing him to move in so low a Sphere, he might prevent an Eclipse of his
pretended right, which he justly feared would be totally obscured, should
Pandion have interposed his.

And as for the Princess, Pandions only sister, though I cannot but say, he
has dealt most honorably with her, having regard not only to her high descent
and extraction, but excellency and worth; for indeed, what is there that can
deservedly merit the title of desert, that is not most transcendently in her?
yet fearing lest in time, her matchless wit and beauty might match her, to some
person of great eminency, who in marrying with her, would espouse her interest,
he has Cloystered her in a Nunnery, and made her vow perpetual Chastity.

And thus did this Politic man improve his Fortunes, whilst poor Pandion born
to a Crown is bred up in a servile obscure condition, having a Forest for a
Kingdom, and wild beasts for his Subjects, with whom he is daily conversant,
exercising a pretty kind of delightful tyranny over them, in chasing some,
settering others, and killing others, as his fancy pleases; and one day as he
ran so far in the pursuit of a Deer, that he knew not which way to return, but
wandering to and fro, he happened to espy me, walking near the mouth of my Cave,
and with all speed came running to me. I was no less astonished at the beauty
of the youth, than amazed to see him in such an unfrequented place; for during
thirty years that I spent in this solitary place, I never beheld the face of
any here before him, whom after my mean manner, I have entertained, for some
years, not being able to direct him to the Foresters habitation.

This story told with so much gravity and deliberation, so moved Periander to
compassion, as that he resolved to accompany young Pandion into Thessalia, and
there by all means endeavor his restoration, which however if he could not
effect, yet, he would render himself renowned for his high Attempt, and
therefore blessed his Fortune, which though hitherto had been adverse to him,
yet now had presented him with such an happy occasion, and so fit a place for a
Theater, whereon to Act the Heroic Exploits which were already transacted
within his thoughts. Neither was Athalus less desirous of acting a part in that
honorable enterprise, so much of his spirits had not steamed forth, from those
streams of blood, as to enfeeble both his body and mind; but still he was as
propense to embrace any action that required valor for its performance, as
ever, but the weakness of his body would not permit him to undertake any thing
proportionable to the greatness of his mind. For though the care and diligence
of the Hermit had brought him from a despair of life, yet not out of danger of
death, should he be too negligent of himself; so that with a seeming unwilling
willingness he yielded to Perianders, and the Hermits persuasions, rather to
return to his Castle, and when necessity should require, assist them with
Forces from thence. And though it was the wound uncured in his body that was
the pretense, it was chiefly the wound incurable in his heart, that made him
withdraw* which nothing could heal but a Sympathetick Plaster, applied to the
Dart that gave the wound, and that was Matilda's Beauty; and therefore to her
must he return, if he will ever find ease, which accordingly he determined to
do.

Having made these conclusions among themselves, they walked abroad to refresh
themselves, and Athalus, who for several days had not tasted the fresh Air, the
Hermit entertaining them with discourses, one while of the vanity of Sublunary
delights, how that their greatest perfection is but imperfection, and in their
best enjoyment attended with annoy, and how ^^itting transitory and fading* and
how unreasonable for a reasonable Soul, of such a depurate, immaterial, and
supercelestial Nature, and therefore a fit soil for the most sublime thoughts
and enravishing affections to spring up in, to delight it self in such course
embracements. Then he would be lavish in the praises of a contemplative life,
the happiness and sweet repose of solitude, how that freed from the worlds
tumultuary distractions, and Corroding cares, the Soul does mount aloft, upon
the Wings of Contemplation, above the Star-glistring Heavens, and satiate her
self with Angelical delights, that reside in a higher Sphere than Nature, and
thence descending taste what excellency Heaven and Earth will present, which as
a solemn repast, after such transporting and rapturous delights, fills and
dilates the Soul with excess of joy and contentation. Can any humane Artifice
(said he) please and delight the eye, as it does the intellectual eye of the
Soul, to see with what unwearied swiftness, the rolling Heavens, whirl the
sparkling Globes of light? and with such violence, as if it meant to sling them
out of the Universe, had not Nature there unmoveably riveted them; to see how
the envious Moon, as it were repining at her brothers glories, strives
maliciously to obscure and hide them, from the view of the admiring world, by
interposing her opake body between it and the Suns refulgent Beams? and then
how the Earth to requi^e that malign interposition, wrappeth her in a misty
shade, and makes darkness triumph over her, and plunder her of all her
resplendent lightsomness, and render her invisible, that gives visibility in
the mids of darkness to all sublunary beings? To read the events of all things
written in Golden Characters, by the hand of the All-seeing Deity? To see how
the revolutions and alterations of persons and actions depend upon their
circumvolutions; what earthly Palace can compare with that where the worlds
great Monarch keeps his Court? environed with an Ethereal Wall, whose ten
arched stories borders upon the Empyreal Palace; moated with a Crystalline
Ocean, guarded with hoasts of twinkling partisans, whose gilded shields and
glistering Spears reflect back the Suns radiant glances; to see the flaming
Courtiers clad in golden Treasses, dance to the Music of the Spheres, roving
and traversing the transparent floor with such confused order, as if they
measured each pace by the sweet Charms of the Musicks modulations, whose
harmonious accents consist of disagreeing concords, so they are most constant
and regular, when most irregularly inconstant. Neither are there wanting
Tiltings and Tournaments, and feats of Chivalry: for how often does the Sun
himself, mounted in his glory-beaming Chariot, s^od with burning bosses, run
the Celestial Ring, with all his flaming attendants, pursuing after in their
full career, through Heavens arched Galleries? The Air is his Kitchen, where
his Cates are prepared, the Clouds the steam that ascends from his boiling
Caldron.

Thus they went, the Hermit beguiling the time with his grave discourses, till
they came to the top of the Hill, which proudly elevating it self above the
humble valleys, and levelling plains, blessed their Eyes with the most delightsom
prospects the Country could afford; there might you have seen Art and Nature
join in Consort, and strive to present a most beautiful Harmony to the eyes.
There were the natural Theaters of lofty Hills, where the most refined gusts of
air would dance to the warbles of the winged Choristers chirping under the
green Canopies of shady Groves. Vales treasuring up silver Rivers, which gently
gliding, would steal away beholders senses; by which the Shepherds would sit
feeding their Flocks, whilst the wanton Lambs would dance to the Music of
their Oaten Pipes.

Not far distant, stood a pleasant Town on the side of a Hill, compassed with
green Meadows, watered with the ^ilver streams of little bubling Rivers, that
strayed to and fro in wanton Meanders; the streets so intermixed with shady
Trees, seemed as if the Woods had left their melancholy retiredness, and grown
sociable, meant to inhabit the Town; or as if the Town had left its cheerful
sociablenesse, and grown to a kind of civil wildness, meant to inhabit the
Woods, or rather as a marriage between both.

Hither did Peri^nder, Pandion and Athalus repair to furnish themselves, and
Pandion especially with Armor, and all acouttements fit for their intended
undertakings, having first taken leave of the good old Hermit, and returned
millions of thanks for his charitable kindness, telling him that they counted
their present unhappiness chiefly to consist in this, that thereby they were
put in an incapacity of giving due testimonies of their gratitude to him, and
that if their Fortunes might be raised equal to their desires, it should be
that they might be able to return requital equal to his deserts. The Hermit
answered, that as his deserts were small in themselves, so they would be less,
should he be so mercenary as to show kindness, in expectation of a requital;
but however, if he had merited any thing, that they had sufficiently repaid him
by their sweet conversation.

Thus after some ceremonies past between them, they left the Hermit, who at
parting could no longer retain his gravity, nor refrain from weeping tears of
joy and sorrow; of sorrow to part with them all, but especially Pandion, whom
he had so long entertained as his Pupil, and instilled those excellent
principles, the effects whereof shall be made apparent in the sequel of the
story; but of joy, through the conceived hopes of his future prosperous Fortune.

These three noble Consorts having traveled for some few days together, came
at length to a parting way, which might properly be so called, for it was the
means of parting Athalus from the other two, whom we shall also part from for a
time, and leaving him, associate our selves to Pandion and Periander; who
amongst many other adventures they encountered withal in their journey, this
was one.

Traveling along one scorching day, the Sun darted his rays with such
vehement violence as that they were forced to betake themselves to a near
adjoining shady Grove for protection, where the spreading boughs so embraced
each other, as if they had combined together to exclude the Suns proud beams
from entering there; where being invited by the pleasantness of the place, and
their own wearisomness to refresh themselves, they lighted off their Horses,
and having pulled their bits out of their mouths, turned them to feed upon the
Grass, which there grew in great plenty, whilst themselves being overcome with
the murmurings of the sweet bubling streams, and the whilstlings of the
quivering leaves were lulled asleep. But long they had not yielded to sleeps
pleasing charms, when their ears were suddenly filled with a sudden shriek,
which pierced and rent the air with such a dividing shrilness, as plainly
appeared it came from a heart pierced, rent and divided with sorrow; and
withal so small and clear, as they knew it came from some Female Breast;
neither came it alone, but was presently followed by a train of doleful groans*
which pursued it with hue and cry as a Thief for stealing her joys from her.
They no sooner heard it, but they arose and guided their steps by the mournful
noise, till they came to a place where they saw a beautiful Lady lying along
upon the ground, leaning upon her elbow; Nature had painted her Face with more
than ordinary Beauty, so that Sorrow seemed to appear in the liveliest color;
her Face, Gestures, Sighs and Tears, and all made apparent, that sorrow had
tuned her heart to so high a Key, that the strings were near cracking. Loath
they were to interrupt her, and yet desirous to serve her. At length they heard
her fetch a groan, and that seconded by a sigh, and both ushered in these
words. Hard-hearted enemies! could your tyrant minds invent no other way, to
vent your merciless cruelty, but by being thus cruelly merciful to leave me
behind to weep his obsequies? what wrong did you ever receive from his
guiltless hands? as nothing could satisfy your boundless rage, nor satiate
your thirsty souls but his dearest blood? and if it was I that did the wrong,
why did you not sheath your Swords in this breast, that my Death might expiate
his? and why do you not come and steep your sulphrous souls in my diffused
blood, that so both they as well as their horrid actions, their monstrous
of-springs, may be of a Crimson dye? O ye celestial powers, since 'twas your
pleasure to join our Hands and unite our Hearts by Hymen's sacred and inviolable
bands, dislodge this Soul of mine, and take it up into that heavenly Chorus,
whereof he is one, that so out of the reach of dull-browd sorrow, we may sing
prolonged Anthems of Peace together, and being no longer entangled with this
Worlds turmoyles, my Soul may be involved in that bottomless Abyss, and
boundless Ocean of immortal happiness. Oh sweet Death, come and welcome, put a
period to my Griefs, and rid me of this dying life; oh how the thoughts of thy
approach revive me! frustrate then not my hopes and expectations, the way to
kill me is to let me live. Oh then augment not my griefs by adding new, let me
not ever languish here in perpetual anguish; but come, oh come, and if my
enemies have extracted the quintessence of all cruelty, and swilled it up into
their parboyl'd Souls, that so there is none left for thee, what then? it is
mercy, not cruelty that I crave; for what greater mercy can there be than to
unloose a soul entangled and hampered with griefs and sorrows? oh then unty
this knot of dull mortality, that pineons my soul and makes her flutter here
below, and let her fly to him who is my Life, my Heart, my Joys, and all that
my highest desires can attain unto. And if with killing him, thou have spent
thy Arrows, for sure his great soul would not surrender up her mansion on too
easy terms) here is Shafts within my Heart shot both from Love and adverse
Fortune, enough to fill thy Quiver, and let that remain full still; Come then
and draw thy Bow, and give that wound that shall heal all other wounds. And
therewithal she gave a sigh, as if Death had indeed made a divo^ce between her
Soul and Body, and her tender heart had bid adieu to this lower world, and fled
into the Empyreal Regions. But proceeding, Charon (said she) prepare thy Boat
to waft me over the Stygian Lake; and if thou fear it is too shoul to
transport such a Cargo of Woes and Griefs as I am filled withal, here is tears
enough that flow in uncontroled Streams from Griefs Fountains, to make it at
its lowest Ebb, overflow the Banks, and if that will not suffice, open my
Veins, drain my Heart dry, rather than let me tarry behind; for what Joys can
ever accrue to me, now Theon, in whom my Joys are placed, has bid farewell? And
then she stopped, giving a groan, as if her Heart had been rest in sunder, and
folding her fair Arms, as if she went about to embrace death.

Pandion and Periander hearing this, no longer able to contain, discovered
themselves to her, and craving pardon for their intrusion, begged to know the
cause of her sorrow, telling her, they would spend their dearest blood to
purchase her desires. Oh then, said she, my desire is to be with my dear Theon,
hand me to the Elizian Plains, where he resides, I desire not your death, but
my own, for, alas, what comfort can I have to tarry here behind? Never more
shall these pale li^s of mine once dare to own a smile, nor this trembling
heart to entertain a joy, since the Heavens have dispossessed me of such a joy,
whose presence made all my joys, I and sorrows too, to be joyful, and at whose
absence all my joys like shadows vanish, but my sorrows increase. Nothing but
grief and care, now he is gone, shall -- And then being no longer able to
speak, she wept a flood of tears, making her language to ebb. Heavens forbid,
said Periander, that the earth should contain such a one, who durst imbrue his
cursed hands in the blood of so fair a Lady, and rob the world of such an
unparalleld beauty. Accursed tha^ hand that should act, yea that tongue that
should speak, yea that breath that should whisper, yea that heart that should
think of spilling such inn^cent blood. Rather, Madam, be pleased, said he, to
lay your commands upon us, and assure your self we will extend our utmost power
to serve you. And if we have not valor enough, yet doubt not, but the heavens
will succeed the cause of one in all excellencies so resembling themselves.
Nay, said Roxana, it is not your valor I doubt of, but contrariwise, it is the
heavens mercy that I despair of: for can I think that they who have so frowned
upon me, frowned do I say? rather conspired to make me miserable, have any love
or mercy reserved for me? for whence can such extremity of cruelty proceed but
from extremity of hatred? do I not see how contrary to my hopes and desires
they force me to live, and deny so poor a request as death? If a ^^^ilitude and
consentaneity in properties, will beget a sympathy in affections, it is rather
from the infernal powers then, that I must hope for succor, whom in all
miseries I do so resemble. But alas, what need I thus speak? it is neither your
fortitude, were it a composition of the very extracted spirits of all the
ancient Heroes valor, nor the Stars themselves, nor all Pluto's black Legions,
should you all combine and unite your powers together, were able to reduce a
Soul once fled from its Terrestrial habitation. And (...) my Theon is dead. And
then she sighed and wept, the tears trickling down in such swift streams, as if
they strove who should first leave the fair possession of her eyes, or rather,
who should first kiss her Rosy cheeks, Ah Theon, said she, and then she rent
her hair, and tarr her beautiful face, as though they could serve for nothing
now Theon was gone.

Periander and Pandion were so moved to compassion at this passionate sight,
that they could not refrain from holding her fair Arms, and by force compel
her to be merciful to her self. Can you accuse the Heavens of cruelty, said
Periander, and you thus cruel to your self? How can you expect that they should
gratify your desires, and you thus contradict its will; be not thus displeased
with what Heaven is pleased, nor lavish of these Pearly drops. Surely, if no
sublunary powers whatsoever can fetch your Theon from the shades below, much
less can your tears. Perplex not then your pensive heart, but appease this
stormy discontent, who knows what Heaven has laid in store for you? It was not
for nothing that our steps were directed to this place, therefore acquaint us
with the story of your Fortune, and we do protest that we will dedicate our
selves wholly to your service.

Ah, said Roxana, ^latter me not with false deluding groundless hopes, do you
think, said she, with a bitter smile, that the clashing of your Armor, should
you descend to Pluto's Court, would tickle his ear with as much delight, as
Orpheus Harp, and would have the like persuasive faculty, as his melodious
Charms? But however, I cannot but with all thankfulness acknowledge your
Civility, in the tender of your service, which I can no otherwise repay, than
in granting your will, by relating my condition, which truly is a poor
requital, but the refusal would be worse.

Know then that my name is Roxana, daughter to Melampus King of Boeotia, I was
once happy (O unhappy word that brings to mind my former happiness, to
aggravate my present misery!) I say I was once happy in the love of Theon. What
need I say any Periander and Pandion persuade Roxana page 52.

more of him? what Country does not echo with his renowned acts? where has
not Fame blazed his honor? who are there that would be liberal, courteous,
magnanimous, and heroically excellent, that set not him as a president before
them?

This Theon is Son to Harpalus King of Thrace; his Father being desirous to
make him complete in all things that were desirable, sent him when he was a
youth to travel, both to inure him to hardships and difficulties, thereby to
instill into him those Virtues both Moral and Political, which commonly thrive
better then, than in the Serenity of times, amidst the delights wherewith all
Princes Courts abound, and also that he might learn the Manners, Customs,
Poli^ies, and State-Interests of Foreign Kingdoms, whereby he would be better
instructed in the interest of his own, and be enabled when the power came into
his own hands to manage the affairs of State with greater advantage. Vain it
would be for me to enumerate the great adventures he achieved in his travels,
since they were so great, as that all the world not only heard of, but admired
and envyed, and therefore they may seem strange to you, but I cannot think, you
are strangers to them.

Amongst other places it was his hap to come to my Fathers Court, where he had
not been long, ere his incomparable Beauty, unconquerable Valor, and
inimitable Excellencies so enravish't my affections, that Theon was the Saint
at whose shrine I offered up my daily Oblations; Theon was my sole delight, and
the delight of my Soul, when ever I was blessed with his presence, methought I
felt my heart chained to his eyes, and when he spoke, his lips seemed to dance
to the sweet accents that came from his mouth, with such pleasing grace, as
methought each motion seemed a Charm, and each word a Spirit, that in^h^alled
my Soul, and led me Captive at the triumphing Chariot of his conquering Beauty;
such Grace, such Majesty, such Perfection were united in him, as the most
curious quick-sighed Symmetrians were not able to discern the least
disproportion in him, much less mine, which was wholly dedicated to his
Perfections. Neither was he wanting to repay me with mutual affections, but as
my contentment and happiness was placed in him, so he ever thought himself
unhappy without me; and so had affection blinded his judgment, as he was
pleased to bestow large Encomiums on my Beauty, commending me rather like a
fond Lover, than a Judicious Artist in Beauties Heraldry; which had it as far
transcended his expressions, as his expressions did me, I should not have
merited his affections. And that that was no small addition to my Felicity, my
Father Melampus was exceedingly delighted in his sweet Society, and Witty
pleasantness, and brave deportment, but most of all pleased with the affections
we bare each other; insomuch that in a short time, by agreement of our Parents,
the day of our happy conjunction in marriage was appointed. Oh that sweet
disuniting union, that makes one Heart of two, and two Souls of one! that
Golden Key that unlocks the treasures of Chaste enclosed delights (...) great
(...) the Heavens only Tantaliz'd me withal, envying its full enjoyment. For
thus it happened, Theon and I, walking together, one Evening into the Fields,
we overheard Idomeneus his Squire, and another quarrelling; what the cause of
the contention was, we could not understand; this we perceived, that they were
ready to leave their Verbal arguments, and betake themselves to sharper than
any their Wit could invent, but their immoderate Passion had not so renounced
the moderation of Reason, but that they could consider, that neither the time
nor place was seasonable; they made therefore a Challenge each to other, to
meet next morning at such a set hour, which they both vowed to observe. Theon
over-hearing this discourse, resolved not to interrupt them, but at the time
appointed to be an unseen Spectator of this combat. I dissuaded him from both,
fearing the event, but with such faint dubious persuasions, as they nothing
prevailed, delighting in his presence, and yet taking pleasure in every thing
that delighted him, though ^t deprived me of my desired happiness: for our
hearts being one, our desires and delights must needs be one, so that I was
forced to yield a dissenting consent.

But when night came, no sooner had Morpheus benumbed all my senses, and
sleeped them in Lethe, but the drowsy Deity, that forges those wild phantasms
on the Anvil of the Fancy, which we call Dreams, began to represent to my
thoughts, Theons pale Ghost came to bid me adieu; the a^frightfulness of the
spectacle awaked me. I think it is but superfluous to use many arguments to
persuade a belief in you, that my joy was not small when I saw it was but a
Dream. But no sooner had sleep again prevailed over my drowsy senses, and
Night had lulled them in her Sable Arms, but an interposing Dream interrupted
the silent peaceful delight* of my quiet fancy, and cumbred me with new
confused thoughts. Methought I saw, and yet methought I did not see, but 'twas
because I would not see, my Theon, and Idomeneus dragged by the Knights of
Clausus Castle, a place that has long been an A^ylum and refuge for the most
p^o^^igate persons to Sanctuary themselves in, under pretense of a privilege
granted to Clausus Ancestors, from my Fathers Predecessors* for a signal Act of
Loyalty, to be exempted from all penalties for any Act whatsoever, excepting
high Treason. By virtue of which, Clausus the present possessor has committed,
and does continue still to commit many outrages, imprisoning all Ladies, and
Gentlemen, whose hard hap it is to come within their reach, so that there are
many now of eminency, who are there condemned by this Tyrant to perpetual
confinement. And not only himself, but all Villains whatsoever, that can
pretend any relation to him (though often the kindred consists not in sameness
of blood, but bloody actions) have the privilege of impunity for whatsoever
wickedness they perpetrate. And by this means this Castle has been as a Nest
of Vermin, a Moth and Canker in the Bowels of my Fathers Kingdom, so that he
has been so tired out with the daily complaints of his Subjects, for injuries
and affronts received from them, that he resolved to raze the Castle to the
ground, intending not to leave the least vestigium of it, to preserve the
memory of such a wicked place. A freedom for Vice, is an unfit reward for
Virtue. But he was prevented by a subtle politic trick of Clausus, which was
this, Clausus receiving intelligence of my Fathers resolutions, and how the
daily provocations from his party incensed him more and more, knowing himself
to be a man of little less than Gigantick bigness of body, and to say truth,
the greatness of spirit being proportionable, imagining himself invincible, he
has of late made this Challenge, that what Knight soever could overcome him in
the Field, he would surrender up his Castle to him, and renounce his privilege.

This fair and honorable proposal, my Father condescended to, and for the
encouragement of any Knight to undertake the Combat, he has proclaimed, that
whosoever should Conquer Clausus, should not only have the Castle for his
reward, but should have the highest honors, his Kingdom was capable to bestow,
conferred upon him. Hither me thoughts I saw Theon dishonorably dragged.

I was no sooner awaked, and freed from my restless rest, and my Dream had
forsook me, but a Tyrant fear succeeded it, and usurped dominion over my amazed
thoughts, so that spurred on with a distracted mind, I hastily arose, and
rushed into his Chamber. But when I saw he was gone, and that his solitary Bed
was deprived of its happiness, to enclose and embrace so sweet an inhabitant;
how did my tormenting fears add wings to my steps? so that in a moment before I
knew whether I was thoroughly recovered of my Dream, I came to the Castle, where
I found to my misery, my Dream fulfilled, and those Villains triumphing over
his beautiful, though lifeless body.

And now, Sir Knight, since you have your request, let me have also mine, that
you will not hazard your selves with that cruel Tyrant, but proceed in your
journey, and leave me here to bewail my miserable condition, which is the only
satisfaction and content you can give to my unsatisfied discontented mind.

In all things, Madam, said Periander, consistent with my honor, I shall obey
you, but where that's engaged, pardon me, if I hearken rather to its dictates,
than your commands; and, said he, it cannot but reflect with dishonor upon this
noble person, who honors me with his company, and my self, should we refuse the
Combat, when there is such high provocations, as the revenging your quarrel,
the redeeming so many Captived Knights and Ladies, and the freeing the whole
Kingdom from such a common pest. And what though I lose my life in it? life is
but a tribute, that we must pay to Nature, and that the best and most valiant
is mortal, and subject to the breath of every unfortunate chance; but honor
that is built upon high atchivements is immortal, and Fortune may as well think
to trample the Stars under her feet, and with her frowns to Eclipse the Sun, as
to depose him that in seated in the Throne of Honor, and he that will purchase
that must not stand upon price.

Roxana hearing this, directed them to the Castle, whither they ha^^ed with all
speed, but by the way there grew a cont^^^ between them, who should have the
honor of the Combat. Periander was willing to yield the pre-eminence, in
respect of the others high descent, neither did he doubt of his courage; the
starry loveliness of his eyes being perfect indices of the sprightfulness of his
mind; but together with the greatness of his spirit, which was loath in point
of Honor to submit to any, the fear le^t Pandon should be wor^ed, doubting
whether he was able to withstand so fierce an encounter in his first initiation
in the School of Mars, made him the more desirous to undertake it himself.

But Pandion being equally ambitious of Honor with the other, and suspecting
lest Periander doubted of his valor, grew into a little heat, which Periander
perceiving, condescended to his desires, with this resolution, that if he saw
him in any danger of being overcome (which he much feared, by reason of his
youth) he would interpose, and they would both stand or fall together. Pandion
gratefully accepted it, and so they passed on, till they came to the Castle,
upon the Gate whereof hung Armor, all of Silver, upon the Breast Plate whereof
there were engraven two Angels, holding a Wreath of Laurel, in the midst of
which was this Impressa, Valors Reward. Upon the Gate was the Picture of Mars,
holding* Banner in his hand, in which were written these Verses, Who Honor and
these Arms would win,
And Ladies free, enslaved within,
Must foyl a valiant Knight in the field,
Or else himself a Captive yield.
Pandion having Read the Verses, drew out his Sword, and with the Pommel of it,
gave such a blow upon the Armor, that it resounded through all the parts of the
Castle, so that with speed came Clausus, and with a flaming countenance and
fiery look, gave such a rude entertainment to Pandion, as if he had been one of
the Cyclops come from Fire breathing Aetna, to Forge Thunderbolts, or rather
as if he himself had been that ^laming mountain, so did his rage-inflamed-Soul
belch ^orth streams of fire at his eyes, that made his face look like a
prodigious Comet, that ^ortended evident destruction to Pandion, his blows
lighting like claps of Thunder, following the Ligh^ning that flashed from the
Torches of his Eyes, which yet served but to enkindle the flames of Pandions
courage, so that at length such a storm of Rage and Fury grew betwixt them, as
showers of blood descended from them both. So that whoever had seen the Combat
between Apollo and Python, Theseus and the fell Min^^aure, Hercules and the
Nemean Lion, would have said, that this had been a perfect resemblance and
image of those, or rather they had been types and models of this rage, Hatred
and disdain exasperating the one, Fury, emulation and disdaining to be
disdained anima^ing the other, so that if the one was prodigal of his bloody
gifts, the other was as generous to repay, and that with interest, even beyond
the receivers desire, though short of his own will; (doubtful it was whether
the one was more liberal or the other more thankful;) Clausus, Minotaure rus
like, assaulting Pandion with such a voluptuous appetite of Blood, as though
nothing could satisfy him but to broach all Pandions veins, encountering him
with such a labyrinth of strength, skill, fury and courage, that Pandion had no
other thread to guide him out, but to cut the thread of Clausus's life, which
he endeavored to do with such well-guided violence, as that though passion and
discretion seldom concur, yet did he keep his passion within the limits and
compass of discretion, or rather steered his passion by discretions compass,
thrusting and guarding with such opportune activity, as that they both seemed
but one Motion, and yet with such active courage, as that he had soon resolved
the doubt Periander was in, which would be the Conqueror, had he not found
Clausus to be a man of invincible courage, and peerless excellency in matters
of Arms; so that if Reason and sudden astonishment ever moved together in one
Sphere without disturbance each of other, they did in Periander, whose most
impartial and reasonable mind found reason to be astonished at the unexpected
valor of such a Youth as Pandion, who supplied with his courage, wherein his
strength was defective, and since Nature had made him the lesser of the two, he
made skill attend and not contend with Nature, avoiding rather than guarding
Clausus blows; but when opportunity presented, he would give his thrusts with
such well-governed force, as that he would both offend his enemy, and defend
himself; fain he would by his frequent feignings have enticed Clausus to
disadvantage, but he having more experience than Pandion, had as much skill to
know how to defend himself from harm, as the other to proser, so that they
spent some time in contending Pandion slayes Clausus page 61.

how to do, whilst that tired them more than the very act of doing.

Clausus, whose fearless mind, and matchless valor, and frequent success, had
raised him to a confidence above hope, finding himself thus matched by a Youth,
enraged and ashamed that he should be so long in conquering one, over whom
though his valor should render him victorious, yet he should not merit the
title of a Victor, summoned together all his active powers, and with united
force, gave such a blow on Pandion, that all the protection he could receive
from his well-managed Sword, was to moderate the violence of the stroke, which
yet nevertheless lighted on the side of his Head with such a force, that it
dispossessed his memory of its bruised habitation, and drove him some few paces
from the place where he stood, which Clausus perceiving, resolved not to
neglect such an opportunity, but pursued him with redoubled blows, and reunited
power.

But Pandion, as if his veins had been filled with Spirits, as fast as they
were emptied of Blood, mustring all his strength, skill and courage together,
being to give a gallant Farewell, like the last blaze of a dying light, ran
with such a vehement courage upon Clausus, that he not aware, but rashly
prosecuting victorious Fortune, the Sword run thorough his Heart, or rather he
ran his Heart upon it, conque^ing himself just when he was triumphing on the
conquest of his enemy; which when the Knights of the Castle p^rceived, not
regarding the Laws of Arms, ^lew in ^o defend their Captain, or rather
themselves, knowing that on the third of his Life hung all their Privileges,
which ^ut in two, must needs fall to the ground, which consideration made them
fall inconsiderately on Pandion: which Periand^r seeing, enraged with contempt
of their Dastardly baseness, to set upon a wounded man gasping for Life, and
more to think that such cowards should be allotted him to be the Subjects of
his valor, and most of all to think that his friend and he should receive
their Deaths from the hands of such miscreants.

Being near over-pressed with the multitude, he rushed upon them with such a
torrent of violence, as drowned whomsoever he encountered withal, in a lake of
their own blood, though surrounded with them, he could not avoid receiving some
blows, yet they served but to increase his rage to the extremity, so that with
a mad violence, or furious madness, all the powers of his Soul, and the
Strength, Dexterity, and Activity of his Body transferred to the one arm, he
dislived some and disarmed others; his valor being crushed between the two
extremes, necessity of preserving his Friends and his own Life, and the
difficulty of accomplishing it, made it so swell within his breast, with the
madness of a terrible fury, that to the destruction and admiration of his
enemies, he went beyond himself in his achievements, killing where he hit, and
hitting where he pleased, separating some not only their Souls from their
Bodies, but their upper parts from their nether; others that were aiming where
to lodge their blow, with the greatest advantage, he deprived of blow and sight
and all: Whilst Pandion, not able to assist his friend, was forced to refresh
his fainting body by resting himself upon the ground. But they were soon
assisted by the Knights imprisoned within the Castle, who knowing that their
Jaylors were imprisoned by Death, and seeing Pandion bestrid by Periander, and
he beset with their enemies, they unanimously assaulted them, all agreeing in
the means of their preservation, their enemies destruction, though all
disagreeing in the end, some fighting to preserve their own honor, disdaining
to be enslaved by such unworthy Villains; others for their Ladies; some out of
Love to the Commonwealth, to quit it from such a nest of Pestilent Fellows;
others out of hatred to their enemies; so that in fine there grew a desperate
combat, as it must needs -- the Combatants growing desperate, the Clausian
Knights resolving rather to lose their lives by wholesale on the point of the
Sword, than retail them out by the hand of Justice, which they knew would
befall them should they surrender, grew fearless through fear, so that Courage
in the Valiant grew desperate, and despair made the Coward courageous; that at
length the conflict grew so cruel, that the very ground was overflown with a
deluge of blood, and the earth that was wont to bury men's bodies, men's bodies
now buried the earth; so that it seemed like Mars's sowing time, the seeds of
cruelty being implanted in each Breast, and watered with Blood; but like Deaths
reaping time, such an Harvest of Bodies there lay in heaps, serving as Bridges
to transport over Rivers of Blood, that streamed in the pavement*

Hard it was to determine which way the balance of victory would poize,
Fortune for a while carrying her self a Neuter; till at length Periander being
a too partial Umpire, by the mediation of his valor decided the controversy,
sending such throngs of Souls of the Clausian Knights, that were loath to answer
for their unanswerable crimes before Melampus his Tribunal, to receive their
eternal doom, that the small remainder yielded, craving mercy, which they
found. Then Periander receiving the Keys of the Gate, gave the Captives that
were the Keepers, to the Keepers that were the Captives, till Pandion whose
right it was to command, should otherwise order; who appointed Sentinels on the
wall, and a watch for that night, intending the next morning to march in
triumph to King Melampus's Court.

But no sooner had each man took his Station, but their Ears were arrested with
the cries of a Female voice, which as well as they could understand, demanded
entrance; the Gates being opened, they all straight knew her to be Roxana their
Kings Daughter, who seeing the event of the Combat, came with speed to the
Castle to perform her last obsequies to Theon, and to return thanks to Pandion
and Periander for their hazardous adventure. And being admitted into the
Castle, she was received with all respect and joy, by all the Knights and
Ladies there, but especially by Pandion, who blessed her ears with the happy
tidings that Theon was yet alive, pointing where his Chamber was, who would
have said more, but the transporting joy, not only divorced all sorrow from her
Heart, but her Body from the place; so that both his words and thoughts were
prevented with her sudden ^light, calling as she went, Theon, Theon, her Tongue
not being able any more to express her unexpressible passion; but as soon as
the eyes of Theon, nay his Heart, nay his Soul was ravished with the sight of
Roxana, as if her beauty had been some divine quintessential extract, or some
ray of that celestial fire, that inspired life into Prometheus Image, he felt a
vigor infused into all his fainting limbs, and the Darts of Beauty to triumph
over the Darts of Death, and her words to blow up the dying sparks of Life into
a flame, so that assembling all his powers together, he cast himself into her
Arms, his Legs being unfaithful and feeble supporters of his Body. But, alas!
as their arms were linked each in other, and their very Souls intwin'd by a
sweet sympathy, Theons Spirits that, like the dying blaze of a Taper, before
gave such a sudden flash, choked with the smoke of that affection that gave
them life, suddenly fled from their battred dwel^ing.

Roxana amazed to see this sad unexpected adventure, remained like one suddenly
thrown from a high precipice, who has his breath stopped ere he know whence he
fell, or whither he is falling, so was she rackt between the extrems of joy and
grief; all the powers of her Soul being overwhelmed with a sudden confusion.
Two extrems overflowing Tides of contrary passions meeting together in one
Breast must needs sink it in a Whirl-pool of amazement. But she was recovered
from that living trance, by the recovery of Theon, who did but by the shortness
as it were counterfeit a Death, that he might be buried in that Lilly vale,
beset with swelling Mounts of driven Snow.

What wanton reaks, said Rozana, does Fortune play, bandying me from one
extreme to another? no wonder that Virtue and Fortune rarely meet in one, since
that moves always in a mediocrity, and this drunk with madness, reels to
extremes. But her Farther speech was interrupted by the coming of Periander,
followed by a Gentleman that came from her Father, who having first performed
his duty to her, and acquainted her of her Parents health, told her, how that
the same of the Castles winning, and of her being found had been blazed in her
Fathers e^rs, who knowing, that the Eccho's that re^ound in her Temple, are
usually reduplicated, and that her Translations and Comments seldom agree with
the Original truth, therefore had sent him to make a more strict inquisition,
that he might have certain intelligence, intending, if it was truth, to send
some of his chief Noble^ to honor that Hero that was their deliverer, not only
according to, but beyond his engagement. And that he sent some of his principal
Doctors and Surgeons to cure the wounded.

She returned him many thanks for his pains, and for his acceptable news, and
requested him to send for a Surgeon to Theon, whose wounds like gaping
mouths seemed to beg for help. But the Surgeon being called, by means of a
sovereign Balm that he had then with him, he presently stopped those bloody
leaks, and in a short time restored him to a great measure of health, and no
less did the other Surgeons effect upon Pandion, and the rest of the
wounded; so that after the burials of the dead, Pandion attending upon Roxana,
and attended with all the Ladies, and most of the Knights, excepting some few
that he left in the Castle to keep it in the Kings behalf, marched toward
Melampus's Court; but they were met by a glistring train of Nobles, Knights,
and Gentlemen, some coming in obedience to the Kings Commands, others to meet
their delivered Ladies, and all to bring Roxana and Pandion to the Court with
great solemnity; having performed their dutiful salutation to the first, they
in the Kings name returned many thanks to the latter for his great service to
the Kingdom, acquainting him with what high acceptance his heroic Act was
received by the King, and bestowing large Encomiums on his valor; who yet
willing that Periander, that was so great a partner in the victory, might also
share in the honor, endeavored to transfer the chief praise of the Action
upon him, extenuating his own part, but extolling his, to whom also they
performed many Ceremonies; All which being past, they proceeded in their
joyrny, beguiling the time with delightful pleasancy, till the end of their
journey put an end to their discourse, where they were brought to the Palace of
the King, being conducted into spacious Courts, adorned with such beauty,
riches, and pompous magnificence, as transported Pandion (who never beheld such
State) with an excess of astonishment, that he thought Heaven and Earth could
not have afforded so much glory. Such was the glistring habit of the Nobles, as
seemed to contend with the golden Pillars which should reflect the Suns rays
with the greatest luster, or rather with the Sun himself for brightness; such
the rich Attire, resplendent Ornaments, and admirable Beauty of the Ladies,
their Ornaments adorning their Beauty, and their Beauty beautifying their
Ornaments, and both adding such particular graces to the solemnity, that held
the Eyes and Heart of Pandion and Periander dazzled between contentment and
admiration.

Being convened into the Kings presence, he arose from his throne, and after he
had embraced his Daughter with joy and affection, turned to Pandion and saluted
him with as great Condescension as Majesty would permit, telling him that he
esteemed himself beholding to Fortune, not so much for sending one who by his
valor had rid his State from such a brood of Villains, as honoring his Court,
by that occasion with the presence of a Person of so great worth as he approved
himself to be; and requested him to acquaint him with his name, and what he
was, that he might know on whom, as well as for what he should confer his
intended Honor.

Pandion (who had resolved to conceal his name, knowing that to reveal it would
be utterly destructive to his design, and therefore agreed with Periander to go
under the name of Danpion, which is the same with his own, the Letters being
transposed in a different order) made this reply.

Great Sir, said he, the Honor you have already done me is sufficient to
reward the worth of one that had the whole worlds excellency contracted
together and united in him, much more the mean deserts of so mean a person as
my self, whose meanness is such, that it may be sufficient excuse if I am
silent, accounting my self unworthy to trouble the Ears and Thoughts of so
great a Prince with any farther relation and knowledge of me than my name,
which is Danpion. Melampus perceiving his reservedness, conceiving he had
sufficient reasons, forbear any further importunities. And taking Danpion on
his right hand, and Periander on his left, accompanied with multitudes of
Knights and Ladies, he led them into the walks, where the lofty Trees were
ranked in such delightful order, as that none durst retreat, and all seemed
equally ambitious of being foremost, their plumy tops, waving with gentle
puffs, sand the dancing air. On the one side were goodly Gardens, where the
smooth Lillies were enclosed with fragrant hedges, underneath whose sweet
protection dwelt air-perfuming Roses, whose Vermillion looks seemed to blush at
their own perfections, and wrapped in lovely folds, as if the Angels themselves
had taken delight each morn, to contend one with another, which should dress
them with the most pleasant intricacies, each bed clad with such lovely
ra^ified flowers, as if Flora her self had there been brought to bed of her
most delightful of-springs, and all the borders so strewed with the springs
inamel'd Tapestry, as if they had bordered upon the Empyreal Paradise, so that
the whole seemed as if it had been Natures Treasury, wherein she kept her
richest beauties. On the other side stood a stately Summer House, Melampus ye
King with Danpion and Periander^ page* 68.

mounted on twice twelve Marble Pillars, beleagured round with a little
murmuring River, whose curling streams like liquid Silver reels to and fro in
wanton mazes, part whereof endeavored with its transparent garment to hide
Diana from Acteons ambitious eyes, her naked Nymphs standing round, some in the
Crystal water, some on the Lilly-paved brink, trampling on those humble Flowers
for comparing with them for whiteness.

Much time they spent in pleasant discourse, and viewing these delights, and
many more than my pen can describe, till at length the Sun began to display his
golden locks to the inhabitants of the other Hemisphere, and the scarlet
evening to fly over Heavens arched Roofs; when Supper being prepared, the King
commanded to have it served into the Banqueting house, where they sat down,
more curious to satisfy the appeti^e of their eyes, than desirous to feed upon
the various Cates that there were marshalled in stately order; The Ladies
darting amorous looks upon the two strange Knights, no less admiring them for
their beauty and comely deportment, than for their valor, and Pandion
especially, who though he had not such a Majestic, manly, and severe look as
Periander, yet of a more pleasant countenance, and attractive grace, his starry
eyes shining with a radiant splendour, like two Quivers filled with Darts of
Love, re^lected back their wanton glances with no less delight and admiration,
and rolled to and fro in that Garden of Beauties, as if he, Zeuxis like, picked
out here and there a heavenly feature, to compose a Posie and mixture of all
excellencies and perfections.

But all this joy and contentmenr did but beget sorrow and discontent in
Periander, by bringing to mind despairing thoughts of Florinda, from whom one
smile were better to him than all those eye-pleasing delights, one accent from
her lips, than all the ravishing warblings of those Angelical voices, that
there sang to Lutes and Viols, and other charming Instruments: so that his
dejected eyes seldom afforded any there a look, as though they scorned to look
on any, since Fortune forbad them to look on her whom they preferred before
all: but the internal eyes of his Soul continually gazed upon the picture of
Florinda, that was lively painted in his Fancy by the Pencil of affection. But
Supper being ended, after some Masks and Revels, and other pleasures, the night
being far spent, they all retired to their Lodgings.

THE SECOND BOOK OF PANDION AND AMPHIGENIA.
SWift-footed Time feathered with flying hours, of it self posts away with
such celerity, that we are no sooner entered upon the Stage to act our parts on
the Theater of this world, but ere we are aware the Scene is concluded, and
Death pronounces an Exit; yet the mirth and jollity of those happy days seemed
to add wings unto it; while unhappy Periander, and the more unhappy, because so
in the mids of so much happiness, would not permit the least joy to intrude
into his heart, but abandoned his thoughts wholly to mournful meditations which
though in themselves unpleasing, yet sweet to him, because hovering in Loves
Dominions, still lighted on so sweet a Center as Florinda. Often would he walk
alone, and recount to himself his various misfortunes, and then account them
all as Ciphers compared with his exilement from Florinda: but then joining both
together, with a multiplying addition, how far (would he say) does it surmount
my Souls Arithmetic, to number my innumerable griefs! Had ever any one such
mountains of sorrows heaped upon him, and not overwhelmed? Cetainly, they are
not set for steps to climb to a Heaven of happiness, rather a^ Tombs, where
all my hopes, desires and joys may be interred.

Thus as the Torpedo, when it feels it self ensnared by the deceitful hook,
vomits ^orth a bane-full humor into the briny Ocean, and not only fills the
places near adjoining to her with a Chilling Ice, but sends it up to the
Anglers hand, wherewith in a moment it (...) and Charms his senses into a
death-resembling sleep: so Perianders sorrow entangled with Loves Bait, not
only filled his heart with the fumes of discontent, but infected all those Joys
that seemed to Angle for it, with their delicious Baits; And one morning, by
that time Aurora had spread her Vermilion Mantle, on Heavens Azure floor, and
the Suns glistering Beams had gilded the mountain tops, Periander leapt out of
his Bed, and went into the Walks, where the shadiness of the Trees, the
coolness of the Air, which was fanned to and fro with Zephyrus wings, and the
sweet agreeable murmuring of the Fountains, fomented in his Breast that humor
which fed it self with the remembrance of Florinda.

What strange unruly passions are these (said he) that thus stand Sentinel at
the doors of my senses, and deny Rest entrance, and if any Joys are suitors for
the possession of my heart, they soon forbid the Banes, and thus domineering
within the Kingdom of my troubled Breast, chase all contentment from me, so
that methinks I could consume an Age in thinking, and make my Griefs keep Time
with the Spheres harmonious motions, till time shall be no more; for as they do
rise, but never set (for when they seem to set to us, they then rise to our
Antipodes) so have my sorrows a beginning, but never ending, keeping a
perpetual motion in my Breast; and when the morning begins, then does my Heart
greet the approaching light, with a hope-absco^ding Cloud of sighs, exhaled by
the heat of Loves Passions, from the Ocean of Grief within my mind; and when
the Evening begins to close the Day, then does my Heart conclude it with
showers of dewy Tears, and all proceeds from the remembrance of Florinda.

Ah sweet remembrance (said he) happy were I, would thou make me forget all
other happiness, or smother the thoughts of my present misery. But more sweet
Florinda, since all abstracted sweetness is lodged in thee, how could I part
with Thee, and not part with Life? or rather how could I part with Life, in
parting with Thee, and yet live? What was I senseless, that I could hear the
fatal Messenger pronounce that more fatal sentence, and the very Cadence of his
speech not stab me to the heart? Sure the very sound would have struck me dead,
but alas, misery had so filled my Heart, that there was no room for death. Oh
envious Fortune, could thou find no other time to blast my happiness, but in
the blooming of it? In what poisonous composition did thou dip thy invenomed
shaft, that feathered both with Life and Death, shot Death to my happiness, but
Life to my misery? Come once more, bend thy Bow, and since thou do delight in
my destruction, draw thy Dart up to the head, and here is a Breast prepared for
thee.

As he was further proceeding in his speech, he was interrupted with a doleful
noise, which being handed to his ears by Eccho's reverberations, seemed as if
she had a fresh begun, with pining lamentations, to bewail her more pining
Narcissus; but er'e he could consider what it was, or whence it came, his ears
were arrested with a train of mournful tones, that followed their flying
predecessor, and then a peircing drilling cry would seem to be a treble to a
murmuring Groan; but drawing near, hoping to find one to sympathize with him in
his misery, he heard the voice formed into these words.

Oh heavens, were it not enough to take her hence, but you must take all mercy
with her; alas, what need is there for mercy, where there is no misery? there
is nothing but a boundless Sea of Happiness, and here nothing but a bottomless
abyss of Woe. Oh command Death to unlock the doors of happiness, that I may
enter in and exchange these Heart-infringing Groans, for the Heaven-bred
Raptures of that Seraphick Quire that surround the Heavenly Throne, and these
Soul-melting Tears, for those Nectarian stream^ of immortal pleasures. Come,
Death, thou that art so prodigal of thy Darts, to shoot a Virgin in the Aurora
of her days, whose fresh smiles would have melted the most flinty heart into
mercy, come spare a shaft to me, whose age as well as miseries inviteth. Oh! why
art thou grown thus preposterous to take the young, and leave the old? would
not her Beauty move pity in thy heart? Methinks her blushing Cheeks might have
made thee ashamed of thy cruelty. How could thou find in thy heart to thrust
thy Sith into her tender sides? Sure, no such thing as Love could be the
cause, no, Love never resides in an obdurate Heart. And ah, the Grave is too
hard a marriage Bed, and thy looks too ghastly for her to delight in thy cold
embracements. Come then to me, to whom thou shall be welcome, puff out this
blaze of Life, and let my fledgd Soul take her Wing. Think thou that a few
Tears can supply with moisture, what so many griefs and years have dried up? No
surely, long it cannot be, ere my sublime Soul must bid farewell to all these
transitory Griefs and Joys.

Having spoken this, he concluded with such a groan, as if he had ended his
speech and Life together. But Periander, no longer able to conceal himself
from, nor from himself him that was the author of these sad lamentations, which
he thought could suit with none as with him, accounting (as it is the property
of all men) his own condition most lamentable, discovered to himself, and
himself to an ancient man apparelled in a Gown of gray, resembling a Pilgrims
weed, lying along in a darksom Cave, the darksomness whereof made it resemble a
Vaul^ or Grave, as his paleness made him resemble a Ghost, so that he lay as if
he had been entombed alive.

Periander at first stood still, having his thoughts distracted between pity
and amazement, and gazed upon him, but then returning to himself, he requested
the Pilgrim (for so he seemed to be) to inform him of the cause of his mournful
complaints, telling him, that he had a sufficient share of sorrow, and
therefore knew how to bear a part in that doleful Consort, and that he had
found by experience, that when he had a partner in grief, it eased him of half
his misery, two being able to support that burden, that one will sink under.
And that if it lay in his power, no way else to avail him, yet he could
sympathize with him. True (answered the Pilgrim) but you your self say you have
a sufficient share already, and therefore I need make no addition: and alas the
story of my fortunes would make an Adamantine heart relent, and move pity in a
Soul that had for ever exiled all mercy from it. The relation (answered
Periander) may add to my griefs, not to my misery, and detract from them, as
much as their relating may give ease to you, which will be some though small,
because one grief concealed, more grievous is, than ten imparted. Since you are
thus desirous (replied the Pilgrim) of a thing so undesirable, I shall consent.

Know then that my name is Geryon, by birth a Nobleman of this Realm, I had a
Daughter (and then the tears stood in his eyes, as doubtful whether they should
leave their Aged Mansions, or continue there) her name was Helena, her Parts
and Beauty made her both desirable and desired, by many principal Noblemen in
the Court. Many suitors she had; among the rest, there came a young Gentleman,
named Pentheus, a man (as I must needs say) of incomparable worth; though as I
then thought, too undeserving for my Daughter, but now I both see and rue my
pride (and then the tears gushed forth, but proceeding) the wealth and honor of
the rest so eclipsed his merits, and dazzled the eyes of my judgment, that I
thought him fitter for her menial servant, than a servant in affection. But I
disliked him not so much as my Daughter liked him, or rather I disliked him the
more, because she liked him, not out of want, but excess of over-vehement
affection to her. But my hate to him, could not quench her love to him, but
rather increased it, which for a while was interrupted upon this occasion.
Often had I forbad him coming to my house, threatening little less than Death,
charging my Daughter also upon penalty of my utter displeasure, not to
entertain him in her Arms, or in her heart; but as the latter was impossible
for her to effect, so the former was attended with little less difficulty,
being as unwilling to do the one, as unable to do the other; so that they
continu^d still their stolen meetings, which was not so private, but it came
to my ear, so that perceiving, they little minded my threatenings, I minded
little to threaten, but laid an Ambushment to entrap them one Evening, who
passing along as they were toying and discoursing and using their wonted
Dalliances, my servants started up and apprehended them; her they brought home,
and him they carried into a Wood, that was some miles distant from thence, with
intentions to kill him, but they were set upon by the Knights of Clausus
Castle, and some killed, others wounded, and many carried prisoners to the
Castle, among which he was one. Those few that remained and escaped, fled in
have to acquaint me with the event of the action, which did then exceedingly
delight and content me, such was my wicked folly, that I never considered what
would be the event of such a wicked event; the eyes of my affection and
judgment being blinded with the dazzling of that happiness I flattered my self
withal, which I thought nothing then could impede, when such an obstacle and
impediment was removed away; but ah, there was a greater obstruction, my
wickedness, that I minded not to remove, which is that that now more afflicts
me, than all the misery and misfortune that is inflicted upon me; such is the
adversity that attends wicked prosperity, and succeeds prosperous successes in
wickednesses, they do but harden the actor in his enormous courses, and by that
means fit him for inevitable ruin, whilst he taken with the appearing
sweetness of such transient happiness, regards not to repress those
exorbitances, which in the end depress him with misery.

Pentheus being gone, nothing now remained, but to match my Daughter to the
most deserving of her noble ^uters, amongst whom was one Trebonius, a young
Nobleman, of great estate and power. As his affections were most vehemently
bent toward my Daughter, so were mine toward him, esteeming him in my
overpartial judgment as far to excel Pentheus, in worth and excellency, as he
did exceed him in riches, though that worth to my grief I found chiefly
consisted in worthless wealth and honor. To him was I determinately resolved to
marry my Daughter, and to that end used what arguments and persuasions I was
able to prevail upon her affections; but as they were not in my power to
command, so neither could she compel them to obey; which I perceiving, was
forced to use my paternal authority, by which at length, with many arguments
and threatenings, I got her consent, not because she was pleased in her choice,
but because her choice was to please me, so that in fine married they were, to
my great joy and contentment. But, alas, what constancy is there in humane
estates? for when we are surrounded with the greatest prosperity, then many
times are we also environed with the greatest disasters; good nor evil never
abiding in one posture, so it was with me. Little did I preconceive what a part
Fortune, or rather misfortune had to act in this Tragi-comedy. But whatever I
conceived, that monstrous birth, that Fortune was then conceiving, made me a
monster of misery, which was Midwived by this occasion.

Of late two strange Knights by their valor, killed the Captain Clausus, took
the Castle, and redeemed the prisoners, (all which I suppose, you cannot be
ignorant of, for its not only the discourse, but the admiration both of Court
and Kingdom) amongst which he was one, that was released from that Captivity,
but, ah! to be ensnared in a greater Captivity both of affection and misery.
For no sooner was the Castle won, but with all speed possible, he ran, first to
inform the King, of the Castles surprizal, and then with greater have, spurred
on by a despairing hope, to inform my Daughter, the Queen of his heart, of his
own delivery. But the first object that saluted his eyes, was to behold Helena
in Trebonius arms.

Here a most Rhetorical Orator might have a fair field to emblazon with
Eloquence, the strange diversity of Passions, that abounded in their hearts at
the first encountering. He whose mind before was distracted between despair,
and hope, was now wholly distracted with despair. In his face, one might have
read a combat between the Beams of Love and Beauty, and Cloud of grief and
hatred, and all these stunned with a maze of amazement; whilst she no less
answered his affection with reciprocal interchanges of Passion, at first she
blushed, as ashamed of her unfaithfulness, and then looked pale with fear, lest
I should perceive her blushing; but then she blushed again, lest her paleness
should be discovered, so that there seemed a sweet contention between the Rose
and the Lily, which should have the possession of her face.

At length Pentheus, like one returned from a ^rance, flung away with such a
frowning mourning disdainful pale countenance, as if anger, grief, hatred, and
death it self, had all begun to prey upon him, and all strove which should have
the greatest share. Which poor Helena seeing, no longer able to contain, gave a
sigh, as if that breath had been her last, after which the tears gushed out,
which trickled down her Cheeks, like Pearls dissolved, just as the blushing
Rose, watered with Heavenly dew, when the soft Air gently breaths upon it,
those Crystal drops leave their perfumed dwelling, and distill upon the
ground; so did her tears blown with sweet gales of gentle sighs, leave the
Crystalline mansions of her eyes, and descend upon the floor; which she strove
against with so sweet a violence, as added such a grace to her sorrow, that
instead of restraining it she constrained us to imitate her stormy eyes, so
that there were scarce any present, who were not drawn into society of their
tears. But at length swinging out of her Husbands arms, with a hateful look in
a lovely countenance, counting him the only object of her hatred, and cause of
all her misery, she run to her chamber, and there made this complaint to her
self, which I her Husband stealing after her, overheard.

Hard-hearted Father (said she, and well thou may call me so) could a little
estate bribe your affection so, as not to regard the miserable estate of your
poor Daughter? True it is I derived my being from you, a blessing which I can
never requite, but alas, the blessing of a being cannot countervail the misery
of a miserable being, which I have also derived from you: for better never come
into this miserable world, than come into such a world of misery, as I am now
involved in, so that my Heart, Head, Eyes and Tongue are too barren of Sighs,
Thoughts, Tears and Words, to express my unexpressible grief; come all you
fountains, fill my head with Springs of Tears, and all you Clouds dissolve in
shoures, and come and inhabit my eyes, that so these thirsty Eyes which before
quaffed in such draughts of Love, may now be punished for their sweet
intemperance, and satiated with overflowing streams of briny tears, or rather
that this sinking soul of mine might be swallowed up in a deluge of surging
griefs. Ah hateful Trebonius, from thee flows all my misery, oh that my eyes
had been masked with an eternal night, when first they beheld thy loathed face,
or that my marriage bed had been my grave, and instead of my Epithalamum, that
they had warbled out my Epicaedium; then might my touring soul, whilst they
were chanting forth their doleful tones here below, have bore a part among the
Angelical Hierarchy, and there unskreen those awful secrets, which are only
reserved for the eyes of purified souls, where no woes dare crave for entrance,
but all joys enjoyed in their full perfection. Ah my dear Pentheus, little
think thou what a faithful lover thy poor Helena is to thee, and what a
killing thought it is to me to think that my foolish, but necessitated levity,
should occasion thee to harbor any hard thoughts of me, the very thought is
able to put me beyond all thinking. Oh my sweet guardian Angel (if any such be
allotted to my protection, which sure if there were, all these miseries would
not befall me) I say, if any such I have, prepare thy wings, haste quickly, fly
to my Pentheus, and tell him that he is more dear to Helena^ than ever, and
that a forced marriage has only changed her State, not her, and though another
to her endless grief enjoyed her Body, yet none her Heart, which she has kept
entire for him, and that her chaste unstained soul, has not embraced a thought
or desire, that has thought of or desired any other but him. But why do I
fondly bemoan my self to these senseless walls, haste I will to him, without
whom to Live, were worse than Death, and with whom to Dye, is better than Life.
And therewithal she ran out of the chamber, and ran down stayres, but her
speed was stopped by an affrightful messenger, that looked like one arisen from
the dead, to bring news from those dark Regions, and as one that regarded not,
or indeed knew, neither what nor to whom he spoke, in a mournful tone, belched
out by parcels the death of Pentheus.

Helena, whose former griefs had carried her to such an excessive raging, that
they had transported her beyond her self, so that at first she minded not what
the messenger spoke, but Trebonius and I who still followed her, he jealous of
her, and I, what would be the issue, demanded of the man the manner of it; He
like one newly awaked from a terrible dream, who looks about to see whether his
past thoughts were realities, or only the productions of his fancy, mustering
up his senses, and collecting his thoughts, told us, that passing by, it was
his fortune to come just as Pentheus was speaking his last words, some of
which, as well as his confused memory could retain, he said were these, Oh
Helena, how willingly would I resign my life, might my remembrance but lie
intombed in thy sweet thoughts, where thy daily meditations of me would be
better than embalming spices; would Heaven grant me such a favor, I should
then count the divorce between my soul and body, the sweetest marriage to the
greatest happiness. How soon would I build my Funeral Pile of woes and
miseries, and enkindle them with the flames of Love, and therein consume my
self to Ashes, might those Ashes be kept as a relic of one of Loves Martyrs,
within the Urn of thy breast. Well may I call thy Heart, a glassy Urine, seeing
I have found it both brittle and transparent. But ah! what woman is not so? she
must have degenerated from her Feminine nature, or have been some third sex,
had she been endued with a faithful constancy; for Woman she could not be, and
Man she was not; Oh what a thing were Woman, should her visage alter with her
mind, and her external form should receive constant figurations from that
inconstant mould! she would be twenty several women in a moment. Never was any
Chamelion or Proteus more subject to various mutabilities. But why do I blame
the whole Sex for the unfaithfulness of one, and why do I blame her for my own
unworthiness? ah it was not her inconstancy to me, but my inconstancy to any
thing of worth, that made her hate me. I that was the reason, I am not worthy
of her; of her? no, not to live. Then once more I bid farewell to all my hopes,
farewell all false deluding pleasures, painted woes, sugared lies, and farewell
Helena, the sum of all; thou have already peirced my heart with a wound more
deep though not so deadly as this; with that I ran in, but ere my trembling
feet could convey me to him, his bloody knife had made passage for his soul to
fly from her claiy prison. My daughter who had by this time so far come to her
senses, as sensibly to understand the sequel of the story; no sooner heard it,
but overwhelmed with the raging agony of a furious passion, ran up stairs, whom
still we carefully pursued; but ah! my tongue falters, and my heart fails to
speak the rest, and then the tears began to glide down his Cheeks in such a
liberal manner, that Periander could not forbear to incorporate his with them,
but entreating him to proceed, he thus went on. Ah said he, the rest is so
tragical, that it cannot be heard or related without a fractured heart; for we
could not follow her so fast as she followed death, neither did we overtake
her, ere she had overtaken it; for seeing her self pursued, and no other way to
bereave her self of life, she leapt out of the window; which Trebonius seeing,
as one already carried out of himself with horror, despair, and amazement,
knowing himself to be the cause of all these bloody Tragedies, to appease their
Ghosts, which otherwise he thought might continually attend him with
affrighting representations in this world, he would attend them in the other,
and thereupon leapt after her; so that as if Fortune had studied how to
exercise her uttermost power in making me miserable in one moment, I was
deprived of Son and Daughter, Joy and Comforts all at once, so that hopeless of
ever superviving such extremity of miseries, I resolved to spend the re^idue of
my few days in preparing for death, which my age now begins to summon to.
Scarce had he concluded his lamentable relation of a more lamentable story, but
a panting messenger came running with such haste, as if his ambitious legs
unsensible of their burden, had contended which should be esteemed the
swiftest, or attain the period of their journey the soonest. His message was to
require Geryon from the King with speed to haste to Court; who accordingly
arose, and accompanied with Periander, presently walked thither, where the
first species that did greet his eyes was the King and his Daughter Helena,
with their hands intermixed, coming to meet him; no sooner had his eyes beheld
her, but as if they had retained their visive power only for such a sight, and
now satiated with that, resolved for ever to exclude all other objects that
might exclude it, determined never to see more*

His aged Heart rent with the violent extremities of over flowing excess of
misery, and now a too prodigal access of comfort, not able to contain his vital
spirits, he in a moment, just as he was going to salute and embrace her,
malicious Death, as envying him so much happiness, tript up his heels, and
robbed him of life and kiss and all; which Helena seeing, showing no less
dutiful affection to him dead, than living, after many vain endeavors to
recall his revolted spirits, caused his funerals to be solemnized with as much
state, as his quality required and her ability could perform. Fortune who had
hitherto filled the eyes and ears of all men, with nothing but dismal
Tragedies, was now minded to play a wanton reak, and as sated with so much
blood, for its better digestion brought in this Comical adventure amongst them.

It happened that one evening as they newly concluded their Supper, a messenger
came, and privately whispered in Helena's ear, telling her that an ancient
Gentleman without desired the favor of some converse with her. She granted it,
bade the messenger to invite him in. He drawing near, after humble obeisance
made to the King, and the rest there present, directed his speech to the Lady
Helena in this sort.

Madam, said he, it was my fortune to be present at the death of unhappy
Pentheus (but who can be unhappy, that ever was beloved by such a Lady as your
^^lf?) who bequeathed his last gasp into my mouth, which as well as I could
understand, breathed out these words. Go tell dear Helena, said he, (and dear
may I well call her, since she has cost me my life) that here I dye, a mirror
of Love and Faithfulness, and a true pattern of a faithful Lover. And moreover
commanded me to beg of you, that if any sparks of love or mercy to him yet
remained, and conjure you by the former testimonys of affection, and the sweet
remembrance of your more sweet embracings, you would for your own sake, if not
for his (for otherwise his unquiet Ghost would never rest appeased) entertain
my Son as your servant, whilst Trebonius remains alive, and after as your
husband, that so the resemblance that he bears of him, may be a continual
Memento to you. And now, Madam, said he, I have performed the Will of the dead
on my part, the residue of obedience only remains on yours. of which I cannot
but promise my self performance; for sure so much cruelty and unfaithfulness as
to deny, cannot be disguised under so sweet a visard as Nature has adorned
your face withal. And then he stopped, earnestly waiting Helena's answer, who
first making many sighs and tears a prologue to her discourse, made this Reply.
Sir, said she, I call heaven to witness to my faithfulness and constancy, whose
All-surveying Eye sees into the most abstruse retirements of the Soul, and
knows all its most secret productions, to whom I dare appear. Surely, had I
been faithless to such a one, had the whole worlds contracted powers,
endeavored to Barricado me against heavens vengeance, all their united force
had been but as paper bulwarks. My spotless innocence is the only Brazen Wall,
that can protect me from its Cannon shot, which I humbly importune heaven (and
then she kneeled) that the very Clouds might discharge against this breast, if
there be any other than truth and faithfulness in me toward my Pentheus. Madam
(answered the other) such imprecations are unnecessary; he whose distrustful
breast, dares lodge an unbelieving thought of what comes from so sweet a mouth,
may Cassandra's curse in its full extent light on him, never to be believed by
any, though he should swear by all that^ sacred, no, not by himself, that so
when he himself by an infernal instinct, should prophecy his own ruin, his
base mistrust might not permit him to use means for anticipation.

It is my confidence of your perseverence, that makes me persevere in
confidence, to urge his dying request, than the concession of which, there can
be no greater manifestation of your love and constancy; but the refusal would
not only by actions contradict your words, but oppose that which Fate and
Nature seem to conjoyn their powers, and combine together to accomplish; the
former, by removing away your husband Trebonius, the only Remora, and the
latter by bestowing such a resemblance of Pentheus on my Son, as I am
persuaded, when you see him, you will not easily be convinced, that it is any
other than he himself. What an unfaithful faithfulness were that (replied she)
that were to commit the highest fal^eness, veiled with a pretended fidelity. No
(said she) let Fate and Nature conspire how they will, all their combinations
shall never make me love any other but Pentheus. And whatever similitude your
Son may have of him, it cannot be a greater resemblance, than his Idea
indelebly engraven in my heart.

Then (said he) since you will have none but him, here he is, and with that he
pulled off a vizard, and discovered himself to be Pentheus indeed. Helena, in
whose mind grief had so fixed the death of Pentheus, that hard it was by all
Arguments for him to eradicate the belief of it thence, but she stood rather as
if she had been affrighted with his Ghost, than delighted with his presence,
but Pentheus continued still his persuasions, telling her the truth, how that
when he went away from her, he was so transported with the rage of a passionate
madness, that he resolved to kill himself, and therefore fled into the next
Wood, where meeting with some men, he to hide his intentions, ran into a Cave,
and when he thought that the Coast was clear, and none to interrupt his bloody
design, he ran a kni^e into his breasts, but his good fate more careful of him,
than he of himself, fenced so well for him, as broke both his thrust, and his
weapon, by glancing it on a rib; the wound made him give a groan, so that some
undiscovered persons, that still remained in the Wood, came speedily in, and
carrying him to the next house, compelled him to be dressed, where having ^ain
some time, the strange news of her death and recovery came to his ears, and
every circumstance of it, how she leapt out of the window, and her Husband
Trebonius after her; how her fall brake his heart, but his, his neck, and how
she had only bruised her fair limbs, and the breath for a while expelled out
of her body, but that loath so soon to be turned out of its sweet Tenement,
resolved still to continue, and bless the world with the enjoyment of so much
excellency. This news (he said) was a greater Cordial and restorative to him,
than all the Galenists and Paracelsians in the world were able to compose, and
he that before was so desirous of death, was now as eager of life, and had
rather he had a thousand lives to regain, that he might spend them all in the
fruition of Helena's sweet society; so that now willingly accepting, whatsoever
might restore him, he was in a short time, by the diligence and care of the
Surgeons, perfectly cured, and resolving to make a trial of her constancy,
and whether Fame had not been a liar, he came in this disguise. This speech
being confirmed by some Gentlemen, Companions of Pentheus, convinced Helena.
Then no longer able to withstand the Invasion of their minds, they mutually
embraced each other, so that by agreement and consent of all, the Nuptials were
the next day to be celebrated.

After the joyful Nuptials of Theon and Roxana, Pentheus and Helen^ were
solemnized, with great joy and admiration, Periandor and Danpion took leave of
the King, and the rest of the Court, to proceed in quest of their Fortune, and
after many fruitless importunings from all there present, but especially the
King, who seemed to be passionately desirous of their stay, telling them that
as their worth was such, that no place in the world but would be proud of such
Guests, so his estimation of them was such (though short of their merits) that
their presence should be more acceptable to none than to him, Danpion replied,
Great Sir (said he) to be enthroned in your Royal thoughts, and estimation, is
a reward that would transcend an Angels merits, much more my poor deserts,
which if I have any thing mine, that can arrogate this title, it is but the
reflection of yours. If I have any worth in me (answered the King) it consists
in this, that I delight to see it in any, and to reward it, where I see it,
which your departure disinables me to do. Royal Sir (said Danpion) the many
glorious and happy days, we have already spent under the heaven of your Court,
has so involved us already in a Sea of obligations, that we desire no longer
to live, then our obsequiousness should attend your commands, but to continue
longer, were to plunge our selves yet deeper, and by that means enforce our
selves, in despite of our greatest gratitude to dye ungrateful. King Melampus
seeing his persuasions vain, with many ceremonies, dismissed them.

Periander and Danpion having consumed many days, in a long and tedious journey
into Thessalia, and passing through many Cities therein, to inform themselves
the better how the affairs of State were managed, as Trica, and Phthia, and
Trachys, and Phyllus, and over the high mountains Ossa, Oeta, and Pindus, where
they met with many strange adventures, at length they came to Tempe, a place
not undeservedly renowned for pleasure. It seemed as if the whole worlds
delights had been there Epitomized, and contracted into a lesser volume, but
more excellent Character. There were delicious fragrant Gardens, enamelled with
odoriserous flowers, large and invious Woods, whose s^ady locks swept the
Chambers of the Air, and seemed to dance to the harmonious retortings of the
reverberating Ecchoe's; delightful Groves, within whose embracing boughs dwell
the winged Musicians of the Air, chanting forth their Love Sonnets in
Care-charming accents; walks of love bestrewed with Roses and Lilies, bedewed
with the sweet drops spouted from Crystal Fountains; fresh purling rivulets,
whose delightful streams tuned their agreeing murmurs to the soft whispers of
the wagging leaves, frizled by Zephyrus wanton wings, the spreading boughs
casting such pleasing shades on the smiling ground, like the shadowy strokes in
a picture, made it more florid and delightsome; the trembling leaves moved by
the fresh breathings of the healthful Air, dancing to the harmonious curlings
of the Azure streams, with such peaceful pleasure, as would have forced a
Stoic to have indulged his most obdurate mind to loves melting passions. And
all this surrounded partly with lofty mountains, whose high towering tops seemed
to scale the Clouds, as ambitious both to behold and embrace these rare
delights, and partly with little hills of meaner ascent, whereon there blew the
most pure refined gusts of clarified Air. Many Palaces here were, for the
nobles and Knights of Thessalia, but in the center of all stood the Kings, a
most magnificent structure, the Walls of Porphiry, rough-cast with shining
Carbuncles, and other precious stones, cast in devises, Scutcheons, and
Emblems, enclosed with a Quadrangle-platform of Jasper, made level with
battlements. At each corner, a sumptuous convent, wherein was a stately Temple
dedicated to Venus, Diana, and Pallas, signifying the three chief feminine
Excellencies, Chastity, Wisdom, and Beauty. Within, were Magazines of Arms,
Wardrobes, rich edifices, for the Kings Attendants, besides many Groves of
Cypress and Cedar, goodly Gardens and Fountains encompassed with Ballisters of
Copper, and fair Arches, supported with Brazen Pillars.

Danpion and Periander, that they might the better view these glistering
buildings, and the other ravishing delights, that the place did abound withal,
went up a little hill, on whose brow, they beheld in the bottom, a pleasant
Vale, with a more pleasant Garden. In the midst of which there was a Bath,
surrounded with a Wall of Jet, and over head to defend it from the Suns
peircing rays, an Arched Roof, supported by Statues, standing upon gilded
Columns, each Statue holding in her hand a silver Rod, on which hung Curtains
of white Damask, fringed with green Silk and Gold; one of which being drawn,
Pandion espied a most lovely Lady, resting her soft Limbs in a Chair of Jet,
made at the Basis of a Pillar, Combing her golden Tresses, newly come out of
the Bath, so that the Silver drops, as it were grown ponderous, with
over-burdening grief, that there nature should compel them to leave the
possession of so much perfection, fell in Tears from her Snow-white Limbs. Each
part was enshrined in so much excellency, that Pandion felt his heart arrested
with strange passions, so that he could not restrain his eyes from surveying
her rapting features, and the more he gazed the more he desired to gaze, and
the more admirable she seemed.

Her eyes like two Lucent Stars, shining with such a transporting influence, as
Pandion grew an Astrologian, and his eyes Star-gazers, fixedly observing the
motions of these two wandering Planets, whose every Beam darted a living death.
Her arched brows, where sat a mild sweet Majesty, seemed like two bows of love,
strung with his heart strings. Her eyelids like Ivory covers to two Cabinets,
filled with Diamonds, at their opening a thousand sparkling Gemms would shine
with a radiant fulgor, and at their closing, as many would be eclipsed. Each
cheek seemed a Rosy Paradise, intermixed with Lilies. Her lips like shreds of
Vermilion Satin, enclosed two polisht rows of Ivory teeth, from whence such
sweet persuming fumes steamed forth, as the very Air, when she drew her breath,
seemed to press with delight into her delicate mouth. Her nose, chin and neck
were of so pure a whiteness, as the Lilies looked pale with grief to see
themselves so far excelled. Her breasts were like two Ivory Caskes of Nectar,
from whence leads a milky way to Cupids Palace. Her lovely hair, which the
wanton wind sportively tossed to and fro, one while from her, that it might the
more freely kiss her Snowy skin, then twist it in intricate Curles, and then
divide it, now take a Tress, and fan her face, and then a golden thread, and
dally with her eye, so that it seemed to weave a Net to entangle Pandions
heart, whiles her Lily hand endeavored to repress those lascivious
exorbitancies with a silver Comb, so that Pandion was in doubt, which was the
more happy, her hair to be methodized by so sweet a hand, or her hand to handle
such excellent hair, so sweet both by Art and Nature, as would make one wish
for Mars his fortune, to be ensnared in a Vulcans Net, were it made of such
Heavenly Wire. Her legs like two Columns of Alabaster, or Atlasses, which
supported this little world of Excellency. Pandion whose sight was resisted by
nothing, but his avaritious eyes had full freedom to fill their Pearly Coffers
with those sweet treasures, had the flames of affection so augmented with
admiration and delight, that loath to trust the brittle treasury of his eyes,
he locked them in his heart. And having his Wit refined by love, and he
inspired with a Poetic fury, he to himself, lest Periander should hear, in
mournful Aires, warbled forth this Song.

What strange untrained passions do control,
And domineer within my troubled Soul?
What means this crowd of thoughts within my breast?
Has some strange antic fury dispossessed
Me of my Reason? Oh, it is Love I see,
That of my mind usurps the Sovereignty;
And has deposed my Will. Oh traitrous Eyes!
You are the inlets of my miseries;
You are th'incendiaries of this Civil War,
Within my breast, answer to Reasons Bar,
My heart's two Crystal Forts, how durst y' unclose
Your Ivory doors, to admit such throngs of Woes?
Ah it is her Conquering Beauty, that is the Key,
That has unlockt my Heart, unveiled my Eye,
That the one cannot but look, the other love,
And both admire, what Deity above,
Mindless of us, poor lovers here, does give,
To rapting Beauty such prerogative.
A skin where Rose and Lily do intwine
Themselves in lovely mixtures, and combine
To make a box, where sweets compacted lie;
Perfections quintessence is heaven's Alchimy,
Divine Elixar, that turns all to Gold,
Her hands do touch, or her fair Eyes behold,
This heavenly extract, stamped with sweet, divine,
And heart-attracting features is a Coin
Might pass among the Gods; what is it they prize,
But she excells? the luster of her eyes
Exceeds the Stars; should she her fair hand lay,
On water, straight 'twould turn Ambrosia.
Not all the Goddesses can spin so rare,
So fine, so soft a thread as is her hair.
Oh, how my heart's entangled in each Curl!
Whilst my eyes envy the rude wind should hurl
Such golden treasure, and have free access
To her, for whom I pine without redress.
In fine each part is fine, rare and divine,
A mine of worth, oh would her worth were mine.
Well then my Eyes, since thus you would bribed be,
My heart too render to my enemy;
And suffer Cupid in a golden shower
Of beauty, to descend into the Tower,
And ravish there my Heart without control,
This is your mulct, to quench my burning Soul,
You are amerc'd by Loves all-conquering power,
Tributes of tears to pay, each day and hour.
But having concluded, he looked about to see if Periander perceived his
Passions, but as he turned his head aside, he saw a Gentleman on horsback, a
pretty distance off, beckning with his hand to come to him. They rid up to him,
and as they approached near, he met them with this salutation, Sir (said he)
pardon my abrupt interruption of your pleasing meditations, and impute this
seeming rudeness, not to my incivility, but my care and respect, for I perceive
you are strangers in Thessalia, and as unacquainted with the place, so with the
Laws and Customs. Acteons punishment is allotted to Acteons Crime, whosoever is
seen to gaze into that Bath, though they cannot transform his shape, yet he
shall speedily be apprehended by a kennel of bloud-hounds, that lie in wait to
devour all passengers, that dare once glance their eye, to pry into these
forbidden secrets.

They gave him humble thanks for his care, and requested him, further to inform
them of that Custom, lest their ignorance hereafter might expose them to any
danger, which now his civility had freed them from* Sirs (said he) that I may
make some satisfaction, for that Error, which in part I must acknowledge I am
guilty of, be pleased to accept of entertainment at my house, which that I may
engage you not to refuse, I shall defer any further relation, till we are there.

Periander and Danpion received his courteous invitation with all gratefulness,
and rode along with them, until they came on the top of the hill, whence they
beheld in a great Plain beset with many ranks of Trees, a fair house,
bordering on a River, whither with speed they rode. The house was built of fair
Freestone, both strong and delightfully seated, that showed a kind of thristy
prodigality, and that they had consideration both to profit and pleasure; where
having entered in a while, and refreshed themselves, the Gentleman began this
Relation.

This Country of Thessalia, as it has been ever famous for pleasure and
delight, being counted the Flower of the World, a Paradise upon Eearth, and a
place where the Golden Age, that had forsaken all other places, has nested it
self; but also for a well-tempered Government, being a kind of Monarchical
Aristocracy, which neither derogates from the Royal power and prerogative, nor
yet detracts from the peoples just rights, liberties, and proprieties; Till of
late Agis our deceased King, by his many tyrannical Impositions, and illegal
Usurpations, rendered both himself and the Covernment odious and contemptible,
so that in fine he was deprived of Crown and Kingdom by Hiarbas King of Caonia,
who now reigns, and as he succeeded him in Regal power, so in Tyrannical
Invasions upon the peoples Liberties, Ruling by the Sword of Conquest, not the
Sword of Justice, so that of late, most of the Nobility, and great numbers of
the Commonalty have adhered to young Pandio^s Interest, Son to Agis, who is now
up in Arms, and has seized upon most of the principal Cities, Forts, and
Garrisons, in the Kingdom, and grown so strong, that Hiarbas perceiving it was
not in his power to quell such a mighty force, without great hazard of his Life
and Kingdom, and loath to refer the decision of so great a controversy, to
such an unconstant unfaithful Umpire, as the Fortune of War, to accord all
differences has proffered his only Daughter Amphigenia to be joined in
marriage with Pandion, and no less than the whole Kingdom of Caonia as her
Dowry for the present, and to succeed him in the Kingdom of Thessalia, after
his Death.

These great proposals one would think would be a Sovereign remedy to heal all
differentes, the Lady Amphigenia being in all respects so incomparably
excellent, that none but would esteem themselves gainers, to exchange a Kingdom
for the possession of her; Her eyes containing more precious Gems, than ever
yet adorned a Princes Diadem; her fingers Scepters for the God of Love, such as
all Kingly Scepters must do homage to. If your eyes ever were blessed with the
sight of her, I am sure you would say, that none but would refuse a Crown, to
be Crowned with her Love, much less would any reject such a Paragon, laden not
only with all Heavenly perfections, but with Earthly Crowns and Scepters,
having one Kingdom in present possession, and another in reversion, and all to
purchase Pandions consent to his own happiness, which notwithstanding he more
blind than the Fortune that does attend him sees not, but proceeds in his
warlike preparations, and resolves to have all or none, whether it be evil
Counselors that inconsiderately stimulate him to these rash proceedings, or
what the reason is, some conjecture, few know, and most admire. But however
these two things are known to be the main obstructers of our peace, the one is,
Pandion has long been in love with a Nun, who by reason of her indispensable
vow, cannot consent to his desires, so that he is resolved not to purchase a
Kingdom with the loss of his Love, which he conceives he can obtain by force.
The other is, the Lady Amphigenia has such a perfect Antipathy against all
men, (but her Father, which nature forbids, lest it should contradict it self,)
that she abho^s the sight of any, and will not endure to hear of marriage,
though upon the most advantageous and honorable terms, and with the most
excellent and absolutely complete person the whole world could afford. And her
Father Hiarbas, taking exceeding joy and delight in her, accounting her the
only prop and staff of his age, has granted her this request, that as she has
vowed, that if ever she become an Amorist, and place her affections upon any
person, she will never join her self in marriage without her Fathers consent,
so neither shall he enjoin her marriage with any without hers. And moreover
has obtained this, that none shall so much as make suit to her, or once behold
her, without their mutual consent; And who should dare ignorantly or otherwise
to cast an intruding look into that Bath and Garden whither she frequently
resorts to sport her self with her Female companions, forfeit no less than
their eyes for their saw^y presumption. And that was the reason that I beckned
to you to come away with speed, not daring engage my self to run so great a
hazard as to go to inform you of your error, which otherwise civility would
have obliged me to, lest we should all be ensnated, and then my punishment had
been equal, if not exceeding yours. (...) five of Pandions Knights were riding
over that hill, and being exceedingly taken with the gallantry of the place,
stood awhile to gaze, ignorant what would be the event, and it happened that at
the same time King Hiarbas, and his Daughter Amphigenia were walking together
in the Garden, and no sooner espied them, but sent several Knights after them,
who overtook and apprehended them, and brought them to the King, to whom they
acknowledged who they were, and humbly craved of him, that since their chief
crime was ignorance, and their sight as precious as their lives, they might dye
like men, by the valiant hands of some of his hardy Knights, who durst
encounter them. Some of Hiarbas Knights being present, provoked with so bold a
challenge, begged of the King to permit the combat, who after much persuasions
granted it; but because Pandions Knights were then unprovided of all
accoutrements fit for the duels, and Hiarbas Knights scorning to take any
dishonorable advantage, the day was appointed, which will be about three days
hence, the place in an open plain, equally distant from Hiarbas palace, and
Pandions Castle.

Danpion hearing this story was struck with such a maze of distracting
thoughts, that all the whole strength of reason could hardly curb, despairing
of ever obtaining his Kingdom, or her whom he prized above it, and amazed to
hear that another had usurped his name and power, all which he endeavored to
conceal, as well as his unbridled passions would permit. But both he and
Periander, betraying by their looks the thoughts of their mind, that they were
desirous of some private conference, the Gentleman withdrew and left them to
their desired privacy, when after some discourses that passed betwixt them,
they concluded that the only way to accomplish their ends, was for the one to
insinuate himself into the Kings favor, the other into the Impostors, that so
they might be informed and inform each other of the most private determinations
of them both, and by that means foment new divisions in either party, and
interrupt any reconcilement betwixt them, and so in time destroy them both; and
then Danpion engaged, that if ever he attained to the Crown, he would raise
what forces he was able, and invade Corinth for the regaining of Florinda. And
(said Danpion) the fates themselves could not have devised a more fit and happy
opportunity than this that now presents it self, for when the combat is, we
will stand at such a distance, where unseen of any, we may behold which party
has the advantage, and are most probable to prove victorious, and which
declineth, and said he, if Hiarbas Knights are much worsted then will I come in
and defend them, and if I chance to prove a victor, do you then immediately
come and make a challenge to me, which I Will accept, and after a few skirmishes
betwixt us, you may kill my Horse, and with some other accidents, that our wits
refined in the heat of courage, will be then pregnant to invent, you may disarm
me and give me my Life. And the same part shall you act if Pandions Knights are
overcome, by which means we may both be accepted of, the one by Hiarbas, the
other by Pandion. Periander much approved of his witty politic advise, and
willingly embraced what Danpion had propounded.

The day being come, whereon Mars was to be the bloody arbitrator between the
two discording parties, Danpion and Periander having fitly armed themselves for
their intended enterprise, rode to the place appointed, where they found the
Tents were pitched, and two Scaffolds erected on either side the lists, covered
with crimson velvet, and Chairs of cloth of Gold within, the one for Hiarbas,
the other for Pandion, each holding a golden Rod in his hand, and attended
according to agreement, with two hundred armed Knights.

Then came Lord Petronius, clothed in a robe of Gold, that by consent of both
was chosen Lord High Constable for that day, and entered the Lists, before whom
came sixty Gentlemen and Squires, bearing two Royal swords before him, the one
s^eathed, as Lieutenant to Hiarbas, signifying that the power of his sword was
invested with sovereign authority; and the other naked, as Pandions Lieutenant,
betokening that as he was unjustly stripped from his power by the sword, so he
would defend his just right, naked, from any false deluding glosses, with the
sword.

After them followed two Heralds clothed with the Apparel of their Office, and
carrying two Coats of Arms, the one belonging to Hiarbas, being his Coat,
quartered with the Arms of the two Kingdoms of Thessaly and Caonia, and the
other Pandions Arms, quartered only with the Arms of Thessalia. After them many
young Pages, in Vermilion Satin, richly embroidered with Gold.

The Lord Constable having surrounded the Camp, and viewed it every where, he
caused the Kings Heralds to make this proclamation, in the name of King
Hiarbas, that if Fortune should incline to his adverse party, and his Knights
should be conquered, he pronounced freedom for any hardy Knight (excepting
those appointed to guard his person) that out of loyalty to their King, and to
defend his just Authority, and to merit honor, would hazard his person against
the Conquerors, to encounter them, at the holding of the Kings golden Rod, and
if he overcame, he should be rewarded, according to his high merits. The same,
mutatis mutandis, was also proclaimed by Pandions Herald.

Then entered the Combatants into the Lists, where after the sounding of the
Trumpets, and other warlike noises, that were the terrible preludes to a more
terrible and ill-agreeing Music, of breaking of Lances, clashing of Armor,
neighing of horses, and resounding of blows that presently followed. The
Hiarbian Knights, as scorning that their valor should be tried by condemned
Rebels, who were rather desperate than courageous, gave them so fierce a
rancounter, as if they meant at once to swallow them up with an overflowing
tide of valor. But this torrent of fury was soon stopped by a more violent
Cataract of rage from the Pandionians, who fought for their lives, but the
other only for their honors, so that the shivered Lances slew in pieces, some
one way, and some another, as if they had sled to avoid the madness of their
guiders. But the place was soon supplied by the merciless swords, wherewith
they so minced each other, steeping their flesh in one another blood, as if
each had been an infernal Cook sent from Hell, to dress a Breakfast for Pluto.
So that terror it self grew more terrible, by being dressed in a terrible garb.
The glittering of swords, the shining of gilded Armor, that at first made
terror it self delightful, being now totally defiled and defaced with blood,
dust, wounds, and fractured bones, enclosed with mangled flesh, and that again
defended with broken Armor.

In fine fortune had long been dubious and indifferent, whom to bestow the
victory on, till at length Zethus and Alcanor the two principal Hiarbian
Knights, being too confident of their valor, that had rendered them triumphant,
over so many victorious Champions, too frequently engaged themselves, in the
midst of their enemies, and never retreated without some notable marks of
their Antagonists resolute fury, until at last their lives streamed out with
their blood; which the other three perceiving, as if with them, they had lost
their valor and all sense of honor, seeing themselves exceeded both in number
and resolution, they retired, endeavoring to save their lives, though with the
irreparable loss of their honor. King Hiarbas observing this, waved his golden
rod, whereupon came several Knights, rushing into the Lists, contending which
should be foremost; but Danpion watching his opportunity came in soonest, so
that by the determination of the Lord High Constable, he had the precedence,
and the Combat was allotted him, with these conditions, That he was to fight
with them successively, and not at once, and that if he conquered he should not
be engaged to encounter with any more than one fresh Knight, that would
undertake to defend Pandions interest. Then entering the Lists, apparelled in
sky-colored Armor, where the firmament seemed to be over-cast with Clouds,
excepting in some few places, where the tenuity of the Air would not so
forcibly resist his rays, and there the Sun was painted to peep through, and
steal a view of the Earth, so to the life, that the reflection of the Sun Beams
from that counterfeit Sun delineated in Pandions Armor, made the dazzled
beholders believe, they saw a Pare^^^s.

On the Cloud there was engraven this Impressa, Hope appears. In his shield he
had a Cancer. His horse was of a coal black, but his furniture all of silver
Swans, whose gli^tering made it look like Stars at midnight. The Trumpets being
sounded, Scodius came forth, but in such a bloody posture, and so deformed with
wounds, that Danpion could hardly distinguish, whether he was a man or a
monster, but ere they had exchanged many blows, Danpion perceiving himself much
to overpower him, disdaining to conquer a conquered man, referred the victory
to his horse, who enraged with some blows he received, fell into his Career,
and over-turned both Scodius and his horse, and with his hinder food struck the
wind out of his body; the Chirurgions having conveyed him away into his Tent.

The second, which was Gentius, appeared in the Lists, but he having lost his
right eye, Danpion had the better aim at his blind side, so that having a
dexterous and steady hand to direct his horse, and his horse as nimble to
observe the motions of his hand, he ere Gentius was aware, cut off his right
hand; so that he lost both weapon, hand and all, and had also lost his life,
had he not begged it of Danpions hand.

The third that came was Massurius, who encountered Danpion, with another manner
of violence than his predecessors, his confidence and resolution being chiefly
augmented by the prophecy of a blind Astrologer, who some few days before had
told him, that he should dye by an intemperate satisfying of an immoderate
thirst, and therefore fearless of Danpions sword, he boldly and fiercely
charged him, confiding in that prediction: but his own rashness soon unridled
the meaning, for Danpion gave such a wound overthwart his mouth, from whence
such an inundation of blood streamed down his throat, that having two mouths,
that sluce-like exonerated themselves into that narrow gullet, soon satisfied
his unsatiable blood-thirstiness, by putting him in a capacity never to thirst
more.

Then came Hypenor, who assaulted Danpion with such an impetuous storm of rage,
as if he thought all valor had centred in him, which preserved by the
impenetrable superficies of his Steely Armor, would protect him from the
destructive influence of that traversing Planet, whose terrible (though
beautiful) aspect, had struck such a kind of delightful terrifying amazement
into the spectators, and amazing terror into his enemies; but he soon sound that
Danpions sword had made large Pores in his Armor, through which he had too
frequent recourse to, and intimacy with his body; but the (...) of blood did
but augment the surging Sea of rage, so that elevated with a transporting
magnaminity, (...) gave such a blow, as cleft Danpions shield, Armor, Breast,
and all, and had reached his heart, had not the suddenness of the stroke made
his horse startle back. Danpion seeking to revenge his injury, conjuring all
his spirits into his ^^newy arm resolving to give a plenary requital, lets slye
at him, with all his might and courage, but Hypenor awarding his blow, it light
upon his horse, which stunned with the strength and fury of it, stumbled and
fell upon his rider, so that whereas before, his horse bore him, he now bears
his horse, which Danpion perceiving alighted, and in a Martial scorn stamped
with his victorious foot upon his bruised paunch with such a madness, that the
blood issued out of Hypernors mouth, but completing his victory, he buried his
dagger in his bowels.

The fifth and last was Machaon, but he approving himself, rather a Forlorn than
a Reserve, seeing so many puissant Champions conquered before him, and
perceiving himself to faint through want of blood, but more through want of
valor, he came with unbended brows, and a flattering look to Danpion,
extending his arm, intending to deliver up his Weapon. But Danpion thinking he
had contemned his youth, more en^aged with those glozing looks, than he could
be with the most grim threatening and stern visage, the countenance of a
Hercules could have framed, gave Machaon so fierce a blow on his head, that
down he fell, shaking his heels, as if he spurned at heaven, because it allowed
him no more protection, or as if he strove to ride in the Air, since his horse
proved such an unfaithful supporter.

Scarce had Pandion given the signal, by shaking his golden rod, but Periander
appeared in the Lists, his horse was of a Chestnut color, on his Bases and
Caparison was embroidred two gilded Eagles, which spreading their Wings, with
every motion, made the horse seem as if he flew. On his Armor was painted a
waving Sea, which cast such a reflection, as the water does, when the Sun in
the Meridian views it. On his shield, for his Impressa, he had the Fish called
Cantharus. The word was, Living constant, though living in unconstancy.

They no sooner saw each other, but they charged with such a dissembled fury,
as if at the first shock they meant no less than to send each other to the dark
infernal Regions, when as they meant nothing less, for if they hit, they missed
of their intents, but if they missed, they hit of their will. And yet with such
guileful Art, casting a mist of rage before the spectators eyes, each
assaulting, and retorting with such stormy Cuffes, and counterbuffes, as when
they mist, it was imputed to the Defenders skill, not the Offenders will. The
Lances being broken, they drew out their swords, and with a counterfeited
gallant bravery, encountered each other, but Danpion feigning a faintness, which
his horse Caparisoned with blood, and his Armor of the same dye, not a little
confirmed, tumbled off his horse upon the ground, and with the fall, brake his
sword, which Periander perceiving, pretending to use the favor of occasion,
alighted, and would have redoubled his blows, but the Lord Constable commanded
the contrary, affirming, that it was neither according to the Law of Arms, and
true Chivalry, much less to principles of Honor, to kill a disarmed man, and
one that had disabled himself with the Conquest of so many. Periander told
them, that they fought not for their own honors, but for the interest of their
Princes, and he was assured, private quirks must ever veil to public
concernments, and therefore craved the Combat might be concluded. The
Constable Replied, that his will must veil to his commands, and they had
already put a period to it.

Periander in fine, with a seeming unpersuableness, was forced to consent. All
being dismissed, the two Champions Danpion and Periander, that had defended the
differing quarrels with such puissant bravery, were received with all honor and
applause, into the several Camps, especially Danpion, who had showed
incredible Gallantry in all the Combats, so far exceeding the expectations of
any from such a youth, that it was to admiration of all, so that there was none
that did not bear a part in the Consort of his praises, some commending him for
his graceful deportment on his horse, how fast, steady and straight he sat,
how he made him perform all his necessary motions, with such time-ordered
skill, as that his hand and the horse seemed to move both together, as if the
horse and rider had both willed together, and the same, or rather both had the
same will. Others for his dextrous management of his Lance, how the advancing
it from his thigh, the couching it in his rest, and the letring it sink
downwards, seemed so to be done, as if they could hardly discern whether they
were done at all, whilst their appearing not to be done, made the doing more
delectable and graceful. Some extolled him for his force and Cleodora and
Periander page: 1. 6. etc.

courage, others for his beauty, which as it rendered him more delightful, so
his valor more admirable, that one that seemed more fit for the soft Camps of
Venus, should be a Scholar of so high a Classis, in the School of Mars.

In fine, their disagreeings in the matter of his praise, made the more
agreeable Music in the harmony of his applause. Neither was the King a less
admirer of him, but vehemently desired his abode with him, telling, that his
great worth had made him ambitious of having such a Phoenix to adorn his Court.
Danpion replied, that his Court already abounded with persons of such
incomparable worth, that he should be no other ornament to it than as a spot in
the face of the Sun, or as blackness is the foyl of beauty, and he presumed
that it was the luster of their merits, that had dazzled him, and obtruded an
erroneous estimation of him, which otherwise his over-peircing judgment would
not entertain. And since your Majesty is pleased (said he) to term me a
Phoenix, although its not my happiness to merit it by any thing else, yet it
shall by this, that my fortunes, life and honor, shall be ready to be
sacrificed, when the rays of your commands shall enkindle, and I should account
such an immolation, as the greatest felicity the heavens could bestow, it being
the only way to consecrate me to an eternity of honor, among posterity; Acts
of Loyalty to ones Prince, being as embalming spices, to the names of faithful
subjects. Oh that it were my fortune to expire in such a nest of spices,
inflamed by your Royal Mandates. Let this command (answered the King) to remain
with me, be for an exploration of your obedience, which you so highly profess.
Let me be stigmatized with an eternal brand of infamy (said Pandion) if ever I
let a command drop from your mouth in vain.

Thus with these, and some other expressions, was Pandions abode there
concluded, and he was led among them to the Palace.

And thus did Danpion play this first Act of that real interlude, whose Scenes
as they had been hitherto generally mourntul, Fortune dressing her self in
Tragic attire, so they continued; for during the space of several Months, that
he remained in the Court, he never could have opportunity, either to reveal
himself to Amphigenia, the Mistress of his heart, the main reason of his
continuance there, nor to meet with his friend Periander, at the place
appointed, and agreed betwixt them. Some few groundless hopes he flattered
himself withal, was his only support, which daily increased, as his favor
with the King increased, which was also every day more and more, so that in
conclusion, within a short time, his graceful deportments, unconquerable
valor, acute wit, and all beyond his years, and that which added grace to all,
his delicate beauty, were all as so many letters of admission into the Kings
heart; so that nothing of moment was done in Court or Kingdom, without Danpions
consent and advice. All Offices and favors were distributed and dispensed by
him; no affairs of consequence in the State, but he had an influence upon and
inspection into. A great solecism in Policy for so great a Politician as
Hiarbas was to commit, for by these favors, did he weave a webb to entangle
himself to his utter ruin. Princes had need beware, whom they embrace in the
bosoms of their affections, much more whom they entertain in their Cabinet
Counsels. For as the eye being the most tender part of the body, will therefore
least endure any injurious usage, and we are most careful to preserve it; being
the directrix of the whole body* so a Princes understanding being the eye of a
Kingdom, which ought to be of a Lynceous Sagacity and acuteness in the
discerning of Counsels and Counselors, and be able to pierce not only into the
wisdom of their advice, but integrity of their very thoughts and purposes,
therefore most perilous to have it corrupted by the poysonings of unfaithful
Counsel, which like false Mediums represent the state of things, in another
posture than as they are in themselves, and by that means their Government is
under-min'd, their honor eclipsed, and a gap made for all innovations. This
Hiarbas considered not, his judgment being blinded by his affection, but let
all things be swayed by Danpion, who notwithstanding was little satisfied with
all, whilst he was barred all means of obtaining her, whom he preferred before
all. And one Evening as he walked out, to feed his love-starved heart, with the
sweet repast of his fancy, he heard a voice deliver it self in such ravishing
Airs, as might have compared with the Spheres dancing harmony, and drawing
near, the more to enrich and refine his thoughts, with those heart-pleasing
strains, with the distance interrupted, he saw a Lady playing on a Lute, with
accents so sweet and soft, as if each note had been a cloze of Angels Music;
the Air with such sweet vibrations danced after her fingers, as if the wind of
it self had breathed Musical Tones, and drawing near, he heard her sing this
Song.

The Song.
Phoebus lend me thy fulgent rays
To pencill out my joy,
Free from annoy,
None else can to the life express,
My heart-transporting happiness:
Gild with thy Beams my happy days,
Expel each interposing Cloud
That seeks to mask thy face, and shroud
Thy golden locks, and dim my joy,
Free from annoy.
On lively pieces, Artists cast
A pleasing darkning shade
On what they have made:
Umbriferous strokes of black despair,
My infant joys, soon would impair,
And them compel to expire their last,
Should Fortune seek, out of her hate,
In striving to delineat
My bliss, to cast despairs dark shade,
On what she' as made.
You rolling Spheres, lend me your tones,
To warble out my joy,
Free from annoy:
A Lutes sweet note-producing womb
Is far more fit to be a tomb
To interr the joys of mournful ones:
For her best strains are sweet and sad,
And makes the hearer sad and glad,
According discords; but my joy
Has no annoy,
You Quire above, lend me your Lays,
To twist a heavenly verse,
Joys to rehearse:
My wit's too barren to express
My words-transcending happiness,
Unless you it refine and raise;
Draw wits Elixar from the Nine
Patrons of Poesy, so that mine
Heightened with that, may in a verse
My joys rehearse.
Sure Love's no Virtue, for it moves
Its heart-inflaming beams
Sill in extremes:
If deep despair, racking annoy,
But if sure hope, there is rapting joy;
He loves not, that meanly loves;
Rather it is Virtues quintessence,
The spirits of their excellence,
Thesauriz'd in its Hive of beams,
Still in extremes.
Lovers have Poles to which they tend,
But if in love the excel,
No parallel:
Or if they have, these Parallels kiss,
And Poles do meet, which makes the bliss,
In Lovers hearts, which has no end.
Then hence all cumbrous grief be gone,
Here Is room for naught but joy alone,
Our hearts do meet, our Loves excel
All parallel.


Having ended her Song, there arose a Knight that had lain undiscovered on the
ground, and taking the Lady by the hand, thus proffered to salute her, Come my
divided Soul (said he) my sweetest half, let me fix on thy Rosy Lips, the seal
of my constant affection; and let our kisses be as the endorsements of that
delight, which by mutual vows and stipulations written in our hearts, with a
Pen plucked out of Cupids Wing, we have obliged our selves to bless each other.

Danpion calling to mind, he had heard that voice, and therefore presumed he
might not he unacquainted with the person, drawing near to see who it should
be, he preceived it to be his friend Periander, whereat not a little rejoiced,
he demanded of him, if that was not the Lady Florinda, which honored him with
her affections, for (said he) my dubious thoughts collect so much, from that
Song which her Siren voice lately warbled out. Periander acknowledged, she was.

Then Danpion turning to Florinda, thus accosted her, Madam, said he, accept of
this rude salute as an oblation to your Beauty, where the glory of all
perfection is enshrined, and which makes me esteem Perianders felicity above
expression, and such that were he not Periander, I could freely indulge my
thoughts to envy him, but my heart is wholly devoted to his happiness, and
mine is involved in his.

After mutual gratulations that past between them, Danpion requested Florinda
to honor him with the relation of the manner of her escape, from Acastus King
of Coninth, and how she fortuned to meet with Periander, which she consented
unto, and thus declared.

The fates (said she) who expose not their decrees to vulgar view, though for a
time they seemed to thwart my desires, and bury my hopes in the grave of
despair, yet they intending in conclusion, (as the event manifests) to crown me
with my long-wished-for joy, to bring about their resolutions, thus ordered it.

It happened that Novellus the Kings Nancius that brought me that sad citation
to the Court, no sooner saw me, but he fell into his Masters distemper, and
grew fondly amorous, and carried me to the Palace, but put me in the custody of
Octavia, a Lady, as great an admirer of him, as he was of me, and told the
King, that the present state of my body required purification, ere I was fit
for his Royal embraces; which Octavia no less watchful than Argus, nor jealous
than Juno, readily confirmed, of all which I was ignorant, but amazed at my
imprisonment, and what should be the reason of my invitation to the Court,
until at length privately inquiring of Abra, Octavias Woman, she fully
informed me of my condition; I perceiving by Novellus faint sighs, and
mind-disclosing countenance, his passionate affection, resolved to make a
virtue of necessity, and by his means to make a way for escape, and therefore
cast frequent favorable glances ^t him, and sometimes let fall ambiguous
expressions, to encourage him in his affection, and the more to provoke
Octavia's jealousy, who nor able to suppress those ardent flames that run
thorough all her veins, presently suggested to the Queen the whole matter, who
no sooner heard it, but her heart was arrested with the Tyrant pangs of
Jealousy, in as great a measure as Octavia; so that between them both they
thus plotted my destruction, either to convey me privately put of the Kingdom,
or to send me to Deaths cold confines, with a poisonous drop, secretly infused
into my cup, and then by commixing some dangerous drug with my Physic, bereave
me of my life, and them of their jealous fears. But my courteous stars, whose
benign rays were as so many Bucklets to protect me from the insolence of these
two Furies, would not permit this horrid contrivement to take effect; For one
morning when Octavia had resolved to attempt her intended murder, Novellus as
he was wont came to visit me; but Octavia knowing how contrary to her bloody
design Novellus presence was, refused him admittance into my chamber,
pretending my indisposition of body rendered me unfit for any society for the
present. Novellus the more desirous of entrance pressed so rudely, that with
the struggling Octavia spilt the venomous draught which she had prepared for me;
which my Dog presently licked up, and fell into a languishing distemper, that
in few days killed him. I perceiving this, not daring to trust my self with one
so barbarously perfidious, resolved to go to the King, and impetrate a
releasment from my imprisonment, or if it was denied me, to effect my freedom
by a plot which I then contrived. Accordingly choosing a convenient opportunity
when the King was solitary, and none to interrupt or observe me, I went into
his presence, and fell on my knees, and thus addressed my self to him.

Royal Sir, (said I) summoned by your Majesty's Command, I thought it my duty
to attend your pleasure, but some in the court, I presume unknown to your
Highness, have not only restrained me from the performance of my duty, but from
all liberty; so that my humble suit to your Highness now is, to supplicate a
freedom from such restraint, and I cannot but hope* your Majesty will not
remain inexorable, if you retain your (...) clemency*

Before I could have ended my speech, the King arose, and with a smiling
countenance took me by the hand, and made me arise; Come said he, my hearts
sweet Jailer, let me ingraft thee on my heart with these embraces, and let us
mingle our united souls with mutual kisses, this is my pleasure and the
pleasure I command.

Oh Sir, said I, will you thus contaminate your unstained honor with so foul a
blu^; you whom the world has honored for a Prince, that could govern your
most exorbitant passions as well as your kingdoms, and by that means fabricked
a kingdom of honor in each noble breast, who pay you the constant tribute of
assiduous Prayers, for your long life, and whose perpetually admiring thoughts
are your subjects, will you now expose your glorious name to the blasts of
vulgar opprobry for the obtaining of a little bessial pleasure? By that time I
had said this, there came in one of the Nobles, who seeing the King to frown
upon him, for this interruption of his privacy, suddenly retired, and lest us
to our selves. The Kings lascivious (...) were not all extinguished with what I
said, but he continued his endeavors to obtain his lustful desires, but in a
more gentle manner than before, using nothing but inticements and persuasions,
until in the conc^usion I seemingly consented to meet him the next day in the
private walks, where none were admitted without special license, whither the
King was wont to resort for his private meditations; but with this proviso,
that the Queen should be conveyed the next morning some distance from the
palace, lest her jealous vigilance should deprive us of our happiness. The King
was as ready to consent to that as my self, so that with a countenance
bewraying much affection, and how ill I brooked so long protraction, I parted
from him, and hasted to Abra, whom I made the constant depository of all my
secrets, and bid her go to the Queen, and with a great deal of pretended zeal
to her honor, inform her of the plighted vows between the King and me, and of
every circumstance of our agreement, and advise her to attire her self in my
habit, and Abra in the Queens, and so they might discover and prevent our
libidinous machinations. Abra the next morning, according to my request,
carries some of my vestments to the Queen, and as I had counseled her, informs
the Queen, and persuades her to dress her self in those garments of mine, which
to that end she pretended she had secretly conveyed out of my chamber, and
brings the Queens robes along with her, as I had requested.

The Queen stung with this report, greedy of revenge, impatient of delay, thus
disguised hasts to the walks, which I being acquainted withal by the means of
Abra, put on the Queens Robes, and in as majestic a posture as I could frame,
seated my self in the Queen^ bedchamber: But long it was not ere my ignorant
deliverers came, and supposing me to be the Queen, submissively delivered this
message.

Madam (said they) the Kings Majesty attends your presence below, intending to
bless himself with your company abroad this morning, to alienate those griefs
from his breast, which your absence has revived. Many persuasions you may
conceive were superfluous to me, who desired nothing more than this happy means
of releasment. Therefore thus attended, I rode abroad in the Kings coach, some
miles from the Palace, until I perceived a place where I thought an
opportunity to escape presented it self: Then I desired the coachman to set me
down, for I told him the time and place seemed to invite to contemplation, and
so commanding him to wait until I came, I walked out; but when I thought my
self out of his fight, I ran to a Town adjacent, whence the next day I went to
range the wide universe in search of my dear Periander, and hearing of his
abode in Thessalia, hither I fled on the wings of Love, and by the means of
some Ladies in the court, who have showed extraordinary favor to me, I got to
be an attendant to the Princess Amphigenia, who is so male affected to the Male
sex, that she will not admit any to have a view of her, not retain any of her
Ladies of Honor, whom she finds in the least degree amorously affected; so
that now I am chained with as great a bondage as before, though not so
dangerous and dishonorable. And as for my happy meeting with the Crown of my
joys Periander, it was this evening, that walking out to take the fresh air, I
heard a Lute, so admirably played on, that methought I felt my very soul tuned
in consort with the strings; so that nothing would satisfy me till I had
resolved my self who was the Author of those melodious strains, but ere I had
taken many steps, I plainly perceived it to be Periander, the sweet Saint, to
whom I had gone so far in Pilgrimage,

Florinda having finished her relation, Danpion and Periander informed each
other of the state of affairs in both Factions, how they much debilitated the
strength of both parties, the one by persuading the King, and the other the
counterfeit Pandion, to turn out many, and frown on most of those Lords and
commanders, who were most faithful to their trust, and placing such of
mercenary spirits, who must be cudgel'd to loyalty with a silver wand, and
others, that had revolted through disaffection, and the secret insinuations of
private persons set on work by them for that purpose; and farther, how that
many great persons on either side, that might prove potent and irremoveable
obstructions to their germinating design, that through disesteem they had
caused to turn from the one side, they had also disobliged them on the other,
by reposing little or no confidence at all in them, that so they might remain
as Neuters, and finding Incivility from both parties, they might be affected to
neither, and in fine when their contrivements were come to maturity, Pardion
discovering himself as he intended, these might be the persons that might
defend his interest. And for men of service and action, that still adhered to
their engagements, and that by their magnanimous exploits had fixed themselves
in favor past all remove, they endeavored that as little countenance might be
showed, and reward conferred as possible, thereby to suffocate these Martial
sparks, in those brave loyal spiri^s, which every blast of infamy blown at
their Masters honor, was ready to increase to a flame of revenge, to consume
the detractors to Ashes. Then they agreed on the time and place where they
would meet, to acquaint each other with their Plots and Counsels, that so what
the one had advised to or dissuaded from, by the others assistance might take
effect, and both be confirmed and fixed in their Masters favor.

And lastly they concluded, that Florinda should yet continue to wait on the
Princess, who having so great an influence on her Father, by the mediation of
Florinda, many things might be done, which Danpion would be unwilling to appear
in. After mutual te^^imonies of great affection, they parted to their
particular habitations.

Danpion that had consumed many days in fruitless endeavors to get but a
minutes conference with Amphigenia, could not during all that time that he
remained in Hiarbas Court, by all the subtilties his Wit could invent, once
bless his eyes with the sight of her, but he daily pined in the midst of
excess; so that his custom was to withdraw himself frequently from all society,
to converse with his thoughts, accounting himself never more accompanied, than
when secluded from all company, entertaining himself with soliloquies and
passionate discourses; one while lamenting his hopeless condition, then
extolling the beauties of Amghigenia; sometimes charging himself with extreme
folly, and baseness of spirit, that he was not able to bridle his passion. Has
propitious heavens (would he say) profusely showred down their choicest favors
on me, and shall my ungrateful soul repine, because it is their pleasure to
detain Amphigenia from me? It may be the Powers Divine sent her hither, to
triumph over the rest of Natures works, and to show in her Snowy skin, how pure
a grain they were able to (...) and fearce ou^, out of the course Elements; and
in her heart-captivating eyes, what Jewels they yet retain, far exceeding any
that ever yet adorned our Mother Earth. (...) may be they esteem her, as she
justly merits, too fair a transcript of divine excellencies, to be blu^^ed by
humane embraces, and intend to six another Virgo in the heavens, having
stellified her on earth, with so many heavenly beauties and graces, as she is
already grown a Cons^ellation. Shall I then oppose the powers sublime, that are
able to diffect me to invisible, to indivisible Atoms, when with their bounty
they have so liberally bribed me? Am I not above expectation securely riveted
in the Kings bosom? Am I not placed next the Throne in power? Do not all the
inferior Orbs receive motion from me, as their second moveable? and all powers
dye or vegetate according as they receive warmth from the Sunshine of my
favor? What can be more satisfactory to a lofty spirit than Supremacy, and
shall I lament because the Stars of Amphigenia's eyes refuse to show their
luster at the high noon of my prosperity? Amphigenia did I say? Can I name that
name and not adore it? Could I in a Poetic rapture admire her transcendent
beauty, and not be thought an Idolizer, I would translate my very Soul into a
verse, that might express the most pure Elixar of my Love, which if I thought
she would vouchsafe the reading, I would dissolve my heart into a tear, which
black with constant griefs might serve for Ink to characterize my mind. With
these and the like speeches would he bewail his despairing and desperate
affection. All his hope was in Florinda, whom he had prevailed with to be his
Intercessor to Amphigenia, to speak in his commendation, and to dive into her
thoughts, what she could, and to try whether it were possible to root out that
humor in her, so antipathetical to the Malesect, and insect her with amorous
inclinations, and lastly to advise him how he might procure a view of her. To
all which he received little satisfaction, the last excepted; For Florinda had
discovered a secret vault under ground that conducted to Amphigenia's Chamber,
this she informed Danpion off, who as Florinda had advised him, on an Evening
took a Lute, and stole to Amphigenia's Chamber, and there behind the hangings
thorough a crevice unseen, he might discern all over the room; on whose Arched
top, some rare Apelles had deciphered many excellent Hieroglyphics, devises
and Impressa's. There was This^e newly returned from the Cave, where she had
hid her self from the Lioness, and beholding her lover Pyramus fallen on his
sword, she stood as if she was statuized, the Painter having pourtrayed in her
countenance, the passions of grief, grown insensibly profound, and confounding
admiration, so to the life, that the beholder might see a contention between
them both, and yet a predominancy of neither. Not far distant was Narcissus,
kneeling over a Fountain, beholding his face in the Crystal streams,
augmenting them with his tears, and with a sweet lovely pining countenance
lamenting, that such a thin transparent Wall should part him from his imaginary
love, whilst the feigned species so lively reflected back his sweetly
languishing looks, that one could not tell, which most desired the others
embraces, which most lamented and pined for their unhappy separation. There
stood the fair Phrygian Shepherd giving the golden Ball to Venus, who receiving
it with a pretty insulting smile, looks on Juno and Pallas, whilst scorn
revenge and envy display themselves in Juno's countenance, but a modest blush
veils Pallas's beauty. There was Jupiter courting Io, with a look discovering
both a venereous affection, and a fear to be discovered by jealous Juno, who
was painted to come out of the Clouds with such ^lashes of rage from her eyes,
as if she had been a thudnerbolt; and here the Painter used such Art, that if
you looked on the one side, it was as here is represented; but if on the other,
you might see Io meramorphosed into a Cow, therein imitating Jupiter himself,
who (as Poets feign) was ^ain to transform his Concubine into a Heifer,
thinking thereby to hide his salacity under a Cows Hide, from his wives
jealousy. Hard by this sat Hercules in woman's attire, spinning at Queen
Omphales commandment, with a furious countenance, and a Beard like the Tow on
his Distaff; who would have moved a Stoics spleen to laughter, whilst the
Queen sits in State, and with a Majestic smile beholds him. By these in
Landskips was double-topt Parnassus, Atlas-like supporting the Clouds, on his
side sat the Nine Muses, and Apollo the President of that Virgin Quire; from
his top straggling rivulets streamed down. Near that was Mercury like a
Shepherds Boy, toying with Hebe under a spreading Oak. In one part Ganymede,
carried by an Eagle up to the Clouds, and wanton Jupiter, looking down from
heaven, with a greedy delight on his fair Boy, and blaming his winged
Ambassador for his loytering. In another, was Phaeton, thrown among the Clouds,
and Titans ^aging Palfreys, having broke their reigns, galloping through the
flaming sky, the Chariot tumbling, and Heaven and Earth of a blaze, as if the
Elements had exchanged their places; the hungry Fire forsaking its lofty
dwelling, and coming to feed on the earth, the Clouds dispossessed of their Airy
mansion by the smoke, and the Earth and Water ascending, only refined and
minced into lesser A^omes, and in the midst of all this Combustion Phaeton
falls into Padus; His sisters bewailing his misfortune, weeping, as if those
flames had exhaled all their moisture, or as if with the moisture of their
tears they endeavored to quench those flames, are turned into Trees, but so
retaining their natural forms, as it was difficult to say, whether the drops
fell from dewy boughs, or tears from their eyes. Under a Canopy represented
like a Cloud, held up by four winged Angels, whose golden plumes spread served
for Curtains, was a rich Bed, covered with a counterpane of Tissue. The Table
was spread with Carpets, of Violet Damask, bordered with Gold. Amphigenia was
set in an Ebony Chair, covered with purple Velvet, attired in Carnation Satin,
embroidred with Roses of Gold, her hair which hung in heartintangling Curles,
was powdered with seed of Pearl, her face seemed a compendium of all those
excellencies, a treasury of all those riches that Beauty and Majesty can bestow
to make humanity adorable. Danpion that thorough the crevice could perceive
this miracle of nature, as if every beam shot from her eye had darted into him
an Enthusiasm, ravished with a kind of divine afflation he sings this Song.

You Angels that reside above,
Refine my wit to' express my Love,
And sing her praise.
In Nectars spirits let me steep
My brain, for Hyppocrene's too course,
TO would stain my wit, which wants a source,
And flowing fount of fancies deep,
To sing her praise.
Inhabit then my steril brains,
Inspire me with Seraphick strains,
To sing her pies^,
Whose each part is a Mint of heavenly treasures,
Excelling all Elizum's feigned pleasures.
Each eye's a hive of radiant beams,
Whose heavenly rays that thenceforth streams,
My soul intrance.
There Venus Doves do build their nests;
Thence Cupid shoots his fiery Darts,
Would melt and pierce the steeliest hearts,
And souls with rapting love divests,
As in a trance.
There wanton Love in ambush ^ys,
To snatch my soul out of my eyes,
And it intrance.
Ravished with her perfections, here I lie,
Wrapped in a Soul-transporting ecstasy.
Then must I lie here in a swound?
And is there none can cure my wound?
The darts themselves
That gave the wound, the wound can cure;
Love with thy wings come gently fan
My burning Soul, there is none else can
Heal me of my Love Calenture,
The darts themselves
Except (...) with Love balm,
My raging soul cannot cure nor calm.
The Darts themselves
Thus ripped with love and beauty soon would ease
My burning heart, and raging soul appease.
Pure threads of purest gold's her hair,
Which amorous hearts soon do ensnare,
All pearls transcending;
The Down that is under Angels Wings
Is not so soft, Titans bright fair
Rich dazzling tresses cannot compare
With that curled up in curious rings,
All Pearls transcending.
You heavens, come show your power and art,
Transform into a Gem my heart,
All Pearls transcending,
That having luster from her eyes, and there
Fixed, may make rings for the Gods to wear.
Ah is there none the way can find
My captived fettered ^eart to unbind,
Bound in her hair?
The more this bow-knot I unloose,
Ah me! the faster it does knit,
And striving more, I tangle it,
And wind it in an endless noose,
In her fair hair,
A bow knot, well I may it call,
Since from Loves bow is all my thrall,
Strung with her hair.
Soon would my heart be eased of all my trouble,
Would she but tie this single Love-knot double.
Her lips are beauties nests that swell
Pregnant with sweets, where graces dwell
Wrapped in Vermilion.
The Arabian Aromatic gales,
When they the blushing Roses kiss,
Breath not such sweet perfumes, as is
Her breath, which her pure lips exhales,
Wrapped in Vermilion.
Each word an Eagle soaring high
With wit, that from those lips does fly
Wrapped in Vermilion.
When she speaks, Angels listen, and the Spheres
Stand still, neglect their Music, wish the had ears.
No wonder all means prove so vain
To make her heart love entertain,
For Love is slain,
And plundered too of every sweet,
In her hard marble heart he lies,
Entombed, his shafts are in her eyes,
Her purest white's his winding sheet,
Poor Love is slain.
Her lips with his blood sprinkled are,
His wings are now become her hair,
Ah! Love is slain.
His bow is turned into her arched brow,
And thus poor Love is slain, but none knows how.
My Lute, let us sing his obsequies,
You Clouds with tears supply my eyes,
For Love is dead.
No marveil then that all things war,
Love tunes the whole worlds harmony,
Whose diapazon still does lie,
In sweet consent, where is no jar,
Ah! Love is dead.
Oh no, the wanton saucy Boy
Would with his mother sport and toy,
Love is not dead.
For which she has exiled him, and he is fled
Into my heart, and feigns that he is dead.
Amphigenia that had attended to this Song with delight and astonishment,
admiring whence the Music came, for by reason of the thickness of the
hangings, and largeness of the room, the Lutes sweet Airs were not so clearly
conveyed to her ear: But directing her steps by the sobbing voice, she came to
the hangings, behind which Danpion sat; where calling for Florinda, demanded of
her, if she knew whence those strains should come. Who replied, that it must be
some Angel that was turned inamorate, and fled to her Chamber, mistaking it for
Loves Paradise, for sure no mortal dares or can attempt (said she) so near an
approach, when restrained by your Fathers special prohibition.

Danpion hearing Amphigenia make such strict inquiry, hasted thence, lest he
should be discovered; but now the flames of Love burned with more vehemence
than before; so that the torment had been insupportable, had it not been fanned
and cooled with hope, which began to breath upon him with some gentle gusts.
For having such a passage, where undiscovered to any, he might have resort to
her Chamber, he resolved to personate some Intelligence, till he might have
free admittance to her presence, which in time he thought he might be able to
effect, by reason of Florinda's intimacy with her, who by her insinuations,
would confirm in Amphigenia's apprehensions what he should do, not to be
delusions, but realities. Accordingly the next night after, when he thought the
time of night might invite fair Amphigenia to refresh her self with sweet
slumber, he took his Lute (as before) and softly stole to her Chamber. But as
he went, his mind was filled with distracting thoughts, How well (did he say)
does this blind passage ressemble those blinder paths I thus tread to my
happiness! These dark windings, and craggy turnings, that this Vault abounds
in, methinks lightsomly represents the inexsucerable difficulties, and
inextricable intricacies, I am forced to pass thorough, and must be involved
in, ere I can arrive at any glimmerings of hope. But my comfort is, that, as
this conducts to an Elyzium, such a one, as the Gods would exchange theirs for,
such a one as the Antic Poets inspired with a prophetic as well as Poetic
fury did but typifie in their fictions; so the various windings of my unhappy
love, when my Cloudy fortune shall unmask her dusky face, will at length be
unwound, and come to a bottom, where they will center in an Elyzium of happiness.

Being come to the end of the Cave, he perceived Amphigenia fast asleep, her
Wax Taper burning by her. As she lay his eyes carved such ravishing sweets, as
transported with the violence of so many Darts, he thought he had attained the
Zenith of his felicity. The Pillow blessed with a kiss from her Cheeks, as
pregnant with delight, swelled on either side. Her eyes Canopyed in sleeps dark
veil, showed life's triumph in the Map of death. Her hand contended with the
Lawn for whiteness, and being partly covered with it looked like a Lilly
through purest Crystal. A lock that had stolen from its sweet prison, folded
in cloudy curls lay dallying with her breath, sometimes striving to get a kiss,
and then repulsed flew back, sometimes obtaining its desired bliss, and then as
rapt with joy, retreats in wanton caperings. Her body that lay arrayed, or
rather disarayed in a thin Smock, wrought with blew silk and silver, obscured
not her skin, but rather made it appear the lovelier, if lovelier it could be.
Her breasts at liberty displayed, were of so pure a whiteness, as if ones eye
through the transparent skin, had viewed the milky treasures they enclosed. Her
Violet veins that streamed in branched Rivers, seemed like Azure paths in a
milky heaven. This confluence of delights, put Danpion besides himself for a
while, but recollecting his thoughts, he took his Lute, and tuning it in
Consort with his Soul, in a Love rapture sang this Song.

Were I immured in flesh and blood,
And might enjoy so sweet a good,
I Would not exchange my blissful state,
With any earthly Potentate.
Ah now I see that beauties Darts,
Can penetrate the Angels hearts.
I see those lucid Stars that shine
In Heavens bright Orb, near the divine
Empyreal throne, though they transcend
Earths beauties all, yet love can rend
The heavens, and pierce the Azure sky,
And rapt them with loves ecstasy.
Who'd think the winged Boy could climb
Through all the starry Spheres sublime,
His quiver filled with beauties rays,
And though so blind, yet see such ways,
In heaven to steal, and durst enthrall
The very powers Angelical?
Sweet Amphigen' thy beauty rings
Through Heavens Court, each Angel sings
Thy praise, and poor I, to behold
What same had echoed there, and told,
Came thence; but now flames from thine eye.
Has sindg'd my wings, I (...) rise.
And more, this Love, a power divine,
TO enlarge his wings, has pinion*d mine:
My pain here end not; for unseen
Poor I must bear his arrows keen,
Vnpittyed, whilst she humane sense
Prefers before Intelligence.
Sure fitter it is, for such a gem
Heavens King to wear in's Diadem,
Than mortal man t'injoy alone.
What fitter may b'ingrafted on
An Angels stem, or in heaven fixed
A Star, than with such dirt commixt?
Poor fleshy puddles will but stain
This Gem, which none can scou^e again,
Time will but mask thy face with rust,
And then convert thee into dust;
Whereas an Angel ca^t ans^ate
Thee to a high immortal sta^e.
But sweetest, take thy rest, and sleep,
Whilst here I Will sit, and gaze and weep,
And strive to spend my self in groans,
And lull thee with my mournful tones;
My power extend I Will, what I can,
Fair one, to be thy Guardian.
The fates decrees are, there must none
Enjoy thee, but great Danpion,
And happy he must glut his sense,
And satiate with thy excellen^e,
Whilst I will seek all what I can,
To be to both a Guardian.
Scarce had Danpion sung the first part of the first Stanza, ere Amphigenia
awaked, and attentively listening to the Music, her watchful senses, by that
time the last was concluded, were bribed by the Musicks Charming Airs, to
re-enter Morpheus drowsy Cell, which Danpion perceiving returned, and left her
to her sweet repose.

No sooner were the shadows of the misty Night dispersed, by the Rosy mornings
purple beams, but the sleepy Deity dismissed sweet Amphigena's senses, out of
his drowzy prison, when calling to mind, what her ears had been entertained
withal, in the beginning of the Night, she began to doubt, whether it was not
a vision; but long she had not revolved these things in her ambiguous thoughts,
ere Florinda came into her Chamber, and after salutations that passed betwixt
them, Amphigenia acquainted her with the whole relation of what she heard,
demanding what her judgment was concerning it, telling her, she was persuaded
it was a delusion, for (said she) it consists not with Angelical purity to
admit of muddy passions, we may as well think a dunghill can stain the Sun
beams, because they view it, as that an Angel should be enamored with humane
beauty. Will they whom Nature has refined to such a pureness, that they seem
to be termed spirits, in that they are the very spirits and quintessential
extracts of heavenly excellencies, will they, I say, delight in such earthly
dross as we are, who are at best but well-complexioned dust, cemented with a
little moisture? our Souls, though their inferiors, could not be blurred with
fond contaminating passions, were they not immersed in flesh and blood. It Is
true, what you say, Madam, replied Florinda, but yet the loud fame of your
transcendent beauty, which Echoes from one Kingdom to another, might resound
thorough heavens hollow Arches, and the spiritual inhabitants might draw the
Azure Curtain of the sky, and gaze upon their Makers workmanship; and some one
of that winged crew, more ravished than the rest, with his Creators power and
wisdom, in framing such a composition, out of such course principles, might
descend to bless himself with a cleerer view of you, which he saw, but
imperfectly at so great a distance. I should be miserable vain (said
Amphigenia) should I heed thy words* and were it not that my constant
experience of thee confirms in me the reality of thy affection, I should think
thy hatred to me, made thee use those adulatory expressions to make me
conceited of my self, and thereby to render me ridiculous. Madam, answered
Florinda, you are above the power of adulation, no tongue can be liberal
enough, much less too profuse in your praises.

Pray forbear (said Amphigenia) unless you will incur my irreconcilable
displeasure. But (said she) what did he mean, when he said Danpion should enjoy
me, and glut his sense with me, as he termed it, must he deflour me? You put
too hard a construction on it, said Florinda, Danpion is a person of too much
honor, to commit an act so vile and dishonorable, and I am confident would kill
him that should dare to suggest so base a thought to him. I rather think that
heavenly Intelligencer had ^urned over the pages of your fate, and read your
destiny, which it seems is, that notwithstanding your strange aversness to all
men, yet Danpion is designed to be made happy with your affection, and in
conclusion, with the fruition of you, who is one, that though he cannot
challenge to himself so great deservings, as to merit you, set so adorned with
Beauty and Virtue, enriched with all things, that may make a man incomparably
complete (Nature intending to show in him, what humanity is capable of) as
methinks he seems the man that heaven has endued with these excellencies, on
purpose to make him a fit consort for you.

After these and many other the like speeches that passed betwixt them, they
heard a noise of Drums and Trumpets, and other Martial sounds, as if there were
a sudden preparation for War; but ere they could consider what should be the
cause, a Lady that attended upon the Princess Amphigenia in her Chamber, came
running panting and in an affrighted posture told her that Pandio^ was coming
with all speed with an Army to besiege the Palace, but the King her Father,
having intelligence of it was newly marched out with his guard, and as many as
could be in Arms on the sudden, intending to give him battle; and has left
Danpion to Rule and Govern the Palace in his absence.

This news did for the present sta^tle Amphigenia, until the consideration of
the justness of her Fathers cause, the valor of his person, and the continual
success that ever attended him, as if he had made a League with Fortune,
banished all affrighting Passions, and reduced her to her self; and then she
began to entertain a thought which never before entered into her mind, and that
was to see this Danpion whom the pencill of fame had painted with so many
excellencies; and in whom her Father reposed so much con^idence; and concealing
her desires, she sought all opportunities, when undiscovered she might have a
view of this darling of Nature. And perceiving her endeavors to be vain, she
secretly acquaintnd Florinda with her inten^s; who inwardly rejoicing at these
beginnings of Amphigenia's conversion from such a heresy in Nature,
endeavored to augment those desires in her; and told her that he used to
resort to the Walks frequently to meditate, and that in the Cypress Grove near
the Fountain undiscovered she might see him if she took the benefit of
opportunity when he went ab^oad, which was either in an Evening, or early in
the Morning.

Florinda having given this advice to Amphigenia, presently posts with all
haste to Danpion's Chamber, thorough a private passage, where he and she had
egreed to have their continual entercourses; and informs him of her desires,
and advises him to appear in as gallant habit, and as richly accoutred as may
be, that so if possible to slide into her affections, and (...) upon her
complying mind. Danpion, who had never been yet acquainted with any
mediocritie, grew as boundless in his joy as before he was in his grief and
despair, and observing Florinda's counsel, furnished with all rich habi^iments,
went down into the Walls just as Titans smoking Steed^ were posting to bath
themselves in the Western Waves, where accordingly, as she had told him, she
perceived Amphigenia standing in the Grove of Cypress, and peeping thorough the
leaves, with a look that betrayed rather a Feminine curiosity, than any
affection or delight. But Danpion standing on so high a precipice of happiness,
slippery with affection, could not restrain his over-fond desires from hurrying
him down into such an error, as had like to have broke the neck of his design:
For his reason being overwhelmed with such an accumulation of encouragements,
as that considering nothing but opportunity, he steals into the Grove where
Amphigenia was looking and expecting when he would return from the other end of
the Walk, and thought to have powered out such a flood of eloquence, as should
have drowned her former harsh thoughts of his Sex, and wholly conquered her
affections; but just as he was entering into his Rhetorical Oration, Amphigenia
looked back, and seeing him so near gave a shriek that ecchoed thorough the
Grove, and ran as fast as her fair Legs could carry her, whilst Danpion more
sensible of love than fear, and through this sudden amazement in a manner
sensibl^ of neither, stands still in a transporting admiration; but he was soon
recalled out of that astonishment by the beauties she discovered to his twice
wounded eye; for the saucy wind too immodestly sporting with her cloths,
disclosed that which otherwise she would have concealed: so that ere he was
gone, Florinda was come to her rescue, with some other Ladies that followed
her, which when he perceived, he secretly conveyed himself away, and thence to
his Chamber, where we (...) to bewail his own indiscretion, and the unkindness
of his hard ^ortune that succeeded him no better.

Amphigenia, who before with Danpions majestic deportment, beautiful and yet
Martial countenance, Amphigenia and Danpion page. 134.

there being a lovely mixture of Venus's sweetness, and Mars's sternness, began
to entertain such thoughts of him, as though they deserved not the title of
affection, yet might properly be termed a good esteem or liking of him, grew
now to such a mortal distaste of him, that she began to conclude with her self,
that her pretended Angel was some Impostor that Danpion had hired to delude
her; then she began to doubt of Florinda's fidelity; at length she resolved to
send her Father notice of his ignoble carriage toward her, and considering with
her self, that though she was the Kings Daughter, yet he was the Kings Minion,
and that they had need be well advised, that go about to traduce a Princes
Favorite, therefore she writ her Letter, in these insinuating terms.

Amphigenia,
to her Father King Hiarbas.
SInce my Infancy, I have ever perceived in your Majesty, such an innate
propensity to your peoples good, that you could never take any felicity in all
the Trophies, and Triumphs that Fame and Fortune conspiring with your Valor,
have erected for your eternal renow^, if the least infelicity befell your
Subjects: so that I cannot but conceive that the present Civil broyls and
dissentions that disturb your Kingdoms, cause no small disquiet in the Kingdom
of your Royal thoughts; which consideration had imposed upon me an eternal
silence, rather than I would have caused any additionary distractions in your
Princely mind, had not I thought it my duty timely to inform you, lest you
should nourish such infection in your bosom, as for want of mature anticipation
may bring ruin and dishonor upon your Majesty's person, Government and
Posterity. Now, Sir, to forbear any abstruseness, and prolixity, and that I may
not detain you too long from your serious thoughts, the occasion of my writing
is this. My Lord Danpion, whom your Majesty has left here to Rule as your
Vicegerent, notwithstanding those many favors you have heaped upon him, enough
to have rewarded the highest merits, much more to have bribed the most
unfaithful person to Loyalty, has abused the confidence and Royal trust you
have reposed in him, having not only disobeyed your strict commands, that none
should invade my privacy in the Walks and Groves, your Majesty out of your
Royal goodness, has set apart for my retiredness, but seeks to ruin my honor,
and fraudulently to possess me, and in me your Kingdom, I being the immedi^te
Heir. Sir, did the injury redound only to my self, I should bury it in eternal
oblivion, rather than perturb your breast with the relation of it, accounting
that a dear purchased felicity, that is acquired by your thoughts least
didisturbance: but if my overforward zeal clouds not my judgment, these
actions speak ambitious thoughts, and such thoughts as dare a flight too near
the beams of Sovera^gnty. But I leave that to your Majesty's all-wise
consideration, and my self to your Royal Care, not doubting but if he attempts
to soar above his Sphere, the Waxen wings of his ambition will melt before the
rays of Majesty, and plunge him into a Sea of misery and contempt, but much
less doubting of your Princely and paternal affection and protection toward
her, who has the honor to be

Your Daughter Amphigeniae.


This Letter she gave unto one of her principal Pages, commanding that with all
diligence, care, and celerity, it should be presented to her Fathers hands. But
now to acquaint you with the raging fury, that even distracted Danpion, when
Florinda told him of Amphigenia's hatred, and what she had done to incense her
Father against him; I had need to dip my pen in Nessus blood, or infuse
Alecto's poison into my Ink, for never did any one so nearly resemble raving
Hercules, when he had put on Deianira's invenomed Shirt, as he, when he
considered, not only that now he was unhappy, but fallen from so high a pitch
of happiness, and that through his rash folly, and that not only he had
incensed the Mistress of his heart, but the Master of his life, and by one
inconsiderate action at once cut off all hopes of ever attaining that happiness
he promised himself, both in his Throne, and in his Bed.

But this tempest lasted not long, for though he had not Socrates his composure
of spirit, under all fortunes to remain the same; yet he had such a power over
his Passions, as they seldom raged beyond suppression, or could claim such a
predominancy, but he would make them submit to his Reason, as now appeared. For
consulting with his thoughts, how he should prevent this storm, that threatened
his ruin, he concluded there was no way but it must inevitably fall upon him,
unless Florinda would prove his friend, but yet seem his enemy; which she
consenting to, they both together agreed upon a plot, which we shall after
declare.

The King, when he had received the Letter, and read the Contents, Heavens! how
did he lift up his hand and admire, as though he was viewing some proprodigious
Comet in the Air. What an Age is this (said he) what dares not man attempt?
Faithless Danpion! is this the requital for my unparalled goodness to thee?
is this thy gratitude? how am I abused through fond credulity? is it not enough
that I have a public adversary, that daily incroaches upon my honor, and seeks
to usurp my Royal Power and Dignity, but I must have a private Pioner to
undermine them all? but no matter, I Will make him know, that Kings have
thunderbolts to hurl at those that dare to mount the Chariot of Majesty, and
take the reigns of Sovereignty into their presumptuous hands, And since he dare
to Arouze my anger, he shall soon find its Lion-like roarings shall awake him,
out of his dream of imaginary dignity, and then he will wish his ambitious
thoughts had flown at lower distance.

Thus the King stormed for a while, but recovering himself, he began to
consider, that it was not safe to continue his Daughter and family under the
command and inspection of Danpion, that sought so basely both to blow up her
honor, and his power; and that it was less safe, to call him before the
Tribunal of public Justice, his affairs being now in such a distracted
posture, ready to be beleagured with a potent Army; and therefore he had more
need endeavor union amongst his men, and by that means, to fortify himself
against his common enemy, than to diminish his strength, by augmenting and
fomenting more divisions, which he feared would follow, if he should on the
sudden totally degrade him, and confer his honor on another.

And therefore to avoid this Scylla and Charybdis, he resolves to couch his
resolutions underneath his secret thoughts, and send for Danpion from the
Palace, and put him upon something that could not be effected without the loss
of his honor or life, or both. And this way he counted the more secure,
remembering, that such Court Minions, that like Stars of the greatest magnitude,
move in so high a Sphere, are seldom eclipsed and obscured by the interposition
of a new Favorite, but rather by the bright luster of the rays of Majesty.

To prosecute his intents, he sends for Danpion, who in obedience to his
summons, marches from the Palace, and as he thought from all his honors, hopes
and preferments, but being of an unconquerable spirit, bears it with as much
magnanimity as he was able, and comes to the Kings Camp; but above and beyond
all his hopes and expectations, the King looks upon him with a smooth brow, and
tells him, he had found him to be a man of an impavid spirit, and greedy of
renown, and therefore he had sent for him, to perform a piece of service, the
very attempt whereof would redound to his great honor, but the execution of it,
would not only crown him with immortal fame, but be highly advantageous to the
Kingdom; Danpion see-such an unexpected event, began in his thoughts to insult
over this result of Fortune, and thus replied, Great Sir (said he) I were
unworthy of either life, or honor, should I refuse, at your commands, to part
with either, since to your exceeding munificence I owe more than both; neither
can all I were able to do, could I accomplish more than Hercules, return such
retributions as might compensate those transcendent favors, your Royal
goodness has been pleased to confer upon me. Therefore were it to scale the
heavens and fetch Atlas thence, to conquer the Rebels your enemies, though your
valor needs it not, yet were it your commands, I would do it, or dye in the
attempt.

Then (said Hiarbas) I am informed that Pandion has an enchanted Standard,
whose Magical force, so ingages all the Subterranean powers, Pluto's black
Legions on his side, that he is invincible, until some valiant Knight, by his
single fortitude, takes it from him, and I know none in my Army or Kingdom,
whose great undanted courage would provoke them to undertake such an
enterprise, except your self. If that be all (said Danpion) my sword shall soon
cut the Charm in sunder, and send the infernal spirits themselves down to their
dark mansions. Whereupon he went and furnished himself with Horse and Armor,
and all things requisite for his encounter.

Pandion being come with his Army in ken of his enemies, draws them up into a
Battalia, intending to fight, which Hiarbas having notice of before, by his
Scouts, he draws his men also up into a form, and after a brave Oration, to
encourage them to fight, he himself in person marches before them into the
field. Where, as if the very fight of their enemies had been a Loadstone to
their courage, their Martial spirits were so provoked, as that it was difficult
for their Commanders to restrain them from making an untimely onset.

The signal for the battle being given, there began such a terrible conflict,
as that within a short time, thousands lay dead in the place, both sides
maintaining their assaults with such impetuous rage, as if the Giants had been
come, to heap mountains of Carcasses, to assail heaven, and besiege the Gods;
nothing but fury reigned in every b^east, some that were thrust thorough with
Lances, would yet run themselves farther on to reach their enemies, and require
that morral wound; others, that were just expiring through want of blood, would
yet strive to bequeath another death as their last Legacy to their Sabillus and
Bonosus p: 141.

enemies; the earth grew of a sanguine complexion, being covered with blood, as
if every soldier had been deaths Herald, and had come to emblazon Mars's Arms,
with a Sword Argent, on a Field Gules* There was Panomphaeus a Commander under
Hiarbas, that fought a single combat with Sabillus, who after he had his Breast
ripped open by an unfortunate blow, yet held his sides together with one hand, as
if he had bee^ buttoning an upper Garment, whilst he encountered Sabillus with
the other, till Bonosus came, and thrust his hand into his body, as if he would
have pulled his Soul out of her dwelling by violence, and tare away his Vitals.

Sabillus enraged that he had thus snatched his victory out of his hands,
lifted his Arm, intending to have cleft Bonosus's head, but the sword by an
accident flying out of his hand, only cut off his Nose; which unexpected blow
so stunnied Bonosus, as in an amazedness, looking on one side, and the other,
to see which way the blow came, as if he would not take the advice of his eyes,
now he had lost the Moderator that used to interpose betwixt them, and in a
fury ran forward, and (as the Proverb has it) followed his Nose, and ere he
himself, or Sabillus were aware, thrust him thorough the throat. Here lay
shivered Lances, and broken swords, and there dead Horses, and Carcasses of men
mangled, as if they had been newly anatomized.

In one place lay Heads deposed from their soveraignties, yawning and sta^ing
as if they looked for their Bodies; In another heaps of mutilated Arms, Hands,
and Legs, as if Death had there kept its Shambles. Long did the fight continue
dubious, Fortune equally sharing the Laurels, until at length it began
something to incline to Hiarbas; which Memnon a valiant Warrier and great
Commander under Pandion espying, rage and contempt so burned in his bosom,
that his eyes flamed, as if they had contained the whole Element of fire, and
he thundered forth a roaring voice, as if his Lungs had sucked in the middle
Region of the Air, and with his breath he could blow away a World, upbraiding
the Soldiers for their base pusillanimity, to give ground to such a dastardly
crew as he conceived his enemies to be, and running into the mids of Hiarbas
men, with such a boisterous madness, as if with his single valor he could send
an Army to Tartarus, and by his strength could unhinge the Poles, and stop the
primum mobile's career, he slaughtered all that stood within the reach of his
weapon, decollating some, making them shorter by the head, and dissecting
others, some he thrust thorough with his Sword, pointing out plainly what death
they should dye, and cleft others skulls, and thus he unmercifully triumphed
over his enemies, till at length Death put an end to his victory, by a flight
of Arrows that, feathered with destruction, lighted upon him. And thus was he
slain by this winged Army, which otherwise would have slain an Army had he
lived, and at his Death haled hundreds of souls out of their claiy prisons, and
compelled them to attend him in the other world.

His followers provoked by his example, to make good what he by his valor had
gotten, had engaged themselves so far in the mids of their adversaries, that at
length they were surrounded on all sides by Hiarbas his policy, who had caused
his men before to retreat some paces backward for that end. Danpion who had all
this while been butcherring of his enemies in the rear, intending to cut his
way thorough them to come to the Standard Bearer, perceiving so great a breach,
and Chasm (as it were) in his enemies party, improves the benefit of
opportunity, and rides up to the Standard Bearer, kills him, and in the fight
of all his enemies carries away the Standard, which Phoedon a Commander of
Horse under Pandion espying, pursued with full speed with all the men under his
command. Others that knew not of this accident, seeing their Standard flying,
and so great a party fled after, thought the day was lost, and time to secure
themselves, and thereupon flung down their weapons, and hasted after the rest,
with such confusion, as put them into no less disorder than themselves. With
that a party of the Hiarbian Horse, to complete their victory, pursued them,
and put them so to the rout, that they le^t few to complain of their harsh
usage, and some rescued Danpion, who being overtaken, having endeavored to
keep his prey in despite of his adversaries, that environed him, had almost
resigned it up, had he not been relieved by this fortunate chance. In the mean
time those few that were enclosed by the Hiarbians, were sacrificed to appease
the revengful fury of their enemies.

The victory being thus obtained, and Danpion contrary to Hiarbas hopes and
expectations won the Standard, by this valiant act got so much renown, that he
was more admired than before; the general applause of the Army so cried him up,
that Hiarbas grew more jealous of him than ever, and resolved if that which his
Daughter had writ was true, to cast him out of favor wholly, and put him in an
utter incapacity to accomplish any of his high projects. But though these were
his secret intentions, yet he carried himself with as much external serenity
toward him as before, and arriving with great triumph at the palace, after he
had abode there some time, he secretly inquires of his Daughter, whether any
one else could affirm, what she had writ, to be truth.

She told him every circumstance of it, and how that Florinda was come to her
rescue, before he had fled from her, and that she presumed, that she was able
to inform him more distinctly of his intentions, than her self, to whom she was
and ever should be an utter stranger.

With that a Lady was presently dispatched as a messenger to Florinda, to
acquaint her that the King desired a few minutes conference with her in
Amphigenias Gardens, where he stayed expecting her coming. Florinda obeys the
summons, and accompanies the messenger to the King, who after some private
converse with her, is exceeding inquisitive to know of her whether she could
give him any particular information about Danpions design; whether she ever had
dived into his thoughts, and could tell whether he had any aim at the
Sovereignty or not, and many other questions to the same effect, he demanded of
her. Florinda gives him little or no satisfaction to all his Quae^ies, but
endeavors to confirm his suspicion, what she could, and inveighs against
Danpion with more bitterness than Amphigenia, and at length suggested to the
King this Counsel, that since they had no reasons to convince any man of
Danpions treachery and disloyalty, but what was grounded chiefly on suspicion:
if his Majesty would deign to honor their advice with his acceptance, she
would inform him a way, ^how he might ransack his very intrals, and discover
all his intentions, and read the very inside of his heart. The way she said was
this, that the King would please to counterfeit himself suddenly seized upon
with a malignant distemper, and for a time retire himself in his Chamber, and
admit none of his greatest favorites to wait upon him, nor visit him, but only
the princess his Daughter, and her self, that so there might be no grounds of
suspicion for Danpion; and in conclusion to feign himself dead. And then (she
said) she questioned not but that she had such an influence upon him, by reason
of more than ordinary affection that Danpion bare to her, as in his presence to
make him confess to her, if he had any thoughts tending to Amphigenia's
dishonor, or of disloyalty to the King.

This advice was accepted of, both by Hiarbas and Amphigenia, and accordingly
put in execution; So that suddenly the ears of all were filled with the sad
news that the King was fallen dangerously sick. The Courtiers swarm like Bees
at the King Chamber door, to perform their Allegiance to him, but none
admitted, amongst whom Danpion was a constant visitant, but as constantly as
the rest repulsed.

In fine, Danpion was secretly informed that the King was dead, and that care
must be taken for establishing his successor before his Death should be
divulged, lest the knowledge of it should cause any broils and tumults in the
Kingdom, which it might be apt to occasion, there being such swarms of
discontented persons, and those that affected novelties and alterations, though
for the worse. And if he received not this information for truth, his eyes
should convince him, if he would come to his chamber, for Amphigenia (they told
him) durst not disoblige such a potent person as himself, who might hazard to
interrupt her succession.

These things being privately buzzed, and whispered into Danpions ears, by some
that were Florindas engines, he accordingly repairs to the Kings chamber, where
he finds him stretched out on a bed of State, and covered with a Pall of black
Velvet, the body lying in a posture lively representing Death, and none but
Florinda in the room. Danpion having contrived all this before hand, and by the
assistance and fidelity of Florinda, thus far effected it, was not now to seek
in the latter part of his plot, but thus begins to confer with Florinda. Since
Heavens (said he, seignedly weeping) have thus deprived us of our King, and me
of my Royal Master, accounting us unworthy of him, and him more worthy to
inhabit among the celestial dwellers, than such as we are, it is both our
wisdom and duty, first to proclaim his Daughter Amphigenia, lest an interregnum
should occasion any insurrections among this people, prone to rebellion and
disorder; And then to honor his Memorial, with the celebration of his Funerals
in as great State as may be, both to testify to the World our Loyal affections
to our deceased King, and also that our Foreign and Intestine wars have not so
exhausted the public treasury, but that we are able to support and maintain
the honor of our King and Country. Tell not me (my dearest) said Florinda, of
State affairs, they belong not to our Sex, but if I have found any place in thy
Heart, let me conjure thee by the many vehement protestations of affection, to
disclose a secret to me, the faithful revealing of which, I shall esteem as a
far greater confirmation of thy loves reality, than ten thousand asseverations.
Prithee be free and ingenuous in thy expression, and leave not my thoughts a
prey to their own anxiety, to doubt will more torment me than all thy tongue
can utter, First let me dye (said Danpion) before I let a word drop from thy
mouth in vain. Then (said Florinda) what was the meaning of your attempting to
invade Amphigenia's chastity in the Grove? Invade Amphigenia's chastity (said
Danpion) may I sink to the Center of the Earth, if ever such a thought possessed
my mind; what Devil breathed this abominable report of me? should I rip up my
breast, and dissect my heart, thou should find nothing but Constancy and
Loyalty there, which when it is otherwise, may the powers above tear it out of
my body, for a preventive pattern to future Ages. What occasioned your being
there? (said Florinda) were not my eyes spectators of her affrightful flight?
did I not see how a palli^ whiteness had usurped the possession of her
beauteous face, and expelled the Rosy redness thence? did I not see, how every
part of her fair body was shook with a timorous Palsy, just as the Aspen
leaves tremble, when the gentle Air softly breaths upon them? did I not see you
in the Grove stand benumbed with astonishment or pannick fear, I know not
which, as if you had been Planet-strucken, or some unseen Nemesis had statuized
you, on purpose to discover that dishonorable intention of yours, which you
would have concealed? Prithee then disclose the cause of this that I have said,
unbosom thy thoughts to me, how can I think thou do include me in thy heart,
when thou do exclude me out of thy most retired resolves? If I should deny
what you say (said Danpion) it were just the earth should open me a living
grave, and intomb me alive in her dark Cavernes* But (said he) the cause of
Amphigenia's flight, may soon be conjectured by any that ever heard of her
Antipathy toward all of ou^ Sex, for she had no sooner glanced her eye upon
me, but as if I had been some Demon, or horrid apparition, she fled, as though
my very looks had infused a swiftness into her. But I Will a^peal to her, if I
either said or did any thing, that Dio^^s would blush to own. And it was my
fond curiosity, that prompted me to take a view of that Paradise, which since,
I understand is reserved only for Amphigenia's privacy. So that my ignorance
put me upon that uncivil intrusion which otherwise the torture of a thousand
deaths should not have compelled me to. But I hope my future fidelity shall
crave my remission at Amphigenia's hands, and confirm my innocence.

No sooner had Danpion ended his speech, but the King started up out of the
Bed, at which Danpion flew back, pretendingly amazed, at this sudden
resurrection. Nay (said the King) let not our seeming restitution to life,
surprise thee with a causeless fear. Our ears have been auditors of thy
expressions. This was but a contrivance to search the truth of that which my
suspicious thoughts suggested to me. We have found thee truly Loyal, and thou
shall find out Royal goodness extended to recompense thy all-deserving worth.
Thou art now faster rivetted in our bosom, than before. Danpion hearing this,
fell down on his knees, and humbly begged pardon for his offense, which was no
sooner craved than gr^nted.

And thus was he more confirmed in the Kings favor than before. And now he
resolves to acquaint Periander with his success, and advise with him, how he
might proceed in his design of obtaining the Kingdom, which he had daily more
and more hopes of, by reason the breach between Hiarbas and Pandion was still
augmented, but their strength diminished. And one Evening, when as the Sun
drawing nee^ his occident, extended the shadow of the mountains, Danpion under
pretense of riding out to take the fresh Air, secretly steals to the Cave, that
little Senate House, where Periander and he had agreed to meet and consult
about their designs; and having waited there some time, Periander came. After a
great many testimonies of affection and mutual congratulations, Danpion relates
the whole story of his unfortunate love, and how he had almost lost the Kings
favor, and by what means he regained it, and what posture Hiarbas present
affairs were in, and many other discourses to the like purpose.

Periander, attending to his discourse, found such intricateness in his
condition, as he could not tell how to devise a way to lead him out of that
mazing Labyrinth, but he said, as for his Regal power, he questioned not, but
time the p^rent of all things, will er^ long produce that that should fulfill
his desires: for (he said) Pandion was so weakened with the loss of the la^t
battle, that he was ready to shift for himself by a dishonorable ^light, had he
not been persuaded to the contrary by him, which he did, to keep on foot the
divisions in the Kingdom, which otherwise would cen^re in an happy union for
Hiarbas. But that could never be, whilst Pandion remained, and would but own
his own cause; a Star of so great a magnitude, moving with so vigorous an
influence, and with gil^ed pretenses, casting so great a luster on his
undertakings, must needs exhale the affections of the people, which the further
they are drawn from the King, the dissentions must needs be wider, like lines
drawn from the Center, which the further they tend, the wider they extend.
Danpion returning him many thanks for his condancy and fidelity to him,
demanded of him why he was not in the battle, Periander replied, that the
occasion of it was this, Pandion (said he) as you may remember the Gentleman
told us, that first informed us of our danger, when we were gaving into
Amphigenia's Gardens, is deeply inamoured with a Nun, so that he is grown
wholly negligent of his weighty affairs, all his discourse is of her, her
exquisite beauty is his daily theme, and he that before was continually
instructing his men in Martial Discipline, now exercises himself in nothing but
Love Sonnets, and Madrigals, and such like toys, forsakes his mirthful
inclination, and all Society, and frequents solitary loneness, and drooping
sadness; but this accustomed sequestration of himself from the company of those
Nobles that have joined with him, has so displeased them, that I think) had
they not so allied their interests to his, that their welfare is wholly
involved in his, by reason many of them revolted (as you know) from Hiarbas,
they would all forsake him, and expose him to the malice of his enemies. But
she to avoid the constant trouble of his endless importunacy, and fearing lest
in time he should by force unty her Virgin Zone, has secretly fled out of the
Nunnery, and none can inform whither: so that when I should have done him
service in the field, mine employment was (so his jealousy would not let him
confide in any one (...) to ransack the Kingdom for her; which I did with as
much curiosity, as Diogenes, when with a Torch at Noon he went to look for an
honest man, and returned with his success, so that Pandion is now worse tha^
ever; which does almost convince me that there is some truth in that saying,
that the Soul is not where it animates and informs, but where it loves* for as
if her Angel-form by a sympathetical attraction had snatched away his, he raves
like one deprived of his intellectuals, regards not his interest, neglects his
men, and would forsake all, to pursue her, were he not terrifyed by those of
the Nobility and Gentry, that fide wi^^ him; So that were your party in as
distracted a condition as ours, we would with a few men soon dissipate the
sorce of both, and make our selves Masters of all.

As they were thus discoursing and plotting, they espied on a Hill several
Horsemen, that rid as if they pursued them, and both suspecting that they were
suspected, and fearing lest they should be overtaken and discovered, they
mounted their Horses, and ^led with all speed into an adjacent Wood, whither
(...) they were followed, so that they could hardly escape their pursuers, till
the nights darkness concealed them; when wandering and roving to and fro, no^
knowing where they were, they saw at a great distance, a moving light, roll up
and down, much like an Ign^s F^tuus, as they conceited; at first they were
(...) with this sudden fiery appearance, but at length they resolved to ride up
to it, and see whether their fancies were not deluded, hoping it might be the
Torch of some Traveller, that could direct them in the way. But as soon as they
came pretty near, and were able to discern it, to be no such Meteor as they
before conceived, they heard a hoarse yelling shriek, that echoed through the
Woods, and the light falling, as if it sank into the Earths bowels, presently
vanished; but suddenly two other lights succeeded it, so that Danpion and
Periander retaining their wonted courage, were now more earnest than before, to
satisfy themselves what it should be; but their desires were soon fulfilled,
for, before they were come up to them, they saw a young Wench rubbing of an old
Beldame, and pulling her by the Nose, striving to ^etch life in her; who it
seems (as they were afterward told) swounded away, by the f^ight she received
with the noise of Danpions and Perianders Horses. As soon as the Wench heard
the neighing of the Horses, no less affrighted, than her old Grandam, she ran
into the house, and (...) the door, and left her lying upon the ground like a
Witch in an Ecstasy; whiles Danpion and Periander glad that their Apparition,
vanished into this, hoping they might now meet with a Guide, rode up to the
house; but ere they were there, they were encountered by an ill-favored
crooked-backt, ruffainly Rustic, that with a Forest-Bill on his neck, came out
of the house, swearing by Pans cloven-hoof, that whether they were men or
devils he cared not, he would teach them for base dastardly Cowards as they
were, to fright a poor old woman. But he no sooner saw them, but he flung down
his Bill, and in all dutious reverence on his knees entreated them to be
merciful, and said they were poor folks, and had nothing fit for such Gentles
as they were. We desire not any thing (said Periander) we are Servants that
have lost our way in these Woods, and desire to be conducted to some place
where we may lodge to night, and to morrow travel hence about our occasions.
Truly (said the man) I am very ingrant of the way hereabouts, and can give you
no sa^tifaction where you may lie to night, unless in this house, and Battus
the Forester that dwells here, is gone abroad, and will not be at home these
nine days, and none but he knows these places. Danpion and Periander hearing
this, smiling at the fellows rusticity, alighted off their Horses, and went
into the house, where there was none but the Wench that had been so officious
to the old woman; and she sat in the Chimney-corner, sni^ling and drivling in
such a posture, as would have made one loath all lamentation; and she was sure
(she said) she should not have such another loving Grandam, and what would her
Grandsir say, when he comes home, and many other the like expressions.

But as soon as they came in, she arose from her seat, and making a loathsomly
squeamish Countenance, and wiping her Eyes with the fag-end of a Dish-clout,
and ^^ying her Body and her Neck, as if she was in a Convulsion-fit, made many
fine Daps, and ran out of the house to her Grandmother; who before she could
get to her, had made a shift to raise her self on her withered legs, and came
grunting, and crawling to the door, like a carcass newly risen from a Tomb; for
her Eyes looked like two* Worm-holes, and her Face like snips of tannd Leather
stitcht together, and the wrincles like the di^ty seams. The old Tooth-drawer
Time, had robbed her of all her Teeth, excepting one, that out of compassion he
left to adorn, and Pallisado her Chops, and withal, to fence in her upper Lip,
which otherwise would have slapped too near her Chin, and hid the comeliness of
her nether. Her Cheeks hollow, like her heart, contained Dens of dirt, where
Deformity lay battening it self, and looked like the Earth in Dog-dayes
drought, when the Sun has ^uckt out all its moisture. Her bearded Chi^ and
worm-eaten Nose, as if inamoured with each others Beau^y, were near kissing;
but Nature wisely considering, that if they met too close, they might hinder
the passage of her words, had caused the But-end of her Nose to turn up like a
Hunte^s-horn. Her Body was a bundle of Bones sowed together, like a Sceleton,
that few but would have taken her for a Fury; for she was not like one defaced,
but gnawn with Age.

But though her other Parts were thus decrepit, yet her old Palsied Tongue was
lively, that that is the Vltimum morions, and last decaying Member in a woman;
for all the way as she came limping, and supported by her Daughter, (for so any
one would swear she was, by their likeness) that never left shaking and
scolding at her for minding her no more, and letting her lie on the cold
ground; she thought (she said) to let her have the She^herd M^schus, and have
given her something that she had kept in a clout for her, should have done her
good, but since she had no more care, she knew what she knew well enough.

Daphins hearing this sad sentence, making a whining countenance, wherein she
pourtraied sorrow in such a ridiculous posture would have made even sorrow it
self mirthful, drawing her mouth on one side, as if she would have whispered
something into her own ear, and gaping as if she would catch the honey tears
that dropped from her eyes, fell down at her Grandams feet, and was entering into
an ill compiled excuse, but she was prevented; for the old hag, wanting her for
her crutch, and being on the sudden deprived of her prop, by this humble
reverence, fell with her crown upon Daphins back, who rising on the sudden to
assist her, tumbled her Grandam with her heels over her head, in the manner of
a Christmas gambole, and threw her bum with such a force upon the door ^ill,
that even beat the wind out of her body (I mean backwards) and made her
haunches like a couple of wrinkled bladders that had been smoked seven years in
a chimney corner, rebound with the violence of the fall, insomuch that they had
been beaten flat and disfigured had they not been well stiffned with age. And
now poor Daphins case was worse than before, so that Anus was so enraged, that
she would not let her help her out of that uncomly posture she lay in, her
heels higher than her head, and the threshold a pillow for her posteriors, but
bid her varlet that she was get her fu^thet, for she could not abide the sight
of her (nor I think few else) and thus undecently she lay until Bion that had
been walking the horses all this while came, and by main strength lustily ^lung
her on his back, made on purpose Camel like, to carry that deformed burden, or
bundle of de^ormity, and came and set her on a block by the fire side, who Bion
and Anus page 154.

casting a hags look upon Danpion and Periander, demanded of them who they
were; Uh! (said she grunting) if you come for my Daughter 'ene take her, would
I had never seen her ugly eyne for me. Uh! Uh! (quoth she) did you not see what
a vile toss she gave me? it was a wonder she had not borst my crupper. But --
Uh! Uh! I Will warrant her -- Uh! I Will fit her.

Danpion and Periander, that with abundance of mirth beheld this pitiful fray,
had much ado to contain themselves from bursting out with a loud laughter, but
considering it would more provoke the old woman, returned her the same answer
they did to Bion, and requested a lodging there for that night, and told her,
that if they could have a guide to conduct them out of this Forest, they would
be gone the next day. Welcome (said the old woman); Minx (quoth she to her
Daughter) get you up stairs, and fit the best bed for these strangers, and put
in the fine sheet you are to lie with Moschus in when you are married, and if
you be warm, get you in and air it. Good Mother (said Danpion) rather let us lie
without a Sheet, or by the fire side, for we love not to have our sheets a^red;
therefore (quoth the old woman) you shall have but one sheet; there i^ not much
difference (said Danpion) pray, rather than have th^^ a^^ed, let us take our
repose here by the fire ^ide, for we h^ve been Soldiers, and are now Servants,
and therefore are not unacquainted with hardships; nay by (...) ^atters (quoth
she) you shall not lie here* (...) you lie in a bed, to go away and disgrace
our house as though we had not a bed for as good as you.

After some such wise discourse as this, the night being far spent, they all
(...) themselves to their lodgings; the old woman she lay below, (...) upon
four three-footed stools by the fire side, Daphins in a trundle bed under
Danpion and Periander. But in the night, as though hard-hearted fortune had a
mind totally to ruin poor Daphins, there happened this sad mischance, not to
acquaint you how Daphins poring upon her woeful misery had forgot to take away
the ^ot stone, wherewith instead of a warming-pan, she used to heat her
Grandams bed; so that the old woman unawares clapping her buttocks on it,
shrivelled them up like a leathern pouch; but in the night Daphins (it seems)
was arrested with a laxative humor, so that she was forced to arise and
disburthen her self into a great close-stool-pan, that always stood under her
Grandmothers bed, and was pretty spacious, that so it might contain the
excrementitious evacuations of the whole family. Daphins having purged what she
could with convenience, loath that the old woman should discover her loathsome
bestiality, sets the pan on the tester of the bed, intending to purify it the
next day, which for many months before, and by its complexion one might think
years, had escaped a scowring. But she had not been long gone, and warm in her
bed, ere Daphins evil genius maliciously awaked her Grandam, who whether she
had taken cold when she lay on the ground, or through a loving sympathy with
her daughter I cannot tell, but she was afflicted with the same running
distemper, and making a shift to crawl out of her bed to look for the
close-stool, it was too cunningly hid for her to find, so that she raging that
her Daughter had again served her so vilely, takes a crutch, and pounces at the
chamber floor for Daphins to come and assist her, but the Cat unhappily lying
over the bed, suddenly awaked, and affrighted with the noise, intending to have
leapt away, jumps full upon the close-stool, and over-turns it, and tumbles it,
and all that it contained, upon the poor old woman's noddle.

Daphins who had not slept all this while, through fear that Anus should awake
at this sad summons, arises, and tremblingly comes down at her call, to see
what is the matter; But as soon as she saw Anus with the pan on her head, and
the crutch in her hand, striking at her with might and main, for scold she
could not, being querkned with the filthy ordure, she thought her Grandsire
Battus had been come home drunk as he had wont, with his Helmit on his head,
and had been fencing with his quarter staff, so that she was fain to awake Bion
to hold him, lest he should wrong her Grandam; but she was soon saved that
labor, for stealing to Bions tressels, thinking unseen and out of any danger
of a blow to arouse him, Anus notwithstanding perceiving her cunning, thought
to have reached her such a blow, as should sufficiently recompensed all her
abuses, but it unluckily, as fortune would have it, alighted on Bions panch
near to his midriff, with such a force, that he was even compelled to disgorge
those superfluities of the pan, that at its overthrow, had extravagantly fled
into his mouth, being wide open, as if he was d^vouring of sleep by mouthfuls,
and that he had been all this while struggling to digest. Bion enraged with this
blow, between sleep and wake, arises, and gets up one of his four tripodes, and
threatens apparent destruction to all that came near him. And as if Apollo-like
he had from that tripos given forth an Oracle, he strikes such a blow on old
Anus one tooth, that grew like an Unicorns born out of her nether gum, that not
only deprived her under chop, and her upper lip of that ornament, but laid her
flat on her back, and made her kick up her heels, and Hieroglyphically
represent her husbands fortune, and doubtless had quite spoiled her face, had
it not been well defended and fortified by the close-stool-pan. But not to
detain the honorable guests Danpion and Periander any longer from their sleep,
by the rude rumbling and brawlings of this unseemly crew, this bloody fray was
soon ended by their mutual intercession, all being of a loving nature, and
willing to be reconciled, every one framing a wise Apology, and Daphins having
first cleansed her Grandam, and the Pan, being before much of a complexion, as
well as she could, they again betook themselves to their rest.

Scarce had the early Lark, the winged Herald of the morning, with its pretty
warbling notes, summoned the bright watchmen of the night to prepare for a
retreat, and Aurora had opened the vermilion Oriental gate to make room for
Titans radiant beams, to slide through the gloomy air, when Danpion and
Periander weary of their uneasy pallet, arose and left Daphins fast asleep,
champing as if she was chewing the cud, and her mouth slabbering her fingers,
as if she had dreamt of her good houswifry, and was going to spin, the other
hand pulling a reddish yellow lock out of her head, reddish, I may properly
term it, since it was much of the color of a Reddish; and this she twisted to
and fro, as if it had been the ^ow, and well she might mistake her head for the
distaff, since it was much of the same Pyramidal form; and the other two they
left ^noring, as if their over greedy swallowing of sleep had near choked them,
and walked out ^o refresh themselves with the sweet air, being almost poisoned
with the ^unk that ascended from the last nights Combat, and to see what pickle
their Horses were in; Bion the Groom lying snorting in the Chimny, as if he
were looking to swine, and had not time to mind Horses. But as it happened, they
were grazing about the house, so that having caught them they rode up and down
to see if there were any other house or hamlet near adjoining, where they might
be better accommodated, until they could meet with a guide, but finding no
place else thereabouts, and unwilling to ride too far, they returned to the
house, where by this time the three goodly inhabitants were all arisen from
their couches, and had prepared a sumptuous breakfast for the strangers, so
that now they could have a full view of Daphins, whose beauty the ^able night
had masked, whom they took the better notice of, because she was all the cook
they had. And indeed she was an exquisite piece, and so youl'd say if you had
seen her; and so Anus her mother, Moschus her suter, and Bion her well-wisher
said, and I should think the verdict of such curious persons might be something
regarded; but you will object, that their judgments were biased with interest
and affection; so may be yourn is for ought I know. But then to convince you
further I Will describe her.

To begin with the crown of her Head, kind Nature the better to discover the
pure whiteness of the skin, that covered her thick Scull, had lovingly
unthatched her crown, and peeled away all the unnecessary hai^ thereabouts, and
lest her a dainty soft ridge of moss, that fringed her head round like a
garland, so that if you had seen her, you would have certainly thought she had
a night cap on, thrumnd with furs. This hair was something short, lest it
should hide her comely spacious Ears; spacious they were, that so they might
hear the biggest sounds distinctly, which was the reason that she often gave
why she had the sense of hearing so admirable, and could distinguish of sounds
so acutely, for she would stand without doors, and if the Dog threw down the
tongues in the kitchen, or the Sow overset the Milk pan in the Dairy, she would
tell you exactly what it was fell down, and never go into the house at all to
know, and therefore she would often wisely admire, how it was possible for
little ears to hear great sounds, for (said she) how should great sounds, get
in at little ears? but I think that Objection might be answered by your
Naturalists, that make it their business to pry into Natures abstruse and
abscondite secrets, and therefore to their wisdoms I leave the discussion of
it, and proceed in my description.

Her head was triangular, that being (as Moschus would often say) the best and
most commodious shape; for, said he (for you must note he was book learned) a
head of a rotund figure cannot possibly be so commodious to lodge the three
Organs of the Soul, the common sense, fantasy, and the memory, nor contain so
much wit as a three square noddle; for a Globical head (quoth he learnedly)
confusedly jumbles all the three together, which is the reason that many are so
troubled with the Vertigo in their brain, it is because they are round heads;
their conceits endlesly running in a circle of fancy, having neither rational
beginning nor ending. But now a tripple cornered noddle has three convenient
cavities, where the three things aforesaid may lie distinctly and severally
undisturbed, like Hares on their Forms, or Foxes in their holes, until they
are started and unkennel'd by the barkings of Reason. And further (said he)
I Am sure, its plain, it cannot contain so much wit, for a Globe cannot fill a
triangle, much less can that that is contained in it fill it. For (quoth he)
this is an undeniable rule, that body that can contain both the thing
containing and the thing contained, can much more contain the thing contained,
that can be contained in thing containing. But prithee, Moschus* be not thus
tedious in thy prolix comments upon thy Daphinsses strange perfections, but let
me proceed.

Her purple forehead (that color betokening Majesty) was streaked with lovely
wrinkles, which black with atoms of dirt, that as it were in love with her
beauty, had transplanted themselves from their native habitations, to dwell in
those amiable furrows, so that they looked like shadowy strokes, that Nature
made, the better to set off the (...) of her beauty; or rath^r like curious
folds, where Nature wrapped her perfections, lest they should dazzle spectators
Eyes.

Eyebrows she had none, lest she should srown, and fright her poor Lovers; her
Eyes were dainty Matches, at which Cupid enkindled the Torches of Affection,
and set them on fire for her Lovers hearts. Matches did I say? They were not
Matches, for the one was as big again as the other.

Her right Eye being of a Hazel brown, stood peeping out of its Den, like a
Mouse catched in a Trap; for so her Lovers thought, that that be sure was
ensnared in Loves Trap, and enticed with the Bait of Affection* but her left
Eye, being of a goggle size, to revenge her sisters quarrel, stood staring out,
ready to ^ly in their faces, for having such base thoughts of the right. And
indeed Dame Nature had herein showed abundance of wisdom, for she had placed a
third part of her left Eye out of her head, le^t her right eye modestly hiding
it self, should creep into her head; and placed her right eye far into her
head, lest her left Eye should sta^^ quite out of her head.

Her virtuous Nose, was like the letter Y* Pythagoras Hieroglyphick of virtue,
whence a rare qui^tessential distillation continually dropped, which le^t it
should be lost, her nether lip stood pou^ing out, to catch it. Her Cheeks were
of a Pease-porridge-tawny, the Sun being in love with her rare beauty, as the
Moon was with Endymion, had often all to be -- kisst her (what had I like to
have said, but if I had, I think you would have believed me, if you had seen
her complexion) I say, he often smacked her countenance, and left the print of
his lips behind. Indeed a dainty crop of hair she had upon her upper lip, which
some said, was made for an eye-brow, because she being singular in her other
parts, was therein to have been a miracle, and had her eyes placed under her
nose, that she might the better see the way to her mouth. But Moschus (whose
judgment I chiefly follow) replied, That the comely latitude of her mouth,
made it an easy mark for her fingers, and then, had they been placed there, a
constant Flux of Rheum from her nose had interrupted their sight.

But as for that curious hay-mow on her lip, for so I may properly term it, by
reason of pretty mops and mews she used to make, would provoke any one to spue
out a laughter, and because once in twenty five hours she used to mow it, but
if that term will not please, then that thorn-hedge on her lip, was but to
fence round the dike, her mouth, to keep her nose from trespassing on her chin.
But Moschus said, they were the prickles that grew about the Roses of her lips.
Her teeth as if afraid they should eat one another, were ranked in their open
order, to give the freer passage to her words. Rankt do I say? I that they
were, like the dregs of putrefaction, or the corrupted funk, that steams from
the purging Carcass of a gut-^ed Cannibal. Her neck warpt awry, that made her
head stand on one side, as if she had a mind to a kiss. But as for her other
parts, I leave the description of them, to those that are better acquainted, as
Moschus, Bion, etc. fearing, lest in going about to convince my Reader of an
uncharitable error, I my self commit an error exceeding the limits both of
excuse and charity, in blurring so much innocent paper, with the pourtraying
such ^oul deformities, which yet may have thus much use to foil Amphigenia's
words-transcending perfections.

But you may object, there is another crime, I am guilty of by this long
relation, and that is detaining Danpion and Periander too long from their
Breakfast, which Daphins had prepared.

To that I answer negatively thus, viz. It is no such matter, for when they saw
this bundle of Kitchin-stuff, Daphins, they had as much mind to break their
necks, as their fasts, and to eat the Kitchen as the stuff that the Wench had
dressed for them, for she had filled the stuff so with dirt and filth, that an
Ostriches stomach, that can digest Iron, would have nauseated it, so that they
left it to be maunched by the company, who indeed most valiantly behaved
themselves. Bion with teeth-like half Pikes, most courageously slaughtering all
that came near him, and Daphins with no less fury chopping it as small as
Herbs for the pot; and having thus quartered and buried the enemies, that
durst assault and scale her chops, she now begins to fall hastily to the hot
hasty pudding that stood next her, which it seems was so hot, that she having
greedily hoised in by whole sale, a wooden ladle full, it so parcht her
gummes, that she was fain to tumble it to and fro in her mouth, like one that
was mumbling a twit^y ^itmouse, not daring to let it go, or swallow it. Anus
seeing her mump, and her chops wamble up and down, thinking she had mocked her,
hurles the dish of porridge, that she had in her hand at Daphins, but it
unfortunately hit Bion, who enraged with this affront, snatches up the nasty
pudding and swashes it all about Daphins and her Grandam. Daphins mad with
this, slaps two pound of butter, that she had churned that morning, upon Bions
face, so that it clammed so to his eyelids, that it almost blinded him, the
rest hanging dripping upon his whiskers. With that Bion starts up in a rage,
and sets her head in the ^rumity pot, and so intangles her heels in the
hangers, that, poor Wench, e're she could recover her self, she was just ready
to give up the ghost, had not her tenderhearted Grandam come and relieved her,
and cleansed her with the dish-clout, as well as she was able, whilst Bion
brusht his beard with a broom besom. Danpion and Periander seeing this suffle,
laughed so vehemently, that the old woman was ready to hurl the frumenty-dawbed
dish-clout at Periander. This is brave (quoth the old (...), quoth she) what,
cannot I do what I will in my (...) house? By ^uno's petticoats (quoth she) had
I (...) you would have been so unmannerly, you should have (...) a dike for me, and
never have dirted my sheet with (...) ugly hoofs. Bion (quoth she) give him a
dust (...) teeth, and a kick^oth' tail, and turn him out of (...), I charge
you. B'e^ Lady, quoth Bion, that's the way to have two for it, believe me (quot^
he) I love to sleep in a whole skin.

But by this time came in Moschus, and old Thyrsis the shepherd, with some
other shepherds and Foresters, that were the nearest inhabitants, to visit old
mother Anus, and young Daphins, and to know if Battus was come home, who seeing
two such comely personages as Danpion and Periander, fell into admiration, who
they should be. Moschus was jealous, lest they should be ^uters to Daphins,
Thyrsis was ambitious* that he might have them for his Sons-in-law and
therefore comes with abundance of Rhetoric, and importunes them to accept of
entertainment, at his poor Cottage, until Battus should come, being informed
that they were servants that had lost their way, and wanted a guide.

Danpion and Periander hoping they might meet with better accommodations there
than here, accepted of his invitation, and went along with them, leaving
Moschus kissing and courting of Daphins. Thyrsis greedy of knowing who these
persons should be, seeing them to be likely and hopeful young men, demanded of
them their names, and whom they served.

Periander (according to the agreement between Danpion and him, to change their
names) called himself Troilus, and Danpion, Thestilus, and told him that they
were servants to a couple of Gentlemen, that lived* the one near the Court, and
the other retired himself in the Country, and they two being of acquaintance,
had incon^iderately traveled together, so far into that Forest, that they had
quite lost their way, and entreated no other courtesy of him, but if possible
to direct them out of the Forest, for otherwise they feared, if they should
stay until Battus came home, they should exceed their time limited, and incurr
their Masters di^^leasure. Truly (said Thyrsis) this many a long day have I
been a shepherd upon these Plains hard by, and yet never in all my life did I
stray any where, unless after a straggling sheep, but up and down from one
neighbors house to another, and none about us knows the way but Battus, that I
can t^ll of.

With these and the like discourses they passed away the time, until they came
to the house that sto^^ upon a pleasant plain, mantled with the verdant (...),
and checkered with eye-pleasing Flowers, which (...) to a little hill, upon
whose aspiring brow, you might survey the Country round, which though it
abounded with enameled Meadows, spread with Flora's Tapestry, and Pastures for
Sheep to graze on, watered with bubling Springs and murmuring Streams, and all
things for a Shepherds life, yet it was enriched with invious Woods and
Forests, not pervious for any but those well acquainted with the passages, so
that it seemed like a sweet pleasant spot of ground that they had culled out to
encloyster themselves from the residue of the turmoiling world.

Troilus and Thestylus (for so they now termed themselves) having a while
viewed the pretty delightsom prospects that the Country presented to their
sight, went into the house with Thyrsis, where there was his two Daughters
Phyllis and Arethusa, as busy as Bees, running up and down the house to fit it
against their Father came home. Phyllis was a pretty black wench, of a loving
nature, but proud and coy, and though desirous of a Husband, yet thought few
good enough for her, but would lift up her nose, and wag her head with many a
coy nod, as though she looked higher than such as they, and tell them, that
truly she could live without a Husband, whatever they thought. Arethusa was
fair and modest, and mightily itched for a Husband, and therefore would cast
many loving sheeps eyes at young men that came in; but yet if any came to her,
her foolish bashfulness would not let her consent, but she would pule them out
all*

As Soon as these two saw Troilus and Thestylus come in with their Father,
observing diligently that they were prettier and more proper men than ordinary,
and hoping they might come as Suitors, fell inamoured presently with them;
Phyllis she began to feel her heart tumble up and down in her, and she could
not but skeu at Troilus and wish that he was her Husband; when his lips opened
to speak, she imagined they smack'd together, as if they were kissing of her,
and if he chanced to look awry, she thought presently it was an amorous look at
her; and she would make many occasions to pass by, and then she would look more
demurely than ordinary, and skrue her face into a posture, that a bit of
looking glass flatteringly made her believe was handsome, and dip down many
dainty dops, as though somebody had struck her in the hams. Arethusa, she was
taken with Thestylus, and she was not so confident as her sister, but would
stand behind the pantry door, and peep through the key hole at him, and oh! she
wished that she could entice him a milking with her, and she resolved if ever
he came a wooing to her, that she would pluck up a good heart, and say Yes at
first word, for by that ugly word No, she had lost many a well favored suter,
that would have had her otherwise. But hey, the joy there was when their Father
came and told them, that these young men were come to be their Husbands, and
bid them be kind to them; that is a very unnecessary command, thought they.
Phyllis she felt her heart wamble, and pant, and keep such a stir in her, that
she could not rest in a place, but must needs hop up and down the house, and
was ready to go to Troilus and tell him she consented, before she knew whether
he would have her or no. Arethusa was so netled, that she flung to and fro, as
if she had a gad sly in her tail, and both of them were so over joy'd, that
neither of them knew what they did. And thus were the poor wenches senses
almost rackt out of course between the extremes of Joy and Love.

Many days Troilus and Thestylus here continued to their far better contentment
than at Battuses. Phyllis and Arethusa being very observant, wooing them by
their officious carriage, and Thyrsis showing all manner of kindness, according
to his rustical generosity, hoping to win them in the end; daily telling them
how many teems of Oxen he would give Phyllis, and how many flocks of Sheep he
would give Arethusa, and what Meadows and Pasturage he would bestow upon them,
and thus continually ty^ing their ears with such kind of discourse, until at
length the nine days were expired, but yet no news that Battus was come home,
for Thyrsis would fain have continued them a^ his house, till he had enticed
them to have married his Daughters, and therefore concealed Battuses coming as
long as he was able.

But at length for all Thyrsisses policy, one morning there comes a couple of
young Shepherds to his house, and desires to speak with the strangers that he
harbored there, Thyrsis (...) they might come to bring the fatal tidings that
Battus was returned, began to deny that they were within, which Troilus
hearing, suspecting there might be some plot in agitation, calls out to the
Shepherds, and tells them that if they had any thing to say to them, they were
within, and might be spoken withal: whereat the young men presently marched in,
and being pretty burly chuffs, and (...) their countenances to chumping looks,
the bigger of them, and as he himself thought the stouter, comes up to Troilus,
and challenges him to do any manner of (...) with him presently, whatever he
durst. P^eth^e ^ellow (said Troilus) what do thou mean? (...), what do thou
mean fellow? said the (...); Fellow me, no, fellows, but (...) dare, thou
know well enough (...) but that thou art wilfully blind, and (...)
cowardice, and art afraid to see my Troisus and the Sheaphard page. 169.

meaning, for fear then thou should be engaged to accept of my challenge; I
say once more come out of thy den here, if thou dare, thou dastard, for thy
ears; I Will promise thee, if thou do, I Will beat thy nose flat; what thou
think to steal away Phyllis sneakingly, and no body know of it, but for that
trick if thou have her, it shall cost thee a bloody nose, for all thy fine
gewgaws about thee. Troilus loath to descend so much beneath himself, as to fowl
his fingers with such a rude lout, told him that he came not for Phyllis, nor
his intent was not to have Phyllis, he might do what he would with his Phyllis;
what will thou lie too (said the Shepherd) and with that perceiving that
Phyllis saw him through a chink of the door, resolving now if ever to show
himself manful, snatches up a fire-shovel that stood by him, and was ready to
strike Troilus over the face, but that he quickly observing it was time to curb
his rudeness, nimbly drew out his sword and cut off his hand, and with the
force of the blow struck him along, so that the shovel falling upon the ground,
and his hand upon the shovel, and himself upon his hand, he looked as if he had
been shovelling his hand into the fire. The other young fellow willing to
second his companion, gets up a skene bill, and laid at Thestylus, and had
cle^t his head ere he could and his sword, had not old Thyrsis, fearing he
should ^se a Son^in-law, held the Shepherd by the arm, but (...) willing to
have his blow before Thestylus could de^^nd himself, swings himself from
Thyrsis with such ^^lence, that his coat being old and rotten, one that (...)
used to wear in his nonage, he ^are off the sleeve; (...) he not regarding
that, lays, at Thestylus, who by (...) time had found his sword, and
de^te^ously avoid^ng the bl^w* served him in the same manner, as Troilus had
his brother Shepherd, since he so much desired to share with him in the same
fortune, and almost cut off his arm that it depended only upon a little morsel
of flesh, that kept it from falling to the ground, so that as his the other arm
hung without a sleeve, so this hung like a sleeve without an arm; but feeling
the smart of the blow, and seeing the sad effect of encountering with a
champion, he flings away his Bill, and falls down on his knees, just as the
other had made a shift to scramble upon his knees, and asks forgiveness, laying
all the fault on his brother Shepherd, saying, that he had not come but for
him, and calling him logger-head, and all the rustical names that his beetle
brain could invent, for bringing him into such a praemunire. With that the other
fellow enraged, gives him the lie, and a box on the ear, which was returned him
again to the full, with interest, so that there had been a combat between these
one handed men on their knees, had they not been parted by Thestylus: who
before he would fully pardon them, laid this penance upon them, that to procure
their remission for their uncivil abuses, they should one of them run to
Battuses house, to see if he was returned yet, and the other remain as an
hostage. They replied that he had been at home these three days at least.
Troilus and Thestylus hearing this, commanded presently that their Horses
should be fitted ready for their journey, which was readily performed, so that
taking leave of old Thyrsis and returning him thanks for his courteous
hospitality toward them (who poor man could not refrain from weeping, to see
that he must part with them, and in parting with them, part with all that
felicity he flatteringly promised himself in them) they went on their journey
toward Battuses, but taking the Shepherds along with them lest they should
deceive them. And by the way Troilus begins to examine the fellow that had so
rudely affronted him, what was the reason that he came and challenged a
stranger in that unmannerly manner as he did? Ah! (said the Shepherd) Love,
Love was the cause, you would have bestirred your self an you should have lost
your love I warrant you; Why are you in love (said Troilus) prithee tell us how
thou came about to be troubled with that distemper, and with whom? Why (said
the Shepherd) one fine Somers-day, as you should have seen among twenty, I
walked out to look birds nests to and fro among the hedges and bushes, but weas
me! instead of finding what I sought, I found what I sought not, as well as
sought not what I found; for straggling up and down just like a strayed sheep
after my sport, I happened to espy in Thyrsis Garden, a Bush made of Cupids
Arrows, where Venus Doves had built their nests, and poor I, ingrant of loves
matters, thinking cunningly to have caught them ere they were aware, as we do
other birds, was cunningly caught my self, with the lime twigs of beauty; so
that though I now desire what I found, yet I found not what I desired: and who
do you think I found? why it was 'eene Phyllis, amiable Phyllis, dainty fine
Phyllis.

Phyllis with face fairer than any new washed Lamb, with eyes black as Berry,
and lips as red as Coral; this Phyllis, I no sooner saw her, but as if her
look; had bewitched me, I could not for my life restrain my eyes from straggling
after her, but I must be looking at her, though to my cost, I found, that every
look (methought) conveyed a piece of my heart, to her til at length she
monopoliz'd it all to her self, so that I minded nothing but thinking of her,
and neglecting my Sheep, would walk all alone and talk of her, never caring
what a murrain became of my flock, for now I my self was become one of Cupids
flock, and Phyllis eyes were the sheephooks wherewith he caught me, her mouth
the Tar-box, and her comforting words the Tar, wherewith he kept me from pining
away with the Love-rot; the pond where he daily washed my fleece was made of
tears, for indeed when I was by my self, I could do nothing but whine, as often
as I thought of Phyllis; and as he daily washed me, so he daily fleeced me,
that I was become 'een nothing but skin and bone, that I looked just like a
Skillet (as Doctors call a man, after they have picked his bones) so that when
I came amongst the rest of my companions, they amazed got about me like Birds
about an Owl, and made jests of me, some said, I looked as I had got the
Murrain, and would rub Tar over my face; others said my bones looked like a set
of keiles, and would toss their bowls at me; and indeed I did look most
piteously, for I have often seen my face in a Spring, but for all that, I in
the end obtained Phyllis's love, and was to have been married to her, just as
you came to the house, but as soon as you came, the case was altered, Phyllis
looks coy (forsooth) as though I were not good enough for an husband for her,
and she looked for another-gates husband than I, and the like. Whereupon (dy'
see) I enquired after you, who and what you were, and whether you came to marry
Phyllis or not, and amongst my neighbors, at length I heard, that you came to
steal away Thyrsisses daughters privately, and no body know of it, but the old
man, who had consented, and brought you to his house for that purpose, and the
young Maids, be sure you would not long stay for their good will, for they were
so much taken with you, it passed, that none of we durst speak to them, the
Gentlewomen were grown so proud, whereupon (dy' see) I was so provoked, that I
should be so disdained, and my Fathers eldest Son and all, that I resolved to
try a touch with you, for I would have you to know, that though you now were
too hard for me, yet I could make my party good with e're a young man of my
inches, in these parts, let him be who he will. And then the fellow began to
puff, and look bigger than ordnary, and with that swelling made an end of his
story.

But by this time they had gotten to Battusses house, where (as their fellows
had told them) they found him at home, so that having dismissed them they
applied themselves to Battus, and requested him to conduct them out of this
Forest, and they would recompense him for his labor. Battus willingly
consented, and so they went on their journey, when by that time the Worlds
great Luminary had hid himself behind the mountains, and was descending to take
his rest on Thetisses watery couch, they came to the place where they first met,
where having first gratified Battus for his pains, the two friends Danpion and
Periander (now no more Troilus and Thestylus) agreed upon time and place, where
again they might have recourse to inform each other of the affairs of State,
and of the state of affairs in both parties; and so they parted, Periander
betaking himself to Pandions Castle, and Danpion to the Kings Court, whither by
that time the torches of the night were enkindled in the heavens, he arrived.
But scarce had he alighted off his horse, ere winged Fame had carried tidings
of it to the ears of most, and by reason of his eminency it was not long,
before it was known to all, so that the King having notice of it, he
immediately sends for him to come to his presence, to give an account of his
absence, for there wanted not in the Court, those malicious and yet ambitious
spirits, that repining at Danpions supereminent glories, took all advantages
against him, and in particular this of his withdrawing from the Court to beget
suspicious thoughts of him in the King, that so by degrees they might bring him
to his Occident, whose presence thus in the Meridian favor, totally obscured
their luster, and in whose absence only their dim Starlight could appear. And
knowing him to be too potent with the King, and too strongly fixed in his
bosom, to remove by apparent violence, and impetuosity, they therefore
imitating those that when they cannot take a Fort by storm, seek to undermine
it, sought privately to calumniate and reproach him with treachery an
infidelity, to which this present absence of his seemed to add no small
confirmation.

But all these obtrectations proved in the end but like Dogs barkings at the
Moon, who slackens her pace never the more, nor wraps her face in a Cloud never
the sooner, for all his Choleric yelpings. So Danpion soon obtained his former
favor, when he had informed the King, that the occasion of his absence was
only an accidental loss of his way, as he rode out on an Evening for his
recreation.

Danpion having continued some time in the Court, seeks by all means possible
to acquaint Florinda, that he was returned, that she might give him
intelligence whether there were any hopes of reconciliation with Amphigenia,
and whether all endeavors to that purpose would be fruitless or not.

Florinda having notice by this means that Danpion was come, secretly repairs
to his Chamber, and there tells how desperate averse the Lady Amphigenia yet
continued to all his Sex, and in particular to him, by reason of the last
affront he offered her (for so she esteemed it) but yet incourages him to
prosecute his intents, with what prudence and secrecy he could, for she said
the prosecution of such a design required both in the full extent of their
natures; and moreover she promised him that wherein her assistance could be
available, she did oblige her whole power to his service. Danpion returning her
infinite thanks for her unimitable civilities, takes his leave and goes and
ponders by himself, and at length concludes upon a plot, which in short time he
thus puts in execution.

It was when the black brow'd night triumphing over the day, sat shaking her
dewy locks in her Ebony throne, having spread her rorid Carpet over the sable
Hemis^here, and dul-eyed Morpheus, with his drooping Charms, and hushed the
tired senses to their rest, when Danpion attended on by his Page, secretly
steals through the crankling vault, to Amphigenia's Chamber, whom he finds just
as the drowsy Deity had benumbed her senses, a book in her hand, and her waxen
Taper, a Lovers true Hieroglyphick, burning by her, as if composed of Lovers
hearts, it had fetched flames from her eyes, and with those flames consumed it
self to ashes. And perceiving the opportunity fit for his intended enterprise,
he attires his beautiful Boy like one of heavens swift Pursivants, with golden
Wings, which by reason of a private Engine, so poyzed his body in the Air, like
Archytas Dove, that as if some secret spirit lurkt in those gilded plumes, he
could convey himself whether he pleased. About his fair naked body was girt a
silken weed, which partly of a Caerulean-colour, sweetly intermixed with purple
streaks, seemed as if he had been clothed in a piece of Aurora's mantle, and
partly of a misty gloomy color, artificially interwoven with Gold, looked as
if he had snatched a Sunbeam, sheathed in a dewy cloud; that golden Zone that
encompassed his middle, looked like the Zodiac, the Jewels wherewith it was
embost, like the Planets, and the rich Carbuncle, that served for a button,
whose nature is to be most resulgent in the darkest night, shone with so much
resplendency, as in the midst of that darkness, it most lightsomely represented
the Sun. In the one hand, he put a Harp, and in the other a Letter, which was
thus superscribed. Venus Queen of Beauty, to Amphigenia, her Successor.

In this Garb he conveys him into the room, through a secret passage, like a
trap-door, made in the roof of the Chamber, that he had carved out for that
purpose. The lovely Boy, being thus entered into the room, and instructed in all
things, gently moves his Air-dividing Pineons, and marrying his sweet quavering
voice, to the Harpes ravishing Airs, as he flys, sings this Song.

Fair Venus Queen of Beauty's dead,
And has bequeathed her white and red
To Amphigene.
And that her Graces all should lie,
In thee as in a treasury,
Perfections lovely Queen.
Thus runs her will,
And heavenly powers have sworn it to fulfill.
And those that used for to invoke,
Her name, and make her Altars smoke,
With fumes of sighs,
And haunted often her hallowed shrine,
And owned Love a power divine,
Quotidian votaries,
At her last breath.
(More sweet than Myrrh!) to these she d^d bequeath.
A coin made of thy heavenly gold,
With melting flames of love that should
Dissolved be,
And Cupids image stamped thereon,
And dol'd about to these, for none
But such deserv't (said she)
And then a groan
She gave, that heaven echoed with the tone;
And sighing said, as she did moan,
I here surrender up my Throne
To Amphigene.
Her eyes refulgent beams must be,
Scepters to rule all hearts, and she
Must now be Beauties Queen:
Go, Boy, proclaim,
Through all the world, fair Amphigenia's fame*
Scarce this she said, ere she expired,
I Am come to do what she desired;
Hail Amphigene.
All hearts must now revere, adore
Thy rare perfections, nay yet more,
To thee as Beauties Queen
Admiring eyes
And tongues must tribute pay, and sacrifice.
The powers above, to keep their vows,
With Graces all do Crown thy brows,
Her will to obey.
Her neckless made by Cupids arts,
Of weeping eyes, and bleeding hearts,
Linkt on a fulgent ray
That streaming came
From thy sweet eye, they must restore the same.
The Coach where she triumphant rode,
And thy Idea has abode,
Is Danpions heart;
Thy cheeks must be the milk^ Doves
By which the Chariot's drawn, by Loves
Transcendent Conquering Art,
And to restrain
Thy tressing curles must be both whip and reign.
Then as a Herald from the powers
Above, the Queens Executors,
Proclaim I do,
Thee, Queen of hearts, and Queen of Love
That Angels rules, that dwell above,
And men that live below;
Then here by Jove
And Styx thou swear'st, thou wilt not a tyrant prove.


Having sung this Song, as he waved to and fro in the room, he gently descends
upon the Bed, where Amphigenia lay, and delivers her the Letter, which
contained thus much.

Let not my death cause thee to entertain any undervaluing thoughts of thy
perfections, for though with its sordid embraces it may soil so pure an
immaculate transcript, where Nature in Rosy t^nctured ^eatures, as in golden
Characters, has exactly copied out those Excellencies that give immortality to
the Gods, yet know, the Original is on ^ile in Heaven, which time with his
rusty fingers can never come to defile. Beauty is an immortal Plant springing
up in humane soil, an inextinguishable ray of Divinity, or rather an
enravishing reflection of the dazzling Beams, that stream from Divine Beauty;
therefore the powers sublime have decreed, that though in me (ah me!) their
protraicture's defaced, the transcript's soiled, the soil is spoiled, the Plant
is withered, the reflection shaded and eclipsed by deaths malevolent
interposition; yet that in thee their picture shall more lively be pourtrayed,
the transcript varnished, the soil enriched, the Plant transplanted, and the
reflection with greater luster augmented, and the quintessence of that purity
which made all hearts adore me, and gave me a divine sovereignty, and unlimited
prerogative, must be transmigrated into thee. Then since by the universal
determination and suffrage of the Gods, You must succeed me in my dominion,
take this advice, as the counsel of a dying Queen, and your predecessor, Avoid
these two extremes.

1. Let not your beauty be a pander to venereous desires.

2. Nor let it raise your thoughts to so high a pitch above humane nature, as
to disdain any community inferior to divinity.

The consumption of that heap of rich perfections once treasured up in me,
sufficiently testifies the bad consequence that attends the former error. For
though my revenews were large, and so large, as that they were not capable of
augmentation, without increasing to Infinity, both heaven and earth as
tributaries, bringing in the choicest of their treasures, and contending who
should most enrich the Exchequer of my beauty, of which I need not trouble you
with an Inventory, since in your self you may read the Total sum, yet my too
prodigal expense has made me turn bankrupt, so that now grim death has
arrested me, and would convey me into the earths hollow womb, there endlesly to
pore upon my misery, did not fulminating Jove pawn his divinity to Bail me. But
what need I use such expressions as these, to one whose unpolluted mind was
never yet stained with an unchaste thought? Else I might have added, that this
counsel is not only consonant to Prudence but Policy, for by that means you may
contract an inviolable league with Diana, my irreconcilable enemy, whilst I
reigned, and procure an union between the two principalities, which otherwise
will be a continual pest each to other. But as for the latter extreme, what
ever you do, avoid that, as a notorious Solecism in policy, and that that will
inevitably tend to the devastation of your Kingdom. For who do ye think will
make your sacred Altars smoke with incense, if you incense them with austere
reryredness, and supercilious behavior, which above all things Lovers hate? If
you would have access to your peoples hearts, and be honored and adored in the
most recondite parts of their souls, your Throne must not be inaccessible. You
will soon find that love-wounded mortals will disdain your Ceremonious rites,
if you deny them Hymeneal rights, a fundamental privilege, which all your
subjects will claim as their proper inheritance.

Beauty is Natures Ivy-bush, now, you will be a Cheat to the world, if you
either sell that that's naught, or there is naught to sell. What would my
subjects say of me, think you, if you should prove a superficial Queen, having
little of the substance of Royalty, and they should see themselves compelled to
embrace a misty resemblance of sovereignty in their affections? truly there is
cause to fear, if you should thus simulize Ixions Cloud, you would be forced to
suffer Ixions penalty, endlesly to turn about the Wheel of your Fortune, and
spin the thread of your own misery. To shun then both these extremes, and tread
upright, verging to neither side, the only Counsel I can give you is this.

On the one hand not to debar your self of those Chaste sweets, wherein espoused
Souls are steeped in Bridal nights; nor on other the hand to drown your
intellectuals, by an intemperate quaffing and imbibing in that Cream of sensual
delights, which now my too guilty Soul too late bewailes. Let Hymen's sacred
bands conjoyn your Soul with Danpions. Believe me the Virgin Zone is but a
frozen Climate, productive of nothing but congealed desires, and phlegmatic
conceits, where the minds Hemisphere is continually over spread with the Sable
Clouds of Melancholy, until the Bridegroom, like the Radiant Sun, darts
through his rays, and makes the Zone become torrid, and the soil fertile, and
melts those conglaciated desires into amorous delights, more sweet than Pearls
dissolved in Nectar; and this your own experience does in part testify; for
whence flows that immoderate doting upon that thing called Virginity, which
considered in it self, is but a mere negation, and has no being in nature, but
from that Melancholic humor, which distempers those in your state, with a
little less than Phanatick frenzy? Philosopher^ say, that one is no number, if
so, your single life renders you nothing, without Nuptial society. Now if you
make your choice where I advise you, credit me, he will not prove a Cipher, but
augment your number, or if he do resemble a Cipher, it will be in this, that he
will encircle you in his Arms with his sweet embracings, and prove an endless
Circle of joy and contentment to you. Therefore if the counsel, nay the
commands, nay the requests of a dying petitioning woman, yea of a dying
petitioning Queen, yea of your poor dying Queen, take any impression upon you,
let your thoughts pitch upon him, whose person, parts, and heroic actions,
sufficiently render him eligible, by the most accomplished, and transcendently
beautiful Lady, the whole earth can boast of, and such a one I esteem your self
to be. Else I could have given innumerable reasons for that choice, deduced
from his innumerable perfections, but I thought it would be but to gild the Sun
beams, or to refine the pure Elixar of his praise.

Dear Amphigenia, having thus unlockt the Cabinet of my breast, and
disburthened my thoughts laden with corroding cares, for thine and my peoples
good, unto thee, and have given thee some directions, for the better swaying
the Scepter I have bequeathed unto thee, which I hope thou will not slight,
being they are the last gaspings of thy deceasing Queen, and therefore most to
be attended to, as Musicks cloze has the greatest impression on the hearers
passion, it being the compendium of all the preceding notes: I shall now
acquaint thee how I have distributed the small remainder of my treasure, and
then bid thee farewell.

Imprimis, my Beauty, my choicest Jewel, of highest estimation, I have
bequeathed unto thee, not that Nature has been any thing parsimonious of her
gifts unto thee, or that Charity founded on the necessitous condition of the
recipient, has been the directrix of this my benevolence; but should I have
bestowed it on another, that had been the ready way to have bred endless
dissentions in thy Kingdom, in creating thee a Peer and corrival, which our Sex
and State cannot admit of.

Item, My Venereous appetite, I have given to the Nunneries, it being the only
means to set on fire Diana's Kingdom with libidinous ^lames, thereby to
compensate the injuries mine has received from her deluded Vota^ies.

Item, The Net wherein my jealous husband ensnared Mars and me, when we were
fighting a Love Duel, and satiating each others unsatiable desires, I leave
unto the Stews, to fish for those that swim down the same voluptuous stream.

Item, The Sunbeam, which with such saucy impudence, durst not only pry into
but disclose a Lovers secrets, at the immodest relation of which, in a full
assembly of the Gods, Aurora ever since has blushed, I give unto new espoused
Lovers to light them to their Bridal Beds; and as for Phoebus himself, who sent
this bold spy to reveal my shame, I charge you, revenge it, by out-shining
him, in his greatest luster, with your Beauty.

Item, The Golden Ball of Discord, which the fair Phrygian Shepherd, on happy
Ida's top, adjudged unto me, as the prize of my transcending Beauty, I have
left unto the rich Misers, to be a continual cause of unappeasable jarrs,
between the th^ee powers of their Souls, the Understanding, Will, and
Affections.

Lastly, my Husband Vulcans horns, I have bequeathed unto the Citizens of
Trachys, though they themselves through frigid sterility, have been inclining
to Diana's faction, yet for their Wives faithful loyal and ardent zealous
affection to, and promotion of, our much despised cause, they are rewarded with
them, which will prove as Cornucopiaes, filled with offsprings, riches and all
terrestrial blessings.

Having thus given thee an Enchi^idion, or Breviary of those Legacies, more at
large penned down in my Will, I have now nothing to do, but to bid heaven and
earth and thee and all farewell: Farewell do I say? Can my evaporating Soul
assist my feeble Lungs, in breathing forth that word, and not expire? (...)
languor runs through all my defatigated limbs, at the fatal sounding of that
deadly world! methinks it rings in my ears just like deaths Orator, the tolling
bell, and comes to summon me to the Grave; at the very thought of it my
affrighted blood congeals within my trembling veins, and a faint qualm
surrounds my heart, as if a freezing blast from the glaciated Snow on the bleak
Alps tops, insinuating it self into all my Pores, besieged my Vitals. Ah!
cannot heavens doom be reversed? must I descend to the shades below? must I
change my glistering Pall of immortality for deaths winding sheet? Ah! methinks
I feel my self already Coffined in his Sable Arms; methinks I hear grim Charon
plead for an issue; methinks a dark gloomy Cloud interposes between me and the
half-obscured light, and enwraps me in a black mourning veil. Then sweet
Amphigenia, once more farewell, love thy subjects, remember me, be kind to
Danpion, and therein thou will be kind to

VENUS.


Amphigenia that with a pleasant countenance had read part of the Letter, often
smiling at Danpions subtilty, ere she had perused half, converts her smiles
into frowns, and with any angry blushing look, flings the Letter at the Boy,
and bids him carry it back to Danpion, from whom he received it, and tell him,
that he was very profuse in his own praise, and that she very much doubted,
whether any of those Hyperbolical commendations were due to any of his Sex
living, much less to him; and that if his thoughts were so self advancing, as
to repute himself a person so highly accomplished, the way to have others
concur with him in their judgments concerning his rich endowments (which was
the thing she presumed he aspired at) was not (she said) to reveal so much of
his folly; But if he was so ambitious of praise, it had been more wisdom to
have had another tongue, and not his own, to be lavish in his praises, or that
if he must needs commend himself, it were more honorable to extol himself by
his actions, than by his words; for she was sure the wisest sort of people
would esteem him, whose name was renowned for brave exploits, was sounded forth
by the Trumpet of fame, to merit higher applause, than he whose own tongue
babled forth his own commendations in such an exuberant manner; but truly (said
she) for his actions, those that I have had experience of, they give the lie to
his expressions. Therefore she bad him advise him to sorbear any further
troubling of her with his cheating follies, for (she said) he did but delude
himself, in imagining he should delude her.

The Boy hearing this, nimbly snatched up the Letter, and with his wings
fanning out the light, that he might not be perceived how he vanished, he
swif^ly cuts through the fluid Air, and ascends to the top of the room, where
the passage through which he entered was ready open for his return; so that
after he had delivered himself out of that delightful prison, he neatly closes
again the breach, and flies to Danpion, to acquaint him with the success of the
plot, who having all this while sat in the dark Vault, was not ignorant of
most of these passages. But when he was more fully informed, how she suspected
the plot, and with what disdain and fury she tossed the letter to his Page, he
presently hasts to his Chamber, commands his Boy to be absent, and slings
himself on his bed, permits not his senses to take the least repose, but
sometimes walks up and down the room, lamenting his condition, and then tossing
himself on his Couch, exclames against all women, and upbraids himself of
folly, to be ensnared and captived with such an inconstant vanity. But then he
would condemn himself for calumniating that Sex, when Amphigenia's virtues are
sufficient testimonies of the incomparable excellencies that generous Nature
confers upon them.

In this restless manner he consumed most part of the night, having his
thoughts distracted between despair and grief, which like two potent factions
in a kingdom, b^ed a civil war in his breast, the event of which tended not to
the predominancy of either, but only to a total exclusion of Morpheus, from
usurping dominion over his turmoiled senses, grown almost senseless with those
rude broyls. But then summoning his wonted fortitude, and invincible patience,
under all the adverse storms of fortune, he now begins to banish sorrow and
despair from him, and to rebuke himself for his effeminate submission to his
passion. What (said he) shall I, who never yet was daunted with the terrors of
an enemies murtherous sword, and who durst assault an army of Gorgons, Harpyes,
Furies, and all the infernal Apes and Monsters listed in Plutos Militia, shall
I now be forced to retreat from my resolutions with a Females ^rowns? and be
now compelled to subjugate my self to every domineering passion? though I love
Amphigenia, and for her sake would freely uncase my soul, and (were it in my
power) transform it into a Jewel, which if I ^hought she would vouchsafe to
honor with acceptance, I Would present her, as a testimony of pure affection; yet
Amphigenia shall never make me unman my self, and degenerate from my masculine
aequanimity into a leaden feminine spirit, whose embased flexibleness will bend
and yield to every cross mischance that thwarts their desires. And what though
I love Amphigenia, must I therefore do that that will make me hate my self? No,
henceforth I am resolved to abandon all abject discontent and grief, and leave
whining despair to those dejected souls, who conscious of their own small
worth, become Loves footballs, and suffer themselves to be kicked and spurned
by tyrannizing Beauty. And though the imperious Mistress of my captived heart,
does yet retain her austere reservedness, yet she is a woman, and if a woman,
light and unconstant, as the fleeting Air, or floating wave; and therefore as
the Air is now stormy, and anon serene, the wave now rough, and anon calm; so
who knows how soon she may calm and smooth her stormy brow, and be of a milder
aspect? it is but waiting till her gamesome vein surprise her, and expel her
rigid thoughts, and then she will be as toyish, as now she is coy. But stay,
who is it, that my thoughts thus malape^tly presume to accuse of levity,
coyness, retyredness, and what not? is it not Amphigenia? Amphigenia, the model
of heaven, the Paragon of Beauty, the glory of Nature, the worlds ornament, the
pride of Thessalia, and the Mistress of my heart? Amphigenia whose peerless
perfections so far transcend the Criticism of Owl-ey'd judgment, as that their
dazzling luster renders them even unapprehensible, much more incomprehensible,
and most of all uncontrovertible. Can my dim-sighted soul then think to discern
a spot in that resplendent Beauty, whose refulgent rays, though seen but by
reflection in my thoughts, obscure its purblind sight, with a dusky mist? what
if she be coy, and inexorable to the Petitions of her poor Lovesick
suppliants? it may be she is an Angel clad in flesh, and if so, her purity
debats all thoughts of humane conjunction, but if not, she is a woman clothed
with Angelical Beauty, and that thought subverts all hopes of fruition. Her
body though framed by Nature, of a mavelous Architecture, yet is but a
temporary Cell, where her immaculate Soul, for the freer and more uninterrupted
commerce with heaven, separated from all converse may reside, exchanging sacred
and sublime meditations, the most pure offerings and sweet exhalations of a
Chaste uncontaminated mind, for divine enthusiasms and inspirations. Shall I
then to purchase this transitory Cell, sell my joys, my life, my rest, my heart
and all? no my immaterial Soul will not admit of commixture with the most
refined earth, and therefore it is not her corporal part alone, though molded
into an Angelical form, that does rapt my heart with a transporting affection;
but her Soul, her virtuous Soul, whose beams shining through her eyes, as
through a Crystal medium, reflect round her face, and exhale my affections; but
alas! that is too much wedded to Virginity, and taken up with the ravishing
delicacies of Chastity, ever to be adulterated and ravished with passion, so as
to parturiate amorous desires, the offsprings of love-enthralled souls.
Despair then henceforth shall be the sable hearse of my disturbing thoughts,
I Will now compose my interior, disordered by the jarrings of rebellious
passions, and make my irrational part resign and surrender up all her faculties
to the governance and direction of my intellectuals. And if my discourteous
Stars have not destined me to that happiness, to be linked in matrimonial
union, with such a superexcellent Beauty, and to have our hearts dissolved into
one, with the ardent flames of pure affection; I must frame a content, and make
my Soul acquiesce in heavens determination. But if the kind fates have decreed
the contrary, I shall with unwearied patience await, till the happy hour of
Amphigenia's miraculous conversion (Elixar-like) shall turn all my tormenting
thoughts, and corroding anxieties into true bliss and contentation.

Thus did Danpion sacrifize the night to the vigils of a restless mind, till
about the dawning of the day, when night grown gray with age, began to fly
with his train of Stars, before Titans^ flaming horses, which were now climing
up the gilded Horizon; when leaping out of his bed, he went down into the shady
walks, to solace himself in that Paradise of delights; but he had not walked
many paces, ere his ear was arrested with a voice, which according it self to a
Lutes mollitious Aires, was so harmoniously rapturous, as none but would have
thought it to have been some Seraphim, who blessed with a treble portion of
Celestial joys, in an ecstasy warbled forth his own happiness; so far did it
surpass the Pythagorean accents. These heart-rapting strains could not but
extort attention from Danpions ravished ear, so that stealing nearer, the more
to satiate his avaritious ears with that vocal melody (which was but
parsimoniously conveyed unto him at that distance, as if the niggardly Grove
had treasured up those Soul-inchanting notes, to enrich its winged inhabitants)
he heard this Song.

The Antiphone.
Chorus Sweet day, so calm, so cool, so bright,
Thou have expelled the dusky night,
And Sol begins to mount on high,
And marry Tellus to the sky.
Each thing attired in's best array,
Its purest sweets now does display,
As if this was its bridal day.
Why should not we then court and toy,
And lovers purest bliss enjoy?

Treble. In pearly drops the morning weeps,
And in this dew, her sorrow steeps,
To see her self excelled so far.

Base. She blushes in thy Cheek to see,
So sweet a Crimson die to be,
With which her tincture cannot compare.

Chorus. Thus we consume the Crystal day,
And hours and minutes fly away,
Whilst here we sit and court and toy,
And Lovers rapting bliss enjoy.

Chorus. The Turtles chaste with billings sweet
Unite their souls, whilst bills do meet,
The Rose unfolds its spicy sweets,
With them the purple morning greets,
And marrys her perfumes to the Air,
The earth and sky now clad most rare
Pride it like a new married pair.
Why should not we then Court and toy,
And Lovers purest bliss enjoy?

Treble. The Rosy morn these drops does shed,
As tears, that Sol her spicy bed
So soon will leave, and from her go.

Base. Oh, no, they fall to kiss the Roses,
Which thy pure Snowy Cheeks incloses,
And in that bed of Lilies grow.

Chorus. Thus we consume the Crystal day,
And hours and minutes fly away,
Whilst here we sit and court and toy,
And Lovers rapting bliss enjoy.

Chorus. The winged Angels of the Groves,
In shady boughs do chant their loves,
The early Larks to sing agree,
This sweet days Epit halamie,
Echo transformed by heavenly powers,
To' a voice, that haunts the Groves and Bowers,
Does seek to espouse her strains to ours.
Why should not we then court and toy,
And Lovers purest bliss enjoy?

Treble. Look how the wanton air does dance,
And then as charmed into a trance,
Listens to hear thy warbling airs.

Base. The wanton wind from thy sweet lips
A kiss does steal, and then it skips
For Sanctuary into thy hairs.

Chorus. Thus we consume the Crystal day,
And hours and minutes fly away,
Whilst here we sit and court and toy,
And Lovers rapting bliss enjoy.

Chorus. The leaves now fanned with Zephyt's wings,
Marry their gentle mutterings,
To the murm'rings of the streams beneath,
Still purling, as the air does breath,
The silver streams, that gently creep,
And seem in Crystal tears to weep,
Marry the senses to their sleep.
Why should not we then court and toy,
And Lovers happiness enjoy?

Treble. Look how the days bright Harbinger,
Stands still thy charming voice to hear,
The Orbs melodious tones despising.

Base. Look how Hyperion sends a ray,
To see if thou will rule the day,
And seeing thee blushes at his rising.

Chorus. Thus we consume the Crystal day,
And hours and minunes fly away,
Whilst here we sit and court and toy,
And Lovers rapting bliss enjoy.

Chorus. Fair Phil'mele on her thorny seat,
As she does quav'ring not^s repeat,
And sing away the winged hours,
Does strive to espouse her airs to ours.
Sometimes in plain, then by and by,
She descants sweet, whilst we reply.
And thus we procreate harmony.
Why should not we then court and toy,
And Lovers rapting bliss enjoy?

Treble. Prithee no more hyperbolize,
Loves sweetest speech comes from thine eyes,
Whose powerful language charms my soul.

Base. Oh charming word! cursed be that hour,
When thy commands shall have no power,
My soul to guide, rule, and control.

Chorus. Thus we consume the Crystal day,
And hours, and minutes fly away,
Whilst here we sit and court and toy,
And Lovers rapting bliss enjoy.



Danpion, that for a while lay as it were Iulld into a Trance, with the Musicks
sweet modulations, as if his Captived Soul had been fettered with the trembling
strings, and imprisoned in the Lutes charming Womb, now began to be arowsed
with a new swarm of stinging desires, whose inordinate Curiosity would not be
satisfied, until he had repaired unto the place whence those Harmonious Accents
came, that so with the sight of their Author, he might mitigate the Martyrdom
he suffered under his tyrannizing-thoughts. But he soon redeemed his enslaved
mind, with a full surplusage of Content, when at his arrival at that blessed
Elysium, he beheld the two great Sharers in his Soul, Periander and Florinda,
sitting together on a green Bank, under the protection of a spreading-Oak, and
with their agreeing Voices, sweetly expressing the internal Harmony of their
concording Souls; who no sooner had fixed their eyes upon him, and knew him to
be Danpion, but they arose, and with pleasing looks, and humble deportments,
the Orators of true Respect, and Affection, thus accosted him:

Our good Angel, My Lord (said Florinda) is exceeding Prodigal of his favors
to day, to bless us with the felicity of your company too, this sweet Morning.
Vouchsafe me your Pardon, Madam, (said Danpion) for presuming thus to interrupt
your sweet confederation: how much the harmonious Accents, these sweet
Offsprings of your Angel-voyce transported me, is not within the power of my
ravished thoughts to impart unto you.

Your Hyperbolical expressions, My Lord, almost persuade me to a belief, that
my mean Voice had charmed you out of your self, but that I am too much
acquainted with my own inability to effect things less miraculous: My self must
witness against my self for my own imperfections, which would soon appear, were
they put to the test of an impartial judgment. But (my Lord) I am not a
^tranger to your Rhetorical vein.

Madam (said Da^pion) I must acknowledge you have conquered me; yet, were not I
so rapt with the wonder of your Virtues and Excellencies, that my Brains
incapable to (...) a Reply, I could also say, that benign Heavens have so (...)
with your society, that neither and wholly unacquainted with your wonted
mode^^y, under which, it was always your endeavor to mask your Excellencies,
and with which, as a di^inishing Gla^s, you ever so (...) to lessen your
Perfections. But Madam (said he) they are too ^^spicuous, ever to be concealed
with such a transparent Veil; Modesty rather sets a Crimson gloss upon the
rest, and is but a lively Frontispiece, containing a short Enchiridion of your
Perfections.

Well, My Lord (said she) Women are the weaker Sex, and therefore however we
seem to veil those things you are pleased to interpret Perfections, I Am sure we
must veil to you; but this I must take the liberty to say, That the knowledge
of my own little worth is too much fixed in my thoughts, ever to be unriveted
by any Artifice whatsoever. Nor shall any Rhetoric Madam, (said he) ever
^avish from me the belief of your Excellencies.

After these, and many other the like speeches that passed betwixt them,
Danpion related the story of his unhappy love, what means he had used to
accomplish his desires, but how ineffectual; how he had rackt his Wit, and set
all possibilities on the Tenters of his Invention; but how froward Fortune, the
sworn Enemy to Virtue, and Virtuous Lovers, had opposed his Endeavors, and how
more than all Amphigenia had laden his misfortune with her heavy displeasure,
so that all his Hopes were now Metamorphosed into Despair.

Periander and Florinda, whose own Experiences had taught them how to pity an
unfortunate Lover, could not but commiserate his hopeless condition, so that
they passed away much time in consulting how to lead him out of those mazing
intricacyes he was involved in; till at length, much of the riches of the
Morning being consumed, and Titan having drunk his Mornings-draught of
Crystal-dew, Florinda not daring to continue any longer, upon peril of
discovery, and a total forfeiture of Amphigenia's Favor, with many Kisses and
Embraces (a Lovers sweetest Eloquence) took Gylcera surpriz^d by a Pirate page
195.

leave of Periander, and with a graceful deportment, bid farewell to Danpion;
after whose departure, Periander informed Danpion what great misfortunes had of
late befallen a Beautiful and Virtuous, but unfortunate Lady, whose Redemption
(he said) would exact his presence for a time. Danpion being importunate to
hear the story, Periander thus related it.

Glycera the Nunn (said he) that has so surprised Pandion's affections, as if
the Heavens had frowned upon her, because she frowned upon him, has of late
undergone such calamities in Cyprus, (as we are informed by a Knight, that not
long since was a sad Spectator of her more sad misery) such, I say, as would
Challenge the Tribute of a River of Tears, from an Ocean of Grief; such as
would compel the dryest Eye to bleed or weep, and by as it were an Elemental
transmutation, make the most flinty heart evaporate in aerie fumes of sighs, or
dissolve into a Lake of Tears: For no sooner had she escaped out of the
Nunnery, but a cursed Pirate snatched her up, and conveyed her to his Ship,
where he daily solicited her to part with her Chastity, more precious to her
than her life; but she abhorring the motion, continually rejected him, so that
in the end, that Rebel to Virtue, hells firstborn, and heir inheriting its
damnable practices, perceiving himself to be slighted, and no means to
accomplish his hell-bred desires, resolved to crop the sweet bud of her
Virginity by force, and rob her of that rich Cargazoon of Virtue, which her
sweet soul bound for heaven contained; and to that end having on a day most
importunately urged her, with all the entreaties and inticements, a
hell-inspired mind could invent, seeing all in vain, locks his Cabin door, and
seizes upon her like a Hawk upon the innocent Dove, whilst she (poor Lady)
trembled under his tallons, like a Lamb new yeaued on a sheet of Snow, and
falls down upon her knees, and begged for heavens sake, for Virtues sake, and
for his own sake, as he would not have the Sea open her devouring jaws, and
intomb him alive in her vast womb, as he would not have the Clouds distill down
vengeance upon his head, not to make her innocence become a prey to his lust.

This said, she wept the rest, bedewing her Lillyed Cheeks with Crystal tears.
But he, Marble-hearted Villain, pourtraying in his loathed countenance, a
doleful image of what hells cursed imps animated him unto, not at all daunted
with the Majesty of sorrow, that sat enwrapped in a Snowy veil, nor moved with
her words, whose woeful accents would have melted the most obdurate heart, and
charmed the most merciless soul into commiseration, gripes her in his Arms, and
flings his hellish deformed Carcass upon her, and thu^ endeavors to possess
him of those sweet treasures, which had been more fit to have been reaped by
some heaven-blest, earth-adored Monarch, than by the filthy hand of such a
lust-defiled wretch.

But alas! she (poor Lady) when through the liquid medium of her tears, she
saw, that in despite of her weak struggling, she must part with her Virginity,
that redolent perfume, which had wont to ascend to heaven, as the sweet
sacrifice of her Chaste mind, how did she blush, and weep, and wring her hands,
as if she would squeeze tears from them too, and then look pale, as if grief
had wrapped her beauty in the winding sheet of a Snowy paleness, being ready to
be buried with her Virtue in the loathsome Grave of his lust? and then blush
again, as ashamed to think of her shame, and weep as if his lustful flames had
thawed her very soul into tears; tears that like Pearls, heartbreaking sorrow,
woes factor, had brought from the crimson orient of her blushing Beauty; but
then a Lillyed paleness would exile the Vermilion redness, and look like a Lawn
sheet cast over a bed of Roses. One while the thoughts of her dying honor, but
never-dying reproach, would dye her Cheeks with a Crimson tincture, as if her
heart bleeding for her misery meant to send some streams out at the Crystal
sluices of her eyes, but ah! they were anticipated by an inundation of tears.
And then the thoughts of her afflicted, forsaken, hopeless condition, the sad
thoughts of her unheard, unpittyed, unhelpt distress; ah! but the killing
soul-vulnerating thoughts of her woeful dishonor, at length quite changed her
countenance (sweet countenance, in which there shined a delicate loveliness, a
lovely Majesty, a majestic sweetness, to the inthralling of adoring minds) I
say quite changed her sweet countenance to a ghastly look, as if the lovely
Roses of her Beauty would not grow in that Garden, where he planted his ra^es,
or as if that white immaculate innocence that had hitherto dived into the
bottom of her heart, and there inshrined it self, now grown light, did swim in
the top, and cover her face with a pallid whiteness, as if it came to kiss her
cheeks, and take its last farewell; or rather to supplicate heaven for speedy
assist (...) with shriller cries, than any her seeble voice could utter.

The all-^uling powers, that are seldom ine^or^ble to the heaven-penetrating
shrieks of distressed innocence, had thus far permitted this flagitious
mechator to proceed in his accursed enterprise, when just (oh unjust act, but
just heaven, for so merciful a prevention!) just, I say, as he went to unload
his lust, she gave a shrie^* as if sorrow had eccho-like pined her very soul to
a voice, that it resounded through all the parts of the Ship, like some horrid
cry of a guilt-surrounded soul, newly snatched from the clai'y prison of its
body, and delivered up before it is aware to the immortal pains of the other
world; which arriving at the ears of the Seamen, they like men amazed, in a mad
confusion presently run to the Masters Cabin, and force open his door, where
they beheld this dismal spectacle, the Master endeavoring to abuse the dead
body of a beautiful Lady (for when she saw that the powers above would permit
him to despoil her of her Virtue, her Chaste soul, as abhorring to share with
her fair consort the body, in so detestable a misery, fled to heaven to
impetrate revenge.)

This woeful sight could not but exact tears from a pumice, so that though their
hearts hardened by a frequent performance of horrid actions would not relent at
ordinary griefs, yet this disaster wrung such testimonies of a true
sympathizing sorrow, as no imagination could conceive greater.

The Master, when he saw himself thus surprised in the midst of his barbarous
impiety, started up and stood a while with all his faculties attached, with the
raging agony of a furious passion; but though his silent tongue could pay no
tribute to his madness, yet did his hideous countenance in the terrors of an
affrighting look, decipher the desperate fury of his enraged mind, whilst his
frothing mouth foamed out a dumb reply; till at length with extremity of
passion arrouzed out of his hellish trance, he vomits forth a stream of
monstrous oaths, as if he went to conjure down a legion of infernal spirits,
and bans his men to the pit of hell, and stamps and swears, as if he would tear
the Furies out of Tartarus, and binds his soul with an ear-rending oath, hells
damned language, to make fish-meat of all those audacious villains, that durst
interturb him in thi^ mutinous manner; and with that he begins with the fai^
Corpse of the dead Lady, having ravished her soul from her, though not her
virtue.

But no sooner did Thetis in her Cae^ulean arms embrace this sweet body, but on
a sudden, the Sun, as ashamed that his beams should be accessory to such an
execrable deed, muffled up himself in sable clouds, and the sky (as enraged
that the merciless Sea should make prize of that that heaven only could lay
claim unto) musters together whole Armies of clouds to besiege it, the Sea to
fortify it self against heavens furious assaults, raised up cloud-scaling
mountains, and tosses the Ship as if it meant to dart it at the skys; with that
all the airy inhabitants of the middle region rendezvous together, and erect
vast Towers in the sky, from whence heavens Cannon-shot is discharged with such
a roaring noise, as if the worlds Axle-tree were snapt in sunder, and both the
Poles jumbled together; the rolling billows, foaming with madness, clamber up
to the clouds, where as it were pregnant with night, they are delivered of a
horrid darkness, such a darkness, as if all hells cursed inhabitants had
belched forth a sable fume, or as if the steam that ascends from burning
Phlegeton, Pluto's Cauldron, had overspread the Hemisphere. Mean while the
distracted Seamen run up and down in a hurly burly, rending the air, and their
throats with confused bawling; the Master bans and raves and storms at the
Storm, and commands neither himself nor they know what, for all his Sea
gibberish is born away with the wind, as fast as born out of his sluce-like
mouth; the Sails are torn in rags from the Yards, the Yards and Masts shivered
in splinters, and the Shrowds snapt like burnt twine, mean while the raging
Surges mount and ro^l, as if Death were making wa^ry tombs wherein to intert
these heaven-besieged Souls. At length a breaking Billow came tumbling along,
and boarded the ship with such a force, as split her in pieces, and rent her
stemm from her stern. The poor drowning men to save their lives caught hold
some on the Prow, others on the Poop, some on the Masts, others on the Boat,
But Neptune bowl'd his waves so fast, that they were soon overwhelmed, and made
a prey to the greedy fishes, as the Master had sworn. The Master, whose
execrable villainy had brought this de^truction upon his men, had
notwithstanding awhile saved himself in the Longboat, and began to bless
himself with the hopes of escape, but just Heaven would not permit such
wickedness to go unpunished, nor Glyceras death to go unrevenged, but sent a
furious gust, which transported a breaking billow into the boat, and both
transported him to the Port of death, and that his death might be the more
signal, there came two Sha^kes just as he was thrown out of the Boat, and
contending for his body, tare it in pieces.

No sooner had heavens blustering executioners put their just doom in execution,
but there grew a tru^e between the Winds and Seas, the Sun giving his Beams as
Hostages for the heavens, the Sea demolishing its lofty rampires, and both ^eas
and Skies smiling each on other, in token the powers above were pacified. Many
small vessels that were fishing, some on the coast of Pelopennesus, others by
Cyprus, and others amongst the Aegean Islands, were cast away in this storm,
some wrackt on the shore, others foundred in the Seas, some over-set, and
others s^lit against the Rocks, so that few or none escaped, excepting one
small fisher Boat, that had seasonably disburthened it self of her Masts and
goods, and all things that might make her swim deep in the Sea, and with a
small Sail, fastened to the main Yard, that then served for a Mast, spooned
before the Wind, and by that means nimbly mounting over the lofty waves, and
again gently descending into the low valleys, it saved it self in the midst of
that hideous tempest; but yet was driven from the Euxine promounts, to the
place where this Ship was wracked, that is between Peloponnesus, and the Island
of Cyprus.

This Vessel thus tossed hither, by that time the raging Winds were appeased,
and the Seas allayed, might discern some ribs of the torn Carcass of the Ship,
floating to and fro on Neptunes bowling-green, and here and there Bailes of
goods, Chests and Trunks swimming up and down; which the Fishermen perceiving,
conjecturing that they were the goods of some Ship tossed in the late storm,
they loaded their Vessel with those things that were of most worth, and sailed
toward Cyprus, intending there to Merchandise their spoils; but by that time
they had sailed about three hours, the weather growing more and more ^erene,
the Sun in his most glistring attire cou^ting the Sea, and the Sea to appear
more lovely, smoothing her face from wrinkles, and the sky clipping and
embracing the Sea with a clear Horizon, they might discern in a prospective
glass at a great distance, something move upon the Sea like a man, and (as they
thought) casting his arms to and fro, to cry for succor; they with all speed
make to him, and within half an hour, came so near as to perceive it to be a
woman, by her dishevelled hair, but still as fast as they sailed to overtake
her, she made from them, that in the end they thought her to be some Mermaid,
so that they were clapping on all the Canvass they had saved in the storm, to
make haste from her, but by that time they had sailed some few leagues, they
descryed her ^aking toward them, with so much swiftness, as they thought it in
vain to fly from her, but rather determined to stay, until she came up with
them, which was in a short time, for by that time they had put their Sails in
the wind, she was come so near as they might discern it to be a sorrowful Lady,
sitting (as on horseback) on a Dolphin, her face, the Index of a grieved mind,
seemed to be beauties Coffin, wherein in lamentable Characters, there seemed to
be engraven this Epitaph, Here lys heart-enthralling beauty, murdered by
heartbreaking sorrow. Fain would her breath formed into words, have broken the
sweet prison of her trembling lips, but grief, their tyrannous Jailer, would
not permit it, but converted them into groans. At length giving liberty to her
tongue to Midwive the dolours which her heart pregnant with was in travel
withal, she with lamentable demeanor thus spoke.

Ah woe is me, woe is me (said she) but then the tears interrupted her speech,
and her eyes to assist her fainting voice in sorrows doleful language,
discourst her griefs, but then tears again as it were ratifyed into sighs, and
sighs framed into words, she thus lamented her condition.

Ah (said she) little did I ever think that heaven had thus many plagues in
store for me. Never was poor woman distressed like me; as though one death were
not enough to kill a poor dying woman, but I must daily be tormented with
partial deaths, that methinks tear my soul piecemeal from my body; Oh! show
some mercy to a miserable wretch, a helpless, hopeless, forlorn, forsaken
woman, beset with remediless dolo^^^, and pity my sorrows, as you would ever
hope that heaven should commiserate you, when you are besieged with the terrors
of death-threatning calamities, which how soon may be your lot is known only to
the great disposer of our fates.

These doleful expressions, expressed so dolefully by a Lady beleagured with
extremity of misery, would have scrued tears from a Rock, and made an Adamant
turn Niobe, but yet took no impression upon the Master, but he rather (like an
inhumane Churl) commands them to sail away, What (said he) have we nothing to
do but to mind a foolish woman's babbling? let her alone to prate to the Dolphin,
and mind you your employments. But no sooner had he tacked about to be gone,
but the poor Lady gave a shriek would have rent a heart in sunder, and cried
out to them as loud as her feeble voice could utter; Oh! (said she) have your
hearts made a league with cruelty? though your ears should be deaf to the
lamentable cries of a distressed woman, yet methinks, your eyes might intercede a
little for me with your rocky hearts. Oh that ever so much barbarous immanity
should lodge in humane souls! methinks it might shame you to see a Dolphin more
merciful than your selves. Shame, do I say? alas shame is virtues attendant,
and resides not where virtue is exiled, and virtue is ever exiled from an
obdurate heart. Oh you powers above, will you give no truce to my sorrows? must
I be quite bereft of all relief? and then she gave a groan, as if she had torn
her vital strings, and lifting up her eyes and hands, she thus implored Heaven:

Since it is your will (said she) to drench and pickle up my soul in Briny
sorrows, to preserve it pure and untainted, and that the stormy gusts of
adverse fortune must drive me through a Sea of Tears, ere I can arrive at the
Haven that shall put an end to the turmoiling Navigation of this life; Oh then
(said she) let this also he your will, that when that atome of time, that
inconsiderable instant that links past and future, shall unlink my soul from my
body; then, oh then, let it arrive at that blessed Elysium, where one eternal
indivisible moment chains refined souls to an immortality of unconceivable
felicity.

The Fishermen hearing these woeful complaints, began to be enraged at the
Masters savage cruelty, and in a mutinous manner, with threatenings compelled
him to relieve her; the Dolphin all this time, as if by some instinct from
Heaven, swimming so near the Vessel, as that they could cast a Rope to draw her
in; which in the end they did, the Master not daring to oppose.

The Vessel thus fraught, with more Treasure than all the Eastern Junks or
Caravans, (her Eyes rich Caskets of Diamonds, containing more Gems, and her
Breath more Aromatic Spices, than ever yet adorned and perfumed the Orient)
moved with soft and gentle Gales, thus smoothly slyded along the Seas Briny
surface, for the space of 48 hours; at the end of which, they arrived at Cyprus.

The Master, who while he was at Sea, terrified with the bold threatenings of
his men, durst not vent his Cruelty toward this poor Lady; yet being at
Cyprus, he resolved to revenge the affronts he received for her sake, upon her;
and to that end, one night, when he had after great entreaties, given her his
promise for permission to go ashore, he unknown to any, sold her to an
ill-favored Rustic, that had all the marks of Deformity almost about him; who
in a rude manner haled her ashore, and that night conveyed her to his Cottage,
some miles distant from the Sea, intending the next morning to complete his
felicity by marriage.

But when Glycera saw that Heaven had redeemed her out of a Purgatory of
misery, to fling her into a Hell of calamities, Oh, with what doleful
lamentations did she (sad Lady) consume the night? Now wring her hands and
groan, as if she rang her own Knell; and then weep and sob, as if her Eyes and
Lungs, rivalls in Sorrow, had contended which should express most to the life,
a killing Passion. Sometimes her fainting spirits, as not able to endure the
intolerable tyranny of domineering Grief, would seem condensed into Tears,
which diffused through the floodgates of her Eyes, would leave her surprised
with dying languor: but then her senses restored to their natural functions,
sorrow, with a vigorous impetuousness, would break the damms of moderation, and
like a Torrent for a while restrained, return with greater fury. Sometimes she
would begin to importune Heaven for mercy: O thou great Rector of our Destinies
(said she) must my heart be the Rendesvouz, where all miseries meet? Thou art
the Circumference, from whence these black lines of Adversity stream; must I be
the Center where they terminate? Oh let not tyrannizing sorrow usurp thy
Prerogative over all my Faculties, and subject those Powers to its Rule, which
only ought to obey thy Divine Impositions: Oh destroy not the soul which thou
have made, nor let my Perdition anticipate that Glory which thou did propose
to thy self in my Creation; but show mercy, if ever show mercy, show mercy to
one submerst in misery.

Having said this, she would pause a while, as it were listening what Answer
Heaven would return, and with some faint sighs, seem as it were to parley with
Death; and then a chilly Paleness would arrest her Countenance, as if Heaven,
mindeful of her Petitions, had hung out their white Flagg of Truce, and
displayed it in her face, as a Token of that inviolable League, should ere long
be contracted between her soul, and eternal Bliss; and that now they were
sending their black Ambassador Death, to sign and seal the Articles.

Dear Danpion excuse me, if I am thus Copious in the relation of this sad
Ladies misfortune; but truly, when I heard the story first related by the
Knight (that (as I told you) lately came from Cyprus, and heard her self
relate, what his eyes were not spectators of) I could not but silently bequeath
some drops to the ground; drops do I say? Alas, had I not been in Pandion's
presence, but where I might have let loose the reigns to my Passion, I could
have drowned my self in Tears; for methoughts I felt my vey soul transformed
into sorrow it self. But to proceed, thus I say, She lamentably spent this
lamentable night, in Weeping, Sighing, Sobbing, Groaning, Praying, till the
bright morning had dispelled the shadows of the misty night, and Aurora
wrapping up her face in a Vermilion-mantle, silently bewailed her sorrows in
Crystal Tears.

When Lacon (for so was the Rustic named) awaked by his own loud snoring,
called to mind his new Bride, and ravished with joy, his heart clambring up
into his mouth, almoast choked him with excess of contentment, he arises, and
in haste runs to bless his Eyes with the sight of her Beauty, and ere he or she
was aware, stumbles upon her, who had chosen the darkest corner in the Cottage,
to lament her miseries; and when she saw her self thus surprised, modesty so
sweetly apparelled her Face, in a Vermilion vesture, as that her Cheeks,
besprinkled with Tears, looked like Roses impearled with Heavenly dew.

No sooner did Lacon behold his new Sweet-hearts sweet-heart-attracting
feature, but her Eyes, that might vye Stars with Heaven, darted such sparkling
glances, as soon set on fire the tinder of his Affections; so that transported
with the Ecstasies of love, he boystrously seizes on her, and after his rude
manner, proffers to fix the Seal of his Affections on her melting Lips: Come
(said he) sweet Lombe, let me buss thy Honny-combe Lips, and with that, by
force he smackt her, as if he was sucking the sweet contained in those
Vermilion Hives of Beauty.

Much of the day being spent in this manner, Lacon Wooing, and Glycera Weeping,
he slabbering her Cheeks with his frothy Lips, and she bedewing his with her
Pearly Tears, at length he resolved to consummate his joys with Marriage, and
compels her to go with him to Venus-Temple, to sacrifize a pair of
Turtle-Doves, thereby to procure the Goddesses Benediction. But all the way as
she went, such a Mart of Beauties met in her sweet Countenance, as purchased
her as many Admirers, as Beholders, and Beholders, as Persons; her Eyes
inviting all eyes to behold, and her super-eminent Excellencies, alluring all
Beholders to adore her; so that few there were, whose Sex rendered them not
incapable to enjoy her Perfections, but would have even pawned their souls to
have bought so rich a Treasury of Beauties.

Her beauteous Face, wherein shined the Perfection of all Perfections, was a
visible heart-melting Music; which, as if composed of Charms, entranc't
Spectators, and struck Harmonious Raptures into adoring minds. Thus were the
Eyes, and Hearts, and Tongues of all led Captive by her Beauty, and forced to
pay the Tribute of looking, loving, and commending, to the sovereignty of her
Excellencies.

At length Superstition wedded to Admiration, begat a conceit in their minds,
that sure she was more than what her external form spoke her to be; for there
seemed a greater mixture of Divine Exellencies in her Beauty, than ever frail
Mortality could boast of; and her transcendent Glories seemed to run Parallel
with those that have bribed Superstitious souls to as^ribe Divinity to Venus:
so that in the end, they thought it the highest degree of Sacrilege, for any
Mortal whatsoever, to monopolize those Treasured in the pure vivid Temple of
her Beauty, which are only consecrated to the Gods; but much more for such a
deformed Adonis as Lacon, to enjoy so fair a Venus.

Amongst the many Captives, that were enthralled by Glyceras Beauty, whose
hearts were drawn by its magnetic force, it seems, this Knight was one; who
(as I told you) is the relater of of these sad tidings, whose fortune it was to
epsy her, as she passed along to the Temple: But no sooner were his eyes fixed
on her, but she, as a burning Mirour, wherein all the rays of Beauty centred,
inflamed his heart with the pure fire of chaste Affection; and perceiving her
Eyes with an inundation of Tears ready to overflow their own Beauties and with
silent lamentation to bewail her persecuted innocence, (for though she
endeavored to suppress any insurrections of Passion, what she could, yet
Nature would exact some tears, that wonted Tribute, that grief extorts in such
like Accidents) but I say, observing that internal sorrow she disclosed in her
Countenance, which (as he rightly interpreted it) could be for nothing, but
that she, such a miracle of Beauty, should be linked in Hymeneal Conjunction
with such a Monster of deformity, he said was so moved with compassion, that he
thought he felt the quintessence of each tear distill down into his Soul; and
disdaining that such a wonder of Ugliness, should be his Corrival in affection,
who might more aptly have contended in Rivalry with some of Pluto's fiends for
deformity, he drew his Sword, and compelled him to resign her up to himself,
unless he prized a moments sight of her, above his life.

No sooner Lacon saw the naked steel, but he flies like an Arrow out of a Bow,
not for his swiftness, but for the resemblance his shrimpish-slimgut body had
to an Arrow, as each leg had to a Bow; and all the way as he goes, he howls,
and yells, as if he had been beset with armed Thieves; so that in a short
space, such a concourse of People surrounds the Knight, and his Lady, as if
some wonder had dropped down from Heaven; some coming to behold the beauty of
the Lady, whose perfections fame, in so high a style, had proclaimed in their
ears, but could not obtrude upon their belief; others to see what was the
reason of that Tumult: So that though at first Glycera was the wonder that drew
the concourse, yet at length the concourse it self became the wonder.

And as is the manner of such Plebeian disorders, they seldom end without some
slaughter; and so it happened here: For seeing the Knight with his Sword drawn,
many thought he would have offered violence to the Lady; others hearing Lacon's
roaring, thought he had murdered him; others that were no less wounded with her
Beauty, than the Knight that had ravished her from Lacon, and thought their
Swords might purchase them as good a Title to her, as he, resolved either to
have her, or his life, or both; so that in an instant there was nothing to be
heard, but clashings of Swords, cries of dead men, and all the symptoms of
reigning confusion.

The Knight, that for a great space had gallantly defended himself and his
Lady, making many of the bodies of his Opposers fall, and do homage to his
rage, and their souls, which, to what their bodies had done, would not consent,
he sent to Tartarus, there to endure an eternal Vassalage under Pluto: But yet
having no other Bulwark than his Buckler, to fortify himself against the
incursions of his Enemies, he at last received a Wound, out of which such
plenty of Blood effused, that he was forced to surrender up himself, and his
Lady to the mercy of his Opponents, and by that means, he escaped from amongst
them.

But now the quarrel grew as hot amongst themselves, which should bear away the
Prize; every man accounting the loss of his blood a cheap price, to purchase so
rich a Treasure; thus there grew no end of their disorders, till at length some
Officers from the King came, and with the Point of the Sword of Justice, put a
full point and Period to the rude scufflings of this Rabble.

But when enquiry was made after Glycera, no news could be heard of her; for
taking her opportunity, when her bloody Suitors were all pleading their
Interests, with the Swords sharp-peircing Rhetoric, she escaped away in the
Crowd, and fled to a Wood not far distant, where she spent all that night in
bewailing her sorrowful estate; where her Soul would quaff in huge draughts of
woe, which, as not able to concoct, she would pour out again in Tears; Tears,
that fell like melted Stars from the Heaven of her Beauty.

Thus did she give up her self to the dominion of an unreasonable Passion,
which yet her Passion persuaded her was reasonable. Sometimes grief would
permit her thus to lament her Woes: Oh Me! of all women distressed! Must I be she
in whom miseries combine together, to make miserable? Must all things have
their stint, but my griefs alone be boundless? The Sea has its shore, the
Winds their limits, the Earth its center, and this spacious Globe of Heaven and
Earth its circumference; but Ah! No shore, no limits, no center, no
circumference to my sorrows: No shore to the Seas of my Tears, no limits to the
Wind of my sighs, no center to my deep-rooted griefs, nor no circumference to
the infinity of my miseries: But I am become Fortunes Warehouse, where she
hoords up her store of sorrows; Hells Butt, where my Innocence is the White,
at which they shoot their invenomed Arrows, Winged with Malice, and Piled with
Destruction; and Heavens Tennis ball, when if with the vehemence of the blow,
my Soul chance to bound upwards toward a Heaven of hope (for grief is ever at
the lowest, when it is at the highest; and extremity of misery, is ever the
dawning of mercy;) I say, if it chance to bound, some dismal Accident takes me
at the re-bound, and tosses me into a Hell of calamities: Come then Death, come
quickly, bend thy Bow, and send thy sharp-piled Arrows into this Pile of Dust,
that entombs my Soul. But then her Breasts would be brim-full with a raging
pang, which would struggle for birth; but in striving to vent all, it could
vent nothing, but only stop the passage of her speech; till at length her
breath would be delivered of a Groan, which capring through the Bows and
Leaves, would be re-bounded to her Ears by Echo; which Glycera hearing, the
better to pass away the mournful hours of the night, began thus to entertain a
Dialogue with her; which because the Knight thought worthy the relation to
Pandion, as well as I can remember, I shall relate to you.

Who is that (said Glycera) derides my misery? I, said Echo. Who is that I? Is
it Echo? ^Tis Echo. What do thou mock at woe? No. No sure, thy own woes
might make thee pity mine. Pity mine. Thy griefs indeed would extort pity from
the ^^intiest heart, but oh! What grief's like mine? Mine. ^Tis true, thine
might extract the tribute of a bleeding-eye. I. But sure my sorrows need pity
too. Need pity too. Tell me then Echo, must these griefs still per^^ver? Ever.
Ever? That Is a sad doom; what, must my miseries always proceed? Seed. What, no
sooner ^ipe, and blown, but Seed again? Gain. Gain indeed, to exchange a few
joys, for a million of sorrows; but yet, O that Heaven would release me of my
Bargain. Bare gain. Bare gain certainly, to sell my Soul for sighs and Tears;
but oh, when shall I find release? Lease* What, not till my life's Lease is out?
But when that is done, whither shall I then fly? High. What, to the Elysium of
eternal bliss? Yes. When once arrived there, what shall my Soul enjoy? Joy.
What joys are those that inhabit the Heaven Empyreal? Real. Mean time will not
Heaven hear my cry? Cry. That I have often done, but yet had no reply. Ply. What
if I should Ply it still, what Medicine will Heaven apply to my Disease? Ease.
What if I shall forbear vocal or mental Prayer? Err. Why, will not Heaven hear
the shrill moans of distre^t Innocence? No sense. Why are there any cries more
shrill? Ill. Ill cries aloud for vengeance; but oh, the sweet perfumes that
ascend from the chaste Innocent. No sent. What can such sweet exhalations yield
no sent? No sent. Why is it that such a redolent Balm as Innocencye, which
ascends to Heaven, as a perpetual Sacrifice, should yield without Prayer no
sent? Without Prayer nocent. When the nocent prays, what return does Heaven
make to his desire? Ire. What Answer will Heaven return, if the Innocent pray?
Ray. A Ray of Love, or Light, or both? Both. Which of the Powers sublime can
affect a Mortal? All. When a beam of Love shines from Heaven into a Mortal,
what part does it comfort? Fort. The Fort or Life, where the soul chiefly
retires; which is that part? Heart. How long will such Divine consolations
stay? Ay. For ay will they abide? Bide. Oh Heavenly news! But, Echo* how
come thou to be of Heavens Privy-Counsel? Did e're fly so nigh the Gods, as
to read the Records of Destiny? Nigh. Thou art mortal as well as I, art thou
not? Not. Art thou not born below, among the Trees, and Dens, and Caves,
re-sounding when we hollow? Low. But prithee Echo, tell me, what made thee pine
for coy Na^cissus love? Love. And what became of thy sweet body? O die. Where
went thy soul, when thou grieving saw thy Narcissus tears so many shed?
Vanished. What enchanted Charms were in his beauteous Face, to effect so
strange a transformation? Ah, shone. And could his shining-beauty thee so soon
annihilate? Late. What did thou do, when thou saw him Metamorphosed into a
Flower? Lowre. And what, when thou heardst his last groan? Groan. And what did
the Woods do, when he pined with the sight of his own beauty in the Spring?
Ring. And what have thou done, ever since Heaven did transmute thy shape? Ape.
Since then thou art nothing but a Mortals Ape, how know thou Heavens Decrees
so well? Well. How can thou pry into their Designs, who all earthborn
Mortals in wisdom so surmount? Mount. And will the Gods above none from their
Counsels exclude? Lewd. Art thou not lewd, that for fond Nar^issu's love do
moan incessantly? Lie. Sure such unchaste affection is not holy. Oly. But I have
vowed to live for ever chaste. Haste? And does not such a vow oblige to
chastity? Tie, tie. Well, since it ties me so, I Will hence be gone. Be gone. And
through Heavens assistance perform what I have vowed to do. Do.

Thus did poor Gl^cera s^rive to divert the thoughts of her misery, sometimes by
discoursing with Echo, sometimes be ^oaning to her self her own hard fortune*
sometimes praying to Heaven for relief, sometimes wishing for Death, and if she
chanced to hea^ a whis^r^ng wind, flutter among the Leaves, her sorrow would
persuade her fancy to conceit it to be some Messenger of Heaven or Death, to
bring her the tidings of a reprival, or removal from her state of woe; and if a
whispering blast chanced to re-bound to her from the Leaves, presently grief
would represent to her fancy Deaths Arrows singing her Elogies, as they flew
to her obvious heart.

Thus did she spend that night, in wayling, weeping, sighing, sobbing,
grieving, groaning, till Titan's fiery Steeds had chased away the lesser
luminaries, that had usurped his Throne; but yet no Daybreak of hope dawned
upon her with beams of comfort, but in that woeful despairing condition, did she
run through invious Woods, rocky Deserts, and hollow Caves, where night kept
house, with mournful solitariness, and over hills and mountains inhabited only
by the Clouds, until at length she came into a pleasant Vale, incircled with a
murmuring River, which seemed with silent mutterings to repine at her sorrows;
and overspread with a gloomy shade, by reason of hanging Rocks, that defended
it from the Suns invasion, seemed, as it were, d^essed in funeral-attire to
mourn for Glycera's sorrows.

Glycera observing this Vale to be a fit place, where she might bid her Adieu
to the world, and all sublunary contentments, resolved there to sit her down,
and dye: For of four days and nights, that she had wandered through those
Deserts, had she not received the least sustenance; and therefore her fainting
spirits, too weak Chains to fasten her Soul to her Body, were often ready to let
loose their Prisoner.

By this River she sat down, and prayed to Heaven, to let loose the bands of
Life, and not to retard slow-paced Death any longer, but to consort her among
the shades, that wander in the Elysium Plains: And further begged, That when
Death should crumble her body to Atoms, and resolve it into individual Units,
that then her soul might be united to the great and only Eternal Individual,
and dwell among those beatified Souls, that float like Atoms in the Sunshine
of his resplendent glory.

This having said, she laid her down upon the Brink of the mournfully-grumbling
River, and closed her Eyes, thinking never more to behold the loathed Light,
and hourly expected the sweet Jail-deliver of her soul; but the Destinies that
had inter-woven, and twisted the Threeds of her life, and misery, so together,
as neither could be clipped asunder, without clipping both, resolved that the
bottom of her life, and misery, should not yet be unwound by the wounds of
Death; but nevertheless, a little to ap^ease the ragings of an uncontrollable
Passion, they arrowsed a humid Vapor out of its moist bed of dirt, and sent it
to unlock her Pores, and usher in a gentle sleep.

But no sooner had sleep allayed the surges of Passion, but Morpheus began to
form strange ^^antasms in her imagination: Sometimes he would erect a high
precipice in her Fancy, so high, as the blended Clobe of earth and water would
look like an Atom, and then tumble her down from thence, into some profound
abyss, peopled with Adders, Toads, and Snakes, and other venomous vermin; and
then she would start and give a shriek, that the whole Forest would re^ound
with the Echo; but then the purlings of the silver stream would hush her
asleep again; and then the drowsy Deity would Plant a Forest in her Brain,
where he would digg dens for Lions, Bears, and howling Wolves, and build nests
for Owls, Batts, and Night-Ravens, and other Birds of darkness, and then the
howling, roaring, bellowing, shrieking, croaking of these wild inhabitants,
would attach her faculties with hideous terrors, and imprison them in amazement.

Thus in a confused manner she spent the greatest part of the night, till about
the time when Orion begins to bath himself in the Ocean, and the Lamps near
consumed, she heard a rustling among the leaves and boughs, which putting her
in mind of her dream, obt^uded on her fancy a conceit, that it must needs be
some wild beast, that roving through the Forest, sought for prey, whe^eat
exceedingly astonished, she flies, as if fear and amazement had added wings to
her heels, but, ah! to overtake her own sad fate, for as she was passing by a
hollow cave (hollow-hearted indeed to her, though otherwise repleat with
mischief) there suddenly issued out a savage Ruffin, that ere she was aware,
caught her about her waste, and not at all regardi^g her ^uful cries and
groans, such as would have melt^d a Rock of Adamant, such as would have in^used
a s^nse-di^tracting grief into a Fury, though hardened with quotidian cruelty,
he flings her upon the ground, and draws out a sharp Poniard, and threatens
with that to pierce her heart, if she speedily surrendered not her body (that
sweet Temple, where Virtue lay inshrined, and spotless thoughts were the pure
ob^^ions offered on the Altar of a chaste heart) to the poll^tions of his filthy
lust.

Glycera perceiving her inability to contend by force, by reason of her
faintness, with a voice that showed a heart fearless of death, returned him
this re^ly. Lustful Villain (said she) do thou think that the p^ircing of a
heart, can be a piercing terror, to a heart already peirced with killing
sorrow? the Antipathies between life and death, are too much reconciled in me
by the terrors of assiduous deaths, ever to be terrified with thy
death-threatning savageness, sharpen thy Poniard then with the Whetstone of thy
Marble-hearted cruelty, and when thou have done, sheath it in my heart; but
then know, that it shall prove a Pandora's box, filled with thousands of
miseries, which shall flutter forth out of that wound, and by heavens vengeance
glewed to thy soul, shall at length possess thee with a terror, that will make
thee exercise a death upon thy self, more horrid than this that hell now
prompts thee to exercise upon me; and the very steams that will ascend from my
reaking blood, shall become a thunder, which wheresever skulkt, shall find thee
out, and ^end thee into more pieces than hell will have Furies to torment.

Foolish woman (said he) tell not me of heaven, hell or Furies, I know no other
heaven, but satiating my desires, no other hell than such dilatory
interruptions of my pleasure, when extremity of desire breeds impatiency, nor
other Fury, than a pestilent imperious woman, such as thou; therefore I tell
thee, once more, resign up thy self to my lust, or, by heavens (if there be
any) I Will take thee by storm, as impregnable as thou think thy self, and
quench the flames of my lust in thy heart blood. The fear of death (she
replied) has impression upon none, but such Villains as thou, whose smutty
souls horror striking guilt corrodes; but as for me, my soul is carried on the
wings of Virtue, out of the reach of those terrors, therefore if thou will or
if thou durst, broach my heart, and make thy soul drunk with cruelty, thou will
but make a passage for my soul to fly to those mansions, where happiness dwells
essentially.

Thy virtue? (said he) flatter not thy self wi^^ that, for I Will plunder thee of
that totally, and oh, that my Steeletto could reach thy soul too, I Would nail it
to the ground, from whence it should never fly to fetch revenge; but no matter,
when I have poured out my lust into the kennel of thy body, I Will wash away with
thy blood those pollutions wherewith thy soul in the commixture may have
stained mine. This said, he binds her fair hands with her hair, that lovely
hair, that had fettered and bound so many hearts, must now bind her own hands,
and tears her garments, and in despite of all her shrieking, groaning, crying,
weeping, he at length unloads his lust, and not content only to plunder her of
her honor, after he had thus demolished the Citadel of her virtue, but he with
his Poniard disenthrones those powers, that should govern her faculties, and
seals pale death in the majestic throne of her Beauty; and thus he leaves her
like a fair flower nipt with the mornings Frost, hanging down her head, as if
ashamed of her declining glory; her face covered with hoary paleness, as if
deaths cold blast had congealed the dew of her tears into a hoary Frost.

But by this time the Sun having notice of the Tragedies acted in his absence,
by Nights permission, had sent the morning as his Scout, to draw the Curtain of
the night, and descry whether any such horrid Villainies, as even resounded
thorough the arches of heaven, were committed under the protection of the
Night; whilst he came after with an Army of beams to depose her from her Throne
of Jet: but no sooner had he shaken his dewy locks, wet with toying too long
with Thetis in her watery bower, but he beheld this ravished wounded Lady; and
no sooner beheld than he sent his light to call away a loytring dream that was
sent of an Embassy from heaven to Polienus, a great Nobleman of Crete, that
dwelt in that Forest, to inform of this cursed act, and to command him to
revenge her. When a deep silence has fixed an intenseness upon the souls
faculties, then is the fittest time for divine impressions. Though exemption
from sad fates, is not always entailed upon innocence, yet that unseen Nemesis
that runs through the whole machine of the universe, seldom connives at the
wrongs of distressed Virtue.

The bloody wretch had no sooner sent his Poniard as a messenger of death to
her, but heaven stabbed his soul with horrors, that in a frenzy he leaps from a
Rock, and dashes his body into as many pieces, as his soul was torn with
Fu^ies. So apt a death did heaven prepare for one, whose rocky heart had broke
the neck of a Ladies chastity. Polienus, who (as I said) had been divinely
informed of this Ladies misery, awakens out of his dream, and seems to have a
bloody mist before his eyes, that represents all things to his surprised fancy,
horrid and tragical; so that in amazement he arises, slips on his morning Gown,
takes his sword in his hand, and hasts he knows not whither, to assist he knows
not what. But the heavenly powers who make use of earthly instruments to
execute their reasonable decrees, whilst men only act their own unreasonable
passions; and range humane disorders into a divine kind of order; so ordered
his disorderly steps, as that in a short moment, he came to a place where he
heard a mournful groan, which ushered in these words, Heavens! separate my
spotless soul, from this defiled body, and as my life does, so oh! let the
extravagant follies of my youth, pass out together. Oh! Receive me, where
virtue shall ever be defended from all Villous invasions.

Polienus hearing this runs in a deep amazement some paces farther, till he
finds this poor Lady in a condition to have confirmed an Atheist, but con^uted
a Stoic by converting him into a weeping Heraclitus. For she lay imbalmed in
her own blood, her hands entangled in her hair, and in her shoulder there stuck
a Poniard that made a passage for such streams of blood, as deluged those
beauties that inhabited her skin. Polienus seeing this woeful spectacle, stood
as if a profound sense of her misery, had struck him into an insensibility.

At length recovering himself he runs to her, snatches out the Steel that lay
bathed in a fountain of blood, and stops up the wound, and feels her pulse, to
see if life had yet forsaken its fortress the heart, where it last retires, and
perceiving the living blood to move in her veins, and sent as an Envoy from the
heart, to acquaint him, that though life was straightly besieged in its
Citadel, with squadrons of pangs, yet it had not quite surrendered to the
government of death, he repairs the bloody breach, as well as he could, and
runs home and fetched men from his Castle, that conveyed her thither with all
speed upon a downy Couch; where her sent for Chirurgions with speed to her, who
with their extraordinary care and skill, in a few days restored her to her
primitive health and beauty. When Polienus saw that she was recovered, and no
pretense of weakness could hinder his enquiry what should be the cause of her
misery, he using something more freedom of discourse than ordinary, requested
her to acquaint him, whether some direful chance, armed with merciless and
inevitable fate, or some accursed hand had endeavored to put that untimely
date, to her life and happiness? Glycera considering what great engagements he
had laid upon her, and that she might be justly thought ungrateful, if she
should deny so poor a request, and therefore related to him the whole story of
her misfortunes; how she fled from the Nunnery in Thessalia, to avoid the
tedious Love of Pandion; and how snatched up by a Pirate, who at Sea endeavored
to ravish her, and then how in his rage, being disappointed of his desires, he
threw her overboard; but then how she was most miraculously preserved by a
Dolphin (that faithful friend to mankind in adversities) upon whom she had rid
up and down for the space of several hours without any hope of succor; how she
was relieved by a Fisherman, and by him brought to Cyprus, but when he had
conveyed her hither, how in all particulars he misused her, not permitting her
to go ashore, and then to make amends for all his abuses, how at last he sold
her to a deformed Swain, that carried her to his cottage, and how the next day,
as she was going to be joined with him by Hymen's bands in Venus Temple, a
Knight came and rescued her from him, but then what a tumult there was raised
with the rusticks roaring, and how that occasioned a combat, between the
Knight and others, that thought to have forced her from him, as he had from
Lacon; how at length he was forced to resign her up to them, by that means to
save himself: but then how when they had obtained their prize, they could not
agree among themselves, but fell upon one another, with as much fury as before
they did upon the Knight, and how she perceiving an opportunity for escape,
fled into that Forest, where she had wandered succourless, and hopeless of
succor for several days and nights.

But when she came to relate the dismal story of her dishonor (poor Lady) the
tears fell from a cloud of sorrows, that overspread the heaven of her beauty,
just as if that transparent cloud that encircles heavens hollow arches, had
been condensed into ^ Crystal shower, and her faltring tongue left it to her
countenance, in sorrowful and yet bashful signs to declare her misery, and
there you might have plainly seen the pourtraicture of her bleeding honor,
adumbrated to the life in her blushing Cheeks.

Polienus observing her passionate grief, grew more inquisitive about the
cause, so that with vehement importuning he scrued thus much from her, in a
broken manner, that a villain would have forced her, and would have killed her.
As soon as Polienus heard this, he felt his heart even divided between the two
passions of pity and revenge, at length pity augmenting revenge, gave that the
sovereignty over his will; so that in a fury he kneels down, and implores
heaven, that the vengeance due to such an accursed act might light on him, if
he permitted that to the unrevenged; and with that Glycera having given him a
Character of him, as well as she could, he takes his sword, and mounts his
Steed, and so rides out into the Forest in pursuit of this wretch, but ere he
had gone a quarter of a mile, he found him dead upon the ground, having broke
his neck with the fall from the Rock. When Polienus saw this, he was glad that
heavens vengeance had found him out, but sorry that any one had been the
executioner besides himself, but however he goes home to his Castle, and
commands his men to fetch the body, and give it to his dogs.

Justice thus being done upon him, Glycera began a little to allay the pangs of
sorrow, that daily had wont to stir up some great commotions in her breast, and
to entertain some small familiarity with mi^th, which had so long been exiled
from her, so that in a short time she was restored to her health, and pri^^ine
beauty, which those excellencies before drowned in sorrow, now swimming in her
countenance, sufficiently testified, so that Polienus who before beheld her
only with compassion, now looks upon her with admiration, for she seemed to him
not composed of the common principles, but of some heavenly materials, even
refined to an immateriality, fit to captivate an immaterial soul, so that at
length he never viewed her, but he saw some sweetness, some grace, some
delicacy, that gradually converted his admiration into affection, and by an
imperceptible ascension gave love the sovereignty over his heart; and now
Glycera, and none but Glycera grew the object of his thoughts, the subject of
his discourse, and the joy of his heart. Long did Polienus cover his affection
with the veil of silence, but love, though its chiefest residence is in the
heart, yet it will often peep forth at the Casements of the eyes, and like the
Be, though its dwelling is in the Hive of the heart, yet it must come forth to
feed it self with the heavenly sweets imparadized in those flowers that grow in
the Garden of Beauty; so Polienus though he endeavored to conceal his griefs,
yet his eyes would disclose what his heart enclosed, for if ever he was in her
presence, her beauties attracted both his eyes and heart, and the radiant beams
that glanced from hers would seem to strike upon his heart strings, and compose
such a soft entrancing melody, as he thought he felt his very Soul charmed into
a love ecstasy.

Polienus thus observing daily how love did degree it self into his heart, and
a crowd of inevitable inconveniences issuing thereupon, thronging into his
understanding, he strove to suppress all insurrections of that passion that
thus endeavored to depose his will, and make his Reason do homage to it what
he could. For you must know, this Polienus was one of prime quality, having
both a great wit, and a greater fortune, so that what the former could devise,
the latter could accomplish; his person also not being meanly beautiful, yet
his beauty consisting in a mean between a masculine comeliness, and a feminine
sweetness, and one who as he was never a hater, so neither ever any great
admirer of the female sex, but looked on them as piles of well complexioned
dust, that like Sodoms Apples with the least touch of Times finger would
moulder to nothing, or as Natures painted Gallipots, where you may meet as often
with poison as with a potion; where he saw Virtue enshrined in the Temple of
Beauty, there he could even adore, and counted such as Angels invested in
refined flesh, but where he saw Virtue lie bleeding in a Rosy cheek, and
Lillyed beauty to serve only for Chastities winding sheet, those he counted as
Devils clothed in an Angels form, and born to tempt men to recede from virtue,
and sent to be plagues to the minds of men, and preserved for eternal
pestilence to the world.

This Polienus had been beloved by Amorosia daughter to Loritus King of Cyprus,
a Lady whose accomplishments might well have challenged a reciprocal affection,
having a delicate wit treasured in the Ivory Cabinet of a beautiful body, and
as she had powerful passions in a great mind, so her mind had great power over
her passions, so that long she could conceal her love, sealing it under the
impression of her memory; but (you know) love is such a strong passion that you
may as well think to squeez down the Sunbeams, and hinder their reflection, as
to suppress the flames of love, but in despite of all opposition, yea the more
for opposition, they will rebound from the heart to the eyes, and are legible
there to any that are not unacquainted with the Characters of affections; and
besides, in women that passion is ever most visible, their Ivory faireness is
but as white paper where they pourtray the picture of their minds, which their
tongues are loath to betray, their thin skins being as transparent Crystal,
through which the beams of love will shine, and therefore the most Chaste in that
respect have not the gift of continence, but though they may think to Cloister
up Love as a Recluse in the chaste Nunneries of their hearts, yet alas, upon the
least allurements of their beloveds beauty, they will suffer all such vain
resolves to be ravished from them, and their eyes and tongues to be wedded to a
heart-inflaming eye; so it was with Amorosia, in his absence, his praises was
all the entertainment of her discourse, in his presence, her eyes must move
with his, as if the beams that came from his had chained hers, and as often as
she spoke, she must accent her sentences with sighs, by those fumes plainly
discovering the fire in her heart; which though Polienus observed, yet he would
not be observed to have observed it, but rather penned down his observations in
the leiger of his memory.

But Amorosia's affection that had thus long been imprisoned in her heart,
would no longer endure restraint, but must either come forth, or break the
prison, so that no longer able to endure the unsupportable tyranny of her
passion, she goes to Polienus, and with as much eloquence as a mind wracked
between the extremiti^s of two violent passions, Love and Fear, and distracted
with the contrary thoughts of pondering how to speak, and whether to speak at
all, could frame, deciphering first in her sweet countenance the prologue of
her discourse, she displays the storehouse of her desires, and withal craves
of him to poize them in the balances of honor, and not to let this
condescension of hers exhale any mists of uncharitable thoughts, that might
obscure her Virtue.

Polienus observing in what costly robes both her speech and countenance was
apparelled, the former clad in the refined Go^d of eloquence* even dazzled his
mind with admiration, but in the latter such a Majesty clothed in purple sat
inthroned, as seemed rather to dazzle than delight, so that he could not but
wonder, though he could not love, or rather he wondered why he could not love;
but though her persuasive speeches, and speaking looks could not dart affection
into him, yet they even tran^fixt his heart with compassion, which procured
from him only a short reply, wishing that heaven would crown him with so much
happiness, as to raise his merits to that height, that deservedly he might be
seated in the throne of her heart, but till then he craved pardon if he
rejected her suit, and begged of her, rather to accuse his fortunes than him,
that did thus incapacitate him to satisfy so great a debt as the high honor
she had done him did oblige him to. But however, since he could not retaliate
her affection, nor retribute her unparalled favors, yet he would accept them
with a desire to compensate, when his benign Stars should bless him with a
possibility.

With this answer she went home, endeavoring to cast as charitable a gloss upon
it, as expressions of so deep a sable dye would bear; so easy it is to
circumvent a soul that beholds all things through the refracted medium of
affection, which will represent things straight though in themselves never so
oblique. Thus she remained for a long time, great with child with expectation
of some not only verbal but real testimonies of Polienus's affection, and
longed for that time that should Midwive some such happy production. But
Polienus, whose heart was not con^ederate with his tongue, meant her no such
felicity, as appeared by those exquisite methods he used to avoid and answer
her importunities.

Amorosia observing no fruit of her endeav^r^, and her hopes to wane, but
despair growing to the full, began to wax pale and wan, and pine away; and
those beauties that had hitherto retained their luster, though weather-beat^n
with the stormy frowns of misfortune, as if they had been immarcessible, now
began to fade with his cold replies, like a fair flower nipt with the morning
Frost; thus did her love feed upon her beauty, as if Cupid were turned
Cannibal, and would devour his mother for want of other repast. Concealed
affection is like a Wolf in a woman's Breast, if no other refection be provided,
be sure it feeds on that. The similitudes indeed are homely, but apt and
^ignificative to express the nature of imprisoned passion.

Loritus her Father observing her withered beauty on a day, strictly charged
her to tell him what was the worm that bit the root of so sweet a flower, and
withal promised that the one half of his Kingdom should freely be given to
purchase her content; with that she gave him a full relation of her
unsucceeding affection.

Loritus hearing this, sends with speed for Polienus, and smoothing the rough
furrows of his countenance (being a little moved, when he first heard how his
Daughter was rejected) he endeavors with soft and mild persuasions to allure
his consent to his own felicity: but when he saw all to be in vain, he conjures
him by all the terrifying words, and enraged mind could indite, and Majesty
utter, to give him his final answer, which was only this, that Nature had
engaged him to perpetual Chastity.

These words were as fire, put under the Cauldron of his boiling blood; so that
he swears by J^ve, that if ever he heard, that he sinned against the
Oblig^tion, in what ever remote corner of the wide Universe ^e lurked, his
Revenge, like Lightning, should find him out, and hurl him to destruction: And
believe me (said he) Kings swords reach from Pole to Pole, and run parallel
with all Climates.

Polienus hearing this, fearing he should be entrapt with the delicate Baits of
beauty that Court did abound in, he sequestered himself wholly from their
society, and built him a stately Castle, where now Glycera found him.

But I have too much digressed with this long relation, yet it is only to show
what Squadrons of misfortunes attended his affection, so that he durst not
harbor a thought, that would counsel him to harbor his Passion, but strove to
drive away his new guest, with bad entertainment; but then Love began so to
play the Tyrant, that nothing would satisfy him, but the constant Tribute of
sighs and groans; neither could such windy meat, satiate his hungry desire, but
he must now and then feed upon the dainties of Glycera's beauty; so that at
last, Polienus was forced to unlock the Cabinet of his thoughts, and discover
what a Jewel he there treasured up; no other than Glycera's Picture, lively
engraven on a rich Tablet, gilded with affection, and enclosed in a
Wounded-Heart.

Glycera beholding Polienus so accomplished, and remembering how her body was
abused, thought if e're she consented to him, it might be a means to obscure
that shame, which otherwise would obscure her Honor; therefore began to
embrace his motion.

Polienus ^eeing her thus to stoop to his lure, resolved to squeeze the
quintessence of benefit out of this opportunity, and to give such a thrust to
the falling-stone of her Passion, that it should never rest, till it came to
the Center of Felicity: So that, to be brief, the day was appointed when
Hymen's Bonds should consummate their joys.

Thus long did heaven give intermission to Glycera's sorrows; but alas, many
times there is a reserve of misery, that puts to ^light all our happiness; when
we think we have routed the main Battle, and begin to erect Trophies of joys,
and to lead Captive all our former sad Accidents, at the Chariot of our
triumphing fortune; so it was with Glycera, joy began to triumph in her Eyes,
and her heart bid Adieu to all discontent, and the sudden delight she took in
those rich Excellencies, wherewith Nature had endued Polienus, elevated her
mind to so high a pitch of contentment, that she almost thought some heavenly
Apparition had imparadized her thoughts in a golden representation of Elysium:
but these towering joys did but lead her to a precipice of misery, that so her
fall might be the greater; for before the marriage-day, the King had
intelligence of it.

The multitude may be well compared to a Forest, that Echoes all things spoke
or done, to their Kings ears.

Loritus hearing this, resolved that his revenge should be of an equal Latitude
with his threatening, and though Amorosia upon her knees entreated for his
Pardon, yet he shook her off, and told her, That the heavens themselves, though
more powerful, yet are not more just and resolute to execute their Decrees,
than he was. And accordingly, he sends a Party of Horse in the night, who being
let into the Castle by some Loyal Persons, but treacherous servants to
Polienus, they surprised both him and Glycera in these beds, who little dreamt
of such a sad interception of their happiness, or that their new-coyn'd joys
should thus prove Dross, and not pass current.

Thus does a black shadow of misery attend a Sunshine of prosperity. Thus does
Hope, as a Prospective-glass, present to our dim-e^'d souls some great looming
joy; but in the end, it proves nothing but a vanishing Cloud, or a Rock to
shipwreck our hopes and contents upon.

Thus many times when we think to be conducted by the glimmering glories of
this World, through a night of sorrows, to some Haven, where our deluded
thoughts persuade us Bliss resides, they indeed prove but an ignis fatuus, that
lights us through the invious Paths, and Mists of airy delusions, to a
precipice of misery, where they leave us.

So it was with Polienus and Glycera, Hope, the bright Harbinger of the dawning
day of Comfort, had risen upon them, and the Morning had distilled her Dew upon
their blooming joys; but ah! The one was no sooner risen, than set; and the
other no sooner fallen, than frozen, by the cold blasts of Despair, that nipt
their springing happiness in the Bud: for that night they were conveyed to
Gortyna, a Town of great resort in Cyprus, being the Center of it, and stands
near the River Lethaeus.

The next morning, Polienus was adjudged to be thrown off a high Rock, but
whether or no executed, the Knight could not resolve; but Glycera was conveyed
to Kolax his house, one who was much favored of the King, not for his merit,
but for his flattery, being a man of a servile leaden spirit, and one that
would perfectly bow, and comply with the Kings humor, and receive any Form, or
Impression he would stamp upon him; and thus by this counterfeit Coin, gilded
over with fair pretenses, did he purchase his Kings favor, and possess his
easy nature; so that if any thing that required extraordinary fidelity, was to
be done, he was the Person Elected, and for that reason, Glycera became his
Prisoner.

But Glycera, under all these inquietudes, behaved her self with so much
aequanimity, as plainly showed, that her soul had more Antidote in it, than
misfortune had Poison; as if her constant suffering Fortunes inconstancy, had
hardened her soul, contrary to the nature of spirits, to an impenetrability:
Which Kolax observing, together with the vivacity of her Wit, the magnanimity
of her Spirit, the solidity of her Judgment, and the Majesty that attended them
all, could not sufficiently behold her; and at length fell from beholding, to
admiring, and from admiring, to affecting; and thus became his Prisoners
Prisoner.

Glycera perceiving both visible and audible effects of his passion, thought a
favorable entertainment of him, so far as virtue would permit, might be a
means to procure some liberty from her strict restraint; and therefore received
him still with a Countenance as full of sweetness, and grace, as her mind
repleat with goodness could dispose her to frame; so that at last, she totally
gained his heart to her devotion.

Zelota, wi^e to Kolax, a woman easy to be moved, and being once moved, of an
implacable spirit, espying her husbands love to Glycera, not enduring that any
should be admired, or affected besides her self, and yet doing nothing that
might merit admiration or affection, except to detract from others will
challenge the Title of Desert, and the reward of Admiration, resolved to
countermine all their underminings of her Honor, and either to make way for
Glycera's slight, or to make her away, where she should never more be a Pest to
her cankered mind. At length intelligence arrived at her ears of a Vessel bound
for Peloponnesus, which she presently gave information of to Glycera, promising
to assist in her escape, to the utmost of her ability; and covering the venom
in her heart, with pleasing looks, and more pleasing express^ons, she prevailed
so far on Glycera's Charity, as to infuse a sleepy Potion into her husbands
drink, that should seize all his senses with such a Lethargy, as ere he
recovered out of his brainsick trance, she might be near arrived at
Peloponnesus; and from thence (she said) the passage to Thessalia was not
difficult.

Glycera poizing these Proposals in her judgment, thought it not inconsistent
with prudence to accept of them; for all those mountains of discouragements,
that despair raised in her thoughts, now lay level to her wishes, and what
would be the conclusion of her Imprisonment, she knew not; but however, this
she resolved should be the Conclusion of her doubtfully revolving thoughts,
that a few days should put a Conclusion to her abode there.

The next day Zelota comes to Glycera, with a Cup commixt, not with a sleepy,
but a poisonous drug (oh heavens, what will not a malicious mind, animated with
Revenge, be provoked unto? What venomous gore will not distill out of the
ranklings of a gangrened mind, festered with the incurable wounds of
jealousy?) Glycera not at all imagining what a horrid enterprise she went
about to atchive, yet all the way as she went, a strange kind of horror seized
upon her spirits, the very Air seemed to fetter her legs, and every shadowy
appearance, or even shadow of such an appearance, seemed to interrupt her
Progress, that she even thought her self hurryed away, by a strange kind of
fate, contrary to the bent of her own Genius; however, she stops not, but goes
to Kolax, and tells him, that she had brought him a Love-po^ion, that would
incite amorous desires in the coldest nature: Kolax accepts it with gratitude,
(as love you know invests all things with an amability, that proceeds from the
Object beloved) and drinks of it with such excess, as if he had a mind to
convert himself into Loves individual substance. But no sooner had he emptyed
the Cup of Poison, than the poysonful Cup had filled him with pain and horror;
and having roared out some curses on Glycera, he dyed, leaving her overwhelmed
with amazing Terrors, and rerrifying amazement.

The Servants of the house, hearing this hidious cry, ran up to their Masters
Chamber, where they found him dead with Poison, and Glycera with astonishment;
affrighted with this woeful sight, some ran to find Zelota, but she that morning
had taken a walk abroad, intending to be absent at the execution of her bloody
Plot, thereby to avoid suspicion: Others apply themselves to recall Glycera's
miserable senses, but ah! to be the more sensible of her misery, and others ran
to call near-adjoyning Inhabitants, to behold this lamentable Spectacle; so
that in a short time, Fame had blazed abroad this direful Tragedy, that it
re-sounded in the Kings Court, and at length came to the Kings ears also; who
no sooner heard it, but he grew even distracted with sorrow, for the loss of
his minion, and threatened presently to send Glycera after him, of a message to
Pluto, to require him in his name, to release Kolax from his dark Prisons, and
send him among the living, or else, if he could provoke all the Powers in
Heaven and Earth to destroy his Kingdom, he would do it. Amorosia his Daughter,
that had a Character given her by some of Kolax his Servants, of Glycera, how
she was a woman endued with solid Virtue, profound Wisdom, and strong Judgment,
and hated not so much the name of Vice, as to be vicious; that if the Air had a
voice, it could proclaim no such infection from her, as constantly steams from
an impious soul; so that an Angel in his most recluse retirements, is not more
chaste than she; and whoever had an eye, that could have pierced into her heart,
would have been a greater admirer of her Internal Virtue, than External Beauty;
though in that was sufficiently pourtrayed all the lineaments of a mind fraught
with goodness.

Amorosia I say, having this description given her, could not let common fame
commit such a Rape on her Charity, or entice her to wed her belief to the
tatling reports that all places abounded in, but fell down on her knees, and in
a passionate manner implored Glycera's remission of her father, or at least a
forbearance of Execution, till her Cause was heard. But the King, the more
enraged with her Petitions, thus replied: What, said he, we shall have you
Attorney to every Strumpet, to plead for their unlawful courses, and intercede
for perverting justice; no Daughter, let this resolve of mine henceforth make
you cease the renovations of this sort of entreaties; for, believe it, I Will not
suffer an Innocents blood to rust that Sword of justice, that has hitherto
been kept bright, to the dazzling of admiring Beholders.

Amorosia hearing this, forbore any further supplications, till her father
freed from his passionate Fever, might be able to relish her counsel; which
being not long after, she goes to him, and informs him of her state, and lays
before him all the probabilities of her innocence, a mind discreet and
charitable could suppose, together with the inconveniences might ensue a rash
execution of a Foreign Lady, allied (as she heard) to the blood Royal of
Thessalia, and courted by Prince P^^dion, and withal gave him such a
description of her, that at last divorced the former resolutions from his mind,
and wrought in him such a compassion for Glycera's adversity, that he commanded
she should be honorably attended and entertained, but yet imprisoned, for the
space of about a year and half, within which time, if Pandion sent not some
Knight, that by encountering with and overcoming some Knight of Cyprus, should
release her, that then she should endure the penalty of the Law; but in the
mean time, he would dispatch a messenger unto him, to give him intelligence of
her condition, and his determination. The messenger that he sent, was the
Knight that I spoke of before, and the person elected to atchieve this
enterprise, is my self.

No sooner had he spoke these words, than a shrill noise peirced their ears,
with such an acuteness, as if it had fled before to make way for a groan that
presently succeeded it, which they hearing, imagining they came from some
distressed Lady, ran with speed to help her, and just as they turned round,
they espied Florinda under a Tree, hard by the place where they had sat and
discoursed, fallen upon the ground in a swound. Periander seeing this, chafes
her tender limbs, and recovers her out of her deadly trance, who when she
perceived her self restored to her self, she falls a weeping and sighing; ah,
said she, can my Periander find in his heart to leave me? I can and will leave
thee with all my heart (said Periander) I mean, all my heart with thee; but to
find in my heart to leave thee, I cannot, since I can find nothing there but
thee. Oh but Periander shall not go (said she) Periander will not go (said he)
for he will leave his soul with thee, his better part.

And will you then be gone (said Florinda weeping) what shall become of me the
while, think you? Live in as much repose (said Periander) as a virtuous mind
rewarded by heaven with earthly joys can extract from its own internal
felicity. Can true Lovers part then with so much ease (said she) I had hoped --
(and then the tears distilled down her Cheeks in such abundance, as interrupted
her speech, yet fain she would have spoke, but her striving to speak, made her
speech the more difficult, so that grief made so large a Parenthesis, as if it
would have put a period to her life, in the midst of her sentence) but
proceeding, I had hoped (said she) Periander had thought I had loved him too
dearly, ever to take any repose in his absence. But though he can part from me,
and exchange a spotless affection, for a little blood-stained honor, though he
can insatiably carowse my tears, yet I could not see a tear drop from his eyes,
but 'twould corrode my soul, nor can I part from him, and retain my self, for
affection has so glewed him to my heart, as the least separation would rend it
in pieces.

But he discoursing to her, how much it did import his honor, and of what evil
consequence to Danpions affairs his negligence in that respect would be, she
hung on his neck, and kissed his cheeks, and all the while bathed her kisses
and his cheeks in tears. Oh (said she) do not, do not go, if we must part now,
we must part for ever. But with that, as if every letter in the word, Ever, had
been a thunderbolt shot from the sulphurous clouds of love mixed with sorrow in
her heart, her senses were on a sudden overwhelmed with extremity, and she
falls down into a swoun. Periander seeing this, was forced to take an abrupt
leave of Danpion, whose dear affection each to other would else have compelled
them to be more copious in their parting ceremonies, and takes Florinda in his
arms, and carries her to a house near adjoining, where we leave them.

Danpion being thus unhappily deprived of his friends, and with them of his
hopes of ever attaining either his Love, or his Kingdom, began most
passionately to lament his condition. For Periander that had so far befriended
him on Pandions side, and Florinda by whose means he had accomplished many
projects in Hiarba's Court, and who had defended him so often from Hiarbas and
Amphigenia's displeasure, were now both gone, so that he seemed at once to have
lost both his sword and buckler, and left alone to manage his designs, and bear
the brunt of all.

In this condition he returned to his Chamber, and there gave vent to his
sorrows, and in the midst of all his sadness, he sets down this resolution with
himself, that since all his hopes were fled with Periander and Florinda, he
would quench that Vestal fire of chaste love that flamed in his heart, which
could only be kindled at the beams of Amphigenia's beauty, and with the smoke
of that extinguished flame, smother his grief, and deface that image of sorrow
deciphered in his de-dejected countenance, and straight apply himself to
Hiarbas will, and comply with his humors, by that means not only to enter
into, but to interr himself alive during his dying life in his affection.

But humane determinations are but as glistering Bubbles, where some bright
reflections may please the fancy for a while, but soon vanish into Air with the
least blast of a divine decree; every beam of a Planet comes laden with
transformations, which though it cannot have immediate commerce with the
immaterial soul, yet it will bribe the Organs, and by that means unhinge the
doors of resolution that exclude inconstancy from the mind.

So Danpion, however for a time he flattered his sorrows with the thoughts of
blotting out the Characters of love with black oblivion, yet at length he found
love to be of such a strange invincible unresistable force, that the more he
endeavored to conquer its rebellions, the more it rebelled and conquered his
endeavors, so that in despite of his reason, he was led captive by his
passion. Flashes of beauty may dazzle beholders eyes, but where they light to
purpose, they melt the steeliest hearts, and make them receive impressions of
love, which cannot soon be obliterated: which Danpions experience could
confirm, for the more he endeavored to extinguish the flames of affection with
the cold blasts of despair, the more ardent they grew, and the less tolerable;
so that at length with constant pining, not only the color, but the figure of
his face began to be altered; which many observed, as also how he affected
solitariness, to walk and talk alone, sometimes breathing forth his complaints
in the Groves and Gardens, sometimes inwardly sighing, and groaning, as if his
heart held a dialogue with sorrow. And when he was in company, his thoughts ran
so much of Amphigenia, as all the jollity and recreation the Court did abound
in, seemed to him but unnecessary Parentheses, and tedious digressions, to that
sweet subject that his soul silently discoursed of. And when he was in Hiarbas
presence, though his policy would compel him to throw off those mourning weeds
wherein grief had attired his countenance, lest he should lay a foundation for
suspicion in Hiarbas thoughts, yet the countenance holds such a sympathy with
the mind, that it is very difficult, so to counterfeit a contrary affection,
that a judicious eye in every lineament of the face may not read the
dissimulation; so that Hiarbas could not but by every action discern the
passion, wherewith he was affected, his dull dejected looks, his impertinent
discourse, his frequent sobbing, abrupt sighing, and the very tone of his
voice, that did plainly proclaim his heart held a correspondence with sorrow.

This sudden alteration in Danpions countenance and behavior, bred admiration
in many Noblemen of the Court, but especially one Bascanius a great emulator
and corrival of Danpions, observing his deportments, that he might discover the
cause of his grief (which he conjectured could not be ordinary, since the
effect was so superlative and extraordinary) he on a day in a private place
meeting with Kalapistus, Danpions Page, examined him very strictly, concerning
his Lord, what the cause was of his extremity of grief, whether he was in love,
and had received some repulse, or whether he had committed any traitorous fact,
and feared discovery, the latter of which he chiefly hoped might be the
distemper, and if so, he in his thoughts had soon found a remedy, to wit,
remediless disgrace and ruin.

Kalapistus of late having unjustly (as he thought) received a box on the ear
from his Master, as he was walking with him in the Cypress-grove; the occasion
of which, being only this, Danpion (as was said) delighting much in solitudes,
and soliloquies, one morning walked forth with his Page into the Grove, where
through intensness of mind, forgetting that he was attended, he fell into a
lamentation of his hopeless condition, and despairing affection, and through
vehemence of passion, at length giving liberty to his voice to declare his
sorrows, something louder than ordinary* his words were retorted back to his
ears by Echo, which Danpion hearing, minding not whence the voice came, on a
sudden turned round, and espying his Page, presently entertained a conceit, it
was he that repeated his words, and so for his misconceived saw^iness, gave him
that correction, which being more than his due, he with an ungrateful kind of
gratitude, resolved to requite it, when opportunity presented.

And now fortune endeavoring like Penelope in a night of black adversity, to
unweave that golden web of happiness, wherewith she had hitherto invested
Danpion, incited this faithless Boys evil Genius, to inspire his mind with so
much hellish rancor, as to betray his Lord, which he did to Bascanius's great
satisfaction; telling him how his Lord was in Love with Amphigenia, and what
means he used to gain her affection, and how he once sent him in the night into
her Chamber, attired like an Angel, with a pretended letter from Venus, and
what a secret passage he had through a crankling vault to her Chamber, and many
things so to Bascanius's content, as that he gave him fifty Sestercies, telling
him, my sweet Boy (said he) thou art my Paris, and I accept this news from thee
with higher resentments, than the Cytherean Queen on Ida's top received the
golden Apple from the fair Trojan shepherd, and I doubt not but by thy means to
procure that Helena of glory so courted by us, but yet by him ravished from us.
With these words they parted.

Bascanius being a man of an implacable malice, repining at every beam of honor
that shone from his Peers, never allaying the surges of rage and envy, till he
had swallowed up his Competitors, a great suter to fortune, and had obtained
her for his Paramour, till of late she wedded her self to Danpion, bringing
with her, her whole dowry of honor and riches, and every thing else that makes
her so desirable, having thus discovered a passage to the haven of contentment,
resolved since the wind blew so prosperously from such a corner of the heavens,
not to lose the benefit of success, proffered him in the access of so fit a
means to procure Danpions declension; but though he was rejected by fortune,
yet since he was thus courted by opportunity, he would not slight its
importunities. And being Danpion was so great a Favorite, it was not therefore
safe for him to obey the violent impulse of his inordinate Passion, which
prompted him to nothing, but present satisfying of his Malice, that thirsted
for Danpion's immediate ruin; but rather to wake slowly, and securely. For
having no other to testify Danpion's affection to Amphigenia, but his Page, he
feared, lest if he should inconsiderately inform the King, without some more
pregnant confirmations of it, than his own, and the Boys bare affirmations,
the King should discern his envy, and so the ruin he intended Danpion, might
attend himself.

And therefore to bring about his purposes, he intices Kalapistus with promise
of a most liberal reward, to bring him those clothes in which his Master was
arrayed, when Amphigenia saw him in the Grove. The Boy having gratified his
desires, (...) on a day attires himself in them, and watching his opportunity,
when Amphigenia was bathing her self, he rudely rushes into the Garden, and
comes upon her just as she was come out of the silver streams, which seemed to
murmur for her departure, having only a rich thin mantle cast over her naked
body.

Bascanius, who had never before beheld so much excellency contracted and
united, could not but gaze himself into admiration and astonishment, that he
thought her to be the very refined Elixar of all perfections, and every part of
her a small volume of all created excellencies in heaven or earth epitomized,
and writ in golden Characters; he thought her to be some incarnate Angel clad
with a body composed of the same quintessential matter with the heavens, but
refined to such a purity and even transparency, that every part seemed a
burning mirror, wherein the Angelical beams it enclosed were united, to the
inflaming of all beholders, in fine she seemed in a definite circumference to
set forth an infinite beauty, so that Bascanius stood a while even ravished
with a stupefying contentation, as if he had lost his soul in that world of
beauty, or as if all the faculties of his mind thronging together to behold
that wonder, had overwhelmed each other.

What shall I say? to describe his unexpressible admiration, were a task fitter
for those sublime souls who are acquainted with rapturous contemplations, and
know what it is to be snatched into an ecstasy. But oh, the vehemence of
Amphigenia's passion, at this sudden surprizal! At first she stood wondering
rather whether she saw at all, than what she saw, so that she stood a while
even entranced with astonishment, but at length awakned out of her dream of
amazement, she betakes her self for refuge to her legs, and runs, and shrieks,
with such a peircing shrilness, as the Air seemed to hand her voice to the
heavens, to implore revenge for such hideous presumption; but as it fled the
Air seemed delighted with so sweet a traveller, as it bandyed it to and fro, as
if each part was ambitious to entertain it.

The Ladies that were walking up and down in the Gardens, some beheading
flowers, to purify their brains with fragrant exhalations that steam from
those nests of sweets, others summing up the riches of the ears in Musicks
charming numbers, others passing away the time with pleasant pastime, these, I
say, hearing thus on a sudden their Lady shriek, presently run for her
succor, and at length they might see the Princess nimbly tripping along upon
the verdant Grass, which as proud to be depressed with so sweet a foot, would
erect it self with a pretty kind of stateliness, after her departure, whilst
she ran with so much swiftness, as even robbed their eyes of a plenary view of
her excellencies, and Danpion as they supposed pursuing of her, who no sooner
saw this beautiful train, but he fled with as much celerity from them, as
before he did toward them, and hardly escaped ere the King hearing a whole
Consort of shrieks and cries, among the Ladies in the Garden, came with speed to
know the cause, and found his daughter surrounded with her Ladies, like Diana
amongst her Nymphs, so that she seemed like Sol among the Planets, where all
beauty centered, theirs being only reflections of hers.

The King seeing that, called some of them to him, to inform him of the reason
of their outcries, who told him, that Danpion (as was conjectured by his Garb)
had endeavored to force the Lady Amphigenia; Danpion (said the King) Danpion a
ravisher! Danpion a ravisher of my daughter! oh monstrous impiety! horrid
enterprise! hellish ingratitude! what Danpion, I say, it can never be. He who
has received such transcend^nt favors from me, as would even impoverish a
Monarchs gratitude, that could command all the riches of the Orient, or make
the Sea vomit up her treasures, such as though he would surrender up his soul
it would be too poor a restitution, and can it be, that he should attempt mine
or my daughters dishonor? heaven and earth would conspire their forces in
avengement of such astonishing ingratitude. But if I find it true, by all the
Celestial powers, he had better have mounted on the wings of his ambition to
heaven and de^lowred Venus.

This said, the King in a fury returns to the Palace, and banishes Danpion the
Court, and confined him to a house, some miles from the Palace, upon pain of
death at the least attempt of liberty. Bascanius seeing such a happy result of
his plot, inwardly so swelled with content, that he could not contain his
venomous rancor from bursting forth to the poisoning of Danpions honor, but
privately gives forth scandalous libells, and publicly teaches Fame the
language of Danpions disgrace, which hitherto she had been wholly unacquainted
with, and makes her declame on nothing but the Theme of his lust and ruin; and
not contended only with this, but he relates at large to the King, Danpions
affection to Amphigenia, his former attempts to satiate (as he termed it) his
libidinous desires, to which this late event stood as a test for confirmation.
And now all Danpions opposits in the Court, that had born him inveterate
malice, spurn at this muzled Lion, and vent their malicious fumes to obscure
his luster. Every one can lend a hand to thrust down a tottering Wall.

Thus this innocent Prince was on the sudden made the subject of Fortunes hate,
and his enemies malice, and his new hatched glory choked by the black
Acherontick vapors that steamed from his enemies hellish malignity.

But now to tell you how this gallant and Princely prisoner behaved himself
under this sad fate. At first indeed the suddeness, not the greatness of the
wo^ astonished him, as whom would it not transport with amazement, with a
thunderbolt of Fortune, in an instant to be hurid out of the Chariot of such
dazzling glory, as would have exhausted a Kings Exchequer but to have made so^e
representations of it, and thrown into a lake of mi^ery? and such was Danpions
case, he who before was (...) hing like Fortunes Admiral, in the Sea of her
inconst^nt glory, one little moment and link of time chains him as a slave to
the Galley of misery and disgrace. He who before shone with such a luster as
every beam of State seemd to fasten to him numerous pairs of servil eyes that
did attend his beck, is now plundered of all state, of all respect, unpittyed,
unregarded.

But though misery like Circes cup can thus metamorphose our externals, yet it
can have no influence on the rational part. None but caduque beings are subject
to the tyranny of Time and Change; and therefore abstracted beings, that come
not under the predicament of corporeity, as their essence, so their happiness
is of an immutable permanency; and though some abject souls that steep their
Intellectuals in sense, and can relish nothing but Epicurean pleasures, may
have their delights as transient as time, yet a composed soul, truly fortified
with Virtue, is its own destiny, and depends not for its felicity on any other
than its own arbitrament, and that of an eternal Fate, which guiding all things
according to their natures, consequently rules free Agents, their Actions and
Fortunes, happy or unhappy, as the former are attended with Virtue or Vice,
according to the principles it has placed within them, as its Vicegerents and
representatives to govern them. Now such a one miseries may try, cannot
discompose or disorder; such a one no revolution of time can drive from
resolution in the midst of extremities, and such a one was Danpion. For he
seemed a man to whom whatever can merit the epithete of Excellent might be
attributed to him, having a sublime spirit in a matchless body; the former
seemed a ray of Prometheu^ fire, something ratifyed, and invested with a more
pure and active quality, not having the least mixture of those ponde^^^s
elements that clogg the mind, but all of rare ascending fire, that clarified
his blood from those feculent ^umors that flow from the grossier elements, and
composed such a harmony in his soul, as no misfortune could make a jarr, and
the latter was so sweet a composition of all those masculine graces that at
once feed both delight and wonder, as it seemed that Nature with Lilied beauty
had chalked out his soul a lodging proportionable to its own greatness, and
given him a body suitable to the vigorous activity of his spirit.

In fine, he that will give a perfect representation of the former, must not be
ravished with an ordinary fury; but his mind must be wholly purified from all
drossie conceits; his fancy tarified and heightened with Ethereal fire, and his
soul inspired, actuated, and enlightened with a beam of Empyreal glory, which
must form sublime fancys in it, as the Sun gives form to sublunary matter. And
he that would give a true lively and lovely draught of the latter, he must
either fix his eyes on some person, whose complexion, features and harmony,
hold some proportion with the delicacy, sweetness and grace, of which Danpions
beauty was composed; or else leave the soul of his love and pass by
transmigration into him, that so by that Idea love forms in the mind, to copy
out some imperfect adumbration of his perfections; but the one being unlikely,
and the other impossible, renders the Painter unable.

Now what inundation of misery could overwhelm so great a spirit, which like a
rich mount of Oar, seemed to bid defiance to the turbulent waves of Fortune?
That that did most strongly invade his breast, was the remembrance of the loss
of Amphigenia's favor; and that indeed compelled him to let his sorrow
dissolve in drops, and to indulge himself to melting passions. One while he would
hush his griefs with easy sighs, as if they whispered in his listening ear the
pleasing news of Amphigenia's pity; and then each groan would seem a note of
Love, and with those raptures he would lie entranced a while.

Thus subtly did sorrow insinuate it self into his heart, by coming hid under
a bait of pleasure. But then a deep fetched sigh would tell him roundly in his
ear, those pleasing dreams were but delusions; then grief would change the
former Phrygian harmony, in his thoughts to the Dorick tone, composed of
mournful strains and doleful airs, where every note sounds like a groan, and
every quaver like the trembling sigh of one that weeps; And then a flowing Sea
of sorrow would supply his eyes with tears, which softly trickling down his
cheeks would seem to draw a Map of grief in his face; here Islands inhabited
with sweets and graces, and their Garden filled with Roses and Lilies; here a
lake of liquid Pearls, and there a briny stream softly kissing his cheeks. Then
he would even break out to cursing Bascanius and his Pages treachery, but then
Amphigenia would fill his thoughts, and make him break off abruptly, as he
broke out passionately. At length espying a Lute that hung behind the hangings
in a corner of the chamber, he took it down; and made it discourse his griefs
in such melting accents, as every note seemed to fly gently into the still
entrance of his charmed ear, and intrance him with a soft pleasing passion;
sometimes it would seem even to steal his very soul and imprison it in the
Lute; the anti^athies between the chirping Trebles, and the grumbling Base,
being so sweetly reconciled by the mean, as seemed in Musicks language, to
teach him Virtues mediocrity. But he making no other commentary on it, than
that of grief, would think the quavering strings did tremble at his sorrows,
and the Lutes heart-dissolving airs to sigh forth the lamentations of his
unfortunate but passionate love, in such sympathizing strains, as made him
almost think the spirit of some unhappy Lover had taken up its Elysium in its
belly, and there in silent ^ones breathed forth his woes, which the trembling
strings in imitation of Fame would seem to echo to his ears; and then laying
his mouth to the carved Navel of the Lutes sweet womb, he would call aloud, If
any Lovers soul by transmigration dwells within this little cell of pleasure,
let him come forth and tune his groans to mine, and we will charm our sorrows,
and stop the Spheres, who listening to our tones may not whi^le our woeful fates
so fast upon us, and bribe the Destinies to cancel their decrees; but then
nothing but a hollow sound would give reply to his words, as 'twere to show,
what little substantial comfort such any conceits afforded. It is not so easy
to stanch a Lovers bleeding heart.

But seeing the Lute refused to coffin up his woes, he ^lings it down, and
takes his Pen and Ink, and fain would wrap up his griefs in the winding sheet
of a Letter, which embalmed in tears he would send to Amphigenia to bury them
in her pitying thoughts. And that each sentence might more lively express his
passion, he would steep every letter in a tear; but then the letters as not able
to swim on the briny drops, would sink into the tear-bedabled-paper, and as i^
were drowned in sorrow would lose their forms, and rather represent a monstrous
draught of horror.

Then he would fling away his paper, as not fit to contain the name of
Amphigenia; and toss his pen, which would seem to weep for its neglect, and
besprinkle the wall with its tears; tears that clad in black, seemed as dark
mirors, or the quintessential extracts of sorrow; where each Globe-like-drop,
that trundled among the dust, seemed a little bottle that contained a livelyer
resemblance of griefs Elixar, than Danpion coul distill out of his brain.

But then he would take it again and write, and blot, and enter-line; here he
thought the expression was too flat, and there too full of big-sounding,
bum-baste words, containing more syllables, than sense, and fuller of noise,
than reason; and not like the Amber-phrases, wherein witty Lovers dress their
Passions, where any Love-schooled eye, in every clear conceit may descry Cupid
placed, as in a Crystal shrine: Then he would condemn his wit, which now would
seem too barren, then so full of unlickt fancies, as their number would choke
their grace, and render his Style an indigested mass of
sense-confounding-nonsense, and not like those quick lively raptures, begotten
by the wanton Boy upon the Invention, which so resemble their Father, as seem
to be his perfect Picture; and no sooner born, than borne on his Wings, out of
the view of vulgar eyes. Then he would bid fie on his Genius, that now should
fill his head with nothing but Barbarisms, when his brain had more need been a
Florilegium of sublime Stories; a Storehouse of acute Metaphors, (...)
Similitudes, and compendiums of Eloquence, and an Inventory of all those
Excellencies treasure^ up in every Creature; but then, that would put (...) in
mind of Amphigenia, and then he would blame his Tongue for its unpardonable
presump^ion, to mention with the least detestation, any thing that had but the
shadow of an Image of that, that might be called hers.

Thus did his sorrow variously vent it self, having none to commiserate him,
but the senseless Walls, (which with a dull noise, would repeat his moans, and
say Amen to his cries) and the Marble of the Chimney, which would weep and
sweat, as 't were with sympathizing pain; but grief would transform the Form of
every thing, that had the shape of comfort, and make the Walls echo his groans,
with a sad dolefulness, and the Marble drops to reflect his visage, and therein
the Portraiture of sorrow. True grief delights in solitudes, if it may be said
to have any delight; and he mourns with a witness, that mourns without a
witness.

But now, to leave him in his lamentations, and return to Amphigenia, who with
the fright she took at her surprizal, fell into such a dangerous distemper, as
threatened little less than her sudden dissolution; every moment the fatal
Thief, would steal some portion of her Rosy-excellence, or rather the Graces
enshrined in her beauteous Face, by a mysterious transition passed into my
soul, to make her fit to inhabit among the Celestial dwellers; which when her
Father saw, he grew so enraged with Danpion, as he resolved not to be partial,
but gave strict command to his Keeper, that night to put out his eyes, as
others before had suffered for an offense of the like kind, though without
those high aggravations that attended his: and moreover, to keep him Prisoner,
until they saw whether Amphigenia would recover, or not; if not, he should be
sacrificed on her Tomb, and her Epitaph should be written in his Ashes, and
engraven with the point of a Sword on his Skull; but if the contrary, he should
have his freedom.

The Jailor, to execute the Kings commands, in the depth and dead of all the
night, softly steals up to Danpion's chamber, whom care and sorrow, and a
strange noise of confused thoughts, would not permit to sleep, so that he was
only laid down on his bed, a little wax Taper burning by him, and was reading
the sad story of Hero and Leander's love, and was so moved with its woeful
conclusion, as that he could not but shed some drops on the Book, and by
drowning their names with Tears, make them act over again their own Tragedy.

The Keeper perceiving a dim light in his Chamber, (which gave him to see his
hopes to take him asleep were vanished) rushes in violently with a naked Sword
in his hand, and with all the terror a deformed countenance (expressing more
horror in a ghastly look, than could be otherwise contained in a Volume) could
frame, he delivers the message, and commands him to submit with patience, as he
expected to meet with better usage.

Danpion hearing this unexpected tidings, fixed his eye undauntedly upon him,
whose Majesty might have struck an awful terror into the most ruthless Villains
heart, and enraged more with the churlishness of his speech, than with the
terribleness of his message, he, with a resolute fury, leaps upon the Jailer,
and on the sudden writhes the sword out of his hand, and redeems himself,
giving him blows for his Ransom. Extremity is Virtues Opportunity, which never
appears clad with greater luster, than when stripped naked by Fortune.

Danpion having released himself, runs to a near adjoining Wood, where he
spends that night in sighing forth his woes; sometimes raving at the Kings
merciless tyranny, sometimes cursing Bascanius's treachery, sometimes lamenting
Amphigenia's cruelty. His Mind floating in a tempestuous Sea of thoughts, would
be wrecked, sometimes upon Rocks of insuperable difficulties, sometimes
overwhelmed in a Gulf of despair: Then his Tongue, the servant of his Mind, to
give some little ease, would vent some streams, out of the over-flowings of his
thoughts. Words are airy successors to our intestate comforts: Flitting
Shadows, and vanishing Pictures of our minds, or our minds transformed into
Air, and that formed into Words; invisible transcripts of our thoughts, writ
upon Air, and copyed out by our Tongues; poor breathing Orators of our woes,
whose Rhetoric will for a while hush them to silence; who give ease, though
they give no succor.

So Danpion, with the wind of his words, would a little disperse the Clouds of
grief in his mind. Sometimes he would inveigh against Envy, calling it the
putrid Blain of a corrupt mind, or the very Imposthume of all vicious humors;
which bursting with its own venom, sends forth an infectious gore, called
Slander: Slander, that base canker of Renown, filthy vapor of an ulcerous
mind, whose steam obscures Virtues bright Ray; vile demolisher of the Temple of
Honor, and the accursed spawn of a hellish mind.

But then his Hate to Envy, would bring to his mind the contrary opposite, a
Love to Virtue; and both these would be as alarms, to awaken the thoughts of
Amphigenia, the Object of the first, and the Subject of the latter; And then he
would condemn his too too adventurous eyes, for their presumptuous beholding of
that miracle of beauty; but more his remembrance, for retaining that
Soul-captivating Species, her Idea; but most of all, his Heart, for surrendering
up its Citadel to the tyranny of love.

And then he would call out, Ah! Why did I love? Alas! alas! Why did I love?
Thus to be made a slave to Beauty; but how could I choose but love? love? nay
adore so Divine a Form? Rather why do I remember? since it is remembrance that
is the life of my grief, and that that renews my woes; but how can I choose but
remember such a heavenly shape, in whom all unparalleld Excellencies meet like
parallels in their proper Center; whose every beam glanced from her eyes, writ
a complete story in my mind, of Beauties Perfection, and Loves Prerogative? But
ah! Why did I then give liberty to my eyes to see that model of Divine
perfections? since the eyes are the Crystal doors of the mind, at which all
Objects enter that enthrall the affections; but alas! who could but gaze, and
gaze himself to admiration, and admire himself into an Ecstasy, to behold one,
in whose Eye lay the diapazon of beauties visible harmony, which with their
motions, like the Spheres, would strike Entrancing Raptures into all chaste
hearts; and where thousands of Stars lay couched under a sable Veil, resembling
nights Canopy, whose rapting influence, would compel all eyes to see, all
thoughts to remember, and all hearts to love and adore?

Thus his thoughts flying from one opposite to another, would still center on
Amphigenia; like the Eagles, that flying from East to West, met in Delphos;
and thus he consumed the night, until about the dawning of the morn; that
impartially partial hour, which whilst it seems to stand as a Neuter, between
night and day, and to take to neither, does indeed incline to both; when
remembering, that though his escape had freed him from present misery, yet not
from future ruin, he therefore resolved to flee to Cyprus, after his friend
Periander, and assist him in the releasment of Glycera, and then return with
him to Thessalia, and by his means ingratiate himself with Pandion, and he
feared not but to procure a considerable Party that should revolt from Hiarbas,
upon the least knowledge of his intentions.

As he was thus walking and pondering, there suddenly came upon him about five
Horsemen, who by force (he having no weapon to defend himself) carried him about
the space of a mile, to a green Valley, where there lay great numbers of
Soldiers, as in a Bush; in the midst of whom, was a rich (...), drawn by four
milk-white Horses abreast, wherein there sat a most incomparable Lady, clad in
rich attire, in whose face was displayed all the Ensigns and Trophaes of
conquering beauty, and in her looks there sat not only an attractive sweetness,
but a Majestic stateliness; so that she seemed at once to allure and command
affection, to behold, conquer, and triumph: So that Caesar's Motto, Veni, vidi,
vici, translated into the language of Love, seemed written on every feature, in
the Rosie-Characters of beauty.

In this tryumphant posture she rode, four Virgins that were her Attendants,
sitting at her feet, a proper Gentleman, all in Armor, well mounted, riding by
her as a captive to her beauty; whose soul peeping through the Prison-windows of
his eyes, plainly discovered it self to be fettered with the Beams that came
from hers. To this Gentleman they carried Danpion, who no sooner saw him, but
he dis-mounted, and saluted him with all the testimonies of respect and honor,
an innate civility, together with a true grounded affection, and a just
respect, founded upon great worth, all meeting in one Person, could possibly
dispose him to utter.

Danpion amazed with this unexpected manner of encounter, and the more amazed,
because so unexpected, was at first (contrary to his wonted manner of laying
deep engagements upon others, with his unimitable courtesy) carried with
astonishment to that extremity, that borders on the confines of Incivility;
till at length, called out of his amazement, with excess of amazement, (as
waters chilness recalls the spirits) he retorts back his salutation, with the
like manner of Ceremonies, and craving pardon for his rudeness, requests him
therein to accuse his bad fortunes, who rendering him unworthy to challenge, had
also banished all expectations to meet with any such honor; and withal,
condemning his memory, that could retain his sorrows, but not the name and Idea
of a Person of so much worth. The Gentleman hearing this told him, that his
name was Athalus, who, that his actions might be of an equal latitude with his
promises, he, with some few men, came to serve him in the attaining of his
Kingdom.

Then Danpion called to mind, that this was the Person that came with Periander
to the Hermits Cave, and also what engagements he made at his parting from
thence, and thereupon embraced him with all possible joy, and gave him Millions
of thanks for his obligements; telling him, how seasonable his assistance came,
and therewithal fully informing him of his condition, and what Plots he had
used, and what success of his Plots, and what advantage by that success, and in
what state and posture his affairs were in for the present; how much weakened by
the sudden departure of P^riander, whose counsel and assistance had exceedingly
farthered his Designs: And then he told him of Periander's happy meeting with
Florinda, and by what wile she had escaped from Acastus; neither did he stick
to tell him of his own affection to Amphigenia, though neither by his manner of
speech, countenance, or gesture, did he accuse in himself any such Passion; not
like those puny Lovers, who can coin no expressions, but in the Mint-house of
Passion; and when they speak, their speech is nothing but a bundle of
incongruities, and incohaerent Phrases, and all the while their April-faces
must now moisten the ground with a shower of Tears, anon the clouds of grief
must be dispersed, and nothing but serenity; and thus by external inconstancy,
describing their inward constancy. But then Danpion began to enquire of
Athalus, about the event of his love to Matilda (for Periander, as they came
along from the Hermitage, had told him the whole story) and whether that
excellent Lady, that beautified the Coach with her Beauty, were not she: To
whom Athalus replied, that that indeed was the Lady, that was the Pole Star of
all his endeavors, through whose favor he breathed, through whose breath he
lived, through the life of whose love he loved his life, and by which he poized
all his felicity.

Danpion having performed his salutations to her, Athalus began his relation.
It happened (said he) that during the time my wounds were healing in the Cave,
where first it was my happiness to meet with your Lordship, Plirio (through
whose means Periander and I were set upon, by the Villains that dragged us into
those Woods, with intents to kill us) became Lord of Parrhasia, by the death of
his Father; he being the only preserver of his name, was left the only
Possessor of his Lordship; who having now ability to execute what only before
he had wickedness to desire, hoping that both of us, but especially my self,
had tasted the fruit of his base revenge, seizes upon my Castle in my absence,
under pretense of a forfeiture for Treasons, Murders, and Conspiracies said to
be acted and ploted by me and my Accomplices. And that he might color over these
unjust pretenses, with pretenses of Justice, he caused those that escaped from
Periander by ^light, after they had acted their bloody Tragedy upon me,
vehemently to petition for justice against me; who being men not only of
murderous, but mercenary spirits, and never would refuse to dive into a Sea of
wickedness, to find that Pearl called Gain, and ever thought it the greatest
piece of folly in the world, for men to recede from their own Interest, through
a childish dread of impiety, and to be affrighted from the beaten rode of Vice,
if it leads to a Mine of wealth, with the foolish Bugbear terrors that haunt
that path; and therefore they would no less deride at those, that not steering
their actions by the compass of Profit, would sail where ever those gusts of
popular breath entitled Honor should drive them; than a skillful experienced
Mariner would at a fresh water Seaman, that neglecting his Compass, should
flatter himself with hopes of a speedy arrival at his Port, because he runs
before the wind, though it blow from a quite contrary quarter. These men being
thus a fit matter for him to superinduce any form upon, he transforms their
former shapes, and makes them become of lovers to Vice, pretended lovers of
Virtue; and therefore desirous of justice, no^ not only because it was justly
ranked in the catalogue of Virtues, but because it was the destroyer of Vice,
and the cherisher and protector of Virtue

And this he did to obscure his own malice, and their revenge, from the popular
view; that so his actions having an image of justice impressed upon them, might
pass current.

Having thus by policy and subtilty, plundered me of my estate, the next thing
he had to do was to possess himself of Arritesia, without whom all the other
issues of his brain would prove abortive; and to that end he invites both the
sisters Arritesia and Matilda, (to intercept all jealousies in them or their
Father, that might intercept his plot) to a most magnificent feast, where (as
was reported) luxury and excess seemed to ride in triumph in every dish, as
though the storehouses of the elements had been ransacked to furnish his Table;
as if he had been rather to have courted his Mistrisses appetite, than her
affection; so that his Table seemed the Scene of Prodigality, whereon was acted
the Tragedy of Temperance and true Liberalty; the most poinant meats being
poisons to the former, as excessive profuseness is destructive to the latter.

But the Feast being concluded, Plivio had another play to act, to which this
served but for a Prologue; and that was to seize upon Arritesia; that since (as
the Philosopher says) every one is the framer of his own fate, he resolved
that none should accuse his negligence for his infelicity, but he would
purchase that by compulsion, to which milder means he saw would prove
ineffectual. For (my Lord) you must know Arritesia was a Lady in whom appeared
all the delicate attractives of beauty, and external demonstrations of internal
Virtue; so that as the former would sufficiently excuse a Stoic should he
become an amorist: excuse? nay accuse him of a base ignorance of worth, should
he not admire her perfections; so the influence of the latter, might have
created goodness in the worst of men, and rendered him inexcusable in whose
breast was the least spark of an impure fire. Now no wonder if a virtuous soul
enshrined in so sweet a body, by a reflex act viewing its own internal beauty,
be like Narcissus gazing on his picture limned by the Sunbeams in a Fountain,
enamoured with its own excellencies; and so was Arritesia, yet not so as to
obscure her worth, with being void of humility, but rather made Humility a
means to discover the worthiness of her worth, and so her Virtues as they
became more perspicuous, so more delectable; so that if her humility was apt to
entice hope, her dazzling worth would again stupisie and confound it. But as
none can cast up their eyes at the Sun, with more confidence, and less dazzling,
than the blind; so none are less ravished with true worth, than those whose
ignorance of it, makes them least admire it.

So Plivio, though none had less grounds for hope, yet none had greater
confidence than he; not because he so far excelled others, as that his
transcending deserts should excite her to pitch upon him, but because his worth
being short of many, made him less able to discern of another, and begat
conceits of himself above what his deserts could challenge, and such thoughts
in any will soon augment hope to a presumption; but this did but create the
more disesteemes of him in Arritesia's thoughts, who by the light of her own
worth was able to see his worthlesness, and where disesteem once gets entrance,
its hard to crowd out disaffection, they being inseparably linked together, as
love and contempt are irreconcileably separated; so that Arritesia thus
slighting his person would much more contemn his importunings, that she let all
his words dye in their own sounds, his most pathetick expressions taking no
more impression on her, than puffs of Air upon an Adamant.

Her mind was a Paradise, where swarmed Angels of high thoughts, such thoughts
as each deserved a Crown, and could he think such thoughts would admit of
society with so mean and abject meditations as his imaginary Virtues? But
whither does my passion transport me! Plivio finding her thus (as he termed
her) an obstinate piece, bent his wit more to devise some stratagem, how to
procure her by the favor of policy, than before he did to compose his smooth
courting speeches to storm her by the force of eloquence. And having by that
subtilty enticed her to his Castle (as I told you) after the Feast was
concluded, and the ri^hes of the time spent in dalliance and delights, the two
Si^^ers, with great acknowledgements of his c^vility, took leave of him.

Plivio being now if ever to accompl^sh his des^r^s, waits upon them to the
Castle Ga^e, performs many ceremonies to them both to delay their sudden
departure, but especially to Arritesia, to whom he applies himself in all the
dilatory postures of a parling Lover; so that Matilda by this time was entered
into her Coach, and all their attendants stood without, waiting when Plivio
would dismiss their Lady, whose ear was surfeited with his tedious complements.
But Plivio having now brought about what he desired, thought it not prudence to
dally with opportunity, but on the sudden gives the watchword to his
servants, who being able to interpret the meaning, make fast the Gate, and by
force drew in Arritesia into the Castle, not regarding her pitiful shrieks and
cries, and tears, able to wound the flintyest heart, and pierce the most
impenetrable ears. Oh! that heaven should ever permit any to fix the
superscription of love, upon actions so plainly visible to the dimmest eye, to
be nothing but the offsprings of a luxurious passion.

Matilda, with the company that were without, hearing Arritesia's cries, and
seeing the sad effects of his plot, and that his former delays were but the
courtings of occasion, they in a confused manner run home to Pirotes's house,
to inform him of his Daughters surprizal; but as they went, amazing fear had so
distracted some, and fearless amazement transported others, that when Pirotes
at their arrival (having his heart no less filled with terror, than his ears
were with the noise of that rout) inquired of them the cause of their
confusion, as the one (at first) could not tell what to relate, so neither
could the other tell how to deliver their doleful message, but made their
countenances supply the defects of their speech; till at length they declared
the villainy of Plivio, and the misery of his Daughter.

Pirotes, whose ears with such greedy haste hunted for words, had now
over-taken the prey that preyed upon him, and pulling his hat over his face (as
I was told) tears fell in such abundance, as if his heart dissolved into drops,
had distilled thorough his eyes; such a source of sorrow did over-^low him, as
even drowned his senses, and with too much sense of grief, made grief become
senseless. Sorrow when it swells above the dam of moderation confounds it self.

In this confused conflict of mind, he fixes this resolution in his thoughts
(if an unsteadfast mind, floating on the inconstant waves of grief, can ever be
said to resolve) that a few womanish complaints should not satisfy his
revenge, but he would give the coin that Mars uses to purchase Kingdoms with
for her Dowry.

The next day, according to his resolution, he summons all his Tenants
together; and as many as through either envy or hatred to Plivio, or love to
Arritesia (for she had many suitors, and he many rivals, whose merits far
over-ballanced his, though his fortunes exceeded theirs) would appear in arms
against him, and besieges him in his Castle before his spies could give any
information; so that all his preparations were to fight Cupids battles, for
instead of that miscellany of noises and combustions that are the usual effects
of sudden alarms, they might hear nothing but Music and dancing, and all
things that argued a fearless security; only, as happened, the Gates were shu^,
but rather to keep out the air than an enemy, the Guard being discharged that
should have watched upon the walls, and the Sentinels that should have given
notice of this invasion.

Thus many times, some unthought of mischief steals away our joys, whilst our
senses lie steept in solace and benumbed with a dream of pleasure, and seldom
that issue of an improvident mind Security, lights upon any that move upon the
still waters of content, but like that inauspicious meteor called Helena, it
presages a storm.

And so it was with Plivio, he was reaping the harvest of delight with one
hand, whilst he sowed the seeds of his own ruin with the other. And had not the
Gates been happily fastened (thanks more to his good fortune than his vigilance)
he had been surprised in the midst of all his jollity; but by that means they
were forced to use scaling Ladders, battering Rams, and other Engines of War,
to force a passage into the Castle. And so strongly was it fortified by Art and
Nature, that notwithstanding they were interrupted with so small resistance, as
only from some few of Plivio's menial attendants, that were more beholding to
Nature for valor than their Master, and had made what opposition, men grown
desperate with courage and necessity would dare to attempt, yet success had not
put a period to their enterprise, until the setting of the Sun had concluded
the day. And just then (as ^ortune would have it) it was my happiness to arrive
at the Castle, to the admiration of Pirotes and all his company, who before
were fully possessed with the belief of my death. But after some
congratulations that passed betwixt us, he gave me a full information of the
reasons of his proceedings, and what had been Plivio's designs in my absence,
and how that fate that commonly attends such actions, had now dissipated all
his endeavors.

The whilst he held me in this discourse, the rest of the men were ransacking
the Castle for Plivio and Arritesia, the one the only prey for their revenge,
and the latter the only treasure they sought after: but notwithstanding all
the care and diligence that could be expected in men searching for a Jewel,
that must ransom them from the killing tortures of a living death, not the
least footsteps of either could be found. But how, or when, or which way, or
whither they escaped, was as great a subject of our admiration, as if the Sun
had droped down from heaven. But I shall never forget how the good old man,
when the news of his Daughters flight ^lew to his ears, how he at once both
wept and wondered, grief and astonishment having both taken the Fortress of his
heart, and both at once displayed their Banners in his countenance, and there I
saw at once an agreement betwixt them to tyrannize over him, and a disagreement
about dominion over each other; his amazement did at once transport him and
confound grief, his grief would at once overflow him and drown his amazement.

But at length after a tedious search for Arritesia, for whom they looked with
more curiosity than Ceres did for Proserpina, and the time of night being come,
that is wont to steal our senses, and hide them in a Pandora's box of dreams,
Pirotes returned home (for home he would return) though (as common civility
obliged) I much pressed him to the contrary. But as he went (poor Gentleman)
methoughts I saw a doleful hearse of sorrow in his looks, his heavy eyes with
their dim lights pointing toward ^he ground, as if there he meant to inhabit
next, and seemed like torches in a grave; whilst every part would act its part,
and seemed to give a dumb relation of that story of woe written in his thoughts.

But to be short, sorrow had so closed up all the entries of his mind, that
there was not the least ^rany for a beam of comfort to shine in; yea it so
played the Tyrant, that it quite exiled all rest and sleep, and every thing that
seemed an enemy to mourning, so that he conversed with nothing but
solitaryness, saw nothing but darkness, heard nothing but inward sighs, spoke
nothing but silent moans, felt nothing but pangs that stupefied his feeling,
and tasted nothing but insipid grief, till at length death that unties the
Gordian knots of nature, that untunes the harmony of compounded beings; the
poor man's wish, the rich man's fear, the sad man's joy, the stout man's Page, the
young man's ^oy, and the old man's expectation; that thief that steals man away,
and leaves his picture for a while, stole Pirotes out of this world, who
amongst many other grave counsels to Matilda (the rare offsprings of those
severe but excellent thoughts, that steam forth from a departing soul, carried
above it self with that excess of joy extracted from those pleasureable
meditations that a well-passed life in this world do afford) I say much and so
excellent advice he gave her, as if he would have contracted the former
goodness of the whole span of his life into a punctum, of all his years into
that last moment, and then like the last blaze of an Aromatic Torch, breath
forth the fragrant odors of his life in his last instant; and then my good
Angel inspired him with such high thoughts of me, as (indeed) it would be the
greatest presumption to think my merits could challenge a far inferior
reputation: So that at his last hour he charged her, that if ever (as he
pleased to term it) so much happiness was reserved for her, as that I should
pitch upon her as the object of my affections, not to be so great an enemy to
her self (he might more properly have said an enemy to me) as to slight me,
though my small worth might be a sufficient excuse, having nothing that might
merit the contrary, except in that I love her; but however, this was ^o^h his
advise and command; so that encouraged by this, (...) fresh remembrance of his
death was a little withered (as nothing ever continues verdant, though far be
it from me to expunge the remembrance of him, 'twould be an eternal blot to my
name, and might justly make me remembered only for infamy) but I say, after the
verdant freshness of it, though watered with the dew of many tears, began to
decay, I went to Matilda, and unbreasted my thoughts to her, and disclosed the
beauteous image of her self there enclosed; and how pure a flame was shot from
her eyes into my heart, and in a broken manner (for such is the language of
Lovers, the commotions of their hearts disturbing their speech) I say brokenly
I begged of her to love me, if not for my own sake, yet as the Cabinet of such
a Jewel as her Idea, and if not for that, yet for her Fathers sake, who had
bequeathed so excellent a Legacy unto me as her self, the Jewel of the world,
the pattern of perfection, in whose presence all beauties lose their luster, as
the Suns refulgent beams drown the splendour of the Stars; and in comparison of
whom Venus was but a blowze, and might justly be accused of the highest
arrogance, should she account her excellencies worth estimation when compared
with hers.

In fine, I left nothing unsaid that Love could dictate (and Love did dictate
as much as can be within the compass of invention) so that at length with these
assaults I battered down all those reasons that fortified her heart against me;
and forced her to blush forth a dumb consent, when methoughts I saw her former
thoughts marching out of her mind with the colors flying in the lovely Air of
her countenance, with such a delicate bravery, as she seemed at once to yield
and triumph; so that I became o^ a captive a victor, but yet such a victor, as
my conquest did but augment my captivity. And before she would surrender up her
heart to my possession, she compelled me by many Vows to swear, not to deface
her spotless Virtue, but that chastity should retain its governance; and
withal to pay a large sum of merits, toward the building a Temple of honor,
where her Virtue should lie enshrined; and since that no deserts purchase
greater renown, than those that are founded on Valor and Deeds of Arms,
therefore she engaged me to travel with her thorough Greece to hunt for fame
with heroic exploits. And remembering that there was no better way to eternize
my name, than to serve so excellent a Prince as your self, in so just and
honorable a cause, I raised what forces I could in Parrhasia, and am now come
to obey Matilda, and serve your Lordship.

Athalus having thus finished his story, Danpion and he began to consult about
their designs. Great affairs being surrounded with difficulties, for their
better accomplishment, require as well Argus's eyes as Briarcus hands. And
therefore as a Prince would proclaim himself guilty of no great prudence, whose
confidence on another judgment should create in him a diffidence of his own,
and by that means make another the Atlas of his Crown; so neither would it
argue height of policy, should an over-valuing opinion of himself, beget in him
a contempt of his counsel: For by that means, viewing his reasons thorough the
spectacles of self-conceipt, be sure they will appear (however empty in
themselves) more full of wisdom, more forcible, and more demonstrative than
others. That Prince had need have a brain pregnant with Minerva that needs no
co^nsel, as he shows himself a Prince (scarce a man I should say) with a head,
empty of brains, that refuses all counsel.

But to digress from this digression. Pandion and Athalus (as I said) fell into
consultation about the managing this cause in which they were embarked, and
how to steer it safely to the Port of Sovereignty. Now in all determinable
cases, controverted by a Council, these three points are chiefly to be insisted
on.

First, The Justness of the cause: for who can expect to return crowned with a
Laurel, that at once fightt against the powers of heaven and earth?

Secondly, The facility of accomplishing; and therein is to be considered the
instrumental causes: for never was any so in league with Heaven, as to
challenge supernatural assistance. None could free him from the imputation of
madness, that would endeavor to effect an enterprise without endeavors; that
were to create not to get victories.

Thirdly, The honor and profit: since man acting as a rational creature by
voluntary election, not by instinct of Nature, or compulsive impulse of Sense,
always propounds some thing to himself, which appearing under the notion of
good, is called the final cause, which though last in execution^, is first in
intention; therefore much more in the management of the highest affairs, man is
entrusted with on earth, they ought to use the greatest reason; and Reason
never excites the will to proceed to election of any thing for its object, that
contains not real worth to render it eligible, or is at least gilded over with
an amability.

Now these three things were chiefly considered in their deliberation.

And as to the first, namely, The justness of the Cause; that was affirmed to
be as apparent as the Sun* by whom all things are apparent; it being the
prosecution of a persecuted right, and such a right, that had been founded upon
an indubitate succession for many generations, proclaimed by the voice of heaven
the people, and confirmed by the Law of Nature and Nations.

And to that Objection that Hiarbas his right, both by Conquest, and by Agis
his resignation, had swallowed up Danpion's, Reply was made: To the first Part
of the Objection, That Nature was an impartial Legislator, and Universals were
equally shared among Specials and Individuals: Now if it was an Universal Rule,
That Might could purchase Right, then it was as just for Danpion to regain the
Kingdom by force, as Hiarbas by force to possess it. If the longest sword is a
fit tool to carve Crowns for one, it is for another. If the Trophies of
Conquest can afford materials for a Throne for one, they can for another. But
the Sword using no other Arguments, than those of Victory and Success, cannot
be a fit way to constitute, nor a fit Umpire to determine Right: And though it
may plead Custom and Example, yet such Pleas are only valid with those, whose
ignorance of the Original and true constitution of Right, Equity, and Justice,
disposes them to adhere to a Precedent; and though they follow the example of
one, whose actions were probably entitled just, because they escaped that
vengeance that pursues injustice: We are not to square our actions by another,
unless he squares his by the rules of justice: And though (it is true) in the
state of War, that all men are in, before the institution of Commonwealths,
(every man by nature being as a little World, so a little Republic) a Right
procured by the Sword is not unjust, because unjustice is the wrongful
detaining of another Propriety; now one man having as much right to all things
as another, there can be no Propriety, until a coercive Power is established,
that must divide this vast Common into Enclosures; yet after Commonwealths are
instituted, to invade another right, is not to procure a Propriety, but a
Possession; for Propriety is a Right to enjoy and improve any thing transferred
by mutual voluntary compact, under a coercive Power, that can render the
Contract valid, by compelling the mutual performance: Now a Covenant being an
act of the Will, and the Will having only some good for its Object, and no
greater evil, than to abandon means of self-preservation (which is the end and
use of all things we seek to enjoy) therefore none can be supposed voluntarily
to renounce his right of enjoyment of that, the loss whereof tends to his
destruction; because he therein cannot be thought to aim at any good to himself.

Again, a Covenant being a voluntary act, must be free from all coercion: For
though the Elicit actions of the Will are not subject to compulsion, yet the
Imperate actions are sometimes forced to rebel against its commands and
dictates: Now a Covenant being a voluntary transferring of Right, that is, not
a conferring a Right upon another that he had not before, because Nature
equally shares all things, among all persons, but a devesting ones self of a
liberty of interrupting another Original Right, in the thing alienated, or a
voluntary standing out of the way, that another may enjoy his Original Right
derived to him by Nature: As Alexander, when he eclipsed the Sun, by his
interposition between it and Diogines's little Hermitage, removed his station
at the Cynicks request: But an enjoyment purchased by force, does not by a
reciprical transferring of some good, move the Will of any one by compact,
voluntarily to renounce his Right, or liberty of impeding another use of his
own Right Original, and to remove himself away the main obstacle, but rather
thrusts such a one away by force; as if Diogines should have crowded Alexander
from between him and the Suns Rays.

And therefore a Right so procured, is only a present fruition, that is
Possession, until a stronger snatches the Prey. Hence, no one can invest
himself with a right of Soveraignety only by force, a power of governing so
procured, being not a Sovereignty, but a Tyranny: For all Soveraigntie, or
Power of governing others, is Originally derived from a certain number of
Persons, covenanting one with another, to surrender up their natural right of
Self-gubernation, to one or more Persons, who representing the whole, so united
by mutual compact, may use the power and strength of them all for the safety,
and benefit, and weal of the Public.

Therefore a Power attained by violence, is not a Power to rule, but tyrannize;
the multitude having never so much as implicitly transferred over their right,
and consequently not obliged to obedience, any farther than as their
Non-obedience may turn to their destruction: And in that respect, the right of
Sovereignty being equally shared among all Persons, by nature, the
disproportion only remains in this, Thar such a one has the longest Sword.

But concerning the second part of the Objection, viz: That Agis had
transferred over his right to Hiarbas by Resignation, this was the solution:

First, though it is true, Covenants entered into by force are Obligatory, from
the Law of Nature that commands Self-preservation, and consequently an Election
of those means that tend thereunto; therefore if an extorted resignation be a
means to procure such a good, as a freedom from that evil that is the Object of
fear, it cannot but be binding, where there is no other Law (as in the
conditihn of mere Nature) forbids the performance; but such Covenants being
acts of men, considered as in the condition of War, are therefore obliging no
longer, than until there arises a new and just cause of fear, and then he is
much obliged by the same Law, that for Self-conservation commanded him to
resign up such a Right, because the reservation of it was inconsistent with his
preservation, to re-invest himself with that right he relinquished, if it be
the only means for his safety, as before he was to resign it up.

But it was alleged, That there was a just cause of fear, though not in Agis,
yet in Danpion his Heir, or Representative, who had the sentence of Death
passed upon him, and therefore might justly seek to re-gain the Kingdom, not
only as his lawful inheritance, but to preserve himself from the invasions of
Hiarbas, there being nothing more reasonable than Anticipation, that is, the
over-powring those Persons that seek ones destruction.

But secondly, The people of Thessalia had given the sovereignty to those that
were lineally descended of Agis's Ancestors, and therefore were bound by
Covenant to obey them, as their lawful Sovereigns: Consequently Agis, though he
might dispose of the Government during his life, yet not of the Succession;
because he derived no such authority from the Fountain of Soveraigntie, the
Multitude, in the first institution; and therefore the transferring of the
right of governing from his Posterity to a stranger, was the giving away
another Propriety, or an assisting of one, in the invasion of another.

Hence, Hiarbas was but a temporary King, to whom the entire exercise of Power
was committed for a time; which once expired, his Power must also expire with
it: after which, his Government was but an unjust Usurpation, or a wrongful
detaining of another Propriety.

The second thing they consulted about, was the facility of accomplishing: For
Policy forbids any man to engage in a War, though for a just and lawful
recovery of his own; unless he can produce pregnant and demonstrative
assurances, that he shall be seconded with success. But they did not doubt of
success, for these Reasons:

First because, the sooner any thing comes to perfection, the sooner it
declines to corruption and dissolution; so the sooner any arrives at the height
of power, the nearer he is to his declension. And this was Hiarbas case, being
on a sudden rebounded, by a strange fortune, into the throne, from the ground
of a hopeless irresolution.

Secondly, As in Nature, so in Government, nothing is permanent that is
violent. For though for a time a Tyrant (i.e. an unjust Usurper, or possessor
of another Power, to whom the right of sovereignty in Propriety belongs)
though for some time he may underprop his state with the Sword and Policy; yet
in the end, Divine Justice snaps the Sword in sunder, infatuates his Council,
and makes his own the subaltern causes of his downfall.

But Hiarbas, as he came to his Government by a Politic violence, so he upheld
it by the same; and therefore they feared not, but that false pretended right,
inscribed by the Sword-point, on the leaf of a Laurel, would be dissipated,
like the Prophecies of that Sybill, that used Leaves for her Paper, by the
blasts of Heavens Vengeance.

Thirdly, That Government that is erected on the Basis of a Faction, cannot
stand; because the Foundation being too narrow for the Fabric, and it having
no Internal Principle of stability, must be upheld by External Props, and
consequently subject to dissolution, upon the least failing of that force, by
which it was constituted.

But as the former was most apparently true in Hiarbas his Government, so also
the latter; viz: That that force that was the Architect of his sovereignty,
daily declined through intestine disorder. These, and many other Reasons that
were then given, encouraged them in their high enterprise.

But as for the third thing, viz: the Honor and Profit that would redound, if
their atchivements were crowned with success, that was so conspicuous, as it
required no great consideration. So that in Fine, this was the result of the
consultation, That Athalus should march with his men to the Court, and pretend
to be revolted from Pandion, through an opinion of the merit of Hiarbas's
Cause; that since Danpion was exiled from thence, and none to nourish Faction
in the Court or Kingdom, Athalus by that means might ingratiate himself with
the King, and breed emulation among the Nobles, and dissentions among the
Commonalty; that so by that means, they might fit all things in a readiness
against the first access of a smiling fortune. And as for Danpion, it was
thought not safe for him to entrust himself in any part of the Kingdom, unless
disguised; it was therefore resolved, that he should attire himself in the
habit of a Lady, and go to the Court as a companion of Matilda's, and so make
that mask a step at once to reach the prize of his Ambition and Affection.

These things thus agreed on, Danpion arrayes himself in a white silken Robe,
that taught from his shoulders to the ground, the train whereof strayed a
pretty distance from his heels, and before was bu^^^ned with rich Jewels, from
his neck, to his knees, and there left open to discover the pure whiteness of
his skin: His legs and feet were imprisoned within the gilded Labyrinth of
rich Buskins, which were fastened under his knee, with a most precious Jewel,
where the ends of all the Knots did center and unite: His hair being very long,
after the Thessalian manner, hung loosely, and carelessly upon his shoulders,
having no other attire upon his head, than a lawn Veil cast over his head,
face, and shoulder, on the top of which, he wore a Coronet of Gold, set with
Diamonds, the ancient Habit of Virgin-Princesses in some parts of Greece. Thus
arrayed, he steps up into the Chariot, and sits on the right hand of Matilda,
and accompanies her to the Court, under the name of Celania; where in a short
time they arrived, and were received by Hiarbas (after notice given by a
Herald from Athalus, what they were, and what the intents of their coming)
with all possible demonstrations of Honor; not neglecting any ceremonies or
complements that appertain to State, but manifesting all things that might
express the greatness of a Princes mind, who scorns to be overcome in courtesy.

And as for the two Ladies, Celania and Matilda, with the four Virgins that
were the Attendants, they were conducted by a chief Gentleman Usher, through the
outward Court, to a stately Gallery, that led into a most beautiful Garden;
where they were received by a Lady of Honor, and thence led to the Princess
Amphigenia; who in her Chamber was set in a Chair of State, under a most rich
Canopy of cloth of gold, with many young beautiful Ladies, clad in Crimson
Damask, attending on her.

Amongst whom, her most transcendent beauty made her shine, with as much
superiority, as the Sun does over the lesser Luminaries; so excellent and
incomparable were the Graces that sat enshrined in her lively Countenance, as
she seemed as a perfect mirror of all beauty and Majesty; such a miraculous
composition of all those Excellencies, that can at once both enravish with
delight, and transport with admiration: She seemed (as indeed she was) a fitter
subject for the pen of Angels, whose vast capacities render them more able to
comprehend, as their being conversant with immortal Glories, to describe the
sublimity of her Perfections, than any Mortal whatsoever; because, though he
had an understanding as vast as the Creation, that he could put a Girdle upon
Nature, and might, like the Be, here and there extract the choycest Flowers,
that grow in her Garden, to fill his invention with similitudes, yet being
cooped within the Universe, he can no more describe the perfection of her
beauties, than a Picture of the Sun can imitate its Splendour.

In this stately posture she sat, until the Ladies were conducted into her
presence, and then she arose and saluted them, with a countenance and gesture
expressing so much sweetness, but yet tempered with such a lovely, but stately
reservedness, as she at once gave them their due Honor, and yet retained her
own State; so that Majesty in her deportments seemed to descend on the wings of
Humility, like Phaebus's Chariot, ruled by Phaeton, and inflamed their hearts
with admiration; but especially Celanias's who was struck into a strange kind
of transport, that had near discovered her, had not conscience recovered her;
for her heart fell into such a vehement panting, and her body was arrested with
such a quivering, as even hindered both her speech and gestures, at least the
grace of them, so that she at first wished she could purchase a hansom
conveyance out of the Room, with the loss of those delights Amphigenia's
presence afforded: And no wonder, for she was never before acquainted with the
happiness of so near an access; much less therefore with the effects of love,
when extafied with so near an approach to the object beloved, and least of all
with an Antidote against the strange influence of those effects.

But at length the consideration of those miseries that would be in the event
of her discovery, conquered those pangs, and gave his reason the sovereignty
over his passion; so that though at first Passion disdained to hearken to
Reason as a Councellor, it now refused not to be subject to it as a Prince.

Celania being now in a capacity ^or converse, fell into conference with
Amphigenia, the cadences of whose words seemed to her a melody beyond the very
relishes and closes of Angels Music, as her features seemed to transcend
Angelical Beauty. After some time consumed in pleasant discourses, Amphigenia
led them into the Gardens, and there showed them all the delights might have
sated an Epicure. Such a banquet had Art and Nature there set forth to feast
the sight, as might satiate the most greedy pomp-expecting eyes, satiate?
rather astonish. Neither were the eyes alone partakers of the mollitious
pleasures of that Paradise, but the ears were enriched with all the treasures a
well-touched Lute (that sweet Exchequer of delights) could afford, whose
resounding womb seemed the Limbeck of harmony, where its quintessence was
distilled, which gently dropping thorough the ear into the Cabinet of Sense,
the Brain, with its soft pleasures charms the soul.

But this was but a prelude to a consort of Instruments excellently played on by
delicate Ladies, sitting under a Sun-proof Arbor, whose features seemed as full
of harmony to their eyes, as their Music was beautiful to the ears. But whilst
they were keeping time in Music, time danced by so nimbly, as they rather in
keeping lost it, each minute crowded on so fast, and seemed to tread on its
predecessors heels, as if it feared the others loytering might intercept its
pleasures: so that it was not long ere the farr-extended shadows of the
mountains, seemed sent as messengers from Titan, to tell them the news of his
declension, when supper was in great state served into the Banqueting house; a
stately building suspended in the Air on Marble pillars, standing on a flowery
plain, embraced with the Silver streams of a purlling River that gently crept
along: the Chamber above was hung with cloth of Tissue, in the midst of it was
a round Tribunal made of Porphyry, on the top of which was a chair of State,
wherein was placed the Statue of Diana, richly apparelled, a golden scepter in
her hand, and the three Graces attending on her, playing on wind Instruments,
which were carved so lively, that as their figure deceived the sight, so did
the Music the hearing, which the water conveyed by silver pipes thorough the
pillars made them compose.

But all these glories seemed to Celania only to adorn the triumph of
Amphigena's beauty, which lead captive more hearts than they did eyes, or the
Music ears; so that she viewed them only with a careless eye, accounting
nothing worth the seeing in Amphigenia's presence but her, nor scarce ever
casting a glance on any thing; unless it were on that whose extraordinary
excellence might justly challenge a look from a Critics eye, and then she
would compare it with her, to render her Beauty incomparable. But if Amphigenia
chanced to crop a slower, or treasure up the perfumes of a Rose, or disperse
the rays of her f^ir eyes on any object, then she would look and look again,
envy the flower, grow jealous of the Rose, and grieve that she her self was not
the object. Ah! (would she say) thou pretty Martyr, how happy art thou to lose
thy life by so sweet an executioner! And when she saw it wither in her hands:
Poor senseless flower (said she) cannot a glance from that eye revive thee? nor
a touch of that hand (whose soft delicacy would warm a heart bennumed with Age,
and in despite of years recall Youth fled with Time) cannot such a hand (I
say) stop the career of thy beauties? Poor foolish flower, what meanest thou to
let death ravish thy sweets? deface that portraiture of beauty, pencil'd by
Nature in thy leaves? demolish thy lovely Citadel of loveliness? think thou
to resume more sweetness, more beauty, more loveliness, from her most sweet,
most beautiful, and most lovely hand? no (fond thing) her chastness hates a
prostitute. What then? what is the matter? do thou bequeath thy sweets to
her? and do they by a secret transition pass away from thee, and by
transmigration dwell in her? no sure, her Ocean of beauty needs not thy drop,
her infinite treasures conferred on her by too prodigal heaven, sure needs not
the addition of thy poor mite: no, no, thou pinest away with grief, and so do I.

Again, when she saw her extract the fragrancy of a Rose: Oh! too happy flower
(would she say) and in this only unhappy, that thou art ignorant of thy
hapness: Little think thou where thy fading sweets do lie entombed; thou
would not grutch to part with all thy wealth, knew thou but where its
treasured, nor to be robbed of thy little cargo of perfumes, did thou but know
thy Pirate. Robbed? if a Merchant that cha^^e^s trash for Gold, or Glass for
Pearls is robbed, then so art thou.

Her pure hand that divides thee from thy root, does but transport thee from
thy native dwelling, to the Vermilion Orient of her lips, where she changes the
Aromaticks of her breath for thy poor odours. Oh! Oh! might my soul be refined
by the heat of Loves passions into such a steam, as now expires out of thy
blushing leaves, and be exhaled like thine, and dwell among the Carnation
clouds of her beauty, I Would not envy the inhabitants of Elysium.

These and the like speeches would she wisper to her self upon every occasion,
extracting out of that Garden of delights, only what might feed the appetite
of love. And when Supper was served in, though there was all the rarities that
could be expected at a refection invented by an Epicure, to feast his Sense
without sense of satiety, yet Celania took no contentment in all, only let her
eyes riot in the most luxuriant banquet of Amphigenia's beauty, which she did
with the more confidence, presuming her disguize might make her looks
unregarded, or at most unsuspected. Such strange effects did Love work in
Celania's heart. If Amphigenia spoke, the sweet harmony of her voice, and
eloquence in her speech, would strike Celania mute. If Amphigenia afforded her
a glance, the luster of her eyes (like the Sun whose own brightness is his
shade, and sends a drop to veil a gazers eye) would strike Celania blind. If
Amphigenia graced a Lute with her playing, the curious swiftness of her fingers
nimbly touching the quavering strings, in deep amazes would strike Celania
motionless.

And thus did Amphigenia's presence absent Celania from her self. But supper
being ended, after a great deal of mirth that usually abounds in Princes Courts
in times of s^renity, but especially upon such occasions the night being far
spent, the Sun having distributed much of his light to those of the other
hemisphere, Amphigenia brought the Ladies to their several lodgings, where my
Muse will bid them good night, and leave them to take their repose, that
consort of darkness, that sovereign of balm for care-wounded-minds.

Thus had Danpion, now Celania, finished the second part of his Tragicomedy,
and is now stepping into the third, which as it was acted under various
di^guizes, so with various fortunes, as we thus declare.

The two happy Lovers Athalus and Matilda having continued some space in the
Court, not willing to stay any longer in the Suburbs of desires, nor to be
confined within the portal of felicity, resolved to imparadise their hearts in
Hymen^ Elysium; and by mar^iage (that pick-lock of chaste sweets) to drench
their love-united ^ouls in a deluge of contentments; which accordingly was
celebrated by Hiarbas's special command, with all the riches, pomp, and
magnificence, that the highest gratitude could throw upon the greatest and most
unmatched desert; and with all the pleasures that might bribe a contemplative
mind to stoop to the lure of sense.

Among the variety of representations, whereby the wits of the Court strove to
form delight in the fancy, the Princess Amphigenia with the chief Ladies of the
Court, presented a Mask before the King and some of the chiefest Nobl^^ where
the Music was so rapturous, as would even confound an earth bred ear, that at
first hearing few could bear so strong a transportation; The well agreeing
notes seeming to combine together to astonish souls with sudden ravishment, and
in their ex^^^es to persw^de them they heard the Spheres rowsing harmony, for
it seemed to the strongest ear, as if the Musicians had contracted that
heavenly melody, in the narrow circumference of their instruments, or had made
an Epitome of its sweetest strains; to which the Maskers footing kept such even
time, as none but would have thought the air (moved by the enchanting sinews of
the Instruments) danced her finest measures after the motions of their feet. So
that they seemed (as it were) the Intelligences that moved the Orbs of Music.

But these delights served but to awaken Celania's evil Genius, who by the
light of Hymen's Torch discovered a way to smother all her newborn joys, which
was this.

It happened that at this time the^e was a Knight of Pandions at the Court, by
name Dokimastus, one that pretended to be a revolter from his Master, but was
indeed a Spy, that Pandion had appointed under that disguize to pry into
Hiarbas's affairs; who as he had resolution to attempt any thing that might
further his Masters designs, so he had craft and subtilty to direct his
resolution* one that had learnt the Art of Insinuation, and with the Gyges Ring
of deceit could walk undiscovered in the midst of others privacies; one that
would seem to disclose himself nakedly to his very thoughts, but yet make that
nakedness his thoughts best clothing. Words are the souls resounding
pourtraiture; he that draws a false picture of his mind, pencils dissimulation,
not his own resemblance. He that agrees not with himself, whose thoughts and
words j^rr, his tongue refusing to accord with his mind in the harmony of
truth, how can he be tho^ght to agree with another? But by this means had he
crept into Hiarbas favor, so that nothing was concealed from him that he
listed to discover, and he li^^ed to discover as much as did tend to his
Masters advantage.

This Dokimastus being present at the Mask, giving liberty to his eyes to range
among that Paradise of Beauties, chanced among other Ladies to espy Celania
covered with her Veil, according to her wonted garb; who having not her
education among those of that Sex which she seemed to personate, and therefore
unacquainted with many female accomplishments, in the catalogue of which the
complete deportment of the body in Dancing is esteemed not the least, which she
being wholly a stranger to, and therefore justly fearing lest at the Mask she
should unmask her self, chose rather to obscure her ignorance with the mist of
a pretended reservedness, and to make another blush with a coy repulse, than
her self ashamed with an indiscreet familiarity. The strangeness of her garb
and deportment, as they made many other objects ungazed on, by affording as
much matter for admiration as they for delight, so in particular they drew a
more curious observation from Dokimastus than others, because that observation
begat a conceit in him that was not in others, viz. that this Celania was no
other then Glycera the Nunn, his Masters she-idoll, escaped out of Cyprus, and
for love of some Courtier or other fled thither under that disguise.

This conceit having admission into his thoughts, did by degrees conquer all
opposition, bribe his belief with accumulation of Arguments from his continued
observation, and at length give it self the sovereignty in his mind; so that he
resolved, that since his observation had conquered his belief, his belief
should Master his purpose, (which was to send her to Pandion) but his purpose
should attend as a ^ervant to opportunity. And that his Present might be more
acceptable he determined to send Amphigenia, that so Pandion having the heir of
the Kingdom in his custody, and Hiarbas's only child, he might be able with
less difficulty to conquer his designs.

These resolves he closetted in his thoughts, till Time the winged Post-horse
of opportunity, that Whet-stone of resolution that keenes the edge of the
dullest mind, should bring the news of success. The next morning by that time
Aurora's blushing cheeks had wept her pearly drops, and sitting in her gilded
Chariot drawn with purple Steeds, had chaste away the Stars, and triumphed over
the gloomy Night, the two Princesses Amphigenia and Celania having forsaken the
Snowy Paradise of their beds, walked forth into the Groves and Gardens, to
share in the Morns refined pleasures; where as they passed along, the gentle
distilling dew would seem to weep for their departure, whilst the Western issue
of the perfumed air would softly fan their tressing cur^es with its flowery
wings, the swift winged singers striving which should salute them with the
sweetest airs.

It happened that at this time Ternotus a Squire that attended on Dokimastus,
invited forth by the Morns mollitious sweets, was walking upon a little hill to
refresh himself with Zephyres cooling gales, where he chanced to espy these two
Ladies, sitting under the green Canopy of a shady Bower, and earnest in
discourse. Celania had her beauty eclipsed with her Lilly Veil, as she had
wont; but Amphigenia fully displayed the treasure of her beauty, where she
seemed to show all the riches of Nature; as she sat under the Bower her eyes
seemed pearly Bowers where thousands of Loves and Graces seemed to flutter up
and down, and with their swift Arrows feathered with Majestic loveliness, and
tipped with Diamonds, would wound beholders hearts: So that the Bower seemed a
shady Palace, where heart-commanding beauty, attended with a great retinue of
perfections, seemed to keep its Court; or as an Asylum under whose verdant
Roof, the Stars in day time kept their residence.

Ternotus having paid a little duty to admiration (as whom would it not
transport with wonder, to behold so many wonders?) run to his Master, and told
him what lovely objects that morning had saluted his eyes withal. Dokimastus
hearing that, went by his Squires direction to the place where he beheld those
two excellent Ladies, whom he had no sooner seen, but he knew to be Celania and
Amphigenia; the rays of whose beauty made the daybreak of occasion, for the
execution of his plot; so that he presently discloses his intents to Ternotus
(having first sworn him to secrecy.) Much time they spent not in traversing of
their thoughts, till at length having agreed upon a way, which their reason
persuaded them would prove effectual, They on a sudden rush into the Grove,
where the Ladies sat (Ternotus having first fetched their weapons, and a suit of
Apparel that belonged to one of Dokimastus's attendants) and by force carried
them into a little Valley, some distance from the Gardens, where they disrobed
Celania of her Garments, and clothed her in that habit, and set Amphigenia in a
Coach that they had prepared ready for that purpose; but by that time they had
accomplished their endeavors, the shrieks of Amphigenia (^oth for her surprizal,
and the fear she took at a bloody fight that grew between Celania and
Dokimastus, who ignorant of Celania's Sex and Valor, had put a sword in her
hand, thinking if any should discover them, it might be thought that he had
conveyed Amphigenia away by force.) But I say Amphigenia's out-crys, the Airy
messengers of her misery, had soon carried tidings of it to the ears of many in
the Court, and with a doleful shrillness challenged speedy succor; who
harkening more to the noise, than to discretion or deliberation, ran out, some
dressed, some undrest, some with Weapons, some without, but using the still
mourning voice, as a winged guide, by which they directed their steps, until
they came to the Valley, where they beheld Dokimastus desperately engaged in a
Combat with Celania, whom now in that garb they knew to be Danpion; and as for
Amphigenia, she was hurried away in the Coach, with so much swiftness, as to
prevent being overtaken with the nimblest Footman; yet not so as to prevent
their ears from overtaking the voice, which like winged Pegasus, rode on the
air, and cried, Help Amphigenia, Help Amphigenia.

This sight and voice so filled the eyes and ears of the new arrived company,
did so distract and confound them with amazement, and all those Passions that
astonish spirits with amazing confusion at such sudden accidents, as that
whilst their hatred to Danpion, but love and duty to Amphigenia, prompted them
both to kill the one, and save the other, and at once to do all things, the
swelling Torrent of Amazement, dammed up the Current of their desires, and
compelled them to do nothing: Some would pursue Amphigenia, whilst themselves
were overtaken with a raging grief; others would fight with Danpion, whilst
themselves were conquered with a mad rage.

Thus the fight continued for a time, to (...) destruction of many, but the
admiration of all* Danpion encountering with the multitude for Amphigenia, as
Hercules once did with the many-headed H^dra, for the Hesperides golden fruit;
till at length, just as he was going to surrender up himself, there came
running among them a Horse, b^oken loose out of the Coach that carried away
Amphigenia; who not regarding the multitude, ran furiously among them, as if it
had been one of Phaeton's mad Palfreys, and killed some, trampled on others,
and dispersed them all; so that Danpion watched his opportunity, catched hold of
the Reigns, and wanting neither agility of body, sprightfulness of mind, nor
skill in horsman-ship, nimbly vaulted upon him, and in the ^ight of them all,
made his escape.

By this time news was fled to the King, that Danpion had carried away by
force his Daughter, and with her, the princess Celania, and how that Dokimastus
was much wounded in their defense, and many others slain, and how that his just
revenge for all these villainous acts, was anticipated by Danpion's flight: But
as if these wounding words, Force, and Flight, had forced his Reason to flight,
he so unreasonably stormed, as he seemed nothing but an^ odd composition of
Passion: What (said he) Amphigenia gone? And with that he stamped on the ground
with his foot, and made the earth quake with his fury, whilst fury made an
Earthquake in him: But then he went on, -- Amphigenia! The life of all my
Comforts, the stay of all my Hopes, and the very treasury of my Joys; and is
she gone? Gone? Nay ravished; ravished? Nay dead, for ought I know. Oh! Deadly
word! Dead! and I live, and live to see all this unrevenged? Oh! Tyrant-heaven!
Was it not enough to rob me of my Daughter? My only Daughter, but you must
plunder me of all means for revenge too? For Revenge, for Justice; if it be not
just to rid the world of such a Monster, I know not what is just; and if so,
Why did you blindly put the Sword of Justice into my hands? But oh! you Powers!
If you will tyrannize, I am your Vicegerent, and am warranted by your example;
and with that he commanded his Courtiers speedily to pursue them, and threatened
to hang them, if they came back without one, or both.

But now, to return to Danpion, who had overtaken Amphigenia, by that time the
Coach was arrived at Pandion's Castle; so that some of the Soldiers that were
upon the Walls, seeing a gallant and beautiful Lady, hunted by a man on
Hors-back, with a drawn Sword (for Danpion, by reason of the madness of the
Horse, had not time to imprison it in the Scabbard, and loath he was to disarm
himself, knowing not what future accidents might require its service) they ran
presently out of the Gates, and commanded them to yield^ Danpion not being
accustomed to surrender on such easi^ terms, began to treat with them in the
churlish language of War, and dispute his Title to Liberty; till at last he was
confuted by the sharp Sophistry of multiplied Swords: who, after they had
argued a while in the school of War, at last prevailed, and led them to
Pandions General; who at the first view of these two excellent and beautiful
Personages, was possessed with such extreme wonder, that every beam of their
Beauty, was a bright Key, that locked up his senses in the Prison of amazement.

As for Danpion, though his Habit became not one of his Birth and Greatness,
yet he so became his Habit, as he seemed to put a Majesty on Poverty; that
whilst his garb presented him as another servant, all those excellent
endowments, that give height of mind in the lowest fortune, attended on him:
His Eyes were graced with such a verecundious sternness, as seemed at once to
allure and threaten; some terrifying flashes would glance from them, but yet
with such a mixture of a well-becoming suavity, as inflamed the heart with a
greater admiration of his Beauty: His Countenance (in which appeared no common
Air) though something clouded, not with a dejecting, but rather such a tumid
grief, as usually attends those great souls, whom no fortunes can discompose,
but those that deprive them of the exercise of Virtue; yet through those Clouds
there shined such Rays of an undaunted Majesty, as might well deserve the
highest admiration in those minds that esteem nothing vulgar.

But as for Amphigenia, she seemed a Person so incomparably excellent, it is
fitter to leave the Soul extasied with the contemplation of her Beauty, than to
attmept its Delineation, since no Tongue, nor Pen can pourtray them, but must
be vast debtors to her Perfections. And that that added no small luster to her
Excellencies, was her Magnanimity under this misfortune, choosing rather that
her heart should break within, than her sorrow break out; and resolving, that
Death should ravish her Soul from her Body, sooner than the saddest accident
her Virtue from her Soul; and making it the chiefest point of Virtue, to be
commander of her inward Passions, whilst her outward estate was a servant to
Fortune: And this present misery, though circumstanced with all the evils that
envy could wish for, or her self detest, not only her Person, but her Chastity
being at the disposal of one, whom a double Antipathy, both as a man, and an
enemy made infinitely hateful; yet by foyling it with her Virtue, she made
serve, but as an Ornament to the beauty of her Virtues: So that the Clouds of
sadness in her Countenance, made the brighter reflections of the beams of a
stately Majesty.

Whilst Pandion was taken up with the Prospect of such Heavenly Aspects, the
Coachman (that had been the Charon that had hurried this sad Princess to such
a Hell of misery) comes to him, and humbly craves a minutes conference: He
consenting, the Coachman informs him, who that beautiful Subject of his
admiration was, and by what, and whose means, and for what end he had conveyed
her thither; and as for the other, he presumed he was some Attendant of the
Kings, by whose command he pursued them.

This news was as a Charm to Pandion's Passion, that gently did allay the
surges of astonishment, and converted them into a smooth Sea of contentment:
For now he doubted not but to procure the Kingdom, since he had gotten the
Inherit^ix within his Power, by making her to resign up her Right, to ransom
her Chastity, or her Farher his Power, to ransom her. And observing in the
looks of Danpion, the Ensigns of a brave resolute mind, and fearing lest by his
valor he should release the Princess, he gave strict charge to the chief
Commander of the Castle, that if within a short space none came to redeem him,
he should be put to Death, to satisfy for the blood of those of his men whom
he had slain.

But as he was farther speaking, he was interrupted by a sudden Allarm, given
to the Soldiers within by the Watch; who (it seems) had not only seen a Cloud
of dust arise, as if some Demogorgon had belcht through a porous part of the
earth, but they had also espied, especially, when the Wind made a chasm in this
dusty Region, the shining of Armor, which like portentous Comets threatened
Destructions; or as glistring Stars were the Harbingers of a bloody day to
ensue.

This Martial noise coming to Pandions ears, as the Prologue of a bloody Scene,
by reason of his Authority, did challenge, with Authority from him, a
particular Attendance; who loath to make negligence the Author of an
irrecoverable Ruin, or his Ruin the mark of an unredeemable neglect,
presently runs upon the Castle-walls, where he might espy vast Numbers of
shining Swords, which though naked, where sheathed in a terrible brightness,
and Armor, inlayed with Sunbeams, and Bucklers, that played at Tenis with the
Sun; and many other Objects, that might beget delight in a mind not already
praegnant with the terror of approaching danger.

Pandion already conceiving, that they were Hiarbas's men, come in rescue of
the Princess (as indeed they were) thought it none of the worst Policy, to
de^a^d their too speedy assault, by sending a Herald with Proposals, and a
challenge; which, after consultation with some of the chief Commanders, he did;
the purport of whose Message was this: That both for putting a Period to that
destructive War, whose terrible effects* had hitherto been no other than the
sacking of many famous Towns and Cities, the ransacking and plundring of many
Lords and Gentlemen, and the general depopulating of the whole Kingdom; That
the whole quarrel should be decided by the Persons most and only concerned,
(which was the King and himself) in a single Combat; which proffer, in regard
of the advantage he had in possessing, not only the greater part of the Realm,
but the Realms immediate Heir, he could not but judge just and honorable, upon
which grounds he hoped it would be so esteemed and accepted.

The Herald having his Message given him, clothed in the Apparel of his
Office, attended by a Trumpet, and (as Pandion had commanded) carrying a
Gantlet dipped in blood, rides to the Army, where he craves audience of the King;
which being granted, he ^^ung down his Gantlet, and delivered his Challenge.

The King hearing it, replied, That it was not the custom of Kings to descend
to a private Duel with a Subject, much less with a Rebel; but if it was, that
his Cause was not so unjust, that he feared success, nor his Soldiers such
Cowards, as they feared to fight, nor his Condition so low, as to use desperate
means, nor himself so unwise, as to leave his Cause, and Condition, Person, and
Army, to the Governance and Arbitration of For^une and Chance, which is apt
ever to favor the rash and foolish: And were his Condition never so low, he
would have him know, that Kings in their lowest estate, are highly
considerable, and one grain of Majesty will weigh down many light pretenses;
though may be not in the Balance of popular judgment, yet in theirs who poize
the Universe.

And for his Kingdom and Daughter, though by he did not know what blind fortune
he had attained some part of the first, and by a base inferior Combination with
Traitors, such as himself, he had ensnared the latter; yet let not (said he)
that success heighten his presumption, nor encourage his perseverance, since
the one will but add Unpardonableness, and the other an impossibility of
recovery to his horrid Rebellion: Therefore (said he) I shall not seek to
ransom the one with the other, but if he means to redeem himself, let him
resign both to my Protection, and himself to my Mercy. With this answer the
Herald returned, and acquainted Pandion, who expected, and indeed desired no
other; the end of his Message being only to dally with Time, that paced by
faster, than consisted with the welfare of his affairs. But having now all
things in a readiness, he marches forth with his men, and as he goes, commands
the Captain of the Castle, that speedy execution be done upon Hiarbas's
servant, and charges him to be as vigilant of Amphigenia, as he would of his
soul, were it in another keeping. The Captain having thus his Orders given
hi^, goes to the Room where Danpion was, intending to release him out of the
Prison, but to imprison him in the Grave; but as soon as he sees him, as if
Danpion's beauty had turned him into Marble, he stands still, as if he grew to
the ground, and fixes his eye steadfastly upon him, as if he would inoculate his
soul into him; at length, like one returned out of a Trance, he kneels down and
kisses his hand. Danpion seeing this, at first amazed at his amazement, and now
no less astonished at this Complement, thus spoke to him: Sir (said he) my
fortunes require no such condescensions. Sir (said the other) not only the
lowest condescensions, but the highest sovereignty is your due by Descent and
Desert. Sir (replied Danpion) as I have not so much vanity to think my self
worthy of the honor you impose upon me, nor so little gratitude, as not to
testify my resentments, though in huge disproportion to your civilities; so
neither am I so happy, as not to be able to accuse my thoughts with the
surrendry of your Name and Person to Oblivion; which I must needs register in
the Catalogue of my misfortunes. Sir (said the other) your Noble thoughts are
too much busied in the contemplation of goodness, ever to admit of such
diversions, as the remembrance of so mean a Person as my self, who have nothing
in me that may merit regard, but that I once served your Highness in the
quality of a Foster-father, being that same Celadon the Forester, who once had
the care of your Royal Person in your infancy, whilst your tender age, unable
for self-protection, exposed you to the malice and tyranny of your Enemy
Hiarbas. Danpion hearing this, fell upon his neck, and embraced him, and even
wept with joy, the tears trickling down, like rain in Sunshine. After some
mutual testimony of great endearments that passed betwixt them, the Forester
kneeled down, and asked him pardon for his traiterous adhering to his Enemy;
but the reason of it (he said) was partly through fear, being terrified with
the loss of all that nature and affection could entitle Precious, upon the
least intimation of discovery; and partly for gain, being bribed with liberal
gifts, and great honors, above what he knew how to manage, being made Commander
of the Castle where Pandion chiefly had his residence; all which he the more
freely accepted, because he then dispaired of ever blessing his eyes with the
sight of his Highness; supposing he had been torn in pieces with some of that
brutish Nation, whom he used for his sport to persecute.

This said, they fell into discourse about Danpions condition, whether there
was any hopes or means for escape; the Forester having first informed him, how
that Hiarbas was come with an Army to redeem his Daughter; then whether it was
possible to procure admission to Amphigenia; and whether Pandion intended any
injury or dishonor to her; and whether by force or stratagem she might be
relea^ed: but as they were thus discoursing, some soldiers with a haste too
slow for their minds, though too fast for their legs, came stumbling into the
room, and called away the Forester their Captain.

Long had they not been separated, ere Danpion heard a noise that sounded like
a rude consort of many ill-agreeing voices, which seemed to keep time to the
Martial Music of clashing of swords, and justling of Armor; amongst which he
heard from a neighboring Chamber such shrieks, as seemed to teach the Air in an
unperfect manner the prefect language of misery, which by reason of its
disordered convoy (the Air being variously divided with a strange confusion of
noises) came not to his ears so distinctly as to give him information of the
Autho^, yet by a strange symyathy, it seemed to wound his soul. His mind in
travail with multitudes of conceptions, would fain have been eased of its
tortures, with the knowledge of Amphigenia's condition, which he endeavored by
a near access to the Chamber, where all those doleful births were generated;
but ah! not to a freedom from, but an augmentation of his sorrow, for he
plainly, too plainly knew it be the voice of Amphigenia. With that, as if every
shriek had been a Dart, not from sorrow but from death, not from an ordinary
death, but from a soul-torturing death, from a death made deadly with torments,
having his senses stupefied, and his reason confounded, not with a sorrow,
rather a desperate madness, he ran about exclaiming against Heaven, Hell,
Earth, Men, Devils; Heaven for permitting her to be abused, Earth for being the
Theater of such an accursed Tragedy; Men for the Actors, and the Devils for the
Inspi^ers. Then he would cry out; Oh! Celadon! why did thou reserve me for
this? these are torments would make an Atlas grown, should a thousand Lions Den
within my breast, they would not tear me like one groan of Amphigenia's. Oh!
cursed walls that hinder all my attempts. And cruel Heaven! that denies me the
common cure of misery, a way to dye, which every slave can command; one dying
groan would sum up all my miseries. It Is true, as a Prince I ought to reserve
my self for better fortunes, and not to abandon my self though all the world
forsake me; yet as a Lover of Amphigenia, I ought not to hope for joy whilst
she remains a Captive to her enemies, and the contrary passion. These and the
like words did Danpion utter; and thus did he sacrifize himself to an
unexpressible passion, who in all things else showed himself commander of an
undaunted mind. But now to leave him, and return to Pandion, who perceiving
that Hiarbas was resolute in his purposes, and wise in his resolutions, and
strong to execute what his wisdom had resolved upon, thought it more wisdom to
Treat with him peaceably, than to referr his cause to the Arbitration of War,
whose partial decision he feared, especially considering the unjustness of his
cause had made him an Outlaw to Heaven, from whom he could challenge no
protection, and therefore he again sends an Envoy with certain Proposals to the
King. The sum of which was this, That if the King regarded either his own or
his Daughters safety or honor, he should retreat with his men, otherwise he
must not hope for any other entertainment for himself or her, than what a
mortal enemy would bestow on the most hateful person. And to let them see that
his performance should be of an equal extent with his threatenings, before the
messenger could deliver his errant, receive an answer, and return, Pandion had
caused a Scaffold to be erected, whereon presently appeared a most excellent
Lady, lead between two executioners, whom both by her Garments, and the Majesty
that apparrelled her deportments, Hiarbas knew to be his Daughter, for there
seemed in her (as well as he could perceive at such a distance) the same
delicate loveliness, lovely excellency, Majestic sweetness, as were the
ingredients of so divine a composition as Amphigenia's Beauty; and if the same
perfections, then sure the same person, since none could boast of an equality
with her, in whom appeared all the excellencies, not wherewith Nature had, but
wherewith she could beautify a body. A lamentable sight it was to see, the
Diamond of the World set in an endless Ring of miseries; to see her act her own
Tragedy, whose countenance seemed the Theater of Love and Beauty; to see her to
whom all hearts do homage, to bow to an injurious fortune. And that that did
extort pity from the cruellest heart, was the manner of her gestures, wherewith
she seemed to Antedate her misery, and make misery it self more miserable, at
least more lamentable; for her eyes were fixed on Heaven, as if she meant to
dart her Soul thither, and prevent her enemies cruelty; her tongue not profuse
of words, her sorrow seeming to feed it self with inward contemplation; yet
those few wherein she embodied her thoughts, were guarded with such a
captivating force, as would have compelled a Tyrants heart, to pity her
sorrow; but they were no sooner Midwived by her tongue, than swadled up in Air,
and so bequeathed to Heaven, that few ears could boast themselves to be the
Nurseries of such Divine offsprings of a Heavenly Soul. Her hands were clasped
and folded each in other, and seemed to take their last embracements; her arms
not extended at their length, but something bowing, seemed to embrace sorrow,
not as an unjust effect of humane malice, but as a just result of a Divine
decree.

In fine, in all her gestures, there was such a Majestic humility, conquering
submission, unconquered Piety, solid devotion, as made a lively and beautiful
representation, of what a great mind could do, depressed under the lowest
fortune. But though the beholders, yea the actors were so acted by pity, as to
pour forth their sense of her condition in tears, and (as it were) by a
repentance to wash way the crime before Commission, yet at length as if the
necessity of Commission had banished away all thoughts of the crime, not the
act, when they saw Hiarbas's men, marching in the order and posture they came
into the Field* differing in nothing but in speedy motion, which too speedily
gave them to understand, that their purpose was to redeem Amphigenia by force
not by Treaty, they by Pandions command, presently separate her Head and Soul
from her Body. But no sooner did the Air convey this sad and bloody spectacle
to the eyes of Hiarbas, but he seemed ^s if rage and sorrow had borrowed his
body to make a lively re^resentation of the deadly pang of a thunder (...)
soul. Flashes flew from his eyes, as if he meant to set the world on fire in
revenge of his Daughter; or as if he thought to use no other light, in scorn of
the Sun, whom in his thoughts he accused of conspiracy with them. And he
commands his men to fall on, and spare none but Pandion, that as he had been
superlative in his Treasons, so he might be exemplary in his tortures. The King
had no sooner spoke these, or the like words, but the signal was given, not for
the battle, but (to the astonishment of Pandion and his whole Army, and of the
Sun it self, which then hid his face in a cloud) for the execution of a plot
between the General and his Commanders, which was to take their own King
prisoner in the head of his Army, and to deliver him up to Pandion; which by
reason the combination was so strong, was soon and easily effected without
sedition or mutiny.

Pandion amazed at this sudden turn of the wheel of Fortune, knew not at first
how to interpret it, but still stood upon his defense expecting some stratagem.
And no less were his whole Army, though now by a strange fate Victorious,
conquered with extremity of wonder; astonishment visibly tryumphing in every
man's countenance, till at length their wonder was converted into joy, by the
resignation of Hiarbas into Pandions possession; who considering it was not a
time to indulge himself to any passion, when such strength of reason was
required for the wise improvement of such an overture of fortune, thought it
the best way now if ever, to fit Hiarbas's Crown for his own head, when melted
in a Fu^nace of misfortune, it seemed apt to receive any form; and therefore
causes strong ^uards to be placed every where, and particularly about himself,
and now stronger then ever, his necessity being greater, and his force more, by
the addition of Hiarbias's men. This done, he commands the Royal Robes ^o be
produced, and in them Hiarbas to be attired, and so attired to go up on the
Scaffold, which was by this time covered with purple Velvet, fringed and
embroydered with Gold, and there to seat himself in a Throne on purpose
prepared, with a Crown on his head, the Scepter in his hand, and the Sword born
before him.

The King thus forced to act over a Pageant-like show of Majesty, to adorn the
triumph of treachery, and to add solemnity to cruelty, sits in the Throne, with
a heavy but imperious look, that the Beams of Majesty seemed to unite and
center in his contracted brow, and with a strange kind of force to write a Law,
not of pity, but of a reverential adoring a King though distressed.

And whilst he thus sits, sometimes looking with an austere and scornful eye on
Pandion, sometimes darting threats with a dauntless look at his soldiers,
Pandion causes Heralds to proclaim;

First, That he had ignobly usurped the Royal dignity, and detained it by force
and fraud, from himself the lawful heir; which words pronounced, an Officer of
State, appointed for that purpose, took away the Crown, and set it on Pandions
head.

Secondly, That he had unjustly usurped the power of administration of Justice,
to the general endamagement of the whole Realm, and to the particular injury of
the just and lawful Sovereign; which pronounced, they took away the Sword, and
caused it to be delivered to Pandion.

Thirdly, That as he had usurped the supreme power of judicature, so of
Government; this proclaimed, they took from him the Scepter, and gave it Pandion.

Fourth, That he had usurped the Royal Throne, from the lawful inheritor; this
was no sooner with a louder voice than ordinary proclaimed, than the King was
compelled to arise out of the Throne.

Lastly, It was proclaimed, that as he was by universal consent of the whole
Kingdom, deposed from all sovereignty, so he must be despoyled of all Ensigns
of Majesty, that Pandion might be therewith invested, to whom by an indubitate
succession they belonged; upon which words Hiarbas was divested of the purple
Robe, and forced to assist in the investiture of Pandion; which done, Pandion
sits down in the Throne, and was proclaimed King of Tbessalia, whilst Hiarbas
was lead away a prisoner into the Castle, chained in fetters of Gold; who as he
went would have spoke to the spectators, who consisted most of soldiers, but
he was interrupted by great acclamations of the people, that cried, God save
King Pandion.

Thus was this great Prince, one not undeserving that title and power, had he
not used unjust means to entitle him to that power, one whose soul was richly
furnished with all those endowments of Fortitude, Justice, Prudence, and
Temperance, which are the simples that constitute a true Princely mind, and one
who never before was unfortunate, unless in being too great a courter of
Fortune; thus (I say) was this so brave, so great a Prince on the sudden thrown
from the top of the highest pinnacle of honor and sovereignty, being lead
captive at Noon, for the world to behold a clear mirror of Fortunes prodigious
levity, and an exact model of the inconstancy of humane felicity.

Pandion having sat a while in great state, arises out of his Throne, comes
down from the Scaffold, and goes into his Castle attended with great numbers of
Lords and Commanders, and guarded with soldiers, Hiarbas's General all the
while bearing the sword before him; where having paused a while on this sudden,
and no less strange, than sudden mutation, the thoughts of all men being at a
stand, and not able to fly higher with admiration, to see an imperious sword
melted into an imperial Diadem, to see a Crown formed into fetters, treachery
to generate Royalty, and Royalty to degenerate into misery.

In fine, to see him who late thundered from a Throne, whose voice was power,
and whose looks were Majesty, to be dethroned with the thunder of fortune,
plundered of all power, and deplum'd of Majesty: They at last fell into
consultation, how to establish that power by prudence, they had acquired by
policy; great fortunes requiring as great force of mind, to conquer those
difficulties that attended them once gotten, as they did force of body to
conquer those enemies that opposed their getting. After some time spent in
bandying to and fro, the various exigencies of State, the mutynies, seditious
uproars and tumults, that are the usual effects of alterations in a Monarchical
Government, and the best means to supply the one, and subdue the other, the
result of all was this, that being Pandion would be thought to come to the
Throne, not as a conqueror, but inheritor; and considering that the manyfold
exactions and impositions, laid upon the people by Hiarbas to maintain his
Army, had provoked them against both himself and them, the sad effect whereof
was palpably visible in his deposition and destruction; and that the greatest
part of the Kingdom was already in subjection and under the command of his
Garrisons, and it was easy to raise a force to subdue that part that should
rebel, that therefore his Armies should be disbanded, with promises of plenary
satisfaction for their service, which (they said) would be a great engagement
to his people to Loyalty, when they saw him esteem their love, as his principal
protection.

And as for the General, that had done such eminent and loyal service, he
should be eminently and Royally rewarded, and dismissed with his me^ to march
at his leisure. And as for a Lifeguard, it was thought rather decent, than
convenient* not any necessity, but ceremony of State requiring it. Therefore a
certain number of choice Warlike Gentlemen were culled out, to guard his
Person, whereof Celadon was made Commander.

These things concluded on, were accordingly executed; the Army being dismi^t,
with great thanks for their gallant service; the person employed in that
office, telling them how highly the King resented their fidelity, and e^^eemed
their valor, and that his rewards should be parallel to his resentment and
esteem.

This done, they further consult about the disposal of Hiarbas's Person; but as
they sat in Council, arguing pro and con, some making plain speeches the Keys
to their thoughts; others, Pathetical Orations, as windows to their desires,
but others attiring both their thoughts and desires in ambiguous Expressions,
which like changable Taffata might variously reflect their minds; they heard in
a Room underneath, such a consort of doleful moans, as expressed the woeful
music of a grieved mind. Sometimes they might hear groans formed into words,
and words transformed into groans, that sorrow seemed to build an Airy Pyramid,
under which it entombed all joy; the deep-fetcht groans resembling the Basis,
as the shrill cries the Spire. Pa^dion hearing that, gave command, that the
Authors of those lamentations should be brought before him, to give an account
wherefore they temporize with sorrow, when joy was the Genius of those smiling
hours. No sooner was the command given forth, than obeyed, the Person being
caused to appear, and no sooner appeared, than was known to be Danpion, by many
of the Lords that had acquaintance with him, whilst he had acquaintance with a
bright prosperity in Hiarbas's Court; but to Pandion only to be that servant of
Hiarbas, whom he had sentenced to dye; which when he saw not executed, he
seemed like one that traveled far from himself, till the consideration that
variety of occasions might well divert the mind of Celadon, interrupted the
farther progress of his thoughts, and gave him occasion to charge strictly,
that executi^n be speedily performed, threatening with a look so severe as
seemed to antedate his threatening, no less than death for the least delay.

This said, the Prisoner was led away; but as he went, none but might have seen
in him, a perfect image of captived courage; his rage, not because he was to
dye, but that any other than a victorious Lance should force him to dye,
though imprisoned in his thoughts by resolution, yet flusht forth at his eyes;
his countenance all the while representing the undaunted constancy^ wherewith
he armed his mind, now he was to run the gauntlet with an invincible Enemy, yet
at the same time attiring his looks in such a graceful Majesty, as if this was
but his marriage-day with Death* having consideration rather to what might
become his own Princely greatness, than the sordidness of his pale Spouse.

But just as he was going out of the door, on the sudden a voice bolted forth
these words, A Crown becoms not a Peasants head.

Pandion hearing that, cried out, What Treason's that? But scarce had the
cadence of his voice put a period to his speech, but a fearful spectacle soon
answered his fearful Interrogation, and deprived him of his fear, by
presenting the evil he feared; for presently there issued out from under the
Hangings, men clad in Armor, with naked Swords, who seized on Pandion in the
midst of all his Pomp, whilst he was dictating Laws with his Looks, and
commanding observance with his Brow, and hale him out of his Throne, disarray
him of his Robes, rob him of that golden Jayl that imprisoned his head, and
plunder him of all his splendour: So soon can a tempest of misery wash away a
new gilded Fortune: Thus every Jewel of a Princes Diadem is a Star of most
malignant influence to Usurpers.

Scarce this was done, before Danpion was called back with speed; and no sooner
turned, than received by Hiarbas's General, with all humility upon his knees;
whom Danpion strictly observing, he knew to be his friend Athalus: With that he
caused him to arise, and with great joy embraced him, telling him, that now he
had found him to be a composition of sincere friendship, and that his soul was
a mere extract of goodness, and many other expressions, whereby he testified
his great resentments: After which, Athalus ^shered him in among the Lords, to
whom he made an eloquent Oration, in which he declared, how that this Person,
whom they saw ready to be sacrifized to the revenge of a Traitor, was the true
Pandion, rightful Heir to Agis; which he confirmed by many Arguments, but
chiefly by Celadon's acknowledgment then present, a chief Actor in this late
turn; and that the other, that had hitherto deluded them, was but an Impostor,
being a Peasants son, his father at present living in B^o^^^, and that his name
was Eumaeus; which was also confirmed by the free and unextor^ed confession of
Lumaeus, or the counterfeit Pandion.

These things thus strangely brought about, Royal Apparel was presently brought
for Pandion, who now commands Hiarbas's speedy releasment, and that he should
be brought to him; which done, he makes himself known to him, returning him
infinite thanks for all received favors, telling him what a high-summ'd debt
he had contracted from his Royal goodness.

After which, he began to clear himself of that inexcusable incivility,
Bascanius's malice and treachery had reproched him withal, confessing what
flames Amphigenia had inkindled in his heart, which neither life nor death --
but as he was farther speaking, the thoughts of Amphigenia divorced his mind
from every thing but Revenge, that he presently commands that Eumaeus, and all
that had any hand in her death, should undergo the severest punishment the Law
in its strictest interpretation could inflict.

Eumaeus hearing this, fell down on his knees, and asked pardon, but was not at
all regarded, till he confessed that the Lady that was executed, was not
Amphigenia, but another in her Apparel, whom (he said) he put to death, for
endeavoring to betray him, and in that manner to terrify Hiarbas.

Every man astonished at the hearing of this, no less than if the Gods had come
down from Heaven, to act wonders on Earth: but especially Pandion and Hiarbas,
whose affection had increased their admiration, even to a transport: but
recollecting themselves, they commanded she should be brought to them, that
they might bless their eyes with sight of the most beautiful Lady, that ever
made her Sex adored; which to their unexpressable joy, wa^ soon performed.

Amphigenia appearing in a mean habit, but so, as her beauty seemed to put a
Majesty on meanness: whom no sooner Hiarbas beheld, but he ran and embraced her
with something more fondness of affection than became a wise Father, and more
condescension, than was fit for a King in such a presence to declare.

And as for Pandion, the excess of joy at the first sight almost took away the
act of seeing, and pillaged his memory of those high-flown expressions that the
raptures of love had created in his fancy; but in an humble manner begged
pardon for whatsoever of his, that in the strictest sense might be interpreted
rudeness, which (he said) proceeded from an irresistible impulse of affection:
And further he craved of her, that since it was not her pleasure, so much as to
inparadize his Form in her thoughts, (for her eyes were something cast aside
upon the wall, showing a lofty kind of humility) but to make an inanimate
creature the object of his envy, that yet she would permit his lips, as
Pilgrims from his heart, to sacrifize the pure Oblations of his Love upon her
hand, that pure shrine of pureness, and there to inscribe its Image, that when
the beauties of her hand, might challenge a glance from her eyes, that glance
might challenge remembrance from her thoughts, of the humblest of her servants,
and the most passionately devoted to her Princely Virtues.

Having said this, he adventured to take her hand, and steal the riches of a
Kiss, from that soft and delicate Treasury; which she permitted, with a
countenance that showed rather how she hated her captivity, than loved her
Captive.

These salutations being past, Amphigenia was conducted to some Ladies, that
hearing of all these Accidents, were come to congratulate their Princesses
safety, and to wait upon her home to the Palace.

After which Pandion accompanied by Hiarbas, attended by all the Lords and
Gentlemen, guarded by Athalus's Army (having left Celadon Commander in chief of
the Castle) presently followed; where^ having steeped some time in an Ocean of
delights, and bribed it with the choycest of Pleasures, to mend its pace,
Pandion was crowned in the chief City of Thessalia, with all the joy and
contentment, pomp and gallantry, as might either beget Loyalty to Sovereignty,
or Reverence to Majesty; both which, that the people might express, they sent
up such volleys of acclamations to the Clouds, as if they meant to storm
Heaven, and plunder it of its choysest glories, wherewith to crown their King.

After which, Hiarbas would have departed to his own Kingdom of Caonia,
together with his Daughter Amphigenia, there to have spent the small remainder
of his days: But Pandion would by no means permit it, telling him, that the
whole Kingdom should be as much at his command, as ever, only reserving the
Superiority to himself, acquainting him also, what Impositions of affection his
Daughters worth had laid upon him; for which reasons Hiarbas consented to take
up his abode in Pandion's Court, chiefly persuaded thereunto, by the hopes of
having such an incomparable Prince for his Son in Law, by whose happy
conjunction with his Daughter in marriage, the Sovereignty of Thessalia might
run in his Reins, which was ever the highest aim of his ambition.

Having thus led my Hero through all difficulties, into the Throne, and laid
him in the lap of Fortune, it may be expected, that to complete his happiness,
I should have placed him in the Arms of his beloved Amphigenia.

But they that know the tedious intricacy, and perplexing (but yet fidling)
difficulty there is in getting the love of a Coy Mistress, will I hope excuse
me, if I give my Pen a quietus est, after so long a Pilgrimage. I esteem
Ambition a more tolerable, and Masculine distraction than Love: And therefore I
had rather place my Hero in the more noble embraces of Fortune, than in the
soft Effeminate Arms of a Lady; about which, I have not impertinent thoughts
enough to spend.

Possibly I may be also thought too hard-hearted, in leaving my other Lovers
succourless in their miseries, and not leading them out of their Labyrinths, by
the Thread of my discourse: But the vulgar Rule of Roma^ces may salve all, That
the Knight must kill the Giant, and get the Lady.

And those that are not pleased with this Conclusion, let them throw away as
many idle hours as I have done, and they may complete that Story, which has
now quite jaded and dulled my Pen.

Finis coronat Opus.

