A Mixed Poem, Partly Historical, partly Panegyricall, UPON THE Happy Return of
His Sacred MAJESTY Charles the Second, AND HIS Illustrious Brothers, the DUKES
of YORK and GLOUCESTER.

With Honorable Reflections upon some State-martyrs, and the Renowned General.

Not forgetting the Rump and its Appurtenances.

By J. C. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bettertun at his shop in Westminster Hall. 1660.

To his most beloved Brother Captain GILBERT CROUCH.
Good Brother,
IT has ever been the Ambition of Writers to climb as high as they can to an
Honorable Patronage, even to Heaven it self, if the Nobility of the subject
might authorize the Presumption; Now Poets, rankt (especially by the more
earthly part of the World) amongst the most airy of Penmen, are priviledg'd by
common Opinion to soar up with the Highest: But my present Obligations instruct
me to the contrary. As Loyalty was the Muse inspired this Poem; so Love shall
appoint the Dedication. Though my weak Muse has sometimes borrowed the
expeditious Aids of the Press, yet not till now appeared in public: As she
never knew the triumphs of Fame, so she never felt the blushes of Dishonor,
was never injurious to any person but her self. But in this subject, Secresy
had been a kind of Combination, Privacy a privative Treason; so ill do
clandestine joys become an universal Jubilee. That I come behind in the rear
of our Poetique Forces, must be imputed to some unkind contingencies; my
thoughts being conceived with the first, but by some misprisions met with hard
labor from the midwifry of the Press. Nevertheless, it will be honor enough
for me, if I may have leave to wait upon (as their obsequious shadows) the
heroic Poems of those 3. Seraphims, Waller, Cowly, and Lluellin, whose sudden
march alarmed both Universities. Mine, if they come not too early, will come
soon enough to blush. But in earnest, I must thank the Press for a second
benefit, besides the manifestation of my Allegiance, that it furnishes me with
a kind occasion of acknowledging unto the ungrateful world, even in Print, the
many kindnesses I have received from so good a Brother. In fine, You, whose
Heart and Sword so long maintained the Royal Cause, are obliged to protect the
Heralds of it Accept therefore, Good Brother, (which compellation I prefer
before all Titles) accept of this Poem (whose only merit is its Subject) as a
mark of Loyalty to my Prince, and as a Token of my Love to your self, from

Your most Affectionate Brother, John Crouch.

Upon the happy Return of his Sacred Majesty CHARLES the Second, etc.
HAil, Second Charles, who (Our Blessed Phoenix) came
From the spic'd Ashes of a Martyrs name.
Welcome (Great Soul!) sent to revive the Dead;
Heavens Plant! nursed up to graft a Monarchs Head.
Stop here, and bleed my muse -- O Cursed Ax!
Made victim'd Majesty pay three Kingdoms Tax.
Mount, mount, my Soul, mount to another sphere,
Leave my dead Trunk a Mourning Statue here.
Death's service is too flight, 'twill not suffice;
Our Altars ask a living Sacrifice:
If piles of slaughtered souls could have appeased
Incensed Heaven, we long since had been eased.
Charles, and three Kingdoms Life at once return,
And chill the Ashes of that Royal Vrn;
The Sun at his Meridian height appears,
Drinks up the Tribute of his Fathers Tears.
Bow, Bow, my Muse; after so long a dearth
Of Loyalty, adore and kiss the Earth,
Long cold, but since the Loyal Spring begun
Warmed with Reflections of the British Sun.
Then rise and snatch, O snatch those orient Rays!
Twine them about thy Brows instead of Bays:
Those Beams which Majesty for luster wear;
I must turn Indian Priest, and Worship here.
I Am rapt above the Moon, but must not stick
So Low, am Sunburned, and not Lunatic.
Sweat, sweat, Star-gazers, till your Hearts grow pale,
You that for Lucre set the Heavens to sale.
Hang thy self Lilly in thy Northern Chain,
Thy darling Swede must die, and Charles must Reign:
Thou, whose praedictions animated strife,
Go now (sad wretch) speak truths to save thy life.
The Bells in the Strand was cracked, it now appears,
When they rung No King for a hundred years. Mr. Lilly at the five Bells in the
Strand, before several persons, proved by his Astrology that there should be
no King in England for an hundred years.

Fly Needham, thou ingenious Devil, fly,
Galled with the late Kings hellish Hue and Cry;
Before the Rope, for thy last comfort, look
On Interest will not lie, that Doomsday book;
Where thou, with a malicious Ravens pen,
Describing our Black Prince (the best of men)
Made a false parallel 'twixt the Soul and Face,
Better skilled in complexions, than in grace.
Whose two Diurnals weekly did disperse
Venom and Rancour through the Universe;
Which stufft with Mischiefs, Flatteries, and Lies,
Poisoned all, but the Antidoted wise.
Who, when thy treasons wanted their pretense,
Kindly bestowdst them upon Providence:
Serv'dst every Interest, though with partial odds,
Did worship two Protectors, thy two Gods.
Go black-mouthed Cerberus, bark aloud and cry
It Is Conscience will not, (Interest may lie)
Tremble proud France, which barbarously sent
Our King the second time to banishment;
Be wise in time, and pawn thy Flower de luce,
To purchase, not a full peace, but a truce;
For our Queens sake, perhaps we may be led
To give your Crown back for your Card'nals head:
That Machivilian Cap, who to advance
His private interest more than that of France,
Hired our Grand Rebel, who for his full pay,
He sent for Gold to Hispaniola.
The grateful Statesman could no less dispense
Than the whole Indies for a Recompense;
Cromwell's ambition would accept no less,
Than an Exchequer might be bottomless.
I cannot blame that Tyrant of Renown,
Who wanted Love, and Gold, to make his Crown.
Bring the Turks Crescent to its lowest Wain,
Only be good and kind to civil Spain;
Prompted by Heaven to espouse the Stuarts Right,
Spain save thy Portugal and Indies by it.
France shall no more raise with a jealous shrugg
The Spanish Faction for the English Bugg;
Nor shall our apish folly more advance
The Vanities, and Antic modes of France;
We Will leave thee to thy fears, and cold despair,
Not to be heightened by the purest Air.
Though we are Protestants, we shall not stick
To own the Spaniard, The King Catholic:
But call thy Red-cap, Devil, or worse man,
And scarce believe his King a Christian,
Quake at your late Auxiliaries advance;
Remember, England has a King of France.
But where is Crumwell, once so gay and brave,
Thief of three Kingdoms, now not worth a Grave?
Where Is that prodigious Camel, whose strong back
Carried three Nations Treasure for its Pack:
That Crocodile, that murderer of Souls,
The Whale that should men out of the world by shoals.
Whose rage spared no degree, no sex; whose pride,
Would nothing that opposed it, abide.
Ask poor Tredah the number of her slain,
Whose streets had only silence to complain:
Where piles on piles of dead, wide breaches filled,
Which cool blood butchered, and wild fury killed.
One person (he a Dr. Bernard.
Priest) the storm did pass,
To tell how kind the Sacrificer was.
Read Worsters story, and you will read the sense
Of Crumwels malice, and Heavens providence,
To what a low Ebb had he brought our state,
When one Mrs Jan(...) Lane.
weak Woman stood 'twixt Charles and fate.
O may she never lose her glorious Name,
Unless it be to advance her House and Fame.
But they seem few, which horrid war destroyed,
The Sword of Justice too must be his Bawd;
A Court's dressed up in Scarlet, that the place
May show the color of his Heart and Face.
Three Kingdoms Head upon the Block must lie,
To give proud Bradshaw's Robes a second dye.
May courteous time his name and memory rot,
May the unmatcht example be forgot:
If the day must be owned, O let it come,
To consecrate the good Kings Martyrdom.
Vultures kill Doves, the blood of Innocence spilt;
A Kings pure blood, by the impure hands of guilt:
As if that black Crime by design had meant
To give the out-vy'd world a new President.
Hambleton, Holland, Capel, (three Peers fall)
To make one Breakfast for this Caniball.
Capel, who dying showed to crown his merit,
A Roman Courage, and a Christian Spirit.
But when great Derby fell, Crumwell began
TO uncrown the King first in the Isle of Man.
Derby, that Regal Lord, whose Loyal Head
Deserved a Coronet of Gold, not Lead.
Shrewsbury must escape, by a Divine reprieve,
So mortal 'twas to love the King and live.
All are not marked for Sacrifices, some
Heaven rates above a Civil Martyrdom.
But the Fiends Altar is not fatted yet,
Till two D. Hew(...), Love.
Priests sacred blood besprinkle it,
Penruddock, Slingsby, many more must go,
To enlarge the book of Martyr's Folio.
For all this Cromwell breathes securely, has
His beds of Roses, and his milky path,
Treads air and Pinacles; thus Cedar-tall,
He knows no Earth, on which to stand, or fall.
Now Parliaments are summoned, but in vain,
Wise Cato's all, come in, go out again.
O strange Vicissitude of Earthly things!
Crowns, Scepters, Thrones, more mortal than their Kings,
Often dye before 'um, as if to be High,
Were to be changed; we rise, we fall, we dye.
Yet Height is no impulsive cause of ill,
We might sit high, and safe, could we sit still:
But we must move Excentrick, cannot see
We tread the Globe of mutability.
Honor is that great Boon the Gods bestow,
Their Image stamped on mortals here below:
And makes them shine like Gods on earth, till they
Poorly their Honor to their ends betray.
Now Vice Virtues white Herauldry must stain,
Honor contemned, is mixed with earth again.
Thus is our Ruin measured by our Rise,
And Greatness brings the greater Precipice.
Now are the old Peers into corners thrust,
Their titles mingled with the Nations dust;
What were those Stars, when this black night begun,
Borrowing their beams from that late Man in the Moon?
Now noble Stars, but Sunlesse had not light
To view themselves, much less to adorn their Night:
The Heralds office all employed, to bring
Crumwels Descent down from some British King.
But fate prevents his pride, the Prince oth' Air
With one good Whirlwind cures our long despair;
He that had raised such Earthquakes in his Life,
Could not depart without the Elements strife,
Trees twisted up by the roots, and tossed high,
Sent by the winds to brush the infected Sky.
Thus, thus the proud Leviathan was hurld
With Curses and black tempests out oth' world.
And now his grateful Vassals when he is dead,
Put a rich Crown upon his useless head,
And so ingeniously their Mock-Prince deride,
Emblematizing why the poor man died:
Who with one impious gripe three Kingdoms got,
Alas, all King, except his Name and Hat.
Great Cromwell's gone, now Rome may live in hope,
Let Us sing Te Deum for the rescued Pope.
But Richard, spurred on by ambitious friends,
In peace the Protectorian Throne ascends;
With spread arms graspt the Chair, but could not reach,
He was too small (god wot) to fill the breach.
They that so near the blessings of a Crown
Had brought the Old Sire, pull the Filly down
Poor Squire, I pity thy unkind advance,
Left heir to mercy, thy Inheritance.
This Mercy too had far more easy been,
Had not possessed thy Fathers Seat and Sin,
The seat of Scorners (our Protector called)
And from that Seat by thy own Vassals haled.
But who knows what this civil Gentleman meant?
Some say he sufferd for this good Intent;
Though he the Scepter swayed, and some months stood,
He kept his hands white, dipped them not in blood:
Pulled down the Scarlet Court; good Heavens for this
May he gain pardon, and the Kings hand kiss.
Now the restored Rump, Jehu-like drives on,
Scorns all Protectors, either God, or man;
Neither confirm the Creatures, nor quite fail,
Hold the Fanatics in an even scale.
Project on Project, Tax on Tax they raise,
Never had England such improving days:
For now our pious Governors, well advised,
Turned Jews, and our Obedience circumcised.
Baptists and Quakers our sole Princes sway,
Scarce one Religious man left to obey.
The Orthodox to Conventicles take,
While bold Fanatics the Church Visible make;
Who neither Anthems sing, nor Chapters read,
All inspired, as the worm crawles in their Head.
Now, now the Steeples in sad tremblings were,
Some with old Age and Ruin, most with fear.
Doubtless good luck preserved the merry Bells,
To ring in good time the Fanatics Knells.
But see how natural it is for one to reign,
Lambert for Lambert, Booth for King again:
No sooner blazed a Comet from the East,
When with faint beams The Sun declined in the West;
Without dispute the Almighty One then meant
To do his work by a single Instrument.
Lambert, proud of a Victory without Fight,
Rears his hopes to a Protectorian height;
The Army gather into mutinous Herds,
March up, and pluck their Masters by the Beards.
The Rump turns backwards on a fatal broach,
Rise and do reverence to the Swords approach;
But Lambert, spite of Country, Rump, and City,
Winds up three Nations into one Committee,
Ycleped Safety; but event ere long,
Declared the Bastard Child was Christn'd wrong.
The Commonwealth is to be Minted new,
But what the stamp should be no Conjurer knew.
O Architects than Babells more unskilled!
Strange Platonists, without Idea's build
Mean time new Workmen from the Scottish Land
Prepares themselves, with sharp tools in their hand;
Out of the frozen pole starts a good Swain,
Rigs up, and wheels Charles long-dismounted Wain;
The Lambertonians shrink, refuse to Move,
Encouraged by apostate friends Above;
Who for a little Coin, and less applause,
Leave their Lieutenant and the Good old Cause.
Now the Rump rules the Roast again in the East,
Served up to Usher in a second Feast;
Up marches George undaunted, though he find
Armies before him, Armies left behind;
Through all the awakened Counties as he went,
The loud Air Echoes, A Free Parliament.
The people from all parts like Snow-balls roll,
Love and praise Monk, as if they knew his Soul.
No person of a King one word durst start,
He still sleeps safe in every Loyal Heart.
Monk climbs to London, where he found (fame says)
His Masters half persuaded of his Faith.
They vote their Gold to the Touchstone, and (O Fates!)
Send him commands to unhinge the City Gates.
But the Sagacious General smells their Ends,
(To make him odious) hastens to his Friends.
Triumphant London her proud Joys expresses
In Acclamations, Shouts, and frank Caresses:
The Rump now flye-blown, quit their seats, but thence
Shall not be forced by Sword or Violence:
But as the Hammer makes Nail strike out Nail,
So the Secluded Head thrusts out the Tail.
Now, not till now, the wise Mysterious Monk
Whispers with Charles from his oraculous Trunk;
The General had (with Reverence I infer)
Only the King his Privy Counceller.
O Secrecy, the Midwife of Designs!
Betray'st not, but bring'st forth thy Golden Mines,
Wrought and sublimed by Industry and Art:
Charles owes much to Monks Head, more to his Heart.
Had either Fear or Joy this silence broke,
Perhaps the Thing it self had never spoke
England has long adored a George in paint,
That was the Picture, but this George the Saint:
God acts with the same Methods he begun,
We had the shadow first, and then the Sun.
Secluded Members Act, Vote their consent
For the just freedom of a Parliament.
They rise, when forthwith from their burdned Hives,
Ripe Bees swarm out, all prodigal of their Lives:
The Bells to their new Hive these clusters Ring,
Where, with one humming Vote they call their King.
Great Charls's called home, not manacl'd, nor chained,
But to the height of his just power maintained:
Monk was not so much Presbyter to bring
A Royal Captive home, instead of King,
That he himself might his return deplore,
As made more Exile than he was before.
Charles is proclaimed with all Imperial Dues,
Whilst every hollowing Street sends Heaven the news.
Such Flames into the air proud Bonfires sent,
Threatened to change the Cognate Element.
Event, by truth, false Prophets does beguile,
London was (and yet stands) one burning pile:
No sooty Pyramids of smoke aspire,
The whole City is one Elementall fire:
Shouts damp all sounds, the Air oppressed with throngs,
The next great Pest must be Decay of Lungs.
The active fireworks sinsg'd the Moons bright horns,
The Man had much ado to save his Thorns;
Light speaks the Sun, Expression Souls; O then!
What Joy, what Bonfires in the hearts of Men.
Clip, clip your VVings, my Joys, soar not too high,
Lest you unfit me for humility;
May the just Adoration of a Crown
Humble my joys, and weigh my Raptures down.
Great Charles, brought upon Angels wings, appears,
The long despair, of prayers, of sighs, of tears,
VVelcome three Kingdoms Love, methinks all three
Now in my hearts triangle panting be.
Welcome three Brothers, and three Kingdoms Joys,
One Mighty Monarch, and two Great Vice-Royes,
VVelcome blessed Prince, sent in a needful hour,
Whom Heaven restored to show its slighted power;
O may your Reign bring back the Age of Gold
May Love's soft hand your Sword and Scepter hold:
Some say the Heavens, some say the Earth do move,
But sure both Globes turn on the poles of Love.
O that the whole worlds pride sat on my knee,
It all should bend to your Dread Majesty:
Since lowest things durst brave your Empire, now,
All heights and Pyramids under Heaven shall bow.
All hearts are pleased, except such hearts as prove
Gall-drencht, not born to be beloved or love;
The City now long squeezed and wire-drawn, made
The Citadel, and Mart of Europe-trade*
The Ship-wrackt Merchants in full Change resort,
Conceive both Indies brought home with the Court.
For ever, London, shut thy Heart and Hands
Against all factious and rebellious Bands:
'Twas time to King it, when thy purse and fame
Lore'd to the Imperious Bank of Amsterdam,
The Country has reapt a liberal crop of all
Their hopes, fancy their Garners in Whitehall.
The Loyal Rusticks scarce a Psalm will sing,
Unless each Stanza chaunt the name of King.
The chastest Virgins unespous'd, unwo'd,
Feel Throes of joy, and think themselves bestowed:
Law and Religion (sick twins) gasping lay,
Now that protects this, while for both she pray.
The Muses (O Heavens) in their sackloth slain!
Are by three Graces brought to life again.
Burdens are balms; tax now, Sir, for your good,
Not our Estates, but Lives; not Coin, but Blood:
Blessed Halcyon days! if any thing annoyes
Your Kingdoms now, it is that you kill with Joys,
Your Return had made three Realms one Sacrifice,
Had not their guilt allayed their Ecstasies.
Monarch of Hearts, the sum of Heavens Expense,
Heir by Succession, King by Providence;
Heaven Crown your Wisdom, which has quenched our Wars,
Not by subduing Rebels, but the Stars.
FINIS.

