FLOWERS Strovved by the MUSES, Against the coming of the most Illustrious
Infanta of PORTUGAL Catharina Queen of ENGLAND.

(...). -- Tibi lilia plenis
Ecce ferunt Nymphae calathis --
By John Crouch Gent.

LONDON Printed for Francis Kirkman and Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in
Chancery Lane, 1662.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Henry Marquis of DORCHESTER, Earl of Kingston,
Viscount Newark, And one of his MAJETIES most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Lordship,
THe humble presenter of this Poem (once your Lordships I Domestic, had almost
said your Favorit) is as well acquainted with your Lordships goodness, as your
Lordship can be with his unworthiness; and therefore stands more in need of
Merit then Encouragement: However his Subject (the greatest and best of
Princes) will easily court your Lordship to the kindest Reception: Since his
Majesty's Royal Spouse is now become the care of the Priest, it is time She
should appear the Joy of the Poet; and have Her Canticles as well as Prayrrs.
My Lord the Authors presumption in borrowing your name to adorn his
Frontespiece, hach two honest and Honorable Designs (to be improved by your
Lordships Favor) the one is an Ambition to proclaim his Alleigance by so great
and glorious a Herald of all Honor, Virtue and Learning: by so Noble a
Confessor of a Martyrd cause; which Your Wisdom and Courage maintained to its
last and longest breathing. Oxford (that Loyal Sphere of clouded Majesty) may,
without the use of Sophismes, vindicate your Lordshs. untainted Reputation;
whose early surrender you so strenuously opposed. His other design (as innocent
though not so honorable as the former) is, to make the world a witness (too
corrupt to be a Judge) how much Duty and Service is owing to your Lordship, from

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant, JO. CROUCH.

Upon the approach of the most Illustrious Infanta of PORTUGAL, Queen of England
A Prologue to the following Poem.
AFter such Dire Scenes this Romantic Age
Acted in England, on her public stage;
Vicisitudes the Sun nor Moon ere saw,
Moving without the Circle of their Law;
When faith rackt on the wheel, and scru'd too high,
Suspected sense, grew jealous of the Eye:
What can be strange? posterity may tell
Some little wonders, no new miracle.
Time with expanded wings, has things reveald,
Like the Spears, glorious, but by clouds conceald;
The Spheres those plastic wheels, which Sages say,
Inform us, as the Potter forms his clay:
Rapt with whose motion, Ptolemys sharpest spies
Midst bright Intelligences lost their eyes,
Though 'assisted with auxiliary light
Of Sun, Moon, Stars; inlightued into Night.
Dull Ignorance has still a Gazer been,
Of truths, not as Perplexed, but not foreseen;
The People fear to be surprised with good,
Traduce all Acts by them not understood;
Which yet in wisdoms balance poys'd, are found,
Full weight, and Fools Absurdities proved sound:
Could popular Pride make good its bold appeal,
Heaven nor the King should have their Privy Seal
Happy that man, who learnd in Natures Laws,
Admires The Effect because he knew the Cause!
But Kings sit in a higher Orb, and so
Discover Stars, not seen by us below;
Act their clear wills, and then a license give,
For curious Eyes, to use their Perspective.
The Poem.
A Match with Portugal? Good news but strange!
Believe me it is a Royal New Exchange!
(We once (affairs so inauspicious stood)
Mingled in slaughters, now in kinder blood.
Heaven that pacifick Throne, serenely wise,
Makes two strange Nations strangely sympathize!
(One lately ravished from the Eagles claws,)
(One later, from a Bears untoward Paws.) cromwell

Link not in League but Love, join Hearts and Hands;
Thames sylver streams, with Tagus golden sands.
East, West, North, South, (so opposite) may share
In tempers, mix affections, though not Air,
If in this vast bulk of the World there be
A Form or Soul doubtless it is sympathy:
Hence conflicts kindness; ills compassion move,
Extremes dispute themselves into a Love:
This match, to prove great Digbys Secret good
Cured two States by the sympathy of blood.
Time before now has known the British Sun, Henry 2.

In converse with the Lusitanian Moon;
Our Prince in honor of the Foreign Maid
Though Black himself, against the Moors sent aid.
Some Legends talk of Interests as near
As those famed Duellers, York and Lancaster.
Crown-Controversies well espouse and Wed
Make best Convinctions in the Nuptial Bed.
Thy Catharina, Charles, approaches nigh:
South Winds blow-warme, not from the Austrian Sky:
Fair Catharina, favorit of same,
whose virtue is her Nature and her name! Purity.

Since Edwards Resormation first began
We he're had such a gracious Puritan!
From whose pressed lips divinest Nectar flows
An air of Spices with her motion goes:
Her eyes though black, so quick and piercing bright.
Sparkles like Stars through clouds, make darkness light:
But her best Excellencies, glorys, bless,
Like Heaven's, are rich invisibilitys:
He that has eyes can reach a virtuous mind,
May there fair Catharin's Beauty find:
Shall there the greatness of her spirit see
Raised on a Column of Humility.
When joys exalt the lusture of her Eye,
Her Soul descends as low as Heaven is high.
One that a glorious Cabinet views, may guess
By that first cost how rich the jewel is!
Join happy payr! your Ring is richly set,
But still the Diamond thanks the friendly Iet:
Mix your majestic Locks, those mystic bands
At home are amorous and abroad commands:
Black and yet lovely must not be denied,
Enamored Heaven courts a dark-featur'd Bride,
When the Altars Coal in flames of Incense glow's
There Is no such beauty in the fairest Rose.
Natures first Cabinet, wore this Royal Hue,
From whence (unlockt) a world of Beauties flew:
From whose rich Blackness sprang the Sun, Moon, Stars,
Fire, Air, Earth, Sea, Espoused by their Jarrs.
Nor Nature, nor Apelles ever made
Sun shine, or Picture smile without a shade!
Beloved Black! whose never alterd dye,
Gathers the optics and unites the Eye:
When glittering Colors in their weakness gay
Make sight by loose Emissions weak as they,
O may your likeness of complexions find
Similitude of Virtue, Temper, mind!
May your kind Hearts as close in union come
As nature, that admits no vacuum!
Or when you sever for short days, or nights,
Renew your Nuptials, meet with fresh Delights.
But can Kings fancy what they never saw?
Create Love, not by sympathy but law?
Not to transcend a Poets sphere, and tell
How nobler Objects are invisible;
Princes commence not Suits like common men,
Their leaden eyes must see and see again;
Whose first congress, if it fall out by night,
No love, no faith, till the next day give light:
And then (poor amorous moles,) look themselves blind,
Meet not as Rationals, but like beasts, too kind:
So few once fired, are in their slames discreet,
Like wild sparks, to their own Extinction meet!
When Monarchs, like their Brother-sun dispense
Pure rays, send Spirits for intelligence:
Court not the woman, but the Goddess Queen,
Who, like his Daphne must be ever, green:
Vend not their passions at a vulgar rate,
Distance is merit, in Amors keep slate:
Subject not Honor to their sostest will.
But though great Lovers, are great Princes still.
Pictures serve them, whose active fancy give
Spirit to paint, and make dead Colors live:
Can kiss those cheeks and lips, inspired by Art
T'express the silent language of the heart:
Gaze on two Stars, till (fancy working high)
They twinkle; Time now to lay the Picture by.
No durty passion such a flame controuls.
Where two espouse not Bodies but chaste Souls!
Angels ride post twixt such a payr as this,
Act their affairs, and expedite their bliss,
Temper the weak and strong, the fair and wise,
Lovers inspired, moved by impulse not eyes:
If business render Love more nicely kind,
Letters (that brightest imag'ry of the mind)
From heart to heart so swift intelligence brings
As if the enclosed Thoughts had lent them wings.
Heaven seals such matches! If all this be true,
Princes may Love without an interview.
Sit still ye floating Isles, you have long wheeld round,
Danced mazes long, centerd on air not ground:
With storms, and Earthquakes long bin rent and torn.
Yet toylings Turks have still the crescent worn:
When your half Moon grew big, began to swell,
Rebels turned Lunaticks and madly fell.
Now Britaine's moon is full. Her total sum
Contains the fractions of all Christendom:
Let civil (but wise) Spain cease to be kind,
Englands Queen shall be treated not designed;
Not all the Mines of India should control,
Or Bribe the judgment of a generous soul:
Resolve to conquer first with slighter pains,
ndias whole body, with its wealthy veins!
Blush, blush degenerous Princes, you that Mate
Not to concern your Honor but estat;
Conclude how little England is afraid,
Whose King has wood a persecuted Maid:
A Phaenix destined for the Eagles prey,
But by the care of Providence snacht away:
He, whom Heaven rescued with so strong a hand
Owed a Protection to some tottering Land:
An Act worthy a Martyrs son, to wed
As well his Ladys Sufferings as her bed!
Spain could not his Infanta thus advance,
To britains Monarch, and the King of France:
Fortune in this has hallowed her lost name,
By dealing Crowns to Merit and not fame!
Triumph great Heir of Portugal! To Thee
This marriage is beyond a victory:
Affinity with England, either ends
Thy wars by Power, or makes thy foes thy friends:
Ride on brave Prince victorious, to maintain
Thy Portugal against usurping Spain;
Those Ensigns spread, tempests had surld before
Conquer thy pristin conqueror, the Moor
But few and fools, to Castile back return,
And let the Proverb prove the Coyners scorn,
This Match and their Recovery, declare
Spain wise! what fools the Portuguesses are!
See the grave Spaniard well advised inclines,
To save his Honor and his Silver Mines.
Thou first Restorer of thy self and Kings,
Whose sharper Policy prund the Eagles wings,
Sleep great Briganza! Let the proud Bird soar,
She may be blind, but thou disthrond no more.
Have good Queen! England with impatience naites
Till Charles have Tangeers and possess the Straits.
FINIS.

