AN ELEGY, Upon the Death of the RIGHT HONORABLE ANNE, COUNTESS OF
SHREWSBURY.

By J. C. Gentleman.

LONDON, Printed 1657.

To the Right Honorable THE EARL OF SHREWSBURY.
IF your Lordship can descend so low as to own those Relations, which some of
my friends now have, or lately have had to your Lordship, this Dedication will
be so much the less your wonder; and indeed in my own present capacity, I take
my self to be within the circle of duty, though more remote from the center of
your Immediate Commands. My Lord, This Elegy is guilty in two particulars;
first, that it raises the dead (uncivil almost to a miracle) after the expense
of so much sorrow, to live shall I say, or rather to bleed, afresh to your
awakned memory? putting you in mind of a sad sequestration never to be
compounded, for: Next, that it rudely paints out in dead colors those
lineaments of virtue, which in her were so lively expressed, that I may
religiously affirm, she was a True Copy drawn from the Divine Original. And let
it be the mark of my weakness, so long as it is likewise the merit of her
Glory, to be above both my conception and expression. I confess the
contemplation of her Excellencies might creat a Poet, but such a Poet must
needs act beneath his Creation, his form being too Noble for the matter it is
to actuate; My Lord, Your deceased Lady, whom we commemorate, was full of
sweetness and benignity, and your Lordship is as much Executor of her
perfections as you are Master of your own; you will therefore be pleased in the
name of both, to pardon this presumption of

Your Lordships most humble Servant JO: CROUCH.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LADY MOUNT GARRET.
MADAM,
THough by the power of Law and Religion, my Lord of Shrewsbury was sole
proprietor of your Daughter and her Inheritance, (both which he purchased by
the instrate of his merits) yet by the Law of Nature your Honor had the first
and most intimate propriety; She being your real flesh, and his Metaphorical,
yet that more real then usually Metaphors intend, the former tie ingageth
conscience, but the latter more nearly obliges affection. Madam, I thought it
my duty to divide this service between my Lord and You; being both joint
Purchasers in her life, and Sympathizers in her death, if there be any thing in
this Elegy which may pretend to Life and Spirit, doubtless it was inspired by
the Genius of your deceased Daughter; if any thing of sadness and mourning your
Ladyship may suppose it dropped from my Sisters eyes: It Is smooth and easy, like
her temper and disposition it commemorates; and your Ladyship (as your goodness
must prompt you) will, I hope, be the same to it. And upon that account only,
I expect your Ladyship will pardon this service, and the weakness of it, to

MADAM, Your Honors most humble Servant, JO: CROUCH.

THE ELEGY.
Farewell Great Conyers Heir, thou brightest Pearl
Nature 'ere polisht to enrich an Earl,
An Earl of the first Magnitude, yet He
So high, concludes he was too low for Thee:
His goodness, greater then his Name, before
Rendered his Titles too inferior;
He kindly fell degraded by his Love,
That humbled this great Turtle to his Dove:
But what his goodness wrought before, his Fate
Sad Earl! submits him still beneath thy State.
Death, that grand Tyrant over Mortal things,
Who disthrones Emperors, Protectors, Kings,
Has enthroned Thee; now raised as far above
Thy Earl, as he transcends all Earls in Love.
Hard lot! He loves still, rather more then less;
Must keep his Love, and loose his happiness!
Whose sorrow knows no ground of joy but this,
No power, below Heaven, could divide your bliss.
He Is not alone, their death, when great Stars fall,
Though not disease, proves Epidemical.
Fair Saint, how many lives lament thy death?
Whose blood was warmed by thine, not their own breath,
Forgive astonishment if it cannot mourn,
Our Hearts are dead and buried in thy urn:
Pardon our eyes if dry, thei're sunk, and weep
Back to our hearts, our sorrows are so deep!
But let us with leave of Providence inquire
Why this Fair Rose must in its June expire?
Was it because she took no pleasure here
In Husband, Mother, Babes? Three things so dear:
I Am sure they all loved her, and now improve
Their grief by the dimensions of their Love:
She died, but once (O that vast once!) but they
Each hour sad tributes to her Memory pay.
Sometimes our vigorous phansies (though in vain)
Possessed, act high, and fetch her back again
With an Herculean Love; Now Hopes and Fears
Struggle, and Joy smiles in a Bath of Tears:
But O the emptiness of that Creation
Takes Birth and form from fond imagination!
One minute makes her live, another dye,
Thus we her death, our own griefs multiply:
O then 'twas not for want of Love she died!
That might have been sooner then life supplied:
Her death knew no such disharmonious strife,
But answered the sweet Music of her life:
Her last sigh (loves last Echo) though but faint,
Breathd out her kind soul in an amorous pant:
Her Lord and She, never was kinder Pair,
One Soul moved both, which fed on Love, not Air;
How often did this sweet expression start
From the full satisfaction of her Heart;
I would not change (quoth she) good Shrewsbury's Wife
For Empress; better pleased with him then life!
Nor was her venture small, when providence led
This best of Ladies to her Nuptial Bed;
She was her Fathers Heir, and must disclaim
Not only his Estate, but House, and Name:
That Dower must vast and comprehensive be,
Whose Total is the whole Posterity!
When Conyers must be lost, except the Font
Christen the Name, A Daughte^^
and stamp new life upon it:
Here exspir'd not the breath of one, but all,
A Families life dead in one funeral!
Were I to write her Epitaph it should be,
Here lies interred a Genealogy!
Posterity, Ancestors, all dead but Name,
And that to live upon the breath of Fame.
Live pretty Lady Conyers, live, to save
Talbot from guilt, and Conyers from the grave!
And yet, good soul! this universal sale
Still seemed to her too cheap to countervail
His merit, and her Love; t'improve her land,
Gives him her life, her lif's at his command:
Good Saint! she might have saved this liberal cost,
Had she but reckoned what he reckoned most;
Had she cast in the treasure of her mind,
Sh' had raised her sum, had been both rich and kind,
That was the first unkindness she ere gave,
Her dearest Lord, to lead him to her Grave!
This Loyalty to her Lord, could not impair
Her duty, equal to her Mothers care;
In all just things obedient to her will,
As if the Countess had been Conyers still:
And might have well appeared to vulgar sense
Virgin for aspect, duty, Innocence.
No Child to Parent more just homage paid,
Only she dyed, and there first disobeyed:
That was against her Mothers will, you will say,
But 'twas Heavens Mandate, and she must obey:
Thus Heaven at once infrings, and forgives
All Obligations made to Relatives!
Madam you're Wise, then make no vain complaints,
Can you act higher, then furnish Heaven with Saints?
When you observed Heaven shining in her face,
Did you not then assign her to that place?
So good! what then? O let her live, you cry!
So good! she is ripe for Heaven, O let her dye!
Where is our intellect, our sense, our eyes?
When we think virtue fit to mortalize?
But must the Genial Bed, O Juno! be
Not her Babes, but her Souls delivery?
Ingratitude of Nature! Must a Tomb
Prove the sad Merit of a Fruitful Womb?
What will thou do sweet Babe to purge thy Fate,
Who bought'st this cheap World at so dear a rate?
Poor harmless Viper! thou made I dare say,
Prophetic lamentations the first day.
Those very bowels which thy Birth had rent
Still pitty'd thee, thou was it so innocent:
Be sure to pay thy Father, when thou know
How much thy Mother for thy Birth thou ow'st;
Thou ow'st as much duty, as life; for she
Lost her own life to give a life to thee.
Yet with Heavens leave (discreet at last) she stays
(In labor now with death, not thee) some days;
'Twas for thy sake that not till then she died,
To save thee from the guilt of Matricide!
Sweet Babe! may Heaven prolong thy precious life,
Thou pledge of the best Mother and best Wife!
France that spruce Nation, of the Purest Air,
Admired this Lady both for Wise, and Fair;
She spoke their Language with its natural tone,
They thought (but much deceived) she was their own:
Theirs, all except their vice; for when she came
Back to her Native Soil, she was the same,
The same White Conyers still: The change of place
Alters no Soul, without a change of grace!
She brought their decent modes and used them here,
Only she left the Nations vanity there.
Her voice was sweet without affected Art
Fit for the Quire, where now she bears a part.
As for her Charity consult the Poor,
They say she kept a Table at her door;
Their thronging to her grave kind witness bears,
Strowing the sad way not with flowers, but tears:
The Poor lament, and tell you, how they fared,
Heaven speaks her Charity best by her reward:
This Diamond in her Crown is not the least,
To meet Rich Saints, whom Poor she used to feast.
Is this that Charity which in stead of Poor,
Sits now her self without an Alms at door?
That Charity, which with so much noise and din
The Faith o'th age has almost made a sin?
This was that Charity she did so prise,
Her Grace within, without her Exercise!
You Ladies that exhaust your wealth and time
In dear bought toys to make a costly crime,
Lay up some gold for Heaven; what you spend here,
If ill dispensed, will not be reckoned there.
But I digress, who now no Satyr write,
But Elegy; Dead Folks use not to bite!
Witness good Heaven, I would not wish to find
Great Shrewsbury's wealth, without his Ladies mind!
So pious, so devout! me thinks I see
The posture of her bended Heart and Knee,
Both alike flexible: believe me, when
She dealt with Heaven, she was no Countess then!
Allowing Natural Acts, and sober care
Of decencies, her whole life was one prayer.
See, see, her moist Eyes, whilst with Heaven she pleads,
Drop Tears, Religious Pearls, in stead of beads!
Her pious life was her deaths best presage,
Whose whole tract was a Christian Pilgrimage;
A Pilgrimage to that Jerusalem, where
Dwell, only Saints, no Turk inhabits there.
Death had not much to do in the extreme hour,
So weakened were the sinews of his power:
Her cheerfulness at last all fear beguiles,
Taking her leave, like a kind friend with smiles.
But what Crowns all (in other great ones rare)
She knew no pride either of good or fair:
Her goodness ('it is a sweet absurdity)
Raised her to Heaven by its humility;
That Ladder on which good Father Jacob went
To Heaven; humility the souls ascent!
When Eyes fall, Hearts may rise: Humility thus
Like showers the clouds, draws down our Heaven to us!
Great Souls may act high, when their bodies faint:
And Heaven stoops down to meet an humble Saint!
Her very Maids proud of their Mistress name,
Learnt to be humble at the price of shame,
Were forced to blush, and guilty skarlet be
By mere reflections of her modesty;
I Am sure she made them humble, when she dyed,
Her death was the grand Penance of their pride.
This rich Pearl lost, makes the sad owners poor,
All turns to grief now what was joy before:
Her Beauty, Wisdom, Grace, serve all t'express
Her great bliss, and our great unhappiness!
Could not all this our Countess keep alive?
No; she must dye, and all this must survive:
When such ripe fruit in gracious Souls you see,
It springs from seeds of Immortality!
Farewell blessed Saint, none ever riper died,
Thou liv'dst till thou wa'st almost glorified;
So Angelical was thy Soul! If Providence
Had pleased, thou might have been translated hence
Without th'exspiring of thy perfumed breath;
Grace called for Heaven, humility for Death!
Thy Name, though Glorious, here was at a loss;
The Christians Crown is brighter then his Cross!
He that would write thy praises, first should go
To Heaven, and there their just dimensions know.
FINIS.

