THE RESURRECTION OF The Witnesses; AND ENGLANDS Fall from (the mystical
Babylon) ROME.

Clearly demonstrated to be accomplished.

Whereby Great encouragement is administered to all Saints, but especially to
the Saints in England.

In the handling of a part of the eleventh Chapter of the REVELATION.

By M. Carry, a Minister or Servant of Jesus Christ, and of all his Saints.

PSALM. 126. 1, 2, 3. When the LORD turned again the captivity of Sion: we were
like them that dream. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue
with singing, then said they among the heathen: The LORD has done great things
for them. The LORD has done great things for us; whereof we are glad. London,
Printed by D. M. for Giles Calvert at the black-spread-Eagle at the west end of
Paul's, 1648.

To the Honored FRANCIS ROVSE AND Thomas Boon Esquires, Members of the
Honorable House of COMMONS in PARLIAMENT.
Honored Sirs,
IT being the great design of God the Father to set up his Son our Lord Jesus
Christ, as his King upon the holy hill of Sion, and (though the Heathen rage,
and the people imagine vain things, saying, Come let us break their bonds in
sunder, and cast away their cords from us) to give him the Heathen for his
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession. I say,
this being Gods design, he has for the effecting of it, given all power and
authority in heaven and in earth into his hand, and accordingly Jesus Christ
has undertaken to execute all Gods Decrees, which are mentioned in the
Prophecy of the Book of the Revelation, where we find that God had decreed,
that for an appointed term of time, his Church, his Temple, his Saints should
be in an afflicted, persecuted, depressed, low condition, and that the Beast,
and the Babylonian enemies of his Church should have power to grow great, and
to flourish, and to make war against the Saints, and to blaspheme God, and his
name, and his Saints, for an appointed time also, and that after that time was
expired, that then Jesus Christ should improve that power that was for that end
given to him, in giving a glorious Deliverance to his Church, and ruining
totally the Beast, great Babylon, and all his enemies, That so the Kingdoms of
this world may become his Kingdoms, and that in such a manner, as they were not
before, even so as all that are in authority, that will not cast their Crowns
at his feet, shall be broken in pieces, for he the Lord alone must be exalted
in that day; there must be one Lord, and his name one in all the earth. Now as
it most clearly appears to me from the divine Oracles of the Scripture, having
compared the works of God, and his Word together, I have in the ensuing
Discourse held it forth (for the encouragement of all that wait for the
appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ for the overthrowing of his enemies, and the
deliverance of his people from their persecutions) that the time is already
come, wherein the appointed time of the prevailing power of the Beast over the
Saints, is come to a period; and accordingly Jesus Christ has begun to bring
down the power of the Beast, and to lift up his Saints out of that low,
afflicted, persecuted condition in which they have been, and that in order to
the perfecting of these things England is already fallen from the mystical
Babylon, Rome.

Now, Honored Sir, You having been glorious Stars, shining with a great deal
of splendor in Your Country both in the publikenesse of Your spirits, and the
holiness of Your conversations, wherein You have been eminent Examples, and
special encouragements unto others, and knowing that it is the desire of Your
souls to see the Lord Jesus alone advanced, who-ever be thrown down. I have
presumed to present this little Treatise unto You, not doubting of Your
ingenuous and favorable acceptance of it. But though I publish it under Your
name and favor, yet do I not thereby desire You to patronize any thing in it
(if there should be any thing) that is not truth, and for the truth that is in
it, I need desire no Patron; For great is the truth, and it will prevail. Yet
notwithstanding the sons of truth, as far as the truth appears to them in
truth will own it, and contend for it, and doubtless so will You. I am

Sirs, A Petitioner to heaven for Sions, this Kingdoms and your prosperity, M.
C.

TO THE READER.
OUr Lord Jesus Christ, in the eighteenth Chapter of Luke, from the first to
the eighth verse, from the example of the importunate widow, stirring up his
Disciples to importunate prayer, he there assures them, That God will surely
hear the prayers of his own elect that cry to him day and night, and avenge
them of their adversaries; and this he will do for them, though he make them
tarry long. And hereby Saints may be assured, That God will hear their frequent
importunate prayers, which night and day they have put up against the man of
sin, the Beast, and their Babylonian enemies, who have trodden the Saints
under feet, and made war against them, and overcome them, and dealt cruelly
with them above this twelve hundred years: and that he will at last avenge them
on these their enemies. But says our Savior at the eighth verse,
Nevertheless, when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on earth?
Whereby he implies, That when he comes, his people shall scarce have faith to
believe that he will thus avenge them on their enemies. But when he shall come
to do it, it will be beyond their faith. And even thus is it with Saints now,
they have scarce faith to believe, that the Lord Jesus has now begun, and is
going on to avenge his own elect on their adversaries, the mystical
Babylonians. Now for the strengthening of the faith of Saints concerning this
thing, I do present them with this ensuing Discourse, wherein as the Lord has
discovered it to me (to the strengthening of my faith concerning the prosperity
of Sion henceforward, and giving me great joy and pleasure therein.) I have
made it to appear from the Scriptures, That the Lord has already lifted up
his Saints from under the vassalage of their enemies, and has begun to put
the cup of trembling, into the hands of them that afflicted them. Which I
desire that all that love, and honor the Lord Jesus may diligently observe.

For the most high God, of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all things,
and for whose pleasure they are, and were created, both whose wisdom and
knowledge are unfathomable; tells his people of old by the Prophet Isaiah, as
we have it in the forty eighth Chapter of his Prophecy, at the third and the
fifth verses, That he declared from the beginning the things he would bring to
pass, and that he showed it them before it came to pass: and he gives the
reason why he did so, in the fourth and fifth verses, Because (said he) I knew
that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass:
And, least thou should say, Mine idol has done them, and my graven image,
and my molten image has commanded them. And therefore the Prophet Isaiah in
the forty eighth Chapter, and fourteenth verse, he makes a challenge to the
Nations, and to the People, to assemble themselves, and to show which among
them has declared those things. But there is none to be found among the sons
of men that can declare any thing: for he makes the diviners mad, etc. And
Isaiah the forty third, and the thirteenth, he says, Before the day was, I am
he, and there is none that can deliver out of mine hands: I will work, and who
shall let it. And Isaiah the forty six Chapter, and the ninth and tenth
verses, I am God, and there is none like me, Declaring the end from the
beginning, and from ancient times, the things that are not yet done, saying, My
counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. And yet notwithstanding
all this, that people of Israel, who had seen and known, (or might have) all
the glorious works of the most high, and observed how he declared things
before they came to pass, and had thereby a greater advantage then the
Heathen, of being convinced of his eternal Power and Godhead: Yet were they
so vile, as to question it, having in them an emnitie to the true God, and
chose rather to worship Idols, and deny the Eternal God: As appears in the
forty sixth Chapter of Isaiah, and therefore at the eighth and ninth verses,
he says, Remember this, and show your selves men, and bring it again to
mind, O ye transgressors. Remember the former things of old, for I am GOD,
and there is none else, I am GOD, and there is none like me, Declaring the end
from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done;
saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. Remember; as
if he had said, and show your selves men, show your selves to be rational
creatures, and be not as the horse and mule that has no understanding; but
seeing I have declared from ancient times, the things I would do long before
they came to pass: saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my
pleasure: And be ye thereby convinced, that I am GOD, and there is none like
me. But as then, so now, are there many that are become Atheists, denying the
true GOD, and JESUS CHRIST, whom he has sent, whose neck are an iron sinew,
and their brow brass, who had they not lost the principles of reason, might by
the things of the Creation, be convinced of his Eternal Power and Godhead,
Romans the first Chapter, and the twentieth verse. As also by observing how he
declared, what it was his will to bring to pass long ago, and how he has
brought to pass what he so declared. But they have lost even the principles
of reason which they once had, by which they might have then been convinced
hereof; whereby they are left without excuse, as the Apostle says, Romans the
first and the twentieth. But they having lost reason, are now become vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart is darkened; and though they
profess themselves to be wise, and are puffed up with selfe-conceits of wisdom,
in their frothy and blasphemous Discourses: yet they are become fools,
changing the truth of GOD into a lie. And the Apostle gives the reason why GOD
has thus given them over, in the first Chapter to the Romans the one and
twentieth, and the eight and twentieth verses, Because they did not like to
retain GOD in their knowledge, and because that when they knew GOD, they
glorified him not as GOD. The like reason he gives, why them that perish are
deceived by the man of sin, as in the second Epistle to the Thessalonians the
second Chapter, and the tenth verse, Because they received not the love of the
truth.

But now, Though Atheists, and Papists, deny the Eternal GOD, and observe not
his wonderful works, how he declares things long before they come to pass:
saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure; and
accordingly brings it to pass, because their foolish heart is darkened: yet all
his Saints do, and will observe this: For says the Psalmist, in the hundred
and eleventh Psalm, and the second and third verses, The works of the LORD
are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. His work is
honorable, and glorious, and his righteousness endures for ever: He has
made his wonderful works to be remembered, etc. The LORD has made his
wonderful works to be remembered among his Saints, though others remember them
not, yet his Saints have pleasure in them, and therefore search them out, and
they have a promise made to them, That in the observing the wonderful things
of the LORD, they shall understand his loving kindness, it runs thus, Who
so is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the LORD The Psalmist in the former part of that Psalm,
had been speaking of several passages of the providence of GOD, which it
concerns Saints to observe, amongst the rest these are some, He pours
contempt upon Princes, causes them to wander in the wilderness where there is
no way; yet he sets the poor on high from affliction, and makes him
families like a flock. The righteous shall see it and rejoice, and all
iniquity shall stop her mouth. Now this is that which is by Saints to be
observed at this time also, even how GOD begins to pour contempt upon
Babylonish Princes, viz. Bishops and other Babylonian Factours, and to set the
Saints that were looked upon as poor despised creatures on high from afflictions
and to make of them families like a flock, who not long since were small in
number, but now is this number greatly increased.
, as Psalm the hundred and third and the forty third verse. Now it being so,
let Saints diligently observe the ensuing Discourse, wherein it does appear,
That GOD has brought to pass the things he did fifteen hundred years ago
predeclare; which they observing it may tend much to the strengthening of their
faith in this, That JESUS CHRIST has begun, and is going on to avenge them on
their enemies. For in the ensuing Discourse it will appear, That as JESUS
CHRIST did long since reveal to John, how that after the mystical Babylonians
had persecuted his Saints a long time, he would raise up his Saints out of
their persecuted condition, and bring down those their Babylonian enemies: So
he has already begun to do this thing, even to raise up his Saints, and
to bring down their enemies, and that punctually, according to what he did
reveal to John.

Now I know there has been observed by many Saints, many things that GOD
revealed to John, which he has brought to pass. Many of which Observations
are already in print: but that which I chiefly aim at in this Discourse, is
that which is not yet printed by any other, and whether any other have yet
observed it, I know not; but they are passages so eminently worthy to be
observed, in this present time, because they give the Saints such ground of
encouragement and consolation, in respect of the happy success that shall be
of the very present affairs of this Kingdom (how knotty and difficult so ever
for the present, or for sometime, yet they may appear to be) as that in love to
all Saints I could not but communicate them to them in this way.

But there are two things, which it may be may cause some to retain some
unbeleeving and doubtful thoughts concerning the happy success of present
things, although it be made clear in the following Discourse, That the time of
Saints being clothed in sackcloth is expired.

First, It may be some cannot receive it, because they look for farther
judgments to come upon this Kingdom, (wherein outwardly the Saints may suffer
also) because of the great provoking sins of this Kingdom, as drunkenness, and
adulteries, and oaths, and their entering into so many Covenants concerning
religious things, for which they have no sufficient warrant, now in the times
of the Gospel, and the oppressions of the poor, and meaner sort of people, and
the great neglect of doing justice generally, etc. Now to these I say, That it
is true, that if God should deal with this Nation, according to its demerits;
then indeed no other could be expected, but an utter desolation of it, that it
might either swim in blood, or burn with fire until it were consumed. But

First, I desire you to consider, That God has a very great number of his dear
Saints in this Kingdom, in whom he delights, and for whose sake he may, and I
had almost said, will spare this Kingdom, and spare the Cities and Towns, and
Counties where they are for if God would have spared Sodom for ten righteous
persons, we have a great ground of hope, that he will spare London, yea all
England from a general devastation and desolation, having thousands of
righteous persons in London, and in all England a very great number. And how
many plots of wicked men, wherein they endeavored the ruin of this Kingdom,
has God blasted? Having such a great number of his precious jewels in it.

And secondly, What though h^ere be in this Kingdom, many that are great
enemies to Jesus Christ, yet God can by his Covenant of Grace, bring many of
them in to the obedience of Christ, and make them of persecutors to become
eminent Saints, and call those his people that were not his people: And why
should we doubt whether he would do so, since these are the times wherein he
has promised to do so, and has already begun to do it? But

Thirdly, If it be so, that some are hardened to destruction, and they are never
quiet, but still are plotting against the just, to ruin them: yet know they
shall not prevail over the Saints, but in opposing them shall ruin themselves,
Zech. 12. 3. as appears in the following Discourse.

Secondly, Doubtful thoughts may be in others, that yet the Saints may be
overcome, because they see they have so many enemies abroad, and at home, and
they are speaking great words, and are still plotting against them. To such, I
say, Let them suppose that there were none that did dare to make any
opposisition at all in this Kingdom, but that all things went smoothly on, in
the hands of those that are carrying it on: and if they could then believe,
that indeed God would not have his Saints in this Kingdom to be trodden under
foot by the Beast any more. Then let them have the same faith to believe it
now, as knowing it is as easy with God, to carry on this work over the
mountains as over the plains, and he will make the great mountain to become a
plain before Zerubbabel, before his people, Zech. 4. 7. He can command those
that are preparing war against them to sit still, and proceed no farther, and
put a fear upon them; or if they do go on, yet he can make it to come to
nothing, and to be the most effectual way to lay them lower, and to raise his
people higher.

Now if any particular man would be as sure of safety, as all the Witnesses in
general are; then if he be a man in any public imploiment, let him according
to his place oppose the Beast, and act for the welfare of all that wish well to
Sion, and do justice unto all, from the highest unto the lowest, and be more
forward to act for the meanest, then for the highest. Let him suppose the
condition of the meanest man I say, that seek for just things, not those that
seek for unjust things, as for protection in evil ways, or for places of
profit or honor, when they neither deserve them, nor are fit for them, or else
have too many already, etc.
that seeks to him for just things to be his own condition, and act for him, as
he would be dealt with himself were he in that condition: for thus relieving
of the poor and distressed ones, is most acceptable to the Lord of Sabbath, and
in so doing, I am confident it will go well with him, however it go with others.

Again, If he be a private man; let him also in his place, wish well to Sion,
and oppose the Beast; so shall he also prosper in the prosperity of Sion.

And now Reader, who ever thou art, if thou do receive any benefit of any
kind, by reading the ensuing Discourse, whether of encouragement, consolation,
information, or quickening, I beseech thee to return all the glory of it to the
most High, to whom alone it is due, who for that end made use of so weak an
instrument: in whom if thou be a friend to the Lord Jesus Christ, I am

Thy friend (...) serve thee M. Carry.

Revel. Chap. 11. from Verse. 1. to 14. Verse 1. AND there was given me a reed
like a rod, and the Angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the Temple of God,
and the Altar, and them that worship therein.

2. But the Court which is without the Temple, leave out, and measure it not:
for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread under
foot forty and two months.

3. And I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed in sackcloth.

4. These are the two Olive Trees, and the two candlesticks, standing before
the God of the earth.

5. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and
devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner
be killed.

6. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their
prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the
earth with all plagues, as often as they will.

7. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascends
out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall overcome
them, and kill them.

8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.

9. And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, shall see
their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead
bodies to be put in graves.

10. And they that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and shall send gifts one to another: because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the earth.

11. And after three days and an half, the Spirit of life from God entered
into them: and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them which
saw them.

12. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto them, Come up
hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud and their enemies beheld them.

13. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the
City fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand; and the
remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven.

14. The second woe is past, and behold, the third woe comes quickly.

The Preamble.
FRom these verses, I desire as the Lord shall enable me, to declare that which
God has discovered to me: For I hope that it may be as advantageous to others,
as it has been to my own soul.

But though the publication of what appears to me in these verses, be that
which I chiefly aim at; yet being pressed in spirit, to give forth some
meditations from the Preamble of this Book; which Preamble is contained in the
three first verses of the first Chapter of this book of the Revelation: I
cannot but here insert it, as a Preamble to the following discourse also;
though it may be it may not seem in the eyes of some so pertinent.

The three verses are as follows:

1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his
servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it
by his Angel unto his servant John.

2. Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ,
and of all things that he saw.

3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy,
and keep those things which are written therein, for the time is at hand.

In these verses is contained these five particulars:

First, The subject matter of this book.

Secondly, The reason of the divulgation of this book.

Thirdly, The instruments of the divulgation of this book.

Fourthly, The fruitfulness of those instruments in the divulging this book.

Fifthly, The pronunciation of a blessing upon the persons that read or hear
the words of this book.

The first particular contained in these verses, is the subject matter of this
book; and that it expressed in these words, The Revelation of things that must
shortly come to pass, The word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ. From
whence this is the Observation.

Observe. 1. That the whole book of the Revelation, is a Revelation, declaration
or manifestation of the mind of God, about the things which were to come to
pass, shortly after the revealing of it: which Revelation is the word of God,
and the testimony of Jesus Christ.

This point being so evident, and clear in the Text, I shall not produce any
further proofs of it, because I intend brevity, but immediately proceed to the
Deductions which flow from it, which are these.

If this book be a Revelation or Declaration of the mind of God about the
things, which were shortly to come to pass: then it is our duty to observe how
God has brought to pass, the things which he did pre-declare he would bring
to pass; that so we may glorify God in his omnisciency in foreseeing, and
foreknowledge of all things, and in his omnipotency, in bringing the things to
pass which he did foreappoint to bring to pass: that he can do all things,
and nothing can hinder him from bringing all things to pass, according to the
counsel of his own will. When Saints do most diligently observe the works
which God brings to pass, according to what he has pre-declared in his word;
then do they most answer the end, for which God did before reveal these things,
which was that he might be admired and magnified by his people, in bringing all
things to pass according to his word, showing that he is God alone: for none
else can declare things to come, as the eternal God does. But how can Saints
have experience of this, but by comparing his Word and works together?
Therefore it is the duty of Saints frequently so to do. So much of the first.

Secondly, Is this book of the Revelation, the word of God, and the testimony
of Jesus Christ? then we are hereby informed, That it is warrantable for us to
call that which is a Revelation of the mind of God, the word of God. We see
John calls it so, and why may not we? I the rather speak of this: because some
have affirmed, That nothing may be called the Word of God, but Jesus Christ;
because it is a title the Scripture gives to him, as John 1. 1. In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. And
verse. 14. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory,
the glory as of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth. And 1 John 5. 7. For there are three that bare record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. And Revel. 19. 13. And he
was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, and his name is called, The word of
God; and the armies that were in heaven followed him upon white horses, etc.
But let these know, that though in these places that title, The word of God, is
given to Jesus Christ, he being the essential word of God: which is the reason
why this title is given to him. Yet that the Spirit of God, gives this title
also to the Scripture, to the written word, the word which is the Revelation of
the mind of God, as appears here, and in other places, as Jer. 2. 1. Moreover,
the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Go and cry in the ears, etc. And
verse. 4. Hear ye the word of the Lord, O house of Jacob, and all the families
of the house of Israel. And Jer. 7. 2. Stand in the gates of the Lords house,
and proclaim there this word, saying, Hear the word of the Lord all ye of
Judah, that enter in at these gates to worship the Lord. Thus says the Lord of
host, the God of Israel: amend your ways, etc. And Jer. 14. 1. The word of the
Lord that came to Jeremiah concerning the dearth, etc. And Jer. 30. 1, 2. The
word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, Thus speaks the Lord God of
Israel, saying, Write all the words that I have spoken unto thee in a book. And
several like passages to these we have, as in Ezekiel 6. 1. and 7. 1. and 12.
1. and 16. 1. and Hos. 1. 1. and 4. 1. And the like we have also in Joel,
Jonah, Micah, Zechary, and the rest of the Prophets: where it is clear, That
that which was the Revelation, or manifestation of the mind of God, concerning
the ways in which he would have his people to walk, or the things which he was
about to do, whether of bringing a dearth upon a people, or any other
judgment; or the doing of them good: This title is given to it; The word of
God. So that it is clear that this title may be given to the written Word, the
Scripture, both by all the forecited places (besides many others that might
have been cited to the same effect) and also in the text, where this book of
the Revelation, is called the word of God. But I still acknowledge, That Jesus
Christ is more eminently the word of God, he being the original of it: for as
God does all things else by Jesus Christ, so he gives out his Word by him, and
Jesus Christ gives testimony to it: which is the next instruction arising from
the point, and comes now to be spoken of.

Thirdly, Is it so, That this Book of the Revelation is the Word of God, and
the testimony of Jesus Christ? Then this may inform us, that as this: so all
the Scriptures, do as truly come from Jesus Christ, as from God the Father:
for he gives testimony to what the Father says. What the Father declares, he
witnesses, and testifies the same; and therefore he is said to be The
faithful witness. Rev. 1. 5. And it is said of him, 1 Cor. 1. 20. For all the
promises of God in him are yea, and in him amen. So much of the first
particular, the subject matter of this Book. I come now to the second, which is.

The reason of the divulgation of this Book; and that is contained in these
words: Which God gave unto Jesus Christ to show unto his servants. From whence
arises this Observation.

Observe. 2. That it is the pleasure of God, to have his servants acquainted
with his secrets, and to know what is his mind concerning things to come.

This we see was the reason of the divulgation of this Book: because it was the
mind of God to have his servants acquainted with it, a suitable place to this,
is that, John 15. 15. Henceforth (says Jesus Christ) I call you not servants;
for the servant knows no what his Lord does; but I call you friends: for all
things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you: and Psalm.
25. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show
them of his covenant. So that it is a clear truth, That it is the pleasure of
God to have his servants acquainted with his secrets, and to know his mind,
concerning things to come.

It being so, in the first place it teaches Saints to admire, and magnify the
love of the Father, that does express himself so graciously to them, as to
afford them that honor to be as his friends, in r^vealing his secrets to them.
It is a remarkable passage, Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing,
but he reveals his secrets unto his Servants the Prophets. Oh what a high
savor is this, that the Lord should engage himself that he will do nothing,
but he will reveal it unto his servants! As a tender Husband unbosomes himself,
and discovers his secrets to his beloved Wife, and cannot withold them from
her. So the Lord God does express his tender love unto his servants, in
revealing his secrets to them, and he will do nothing but he will discover it
unto them. What cause have Saints now to admire, and extol that rich Grace of
God, that is extended to them herein?

Secondly, Does the Lord reveal his secrets unto his servants? Then ought they
to be dilligent observers of what he reveals unto them. Revealed things are
said to belong unto us, and if they belong unto us, then it behooves Saints to
observe them, and to improve them to those ends for which they are discovered
to us; and if we should come short of it, we should demean our selves very
unworthily. When a man reveals his secret unto his dear friend, if his friend
should slight him in it, and take no notice of what he discovers to him, he
were a very unkind, and a very unworthy friend: But how much more may we be
said, to carry our selves unkindly, and unworthily; if we should slight the
love of our God, in revealing his secrets to us, by not being diligent in
observing of them? Since it pleases the Lord, to reveal to his servents things
to come; it well becomes them to observe them exactly. And so much of the
second particular, The reason of the divulgation of this Book.

I come now to the third, which is the instruments of the divulgation of this
Book, which is contained in these words: Who sent, and signified it by his
Angel unto his servant John. So that the Angel, and John, were employed as
instruments in that work. From whence the Observation is this.

Observe. 3. That though Jesus Christ could reveal immediately to al his
servants, all these things revealed in this Book; yet it pleased him to choose
rather to do it by instruments.

If it had pleased him, he might have revealed these things to all his people,
in all ages since John, immediately by his own Spirit; but he chooses rather to
do it by the writings of John: which he preserves and keeps up in a high
esteem in the hearts of all his Saints; as his own infallible, and
unquestionable truth, and testimony: or else he might have sent a John, or some
Prophet of his, to have revealed these things by mouth unto his people, in
every age, age after age: but he chooses rather to do it by revealing it to
John, so many hundreds of years ago; and his writings must be the instruments
of revealing these things unto his people; and he might have revealed those
things unto John immediately himself, without any other instrument: but he
chooses to signify it by his Angel to his servant John. So he might teach, and
edify, and build up his people immediately; but he chooses rather to do it by
instruments, by Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Pastors, and
Teachers: which he has appointed, For the perfecting of the Saints, for the
edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and
of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfectman, etc. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.

So he might likewise, have revealed himself immediately to all his people of
old; but generally it pleased him to make use either of Angels, or of his
servants the Prophets, to be the instruments of revealing his mind unto his
people then. Now the reasons why it pleases God, usually to make use of
instruments to effect his designs by, may be these.

The first is that which is the reason of all his doings; his own will. He
makes use of instruments, because it is his will to make use of instruments:
for his will is the reason, and the rule of all his actions.

Secondly, But a subordinate reason to this, may be to show his sovereignty
over al his people; therefore he sends them about his work, they being all at
his royal command.

As a Prince has power over all that are in his dominion, saying to this man
go, and he goes, and to another, come, and he comes, and to another do
this, and he does it: So the great King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, makes it
to appear that he has all his servants at his beck, by sending of them about
several employments.

Thirdly, Another reason why he makes use of instruments, in revealing and
discovering his mind to his people, and building up of his Saints, may be to
maintain a communion among Saints: for if God should reveal himself to all
alike, then would not his people have such communion one with another, as they
have, to the end they may partake one of another gifts; and therefore does it
please the Lord to make use of instruments, whereas if it pleased him, he could
have effected all things immediately, without means or instruments: and since
it is so then,

First, It reprehends those that have a low esteem of instruments, and slight
and undervalue means, upon this ground: that God can work without instruments,
and without means. But let such know, that it is the will of God to make use of
instruments, and in sleighting instruments, they contradict his will: and as
they that slight the Kings Officers, do slight the King: So they, in
sleighting the instruments and means that God has appointed to work by, do
slight God himself, and they do as much as in them lies, endeavor to break the
Communion of Saints. And surely what ever the pretenses of such persons are,
that do neglect means, and slight instruments, this comes not from the
Spirit of God in them; for the Spirit teaches not to undervalue any means,
which God has appointed to be used. Though it is true, The Spirit teaches us
not to idolize means, nor to tie God to work only by means, but to acknowledge
that God can, and sometimes does work without means and instruments; Though he
does usually work by means and instruments: and therefore it is as great an
evil on the one side, to reject the instruments, or means that God uses to work
by, because he has not absolutely tied himself to them; as on the other side,
to idolize means or instruments, because God does usually work by them.

Therefore in the second place Saints are here exhorted, to have a high esteem
of instruments, as being of Gods appointment, by whom he will reveal himself to
his people, and quicken, and comfort, and build them up upon the true
foundation. Since the Lord will make use of instruments, O Saints do not you
slight them, least you slight God himself: but esteem them very highly in
love, for their works sake. It is the rule of the Apostle, 1 These. 5. 12, 13.
says the Apostle there, We beseech you brethren, to know them which labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them
very highly in love for their works sake. The Apostle knew very well that God
could if he had pleased, have built up his people without employing some to
labor among them, in the Word, and Doctrine, and without the admonitions of
men, but these being instruments, and means of Gods appointment; He therefore
presses the Saints, to esteem very highly of those instruments, for that works
sake that God had appointed them unto: for though Paul, and Apollo, and Cephas
can do nothing of themselves, yet they are to be highly esteemed, as being
instruments in Gods hand, by which God will work. And so all the means which
God has appointed for his people to make use of, in which he will be found of
them, and in which he will have Communion with them, let them prize, and
embrace, and make use of, waiting upon God in the use of them, who will be
found of them at last, and will make it appear, that they have not sought him
in the use of means in vain. Though for a time he seem to be silent toward
them, yet at last he that shall come, will come, an I will not tarry.

It is unquestionably the policy of Satan, to take off Saints from using means,
that they may be deprived of that comfort, and benefit which otherwise they
might obtain in the use of means.

Therefore let all Saints beware of such delusions, whereby they are drawn to
dishonor God, in sleighting the instruments and means which he has appointed,
and let them be exhorted to embrace means, and make diligent use of them; for
they are blessed that so do, as will appear in the handling of the fifth
particular. But so much for this third particular, The instruments of the
divulgation of this Book.

The fourth particular, Is the faithfulness of those instruments in the
divulgation of this book, it is expressed in these words: Who bare record of the
Word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus, and of all things that he saw. We
see that as the Angel signified it to John, so John did not fail in recording
any thing of it, but he bare record of all things that he saw. Whence the
Observation is this:

Observe. 4. That when God sets instruments about a work which he will have
done, they must, and they shall effect it.

Jesus Christ will have his secrets declared to his servants, and he imploieth
John about this work; and John does it punctually: he bare record of the word
of God, and of the testimony of Jesus, and what, of some things? Nay, of all
things which he saw. And this truth is further confirmed, by two pertinent
Scriptures, which we have to this effect. One is Amos 3. 8. The Lion has
roared, Who will not fear? The Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy? The
other is, Acts 4. 20. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen
and heard. In both these places it appears, that it is not possible for
instruments to be silent, nor to sit still, when God has spoken to them, and
given them commission to do his work.

First, Is it so that when God sets instruments about a work which he will
have done, that they must, and shall effect it? Then this informs us of the
reason why Saints fear not persecution, nor imprisonment, nor death, but choose
rather to suffer them all, then to conceal the truth that is discovered to
them, or to disert the work they are called to: for God having stirred up their
spirits, and set them about this work, they cannot be silent, and sit still,
but shall go on in despite of all opposition, to accomplish the work which God
has appointed them to do. Thus did Luther, and thus have many other Saints
done, and many shall do: For if the Lord have spoken they cannot but
prophecy, speak the things they have seen and heard: for their light is not
given them to hide it under a bushel; but their love to Christ constraines
them to hold it forth, and the strength of Christ carries them forth.

Secondly, Since it is so, it serves to encourage Saints, considering that the
work that God has to do shall surely be accomplished, no opposition shall
hinder it: for though instruments seem to be never so weak, yet they must, and
shall accomplish Gods designs. Therefore fear not, the day shall break forth,
and the shadows shall fly away, and none of the powers of darkness shall be
able to hinder it. But I shall say more to this point in the following
discourse; Therefore so much shall suffice to be here spoken of it, and of this
fourth particular, the faithfulness of the instruments of divulging this Book.

The fifth particular, Is the pronounciation of a blessing upon the persons
that read, or hear the words of this Book. And that we have in these words:
Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and
keep those things which are written therein; for the time is at hand. From
whence arises this Observation.

Observe. 5. That it is a blessed thing, to read and hear the Word of God, and
particularly that which is contained in the book of the Revelation, so as to
keep it.

This clearly appears in these words: and the Apostle James likewise witnesses
the same, Jam. 1. 25. Be ye doers of the word (says he at the 22. verse.) and
not hearers only deceiving your own selves. Whereas it appears he speaks of
the written Word, which men may ^^ar with the ear, and do not. And now at the
15. verse. he says: Who so looks into the perfect law of liberty, and
continues therein; he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work,
this man shall be blessed in his deed. What is the man that James says shall
be blessed? It is the man that looks into the perfect law of liberty, (that
is) hears or reads the word of God in the Scripture, (which is a perfect
law of liberty, Spiritual liberty) and hears or reads it, not forgetfully,
but is a doer of it: This is the blessed man.

Thus it is a clear, That it is a blessed thing to hear and read the Word of
God, and particularly that which is contained in the Book of the Revelation, so
as to keep it.

Then first, This condemns those that neglect the reading, and the hearing of
the word: since it is a blessed thing to read, and hear the Word of God so as
to do it.

Now they that do not read it, nor hear it, cannot do it: for says the
Apostle, Romans 10. 14. How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? Implying, That without hearing the Word of God, they cannot believe in
God: but if the Apostle had not so said, yet we see it to be true, In that the
nations and people to whom the Gospel is not preached, and that do not read
it, do altogether continue in unbelief. And so those that are under the
darkness of Popery, to whom the word in the purity of it is not preached, and
have not liberty to read it, they continue also in a dark and a miserable
condition; but among those people where the Word is embraced, and read, and
heard there are many brought into the obedience of faith. Nay, in some places
of this Kingdom where they seldom en^oy a public Preacher, yet by reading the
Word they are made partakers of the sweet blessing of it. They ought therefore
to be sharply reproved for their folly, who neglect the hearing, and reading
the Word, and consequently the doing of it, in which they might be blessed.

In the second place, Hence all sorts of people are exhorted to be frequent in
reading the Word, for all desire to be blessed, and those that have in any
measure been made partakers of the blessing of the Gospel, they cannot but
desire more of it; therefore it would be wisdom for all to improve the means of
being made blessed, which is hearing, and reading the Word.

If a man that desires a great outward estate, should be persuaded that if
there were any way at all for him to attain that estate, it must be such, or
such a way, that man would be sure to take that way.

Why this is the case in respect of attaining Spiritual blessings; the readiest
way that any Soul can take to attain them, is a frequent reading, and hearing
of the Word of God, waiting for the coming in of the Spirit in it. O therefore
let not men discover that they have a slight esteem of Spiritual blessings,
and heavenly treasures, by neglecting the means by which they are attained: for
if men have a high esteem of Gold, and Pearls, if they know the means by which
they may be attained, they will make use of those means: so according to the
esteem we have of Spiritual blessings, will be our diligence in improving the
means of attaining them.

Object. But it may be some one will say, I have been frequent in hearing and
reading the Word, and find it but an empty thing, I hear and am as carnal as
before, I read and am as dark, and low as before; and therefore how can it be
said that hearing, and reading the Word, is a means of attaining Spiritual
blessings?

I Answer,

Answ. First, If thou find to thy apprehension, but little benefit from
hearing or reading the Word; yet thou can not conclude it would be better
with thee, if thou did not read or hear the Word, for there is no ground of
hope for thee, when thou neglectest all means of enlivening, comforting, or of
heightning the Spirit.

But secondly, Though to thy apprehension thou have no benefit from reading, or
hearing the Word, yet remember, that the Word is compared to seed, Mat. 13. 19.
and 1 Pet. 1. 23. Now you know that seed uses to lie hid under the clods for a
time, and afterward grows up: so may the seed of the Word seem to be hid in
thee for a time, and yet afterward it may grow up, and bring forth fruit. The
Disciples while the Lord Jesus was with them, often heard his word, and he
plainly foretold them of his Resurrection, but when their Lord was crucified,
though they had so often heard it, yet they seemed to be altogether ignorant of
the doctrine of the Resurrection, but afterward it was sweet unto them when the
Spirit brought it, with other things to their remembrance. In the 4. of John's
Gospel, at the 36, 37, 38. verses, our Savior tells his Disciples, That both he
that sows, and he that reapeth shall rejoice together, but (says he) herein
is that saying true, one sows, and another reapeth. I have sent you to reap
that whereon ye bestowed no labor, other men labored and ye are entered into
their labors. Others had sowed the seed of eternal life in the hearts of the
people: and therefore he said in the 35, verse. That the fields were already
white unto the harvest, but the Disciples were sent to reap the fruit of that
seed, that others had labored in the sowing of: So that one Minister may sow
the seed of life, and joy in the hearts of some people, and another may reap
it. But the time shall come, that both he that sows, and he that reapeth
shall rejoice together. When the seed ^^ sown the fruit does not by and by
appear, and of this Saints have had experience, that have lain long under the
hearing of the Word, frequently attending upon it, and been diligent in
reading, and yet have attained to their own apprehensions neither to faith, nor
peace, nor joy, nor strength, but have seemed to be as unbelieving, as carnal,
and as fleshly as ever, walking heavily for a long time: And that Word which
has been sweet to others that at the same time heard it, has been as nothing
to them. That word which has raised the heart, and strengthened the faith, and
inflamed the love of others, has seemed to have no effect upon them, and thus
some have continued weeks, months, nay years together, and if they have had any
reviving, it has been but as a morning dew; and yet at last when the Fathers
appointed time was come, wherein he has raised them up to joy, and peace in
believing, and given them life, vigor and strength, then has the Spirit
brought to their remembrance, the things which they heard many years before,
and then have they been wonderfully overcome, and taken with it, and it has
brought forth fruit abundantly in them. Therefore Saints, you that say you
find little or no effect, the word has upon you for the present, be not
thereby discouraged, but go on to read and to hear the word still, for it is
a means which is often blessed to many.

But thirdly, Is it so, that it is a blessed thing to read and hear the Word,
so as to keep it? Then it serves to exhort all, as to hear and read the Word,
so to look beyond it, in the frequent hearing and reading of it waiting for the
coming in of the Spirit; for the blessing is not pronounced upon the hearers of
the Word only, but such as hear it, and keep it, and hear it and do it: and
then shall thou hear the Word so as to keep it, when the Spirit comes along
with it: Therefore when thou come to hear the Word, do not rest upon the
bare hearing of the Word, but expect the coming of the Spirit; and that thou
may thus do, consider that there are frequent presidents in Scripture, That
in the hearing of the Word the Spirit has been given: as you have it, Act. 10.
44. While Peter yet spoke these words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which
heard the Word. And in the second of the Acts at the 41. verse, we find that
there were three thousand souls converted, at the preaching of Peter. And when
Philip went down to Samaria, and preached the Word, there were by his preaching
many converted, both men, and women, as appears Acts 8. 12. There are several
other passages in the Acts to this purpose. And Gal. 3. 2. says the Apostle,
Received you the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith?
Whereby it appears, That the Spirit was received by the hearing of the word of
faith, and therefore it is that the Apostle calls the Ministry of the Gospel,
The ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8. Therefore let all be encouraged in
the hearing of the Word to wait for the Spirit, whereby they may not be
forgetful hearers, but doers of the Word, and be blessed in so doing.

Use 4. And in the last place it serves to encourage all Saints, to be frequent
in reading of, and meditating upon the book of the Revelation; for there is a
blessing particularly pronounced upon them that read, or hear, and keep the
things that are written therein: therefore let none be discouraged from reading
those things that are written in this book, because they are so hard to be
understood, and are more dark and mysterious than most places of Scripture. It
is true, they are so, but to encourage us to be frequent in reading of it,
notwithstanding the mysteriousnesse of it, the holy Ghost hear pronounces a
particular blessing to it, which is a special encouragement to incite us to
the reading of it. And there is also another encouragement in these words, For
the time is at hand. And now if we be desirous to be informed, of the things
that concern the present time, then let us look diligently into the book of the
Revelation, for this word, The time is at hand, has held true, and does, and
shall hold true, in all ages, and times, even until the glorious appearing of
Jesus Christ, to judge the quick and the dead, when all shall appear before the
judgment seat of Christ: for there has been no age since the delivery of it,
in which it might not be said, The time is at hand, that is, The time is come,
in which some part or other of it, has been fulfilling: for at the time when
this Revelation was given to John, then was fulfilling that which is spoken
concerning the seven Churches; and soon after, that which was to be done in the
opening of the seals, began to be fulfilled, which is not yet fully
accomplished, and about four hundred year after John's time, began that to be
fulfilled, which is spoken of concerning the rising of the beast, and what is
revealed concerning the actions of the beast; and the pouring out of the viols
upon the beast, has been since that and now is a fulfilling, and what is
spoken concerning the total ruin of the beast, and the happy deliverance of
the Saints, and the glorious state of the Church after deliverance, shall be
hereafter fulfilled. So that still it might, and now, and hereafter it may be
said of the prophecy of this book, The time is at hand: therefore it concerns
us to be frequently looking into it, and diligently to observe the things, that
are written therein.

And now since the following Discourse, is on a part of the book of the
Revelation; let these two motives, which here you have to stir you up to the
reading of the whole book; as, that it is a blessed thing, and it concerns the
present time, incite you to the reading, and the serious consideration of what
is herein delivered, concerning the exact accomplishment, of some of the things
contained in this book, which comes now to be spoken of.

AN EXPOSITION UPON Part of the eleventh Chapter OF THE REVELATION.
The Exposition of the first Verse.
And there was given unto me a reed like unto a rod]
IN the 21. Chapter of this book at the 15. verse, when the holy City was put
into a delivered, enlarged, raised condition, there is mention made of a golden
reed wherewith it was to be measured. But here is not a golden reed, but a reed
like unto a rod, importing, that it is a chastized and afflicted, depressed,
low condition into which it was at this time to be put: and that it was indeed
so, appears in what follows.

And the Angel stood, saying] This Angel, chap. 10. 1. is thus described: And I
saw a mighty Angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow
was upon his head, and his face was as it were the Sun, and his feet as
pillars of fire. This description resembles that which is given of Jesus
Christ, Chap. 1. 15, 16. by which it appears, That this Angel here spoken of is
Jesus Christ. It is indeed the Lord Jesus Christ, that does order and dispose
all things in, and concerning his Church, and all things in the world, and
therefore it is, that all power is given unto him, in heaven, and earth, Mat.
28. He is the King of the holy hill of Sion, Psalm. 2. And he must rule the
Nations with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel, and
he must reign until he have put all his enemies under his feet.

Rise and measure] The Lord Jesus does not leave his people in the hand of
enemies, nor under the rod of the wicked in a careless manner, as if he did
not care how much they were given up to the hand of the enemies: no, but they
are measured out to affliction, and so far as they are measured out unto it so
far shall they be under affliction, and no farther. So God measured Job to
affliction, All that he has is in thy power only upon himself put not forth
thine hand, Job 1. 12. and again, Behold, he is in thine hand, but save his
life. The wicked shall not go a hairs-breadth beyond the measure. Jesus Christ
has such a tender respect unto all his people in their sufferings, that they
shall have no more then need, 1 Pet. 1. 6.

Measure the Temple] The word Temple in the old Testament, is used only for
that House that Solomon built in Jerusalem unto the Lord, which was called the
Temple of the Lord; it being the place wherein God was in a special manner
present, and wherein he would in a special manner be worshipped. But in the
new Testament it is used, first, for the Church, the Saints of God, of which
that Temple was a figure: for as God was in a special manner present in that
Temple, so he is in a special manner present in his people. And so we have it,
2 Cor. 6. 16. For ye are the temple of the living God, as God has said, I will
dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. and 1 Cor. 6. 19. What know ye not that your bodies are the Temple of
the holy Ghost, which is in you, etc. and thus the word Temple in the new
Testament is used for the Saints, as the Temple was a figure of them, as they
have a special presence of God in them. Which is likewise spoken of Isay. 66.
1, 2. Thus faith the Lord, the Heaven is my Thron, and the Earth is my
footstool: where is the house that ye build unto me, and were is the place of
my rest, for all these things has my hand made, and all these things have been
says the Lord, but to this man will I look; even unto him that is poor, and of
a contrite spirit, and that trembles at my word. So that he that is of a poor,
and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at the word of God, shall be the house,
the Temple of God. As we have it also Isay. 57. 15.

But secondly, The word Temple in the new Testament, as it is used for those in
whom there is a special presence of God; so it is used to signify that means
by which knowledge, and instrustion is given out: as the Temple of old was the
place where people were to receive instruction and knowledge. And in this sense
it is used, Rev. 21. 22. And I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God
Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it. This is spoken of the new
Jerusalem, of that glorious state the Church shall be in, when they shall be
all taught of God, from the greatest to the least.

Now the word Temple here in the Text, does signify these.

Eirst, It signifies the Saints of God, as they are they in whom God in a
special manner dwells. And*

Secondly, It signifies the Ordinances, and means whereby knowledge is
dispensed, and instruction is received: for it is the Saints that are as lights
in the World, and they both instuct the ignorant, and edify one another,
especially when they are congregated, assembled together to worship God,
according to his own will, and to prophesy to edify one another.

The Temple of God and the Alter, and them that worship therein] It clearly
appears in these words, that the word Temple here, includes the Saints, both as
they are an habitation of God through the spirit; and so are his Temple, and as
they are being assembled together, the means of instruction and increasing
knowledge, and do worship God aright: For least the word Temple should not be
full enough to express this, it is added, And the Altar (which in the Temple
was the place where they worshipped God) and them that worship therein. Not
only the place of worship, but the worshippers. So that this takes in all
Saints, as they are a Temple, as their assemblies are the place wherein God is
worshipped, and instruction is given, and received; and as they are worshippers
as Saints worshipping God, and possessing God.

Verse 2.
But the Court that is without the Temple]
The Court is said to be without the Temple: as of old the Court was without
the Temple, and was a more common place, not so holy as any part of the Temple
was; so that the Court here being without the Temple, it is some outside thing,
it is no part of the Temple. Now it being apparent that Saints only are the
Temple of God, this Court here mentioned, though it seem to be near the Temple,
yet is not the Temple, is none of the Saints, but some outside professors, that
seem to the outward eye to be near to Saints: as the Court was near to the
Temple, yet they are not of that holy place, they are but an outside, they are
without the Temple.

But the Court that is without the Temple leave out, or cast out, and measure
it not] Though Jesus Christ have a tender care of his Saints under affliction,
and they are measured out to the chastisement appointed to them; yet has he no
such respect unto such as are not his. Though they are professors. Though they
seem to be near the Temple, yet if they be not the Temple, though they do
profess him, yet if they do not possess him as the Temple does, they must be
left out, cast out of the care of Jesus Christ.

But the Court that is without the Temple cast out and measure it not (Jesus
Christ will not own that as his, and therefore it must not be measured) For it]

It was the Temple and the Altar, and them that worshipped therein, that was
measured out to chastisement: So then it was it that was to be given unto the
Gentiles by measure; so that this word (for it) may be read thus (for the
Temple) Is given unto the Gentiles] The word Gentiles in the old Testament,
when the Temple was in its glory, was used to express such as were not of the
Church of God; for the Israelites only were accounted the Church: and all
others were looked upon as strangers to it, such as were a far off: as such as
were enemies to the Temple, and would have the Temple ruined and laid wast. But
note, though the difference between Jews and Gentiles since the days of the
Gospel be taken away, and the Gentiles, as well as the Jews may now be of the
Church of God, if they be built upon the Lord Jesus; yet the word Gentiles is
here used to express those that were not of the Church, nor of the Temple; but
would have the Temple ruined. And as the Babylonians of old had the Temple for
a while given unto them: So now Jesus Christ gives his spiritual Temple, into
the hands of these Gentiles the mystical Babylonians for a while.

And the holy City] This title, the holy City, we find in Scripture, is first
given unto the City of Jerusalem, the City wherein the material Temple was
situate, as appears Matthew. 37. 3. where it is said at the death of our
Savior, That the graves were opened, and many bodies of the Saints which slept
arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the
holy City, and appeared unto many. Which City it is evident was the City of
Jerusalem. And indeed Jerusalem was then accounted a City more holy then
others; because it was the place wherein men ought in a more especial manner
to worship God. And therefore says the woman of Samaria, Ye say in Jerusalem
is the place where men ought to worship; And our Savior does not contradict
this, (for indeed it is out of all contradiction) that Jerusalem had been the
place where men ought to worship, for God had placed his name there, and there
he would be worshipped; because the Temple was there wherein was his special
presence. So that in this respect, Jerusalem was once a more holy City then
others.

But when the cause was taken away the effect ceased, when Jerusalem ceased to
be the place where men were enjoined to worship God, and God had removed his
special presence from the Temple; then Jerusalem was no more holy then another
place.

And because that Jerusalem was to cease to be the place of worship, and the
holy place; therefore it is that our Savior, John 4. 21, 23. says, The hour
comes when ye shall neither in the mountain of Samaria, nor yet at Jerusalem
worship the Father; but the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
Spirit, and in truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him. As if he had
said, Jerusalem shall not be the place of worship, men shall not worship God
there, for if men do perform Jerusalem worship, that is, worship with that
worship that has respect to an outward place, it shall be accounted as no
worship, no, men shall not worship in Jerusalem, but such as worship the Father
must worship him with an inward, Spiritual worship, and in truth, that is, in
the Son, in the Spirit, and in the Son, and such the Father seeks to worship
him, such he is now a seeking out, both of Jews and Gentiles; and such worship
is most pleasing unto him. So that Jerusalem had once the title of the holy
City. It was once the place wherein God was worshipped, but it is now ceased to
be so.

But secondly, This title, The holy City, is given in Scripture unto that City,
of which that Jerusalem of old was a figure, and that is, the Saints, and
people of God, who are all citizens of the holy City. And therefore Paul
writing to the Saints at Ephesus, says he, Ephesians. 2. 19. Ye are no more
strangers, and foreigners; but fellow citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God. And that Jerusalem of old was a figure of this Holy City,
appears Hebr. 12. 22. and Gal. 4. 26. where the Saints are called by the name
of Jerusalem, only they are differenced from the material Jerusalem, in that
they are called, The heavenly Jerusalem, and Jerusalem which is above. Now that
this Heavenly Jerusalem, which is compacted of Saints, and Sanctified ones, and
therefore must needs be a Holy City. I say that this Spiritual Jerusalem has
this title, The holy City, given to it does appear, Revel. 21. 2. And I John
saw the holy City, new Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven, prepared
as a bride adorned for her husband. Who is the spouse, the bride that is
adorned for her husband Jesus Christ, but his Saints? They then are the new and
heavenly Jerusalem, they are the holy City.

And the holy City shall they (that is the Gentiles fore-spoken of) tread under
foot] To be trouden under foot by an enemy, is the highest kind of insultation
of an enemy over a people that possibly can be: for what greater contempt, and
scorn, and envy can an enemy express, then by treading, a person or a people,
under feet? And yet this is the condition, the Church was put into, which is
spoken of in the prophecy of Isaiah, Chap. 51. 23. where it was said that
those enemies, that afflicted the Saints, Said to their Souls bow down, that we
may go over, and their bodies was laid as the ground, and as the streets to
them that went over. And this is the condition which the holy City, the Temple
of God, his precious Saints are here also appointed unto, even to be trod under
foot, to be depressed, and greatly persecuted, to be bowed down under the feet
of their enemies, to be made as the ground, and as the street to them to go
over.

Querie. But now, before I proceed any further, the Querie will be, What those
Gentiles are in particular, to whom the Temple, and the holy City was to be
given, and by whom they were to be trodden under foot? For as Jerusalem, and
the Temple of old were given to the Babylonians in particular: so the question
is now, Who the particular enemies are to whom the Temple, and the holy City
now are delivered? For though the holy City has many enemies, yet she is not
given to them all.

Answ. I Answer, Though in this Chapter there be no other description of them,
but only this, the Gentiles: yet we have a large description of them, in three
several Chapters of this prophecy: which descriptions as they lie, I shall
here incert.

The first is, Rev. 12. 3. 4. And there appeared another wonder in Heaven, and
behold a great red Dragon having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven Crowns
upon his heads, and his tail drew a third part of the Stars of Heaven, and did
cast them to the earth.

The second place in which the enemies of the Saints, (to whom they are given
for a while) are described is, Rev. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. verses, which
is as follows. And I stood upon the sand of the Sea, and saw a Beast rise up
out of the Sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten
Crowns, and upon his head the name of blasphemy. And the Beast which I saw was
like unto a Leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a Bear, and his mouth as
the mouth of a Lion, and the Dragon gave him his power, and seat, and great
authority. And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death, and his
deadly wound was healed, and all the world wondered after the Beast, and they
worshipped the Dragon which gave power unto the Beast, and they worshipped the
Beast saying, Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to make war with him? And
there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things, and blasphemies, and
power was given unto him to continue forty, and two months. And he opened his
mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and
them that dwelt in heaven. And it was given unto him to make war with the
Saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds and
tongues, and nations, and all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him,
whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world.

The third place where the enemies of the Temple, and the holy City, viz. The
Saints are described, is Rev. 17. 3, 4, 5, 6. as it follows.

And I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet colored Beast, full of names of
blasphemy, having seven heads, and ten horns, and the woman was arraied in
purple, and scarlet color, and decked with gold, and precious stone, and
pearls, having a golden cup in her hand, full of abominations and filthiness
of her fornication: and upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON
THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. And I saw the
woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs
of Jesus: and when I saw her I wondered with great admiration.

Thus now the enemies of the Church, the Temple or holy City, which in the text
in hand are only described by this word (the Gentiles) in these passages are
more largely characterized.

But these expressions used in these descriptions of these enemies, being for
the most part very mysterious: we have these mysteries opened, and unveiled in
the 17. Chap. from the 7, verse. to the end of the Chapter, as it follows.

And the Angel said unto me wherefore did thou marvel? I will tell thee the
mystery of the woman, and of the Beast that carries her which has the seven
heads, and ten horns. The Beast that thou saw was, and is not, and shall
ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition; and they that dwell
on the earth shall wonder, whose names were not written in the book of life,
from the foundation of the World, when they behold the Beast that was, and is
not, and yet is. And here is the mind which has wisdom: The seven heads are
seven mountains, on which the woman sits, and there are seven Kings, five
are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come: and when he comes, he
must continue a short space. And the Beast that was and is not even he is the
eighth, and is of the seven, and goes into perdition. And the ten horns which
thou saw, are ten Kings which have received no Kindome as yet: but receive
power as Kings one hour with the Beast. These have one mind, and shall give
their power and strength unto the Beast. These shall make war with the Lamb,
and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
and they that are with him, are called, and chosen, and faithful. And he says
unto me the waters which thou saw, where the Whore sits, are peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues. And the ten horns which thou saw upon
the Beast, these shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate and naked,
and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, for God has put in their
hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree, and give their Kingdom unto the
Beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled. And the woman which thou
saw is that great City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth.

In these words, we have the mystery opened of what is delivered in the 12,
13, and 17. Chapters, concerning the Beast, and the Woman, and the Heads, and
the Horns, and the many waters: which are all mysterious expressions, and hard
to be understood, (as those were, Dan. 7. from the 1, to the 9, ver. until the
interpretation was given to Daniel at the 16, verse and so on) but the Angel
having in this 17, Chap. opened these mysteries, now the meaning of them is
more apparent: So that,

First, If it be queried, What is the Beast?

We have it answered, verse 8. in these words, The Beast that thou saw was,
and is not; and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition.
Now by comparing this with some passages in the 12, and 13. Chapters, we shall
plainly see what the Beast is. In the 11. Chap. at the 9, verse, the Dragon
there mentioned, is said to be, That old serpent called the Devil, and Satan
which deceives the whole world. And in the 13. Chap. at the 1, and 2. verses,
it is said, That a Beast did rise up out of the Sea, having seven heads, and
ten horns, and upon his horns ten Crowns, and upon his heads the names of
blasphemy: and the Beast was like unto a Leopard, and his feet were as the feet
of a Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion; and the Dragon gave him his
power, and his seat, and great authority.

So then; The Beast that has seven heads, and ten horns, and is like unto a
Leopard, etc. is some wicked one in whom the devil raigns; who has power, and
a seat, and great authority in the earth: which power, and seat, and great
authority, was given unto him of the devil. And though that wicked one, that
has that devilish power, and authority, be distinct from the devil; (as he
that receives is distinct from him that gives:) yet they are so one, as the
devil is said to be in the Beast: for what the Beast is said to do, the
devil is said to do: for in the 13. Chapter, at the 7, verse. it is the Beast
that is said to make war with Saints: but in the 12. Chapter, at the 17, verse,
the devil is said to do it. And again, they are so one, as the Beast is said
to be the devil; and therefore when the Angel comes to declare what the Beast
is, in the forementioned place, says he, The Beast shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit. It is not said he shall receive his authority from him that
ascends out of the bottomless pit, (though that be the meaning of it, as
before appears:) but He shall ascend out of the bottomless pit; to show the
oneness of the devil, and the Beast. Thus the mystery of the Beast is
unfolded; and it appears, that the Beast is a wicked one, that has a devilish
power, and authority, and is one with the devil.

This is he of whom it is said, All the world wondered after the Beast; and
worshipped the Dragon that gave power unto the Beast; and worshipped the Beast
saying, Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to make war with him? And of
whom it was said, That there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things,
and blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two
months, etc. As you have it pages 46, and 47.

But secondly, If it be queried, What that Woman is, that is said Chapter 17.
3. to sit upon this Beast?

We have an Answer to this, in the 18, verse of this 17. Chapter, in these
words: And the Woman which thou saw, is that great City which reigns over
the Kings of the earth. Now what that great City was, that did then reign over
the Kings of the earth; though it were not so apparent in several other
histories as it is; yet the Scriptures could sufficiently inform us: for it
informs us, that Tribute was paid to Caesar; Matthew. 22. 17. And that because
Caesar was he that reigned over the kings of the earth, the Jews said to
Pilate, If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend. And that Paul
appealed to Caesar, as being the highest authority that then was: as appears,
Acts 25. 10, 11. Now the place where Caesar's royal seat was then, was the City
of Rome, as appears in that Paul was sent thither. So that Rome was the City
that then reigned over the Kings of the earth. And therefore it was that it was
accounted such a privilege to be a Roman, Acts 22. 25, 26.

Now since it is clear in Scripture; (and all histories do acknowledge it,)
that Rome was the great City that reigned over the Kings of the earth; Then it
appears, That Rome is that Woman that is said to sit upon the Beast. Now this
being apparent, it does appear the more clearly what the Beast is.

It was clear before, That the Beast was a wicked one in whom the Devil
reigned, that had received power, and a seat, and great Authority from the
Devil: but it did not so clearly appear who that wicked one in particular is.
But here it appears that it is particularly he upon whom the City of Rome
sits: he that supports it.

Now it is apparent that it is that wicked one the Pope, that is the support of
the cursed City. He it is that bears her up in her pomp, and pride, and filthy
abominable, Sodomiticall practices. He is the Beast upon which that great Whore
sits. And the City of Rome has been, and to this day is such a fountain of
filthiness, and whoredoms, and all cursed abominations: as this name appears
so perspicuously in her forehead, as he that runs may read it, MYSTERY,
BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. And it
is apparent, that She is drunken with the blood of Saints, and the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus.

But thirdly, If the Question be, What the seven heads of the Beast are?

The Angel gives an answer to that, at the 9, verse of the 17. Chapter. The
seven heads are seven mountains upon which the Woman sits. The Woman being
the City of Rome; the seven heads of the Beast, are said to be the seven
mountains upon which that City was built. And with this Historians agree, (...)
say, that the City of Rome was founded upon seven mountains. Now these may as
properly be said to be the seven heads of the Beast; as the ten Kings may be
said to be his ten horns: as will appear by and by.

Fourthly, If it should be enquired, What the ten horns are, mentioned Chap.
12. 3. and 13. 1. and 17. 3?

The Angel answers that in the 12, verse of the seventeen Chapter, in these
words: And the ten horns which thou saw are ten Kings, which have received
no Kingdom as yet, but receive power as kings one hour with the Beast. These
have one mind, and shall give their power, and strength unto the Beast; these
shall make war with the Lamb, etc. In these words the Angel unveils this also,
and tells us, that those which are mysteriously expressed by the ten horns of the
Beast, are the ten Kings, which did give up their power, and strength unto the
Beast with one consent, and one mind, and thus it came to pass: for when the
devil gave the Pope that power, and authority, whereby the Emperor of Rome was
subjected to him, then the ten Kingdoms that were under Rome, did likewise
willingly give up their power to him also; and were subjected to the Beast, and
as he, so they also made war with the Lamb the Lord Jesus in his Saints: and
so became the ten horns of the Beast, by which he became the more dreadful,
and terrible: for he had not been so dreadful, if he had but only had the
strength of his seven heads, of that great City that is seated upon seven hills:
but having these ten horns also, these ten Kingdoms he was become very terrible.

But fifthly, If it should be queried, What the many waters are upon which the
Woman sits, mentioned Chap. 17. 1. and 13. 1?

The Angel answers that also, in the 15. verse of the 17. Chapter, in these
words: The waters which thou saw where the Whore sits, are peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues. So that this is not left in the mystery
neither; but the Angel plainly declares, That by the waters is meant the
peoples, and nations, and multitudes, and tongues. And the Whore is said to sit
upon them; because they have willingly subjected themselves unto her, to be as
it were vassals to her.

Now by this time it appears from these 12, 13, and 17. Chapters, what those
Gentiles (mentioned in the text, to whom the Temple, and the holy City was
given,) are in particular: for it appears that as though the Church of old had
many enemies, yet they were particularly given to the Babylonians, the
Chaldeans: So now, the Church is particularly given to be trodden under foot of
mystical Babylon, Rome, and of that wicked one the Pope, that has received
from the devil, his power, and his seat, and great authority.

Now that these particular enemies did as the text declares, Tread the holy
City under foot, appears also in these following passages:

Rev. 12. 13, 14, 15. The Dragon persecuted the Woman, which brought forth a
man-child: and to the Woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she
might flee into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a
time, and times, and half a time from the face of the serpent; and the serpent
cast out of his mouth water as a flood after the Woman, that he might cause her
to be carried away of the flood. That by the Dragon here mentioned, is meant
the Pope who is one with him, appears page 49. 50.

Now he is here said to persecute the Woman, (the Church) that is clothed with
the Sun, and the Moon under her feet. And this wicked one persecutes the
Church, as she is thereby driven into the wilderness: that is, into a
desolate, bewildred, barren, and sad condition; and that, so long as the Beast
remains: (for that is the meaning of a time, times, and half a time, as will
appear in what follows,) as if it were not possible for the Church to be in any
other then a wilderness condition, until the ruin of the Beast, and the fall
of Babylon were come. And when he had driven the Church into that desolate
wilderness condition, he was not therewith satisfied, but cast out water as a
flood after her, that he might cause her to be carried away with the flood. And
has it not been even thus? Did not that scarlet colored Beast so persecute
the holy City, all the Saints of God ever since his first rise, as that they
have been in a desolate, sad, wilderness condition ever since? And yet is he
not so satisfied, but is sending out of his floods of malice, and fury after
the Saints; and would swallow them all up if it were possible.

Again, Chapter 12. 17. he is said, To be ^roth with the Woman, and to make war
with the remnant of her seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ. And Chap. 13. 6, 7. And the Beast opened his mouth
in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them
that dwelt in heaven; and it was given unto him to make war with the Saints,
and to overcome them. And has not that Beast, the, Pope punctually done as is
here spoken of him, in opening his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme
his name and his Saints? Has he not said himself was the head of the Church,
and that he could forgive sins, with many other blasphemies? And has not he
made war with the Saints, which kept the Commandments of God, and the testimony
of Jesus Christ? Have not they been the only ones with whom he has made war?
The most vilest, and most abominable persons were most nourished by that cursed
Beast; and the most precious Saints have been most hated, and has he not also
overcome them? For, for this twelve hundred years he has so overcome them, as
they never had power to rise up against him until of late. Again, Chap. 17. 6.
the great Whore is said to be drunk with the blood of Saints, and with the
blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. And Chap. 18. 24. It is again said of Babylon,
the City of Rome, the great Whore, That in her was found the blood of Prophets,
and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth. And most evident it
is, That Rome has not only made others drunken with the cup of her
abominations, and filthiness of her fornications; but is her self drunken with
the blood of the Saints, and the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, which she has
taken in greedily, and eagerly, and in her it will be found, when with violence
she shall be thrown down, and become the habitation of devils, and the hold of
every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hurtful Bird. Thus by this
time it appears by whom, and how the holy City has been trodden under foot.

And the holy City shall they tread under foot, forty and two months.] It
being apparent, what the enemies of the Church are, and that they have trodden
the Temple, and holy City under foot. The next thing to be cleared, is the time
how long those enemies of the Church were to tread her under foot. And that is
here said to be forty and two months. Now what the meaning of this is, will
more clearly appear, by comparing it with four other passages in the prophecy
of this Book. One is Chap. 12. 6. And the woman fled into the wilderness,
where she had a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a
thousand two hundred and threescore days. A second, Chap. 12. 14. And to the
woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might flee into the
wilderness: into her place; where she is nourished, for a time, and times, and
half a time, from the face of the Serpent. A third, is Chap. 11. 3. And I will
give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand two
hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. A fourth, is Chap. 13. 5.
And there was given unto the Beast, a mouth speaking great things, and
blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months.
and it was given unto him to make war, etc.

Now the text speaks of the afflicted condition of the Church, under the
expression of being trod under foot: and the first of these passages speaks of
the afflicted condition of the Church, under the expression of flying into the
wilderness; because of the persecution of her enemies. The second of these
passages, speaks likewise of the afflicted condition of the Chuch, under the
same expression as the former, of fleeing into the wilderness. The third of
these expressions, speaks of the afflicted condition of the Church, under the
expression of being clothed in sackcloth. and the 4. speaks of the afflicted
condition of the Church, under the expression of the Beasts making war with the
Saints and overcoming them, and they all speaking the same thing: the
affliction of the Church, do also speak of the same time of the continuance of
that affliction, with this in the Text. Now in the Text, that time is expressed
under the expression of forty and two months. And In the first of A thousand
two hundred and threescore days.

In the second of A time, and times, and half a time.

In the third of A thousand two hundred and threescore days.

In the fourth of Forty and two months.



Now that these agree in one, appears thus.

In forty and two months, accounting thirty days to a month, there is just
a thousand two hundred and threescore days: so that forty and two months,
and a thousand two hundred and threescore days, agree in one. Again in three
years and a half, we have just forty and two months, accounting twelve months
to a year: So that a time, times, and half a time, that is, one year, two
years, and half a year, which is three years and a half, agrees with forty and
two months. And with a thousand two hundred and threescore days. So that the
time the Church was to continue under affliction, to be trodden under foot, was
a thousand two hundred and threescore days.

Now as the Prophet Ezekiel was to account a day for a year (Eze. 4, 5, 6.) so
this one thousand two hundred and threescore days, is to be accounted a
thousand two hundred and threescore years.

So then whereas in the Text it is said, that the Church should be trodden under
foot forty and two months by the Gentiles; that is particularly, by that
wicked one the Pope, and his adherents, the mystical Babylonians: the meaning
of that forty two months is, A thousand two hundred and threescore years. And
it must of necessity be acknowledged to be so; for the Beast has trodden the
holy City under foot, for above twelve hundred years already.

Verse. 3.
And I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy a
thousand two hundred, and threescore days clothed in sackcloth.]
That this word (My two Witnesses) cannot be confined only to two men, that
should be the Witnesses of Christ Jesus; is most apparent: because they are
said to continue so long, as the holy City was to be trodden under foot of the
Beast; which is a thousand two hundred and threescore years. Now twelve hundred
years, is a term of time which no man ever lived when men lived longest: much
less since the flood, therefore since the two Witnesses are said to continue
twelve hundred and sixty years; they cannot be confined only unto two men, but
do include all the Saints, that have been Witnesses of the truths of Jesus
Christ, ever since the Beast began to persecute the Church: for Jesus Christ
during all that time, did never leave himself without witnesses, though for the
most part of that time, the number of them were very small, in comparison of
the false prophets of the Beast: which may be the reason, why they are here
expressed by the smallest of numbers, the number two. But I say, Jesus Christ
has never left himself without Witnesses; but has had some at all times, that
have been witnesses of his truths, in opposition to the Beast. And those are
they, that are here in the text said to prophecy, a thousand two hundred, and
sixty days. Now as this text holds forth, That Jesus Christ has had
Witnesses, during all the reign of the Beast, and the persecuted condition of
the Church: so other passages in this prophecy confirm it, as Chap. 8. 9. I
saw under the Altar, the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and
for the testimony which they held. These were some that had witnessed, and
testified the truths of Christ against the Beast, and sealed their testimony
with their blood; for they were slain for the Word of God, and for the
testimony which they held. And to show that these were not all that witnessed
the truths of Christ, but that Jesus Christ had continually some that were his
Witnesses, which the beast should continually be slaying; it is said in the 11.
verse of that Chap. That they should rest yet for a little season, until their
fellow servants also, and their brethren that should be killed as they were,
should be fulfilled: So that Christ had a further number of Witnesses, which
were also to honor him, by laying down their lives for his truth. And Chap.
12. 11. The Witnesses of Christ, are again mentioned, for it is said, That the
Dragon did make war, with them which kept the commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ. And verse 12. they are said, To overcome the devil,
by the blood of the Lamb, (by which all Saints do overcome him) and by the word
of their testimony: for they loved not their lives unto the death. Here it
appears that the Saints did so witness the truths of Christ; as they counted
not their lives dear unto them, but laid them down to seal the truth which
they held, which was a means of convincing many of the truth, and thereby they
were overcomers of the Beast. And chap. 18. 24. when Babylon came to be thrown
down, it is said, That in her was found the blood of Prophets, and of all that
were slain upon the earth: whereby it appears, That during all the reign of the
Beast, he has been slaying the Prophets, Witnesses, and Saints of Jesus Christ.

Thus by these several passages it is evident, That Christ has had his
Witnesses during all the reign of the Beast; and it is apparent that this word,
My two Witnesses includes all those Witnesses of Christ, that have been during
all the reign of the Beast: for they have been said to prophecy a thousand two
hundred and threescore years.

Object. But how could all the Witnesses of Christ, be said to prophecy?

I answer, Every Saint in a sense, may be said to be a Prophet. For they are
Prophets to whom God discovers his secrets: and there is no true Saints, but
the secrets of God are discovered to them, Psalm. 15. 14. The secret of the Lord
is with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant. The truth is,
it is the discoveries of God, and of Jesus Christ, and of hidden truths that
makes Saints. If the Lord did not reveal his secrets unto poor souls, it would
not be possible for them to be Saints. Now then as soon as the soul is made a
Saint, it is made a Prophet: for when the Lord has revealed himself unto the
soul and discovered his secrets to it, made it to see the wonderful things of
his law, and caused it to rejoice in the sweet discoveries of his grace, the
soul cannot choose but declare them to others. Yea the word is as a fire in its
bosom, and it cannot hold it in, according to that rule, When thou art
converted strengthen thy brethren. This is ever the sweet temper of a real
Saint, he cannot but give vent to the bublings of Christ upon his heart: and
that in opposing gain-saiers, contending earnestly for the faith, and in the
edifying, exhorting, and comforting of other Saints.

Now that this is prophesying, is most evident in these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 14.
3. He that prophesies, speaks unto men to edification, and exhortation, and
comfort. Now this all Saints in some measure or other can do, and sometimes
does; though some Saints can do it far more excellently then others, yet he
that speaks to edification, exhortation and consolation, though with much
weakness, does as truly prophecy as he that has greatest abilities. Another
Scripture is Act. 15. 32. And Judas and Silas being prophets also themselves,
exhorted the brethren with many words, and confirmed them. Here it is evident,
That to speak the word of exhortation, and information, to the confirming of
Saints in the truth, is to prophecy: for Judas and Silas are said to exhort
and confirm the Saints, as they were Prophets. Another passage to this purpose
is Revel. 19. 10. For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. This
passage gives a most clear answer to the question, What is it to prophecy? The
Angel had said, Chap. 18. 24. That in Babylon was found the blood of Prophets,
and of Saints. Now here he makes it to appear, what the Prophets were that Rome
had slain; namely, they were they that had the testimony of Jesus; for (says
he) The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. So that all Saints that
have the testimony of Jesus, have the spirit of prophecy: and so all that were
slain for the testimony of Jesus, were they that did prophecy in sackcloth.

I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand
two hundred and threescore days clothed in sackcloth.] Jesus Christ having in
the former verse, declared that the holy City should be trodden under foot,
which is the afflicted condition of the Church, he does here declare, what
supplies they should have in that condition: in that he says that he would
give unto them this gift, that they should prophecy. Though they are to be
destitute of outward comforts and outward liberties by the enemies persecuting
of them, yet they are to have inward comforts: the Lord will reveal his secrets
to them, which shall exceed all outward comforts; they shall have the testimony
of Jesus, which is the spirit of prophecy.

I will give unto my two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand two
hundred and threescore days.] That this one thousand two hundred and
threescore days, is a thousand two hundred and threescore years, appears in
page 59, 60, etc. Where it is evident, that it is the same term of time with
that in the former verse, and with that in former passages of this book; and
that the meaning of them all, is a thousand two hundred and threescore years,
there appears.

Clothed in sackcloth] While the Church was in the material Babylon, they
were in a sad and mourning posture; for they wept and hung their harps on
willows, and could not sing the songs of Sion: So the Church now being in
mystical Babylon, and insulted over by their enemies, God having for a time
given them to be trodden under foot by them, they are in mourning, sad and sable
garments; clothed in sackcloth: though they inwardly enjoy the discoveries of
the bosom secrets of the Father, the comforts of the Spirit, though they have
the Spirit of prophecy: yet they prophecy in sackcloth, their outside, their
clothing is sackcloth, to the outward eye they are in a sad posture: and they
cannot be otherwise, while they are under the power and tyrany of Babylon.

Verse 4.
These are the two Olive-trees]
These, that is, these two Witnesses, are the two Olive Trees. In that they are
said to be (the) two Olive Trees, it implies it has reference unto some
passage of Scripture, wherein there is a former mention of them. Now the place
where they are mentioned, is Zech. 4. so that Zechariah does prophecy of these
two Witnesses, under the expression of two Olive Trees; and therefore the holy
Ghost mentioning the Witnesses here, declares, that these are they that are
elsewhere called the two Olive Trees. Now in that place, Zech. 4. 4. we find
that the Prophet does ask the Angel, What these be? And then the Angel makes
this answer, This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying; not by
might, nor by power, but by my spirit, says the Lord of hosts: Who art thou, o
great mountain? Before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain, and he shall bring
forth the head stone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, Grace unto it. Now
this is somewhat a mysterious answer; but thus much appears in it: That though
the Saints seem to be little in the eyes of men, and their enemy (whether it be
the material Babylon, or the mystical Babylon) seem to be a great mountain, as
if it were impossible for the Saints to remove their mountainous enemy: yet
they shall be removed out of their way, the great mountain shall become a plain
before them; and those Saints that seem to be little, but as an handful to a
mountain, they shall when the great mountain is become a plain; again, become a
glorious Temple, and when it shall be thus, there shall be shoutings, crying,
Grace, Grace unto it. And this appears to be spoken of the two Witnesses in the
Text; for they have seemed to be small and little, and their enemy a great
mountain: but undoubtedly this mountain shall become a plain before them, and
they shall again become a glorious Temple, a mountain of holiness, the praise
of the whole earth. But the Prophet at the 12 verse, is said again to ask the
Angel, What the Olive-branches are? and receives this further answer: These be
the two anointed ones, that stand by the Lord of the whole earth: here is
another description of them, in which it is most evident, that by the two
Olive Trees is meant the Saints, Servants and Witnesses of Jesus Christ; for
this is a plain character of Saints; for first, Saints are anointed ones, and
are said to be anointed, 2 Cor. 1. 21. and are said to have received an unction
from the holy One, 1 John 2. 20. Again secondly, as Saints are anointed ones,
so it is they only that can come into the presence of God; it is they only that
can enter into the Holy of Holies, by the new and living way, which Jesus
Christ has made for them.

Now by this time it is clear, That by the two Olive Trees, is meant all
Saints: for they are anointed ones, and they stand in the presence of God; they
then are the two Olive Trees, which have prophesied, clothed in sackcloth, and
though they have been but as a handful, compared with that great mountain the
Beast, so that they could not prevail by might, nor by power, yet by that
unction, by that anointing, that Spirit that is upon them they shall prevail.

These are the two Olive Trees, and the two Candle-sticks] These Witnesses are
also said to be candle-sticks, because all Saints as they are anointed ones, so
they are the light of the world, Mat. 5. 14. they are light in the Lord, and
they shine as lights amidst a crooked and perverse generation.

These are the two Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks, standing before the
God of the earth.] The wicked (says the Psalmist) shall not stand in thy
presence, neither shall evil dwell with thee. It is indeed only the
prerogative of those holy ones, that are washed in the blood of the Lamb, that
are unblameable and unreprovable in his sight: and to these does he hold out
the golden scepter of his grace, and these do stand in the presence of the Lord
of the whole earth.

Verse 5.
And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and
devoureth their enemies.]
The Saints in a sense, are the Judges and Executioners of their enemies.
Behold a King, says the Prophet (Isa. 32. 1) shall reign in righteousness,
and Princes shall rule in judgment; speaking of the reign of the Lord Jesus,
and his Saints ruling with him, so that as he judges, so do they; and they
pass sentence with him upon their enemies, and therefore is it here said, If
any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and devoureth their
enemies: That is, that breath of the spirit that proceeds out of their mouth,
in their prayers does both pronounce the sentence and bring down the fire of
wrath upon their enemies. And this is clear, Revel. 8. 3. for there it appears,
That when the prayers of all Saints were offered upon the golden Altar, that
then the Angel took the Censor, and filled it with fire of the Altar, and cast
it into the earth, and there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and
an earthquake. So that this is the power that Saints have to devour their
enemies, and though their enemies be never so high and potent, yet they are not
so high, nor so potent, but they can reach them, either to kill or destroy
them, or to bind and imprison them. And this is further witnessed unto by the
Psalmist, Psalm 149. 6, 7, 8, 9. where speaking of the Saints, says he, Let
the high praises of God be in their mouths, and a two-edged sword in their
hands, to execute vengeance upon the Gentiles, and punishments upon the people,
to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron; to
execute upon them the judgment written: This honor have all his Saints. Here
the Psalmist speaks of executing vengeance upon the Gentiles, and punishments
upon the people, of binding Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters of iron.
Why? Who must do thus? Must it not be some great and mighty Potentate? No, but
this is to be done by Saints, and that not only by some Saints, but as well by
the weakest of Saints, as by the strongest; For this honor have all his
Saints. All Saints do execute vengeance upon their enemies; If any man will
hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth; from their prayers proceeds a
fire of wrath, and devoureth their enemies.

And if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed.] As a fire
proceeds out of their mouth, that devoured their enemies in general: so if
any man will hurt them, he must in the same manner be killed, that is, by the
fire that proceeds out of their mouth.

Verse 6.
These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their
prophecy.]
As the fire mentioned in the former verse, was not material fire, but it was
mystically spoken: so the rain here mentioned, is to be mystically understood,
as it is in several places of Scripture. I will cite but only two places, for
they will be sufficient: and in both of them, what is to be understood by water
or rain, is declared. As Isa. 44. 3. I will pour water upon him that is
thirstly, and floods upon the dry ground. Now would we know, what is here meant
by water and floods? it follows in the next words, I will pour my spirit upon
thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. So that here the Spirit, and
the blessings of heaven are expressed by water, and by floods. The other place,
is Joh. 3. 38, 39. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has sa^d, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living water. The next verse explains this, This
he spoke of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive. So that
we see what the Scripture means by water, when it speaks mystically of it: so
that it is in this sense, that the Saints are said here during the prevalency
of the Beast, to shut heaven that it rain not: for it cannot be understood of
material rain, for that has been extended to the unjust, as to the just: and
if material rain should be withheld, the Saints and Witnesses might have as
well suffered by the withholding of it, as others: no, it is not the
withholding of material rain, but a greater judgment then that: for as the
Saints had power to bring a fire of wrath upon their enemies: so to shut up the
rain of spiritual blessings, that the floods of the spirit do not descend upon
them. But whereas the Saints are like the tree, that is planted by the rivers
of water, that is always green and flourishing; their enemies are for want of
these waters, as a dry tree that brings forth no fruit, and must be hewn down
and cast into the fire.

That it rain not in the days of their prophesie] We see what the days of
their prophecy is, at the third verse, where they are said to prophecy,
clothed in sackcloth, a thousand two hundred and threescore days: which has
been showed to be so many years, which is the term of time which the Gentiles,
the Beast is to prevail, and the holy City, the Saints are to be trodden under
foot; these we see are said to be the days of their prophesying, clothed in
sackcloth; not but that they might prophecy after that time is expired: but
those were the days of their prophesying in sackcloth, because they are trodden
under foot, and they are given to the Beast, the Babylonians, and during these
days of their prophesying in sackcloth, they have power to shut heaven, that
it rain not spiritual blessings upon their enemies. And has it not been even
thus? Has not the Beast, and all his adherents been as dry trees, and have
they not continued to be so, without ever obtaining a drop of spiritual grace?
Have they not been as the dry ground, obdurate and hardened in their hellish
ways? insomuch as it is to be admired, that they should so continue without
any relenting or returning for so many hundred years, although they have had
the Scriptures, and many of them great outward parts and abilities, and the
writings of many precious Saints; which are means by which God uses to work;
but none of these means could work any thing, because they had the Heaven so
shut, that none of the waters of the Spirit did descend upon them. Therefore it
was that the letter of the Word, and all other advantages could do nothing,
for they are all nothing without the Spirit.

And have power over waters, to turn them to bloud] This is another plague
distinct from the former (but it is also mystically expressed) therefore these
waters, are not those that are said to be shut up from them: for it is not
possible for them to be turned into blood: that is, to be made useless, as
waters are, when they are turned into blood: but they are those waters which
their enemies the Babylonians made use of, in stead of the waters of the
Spirit: And what were they? It were their Canons, and Decrees, and
Constitutions which they gave forth, as equivalent unto the very dictates of
the Spirit it self: and they declared them to be of as great authority, and of
these waters they made all that did adhere to them to drink: and with these
waters they contented themselves, never caring for the waters of the Spirit.
Now the Saints had power over these waters, to turn them to blood; which they
did by the Spirit of prophecy which they had; whereby they did so hold forth
the Testimony of Jesus Christ, in the purity of it, as all the Romish
Doctrines, and Popish Canons were turned to blood, rendered useless unto
others, and discovered to be corrupt. And this is that which was done by those
Angels or Saints, that poured out the second and third viols. Revel. 16. 3, 4.

And to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.] How Saints
may be said to smite the earth, or earthly men with all plagues, does in part
appear page 72. where it appears, That they do it by their prayers: for when
the prayers of the Saints ascended up before God, then it is said, Revel. 8. 5.
That fire was cast upon the earth, or earthly men, and produced dreadful
effects; as voices and thundering, and lightnings, and an earthquake. Thus
Saints do smite the Earth with all plagues by their prayers. But they do not
only smite the Earth by their prayers, but also by their prophesying, and
holding forth the Testimony of Jesus Christ: for by the earth here spoken of,
is peculiarly expressed those earthly men, that in a more especial manner trod
the Saints under foot. Now they (as before appears) were the Beast, the Pope,
and his Accomplices, the Babylonian Romans, and all that were of that faction.
Now these the Saints do smite with all plagues, by their holding forth the
Testimony of Jesus Christ against them (as well as by praying against them:)
for thereby is their Doctrine discovered, to be a pack of abominable lies; and
this proves a plague unto them, and this pains them at the very heart: for by
this plague, they are like to die, it is like to prove a mortal disease unto
them, and therefore is very grievous, Revel. 12. 11. The Saints are said to
overcome the Dragon by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
Testimony; for they loved not their lives unto the death: Whereby it is
evident, That by holding forth the Testimony of Jesus Christ, and sealing it
with their blood, the Saints do smite the devil in the Beast, so as to
overcome him. And thus by their prayers, and by the word of their Testimony,
Saints do smite the earth, that is, their Babylonical enemies with all plagues
as often as they will.

Verse 7.
And when they shall have finished their testimony.
It is but a prefixed term of time, as appears in the third verse, That Jesus
Christ will have his people prophecy in a despicable, sad, and low condition,
clothed in sackcloth: and that is so long as the Beast is to continue, as
appears by comparing the third verse of this Chapter, with the fifth verse of
the thirteenth Chapter: and that term of time which the Beast was to continue,
and the Saints to be trodden under foot, and to prophecy in sackcloth, is a
thousand two hundred and threescore years, as appears, page 62. Now this 1260.
years, being added to the year wherein the Beast received his devilish power,
and seat, and great authority, in the reign of Phocus the Emperor: which was,
as say Historians, in the year 404. I say adding to this, 1260. it makes up,
1664. And this year, 1664 should be the year wherein the Witnesses should
finish their giving Testimony, Clothed in sackcloth: If this 1260 years should
be computed according to the rule of Astronomers, allowing 365 days to a year,
and to every fourth year adding a day more. But we find that the holy Ghost in
this prophecy, not observing that rule, does allow but 360 days to a year,
and according to that rule, 1260 days to three years and an half.

And therefore in computing the time of the Witnesses, prophesying in
sackcloth, we are to observe the rule which the holy Ghost here lays down, to
allow 360 days to a year, and so the time of the Witnesses prophesying in
sackcloth, is to expire eighteen years, and almost an half, sooner then as by
the other account: and so the beginning of the year 1645. was the time when the
Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, and of being trodden under foot of the
Beast, and his adherents did expire.

And when they shall have finished their Testimony, the Beast that ascends
out of the bottomless pit] That the Pope is the Beast that ascended out of the
bottomless pit, is made evident, in p. 49, etc. And therefore it is the Pope,
that is expressed here also, by the name of the Beast that ascends out of the
bottomless pit.

The Beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against
them.] This war which is here mentioned, that the Beast was to make against
the Witnesses, the Saints of Jesus Christ, is the late war that has been by
him made in Ireland and England, as will perspicuously appear, by comparing it
with that description of it, which is given in this and the following verses.

And first that this war was made by the Beast that ascended out of the
bottomless pit, that is, by the Pope, is most evident: For,

First, What is done by any of the ten Kingdoms, that are of his horns is his
act. And

Secondly, Whatever is done by his instigation, is done by him: Now in both
these respects, the war late in England, and in Ireland is the Beasts war.
For

First, All that have acknowledged any Kingdoms to be the horns of the Beast,
have acknowledged England to be one of them. Therefore this war being made by
the authority of one of the ten horns of the Beast, was made by the Beast.

But it may be objected: But England was fallen from Rome before the war,
which was begun in 1641. for Queen Elizabeth long since cast off the Popes
Supremacy, and it was never since acknowledged by the Kings of England; and
together with the Popes Supremacy, was the Popish Canons and Decrees rejected,
and for matter of Doctrine, the Doctrine embraced in England, was purely
refined from the dregs of men's inventions, And how could England then be said,
(these things being done) to be one of the horns of the Beast, and a part of
the Babylonicall City of Rome?

Answ. Although England had done these things, yet England was still one of the
horns and a part of that City. And this will appear, if we consider, what it
was that made the Bishop of Rome to become the Beast, and what made the City of
Rome, to become the mystical Babylon. Now the Bishop of Rome did then become
the Beast, when he did receive from the devil (for Jesus Christ never gave it
him) a power to exercise authority, over the consciences of all that did
profess Christianity: and by this power he did oppress, and trouble, and
afflict the precious Saints of Jesus Christ; by this means also did Rome become
the mystical Babylon; for heerby did it enslave, and vassalize the Saints, as
Babylon of old did the Church that then was: and then consequently all the ten
Kingdoms, that did exercise this authority over the conscience, did thereby
become a part of Babylon, and the horns of the beast; by which he did push, and
gore, and destroy the Saints of Jesus Christ. And hereby was the holy City
trodden under foot.

Now then, though Queen Elizabeth cast of the Popes supremacy, and a great part
of his devilish doctrine; yet England did notwithstanding remain one of the
horns of the Beast, and a part of Romish Babylon: because there was a party
retained, which did exercise authority over the consciences of Saints; which
has proved a great bondage to them, and has persecuted the Saints, as the
Beast was wont to do: for even in Queen Elizabeth's days, there were some
Saints persecuted, that did scruple in some things to conform to the Bishops;
though the Bishops then, were not so bad as they have been since: but since the
Bishops grew worse, and worse, and became more profane, and filthy, and wicked
(as all that usurp authority over the consciences do, and as the Bishop of Rome
did) I say since Queen Elizabeth's time, that they grew worse and worse, they
have grown higher, and higher in the persecution of Saints; so that a real
godly Minister could scarce be suffered to abide in the Kingdom: but many were
fain to fly to Holland, and New England, and other places; and those that did
abide in the Kingdom, were exceedingly persecuted. And thus England did remain
a horn of the Beast, and a part of Babylon; because there was a power retained,
that did exercise authority over the conscience.

And heerby it is evident, That the late war in England and Ireland was made by
the Beast. For

First, That war was made by one of his horns, England being then a horn of the
Beast. And

Secondly, This war was made by the Beast: because it was by his instigation;
for it was evident that this war was, Bellum Episcopale, the Bishops war; and
that they together with the Queen, acted for the Beast, and were thereunto
instigated by him: and to that end the Popes Nuncioes, and Jesuits were so
long resident in England, and Ireland; and all the Papists in England and
Ireland, were violent in the prosecution of it. So that this is clear, that the
late war in England and Ireland was made by the Beast.

But secondly, as the war in England and Ireland was made by the Beast; so it
was made by him against the Witnesses, the Saints, and precious ones of Jesus
Christ: for that which is done against the most considerable number of Saints,
is done against the whole; as being the way to prevail over all. Now in England
there are a more considerable number of the faithful servants, and Witnesses
of Jesus Christ; then is in any Kingdom in the World. As one truly said,
England is the richest Ship in the World; for God has more of those precious
jewels in it, than he has in any other Kingdom in the World. It is true that
in other Kingdoms, as in France, and Germany, and Scotland, etc there are a
vast number of such as are called Protestants; but they are exceeding formal,
and lukewarm generally; they are professors, but few possessors of Christ:
but for sincere, real Saints that walk close with God, in a pious and holy
conversation; England* exceeds all other Kingdoms in the world. Now the war
being made against these, it was made against all the Witnesses, against all
Saints. Now that it was made against the Saints in England. is also evident for
it was the rooting out of such as were called Puritans, and Independents, and
Brownists, that was chiefly aimed at in that war; and therefore it was given
out, that they would leave no more Puritans in England, then there were
protestants in Rome. And this was made evident in all their proceedings, for
the Puritans were they, against whom they expressed their greatest malice. And
such as they called Puritents, were the most precious Saints of Jesus Christ.
Thus it is evident, that this war was made by the beast against the Saints,
the Witnesses of Jesus Christ.

And the Beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war
against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them.] Iu this war that was
made by the Beast against the Saints, and Witnesses of Jesus Christ, he did so
prevail as he did overcome them; for at the very first breaking out in Ireland,
there was such terrible blow given unto the Saints, and they were so overcome,
as the Beast, and his adherents thought themselves sure of overcoming all the
rest in Ireland, and England; so that all the rest did then seem to be as dead
men; and as at the beginning they overcame, so they continued overcoming, and
keeping the Witnesses under, for they did both prevail in the field, and
exceedingly overcame them that opposed them, and also took Cities, and Towns,
and Castles, and got possession of County after Country; so that the Witnesses
whom they chiefly opposed, were brought to such a low ebb, as for three years
and a half, they seemed to be as dead, as lost, and had little hope, and less
confidence of overcomming the enemy, but on the other side, the enemy had great
confidence, that the Puritants and Roundheads (as they termed them) should not
rise again; for they looked upon them as dead*

Verse. 8.
And their dead bodies]
The Witnesses being overcome, and brought to such a low ebb, and seeming to
be so unable to recover strength again to overcome the Beast, they were looked
upon as dead bodies; as no more able to overcome the beast, than so many dead
carcases.

And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified] There
is a mention made of Rome, Revel. 17. 18. And there this title is given to it,
The great City. And here again the same title is given to it, The groat City.
But least this should not express it clearly enough; here are some other
distinguishing characters given to it: and they are these:

First, That it is Spiritually called Sodom; for the abominable filthinesses,
and Sodomiticall practices, that are in it; for the abominations of that City
are so many, and so apparent; as there is no City in the world, that may so
fitly be called by the name of Spiritual Sodom, as it.

And secondly, It is spiritually called Egypt: and this name also is most fitly
given to that City; for as Egypt of old, was a house of bondage to the people
of God; so has Rome been a house of bondage, to the Saints, for above twelve
hundred years.

Thirdly, It is distinguished by this character, Where also our Lord was
crucified: because it was by the power of Rome, that our Lord was crucified; so
that though it was not in Rome, but near Jerusalem, yet Jerusalem being then
under the power of Rome, it was accounted as a part of Rome. These are the
characters that are given to Rome; whereby it is made evident, that this great
City is Rome. Now that the Witnesses being overcome, that their dead bodies did
lie in the street of this great City is apparent; for England being one of the
ten horns of the Beast, is a part of that great City. And so the dead bodies of
the Witnesses being in England, did lie in the street of that great City.

Verse. 9.
And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations shall see their
dead bodies]
These that are here expressed by those titles of the people, and kindreds, and
tongues, and nations, are some that are distinct from the Witnesses; for they
are said to see their dead bodies: so that they are another sort of people,
that is, they are not Saints, are not of the holy City, but of the people, and
kindreds, and nations of the World.

Shall see their dead bodies three days and a half] Those days as these
mentioned in the 3. verse, are prophetical days; so that by these three days
and a half, is meant three years and a half.

And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations shall see their
dead bodies three days and a half, and shall not suffer them to be put in
graves] These people, and kindred, and nations, and tongues, though they be not
of the Witnesses, and Saints; yet they are not for the Beast, but do help the
Saints against the Beast; for they are said to keep the dead bodies of the
Saints, from being put in graves: when the Beast had overcome the Saints so as
they seemed to be quite lost, they seemed to be dead: then they would not
suffer them to be interred; though they were brought low, yet they would not
suffer them to be brought so low, but kept them from being totally removed out
of sight; from being put into a condition, wherein they should not be in such a
capacity of rising, as when they were unburied. Suitable to this, is that
passage, Rev. 12. 16. where it is said, when the Dragon poured out waters as a
flood after the Woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood;
that then the earth helped the Woman, and opened her mouth, and swallowed up
the flood.

Here it is evident, that the Church being followed by the Beast, with a flood
of persecution, that the people of the earth do keep off the fury of the
Beast, from destroying the Church utterly; so that the people of the earth are
made instruments of helping the Saints, against the persecution of the Beast.
And so it was in the late war in England, the Lord made some such as were but
carnal, and profane, to be instruments of helping the Saints, from being
totally overcome of the Beast; for those of the Saints that were in the
Parliaments Army, that fought against the Beast, were but a small number
compared with the others in that Army, that were not Saints. And indeed it is
very wonderful to consider, how by an overruling providence, the hearts of
carnal men were commanded to stand up in the defense of the Witnesses, against
the Beast: for there were many thousands, that did engage themselves with the
Parliament, in their defensive war, that were not the Witnesses. Thus God
made them of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, to be
instruments of keeping the bodies of the Witnesses, from being put in graves,
from being put totally under the earth, under the Beast, although they were
brought so low, as they were as dead in their own, and the account of the Beast.

Verse. 10.
And they that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them, and make merry,
and shall send gifts one to another]
They that were the adherents of the Beast, are here expressed by this
character, They that dwell upon the earth. For this is a character most proper
to them, and is most usually used to express the Beast, and his faction, in
the prophecy of this Book; as Chap. 16. 1. where the seven Angels, are bid to
pour out their viols upon the earth, which was upon the Beast and his
adherents, as appears throughout the Chapter, and so again in the 6, verse of
this 11. Chap. it is said, The Witnesses had power to smite the earth, with all
plagues as often as they will. Which is peculiarly spoken of the members of the
Beast: for it is they that the Witnesses do more especial plague; and so it
is they, (I say) that are here thus expressed, They that dwell upon the earth.

They that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and
shall send gifts one to another] The Witnesses being overcome, and lying for
dead; they that are of the Beast do therein rejoice, and express a great deal
of delight, that they have in it, and make themselves as merry with it as
possibly they may, and a mad mirth it is.

And thus they did here in England, for that three years and a half, that the
Witnesses seemed to be dead. For in Oxford, and other places where they that
were for the Beast were resident; they had feasting, drinking healths, and
ringing bells, and making bonfires, and roaring, and carousing, and swearing,
and cursing, and banning, and damning; and all the hellish mirth they could
invent. And why? Because the Puritans, and Roundheads, and Anabaptists,
Brownists, and Tub-preachers (as they termed the Witnesses) were overcome.

They that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and
send gifts one to another; because these two Prophets tormented them that dwelt
on the earth] The Witnesses, Prophets, Saints, of Jesus Christ, do kill,
plague, and torment those that dwell upon the earth: that is, those that were
members of the Beast, and how they do so, has been showed in the opening of
the 5, and 6. verses: and because they do so, is the reason why they are so
hated of them, and why they do so much rejoice in the casting down of them;
for they cannot endure those torments, that the Prophets of Jesus, do inflict
upon them, when they hold forth the truth of Christ, so as to overthrow their
devilish doctrines, and turn their waters into blood; when they do so hold
forth the truth, as to throw down the pomp, and pride, of their Clergy: they
cannot endure this, and when they do declare against the sottishness, and
blindness, and profaneness of the people which they nourish up, and admit to
partake of sealing Ordinances: this proves a torment to them, as does also the
holding forth of other truths of Christ, which do oppose them in their lusts,
and in their crooked ways: and because the Saints do so torment the Beasts
crew, therefore do they rejoice so much when they have any hope of rooting
them out.

Verse. 11.
And after three days, and a half, the Spirit of life from God entered into
them]
As the late war made by the Beast against the Witnesses, does fully agree with
all the circumstances of it, laid down in the former verses; so it agrees
exactly with what is laid down in this verse also: for after the Witnesses had
been in so low a condition, as they were (as Paul was when he was stoned)
supposed to be dead, for three years and a half: they did not lie as dead a day
longer, but at the very day, when the three years and a half were expired; then
the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they began to stand upon
their feet.

For on the 23. day of October, 1641. did the Beast begin the war in Ireland;
and he continued overcomming the Witnesses, the Saints of Jesus Christ, in
Ireland, and in England, until the 5. day of April, 1645. and from the 23. of
October, 1641. unto the 5. of April, 1645. there is just a thousand two
hundred, and sixty days; which according to the Scripture account, (though not
according to the Heathen account) is three years and a half complete: and when
this three years, and a half were expired; which was, I say, one the 5. of
April, 1645. then was the resurrection of the Witnesses: for they having lain
dead for three years and a half before; then the Spirit of life from God entered
into them. And the year 1645. as it is the year wherein the Witnesses were
raised from the dead; so it is the year, wherein the term of time in which they
were to prophecy in sackcloth, and to be trodden under foot was to expire, and
the year also wherein the prevailing power of the Beast over the Saints was to
expire, as is made evident in the opening of the 2, verse. page 60. etc. Now
that one the 5. day of April, 1645. the Saints, Witnesses, and Servants of
Jesus Christ, were raised up, and that then a Spirit of life from God entered
into them, appears thus:

On the 5. day of April, 1645. the Parliaments Army, who had stood for the
defense of the Saints against the Beast; and had bin before that time
exceedingly overcome, and were brought into a very low condition at that time,
being new modelled, and having a great many precious Saints in it, both eminent
Commanders, inferior Officers, and common Soldiers; and being then put under
the conduct of Sir Thomas Fairfax; they then began to march against the enemy,
and then had a Spirit of life from God, that entered into them, as did appear in
all their actings afterward; for they went on with such vigor, courage, life,
and fortitude, as they effected every work they took in hand; defeated all the
enemies with whom they did encounter; had the victory in every battle they
fought; never sat down before any City, Town, or Castle, but they took it in,
before they raised their siege: Thus they acted like men raised from that dead,
low, condition they were in before, And why? Because now a Spirit of life from
God was entered into them: and unto God did they give all the praise, and so let
them do still: for they had as surely fled before their enemies, and been beat
down as the mire in the streets then, as ever they had been before, if the
Spirit of life from God had not been put upon them.

Thus the 5. day of April, 1645. did the Witnesses, the Saints, (of whom the
Beast thought to make an utter end,) stand upon their feet having a spirit of
life from God put upon them; when the Army that fought their battles, and
defended their righteous cause, began to march against the Army of the Beast,
to the overthrowing of it.

And they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them that saw them]
The Saints being raised from the dead, from that dejected, low condition in
which they were, for three years and a half; a Spirit of life from God being
put upon them: they then stood upon their feet, to the fear, and amazement of
their enemies. Before indeed the Saints did lie dead in the street, and were as
the street to them that went over them: but since the Spirit of life from God
entered into them, they have stood upon their feet; and as men that stand upon
their feet, so long as they do stand upon their feet, are not in a capacity of
being trod under foot of men: So the Witnesses, and Saints of Jesus Christ,
since they stood upon their feet, could not be trodden under foot of men. Though
they have been trodden under feet a thousand two hundred, and threescore years,
and the Beast has had power so long to trample them under feet; yet since the
Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, it
was not possible for the Beast, nor any of his adherents, so to trample them
under foot any more.

And they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them which saw them]
The Witnesses standing upon their feet, as men risen from the dead, did cast a
great fear, and terror upon their enemies: for now they begin to fear what
will become of themselves, and their great Idol, The Beast; they seeing the
Witnesses of Jesus to stand upon their feet, fearfulness does surprise them*
because now they conceive that their Kingdom is going down; as indeed it is
going down wonderfully, as they did rejoice, and make merry, when they saw the
Saints, or Puritans, as they termed them, brought into a low condition, when
they lay dead; so now on the contrary, they seeing these Puritans, the precious
Sons of Sion to stand upon their feet, now a fear, a great fear is fallen
upon them.

Verse. 12.
And they heerd a great voice from Heaven, saying, unto them, come up hither.
And they ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud, and their enemies beheld them]
As the Beast, and they that join with him, are in several places of the
prophecy of this book, called; The earth: So the Saints, and Witnesses of
Jesus Christ, are in opposition to the Beast, called, Heaven As Rev. 13. 6. it
is said of the Beast, That he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to
blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwelt in Heaven. By them
that dwelt in Heaven, is meant, the Saints of God, who are called, Them that
dwell in Heaven. As the members of the Beast are called, Them that dwell upon
the earth, Rev. 11. 10. And so Rev. 15. 5. It being said (in the former verses)
of the Saints, that had gotten the victory over the Beast, and over his image,
and over his mark, that they sung the Song of Moses the Servant of God, and the
Song of the Lamb; says John, After this I looked, and behold, the Temple of
the Tabernacle of the testimony in Heaven, was opened. And Chap. 11. 19. And
the Temple of God was opened in Heaven; and there was seen in his Temple, the
Ark of his Testament, etc. It is evident, that in both these places the Saints,
the Church of God, is called Heaven; for it cannot be understood of Heaven it
self; for there is no Temple. So in this verse, whereas it is said the
Witnesses heard a voice from Heaven: by Heaven, here also, is meant, the
Church, the Saints of God. So that, the meaning of this verse, is this, The
Witnesses of Jesus, being raised from the dead, and having a Spirit of life
from God put upon them; and standing upon their feet like living men; that part
of the Saints that in a more especial manner, acted in opposing the Beast, and
had a most eminent Spirit of life, and courage put into them, did hear a voice
from the Churches of Christ; from most of the Saints, wherein they expressed
their great affection to them; and owned them, and embraced them in their
societies. They said unto them, Come up hither, and they again mutually
embraced them; they went into the Heavenly societies of the Saints, they
ascended up to that Heaven: but it was in a cloud, it was not clearly seen of
men, but though not clearly, yet it was seen by them; for their enemies beheld
them; their enemies beheld them though in a cloud, in an obscure manner.

And thus it was with those Saints that were in the Army on the Parliament
side, as before they stood upon their feet, and prevailed against their
enemies, they had the prayers of all other Saints: so afterward, were they with
great affection, received into the societies of Saints, and embraced by them,
and this did appear to their enemies; though not very clearly.

Verse. 13.
And the same hour was there a great earthquake.
The Kingdom of the Beast being called the earth, it is that earth of whom
this earthquake is spoken. Now this earthquake, is said to be the same hour
when the Witnesses being risen from the dead, did ascend into the societies of
the Saints; and were by them received, and embraced: in that same hour, there
was a great earthquake. The state of the Beast has been shaken before. The
Witnesses have made a former earthquake in the Kingdom of the Beast, which was
mentioned, Chap. 7. 5. but that is not said to be a great earthquake; but this
is said to be a great earthquake. And indeed this was a greater earthquake; a
greater shaking to the Kingdom of the Beast, then any that has been before
it, as does appear by the effects of it, mentioned in this verse. Though it is
true, this is not the greatest earthquake that shall come on the Kingdom of
the Beast; for there shall be a far greater earthquake that shall come upon
it: as appears, Chap. 16. 18. yet this was a very great earthquake; a very
great shaking to the Kingdom of the Beast: For in this earthquake,

The tenth part of the City fell] This word, The City, has reference unto a
City, formerly mentioned in this Chapter, and that is verse. 8. and it is there
so plainly described, as it does evidently appear to be the mystical Babylon.

And the tenth part] The ten Kingdoms that were the ten horns of the Beast,
were ten several parts of mystical Babylon, which did reign over them. So
that England being one of them, was a tenth part of mystical Babylon.

And a tenth part of the City fell] This was one of the effects of the
earthquake, which was occasioned by the resurrection of the Witnesses, the
Saints in England; it did so shake the great Babylon of the Beast, as a tenth
part of it fell. And this most exactly came to pass, in the year of the
Resurrection of the Witnesses, 1645. for then did the Kingdom of England
(which was a tenth part of great Babylon) fall from Rome; for then was that
removed from it, whereby it had continued to be a part of Babylon (the place of
Saints slavery) namely, the power of men over the consciences of Saints: For
after the Army, which was for the Witnesses, stood upon their feet, in 1645.
they so cast of that power that men had had over their consciences, and over
their persons and estates for their conscience sake; as it was not possible for
the Beast, nor any of his Adherents to recover that power again, over the
consciences of the Saints in this Kingdom (though they did with all their
strength, and greatest industry endeavor it afterward) for the Witnesses then
standing upon their feet; there was such an earthquake, great Babylon was so
shaken, as England fell from it; the yoke of bondage which was upon the
consciences of Saints in England, was then cast off: And this was one effect of
the great earthquake, which there was in mystical Babylon, at the
resurrection of the Witnesses: that England fell from it.

Thus England is fallen from the great Whore, mystical Babylon; and is become a
president to the other Kingdoms; who must all in time, cast off the yoke of
bondage under which they are; and hate the Whore, and make her desolate, and
naked, etc. Revel. 17. 16.

And in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand.] This was another
effect of the earthquake, that as a tenth part of the City fell, so there were
slain of men seven thousand.

What is meant by the fall of the tenth part of the City, is already apparent,
and it is not the material falling of a tenth part, of any material City, but
the mystical falling of the tenth part of a mystical City. And suitable to
this, is the meaning of this slaying of seven thousand men, not by the material
falling of any part of a material City. But the earthquake being a mystical
shaking of mystical Babylon; this is a mystical slaying of seven thousand men;
whereby they die mystically, that is, cease to live any longer to mystical
Babylon, being by beholding the great victory, which the Saints had over the
Beast converted, and fallen off from the Beast, which seven thousand men were
before, either secretly, or openly lovers and worshippers of the Beast.

But it may be objected, How does it appear that seven thousand men, or persons
were so converted, by the resurrection of the Witnesses?

Answ. Though it do not visibly appear to the outward eyes of any; yet it is
sufficient to persuade me, and should be to persuade all Saints to believe it:
in that this Scripture, this oracle of Heaven, says it. When there was no true
worshippers of God in Israel, that were visible to Elijah the Prophet, and that
then the Lord telling him, that he had left seven thousand in Israel, who had
not bowed the knee to Baal, nor had kissed him with the mouth; it was
sufficient to persuade Elijah to believe it: although not one of those seven
thousand did visibly appear to him. Therefore much more ought Saints now, not
to question the truth of this; that seven thousand are in this mystical
earthquake, mystically slain, though it be not altogether so visible to us
(as other things are) because this Scripture says it. And besides, what the
Scripture says in it, there is a probability of it, for it is very probable,
that many are convinced, that the Witnesses, the Saints, are Gods people, and
those that sight against them, are enemies of God, and do fight against God. I
say it is probable, that many are convinced of this, because God has so owned
his people, and given them such victory over those vile wretches that did
oppose them, and formerly reproach them, and say, Where is your God? And now
God appearing to be for them, when the enemy were come to such a height of
impiety and insolency: there is no question, but that many were convinced by
it, and fell from the Beast, and that the number of these so fallen from the
Beast is, no less then seven thousand. And this was the effect of the great
earthquake.

And in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand, and the remnant were
affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven.] This remnant here spoken of,
are distinct from the Witnesses, whether they be such as were for the Beast, or
others; they are not of the Witnesses, but were some that were affrighted at
the Witnesses, having a spirit of life from God put upon them; and their
standing upon their feet: and therefore not of them, but some others, and they
were not of the seven thousand neither, because they are said to be the
remnant, or the residue. So then, the meaning of this clause, is this; that the
raising up of the Witnesses in such an eminent manner, to the shaking of great
Babylon, did so work upon the residue of people, as were not of the Witnesses,
nor of the seven thousand, as that either they were affrighted at it, or had
their mouths opened to glorify God in it, or both.

And thus it was in the year 1645. the generality of people, both in the
Kingdom, and in others, that either saw or heard of the great things God did
for the Saints, were either affrighted, and amazed at it, or else did glorify
God in working so wonderfully as he did: for when God did work so wonderfully,
and beyond expectation, in giving victory upon victory, and success upon
success unto his people; so as they seemed to be, as them that dreamed: I say,
when God did thus, then the generality of people did admire, and acknowledge
God in it, and give him the glory of it, They glorified the God of heaven, that
had done such great things, in such an unexpected manner, and in so short a
time. And thus the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven.

Verse 14.
The second woe is past, and behold the third woe comes quickly.
In the 8. Chapter at the 13. verse, it is said, That an Angel did fly through
the midst of heaven, saying, with a loud voice; woe, woe, woe to the inhabiters
of the earth; by reason of the other voices, of the trumpet of the three
Angels, which are yet to sound. And at the 9. Chapter in the former part of
that Chapter, there being a description of a great judgment of God, upon
wicked men, such as had not the seal of God in their foreheads, at the 12.
verse it is said, One woe is past, and behold there come two woes more
hereafter. And now upon the resurrection of the Witnesses, which brings in such
a great earthquake at the same hour with it; which gives such a terrible blow
to Babylon, and the Beast; it is said in this verse, That the second woe is
past, and the third woe comes quickly. So that there remains one great woe
more to come upon the That is upon mystical Babylonians.
inhabiters of the earth. And what this woe is which is to come, now quickly
upon the inhabiters of the earth will be, appears in the following verses of
this Chap. as the taking off the Kingdoms of this world, from the Beast, and
from all others, to be subjected only to our Lord, and his Christ; for him to
reign over them for ever and ever, etc. and now, that the Witnesses are risen,
this is to be expected, and that quickly; and that to the great joy of all
Saints, and to the casting down of all their enemies that are implacable. And
thus much for the Explication of that part of the Chapter which at this time I
intended to treat of. I now come to draw some Deducations from it, wherewith I
shall conclude this Treatise.

The Application.
THese verses being thus opened, many profitable Deductions do arise
therefrom. But I shall pass by some of them, and be as brief as I may in
others, that are points fully and sweetly held forth by others in other
Treatises, because I shall take liberty to be more large in some things that
are not as yet clearly held forth in print by any other, that I have heard of.

Deduction 1.
That Deduction that first in order arises from the first verse, is a word of
Comfort for all afflicted Saints; and the word of Comfort for such is this,
That all their afflictions, whatever they be, are measured out unto them by
their God, who has a tender love unto them, and care over them in their
affliction. The Saints of God who are his Temple, and the holy and beloved
City, we see here are measured out unto an afflicted, sad condition: and their
afflictions come not at random, nor according to the will of their enemies:
no, but they are measured unto affliction, and their enemies could have no
power over them, but that they were by their God given unto the Gentiles, to be
trodden under foot, otherwise it could not have been possible, for the Gentiles
to have trodden them under foot. Now since it is Gods act toward his people, it
must needs be for their good, and therefore Paul speaking of the afflictions,
and the sufferings that Saints undergo, speaks of it as their privilege,
Phil. 1. 29. Unto you it is given, in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe
on him, but also to suffer for his sake. And the holy Ghost in the Prophecy of
Micah, speaks of the rod of affliction, as of the food of the people of God,
Micah 7. 14. Feed thy people with thy rod; the flock of thine heritage, which
dwell solitarily in the wood. And as in Micah, God is said to feed his people
with his rod; so he is said to comfort them with his rod: for says David,
Psalm. 23. 4. Thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. And therefore let Saints
in an afflicted condition, be comforted in this consideration, That their
affliction, what ever it be, is that which comes not by chance, as men use to
say; nor according to the wills of men; but their God has dispensed it out unto
them, who does it in great wisdom, and great love, and gives them out
affliction, as their privilege, as their food, and for their comfort. O
therefore, let poor souls in affliction be no more cast down, and walk no more
heavily, nor go mourning all the day long no more, because of their
afflictions, but walk comfortably under afflictions, because they come from a
loving God, who has appointed them thereunto, 1 These. 3. 3.

Deduction 2.
In the second place, it serves to inform us, That it is of God, that enemies
do rise up against the Saints; for we see here, that the Gentiles, the mystical
Babylonians, were by God appointed to afflict the people of God; to tread the
holy City under foot, before ever they had a being. Now as God does in love
suffer his people to be afflicted: So in wrath he usually gives up wicked men
to be the instruments of afflicting his people. For as the sufferings of Saints
work out for them a greater weight of glory, (2 Cor. 4. 17.) So the wrongs and
violence; that wicked men do offer unto the Saints, does procure for them a
greater weight of vengeance. And therefore the Apostle, Phil. 1. 28. bids the
Saints, To be in nothing terrified by their adversaries; which is to them
(says he) an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of
God. And 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. It is (says he) a righteous thing with God, to
recompense tribulation unto them which trouble his Saints. So that God raises
up wicked men to afflict his people, that he may pour out the fuller viols of
wrath upon them. And therefore, when God told Pharaoh, That he would at that
time send all his plagues upon his heart, and upon his servants and people,
Exodus 9. 14. says he at the 16. verse. And in very deed, for this cause have I
raised thee up, for to show in thee my power, and that my name may be declared
thorowout all the earth. So that no enemy can rise up against the people of
God; but it is of God, and God usually does it, that he may pour out the fuller
viols of wrath upon them. I say usually, it is so, but it is not always so:
for some enemies of Saints are sometimes chosen vessels, as Paul was: but
ordinarily, it is so, and so it shall be with the Beast: for both Babylon of
old, and this mystical Babylon, after they had afflicted, and oppressed the
people of God, so much as was before ordained, were appointed to take off the
dregs of that cup of trembling, which they put into the hands of the people of
God, Isa. 51. 21, 22, 23. Hear now thou afflicted, and drunken, but not with
wine: thus says thy Lord, the Lord and thy Gad, that pleads the cause of ^is
people; behold I have taken out of thy hand, the cup of trembling, even the
dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shall no more drink it again, but I will put
it into the hand of them that afflict thee, which have said to thy soul, Bow
down, that we may go over, and thou have laid thy body as the ground, and as
the street to them that went over. And how this was done, and shall be done,
both to the material and the mystical Babylon, appears at large in the 47.
Chapter of Isaiah, and the 51. of Jeremiah, and the 18. of the Revelation:
besides in several other Scriptures. Now then, we may cease to wonder, why
wicked men do prevail so much, and continue so long in doing violence unto
Saints; for we see it is of God; for ordinarily he suffers it, that vengeance
may fall the heavier upon them at last. Babylon has multiplied her
abominations for a long time, and made her self drunk with the blood of
Saints; but at last she shall be rewarded double for all the cruelties she has
done to the Saints.

Deduction 3.
Thirdly, Saints are here instructed to beware how they be too hasty to get out
of an afflicted condition; and especially to beware how they use any indirect
means, that so they may come the sooner out of affliction: for it is vain and
sinful for them so to do: for the time how long they shall remain in an
afflicted condition, is fixed by the Father, and so long they shall remain
under affliction, though they strive and struggle never so much, to come sooner
out of it. For we see here the holy City, was to be trodden under foot of the
Gentiles, to be in an afflicted condition forty and two months, and so long
they did abide in that condition; it may be they might expect deliverance the
first month of years; but if not then, yet the second month, when sixty years
were expired, they might then hope deliverance was near. For the material
Babylon, held the people of God but seventy years, but yet deliverance came not
in three, nor four, nor five, nor twenty months of years; but when they had
been five hundred years under persecution, there came no deliverance from the
tyranny of the Beast, but the Saints were to remain seven hundred years longer,
and why? because the time appointed for deliverance was not come till then. The
decree was past, that the holy City should be trod under foot forty and two
months, and the decree being past, so long it must, and so long it did remain
to be trodden under foot. It is wisdom therefore for Saints, quietly to submit
to the will of their God, in affliction, and not to be too hasty to get out,
before the appointed time of their God be come; but if he tarry they must wait.

Deduction 4.
Fourthly, In the next here is a further word of Consolation to Saints in
affliction: and that is, That when the time of affliction, in which they are to
abide under affliction, is expired, then they shall be delivered out of
affliction, and nothing shall longer prolong their affliction: for we see that
though the holy City must be trod under foot, forty and two months: yet when
that time is expired, they must be delivered. The rod of the wicked must not
always rest upon the lot of the righteous: No, the Father has appointed a time,
wherein deliverance must come. The Saints must not always be laid low, and
therefore says the Church, Micah 7. 8. Rejoice not against me, o mine enemy;
when I fall, I shall rise again. So, though the Witnesses be clothed in
sackcloth, a long time, yet it shall not be always so, They shall at last
have beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise, for
the spirit of heaviness, Isa. 61. 3. And though they have for a time lien
among the pots; yet shall they be, as the wings of a Dove, covered with silver,
and her feathers with yellow gold, Psalm. 68. 13. And of this we are to be
confident under any affliction, that we shall have deliverance, and nothing
shall be able to hinder it, when the appointed time for our deliverance is
come, though not before.

Deduction 5.
Fifthly, In the next place, Is it so, that Jesus Christ has had some that
have prophesied, during all the twelve hundred and odd years that the Beast
has tyrannized over the Saints, during all the time, the Saints have been
under the bondage of mystical Babylon, then this may serve to convince those
of their error, who will not hear (such as they acknowledge to be real)
Saints, to hold forth the word of truth, the Testimony of Jesus, to the
edification, exhortation, and comfort of others: and the reason why they will
not hear them, is, because they conceive, that since the rising up of the
Beast, and the Babylonish darkness, there has been no true Pastors, nor
Teachers, nor Prophets. Now for the convincing of those of their error herein;
I shall be the more large in this Use, endeavoring to make it clearly to
appear to be their great weakness.

And now, you that lie under this scruple, in the spirit of love and meekness,
I desire you to consider, how evident it is, that Jesus Christ has had some
true Prophets, during all this twelve hundred years, that the Beast has trodden
the Saints under foot: For Jesus Christ says expressly, I will give power unto
my two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand two hundred and sixty
days, clothed in sackcloth. And this has been made good, for it appears,
tha^ in all times since, Christ has had some that have prophesied, that is,
have held forth the Testimony of Jesus Christ; For the Testimony of Jesus is
the spirit of prophecy. And indeed every true Saint is a Prophet, because the
Lord revealing his secrets to a soul, as it makes it a Saint, so it makes it
a Prophet, and so the Lord looks upon his Saints* as his Witnesses and
Prophets. Now this being evident, That Christ has had true Prophets; this
makes it clear, that as it is said, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13. That Jesus
Christ, when he ascended up far above all heavens, gave some Apostles, and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ, till we all come into the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ. So this word has been fulfilled, Jesus
Christ has always continued these. For,

First, Apostles have been continued for the edifying of the body of Christ, as
it is here said: for the Apostles being the eie-witnesses of the Lord Jesus
Christ, in all that he did and suffered, and of his Resurrection, as it is
evident in that expression of Peter, when another Apostle was to be chosen in
the place of Judas, Acts 1. 21, 22. Wherefore of these men which have
accompanied with us, all the time that the Lord Jesus went in, and out among
us. Beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day he was taken from
us, must one be ordained to be a Witness with us of his Resurrection. I say,
they being eie-witnesses of the Lord Jesus, their witness which they gave of
him is left still upon record, in which Apostles still continue useful to the
Church, for perfecting of Saints for the work of the Ministry, and for the
edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come, etc. and in this sense
Apostles have continued: but Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers have
actually continued in the Church; and that does appear by this, because we here
see it is evident that Prophets have been continued. Now a man that is a true
Prophet of Jesus Christ may be, and in some degree truly is an Evangelist, and
Pastor, and a Teacher also. For

First, To be an Evangelist, is to be able to hold forth the Gospel, in the
grace and sweetness of it, and he that is so is an Evangelist. And

Secondly, To be a Pastor, is to be able to feed the flock of Christ, both the
sheep and tender lambs, with the wholesome, saving truths of Christ, to the
nourishing, and strengthening of their Souls. And

Thirdly, To be a Teacher, is to be able to unfold the mysteries of the Gospel,
and clearly to hold forth the truths of Christ, to the instruction of the
ignorant, and increasing of knowledge; and he that is so is a Teacher.

Now he that is a Prophet, may be all these:

First, He may be a man that publishes the glad tidings, of the Grace of the
Gospel.

And secondly, A man that teaches, and instructs people, with knowledge and
understanding.

And thirdly, A man that feeds the flock of Christ, with wholesome saving
truths. I say a Prophet may be, an Evangelist, a Pastor, and Teacher, and so
was Paul: that he was a Prophet, appears, Acts 13. 1. and that he was a
Pastor, appears, in that he was so frequent in feeding the Church of God: and
that he was a Teacher, appears, Acts 13. 1. and 2 Timothy 1. 11. and Acts 20. 27.
and that he was an Evangelist, appears in all his Epistles, by his full, and
sweet holding forth the Grace of the Gospel in them, and as Paul was so: so it
might be also said of Apollo, and Peter, and Barnabas, and Timothy, and others.

But here it may be objected, If one man may be both a Prophet, and Evangelist,
a Pastor, and Teacher, Why does the Apostle speak of them particularly, as
given to particular persons; For says he, Jesus Christ when he ascended gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and
Teachers. And again, 1 Cor. 12. 29. he says, Are all Apostles? Are all
Prophets? Are all Teachers? Implying that the Spirit had dispensed out the gift
of prophesying to one, of teaching to another, of Apostleship to a third, and
not all these gifts to one.

Answ. Though it be true, That a Prophet may be also an Apostle, an Evangelist,
a Pastor, and Teacher, as Paul was; yet the Scripture speaks particularly of
them, because they are several gifts, and sometimes they are severally
dispensed; so that one man may be more properly said to be an Evangelist,
because he may be more able to hold forth the sweet word of the Gospel, and to
be a son of consolation, and to be more Evangelical then other, and so may be
more properly said to be an Evangelist. And so of the rest, one man may be more
eminent in one of these gifts, then in the rest; and so may be more properly
said to be, either a Pastor, or a Teacher, and yet notwithstanding, he that is
an Evangelist, may in some sort be able to act, as a Pastor, or a Teacher: so
he that is a Pastor, may in some sort, be able to act as an Evangelist, or a
Teacher, though in an especial manner he may be fitted to do the work of a
Pastor, and so of the rest: So that the reason why they are particularly
spoken of, is, because that some Saints may be more eminently fitted for one of
them, then for the rest; and not that they, that have one of these gifts, have
only one of those gifts, and is utterly void of the rest, and this will be the
more confirmed, and cleared by comparing this, with that passage, 1 Cor. 12. 8,
9, 10. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another tbe
word of knowledge, by the same Spirit, to another faith, by the same Spirit, to
another the gifts of healing, by the same Spirit, to another the working of
miracles, to another prophecy, to another discerning of Spirits, to another
diverse kinds of toungues, to another the interpretation of tongues. Here the
Apostle speaks of several gifts, and says that one is given to one, and
another to another, and a third to a third, etc. And his meaning is, That one
Saint is more eminent for one gift, and another for another, and not that he
that had the word of wisdom, had no knowledge, nor no faith, etc. Nor that he
that had faith, had not wisdom, nor knowledge, etc. Nor that he that had
knowledge, had no faith, nor wisdom, nor prophecy, etc. Nor that he that had
discerning of Spirits, had no knowledge, nor prophecy, nor wisdom, nor faith,
etc. But this is the Apostles meaning, That he that had the word of knowledge,
might not have so much faith, nor wisdom, nor discerning of spirits, etc. as
he that had less knowledge, so he that was full of faith, might have less
wisdom, and discerning of spirits, and knowledge, etc. then those that were
more weak in faith. But now as some might be eminent in one of these gifts
only; so some might be eminent for two, or three: and others might be eminent
for them all. And those that were eminent for one only, could not be said to
have none of the rest.

Now by this time the reason is evident, why the Apostle speaks of Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers distinctly, and withal it is evident, that
he that is a Prophet is an Evangelist, a Pastor, and a Teacher. For as it
cannot be said of him that has faith, that he has no knowledge, nor wisdom,
nor discerning of spirits, etc. So it cannot be said of a Prophet, that he is
no Evangelist, nor Pastor, nor Teacher.

And now, it is evident, That Prophets have been continued all the while, the
Saints have been in Babylon; and in the continuance of Prophets, there has
been a continuance of Evangelists, and Pastors, and Teachers, whereby that
Scripture has been made good, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13. which says, they must
all continue, Till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge
of the Son of God, etc. And this being so evident, it appears to be from
weakness, and darkness that any have questioned, whether any of these have
been during the time, that the Saints have been captivated to Babylon.

But here this query may be made; May there be Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles,
and Teachers, that were never ordained by the laying on of hands?

Answ. Yes they may; for the Scripture speaks not of laying on of hands upon
any, but only of Bishops, and Deacons; and they only had the laying on of hands
because they were ordained, to do some particular things, which were to be
done by them, and was proper to them only, and none in the Church else, were to
act in them, but only they. But Prophesying, and Evangelizing, and feeding, and
teaching, and building up one another, was common to all in the Church, as
every one had received the gift, so to minister, as good stewards of the Grace
they had received! 1 Pet. 1. 4. 10.
For their gifts are not given to be laid up in a napkin, But the manifestation
of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 7.
is given to every one to profit withal. So that, these I say were not
restrained only to be done by Bishops, and Deacons, who only were persons
ordained, by the laying on of hands; but were common to be done by all.

Now a Bishop, (which the Scripture indifferently calls, either a Bishop, or an
Elder, or a Presbyter,) is ordained by the laying on of hands; because he is
appointed to the work, which is proper to that Office, and not to any other in
the Church.

Now the works that are proper to a Bishop, Elder, or Presbyter. Are,

First, To rule, and guide, and govern the Church: and this is clear by that of
the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Bishops that rule well be counted worthy of
double honor. And 1 Timothy 3. 4. the Apostle says, That a Bishop must be one
that rules well his own house; implying, that he is not fit to rule the Church
of God, if he do not rule his own house well. And of those it is that the
Apostle speaks, Hebrew. 13. 7. Remember them which rule over you, who have
spoken unto you the word of God. And verse. 17. Obey them which have the rule
over you and submit, for they watch for your Souls. And of these he also
speaks, 1 These. 5. 12. Know them which labor among you, and are over you in
the Lord, and admonish you.

Moreover, secondly* It is the work of a Bishop, or Presbyter, to ordain
Elders, or Bishops in the Churches where they are wanting, as appears, Titus 1.
5. The Apostle there speaking to Titus, who was a Bishop or Presbyter, says,
For this cause left I thee in Crete; that thou should set in order the
things that are wanting; and ordain Elders in every City. And so Timothy being
a Bishop, it was his work, as appears by that rule given him, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay
hand suddenly on no man. Again it likewise is made evident, to be the work of
Presbyters, 1 Timothy 4. 14. and 2 Timothy 1. 6.

Now these things were proper to the Office of a Bishop, and others that are
not ordained to be Bishops, have no warrant to take upon them to act in these
things.

But there are other things that Bishops are also enjoined to do, that may be
and ought to be done by other brethren, but Bishops are enjoined to do them,
in an especial manner, and they are these:

First, To feed the flock over which they are made overseers, and this is that
Paul enjoins the Elders of the Church of Ephesus to do, Acts 20. 29. Take heed
unto your selves, and unto all the flock over which the holy Ghost has made
you overseers, and feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his
own blood. And this is that which Timothy, who was an Elder, or Bishop, was
enjoined to, in these passages, 1 Timothy 4. 3. Preach the word, be instant in
season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering, and
Doctrine. And verse. 5. Do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy
Ministry. And 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a
workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly deviding the word of truth.
Thus ought Bishops in a more especial manner to feed the flock of God, and to
instruct and admonish them. But this is not their duties only, but the duty of
all the brethren, according to their several abilities. But

Secondly, It is the duty of Bishops, or Presbyters, to be good examples to
believers: this also Timothy was enjoined unto, 1 Timothy 4. 12. Be thou an
example to believers, in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith,
and purity. And this Titus, who was a Bishop, was also enjoined unto, Tit. 2.
7. In all things show thy self a pattern of good works: in Doctrine showing
uncorruptnesse, gravity, sincerity. And 2 Timothy 2. 2. The things which thou have
heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who
shall be able to teach others also. Thus it is the duty of Elders, or
Presbyters, to be a good example to believers: but it is not their duty only,
but the duty of all other Saints also.

Thirdly, It is the duty of Bishops, to watch over the souls of the flock which
are committed to them; for they must give account of them to God, and this the
Elders, or Bishops of the Church of Ephesus, are enjoined unto, Acts 20. 28.
Take heed (says the Apostle) unto your selves, and unto the flock over which
the holy Ghost has made you overseers: for I know (says he) that after my
departure, there shall grievous wolves enter in among you: So that the Elders
of the Church ought to look to the flock, to keep them from the pernicious
Doctrines of wolvish men, and Heb. 13. 17. says the Apostle, Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your souls,
as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy. So that it is
evident, that it is the duty of the Elders of the Church, to watch over the
souls of the people. But this is not their duty only; but the duty of all
believers, to watch over one another.

Thus the Scripture declaring that Bishops are ordained, by the laying on of
hands, declares what things are to be done by Bishops, as Bishops, and not by
other Saints; and what things are to be done by them, which is to be done by
others also. Now the Scripture speaks but of one Office more, to which persons
are ordained by the laying on of hands, and that is of Deacons.

Now the Office of a Deacon the Scripture expresses distinctly also, namely,
that they are to receive the collections for the poor, and to distribute it to
the poor, to widows, and to such as are in want, and to all according to their
necessities. And this appears, Act. 6. 1. 2, 3. and 4. verses compared
together; this was the work which Deacons were ordained to do, and which is to
be done by them only, and not by others in the Church. But we find that
Stephen and Philip being Deacons, were such as did feed the flock, preach the
Word, opposed gainsaiers, were Teachers, and did the work of Apostles and
Evangelists, and wrought miracles, and wonders among the people, as appears in
the sixth, seventh and eighth Chapter of the Acts; but these are the duty of
Deacons; but not their duties only, but the duties of all the brethren, in
which they are to act according to the measure of grace received.

And now, since the Scripture speaks but only of Bishops and Deacons, that were
ordained by the laying on of hands, and declares it is the duty of the rest of
the brethren in the Church, to prophecy, as 1 Cor. 14. 31. Ye may all
prophecy one by one; and that it is the duty of others in the Church to do
the work of Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers. It is hereby clear, that they
may be Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, that were never
ordained by the laying on of hands. And so much for answer to that query.

And since it is made so evident, that Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists,
Pastors and Teachers have continued all the while the Beast has continued, I
hope, hereby they that through darkness have been of the contrary mind, will
be hereby convinced of their error herein. And now be ye exhorted to frequent
the Assemblies of Saints; and come to those meeting places, where such as are
precious Saints, do hold forth the word of truth; and by the Spirit of
Prophecy do sprak unto men, to edification, exhortation and comfort. O come
you, and partake of those gifts of the Spirit, whereby some are enabled to hold
forth the glad tidings of the Gospel, to publish peace, and grace, and mercy
through Jesus Christ, and to do the work of an Evangelist, and partake you of
those gifts, whereby others are enabled to unfold the mysteries of the Gospel,
and to teach, and instruct the simple, and to do the work of a Teacher. In a
word, Come and partake of Apostolical, Prophetical and Pastoral gifts, of
all the particular operations and manifestations of the Spirit of Christ in his
Saints: which are given to profit withal. Consider that Jesus Christ says, I
will give unto my two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy. It is the gift of
Jesus Christ unto his people, which he gives not only for the good of the
persons in whom it is, but for the good of others also. Saints have an interest
in one another gifts; and therefore Paul speaking of such as were Prophets, as
himself and Peter, and Apollo, says he to the Saints (1 Cor. 3. 21, 22.) all
are yours, whether Paul or Apollo, or Cephas, etc. Thus the gifts that are
given to others, are given to them for me, and the gifts that are given to me,
how weak soever, are not altogether for my self, but for others also: for Jesus
Christ has so disposed of it, to give several gifts to several Saints, to this
end to maintain Communion among Saints. O therefore you that are Saints, have
Communion one with another, that you may receive benefit from one another, as
Christ has appointed: For he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; What to do? For the perfecting of
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.
Now do you desire to be edified? Do you desire to press forward toward
perfection, that you may not be as children, carried about with every wind of
doctrine? Then frequent the Assemblies of the Saints, that you may partake of
their gifts. Jesus Christ has given them to effect these things in you, and
all his people: and for the keeping a spirit of love among Saints, that they
receiving benefit one from another, may not say one to another, I have no need
of you, as those seem to do, that forsake the Assemblies of Saints: but that
all being joined and knit together, may increase with the increase of God. And
so much shall suffice to be spoken to this.

Deduction 6.
Sixthly, The next instruction that I shall come to (though it be not the next
in order, yet I shall place it here, because of the affinity it has with this)
is this. That since the Witnesses, the Saints of Jesus Christ, have had a
spirit of prayer, all the while the Beast has continued; whereby their enemies
have been devoured, as by a spiritual fire: then hereby they may be convinced
of their error, that say they are in Babylon, and therefore do not join with
any, in pouring out their fouls to God in prayer, nor yet do it themselves.

Now let such consider, that in the darkest midnight of Popery, Saints have
had a spirit of prayer; and indeed it is not possible to be a Saint, and not to
have a spirit of prayer. It is the very nature and constitution of the spirit
of a Saint, to ascend upward to God in prayer, at all times, and upon all
occasions.

The truth is, that though the Saints may be without other Ordinances, as
baptism, and breaking of bread (though I know no rule they have willingly to
neglect them neither:) yet they cannot be without the use of prayer and
prophesying; and therefore we see that Saints have always enjoyed them, during
all the time they have been trodden under foot: the spirit of prayer, and
prophecy has been still upon them. And herein they have appeared to be both
living Christians, and waking Christians: a dead man cannot breathe, nor can a
sleeping man speak; but when a man breathes and speaks, he is discovered to be,
both a living, and a waking man. Now if Christians be not dead Christians, then
sure they will both breathe, and speak as soon as the breath of spiritual life
is in a man, he is a man that breaths toward God in prayer continually: and
when he is grown up a little, he is able to speak, to edification, exhortation
and comfort; though some are more fluent in speaking, and have better utterance
then others, yet Therefore to confine this speaking or prophesying to such only
as are ordained to be Bishops or Presbyters, is a principle derived from
Babylonian darkness, and has not the least footing in the Scripture.
all in whom there is true spiritual life, in some sort or other, do so speak
as to edify, exhort, and comfort one another. Let such therefore as are in
this error, beware how they entertain principles, so contrary to the very life
of Christianity. And O do you not stop your breath; what though you be in
Babylon? yet you must breathe there, otherwise you are stifled. Beware
therefore of being stifled, breathe freely toward thy God, wherever thou art.
Thou may have Communion with him in any place. Though thou art with Daniel in
Babylon, and in a Lions den; yet the breathings and the pantings of thy soul
after God, are acceptable to him.

Object. But perhaps some may say, When I go about to pray, I find much
deadness, fleshlinesse, carnality and coldness in my self, both when I am to
pray publicly with other Saints, and when I am privately retired; and I look
upon this as an effect of Babylonish darkness. I question therefore whether I
may pray, until it be wholly done away.

Answ. The Apostle, when he bids us, In all things to make known our requests
to God, and to pray without ceasing, and to continue in prayer, and to pray
continually, Phil. 4. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Col. 4. 2. did very well know, That
Saints did carry flesh about them, which would be opposing the Spirit^; and
therefore he himself says, When I would do good, evil is present with me;
and, The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh,
and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do the things
that ye would, Gal. 5. 17. I say the Apostle knew this, That the flesh would
oppose, but he would not have Saints, upon that ground to neglect spiritual
duties: for that were to suffer the flesh to get the victory; but rather to be
the more frequent in spiritual duties, and to be the more incessant in holy
performances, especially in prayer, that so they might overcome the flesh that
so opposes.

Again secondly, When the Apostle presses Saints to spiritual duties, he
speaks to them as knowing, that though they carry flesh still about them, yet
that they have a spirit in them, in which they are to act toward God: and that
though flesh be acting in them; yet at the same time, that spirit may act in
them. And therefore when Saints come to pray, though the flesh do endeavor,
to put out the life of the Spirit, yet the Spirit strives to mortify the
flesh: and though both act at the same time, yet God is able to distinguish,
between what comes from his own Spirit, which is always in his Saints, and
what comes from flesh in them. And though the flesh do act its part, yet Jesus
Christ having by one offering, done away all the corruptions of the flesh in
his people: God can notwithstanding the flesh in them, smell a sweet savor in
those performances, in which there is much weakness and flesh, and but little
of the Spirit appearing; there being an atonement already made, for the sins
of their holy things. So that Saints, you having Spirit in you, as well as
flesh, you are not to neglect to perform spiritual duties, because you do
not see flesh wholly subdued (for that was never yet done in any Saint, while
he remained in this tabernacle) but in that spirit to act, especially in
prayer, even when you find flesh also acting; for if you have but a spiritual
desire, to have that flesh subdued, that desire comes from the Spirit; and
that spark being neglected, may seem to die; but if according to the rule of
Paul to Timothy, we stir up that gift of the Spirit we have received, how
weak soever it may seem to be, that spark may grow up into a flame, and get
strength in a great measure, to burn up that corruption that so troubles and
burdens us. Therefore the Apostle gives this rule, To continue in prayer.
Saints do you desire to have flesh subdued? then continue so desiring, and be
continually lifting up your spirits, to your God in prayer against it: and that
you may do so, take all opportunities to retire your self, from other
imploiments, that you may lift up your souls unto God in prayer: and do not
content your selves with barely having these desires, and so be continually
plunging your selves in worldly imploiments, in conversing with sublunary
things: but improve all opportunities, to retire your selves, from conversing
with these things, for the enlivening and enflaming of your spirits; and do
not persuade your selves, that while you are discoursing of your bargains, and
tradings, and lands, and livings, and clothing, and I know not what; that you
pray as well, as when you retire your self into a private place, to lift up
your souls in secret to God in prayer: For our Savior gives you this
direction; When you pray enter into your closets, and shut your doors, and pray
to your Father which is in secret, etc. Matthew. 6. 6. And our Savior himself
observed the same rule: for it is often said of him, That he went apart into a
mountain to pray; and continued whole nights in prayer unto God: the night
being the time in which he was free from other imploiments. And so Act. 10. 9.
it is said, That Peter went upon the house to pray. And truly if Saints did
improve more opportunities, and take more advantages thus to retire themselves
to converse with God; so much coldness and lukewarmnesse, worldliness,
covetousness, pride, and contention would not appear in them. But it has been
the design of the common enemy, to take off Saints from these warrantable,
profitable and advantageous retirements, wherein they might enjoy Communion
with God, to the end they may continue in a more loose and carnal frame, to the
sading of their spirits, and to the scandal of their most holy profession.

But another may say, I find that our Savior says unto his Disciples,
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do, Joh. 14. 13. And John
says, We have confidence toward God, and whatsoever we ask, we receive of him,
1 John 3. 21, 22. And again, This is the confidence that we have in him, that
if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us; and if we know that
he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the Petitions that we
desired of him, 1 John 5. 14, 15. And by these passages it appears, That Saints
in the Primitive times, before the great falling away, and the rising of the
Beast; when they prayed, had assurance that they should have the Petitions they
desired. But when I pray, I have no such confidence in many things: and many
times it is a long time before my Petitions are answered; and in some Petitions
I have a plain denial; and therefore I question, whether it be not sinful for
me so to continue praying, until I am fully come out of Babylon: and then I
conceive that I shall have such a spirit of prayer, as the Saints had in the
Primitive times, and have confidence, that whatsoever I ask of God, I shall
receive of him.

Answ. First, That the Saints while they have been under the bondage of
Babylon, have had a spirit of prayer; and have had their petitions heard, is
evident. For their prayers have brought judgments upon their enemies, being
presented upon the golden Altar. And if it have been no sin, for these to
continue praying, though they were in Babylon: then doubtless it would be no
sin for thee to pray, though thou should be in Babylon. But

Secondly, Whereas thou say, That in some things thou have no confidence that
thou shall be heard; and sometimes it is long before some Petitions are
granted, and other Petitions are plainly denied. Let me tell thee, That if in
those things, in which thou have no confidence, thou do pray for them with the
submission of thy will, unto the will of the Father, it may be no sin for thee
so to pray, for the things that thy soul desires, though thou have no
confidence of them; if they be such things, as be not sinful in themselves, as
such as these are not, viz. to be delivered from bodily distempers, to be kept
from dangers in traveling, whether by sea or land; to be delivered from the
tyranny of unreasonable men, that seek to do thee hurt: or to have parents, or
children, or wife, or husband, or brethren, or sisters, or any other friend
delivered from bodily distempers, or dangers in traveling, etc. or to have
them brought to the knowledge of the truth, from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan to God: or to have them kept from errors and seducing
spirits. I say these, and such like things, which are not sinful in
themselves, if thy soul desire them, it will be no sin for thee to pray for
them, though thou have no confidence that they shall be granted; so thou pray
for these, with the submitting of thy will, to the will of the Father. And this
is clear, in that the Lord Jesus himself, in whom was no sin, did pray so,
with submission to the Fathers will, for deliverance from that bitter cup,
which he was to drink of, though he had no confidence that (...) Petition
should be granted. So that Saints may pray, for those things which they do not
infallibly know, to be according to the mind of God: and yet it may be no
sin so to pray, if they do pray with submission to the Fathers will. And in
so praying they may be acceptable to the Father, who many times does grant some
of those Petitions, as soon as they are put up; and at other times, after he
has made his people to wait long, and to pray importunately for them. And if
some of them be denied, yet their persons and prayers may be accepted, and may
be, and sometimes are granted another way, God giving them in that, which is
better then the thing desired. But

Thirdly, All Saints may have, and doubtless many Saints have as much
confidence now in prayer, as the Saints had in the Primitive times; for what
was the confidence that Saints then had? Says John, This is the confidence
that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears
us. This was the primitive Saints confidence, and what Saint has not this
confidence now, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us?
Saints are now confident, That the things they pray for which God wills, and
intends to give unto them, shall be granted, only they have not an infallible
spirit, so as to know in all things, what it is the will of God to bestow upon
them. But many things they do know, and others they have strong persuasions
of, when God in a more then ordinary manner, moves their spirits to pray for
them.

Thus Saints have a holy boldness and confidence, in approaching to the throne
of Grace, by the mediation of Jesus Christ, coming to God in the spirit of
Adoption, being confident of having every good thing, that a gracious and
loving Father sees good for them, all their Petitions are heard. They are
confident, that if they ask any thing according to his will, he hears them.
And no Saints in the Primitive times had other confidence. So that Saints, it
is no sin for you to continue praying, making known your requests to God, but
it is your duty so to do. But

Fourthly, Though flesh do break out, and in some things Saints do not pray
aright, yet they are not therefore wholly to neglect praying: knowing that God
still delights in the breathings of his own Spirit in them; although they have
many weaknesses and infirmities in them. And

Fifthly, If they find their faith is not so high, nor their confidence so
strong, as some Primitive Saints were, then ought they to pray for the increase
of faith. If they be weak in faith, let them have recourse to him, who is the
author and finisher of faith, for the strengthening of it; who will give
liberally, and will not upbraid his people, though they be weak. Though a man
that is altogether faithless, has no promise sure to him; yet the man weak in
faith, has as many promises made to him, as he that is strong in faith. So
that though it be weak, yet if it be a true faith in him that prays for the
increase of faith, he shall find access to the throne of grace. And so much
for the clearing of this.

Deduction 7.
Seventhly, The next Deduction is to discover the excellency and preciousnes of
Saints, from the 4 and 5 verses, they are discovered to be excellent, in that
they are said to be Olive trees, they are not as the dry tree, who is nigh unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned, He. 6. 8. But blessed and happy is the
condition of Saints: For they have an unction from the holy Ones, they stand in
the presence of the Lord of the whole earth. They are precious in the eyes of
God, and profitable to men: for they empty the golden oil, they have received
from the holy one into others; the Spirit as it flows from them, sometimes
penitrates into those that are strangers, aliens to Jesus Christ, whereby they
are brought home to the embraces of Jesus Christ: and then Saints are excellent
in their eyes also. And so David calls them, Psalm. 16. 2, 3. My goodness
extends not to thee; but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the
excellent in whom is all my delight. And excellent they are.

Secondly, Because they are not only as Olive Trees, but as Candle-sticks. For
as it is said of Jesus Christ, so it is said of them, They are the light of the
world, Mat. 5. 14. They are as light shining in a dark place. Now how precious
is light, to them that are continually in a sensible darkness? Light is one of
the most precious things in the world: it puts a beauty upon other things, it
chears and comforts the heart; it causes men to see the dangers that are in
their way, that so they may avoid them: and many others, are the excellent
properties of this natural light; but many more, are the precious effects of
spiritual light. And this is that that Saints have; though others are in the
darkness of hell, yet they enjoy the light of heaven: The Lord God almighty,
and the Lamb are a light unto them, Rev. 21. 23. And in this respect also
Saints are excellent and precious ones: But I would be brief in this
particular, and therefore shall not further enlarge it.

Deduction 8.
Eighthly, The next Deduction, in which I shall be brief also, is to discover
from the fifth verse, the dangerous condition of those wicked men, that are
enemies to Saints. Though Saints seem to be poor, weak, despicable creatures,
and their enemies in outward appearance seem to be strong and potent, and to be
overcomers of them: yet these seeming weak Saints, are strong, and mighty: for
they can but send up a message to heaven, and bring secret and invisible arrows
from thence, which shall destroy their enemies. The breath of their mouth
kindles coals of fire, that destroies their enemies; And if any man will hurt
them, he must with this fire be killed. Little do wicked men think, that when
they deal cruelly with Saints, they bring coals of fire upon their own heads;
yet so they do, if they continue irreconcilable enemies unto them. There is a
notable place, to show the danger men run upon, when they offer to wrong the
Saints of God, it is Zech 12. 3. In that day, says the Lord, will I make
Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it
shall be cut in pieces; though all the people of the earth shall be gathered
together against it. Though the spiritual Jerusalem, the Saints of God, had
all the people of the earth gathered together against them; yet so potent and
strong are they, through the Lord of host their God, as they should overcome
them all; they should be as a burdensome stone, and should crush in pieces, all
that burden themselves with them. Therefore it would be wisdom in men, to
beware how they offer any violence to any one of the Saints of God, either to
their lives or liberties, how colorable so ever the pretenses be, upon which
they do it; seeing it is such a dangerous thing to abuse Saints: as that in
wronging them, men be devoured or destroyed by them. And so I have done with
this particular also.

Deduction 9.
Ninthly, In the next place from the sixth verse, might be discovered the
reason, why there has been such a hardness of heart and impenitency upon the
Beast, and the Babylonish crew; namely, because that as a judgment upon them,
for persecuting the Saints of God; the heavens have been so shut up against
them, as that none of the waters of the spirit have descended upon them. But I
pass this by, with some other particulars that might be observed in that verse.

Deduction 10.
The tenth Deduction is from the seventh verse, where it is said, The Beast
that ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war, etc. It does
enform us, that this title, The Beast, is the most proper title of the Pope; as
is evident in the comparing of the several passages in this prophecy, where
the Beast is mentioned together; which is done in the explicatory part of this
Discourse; where it appears evidently, that by the Beast is meant the Pope: Now
in all the other passages, of the prophecy of this book, where the Pope is
mentioned; and in this seventh verse, he being called the Beast, it is evident,
that this is his most proper title. Though it is true, the Pope is
Antichristian, yet we do no where, in the prophecy of this book, nor in any
other Scripture where he is expressly spoken of, find the title of Antichrist
given to him. But generally, in the prophecy of this book, and in the
prophecy of Daniel, where there are some things spoken of him, he is called
the Beast. And for the 2 Thessalonians. 2. where he is also expressly spoken of, and
plainly described, he is not called there Antichrist neither, but is there
called, That man of sin, the son of perdition, and that wicked.

Now it is said, there are many Antichrists, 1 John 2. 19. But it is no where
said, There are many Beasts, and therefore he is called, The Beast, and that
man of sin, the son of perdition, and that wicked. As we use to say, The
King of such a Kingdom; and The Governor of such a place; and, The Mayor of
such a City or Town; importing there is but one: So the Pope is called, The
Beast. For though there be many Antichrists, yet there is but one Beast; but
one Pope, who is, The Beast. I do the rather observe this: first to discover,
the exceeding greatness of the wickedness, and the abominablenesse of the
Pope; who for his opposition to God, and his enmity to the Saints, is expressed
by a peculiar title, that is proper only to that wicked one: to show that he is
above al others hateful and cursed.

And secondly, I do the rather speak of this, because some do confusedly
speak of the Beast and Antichrist, confounding the Beast with Antichrist,
whereas there be many that are, and may be called Antichrists, especially some
that are risen up lately, That deny that Jesus is the Christ, making themselves
equal with the Lord Jesus Christ: and who do also deny, That Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh; or at least have a light esteem of Christ's coming in the
flesh: by looking upon that flesh, which was so united unto the Godhead, as
when the life of it was laid down: it was said to be the life of God, 1 John 3.
16. as no Though that flesh as it was offered up through the eternal spirit,
was a propitiation for our sins, and that blood so shed did cleanse us from all
sin: ye that flesh so offered, did at once sanctify and perfect all that are
his. 1 Jo. 4. 10. and 1 John 1. 7. and Heb. 10. 10. and 14.
more to be esteemed then the flesh of a common man. I say these, and such as
these are Antichrists, as is clear, 1 John 2. 22. and 1 John 4. 3. But though
there be many Antichrists, yet there is but one that may be called the Beast:
but by confounding the Beast with Antichrist, some look upon the Beast only as
Antichrist, whereas there be many Antichrists, which are to be rejected and
avoided, besides the Beast; though they have more specious pretenses than the
Beasts pretenses now are, and are thereby the more like to prevail upon the
more knowing professors of the time. So much for this particular.

Deduction 11.
Eleventhly, In the eleventh place, it serves to justify the Parliament, and
all that joined with them in the late defensive war. Now although they have
been branded with the odious titles of Rebels and Traitors, and what not: yet
here their justice and righteousness in that act, appears as clear as the Sun.

For first, we see here, that the enemies which they did oppose was the Beast,
that did ascend out of the bottomless pit. And who the Beast is, and how the
Beast did appear to be he, that did wage the late war in England and Ireland,
is made evident in the explicatory part of this Discourse. Now since it was the
Beast, that cursed enemy of Jesus Christ, and all his Saints, that raised this
war, it was a most righteous act in the Parliament, and all that did adhere
to them, to oppose him, and his party in it.

But here by the way I desire to declare, That though I do affirm, that that
war was raised by the Beast, that cursed enemy of Jesus Christ: yet do I not
hereby condemn every particular man that did engage in this war; nor any
particular man, high or low: for I know not, but that it might be possible, for
some by colorable pretenses to be drawn to engage in this war, that never
intended to fight for the Beast, but on the contrary hated him. But this I
affirm, that the generality of those (especially of the chiefest) that engaged
in this war, were such as were thereunto incited by the Beast, and intended
the advancement of the Beast.

And now I say, seeing the war, that was raised against the Protestants in
Ireland, and against the Parliament, and such as were styled Puritans and
roundheads in England, was a war made by the Beast, that ascended out of the
bottomless pit, and contrived in Rome and hell: it was a most righteous thing
for the Parliament, and those that adhered to them, to defend themselves
against it: God having put a power into their hands to do it: and yet were they
no Rebels, unless it were rebellion to oppose the Pope and the devil.

And secondly, The righteousness of the Parliament, and those that adhered to
them, is made further evident, by considering the ends for which the Beast did
raise this war; and they were,

First, To destroy the Witnesses, to make an utter end of all the Saints and
servants of Jesus Christ, and to leave none that should oppose or speak against
the Beast, the Pope, that so he might bring all men into a professed subjection
to himself. And knowing that the Puritans were the only obstructers hereof (for
others would easily enough have been persuaded unto a uniformity, and would
say, that there was little or nothing in the Romish doctrines, but might have
been embraced, rather then to make any division, if the Puritans were removed
out of the way) therefore one main end the Beast had in this war, was to
overcome the Witnesses. Now this being one end of the Beast in that war, it
was a righteous thing for the Parliament, and those that adhered to them, to
oppose the Beast, for the rescuing of, and preserving of the Saints of Jesus
Christ, from the tyranny of the Beast.

It being a righteous act in Abraham to rescue and deliver one just Lot, from
those that would have captivated him, and his family: It is much more a
righteous act in the Parliamentary party, to rescue and deliver, all the
precious Saints of Jesus Christ: (for all Saints had a share in this
deliverance) from the cruelty and tyranny of the Beast, that sought their
ruin. But

Secondly, Their righteousness in that act, will appear, if we consider the
other end of the Beast in the late war, and that was to thrust out Jesus
Christ, from reigning as King, and to set up his own Kingdom, by subjecting
the consciences of all that profess Jesus Christ, both in this Kingdom, and
all others, unto his laws. Now this being his other great design in that war;
it was a most righteous thing to oppose him in it. And it had been a great
sin for the Parliament to stoop themselves, and to suffer all the rest in the
Kingdom, thus to be subjected to the Beast; and lay aside the Regal power of
Jesus Christ: God having put power into their hands, to oppose the Beast herein.

Thus, the righteousness of those that did oppose the Beast, appears, if we
look upon the ends of the Beast in that war. And

Thirdly, Their righteousness in that act of opposing the Beast, is made the
farther evident, because it is in part a fulfilling of that righteous sentence,
which God has past upon the Beast, Revel. 18. 6, 7. where God says to his
people thus, Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double
according to her works; in the cup which she has filled, fill to her double:
how much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment
and sorrow give her. Now this sentence is in this war (wherein the Beast has
been overcome, and his designs frustrated, and a tenth part of Babylon is
fallen) in part fulfilled: for in this war Babylon has in part had of the
same cup, which she filled to the Saints, as she overcame them, so they have in
part overcome her; and this is the beginning of her torments, which are coming
on apace, and ere long the cup that she has filled, shall be filled to her
double.

Now the Parliament, and those that adhered to them, having in the late
defensive war, in part fulfilled that righteous sentence of God upon Babylon;
it does therein most clearly appear to be a righteous act.

Deduction 12.
Twelfthly, In the next place here is a discovery of the reason why the
Parliamentary Army, did not more prevail for the first three years and an half,
and why after that period of time it was so successful and victorious: The
reason of it here plainly appears to be, because it was (according to
fore-appointment) the mind of God, to have his people brought to a low ebb,
for such a period of time; so that they should be looked upon as dead men, and
the enemy should rejoice over them, as if they were all totally overcome for
three years and an half: And since it was so, it was not possible for the
instruments that were then employed, if they had been never so faithful, so
active and diligent, to do any more, then that which God had raised them up
for; which was only to keep the dead bodies of his people from being buried:
and so much they did: they still defended the cause of the Witnesses against
the enemy, so as it was only kept, as it were above-ground, though it seemed to
be as dead. And so God would have it to be, for the first three years and an
half: but when the first three years and an half were completely (according to
Scripture account) expired; then it was not possible, for the adverse party to
prevail over them; for then the time was come, in which the Witnesses were to
be raised, and then the Spirit of life from God entered into them: and that was
the reason why they went on like active, living men, so courageously and
victoriously: for God had appointed them to carry on his work, for the fall of
this Kingdom from Rome.

Deduction 13.
Thirteenth, In the next place, this serves to exhort all those that were
drawn to engage in the late war against the Parliament, and those godly people
that adhered to them, to relinquish that act of theirs. And that,

First, Because it is so apparent, that in so doing, they were instruments of
upholding the Kingdom of the Beast, and that they did in it endeavor to
support the Beast, as much as in them lay, whatever the pretenses were upon
which they were drawn to engage in it: and therefore if they desire to be
enemies to the Beast, let them be enemies to this act of theirs: for in it they
went about to support the Beast, though it was in vain, the time of his ruin
being come: and therefore it behooves them to repent of what they have done in
it; for it is not good pretenses can justify an evil action. It would be their
wisdom therefore, now at last to renounce it, as they renounce the Beast
himself. And

Secondly, It concerns them to repent of this deed of theirs, considering
against whom they fought, not against ordinary men, but against the choicest of
Though I say that it was against the choicest of men; yet I do not hereby
affirm, That all that were engaged on that side, in an outward opposition,
were the choicest of men: for some that were on that side, might be as bad as
some on the other side: for some of the nations, and kindreds, and tongues, and
people that were distinct from the Witnesses did help the Witnesses, as the
earth was said to help the woman, Revel. 12. 16.
men, the Witnesses and servants of Jesus Christ: nay they fought not against
them only, but against Jesus Christ: for as Jesus Christ says to his
Disciples, That the world hated them, because it hated him; and he that hates
him, hates the Father also, Joh. 15. 18. and 23. So it may be said, that they
that fought against the Saints of Jesus Christ, fought against Jesus Christ
himself, and against the Father also. Now therefore, you that were active in
that quarrel of the Beast, how does it concern you to renounce what you have
done therein? least you be found to be fighters against God: and let no longer
a spirit of emnity and difference remain between you, and those that you
opposed in that particular, but be of one mind with them, in a mutual
opposing of the Beast with them. And this do, least persisting in that way of
defending the Beast, you be destroyed with the Beast.

Deduction 14.
Fourteenthly, In the next place it enformes all those that did engage in the
late defensive war, that they have cause to rejoice in what they have done,
in that particular, and no cause to repent of it. Have you contributed to the
maintenance of the war in England and Ireland, by lending plate, and
disbursing money? And have you sent horses, and arms, and provisions to the
Army? And have your servants or children, or your selves in person, been
actually in that war? You have cause to rejoice in all that you have done
therein: for you see it was a most just and righteous act, and God has by it
brought a most glorious work to pass, in the bringing this Kingdom from that
vassallage to Rome, in which it has been this twelve hundred years, and
putting the cup of trembling into the hands of the enemies of Jesus Christ, the
dregs whereof they shall at last take off. And therefore you have no cause to
repent, but to rejoice in what you have done therein; to rejoice that you had
the honor to be in any measure instruments of promoting such a cause; and if
you suffered any losses, by being opposers of the adverse party, yet it was
far better to be losers in opposing them, then in any measure to comply with
them. And you that have received wounds, or lost limbs, for promoting that
cause may glory in them: for what soever you have herein done, or suffered, it
has been in, and for opposing that grand enemy of Jesus Christ, The Beast, and
in being instruments of bringing Gods design to pass, for the ruining of
great Babylon, and the setting up the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. And therefore,
how ever you seem to be rewarded of men for it; yet never repent of it, but
rejoice in what you have done in it.

Deduction 15.
Fifteenthly, In the next place this may convince those of their error, that
take to themselves a power over the consciences of Saints, to rule over them,
and make laws for them, and to force them to obedience to those laws.

Let such seriously consider this, that this is apparently that cursed power
that the Beast has usurpt to himself, or at least it had no other Donor then
the Dragon, the old Serpent, the Devil: who gave the Beast his Power and Seat,
and great authority. And by this Power the Bishop of Rome, first became, and
still continues to be the Beast. And this is a Power that is abhorred of God;
for those men that exercise this Power, do take away the legislative power of
God, who is the King, the Judge, and the LAWGIVER of his Saints; and do give
Jesus Christ less honor, then the Heathens do their idols, who do allow
them to be the orderers of their own worship.

O that these men therefore might be convinced of their error, in imposing
their laws upon the consciences of Saints, and constraining them to worship
God, according to the rules that they have hammered out from them; though they
dare not affirm that they themselves are infallible: for surely, if they
persist in it, God who is jealous of his glory, and will not give it to
another, will break out in the fire of his jealousy against them, as well as
against the Beast, that great man of sin, who sits in the Temple of God, and
takes upon him to make laws as God. It concerns them therefore, to beware how
they go on in these ways, least they be destroyed with that son of perdition.

Again, Let such consider, that all those that ever exercifed this power, for
the generallity of them were always enemies of the most precious, and most
spiritual Saints; and were followed with a curse. Let them but look upon the
Bishops, and generally they were enemies of Saints, and a curse rested on them,
even a blindness of mind, and hardness of heart; and at last they were
brought down, and shame and contempt cast upon them.

And it may be some of you, that have endeavored to take the same power, have
opposed the Bishops for the same thing: O therefore, that in the consideration
heerof you might at last lay down that imposing power, although thereby you may
seem to lose, that honor that you seek from men, and to lose much of these
outward things, the things of the world, which at best are but vanity: for it
is far better to be without these, and have a good conscience, than to enjoy
much of these, either with a troubled, or seared conscience, and a hardened
heart. It is better to be at emnity with the Beast heerin, and lose much of the
world, then to enjoy abundance of the world, and soon after to perish with the
Beast.

Again, This let me tell you with all, that if you shall persist, in
endeavoring to get such an imposing power (it being that by which the Beast
raigns in any place where it is) it is in vain for you to endeavor it in
England, for England is fallen from Rome, and is no more a part of Rome; and
therefore it is in vain to seek to exercise a Romish power any longer in it.
And England being thus fallen, is become a president to the other Kingdoms so
to do, and shall not return to Rome again, for England and all the other
Kingdoms must hate the whore, and make her desolate.

And thus much I cannot but speak, to you that endeavor to take such a power
upon you, whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear.

Deduction 16.
16. The next particular arising from these verses thus opened, is an
exhortation to all the Saints in England, to dwell together in unity. O you
precious sons and daughters of the Almighty, the Saints, and Witnesses of the
Lord Jesus Christ, that are in this Kingdom of England, Consider you what your
condition was about seven or eight year ago; at what time you were trampled
upon by the Bishops (which was a treading under foot of the Beast) Call to
mind how some of you were pillored, and had your ears cropped and many of you
imprisoned, and fined, and by several other ways were persecuted, and
troubled by the members of the Beast your adversaries: and that only for
acting that which in your conscience, you were parswaded was according to the
mind of God; and which if you had for fear of men, or for any other reason
left undone, your conscience told you, that you should in so doing be
disobedient to your heavenly Father. I say, call these things to mind, and
what a great pressure it was to your spirit, that you could not with liberty,
and freedom follow the Lamb; but men did what in them lay to enforce you to
worship the Beast, and to embrace for doctrine, the commandments of men. O how
grievious was this oppression to you! And what a burden was it? And how did you
groan in your spirits to be delivered? What a grief was it to you to see
precious Saints cruelly, and ridgedly dealt with, by the enemies of Jesus
Christ? And how many frequent prayers did your souls breath out, and lift up to
heaven against your enemies, and for deliverance, from their yoke of bondage?
I say, call these things to mind, and remember that this was the condition of
you all, whether you are such as are commonly called Presbyterians, or
Independents, or Anabaptists, if you were Saints, if you loved the Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity, you were all a like hated of, and opposed by the Beast:
and it was a grief, and burden to all your spirits, to see the enemies of Jesus
Christ to prevail so much, and you all, both Presbyterians, Independents and
Anabaptists did pour out many effectual, fervent prayers against the Beast, and
the Bishops his adherents in England.

Again, Consider, as the Beast was thus an enemy to you all alike, so it was a
mercy to you all alike, when in the year 1645. God gave you all, a full victory
over the adherents of the Beast in this Kingdom: for then the Bishops, and them
that fought for them (and in them the Beast) was overcome. And this, I say, was
a mercy to you all alike, and it was alike answer to all your prayers, and
alike joy to all your spirits, to see your enemies, and the enemies of Jesus
Christ overcome. And now since you are all children of the same Father, and
have all one Lord Jesus Christ, and have all one Spirit, and have all drank of
one cup of affliction, and had all one common enemy that hated you all, and
persecuted you all, because you had all the one holy Spirit of the Father, and
of the Son in you: and since your Father in love to you all, and in answer to
the prayers of you all, gave you all alike deliverance from that enemy of you
all. O unite, unite, unite! since your God has made you one in his love, O be
you one in your love one to another! and let it appear that you dwell in God,
by dwelling in love. What a low, unworthy thing is it, for you that dwell in
God, to grow cold in love toward your brethren, the children of your Father,
for differing from you in judgment, in some circumstantiall things only? What
if some be weak, and do not know so much of the mind of God, in some
circumstantial things as you (whether you be Presbyterians, Independents or
Anabaptists) conceive you do? Will you therefore not love your weak brother,
for whom Christ died, and who is beloved of your Father, because your Father in
his wisdom, has yet withheld that light from him, which he has given to
you? What a weakness is this in you thus to do? Do you not know, that it is
not for your merits that you have more then him, but it was from grace, from
free favor that you have it? And does what you have received from grace, work
such an effect in you, as to make you grow cold in love toward your brethren? O
let it be far from you!

And what though some are Presbyterians and some Independents, as they are
commonly distinguished? Though I could wish, that these distinctions of
difference might be all laid aside, and that all that belong to Jesus Christ
might only be called Saints, and the servants of Jesus Christ, and by such
general expressions as include them all, though they still differ in
circumstances: for there were no such distinctions used among Saints in the
primitive times, though there were differences in some circumstances. But I
say, What though some are Presbyterians and some Anabaptists, etc. Yet if they
are such as you judge to be in Christ Jesus, and to be beloved of the Father:
resolve you in the strength of Christ, to suffer none of their differences from
you in judgment, to withdraw your affections from them: but since you love
your God and Father, love you his beloved children, and your brethren: and
since you sincerely love the Lord Jesus Christ, let it appear in loving of
those upon whom his image is stamped: For there is no reason, why you should not
love Presbyterians, as well as Independents, and Anabaptists, as well as
Presbyterians, etc. unless you look upon them as no Saints, as such as are no
lovers of the Lord Jesus: but if you look upon them as Saints, then if you love
the Lord Jesus, you cannot but love them, what ever their judgments be. And if
you be deficient herein, you are to condemn your selves in it, and to be
humbled for it. And henceforth, considering the oneness that is between you
all, what ever your judgments are, and that you have been as one in your
sufferings, and as one in deliverances from sufferings, do you still be one in
love, and then upon you will the Lord command the blessing, even life for
evermore. Psalm. 133. 3.

Deduction 17.
17. The next, and the main Deduction that flows from these verses, being thus
explained, is a special encouragement, in particular to the high and
honorable Court of Parliament, and to his Excellency the Lord FAIRFAX, and the
honored his Council of War, and all inferior Officers and Soldiers, and
in general to all the Witnesses of Jesus Christ in this Kingdom of England.

First, It is of special encouragement unto the high and honorable Court of
Parliament; for as much as (a great number of them, being the Witnesses of
Jesus Christ) they were the primary or first instruments, that God made use of
to defend the cause of his people, and to preserve them from the tyranny and
fury of the Beast.

Now you being the first instruments that God made use of, to plead the cause
of his people, God having into your hand first put the power of opposing the
Beast: and that wonderful has been the spirit of courage and constancy, that
has been put upon you in that high Court of Parliament, that make it your
design to advance the honor of Jesus Christ, and the good of the Saints, and
of all the Subjects of this Kingdom in general: so that though you have been
opposed by great and potent enemies, yet your courage has not failed, but you
have persisted constant, in prosecuting the same designs, since you first
began to oppose Strafford and Canterbury, in 1641. unto the year 1645, still
opposing the adverse party; and you have not basely complied with them (though
some corrupt members diserted you, and did so) but you still stuck to your
first principles; and God having put power into your hands, has enabled you to
carry on his design in the worst of times, and after all, having graciously
given you good success, to your unwearied pains and labors through which you
had gone, by giving you a happy conquest over your enemies.

And in all this, the word of God being fulfilled, these things being according
to what is written, even your being first laid low, and also your raising
again, it being written, predeclared, that the Beast should make war with the
Witnesses (of whom you are a part, and whose cause you defend) and should
overcome them, and kill them, and that they should lie dead three years and an
half, and after three years and an half, should be raised to the terror of
their enemies, and that in their rising, a tenth part of Babylon should fall,
etc. These things being written and fulfilled, the Beast having made war
against the Witnesses (whose cause you have been principle instruments of
defending against him, and his adherents,) and having overcome them and killed
them, both in England and Ireland, and they being dead for three years and an
half, the enemy rejoicing over them, and making merry, because they thought
they had been so slain, as they should never recover life again; your Armies
being overcome, and your Garrisons being possessed by the enemy, and after three
years and an half, the Spirit of life being put upon your Army, and they, as it
is written, standing upon their feet, and therein at the same time, England
being fallen from the Beast, from being a part of great Babylon, and this in
the year 1645. and that year being the year, wherein it is written, The
prevailing power of the Beast should come to a period. I say, these things
being so, here is special encouragement to you Witnesses, in the high Court of
Parliament, to go on in defending that cause, that God has given you the
honor hitherto, to be instruments of defending: I say, to go on to defend it.
And that,

First, By doing justice upon your, and the enemies of Jesus Christ. Has God
delivered any of the chief actours of this unnatural, bloody war into your
hands? then you being a Civil Power, ordained of God, are to do justice upon
evil doers: for the Apostle says of a Ruler, Romans 13. 4. He is the minister of
God, and he bears not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a
revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. And they are evildoers in a
high degree, that are thieves and murderers: and such are the chief actours of
an unjust war. Now if God have delivered any such into your hands, you are to
execute wrath upon them: for it is an observable passage, 1 King. 20. 42. The
Prophet of the Lord there tells Ahab King of Israel, after he had let Benhadad
King of Syria, whom the Lord had delivered into his hand, to go away with his
life; that Ahabs life should go for his life. Therefore it is not safe, to
neglect doing justice upon such persons, although they consent to such Articles
of agreement (being constrained to do it, for their own ends) as Benhadad did,
1 King. 20. 34. Now you in the high Court of Parliament, whom God has honored
to be the chief instruments of defending the righteous cause of the Witnesses,
have special encouragement to go on to execute just wrath upon such gross
evil doers, without fear.

And also secondly, You have encouragement to go on, to deal well with all the
Witnesses and servants of Jesus Christ, that walk soberly and justly toward
men, and holily toward God, that are under your jurisdiction; whether they be
such as are commonly called Presbyterians or Independents, or Anabaptists, etc.
even to deal well with them, and all the Subjects of the Kingdom, and to undo
the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and to break every yoke,
and to establish just and righteous laws. I say, here is special encouragement
for you to do thus; for in doing thus, you shall prosper and become a glory to
the Kingdom; and no enemy shall ever henceforth be able to prevail against
you: for though formerly you were brought into a low condition, and the enemy
prevailed over you with a very high hand; yet henceforth the enemy shall no
more prevail against you, although they were in number a hundred thousand more
then they are.

And secondly, From these verses thus opened, here is special encouragement in
particular, for his Excellency the Lord FAIRFAX, and the honored Council of
war: since as the Parliament are the primary, so they are the secondary
instruments, of defending the cause of the Saints of God against the Beast.
Now, since you, and the Army under you in an especial manner (according to what
is written, and declared long ago) were they that had a spirit of life from
God put upon you, in the year 1645. whereby life was put into all the
Witnesses, and whereby you were enabled to act like living men, men that had a
life from God, in the overcoming the Beast and his adherents in this Kingdom:
and seeing you have been instruments of defending that cause ever since: I say,
seeing God has honored you, so as to make you such eminent instruments of
this great work, and the hearts of all the Saints in England, are generally
knit unto you, and the eyes of all the Saints in England are upon you, most
Noble General, and Worthy Commanders; here is, I say, special encouragement for
you to go on still to improve the power that God has given you, for the same
end for which it was given you, viz. The suppressing of the Beast, and
defending all the Saints and servants of Jesus Christ in this Kingdom, and to
go on (having the honor of Jesus Christ, and not your own, and public good
more then private ends in your eye, and in your heart) to endeavor to cause
justice and righteousness to abound in this Kingdom: and this is your
encouragement, that in so doing, as you have always been since 1645. So you
shall ever be conquerours in all the battles you fight, and overcomers of all
the enemies with whom you encounter, no weapon that is formed against you shall
prosper, nor no enemy shall be able to stand before you; yea though all the
people of the Earth should be gathered together against you; yet you should be
but as a burdensome stone unto them, and all that burden themselves with you,
should be broken in pieces.

And thirdly, Here is special encouragement, for all the Saints in England in
general, to be of good courage, not to fear the menaces or threatenings of any
enemy: for no enemy shall ever any more prevail over them.

Now what I say, for the encouragement of the Parliament, and of the General,
and chief Commanders of the Army in particular, and of all the Saints in
England in general, is clearly grounded in the Scripture, and therefore is it
unquestionable, and to be received and observed of the Parliament, Army and
Saints in England. Indeed if I should declare any thing to you, and tell you
that I had it by vision or revelation, and it were not apparent in Scripture, I
know no warrant you had to receive it, or to have any confidence of it: For as
Paul speaking of the day of Christ, says to the Thessalonians, Now we beseech
you by the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering unto him,
that you be not soon shaken in mind, nor be troubled, neither by spirit, nor
by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand; Let
no man deceive you by any means; for that day shall not come, except there come
a falling away first, etc. So may I say, you have reason to beware that you be
not soon shaken in mind, or troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by
letter from any, concerning any thing for which they do not bring a word from
the Scripture: and let no man deceive you, for you may be deluded and deceived,
if you receive any thing from any, which is not according to what is revealed
in the Scripture, as the young Prophet was deluded by the old Prophet, when he
received that Doctrine which was contrary to the Word of the Lord, which before
he had received: So may you, if you should so do. Therefore if a Prophet, or
an Apostle, or an Angel from heaven, should bring any message which is not
consonant unto the Word, which you have already received in the Scripture, you
are not to be shaken in mind, nor to be troubled by it, nor to embrace it. But
now the Scripture grounds, upon which I do for their encouragement declare and
affirm, That the Parliament, and the Army in prosecuting the righteous cause
of the Saints (and that all the Saints of England in general) shall all
overcome their enemies, and go on victoriously hence forward are these.

First, Because the Witnesses are raised from the dead, The Spirit of life from
God is entered into them, and they do stand upon their feet.

Secondly, Because England is fallen from Rome, and is no more a tenth part of
that great mystical Babylon.

Thirdly, Because the one thousand two hundred and threescore years, in which
the Beast was to tread the holy City under foot, did expire in 1645.

Now the first of these grounds, is evidently drawn from Scripture, as appears
in the explicatory part of this Discourse; where it is evident, That that great
and considerable number of Saints in England, and all real Saints of Jesus
Christ, of whom it is said, That the Beast should make war against them, and
overcome them, and that they should lie dead three years and an half, the
Spirit of life from God should enter into them, and they should stand upon
their feet, to the fear of their enemies, and to the glory of their God. And it
is evident, that this which this Scriptrre has said of them, is punctually
come to pass; The Beast did make war against all Saints, in making war
against that great number of the Saints in England in the late war, the Beast
did overcome them, and kill them, and they were mystically dead for three years
and an half, and as soon as the three years and an half were completely
expired, the Spirit of life from God entered into them, a Spirit of life,
vigor and courage was put upon them, and they did no longer lie as dead men,
but like living men, they stood upon their feet, to the fear and amazement of
their enemies, and to the glory of their God, who had put such a Spirit of
vigor, and courage upon them. And now upon this ground, may all the Saints in
England, and those Worthies in the Parliament of England, and their Army, who
have been instruments of bringing down the power of the Beast in England, be
encouraged to continue opposing the Beast, and acting justly and righteously
toward all, and be assured (God having put a Spirit of life upon them, and made
them to stand upon their feet) they shall overcome every enemy, that shall rise
up against them, and the enemy in no battle, shall be able to stand before
them, nor give them one defeat, but shall fall before them, and be cut down
as mowne grass, and the men of war shall not find their hands, but turn
their backs, and flee before them: for they shall now find them living men,
such as have a Spirit of life from God put upon them.

The second ground, upon which I affirm, That no enemy shall be ever able to
prevail over them, is clear in Scripture. For it is also evident in the
Explicatory part of this Discourse, That England is that tenth part of the
City, which the holy Ghost in this Scripture speaks of, where it is said, That
upon the raising of the Witnesses, and their having a Spirit of life from God
put into them, and their standing upon their feet, A tenth part of the City
fell. And it also appears, That England being that tenth part of the City, is
fallen from mystical Babylon, and is no longer a part of it, but is overcome
by the Lord Jesus, he is now King of it, who is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, who will keep it for himself, and will not suffer it to be subjected to
the Beast any more: The Saints in England are brought out of the bondage of
mystical Babylon, and shall return no more to it, and therefore they may be
confident, That none of the Romish power, of any of the other nine Kingdoms,
neither those that are more remote, or those that are nearer neighbors to it,
shall ever be able to prevail over England.

Thirdly, The third ground of my affirming that the Parliament, Army and
Witnesses in England, shall henceforth overcome all the enemies that shall
rise up against them, is evident also in Scripture: for it appears also in the
Explicatory part of this Discourse, That the one thousand two hundred and
threescore days, in which it is said in this Scripture, That the holy City
should be trodden under foot, and that the Witnesses should be in sackcloth, by
reason of the Gentiles, the spiritual Babylonians tyrannizing over them, is
one thousand two hundred and threescore years, and did expire, Anno Domini
1645. as appears by computing the time of the Beast's continuance (as it ought
to be computed) by the Scripture account: And also, this one thousand two
hundred and threescore years of the Beast's continuance, appears to be then
expired, because it is said, That when the Witnesses had finished their
prophecy in sackcloth, that then the Beast should make war with them, and
overcome them. Now the Beast having made war against them, and overcome them,
and they being raised again, and set upon their feet, to the fear of their
enehemies, in the year, one thousand six hundred forty and five. It is by
this evident, that that year, the one thousand two hundred and threescore
years, wherein the holy City, the Saints should be trodden under feet by the
Beast, did expire. And now you Witnesses in the Parliament, and Parliamentary
Army, and Kingdom of England, may be confident, that all the combined power,
both of men and devils, which shall conspire against you, shall never be able
to prevail against you; for you shall be trodden under foot no more, the Beast
shall prevail over you no more; for the time of his prevailing over you is
expired, and he must henceforth be trodden under foot himself, and you must
henceforth prevail over him, and you must reward great Babylon, as she has
rewarded you; the Cup which she has filled, you must go on to fill to her
double.

Now in these considerations, and from these grounds, held forth in the Word of
Truth, the Scripture, and that part of it in this book of the Revelation,
which Revelation God gave unto his Son Jesus Christ, to show unto his
servants. Let all the Saints in England be strong, and of a good courage, and
fear not what man can do unto them. Let not the heart of any one Saint be
troubled, fearing that either Popery, Prelacie, or Presbytery shall recover
any power in England, to Lord it over Gods heritage, to tyrannize over the
Witnesses of Jesus Christ, or to restrain them from walking in that way, which
appears to them to be according to the mind of God. But Saints, be you assured
it shall never be, since you have a Spirit of life from God put upon you; and
since England is fallen from Babylon, and since the time of the Beast's
tyrannical power over you, is expired, therefore cast off all unbeleeving
thoughts, and all distrustful fears of these things; and be confident, That
Jesus Christ will by you, go on conquering, and to conquer. And what though a
great Army should be a preparing to overcome you, as there was in July, one
thousand six hundred and forty seven? Yet as then, they were soon blasted, so
they shall be for the future: For you have a Spirit of life and courage from
God put into you; therefore men shall not prevail over you. And you are no
more a part of Babylon, therefore you cannot be kept in bondage, and the time
of your being trodden under foot is expired: and therefore though all the
Malignants in this Kingdom, and in Scotland, and all those foreign Forces,
that those factours of Rome, that are gone from England into France, or
elsewhere, can possibly procure, were conjoined together in one body, and
marching against you; yet should not your hearts be troubled, nor be afraid,
but be assured they should be overcome by you: And what though you seem to be
small in number? You know that God has formerly commanded others to stand for
you, and can do so still, if it be consonant to his wisdom now also; but if
it were not so, it were an evil in you to distrust his power, to whom it is all
one to save by few, or by many; For victory comes not from the strength of
horses, or the legs of men, but from the Lord of hosts.

And therefore upon these grounds, let all the Witnesses of England, be
confident of overcomming all that shall rise up against them, by the strength
of the Lord of hoasts their God. And having experience that God has done thus
for them ever hitherto, since one thousand six hundred and forty five, let
them not be of such unworthy spirits, as to be distrustful for the future.

Deduction 18.
The last particular that I shall hence observe, is, To stir up the hearts of
Saints to joyfulnesse and praises. O Saints considering what God has done for
you, seeing he has put a Spirit of life upon you, and has made you that lay
dead to stand upon your feet; And seeing that England is fallen from mystical
Babylon; and that now your enemy the Beast shall have no more power over you,
he that has trodden you under feet a thousand two hundred and threescore
years, shall tread you under foot no more; and that now your time of
prophesying in sackcloth is expired: Put you now on, in stead of your
sackcloth, the garments of joy and praise, and walk no longer sadly, being
delivered out of the bondage of spiritual Egypt, and from the oppression of
your enemies; let your hearts be affected herewith, and your souls rejoice in
the apprehension of it. For suppose that when you were under that bondage, so
that you were driven into corners, and your enemies hunted after you to make a
prey of you, and having taken some of you, did imprison some, and fine others,
and banish others, and pillory others: if one should then have come into your
meetings, and told you as an infallible truth, That within one month your
enemies should be brought down, and tyrannize no longer over you, but you
should be set at liberty to worship the Lord Jesus, in that way which he should
discover to you, to be most agreeable to his own mind. How would your spirits
at the apprehension hereof, have been filled with joy? Your joy would have been
such, as would have been beyond expression. O let your joy be now no less,
since this is actually done; and especially having assurance that you shall be
brought under bondage no more: but let your hearts leap and sing for joy! And
in your joy let the high praises of God be in your mouths, and let him be
exalted in your spirits. O be frequent in offering up the Sacrifices of
praises, in the secrets of your spirits unto your God, that has done such
things for you! I will extol thee, O Lord (says David) for thou have lifted
me up, and have not made my foes to rejoice over me. This is now the case of
all the Saints in England. The Lord has lifted them up, and does not suffer
their foes to rejoice over them. O that with that sweet singer of Israel, they
might extol the Lord their God in it, and for it; for Praise is comely, says
that holy man, For the upright (Psalm. 33. 1.) And it is a good thing (says he)
to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto the name of the most
High, and to show forth his loving kindness in the morning, and his
faithfulness in the nights, Psalm. 92. 1, 2. Let Saints therefore be much in
this comely, good and pleasant work of praise; and improve all opportunities
to exercise themselves in this work. Let them sing praises unto the most High
in the morning, and show forth his loving kindness and faithfulness in the
nights. Though others forget God, and he is not in all their thoughts, and they
do not remember the great things he does for his people, yet let him be much
in the thoughts of his Saints, yea much in their thoughts to praise him for his
benefits. And let them say within themselves; Bless the LORD, o my soul, and
forget not all his benefits. O let them not forget to praise him for what he
did for them, in the year, 1645. but let them register in their hearts, the
particular acts of the great things he then did for them: and let them not
forget, what he did do for them in July 1647. Let them not suffer these
things to slip out of their mind, but let them call to mind how frequent and
importunate they were with God in prayer, for to obtain these mercies for
themselves, and for the Kingdom: and having now attained them, let them be as
frequent, and as ready to praise him, Call upon me, says God, in the day of
trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50. 15. O now,
you that called upon God in the day of trouble, and were heard: be you much in
that heavenly and angelical work of glorifying God! Let all that love the Lord
in England, remember that it is the duty, as well as the privilege of those
that have got the victory over the Beast, to sing a song of praises, unto him
that fits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever, Revel. 15. 3.
And since they are the persons, that have now got the victory over the Beast:
Let them with enlarged hearts, sing that new song of praise, and let not
doubtful, nor distrustful thoughts of the power and faithfulness of God for
the future in the least measure sad their spirits, or keep back their praises:
but let the voice of joy and praise be heard in the tabernacles of the
righteous in England: for the right hand of the Lord is exalted, the right hand
of the Lord has done valiantly for them, and they shall not die but live, and
declare the works of the LORD, Psalm. 118. 15, 16, 17.

The Postscript.
IT being so, that (since my finishing of this Discourse) there are some
further mutations in these Kingdoms, which may seem to give to some some
ground to question that which I have here asserted, viz. That the Witnesses are
slain by the Beast, and that (according to this Prophecy) after they had lain
dead three years and an half, they are risen and do stand upon their feet: If
this be so, may some one say, then how comes it to pass, that there is such a
probability that the enemies of the Saints shall again get ground of them, and
bring them again into a low condition? For Inchiquin in Ireland, and Poyer in
Wales, and a great party in Scotland do seem to act afresh for the Beast, and
do expressly declare against the Witnesses under the titles of Independents and
Sectaries, etc. but if the Witnesses were indeed slain and raised, then
undoubtedly they should indeed go on conquering and overcoming the Beast, and
the Beast should no more recover power over them, to put them into a distressed
condition; for then the days of their prophesying in sackcloth, in sad and
sable garments is expired: But how can it be said to be so, since the Beast
seems in a probable way of recovering power over them again?

Now that this seeming ground of fear may be removed, I shall lay down these
three considerations.

First, That though the Beast shall no more prevail over the Witnesses to bring
them down, yet he may and must endeavor to oppose the Witnesses, and again to
make war against them that they may bring him down: for now that the time of
his prevalencie over the Saints is expired, he must not long continue in his
present station; but as he shall not go higher, so he shall go lower, yea he
shall come down wonderfully, and how shall that be but by his opposing the
Saints, who shall be as a burden some stone, and all that burden themselves
with it shall be cut in pieces? And therefore the more we see that that the
accomplices of the Beast do endeavor to oppose the Saints, the nearer we may
conclude that he and they are to their ruin; and therefore their risings and
stirrings should be rather encouragements then discouragements unto the Saints.
But

Secondly, That the Witnesses are indeed slain and risen, and do stand upon
their feet, is altogether unquestionable, because (as appears by the
foregoing Discourse) this prophecy of the slaying of the Witnesses, and of
their rising, etc. is in every particular iota and tittle of it most exactly
accomplished, I will not here recapitulate any of the particulars, but refer
the Reader to the foregoing Discourse, but shall here only desire the Reader
to consider of this one in a more especial manner, viz. That the holy Ghost
expressly declares, that the falling of a tenth part of the City should
immediately follow the Witnesses, standing upon their feet, and be in the same
hour with it as an effect of it. Now that a tenth part of the City
(particularly the Kingdom of England) is fallen from the mystical Babylon, that
is to say, from being a place of bondage to the Saints is most evident, and
therefore it is undeniable, That the Witnesses are slain and risen.

Thirdly, It is no wonder that the Witnesses being raised, and having a spirit
of life from God put upon them, that the Beast does endeavor to oppose them;
for that spirit of vigor and courage that is put upon them, is to be exercised
and actuated, and they must go on in it to give that scarlet Whore blood to
drink, and to reward her, as she has rewarded them, and of the cup which she
has filled to them to fill to her double: for the Saints are those Armies in
heaven, which are said to follow him that is faithful and true, and in
righteousness does judge, and make war, who is clothed with a vesture dipped in
blood, and whose name is called the Word of God, when he comes to make a final
end of the Beast, and the false prophet, and them that worship his image, and
to cast them a live into a lake of fire burning with brimstone. Now that the
Saints may be actual instruments, not only of beginning to ruin the Beast,
but of the total ruining of the Beast: it is no wonder that he endeavors
again to recover strength against them; and therefore when the Dragon and his
Angels (the Beast and his imps) do fight against Michael and his Angels (Jesus
Christ and his Saints) it is said that they prevailed not (that is after the
Witnesses were risen to oppose the Saints) but were cast out, and that was the
shortest way they could take to be overcome, and to be cast out, even their
opposing Jesus Christ, and his Saints, which have a spirit of life from God put
upon them. Thus much for the removing of that doubt.

Now that I may not be mistaken, I shall here add a caution, and so conclude:
It is this,

I desire it may be observed, That though I have particularly (in this
Discourse) mentioned the Parliament and the Army (having good ground so to do
from what they have done, and have been instruments of already) encouraging
them to go on in opposing the Beast, and his adherents, and defending the
Witnesses of Jesus Christ, assuring them of success in their undertakings, yet
it is upon no other grounds, then as they shall so go on; but if they shall
turn aside, and aim more at corrupt and self ends then at the promoting of
justice and righteousness, then at the public good of the Kingdom, then
enlargements shall come for the Saints, and they being delivered from the rage
of the Beast, shall be preserved wholly from his fury some other way, and by
some other means, when corrupt persons may perish in carrying on of corrupt
designs, but I hope (and have persuasions of) better things of those Worthies,
even that as God has begun, so he will go on to grant them the honor, and the
happiness still to remain glorious instruments in his hand, of setting up his
King upon his holy hill of Sion, and subjecting these Nations unto his royal
Scepter, that judgment may run down among us as water, and righteousness as a
mighty stream.

FINIS.

