SENTENCES FOR CHILDREN English and Latin. Collected out of sundry Authors
long since By LEONARD CVLMAN, And now translated into English By CHARLES HOOLE:
For the first enterers into Latin.

P. Antesignanus in his Epistle to the Saraei, brethren. Let others affect the
opinion of learning; I do plainly and ingenuously confess, I have seriously
addicted my self both to fashion, and promote Childrens studies all that ever I
can.

LONDON. Printed for the Company of Stationers, 1658.

SENTENTIAE PUERILES Anglo-Latinae. Quas e diversis Authoribus olim collegerat
LEONARDVS CVLMAN, Et in vernaculum sermonem nuperrime transtulit CAROLVS HOOLE:
Pro primis Latinae Linguae Tyronibus.

P. Antesignatus in Epist. ad Saraeos fratres. Doctrinae opinionem affectent
alii; ego pro mea virili part me puerorum and formandis and promovendis
studiis omnem meam operam addixisse aperte and ingenue fateor.

LONDINI. Sumptibus Societatis Stationariorum, 1658.

Sentences (or Sayings) of Wisemen
Sentences of two words.
BE helpful to thy friends.

Abstain from other Men's things.

Conceal a secret.

Be easy to be spoken to.



Fool-bardiness is dangerous.

Make use of thy friends.

Honor good Men.

Be kind-spoken.



Say well to all Men.

Know thy self.

Respect thy Kinsfolk.



Hate slandering.

Advise blamelesly.

Fear cosenage.

Keep a thing given.



Accuse no Man.

Give content to thy friends.

Use diligence.

Keep thy credit.



Shun drunkeness.

Exercise honesty.

Judge indifferently.

Take care of thy family:



Instruct thy children.

Avoid filthy things.

Avoid fallings out.

Moderate thy passion.



Judge justly.

Maintain Justice.

Keep thy Oath.

Learn willingly.

Avoid idle pastimes.

Obey the Laws.



Rule thy tongue.

Read over thy Books.

Teach thy children.

Hate strife.



Be afraid of the Magistrate.

Be cleanly.

Give place to thy better.

Forbear thy inferior.



Please the multitude.

Hate a lie.

Shun a whore.

Provoke no body.

Mock no body.



Dispraise no body.

Be against no body.

Nothing is long-lasting.



Rule thine eyes.

Be not idle.

Aviod idleness.



Love peace.

Follow after godliness.

Avoid disgrace.

Honor the Prince.

Rashness is dangerous.



Keep Modesty.

Keep thine own things.

Exercise wisdom.

Look at what is to come.



Respect Religion.

Honor the King.

Moderate thy laughter.



Obey reason.

Shun reports.

Make use of wise men.

Be sober.



Reverence thy superior.

Cast away suspicion.

Use temperance.

Observe the time.



Stick to the truth.

Use virtue.

Hate violence.

Moderate thy pleasure.

Answer modestly.



Sentences of three words.


Self-love is blind.

Weapons regard not Laws:

Fortune does help adventurous Men.

Continual diligence overcomes the hardest things.



Nothing is more miserable than covetousness.

Nothing is unconquerable with Gold.

Art overcomes nature.

A bow too much bent is broken.

Do not covet other men's things.



Moneys do make friends.

Covetousness is the head of vices.

Some men excel others.

Using (to do a thing) is most effectual.



Be mindful of a courtesy received.

The Fortune of War is doubtful.

War is to be made by counsel.

The life of Man is short.



Gods worship is an holy thing.

The heart of Man is untamable.

The heart of Man is wicked.

Many faults are to be winked at.

Every Comparison is odious.



Gentleness gets friends.

Froward Folks are to be won by fair means.

Conscience is a thousand Witnesses.

Too much meat is hurtful.



Covetousnessess is unsatiable:

Covetousness of money is to be avoided.

His misery is to be upbraded to no man.

We must not answer raising speeches.



Time brings many things about.

It is hard to leave things that one is used to.

Riches bring forth haughtiness.

Time takes away grief.



Gifts can do much.

Offenders are to be Punished.

Riches are the occasion of vices.

It is a very hard thing to Conquer Nature.



Those things are difficult which are honest.

A rich man's speech is unwarie.

Division does lessen an estate.

Try every thing that is doubtful.



Every rich man is unsatiable.

Time is the Physician of grief.

Exshcise is the best Master.

Exercise can do all things.



Banishment does grace many men.

Nothing is more certain than trial.

We are made wiser by age.

Forgetfulness is the companion of drunkenness.



The end of Villainies is base.

Rich men have many kinfolks.

Felicity does raise up enmities.

Hunger is the best sauce.

Fortune makes men insolent.



Fierceness is assuaged by mildness.

A fool does own the thing done.

Women are unconstant.

We must give way to fury.



Look at the end of thy life.

Beauty is marred with Wine.

Fortune does help resolute men.

Nothing is more miserable than hunger.



Age is fleeting.

We must not believe a blab.

Death is the end of misery.

Joy is joined to grief.



Labor is the foundation of glory.

Honor does nourish arts.

The Minds of men are various

Money gets honor.



There is an interchange of humane things.

The end of suits is unnhappy,

The end of things is uncertain.

Anger is the torment of it self



Truth is in Wine.

It is an hard thing to bridle Anger.

Envy is a companion of boasting.

The dispositions of men are diverse.



A discommodity must be sweetened with mirth.

Necessity is a very great dart.

God helps the painful person.

Partnership is always unfaithful.

Inconstancy disdaineth friends.



Beggary is unsatiable.

An injury is overcome with a good turn.

The enterchange of things is pleasant.

Every ignorant man is unconstant.



It is an hard thing to bear wrongs.

Praise stirs up the wit.

Strife does breed strife.

All things flourish by labor.



Labors are the foundation of glory.

Keep in thy tongue with thy finger.

Labor is a man's treasury.

Praise is the reward of virtue.



An evil Person does seek his liberty.

A thing evil gotten is quickly gone.

Hunger teaches many things.

An evil thing is born by patience.



Silence adorneth a woman.

It is a most miserable thing to die with hung

Nothing is safe to mortal men.

Gifts do catch men.



Love teaches music.

Death throws down all before it.

Death is unavoidable.

Crosses hasten old age.



Memory is the treasury of Arts.

We must not answer railing terms.

Nature is content with a few things.

No body is born for himself.



Thou ought not to lie.

Necessity bath no law.

Do not brag of thine own things.

Do not despise other men's things.



Nothing does resist necessity.

Necessity breaks iron.

Too much niggardliness is to be avoided.

The night is void of shame.



Nothing is greater than daily use.

Faith is no where safe.

Affirm nothing untried.

It is in vain to resist nature.



Smooth carriage gets friends.

Opportunity makes a thief.

Wealth takes away friends.

Every beginning if troublesome.



Riches swiftly pass away.

Hatred is abated by plyantness.

Time affords all things.

Riches are gotten by skill.



Povertry stirs up arts.

Let a Scholar obey his Master.

All things obey Money.

Rash counsel is unluky.

Poverty bereaves us of friends.



Shame fastness is unprofitable for a beggar:

The most voices overcome.

Nothing is sweeter than ones Country.



The beginning is the half of the whole.

The things which hurt us, do teach us.

Every land is ones Country.

Too much laughter is to be avoided.



Like rejoices in the like.

All slavery is miserable.

Only fortunate men are loved.

Sleep is the image of death.



Study makes men courteous.

Every one likes his own things best:

The spring does follow the winter.

A fool does speak foolish things.



Chance turns all things upside down.

Silence is safe every where.

Proud men are hardly reformed*

The wise man is the only rich man.



Every man pleases himself.

Fullness does breed fierceness.

Idle persons have every day holy day.

The speech does cure sorrow.



Time is a devourer of things.

Time is short.

Time runs away very swiftly.

All things are changed in time.



All things are dispatched in time*

Nothing is swifter than time.

All things are done in time.

Time does assuage grief.

(i. e.) it will not be persuaded.

We lust after things forbidden.

The speech of truth is plain.

The judgment of the common people is fond.

Virtue being commended does increase.



The gifts of Men are diverse.

Sentences of four words.


( i. e.) Some things become one Age, some another.

Other Men have other faults. ( i. e.) One Man has one fault, and one another*

We must use friends with Modesty.



We must take heed of flattering persons.

We know our friends in adversity.



Old friendship is seldom abolished.

Nothing is hard to a lover.

Ambition is most mischievous in a Commonwealth.

Friendship is to be preferred before all things.

The year does fructify, not the earth,



There is no discretion till toward years.

Evils that one is used to, do not offend.

Love is not curable.

Crosses do of-times stir up the wit.



The desire of a covetous Man is never satisfied.

It is not a wise Man's part to be adventurous.

Nothing is more precious than a faithful friend.

Every thing has a mean.

There be few friends that admonish one freely.



Friendship refuses no labor.

The eyes especially win love.

Covetous men cannot be satisfied.

No vice is more mischievous than covetousness.



One good turn does always provoke another.

A benefit is to be measured by the mind of the giver.

The upbraiding of a benefit is irksome.

Civil war is a dangerous evil.

Many good things are lost by being neglected.



All things become good men.

Men are persuaded by good words.

The matching of unequal parties is bad.

Fearful dogs do bark the more eagerly.



That is dear which is rare.

Custom does make all hard things easy.

Counsel prevails much every where.



Custom is more prevalent than any tyrant.

A common shipwreck is comfort to all.

Counsel is unprofitable after the things are done.

Wisdom is more precious than all riches.



An enemy deceives when he flattereth.

Friends are changed with fortune.

Fear does argue base spirits.

Riches a burden to a good mind.

Scholars delight in the company of scholars.



Our own country soil is pleasant.

The greater part is always of the worst.

Loss is to be preferred before base gain.



A gift is valued by the mind of the giver,

Riches are the cause of brablings.

We ought to condemn no man rashly.

A man's own misery is to be concealed.



The idle hand brings want.

Love is bred by looking at one.

We are all made wiser by loss.

Mourning possesses the last of joy, (i. e.) After the greatest

Drunkenness does discover the greatest secrets of the mind.

The greatest things arise from small beginnings.

It is a common thing for men to mistake themselves.

A sword must not be given to children.

(i. e.) No man must be upbraided with his calamity.

Experience is the mistress of providence.

Great things are made of little ones.

Vices come from idleness.



Prosperity has many kinsfolks.

Fortune is very like the wind.

It is a bad thing to deceive other men:

There is no certain knowledge of things to come.



The company of evil men is to be avoided.

The agreement of brethren is rare.

Too high things are to be avoided.

Faith is to be kept even toward an enemy.



Glory is not bought with moneys.

Men are prone to mischief.

The fashion of a man is known by his speech:



Nothing is more intolerable than a fortunate fool.

Angry folks do nothing well.

Agreement is rare amongst brethren.

Idle persons have always holy days.

Unthankfulness is the head of all vices.



A friend is tried in adversity.

Variety is delightful in every thing.

Laws are silent amongst weapons.



Violence does do all things ill-favoredly.

Honor does cost innumerable pains.

Anger waxes old the slowliest of all things.

A good friend is a great treasure.



Glory has a very great spur. (i. e.) It sets on apace.

Envy does torment its owner.

Nothing is more mischievous than a bad tongue*

Carelessness breeds many mischiefs.



Anger is not appeased by angriness.

Labor is a treasure to men.

Labor receives the glory of virtue.

Hard labor overcomes all things.



Bear willingly that which must needs be.

We must strive to do nothing our nature being against it.

An evil weed dies not.

The mind is a fore-teller of that which is to come.



It behooves a liar to have a good memory.

Bad gain is equal to loss.

An Oak is hewn down with many blows.

Froward persons interpret nothing well.

Evil counsel is the worst to the counselor.



Death is common to every age.

Evil things are near to good things.

A fool is wise after the evil is received.

Forced wits do answer badly (i. e.) make an ill proof.



Miserable men use to envy happy men.

Nature loves nothing that is solitary.

It is a busy matter to contend in Law.

Do not follow the errors of the common people.

(i. e.) few men enjoy quietness

Nothing is more effectual than plain truth.

Undertake not things beyond thy power.

Nothing is more filthy than a lecherous old man.



No mortal man is absolutely blessed.

Natures necessity is satisfied with a little.

No man is hurt but from himself.

Rashness does much hurt men.



Nothing is more subject to misery than man.

Nothing is sweeter than a friendly admonisher.

Nothing is more common than to deceive men.

Too much mildness is not allowed of.

Fortune does not always smile upon one.



No man can have all things.

No man is wise at all times:

It is the best to make use of another man's folly.

All things are to be done in their own time.



The masters eye does fatten the horse.

Idleness does teach many vices.

It is the sweetest thing of all to receive.

All good things consist in peace.



The speech is the picture of the deeds.

The eyes are more faithful than the ears:

Every soil is a valiant man's country.

Poor folks death is without noise.



Old men's opinions are the best.

Small things are not to slighted.

Soon-ripe wits do soon decay.

His own country is most pleasant to every man.



Goods increase by sparing and pains.

It is a wise man's part not to take notice of many things.

Nothing is pleasant to a troubled mind.

It is a very hard thing to be an honest man.



Honesty makes a confident wit.

Obedience is not to be given to a man when he does amiss.

Envy cease after death.



So many men, so many minds.

Such a man, such a speech.

Such a Prince, such a people.

Every man flatters his own evils.



So many men so many opinions.

As much you shall have, at so much you shall he valued.

Such a question, such an answer.

Asking advice is an holy thing.



We are all wise when a thing is past.

Redness is the color of virtue.

There is seldom any calamity alone.



Only men in misery are free from envy.

A man's quality is known by his talk.

In is better to answer many men by silence.

A calm does easily follow a storm.



Nothing is more pleasant than old age that may take its ease

Seasonoble talk is the best.

Speech is the character of the mind.

Her own King does please the Queen.



Whosoever does covet is always poor.

His own studies delight every man.

We are able to do nothing without means.

Nothing is better in the life than health.



Too much wisdom is not wisdom.

His own error is to be attributed to every one.

We must attempt nothing beyond our strength.

Every one is delighted in his own study.



Dishonest gain does bring loss.

Time draws all things along with it.

His own pleasure does draw on every man.

A friend is tried in time of adversity



Immoderate Wine is a cause of mischief.

Consultation is worse when the belly is full.

The common sort do measure friendship by profit.

The more seldom use commends pleasures.

Where fear is, there shame is.



Where love is, there the eye is.

Where the pain is, there the finger is.

One man is no man.



No possession is greater than verue.

The changes of things are diverse.

Faults cannot be concealed

Vainglory is not to be sought after.

Sentences of more words.
LEarn what thou may avoid by the fall of other men

Shame is to be thrown away, as often as necessity constrains



We are all disposed to idleness.

Adversities are to be undergone with a patient mind.

Flattery is the greatest plague in friendship.

It is the duty of a young man to reverence his betters.



Old age is more slow to all kind of learning:

The doers and consenters are punished alike.

One man's weal, is another man's bane.



Another life, another course of living.

A true friend is a great treasury.

Friends are known in adversity.

True love knows not how to keep any measure.



Every man's mind is discovered by his speech.

Art is hardly put to its shifts without the help of means.

An Ass had rather have straw than gold.

Gold has oft-times persuaded men amiss.



A benefit bestowed upon thankful persons is wont to come home with profit.

It is better to be honestly poor, than badly rich.

The city is most happy, which is governed by wise men.



That which is done to good men is not lost.

Railing terms do not hurt good men.

Good men come to good men's feasts of their own accord*

A dog does always haunt a poor stranger.



An old dog cannot be wonted to a chain.

Those things which are seen, are more certain than those that are heard.

We are not quickly to believe what is spoken.



We must beware of him that has once deceived us.

Whatsoever is gotten by hire is dearer to us.

You may better overcome one by advice, than angriness.

There is no need of advising after a thing be done and past.



Acquaintance is to had with honest men.

Choose rather to have thy body grieved than thy mind.

It is an hard thing to correct an evil nature.

Being to take a journey, never make use of a naughty Companion.



Care prevails much in every thing.

We must not fall out with a friend that has deserved well.



It is main wisdom to play the fool in due seasons.

Differing manners do follow differing studies.

They that disagree are easily overcome, they that do agree, not easily.

No man is beloved, but he to whom fortune is favorable.



He is a rich man who thinks he wants nothing.

Riches are gotten by labor, and are lost by prodigality.



A true friend is a hard thing to be found.

When thou art rich rememher to do good to the poor.

Learning is to no purpose, unless reason be joined to it.

A portion does not make a good marriage, but virtue.



Every one talks of his own matters.

Whilst I cannot, as I desire, I live, as I can.

Condemn no man before his cause be known.



Whilst the Cat sleeps the Mice skip about.

Wealth is given to none now, but rich men.

It is harder to bear prosperity, than adversity.

A learned poor man is prefered before an unlearned rich

A great thing does rise from a little beginning.

A wiseman does amend his own by another man's fault.

We are made more wary by other men's mistakes.

It is a banishment to a man, where he lives not conveniently.



A sword does wound the body, but the speech wounds the mind.

We our selves do not acknowledge our own fauls.



It is the part a valiant man not to be troubled in adversity.

One does easilier advise other men, than himself.



Error and repentance are the companions of haste.

He is happily wise, who is wise by another man's danger.

He will quickly find a cudgel, that has a mind to beat a

A word does quickly fly out, yet it never returns.

Prosperity does undo one whilst it fawneth upon him.

He is very happy, to whom no evil has happened in his life.



It is an easy thing to conquer an absent man, that makes no resistance.

He is wise to no purpose, that is not wise for himself.



Virtue proceeding from a fair body is more pleasing.

It is the best revenge to overcome an enemy by good turns.

A mean fortune is more safe, than a lofty.

The inheritance of a good name is more honest than that of

The guessing at a man's mind is difficult.

A covetous man hastneth all things, whatsoever he does.

Calm waters have also their storms.

The masters honesty makes also the family better.



Things unlooked for do fall out oftener than what you look for

Famous wits never wanted emulators.

He that willingly bears the yoke, makes it light.



Conceal thy misery, left thou make thy enemies merry.

Huge wealth is not got without deceit.

Ingratitude conteins all vices in its self.

A discommodity is always a companion of commodities.



If you command your anger, you shall live a very healthful life.

It is a wearisome thing to busy our selves every where about several matters.



A friend is known in adversity.

We are not to slumber in a dangerous business.

It is the property of one that doateth to wish things impossible to himself.



We must bring a buyer of our selves to ware that will not off.

Time tries friends, as the fire does gold.

An envious man waxes lean at the prosperity of another.

Suits use to take away the quietness of the mind.



He is commended, not who has lived long, but who has lived well.

Evil gain always brings loss.



A man must be liberal, but according to his ability.

No body would be bad unless there were gain.

Men believe eyewitnesses more willingly than ear-witnesses.

The burden that is born well is made light.



A wicked woman is more savage than all wild beasts.

A thrifty dame is not every where to be met with.

A woman is the preservation or overthrow of a house.

It is a most miserable kind of death to die with hunger.



Thoa shall lose greater matters, unless thou keep small ones.



A mean is to be accounted the best in all things.

Many good things have befaln to many beyond their hope.

Many envy the good things to others, which they want themselves.

The manner of the speech uses to show the disposition of the mind.

He displeases many* that humors himself too much.

It is much better to remedy the beginnings than the end.



Be acquainted with your friends manners, but hate them not.

All mortal things have many changes.

Great things do decay by discord, they grow strong by concord.

Every wise man and good man hates a lie.



It is a very great bevefit to know how to use poverty.

Nothing is ours, that can be taken from us.

There is no falling out, where there is the same mind.

Have no commerce with wicked men.



Punish no man, unless you well consider the matter.

Insult not over a miserable man* lot is common.

A good man is never made rich on a sudden.

No living creature, no ware is harder to be known than a man.



Wisdom is gotten, not by age, but by wit.

Goodness of wit will do thee no good, unless thou make use of it.



Stir not a bad matter that is well ended.

Nothing is more base than to quarrel with a friend.

There is no man, in whom there is not some fault.

It is not a benefit, which is done for advantage.



Do not learn any filthiness, neither do you suffer it.

Gold does not set out a woman, but good manners.

Nature has not granted women to rule.

A woman knows nothing, but what she has a mind to.



There is nothing happy on all parts.

Nothing is worse than heaviness in things that concern men.

Thou can bear no burden more troublesome than poverty.

I pray you do not believe all men withal things.



There is nothing so grievovs as poverty.

Do not haste to be rich, lest you quickly become poor.

Naughtiness of manners does quickly infect nature.

There is nothing so unkind, but you may make it friendly.



No man does so diligently look after other men's business, as he does after his
own.

Do not go about that which cannot be done.

There is nothing so long-lasting which continual diligence

The night, love, and wine, do persuade filthy things.

It hurts not any man to hold his peace, it hurts to have spoken.

The same man cannot say many things, and to the purpose.

There is nothing more odious, than that which is always

It is an hard thing to take from nature its own right.

Fearn that is to be burnt grows in fields that are not husbanded.



All things do not befall, which you purpose in your mind.

Every thing that is too much, is to be avoided in all things.

We are rather to believe our eyes than our ears.

Things devised for the best, do oft-times fall out for the worst.



All the best things have difficult ends.

All men wish better to themselves than to another man.

Every thing breeds error by making haste.



All delay though it be very little, does seem very long.

We must take that which we have at present, in good part.

It is the best for one to take a fit time.

Undertake not a burden which thou art unfit for.



Death is the utmost of all things.

Those things which cannot be altered, are to be patiently born.

Our fathers manners are not to be found fault withal, but endured.

Few men are moderate in prosperity.



His own country is most pleasant to every man.

We are wise for the most part after a thing be done.

Horns shoot out on a sudden to Rams that are well fed.

Anger and lust are the worst advisers.



Very many things are to be known, but the best to be retained.

Rash anger is the causer of many evils.

Medicines are to be applied to a breeding evil.

The beauty of the body is a brittle good thing.



A little spark being neglected, has caused a very great fire.

It is a dangerous thing to adventure ones self to the waters.

There is the most scarcity of the best things.

It is the part of a wise man to do nothing rashly.



Good ware does quickly find a chapman.

Things past may be blamed, but they cannot be amended.

More are overcome by fair means, than by hard means.



It is better to die than to lead a dishonest life.

Grief will be well eased with sweet words.

It is good to keep a measure in anger and pleasure.

It is better to stand in need; than to grow rich by wickedness



One eyewitness is more worth than ten ear witnesses.

The tongue kills more than the sword.

Nothing is pleasant to a troubled heart.

A fat belly does not beget a fine wit.



Every man hears more at home, than he does abroad.

Eyes see more than an eye.

Honest deeds proceed from honest minds.

It is a man's country wheresoever he lives well



Naughty company brings forth bad fruit.

When shame is lost, all virtue quickly decays.

Things present make us to have consideration of things t^ come.



It does children hurt to drink wine.

That which is taken up suddenly is not long-lasting.

Those things that are seen are more certain than those tha^ are heard.



Thou must not do that which thou blamest others for.

Whatsoever happens besides hope, account it to be gain:

They that avoid labors, wish far holy days.



See often, what you say of any man, and to whom.

It is not presently good which many men do.

That which seems good to one man, seems bad to another:

That which is not used to it, refuses labor.

i. e.) the most haste, the worst speed.

He that knows not how to dissemble knows how to rule.

He that has enough, let him wish no more.

He that knows not that he does amiss, will not be corrected



You can corect by no pains, that which is inbred by nature,

(i. e.) What is bred in the bone, will never out of the flesh.

Every man is careful about that* which he has a mind to



Whatsoever is natural, is not easily changed.

He that catches at a double profit at once, is deceived of both*

What the destinies have decreed, no man can avoid.

What is done cannot he undone.



They that vaunt proudly of themselves, have bad neighbors.

Those things are to be born patiently, which you suffer deservedly*

A contrary state is to be feared, especially in prosperity.



A small matter in the beginning does increase to a greater*

A thing hard to be done, is yet overcome by continual industry

The custom of an evil thing is the worst that can be.

Humane things are by nature prone to corruption.



He is a great King whosoever shall rule well.

A friend that suffers with us, is a comfort in misery.

Prosperity maddeth, and destroys unwary men.



Wisdom is of-times under a thred-bare-cloak.

Anger arises oft-times from very light causes.

It is not an easy thing to fly without wings.

A shril noise is a woman's household goods.

The best wits do oft-times lie hid in a secret place.



It is wisdom to learn of a wise man.

The tongue must be ruled with a great deal of care.

They are fools that will not be corrected.

All fortune is not to be overcome by suffering.



An old man is troublesome to young men's company.

There is nothing more worthy than wisdom.

A wise man has all his wealth in himself.



It is a base thing for a wise man to say, I wist not:

Excellent virtue was ever envied by wicked men.

An old man sees many things, which he would not.

If you say what you list, you shall hear what you list not.



A fool is changed, just as the Moon.

You may oft-times overcome him with patience, whom you cannot overcome with
force.

Things otherwise invincible may be overcome with money.



The single-hand fight is but weak.

Life is unpleasant without a friend to live with us.

No man offends by being silent, but very often by speaking.

We all in common despise things that are present.



We can do nothing without Gods help.

God does always bring like to like.

We often embrace the worst things for good.



It is better to be silent, than to utter things to be kept silent.

The event is oft-times unlike the advice.

The end and issue of a thing is ever to be looked at.

No time is to be spent unprofitably.



Men do then judge, when they begin to repent.

Time brings the truth to light.

A drunken man asleep is not to be awaked.

Slowness in doing things is odious.



Every man becomes such as they with whom he is familiar*

Bashfulness is a good sign in a young man.



Strength does no good without counsel.

Where every one has his treasure, there also he has his heart.

As your speech shall be, so shall you be answered.

The will is oft-times to be commended, where power is wanting.



A Woman is always wavering, and unconstant.

A Wife that has lost Chastity, has lost all things.

We learn our Wives faults after the marriage.

Men are taken with pleasure, as fish are with an hook.

Art is the only refuge in poverty.



Nature has given a defect to every thing created.

Where one feels it smart, there he lays his hand.

Our life is like a bubble on the water.



Holy Sentences to be taught Scholars upon Holy Days.


God requires the affection of the heart.

The Lord is wont to be with the afflicted.

All things depend upon God.

We must not look after earthly things.



We must work well continually.

Our crosses are from God.

Covetousness does cause forgetfulness of God.

We add nothing to the word of God.



When the Word of God is lost, all things are lost.

The welfare of the soul does depend upon Gods Word.

Covetous men do deride the Word of God.

The Lord throws down presumptuous men.

Adam.

God bestows upon us all things that we need.

Man is prone to vanity by nature.

Help is to be expected from God.

Covetousness does blind, and harden the heart.



The blessing of God makes all things fruitful.

All good things are given to a believer.

We are only the Stewards of our goods.

The goodness of God does clearly appear in all things.



They that first begin the war, are oft-times overcome.

Kingdoms got by war, are lost by war.

Good things befall the godly by the grace of God.

Good works do prove faith.



The knowledge of God is life eternal.

All things are done by Gods decree:

All things are possible to him that believes:

The counsels of God are not changed.



Christians are the Temple of God.

Charity is the badge of believers.

Charity is the fulfilling of the Law.

There is no counsel against the Lord.



Sole confidence must be had in God.

He that has Christ by faith, has all things.

Christ is the treasure of all good things.

The cross does follow the confession of faith.



We must have a fellow feeling with all men.

The cross is the trial of our faith.

All things must be done with a sure conscience.

Blindness is a punishment of the contempt of Gods Word.



Every calamity is a punishment of sins.

Believers commit all things to God.

Believers in Christ have eternal life.

The Church is to be governed by concord.



He that is of the truth, does hear Christ.

All creatures do obey Christ.

The Kingdom of Christ shall endure for ever.

There is no worship of God without faith.



All care is to be committed to God,

Christ al ne does deliver us from death.

Nothing can be wanting to them that follow Christ.

We must deal kindly with our enemies.



We must not trust in Man.

Men's Counsels are ordered by God.

There is no remedy against death.

The will of God is to be looked at in all things.



God has a care of us.

We must blame nothing rashly.

An account must be given of every idle word.

God amends us by the cross.



God helps his servants speedily.

God alone is the searcher of hearts.

Nothing is impossible to God.

God is the maker of all things.



God alone is everlasting.

God is known by faith.

God is the hope of the faithful*

Nothing is hidden to God.



God rules all things.

Every Doctrine must be tried.

God has subdued all things to man.

God respects not persons.



Gods counsels are hidden from us.

We must obey God rather than Men.

God has reserved all things for himself alone.

We must add nothing to Gods commands.



God does deliver those that are his in his own time.

The rich and the poor are of Gods making.

Where God is not, there is nothing.

Man's cunning can hide nothing from God.



God will not have men to be idle.

The desire of Riches withdraws men from God.

God feeds and preserves us beyond our care.

God is a Spirit, and to be worshipped in Spirit.



God alone and freely forgives sin.

God works all our good works in us.

God admonishes us by his Word, before he does punish.

God corrects his, but does not cast them away.



The examples of many men are not to be followed.

Outward things do not defile a man.

Those things befall not, which we determine, but which God has decreed.



The amendment of our life is made by the law of God.

Foolishness is the punishment of drunkenness.

Nothing is wanting to the faithful.



Rage depraveth the judgment.

Faith is the gift of God.

Faith alone does justify.

Faith is freely given.



Works are the signs of faith.

Faith makes us the Sons of God.

Faith is tried in adversity.

The death of the faithful is life.



The faithful have enough in time of famine.

Faith is the fountain of good works.

Faith rests upon the word of God.

The care of things to come is unprofitable to us.



True faith cannot be idle.

Every ones faith is known by its fruits.

Glory must be given to God, not to our selves.

God hears the groaning of the oppressed.



Overmuch talk is an argument of folly and lying.

God by grace promises good things to them that are yet unborn.

God lifts up the humble.



All things do serve man.

God requires humility.

Man's life is a warfare.

Honor belongs only to God.



Humane comforts do fail.

Man is a living creature that is subject to calamity.

Man is born to misery.

Man receives all things from God.



Men are governed by wisdom, not by their own strength:

God does bring down all lofty things.

Man's heart is wicked of its own nature.

Humane reason acknowledges God.



It is the best revenge to overcome an enemy by a good turn.

The Judgments of God are unsearchable.

Disobedience is displeasing to God.

It is a dangerous thing to judge other men.



We must judge after the cause be known.

The counsels of wicked men do not prosper.

Unbelief is the root of all sins.

Wicked men are overthrown by their own devises.



They that know not the Law of God, are accursed.

All things are to be undertaken in the fear of God.

It is a wicked man's pleasure to hurt another man's name*

We are saved in the name of Jesus only.



What a wicked man most fears, does befall him.

All things fall out ill to ungodly men.

We must get our living by labor.

God blesses liberal men.



The mirth of just men never ends.

Store of children is a very good gift of God.

The longer life is a long-lasting misery.

We must obey the Magistrate.



Diseases come because of sin.

We must give respect to our betters.

God does not do miracles rashly.

Bad men are to be punished, that good men be not hurt.



The mercy of God is necessary for all men.

A hard death comes after a good life.

They that do not obey wholesome admonitions are lost.

Death has no authority over believers.



Evil is not put away by another evil, but by good.

God does make use of ill instruments.

We must not judge rashly.

No evil will go unpunished.



We must speak evil of no man.

No man is without sin.

No man is innocent before God.

No man is born for himself alone.



Wicked men do not endure correction.

There is nothing more easy, than to charge men falsely.

No Prophet is accepted in his own Country.



We can do nothing of our selves.

There is nothing more infectious than bad doctrine.

God does not forget his own.

Nothing is blinder than a wicked man's heart.

God regards no outward thing.



God detesteth idleness.

We are all sinners.

All the works of men are impare.

The workman is worthy of his meat.



The lust of the eye deceives us.

All our things are in the hands of God.

All things are possible to him that believes.

God respects not the work, but the affection.



All things are made by the Word of God.

All things are to be construed to the better sense.

Opportunity is every where to be observed.

Zaziness to pray is as evil sign.



The Lord makes much of the godly.

Sin is the cause of death.

Charity covers sins.

The punishment of wicked men is eternal.



The memory of godly men is eternal.

God revengeth the poor.

Sins are not done away by works.

Sweet things are seasoned with bitter for the godly.



A good Prince is given from the Lord.

Sins are forgiven by the grace of God.

God is most sure to feed his.

That which is without faith is sin.



A poor man's wages must not be put off.

God alone does forgives sins.

The world is governed by Gods providence*

God ready to favor us is the best inheritance.



He that coveteth to get more, gets less.

They that attempt great things, bring nothing to pass.

The commonwealth flourishes because of the godly.

It shall be rendered to every one according to his deeds.



We must use goods, but not trust in them.

Let reprehension be without reproaching.

Old age is to be reverenced.

God destroys the proud.



The success is from God.

Pride is the destroyer of souls.

We must not give an offense to Children.



It never went well with seditious persons.

No man is saved without faith in Christ.

No man is wise without the Word of God.

Wise men endure correction.



God makes void the counsels of wise men.

Humane wisdom is folly in the things of God.

We must be slow to be angry.

Quietness is not to be looked for in this life.

They that fear the Lord shall live well.



We are nourished by the Word of God.

The will of God is firm.

God forbids revenge.



A good wife is given by the Lord.

Every one must look to his own calling

The contempt of the truth is a very grievous sin.

It is the greatest valor that can be to conquer our own lust.


WHen you get up it a morning, begin the day in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.



Thank God, that he has given you a good night.

And then pray, that he would bless that whole day to you, that you fall not
into sin.

When you come anon into the sight, bid your Father and your

After that, comb your head, wash your face with your hands, that you may get
you to the school as fast as can be.



When you come into the school, be willing to attend, and what ever you do, do
it heartily.



Above all things have a care you deserve not to be whipped.

Do not offend your Master, or your fellows at all, either by word or deed.

Rather teach, than conquer him that wrangles with you.



If you be to do any thing for your parents at home, be sure to go about it,
and dispatch it.



When dinner time comes spread the table, in due time.



First of all* the table cloth must be laid on the table, then the brass circle
or ring, then the salt seller, after these the trenchers or plates, and last of
all the bread.

And in the same manner the table is got ready, so also it must

First the trenchers shall be taken up, then the salt meats, and the salt.

After that the cheese, and whatsoever else there is of a second mess.



Stand with your feet straight, and set together, carefully minding, that there
be nothing wanting. And when any thing is to be filled, or reached, or set on,
or taken away, do it mannerly.



Say grace, or give God thanks before, and after meat.

Do not trouble or interrupt other folks talk as you stand by, but when you are
asked a question, give a short answer.



Do not forget the salt.

Set not any thing that is cut or broken upon the table.



When you snuff the candle, do not put it out.

But do not use your self to slap up whatsoever is taken away

When grace is said, after all things are taken away, refresh your mind with
some honest recreation amongst your fellows, till the time recall you from your
play, into the School.



First of all, have your nails pared.

Wash your hands.

Sit up straight.



Avoid drunkenness.

Be sober.

So show your self merry, as that you always remember what becomes your age.



If any thing more dainty than other be offered you, refuse i^ modestly.

If it be urged upon you, take it, and thank them.

Presently, after you have cut off a little bit, give back again

But give nothing back to another man's Wife, when her husband fits by. Likewise
give nothing back to a Prince, or great man.



If any dainty bit be offered you, as fish liver, and some such like things,
taste sparingly of it, and give the rest about you.



But drink sparingly your self, If you be not thirsty, yet put the cup to your
lip. Look pleasantly on them that talk.

Say nothing your self, unless you be asked.

If any silthy thing be spoken, do not smile at it, but make a

Back-bite no body at the table.

Do not make as though you were a better man than another.

Do not brag of your own things.

Do not scorn other folks things.



Accuse no body.

Be not a blab of your tongue.

If you see the meal is too long, after you have craved leave, and saluted the
guests, go away from the Table.



As you cut, hold not your fingers before the knife.

Eat what is set before you, and by you.

When you are to take any thing out of the dish, hold it upon the point of your
knife.



Do not mix or jumble with your fingers, what things are orderly laid in a dish.

When you are to eat an egg, cut your bread into little gobbets first.



Eat your egg quickly.

Throw not your shells again unbroken into the dish.

Drink not, whilst you are eating an egg.

As you eat it, do not daub your doublet.

As you eat pepper too, do not lick it up with your finger.



Scrape not off the snot with your finger.



Take not too thick nor too large morsels, but cut every one of them.

Take nothing out of your mouth unto your trencher.



All lavish laughter is ill-favored at a meal.

When you are to drink, wipe the outside of your lips (or your lip ends) with
two fingers.

Let to grease or fat be seen to float in your cup.



It is a clownish thing to eat and talk both at once.

Likewise to teach, or yawn, or spit out often, is accounted an unmannerly
thing too.



It is a foolish thing to eat toasts out of a cup amongst a company of Men.

Lean not backwards as Clowns use to do.



As you sup it let none drop, and do not sup twice at (...) spoonful.

Do not sup again, till you have chewed and swallowed that down.



If any meat stick on the bones, cut it off handsomely with your knife.

Do not rashly gaze about, to see what other guests cut, or have on their
trenchers.



It is an ill-favored thing to throw bits of bones, or meat under the table.

It is an unseemly thing too, to make clean ones teeth with

Let your meat be moderate, and provoking mirth.

Dine more sparingly.

Sup more plentifully.



Take as much meat and drink as is sufficient, not for lust, but for nature.

When you have dined, do something in a merry manner.

Toward supper walk a little while.

Being to get your supper do so too:

Study and write with an empty stomach.

THE END.
Sapientum sententiae,
Sententiae duarum dictionum
AMicis opitulare.

Alienis abstine.

Arcanum cela.

Affabilis esto.



Audacia periculosa.

Amicis utere.

Bonos honora.

Blandus esto.

Bonis benefacito.



Cognosce teipsum.

Cognatos cole.

Concordiam sectare.



Consule inculpate.

Dolum time.

Datum serva.

Depositum read.

Deferto neminem.



Diligentiam adhibe:

Existimationem retine:



Ebrietatem fuge.

Exerce probitatem.

Aequum judica.

Familiam cura.

Fac justa.



Fuge turpia.

Inimicitias fuge.

Iracundiam tempera.

Inimicitias dissolve



Justitiam colito.

Jusjurandum serva.

Libenter disce.

Ludos fuge.



Laudato honesta.

Linguam tempera:

Libros evolve.

Liberos institue.



Mortalia cogita.

Magistratum metue.

Mundus esto.

Majori cede.



Magistrum metue.

Multitudini placet.

Mendacium oderis.

Mieretricem fuge.



Neminem irriseris.

Ne jurato.

Neminem vitupera.

Nemini adverseris.

Nihil diuturnum.



Oculis moderare.

Otiosus ne sis.

Otium fuge.

Omnia mutantur.

Pacem dilige.



Probrum fugito.

Principem honora.

Pericolosa temeritas.



Pudorem serva.

Propria custodi.

Prudentiam exerce,

Respice suturum.



Religionem cole.

Regem honora.

Risum moderare.

Rectum quaere.



Rumores fugito.

Sapientibus utere,

Sobrius esto.

Saluta libenter.



Suspitionem ab jicito.

Temperantiam exerce.

Tempori pare.

Tecum habita.



Utere virtute.

Violentiam oderis.

Voluptatem tempera.

Verecunde responde.



Sententiae trium dictionum.
AMor vincit omnia.



Arma nesciunt leges.

Audentes fortuna juvat.

Assiduitas durissima vincit.



Avaritia nihil miserius:

Auro nihil inexpugnabile.

Ars vincit naturam.

Arcus nimis intensus rumpitur.

Aliena conscupiscere noli.



Amicos pecuniae faciunt.

Avaritia vitiorum eaput.

Alii aliis praestant.

Assuefactio efficacissima est.



Beneficii accepti memento.

Belli fortuna anceps.

Bellum gerendum consilio.

Brevis hominum vita.



Cultus res sacra.

Cor hominum indomabile.

Cor hominis pravum.

Crimina multa dissimulanda.



Cuique sua dos.

Comitas amicos pa rit.

Comitate vincendi morofi.

Conscientia mill testes.

Cibus immodicus noxius.



Cupiditas est inexplebilis.

Cupiditas pecuniae fugienda.

Calamitas nemini exprobranda.

Convitiis non respondendum.

Defidia generat oblivionem.

Dies affert multa.

Difficile assueta relinquere.

Di vitiae fastum pariunt.

Dies aegritudinem adimit.



Dona multum possunt.

Delinquentes sunt corrigendi.

Divitiae vitiorum ministrae.

Difficillimum vincere naturam.

Discordia dilabuntur regna.



Divitis incauta oration.

Divisio rem attenuat.

Dubium quodcunque probato.



Dives omnis inexplebilis.

Doloris medicus tempus.

Exercitatio optimus Magister.

Exercitatio potest omnia.



Exilium multos honestat.

Experimento nihil cettius.

Aetate prudentiores reddimur.

Ebrietatis comes oblivio.

Aetas corrumpitur vino.



Felicium multi cognati.

Felicitas incitat inimicitias.

Fames optimus coquus.

Fortuna reddit insolentes.



Ferocitas lenitate sedatur.

Factum stultus agnoscit.

Faeminae sunt inconstantes.

Furori cedendum est.



Finem vitae specta.

Forma perit vino.

Fortes fortuna adjuvat.



Firmum in vita nihil.

Fugax est aetas.

Futili nihil credendum.

Finis miseriae mors.



Gratia gratiam parit.

Gloriae fundamentum labor.

Honos alit arts.

Hominum mentes variae.

Honores praebet pecunia.



Humanarum rerum vicissitudo:

Infelix litium exitus.

Incertus rerum exitus.

Ira tormentum sui ipsius.



In vino veritas.

Ira^^ compescere arduum.

Jactantiae comes Invidia.

Ingenia hominum varia.



Incommodum hilaritate condiendum

Ingens telum necessitas.

Industrium adjuvat Deus.

Infida semper societas.

Inconstantia fastidit amicos.



Inexplebilis est mendacitas.

Injuria beneficio vincitur.

Jucunda rerum vicissitudo.

Ignorans omnis instabilis.



Iujurias tolerare difficile.

Laus excitat ingenium.

Lis parit litem.

Labor omnia florent.



Labores gloriae fundamentum.

Linguam digito compesce

Labor est thesaurus hominis.

Laus merces virtutis.



Malus similem quaerit.

Male partum dilabitur.

Multa docet fames.

Malum patientia tollitur.



Mulierem ornant silentium.

Miserrimum fame mori.

Mortalibus nihil tutum.

Munera capiunt homines.



Musicam docet amor.

Mors omnia sternit.

Mors est inevitabilis.

Mala senium accelerant.



Memoria thesaurus artium,

Maldictis non respondendum.

Natura paucis contenta.

Nemo sibi nascitur.



Nil mentire debes.

Necessitas caret lege.

Ne tua jactato.

Ne aliena despicito.



Necessitati nihil repugnat.

Necessitas frangit ferrum.

Nimia parsimonia vitanda.

Nox pudore vacat.



Nihil assuetudine majus.

Nusquam tuta fides.

Nihil inexpertum affirms.

Natura frustra repugnatur.



Obsequium amicos parit.

Occasio facit furem.

Opulentia tollit amicos.



Occasio non negligenda.

Opes celeriter dilabuntur.

Odium obsequio lenitur.

Omnia fert aetas:



Otium ingenii rubigo.

Paupertas excitat arts.

Praeceptori discipulus obediat.

Pecuniae obediunt omnia.

Praeceps consilium inauspicatum.



Parta sunt conservanda.

Pudor mendico inutilis.

Plurium calculus vincit.

Patria nihil dulcius



Principium dimidium totius.

Quae nocent, docent.

Quaevis terra patria.

Risus nimius cavendus.

Similia similibus favent.



Servitus omnis misera.

Soli fortunati amantur.

Somnus mortis imago.

Spes servat afflictos.

Studium humanos reddit.



Sequitur ver hyemem.

Stultus st ulta loquitur.

Studia mentem indicant.

Sors omnia versat



Superbi difficile corriguntur.

Solus sapiens dives.

Spes alit exules.

Sibi quisque placet.



Semper feriae inertibus.

Sermo medetur tristitiae.

Silentio nihil utilius.

Tempus edax rerum.



Tempus celerrime aufugit.

Tempore omnia mutantur.

Tempus omnia revelat.



Tempore nihil velocius.

Tempore fiunt omnia,

Tempus dolorem lenit.



Vetita magis appetimus.

Veritatis simplex oration.

Vulgi judicium stultum.

Virtus laudata crescit*

Usu omnia consumuntur.

Varia dona hominum.

Sententiae quatuor dictionum.


Aliis aliud vitii est

Amicis utendum cum modestia.



Ab hominibus blandientibus caven dum.

Amicos inter adversa cognoscimus.

Amici boni rari snnt.



Amanti nihil est difficile.

Ambitio in Republica pestilentissima.

Amicitia omnibus rebus anteponenda:

Annus fructificat, non tellus.



Ante annos prudentia nulla.

Assueta mala non offendunt.

Amor non est sanabilis.

Aversa saepe excitant ingenium.



Avari cupiditas nunquam expletur.

Audere non est sapientiae.

Amico fido nihil pretiosius.

Adest unicuique rei modus.

Admonentes libere rari sunt.



Amiciria nullum pondus recusat.

Amorem oculi potissimum conciliant.

Avari non possunt satiari.

Avaritia nullum vitium tetrius.



Beneficium semper beneficium provocat.

Beneficium animo donantis metiendum.

Beneficii exprobatio molesta est.

Bellum civil malum perniciosum.



Bonis amicis parcius utendum.

Bonos viros omnia decent.

Blandis verbis homines exorantur.

Conjugium inequalium malum est.



Calliditas nimia interdum obest.

Charum est quod rarum est.

Consuetudo omnia dura lenit.

Consilium ubique plurimum valet.

Conscientia recta suavissima est.



Commune naufragium omnibus solatium.

Consilium post facta inutile.

Cunctis opibus sapientia pretiosor.



Cum blanditur inimicus fallit.

Cum fortuna murantur amici.

Degeneres animos timor arguit.

Divitiae bonae mentis onera.

Docti doctorum familiaritate gaudent.



Dulce est paternum solum.

Deteriotum semper major pars.

Damnum turpi lucro praeponendum.



Donum a dautis animo pensatur.

Divitiae sunt causae jurgiorum.

Damnare facile neminem debemus.

Dissimulanda est sua miseria.

Esquilla non nascitur Rosa.



Ex aspectu nascitur amor.

Eruditiores efficimur omnes damno.



Ebrietas abditissima pectoris profert.

Ex minimis initis maxima.

Errare commune est mortalibus,

Ensis pueris non committendus.



Experientia est providentiae Magistra.

Ex parvis fiunt magna.

Ex otio vitia proveniunt.



Felicitas multos habet cognatos.

Fortuna simillima vento est.

Fallere alios malum est.

Futurorum uulla certa cognitio.



Fugiendum est malorum commercium.

Fratrum concordia rara est.

Fugienda sunt nimis alta.

Fides etiam hosti servanda.



Gloria pecuniis non emitur.

Homines ad malum proclives.

Hominis figura oratione cognoscitur.



Insipiente fortunato nihil intolerabilius.

Irati nihil recte faciunt.

Inter fratres rara concordia.

Ignavis semper feriae sunt.



In omni re opus est animo.

In adversis amicus probatur.

In omni re varietas delectat.

Inter arma silent leges.



Impetus cuncta male ministrat.

Innumeris laboribus honos constat.

Ira omnium tardissime senescit.

Ingens thesaurus bonus amicus.



Immensum gloria calcar habet.

Invidia suum torquet authorem:

Improba lingua nihil perniciosius.

Innumera mala parit securitas.



Ira non sedatur iracundia.

Labor est thesaurus hominibus.

Labor virtutis gloriam accipit.

Labor improbus omnia vincit.



Libenter feras quod necesse est.

Minerva invita nihil tentandum.

Mala herba non perit.

Men's est praesaga futuri.



Mendacem memorem esse oportet.

Malum lucrum aequale dispendio.

Multis ictibus dejicitur quercus.

Morosi nil candide interpretantur.

Malum consilium consultori pessimum.



Mors omni aetati communis est.

Mala sunt vicina bonis.

Malo accepto stultus sapit.

Male respondent coacta ingenia.

Modestia sanitati multum confert.



Natura nihil solitarium amat.

Negotiosa res est litigare.

Ne vulgi sequaris errores.



Nihil efficacius simplici veritate.

Ne majora viribus suscipias.

Nihil turpius seen libidinoso.

Nihil absurdius divite avaro.



Naturae necessitas exiguo placatur.

Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso.

Nocet temeritas multum mortalibus,

Nulla amicorum melior possessio.



Nihil dulcius amico monitore.

Nihil vulgarius quam fallere homines

Nimia lenitas non probatur.

Non semper arridet fortuna.



Omnia habere nemo potest.

Omnibus horis nemo sapit.

Optimum aliena infania frui.

Omnia suo tempore peragenda.



Oculus Domini saginat equum.

Otium multa docet vicia.

Omnium est dulcissimum accipere*

Omnia bona pace constant.



Oration factorum est simulachrum.

Oculi auribus sunt fideliores.

Omne solum forti patria

Pauperum mors est fine strepitu.



Praestantiores sunt senum sententiae.

Parva non sunt contemnenda.

Praecocia ingenia cito desistunt.

Patria sua cuique jucundissima.



Parsimonia and labor crescunt res.

Prudentis est multa dissimulare.

Perrurbato cordi nihil jucundum.

Perdifficile est bonum esse.



Probitas magnun ingenium facit.

Peccanti non praestandum obsequium.

Post mortem cessat invidia.



Quot capita, tot sensus

Qualis vir, talis oration*

Qualis princeps, talis populus.

Quisque suis malis blanditur.



Quot homines, tot sententiae.

Quantum habebis, tanti eris.

Qualis procontatio, talis responsio.



Rem peractum stultus intelligit.

Re praeterita omnes sapimus.

Rubor virtutis est color.



Ratio degenerat sine exerciratione.

Soli miseri carent invidia.

Sermon qualitas viri cognoscitur.

Silentio multis respondetur aptius.

Sequitur facile tempestatem serenitas.

Sua quemque alit ars.



Sermo opportunus est optimus.

Sermo character animi est.

Suus Rex Reginae placet.



Semper inops quicunque cupit.

Sua quemque studia delectant.

Sine opibus nihil valemus.

Sanitate nihil in vita melius.



Sapientia nimia non est sapientia.

Suus cuique attribuendus est error.

Supra vires nihil tentandum.

Suo quisque studio delectatur.



Turpe lucrum adducit infortunium.

Tempus omnia secum trahit.

Trahit sua quemque voluptas.

Tempore adversitatis probatur amicus.



Vinum immodicum, malorum causa.

Ventre pleno, pejor consultatio.

Vulgus amicitias utilitate probat.

Voluptates commendat rarior usus.



Ubi amici, ibi opes.

Ubi amor, ibi occulus.

Ubi dolor, ibi digitus.

Unus vir, nullus vir.



Virtute nulla possessio mayor.

Variae sunt rerum vices.

Vitia celari non possunt.

Vana gloria non est petenda.

Sententiae plurium dictionum.
AB aliorum casu disce quod vites.

Abjiciendus pudor quoties urget necessitas.



Ad otium proclives sumus omnes.

Adversa aequo animo sunt toleranda.

Adulatio, maxima in amicitia pestis.

Adolecentis est majores natu revereri.



Ad omnem disciplinam tardior senectus.

Agentes and consentientes pari paena puniuntur.

Alterius salus, alterius est exitium.



Alia vita, alia vivendi ratio.

Amicus verus, thesaurus est magnus.

Amici in rebus adversis cognoscuntur.

Amor verus nullum novit habere modum.



Animus cujusque sermon revelatur.

Ars laborat citra fortunae opem.

Asinus mavult stramina, quam aurum.

Aurum multis saepe suasit perperam.



Beneficium collatum in gratos solet foenerari*

Been pauperem esse, melius est quam ditescere male.

Beatissima civitas, quae a sapientibus regitur.



Bonis quod sit, haud perit,

Bonos viros nihil maledicta vulnerant.

Boni ad bonorum convivia ultro accedunt.

Canis pauperem peregrinum semper infestat.



Canis antiquus catenae assuefieri non potest.

Certiora quae videntur, quaae quae audiuntur.

Credendum non cito est, quod dicitur.



Cavendum ab eo qui semel imposuit.

Charius est quicquid mercede paratur.

Consilio melius vincas, quam iracundia.

Consultatione, re peracta, non opus est.

Consilium petendum a consultis and prudentibus.

Consuetudo cum bonis viris est habenda.

Corpus magis dolor affici quam mentem velis.

Corrigere naturam malam difficile est.



Consuetudo in rebus omnibus semper est potentissima:

Cura in omni re plurimum valet.

Cum amieo been merito non est suscipiendum certamen



Desipere in loco, summa sapientia est.

Dispares mores disparia studia sequuntur.

Dissidentes facile superantur, concordes haud facile.



Difficile est tristi fingere mente jocum.

Dives est qui nihil sibi desse putat.

Divitiae labor parantur, prodigalitate pereunt.



Difficilis res est inventu verus amicus.

Dives memineris, ut prosis pauperculis.

Doctrina vana eft, ratio ni accesserit.

Dos non facit faustum conjugium, sed virtus.



De suis quisque verbum facit.

Dum non licet, ut expeto, vivo, ut queo.

Damnaveris nullum causa non cognita.



Dum felis dormit, faliunt Mures.

Dantur opes nullis nunc, nisi divitibus.

Difficilius est foelicem, quam adversam far fortunam.

Doctus pauper diviti indocto praeponitur.

Ex parvo initio res magna oritur.

Ex vitio alterius sapiens emendat suum.

Ex aliorum erratis ipsi cautiores efficimur.

Exilium est illic homini, ubi parum commode vivit.

Exima est virtus praestare silentia rebus.

Enfis vulnerat corpus, sed animum oration.

Errata ipsi nostra non a gnoscimus.

Fortis est, falsam infamiam contemnere.

Fortis animi est non perturbari in rebus adversis.

Facilius quis consulit aliis, quam sibi.

Fortunae incommoda nihil movent sapientem.

Festinationis comites sunt error, and poenitentia.

Feliciter sapit, qui alieno periculo sapit.

Facile fustem invenerit, qui cupit caed ere canem.

Facile volat verbum, tamen nunquam redit.

Fortuna prospera, dum blanditur, perdit.

Felicissimus', cui nihil contigerit in vita mali.



Facile est absentem vincere, qui non repugnat.

Frustra sapit, qui sibi non sapit.



Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus.

Hostem beneficiis vincere, oprima ultio est.

Humilis fortuna tutior est quam excelsa.

Haereditas famae, quam divitiarum honestior.

Humani animi difficilis est conjectura.

Homo avarus, quicquid agit, properat omnia.

Habent and suam perrurbationem tranquillae aquae.

Heri probitas familiam etiam reddit meliorem.



Insperata accidunt magis saepius, quam quae speres.

Ingenia praeclara aemulis nunquam caruerunt.

Jugum qui fert volens, leve efficit.



Infelicitatem absconde, ne inimicos reddas laetos.

Ingentes opes non parantur sine fraud.

Ingratitudo omnia vitia in se complectitur.

Incommoditas semper comes est commoditatum.



Irae imperans vitam vives validissimam

Incumbere variis ubique est languidum.



In adversis rebus amicus cognoscitur.

In periculoso negotio non est dormitandum.

Impossibilia optare sibi, delirantis est.



Invendibili merci oportet ultro emptorem adducere.

Indicat amicos tempus, ut aurum ignis.

Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis.



Longior vita solet plurima incommoda afferre.

Laudatur, non qui diu, sed qui been vixit.



Luxu corporis hebetescit mentis acies.

Liberalem oportet esse, sed pro facultare.

Lucrum nisi esset, nemo malus esset.

Libentius oculatis, quam auritis testibus creditur.



Laud and obsequio vincuntur homines.

Mulier mala cunctis feris est ferocior.

Matrona frugi passim non est obvia.

Mulier domus salus est and calamitas.



Mores bonos colloquia prava diruunt.

Majora perdes, parva ni retinueris.

Multa eveniunt homini, quae non vult.

Modus omnibus in rebus optimus habendus.



Multi invident aliis bonum, quo ipsi carent.

Mentis habitum sermonis cultus solet indicare.

Multis displicet, qui sibi nimium placet.

Multo praestat medicari initia, quam finem.



Mores amici noveris, non oder is.

Mortalia omnia mutationes multas habent.

Magnae res discordia pereunt, concordia valent.

Mendacium od ^ omnis sapiens and bonus.



Maxima utilitas scire uti paupertate.

Nihil nostrum est, quod auferri potest.

Nulla discordia, ubi idem est animus.

Ne commercium habeas cum improbis.



Ne quenquam punito, rem nisi expende ris.

Noli misero insultare: sors communis est.

Nunquam repent vir bonus ditatus est.

Nullum animal, nulla merx difficilior cognitu quam homo.



Non aetate, sed ingenio, acquiritur sapientia.

Non proderit tibi ingeni^ ^elicitas, nisi exercueris.



Ne moveris malum been conditum.

Nihil turpius, quam cum familiari bellum gerere.

Nemo est hominum, in quo non aliud vitii inest.

Non est beneficium, quod in quaestum mittitur.



Ne disce turpitudinem, neve admiseris.

Non foeminam aurum exornat, sed boni mores.



Nihil praeter quod gliscit, novit foemina.

Natura non sinit praeesse foeminam.

Nihil est ab omni part beatum.

Nihil pejus moerore in rebus mortalium.

Nullam feres pauperie molem acerbius.

Ne cuncta semper, oro, credas omnibus.



Nihil est tam grave, quam paupertas.

Ne festina ditescere, ne pauper fias statim.

Naturum iniquitas morum plane inficit.

Nihil est tam grave, q^in amicum feceris.



Nemo sic diligenter aliena, ut sua, curat negotia.

Ne conare, quod fieri non potest.

Nihil est tam diuturnum, quod non emolliat assiduitas.



Non ulli tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum.

Non est ejusdem and multa and opportuna dicere.



Naturae suum jus eripere difficile est.

Neglectis urenda filix innascitur agris.

Nihil recte faciunt ministri, nisi adest herus.

Non omnia veniunt, quae in animo statueris.



Oculis magis habenda fides quam auribus.

Optime cogitata saepe pessime cedunt.

Oportet senescentem semper aliquid addiscere.



Omnes sibi melius esse malunt, quam alteri.

Omnis res properando parit errorem.

Omne malum nascens facile opprimitur.



Opportet id, quod adest, boni consulere.

Optimum erit si quis tempus spectaverit aptum:

Onus, cui impar sis, ne subiveris.



Omnium rerum extremum est mors.

Patienter ferenda, quae mutari non possunt.

Patrum mores non sunt arguendi, sed ferendi.

Pauci in secundis rebus moderati sunt.



Patria sua cuique jucundissima est.

Post factum plerunque magis sapimus.

Proruunt cornua arietibus been pastis.

Pessimi sunt consultores ira and cupido.



Plurima sunt cognoscenda, sed optima retinenda,

Praeceps ira multorum malorum author.

Pharmaca nascenti sunt adhibenda malo.

Pulchritudo corporis fragile bonum est.



Parva scintilla contempta maximum excitat incendium.

Periculosum est se aquis credere.

Praestantissimarum rerum summa raritas est.

Prudentis est nihil remere agere.



Proba merx facile emptorem reperit.

Praeterita reprehendi possunt, corrigi non possunt

Plures vincuntur aequabilitate, quam duritia.



Praestat mori, quam foedam vitam vivere.

Placidis dictis dolor recte curabitur.

Ponere modum irae and voluptati, bonum est.

Praestat egere, quam scelere ditescere.



Pluris est oculatus testis unus, quam auriti december.

Plures necat lingua, quam gladius.

Perturbato cordi nihil est jucundum.

Pinguis venture non gignit sensum tenuem,



Plus audit quisque domi, quam foris.

Plus videut oculi, quam oculos.

Probis ab animis facta promanant proba.

Patria est homini ubicunque feliciter agit.

Pauper est, non qui parum habet, sed qui plus cupit.



Pudore amisso omnis virtus ruit.

Praeterita compellunt nos futurorum rationem habere.



Pueris nocet potare vinum.

Quod repent tollitur, non est diuturnum.

Quae cernuntur, certiora sunt, quam quae audiuntur.

Quod quisque vehementer amat, ejus non potest oblivisci.



Quicquid praeter spem evenit, id deputato esse in lucro.

Qui fugitant labores optant dies ^estos

Quicunque recusat laborem, non fert fructum.



Quod multi faciunt, non continuo bonum est.

Quod uni bonum, alteri malum videtur.

Quod non est assue tum, laborem recusat.

Qui nimium properat, serius absolvit.



Quod satis est cui contingit, nihil amplius optet.

Qui se peccare nescit, corrigi non vult.



Quod natura est insitum, nullo corriges negotio.

Quisque advigilat ad id quod expetit.



Quicquid nativum est, id haud facile mutatur.

Qui simul duplex captat commodum, utroque frustretur

Quoq fatis decretum est, nemni licet evitare.

Quod factum est, infectum fieri non potest.



Qui de se praedicant arrogantius malos habenr vicinos.

Quae merito pateris, facile ferenda sunt.



Resnon potest confistere, cum quaestum superat sumptus

Res initio pusilla crescit in majus.

Res factu ardua, tamen assidua iudustria evincitur.

Rei non bonae consuetudo pessima est.



Res mala est multa concupiscere.

Rex magnus quise been rexerit,

Solatium in miseriis amicus compatiens.

Secundae res incautos dementant, and perdunt.



Saepe etiam sub palliolo sordido sapientia est.

Saepe de levissimis causis existit ira.

Sine pennis volare haud facile est.

Supellex mulieris est clarus clamor.



Suum quisque studium maxim probat.

Sapientia est a viro sapiente discere.

Summa cura lingua regi debet.

Sulti sunt, qui corrigi nolunt.



Si non potes quod vis die velis quod possis.

Senex homo est molestus caetui juvenum.

Sapientia non est res ulla dignior.

Sapiens in se omnem habet substantiam-



Sapienti turpe est dicere, non putavi.

Semper malis invisa fuit egregia virtus.

Senex multa, quae non vult, vid et.

Si dixeris, quae vis, quae non vis, audies.



Stultus, perinde atque luna, immutatur.

Saepe vincas sapientia, quem non viceris impetu.

Sola pecunia possunt expugnari alioqui invicta.



Solitariae man it is invalida pugna est.

Sine convictore amico insuavis vita est.

Silendo nemo peccat, loquendo persaepe.

Spernimus in commune omnes praesentia.



Sine open divina nihil valemus.

Semper fimilem ducit Deus ad similem.

Saepenumero pessima pro bonis amplectimur.



Satius est tacere, quam tacenda proloqui.

Saepe consilio dissimilis eventus.

Spectandus semper est finis, and rei exitus.

Tempus nullum est infructuose transeundem.



Tum judicant homines, ubi jam poenitet.

Tempus ad lucem ducit veritatem.

Temulentus dormiens non est excitandus.

Tarditas in rebus gerendis odiosa.



Talis quisque fit, cum qualibus habet familiaritatem.

Verecundia bonum in adolescente signum.

Violentia odium parit, odium dissentiones.



Ubi quisque thesaurum habet, ibi habet and cor.

Vt tua fuerit oration, ita tibi respondebitur.

Voluntas saepe laudanda est, ubi vires desunt.



Varia and mutabilis semper foemina.

Uxor, quae pudicitiam amisit, omnia perdidit.

Uxorum vitia post nuprias discimus.

Voluptate capiuntur homines, ut hamo pisces.



Victum para undecunque, at non ex crimine.

Unicuique dedit vitium natura creato.

Ubi quis dolet, ibidem and manum habet.

Vita nostra similis bullae in aqua.



Sententiae sacra festis diebus juventuti literariae proponendae.


Affectum cordis exigit Deus.

Afflictis adesse solet Dominus.

A Deo pendent omnia.

Ad terrena non respiciendum.



Assidue been operandum.

Adversitates nostrae a Deo.

Avaritia infert Dei oblivionem.

Ad verbum Dei nihil addendum.



Amisso verbo Dei omnia amittuntur.

Animae salus a verbo Dei pendet.

Avari verbum Dei derident.

Audaces Dominus dejicit.

Adamo peccatum in nos derivatum est.

A Deo omnia donantur, quibus egemus.

Ad vanitatem natura proclivis est homo.

Auxilium a Domino expectandum.

Avaritia cor excaecat and indurat.



Benedictio Dei omnia foecundat:

Bona omnia dantur credenti.

Bonorum nostrorum dispensatores tantum sumus.

Bonitas Dei rebus in omnibus elucet.



Bellum moventes primi saepe vincuntur.

Bello parta, bello pereunt regna.

Bona piis adveniunt Dei gratia.

Bona opera probant fidem.



Cognitio Dei vita aeterna.

Consilio Dei omnia fiunt.

Credenti omnia sunt possibilia.

Consilia Dei non mutantur.



Christiani templum Dei sunt.

Charitas symbolum credentium.

Charitas est plenitudo legis.

Consilium nullum contra Dominum.



Confidentia sola habenda in Deum.

Christum qui fide habet, omnia habet.

Christus est omnium bonorum thesaurus.

Crux sequitur confessionem fidei.



Compatiendum omnibus.

Crux est probatio fidei.

Conscientia certa omnia facienda sunt.

Caecitas est poena contemptus verbi Dei.



Calamitas omnis, peccatorum poena est.

Credentes omnia Deo committunt.

Credentes in Christum habent vitam aeternam*

Concordia Ecclesia regenda est.



Christum audit, qui ex veritate est.

Christo obediunt omnes creaturae.

Christi regnum in aeternum durabit.

Cultus Dei sine fide nullus.



Cura omnis Deo committenda.

Christus unus, a morte liberat.

Christum sequentibus nihil deesse potest.

Cum hostibus benefice agendum*



Confidendum non est in homine.

Consilia hominum a Deo moderantur.

Contra mortem non est remedium,

Dei voluntas omnibus in rebus spectanda.



Deus curam nostri habet.

Damnandum temere nihil, est.

De verbo otioso reddenda est ratio.

Deus emendat nos cruce.



Deus subito suos adjuvat.

Deus solus scrurator cordium.

Deo nihil non possibile.

Deus conditor rerum omnium.



Deus solus sempirernus est.

Deus fide agnoscitur.

Deus spes fidelium.

Deo nihil est occultum.



Deus regit omnia.

Doctrina quaevis probanda.

Deus homini omnia subjecit.

Deus non respicit personas.



Dei consilia nobis abscondita.

Deo plus obediendum, quam hominibus.

Deus sibi soli omnia reservavit.

Dei mandatis nihil addendum.



Deus suos liberat suo tempore.

Dives and pauper a Deo facti.

Deus ubi non est, ibi nihil.

Deum humana astutia nihil celare potest.



Deus homines non vult otiosos esse.

Divitiarum cupiditas a Deo abducit.

Deus pascit ac servat nos ultra nostram curam.

Deus est Spiritus, and in spiritu adorandus.



Deus solus and gratis remittit peccata.

Deus operatur omnia bona opera in nobis.

Deus verbo suo monet, antequam puniat:

Deus corrigit, sed non abjicit suos.



Exempla multorum non sunt imitanda.

Externa non inquinant hominem*

Eveniunt non quae nos instituimus, sed quae Deus decrevit.



Emendatio vitae fit lege Dei.

Ebrietatis poena, stultitia.

Fidelibus nihil deest.



Furor depravat judicia.

Fides Dei donum est.

Fides sola justificat.

Fides gratis data.



Fidei signa, opera sunt.

Fides facit filios Dei.

Fides adversitate probatur.

Fidelium mors vita.



Famis tempore satiantur fideles.

Fides bonorum operum fons.

Fides verbo Dei nititur.

Futurorum cura nobis inutilis.



Fides vera non potest esse otiosa.

Fides cujusque ex fructibus cognoscitur.

Gloria Deo tribuenda, non nobis.

Gemitus oppressorum exaudit Deus.



Garrulitas stultitiae and mendacii argumentum.

Gratia nondum natis promittit Deus bona.

Humiles erigit Deus.



Homini cuncta serviunt.

Humilitatem vult Deus.

Hominis vita militia est.

Honor solius Dei est.



Humana solatia pereunt.

Homo calamitosum animal.

Homo ad calamitatem nascitur.

Homo omnia a deo accipit



Homines sapientia, non viribus suis reguntur.

Humiliat Deus omnia excelsa.

Hominis cor ex natura sua malum.

Humana ratio Deum agnoscit.

Homo sibi ipsi calamitatum author.



Judicia Dei inscrutabilia.

Inobedientia Deo displicet.

Judicare alios, periculosum.



Judicandum est post causam cognitam.

Impiorum consilia non succedunt.

Incredulitas radix omnium peccatorum.

Impii suo consilio consumuntur.



Ignorantes legem Dei maledicti sunt.

In timore Dei omnia agredienda.

Impiis voluptas est alienam famam laedere.

In solo nomine Jesu salvamur.



Impius quod maxim timet, accidit ei.

Impiis omnia cedunt in malum.

Labor comparandus victus.

Liberalibus benedicit Deus.



Laetitia jusiorum nunquam perit.

Liberorum copia Dei donum optimum.

Longior vita, diuturna calamitas.

Magistratui parendum.



Morbi ob peccatum veniunt.

Majoribus honor exhibendus.

Miracula non temere fiunt a Deo.

Mali puniendi ut non laedantur boni.



Misericordia Dei omnibus necessaria.

Mors dura sequitur bonam vitam.

Monitis salutaribus non obtemperantes pereunt.

Mors in credentes nihil juris haber.



Malum non alio malo, sed bono pellitur*

Malis Deus utitur organis.

Non temere judicandum.

Nullum malum impunitum.



Nemini maledicendum.

Nemo sine peccato est.

Nemo coram Deo innocens.

Nemo sibi soli natus est.



Non ferunt impii castigationem:

Nihil facilius quam calumniari.

Nullus Propheta acceptus in patria.

Numerus populi Dei paucissimus.

Nihil possumus ex nobis.



Non obliviscitur suorum Deus.

Nihil caecius cord impii.

Nihil externi moratur Deus.



Otium execratur Deus.

Omnes sumus peccatores.

Omnia homnium opera impura.

Operarius cibo suo dignus.



Oculorum concupiscentia decipit.

Omnia nostra in manu Dei posita.

Omnia possibilia sunt credenti.

Opus non respicit Deus, sed animum.



Omnia verbo Dei condita sunt.

Omnia in melius interpretanda.

Opportunitas nusquam non observanda.

Orandi torpor malum praesagium.



Pios fovet Dominus.

Peccatum causa mortis.

Peccata operit charitas.

Poena impiorum aeterna.



Piorum memoria aeterna.

Pauperes ulciscitur Deus.

Peccata non delentur operibus.

Piis condiuntur dulcia amaris.



Princeps bonus a Domino datur.

Peccara remittuntu ex gratia Dei.

Pascit Deus suos certissime.

Peccatum est quod absq^e fide est.



Pauperi merces non est deferenda.

Peccata solus Deus remittit.

Providentia Dei mundus gobernatur.

Propitius Deus optima haereditas.



Qui plus ambit, minus consequitur.

Qui magna moliuntur, ^ihil efficient.

Respublica propter pios floret.

Reddetur unicuique juxta facta sua.



Rebus utendum, sed non fidendum.

Reprehensio sit sine calumnia.

Senectus veneranda.

Superbos perdet Deus.



Succes^us a Deo est.

Superbia animarum perditrix.

Scandalum non praestandum pueris.

Sapientia, non arma, defendit.



Sine fide in Chistum nemo salvatur.

Sine verbo Dei nemo est sapiens.

Sapientes ferunt castigationem.

Satan nocere nequit, non permittente Deo.



Sapientia humana, stultitia in rebus Dei.

Tarde est irascendum.

Tranquillitas in hac vita non speranda.

Timentes Dominum been vivent.



Verbo Dei alimur.

Voluntas Domini stabilis.

Vindictam prohibet Deus.

Veritas semper persecutores habebit.



Vocatio cuique sua curanda.

Veritatis contemptus gravissimum peccatum.

Vincere cupiditatem maxima fortitudo.


SUrgens mane, primum diei initium auspicaberis in nomine Patris, and Filii,
and Spiritus Sancti.



Gratias ages, quod eam noctem voluit prosperam tibi.

Deinde precaberis, ut diem itidem illum totum tibi fortunet been, ne impingas
in peccatum.

Mox veniens in conspectum, felicem diem precaberis

Inde, capillitium comes, manu vultum lavabis, ut quam primum recipias te ad
ludum.

Ante ingressum, Spiritum suum ut tibi largiatur Christus,

Cum veneris in phrontisterium, libenter ausculta, and quod agis, toto pectore
agito.

Responde verecunde. Prava non mordicus confuta, sed

Ante omnia cave, ne merito vapules.

Ne quid dicto factove vel praeceptorem offendas vel sodales tuos.

Disputantem contra te magis doce, quam vince^



Domi si quid est obsequii praestandum parentibus, diligenter obi.

Quod si vacat tecum repetere, quod praelectum est in

Ubi hora ingruerit prandii mensam adornato in tempore.

Sed ante apparatum pocula diligenter mundato.



Eodem autem modo quo apparatur, ita and removetur Mensa.



Inde caseus, vel quicquid aliud est secundarum Men. sarum.



Erectis and compositis pedibus sta, solicit animadvertens ne desit quid; and
cum insundendum, sive quid porrigendum, apponendum, aut tollendum est,
civiliter id feceris.



Ante and post epulas Deo benedicas.

Astans non turbabis, vel interturbabis aliorum sermonem, sed interrogatus
breviter respondeto.



Salis ne obliviscitor.

Scissum vel confractum mensae ne apponito.



Emungens candelam, ne extinguito.

Sed ne assuescas etiam quicquid de mensa remotum est,

Actis gratiis, sublatis omnibus, si quid vacat, lusu quopiam honesto animum
laxa cum sodalibus, donec hora revocat in ludum a lusu.



Imprimis, ungues praescissos habeto.

Manus lavato.

Erectus accambito.



Ebrie tatem suge.

Sobrius esto.

Sic praebebis hilarem te, ut semper memineris quid deceat aetatem tuam.



Si quid datur lautius, recusato modeste.

Si instabitur, accipe, and gratias age.

Mox decerpta portiuncola, quod reliquum est, illi reddito,

Alterius autem uxori, marito assiden^e, nihil reddideris. Similiter principi
aut magnati nihil reddideris.

Parenti, amico, cognaris licet srangere, quae optima videntur.



Si quis praebibit tibi, hilariter illi been precare.



Ipse ne quid loquare, nisi rogatus.

Si quid obscaeni dicetur, ne arride, sed compone v^lrum quasi non intelligas.



Ne cui temet anteponito.

Ne tua jactato.

Ne aliena dispicito.

Esto comis erga tenuis fortunae sodales.



Ne sis lingua fut li.

Si v^der^s conv^vum esse prolixius, precatus veniam, ac salutatis convivis,
subducito te mensa.



Digitulos proscindens cultro ne opposueris.

Quae ante and juxta reposita sunt edito.

Decerpturus ex catino puippiam, summo cultro compehendito.



Ne confundas, vel turbaveris digitis, quae posita sunt in catino.

Ova manducaturus, panem conscindito frustatim prius.



Mature edas ovum.

Testas non contractas in catinum rejicito.

Inter edendum ovum, non potabis.

Comesturus, thoracem ne commacules.



Suprema labia ^ur nasum manica ne immungas intaer epulandum. Nasum non
abstergas nisi sudariolo, idque civiliter atque modesto.

Mucum digito non exculpito.



Buccellas ne nimis densas sumito vel amplas, sed singulas conscindito.

Ex ore nihil extraxeris in orbem.



Omnis cachinnus effusus in convivio turpis est.

Potaturus duobus digitis labra suprema abstergito.

Non appareat supernatans in poculo tuo saginamen aut pinguedo.



Simul and mandere and loqui rusticum est.

Screare similiter, aut oscitare, expuere crebrius similiter incivile habetur.



Panem tinctum vino edere ex poculo in coetu hominum, ridiculum est.

Non recumbes in dorsum more rusticorum.



Inter sorbendum nihil distilles, neque bis uno haustu sorpseris.

Donec manderis and glutiveris, ne sorbeas iterum.



In ossibus si quid pulpamenti haeret, modeste cultro proscindito.

Alii vero convivae, quid praecerpant, vel appositum habeant,

Quod semel dentibus demorsum, aut rosum est, paropsidi ne inseras.

Turpe est ossium and eduliorum quisquilias sub mensam dejicere.



Cibus efto temperatus ac festivus.

Prande parcius.

Caena liber alius.



Cibi vel potus, non quantum libidini, sed quantum naturae satis est, sum.

Pransus, hilariter quaedam facito.

Sub caenam paulisper ambula.

Caenaturus idem facito.

Jejunus studebis, acscribes.

FINIS.

