THE CRY OF OPPRESSION and CRUELTY
Inflicted upon diverse Innocent People called Quakers, in the County of
Gloucester, for peaceable meeting together to worship God; being a Copy of a
Paper directed to the Judges of the late Assizes at Gloucester; presented to the
tender Consideration of such, who are in Power to relieve the oppressed.
BEfore you we lay our Grievances in as brief a manner as may be, desiring you
may weigh and consider thereof, and relieve the oppressed, who are a People
searing God, and do show forth the Fruits of his Heavenly Gift, in walking
honestly and justly in the sight of all our Neighbors and Countrymen.

This is an Account of the sad and deep Sufferings of the People called QUAKERS
in and about Winterburn and Olverstone, and about Kings-Westone, and about
Westerly, and Little Badmanton, in the County of Gloucester, in the years, 1676,
and 1677. by Francis Fane, and Gabriel Low, and John Meridith, called Justices
of the Peace.

In and about those Places aforesaid, from about Fifty Eight Persons
Inhabitants thereabout, there has been taken away and lost of their Goods, on
Account of the late Act against Conventicles, by Warrants from the Justices
aforesaid, the Goods and Losses already suffered amounting to about 717 l. 11
s. the Particulars being ready to be showed to them that desire it: And besides
the Account above, there are more Fines imposed, and Warrants granted
thereupon, to the value of One Thousand Pounds and upwards.

Also a further account of the most cruel and barbarous Actions and Proceedings
of J. Meridith called Justice, against an Innocent, Harmless People for no
other cause, but for their meeting and worshipping the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth; and in the pure Worship in the Spirit of Truth endeavoring to keep
their Consciences void of Offense both to God and man. -- He caused 27 Persons
to be indicted at the Sessions at Gloucester, in the year 1677. for not coming
to their Church so called, though many of them had been Sufferers by the Act
against Conventicles; and they were threatened with Imprisonment.

The said Justice Meridith at a Meeting sent Henry Poyntin and Nathaniel
Heskins to prison, for not finding Sureties for their good Behavior, though no
misbehaviour was proved against them: and they were kept above a quarter of a
year prisoners, on no other Account, without any Trial: and then he caused an
Indictment to be read against them, above a quarter of a year after they had
been imprisoned as aforesaid: and that Indictment being read at the Sessions
against them, for not coming to their Church so called, for eight weeks, they
were fined Forty Pounds a piece, and kept Prisoners as they had been above
three Months, and had no Trial, and are Prisoners to this day.

The said Justice Meridith at a Meeting at Frenchbaw, in the County of
Gloucester, upon the 13th day of the 4th month (commonly called June) fell upon
William Bennet, and beat him very sorely; and he did beat William Wade also.
The twentieth of the same Month, at the same place, in the Highway, near the
Meeting House, be found John Silcock and he took him by the hair of the Head,
and plucked him into the Meeting House Yard, and then drew his naked Knife, and
said, He would mark him; but his own Clerk and others stepped in and prevented
him: otherwise it was verily thought, he would have done the said Silcock some
great mischief. -- The twenty third of the same month, coming to the same
place, he demanded of George Peace what his Name was, and he not giving his
Name suddenly, John Meridith drew his naked Knife upon him, but one of his own
Servants restrained him from his wicked purpose. -- The twenty seventh of the
same month at the same place, the said John Meridith took John Bawn and pulled
him by the hair of the head, and after that finding him in the Highway the
same day, he fell upon him and beat him after a very cruel and barbarous manner.

And the said Meridith did beat John Friar, and Joseph Glover two Officers,
because they refused to pull and hale people as he would have them. Samuel
Symons making his Appeal to John Meridith for a Fine taken from him, the said
Meridith fell upon him and beat him exceedingly in his own house.

Several others were beaten and abused by the said Meridith, which would be
tedious to mention particuly. Many Friends were Eyewitnesses to these
Passages. And the said Justice Meridith broke five Glass Windows to pieces with
his Staff, not leaving so much as one whole Quarrel, and also caused the
Benches and Forms to be cut to pieces.

Since the Account aforesaid there has been taken from John Boy of Luckinton,
for three several Fines amounting to 11 l. goods worth about the same value, by
Warrant from Justice Gabriel Low.

And the Officers when they seized upon our poor Friends Goods, belonging to
Badmanton Meeting, did say, they were charged by Gabriel Low Justice, to take
all they could find, and that which was not worth carrying away, they should
burn it, or break it to pieces, insomuch that Thomas Holbrow an old blind man,
and his wise, and several other poor Friends, had not a Bed left them, but
their Lodging has been on Straw for several weeks; and its above eleven
Months since the blind man's Bed was taken, and his Lodging is on Straw to
this day. And some Friends lent some of the Sufferers a Bed and Coverlets, and
some other things to keep them warm in the winter, and the said Officers took
away part thereof, and broke the Bedstead, and cut the Cord. Also the aforesaid
blind man and Henry Ash by of Hawksbury-Vpton were taken up by Sessions
Process, and carried to Goal, being indicted by that Act for not going to their
Worship.

Some of the Marquess of Worcester his Servants, Thomas Cook his Butcher,
Robert Long his Brewer, John Newman his Keeper, These became Informers, and
went to Little Badmanton often to the Quake's Peaceable Meetings being at the
Blind man's house and there in a most cruel barbarous manner abused the
Innocent People of that Meeting, of which Abuses he ear some few Instances,
for the sake of them that have some Tenderness in them, and are against these
wicked Practices.

Thomas Cook the Butcher one of the Informers aforesaid, at the said Meeting
said, It was no more sin to kill one of them, then to kill a Dog: He did much
abuse Sarah Ashby, by punching, beating, and using her in a shameful manner,
And so did John Newman another of the aforesaid Informers throw the said Sarah
to the Ground in a shameful, wicked manner; and by the wrong she received, she
suffered damage to her Body, and some time after fell ill. The said Informers
came to the Meeting when there were but three Persons besides the Family, whom
they took and threw against the walls, and against the Posts of the Door in a
cruel barbarous manner; and Thomas Holbrow the blind man of the house told
them, their Actions were quite contrary to the Act; the said Informers replied,
What do you tell us of the Act? We matter not the Act. The said Informers
abused John Jones in a desperate shameful manner, throwing him over the Gate
several times to the hazard of his Life, throwing him upon his Back, and then
laid him thwart a Stick, and in a grievous manner abused him.

And at another time, when the said Informers were abusing Friends, they said,
If we kill one of you, we believe we shall not be hangged for it.

And the said Informers took Benjamin Power, and threw him over a wall, and did
beat him in a shameful manner; and at another time in a Meadow, the said
Informers took him, and threw him upon his Back, and in a most wicked manner
abused him. And the said Informers took John Boy and threw him over a Gate and
Style several times, and dragged him in the Street on his Back, in the Dirt,
and drove him in a Wheel-Barrow, and threw water on him, also they took him a
Height from the Ground, and let him fall on his Back; This they have done
several times. Also the said Informers took John Tailor in the Street, and
struck him Several desperate Blows, and threw him over a Wall in such a
dangerous manner that it might have undone him. Thomas Cock Informer took
Nehemiah Stinchcomb and led him away from the Meeting, out of sight, and did
beat him till his flesh was black; and had not one looked over a Wall
accidentally, they knew not but he might have been spoiled: And he lay very ill
under the Bruises several days.

The said Informers took John Beard as he was going into a Friends house, by
the hair of the head, and beat his head against a Post in an Unchristian-like
manner; and they swore very desperate Oaths, That they would out off his Ears;
and they followed him half a Mile Beating, Kicking, Punching, and Nipping him
by the Ears, in a very wicked barbarous manner; another time they put a Rope
about his Neck, and so led him up the Street. The said Informers took John
Peace, a man about sixty four years old, and dragged him out of the Meeting
into the Street, and threw him upon his Back, and then took him up by his
Girdle above the Ground, and let him fall again, in a desperate manner:
Moreover they said, they would throw him into a Well (which was near) but one
coming by prevented them; and being much bruised he complained of it a great
while.

It would be tedious to instance all the Wrongs and Injuries which these
Innocent People have suustained from these wicked malicious Informers.

And also some suffer by the Act of 12 d. a day for not coming to the
Parish Church so called: So the Judges, and others in Authority to do Justice,
may see how many Laws are laid upon us, to destroy us, contrary to the King's
Words and Speeches (viz.) That none should call us in Question if we live
Peaceable: And none can justly say, that ever we did forfeit our Liberty: And
we do believe it is not the King's mind, that we should be ruinated and
destroyed, who are his Peaceable Subjects, and desire his Good, and all that
are under HIM.

A further Account of the Sufferings of the People called Quakers in the
Forest of Dean, in the County of Gloucester, upon the late Act against
Conventicles; By these and such like proceedings the Cruelty of the Merciless
is made manifest.
JOhn Gwyn of Colford in the County aforesaid, for being at Meetings to worship
God, in the aforesaid Town, was fined Twenty five Shillings, for three several
Meetings (viz.) the first Meeting being on the seventh day of the eighth
month, 77. The second upon the twenty first of the eighth month, 77. The
third Meeting being upon the eighth day of the tenth month, 77. for which he
had a Mare, Saddle, Bridle, Hatchet, Nippers, Looking-glass, and two Eggs, and
his Wife's nursing-basket and Comb (having a Wife and five small Children) with
other Goods taken from him upon the twenty first day of the tenth month, 77.
to the value of 3 l. by John Benfield Constable of the said Town, by virtue of
a warrant from Baynham Throck-morton Knight, upon Information to the said
Justice by Charles Williams Bailiff of the Hundred, and William Vick being
Informers.

William Hibbs of Aylburton, in the County aforesaid, for being at the same
Meeting to worship God, was fined in the sum of twenty shillings; and by
warrant from the aforesaid Justice, directed to Richard Brown Constable, who
came with other Officers the last day of the tenth month, 77. to take
distress; and the said William not being at home, John Mills Overseer of the
poor, violently broke open his Son Jonathan Hibs his shop door, and took as
much Cloth of Linen, and Woollen, that was worth twelve Ponnds and upwards, for
the fine of twenty shillings imposed upon his Father.

Jenkin Hopkin of Colford for being at the same Meetings, was fined for himself
and others, in the sum of 14 l. of the which fine 10 l. was for the Speaker;
the aforesaid John Benfield Constable, with several other Officers, came to
take Distress the twenty fourth day of the tenth month, 77. and did take away
out of his shop, Cloth and other Goods; and the twenty sixth day following,
they being not satisfied for the fine, came again and riffled his shop and his
house, and carried away what they pleased, not leaving Bed-clothes to cover
himself, his Wife and Children; This was done in the presence of many of his
Neighbors; who seeing their Cruelty, did lament and weep, and said, They
feared God's Judgments would come upon them, because of such Doings: The value
of which Goods cannot at present be justly given account of as hereafter may.

Henry Lloyd of Alvington in the County aforesaid, being fined in the sum of
twenty pounds, for the Meeting House, and by Warrant from the aforesaid
Justice, directed to John Knight Constable of the aforesaid Town, who with
other Officers came and seized upon his Corn in his Barn, to the value of
Thirty pounds.

William Howel of Colford, for being at the same Meetings before mentioned, was
fined in twenty five shillings, for which he had Iron and other Goods taken
from him the twenty sixth day of the eleventh month, 77. by John Benfield
Constable of the aforesaid Town, and other Officers, worth three pounds, which
Goods, fifty shillings worth of it not being his own, the Owner had it again.

John Rainolds of Beryhill, for being at one of the said Meetings before named,
was fined in five shillings for himself, and ten pounds for the Speaker, for
which he had taken from him on the twenty sixth day of the tenth month, 77. by
the aforesaid Constable and other Officers, by Warrant from the aforesaid
Justice, One Cow, One brewing-Kettle, One big Iron Pot, One Brass Pot, One big
Brass Candlestick, One Pewter Candlestick, Three Dishes of Pewter, One Pewter
Salt-sellar, One Gridiron, Two Dripping-pans, One Bolster, One Pillow, One
Coverlet, and a Table-cloth: The just worth of these Goods we know not.

This Account was taken the 22d day of the 11th month, 77. by us whose Names
are hereunto subscribed. Henry Lloyd Jenkin Hopkin. William Hibbs. John Hibbs.
William Howel. John Gwyn.


A Postscript.
WE are persuaded, yea, clearly and fully satisfied by our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, That NONE (Especially such) who do profess his Holy Name and
Doctrine, Ought to persecute about, or concerning Religion, Faith and Worship
of the living God; Persecution being wholely inconsistant with the Tender
Spirit, Holy Doctrine, Meek and Innocent Conversation of the Heavenly Man
Christ Jesus our souls Captain, High Priest and Bishop, who came not to cost^oy
men's Lives, but to save them, who is our Prince of Peace, who leads us into
Peace with God, and one with another, and to have Unfeigned Love unto our
Enemies; in which Love we pray for those who have and do persecute and
Dispitefully use us, in which we desire their Unfeigned Repentance, and
Salvation.

The Law which came by Moses, which punished those who rebelled against God (in
running into false worship and Idolatry) with outward and bodily Punishment to
death, was ended by our Lord Jesus Christ, who offered up himself through the
eternal spirit, 1600 years ago, as a Lamb without Spot and Blemish, who rebuked
his own Disciples, who in their infancy would have fire come down from heaven
to destroy those who would not receive him: We believe and are assured by him,
that it is the Duty of his Disciples and Ministers to labor in the Spirit of
Truth, in Unfeigned Love, Meekness and Patience, to convince and convert
Idolators and all Gainsayers (who are under Mistakes about Religion, Faith in
God and Christ, and Worship, etc.) by Sound Doctrine, Good Life and
Conversation; for so Christ Jesus and his Holy Apostles and Ministers did;
whose Holy Doctrine and Example we are exhorted, by him and them, to follow: By
these Spiritual Weapons they destroyed Idolatry out of the hearts of Multitudes
and coverted them to God; but those who have pretended to set up and uphold
Christian Religion, by outward Violence, in oppressing People, and destroying
them in their Persons and Estates, by these their Carnal and Unchristian
Weapons, they never made one True Christian, nor ever can; but such do bring a
great Scandal upon the Name of Christianity among the Turks, Jews and Heathens.

Christ and his Apostles were persecuted for their pure, peaceble Religion, but
they never persecuted any. We desire the Rulers and Magistrates of England
seriously to consider of these things, and of the many Grievous Burdens which
have been laid and long continued upon us in our Persons and Estates, Only for
our Faith in, and Obedience to God and Christ. And we desire you in the Fear
and Love of God, to exercise your Power to remove Oppression from off the
Peaceable People of God in this Land, that the God that made you may take
pleasure in you, and give you the Reward of Peace and Rest in your latter End;
for he will certainly reward every one, According to their deeds done in the
Body, whether they be good or evil.

Friends, Remember and obey the Command of Christ Jesus, who said, Whatsoever
ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them: And he said, If
ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my Love, as I have kept my Fathers
Commandments, and abide in his Love.

^e secution about the exercise of Faith and Worship unto God and Christ, has
made many Hypocrites; but it never made one True Christian, nor ever will:
Therefore let all Magistrates, Teachers and People who are concerned therein,
speedily cease from this Unchristian practice, and repent of what is already
done, that it may be well with them in the world to come.

Given forth by a Member of the Church of Christ William Gibson.

THE END.

