In Effigiem Nicholai Culpeper Equitis.

The shadow of that Body here you find
Which serves but as a case to hold his mind,
His Intellectual part be pleased to look
In lively lines described in the Book.
Crofs sculpsit

THE English Physician: OR An Astrologo-Physical Discourse of the Vulgar Herbs
of this Nation.

Being a Complete Method of Physic, whereby a man may preserve his Body in
Health; or cure himself, being sick, for three pence charge, with such things
only as grow in England, they being most fit for English Bodies.

Herein is also showed, 1. The way of making Plasters, Ointments, Oils,
Pultisses, Syrups, Decoctions, Julips, or Waters, of all sorts of Physical
Herbs, That you may have them ready for your use at all times of the year. 2.
What Planet governs every Herb or Tree (used in Physic) that grows in
England. 3. The Time of gathering all Herbs, both Vulgarly, and Astrologically.
4. The Way of drying and keeping the Herbs all the year. 5. The Way of keeping
their Juyces ready for use at all times. 6. The Way of making and keeping all
kind of useful Compounds made of Herbs. 7. The way of mixing Medicines
according to Cause and and Mixture of the Disease, and Part of the Body
Afflicted.


By Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange. 1652.

TO THE READDR.
Courteous Reader,
ARISTOTLE, in his Metaphysics writing of the Nature of Man, hit the Nail on
the Head when he said, That Man is naturally inclined to, and desirous of
Knowledge: and indeed it is palpable and apparent, that as Pride is the first
visible sin in a child, whereby we may gather that it was the first sin of
Adam; so Knowledge being the first Virtue a Child minds, as is apparent to them
that do but with the eye of Reason heed their actions even whilst they are very
young, even before they are a year old, even by natural instinct, whereby a man
may more than guess that Knowledge was the greatest loss, or at least one of the
greatest we lost by the fall of Adam: Knowledge, says Aristotle, is in
Prosperity an Ornament, in Adversity a Refuge; and truly there is almost no
greater enemy to Knowledge in the world than Pride and Covetousness: Excellently
said, Juvenal, Sat. 7.

Scire volunt omnes, mercedem solvere nemo.
Alhtough all men, in Knowledge take delight,
Yet they love money better, that is the spite.
And again, some men are so damnable proud and envious withal, that they would
have no body know any thing but themselves; the one I hope will shortly learn
better manners, and the other be a burden too heavy for the Earth long to bear.

The Subject which I here fixed my thoughts upon is not only the Description
and Nature of Herbs, which had it been all, I had authority sufficient to bear
me out in it, for Solomon employed part of that wisdom he asked, and received
of God in searching after them, which he wrote in Books, even of all Herbs,
Plants and Trees; some say those Writings were carried to Babylon by
Nebuchadnezzar; being kept in the Temple at Jerusalem for the public view of
the People, but being transported to Babylon in the Captivity, Alexander the
GREAT TYRANT at the taking of Babylon gave them to his Master Aristotle, who
committed them to the mercy of the fire.

But since the days of Solomon, many have those famous men been that have
written of this Subject, and great Encouragements have been given them by
Princes, of which I shall quote an example or two, Mathiolus his greediness was
such to finish his Comment upon Dioscorides, which Book is yet in use in the
famous Universities in Leyden in Holland, and Mountpilier in France, that he
forgot to count what the charges of it might amount to, although I rather
commend him for his diligence in Study and Care of the Worlds good, than
harbor the leastill thought of him for not counting the middle and both ends
before he began the Work, I say when he came to count the charges of Printing
and cutting the Cuts, it far surmounted his Estate; in this he was abundantly
furnished by Ferdinand the Emperor, and diverse other Princes of Germany, as
himself confessed furnished him with great sums of money, for perfecting that
so great, so good a Work; the Prince Elector of Saxonysent him much money
toward his charge, as also Joachim, Marquess of Brandenburg, who as he was
neighbor to Saxony in Place, so was he in Affection to so good a Work;
Frederick, Count Palatine of the Rhine, the Cardinal Prince of Trent, the Arch
Bishop of Saltzberg, the Dukes of Bavaria and Cleveland, and the Free State of
Norimberg, together with many others, so that he had the help of the Emperor,
of Arch Dukes, Dukes, Electors, Cardinals, Princes. Happy is that Nation whose
Magistrates countenance such as mind and study their Good: I might instance in
many more, and thereby give you a glimps how Magistrates formerly favored this
Art, and which is more, how studious they were in it. Bellonius a man that
soared high in the Nature of Herbs, also professed he had the helping hand of
Kings and Cardinals to maintain him in his Studies, and more than this, Kings
themselves were Studious in it; amongst which ( Solomon excepted) Mithridates
that renowned King of Pontus seems to bear away the Bell, his Writings after
his death were found in his Country Manor by Pompey the great, but never a
Roman of them all had the honesty to print them with his name in the
Frontispiece, so that we have nothing of them but what is quoted by some honest
Authors, especially by Plutarch.

Ad nos vix tenuis fame dilabitur aura.
Men mind our good, but such cross times do fall,
We only hear they did, and that is all.
Mesue King of Damascus, Avicenna, and Evax King of Arabia, labored much in
this Study, and I could well have afforded ^ have mentioned Dioclesian the
Roman Emperor had he not washed out his Virtues, and defiled them with a Purple
stain, in a most bloody persecution of Christians. It is quoted in Virgil, that
when a famous Prince was proffered by Apollo to be taught his Arts, viz.
Physic, Music, Augury, and the Art of shooting in the Bow, he made choice of
Physic and to know the Nature of Herbs.

Ipse suas arts, sua munera, laetus Appollo
Augurium, Citheramque dedit, celeresque sagittas,
Ille, ut depositi preferret fata Parentis
Scire potestates Herbarum, usumque Medendi
Maluit: and mutas agitare (inglorias) Arts.
His Arts to him, when great Appollo gave,
He did nor Augury, nor Arrows crave,
Nor the Melodious Lute, but to prevent
His Fathers death, who now with age was spent,
To be an Herbarist, and Medicine
To learn, he rather did his thoughts incline.
So precious has the knowledge of the Virtues of Herbs been in former times to
men of quality, and indeed happy is that Nation, whose Rulers mind Knowledge, as
Solomon says on the contrary, Woe to that Nation whose King is a Child, and
indeed in Ancient times people need little other Physic than such Herbs as
grew near them, some Footsteps of which and but a few only, are now in use with
us to this day, as people usually boil Fennel with Fish, and know not why they
do it but only for custom, when indeed the Original of it was founded upon
Reason, because Fennel consumes that Phlegmatic quality of Fish, which is
obnoxious to the Body of man, Fennel being an Herb of Mercury, and he so great
an Enemy to the Sign Pisces.

In this Art the Worthies of our own Nation, Gerard, Johnson, and Parkinson are
not to be forgotten, who did much good in the Study of this Art, yet they and
all others that wrote of the Nature of Herbs, gave not a bit of a reason why
such an Herb was apropriated to such a part of the Body, nor why it cured such
a Disease; truly my own body being sickly brought me easily into a capacity to
know that Health was the greatest of all Earthly Blessings, and truly he was
never sick that does not believe it; then I considered that all Medicines were
compounded of Herbs, Roots, Flowers, Seeds etc. and this first set me a work in
studying the Nature of Simples, most of which I knew by sight before, and
indeed all the Authors I could read gave me but little satisfaction in this
particular, or none at all; I cannot build my faith upon Authors words, nor
believe a thing because they say it, and could wish ever^ body were of my mind
in this, to labor to be able to give a reason for every thing they say or do;
they say reason makes a man differ from a Beast, if that be true, pray what are
they that instead of Reason for their judgment, quote old Authors, perhaps
their Authors knew a reason for what they Wrote, perhaps they did not, what is
that to us, do we know it? Truly in writing this Work first, to satisfy my
self I drew out all the Virtues of vulgar Herbs, Plants, and Trees etc. out of
the best and most approved Authors I had or could get, and having done so, I
set my self to study the Reason of them; I knew well enough the whole world and
every thing in it was formed of a Composition of contrary Elements, and in such
a harmony as must needs show the wisdom and Power of a great God. I knew as
well this Creation though thus composed of contraries was one united Body, and
man an Epitome of it, I knew those various affections in man in respect of
Sickness and Health were caused Naturally (though God may have other ends best
known to himself) by the various operations of the Macrocosm; and I could not
be ignorant, that as the Cause is, so must the Cure be, and therefore he that
would know the Reason of the operation of Herbs must look up as high as the
Stars; I always found the Disease vary according to the various motion of the
Stars, and this is enough one would think to teach a man by the Effect where
the Cause lay; Then to find out the Reason of the Operation of Herbs, Plants,
etc. by the Stars went I, and herein I could find but few Authors, but those as
full of nonsense and contradictions as an Egg is full of meat, this being
little pleasing, and less profitable to me, I consulted with my two Brothers,
Dr REASON, and Dr EXPERIENCE, and took a Voyage to visit my Mother NATURE, by
whose advice together with the help of Dr DILIGENCE, I at last obtained my
desires, and being warned by Mr Honesty, a stranger in our days to publish it
to the World, I have done it.

But you will say, What need I have written of this Subject, seeing so many
famous and learned men have written so much of it in the English Tongue, nay
much more than I have done?

To this I Answer,

1. All that have written of Herbs either in the English or not in the English
Tongue, have no ways answered my intents in this Book, for they have
intermixed many, nay very many outlandish Herbs, and very many which are hard,
nay not at all to be gotten, and what harm this may do I am very sensible of.
Once a Student in Physic in Sussex sent up to London to me, to buy for him
such and such Medicines, and send them down, which when I viewed, they were
Medicines quoted by Authors living in another Nation, and not to be had in
London for Love nor Money, so the poor man had spent much pains and Brains in
studying Medicines for a Disease that were not to be had; so a man reading
Gerards or Parkinsons Herbal for the Cure of a Diseas, he may as like as not,
light on an Herb that is not here to be had, or not without great difficulty,
if possible; but in mine, all grow near him.

2. My last, though not the least of my Reasons is, Neither Gerard nor
Parkinson nor any that ever wrote in the like Nature, ever gave one wise Reason
for what they wrote, and so did nothing else but train up young Novices in
Physic in the School of Tradition, and teach them just as a Parrot is taught
to speak, an Author says so, therefore it is true, and if all that Authors say
be true, why do they contradict one another? But in mine, if you view it with
the Eye of Reason, you shall see a Reason for every thing that is written,
whereby you may find the very Ground and Foundation of Physic, you may know
what you do, and wherefore you do it, and this shall call me Father, it being
(that I know of) never done in the world before.

I have now but two things more to write and then I have done.

1 What the profit and benefit of this Work is. 2 Instructions in the Use of
it.
1. The Profit and Benefits arising from it, or that may acrue to a wise man,
from it are many, so many that should I sum up all the particulars, the Epistle
would be as big as the Book; I shall only quote some few general Heads.

First, The admirable Harmony of the Creation is herein seen, in the Influence
of Stars upon Herbs and the Body of man, how one part of the Creation is
subservient to another, and all for the use of man whereby the Infinite Power
and Wisdom of God in the Creation appears; and if I do not admire at the
simplicity of the Ranters, never trust me, who but viewing the Creation can
hold such a sottish Opinion, as that it was from eternity, when the Mysteries
of it are so clear to every eye; but that Scripture shall be verified to them,
Romans I. 20. The invisible things of Him from the Creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
Power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse. And a Poet could teach them
a better Lesson.

Excideret ne tibi divini muner is author
Presentem monstrat, quaelibet Herba Deum.
Because out of thy thoughts God should not pass,
His Image stamped is on every Grass.
This indeed is true, God has stamped his Image upon every Creature, and
therefore the abuse of the Creature is a great sin; but how much more does the
Wisdom and Excellency of God appear if we consider the Harmony of the Creation
in the Virtue and Operation of every Herb; this is the first.

Secondly, Hereby thou may know what infinite Knowledge Adam had in his
Innocence, that by looking upon a Creature, he was able to give it a name
according to his Nature, and by knowing that, thou may know how great thy
fall was, and be humbled for it eve^ in this respect, because hereby thou art
so ignorant.

Thirdly, Here is the right way for thee to begin the study of Physic if thou
art minded to begin at the right end, for here thou have the Reason of the whole
Art. I wrote before in certain Astrological Lectures which I read, and printed,
entitled Semeiotica Vranica what Planet caused (as a second Cause) every
Disease, and how it might be found out what Planet caused it; here thou have
what Planet cures it by Sympathy and Antipathy; and this brings me to my last
promise, Viz.

Instructions for the right use of the Book.

And herein let me premise a word or two, Many Herbs, Plants, etc are not in
the Pook apropriated to their propper Planets, the Reason was, want of time, or
some other thing else, which many that know me will easily guess at; at last
the Book hanging longer in the Press than I imagined it would, I took the time
and pains (though I could ill have spared either) to apropriate them all, and
have for thy benefit (Courteous Reader) inserted them in order after the
Epistle, now then for thy Instruction,

First, Consider what Planet causes the Disease; that thou may find in my
Semeiotica.

Secondly, Consider what part of the Body is afflicted by the Diseas, and
whether it lie in the Flesh, or Blood, or Bones, or Ventricles.

Thirdly, Consider by what Planet the afflicted part of the Body is governed;
that my Semeiotica will inform you in also.

Fourthly, You have in this Book the Herbs for Cure a propriated to the several
Diseases, and the Diseases for your ease set down in the Margin, whereby you
may strengthen the part of the Body by its like, as the ^rain by Herbs of
Mercury, the Breast and Liver by Herbs of Jupiter, the Heart and Vitals by
Herbs of the Sun, etc.

Fifthly, You may oppose Diseases by Herbs of the Planet opposite to the Planet
that causes them, as Diseases of Jupiter by Herbs of Mercury, and the
contrary; Diseases of the Lum^naries by Herbs of Saturn, and the contrary;
Diseases of Mars by Herbs of Venus, and the contrary.

Sixthly, There is a way to cure Diseases sometimes by Sympathy, and so every
Planet cures his own Diseases,, as the Sun and Moon by their Herbs cure the
Eyes, Saturn the Spleen, Jupiter the Liver, Mars the Gall and Diseases of
Choler, and Venus Diseases in the Instruments of Generation.

Seventhly, There was small Treatise of mine of Humane Virtues, printed at the
latter end of my Ephemeris for the year 1651. I suppose it would do much good
to young Students to peruse that with this Book.

Eighthly Young Students would do themselves much good, and benefit themsel^es
exceedingly in the Study of Physic if they would tak the pains to view the
Virtues of the Herbs etc. in the Book, and compare them to these Rules, they
shall to their exceeding great content find them all agreeable to them, and
shall thereby see the reason why such an Herb conduces to the Cure of such a
Disease.

Ninthly, I gave you the Key of al in the Herb Wormwood, which if because of
the volubility of the Language, any think it will not fit the Lock, I will here
give it you again in another Herb of the same Planet which in the Book either
through my own forgetfulness, or my Amanuensis was omitted, and here I shall
give it you plainly without any circumstances.

The Herb is Carduus Benedictus.

It is called Carduus Benedictus, or blessed Thistle or holy Thistle, I suppose
the name was put upon it by some that had little Holinessin themselves: It is
an Herb of Mars, and under the Sign Aries; now in handling this Herb, I shall
give you a rational Pattern of all the rest, and if you please to view them
throughout the Book, you shall to your content find it true.

It helps Swimmings and giiddiness of the Head, or the Disease called Vertigo,
because Ariesis the House of Mars.

It is an excellent Remedy against the yellow Jaundice, and other Infirmities
of the Gall, because Marsgoverns Choler.

It strengthens the attractive faculty in man, and clarifies the Blood, because
the one is ruled by Mars.

The continual drinking the Decoction of it helps red Faces, Tetters, and
Ringworms because Marscauseth them.

It helps Plague-sores, Boils, and Itch, the Bitings of mad Dogs and venomous
Beasts, all which infirmities are under Mars. Thus you see what it does by
Sympathy.

By Antypathy to other Planets.

It cures the French Pox by Antypathy to Venuswho governs it.

It strengthens the Memory and cures Deafness by Antipathy to Saturnwho has
his Fall in Aries which Rules the Head.

It cures Quartan Agues, and other Diseases of Melancholy and adust Choler by
sympathy to Saturn, Marsbeing exalted in Capricorn.

Also it provokes Urine, the stopping of which is usually caused by Marsor the
Moon.

If you please to make use of these Rules, you shall find them true throughout
the Book, and by heeding them, you may be able to give a Reason of your
Judgment to him that asks you: I assure you it gave much content to me, and
for your goods did I pen it; but I must conclude, my Epistle having exceeded
its Bounds already; hereby you see what Reason may be given for Medicines, and
what necessity there is for every Physician to be an Astrologer, you have heard
it before I suppose, but now you know it; what remains, but that you labor to
glorify God in your several places, and do good to your selves first by
increasing your Knowledge, and to your Neighbors afterward by helping their
Infirmities; some such I hope this Nation is worthy of, and to such shall I
remain a Friend, during life, ready to my poor power to help.

Nich. Culpeper.
Spittle-fields next door to the red Lion. November. 6. 1652.

Authors made use of in this TREATISE.
A
AEgineta. AEtius. Aristotle. Avicenna. Averrois. Avenaris. Andreas
Caesalpinus. Antonius Musa.
B
Bauhine. Bellus. Bartholomeus Anglus. Butler, a Manuscript.
C
Clusius. Cameravius.
D
Dodoneus. Dioscorides.
E
Dr. Experience.
F
Fabius Columna. Fuchsius.
G
Gesner. Galen. Gerrhard.
I
Isidore. Johnson.
L
Leonicerus. Lobel. Lug dunensis.
M
Mathiolus. Mesue. Mizaldus.
O
Otho Brunfelfius.
P
Parkinson. Pliny. Pena. Platearius. Pona.
R
Dr. Reason. Rhazis.
S
Serapio.
T
Taberna Montanus. Theophrastus. Turner. Tragus.
A Catalogue of the Herbs and Plants etc. in this Treatise, apropriated to
their several PLANETS.
Under Saturn are,
Barley Red Beets Beech-tree Bifoyl, or Twayblade Birdsfoot Bistort, or
Snakeweed Blewbottles Buckshorn-Plantane Wild Campions Pilewort Cleavers, or
Goosgrass Clowns Woundwort Comfry Cudweed, or Cottonweed Sciatica Cresses
Crosswort Darnel Doddar Epithimum Elm-tree Osmond Royal Fleawort Flixweed
Fumitory Stinking Gladwin Goutwort Wintergreen Haukweed Hemlock Hemp Henbane
Horstail Knapweed Knotgrass Medlar-tree Moss Mullein Nightshade Polypodium
Poplar-tree Quince-tree Rupture-wort Rushes Solomons-Seal Sarazens Consound
Service-tree Spleenwort, or Cetrach Tamaris Melancholly-Thistle Blackthorn
Throughwax Tutsan, or Parkleaves Woad.
Under Jupiter are,
Agrimony Alexanders Asparagus Avens Bay Tree White Beets Water-Bettony
Wood-Bettony Bilberries Borrage Bugloss Chervil Sweet Cicely Cinkfoyl Costmary,
or Alecost Dandelyon Docks Bloodwort Dog, or Quich-grass Endive Hartstongue
Hysop Housleek, or Sengreen Liverwort Lungwort Sweet Maudlin Oak-tree Red Roses
Sage Sauce alone, or Jack by the Hedge Scurvy Grass Succory Our Ladies Thistles.
Under Mars are,
Arsesmart Asarabacca Barberry-bush Sweet Bazil Bramble-bush Briony Brooklime
Butchers-broom Broom Broomrape Crowfoot Cuckoopint, or Wake-Robin Cranebil
Cotton-Thistle Flax-weed, or Toad-flax. Fursebush Garlic Hawthorn Hops Naddir
Masterwort Mustard Hedg-Mustard Mettles Onions Pepperwort, or Dittander Carduus
Benedictus in the Epistle Rhadish Horse Rhadish Rhubarb Rapontick Bastard
Rhubarb Thistles Star-thistle Tobacco Wolly Thistle Treacle Mustard Mithridate
Mustard Would, Weld, or Dyers Weed, Wormwood.
Under the Sun are,
Angelica Ash-tree Bawm One-blade Burnet Butter-bur Chamomel Chelondine
Centaury Eyebright St. John's wort Lovage Marigolds Misleto Peony St. Peter's
wort Pimpernel Rosa Solis Rosemary Rhue Saffron Tormentil Turnsole, or
Heliotropium Vipers Bugloss Walnut-tree
Under Venus are,
Alehoof, or Ground Ivy Black Alder-tree Alder-Tree Apple Tree Stinking Arrach
Archangel, or Dead Nettles Beans Ladies Bedstraw Birch-tree Bishops Weed
Blites Bugle Burdock Cherry-tree Winter Cherries Chickweed Cichpease Clary
Cocks-head Coltsfoot Cowslips Daisies Devils-bit Elder Dwarf Elder Eringo
Featherfew Figwort Filipendula Foxgloves Golden-rod Gromwel Groundsel Herb
Robert Herb True Love Kidneywort. peniwovt: pa: yo: Ladies Mantle Mallows
Marshmallows Mercury Mints Motherwort Mugwort Nep, or Catmint Parsnip
Peach-tree Pear Tree Penyroyal Perewinkle Plantane Plum-tree Primroses Ragwort
Rocket Winter-Rocket Damask Roses Wood Sage Sanicle Selfheal Sopewort, or
Bruisewort Sorrel Wood Sorrel Sowthistles Spignel Strawberries Garden Tansy
Wild Tansy, or Silver-weed Teazles Vervain Vine-tree Violets Wheat Yarrow.
Under Mercury are,
Calaminth, or Mounta^ Mint Carrots Carraway Dill Elicampane Fern Fennel Hogs
Fennel Germander Hazel Nut-tree Horchound Houndstongue Lavender Liquoris
Wall-Rhue Maidenhair Golden Maidenhair Sweet Marjoram Melilot Moneywort
Mulberry-tree Oats Parsley Cow Parsnep Pellitory of the Wall Groundpine, or
Chamepitys Rest-Harrow, or Chamock Sampire Summer and winter Savory Scabious
Smallage Southernwood Meadow Trefoyl Garden Valerian Woodbind, or
Honey-Suckles.
Under the Moon are,
Adders Tongue Cabbages Coleworts Sea Coleworts Columbines Watercresses
Duckmeat Yellow Waterflag Flower-de-luce Fluellin Ivy Lettice Water Lillies
Loosestrife, with, and without spiked Heads Moonwort Mousear Orpine Poppies
Purslain Privet Rattle-grass White Roses White Saxifrage Burnet Saxifrage
Wall-flowers, or Winter-gilliflowers Willow-tree
The Names of several Books printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing
Press in Cornhill, by the Exchange, London.
Four several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.
1 A PHYSICAL DIRECTORY: Or a Translation of the Dispensatory, made by the
College of Physicians of London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galen's Method
of Physic. 2 A DIRECTORY for Midwives; or a Guide for Women. 3 An EPHEMERIS
for the year 1651. Amplified with Rational Predictions from the Book of the
Creatures. 1 Of the State of the Year. 2 What may probably by the effects of
the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, July 9. 1650. in Scotland, Holland,
Zealand, York, Amsterdam, etc. and about what time they may probably happen. To
which is joined, An Astrologophysical Discourse of the Humane Virtues in the
Body of Man. 4 GALENS ART OF PHYSIC; wherein is laid down,
1. A Description of Bodies, Healthful, Unhealthful, and Neutral. 2. Signs of
good and bad Constitutions. 3. Signs of the Brain, Heart, Liver, Testicles,
Temperature, Lungues, Stomach, etc.
being too Hot, Cold, Dry, Moist, Hot and dry, Hot and moist, Cold and dry,
Cold and moist.

4. Signs and Causes of Sickness.
Translated into English, and largely Commented on; Together with convenient
Medicines for all particular Distempers of the Parts, a Description of the
Complexion, their Conditions, and what Diet and Exercise is fittest for them.

A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the Word of God at Dedbam in Essex.

The Wonders of the Lodestone, by Mr. Samuel Ward of Ipswich.

An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward.

Clows Surgery.

Marks of Salvation.

Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin.

Great Church Ordinance of Baptism.

Mr. Love's Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.

Vox Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace.

Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's Overthrow. Pious man's practice in
Parliament Time.

A Treatise of the Rickets, being a Disease common to Children; Wherein is
showed, 1. The Essence, 2. The Causes, 3. The Signs, 4. The Remedies of the
Disease. Published in Latin by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bate, and Dr. Regemorter.

Mr. Symsons Sermon at Westminster.

Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major.

Mr. Phillips Treatise of Hell. -- of Christ's Geneology.

Seven Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published; As also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4. II. Wherein is showed,
1. What Contentment is, 2. It is an holy Art and Mystery, 3. The Excellencies
of it, 4. The Evil of the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of
it. 2 Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10. 3. Wherein is showed, 1. The right manner of
the Worship of God in general; and particularly, In Hearing the Word, Receiving
the Lords Supper, and Prayer. 3 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1. 17. Wherein is
showed, 1. That the Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by
the Light of Nature, 2 Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3. And suitable to
what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those Men
that have their Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17. 14. 4 A Treatise of
Earthly-mindedness. Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthly-mindedness is, 2 The great
Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. Verse. Also to the same Book is joined,
A Treatise of Heavenlymindedness, and walking with God, on Genesis 5. 24. and on
Phil. 3. 20. 5 An Exposition, on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters
of the Prophecy of Hosea. 6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth
Chapters of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth
Chapters of Hosea.
The Compassionate Samaritan.

Twelve several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into one Volumn. Viz.
1 The great Gospel-Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office. 2 Satan's Power to Tempt; and Christ's Love
to, and Care of His People under Temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in every
Condition. 4 Grace for Grace or, the Overflowings of Christ's Fullness received
by all Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith, through Natural
Impossibilities. 6 Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual-Life, and In-Being
of Christ in all Believers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9 The Saints Hiding Place in
time of Gods Anger. 10 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight. 11 A Vindication of
Ordinances. 12 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.
Cum multis aliis --
THE English Physician.
Adders Tongue.
Description.
THis small Herb has but one Leaf; which grows with the Stalk a fingers length
above the ground, being fat, and of a fresh green color, broad like the Water
Plantane (but less) without any middle Rib in it: from the bottom of which Leaf
on the inside, rises up (ordinarily) one, sometimes two, or three small
slender: stalks, the upper half whereof is somewhat bigger, and dented with small
round dents of a yellowish green, color, like the Tongue of an Adder or
Serpent (only this is as useful as they are formidable) The Root continues all
the year.

Place.
It grows in moist Meadows, and such like places.

Time.
And is to be found in April and May, for it quickly perishes with a little
heat.

Virtues and use.
It is temperate, in respect of heat, but dry in the Second Degree. The Juice
of the Leaves drunk with the distilled Water of Horstail is a singular Remedy
for all manner of wounds in the Breast, Bowels, Wounds in the Breast, Bowels,
Vomiting, Bleeding, Terms stops, Whites, Wounds, Ulcers, Inflammations in Wounds.
or other parts of the Body, and is given with good success unto those who are
troubled with Casting, Vomiting, or bleeding at the Mouth or Nose, or otherwise
downwards. The said Juice given in the distilled Water of Oaken Buds is very
good for Women who have their usual Courses, or the Whites flowing down too
abundantly. It helps sore Eyes. The Leaves infused or boiled in Oil Omphacine,
or unripe Olives set in the Sun for certain days, or the green Leaves
Sufficiently boiled in the said Oil, is made an excellent green Balsom, not
only for green and fresh Wounds, but also for old and invererate Ulcers,
especially if a little fine clear Turpentine be dissolved therein: It also
stays and represseth all inflammations that arise upon pains, by Hurts, or
Wounds.

It is an Herb under the Dominion of the Moon in Cancer, and therefore if the
weakness of the Rententive Faculty be caused by an evil influence of Saturn, in
any part of the Body governed by the Moon, or under the Dominion of Cancer,
this Herb cures it by Sympathy: It cures those Diseases before specified in any
part of the Body under the influence of Saturn, by Antypathy.

What parts of the Body are under each Planet and Sign, and also what Diseases
may be found in my Astrological Judgment of Diseases, and for the internal Work
of Nature in the Body of Man, as Vital, Animal, Natural, and Procreative Spirit
of Man, The Appre^^ Judgment Memory. the external Senses, viz. Seeing, Hearing,
Smelling, Tasting, and Feeling; the Virtues, Attractive, Retentive, Digestive,
Expulsive etc. under the Dominion of what Planets they are, may be found in my
Ephemer^s for the year 1651. in both which you shall find the Chaff of Authors
blown away by the Fame of Dr. Reason, and nothing but Rational Truths left for
the Judgment of the Ingenious to feed upon.

Lastly, To avoid blotting Paper with one thing many times, and also to ease
your Purses in the price of the Book, and withal to make you Studious in
Physic, you have at the latter end of the Book, the way of preserving all
Herbs either in Juice, Conserve Oil, Oyn^ment, or Plaster, Electuary Pill or
Troches.

Agrimony.
Description.
THis has diverse long leaves (some greates, some smaller) set upon a Stalk,
all of them dented about the edges^, green above, and grayish underneath, and a
little hairy withal: Among which arises up usually, but one strong, round,
hairy, brown Stalk, two or three Foot high, with smaller Leaves set here and
there upon it, at the top whereof grow many small yellow Flowers one above
another in long Spikes: after which come rough heads of Seeds hanging downwards
which will cleave to and stick upon Garments or any thing that shall rub against
them. The Root is black, long, and somewhat woody, abiding many years and
shooting afresh every Spring which Root, though small has a reasonable good
scent.

Place.
It 'groweth upon Banks near the sides of Hedges, or Pales.

Time.
And it Flowreth in July and August, the Seed being ripe shortly after.

Virtues and uses.
It is of a clensing Clensing, Drying, Binding, Liver, Jaundice, Inward Wounds,
Inward Bruises, Bloody and troubled urin, Chollick, Breast, Cough, Tertain and
Quartan Agues, Bloody Flux, ulcers, Cancers, Thorns, Splinters and Nails in the
flesh Members out of joint, Aposthumes.
and cutting faculty without any manifest heat, moderately drying and binding;
It opens and cleanses the Liver, helps the Jaundice, and is very beneficial
to the Bowels, healing all inward Wounds, Bruises, Hurts, and other distempers.
The Decoction of the Herb made with Wine and drunk is good against the stinging
and biting of Serpents, and helps them that have foul, troubled, or bloody
waters, and makes them piss clear spedily; It also helps the Chollick,
cleanses the Breast, and rids away the Cough. A draught of the Decoction taken
warm before the Fit, first removes, and in time rids away the Tertian or
Quartan Agues: The Leaves and Seed taken in Wine, Stays the Bloody Flu^. ^^
app^^^, being stamped with old Swines grease, it helps old sores, Cancers,
and inveterate Ulcers; and draws forth Thorns, Splinters of Wood, Nails, or
any other such thing gotten into the Flesh; it helps to strengthen the
Members that be out of joint; and being bruised and applied, or the Juice
dropped in, it helps foul and imposthu^ned Ears.

The distilled Water of the Herb is good to all the said purposes, either
inward or outward, but a great deal weaker.

It is an Herb under Jupiter, and the Sign cancer, and therefore strengthens
those parts under that Planet and Sign, and removes Diseases in them by
Sympathy, and those under Saturn, Mars, and Mercury, by Antip^thy. If they
happen in any part of the Body governed by Jupiter, or under the Signs, Cancer,
Sagitary, or Pisces, and therefore must needs be good for the Gout, either used
^outwardly in an Oil or Ointment, or inwardly in an Electuary or Syrup, or
concreated Juice, for which see the latter end of the Book.

It is a most admirable remedy for such whole Livers are annoyed either by heat
or cold. The Liver is the former of Blood, and Blood the Nourisher of the Body,
and Agrimony and Strengthner of the Liver.

I cannot stand to give you a Reason in every Herb why it cures such Diseaess,
but if you please to peruse my Judgment in the Herb Wormwood you shall find
them there, and it will be well worth your while to consider it in every Herb,
you shall find them true throughout the Book.

Alehoof, or Ground Ivy.
Description.
THis well known Herb, lies, spreads, and crcepeth upon the ground, shooting
forth Roots, at the corners of the tender joynted Stalks, set all along with
two round Leaves at every Joint, somewhat hairy, crumpled, and unevenly dented
about the edges with round dents: at the Joints likewise with the Leaves
toward the end of the Branches come forth hollow long Flowers of a bluish
Purple color with small white spots upon the lips that hang down: The Root is
small with strings.

Place.
It is commonly found under Hedges, and on the sides of Ditches, under Houses,
or in shadowed Lanes, and other wast grounds in almost every part of the Land.

Time.
They Flower somewhat early, and abide so a great while; the Leaves continue
green until Winter, and sometimes abide, except, the Winter be very sharp and
cold.

Virtues and use.
It is quick, sharp, and bitter in taste, and is thereby found to be hot and dry,
a singular. Herb for all inward Wounds, Inward Wounds, Pains Griping, Wind
Choler, Stomach, Spleen, Belly, stopping in the Liver, Gal Plague, Poison,
Gout, Sciati^^, sore Mouth and Throat, Ulcers in the Privities, Itch, Scabs,
Web in the Ej^ Redness and watring of them, ulcers, noise in the Ears Deafness.
exulcerated Lungs, or other parts, either by it self or boiled with other the
like Herbs: And being drunk, it in short time eases all griping Pains, Windy
and Chollerick Humors in the Stomach, Spleen, or Belly: helps the yellow
Jaundice by opening the stoppings of the Gaul and Liver, and Melancholy by
opening the stoppings of the Spleen, expels Venom or Poison, and also the
Plague, it provokes Urin, and Women's Courses. The Decoction of it in Wine
drunk for some time together procures case unto them that are troubled with
the Sciatica or Hip Gout, as also the Gout in the Hands, Knees, or Feet: and if
you put to the Decoction, some Honey, and a little Burnt Alum, it is excellent
good to gargle any sore mouth or Throat, and to wash the Sores and Ulcers in
the privy parts of man or woman: It speedily heals green Wounds being bruised
and bound thereunto: The Juice of it boiled with a little Honey and Vardigrees,
does wonderfully clens Fistula's, Ulcers, and stays the spreading or eating
of Cancers and Ulcers, It helps the Itch, Scabs, Wheals, and other breakings
out in any part of the Body. The Juice of Celondine, Field Daysies, and
Ground Ivy clarified, and a little fine Sugar dissolved therein and dropped into
the Eyes is Sovereign Remedy for all the Pains, Redness, and Watering of them;
as also for the Pin and Web, Skins, and Films growing over the Sight; It
helps Beasts as well as Men; The Juice dropped into the Ears does wonderfully
help the noise and singing of them, and helps the Hearing which is decayed.
It is good to Tun up with new Drink, for it will so clarify it in a night,
that it will be the fitter to be drunk the next morning; or if any Drink be
thick with removing or any other accident, it will do the like in a few hours.

It is an Herb of Venus, and therefore cures her Diseases by Sympathy, and those
of Mars by Antipathy; how to preserve it all the year you shall find at the
latter end of the Book.

Alexander.
Description.
IT is usually sown in all the Gardens in Europe, and so well known, that it
needs no further Description.

Time.
They Flower in June and July, and the Seed is ripe in August.

Virtues and use.
It warmeth^ a cold Stomach, and opens stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, it
is good to move Women's Courses, to expel the Afterbirth, to break Wind, to
provoke Urine, and help the Strangury; and these things the Seeds will do
likewise, if either of them be boiled in Wine, or being bruised and taken in
Wine, it is also effectual against the biting of Serpents. Obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen, provokes the Terms Afterbirth Wind, provokes urin, biting of
Serpents.
And now you know what Alexander Porredg which is so familiar in this City is
good for, that you may no longer cat it out of ignorance but out of knowledge.

The Black Alder-Tree.
Description.
THis Tree seldom grows to any great bigness, but for the most part abides
like a Hedge, Bush, or Tree spreading into Branches, the Wood of the Body being
white, and of a dark, red Core or Heart; the outward Bark is of a blackish
color, with many white spots thereon: but the inner Bark next unto the Wood is
yellow, which being chewed will turn the Spittle near unto a Saffron color.
The Leaves are somewhat like those of the ordiuary Alder-Tree, or the Foemale
Cornel, or Dogberry-Tree, called in Sussex Dog-wood, but blacker, and not so
long. The Flowers are white, coming forth with the Leaves at the Joints, which
turn into small round Berries, first green, afterward red, but blackish when
they are through ripe divided as it were into two parts, wherein is contained
two small round and flat Seeds: The Root runs not deep into the Ground, but
spreads rather under the upper crust of the Earth.

Place.
This Tree or Shrub may be found plentifully in St. John's Wood by Hornsey,, and
in the Woods upon Hamsted Heath; as also at a Wood called the old Park in
Barcomb in Sussex, near the Brooks side.

Time.
It Flowreth in May, and the Berries are ripe in September.

Virtues and use.
The inner yellow Bark hereof purges downwards both Choler and Phlegm, Choler,
Flrgm.
and the watery humors of such as have the Dropsy, and strengthens the inward
parts again by binding. If the Bark hereof be boiled with Agrimony, Wormwood,
Dodder, Hops, and some F^^^^ with Smalledg, Endive, and Succory, Roots, and a
reasonable draught taken every morning for some time together, it is very
effectual against the Jaundice, Dropsy, Jaundice Dropsy, Cach^^, Liver, Spleen.
and the evil disposition of the Body, especially if some suitable purging
medicine have been when before to avoid the grosser excrements; It purges and
strengthens the Liver and Spleen, clensing them from such evilhumors and
hardness as they are afflicted with, It is to be understood that these things
are performed by the dried Bark, for the fresh green Bark taken inwardly
provokes strong Vomitings, pains in the Stomach, and gripings in the Belly:
Yet if the Decoction may stand and settle two or three days until the yellow
color be changed black, it will not work so strongly as before, but will
strengthen the Stomach, Stomach weak, Apetite lost, Flux, Li^^ Itch, Scab^
toothache, Teeth loos.
and procure an Appetite to Meat. The outer Bark contrariwise, does bind the
Body, and is helpful for all Lasks and Pluxes thereof, but this must also be
dried first, whereby it will work the better. The inner Bark hereof boiled in
Vinegar, is an approved remedy to kill Lice, to cure the Itch, and take away ^^
by drying them up in a short time: It is singular good to wash the Teeth, to
take away the Pains, to fasten those that are loos, to clens them, and keep
them sound. The Leaves are good Fodder for Kine to make them give more Milk.

If in the Spring time you use the Herbs before mentioned and will but take a
handful of each of them, and to them ad a handful of Elder Buds, and having
bruised them all, boil them in a Gallon of ordinary Beer when it is new, and
having boiled them half an hour, ad this to three Gallons more, and let them
work together, and drink a draught of it every morning, half a pint or there
aocuts: It is an excellent Purge for the Spring, to consume that Phlegmatic
quality the Winter, has left behind it, and withal keep your Body in health,
and consume those evil humors which the heat of Summer will readily stir up,
esteem it as a Jewel.

The Common Alder-Tree.
Description.
Grows to a reasonable height, and spreads much if it like the place; It is
so generally well known unto Country People that I conceive it needless to tell
them that which is no news.

Place and Time.
It delights to grow in moist Woods and watery places, Flowring in April or
May, and yiedling ripe Seed in September.

Virtues and Use.
The Leaves and Bark of the Alder-Tree, are cooling, drying, and binding,
Cooling, Drying, Binding, Swellings, Fleas.
The fresh Leaves laid upon swellings, dissolveth them, and staieth the
Inflammations; The Leaves put under the bare Feet gauled with traveling are a
great refreshing to them: The said Leaves gathered while the morning dew is on
them, and brought into a Chamber troubled with Fleas, will gather them therinto,
which being suddenly cast out will rid the Chamber of those troublesome
Bed-fellows.

It is a Tree under the Dominion of Venus, and of some warry Sign or other, I
suppose Pisces, and therefore the Decoction, or distilled Water of the Leaves is
excellent against Burnings, and Inflammation, Burnings, inflammations.
either with Wounds or without, to bath the place grieved with, and especially
for that inflammation in the Breast which the vulgar call an Ague.

If you cannot get the Leaves, as in Winter ^tis impossible, make use of the
Bark in the same manner.

Angelica.
TO write a Description of that which is so well known to be growing in almost
every Garden, I suppose is altogether needless: yet for its Virtues it is of
admiaable use.

In times of Heathenism when men had found out any excellent Herb etc. they
dedicated it to their gods, As the Bay-trce to Apello, the Oak to Jupiter, the
vine to Bacchus, the Poplar to Hercules: These the Papists following as their
Patriarchs, they dedicate them to their Saints, as our Ladies Thistle to the
Blessed Virgin, St. John's Wort to St. John, and another Wort to St. Peter, etc.
Our Physicians must imitate like Apes, (though they cannot come off half so
cleverly) for they Blasphemously call Pansies, or Hartseas, an Herb of the
Trinity, because it is of three colors: and a certain Ointment, an Ointment of
the Apostles, because it consists of twelve Ingredients; Alas poor Fools, I am
sorry for their folly, and grieved at their Blasphemy; God send them the rest
of their Age, for they have their share of Ignorance already; O! why must ours
be Blasphemous because the Heathens and Papists were Idolatrous? certainly they
have read so much in old rustie Authors, that they have lost all their Deomity,
for unless it were amongst the Ranters, I never read or heard of such
Blasphemy: The Heathens and Papists were bad, and ours wors, the Papists giving
Idolatrous Names to Herbs for their Virtues sake, not for their fair looks; and
therefore some called this an Herb of the Holy Ghost, others more moderate
called it Angelica, because of its Angelical Virtues, and that name it retains
still, and all Nations follow it so near as their Dialect will permit.

Virtues and use.
It resists Poison, Poison, Pestilence, Epidemical Diseases.
by defending and comforting the Heart, Blood, and Spirits, it does the like
against the Plague, and all Epidemical Diseases if the Root be taken in powder
to the weight of half a dram at a time, with some good Triacle in Card^s Water,
and the party thereupon laid to sweat in his Bed. If Treacle be not at hand,
take it alone in Cardus, or Angelica Water. The Stalks or Roots candied and
eaten fasting, are good Preservatives in time of Infection; and at other times
to warm and comfort a cold Stomach. The Root also steeped in Vinegar, and a
little of that Vinegar taken sometimes fasting, and the Root smelled unto is
good for the same purpose. A water distilled from the Root simply, or steeped
in Wine and distilled in Glass, is much more effectual than the Water of the
Leaves; and this Water drunk two or three spoonfuls at a time, eases all Pains
and Torments coming of Cold and Wind, Cold ^^^^ Pleuresy, Cough, Lungues,
Breast, Strang^^^, Shortness of Breath Chollick, provokes the Terms,
afterbirth, stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, Indigestion, Surfets, Toothach,
biting of Maddogs.
so as the Body be not bound: and taken with some of the Root in Powder at the
beginning helps the Pluresy, as also all other Diseases of the Lungues and
Breast, as Coughs, Phthisick, and shortnefs of Breath; and a Syrup of the
Stalks does the like: It helps pains of the Colic, the Strangury, and
stopping of the Urin, procures Women's Courses, and expels the Afterbirth,
opens the stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, and briefly eases and
discusseth al windiness and inward swellings. The Decoction drunk before the
fit of an Ague, that they may sweat (if possible) before the fit come, will in
two or three times taking rid it quite away: It helps digestion, and is a
remedy for a Surfeit. The Juice or the Water being dropped into the Eyes or
Ears, helps dimness of sight and deafness: The Juice put into the hollow Teeth,
eases their pains. The Roots in Powder made up into a Plaster with a little
Pitch; and laid on the biting of a madDog, or any other venomous creature, does
wonderfully help: The Juice or the Water dropped, or tents wet therein, and put
into old filthy deep Ulcers, Ulcers, Gout, Sciatica.
Or the Powder of the Root (in want of either) does clens and cause them to heal
quickly, by covering the naked Bones with Flesh. The distilled Water applied to
places pained with the Gout or Sciatica, does give a great deal of ease.

The wild Angelica is not so effectual as the Garden, although it may be safly
used to all the purposes aforesaid.

It is an Herb of the Sun in Leo; let it be gathered when he is there, the Moon
applying to his good Aspect; let it be gathered either in his hour, or in the
hour of Jupiter, let Sol be angular. O^serve the like in gathering the Herbs of
other Plants, and you may happen do wonders. In all Epidemical Diseases caused
by Saturn this is as good a Preservative as grows.

Apples.
A Word or two of the most usual kinds of Apples, though the college of
Physicians make use of none but such as Vulgo vulgati, Pearmains, vel Pippins.

Apples in general are cold and windy, and being of sundry tastes, Galen shows
thereby how to distinguish them: Some have a sharp taste, and are good for
fainting Stomachs and loos Bellies; Fainting Stomach, Loos Bellies, Thirst,
Phlegm.
others sour, good to cool and quench thirst; some sharp, fit to cut gross
phlegm; some sweet, soon distributed in the Body, and as soon passed away, yet
sooner corrupted is the Stomach if they be staid: The best sorts before they be
thoroughly ripe are to be avoided: then to be roasted or scalded is the best way
to take them, and a little Spice or Seeds cast upon them and taken after meat,
do strenthen both Stomach and Bowels, Stomach, Bowels, Vomiting, Flux, ^lo^sen,
Worms Melancholy, Agues, Heats of the Liver and Stomach.
especially in those that loath, or hardly digest their meat, or are given to
casting, or have a Flux or Lask: Those that are a little sour and harsh used in
that manner are fittest: Sweet Apples loosen the Belly and drive forth Worms;
Sour Apples stop the Belly, and provoke Urin 3 and Crabs for this purpose are
fittest: The sweet Apples as the Pippin and Pearmain, help to dissolve
Melancholy humors, and to procure Mirth, and therefore are fittest for
Confectio Alkerimes, and Syrupus de Pomis. The Leaves boiled and given to drink
in hot Agues, where the heat of the Liver and Stomach causes the Lips to break
out, and the Throat to grow dry, harsh and furred, is very good to wash and
gargle it withal, and to drink down some. This may to good purpose be used when
better things are not at hand, or cannot be had. The Juice of Crabs either
Verjuyce or Cider, is of singular good use in the Heat and faintings of the
Stomach, and against Casting to make a Posset with, or taken some of it alone by
it self. The Juice of Crabs, or Cider applied with wet clothes therein to
scalded Scalding, Burning, Eyes, Inflammation ulcers, Spots, Freckles.
or burnt places, cools, heals, and draws sorih the Fire. A rotten Apple
applied to Eyes bloodshotten, or enflamed with heat, or that are black and blue
about them by any stroke or fall, and bound too all day or night, helps them
quickly. The distilled Water of rotten Apples does cool the heat and
inflammations of Sores, and is good to bath foul creeping Ulcers, and to wash
the Face to take away Spots, Freckles or other discolorings. The distilled
Water of good and sound Apples is of special good use to procure Mirth, and
expel Melancholy. The Ointment called Pomatum, if sweet and well made, helps
the Chops in the Lips or Hands, Chaps in the Lips and Hands
and makes smooth and supple the rough Skin of the Hands or Face parched with
wind or other accidents.

Thus my Authors.

All that I can say of Apples is this:

1 That they are extreme windy.

2 That they provoke Urin, being roasted (especially Pomwaters) and mixed with
fair Water, and drunk up at night going to bed; half a dozen great ones mixed
with a quart of Water, excellently provokes Urin, if there be no material stone
in the Body: This I had of Gerhard, and have often known it proved, and always
with good success. All Apples loosen the^ Belly and pleasure the Stomach by
their coolness.

Arrach wild and stinking.
Description.
THis has small and almost round Leaves, yet a little pointed and without dent
or cut, of a dusky mealy color, growing on the slender Stalks and Branches
that spread on the the Leaves, and small Seeds succeding like the rest,
perishing yearly, and rising again with its own sowing. It smells like old
rotten Fish, or something worse.

Place.
It grows usually upon Dunghils.

Time.
They flower in June and July, and their Seed is ripe quickly after.

Virtues and use.
Stinking Arrach is used as a remedy to help Women pained, and almost strangled
with the Mother, Mother,
by smelling to it: But inwardly taken, there is not a better Remedy under the
Moon for that Disease. I would be large in commendation of this Herb, were I
but Eloquent. It is an Herb under the dominion of Venus, and under the sign
Scorpio: It is common almost upon every Dunghill. The Works of God are given
freely to Man, his Medicines are common and cheap, and easy to be found: it is
the Medicines of the College of Physicians that are so dear and scarce to find)
I commend it for an Universal Medicine for the Womb, Womb.
and such a Medicine as will easily, safly, and speedily cure any Diseas
thereof, as the fits of the Mother, Dislocation or falling our thereof; it cools
the Womb being over-heared (And let me tell you this, and I will tell you but the
truth, Heat of the womb is one of the greatest causes of hard labor in
Childbirth) It makes barren women fruitful, it cleanses the Womb if it be foul
and strengthens it exceedingly; it provokes the Terms if they be stopped, and
stops them if they flow immoderatly: You can desire no good to your Womb, but
this Herb will effect it; therefore if you love Children, if you love Health, if
you love Ease, keep a Syrup always by you made of the Juice of this Herb and
Sugar (or Honey if it be to clens the Womb) and let such as be rich keep it for
their poor neighbors, and bestow it as freely as I bestow my studies upon them,
or else let them look to answer it another day when the Lord shall come to make
inquisition for Blood.

Archangel.
To put a gloss upon their practice; the Physicians call an Herb (which Country
people ^ulgarly know by the name of DeadNettles) Archangel, wherein whether
they savor of more Superstition or Folly I leave to the judicious Reader. There
is more curiosity than courtesy to my Countrymen used by others in the
explaination, as well of the Names as Description of this so wel-known an Herb;
which that I may not: also be guilty of, Take this short Description first of
the Red-Archangel.

Descriptions.
This has diverse square stalks somewhat hairy, at the joints whereof grow two
sad green Leaves dented about the edges, opposite to one another, the lowermost
upon long footstalks, but without any toward the tops which are somewhat round,
yet pointed, and a little crumpled and hairy: Round about the upper Joints
where the Leaves grow thick, are sundry gaping Flowers of a pale reddish
color, after which com the Seeds three or four in a Husk. The Root is small and
thriddy, perishing every year: the whole Plant has a strong scent, but not
stinking.

White-Archangel has diverse square stalks not standing straight upright but
bending downward, whereon stand two Leaves at a Joint, larger and more pointed
than the other, dented about the edges and greener also more like unto
Nettle-Leavs, but not stinking, yet hairy: At the Joints with the Leaves stand
larger and more open gaping white Flowers, in Husks round about the Stalks (but
not with such a bush of Leaves, as Flowers set in the top, as is on the other)
wherein stand small roundish black Seeds: The Root is white, with many strings at
it, not growing downward but lying under the upper crust of the Earth, and
abides many years increasing: This has not so strong a scent as the former.

Tellow-Archangel is like the White in the Stalks and Leaves, but that the
Stalks are more straight and upright, and the Joints with Leaves are further
asunder, having longer Leaves than the former; and the Flowers a little larger
and more gaping, of a fair yellow color in most, in some paler. The Roots are
like the White, only they creep not so much under the ground.

Place.
They grow almost every where, (unless it be in the middle of the street) the
Yellow most usually in the wet grounds of Woods, and sometimes in the dryer, in
diverse Countries of this Nation.

Time.
They flower from the beginning of the spring all the summer long.

Virtues and use.
The Archangels are somewhat hot and dryer than the stinking Nettles, and used
with better success for the stopping and hardness of the Spleen than they by
using the Decoction of the Herb in Wine, and afterward applying the Herb hot
unto the Region of the Spleen Spleen.
as a Plaster, or the Decoction with Spunges. The Flowers of the White White,
Red and yellow Flux.
Archangel are preser^ed, or conserved to be used to stay the Whit^s, and the
Flowers of the Red to stay the Reds in Women. It makes the Heart merry, drives
away Melancholy, Melancholy, Quartan Agues, Bleeding at Nose, Swelling,
King's Evil, Gout, Sciatica, Joints, ulcers, old sores, Bruises, Burnings.
quickens the Spirits, is good against Quartan Agues, stancheth bleedings at
Mouth or Nose, if it be s^amped and applied to the nape of the Neck: The Herb
also bruised and with some Salt and Vinegar, and Hogs Greas laid upon any hard
tumor or swelling; or that which is vulgarly called the Kings Evil, does help
to dissolve or discuss them, and being in like manner applied does much allay
the pains and give eas to the Gout, Sciatica, and other aches of the Joints and
Sinews: It is also very effectual to heal all green Wounds, and old Ulcers,
also to stay their fretting, gnawing, and spreading; It draws forth Splinters
and such like things gotten into the flesh, and is very good against bruises
and burnings. But the yellow Archangel, is most commended for old filthy
corrupt Sores and Ulcers, yea, although they grow to be hollow; and to dissolve
tumors. The chief use of them is for Women it being an Herb of Venus, and may
be found in my Guide for Women.

Arsmart.
Description of the Mild.
THis has broad Leaves set at the great red Joints of the Stalks, with
semicircular blackish marks on them usually, yet sometimes without: The Flowers
grow in long Spikes usually either blush or whitish with such like Seed
following. The Root is long with many strings thereat perishing yearly; this
has no sharp taste (as another sort has, which is quick and biting) but rather
sour like Sorrel, or else a little drying or without taste.

Place.
It grows in watery Plashes, Ditches, and the like, which for the most part are
dry in Summer.

Time.
It Flowreth in June, and the Seed is ripe in August.

Virtues and use.
It is of a cooling and drying quality, and very effectual for purrified Ulcers
ulcers, Cold swellings, bruises, congeled Blood, Toothach, Felons, or Andicoms,
worms in the Ears. Fleas, Tired Horses,
in Man or Beast, to kill the Worms and clens the putrified Places: The Juice
thereof dropped in, or otherwise applied, consumes all cold Swellings, and
dissolveth the congealed Blood of bruises by strokes, falls, etc. A piece of
the Root, or some of the Seed bruised and held to an aching Tooth, takes away
the pain. The Leaves bruised and laid to the Joint that has a Fellon thereon,
takes it away: The Juice de^royeth Worms in the Ears being dropped into them:
if the hot Arsmart be strewed in a Chamber it will soon kill all the Fleas; and
the Herb or Juice of the cold Arsmart put to Horses or other Cattels sores will
drive away the Fly in the ^ottest time of Summer; A good handful of the hot
biting Arsmart put under a Horses Saddle will make him travel the better
although he were half tired before: The mild Arsmart is good against hot
Imposthumes and Inflammations Impostums Inflammations, Wounds.
at the beginning, and to heal green Wounds.

All Authors chop the Virtues of both sorts of Arsmart together, as men chop
Herbs for the Pot, when both of them are of clean contrary qualities, The hot
Arsmart grows not so high or tall as the mild does, but has many leaves of
the color of Beach leaves, very seldom or never spotted, in other particulars
it is like the former, but may easily be known from it, if you will be but
pleased to break a Leaf of it cross your Tongue, for the hot will make your
Tongue, to smart, so will not the cold; if you see them both together, you may
easily distinguish them, because the mild has far broader Leaves: And out
College of Physicians out of their learned care for the public good, Anglice
their own gain, mistake the one for the other in their New-Master-Piece, whereby
they discover, 1. Their Ignorance, 2. Their Carelessness, and he that has but
half an eye may see their pride without a pair of Spectacles. I have done what
I could to distinguish them in their Virtues, and when you find not the
contrary named, use the cold. The truth is, I have not yet spoken with Dr.
Reason, nor his Brother Dr. Experience, concerning either of them both.

Asarabacca.
Description.
A Sarabacca has many Heads rising from the Roots, from whence come many
smooth Leaves, every one upon his own Footstalk, which are rounder and bigger
than Violet Leaves, thicker also, and of a darker green shining color on the
upper side, and of a paler yellow green underneath, little or nothing dented
about the edges; from among which rise small round hollow, brown green husks,
upon short stalks about an inch long, divided at the brims into five divisions,
very like the Cups or Heads of the Henbane Seed, but that they are smaller; and
these be all the Flowers it carries, which are somewhat sweer, being smelled
unto, and wherein when they are ripe is contained small cornered, rough Seeds,
very like the Kernels or Stones of Grapes or Raisons. The Roots are small and
whitish spreading diverse ways in the ground, and increasing into diverse Heads;
but not running or creeping under ground as some other creeping Herbs do; They
are somewhat sweet in smell, resembling. Nardus, but more when they are dry,
than green; and of a sharp but not unpleasant taste.

Place.
It grows frequently in Gardens.

Time.
They keep their Leaves green all Winter, but shoot forth new in the Spring,
and with them come forth those Heads or Flowers which give ripe Seed about
Midsummer, or somewhat after.

Virtues and use.
This Herb being drunk, not only provokes vomiting, but purges downward, and
by Urin also, purging both Choler and Phlegm: if you ad to it some Spicknard,
with the Whey of Goats Milk or Honeyed Water, it is made more strong, but it
purges Phlegm more manifestly than Choler, and therefore does much help pains
in the Hips and other parts, it being boiled in Whey, it wonderfully helps
the Obstruction of the Liver and Spleen, and therefore profitable for the
Dropsy and Jaundice being steeped in Wine and drunk. Causes Vomiting,
Choler, Phlegm, urin, Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Dropsy, Jaundice,
Agues.
It helps those continual Agues that come by the plenty of stubborn humors: An
Oil made thereof by setting it in the Sun, with some Laudanum added to it,
provokes sweating (the rige of the Back being anointed therewith) and thereby
drives away the shaking Fits of Agues. It will not abide any long boiling, for
it loses its chiefest strength thereby; nor much beating; for the finer Powder
does provoke Vomits and Urin, and the courser purges downwards.

The common Use hereof is to take the Juice of five or seven Leaves in a little
Drink to cause Vomitings: The Roots have also the same Virtue, though they do
not operate so forcibly, yet they are very effectual against the biting of
Serpents, Serpents.
and therefore is put as an ingredient both into Metbridate and Venice Treacle.
The Leaves and Roots being boiled in Ly, and the Head Head.
often washed therewith, while it is warm, comfort the Head and Brain that is
ill affected by taking cold, and helps the Memory. Memory.


I shall desire Ignorant people to forbear the use of the Leaves, the Roots
purge more gently, and may prove beneficial in such as have Cancers, or old
putrified Ulcers, or Fistulaes upon their Bodies, to take a dram of them in
Powder in a quarter of a pint of white Wine in the morning. The truth is, I
fancy Purging and Vomiting Medicines as little as any Man breathing does, for
they weaken Nature, nor shall never advise them to be used unless upon urgent
necessity. If a Physician be Natures servant, it is his duty to strengthen his
Mistress as much as he can, and weaken her as little as may be.

Asparagus, Sparagus, or Sperage.
Description.
IT rises up at first with diverse whitish green scaly Heads, very brittle or
easy to break while they are young, which afterward rise up into very long and
slender green stalks, of the bigness of an ordinary riding wand at the bottom
of most, or bigger or lesser, as the Roots are of growth; on which are set
diverse branches of green Leaves, shorter and smaller than Fennel to the top, at
the joints whereof come forth small mossie yellowish Flowers, which turn into
round Berries, green at the first, and of an excellent red color when they are
ripe, showing like Beads of Corral, wherein are contained exceeding hard, black
Seeds. The Roots are dispersed from a spongeous Head into many long, thick, and
round strings, whereby it sucketh much Nourishment out of the ground, and
increases plentifully thereby.

and Jupit; Prickly Asparagus, Sparagus, or Sperage.
Description.
IT grows usually in Gardens; and some of it grows wild, in Appleton Meadow
in Glouce stershire, where the poor people do gather the Buds, or young Shoots,
and sell them cheaper than our Garden Asparagus is sold at London.

Time.
They do for the most part Flower, and bear their Berries late in the year, or
not at all, although they are housed in Winter.

Virtues and use.
The young Buds or branches boiled in ones ordinary broth, makes the Belly
Belly, Strangury, Disury, Gout, Sciatica, Eyes Toothache.
soluble and open, and boiled in white Wine, provokes Urin being stopped, and
is good against the Strangury, or difficulty of making water; it expels the
gravel and stone out of the Kidneys, and helps pains in the Reins: And boiled
in white Wine or Vinegar it is prevalent for them that have their Arteries
loosned, or are troubled with the Hip-Gout, or Sciatica. The Decoction of the
Roots boyied in Wine and taken is good to clear the sight, and being held in
the Mouth eases the Toothach: And being taken fasting several mornings
together stirs up bodily lust in Man or Woman (whatsoever some have written
to the contrary.) The Garden Asparagus nourishes more than the wild; yet has
it the same effects in all the asorementioned Diseases. The Decoction of the
Roots in white Wine, and the Back and Belly bathed therewith, or kneeling or
lying down in the same, or sitting therein as a Bath, has been found effectual
against pains of the Reins and Bladder, pains of the Mother and Chollick,
Reins, Bladder, Mother, Cramp, Chollick, Convulsion
and generally against all pains that happen to the lower parts of the Body;
and no less effectual against stiff and benumbed Sinews, or those that are
shrunk by Cramps, and Convulsions, and helps the Sciatica.

Ash-Tree.
THis is so well known that time will be mis^pent and Paper wasted in writing a
Description of it; and therefore I shall only insist upon the Virtues of it.

Virtues and use.
The young tender Tops with the Leaves taken inwardly, and some of them
outwardly applied are singular good against the biting of the Viper, Adder,
Adders and Vipers biting, Dropsy, Stone, Jaundice, Leprosy, Scabs, Scald
Heads, Stitches, Stone, Disury, Rickets.
or any other Venomous Beast: And the Water distilled therfrom, being taken a
small quantity every morning fasting, is a singular Medicine for those that are
subject to a Dropsy, or to abate the greatness of those who are too gross or
fat. The Decoction of the Leaves in white Wine, helps to break the Stone and
expel it, and cures the Jaundice. The Ashes of the Bark of the Ash made into
Ly, and those Heads bathed therewith which are Leprous, Scabby, or Scaled, they
are thereby cured. The Kernels within the Husks commonly called Ashen Keys,
prevails against Stitches and pains in the sides proceeding of Wind, and
avoideth away the stone by provoking Urin.

I can justly except against none of all this save only the first, viz. That
Ash-tree Tops and Leaves are good against the biting of Serpents and Vipers,
and I suppose this had its rise from Gerard, or Pliny, both which hold that
there is such an Antipathy between an Adder and an Ash-tree, that if an Adder
be compassed round with Ash-tree Leaves, she will sooner run through the fire
than through the Leaves, the contrary to which is the truth, as both my eyes
are witnesses: the rest are Virtues something likely; only if it be in Winter
when you cannot get the Leaves, you may safely use the Bank instead of them,
the Keys you may easily keep all the year, gathering them when they are ripe.

Avens.
Description.
THe ordinary Avens has many long, rough, dark green, winged Leaves rising from
the Root; every one made of many Leaves set on each side of the middle Rib, the
largest three whereof grow at the ends and are snip'd or dented round about the
edges: the other being small pieces, sometimes two and sometimes four standing on
each side of the middle rib underneath them; among which do rise up diverse
rough or hairy Stalks about two foot high branching forth with Leaves at every
Joint, not so long as those below, but almost as much cut in on the edges, some
into three parts, some into more: On the Tops of the Branches stand small pale
yellow Flowers consisting of five Leaves, like the Flowers of Cynkfoyl, but
larger in the middle, whereof stands a small green Head, which when the Flower
is fallen grows to be rough and round, being made of many long greenish
purple Seeds (like grains) which will stick upon your Clothes. The Root
consists of many brownish strings or fibers, smelling somewhat like unto Cloves,
especially those which grow in the higher, hotter, and drier grounds, and in
the freer and clear Air.

Place.
They grow wild in many places under Hedge sides, and by the Pathwaies in
Fields, yet they rather delight to grow in shadowy than in Sunny places.

Time.
They Flower in May and June for the inost part, and their seed is ripe in July
at the furthest.

Virtues and use.
It is good for the Diseases of the Chest or Breast, Breast, Stitches, Wind,
Belly, Stomach Inward Wounds, Heart, cold Brain, Obstructions, Chollick,
Fluxes, Ruptures, Spots and Marks in the Face, Plague, Poison, Indigestion.
for pains and Stitches in the Sides, and to expel crude and raw humors from
the Belly and Stomach by the sweet savor and warming quality; it dissolveth the
inward congealed Blood happening by falls or bruises, and the spitting of Blood,
if the Roots either green or dried be boiled in Wine and drunk, as also al
manner of inward Wounds or outward if they be washed or bathed therewith. The
Decoction also being drunk comfort the Heart, and strengthens: the
Stomach, and a cold Brain, and therefore is good in the Spring time to open
Obstructions of the Liver, and helps the wind Chollick; it also helps those
that have Fluxes, or are bursten, or have a Rupture; It takes away spots or
marks in the Face, being washed therewith: The Juice of the fresh Root or Powder
of the dried Root has the same effect with the Decoction. The Root in the
Spring time steeped in Wine does give it a delicat savor and taste, and being
drunk fasting every morning comfort the Heart, and is a good Preservative
against the Plague, or any other Poison; it helps Digestion, and warmeth a
cold Stomach, and opens the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen.

It is very safe, you need have no Dose prescribed^ and is very fit to be kept
in every good bodies house.

Balm.
THis Herb is so well known to be an Inhabitant almost in every Garden, that I
shall not need to write any Description thereof, although the Virtues thereof
which are many may not be omitted.

Virtues and use.
The Arabian Physicians have extolled the Virtues hereof to the Skies, although
the Greeks thought it not worth mentioning. Se^apio says, It causes the Mind
and Heart Mind, Heart, Faintings Swonings, Melancholy, Indigestion, Obstruction
of the Brain, Heart, Arteries, Venemous-Beasts, Mad Dogs Terms provokes,
Toothach, Bloody Flux.
to become merry, and reviveth the Heart fainting into soundings, especially of
such who are over taken in their sleep, and drives away al troublesome cares
and thoughts out of the Mind arising from Melancholy, or black Choler; which
Avicen also confirms. It is very good to help Digestion, and open
Obstructions of the Brain; and has so much purging quality in it (says
Avicen) as to expel those Melancholy vapors from the Spirits and Blood which
are in the Heart and Arteries, although it cannot do so in other parts of the
Body. Diascorides says, That the Leaves steeped in Wine, and the Wine drunk,
and the Leaves externally applied is a remedy against the sting of Scorpions,
and the bitings of mad Dogs, and commends the Decoction thereof for Women to
bath or sit in to procure their Courses; it is good to was^^aching Teeth
therewith, and profitable for those that have the bloudy-Flux. The Leaves also
with a little Nitre taken in Drink, are good against a Surfeit of Mushromes,
Mushroms dificulty of breathing, Gout, Liver, Spleen, women in Child bed,
Fainting in travel, Boyls,
helps the griping pains of the Belly, and being made into an Electuary is good
for them that cannot fetch their breath: Used with Salt it takes away Wens,
Kernels, or hard Swellings in the Flesh or Throat; it cleanses foul Sores, and
caseth pains of the Gout: It is good for the Liver and Spleen. A Tansie or
Cawdle made with Eggs and the Juice thereof while it is young, putting to it some
Sugar and Rosewater is good for Women in Childbed when the Afterbirth is not
thronghly avoided, and for their faintings upon, or after their sore travel.
The Herb bruised and boiled in a little Wine and Oil and laid warm on a Boil,
will ripen and break it.

It is an Herb of Jupiter and under Cancer, and strengthens Nature much in all
its actions; let a Syrup made with the Juice of it and Sugar, (as you shall be
taught at the latter end of the Book) be kept in every Gentlewomans house, to
releeve the weak stomachs and sick Bodies of their poor sickly Neighbors; as
also the Herb kept dry in the House that so with other convenient Simples you
may make it into an Electuary with Honey according as the Diseas is, and as you
shall be taught at the latter end of the Book.

Barberry.
THe Shrub is so well known to every Boy and Girl that has but attained to the
age of seven years, that it needs no Description.

Virtues and use.
Mars owns the Shrub, and presents it to the use of my Countrymen to purge
their Bodies of Choler. Choler, Scabs, Itch Tet^ers, Ringworm
Yellow-Jaundice, Boyls, Agues, Burning, Scaldings, Apetit lo^ Hair.
The inner Rind of the Barberry Tree boiled in White Wind and a quarter of a
pint drunk each morning, is an excellent remedy to cleanse the Body of
Chollerick Humors, and free it from such Diseases as Choler canseth, such be
Scabs, Itch, Tetters, Ringworms, yellow Jaundice, Boils, etc. It is excellent
for hot Agues, Burnings, Scaldings, heat of Blood, heat of the Liver,
Bloudy-flux, for the Berries are as good as the Bark, and more pleasing; they
get a man a good stomach to his victuals, by strengthening the attractive
faculty, which is under Mars, as you see more at large in the latter end of my
Ephemeris for the year 1651. The Hair washed with the Ly made of the Ashes of
the Tree and Water, 'twil make it turn yellow, viz. of Mars his own color. The
Fruit and Rind of the Shrub, the Flowers of Broom and of H^ath, or Furz, clens
the Body of Choler by Sympathy, as the Flowers, Leaves and Bark of the
Peach-Tree do by Antipathy; because these are under Mars, that under Venus.

Barley.
THe continual usefulness hereof has made al in general so aquainted herewith,
that it is altogether needless to describe its several kinds hereof plentifully
growing, being yearly sown in this Land. The Virtues whereof take as follows.

Virtues and use.
Barley in all the parts and compositions thereof (except Malt) is more cooling
than Wheat, and a little clensing: and all the Preparations thereof, as
Barly-water and other things made thereof, do give great nourishment to persons
troubled with Fevers, Agues, Fevers, Agues, Stomach, Apostums, Inflammations,
Spleen Ears, Throat, Neck, King's Evil, Leprosy, Flux, Gout, Irsh Eyes.
and heats in the Stomach. A Pultis made of Barley Meal or Flower boiled with
Vinegar and Honey, and a few dry Figs put into them, dissolveth all hard
Imposthums, and aswageth Inflammations being thereto applied: And being boiled
with Melilot and Chamomel Flowers, and some Linseed, Fenngreek and Rue in
Powder, and applied warm, it eases the pains in the Sides and Stomach, and
windiness of the Spleen. The Meal of Barley and Fleawort boiled in Water, and
made into a Pultis with Honey and Oil of Lillies, applied warm, cures
swellings under the Ears, Throat, Neck and such like: and a Plaster made
thereof with Tar, Wax and Oil, helps the King's Evil in the Throat: Boiled with
sharp Vinegar into a Pultis and laid on hot helps the Leprosy: Being boiled
in red-Wine with Pomgranat Rinds and Mirtles, stays the Lask or other Flux of
the Belly: Boiled with Vinegar and a Quince, it eases the hot pains of the
Gout. Barley flower, white Salt, Honey and Vinegar mingled together, takes away
the Itch speedily and certainly: The Water distilled from the green Barley in
the end of May is very good for those that have Defluxions of humors fallen into
their Eyes, and eases the pains being dropped into them: or White-Bread
steeped therein and bound on to the Eyes, does the same.

Garden Bazil, OR Sweet Bazil.
Description.
THe greater ordinary Bazil rises up usually with one upright Stalk diversely
branching forth on all sides, with two Leaves at every Joint, which are
somewhat broad and round, yet pointed, of a pale green color, but fresh, a
little snipt about the edges, and of a strong heady scent: the Flowers are small
and white standing at the rops of the Branches, with two small Leaves at the
Joint, in some places green, in others brown, after which come black Seed. The
Root perishes at the approach of Winter, and therefore must be new sown every
year.

Place.
I^ only grows in Gardens.

Time.
It must be sowed late, and flowers in the heat of Summer, being a very tender
Plant.

Virtues and use.
This is the Herb which all Authors are together by the Ears about, and rail at
one another like Lawyers: Galen and Diascoride hold it not fitting to be taken
inwardly: and Chrysippus rails at it with downright Billingsgate-Rhetorick.
Fliny, and the Arabian Physicians defend it.

For mine own part I presently found that Speech true;

Non nostrum inter nos tantas-compon^re lites. And away to Dr Reason went I,
who told me it was an Herb of Mars, and under the Scorpion, and perhaps
therefore called Basilicon, and then no mervail if it carry a kind of virulent
quality with it: Being applied to the place bitten by a venomous Beast, or
stung by a Wasp or Horner, Venomous Beasts, Bees, Wasps, Hornets.
it speedily draws the Poison to it; Every like draws his like. Myzal^us
affirms, That it being laid to rot in Horsdung it will breed Venomous Beasts.
And Hollerius a French Physician affirms upon his own knowledge, That an
acquaintance of his by common smelling to it, had a Scorpion bred in his Brain.
Something is the matter this Herb and Rue will not grow together, no, nor near
one another: And we know Rue is as great an enemy to Poison as any grows.

To conclude: It expels both Birth, and Afterbirth; and as it helps the
deficiency of Venus in one kind, so it spoils al her actions in another. I date
write no more of it.

The Bay Tree.
THis is so well known that it needs no Description; I shall therefore only write
the Virtues thereof, which are many.

Virtues and use.
Galen says, That the Leaves or Bark do dry and heal very much, and the
Berries more than the Leaves: The Bark of the Root is less sharp and hot, but
more bitter, and has some astriction withal, whereby it is effectual to break
the Stone, Stone, Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Dropsy, Poison,
Jaundice, Bees, Wasps, Hornees Terms provokes, Cause Delivery, After birth
Eyes, Lungs,
and good to open obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and other inward parts,
which bring the Dropsy, Jaundice, etc. The Berries are very effectual againft
al Poison of venomous Creatures, and the Stings of Wasps and Bees, as also
against the Pestilence or other infectious Diseases, and therefore is put into
sundry Triacles for that purpose: They likewise procure Women's Courses; and
seven of them given to a Woman in sore travel of Childbirth, do cause a speedy
delivery, and expel the Afterbirth; and therefore not to be taken by, such as
have not gone but theit time lest they procure Abortment, or cause Labor too
soon: They wonderfully help al: cold and rhumatick Distillations from the Brain
to the Eyes, Lungs or other parts: And being made into an Electuary with Honey,
do help the Consumption, old Coughs, shortness of Breath, Coughs, Shortness^ of
Breath, Megrim, wind, Vertigo, Disury, Mother, worms, Joints, Nerves, Arteries,
Stomach, Belly, womb, Ears, Marks in the Skin, Itch, Scabs.
and thin Rhewms: as also the Meagrim, they mightily expel wind and provoke
Urin; help the Mother, and kill the Worms: The Leaves also work the like
effects. A Bath of the Deccction of the Leaves and Berries, is singular good for
Women to sit in that are troubled with the Mother, or the Diseases thereof, or
the stoppings of their Courses, or for the Diseases of the Bladder, pains in
the Bowels by wind, and stoppnig of Urin: A Decoction likewise of equal parts
of Bay Berries, Cummin-Seed, Hysop, Origanum, and Euphorbium, with some Honey,
and the Head bathed therewith does wonderfully help Distillations and Rhewms,
and setleth the Pallat of the Mouth into its place. The Oil made of the Berries
is very comfortable in all cold Griefs of the Joints, Nervs, Arteries, Stomach,
Belly, or Womb, and helps Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, Aches, trembling and
numness in any part, weariness also, and pains that come, by sore traveling:
Al griefs and pains likewise proceeding from Wind, either in the Head, Stomach,
Back, Belly, or Womb, by ^nointing the parts affected therewith: And pains in
the Ears are also cured by dropping in some of the Oil, or by receiving into
the ^Ears the warm fume of the Decoction of the Berries through a Funnel. The
Oil takes away marks of the Skin and Flesh by bruises, fats, etc. and
dissolveth the congealed Blood in them: It helps also the Itch, Scabs, and
Wheals in the Skin.

I shall but only ad a word or two to what my Friend has written, viz. That it
is a Tree of the sun, and under the Co^lostial sign Leo, and resists
Witchcraft Witchcraft
very potently, as also all the evil old Saturn can do to the Body of Man, and
they are not a few, for it is the Speech of one, and I am mistaken if it were
not Myzaldus, That neither Witch nor Devil, Thunder nor Lightning will hurt a
Man in the place where a Bay Tree is.

Beans.
BOth the Garden and Field Beans are so well known that it saves me labor of
wriring any 'Description of them: Their Virtues briefly are as follows.

The distilled wather of the Flowers of Garden Beans is good to clens the Face
and Skin from Spots Spots, Stone, Disury, Inflammation, Women's Breasts,
and Wrinckles, and the Meal or Flower of them, or the small, does the same. The
Water distilled from the green Husks is held to be very effectual against the
Stone, and to provoke Urine. Bean Flower is used in Pultisses to assuage
Inflammations rising upon Wounds, and the swelling of Women's Breasts caused by
the curding of their Milk, and represseth their Milk: The Flower of Beans and
Fenugreek mixed with Honey, and applied to Fellons, Boyls, Bruises, Felons, or
Andicoms, Boils, Bruses, Ears.
or blue Marks by blows, or the Imposthumes in the Kernels of the Ears, helps
them all: And with Rose Leaves, Frankinsens and the white of an Egg being
applied to the Eyes, Eyes, Leeches.
helps them that are swollen, or do water, or have received any blow upon them
is used with Wine. If a Bean be parted in two, the skin being taken away, and
laid on the place where a Leech has been set that bleedeth too much, it
staieth the bleeding. Bean Flower boiled to a Pultis with Wine and Vinegar and
some Oil put thereto, cease both pain and swelling of the Cods: Cods swelled,
Flux, Pain, Sinews, ^ Sciatica, Gout.
The Husks boiled in Water to a consumption of a third part thereof staieth a
Lask: and the Ashes of the Husks made up with old Hogs Greas, helps the old
pains; contusions and Wounds of the Sinews, the Sciatica, and Gout. The Field
Beans have all the aforementioned Virtues as the Garden Beans.

Beans eaten are extreme windy meat, but if after the Dutch fashion when they
are half boiled you husk them, and then stew them (I cannot tell you how, for I
never was Cook in all my life) they are wholsomer Food.

French-Beans.
Description.
THe French or Kidney Bean arises up at first but with one ftalk which
afterward divides its self into many Arms or Branches, but also weak that if
they be not sustained with sticks or poles, they will lie fruitless upon the
ground: at several places of these Branches grow forth long footstalks, with
every one of them three broad round and pointed green Leaves at the end of them,
toward the tops whereof come forth diverse Flowers made like unto Pease
Blossoms, of the same color for the most part that the fruit will be of, that
is to say, white, yellow, red, blackish, or of a deep purple; but white is most
usual; after which come long and slender flat Pods, some crooked, some
straight, with a string as it were running down the Back thereof, wherein are
contained flattish round fruit made to the fashion of a Kidney; the Root is
long and spreads with many strings annexed to it, and perishes every year,

There is also another sort of French Beans commonly growing with us in this
Land, which is called the Scarlet flowred Bean.

This arises up with sundry Branches as the other, but runs up higher to the
length of Hop-poles, about which they grow twining, but turning contrary to the
Sun, having Footstalks with three Leaves on each as on the other: The Flowers
also are in fashion like the other, but many more set together, and of a most
Orient Scalet Color. The Beans are larger than the ordinary kind, of a deep
Purple color, turning black when it is ripe and dry: The Root perishes also
in Winter.

Virtues.
The ordinary French Beans are of an casie digestion, they move the Belly,
provoke Urin, enlarge the Breast that is straightened with shortness of Breath,
engender Sperme, and incite Venery. Disury, Shortness of breath, Incite to
Venery.


And the Scarlet-colored Beans in regard of the glorious beauty of their
color, being set near a Quickset Hedge, will bravely adorn the same, by climing
up thereon; so that they may be discerned a great way, not without admiration of
the beholder at a distance. But they will go near to kill the Quicksets by
clothing them in Scarlet. A gallant show.


Ladies-Bedstraw.
Description.
THis arises up with diverse small brown and square upright Stalks a yard high
or more, sometimes branched forth into diverse parts, full of Joints, and with
diverse very fine small Leaves at ever one of them little or nothing rough at
al: At the tops of the Branches grow many long tufts or branches of yellow
Flowers very thick set together, from the several Joints which consist of four
small Leaves apiece, which smell somewhat strong, but not unpleasant: The Seed is
small and black like Poppy seed, two for the most part joined together: The Root
is reddish with many small thrids fastened unto it, which take strong hold of the
ground and creeps a little: And the Branches leaning a little down to the
ground take Root at the Joints thereof, whereby it is easily increased.

There is also another sort of Ladies-Bedstraw growing frequently in England,
which bears white Flowers as the other does yellow; but the Branches of this
are so weak that unless it be sustained by the Hedges, or other things near
which it grows it will lie down on the ground; the Leaves a little bigger than
the former, and the Flowers not so plentiful as those; and the Root here of is
also thridy, and abiding.

Place.
They grow in Meadows and Pastures both wet and dry, and by the Hedges.

Time.
They flower in May for the most part, and the Seed is ripe in July and August.

Virtues and use.
The Decoction of the former of these being drunk is good to fret and break the
Stone, and provokes urin, stays inward bleedings, and heals inward Wounds:
Stone, Dysurey, Bleeding, Wounds,
The Herb or Flower bruised and put up into the Nostrils, stays their
bleeding likewise: The Flowers and the Herb made into an Oil by being set in
the Sn^, and changed after it has stood ten or twelve days; or into an
Ointment being boiled in Axungia or Sallet-Oyl with some Wax melted therein
after it is strained; either the Oil made thereof or the Ointment do help
Burnings Burnings, GauledFeet, Weariness, Stifness of Joints, Scabs, Itch
with Fire, or Scalding with Water: the same also, or the Decoction of the Herb
and Flower is good to bath the Feet of Travelers and Lacquies whose long
running causes weariness and stifness in their Sinews and Joints; If the
Decoction be used warm, and the Joints afterward anointed with the Ointment.
It helps the dry Scab, and the Itch in Children: And the Herb with the white
Flower is also very good for the Sinews, Arteries, and Joints to comfort and
strengthen them after travel, cold and pains.

They are both Herbs of Venus, and therefore strengthen the patrs both internal
and external which she rules.

Beets.
Description.
THere are two sorts of Beets which are best known generally, and whereof I shall
principally entreat at this time. Viz. The White and the Red Beets, and their
Virtues.

The Common White Beet has many great Leaves next the ground somewhat large,
and of a whitish green color: The Stalk is great, strong and ribbed, bearing
great store of leaves upon it almost to the very top of it: The flowers grow in
very long tufts; small at the ends, and turning down their Heads, which are
small, pale, greenish, vellow Burrs, giving cornered prickled Seed. The Root is
great, long and hard, and when it has given Seed of no use at all.

The Common Red Beet differs not from the White, but only it is lesser and
the Leaves and the Roots are somewhat red: The Leaves are differently red, in
some only with red strakes or veins, some of a fresh red, and others of a dark
red. The Rot here of is red, spungy and not used to be eaten.

The White Beet does much loosen the Belly, and is of a clensing and digesting
Clens, Digest, Disury obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Vertigo, Venomous
Beasts.
quality, and provokes Urin: The Juice of it opens obstructions both of the
Liver and Spleen, and is good for the Headaches and swimmings therein, and
turnings of the Brain; and is effectual also against al venomous creatures and
applied upon the Temples, stays Inflammations in the Eyes; it helps Burnings
Brning, St. Anthonies Fire, Wheals, Blisters, Chilblains, Kibes, Itch Dandriff,
Scurff, Scabs, ulcers, Cankers, Boldness.
being used without Oil, and with a little Alum put to it, is good for St.
Anthonies fire. It is also good for all Wheals, Pushes, Blisters and Blains in
the Skin: The Herb boiled and laid upon Chilblains or Kibes, helps them: The
Decoction thereof in Water and some Vinegar heals the Itch, if bathed
therewith, and cleanses the Head of Dandraf, Scurff, and dry Scabs, and does
much good for fretting and running Sores, Ulcers, and Cankers in the Head,
Legs, or other parts, and is much commended against Baldness and shedding of
Hair.

The red Beet is good to stay the Bloody Flux, Flux Terms stops, whites,
Stinking Breath, Noise in the Ears, Toothach, Smell lost.
Women's, Courses, and the Whites, and to help the yellow Jaundice. The Juice or
the Root put into the Nostrils purges the Head, helps the nois in the Ears,
and the Toothache; the Juice snuffed up the Nose helps a stinking Breath if the
cause lies in the Nose as many times it does, if any bruis have been there, as
also want of smell coming that way.

Water-Betony.
Description.
FIrst of the Water-Betony, which rises up with square hard greenish Stalks,
and sometimes brown, set with broad dark green Leaves dented about the edges with
notches, somewhat resembling the Leaves of the Wood-Betony, but much larger, two
for the most part set at a Joint. The Flowers are many, set at the tops of the
Stalks and Branches, being round bellied, and open at the Brims and divided
into two parts, the uppermost being like a Hood, and the lowest like a Lip
hanging down, of a dark red color, which passing away, there comes in their
places small round Heads with small points in the ends, wherein lie small and
brownish Seeds: The Root is a thick Bush of strings and threads growing from an
Head.

Place.
It grows by Ditchsides, Brooks, and other Watercourse generally through
this Land, and is seldom found far from the Waters sides.

Time.
It Flowreth about July, and the Seed is ripe in August,

Virtues and Use.
It is of a clensing quality; the Leaves bruised and applied are effectual for
all old and filthy Ulcers; Ulcers, Bruises, Sunburning.
and especially if the Juice of the Leaves be boiled with a little Honey, and
tents dipped therein, and the Sores dressed therewith: as also for Bruises or
Hurts whether inward or outward. The distilled water of the Leaves is used for
the same purposes; as also to bath the Face or Hands spotted or blemished, or
discolored by Sunburning.

I confess I do not much fancy distilled Waters, I mean such Waters as are
distilled cold, some virtue of the Herb they may happliy have (it were a
strange thing else) but this I am confident of, that being distilled in a
Pewter Still, as the vulgar and apish fashion is, both Chemical Oil and Salt is
left behind, unless you burn them, and then all is spoiled, Water and al, which
was good for as little as can be by such a Distillation. You have the best way
of Distillation in my Translation of the London Dispensatory. The College of
Physicians having as much skill in Distillations as an Ass has reading Hebrew.

Water-Betony is an Herb of Jupiter in cancer and is apropriated more to Wounds
and Hurts in the Breast than Wood-Betony which follows.

Wood-Betony.
Description.
THe Common or Wood-Betony has many Leaves rising from the Root which are
somewhat broad and round at the ends, roundly dented about the edges, standing
upon long Footstalks, from among which rise up small, square, slender, but yet
upright hairy Stalks, with some Leaves thereon, two apiece at the Joints,
smaller than the lower, whereon are set several spiked Heads of Flowers like
Lavender, but thicker and shorter for the most part, and of a reddish or purple
color, spotted with white spots both in the upper and lower part: The Seeds
being contained within the Husks that hold the Flowers, are blackish, somewhat
long and uneven. The Roots are many white threddy strings; the Stalk perishes,
but the Root with some Leaves thereon, abides all the Winter. The whole Plant is
somewhat small.

Place.
It grows frequently in Woods, and delights in Shady-places.

Time.
And it flowreth in July, after which, the Seed is quickly ripe, yet in its
prime in May.

Virtues and Use.
Antonius Musa physician to the Emperor Augustus caesar, wrote a peculiar Book
of the Virtues of this Herb, and amongst other Virtues, says of it, That it
preserves the Lives and Bodies of Men free from the danger of Epidemical
Diseases, Epidemical Diseases, Witchcraft, Apetite, indigestion, Stomach,
Belching, Jaundice, Fallingsickness, Palsy, Convulsion shrinking of the
Sinews, Gout, Dropsy, Frenzy, Cough, Cold, shortness of Breath, Agues of all
sorts, Sore Eyes, Worms, Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Stitches, Pains
in the Back and Belly, Terms provokes, Mother, Childbirth Stone, Toothach,
Venomous Beasts, Mad-dogs Weariness, Bleeding at Mouth and Nose, Pissing and
spitting of Blood, Ruptures, Bruises, Wounds, Veins and Sinews cut, ulcers,
Fistulaes, Boyls, Ears.
and from Wicchcrafts also: It is found by daily experience to be good for many
Diseases; It helps those that loath, or cannot digest their Meat, those that
have weak Stomachs, or sower belchings, or continual rising in their Stomach,
using it familiarly either green or dry; either the Herb, the Root, or the
Flowers in Broth drunk, or Meat, or made into Conserve, Syrup, Water Electuary,
or Powder as every one may best frame themselves unto, or as the time or season
requires, taken any of the aforesaid ways. It helps the Jaundice,
Falling Sickness, the Palsy, Convulsions or shrinking of the Sinews, the Gout,
and those that are inclined to Dropsies, those that have continual Pains in
their Head, although it turn to Frenzy. The Powder mixed with pure Honey is
no less available for all sorts of Coughs or Colds, Wheesing or shortness of
Breath, Distillations of thin Rhewm upon the Lungues, which causes
Consumptions. The Decoction made with Mead and a little Penyroyal, is good for
those that are troubled with putrid Agues, whether Quotidian, Tertian, or
Quartan, and to draw down and evacuate the Blood and humors that by falling
into the Eyes do hinder the Sight: The Decoction thereof made in Wine and taken,
kills the Worms in the Belly, opens Obstructions both of the Spleen and
Liver, cares Stitches and Pains in the Back, or Sides the Torments and griping
pains of the Bowels, and the wind Chollick: and mixed with Honey purges the
Belly, helps to bring down Women's Courses, and is of especial use for those
that are troubled with the falling down of the Mother, and pains thereof and
causes an easy and speedy delivery of Women in Childbirth: it helps also to
break and expel the Stone either in the Bladder or Kidneys. The Decoction with
Wine gargled in the Mouth, eases the Toothach. It is commended against the
sting or biting or Venomous Serpents or Mad Dogs. Being used inwardly and
applied outwardly to the place. A dram of the Powder in Betony taken with a
little Honey in some Vinegar, does wonderfully refresh those that are
overwearied by travail; it staieth bleedings at the Mouth or Nose, and helps
those that pise or spit Blood, and those that are Bursten or have a Rupture,
and is good for such as are bruised by any fall or otherwise. The green Herb
bruised, or the Juice applied to any inward hurt or outward green Wound in the
Head or Body will quickly heal and close it up; as also any Veins or Sinews that
are cut; and will draw forth any broken Bone, or Splinter, Thorn or other thing
gotten into the Flesh: It is no less profitable for old Sores, or filthy
Ulcers, yea, though they be Fistulaus and hollow, but some do advise to put in
a little Salt to this purpose: Being applied with a little Hogs Lard, it
helps a Plague Sore, and other Boyls and Pushes: The fumes of the Decoction
while it is warm received by a Funnel into the Bars, caseth the pains of them,
destroys the Worms, and cures the running Sores in them. The Juice dropped
into them does the same. The Root of Betony is displeasing both to the taste and
Stomach, whereas the Leaves and Flowers by their sweet and spicy taste, are
comfortable both in Meat and Medicine.

There are some of the many Virtues Antony Musa an expert Physician (for it was
not the practice of Octavius Caesar to keep Fools about him) apropriates to
Betony; It is a very precious Herb that is certain, and most fitting to be kept
in a man's house both in Syrup, Conserve, Oil, Ointment, and Plaster. The
Flowers are usually Conserved.

The Herb is apropriated to the Planet Jupiter, and the Sign Aries.

The Beech-Tree.
IN treating of this Tree, you must understand that I mean the great Mast
Beech; which is by way of distinction from that other small rough sort, called
in Sussex, the small Beech; but in Essex, Hornbeam.

I suppose it needless to describe it, being already so well known to my
Countrymen.

Place.
It grows in Woods amongst Oaks, and other Trees, and in Parks, Forests, and
Chases, to feed Deer; and in other places to fatten Swine.

Time.
It bloometh in the end of April, or beginning of May for the most part, and the
Fruit is ripe in September

Virtues and use.
The Leaves of the Beech-Tree are cooling and binding, Cools, Binds, Hot
swellings, Scurff, Scabs, Tetters.
and therefore good to be applied to hot Swelling to discuss them: The Nuts do
much nourish such Beasts as feed thereon: The Water that is found in the hollow
places of decaying Beeches, will cure both Man and Beast of any Scurf, Scab, or
running Tetters, if they be washed therewith. You may boil the Leaves into a
Pultis, or make an Ointment of them when time of year serves.

BILBERRIES: called also (by some) Whorts, and Whortleberries.
Descriptions.
OF these I shall only speak of two sorts, which are commonly known in England,
Viz The Black, and the Red Bilberries. And first of the Black.

This small Bush creeps along upon the ground, scarce rising half a yard high,
with diverse small dark green Leaves set on the green Branches, not always one
against another, and a little dented about the edges: At the foot of the Leaves
com forth small, hollow, pale, blush colored Flowers, the brims ending in five
points, with a reddish thread in the middle, which pass into small round Berries
of the bigness and color of Juniper Berries, but of a Purple sweetish sharp
taste; the Juice of them gives a Purplish color to their Hands and Lips that
eat and handle them, especially if they break them. The Root grows asloop
under ground, shooting forth in sundry places as it creeps: This loses its
Leaves in Winter.

The Red Bilberry, or whortle-bush, rises up like the former, having sundry
harder Leaves, like the Box-Tree Leaves, green and round pointed standing on
the several Branches, at the tops whereof only, and not from the sides as in
the former, com forth diverse round flowers of a pale red color, after which
succeed, round, reddish sappy Berries when they are ripe, of a sharp taste: The
Root runs in the ground, as the former; but the Leaves of this abide al
Winter.

Place.
The first grows in Forests, on the Heaths and such like barren plaaces: The
Red grows in the North parts of this Land, as Lancashire, Yorkshire, etc.

Time.
They slower in March and April; and the Fruit of the Black is ripe in June and
July.

Virtue and use.
The Black Bilberries are good in hot Agues Agues, Stomach, Liver, Vomiting,
Apetit lost, Cough, Phtisick, Fluxes.
and to cool the heat of the Liver and stomach; they do somewhat bind the Belly,
and stay Vomitings and Loathings: The Juice of the Berries made into a Syrup,
or the Pulp made into a Conserve with Sugar, is good for the purposes
aforesaid, as also for an old Cough or an Ulcer in the Lungs, or other diseases
therein. The Red Whorts are more binding, and stop Women's Courses, spitting of
Blood, or any other Flux of Blood or Humors, being used as well outwardly as
inwardly.

Bifoyl, or Twayblade.
Description.
THis small Herb from a Root somewhat sweet, shooting downwards many long
strings, rises up a round green Stalk bare or naked next the ground for an
inch, two or three to the middle thereof, as it is in age or growth, as also
from the middle upward to the Flowers, having only two broad Plantan-like
Leaves (but whiter) set at the middle of the Stalk one against another, and
compasses it round at the bottom of them.

Place.
It is a usual Inhabitant in Woods, Copses, and in many other places in this
Land.

There is another sort grows in wet grounds and Marshes, which is somewhat
differing from the former: It is a smaler Plant, and greener, having sometimes
three Leaves; the Spike of Flowers is less than the former, and the Roots of
this do run or creep in the ground.

They are much and often used by many to good purpose for Wounds both green and
old, and to consolidate or knit Ruptures.

The Birch-Tree.
Description.
THis grows a goodly tall straight Tree, fraught with many Boughs and
slender Branches bending downward; the old ones being covered with a
discolored chapped Bark, and the younger being browner by much: The Leaves at
their first breaking out are crumpled, and afterward like the Beech Leaves, but
smaler and greener, and dented about the edges: It bears small short Catkins,
somewhat like those of the Hazel-Nut-tree, which abide on the Branches a long
time, until growing ripe they fall on the ground, and their Seed with them.

Place.
It usually grows in Woods.

Virtues.
The Juice of the Leaves while they are young, or the distilled Water of them,
or the Water that coms out of the Tree, being bored with an Augur and distilled
afterward; any of these being drunk for some time together, is available to
break the Stone Stone, sore Mouths.
in the Kidneys or Bladder; and is good also to wash sore Mouths.

Birds-Foot.
THis small Herb grows not above a span high, with many Branches spread on the
ground, set with many wings of small Leaves; The Flowers grow upon the
Branches, many small ones of a pale yellow color, being set at a head together,
which afterward turn into so many small joynted Cods with Seeds in them; the
Cods well resembling the Claws of small Birds, whence it took its name.

There is another sort of Birds-Foot in all things like the former, but a
little larger; the Flowers of a pale whitish red color, and the Cods distinct
by Joints like the other, but a little more crooked, and the Roots do carry
many small white Knots or Kernels amongst the Strings.

Place.
These grow on Heaths, and many open untilled places of this Land.

Time.
They flower and seed in the end of Summer.

Virtues and use.
They are of a drying, binding Dry, Bind, Wounds, Stone, Ruptures.
quality, and thereby very good to be used in Wound-drinks, as also to apply
outwardly for the same purpose. But the latter Birds-foot is found by
experience to break the Stones in the Back or Kidneys, and drive them forth, if
the Decoction thereof be taken; and it wonderfully helps the Rupture, being
taken inwardly, and outwardly applied to the place.

All Salts have best operation upon the Ston, as Ointments and Plasters have
upon Wounds; and therefore if you may make a Salt of this for the Stone, the way
how to do so may be found in my Translation of the London Dispensatory, and it
may be I may give you again in plainer terms at the latter end of this Book.

Bishops-weed.
Description.
COmmon Bishops-weed rises up with a round straight Stalk, sometimes as high as
a Man, but usually three or four foot high, beset with diverse small, long, and
somewhat broad Leaves, cut in some places and dented about the edges, growing one
against another, of a dark green color; having sundry Branches on them, and at
the top small umbels of white flowers, which turn into small round brown Seed,
little bigger than Parsly-seed, of a quick hot scent and taste: The Root is
white and stringie, perishing yearly after it has seeded, and usually rises
again of its own sowing.

Place.
It grows wild in many places in England and Wales, as between Greenheath and
Gravsend.

Virtues.
It digesteth Humors, provokes Urin and Women's Courses, dissolveth Wind; and
being taken in Wine, eases pains and griping in the Bowels, and is good
against the biting of Serpents: It is used to good effect in those Medicines
which are given to hinder the poysonful operation of Cantharides upon the
passages of the Urin: Being mixed with Honey, and applied to black and blue
marks, coming of blows or bruises, it takes them away: and being drunk or
outwardly applied, it abateth an high color, and makes it pale; and the Fumes
thereof taken with Rozin, or Raisons, cleanses the Mother. Disury, Terms
provokes, Wind, Chollick, Venomous Beasts, Cantharirides, black and blew spots,
High color; Mother.


It is hot and dry in the third degree, of a bitter taste and something sharp
withal; it provokes Lust to purpose; I suppose Venus owns it.

Bistort, or Snakeweed.
Description.
THis has a thick; short, knobbed Root, blackish without, and somewhat reddish
within, a little crooked or turned together, of an harsh astringent taste, with
diverse black threads hanging there, from whence spring up every year diverse
Leaves standing upon long Footstalks, being somewhat broad and long like a
Dock-leaf, and a little pointed at the ends, but that it is of a bluish green
color on the upper side, and of an Ash color gray, and a little purplish
underneath, with diverse Veins therein; from among which rise up diverse small and
slender Stalks, two foot high, and almost naked, and without Leaves, or with
very few, and narrow, bearing a spiky Bush of pale Flesh colored Flowers,
which being past there abides small Seed, somewhat like unto Sorrel Seed, but
greater.

There are other sorts of Bistort, growing in this Land, but smaller, both in
height, Root, and Stalks, and especially in the Leaves, The Root blackish
without, and somewhat whitish within, of an austere binding taste as the former.

Place.
They grow in shadowy moist Woods, and at the foot of Hills, but are chiefly
nourished up in Gardens. The narrow leaved Bistort grows in the North, in
Lancashire, yorkshire, and Cumberland.

Time.
They Flower about the end of May, and the Seed is ripe about the beginning of
July.

Virtues and use.
Both the Leaves and Roots have have a powerful faculty to resist al Poison.
Poison, Plague, Small pocks Meazles, Purples, Epidemical Dise^ses.
The Root in Powder taken in drink expels the Venem of the Plague, the small
Pox, Meazles, Purples, or any other infectious Diseas, driving it out by
sweating: The Root in Powder or the Decoction thereof in Wine being drunk,
stays al manner of inward bleedings Inward bleeding, Flux, Vomiting,
Ruptures, Jaundice,
or spittings of Blood, and any Fluxes in the Body of either Man or Woman, or
Vomitings; it is also very available against Ruptures or Burstings, or all
bruises or falls, dissolving the congealed Blood, and eases the pains that
happen thereupon it also helps the Jaundice. The Water distilled from both
Leaves and Roots, is a singular remedy to wash any place bitten or stung by any
venomous Venomous Beasts.
creature; as also for any of the purposes before spoken of.

And is very good to wash any running Sores or Ulcers. Ulcers,
The Decoction of the Root in Wine being drunk, hinders Abortion Abortion,
Worms, Diabites,
or Miscarriage in Childbearing. The Leaves also kill the Worms in Children, and
is a great help for them that cannot keep their Water, if the Jayce of Plantane
be added thereto. And outwardly applied, much, helps the Gonorrhea, or running
of the Reins. Running of the Reins.
A dram of the Powder of the Root taken in the Water thereof, wherein some red
hot Iron or Steel has been quenched is also an admirable help thereto, so as
the Body be first prepared and purged from the offensive humors. The Leaves,
Seed, or Roots are al very good in Decoctions, Drinks or Lotians, for inward or
outward Wounds Wounds,
or other fores: and the Powder strewed upon any cut or wound in a Vein,
stays the immoderat bleeding Bleeding,
thereof. The Decoction of the Roots in Water whereunto some Pomgranate Pills and
Flowers are added, injected into the Matrix, Matrix,
stays the access of humors to the Ulcers thereof, and brings it to its
right place, being fallen down, and stays the immoderat flux of the Courses.
Terms stops,
The Root hereof with Pellitory of Spain and burnt Alum of each a like
quantity, beaten small and made into Past, with some Honey, and a little Picce
thereof put into an hollow-Tooth, Toothache,
or held between the Teeth if there be no hollowness in them, stays the
defluxion of Rhewm upon them, which causes pains, and helps to cleanse the
Head, Head.
and avoid much offensive Water. The Distilled Water is very effectual to wash
Sores or Cankers Cankers,
in the Nose or any other part, if the Powder of the Root be aplied thereunto
afterward. It is good also to fasten the Gums, Gums, Inflammations Almonds of
the Ears.
and to take away the heat and inflammations that happen in the Jaws, Almonds of
the Throat or Mouth, if the Decoction of the Leaves, Roots, or Seeds be used, or
the Juice of them; but the Roots are most effectual to all the purposes
aforesaid.

One-Blade.
Description.
THis small Plant never bears more than one Leaf, but only when it rises up
with its Stalk which thereon bears another, and seldom more, which are of a
bluish green color, broad at the bottom and pointed with many Ribs or Veins
like Plantane: At the top of the Stalk grow many small white Flowers
Star-fashion smelling something sweet; after which come small reddish Berries
when they are ripe. The Root is small, of the bigness of a Rush, lying and
creeping under the upper crust of the Earth, shooting forth in diverse places.

Place.
It grows in moist shadowy, grassie places of Woods in many places of this
Realm.

Time.
It flowreth about May, and the Berries be ripe in June, and then quickly
perishes until the next year it springth from the same again.

The Virtues.
Half a dram, or a dram at most of the Roots hereof in Powder, taken in Wine
and Vinegar of each a like quantity, and the party presently laid to swear, is
held to be a sovereign remedy for those that are infected with the Plague, and
have a sore upon them, by expelling the Poison and defending the Heart and
Spirits from danger: it is also accounted a singular good Wound-Herb, and
therefore used with other Herbs in making such Balms as are necessary for the
curing of Wounds, either green or old, and especially if the Nervs of Sinews be
hurt. Peslilence, Wounds, Nervs. hurt.


The Bramble; OR Black-Berry-Bush.
THis is so well known that it needs no Descrption. The Virtues thereof are as
follows.

Virtues and use.
The Buds, Leaves and Branches while they are green are of a good use in the
Ulcers Ulcers, Sores, Quinsie, Wounds, Flux, Bloodyflux Spitting Blood, Gravel,
Stone, Secrets.
and putrid sores of the Mouth and Throat, and for the Quinsie; and likewise to
heal other fresh Wounds and Sores; but the Flowers and Fruit unripe are very
binding, and so profitable for the Bloudy-flux, Lasks, and are a fit remedy for
spitting of Blood. Either the Decoction or Powder of the Root being taken is
good to break or drive forth Gravel, and the Stone in the Reins and Kidneys.
The Leaves and Brambles as well green as dry, are excellent good Lotions for sores
in the Mouth or secret parts: The Decoction of them and of the dried Branches,
do much bind the Belly, and are good for the too much flowing of Women's
Courses: The Berries or the Flowers are a powerful remady against the Poison
Poison, Venomous Beasts. fundament Piles,
of the most venomous Serpents; as well drunk as outwardly applied, helps the
sores of the Fundament, and the Piles. Terms stops,
The Juice of the Berries mixed with Juice of Mulberries, do bind more
effectually, and help fretting and eating sores and Ulcers whersoever. The
Distilled Water of the Branches, Leaves and Flowers; or of the Fruit, is very
pleasant in taste, and very effectual in Fevers and hot distempers of the Body,
Head, Fevers, Head, Eyes, Itch, Scabby Heads.
Eyes and other parts, and for all the purposes aforesaid. The Leaves boiled in
Ly and the Head washed therewith, heals the Itch and the running sores
thereof, and makes the Hair black. The Powder of the Leaves strewed on cankrous
and running Ulcers, does wonderfully help to heal them. Some use to condensate
the Juice of the Leaves, and some the Juice of the Berries to keep for their
use all the year, for the purposes aforesaid.

It is a Plant of Venus in Aries: You shall have some Directions at the latter
end of the Book for, the gathering of al Herbs and Plants etc. If any ask the
Reason why Venus is so prickly? Tell them it is because she is in the house of
Mars.

Blites.
Description.
OF these there are two sorts commonly known, Viz. White and Red. The White
has Leaves somewhat like unto Beets, but smaller, rounder and of a whitish green
color, every one standing upon a small long Footstalk: The Stalk rises up two
or three foot high with such like Leaves thereon: The Flowers grow at the top in
long round tufts or clusters, wherein are contained small and round Seed. The
Root is very full of threeds or strings.

The red Blites is in all things like the white, but that his Leaves and tufted
heads, are exceeding red at first, and after turn more Purplish.

There are other kinds of Blites which grow wild, differing from the two former
sorts but little, only the wild are smaler in every part.

Place.
They grow in Gardens, and wild in many places of this Land.

Time.
They seed in August and September.

Virtues and use.
They are all of them cooling, drying and binding, serving to restrain the
Fluxes of Blood in either man or woman, especially the Red; which also stays
the overflowing of women's Reds, as the white Blite stays the Whites in
Women. Reds and Whites in Women.
It is an excellent secret, you cannot well fail in the use; they are al under
the Dominion of Venus.

There is one other sort of wild Blites, like the other wild kinds, but having
long and spike heads of greenish Seed, seeming by the thick setting together to
be al Seed.

This sort the Fishes are delighted with, and it is a good and usual Bait; for
Fishes will bite fast enough at them, if you have but wit enough to catch them
when they bite.

Borrage and Bugloss.
THese are so well known to be Inhabitants in every Garden, that I ^old it
needless to describe them.

Time.
They flower in June and July, and the Seed is ripe shortly after.

Virtues and use.
They are very Cordial. The Leaves or Roots are to very good purpose used in
putrid and Pestilential Fevers, Fevers, Pestilence, Poison, Venomous Beasts.
Milk in Nurses. Melancholy, Ill Blood,
to defend the Heart, and hlp to resist and expel the Poison, or the Venom of
other Creatures; the Seed is of the like effect; and the Seed and Leaves are
good to increase Milk in Women's Breasts: The Leaves, Flowers and Seed, all, or
any of them are good to expel Pensiveness and Melancholy: it helps to
clarify the Blood, and mitigate heat in Fevers. The Juice made into a Syrup
prevails much to all the purposes aforesaid, and is put with other cooling,
opening, clensing. Herbs, to open obstructions, and help the yellow-Jaundice,
Yellow Jandice, Itch, Ringworms, Tetters,
and mixed with Fumitory, to cool, clens, and temper the Blood, thereby it
helps the Itch, Ringworms; and Tetters, or other spreading Scabs Scabs,
Weakness by long sickness, Consumption, Swooning, Inflammations. Ulcers, sore
Mouths and Throat, Cough, Phlegm.
or Sores. The Flowers candied or made; into a Conserve are helping in the
former causes, but are chiefly used as a Cordial, and is good for those that
are weak with long sickness, and to comfort the Heart and Spirts of those that
are in a consumption, or troubled with often swoonings or passions of the Heart:
The Distilled Water is no less effectual to all the purposes aforesaid, and
helps the redness and inflammation of the Eyes being washed therewith The
dried Herb is never used, but the green; yet the Ashes thereof boiled in Mead,
or Honyed Water is available against Inflammations and Ulcers in the Mouth or
Throat, to wash and gargle it therewith. The Roots of Bugloss are effectual
being made into a licking Electuarie for the Cough, and to condensate thin
phlegm, and Rhewmatick Distillations upon the Lungs.

They are both Herbs of Jupiter; and under Leo, both great Cordials, great
strengthners of Nature.

Bluebottles.
THese are so well known generally unto my Country men to grow among their Corn,
that I suppose it needless to write any Description thereof: There are other
kinds which I purposely omit both in this and others, my intent being only to
insist most principally upon the vulgarly known, and commonly growing Flowers
and Herbs.

Time.
They Flower and Seed in the Summer Months.

Virtues and use.
The Powder or dried Leaves of the Bluel ottle, or Cornflower is given with good
success to those that are bruised by a sal, or have broken a Vein inwardly, and
void much Blood at the Mouth, being taken in the Water of Plantane, Horstail,
or the greater Comfry. Bruises, Broken Veins, Poison, Plague, Epidemical
Diseases, Wounds, ulcers, Inflammations in the Eyes.
It is a Remedy, against the Poison of the Scorpion, and resists al other
Venoms and Poisons; The Seed or Leaves taken in Wine is very good against the
Plague, and al infectious Diseases, and is very good in Pestilential Fevers.
The Juice put into fresh or green Wounds does quickly soder up the Lips of them
together, and is very effectual to heal al Ulcers and Sores in the Mouth: The
Juice dropped into the Eyes, takes away the heat and inflammation in them. The
distilled Water of the Herb has the same properties; and may be used for all
the Effects aforesaid.

Briony, or VVild Vine.
Description.
THe Common white Briony grows ramping upon the Hedges, sending forth many
long rough very tender branches at the beginning, with many very rough broad
Leaves thereon, cut (for the most part) into five partitions, in form very like a
Vine Leaf, but smaller, rougher, and of a whitish or hoary green color,
spreading very far, spreading and twining with his small Claspers (that come
forth at the Joints with ^he Leaves) very far on whatsoever stands next it: At
the several Joints also (especially toward the top of the Branches) comes
forth a long Stalk bearing many whitish Flowers, together in a long tuft,
consisting of five small Leaves apiece, laid open like a Star: after which come
the Berries, separated one from another more than a Cluster of Grapes, green at
the first, and very red when they are through ripe, of no good sent, but of a
most loathsome taste provoking Vomit: The Root grows to be exceeding great with
many long Twines or Branches growing from it of a pale whitish color on the
outside, and more white within, and of a sharp, bitter loathsome taste.

Place.
It grows on Banks, or under Hedges, through this Land the Roots lie very
deep.

Time.
It Flowreth in July and August, some earlier and some later than others.

Virtues and Use.
The Roots of the Briony purge the Bell, with great Violence, troubling the
Stomach, and hurting the Liver, and therefore not rashly to be taken, but being
corrected is very profitable for the Diseases of the Head, as Falling Sickness,
Fallingsickness, Vertigo, Phlegm, Palsies, Convulsion Cramp, Stitches, Dropsies,
Gravel, Stone, Obstructions, Womb, Mother, Dead Child, Afterbirth.
Giddiness, and Swimmings, by drawing away much Phlegm and Rhewmatick humors
that oppress the Head, as also the Joints and Sinews, and is therefore good for
Palseys, Convulsions, Cramps, and Stitches in the Sides, and the Dropsy; and
in provoking Urin it cleanses the Reins and Kidneys from Gravel and the Stone,
by opening the Obstructions of the Spleen, and consumes the hardness and
swellings thereof. The Dec^ction of the Root in Wine drunk once a week at going
to bed, cleanses the Mother, and helps the rising thereof, expels the dead
Child, and Afterbirth, but is not to be used by Women with Child, for fear of
abortion; a dram of the Root in Powder taken in white Wine brings down their
Courses. An Electuary made of the Roots and Honey, does mightily clens the
Chest of Rotten Phlegm, and wonderfully help an old strong Cough, Cough,
Shortness of Breath, Sores, Cankers, Gangrenes, Tetters, Ringworms, Black
Spots, Freckles, Morphew, Leprosy.
those that are troubled with shortness of Breath, and is very good for them
that are bruised inwardly, to help to expel the clotted or congealed Blood. The
Leaves, Fruit, and Root, do clens old and filthy Sores, are good against al
fretting and running Cankers, Gangrenes, and Tetters, and therefore the Berries
are by some Country People called TetterBerries. The Root cleanses the Skin
wonderfully from al black and blow Spots, Freckles, Morphew, Leprosy, soul
Scars, or other deformity whatsoever: as also al running Scabs, and Manginess
are healed by the Powder of the dried Root, or the Juice thereof, but especially
by the fine white hardened Juice: The distilled water of the Roots works the
same effects but more weakly. The Root bruised and applied of it self to any
place where the Bones are broken, Broken Bones, Splinters Thorns, Whitlows, or
Nailwheals, or Andicoms.
helps to draw them forth, as also Splinters and Thorns in the Flesh; and
being applied with a little Wine mixed therewith it breaks Boyls, and helps
Whitlows on the Joints.

For all these latter beginning at Sores, Cankers etc. apply it outwardly and
take my advice along with you, you shall find in my Translation of the London
Dispensatory, among the Preparations at latter end, a Medicin called Foeculae
Brioniae, take that and use it, you have the way there how to make it, and mix
that with a little Hogs Greas or other convenient Ointment, and use it at your
need.

As for the former Diseases where it must be taken inwardly, it purges very
Violently, and needs an abler hand to correct it than most Country people have,
therefore it is a better way for them (in my opinion) to let the Simple alone,
and take the Compound Water of it, mentioned in my Dispensatory, and that is
far more safe, being wisely corrected.

Brooklime.
Description.
THis sends forth from a creeping Root, that shoots forth strings at every
Joint as it runs, diverse and sundry green Stalks, round and sappy with some
branches on them, somewhat broad, round, deep green, and thick Leaves set by
couples thereon: from the Bosom whereof shoot forth long Footstalks, with sundry
small blue Flowers on them, that consist of five small round pointed Leaves apiece.

There is another sort nothing differing from the former, but that it is
greater, and the Flowers of a paler blue Color.

Place.
They grow in ^mal standing Waters, and usually near Watercresses.

Time.
And Flower in June and July, giving Seed the next Month after.

Virtues and use.
Brooklime and Watercresses are generally used together in Diet Drinks with
other things, serving to purge the Blood Blood purges, Ill Humors, Scurvy,
Disury, Stone, Terms provokes, Dead child Swellings, Inflammations.
and Body from ill Humors that would destroy health, and are helpful for the
Scurvy: They do also provoke Urin, and help to break the Stone and pass it
away; they procure Women's Courses, and expel the dead Child. Being fried with
Butter and Vinegar and applied warm, it helps all manner of Tumors or
Swellings, and Inflammations.

Such drinks ought to be made of Sundry Herbs according to the Malady
offending, I shall give a plain and easy Rule at the latter end of the Book.

Butchers-Broom.
Description.
THe first shoots that sprout from the Root of Butchers-Broom are thick,
whitish, and short, somewhat like those of Asparagus, but greater: these rising
up to be a foot and an half high are spread into diverse Branches, green and
somewhat crested with the roundness, tough and flexible, whereon are set somewhat
broad and almost round hard Leaves, sharp and prickly pointed at the ends, of a
dark green color, two for the most part set at a place, very close or near
together; about the middle of the Leaf, on the back or lower side from the
middle Rib, breaks forth a small whitish green Flower consisting of four small
round pointed Leaves standing upon little or no Footstalk, and in the place
whereof comes a small round Berry, green at the first, and red when it is ripe,
wherein are two or three white, hard, round Seeds contained: The Root is thick,
white, and great at the Head, and from thence sends forth diverse thick,
white, long, tough strings.

Place.
It grows in Copses, and upon Heaths and wast grounds, and oftentimes under
or near the Holly-Bushes.

Time.
It shoots forth his young buds in the Spring and the Berries are ripe in or
about September, The Branches and Leaves abiding green all the Winter.

Virtues and use.
The Decoction of the Roots made with Wine, opens Obstructions, Obstructions,
Disury, Gravel, Stone, Strangury, Terms provokes, Yellow-Jaundice, Headache,
Phlegm. Broken Bones, Dislocations.
provokes Urin, helps to expel Gravel and the Stone, the Strangury, and
Women's Courses, as also the yellow Jaundice and the Headache; and with some
Honey or Sugar put thereunto, cleanses the Breast of Phlegm, and the Chest of
much clammy Humors gathered therein. The Decoction of the Roots drunk, and a
Pultis made of the Berries and Leaves being applied, are effectual in knitting
and consolidating broken Bones and Parts out of Joint.

It is called Bruscus in some places, and in Sussex Kneeholly, and Knecholm.
The common way of using it is to boil the Roots of it and Parsley, and Fennel,
and Smallage in white Wine, and drink the Decoction, adding the like quantity
of Grass Roots to them; the more of the Roots you boil the stronger will the
Decoction be, it works no ill effects, yet I hope you have wit enough to give
the strongest Decoction to the strongest Bodies.

Broom, and Broomrape.
TO spend time in writing a Description hereof is altogether needless, it being
so generally used by all the good Huswifes almost through this Land to sweep
their Houses with, and therefore very well known to all sorts of people.

The Broomrape springs up in many places from the Roots of the Broom (but
more often in fields, by Hedge sides, and on Heaths) The Stalk whereof is of the
bignels of a Finger or Thumb, above two Foot high having a show of Leaves on
them and many Flowers at the top, of a deadish, yellow color, as also the
Stalks and Leaves are.

Place.
They grow in many places of this Land commonly, and as commonly spoil all the
Land they grow in.

Time.
And Flower in the Summer Months, and give their Seed before Winter.

Virtues and Use.
The Juice, or Decoction of the young Branches, or Seed, or the Powder of the
Seed taken in Drink, purges downwards, and draws Phlegmatic Phlegm, Joints,
Dropsy, Sides, Spleen, Bladder, Kidneys, Stone, Disury, black Jaundice, Agues.
and watery humors from the Joints, whereby it helps the Dropsy, Gout,
Sciatica, and the pains in the Hips and Joints: It also provokes strong
Vomits, and helps the pains of the Sides, and swellings of the Spleen,
clenfeth also the Reins, or Kidneys and Bladder of the Stone, provokes Urin
abundantly, and hinders the growing again of the Stone in the Body. The
continual use of the Powder of the Leaves and Seed, does cure the Black
Jaundice: The distilled Water of the Flowers is profitable for all the same
purposes; it also helps Sursets, and alters the Fits of Agues, if three or
four ounces thereof, with as much of the Water of the lesser Centaury and a
little Sugar put therein, be taken a little before the fit comes, and the party
be laid down to sweat in their Bed. The Oil or Water that is drawn from the
ends of the green sticks heated in the fire, helps the Toothach. Toothach.
The Juice of the young Branches made into an Oyment of old Hogs Greas and
anointed, Or the young Branches bruised and heated in Oil or Hogs Greas, and
laid to the Sides pained by wind, as in Stitches, Wind, Stitches, Lice.
or the Spleen, eases them in once or twice using it: The same boiled in Oil
is the safest and surest Medicine to kill Lice in the Head or Body of any; and
is an especial Remedy for Joint aches, and swollen Knees that come by the falling
down of Humors.

The Broomrape also is not without his Virtues.

The Decoction thereof in Wine is thought to be as effectual to avoid the Stone
Stone, Disury, Green Wounds,
in the Kidneys and Bladder, and to provoke Urin, as the Broom it self: The
Juice thereof is a singular good help to cure as well green Wounds, as old and
filthy Sores, and malignant Ulcers. The insolate Oil wherein there has been
three or four Repetitions of Insusion of the top stalks with Flowers strained
and cleared, cleanses the Skin of al manner of Spots, Marks and Freckles that
arise either by the heat of the Sun, or the Malignity of humors.

As for the Broom (for as yet I know not what to say to Broomrape in the
business) but as for Broom, Mars owns it, and it is exceeding prejudicial to
the Liver, I suppose by R^s^n of the Antipathy between Jupiter and Mars,
therefore if the Liver be disaffected, administer none of it.

Bucks-horn Plantane.
Description.
THis being sown of Seed, rises up at the first with small, long, narrow hairy
dark green Leaves like grass, without any division or gash in them; but those
that follow are gashed in on both sides the Leaves into three or four gashes,
and pointed at the ends, resembling the Knags of a Bucks Horn (whereof it took
the name) and being well grown round about the Root upon the ground, in order
one by another thereby resembling the form of a Star: from among which rise up
diverse hairy Stalks, about a hand breadth high, bearing every one a small long
spiky Head like to those of the common Plantane, having such like Bloomings and
Seed after them. The Root is single, long, and small, with diverse strings at it.

Place.
They grow in dry Sandy grounds, as in Tuttle-Fields by Westminster, and diverse
other places of this Land.

Time.
They Flower and Seed in May, June, and July, end their green Leaves do in a
manner abide fresh all the Winter.

Virtues and Use.
This boiled in Wine and drunk, and some of the Leaves applied to the hurt
place, is an excellent remedy for the biting of the Viper or Adder which I take
to be one and the same: The same being also drunk helps those that are
troubled with the Stone in the Veins or Kidneys by cooling the heat of the
parts afflicted strengthening them: as also weak Stomachs that cannot retain but
cast up their Meat. Venomous Beasts, Stone, Stomach, Vomiting, Bleeding,
Pissing blood, Flux Bloody Flux, Agues, Eyes.
It stays al bleedings at Mouth and Nose, bloody Urin, or the Bloody Flux,
and stops the Lask of the Belly and Bowels. The Leaves hereof bruised and laid
to their sides that have an Ague, suddenly eases the Fit: and the Leaves and
Roots beaten with some Bay Salt and applied to the Wrists, works the same
effects. The Herb boiled in Ale or Wine and given for some mornings and
evenings together, staieth the distillations of hot and sharp Rhowms falling
into the Eyes from the Head, and helps al sorts of sore Eyes.

Venus challenges the Dominion of this Herb.


Description.
THis has larger Leaves than those of the selfheal, but else of the same
fashion, or rather a little longer, in some green on the upper side, and in
others more brownish, dented about the edges, somewhat hairy, as the square
Stalk is also, which rises up to be half a yard high sometimes, with the Leaves
set by couples; from the middle almost whereof upwards stand the Flowers
together, with many smaler and browner Leaves than the rest on this stalk
below, set at distances, and the stalk bare between them, among which Flowers
are also small ones of a bluish, and sometimes of an Ash color, fashioned like
the Flowers of the Ground Ivy, after which come small, round, blackish Seed.
The Root is composed of many strings, and spreads upon the ground in diverse
parts round about.

The White-flowered Bugle differs not in form or greatness from the former,
saving that the Leaves and Stalks are always green and never brown like the
other, and that the Flowers thereof are very white.

Place.
They grow in Woods, wet Copses, and Fields generally throughout England; but
the White flowered Bugle is not so plentiful as the other.

Time.
They flower from May until July, and in the mean time perfect their Seed. The
Roots and Leaves next thereunto upon the ground abiding all Winter.

Virtues and Use.
The Decoction of the Leaves and Flowers made in Wine and taken dissolveth the
congeled Blood in those that are bruised inwardly by a fall or otherwise, and
is very effectual for any inward Wounds, Thrusts or Stabs into the Body or
Bowels, and is an especial help in all Wound-drinks, and for those that are
Livergrown (as they call it.) Bruises, Falls, Wounds, Scabs, Ulcers, Livergrown,
Gangreans Fistulaes, Sore Mouths, Gums. Sores in the Secrets, broken bones.
It is wonderful in curing all manner of Ulcers and Sores whether new and
fresh, or old and inveterate, yea Gangrenes and Fistulaes also, if the Leaves
bruised be aplied, or their Juice used to wash and bath the places. And the
same made into a Lotion with some Honey and Alum, cures all sores of the
Mouth or Gums be they never so foul, or of long continuance; and works no
less powerfully and effectually for such Ulcers and Sores as happen in the
secret parts of Men or Women: Being also taken inwardly, and outwardly applied,
it helps those that have broken any Bone, or have any Member out of Joint. An
Ointment made with the Leaves of Bugle, Scabious and Sanicle bruised and boiled
in Hogs-Greas, until the Herbs be dry, and then strained forth into a Pot, for
such occasions as shall require it, is so singular good for all sorts of hurts in
the Body, that non that know its usefulness will be without it.

This Herb is belonging to Dame Venus, and if the Virtues of it make you in
love with it, (as they will if you be wise) keep a Syrup of it to take inwardly,
and an Ointment and Plaster of it to use outwardly always by you.

The truth is, I have known this Herb cure some Diseases of Saturn, of which I
thought good to quote one. Many times such as give themselves much to drinking
are troubled with strange Fancies, strange sights in the nighttime, and some
with Voices, as also with the Diseas Ephialtes or the Mare. Mares, Strange
Sights in the night.
I take the reason of this to be (according to Fernelius) a Melancholy vapor
made thin by excessive drinking strong Liquor, and so flies up and disturbs the
Fancy, and breeds imaginations like it self, viz. fearful and troublesome: These
I have known cured by taking only two spoonfuls of the Syrup of this Herb,
after Supper two hours when you go to bed. But whether this do it by Sympathy
or Antipathy is some question; all that know any thing in Astrology, know that
there is a great Antipathy between Saturn and Venus in matter of Procreation,
yea such an one, that the barreness of Saturn can be removed by none but Venus,
nor the lust of Venus be repelled by none but Saturn: but I am not yet of
opinion this is done this way; and my reason is, because these vapprs though in
quality Melancholy; yet by their flying upward seem to be something Aerial,
therefore I rather think it is done by Sympathy, Saturn being exalted in Libra
the house of Venus.

Selfheal, which follows, is of the same nature, and I am of opinion the same
Herb, only differs a little in form according to the difference of place they
grow in; this I am sure they work the same effect.

Burnet.
THe common Garden Burnet is so well known that it needs no Description.
There is another sort which is wild, the Description whereof take as follows.

Description.
The great wild Burnet, has winged Leaves rising from the Roots like the Garden
Burnet, but not so many, yet each of these Leaves are at the least twice as
large as the other, and nicked in the same manner about the edges, of a grayish
color on the underside: The Stalks are greater and rise higher, with many such
like Leaves set thereon, and greater heads at the tops of a brownish green
color, and out of them come small dark purple Flowers, like the former, but
greater. The Root is black and long like the other, but greater also: It has
almost neither scent nor taste therein like the Garden kind.

Place.
The first grows frequently in Gardens. The Wild kind grows in diverse
Countries of this Land, especially in Huntington and Northampton shires in the
Meadows there; as also near London by Pancras-Church, and by a Causey side in
the middle of a Field by paddington.

Time.
They flower about the end of June and beginning of July, and their Seed is
ripe in August.

Virtues.
They are accounted to be both of one property, but the lesser is more
effectual, because quicker and more Aromatical: It is a friend to the Heart,
Liver, Heart, Liver, Melancholy, Pestilence, epidemical Diseases, Bleeding,
Stops Terms and Whites, Belching, Vomiting, Wounds, Ulcers, Cankers, Sores,
Fluxes.
and other the principal parts of a man's Body. Two or three of the Stalks with
Leaves put into a Cup of Wine, especially Clarret, are known to quicken the
Spirits, refresh and cheer the Heart and drive away Melancholy. It is a
special help to defend the Heart from noisome vapors, and from Infection of the
Pestilence, the Juice thereof being taken in some Drink, and the party laid to
sweat thereupon. They have also a drying and an astringent quality, whereby
they are available in all manner of Fluxes of Blood or Humors, to stanch
bleedings inward or outward, Lasks, Scourings, the Bloudy-flux, Women's too
abundant Courses, the Whites, and the Chollerick belchings and castings of the
Stomach; and is a singular good Wound-herb for all sorts of Wounds both of the
Head and Body, either inward or outward; for all old Ulcers, or running Cankers
and moist sores to be used either by the Juice or Decoction of the Herb, or by
the Powder of the Herb or Root, or the Water of the Distilled Herb, or Ointment
by it self, or with other things to be kept. The Seed is also no less effectual
both to stop Fluxes and dry up moist Sores, being taken in Powder inwardly, in
Wine or steeled Water, that is, wherein hot Gads of Steel have been quenched. Or
the Powder of the Seed mixed with the Ointments.

This is an Herb the Sun challenges dominion over, and is a most precious
Herb, little inferior to Betony: The continual use of it preservs the Body in
health, and the Spirits in vigor; for if the Sun be the preserver of life under
God, his Herbs are the best in the World to do it by.

The Butter-Bur.
Description.
THis rises up in February, with a thick Stalk about a foot high, whereon are
set a few. small Leaves, or rather pieces, and at the tops a long spiked head of
Flowers, of a blush or deep red color, according to the soil wherein it
grows; and before the Stalk with the Flowers have abidden a month above
ground, will be withered and gone, blown away with the wind; and the Leaves will
begin to spring, which being full grown are very large and broad, being somewhat
thin and almost round, whose thick red foot stalks, about a foot long stand
toward the middle of the Leaves: The lower parts being divided into two round
parts, close almost one to another, and of a pale green color, and hoary
underneath. The Root is long and spreading under ground, being in some places
no bigger than ones Finger, in others much bigger, blackish on the outside and
white within, of a bitter and unpleasant taste.

Place and Time.
They grow in low and wet grounds by Rivers and Waters side: their Flower (as
is said) rising and decaying in February and March, before the Leaves which
appear in April.

Virtues and use.
The Roots hereof are by long experience found to be very available against the
Plague Plague, epidemical Diseases. Poison, Mother, ^^^: wheezing, Difficulty
of breathing, Disury, Terms provokes, Flat and broad worms, Bl^mishes of the
skin
and Pestilential Fevers, by provoking Sweat, if the Powder thereof be taken in
Wine, it also resists the force of any other Poison. The Root hereof taken
with Zedoary and Angelica, or without them, helps the rising of the Mother: The
Decoction of the Root in Wine is singular good for those that wheeze much, or
are short-winded. It provokes Urin also and Women's courses, and kills the
flat and broad Worms in the Belly. The Powder of the Root does wonderfully help
to dry up the moisture of sores that are hard to be cured, and takes away all
spots and blemishes of the skin.

It were well if Gentlewomen would keep this Root preserved, to help their poor
Neighbors: It is fit the Rich should help the Poor, for the Poor cannot help
themselves.

The Bur-Dock.
IT is so well known even to the little Boys who pull off the Burs to throw and
stick upon one another, that I shall spare to write any Description of it.

Place.
They grow plentifully by Ditches and Water-sides, and by the Highways almost
every where through this Land.

Virtues and use.
The Bur Leaves are cooling, Cools, Dryes, Ulcers, Sores, Phlegm, Sinews,
Arteries,
moderatly drying, and discussing withal, whereby it is good for old Ulcers and
Sores: A dram of the Roots taken with Pine Kernels, helps them that spit
foul, ^^^tery, and bloody Phlegm: The Leaves applied on the places troubled with
the shrinking of the Sinews or Arteries, give much case: The Juice of the
Leaves, or rather the Roots themselves given to drink with old Wine does
wonderfully help the bitings of any Serpents: And the Root beaten with a little
Salt and laid on the place, suddenly eases the pain thereof, and helps those
that are bit with a mad-Dog. Venomous Beasts,
Mad dogs, Disury, Bladder,
The Juice of the Leaves taken with Honey provokes Urin, and remedieth the pain
of the Bladder. The Seed being drunk in Wine forty days together, does
wonderfully help the Sciatica. Sciatica, Burning,
The Leaves bruised with the White of an Egg and applied to any place burnt with
Fire, takes out the Fire, gives sudden ease, and heal;s it up afterward. The
Decoction of them fomented on any fretting sore or Canker Sores, Cankers,
stays the corroding quality, which must be afterward anointed with an
Ointment made of the same Liquor, Hogs-Greas, Nitre and Vinegar, boiled
together. The Roots may be preserved with Sugar, and taken fasting, or at other
times for the said purposes, and for Consumptions, the Ston, Consnmption,
Stone, Flux.
and the Lask. The Seed is much commended to break the Stone and cause it to be
expelled by Urin; and is often used with other Seeds and things to that purpose.

Venus challenges this Herb for her own, and by its Leaf or Seed you may draw
the Womb whith way you pleas, either upward by applying it to the Crown of the
Heed, if in case it fall out; or downward in fits of the Mother, by applying it
to the Soals of the Feet; Or if you would stay it in its place, apply it to the
Navel, and that is one good way to stay the Child in it. See more of it in my
Guide for Women.

Cabbages and Coleworts.
IShal spare a labor in writing a Description of these, since almost every one
that can but write at all may describe them from his own knowledge, they being
generally so well known that Descriptions are altogether needless.

Place.
These are generally planted in Gardens.

Time.
Their flowering time is toward the middle or end of July, and the Seed is
ripe in August.

Virtues and use.
The Cabbages or Colewors boiled gently in Broth and eaten, do open the Body,
but the second Decoction does bind the Body. Venomous Beasts. Terms provokes,
Hoarsness, Consumption,
The Juice thereof drunk in Wine helps those that are bitten by an Adder, and
the Decoction of the Flowers brings down Women's Courses. Being taken with
Honey, it recovereth hoarsness or loss of the voice. The often eating of them
well boiled, helps those that are ^^^ing into a Consumption. The Pulp of the
middle Ribs of Coleworts boiled in Almond Milk, and made up into an Electuary
with Honey, being taken often, is very profitable for those that are pursie and
short-winded. Being boiled twice, and an old Cock boiled in the Broth and
drunk, it helps the pains and obstructions Obstructions, Stone, Sight, Canker
Surfets,
of the Liver and Spleen, and the Stone in the Kidneys. The Juice boiled with
Honey and dropped into the corner of the Eye, clears the sight, by consuming
any Fn^ or cloud beginning to dim it; it also consumes the Canker growing
therein. They are much commended being eaten before meat, to keep one from
surfeiting, as also from being drunk with too much Wine, or quickly make a man
sober again that is drunk before. For (as they say) there is such an Antipathy
or enmity between the Vine and the Colewort, that the one will die where the
other grows. The Decoction of Coleworts takes away the pain and ach, and
allayeth the swellings Swellings, Gout, Sores, Scabs, Wheals,
of swollen and gouty Legs and Knees, wherein many gross and watery humors are
fallen, the place being bathed therewith warm: It helps also old and fi^thy
sores being washed therewith, and heals all small Scabs, Pushes and Wheals
that break out in the Skin. The Ashes of Colewort Stalks mixed with old
Hog's Grease are very effectual to anoint the Sides of those that have had long
pains therein, or any other place pained with Melancholy Melancholy, Wind.
and windy humors.

This was surely Chrysiptus his god, and therefore he wrote a whole Volumn of
them and their Virtues; and that none of the least neither, for he would be no
small Fool, he apropriates them to every part of the Body, and to every Diseas
in every part, and honest old Cato they say used no other Physic, I know not
what Metals their Bodies were made of, this I am sure, cabbages are extreme
windy whether you take them as Meat, or as Medicine, yea as windy Meat as can
be eaten, unless you eat Bagpipes or Bellows, and they are but seldom eaten in
our days, and Col^wort Flowers are something more tolerable, and the wholsomer
Food of the two.

The Moon challenges the Dominion of the Herb.

The Sea Colewort.
Description.
THis has diverse somewhat long and broad, large thick wrinkled Leaves, somewhat
crumpled upon the edges, growing each upon a several thick Footstalk very
brittle, of a grayish green color. From among which rises up a strong thick
stalk two Foot high and better, with some Leaves thereon to the top, where it
brancheth forth much; and on every Branch, stands a large Bush of pale
whitish Flowers, consisting of four Leaves apiece: The Root is somewhat great and
shoots forth many Branches under ground, keeping the green Leaves all the
Winter.

Place.
They grow in many places upon the Sea Coasts, as well on the Kentish, as Essex
Shores, as at Lidd in Kent, Colechester in Essex, and diverse other places, and
in other Countries of this Land.

Time.
They Flower and Seed about the time that other kinds do.

Virtues.
The Broth or first Decoction of the Sea Colewort does by the sharp nitrous and
bitter qualities therein, open the Belly and purge the Body, it cleanses and
digesteth more powerfully than the other kind: The Seed hereof bruised and
drunk, kills Worms. The Leaves or the Juice of them applied to Sores or Ulcers
cleanses and heals them, and dissolveth Swellings, and takes away
Inflammations. Sores, Wounds, Ulcers, Swellings, Inflammations.


Calamint, or Mountain Mint.
Description.
THis is a small Herb seldom rising above a a Foot high, with square hoary and
woody Stalks, and two small hoary Leaves set at a Joint, about the bigness of
Marjoram, or not much cigger, a little dented about the edges, and of a very
fierce or quick scent, as the whole Herb is: The Flowers stand at several spaces
of the Stalks from the middle almost upwards, which are small and gaping like to
those Mints, and of a pale Blush color: after which follow small, reund,
blackish Seeds: The Root is small and Woody, with diverse small sptigs spreading
within the ground, and dies not, but abides many years.

Place.
It grows on Heaths, and Upland dry grounds, in many places of this Land.

Time.
They Flower in July, and their Seed is ripe quickly after.

Virtues and use.
The Decoction of the Herb being drunk, brings down Women's Courses and
provokes Urin: It is profitable for those that are Bursten, or troubled with
Convulsions or Cramps, with shortness of Breath, or Chollerick torments and
pains in their Bellies or Stomachs, it also helps the yellow Jaundice, and
staieth Vomiting, being taken in Wine; taken with Salt and Honey, it kills al
manner of Worms in the Body: It helps such as have the Leprosy, either taken
inwardly, drinking Whey after it, or the green Herb outwardly applied: It
hinders Conception in Women: being either burned, or strewed in the Chamber,
it drives away Venomous Serpents. It takes away black and blue marks in the
Face, and makes black Scars become well colored, if the green Herb (not the
dry) be boiled in Wine and laid to the place, or the place washed therewith.
Being applied to the Hucklebone, by continuance of time it spends the humors
which caused the pain of the Sciatica. The Juice dropped into the Ears kills
the Worms in them: The Leaves boiled in Wine and drunk provokes sweat, and
opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; Terms provokes, Disury, Ruptures,
Convulsions. Cramps, Shortness of Breath, Jaundice, Vomiting, Worms, Leprosy,
Serpents, Black and blue Marks, Scars, Sciatica, Obstruction of the Liver and
Splein.
it helps them that have a Tertian Ague Tertion Agues
(the Body being first purged) by taking away the cold Fits. The Decoction
hereof with some Sugar put thereto afterward, is very profitable for those that
be troubled with the overflowing of the Gal, Gall, Cough, Bowels, Spleen.
and that have an old Cough, and that are scarce able to breath by the
shortness of their wind: That have any cold distemper in their Bowels, and are
troubled with the hardness of the Spleen, for all which purposes, both the
Powder called Diacalaminthes and the Compound Syrup of Calamint (which are to
be had at the Apothecaries) are most effectual.

Let not Women be too busy with it, for it works very violently upon the
Foeminin parts.

Chamomel.
THis is so well known every where that it is but lost time and labor to
describe it. The Virtues whereof are as follows.

A Decoction made of Chamomel and drunk, takes away al pains and Stitches in
the Sides. Stitches in the Side.
The Flowers of Chamomel beaten and made up into Bals with Oil drives away al
sorts of Agues; Agues.
if the party grieved be anointed with that Oil taken from the Flowers, from
the Crown of the Head to the Soal of the Foot, and afterward laid to sweat in
his Bed, and that he sweat well: This is Nichessor an Egyptian's Medicine. It is
profitable for all sorts of Agues that come either from Phlegm or Melancholy,
or from an Inflammation of the Bowels being applied when the Humors causing them
shall be concocted; and there is nothing more profitable to the sides and Region
of the Liver and Spleen Liver, Spleen, Weariness,
than it. The bathing with a Deeoction of Chamomel takes away weariness,
eases pains to what part of the Body soever they be applied: it comfort the
Sinews Sinews, Swellings,
that are overstrained, mollifieth al Swellings: It moderately comfort al
parts that have need of warmth, digesteth and dissolveth whatsoever has need
thereof by a wonderful speedy property. It eases all the pains of the Chollick
and Stone, Chollick, Stone, Belly-ach,
and al pains and torments of the Belly, and gently provokes Urin. The Flowers
boiled in Poster Drink provokes Sweat, and helps to expel Colds, Aches,
Cold, Ach,
and Pains, whersoever and is an excellent help to bring down Women's Courses. A
Syrup made of the Juice of Chamomel with the Flowers and white Wine, is a
Remedy against the Jaundice and Dropsy. Jaundice, Dropsy,
The Flowers boiled in a Ly, are good to wash the Head, and comfort both it and
the Brain. Brain,
The Oil made of the Flowers of Chamomel is much used against al hard
swellings, pains or aches, shrinking of the Sinews or Cramps, Cramp,
or pains in the Joints, or any other part of the Body; being used in Clisters,
it helps to dissolve wind and pains in the Belly; anointed also it helps
Stitches and pains in the Sides. Stitch in the Side.


Nichessor says the Egyptians dedicated it to the Sun because it cured Agues;
and they were like enough to do it, for they were the arrantest Apes in their
Religion that ever I red of. Bacchinus, Pena, and Lobel commend the Syrup made
of the Juice of it and Sugar, taken inwardly, to be excellent for the Spleen.
Also this is certain, that it most wonderfully breaks the Stone, some take it
in Syrup or Decoction, others inject the Juice of it into the Bladder with a
Syring; my Opinion is. That the Salt of it taken half a dram in a morning, in a
little White or Rhehish Wine is better than either, that it is excellent for
the Stone appears by this, which I have seen tried, viz. That a Stone that has
been taken out of the Body of a man being wrapped in Chamomel will in time
dissolve, and in a little time too.

Campions wild.
Descriptions.
THe white wild Campion has many long and somewhat broad dark green Leaves,
lying upon the ground with diverse Ribs therein somewhat like Plantane, but
somewhat hairy, broader, and not so long: The hairy Stalks rise up in the middle
of them three or four foot high, and sometimes more, with diverse great white
Joints at several places thereon, and two such like Leaves thereat up to the top,
sending forth Branches at the several Joints also; al which bear on several
Footstalks white Flowers at the tops of them, consisting of five broad pointed
Leaves, every one cut in on the end unto the middle, making them seem to be two
apiece, smelling somewhat sweet, and each of them standing in large green
striped hairy Husks, large and round below next to the Stalk: The Seed is small
and grayish in the hard Heads that come up afterward: The Root is white and
long, spreading diverse fangs in the ground.

The Red Wild Campion grows in the same manner as the White, but his Leaves
are not so plainly ribbed, somewhat shorter, rounder and more woolly in
handling: The Flowers are of the same form and bigness, but in some of a pale,
in others of a bright red color, cut in at ends more finely, which makes the
Leaves seem more in number than the other. The Seed and the Roots are alike: The
Roots of both sorts abiding many years.

There are forty five kinds of Campions more, those of them which are of
Physical uses having the like Virtues with these above described, which I take
to be the two chiefest kinds.

Place.
They grow commonly through this Land by Fields, Hedg-fides, and Ditches.

Time.
They flower in Summer some earlier than others, and some abiding longer than
others.

Virtues and use.
It is sound by experience that the Decoction of the Herb either the White or
Red being drunk, does stay inward bleedings; Bleeding inward and outward,
Disury, Gravel, Choler, Venomous Beasts. Plagues, Sores, ulcers, Cankers,
Fistulaes.
and applied outwardly it does the like: And being drunk helps to expel the
Urin being stopped, and Gravel. or the Stone in the Reins or Kidneys. Two drams
of the Seed drunk in Wine, purges the Body of Chollerick humors, and helps
those that are ftung by Scorpions, or other venomous Beasts; and may be as
effectual for the Plague: It is of very good use in old Sores, Ulcers Cankers,
Fistulaes and the like, to clens and heal them, by consuming the moist humors
falling into them, and correcting the putrefaction of Humors offending them.

Carrots.
THe Garden kind are so well known that they need no Description; but because
they are of les^ Physical use than the Wild kind (as indeed almost in all Herbs
the Wild are most effectual in Physic, as being more powerful in operation
then the Garden kinds) I shall therefore briefly describe the wild Carrot.

Description.
It grows in a manner altogether like the Tame, but that the Leaves and Stalks
are somewhat whiter and rougher: The Stalks bear large tufts of white Flowers,
with a deep Purple spot in the middle, which are contracted together when the
Seed begins to ripen, that the^ middle part being hollow and low, and the outer
Stalks rising high, makes the whole Umbel to show like a Birds-Nest. The Root
is small, long, and hard, unfit for meat, being somewhat sharp and strong.

Place.
The Wild kind grows in diverse parts of this Land plentifully by the Fields
sides, and in untilled places.

Time.
They flower and seed in the end of Summer.

The Virtues.
The Wild kind, breaks Wind, Wind, Stitches, provokes Urin and the Terms,
Stone,
and removes Stitches in the Sides, provokes Urin and Women's Courses, and
helps to break and expel the Stone: The Seed also of the same works the
like effect, and is good for the Dropsy, Dropsy, Chollick, Barrenness, Ulcers.
and those whose Bellies are swollen with Wind; helps the Chollick, the Stone
in the Kidneys, and the rising of the Mother, being taken in Wine, or boiled in
Wine and taken; and helps Conception. The Leaves being applied with Honey to
running Sores or Ulcers, does cleanse them.

I suppose the Seeds of them perform this better than the Roots; And though
Galen commend Garden Carrots highly, to break Wind; yet experience teaches,
that they breed it first; and we may thank Nature for expelling it, not they:
The Seeds of them expel Wind indeed, and so mend what the Root marreth.

Caraway.
Description.
IT bears diverse Stalks of fine cut Leaves lying upon the ground somewhat like
to the Leaves of Carrots, but not bushing so thick, of a little quick taste in
them, from among which rises up a square Stalk not so high as the Carrot, at
whose Joints are set the like Leaves but smaler and finer, and at the top small
open tufts or Umbels of white Flowers, which turn into small blackish Seed
smaler than the Anniseed, and of a quicker and hotter taste. The Root is
whitish, small and long, somewhat like unto a Parsnep, but with more wrinckled
Bark, and much less, of a little hot and quick taste, and stronger than the
Parsnep, and abides after Seed-time.

Place.
It is usually sown with us in Gardens.

Time.
They flower in June or July, and seed quickly after.

Virtues and use.
Caraway Seed has a moderat sharp quality whereby it breaks Wind and
provokes Urin, which also the Herb does. Wind, Disury, Indigestio^, Head,
Stomach, Bowels, Mother, Black and blue spots, Bruises, Chollick.
The Root is better food than the Parsnep, and is pleasant and comfortable to
the Stomach, helping digestion. The Seed is conducing to all the cold griefs of
Head and Stomach, the Bowels or Mother, as also the wind in them, and helps
to sharpen the Eyesight. The Powder of the Seed put into a Pultis, takes away
black and blue spots of Blows or Bruises. The Herb it self, or with some of the
Seed bruised and fried, laid hot in a bag or double cloth to the lower part of
the Belly, eases the pains of the wind Chollick.

The Roots of Caraways eaten as men eat Parsnips, strengthen the Stomachs of
ancient people exceedingly, and they need not make a whole meal of them neither,
and are fit to be planted in every ones Garden.

Caraway Comfects, once only dipped in Sugar, and half a spoonful of them eaten
in the morning fasting, and as many after each meal is a most admirable Remedy
for such as are troubled with Wind.

Celandine.
Description.
THis has diverse tender, round, whitish, green Stalks, with greater Joints
than ordinary in other Herbs, as it were Knees, very brittle and easy to
break, from whence grow Branches with large tender long Leaves, much divided
into many parts, each of them cut in on the edges, set at the Joints on both
sides of the Branches, of a dark bluish green color on the upper side like
Columbines, and of a more pale bluish green underneath, full of a yellow sap,
when any part is broken; of a bitter taste and strong scent. At the tops of the
Branches which are much divided, grow gold yellow Flowers of four Leaves
apiece, after which come small long pods, with blackish seed therein. The Root is
somewhat great at the head, shooting forth diverse other long Roots and small
Strings, reddish on the outside and yellow within, full of a yellow sap therein.

Place.
It grows in many places by old Walls, by the Hedges, and way sides in
untilled places; and being once planted in a Garden, especially in some shady
place, it will remain there.

Time.
They flower all the Summer long, and the Seed ripeneth in the mean time.

Virtues and use.
The herb or Roots boiled in White Wind and drunk, a few Aniseeds being boiled
therewith, opens Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, Obstructions of the Liver
and Gall, yellow jaundice, Dropsy, Pestilence.
helps the yellow Jaundice: and the often using it, helps the Dropsy, and
the Itch, and those that have old Sores in their Legs, or other parts of the
Body. The Juice thereof taken fasting, is held to be of singular good use
against the Pestilence: The distilled Water, with a little Sugar, and a little
good Triacle mixed therewith (the party upon the taking being laid down to sweat
a little) has the same effect. The Juice dropped into the Eyes Eyes.
cleanses them from Films and cloudiness which darken the sight, but it is best
to allay the sharpnes of the Juice with a little Breast-milk: It is good in old
filthy corroding creeping Ulcers Ulcers,
whersoever, to stay their malignity of fretting and running, and to cause them
to heal the more speedily: The Juice often applied to Tetters, Ring worms,
Tetters, Ringworms, Cancers, Warts, Belly, Buwels, Mother Worms Terms stops,
Top^hach, Itch, Beauty lost.
or other such like spreading Cancers, will quickly heal them, and rubbed often
upon Warts will take them away. The Herb with the Roots bruised and heated with
Oil of Camomel, and applied to the Navel, takes away the griping pain in the
Belly and Bowels, and all the pains of the Mother: and applied to Women's
Breasts stays the overmuch flowing of their Courses. The Juice Decoction of
the Herb gargled between the Teeth that ache, eases the pain; and the Powder of
the dried Root, laid upon an aching hollow, or loos Tooth, will cause it to fall
out. The Juice mixed with some Powder of Brimstone, is not only good against the
Itch, but takes away al discolorings of the Skin whatsoever: And if it chance
that in a tender Body it causes any Itching or Inflammation, by bathing the
place with a little Vinegar it is helped.

This is an Herb of the Sum, and under the Celestial Lion, and is one of the
best cures for the Eyes that is. All that know any thing in Astrology, know as
well as I can tell them, That the Eyes are subject to the Luminaries; let it then
be gathered when the Sun is in Leo, and the Moon in Aries applying to his
Trine; let Leo arise, then may you make it into an Oil or Ointment which you
please to anoint your sore Eyes withal: I can prove it both by my own
experience, and the experience of those to whom I have taught it, That most
desperate sore Eyes have been cured by this only Medicine Andthen I pray, is not
this farbetter than endangering the Eyes by the art of the Needle? for if this
do not absolutely take away the Film, it will so facilitate the work that it may
be don without danger.

Another il-favored trick have Physicians got to use to the Eye, and that is
worse than the Needle; which is, To eat away the Film by corroding or gnawing
Medicines. This I absolutely protest against.

1 Because the Tunicles of the Eye are very thin, and therefore soon eaten
asunder.

2 The Callus or Film that they would eat away is seldom of an equal thickness
in every place, and then the Tunicle may be eaten asunder in one place, before
the Film be consumed in another, and so be a readier way to extinguish the
sight than to restore it.

It is called Chelidonium from the Greek word (...), which signifies a Swallow,
because they say, That if you prick out the Eyes of young Swallows when they are
in the Nest, the old ones will recover their Eyes again with this Herb. This I
am confident, for I have tried it, That if you mar the very Apple of their Eyes
with a Needle, she will recover them again, but whether with this Herb or no I
know not.

Also I have read (and it seems to me somewhat probable) That the Herb being
gathered as I showed before, and the Elements drawn apart from it by the art of
the Alchyraist; and after they are drawn apart, rectified, the earthy quality
still in rectifying them, added to the Terra damnata (as Alchymists call it) or
Terra sacratissima (as some Philosophers call it) the Elements so rectified are
sufficient for the Cure of al Diseases, the humor offending being known and the
contrary Element given, It is an Experience wurth the trying, and can do no
harm.

The Iesser Celondine, usually known by the Name of Pilewort.
I Wonder what ailed the Ancients to give this the name of Celandine which
resembles it neither in Nature nor form: It acquired the Name of Pilewort from
its Virtues, and it being no great matter where I set it down, so I do set it
down at al, I humor'd Dr. Tradition so much as to set it down here.

Description.
This Celandine then or Pilewort (which you please) does spread many round,
pale, green Leaves set on weak and trailing Branches, which lie upon the ground,
and are fat, smooth, and somewhat shining, and in some places (though seldom)
marked with black spots, each standing on a long Footstalk among which rise
small yellow Flowers, consisting of nine or ten small narrow Leaves, upon slender
Footstalks very like unto a Crowfoot, whereunto the Seed also is not unlike,
being many small ones set together upon a Head. The Root is made of many small
Kernels like grain of Corn, some twice as long as others, of a whitish color
with some Fibers at the end of them.

Place.
It grows for the most part in the moist corners of Fields, and places that
are near water Sides, yet will abide in dryer grounds, if they be but a little
shadowed.

Time.
It Flowreth betimes about March or April, is quite gone in May, so as it
cannot be found until it spring again.

Virtues and use.
It is certain by good experience that the Decoction of the Leaves and Roots,
does wonderfully help the Piles and Hemorrhoids, Hemorrhoids, Kings Evil.
as also Kernels by the Ears and Throat called the Kings evil; or any other
hard Wens or Tumors.

Here Is another Secrot for my Country Men and Women, a couple of them together,
Pilewort being made into an Oil Ointment or Plaster, readily cures both the
Piles or Hemorrhoids, and the Kings Evil, If I may Lawfully call it the Kings
Evil now there is no King, the very Herb born about ones Body ne^^ the Skin,
helps in such Diseases, though it never touch the place grieved, let good
people make much of it for these uses, with this I cured my own Daughter of the
Kings Evil, broke the Sore, drew out a quarter of a pint of Corruption, and
cured it without any Scar at all, and in one Weeks time.

The Ordinary small Centaury.
Description.
THis grows up most usually but with one round and somewhat crested stalk,
about a foot high, or better, branching forth at the top into many sprigs, and
some also from the Joints of the Stalks below; The Flowers that stand at the
tops as it were in an umbel or tuft, are of a pale red, tending to a Carnation
color, consisting of five, sometimes six small Leaves, very like those of St.
John's Wort, opening themselves in the day time, and closing at night; after
which come Seed in little short Husks in form like unto Wheat Corns: The Leaves
are small and somewhat round. The Root small and hard, perishing every year: The
whole Plant is of an exceeding bitter taste.

There is another sort in all things like the former, save only it bears white
Flowers.

Place.
They grow ordinarily in Fields, Pastures, and Woods, but that with the white
Flowers, not so frequent as the other.

Time.
They Flower in July, or there abouts, and Seed within a Month after.

Virtues and use.
This Herb boiled and drunk, purges Chollerick and gross humors, and helps
the Sciatica: It opens Obstructions of the Liver, Gall, and Spleen, helping
the Jaundice, and easing pains in the Sides, and hardness of the Spleen, used
outwardly, and is given with very good effect in Agues: It helps those that
have the Dropsy or the green Sickness, being much used by the Italians in
powder for that purpose. It kills the Worms in the Belly as is found by
experience. The Decoction thereof ( viz.) the tops of the Stalks with the Leaves
and Flowers, is good against the Chollick, and to bring down Women's Courses,
helps to avoid the dead birth, and eases pains of the Mother, and is very
effectual in all old pains of the Joints, as the Gout, Choler, Sciatica,
Obstructions, Lver, Gall, Spleen, Agues, Dropsy, green sickness, Chollick,
Terms provokes, Joints, Gout, Sciatica,
Cramps, or Convulsions. Cramp, Convulsion, Venomous Beasts,
A dram of the Powder thereof taken in Wine, is a wonderful good help against
the biting and poison of the Adder. The Juice of the Herb with a little Honey
put to it, is good to clear the Eyes from dimness, mists, and clouds that
offend or hinder the Sight: It is singular good both for green and fresh
Wounds, as also for old Ulcers Eyes, Wounds, ulcers.
and Sores, to close up the one and clens the other, and perfectly to cure them
both, although they be hollow or Fistulous; the green Herb especially being
bruised and laid thereto. The Decoction thereof dropped into the Ears, cleanses
them from Worms, cleanses the foul Ulcers and spreading Scabs of the Head, and
takes away al Freckles, Spots, Ears, Scabby Heads, Freckles, Spots,
and Marks in the Skin being washed therewith.

The Herb is so safe you cannot fail in the using of it, only give inwardly for
inward Diseases, use it outwardly for outward Diseases, It Is very wholesome but
not very toothsom.

Dr. Reason and Dr. Experience could not agree (the last time I spoke with
them) whether the Herb were under the Dominion of the Sun or Mars.

The Cherry-Tree.
I Suppose there are sew but know this Tree, for his Fruits sake, and therefore
shall spare the writing a Description thereof.

Place.
For the place of its growth, it is afforded room in every Orchard.

Virtues and Use.
Cherries, as they are of different tastes, so they are of diverse qualities: The
sweet pass through the Stomach and Belly more speedily, but are of little
Nourishment. The tart or sour, are more pleasing to an hot Stomach, procuring
appetite to meat, and help to cut tough Phlegm and gross humors; but when these
are dried they are more binding the belly than when they are fresh, being
cooling in hot Diseases, and welcome to the Stomach, and provoke Urin. The Gum
of the Cherry-Tree dissolved in Wine, is good for a cold Cough, and boarsness
of the Throat, mendeth the color in the Face, sharpneth the Eyesight,
provokes appetite, and helps to break and expel the Stone. The Black
Cherries bruised with the Stones and distilled, the Water thereof is much used,
to break the Stone, expel gravel, and break the Wind. Appetite lost, Phlegm
Gross Humors, Cool, provoke urine, Cough, Hoarsness, Sight, Gravel, Wind.


Winter Cherries.
Description.
THe Winter Cherry has a running or creeping Root in the ground of the bigness
many times of ones little Finger, shooting forth at several Joints in several
places, whereby it quickly spreads a great compass of gronnd: The Stalk rises
not above a yard high, whereon are set many broad; and long green Leaves; somewhat
like Night shade but larger, at the Joints whereof come forth whitish Flowers
made of five Leaves apiece, which after turn into green Berries, enclosed with
thin Skins, which change to be reddish, when they grow ripe, the Berry likewise
being reddish, and as large as a Cherry, wherein are contained many flat and
yellowish Seeds lying within the pulp; which being gathered and strung up are
kept all the year to be used upon occasion.

Place.
They grow not naturally in this Land, but are cherished in Gardens for their
Virtues.

Time.
They Flower not until the middle or latter end of July, and the Fruit is ripe
about the end of August, or beginning of September.

Virtues and use.
They are of great use in Physic: The Leaves being cooling may be used in
Inflammations, but not opening, as the Berries and Fruit are, which by drawing
down the Urine provoke it to be avoided plentifully when it is stopped or grown
hot, sharp, and painful in the passage; it is good also to expel the Stone and
Gravel out of the Reins, Kidneys, and Bladder, helping to dissolve the Stone,
and avoiding it by greet or gravel sent forth in the Urin; It also helps much
to clens inward Impostumes or Ulcers in the Reins or Bladder, or in those that
avoid a Bloody or foul Urin. The distilled Water of the Fruit, or the Leaves
together with them, or the Berries green or dry, distilled with a little Milk,
and drunk morning and evening with a little Sugar, is effectual to all the
purposes before specified, and especially against the heat and sharpness of the
Urin. Inslamations, Disury, Stone, Gravel, ulcers in the Reins and Bladder,
pissing Blood, sharpness of urins.
I shall only mention one way amongst many others which might be used for
ordering the Berries to be helpful for the Urin and the Stone, which is thus. A
precious Receipt.
Take three or four good handfuls of the Berries either green and fresh, or
dried and having bruised them, put them into so many Gallons of Beer or Ale
when it is new tunned up: This Drink taken daily has been found to do much
good to many, both to eas the pains and expel Urin, and the Stone; and to cause
the Stone not to engender. The Decoction of the Berries in Wine or Water is the
most usual way; but the Powder of them taken in drink is more effectual.

Chervil.
Description.
THe Garden Chervil does at first somewhat resemble Parsley, but after it is
better grown the Leaves are much cur in and jagged resembling Hemlocks, being a
little hairy and of a whitish green color, sometimes turning reddish in the
Summer with the Stalks also; It rises little above half a Foot high, bearing
white Flowers in spoked tufts, which turn into long and round Seed pointed at
the ends, and blackish when they are ripe; of a sweet taste, but no smell, though
the Herb it self smells reasonable well: The Root is small and long and
perishes every year, and must be sown anew in the Spring for Seed, and after
July for Autumn Sallet.

The wild Chervil grows two or three foot high, with yellow Stalks and
Joints, set with broader and more hairy Leaves, divided into sundry parts nicked
about the edges, and of a darker green color, which likewise grow reddish with
the Stalks; at the tops whereof stand small white tufts of Flowers and afterward
smaler and longer seed: The Root is white, hard, and enduring long. This has
little or no scent.

Place.
The first is sown in Gardens, for a SalletHerb. The second grows wild in
many of the Meadows of this Land, and by the Hedgsides, and on Heaths.

Time.
They flower and seed early, and thereupon are sown again in the end of Summer.

Virtues and use.
The Garden Chervil being eaten, does moderately warm the Stomach, Stomach
Clotted Blood, Bruises, Falls, Disury, Stone, Pleuresie, Sides, Swellings,
black and blue Spots.
and is a certain remedy (says Tragus) to dissolve congealed or clotted Blood
in the Body, or that which is clotted by bruises, falls, etc. The Juice or
distilled Water thereof being drunk, and the bruised Leaves laid to the place,
being taken either in meat or drink, it is held good to provoke Urin, to expel
the Stone in the Kidneys, to send down Women's Courses, and to help the Plurisie
and prickings of the Sides.

The wild Chervil bruised and applied, dissolveth Swellings in any part of the
Body, and takes away the Spots and Marks of congealed Blood by Bruises or
Blows, in a little space.

Sweet Chervil; OR Sweet Cicely.
Description.
THis grows very like the greater Hemlock having large spread Leaves, cut into
diverse parts, but of a fresher green color than the Hemlock, tasting as sweet
as the Anniseed. The Stalk rises up a yard high or better being crested or
hollow, having the like Leaves at the Joints, but lesser; and at the tops of the
branched Stalks, Umbels or Tufts of white Flowers; after which com large and
long crested, black shining Seed, pointed at both ends, tasting quick, yet
sweet and pleasant. The Root is great and white, growing deep in the ground,
and spreading sundry long Branches therein, in taste and smell stronger than the
Leaves or Seed, and continuing many years.

Place.
This grows in Gardens.

Virtues.
This whole Plant besides its pleasantness in Sallets, has also his Physical
Virtues. The Root boiled and eaten with Oil and Vinegar, (or without Oil) does
much pleas and warm an old and cold Stomach, Cold Stomach, Wind, Phlegm,
Lungues, Phtisick, Pestilence, Termsprovokes, Afterbirth, Appetite lost, ulcers
Epidemical Diseases.
oppressed with wind or phlegm, or those that have the Phtisick or Consumption
of the Lungs. The same drunk with Wine, is a preservative from the Plague; it
provokes Women's Courses, and expels the Afterbirth, procures and appetit
to meat, and expels Wind. The Juice is good to heal the Ulcers of the Head
and Face. The candied Roots hereof are held as effectual as Angelica to preserv
from Infection in the time of a Plague, and to warm and comfort a cold weak
Stomach.

It is so harmless you cannot use it am^ss.

Chickweed.
Description.
THis is generally known to most People, I shall therefore not trouble you with
the Description thereof; nor my self with setting fourth the several kinds; since
but only two or three are considerable for their usefulness.

Place.
These are usually found in moist and watery places, by Wood sides, and
els-where.

Time.
They flower about June, and their Seed is ripe in July.

Virtues and use.
It is found to be as effectual as Purslane to all the purposes whereunto it
serves, except for meat only. The Herb bruised or the Juice applied (with
clothes or spunges dipped therein) to the Region of the Liver, Hot Liver,
Apostums Swellings, Red Face, Wheals, Pushes, Itch, Scabs Cramp, Convulsion,
Palsy, Red Eyes, Hemorrhoids, ulcers,
and as they dry to have fresh applied, does wonderfully temper the heat of the
Liver; and is effectual for all Imposthums and Swellings wheresoever; for all
redness in the Face, Wheals, Pushes, Itch, Scabs, the Juice either simply used,
or boiled with Hogs-Greas and applied; the same helps Cramps, Convulsions and
Palsies: The Juice or distilled Water is of much good use for all heat and
redness in the Eyes to drop some thereof into them; as also into the Ears to ease
pains in them, and is of good effect to ease the pains, the heat, and sharpness
of Blood in the Piles and generally al pains in the Body that arise of heat; it
is used also in hot and virulent Ulcers and sores in the privy parts of Man or
Woman, or on the Legs or els-where. The Leaves boiled with Marshmallows and
made into a Pultis with Fenugreek, and Linseed, applied to Swellings or
Imposthumes ripeneth and breaks them, or swageth the swellings and eases the
pains: It helps the Sinews Sinews,
when they are shrunk by Cramps or otherwise, and to extend and make them
pliable again, by this Medicine. Boil an handful of Chickweed and a handful of
Red-Rose Leaves dried, but not distilled in a Quart of Muscadine until a fourth
part be consumed; then put to them a pint of the Oil of Trotters, or
Sheeps-feet; let them boil a good while still stirring them well; which being
strained, anoint the grieved place herewith, warm against a fire, rubbing it
well in with ones hand, and bind also some of the Herb (if you will) to the
place, and with Gods blessing it will help in three times dressing.

Cich-Peas, or Cicers.
Description.
THe Garden sorts, whether Red, Black, or White, brings forth Stalks a yard
long, whereon do grow many small and almost round Leaves, dented about the edges,
set on both sides of a middle Rib: at the Joints come forth one or two Flowers
upon short Footstalks, Peace fashion, either white or whitish, or purplish red,
lighter or deeper according as the Peace that follow will be, that are contained
in small, thick, and short Pods, wherein lie one or two Peace more usually, a
little pointed at the lower end, and almost round at the Head, yet a little
cornered or sharp. The Root is small, and perishes yearly.

Place and Time.
They are sown in Gardens, or the Fields, as Peace, being sown later than Peace,
and gathered at the same time with them, or presently after.

Virtues and use.
They are no less windy than Beans, but nourish more, they provoke Urine, and
are thought to encreas Sperm, they have a clensing faculty, whereby they break
the Stones in the Kidneys. Disury, Seed encreas, Stone, Costivness, Terms
provokes.
To drink the cream of them being boiled in Water is the best way; it moves
the Belly downwards, provokes Women's Courses, and Urin, and increases both
Milk and Seed. One ounce of Cicers, two ounces of French Barley, and a small
handful of Marsh-Mallow Roots, clean washed and cut, being boiled in the broth
of a Chicken, and four ounces taken in the morning and fasting two hours after
is a good Medicine for a pain in the Sides. Pain in the sides,
The white Cicers are used more for Meat than Medicine, yet have they the same
effects, and are thought more powerful to encreas Milk and Seed.

The wild Cicers are so much more powerful than the Garden kinds, by how much
they exceed them in heat and dryness; whereby they do more open Obstructions,
break the Stone, and have all the properties of cutting, opening, digesting, and
dissolving, Obstruction, Stone, Open, Digest, Dissolve.
and this more speedily, and certainly than the former.

Cinkfoyl, or Five Leaved. Grass; Called in some Countries, Five fingered Grass.
Description.
THis spreads and creeps far upon the ground, with long slender strings
like Strawberries, which take Root again and shoots forth many Leaves made of
five parts, and sometimes of seven, dented about the edges and somewhat hard; The
Stalks are slender leaning downwards, and bear many small yellow Flowers thereon,
with some yellow threads in the middle, standing about a smooth green head;
which when it is ripe is a little rough, and contains small brownish Seeds.
The Root is of a blackish brown color, seldom so big, as ones little finger,
but growing long with some threads thereat; and by the small strings it quickly
spreads over the ground.

Place.
It grows by Wood sides, Hedge sides, the Pathwaies in Fields, and in the
Borders and Corners of them almost through all this Land.

Time.
It Flowreth in Summer, some sooner, some later.

Virtues and use.
It is an especial Herb used in all Inflammations and Fevers Inslamation,
Fevers, Pestilence, Sore Mouths, ulcers, Cankers, Fistulaes, Quincy, Yellow
Jaundice, Falling sickness, Flux, Terms stops Whites, Bloody Flux, Toothache,
Hoarsness, Cough, Palsy of the Hands, Knots in the Flesh, St. Anthonies Fire,
Shingles, Scabs, Itch, Joints pained, Sciatica, Ruptures, Gouts, Bruises,
Falls, Bleeding.
whether Infectious or Pestilential; or among other Herbs to cool, and temper
the Blood and humors in the Body; As also for all Lotions, Gargles, Injections,
and the like for sore Mouths, Ulcers, Cankers, Fistulaes, and other corrupt,
Foul, or running Sores. The Juice hereof drunk about four ounces at a time for
certain days together, cures the Quinsie, and the yellow Jaundice, and taken
for thirty days together cures the Falling Sickness. The Roots boiled in Milk
and drunk is a most effectual remedy, for all Fluxes in Man or Woman, whether
the Whites, or Reds, as also the Bloody Flux. The Roots boiled in Vinegar, and
the Decoction thereof held in the Mouth, eases the pains of the Toothach. The
Juice or Decoction taken with a little Honey, helps the hoarsness of the
Throat, and is good for the Cough of the Lungs. The distilled Water of both
Roots and Leaves is also effectual to all the purposes aforesaid: and if the
Hands be often washed therein, and suffered at every time to dry in of it self
without wiping, it will in short time help the Palsy or shaking in them. The
Root boiled in Vinegar, helps all Knots, Kernels, hard swellings, and lumps
growing in any part of the Flesh, being thereto applied; as also al
Inflammations, and St. Anthonies Fire, all Imposthumes, and painful Sores, with
heat and putrefaction; the shingles also, and all other sorts of running, and
soul Scabs, Sores, and Itch. The same also boiled in Wine, and applied to any
Joints full of pain and ach^or the Gout in the Hands or Feet, or the Hip-gout,
called the Sciatica, and the Decoction thereof drunk the while, does cure them;
and eases much pains in the Bowels. The Roots are likewise effectual to help
Ruptures or Burstings, being used with other things available to that purpose,
taken either inwardly or outwa^dly, or both; as also for Bruises, or Hurts by
Blows, Falls, or the like, and to stay the bleeding of Wounds in any part
inward or outward.

This is an Herb of Jupiter, and therefore strengthens the parts of the Body
that he rules, let Jupiter be angular and strong when it is gathered, and if
you give but a scruple (which is but twenty grains of it) at a time, either in
white Wine, or white Wine Vinegar, you shall very seldom miss the cure of an
Ague be it what Ague Agues.
soever in three Fits, as I have often proved to the admiration both of my self
and others, let no Man despise it because it is plain and easy, the ways of
God are all such, it is the ungodliness and impudency of Man that made things
hard, and has (by so doing) made sport for all the Devils in Hell, and grieved
the good Angels, and when you read this, your own Genius, if you be any thing
at al acquainted with it, may dictate to you many as good Conculsions both of
this and other Herbs.

Some hold that one Leaf cures a Quotidian, three a Tertian, and four a Quartan
Ague; and a hundred to one if it be not Dioscorides, for he is full of such
Whimseys. The truth is, I never stood so much upon the number of the Leaves, nor
whether I gave it in Powder or Decoction: If Jupiter were strong and the Moon
applying to him or his good aspect at the gathering of it, I never knew it miss
the desired effects.

Clary.
Description.
OUr ordinary Garden Clary has four square Stalks, with broad, ^ough,
wrinkled, whitish, or hairy green Leaves, somewhat evenly cut in on the edges,
and of a strong, sweet, sent, growing some near the ground, and some by couples
upon the Stalks: The Flowers grow at certain distances with two small Leaves at
the Joints under them, somewhat like unto the Flowers of Sage, but smaller, and
of a whitish blue color: The Seed is brownish, and somewhat Flat, or not so
^ound as the wild, the Roots are blackish and spread not far, and perish after
the Seed time: It is usually sown, for it seldom rises of its own sowing.

Place.
This grows in Gardens.

Time.
It Flowreth in June and July, some a little later than others, and their Seed
is ripe in August, or therabouts.

Virtues and use.
The Seed is used to be put into the Eyes Eyes
to clear them from Moats, or other such like things gotten within the Lids to
offend them, as also to clear them from white or red spots in them. The
Muccilage of the Seed made with Water, and applied to Tumors and swellings,
Swellings,
disperseth and takes them away, as also draws forth Splinters, Thorns,
Splinters, Thorns,
or other things gotten into the Flesh. The Leaves used with Vinegar either by
it self or with a little Honey, does help hot Inflammations, as also Boyls,
Felons, Inflammations, Boyls, Felons,
and the hot Inflammations that are gathered by their pains, if it be applied
before they be grown too great. The Powder of the dried Leaves put into the Nose
provokes neesing, and thereby purges the Head and Brain Head, Brain, Lust
provokes, Back, Terms provokes,
of much Rhewm and Corruption. The Seed or Leaves taken in Wine provokes to
Venery. It is of much use both for Men and Women that have weak Backs, to help
to strengthen the Reins, used either by it self or with other Herbs conducing
to the same effect, and in Tansies often: The fresh Leaves dipped in a Batter of
Flower, Eggs, and a little Milk, and fried in Butter, and served to the Table,
is not unpleasant to any, but exceeding profitable for those that are troubled
with weak Backs, and the effects thereof. The Juice of the Herb put into Ale or
Beer, and drunk, brings down Women's Courses, and expels the Afterbirth.
Afterbirth


It is an usual course with Men when they have gotten the running of the Reins,
or Women the Whites, then run to the bush of Clary; Maid bring hither the
Frying Pan, fetch me some Butter quickly, then to eating fried Clary just as
Hogs eat Acorns, and this they think will cure their Diseas (forsooth) whereas
when they have devoured as much Clary as will grow upon an Acre of ground, their
Backs are as much the better as though they had pissed in their shoos, nay
perhaps much wors.

As for that trick of curing the Eyes by it, I can as yet say nothing to it,
for the rest it may be effectual.

We will grant that Clary strengthens the Back, but this we deny, That the cans
of the running of the Reins in Men, or the Whites in Women lies in the Back
(though the Back may sometimes be weakened by them) and therefore the Medicine is
as proper, as for me when my Toe is sore, to lay a Plaster to my Nose.

Cleavers, or Goosgrass.
Description.
THe common Cleavers has diverse very rough square Stalks, not so big as the
Tag of a Point, but rising up to be two or three yards high sometimes, if it
meet with any tall Bushes or Trees whereon it may climb (yet without any
Claspers) or else much lower ^^ lying upon the Ground full of Joints, and at
every of them shoots forth a Branch, besides the Leaves thereat, which are
usually six, set in a round compass like a Star, or the Rowel of a Spur: from
between the Leaves at the Joints toward the tops of the Branches, come forth
very small white Flowers; every one upon a small threddy Footstalk, which after
they are fallen, there do show two small, round, rough Seeds, joined together
like two Testicles, which when they are ripe grow hard and whitish, having a
little hole on the side somewhat like unro a Navil. Both Stalks, Leaves, and
Seeds are so rough that they will cleav to any thing shall touch them. The Root
is small and very threddy, spreading much in the Ground, but dies every year.

Place.
It grows by the Hedge, and Ditch Sides in many places of this Land, and is so
troublesome an Inhabitant in Gardens, that it rampeth upon and is ready to choke
what ever grows next it.

Time.
It. Flowreth in June and July, and the Seed is tripe and falls again in the
end of July or August, from whence it ^pringeth up again, and not from the old
Roots.

Virtues and use.
The Juice of the Herb, and Seed together taken in Wine, helps those that are
bitten with an Adder, by preserving the Heart from the Venom; Venomous Beasts,
Heart, Fainess, Yellow Jaundice, Flux, Bloody Flux, Wounds, Ulcers, Swellings,
Kings Evil, Pain in the Ears.
It is familiarly taken in Broth to keep them lean; and lank that are apt to
grow fat. The distilled Water drunk twice a day helps the yellow Jaundice,
and the Decoction of the Herb in experience found to do the same, and stays
Lasks and Bloody Fluxes. The Juice of the Leaves, or they a little bruisep and
applied to any bleeding wound, stays the Bleeding. The Juice is also very
good to close up the Lips of green Wounds; and the Powder of the dried Herb
strewed thereupon does the same, and likewise helps old Ulcers: Being boiled
with Hogs Greas, it heals al sorts of hard Swellings or Kernels in the
Throat, being anointed therewith. The Juice dropped into the Ears takes away
the pains of them.

It is a good remedy in the Spring, eaten (being first chopped small and boiled
well) in Water Gruel, to clens the Blood, and strengthen the Liver, thereby
keeping the Body in health, and fitting it for that change of Season that is
coming.

Clowns Woundwort.
Description.
IT grows up sometimes to three or four Foot high, but usually about two Foot,
with square, green, rough Stalks, but slender, joynted somewhat far asunder, and
two very long, and somewhat narrow, dark green Leaves, bluntly dented about the
edges thereat ending in a long point, The Flowers stand toward the tops
compassing the Stalks at the Joints with the Leaves and end likewise in a spiked
^op, having long and much open gaping hoods of a Purplish red color, with
whitish spots in them, standing in somewhat rough Husks, wherein afterward stand
blackish round Seeds. The Root is composed of many long strings, with some
tuberous long Knobs growing among them, of a pale yellowish or whitish color,
yet at some times of the year these knobby Roots in many places are not seen in
the Plant: The whole Plant smells somewhat strongly.

Place.
It grows in sundry Counties of this Land both North and West, and frequently
by Path sides in the Fields near about London, and within three or four miles
distance about it, yet it usually grows in or near Ditches.

Time.
It Flowreth in June and July, and the Seed is ripe soon after.

Virtues and use.
I is singularly effectual in all fresh and green Wounds, Wounds, ulcers,
Blood, Cancers, Bloody Flux, Vessels broken Ruptures, Spitting, pissing, and
Vomiting Blood, Veins swelled, Muscles cut.
and therefore bears not this name for naught. And is very available in
stanching of Blood, and to dry up the Fluxes of Humors in old fretting Ulcers,
Cancers, etc. that hinder the healing of them.

A Syrup made of the Juice of it is inferior to none for inward Wounds,
Ruptures of Veins, Bloody Flux, Vessels broken, spitting, pissing or vomiting
Blood, Ruptures are excellently and speedily, even to admiration cured by
taking now and then a little of the Syrup, and applying an Ointment or Plaster
of the Herb to the place. Also if any Vein be swelled, or Muscle cut, apply a
Plaster of this Herb to it, and if you ad a little Comfry to it 'twil not do
amiss, I assure the Herb deserves Commendations though it have gotten but a
Clownish name, and whoever reads this (if he try it as I have done) will
commend it as well as I.

I have done, only take notice, that it is of a dry Earthy quality, and under
the Dominion of the Planet Saturn.

Cocks-Head.
Description.
THis has diverse weak, but rough Stalks, half a yard long, leaning downwards,
beset with winged Leaves, longer and more pointed than those of Lentils, and
whitish underneath; from the tops of these Stalks arise up other slender
Stalks, naked without Leaves unto the tops, where there grow many small Flowers
in manner of a Spike, of a pale reddish ^ol^^r, with some blueness among them
after which rise up in their places, round, rough, and somewhat flat Heads. The
Root is tough and somewhat woody, yet lives and shoots anew every year.

Place.
It grows under Hedges, and sometimes in the open Fields, in diverse places of
this Land.

Time.
They Flower all the Months of July and August, and the Seed ripeneth in the
mean while.

Virtues and use.
It has a power to rarifie and digest, and therefore the green Leaves bruised
and laid as a Plaster disperseth Knots, Nodes, or Kernels in the Flesh, Knots
and Kernels in the Flesh, Strangury, Milk in Cattle.
and if when it is dry it be taken in Wine, it ^elpeth the Strangury: and being
anointed with Oil, it provokes Sweat. It is a singular Food for Cattle, to
cause them to give store of Milk, and why then may it not do the like being
boiled in the ordinary drink of Nurses.

Columbines.
THese are so well known, growing in almost every Garden, that I think I may
save the expense of time in writing a Description of them.

Time.
They Flower in May, and abide not for the most part when June is past,
perfecting their Seed in the mean time.

Virtues and use.
The Leaves of Columbines are commonly used in Lotions with good success for
sore Mouths and Throats: Sore Mouths and Throats, Obstructions, yellow
Jaundice, Women's Travail,
Tragus says, That a dram of the Seed taken in Wine with a little Saffron,
opens Obstructions of the Liver, and is good for the yellow Jaundice, if the
party after the taking thereof be laid to sweat well in his Bed: The Seed also
taken in Wine causes a speedy Delivery of Women in Childbirth; if one draught
suffice not, let her drink a second, and it is effectual: The Spaniards use to
eat a piece of the Root hereof in a morning fasting, many days together, to
help them being troubled with the Stone Stone.
in the Reins or Kidneys.

Coltsfoot, or Foalsfoot.
Description.
THis shoots up a fiender Stalk with small yellowish Flowers somewhat early,
which fall away quickly, and after they are past, come up somewhat round Leaves,
sometimes dented a little about the edges, much lesser, thicker and greener than
those of Butterbur, with a little down or Freez over the green Leaf on the
upper side, which may be rubbed away, and whitish or mealy underneath. The Root
is small and white spreading much under ground, so that where it takes, it whil
hardly be driven away again, if any little piece be abiding therein; and from
thence springs fresh Leaves.

Place.
It grows as well in wet grounds, as in drier places.

Time.
And Flowreth in the end of February, the Leaves beginning to appear in March.

Virtues and use.
The fresh Leaves or Juice, or a Syrup made thereof is good for a hot dry Cough,
for wheesings and shortness of breath. Cough, Wheesing, shortness of breath.
The dry Leaves are best for those that have thin Rhewms, and Distillations upon
the Lungs, causing a Cough, for which also the dried Leaves taken as Tobacco, or
the Root, is very good. The distilled water hereof simply, or with Elder Flowers
and Nightshade, is a singular remedy against al hot Agues, Agues, Inflammations,
Swelling, St. Anthonies fire, Burnings, Chollerich Pushes, Piles, Inflammations
in the Privities.
to drink two ounces at a time, and apply Clothes wet therein to the Head and
Stomach; which also does much good being applied to any hot Swellings or
Inflammations, it helps St. Anthonies Fire, and Burnings, and is singular good
to take away Wheals, and small Pushes that arise through heat; As also the
burning heat of the Piles, or privy parts, clothes wet therein being thereunto
applied.

Comfry.
Description.
THe common great Comfry has diverse very large and hairy green Leaves lying on
the ground, so hairy or prickly that if they touch any tender part of the
Hands, Face, or Body, it will cause it to itch: The Stalk that rises up from
among them being two or three Foot high, hollow and cornered, is very hairy
also, having many such like Leaves as grow below, but lesser and lesser up to
the top. At the Joints of the Stalks, it is divided into many branches with
some Leaves thereon, and at the ends stand many Flowers in order one above
another, which are somewhat long and hollow like the finger of a Glove, of a
pale whitish color, after which come small black Seed. The Roots are great and
long, spreading great thick Branches under ground, black on the outside and
whitish within, short or easy to break, and full of a glutinous or clammy Juice
of little or no taste at al.

There is another sort in all things like this, save only it is somewhat less,
and bears Flowers of a pale purple color.

Place.
They grow by Ditches and Water Sides, and in diverse Fields that are moist, for
therein they chiefly delight to grow: The first generally through all the Land,
and the other but in some several places.

By the leave of my Author, the first grow often in dry places.

Time.
They Flower in June and July, and give their Seed in August.

Virtues and use.
The great Comfry helps those that spit blood, or make a Bloody Urin; The
Root boiled in Water or Wine and the Decoction drunk, helps al inward Hurts,
Bruises and Wounds, and the Ulcers of the Lungs, causing the Phlegm that
oppresses them to be easily spit forth; It staieth the defluxions of Rhewm
from the Head upon the Lungs, the Fluxes of Blood or humors by the Belly,
Women's immoderate Courses, as well the Reds; as the Whites; and the running of
the Reins happening by what cause soever. A Syrup made thereof is very effectual
for all those inward Griefs and Hurts; and the distilled Water for the same
purpose also, and for outward Wounds and Sores in the Fleshy, or Sinewy part of
the Body whersoever; as also to take away the fits of Agues, and to allay the
sharpness of Humors. A Decoction of the Leaves hereof is available to all the
purposes, though not so effectual as of the Roots. The Roots being outwardly
applied, helps fresh Wounds or Cuts immediately, being bruised and laid
thereunto; and is especial good for Ruptures and broken Bones: yea it is said to
be so powerful to consolidate and Knit together; that if they be boiled with
dissevered pieces of Flesh in a pot it will join them together again. It is
good to be applied to Women's Breasts that grow sore by the abundance of Milk
coming into them: as also to repress the overmuch bleeding of the Hemorrhoids
to cool the Inflammation of the parts therabouts, and to give eas of pains. The
Roots of Comfry taken fresh, beaten small, and spread upon Leather, and laid
upon any place troubled with the Gout, do presently give eas of the pains; and
applied in the same manner gives eas to pained Joints and profits very much
for running and moist Ulcers; Gangrenes, Spitting, pissing Blood, Inward Wounds
and Bruises, Phtisick, Bloody Flux, Terms stops, Whites, Nervs cut, Muscles
cut, sharp Humors, Wounds, Ruptures, broken Bones, Knotted Breasts,
Hemorrhoids, Inflammation, Gout, Pained Joints, Gangreans.
Mortifications, and the like, for which it has by often experience been found
helpful.

This is also an Herb of Saturn, and I suppose under the Sign Capricorn, cold,
dry, and earthy in quality, what was spoken of Clowns Woundwort may be said of
this.

Costmary, or Alecost.
THis is so frequently known to be an Inhabitant in almost every Garden, that I
suppose it needless to write a Descriptition thereof.

Time.
It Flowreth in June and July.

Virtues and use.
The ordinary Costmary as well as Maudlin, provokes Urin abundantly, and
moistneth the hardness of the Mother; It gently purges Choler and Phlegm,
extenuating that which is gross, and cutting that which is tough and
gluttenous, cleanses that which is foul, and hinders putrefaction and
corruption, it dissolveth without Attraction, opens Obstructions, and heals
their evil effects, and is a wonderful help to al sorts of day Agues. It is
astringent to the Stomach, Disury, Womb, Choler, Phlegm, putrefaction,
Corruption, Obstructions Quotidion Agues, Stomach,
and strengthens the Liver Liver,
and all the other inward parts, and taken in Whey, works the more
effectually. Taken fasting in the morning, it is very profitable for the pains
in the Head Headache,
that are continual, and to stay, dry up, and consume all thin Rhewms, Rhewm,
or distillations from the Head into the Stomach, and helps much to digest
raw humors Raw Humors.
that are gathered therein. It is very profitable for those that are fallen
into a continual evil disposition of the whole Body called Cachexia, Cachexia,
being taken especially in the beginning of the Diseas: It is an especial
friend and help to evil, weak, and cold Livers. The Seed is familiarly given to
Children for the Worms, Worms,
and so is the infusion of the Flowers in white Wine, given them to the
Quantity of two ounces at a time: It makes an excellent Salve to clens and
heal old Ulcers, ulcers.
being boiled with Oil Olive, and Adders Tongue with it: and after it is
strained, to put a little Wax, Rozin, and Turpentine to bring it into a
convenient Body.

Cudweed, or Cottonweed.
Description.
THe common Cudweed rises up but with one Stalk sometime, and sometimes, with
two or three, thick set on all sides with small long, and narrow whitish or
wooly Leaves from the middle of the Stalk almost up to the top; with every Leaf
stands a small Flower, of a dun or brownish yellow color, or not so yellow as
others; in which Heads after the Flowers are fallen come small Seed wrapped up
with the down therein and is crried away with the Wind. The Root is small and
threddy.

There are other sorts hereof, which are somewhat lesser than the former, not
much different, save only that as the Stalk and Leaves are shorter, so the
Flowers are paler, and more open.

Place.
They grow in dry, barren, sandy, and gravelly Grounds, in most places of this
Land.

Time.
They Flower about July, some earlier, some later, and their Seed is ripe in
August.

Virtues and use.
The Plants are all astringent, or binding and drying, Bind, Dry,
and therefore profitable for Deflnxions of Rhewm from the Head, and to stay
Fluxes, Fluxes,
of Blood whersoever. The Decoction being made into red Wine and drunk, or the
Powder taken therein; it also helps the Bloody Flux, and eases the torments
that come thereby, Terms ill stopped,
stays the immoderate Courses of Women, and is also good for inward or
outward Wounds, Hurts, and Bruises, and helps Children both of Burstings and
the Worms; and the Diseas called Tenasmus, Ruptures, Worms, Tenasmus,
which is an often provocation to the Stool, and doing nothing, being either
drunk or injected: The green Leaves bruised and laid to any green Wound Wounds,
Bleeding,
staieth the bleeding, and heals it up quickly: The Decoction or Juice thereof
does the same, and helps all old and filthy Ulcers Ulcers,
quickly: The juice of the Herb taken in Wine and Milk is (as Pliny says) a
Sovereign remedy against the Mumps and Quinsie; Quinsy.
and further says, That whosoever shall so take it, shall never be troubled with
that Diseas again.

Venus is Lady of it.

. Cowslips.
BOth the Wild and Garden Cowslips are so well known that I will neither trouble
my self nor the Reader with any description of them.

Time.
They Flower in April and May.

Virtues and Use.
The Flowers are held to be more effectual than the Leaves, and the Roots of
little use.

An Ointment being made with them takes away Spots, and Wrinkles of the Skin,
Sunburning Spots, Wrinkles, Sunburning, Head Heat, Wind Beauty ads, Vertigo,
Ephialtes, Convulsion, Cramp, Back Bladder, Wounds, Trembling, Frenzy,
Fallingsicknest, Palsy.
and Freckles, and ads Beauty exceedingly: They remedy all infirmities of the
Head coming of Heat and Wind, as Vertigo, Ephialtes, falls apparitions,
Phrensies, Fallingsickness, Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, Pains in the Nerves:
The Roots eas pains in the Back and Bladder, and open the passages of Urine:
The Leaves are good in Wounds, and the Flowers take away trembling: If the
Flowers be not well dried and kept in a warm place, they will soon putrify and
look green, have a special eye over them: if you let them see the Sun once a
Month, it will do neither the Sun nor them harm.

Because they strengthen the Brain and Nerves, and remedy Palsies the Greeks
gave them the name Prralisis; The Flowers preserved or conserved, and the
quantity of a Nutmeg eaten every morning, is a sufficient Dose, for inward
Diseases, but for Wounds Spots, Wrinkles, and Sunburning, an Ointment is made
of the Leaves and Hogs greas.

Venus lays claim to the Herb as her own, and it is under the Sign Aries, and
our City Dames know well enough the Ointment or Distilled Water of it, adds
Beauty, or at least restores it when it is lost.

Sciatica-Cresses.
Description.
THese are of two kinds; The first rises up with a round Stalk about two foot
high spread into diverse Branches, whose lower Leaves are somewhat larger than the
upper, yet all of them cut, or torn on the edges, somewhat like unto
Garden-Cresses, but smaller: The Flowers are small and white, growing at the
tops of the Branches, where afterward grow Husks with small brownish Seed
therein, very strong and sharp in taste, more than the Cresses of the Garden: The
Root is long, white and woody.

The other has the lower leaves whole, somewhat long and bread not torn at al,
but only somewhat deeply dented about the edges toward the ends, but those that
grow up higher are lesser. The Flowers and Seed are like the former, and so is
the Root likewise: and both Root and Seed as sharp as it.

Place.
These grow by the way sides in untilled places, and by the sides of old Walls.

Time.
They Flower in the end of June, and their Seed is ripe in July.

Virtues and use.
The Leaves, but especially the Roots taken fresh in the Su^mer time, beaten and
made into a Pultis or Salve, with old Hogs Greas, and applied to the place
pained with the Sciatica, Sciatica,
to continue thereon four hours if it be on a Man, and two hours on a Woman; the
place afterward bathed with Wine and Oil mixed together, and then wrapped with
Wool or Skins after they have swet a little, will assuredly cure not only the
same Diseas in the Hips, Hucklebone, or other of the Joints, as the Gout in the
Hands or Feet, but all other old Griefs of the Head (as invererate Rhewms) and
other part of the Body that is hard to be cured: And if of the former Griefs
Gout, Headache, Rhewms,
any part remain; the same Medicine after twenty days is to be applied again.
The same is also effectual in the Diseases of the Spleen^ and applied to the
Skin it takes away the blemishes thereof, whether they be Scars, Leprosy,
Scabs Spleen, Scars, Leprosy, Scurf, Scabs.
or Scurf: which although it exulcerate the part, yet that is to be helped
afterward with a Salve made of Oil and Wax.

Esteem of this as another Secret.

Watercresses.
Description.
OUr ordinary Watercresses spreads forth with many weak hollow sappy Stalks,
shooting out fibers at the Joints, and upward^, long winged Leaves, made of
sundry broad, ^sappy and almost round Leaves of a brownish green color. The
Flowers are many and white, standing on long Footstalks, after which come small
yellow Seed, contained in small long pods like Horns: The whole Plant abides
green in the Winter, and tastes somewhat hot and sharp.

Place.
They grow (for the most part) in the small standing Waters, yet sometimes in
small Rivulets of running Water.

Time.
They Flower and Seed in the beginning of Summer.

Virtues and use.
They are more powerful against the Scurvy, Scurvy, Blood, Humors, Ston Disury,
Terms provokes, Ulcers, Freckles, Pimples, Spots, Dullness, Lethargy.
and to clens the Blood and Humors than Brooklime is, and serve in all the other
uses in which Brooklime is available, as to break the Stone, and provoke Urin,
and Women's Courses. The Decoction, thereof cleanses Ulcers by washing them
therewith. The Leaves bruised, or the Juice, is good to be applied to the Face, or
other parts troubled with Freckles, Pimples, Spots, or the like, at night, and
washed away in the morning,. The Juice mixed with Vinegar, and the forepart of
the Head bathed therewith, is very good for those that are dull and drowsy, or
have the Lethargy.

Water-cress Pottage is a good Remedy to clens the Blood in the Spring, and
help Headaches, and consume the gross Humors Winter has left behind, those
that would live in health may use it if they pleas, if they will not I cannot
help it: If any fancy not Pottage they may eat the Herb as a Sallet.

Crosswort.
Description.
THe Common Crosswort grows up with square hairy brown Stalks, little above a
Foot High, having four small broad and pointed hairy, yet smooth green Leaves,
growing at every Joint, each against other Cross ways, which has caused the
name: Toward the tops of the Stalks ^^ the Joints with the Leaves in three or
four rows upwards, stand small pale, yellow Flowers, after which come small
blackish, round Seed, ^four for the most part set in every Husk. The Root is
very small and full of Fibers, or Threads, taking good hold of the ground, and
spreading with the Branches a great deal of ground, which perishes not in
Winter, although the Leaves die every year, and spring again anew.

Place.
It grows in many moist grounds as well Meadows, as untilled places about
London. In Hamsted Churchyard, at ^ye in Kent, and sundry other places.

Time.
It Flowreth from May all the Summer long in one place or other, as they are
more open to the Sun; and the Seed ripeneth soon after.

Virtues and use.
This is a singular good Wound Wounds inward and outwand, Phlegm, Obstructions,
Stomach, Bowels, Ruptures.
Herb, and is used inwardly, not only to stay bleeding of Wounds, but to
consolidate them, as it does outwardly any green Wounds, which it quickly
sodereth up and heals. The Decoction of the Herb in Wine, helps to
expectorate Flegmout of the Chest, and is good for Obstructions in the Breast,
Stomach, or Bowels, and helps a decayed Appetite; It is also good to wash any
Wound or Sore with, to clens and heal it: The Herb bruised and then boiled and
applied outwardly for certain days together, renewing it often, and in the
mean time, the Decoction of the Herb in Wine taken inwardly every day, does
certainly cure the Rupture in any, so as it be not too inveterate; but very
speedily if it be fresh and lately taken.

Crowfoot.
ABundance are the sorts of this Herb, that to describe them all would the the
Patience even of Socrates himself, but because I have not yet attained to the
Spirit of Socrates, I shall but describe the most usual.

Description.
The most common Crowfoot has many dark green Leaves cut into diverse parts, in
taste biting and sharp, biting and blistering the Tongue, it bears many Flowers
and those of a bright resplendent yellow color, I do not remember that ever I
saw any thing yellower, Virgins in Ancient time used to make Powder of them to
strew Bride Beds, after which Flowers come small heads, of Seeds, round, but
tugged like a Pine Apple.

Place.
They grow very common every where, unless you run your Head into a Hedge you
cannot choose but see some of them wherever you walk.

Time.
They Flower in May and June, even till September.

Names.
Many are the Names this furious biting Herb has obtained, almost enough to
make up a Welch-mans Pedigree, if he fetch it no further than John of Gaunt of
William the Conqueror, for it is called Frogs-foot from the Greek name (...)
Crowfoot, Gold Knobs, Gold Cups, King Kob, Bassinets, Troll Flower, Polts,
Locker Goulons, and ButtierFlowers.

Virtues and use.
This fiery and hot spirited Herb of Mars is no way fit to bagiven inwardly,
but an Ointment of the Leaves or Flowers will draw a Blister, and may so be
fitting applied to the nape of the Neck to draw back Rhewm from the Eyes, the
Herb being bruised and mixed with a little Mustard, draws a Blister as well and
as perfectly as Cantharides, and with far less danger to the Vessels of Urin,
which Cantharides Naturally delight to wrong, I knew the Herb once applied to a
Pestilential rising that was falling down, and it saved life even beyond hope,
it were good keeping an Ointment and Plaster of it if it were but for that.

Cuckowpint, or VVakeRobin.
Description.
THis shoots forth three, four, or five Leaves at the most from one Root,
every one whereof is somewhat large and long, broad at the bottom next the Stalk,
and forked, but ending in a point, without cut on the edges, of a full green
color, each standing upon a thick round Stalk, of a hands breadth long or
more: among which after two or three Months that they begin to wither, rises
up a bare round whitish green Stalk, spotted and straked with purple, somewhat
higher than the Leaves: at the top whereof stands a long hollow Hose or Husk,
close at the bottom, but open from the middle upwards ending in a point; in the
middle whereof stands a small long Pestle or Clapper, smaller at the bottom
than at the top, of a dark purple color as the Husk is on the inside, though
green without; which after it has so abidden for some time, the Husk with the
Clapper decays, and the foot or bottom thereof grows to be a small long Bunch
of Berries, green at the first, and of a yellowish red color when they are
ripe, of the bigness of an Hazel Nut Kernel; which abide thereon almost until
Winter; The Root is round and somewhat long, for the most part lying along, the
Leaves shooting forth at the bigger end, which when it bears his Berries, is
somewhat wrinkled and loos, another being growing under it, which is solid and
firm with many small threads hanging thereat: The whole Plant is of a very sharp
biting taste, pricking the Tongue as Nettles do the Hands, and so abides for a
great while without alteration: The Root hereof was anciently used instead of
Starch to starch Linen withal.

There is another sort of Cuckowpint, with lesser Leaves than the former, and
somewhat; harder, having blackish spots upon them which for the most part abide
longer green in Summer than the former; and both Leaves and Roots are more sharp
and fierce than it: In all things else it is like the former.

Place.
These two sorts grow frequently almost under every Hedge side in many places of
this Land.

Time.
They shoot forth Leaves in the Spring, and continue but until the middle of
Summer, or somewhat later, their Husks appearing before they fall away; and
their Fruit showing in August.

Virtues and Use.
Tragus reports that a dram weight, or more if need be, of the spotted
Wake-Robin, either fresh and green, or dried, being beaten and taken is a most
present and sure Remedy for Poison and the Plague. Poison, Plague,
The Juice of the Herb taken to the quantity of a spoonful has the same
effect. But if there be a little Vinegar added thereunto as well as unto the
Root aforesaid, it somewhat all ayeth the sharp biting taste thereof upon the
Tongue. The green Leaves bruised and laid upon any Boil Boil,
or Plague Sore, does wonderfully help to draw forth the Poison. A dram of the
Powder of the dried Root taken with twice so much Sugar in the form of a
licking Electuary, or the green Root does wonderfully help those that are
pursie and short winded, as also those that have a Cough; it breaks,
digesteth, and riddeth away Phlegm Difficulty of breath, Cough, Phlegm,
from the Stomach, Chest, and Lungs. The Milk wherein the Root has been boiled
is effectual also for the same purpose. The said Powder taken in Wine or other
Drink; or the Juice of the Berries, or the Powder of them; or the Wine wherein
they have been boiled, provokes Urine, and brings down Women's Courses, and
purges them effectually after Childbearing to bring away the Afterbirth.
Taken with Sheeps Milk it heals the inward Ulcers Disury, Terms provokes,
Afterbirth Ulcers,
of the Bowels. The distilled Water hereof is effectual to all the purposes
aforesaid; A spoonful taken at a time heals the Itch; And an ounce or more
taken at a time for some days together does help the Rupture; Itch, Ruptures.
The Leaves either green or dry, or the Juice of them, does clens all manner of
rotten and filthy Ulcers in what part of the Body soever, and heals the
stinking Sores in the Nose called Polipus. Polipus,
The Water wherein the Root has been boiled dropped into the Eyes, Eyes
cleanses them from any Film or Skin, Clouds or Mists which begin to hinder the
Sight, and helps the watering or redness of them; or when by some chance they
become black and blue. The Root mixed with Bean Flower and applied to the
Throat or Jaws Throat, Jaws,
that are inflamed helps them. The Juice of the Berries boiled in Oil of
Roses, or beaten into Powder and mixed with the Oil, and dropped into the Ears
and eases pains in them. The Berries or the Roots beaten with hot Ox Dung, and
applied, eases the pains of the Gout. The Leaves and Roots boiled in Wine with
a little Oil, and applied to the Piles, or the falling down of the Fundament
eases them; and so does sitting over the hot fumes thereof. The fresh Roots
bruised, and distilled with a little Milk, yields a most Sovereign Water to
clens the Skin from Scurff, Freckles, Spots, or Blemishes Gout, Piles, or
Hemorrhoids, Fundament falling down, Scurf, Freckles, Spots, Blemishes.
whatsoever therein.

Authors have left large Commendation of this Herb you see, but for my part I
have neither spoken with Dr. Reason, nor Dr. Experience about it.

Daisies.
THese are so well known to almost every Child, that I suppose it is altogether
needless to write any Description of them. Take therefore the Virtues of them as
follows.

Virtues and Use.
The greater wild Daisie is a Wound Herb of good respect, often used in those
Drink^ or Salvs that are for Wounds, Wounds, inward and outward, Choler, Liver,
either inward or outward. The Juice or distilled Water of these, or the small
Daisies, does much temper the heat of Choler, and refreshes the Liver and
other inward parts. A Decoction made of them and drunk, helps to cure the
Wounds made in the hollowness of the Breast: The same also cures al Ulcers
Breast, ulcers,
and Pustles in the Mouth or Tongue, or in the secret parts. The Leaves bruised
and applied to the Cods, or to any other parts that are swollen Swellings,
and hot, does resolve it and temper the Heat: A Decoction made hereof with
Walwort and Agrimony, and the places fomented or bathed therewith warm, gives
great eas to them that are troubled with the Palsy, Stiatica, or the Gout. The
lame also disperseth and dissolveth the Knots or Kernels Kernels.
that grow in the Flesh or any part of the Body, and the Bruises Bruises,
Falls, Ruptures, Burnings, Inflammations.
and Hurts that come of Falls and Blows: They are also used for Ruptures, and
other inward Burnings with very good success. An Ointment made hereof does
wonderfully help al Wounds that have Inflammations about them, or by reason of
moist humors having access unto them, are kept long from healing, and such are
those for the most part that happen in the Joints of the Arms or Legs. The
Juice of them dropped into the running Eyes of any does much help them.

The Herb is under the Sign Cancer, and under the Dominion of Venus, and
therefore excellent good for Wounds in the Breast, and very fitting to be kept
both in Oils, Ointments, and Plasters, as also in Syrup.

DANDELYON, Vulgarly called, Piss-a-beds.
Description.
THis is well known to have many long and deeply gashed Leaves lying on the
ground, round about the Head of the Root; the ends of each Gash or Jag on both
sides looking downwards toward the Root, the middle rib being white which
broken yields abundance of bitter Milk, but the Root much more: from among
the Leaves which always abide green, arise many slender, weak, naked
Footstalks, every one of them bearing at the top one large yellow Flower,
consisting of many rows of yellow Leaves, broad at the points and nicked in,
with a deep spot of yellow in the middle, which growing ripe, the green Husk
wherein the Flower stood, turns it self down to the Stalk, and the Head of
down becomes as round as a Ball, with long reddish Seed underneath, bearing a
part of the Down on the Head of every one, which together is blown away with
the Wind, or may be at once blown away with ones Mouth. The Root growth
downwards exceeding deep, which being broken off within the ground, will
notwithstanding shoot forth again; and will hardly be destroyed where it has
once taken deep Root in the ground.

Place.
It grows frequent in all Meadows and Pasture Grounds.

Time.
It Flowreth in one place or other almost all the year long.

Virtues and use.
It is of an opening and clensing quality, and thefore very effectual for the
Obstructions of the Liver, Gall, and Spleen, and the Diseases that arise from
them, as the Jaundice, and Hypocondriacal Passion: It wonderfully opens
Opens, Cleanses, Obstructions, Liver, Gall, Spleen, Jaundice, Hypochondriacal
Melancholy, Disury, Consuption, Cachexia, Watching, Heat, Agu, Pestilence.
the Passages of the Urin both in young and old. It powerfully cleanses
Aposthumes, and inward in the Uritory passages, and by the drying and temperate
quality does afterward heal them; for which purpose the Decoction of the Roots
or Leaves in white Wine, or the Leaves chopped as Potherbs with a few Allisanders
and boiled in their Broth, is very effectual. And whosoever is drawing toward a
Consumption, or an il Disposition of the whole Body called Cachexia, by the use
hereof for sometime together shall find a wonderful help: It helps also to
procure rest and sleep to Bodies distempered by the Heat of Ague Fits, or
otherwise. The distilled Water is effectual to drink in Pestilential Fevers,
and to wash the Sores.

You see here what Virtues this common Herb has, and that is the reason you
French and Dutch so often eat them in the Spring; and now if you look a little
further you may see plainly without a pair of Spectakles, that Foreign
Physicians are not so selfish as ours are, but more communicative of the
Virtues of Plants to People.

Darnel.
Description.
THis has all the Winter long, sundry long, fat, and rough Leaves, which when
the Stalk rises, which is slender and joynted, are narrower, but rough still;
on the top grows a long spike composed of many Heads, set one above another,
containing two or three Husks with sharp, but short Beards or awns at the ends;
the Seed is easily shaked out of the Ear, the Husk it self being somewhat tough.

Place.
The Country Husbandmen do know this too well to grow among their Corn^ or in
the Borders and Pathwaies of other Fields that are fallow.

Virtues and use.
As this is not without some Vices, so has it also many Virtues. The Meal of
Darnel is very good to stay Gangreans, Gangreans Cankers, Leprosy, Morphew,
Ringworms,
and other such like fretting and eating Cankers, and putrid Sores: It also
cleanses the Skin of al Lepries, Morphews, Ringworms, and the like, if it be
used with Salt and Rhadish Roots. And being used with quick Brimstone and
Vinegar, it dissolveth Knots and Kernels, and breaks those that are hard to
be dissolved, being boiled in Wine with Pigeons Dung and Linseed: A Decoction
thereof made with Water and Honey, and the place bathed therewith, is profitable
for the Sciatica. Sciatica, Thorns, Splinters, broken Bones, Diabets.
Darnel Meal applied in a Pultis, draws forth Splinters and broken Bones in
the Flesh: The red Darnel boiled in red Wine and taken, stays the ^ask and
all other Fluxes, and Women's bloody Issues; and restrains Urin that passes
away too snddenly.

Dill.
Description.
THe common Dill grows up with seldom more than one Stalk, neither so high,
nor so great usually as Fennel, being round, and with fewer Joints thereon,
whose Leaves are sadder, and somewhat long, and so like Fennel that it deceives
many; but harder in handling and somewhat thicker, and of a stronger
unpleasanter set: The tops of the Stalks have four Branches and smaller Umbels
of yellow Flowers, which turn into small Seed somewhat flatter and thinner than
Fennel Seed. The Root is small and woody, perishing every year after it has
born Seed; and is also unprofitable, being never put to any use.

Place.
It is most usually sown in Gardens, and Grounds for the purpose, and is also
found wild with us in some places.

Virtues and use.
The Dill being boiled and drunk is good to eas Swellings and pains, Swellings,
Pains, Looseness, Vomiting, Mother, Hiccough, Raw and tough Humors. Wind,
Apostums, ulcers.
it also stays the Belly, and Stomach from casting: The Decoction there of
helps Women that are troubled with the Pains and Windiness of the Mother, if
they sit therein. It stays the Hiccough, being boiled in Wine and but smelled
unto, being tied in a Cloth. The Seed is of more use than the Leaves, and more
effectual to digest raw and viscuous humors, and is used in Medicines that
serve to expel Wind and the pains proceeding therfrom. The Seed being toasted
or fried, and used in Oils or Plasters, dissolveth the Imposthumes in the
Fundament, and dries up all moist Ulcers (especially in the secret parts.) The
Oil made of Dill is effectual to warm, to resolve Humors and Imposthumes, to
eas pains and to procure rest.

The Decoction of Dill be it Herb or Seed (only if you boil the Seed you must
bruis it) in white Wine, being drunk is a gallant expeller of Wind and provoker
of the Terms. Terms provokes.


Devils-bit.
Description.
THis rises up with a round, green, smooth Stalk about two soot high, set with
diverse long and somewhat narrow, smooth, dark, green Leaves, somewhat snip'd about
the edges for the most part, being else al whole and not divided at al or but
very seldom, even to the tops of the Branches which yet are smaller than chose
below, with one Rib only in the middle: At the end of each Branch stands a
round Head of many Flowers set together in the same manner or more nearly than
the Scabious, and of a more bluish purple color; which being past there
follows Seed that falls away. The Root is somewhat thick, but short and
blackish with may Strings, abiding after Seed time many years. A Learned Tale
that cost a dull Friar, ^se^^ years study.
This Root was longer untillthe Devil (as the Friars say) hit away the rest of
it for spite, envying its usefulness unto Mankind. Foe sure he was not
troubled with any Diseas for which it is proper.

There are two other sorts hereof in nothing unlike the former, save that the
one bears White, and the other Blush colored Flowers.

Place.
The first grows as well in dry Meadows and Fields, as moist, in many places
of this Land: But the other two are more rare, and hard to meet with, yet they
are both found growing wild about Appledore, near Rye in Kent.

Time.
They Flower not usually until August.

Virtues and use.
The Herb or Root (all that the Devil has left of it) being boiled in Wine and
drunk is very powerful against the Plague, and all Pestilential Pestilence,
Fevers, Poison, Venomous Beasts, Bruises, Falls, Clotted Blood,
Diseases or Fevers, Poisons also, and the bitings of Venomous Beasts; It also
helps those that are inwardly bruised by any casualty, ar outwardly by Falls
or Blows, dissolving the clotted Blood: and the Herb or Root beaten and
outwardly applied, takes away the black and blue Marks that remain in the
Skin. The Decoction of the Herb, with Honey of Roses put therein is very
effectual to help the inveterate tumors and Swellings of the Almonds and
Throat, Swellings of the Throat, Mother, Wind, Worms, Wounds, Scurff, Itch,
Dandriff, Pimples, Freckles, Morphew.
by often gargling the Mouth therewith. It helps also to procure Women's
Courses, and eases all pains of the Mother, and to break and discuss Winds
therein and in the Bowels. The Powder of the Root taken in Drink, drives forth
the Worms in the Body: The Juice, or distilled Water of the Herb is effectual
for green Wounds, or old Sores, and cleanses the Body inwardly, and the Seed
outwardly, from Sores, Scurff, Itches, Pimples, Freekles, Morphew, or other
deformities thereof, but especially if a little Vitriol be dissolved therein.

Dock.
THese are so well known many kinds of them, that I shall not trouble you with a
Description of them; my Book grows big too fast.

Virtues and use.
All of them have a kind of cooling (but not all alike) drying quality the
Sorrels being most cold, and the Bloodworts most drying: Of the Bur-Dock I have
spoken already by himself. The Seed of most of the other kinds whether of the
Garden or Field, do stay Lasks or Fluxes Flux; Loathing^ of Meat, Spitting
Blood, Scabs, Itch, Freckles, Morphew.
of all sorts, the loathings of the Stomach through Choler, and is helpful to
those that spit Blood. The Roots boiled in Vinegar helps the Itch, Scabs, and
breakings out of the Skin, if it be bathed therewith. The Distilled Water of the
Herb and Roots has the same Virtue, and cleanses the Skin of Freckles,
Morphews, and all other Spots and Discolorings therein.

All Docks being boiled with Meat, make it boiled the sooner: Beside Bloodwort
is exceeding strengthening to the Liver, and procures good Blood, being as
wholesome a Pot Herb as any grows in a Garden, yet such is the nicity of our
times forsooth, that Women will not put it in the Pot because it makes the
Pottage black, Pride and Ignorance (a couple of Monsters in the Creation)
preferring Nicity before Health.

Dodder of Time, or Epithimum, and other Dodders.
Description.
THis first from Seeds gives Roots in the Ground, which shoots forth threads
or Strings, grosser, or finer, as the property of the Plant wherein it grows,
and the Climate does suffer, creeping and spreading on that Plant whereon it
fastneth, be it high or low. These Strings have no Leaves at all upon them, but
wind and interlace themselves so thick upon a small Plant that it takes away
all comfort of the Sun from it, and is ready to choke or strangle it: After
these Strings are risen up to that Height that they may draw Nourishment from
the Plant, they seem to be broken off from the ground, either by the strength
of there rising, or withered by the heat of the Sun. Upon these Strings are
found clusters of small Heads or Husks, out of which star^ forth whitish
Flowers, which afterwads give small pale colored Seed somewhat flat, and twice
as big as Poppy Seed. It generally participates of the Nature of that Plant
which it climbeth upon, but the Dodder of Time is accounted the best, and is
the only true Epithimum.

Virtues and use.
This is accounted the most effectnal for Melanchollick Diseases, and to purge
black or burnt Choler, Melancholy, Addust Choler, Trembling, fainting,
swooning, Spleen, Hypochondria, Obstructions, Gall, Jaundice, Liver,
which is the cause of many Diseases of the Head and Brains, as also for the
trembling of the Heart, faintings, and Swounings. It is helpful in all Diseases
and Griefs of the Spleen, and of that Melancholy that arises from the
windiness of the Hypochondria. It purges also the Reins or Kidneys by Urin. It
opens Obstructions of the Gall, whereby it profits them that have the
Jaundice; as also of the Liver, and Spleen; purging the Veins of Chollerick and
Phlegmatic Humors, and helps Childrens Agues, a little Wormseed being put
thereto.

The other Dodders do (as I said before) participate of the Nature of those
Plants whereon they grow: As that which has been found growing upon Nettles in
the West Country, has by experience been found very effectual to procure
plenty of Urin, where it has been stopped or hindered. Disury,
And so of the rest.

All Dodders are under Saturn, Tell not me of Physicians crying up Epithimum,
or that Dodder which grows upon Time (most of which comes from Hymettus in
Greece, or Hybla in Sicilia, because those Mountains abound with Time) he is a
Physician indeed that has wit enough to choose his Dodder according to Nature
of the Diseas and Humor peccant, we confess, Time is the hottest Herb, it
usually grows upon, and therefore that which grows upon Time is hotter than that
which grows upon colder Herbs, for it draws Nourishment from what it grows upon
as well as from the Earth where its Root is, and thus you see old Saturn is
wise enough to have two Strings to his Bow.

Sympathy and Antipathy, are the two Hinges upon which the whole Moddel of
Physic turns, and that Physician which minds them not is like a Door off from
the Hooks, more likely to do a man a mischief than to secure him: then all the
Diseases Saturn causes, this helps by Sympathy, and strengthens all the parts
of the Body he rules, such as caused by Sol it helps by Antipathy, what those
Diseases are see my Judgment of Diseases by Astrology, and you be pleased to
look the Herb Wormwood, you shall find a Rational way for it.

Dogs-Grass; OR Quich-Grass.
Description.
IT is well known that this Grass creeps far about under ground with long
white joynted Roots; and small fibers almost at every Joint very sweet in taste,
as the rest of the Herb is, and interlacing one another, from whence shoot
forth many fair long grassy Leaves, small at the ends and cutting or sharp on
the edges. The Stalks are joynted like Corn, with the like Leaves on them, and a
long spiked Head with long Husks on them and hard rough Seed in them.

Place.
It grows commonly through this Land in diverse plowed grounds, to the no small
trouble of the Husbandman, as also of the Gardiners in Gardens to weed it out
if they can, for it is a constant Customer to the place it gets footing in.

Virtues and use.
This is the most Medicinable of all the Quith-grasses: Being boiled and drunk
it opens Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, Liver, Gall, Disury, Griping,
Inflammation, ulcers, in the Bladder, Wounds, Vomiting, Worms,
and the Stoppings of the Urin, and eases the griping pains of the Belly, and
Inflammations; wastes the matter of the Stone in the Bladder, and the Ulcers
thereof also: The Roots bruised and applied does consolidate Wounds: The Seed
does more powerfully expel Urin, and stays the Lask, and Vomitings; The
distilled Water alone, or with a little Wormseed kills the Worms in Children.

The way of use is to bruis the Roots, and having well boiled them in white
Wine, drink the Decoction; it is opening, but not purging very safe; it is a
Remedy against all Diseases coming of Stopping Stopping.
and such are half those which are incident to the Body of man; and although a
Gardener be of another opinion, yet a Physician holds half an Acre of them to
be worth five Acres of Carrots twice told over.

Dovesfoot, or Cranesbill.
Description.
THis has diverse small, round, pale, green Leaves, out in about the edges, much
like Mallows, standing upon long reddish hairy Stalks lying in a round compass
upon the ground; among which rise up two or three, or more reddish Joynted,
slender, weak, and hairy Stalks, with some such like Leaves thereon, but
smaller, and more cut in up to the tops, where grow many very small, bright, red
Flowers of five Leaves apiece, after which follow small Heads, with small short
bea^ pointing forth, as all other sorts of these Herbs do.

Place.
It grows in Pasture Grounds, and by the Path sides in many places, and will
also be in Gardens.

Time.
It Flowreth in June, July, and August, some earlier, and some later, and the
Seed is ripe quickly after.

Virtues and use.
It is found by experience to be singular good for the Wind Chollick, Chollick,
Stone, Gravel, Wounds, Congealed Blood, Sores, ulcers, Fistulaes, Gout, Sinews,
Ruptures.
and pains thereof, as also to expel the Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys. The
Decoction there of in Wine is an exceeding good Wound Drink for those that have
inward Wounds, Hurts, or Bruises, both to stay the bleeding, to dissolve and
expel the congealed Blood, and to heal the parts, as also to clens, and heal
outward Sores, Ulcers, and Fistulaes; and for green Wounds many do but bruise
the Herb, and apply it to the place, and it heals them quickly. The same
Decoction in Wine fomented to any place pained with the Gout, or to
Joynt-aches, or pain, of the Sinews gives much eas. The Powder, or Decoction
of the Herb taken for some time together is found by experience to be singular
good for Ruptures, and Burstings in People, either young or old.

Ducksmeat.
THis is so well known to swim on the top of standing Waters, as Ponds, Pools,
and Ditches, that it is needless further to describe it.

Virtues and use.
It is effectual to help Inflammations,, and St. Anthonies fire, Inflammations,
St. Anthonies Fire, Pestilenee, Eyes Swillings of the Cods, Headache.
as also the Gout, either applied by it self, or in a Pultis with Barley Meal.
The distilled Water hereof is by some highly esteemed, against all inward
Inflammations, and Pestilent Fevers; as also to help the redness of the Eyes,
the Swellings of the Cods, and of the Breasts before they be grown too much.
The fresh Herb applied to the Forehead, eases the Pains of the Headache coming
of heat.

Cancer claims the Herb, and the Moon will be Lady of it, a word is enough to a
Wise man.

Down, or CottonThistle.
Description.
THis has many large Leaves lying on the ground, somewhat cut in, and as it were
crumpled on the edges, of a green color on the upper side, but covered over
with a long hairy Wool, or Cottony Down, set with most sharp, and cruel pricks;
from the middle of whose Heads of Flowers, thrust forth many Purplish, Crimson
Treds, and sometimes (although more seldom) white ones. The Seed that follows
in these Heads, lying in a great deal of fine white Down is somewhat large,
long, and round, like the Seed of Ladies Thistle, but somewhat paler. The Root
is great and thick spreading much, yet it usually dies after Seed time.

Place.
It grows on diverse Ditches Banks, and in the Cornfieldsd, and Highways
generally every where throughout the Land.

Time.
It Flowreth and bears Seed about the end of Summer, when other Thistles do
Flower and Seed.

Virtues and use.
Pliny and Dioscorides write, That the Leaves and Roots hereof taken in Drink,
helps those that have a Crick in their Neck, Wry Neck,
whereby they cannot turn their Neck but their whole Body must turn also (Sure
they do not mean those that have got a Crick in their Neck by being under the
Hangmans Hands.) Galen says that the Root and Leaves hereof are of an heating
quality, and good for such Persons as have their Bodies drawn together by some
Spasme, Spasmus, Convulsion Rickets,
or Convulsion; as it is with Children that have the Rickets, or rather (as the
College of Physicians will have it) the Rachites, for which name for the
Diseas, they have (in a particular Treatise lately set forth by them) Learnedly
Disputed, and put forth to the public view, that the World may see, they took
much pains to little purpose.

Mars owns the Plant, and manifests to the World, that though it may hurt your
Fingers it will help your Body, for I fancy it much for the Premises.

The Elder-Tree.
I Hold it needless to write any Description of this, since every Boy that
plays with a Potgun, will not mistake another Tree instead of Elder. I shall
therefore in this place only describe the Dwarf Elder, called also Danewort, and
Walewort.

The Dwarf Elder.
Description.
THis is but an Herb every year dying with his Stalks to the ground, and rising
again afresh every Spring; and is like unto the Elders both in form and
quality, rising up with a four square rough hairy Stalk four foot high or more
sometimes. The winged Leaves are somewhat narrower than the Elder, but else very
like them. The Flowers are white with a dash of Purple standing in Umbels, very
like the Elder also, but more sweet in scent, after which come small blackish
Berries, full of Juice while they are fresh, wherein there lie small hard
Kernels or Seed. The Root does creep under the upper crust of the ground,
springing afresh in diverse places being of the bigness of ones finger or Thumb
sometimes.

Places.
The Elder-Tree grows in Hedges, being planted there to strengthen the
Fences, and Partitions of Grounds, and to hold up the Banks by Ditches, and
Watercourse.

The Dwarf Elder grows Wild in many places of England, where being once
gotten into a Ground it is not easily gotten forth again.

Times.
Most of the Elder-Trees Flower in June, and their Fruit is ripe for the most
part in August.

But the Dwarf Elder, or Wallwort Flowreth somewhat later, and his fruit is not
ripe until September.

Virtues and Use.
The first Shoots of the common Elder boiled like Asparagus, and the young Leaves
and Stalks boiled in Fat Broth, does mightily carry forth Phlegm and Choler.
Phlegm, Choler,
The middle, or inner Bark boiled in Water, and given to drink works much
more violently; and the Berries either green or dry, expel the same humors, and
is often given with good success to help the Dropsy. Dropsy,
The Bark of the Root boiled in Wine, or the Juice thereof drunk, works the
same effects, but more powerfully than either the Leaves or Fruit. The Juice of
the Root taken does mightily provoke Vomit, and purges the watery Humors of
the Dropsy. The Decoction of the Root taken cures the biting of the Adder,
and biting of Mad Dogs; Venomous Beasts, Mad Dogs, Terms provokes.
It mollifieth the hardness of the Mother, if Women sit therein, and opens the
Veins, and brings down their Courses: The Berries boiled in Wine performs
the same effect; and the hair of the Head washed therewith is made black. The
Juice of the green Leaves applied to the hot Inflammations Inflammation,
of the Eyes, asswageth them. The Juice of the Leaves snuffed up into the
Nostrils purges the Tunicles of the Brain. Brain,
The Juice of the Berries boiled with a little Honey and dropped into the Ears,
Ears,
helps the pains of them. The Decoction of the Berries in Wine being drunk
provokes Urine. Urine provokes, Sunburning, Freckles, Morphew. Headache, ulcers.
The distilled Water of the Flowers is of much use to clear the Skin from
Sunburning, Freckles, Morphew, or the like; and takes away Headaches coming of
a cold cause, the Head being bathed therewith. The Leaves or Flowers distilled in
the Month of May, and the Legs often washed with the said distilled Water, it
takes away the Ulcers and Sores of them: The Eyes washed therewith, it takes
away the redness and Bloodshot: And the Hands washed morning and evening
therewith helps the Palsy, Palsy.
and shaking of them.

The Dwarf Elder is more powerful than the Common Elder, in opening and purging
Choler, Phlegm, and Water, in helping the Gout, Gout Inflammation, Burning,
Scalding, Chollick, Stone, Disury.
the Piles, and Women's Diseases, coloreth the Hair black, helps Inflammation
in the Eyes, and pains in the Ears; the biting of Serpents or a Mad Dog,
Burnings and Scaldings, the wind Chollick, Chollick and Stone, the difficulty
of Urine, the cure of old Sores, and Fistulous Ulcers.

Either Leaves or Bark of Elder stripped upward as you gather it causes
Vomiting, but stripped downward it purges downwards. Also Dr. Butler in a
Manuscript of his commends Dwarf Elder to the Sky for Dropsies, viz. to drink
it being boiled in white Wine, to drink the Decoction I mean, not the Elder.

The Elm-Tree.
THis Tree is so well known, growing generally in all Countries of this Land;
that it is needless to describe it.

Virtues and Use.
The Leaves hereof bruised, and applied heals green Wounds Wounds, Scurff,
Leprosy,
being bound thereon with its own Bark: The Leaves or the Bark used with
Vinegar, cures Scurf, and Lepry very effectually: The Decoction of the Leaves,
Bark, or Root, being bathed, heals broken Bones. Beauty,
The Water that is found in the Bladders on the Leaves, while it is fresh, is
very effectual to clens the Skin and make it fair: ^^^ if clothes be often wet
therein and applied to the Ruptures Ruptures,
of Children it helps them; if they be after well bound up with a Truss, The
said Water put into a Glass, and set in the Ground, or else in Dung for twenty
five days, the Mouth thereof being close stopped; and the bottom set upon a lay
of ordinary Salt, that the Feces may settle and the Water become very clear, is
a singular and Sovereign Balm for green Wounds, being used with soft tents: The
Decoction of the Bark of the Root somented mollifieth hard tumors, and the
shrinking of the Sinews. Swellings,
The Roots of the Elm boiled for a long time in Water, and the fat rising on
the top thereof being clean scummed off, and the place anointed therewith that is
grown Bald, Baldness,
and the Hair fallen away, will quickly restore them again. The said Bark,
ground with Brine and Pickle until it come to the form of a Pultis, and laid on
the place, pained with the Gout, Gout,
gives great eas. The Decoction of the Bark in Water is excellent to bath such
places as have burned Burning.
with fire.

Endive.
Description.
THe common Garden Endive bears a longer and a larger Leaf than Succory, and
abides but one year, quickly running up to Stalk and Seed, and then perishes:
It has blue Flowers, and the Seed of the ordinary Endive is so like Succory
Seed, that it is hard to distinguish them.

Virtues and Use.
The Decoction of the Leaves, or the Juice, or the distilled Water of Endive
serves well to cool the excessive Hear in the Liver and Stomach, Liver,
Stomach, Agues, Sharpness of urine, and Excariations thereby, Passion of the
Heart, ulcers, Swellings, Eyes, Gout.
and in the hot Fits of Agues, and all other Inflammations in any part of the
Body; it cools the heat and sharpness of the Urine, and the Excoriations in
the Uritory parts; The Seed is of the same property or rather more powerful,
and besides is available for the faintings, swounings, and passions of the
Heart. Outwardly applied they serve to temper the sharp Humors of fretting
Ulcers, hot Tumors and Swellings, and Pestilential Sores; and wonderfully
helps not only the redness and Inflammation in the Eyes, but the dimness of
the Sight also: They are also used to allay the pains of the Gout.

You cannot use it amiss, a Syrup of it is a fine cooling Medicine for Fevers.

Elecampane.
Description.
THis shoots forth many large Leaves, long, and broad, lying near the ground,
small at both ends, somewhat soft in handling, of a whitish green on the upper
side, and gray underneath, each set upon a short Footstalk; from among which
rise up diverse great, and strong hairy Stalks, three or four foot high with
some Leaves thereon compassing them about at the lower ends, and are branched
toward the tops, bearing diverse great and large Flowers like those of the Corn
Marigold, both the Borden of Leaves and the middle thrum being yellow, which
turn into Down; with long small brownish Seed among it, and is carried away
with the wind. The Root is great and thick, branched forth diverse ways,
blackish on the outside, and white within, of a very bitter taste, and strong,
but good sent, especially when they are dried, no part else of the Plant having
any smell.

Place.
It grows in the moist Grounds, and shadowy places oftener than in the dry and
open Borders of Fields and Lanes, and in other wast places almost in every
County of this Land.

Time.
It Flowreth in the end of June and July, and the Seed is ripe in August, The
Roots are gathered for use, as well in the Spring before the Leaves come forth,
as in Autumn or Winter.

Virtues and use.
The fresh Roots of Elecampane preserved with Sugar, or made into a Syrup or
Conserve, are very effectual to warm a cold Cold Stomach, Wind, Stitch, Spleen,
Cough, Shortness of Breath, Wheesing, Terms provokes, Mother, Stone, Poison,
Venomous Beasts, Pestilence, Eyes, Worms.
and windy Stomach; or the pricking therein, and Stitches in the Sides caused by
the Spleen; and to help the Cough, shortness of Breath, and wheesing in the
Lungs. The dried Root made into Powder, and mixed with Sugar and taken, serves
to the same purposes, and is also profitable for those that have their Urine
stopped; or the stopping of Women's Courses, the pains of the Mother, and of the
Stone in the Reins, Kidneys, or Bladder: It resists Poison, and stays the
spreading of the Venom of Serpents, as also of putrid and pestilential Fevers,
and the Plague it self. The Roots and Herb beaten and put into new Ale or Beer,
and daily drunk, clears, strengthens, and quickneth the Sight of the Eyes
wonderfully. The Decoction of the Roots in Wine or the Juice taken therein,
kills and drives forth all manner of Worms in the Belly, Stomach, and Maw;
and gargled in the mouth; or the Root chewed fastneth loos Teeth, Loos Teeth,
and helps to keep them from Putrefaction: And being drunk is good for those
that spit Blood, Spitting Blood, Cramps, Convulsions, Gout, Joints, Itch,
helps to remove Cramps or Convulsions, and the pains of the Gout, the
Sciatica, the looseness and pains in the Joints, or those Members that are out
of Joint, by cold or moisture happening to them, applied outwardly as well as
inwardly, and is good for those that are bursten, or have any inward, bruis.
The Roots boiled well in Vinegar, beaten afterward and made into an Ointment,
with Hogs Suet or Oil of Trotters is an excellent remedy for Scabs or Itch in
young or old: The places also bathed or washed with the Decoction does the same;
it also helps all sorts of filthy, old, putrid Sores or Cankers Cankers,
wheresoever. In the Roots of this Herb lies the chief effect for all the
Remedies aforesaid: The distilled Water of the Leaves and Roots together is very
profitable to clens the Skin of the Face or other parts, from any Morphew,
Spots, Freckles, Morphew, Spots.
or Blemishes therein, and makes it clear.

Eringo, or Sea-Holly.
Description.
THe first Leaves of our ordinary. Sea-Holly, are nothing so hard and prickly as
when they grow old, being almost round and deeply dented about the edges; hard,
and sharp pointed, and a little crumpled, of a bluish green color, every one
upon a long Footstalk: but those that grow up higher with the Stalk, do as it
were compass it about. The stalk it self is round and strong, yet somewhat
crested with Joints and Leaves set thereat, but more divided, sharp, and prickle;
and branches rising from thence, which have likewise other smaller Branches,
each of them bearing several bluish round prickly Heads, with many small jagged
prickly Leaves under them standing like a Star, and are sometimes found greenish
or whitish: The Root grows wonderful long, even to eight or ten Foot in
length, set with Rings or Circles, toward the upper part, but smooth and
without Joints down lower, brownish on the outside, and very white within, with
a pith in the middle, of a pleasant taste, but much more being artificially
preserved and candy'd with Sugar.

Place.
It is found about the Sea Coasts, in almost every Country of this Land which
bordereth upon the Sea.

Time.
It Flowreth in the end of Summer, and gives ripe Seed within a Month after.

Virtues and use.
The Decoction of the Root hereof in Wine is very effectual to open the
Obstructions of the Spleen and Liver, Obstructions, Spleen, Liver, yellow
Jaundice, Dropsy, Chollick, Disury, Strangury, Reins,
and helps the yellow Jaundice, the Dropsy, the pains in the Loins, and wind
Chollick, provokes Urine, and expels the Stone, and procures Women's
Courses, The continued use of the Decoction for 15. days taken fasting and
next to Bedward, does help the strangury, the pissing by drops, the stopping of
Urine and Stone, and all defects of the Reins or Kidneys; and if the said drink
be continued longer, it is said that it perfectly cures the Stone, and that
experience has found it so: It is found good against the French Pox. French
Pox, Kings Evil, Venomous Beasts,
The Roots bruised and applied outwardly, helps the Kernels of the Throat,
commonly called the Kings evil; or taken inwardly and applied to the place
stung or bitten by any Serpent, heals it speedily. If the Roots be bruised
and boiled in old Hogs greas, or salted Lard and applied to broken Bones,
Thorns Thorns, broken Bones, Splinters, Thorns, Apostums, Melancholy, Quartan,
and Quotidian Agues, Wry Necks,
etc. remaining in the Flesh does not only draw them forth, but heals up the
place again, gathering new Flesh where it was consumed: The Juice of the Leaves
dropped into the Ears, helps Imposthumes therein: The Distilled Water of the
whole Herb when the Leaves and Stalks are young, is profitably drunk for all the
purposes aforesaid; and helps the Melancholy of the Heart, and is available
in Quartane and Quotidian Agues, as also for them that have their Necks drawn
awry, and cannot turn them, without turning their whole Body.

The Plant is Venerial, and breeds Seed Seed breeds.
exceedingly and strengthens the Spirit procreative, it is hot and moist, and
under the Celestial Balance.

Eyebright.
Description.
THe common Eyebright is a small low Herb, rising up usually but with one
blackish, green Stalk, a span high, or not much more, spread from the bottom
into sundry Branches, whereon are set small and and almost round, yet pointed
dark, green, Leaves finely snipped about the edges, two always set together,
and very thick: At the Joints with the Leaves from the middle upward, come forth
small white Flowers stryped with purple and yellow Spots or stripes; after
which follow small round Heads with very small Seed therein: The Root is long,
small, and threddy at the end.

Place.
It grows in many Meadows, and grassy places, in this Land.

Virtues and Use.
If this Herb were but as much used as it is neglected, it would half spoil the
Spectaclemakers Trade; and a man would think that reason should teach people to
prefer the prefervation of their Natural before Artificial Spectacles: which
that they may be instructed how to do, take the Virtues of Eyebright as
follows.

The Juice or distilled Water of Eyebright taken inwardly in white Wine or
Broth, or dropped into the Eyes for diverse days together, helps all
infirmities of the Eyes that cause dimness of Sight: Some make a Conserv of the
Flowers to the same effect: Being used any of these ways it also helps a
weak Brain or Memory. Eyes, Dimness, Brain, Memory.
This tunned up with strong Beer that it may work together, and drunk; Or the
Powder of the dried Herb mixed with Sugar, a little Mace, and Fennel Seeds, and
drunk or eaten in Broth: Or the said Powder made into an Electuary with Sugar
and taken, has the same powerful effect to help and restore the Sight decayed
through age. And Arnoldus de villa nova, says, It has restored Sight to them
that have been blind a long time before.

It is under the Sign of the Lion, and Sol claims Dominion over it.

Fern.
Description.
OF this there are two kinds principally to be noted; viz. The Male and Female:
The Female grows higher than the Male, but the Leaves thereof are lesser, and
more divided or dented; and of as strong a smell as the Male: The Virtues of
them are both alike; and therefore I shall not trouble you with any further
Description or distinction of them.

Place.
They both grow on Heaths, and in shady places near the Hedge sides in all
Countries of this Land.

Time.
They flourish and give their Seed at Midsummer.

The Femal Fern is that plant which is In Sussex called Brakes, the Seed of
which some Authors hold to be so rare, such a thing there is I know,, and may
easily Be had upon Midsummer Eve, and for ought yet I know two or three days
before or after, if not more.

Virtues and Use.
The Roots of both these sorts of Ferns, being bruised and boiled in Mead or
Honyed Water, and drunk, kills both the broad and long Worms Worms
in the Body; and abateth the Swelling and hardness of the Spleen. Spleen,
The green Leaves eaten, purges the Belly and Chollerick and waterish humors,
but it troubles the Stomach. Choler, Phlegm, Stomach,
They are dangerous for Women with Child to meddle with, by reason they cause
abortment. The Roots bruised and boiled in Oil or Hogs greas, makes a very
profitable Ointment to heal Wounds, Wounds,
or pricks gotten into the Flesh. The Powder of them used in foul Ulcers,
Ulcers,
dries up their Malignant moisture, and causes their speedier healing: Fern
being burned, the smoke thereof drives away. Serpents, Gnats, Serpents, Gnats,
Venomous Beasts.
and other noisome Creatures, which in the Fenny Countries do in the night time
trouble and molest people lying in their Beds with their Faces uncovered it
causes Barrenness.

Osmond Royal, or Water Fern.
Description.
THis shoots forth in the Spring time (for in the Winter the Leaves perish)
diverse rough hard Stalks, half round and hollowish, or flat on the other side,
two Foot high, having diverse Branches of winged yellowish green Leaves on all
sides, set one against another, longer, narrower, and not nicked on the edges
as the former: From the top of some of these Stalks grow forth a long Bush of
small, and more yellowish green scaly aglets as it were set in the same manner
on the Stalks as the Leaves are; which are accounted the Flower and Seeds; The
Root is rough, thick, and Scaly, with a white pith in the middle which is
called the Heart thereof.

Place.
It grows on Moors, Bogs, and Watery places in many parts of this Land.

Time.
It is green all the Summer; and the Root only abides in Winter.

Virtues and Use.
This has all the Virtues mentioned in the former Ferns, and is much more
effectual than they both for inward and outward Griefs; and is accounted
singular good in Wounds, Bruises Wounds, Bruises,
or the like, the Decoction to be drunk, or boiled into an Ointment or Oil, as
a Balsom of Balm, and so it is singular good against Bruises, and Bones broken
Broken Bones, Chollick, Spleen, Ruptures, Disury.
or out of joint, and gives much eas to the Chollick, and Splenetick Diseases;
as also for Ruptures, or burstings. The Decoction of the Root in white Wine
provokes Urine exceedingly and cleanses the Bladder and passages of Urine.

Featherfew.
Description.
COmmon Featherfew has many large fresh green Leaves very much torn or cut on
the edges: The Stalks are hard and round set with many such like Leaves, but
somewhat smaller, and at the tops stand many single Flowers upon several small
Footstalks, consisting of many small white Leaves, standing round about a yellow
thrum in the middle. The Root is somewhat hard and short, with many strong
Fibers at it: The scent of the whole Plant is very strong, and stuffing, and the
taste very bitter.

Place.
This grows wild in some places of this Land; but it is for the most part
nourished in Gardens.

Time.
It Flowreth in the Months of June and July.

Virtues and Use.
It is chiefly used for the Diseases of the Mother, whether it be the
strangling or rising of the Mother, Mother, Womb, Terms, provokes,
or Hardness or Inflammations of the same, applied outwardly thereunto: or a
Decoction of the Flowers in Wine with a little Nutmeg or Mace put therein, and
drunk often in a day, and is an approved Remedy to bring down Women's Courses
speedily, and helps to expel the dead Birth and Afterbirth. Dead Birth,
Afterbirth,
For a Woman to sit over the hot fumes of the Decoction of the Herb made in
Water or Wine is effectual also for the same; and in some cases to apply the
boiled Herb warm to the privy parts. The Decoction thereof made, with some Sugar
or Honey put thereto, is used by many with good success, to help the Cough,
Cough, Reins, Bladder, Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, Sadness.
and stuffing of the Chest by cold, as also to clens the Reins and Bladder, and
help to expel the stone in them. The Powder of the Herb taken in Wine, with
some Oximel purges both Choler and Phlegm, and is available for those that are
short winded; and are troubled with Melancholy and Heaviness or sadness of the
Spirits. It is very effectual for all pains in the Head coming of a cold cause,
the Herb being bruised, and applied to the crown of the Head; as also for a
Vertigo, Headache, Vertigo,
that is a turning or swimming in the Head. The Decoction thereof drunk warm,
and the Herb bruised with a few Corns of Bay Salt and applied to the Wrists
before the coming of the Ague Ague, Deformety of the skin
Fits, does take them away. The distilled Water takes away Freckles, and other
Spots and Deformities in the Face. The Herb bruised and heated on a Tyle, with
some Wine to moisten it, or fried with a little Wine Wind,
and Oil in a frying Pan, and applied warm outwardly to the places, helps the
wind and Chollick Chollick, Opium.
in the lower part of the Belly: It is an especial Remedy against Opium taken
too liberally.

Venus commands the Herb and has commanded it to succor her Sisters [ Women]
and to be a general strengthner of their Wombs and remedy such infirmities, as
a careless Midwife has there caused, if they will be but pleased to make use
of her Herb boiled in white Wine, and drink the Decoction, it cleanses the
Womb, expels the Afterbirth, does the Woman all the good she can desire of
an Herb. And if any grumble because they cannot get the Herb in Winter, tell
them if they pleas they may make a Syrup of it in Summer.

Fennel.
EVery Garden affords this so plentifully, that it needs no Description.

Virtues and Use.
Fennel is good to break wind, Wind, Disury, Stone, Increases Milk, Amends
Milk, Hiccough, Loathing of meat, Venomous Beasts, Poison, Mushroms
Obstructions in the Liver, Spleen, and Call, Yellow Jaundice, Gout, Cramp,
Wheesing, Terms provokes, After Delivery, Clens, open, Fatness, Eyes.
to provoke Urine, and eas the pains of the Stone, and help to break it. The
Leaves or Seed boiled in Barley Water and drunk is good for Nurses to encreas
their Milk and make it more wholesome for the Child: The Leaves, or rather the
Seed boiled in Water staieth the Hiccough, and takes away that loathing which
oftentimes happens to the Stomachs of Sick, and Feverish Persons, and allayeth
the heat thereof. The Seed boiled in Wine and drunk, is good for those that are
bitten by Serpents, or have eaten Poison full Herbs or Mushroms: The Seed and
the Root much more helps to open Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Gall,
and thereby helps the painful and windy swellings of the Spleen, and the
yellow Jaundice, as also the Gout and Cramps. The Seed is of good use in
Medicines to help shortness of breath, and Wheesing by stopping of the Lungs.
It helps also to bring down the Courses and to clens the parts after
delivery. The Roots are of most use in Physic Drinks and Broths that are taken
to clens the Blood, to open Obstructions of the Liver to provoke Urine, and
amend the ill color in the Face after Sickness, and to cause a good habit
through the Body: Both Leaves, Seeds, and Roots hereof are much used in Drinks,
or Broths, to make people more spare and lean that are too fat: The distilled
Water of the whole Herb or the condensate Juice dissolved, but especially the
Natural Juice that in hot Countries issues out thereof of its own accord,
dropped into the Eyes, cleanses them from mists and films that hinder the
fight. The sweet Fennel is much weaker in Physical uses, than the common
Fennel. The wild Fennel is stronger and hotter than the tame; and therefore most
powerful against the Stone, but not so effectual to encreas Milk, because of its
dryness.

One good old fashion is not yet quite left off, viz. To boil Fennel with Fish,
for it consumes that Phlegmatic homot which Fish. most plentifully afford and
annoy the body by, therefore it is a most fit. Herb for that purpose though few
that use it know why or wherefore they do it, I supoose the Reason of its
benefit this way is because it is an Herb of Mercury and under Virgo, and
therefore bears Antipathy to Pisces. Dill is also an Herb of Mercury, which I
forgot to certify you of before.

Sow-Fennel, or HogsFennel.
Description.
THe common Sow-Fennel has diverse branched Stalks of thick and somewhat long
Leaves, three for the most part joined together at, a place, among which riseth^
^rested strait Stalk, less than Fennel with some Joints thereon, and Leaves
growing there^^, and toward the top some Branches issuing from thence, likewise
on the tops of the St^k and Branches stand diverse tufts of yellow Flowers,
where after grow somewhat flat, thin, and yellowish Seed bigger than Fennel
Seed: The Root grows great and deep with many other parts and Fibers about
them, of a strong scent like hot Brimstone and yielding ^orth a yellowish Milk,
or clammy Juice almost like a Gum.

Place.
It grows plentifully in the Salt low Marshes near by Feaversham in Kent.

Time.
It Flowreth and seedeth in July and August.

Virtues and Use.
The Juice of Sow-Fennel (says Dioscorides and Galen) used with Vinegar and
Rosewater, or the Juice with alittle Euphorbium put to the Nose, helps those
that are troubled with the Lethargy, the Frenzy, Lethargy, Frenzy, Vertigo,
FallingSicknoss, Headache, Palsy, Sciatica, Cramp, Sinews, Cramp, shortness of
breath, Winds Spleen,
the turning or Giddiness of the Head the FallingSickness, long and inveterate
Headache, the Palsy, Sciatica, and the Cramp, and generally all the Diseases of
the Sinews, used with Oil and vinegar. The Juice dissolved in Wine, or put into
an Eg, is good for the Cough, or shortness of Breath and for those that are
troubled with the Wind in the Body^ It purges the Belly gently, helps the
hardness of the Spleen, gives eas to Women that have sore travall in
Childbirth, Childbirth Reins, Bladder, Womb, Ears, Hollow Teeth, Ulcers, broken
Bones, Thorns, Wounds.
and eases the pains of the Reins and Bladder, and also of the Womb. A little
of the Juice dissolved in Wine and dropped into the Ears, eases much of the
pains in them; and put into an hollow Tooth, eases the pain thereof. The Root
is less effectual in all the aforesaid Diseases: yet the Powder of the Root
cleanses foul Ulcers being put into them; and takes out Splinters of broken
Bones or other things in the Flesh and heals them up perfectly, as also it
dries up old and inveterate running Sores, and is of admirable Virtue in all
green Wounds.

Figwort, or Throatwort.
Description.
THe common great Figwort sends forth diverse great, strong, hard, square,
brown Stalks three or four Foot high, wherein grow large, hard, and dark green
Leaves, two at a Joint, which are larger and harder than Nettle Leaves, but not
stinging: At the tops of the Stalks stand many purple Elowers set in Husks,
which are somewhat gaping and open, somewhat like those of Water-Betony; after
which come hard round Heads, with a small point in the middle, wherein lie small
brownish Seed. The Root is great, white, and thick, with many branches at it
growing aslope under the upper crust of the Ground, which abides many years
but keeps not his green Leaves in Winter.

Place.
It grows frequently in moist and shadowy Woods, and in the lower parts of
Fields and Meadows.

Time.
It Flowreth about July, and the Seed will be ripe about a Month after the
Flowers are fallen.

Virtues and use.
The Decoction us the Herb taken inwardly, and the bruised Herb applied
outwardly, dissolveth clotted or congealed Blood, Congealed Blood by Wound,
Bruise, or Fall, Kings Evil, Wens, Hemorrhoids, Fundament, Ulcers, Scurff,
Spots, Freckles, Deformity, Leprosy.
within the Body, coming by any Wound, Bruis, or Fall; and is no less effectual
for the Kings Evil, or any other Knots, Kernels, Bunches or Wens growing in the
Flesh whersoever, and for the Hemorrhoids or Piles, or other Knobs or Kernels
which sometimes grow about the Fundament: An Ointment made hereof, may be used
at all times when the fresh Herb is not to be had. The distilled Water of the
whole Plant, Roots and all is used for the same purposes, and dries up the
superfluous virulent moisture of hollow and corroding Ulcers; It takes away
all redness, Spots and Freckles in the Face, as also the Scurff or any foul
Deformity therein, and the Leprosy likewise.

Some Latin Authors call it Cervicria be, cause it is apropriated to the Neck,
and we Throatwort because it is apropriated to the Throat: Venus owns the Herb,
and the Celestial Bull will not deny it, therefore a better Remedy cannot be
for the Kings Evil, because the Moon that rules the Diseas is exalted there, nor
for any Diseas in the Neck, the rest of the Diseases specified, you may if you
look see a very good reason for their cure by this Herb.

Filipendula, or Dropwort.
Description
THis sends forth many Leaves some bigger, some lesser, set on each side of a
middle Rib, and each of them dented about the edges, somewhat resembling wild
Tansie, or rather Agrimony, but harder in handling, among which rises up one
or more Stalks two or three Foot high, with like Leaves growing thereon, and
sometimes also divided into other Branches spreading at the top into many white
sweet smelling Flowers, consisting of five Leaves apiece with some threads in the
middle of them standing together in a tuft or Umbel each upon a small Footstalk,
which after they have been open and blown a good while do fall away, and in
their places appear final, round chaffy heads like Buttons wherein are the
chaffy Seed set and placed. The Root consists of many small black tuberous
pieces, fastened together by many small long blackish Strings which run from one
to another.

Place.
It grows in many places of this Land, in the Corners of dry Fields and
Meadows, and their Hedge Sides.

Time.
They Flower in June and July, and their Seed is ripe in August.

Virtues and Use.
It is very effectual to open the passages of the Urine, and help the
Strangury, Disury, Strangury, Reins, Bladder, Stone, Gravel,
and all other pains of the Bladder and Reins, helping mightily to expel the
Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder, and the Gravel also, and these are done by
taking the Roots in Powder, or a Decoction of them in white Wine, whereunto a
little Honey is added: The same also helps to expel the Afterbirth. The Roots
made into Powder and mixed with Honey into the form of an Electuary does much
help them whose Stomachs are swollen, dissolving and breaking the Wind Wind,
Lungs, Wheersing, Hoarceness Cough, Phlegm.
which was the cause thereof, and is also very effectual for all diseases of the
Lungs, as shortness of breath, wheesings, hoarsness of the Throat, and the
Cough, and to expectorate cold Phlegm, or any other parts thereabouts.

It is called Drop^ort because it helps such as piss by drops.

The Yellow VVater-Flag, OR, Flower-de-luce.
Description.
THis grows like the Flower-de-luces, but it has much longer, and narrower
sad green Leaves joined together in that fashion; the Stalk also grows
oftentimes as high, bearing small yellow Flowers, shaped like the Flower-de-luce
with three falling Leaves, and other three arched that cover their Bottoms; but
instead of the three upright Leaves as the Flower-de-luce has, this has only
three short pieces standing in their places, after which succeed thick and long
three square Heads containing in each part somewhat big and Flat Seed like to
those of the Flower-de-luces: The Root is long and slender, of a pale brownish
color on the outside, and of a Hoar flesh color on the inner side, with many
hard fibers thereat, and very harsh in taste.

Place.
It usually grows in watery Ditches, Ponds, Lakes, and More sides which are
always overflown with water.

Time.
It flowreth in July, and the Seed is ripe in August.

Virtues and use.
The Root of this Water-Flag is very astringent, cooling, and drying, and
thereby helps all Lasks and Fluxes, whether of Blood or Humors, as bleeding at
Mouth, Nose, or other parts, bloody Fluxes, and the immoderate Flux of Women's
Courses. The distilled water of the whole Herb, Flowers, and Roots is a
Sovereign good Remedy for watering Eyes, both to be dropped into them, and to
have Clothes or Spunges werted therein and applied to the Forehead; It also
helps the Spots or Blemishes that happen in or about the Eyes, or in any
other parts: The said water fomented on Swellings and hot Inflammations of
Women's sore Breasts, upon Cankers also, and those spreading Ulcers called Noli
me Tangere, Binds, Cools, Dries, Flux, Bloodyflux Bleeding, Terms stops, Eyes,
Spots, Blemishes, Inflammations, Sore Breasts, Cankers, Ulcers, Noli me tangere.
does much good; It helps also soul Ulcers in the privy parts of man or
woman, or elsewhere. An Ointment made of the Flowers is better for these
external applications.

Take notice that the Moon rules the Plant and then I have done.

Flaxweed, or Toadflax.
Description.
OUr common Flaxweed. has diverse Stalks full fraught with long and narrow blue
or Ash-colored Leaves, and from the middle of them almost upward stored with a
number of pale yellow Flowers, of a strong unpleasant scent, with deeper yellow
mouths, and blackish flat Seeds in round Heads. The Root is somewhat woody and
white, especially the main downright one, with many fibers, abiding many years,
shooting forth Roots every way round about, and new Branches every year.

Place.
This grows throughout this Land, both by the way sides in Meadows, as also
by Hedge sides, and upon the sides of Banks and Borders of Fields.

Time.
It Flowreth in Summer, and the Seed is ripe usually before the end of August.

Virtues and use.
This is frequently used to provoke Urine being stopped, and to spend the
abundance of those watery Humors by Urine which cause the Dropsy. Disury,
Dropsy, Obstruction of the Liver, yellow Jaundice, Dead Child and Afterbirth
Inflamationes, Eyes, Ulcers, Cancers, Fistulaes, Leprosy, Scabs, Pimples,
Freckles.
The Decoction of the Herb both Leaves and Flowers in Wine, taken and drunk does
somewhat move the Belly downwards, opens Obstructions of the Liver, and
helps the yellow Jaundice, expels Poison, provokes Women's Courses,,
drives forth the dead Child, and Afterbirth. The Distilled water of the Herb
and Flowers is effectual for all the same purposes, especially being drunk with
a dram of the Powder of the Seeds, or Bark of the Root of Walwort and a little
Cinnamon for certain days together, is held a singular Remedy for the Dropsy:
The Juice of the Herb or the distilled Water dropped into the Eyes is a certain
Remedy for all heat, Inflammations and redness in them. The Juice or water put
into foul Ulcers whither they be Cancrous or Fistulous, with tents rouled
therein, or the parts washed or injected therewith cleanses them thoroughly from
the bottom, and heals them up safely. The same Juice or Water also cleanses
the Skin wonderfully of all sorts of deformity thereof, as Lepry, Morphew,
Scurff, Wheals, Pimples, or any other Spots or Marks in the Skin, applied of it
self, or used with some Powder of Lupines.

Mars owns the Herb, in Sussex we call it Gall-wort, and lay it in our Chickens
water, to cure them of the Gall I think, I am sure it releevs them when they
are drooping.

Fleawort.
Description.
THe ordinary Fleawort rises up with a Stalk two Foot high, or more, full of
Joints and Branches on every side up to the top, and at every Joint two small
long and narrow whitish green Leaves somewhat hairy: At the tops of every Branch
stand diverse small short scaly or chaffy Heads, out of which come forth small
whitish yellow threads, like to those of the Plantane Herbs, which are the
Bloomings or Flowers. The Seed enclosed in those Heads is small and shining
while it is Fresh very like unto Fleas, both for color and bigness, but
turning black when it grows old. The Root is not long but white, hard, and
woody, perishing every year and rising again of its own Seed for diverse years
if it be suffered to shed: The whole Plant is somewhat whitish and hairy, smelling
somewhat like Rozin.

There is another sort hereof differing not from the former in the manner of
growing, but only that his Stalk and Branches being somewhat greater do a little
more bow down to the ground: The Leaves are somewhat larger; the Heads somewhat
lesser, the Seed alike; and the Root and Leaves abide all the Winter, and perish
not as the former.

Place.
The first grows only in Gardens, the second plentifully in Fields that are
near the Sea.

Time.
They Flower in July, or thereabouts.

Virtues and use.
The Seed fried and so taken staieth the Flux Flux, Corrosion, Chollerick
Humors,
or Lask of the Belly, and the corrosions that come by reason of hot,
Chollerick, Sharp, and malignant Humors or by the too much purging of any
violent Medicine, as Scammony or the like. The Muccilage of the Seed made with
Rose Water, and a little Sugar Candy put thereto is very good in all hot Agues
and burning Fevers, Agues, Fevers, Inflammation, Thirst, Hoarceness Salt
Humors, Pleuresie,
and other Inflammations to cool the thirst, and lenify the dryness and
roughness of the Tongue and Throat. It helps also hoarsness of the voice, and
Diseases of the Breast and Lungs caused by heat, or sharp salt humors, and the
Pluresie also. The Muccilage of the Seed made in Plantane Water whereunto the
Yolk of an Egg or two, and a little Populeon is put, is a most safe and sure
Remedy to eas the sharpness, prickings, and pains of the Hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids, Headache, Megrim, Apostums, Blains, Wheals, Pushes, Purples, Gout,
Joints, Sciatica, Nipples, Sore Breasts, Ears, Worms,
or Piles, if it be laid on a cloth and bound thereto. It helps also all
Inflammations in any parts of the Body and the pains that come thereby, as the
Headache and Megrim, and all hot Imposthumes or Swellings, or breakings out of
the Skin, as Blains, Wheals, Pushes, Purples, and the likes as also the pains
of the Joints, and of those that are out of joint; the pains of the Gout and
Sciatica, the Bursting of young Children, and the swelling of the Navel, applied
with Oil of Roses and Vinegar. It is also very good to heal the Nipples and
Sore Breasts of Women being often applied thereunto. The Juice of the Herb with
a little Honey put into the Ears helps the running of them, and the Worms
breeding in them: The same also mixed with Hogs Greas, and applied to corrupt
and filthy Ulcers Ulcers.
and Sores, cleanses and heals them.

The Herb is cold and dry, Saturnine, I suppose it obtained the name Fleawort
because the Seeds are so like Fleas.

Flixweed.
Description.
THis rises up with a round upright hard Stalk four or five Foot high, spread
into sundry Branches, whereon grow many grayish green Leaves very finely cut and
severed into a number of short and almost round parts. The Flowers are very
small and yellow growing Spike fashion, after which come very small, long Pods,
with very small yellowish Seed in them. The Root is long and woody perishing
every year.

There is another sort differing in nothing save only it has somewhat broader
Leaves: They have a strong evil savor being smelt unto, and are of a drying
taste.

Place.
They grow wild in the Fields by Hedgsides, and Highways, and among rubbish,
and in many other place.

Time.
They Flower and Seed quickly after, namely in June and July.

Virtues and use.
Both the Herb and Seed of Flixweed is of excellent use to stay the Flux Flux,
Bleeding, Bloody Flux, Terms stops, broken Bones, Members disioynted.
or Lask of the Besly being drunk in Water wherein gads of Steel heated have
been often quenched; and is no less effectual for the said purpose than
Plantane or Comfry, and to restrain any other Flux of Blood in man or Woman, as
also to consolidate Bones broken or out of Joint. The Juice thereof drunk in
Wine, or the Decoction of the Herb drunk, does kill the Worms in the Stomach or
Belly, or the Worms warms, Sores, Ulcers.
that grow in putrid and filthy Ulcers; And made into a Salve does quickly heal
all old sores, how foul or Malignant soever they be. The distilled water of the
Herb works the same effects although somewhat weaker, yet is a fair Medicine,
and more acceptable to be taken.

It is called Flixweed because it cures the Flux, and for its uniting broken
Bones, etc. Paracelsus extols it to the Skies. It is fitting Syrups, Ointments,
and Plasters of it were kept in your Houses.

Flower-de-luce.
Description.
THis is so well known, being nursed up in most Gardens, that I shall not need
to spend time in writing a Description thereof.

Time.
The Flaggy kinds thereof have the most Physical uses; the Dwarf kinds thereof
flower in April, the greater sorts in May.

Virtues and Use.
The Juice or Decoction of the green Roots of the Flaggy kind of
Flower-de-luce, with a little Honey drunk, does purge and clens the Stomach of
gross and tough Phlegm and Choler therein; It helps the Jaundice and the
Dropsy Stomach, Phlegm, Choler, Jaundice, Dropsy,
by evacuating those humors both upwards and downwards, and because it somewhat
hurts the Stomach, is not to be taken but with Honey and Spicknard. The same
being drunk does eas the pains and torments of the Belly and Sides, Belly,
Sides, Agues, Liver, Spleen, Stones, Convulsion, Cramp, Venomous Beasts,
Disury, Chollick, Termsprovokes, Cough,
the shaking of Agues, the Diseases of the Liver and Spleen, the Worms in the
Belly, the Stone in the Reins, Convulsions or Cramps that come of cold Humors,
it also helps those whose Seed passes from them unawars; It is a Remedy
against the bitings and stingings of Venomous Creatures being boiled in Water
and Vinegar and drunk: Being boiled in Wine and drunk it provokes Urine,
helps the Chollick, brings down Women's Courses; and made up into a Pessary
with Honey, and put up into the Body, draws forth the dead Child. It is much
commended against the Cough to expectorate tough Flengm; It much eases pains
in the Head, and procures sleep: Being put into the Nostrils it procures
Neesing, Sneesing,
and thereby purges the Head of Phlegm: The Juice of the Root applied to the
Piles or Hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids, Toothach,
gives much eas. The Decoction of the Roots gargled in the Mouth eases the
Toothach, and helps a Stinking breath. The Oil called Oleum Irinum if it be
rightly made of the great broad Flag Flower-de-luce (and not of the great
Bulbous blue Flower-de-luce as is used by some Apothecaries) and Roots of the
same of the Flaggy kinds is very effectual to warm and comfort all cold Joints
and Sinews, as also the Gout and Sciatica, Joints, Sinews, Gout, Sciatica,
womb, Rhewm, Breast, Wounds Ulcers, Fistulaes, Cankers.
and mollisieth, dissolveth, and consumes Tumors or Swellings in any part of
the Body, as also of the Matrix: It helps the Cramp and Convulsion of the
Sinews: The Head and Temples anointed therewith helps the Catark or thin Rhewm
distilling from thence; and used upon the Breast or Stomach, helps to
extenuate the cold tough Phlegm. It helps also the pains and noise in the
Ears, and the stench of the Nostrils. The Root it self either green or in
Powder helps to clens, heal, and incarnate Wounds, and to cover the naked
Bones with Flesh again that Ulcers have made bare; and is also very good to
clens and heal up Fistulaes and Cankers that are hard to be cured.

Fluellin.
Description.
THis shoots forth many long Branches partly lying upon the Ground, and part
standing upright, set with almost round Leaves, yet a little pointed, and
sometimes more long than round, without order thereon, somewhat hoary, and of an
evil greenish white color; at the Joints all along the Stalks, and with the
Leaves come forth small Flowers one at a place, upon a very small short
Footstalk, gaping somewhat like Snapdragons, or rather like Toadflax, with the
upper Jaw of a yellow color, and the lower of a Purplish, with a small heel or
Spur behind, after which come small round Heads, containing small black Seed.
The Root is small and threddy, dying every year, and raises it self again of
its own sowing.

There is another sort of Lluellin which has longer Branches wholly trailing
upon the ground two or three foot long, and sometimes more, thinner set with
Leaves thereon, upon small Footstalks: The Leaves are a little larger and somewhat
round, and cornered sometimes in some places on the edges; but the lower part of
them being the broadest, has on each side a small point, making it seem as if
they were Ears, somewhat hairy but not hoary, and of a better green color than
the former; The Flowers come forth like the former, but the colors therein are
more white than yellow, and the Purple not so fair: It is a larger Flower, and
so are the Seed, and Seed Vessels: The Root is like the other, and perishes
every year.

Place.
They grow in diverse Corn Fields, and in borders about them, and in other
fertile Grounds, about Southfleet in Kent abundantly, at Buckworth, Hamerton,
and Richwersworth in Huntingtonshire; and in diverse other places.

Time.
They are in Flower about June and July, and the whole Plant is dry and withered
before August be done.

Virtues and Use.
The Leaves bruised and applied with Barley Meal to watering Eyes Eyes, Flux,
that are hot and inflamed by defluxions from the Head, does very much help
them, as also the Fluxes of Blood or Humors, as the Lask, Bloody Flux, Bloody
Flux, Terms stops,
Women's Courses, and staieth all manner of bleeding at Nose, Mouth, or any
other place, or that comes by any Bruis, or Hurt, or bursting a Vein; and
wonderfully it helps all those inward parts that need consolidating or
strengthening: and is no less effectual both to heal and close green Wounds,
Wounds, Ulcers, Cankers,
as to clens or heal all foul or old Ulcers, fretting or spreading Cankers or
the like.

Bees are industrious and go abroad to gather Honey from each Plant and Flower,
but Drones lie at home, and eat up what the Bees have taken pains for; Just so
do our College of Physicians, lie at home and domineer, and suck out the
Sweetness of other Men's Labors and Studies, themselves being as ignorant in the
Knowledge of Herbs as a Child of four years old, as I can make appear to any
Rational man by their last Dispensatory, now then to hide their Ignorance,
there is not a readier way in the World, than to hide Knowledge from their
Country men, that so no Body might be able so much as to smell out their
Ignorance, when Simples were more in use men's Bodies were in better health by
far than now they are, or shall be if the College can help it. The truth is,
this Herb is of a fine cooling, drying quality, and an Ointment or Plaster of
it, might do a Man a courtesy that has any hot virulent Sores, it is admirable
for the Ulcers of the French Pox, and being a gallant Antivenerian Medicine,
under the Dominion of Saturn, if taken inwardly may cure the Diseas. It was at
first called Foemale Speedwel, but a Shentle man of wales whose Nose was almost
eaten off with the Pox, and so near the matter, that the Docters commanded it
to be cut off, being cured by only the Use of this Herb, to honor the Herb for
saving his Nose whole, gave it one of her own Country names, LLUELLIN.

Foxglove.
Description.
THis has many long and broad Leaves lying upon the Ground dented about the
edges, a little soft or woolly, and of a hoary green color among which rile up
sometimes sundry Stalks, but one very often bearing such Leaves thereon from the
bottom to the middle, from whence to the top it is stored with large and long
hollow reddish Purple Flowers, a little more long and eminent at the lower edg,
with some white Spots within them, one above another, with small green Leaves at
every one, but all of them turning their. Heads one way and hanging downwards,
having some threads also in the middle, from whence rise round Heads pointed
sharp at the ends, wherein small brown Seed lies. The Roots are many small
Huskie Fibers, and some greater strings among them; The Flower has no scent;
but the Leaves have a bitter hot taste.

Place.
It grows on the dry sandy Grounds for the most part, and as well on the
higher as lower places under Hedg-sides in almost every County of this Land.

Time.
It seldom Flowreth before July, and the Seed is ripe in August.

Virtues and use.
This Herb is familiarly and frequently used by the Italians to heal any fresh
or green Wound, Wounds,
the Leaves being but bruised and bound thereon; and the Juice thereof is also
used in old Sores, to clens, dry, and heal Clens, dry Heal,
them. The Decoction hereof made up with some Sugar or Honey is available to
clens and purge the Body, both upwards and downwards sometimes of tough Phlegm
and clammy Humors and to open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; Obstruction
of the Liver and Spleen, Kings Evil, Fallingsickness, Scabby, Heads.
It has been found by experience to be available for the Kings Evil, the Herb
bruised and applied; or an Ointment made with the Juice thereof and so used:
And a Decoction of two handfuls thereof with four Ounces of Polipody in Ale,
has been found by late experience to cure diverse of the Fallingsickness, that
have been troubled with it above twenty years.

My self am confident that an Ointment of it is one of the best Remedies for a
Scabby Head that is.

Fumitory.
Description.
OUr common Fumitory is a tender sappy Herb, sending forth from one square
slender weak Stalk and leaning downwards on all sides many Branches two or
three foot long, with finely cut and jagged Leaves of a whitish or rather
Bluish, Seagreen color: At the tops of the Branches stand many small Flowers,
as it were in a long spike one above another, made like little Birds of a
reddish Purple color with whitish Bellies: After which come small round Husks
containing small black Seed. The Root is yellow, small, and not very long, full of
Juice while it is green But quickly perishing with the ripe Seed: In the Corn
Fields in Cornwall this bears white Flowers.

Place.
It grows in the Corn Fields almost every where as well as in Gardens.

Time.
It Flowreth in May for the most part, and the Seed ripeneth shortly after.

Virtues and Use.
The Juice or Syrup made thereof, or the Decoction made in Whey by it self,
with some other purging or opening Herbs and Roots to cause it to work the
better, (it self being but weak) is very effectual for the Liver and Spleen,
Liver, Spleen, Choler, Adust Melancholy, Madness, Forgetfulness, Jaundice,
yellow and black,
opening the Obstructions thereof and clarifying the Blood from Saltish,
Chollerick, and Adust Humors, which cause Lepry, Scabs, Tetters, and Itches, and
such like breakings out of the Skin, and after the Purging does strengthen all
the inward parts; it is good also against the yellow Jaundice, and spends it
by Urin, which it procures in abundance. The Powder of the dried Herb given
for some time together cures Melancholy, but the Seed is strongest in
operation for all the former Diseases. The dististilled Water of the Herb is
also of good effect in the former Diseases, and conduces much against the
Plague and Pestilence, Pestilence,
being taken with good Treacle. The Distilled Water also, with a little Water
and Honey of Roses helps all the Sores of the Mouth or Throat, Sore Mouth and
Throat, Eyes,
being gargled often therewith. The Juice dropped into the Eyes clears the
Sight, and takes away redness and other defects in them, although it procure
some pain for the present and cause Tears. Dioscorides says it hinders any
fresh springing of hairs Hairs,
on the Eyelids (also they be pulled away) if the Eyelids be anointed with the
Juice hereof with Gum Arabic dissolved therein. The Juice of Fumitory and Docks
mingled with Vinegar, and the places gently washed or wet therewith, cures all
sorts of Scabs, Pimples, Itches, Wheals, Scabs, Itch, Pimples, Wheals,
or Pushes which arise on the Face or Hands, or any other part of the Body.

Saturn owns the Herb and presents it to the World as a Cure for his own
Diseases, and a strengthner of the parts of the Body he rules: If by my
Astrological Judgment of Diseases, from the Decombiture, you find Saturn Author
of the Diseas, or if by Direction from a Nativity you fear a Saturnine Diseas
approaching, you may by this Herb prevent it in the one, and cure it in the
other; and therefore it is fit you keep a Syrup of it always by you.

The Furs-Bush.
THis is so well known, as well by this name, as in some Countries by the name
Gors, that I shall not need to write any Description thereof, my intent being to
teach my Country men what they know not, rather than to tell them again of that
which is generally known before.

Place.
They are known to grow on dry barren Heaths, and other wast gravelly or sandy
grounds in all Countries of this Land.

Time.
They also Flower in the Summer Months.

Virtues and use.
They are hot and dry good to open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen.
Obstructions, Liver, Spleen, Yellow Jaundice, Disury, Gravel, Stone.
A Decoction made with the Flowers thereof has been found effectual against the
Jaundice, as also to provoke Urine, and clens the Kidneys from Gravel or Stones
ingender'd in them.

It is a Plant of Mars, and does all this by Sympathy.

Garlic.
THe offensivenes of the breath of him that has eaten Garlic will lead you
by the Nose to the knowledge hereof, and (in stead of a description (direct you
to the place where it grows in Gardens, which kinds are the best and most
Phisical.

Virtues and use.
This was anciently accounted the Poormans, Treacle, it being a remedy for all
diseases or hurts (except those which it self breeds) It provokes Urine Urine,
Terms prouokes, Mad Dogs Venemount Beasts, Worms,
and women's Courses, helps the biting of a Mad Dog and of other Venomous
Creatures kills Worms in Childern, cutteth and avoydeth tough phlegm purges
the head, helps the Lethargy, Lethargy, Phlegm, Pestilence, Aposlums, Mineral
Vapors, Stinking Vapors, Henbane, Hemlock,wolfbane, Dropsy, Cramps,
Convulsions, Faling-sickness.
is a good preservative against, a remedy for any Plague sore, or soul Ulcer:
takes away spots and blemishes in the Skin, eases pains of the ears ripeneth
and breaks Impestumes or other swelling: And for all these diseases the
Onyons are also effectual; But the Garlic has some more peculiar virtues
besides the former: Vi^ It has a special quality to discuss the
inconveniences coming by corn pt Agues or Mineral Vapors or by drinking
corrupt and stinking waters; As elso by taking of Wolfbane, Henbane, Hemlock,
or other poysonfull and dangerous herbs. It is also held good in Hydropick
diseases, the Jaundice, fallingsickness, Cramps, Convulsiers, the piles or
Hemorrhoids or other cold diseases.

My Author quotes here many ^^^ases this is good for, but conceals it services:
its heat is very vehement, and al vehement hot things send up but ill favored
vapors to the brain; in chollerick men 'twil ad fuel to the fire, in men
oppressed by melancholy t'wll attenuate the humor and send up strange sancies
and as strange visions to the head, therefore let it be taken in wardly with
great moderation, outwardly you may maken ^^^ bold with it.

Mars owns the herb.

Germander.
Description.
COmmon Germander shoots forth sundry stalks with small and somewhat round
leaves, dented about the edges: The Flowers stand at the tops, of a deep purple
color: The Root is composed of diverse sprigs, which shoot forth a great way
round about, quickly overspreading a ground.

Place.
It grows usually with us in Gardens

Time.
And flowreth in June or July.

Virtues and use.
This taken with Honey (says Dioscorides) is a remedy for Coughs for hardness
of the Spleen, Cough, Spleen, Disury, Dropsy, Terms provokes, Dead child,
Poison, ulcers,
and difficulty of Urine,and helps those that are fallen into a Dropsy,
especially at the beginning of the diseas, a Decction being made thereof when it
is green and drunk: It also brings down Women's Courses and expels the dead
child: It is most effectual against the poison of al Serpents, being drunk in
Wine and the bruised herb outwardly applied used with Honey,it denseth old and
soul Ulcers, and made into an Oil and the Eyes anointed therewith, takes away
their dimness and moystness: It is like wise good for the pains in the sides:
and Cramps. Cramps.
The Decetion thereof taken for some days together, drives away and cures
both Tertian and Quartan Agues. Agues, Falling sickness, Headache, Melancholy,
dullness of Spirit, Convulsion Palsy, Yellow, Jaundice, Worms.
It is also good against all diseases of the brain as continual Headache Falling
Sickness, Melancholy Drowsines and Dulnes of spirit, Convulsions and Palseys. A
d^^m of the seed taken in Powder purges by Urine and is good against the
yellow Jaundice. The Juice of the leaves dropped into the ears kills the
worms in them: The tops thereof when they are in flower steeped twenty four
hours in a draught of white Wine and drunk, kills worms in the belly. It is
a most prevalent Herb of Mercury, and strengthens the brain and apprehention
exceedingly; you may see what humane virtues are under Mercury in the latter
end of my Ephemeris for 1651. strengthen them when weak, relieve them, when
drooping, by this Herb.

Stinking Gladwin.
Description.
THis is one of the kinds of Flower-deluces, having diverse Leaves rising from
the Roots very like a Flower-de-luce, but that they are sharp edged on both
sides, and thicker in the middle, of a deeper green color, narrower and
sharper pointed and of a strong ill scent if they be bruised between the
fingers: In the middle rises up a reasonable strong Stalk a yard high at least,
bears 3.or 4 Flowers at the top made somewhat like the Flowers of the
Flower-de-luce with three upright Leaves of a dead Purplish Ash Color with
some Veins discolored in them, the other three do not fall down, nor the three
other small ones are so arched nor cover the lower leaves as the Flower-de-luce
does, but stand loose, or asunder from them: After they are past, there come up
three square hard Husks opening wide into three parts when they are ripe,
wherein lie reddish seed, t^rning black when it has abidden long: The Root is
like that of the Flower-de-luce but reddish on the outside, and whitish within,
very sharp and hot in taste, of as evil a scent as the leaves.

Place.
This grows as well on the upland grounds as also in moist places, in woods
and shadowy places by the Sea side in many places of this Land, and is usually
nursed up in Gardens.

Time.
It flowreth not until July, and the seed is ripe in August or September, yet
the Husks after they are ripe opening themselves, will hold their seeds within
them for 2.or 3. Months, and not shedd them.

Virtues and Use.
It is used by many country people to purge corrupt tough Phlegm and Choler
Phlegm, Choler,
which they do by drinking the decoction of the Roots, and some to make it work
more gently do but infuse the sliced roots in Ale, and some take the leaves Which
seryeth well for the weaker stomachs. The Juice hereof put up, or snuffed up the
nose causes neezing, and draws from the head Head,
much corruption; and the powder thereof does the same: The Powder thereof drunk
in wine, helps those that are troubled with Cramps, and Convulsion Cramp,
Convulsion Gout, Sciatica, Belly^ ach, Strangury, Fluxes,
or With the Gout or Sciatica and gives eas to those that have any griping
pains in their body or belly, and helps those that have the Strangury: It is
given With much profit to those that have had long Fluxes by the sharp and evil
quality of humors, which it stays having first cleansed and purged them by the
drying and binding property therein. The Root boiled in wine and drunk does
effectually procure women's courses, and used as a Pessary works the same
effects, but causes Abortion in women with child. Terms provokes,
Disury,
Half a dram of the seed beaten to powder and taken in wine does speedily cause
one to pis which otherwis cannot: The same taken with vinegar, dessolveth the
hardness and swellings of the spleen. Spleen, wounds, Splinters, Thorns, broken
Bones,
The Root is very effectual in all Wounds, and specially of the head, as also
to draw forth any splinters, Thorns, Broken bones, or any other thing sticking
in the flesh without causing pain, being used with a little Verdigreese and
Honey, and the great Centaury Root: The same boiled in Vinegar and laid upon
any Tumor or Swelling, does very effectually dissolve and consume them, yea
even the swellings of the Throat called the Kings evil. Kings Evil, Itch,
Scabs, Blemishes in the Skin.
The Juice of the Leaves and Roots heals the Itch and all running or spreading
Scabs or Sores, and Blemishes or Scars in the Skin wheresoever they be.

Golden Rod.
Description.
THis rises up with brownish small round Stalks two foot high and sometimes
more, having thereon many narrow and long dark green leaves very seldom with
any dents about the edges, or any strakes or white spots therein, yet they are
sometimes so found; divided at the tops into many small branches, with diverse
small yellow flowers on every one of them, all which are turned one way, and
being ripe do turn into down and are carried away with the wind. The Root
consists of many small fibers which grow not deep in the ground, but abides
all the winter therein, shooting forth new branches every year, the old ones
dying down to the ground.

Place.
It grows in the open places of woods and Copses both moist and dry grounds
in many places of this Land.

Time.
It Flowreth about the Month of July.

Virtues and use.
Arnoldus de villa nova, commends it much against the Stone Stone, Gravel,
Disury, Wounds, Flux, Bloody Flux, Terms stops, Ruptures,
in the Reins and Kidneys, and to provoke Urine in abundance, whereby also the
Gravel or Stone may be avoided. The Decoction of the Herb green or dry, or the
distilled Water thereof is very effectual for inward Bruises,as also to be
outwardly applied, it stays bleedings in any part of the Body, and of Wounds
also, the Fluxes of Humors, the Bloody Flux, and Women's Courses; and is no ^ess
prevalent in all Ruptures or Burstings, being drunk inwardly and outwardly
applied. It is a Severaign Wound Herb, inferior to none, both for inward and
outward Hurts, green Wounds and old Sores and Ulcers ulcers, Sore Mouth and
Throat, Teeth loos.
are quickly cured therewith. It is also of especial use in all Lotions for
Sores or Ulcers in the Mouth, Throat, or privy parts of Man or Woman: The
Decoction also helps to fasten the Teeth that are loos in the Gums.

Venus claims the Herb, and therefore to be sure, it restores Beauty lost.
Beauty lost.


Goutwort, or HerbGerrard.
Description.
THis is a low Herb seldom rising half a yard high, having sundry Leaves
standing on brownish green Stalks by threes, snipped about, and of a strong
unpleasant savor. The Umbels of Flowers are white, and the Seed blackish, the
Root runs in the Ground, quickly taking up a great deal of room.

Place.
It grows by Hedge and Wall sides, and often in the borders or Corners of
Fields, and in Gardens also.

Time.
It Flowreth, and Seedeth about the end of July.

Virtues and use.
Goutwort had not his name for nothing, but upon good experience to help the
cold Gout, and Sciatica, as also Joint Gout, Sciatica, Joints,
aches, and other cold Griefs.

The very bearing of it about one, eases the pains of the Gout, and defends
him that bears it from the Diseas.

Gromel.
OF this I shall briefly describe three kinds which are principally used in
Physic, the Virtues whereof are alike, though somewhat different in their
manner and form of growing.

Description.
The greater Gromel grows up with slender hard and hairy Stalks trailing and
taking Root in the ground as it lies thereon, and parted into many other
smaller Branches with hairy dark green Leaves thereon. At the Joints with the
Leaves come forth very small blew Flowers, and after them hard stony roundish
Seed. The Root is long and woody abiding the Winter and shooting forth fresh
Stalks in the Spring.

The small wild Gromel sends forth diverse upright hard branched Stalks two or
three foot high, full of Joints, at every of which grows small, long, hard,
and rough Leaves, like the former but lesser, among which Leaves come forth small
white Flowers, and after them grayish round Seed like the former. The Root is
not very long, but with many Strings thereat.

The Garden Gromel has diverse upright slender woody hairy Stalks brown and
crested, very little branched, with Leaves like the former, and white Flowers,
after which in rough brown Husks is contained a white hard round Seed shining
like Pearls, and greater than either of the former: The Root is like the first
described, with diverse Branches and Strings thereat, which continues (as the
first does) all Winter.

Place.
The two first grow wild in barren or untilled places, and by the way sides in
many places of this Land. The last is a Nursling in the Gardens of the curious.

Time.
They all Flower from Midsummer unto September sometimes, and in the mean time
the Seed ripeneth.

Virtues and use.
These are accounted to be of as singular force as any other Herb or Seed
whatsoever, to break the Stone, and to avoid it and the Gravel Stone, Gravel,
either in the Reins or Bladder; as also to provoke Urine being stopped, and to
help the Strangury. Strangury,
The Seed is of greatest use, being bruised and boiled in white Wine, or in
Broth, or the like, or the Powder of the Seed taken therein: Two drams of the
Seed in Powder taken with Women's Breast-Milk, is very effectual to procure a
speedy Delivery to such Women as have sore pains in their Travail Travail in
Women.
and cannot be delivered. The Herb it self (when the Seed is not to be had)
either boiled or the Juice thereof drunk, is effectual to all the purposes
aforelaid but not so powerful or speedy in operation.

The Herb belongs to Dame Venus, and therefore if Mars cause the Chollick or
Stone, as usually he does if in Virgo. this is your cure.

Winter Green.
Description.
THis sends forth 7. 8. or 9. Leaves from a small brownish creeping Root,
every one standing upon a long Footstalk, which are almost as broad as long,
round pointed, of a sad green color and hard in handling, and like the Leaf of
a Pear Tree, from whence arises a slender weak Stalk, yet standing upright,
bearing at the top many small, white and sweet smelling Flowers, laid open like
a Star, consisting of five round pointed Leaves, with many yellowish threads
standing in the middle, about a green Head, and a long style with them, which
in time grows to be the Seed Vessel, which being ripe is found five square
with a small point at it, weerin is contained Seed as small as dust.

Place.
It grows seldom in the Fields, but frequently in the Woods Northwards, viz.
In Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Scotland.

Time.
It Flowreth about June or July.

Virtues and Use.
Winter-Green is a singular good Wound Herb and an especial Remedy for to heal
green Wounds Wounds,
speedily, the green Leaves being bruised and applied, or the Juice of them: A
Salve made of the green Herbs stamped or the Juice boiled with Hogs Lard, or
with S^llet Oil and Wax, and some Turpentine added unto it, is a Soveragn
Salve, and highly extolled by the Germans who much use it to heal all manner of
Wounds and Sores. The Herb boiled in Wine and Water and given to drink to them
that have any inward Ulcers in their Kidneys or Neck of the Bladder, Ulcers,
Kidneys, Bladder, Flux, Bloodyflux Terms stops, Inflammations, Cankers,
Fistulaes.
does wonderfully help them: It staieth also all Fluxes whether of Blood or
Humors, as the Lask, Bloody Flux, Women's Courses, and bleeding of Wounds, and
takes away any Inflammation rising upon pains of the Heart. It is no less
helpful for foul Ulcers hard to be cured, as also for Cankers or Fistulaes. The
distilled Water of the Herb does effectually perfrom the same things.

Groundsel.
Description.
OUr common Groundsel has a round green, and somewhat brownish Stalk, spread
toward the top into Branches, set with long and somewhat narrow green Leaves cut
in on the edges, somewhat like the Oak Leaves, but lesser and round at the ends;
at the tops of the Branches stand many small green Heads, out of which grow
small yellow threads or thrums, which are the Flowers, and continue many days
blown in that manner before it pass away into Down, and with the Seed is
carried away in the wind, The Root is small and threddy, and soon perishes and
as soon rises again of its own sowing, so that it may be seen many Months in
the Year, both green, and in Flower and Seed, for it will Spring and Seed twice
in a year at least if it be suffered in a Garden.

Place.
This grows almost every where, as well on the tops of Walls as at the foot
among Rubbish, and untilled grounds, but especially in Gardens.

Time.
It Flowreth as is said before, almost in every Month through the year.

Virtues and use.
The Decoction of the Herb (says Dioscorides) made with Wine and Drunk
`helpeth the pains in the Stomach proceeding of Choler ^holler in the Stomach,
Yellow Jaundice, Fallingsickness, Disury, Gravel, Sciatica, Chollick, Liver,
Terms provokes, women's Breasts, Privy parts, Arteries Joints and Sinews over
heated, Kernels, Wounds in the Sinews, Inflammations in the Eyes;
(which it may well do by a Vomit, as daily experience shows) the Juice
hereof taken in Drink, or the Decoction of it in Ale, gently performs the
same: It is good against the Jaundice and Falling Sickness being taken in Wine,
as also against difficulty of making Water, it provokes Urin, expels Gravel
in the Reins or Kidneys; a dram thereof given in Oximel, after some walking or
stirring the Body; It helps also the Sciatica, griping of the Belly and the
Chollick, helps the defects of the Liver, and provokes Women's Courses. The
fresh Herb boiled and made into a Pultis and appled to the Breasts of Women
that are swollen with pain and heat, as also to the privy parts of Man or
Woman, the Seat, or Fundament, or the Arteries, Joints, and Sinews when they
are inflamed and swollen, does much eas them: and used with some Salt helps to
dissolve Knots or Kernels in any part of the Body. The Juice of the Herb, or
(as Dioscorides says) the Leaves and Flowers with some fine Frankincense in
Powder, used in Wounds of the Body, Nervs, or Sinews, does singularly help to
heal them: The Distilled Water of the Herb performs well all the aforesaid
Cures, but especially for Inflammations or watering of the Eyes by reason of the
Defluxion of Rhewm into them.

This Herb is Venus her Mrs. piece, and is as gallant an Universal Medicine for
all Diseases coming of heat whatsoever they be, or in what part of the Body
soever they lie, as the Sun shines upon; it is very safe and friendly to the
Body of Man, yet causes Vomiting if the Stomach be afflicted, if not, it
purging, and it does it with more gentleness than can be expected. It Is moist
and somewhat cold withal, thereby causing expulsion, and repressing the Heat
caused by the motion of the internal parts in Purges and Vomits, Lay by your
Learned Receipts, Take so much Senna, so much Scammony, so much Colocynthis, so
much Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, etc. This Herb alone preserved in a Syrup,
in a distilled Water, in an Ointment shall do the deed for you in all hot
Diseases, and it shall do it, 1. Safely, 2. Speedily.

Hart's-tongue.
Description.
THis has diverse Leaves ^^ing from the Root every one severally which fold
themselves in their first springing and spreading; when they are full grown are
about a foot long, smooth and green above, but hard and with little Sap in
them, and straked on the back athwart on both sides of the middle Rib, with
small and somewhat long brownish marks; the bottoms of the Leaves are a little
bowed on each side of the middle Rib somewhat narrow with the length, and
somewhat small at the end. The Root is of many black threads, folded or interlaced
together.

Time.
It is green all the Winter, but new Leaves spring every year.

Virtues and Use.
Hart's-tongue is much commended against the hardness and stoppings of the
Spleen and Liver, Spleen, Liver, Flux, Bloodyflux Hiccough, Guths, Venomous
Beasts.
and against the heat of the Liver and Stomach, and against Lasks and the
Bloody Flux: The Distilled Water thereof is also very good against the Passions
of the Heart, and to stay the Hiccough, to help the falling of the Pallat, and
stay the bleeding of the Gums being gagled in the mouth. Dioscorides faith it
is good against the stinging or biting of Serpents.

Jupiter claims Dominion over this Herb, therefore is a singular Remedy for the
Liver, both to strengthen it when weak, and eas it when afflicted. it is no
matter by what you should do well to keep it in a Syrup all the year, for
though my Author say it is green all the year, I scarce beleev it.

As for the use of it, my Directions at latter end will be sufficient, and
enough for those that are studious in Physic to whet their Brains upon for one
year or two.

The Hazel Nut.
THese are so well known to every Boy, that they need no Description.

Virtues and Use.
The parched Kernels made into an Electuary, or the Milk drawn from the Kernels
with Mead or Honeyed Water, is very good to help an old Cough; Cough, Phtisick,
Flux, Terms stops,
and being parched and a little Pepper put to them and drunk, digesteth the
Distillations of Rhewm from the Head: The dried Husks and Shells to the weight
of two drams taken in red Wine, staieth Lasks, and Women's Courses, and so does
the red Skin that covers the Kernels which is more effectual to stay Women's
Courses.

And if this be true as it is, then why should the Vulgar so familiarly affirm,
that eating Nuts causes shortness of Breath than which nothing is falser, for
how can that which strengthens the Lungues cause shortness of breath? I confess
the Opinion is far older than I am, I knew Tradition was a Friend to Ertors
before, but never that he was the Father of Slanders, or are men's tongues so
given to slandering one another that they must slander Nuts too, to keep their
tongues in ^re? If any thing of the Hazel Nut be stopping' it is the Husks and
Shells, and no body is so mad to eat them unless Physically, and the red Skin
which covers the Kernel which you may easily pull off. And thus have I made an
Apology for Nuts which cannot speak for themselves.

Hawkweed
Description
This has many large hairy leaves lying on the ground, much rent or torn on
the sides into many gashes like Dandelion but with greater parts more like the
smooth sow Thistle from among with arises a hollow rough stalk two or three
foot high branched from the middle upward, wherein are set at every Joint longer
leaves, little or nothing rent or cut in, bearing at their top sundrypale,
yellow Flowers consisting of many small narrow leaves, broad pointed and nicked
in at the ends, set in a double row or more, the outermost being larger than
the inner, which form most of the Hawkweeds (for there are many kinds of them)
do hold, which turn into down, and with the small brownish seeds, is blown
away with the wind: The Root is long and somewhat greater with many small
fibers thereat. The whole is full of bitter milk.

Place.
It grows in diverse places about Field sides, and the path ways in dry
grounds.

Time.
It flowreth and flies away in the Su^merMonths.

Virtues and use.
Howkweed (says Dioscorides) is cooling Cools, Dries, Binds, Gnawing in the
Stomach, Inflammation, Agues, Crudity, Disury, Venomous Beasts, Poison, Dropsy,
Phlegm, Chollick, Spleen, Watching, Lust stops, Venerious Dreams, Reins,
Bladder, Eyes, Ulcers, Burnings, Inflammations, St. Anthonies Fire, Heat, salt
Phlegm, Convulsion Cramp, Freckles, Spots, Morphew Wrinkles.
somewhat drying and binding, and therefore good for the heat of the stomach, and
gnawings therein, for Inflammations and the hot fits of Agues. The Juice thereof
in wine helps digestion, discusseth wind, hinders crudities abiding in the
stomach, and helps the difficulty of making Water, the biting of Venomous
Serpents, and sting of the Scorpion, if the herb be also outwardly applied to
the place, and is very good against all other Poisons. A scruple of the dried
Juice given in wine and vinegar is profitable for those that have the Dropsy.
The decoction of the Herb taken with Honey, digeisteth thin phlegm in the chest
or lungs, and with Hysop helps the cough. The Decoction thereof and of wild
Succory made with wine and taken helps the wind chollick and hardness of the
spleen, it procures rest and sleep, hinders venery and venercous dreams,
cools, heats, purges the stomach, increases blood, and helps the diseases
of the Reins and Bladder. Outwardly applied it is singular good for all the
defects and diseases of the eyes, used with some women's Milk, and is used with
good success in fretting or creeping ulcers, elpecially in the beginning. The
green Herb bruised and with a little Salt applied to any place burnt with fire
before blisters do arise, helps them, as also inflammations St Anthonies fire
and al Pushes, and eruptions, heat, and salt Phlegm. The same applied with Meal
and fair water in manner of a Poultis to any place affected with convulsions
and the Cramp or such as are out of Joint does give help and ease. The
distilled water cleanses the skin and takes away freckles, Spots, the Morphew
or Wrinkles in the face.

The Hawthorn.
It is not my intent to trouble you with a Description of this Tree which is so
well known that it needs none.

It is ordinarily but a Hedge Bush, although being pruned and dressed it grows
to be a Tree of a reasonable height.

As for the Hawthorn tree at Glastenbury, which is said to flower yearly on
Christmas Dry, it rather shows the superstition of those who observe it for the
time of its Flowring, than any great wonder, since the like may be found in
diverse other places of this land, as in Whey-street in Rumney Marsh, and near
unto Nantwiche in Cheshire by a place called White-Green, where if the Winter
be mild they will be white blossoms all over before and about Christmas, as
in May, if the weather be frosty, it Flowreth not until January, or that the
hard weather be over.

Virtues and use.
The Berries or the seeds in the Berries beaten to powder and drunk in wine,
are held singular good against the stone Stone, Dropsy, Flux, Inward pains,
Splinters, Thorns.
and are good for the dropsy. The distilled water of the Flowers stays the
lask. The seeds cleared from the Down, bruised and boiled in wine and drunk is
good for inward tormenting pains: If clothes and spunges be wet in the said
distilled water and applied to any place wherein thorns, splinters or the like
do abide in the Flesh, it will notably draw them forth.

And thus you see the thorn gives a medicine for his own pricking, and so does
almost every thing else.

Hemlock
Description.
The Common great Hemlock grows up with a green stalk four or five foot high
or more, full of red spots sometimes, and at the Joints very large winged leaves
set at them which are divided into many other winged leaves, one set against
another dented about the edges, of a sad green color branched toward the top
where it is full of Umbles of white Flowers, and afterward with whitish flat
Seed: The Root is long, white, and sometimes crooked and hollow within, the whole
Plant and every part has a strong, heady, and ill favored scent, much
offending the Senses.

Place.
It grows in all Countries of this Land by Walls and Hedges sides, in wast
Grounds and untilled places.

Time.
It Flowreth and Seedeth in July, or thereabouts.

Virtues and Use.
Hemlock is exceeding cold and very dangerous, especially to be taken unwardly:
It may safely be applied to Inflammations, Inflammations, St. Anthonies Fire,
Tetters, Ringworms, Eyes, Pin and Web,
Tumors, and Swelling in any part of the Body (save the Privy parts) as also to
St. Anthonies fire, Wheals, Pushes, and creeping Ulcers that rise of hot sharp
Humors, by cooling and repelling the heat. The Leaves bruised and laid to the
Brow or Forehead, is good for their Eyes that are red and swollen, as also to
take away a Pin and Web growing in the Eye, this is a tried Medicine,; Take a
small Handful of the Herb and half so much Bay Salt beaten together, and applied
to the contrary Wrest of the Hand for twenty four Hours, does remove it in
thrice dressing. If the Root hereof be roasted under the Embers, wrapped in
double wet Papers, until it be soft and tender, and then applied to the Gout
Gout,
in the Hands or Fingers it will quickly help this evil. If any shall through
mistake eat the Herb Hemlock instead of Parsley, or the Root instead of a
Parsnip (both which it is very like) whereby happens a kind of Frenzy, or
Perturbation of the senses, as if they were stupefied or drunk, The Remedy is
as Pliny says, to drink of the best and strongest pure Wine, before it strike
to the Heart, or Gentian put into Wine, or a draught of good Vinegar, wherewith
Tragus does affirm that he cured a Woman that had eaten the Root.

Saturn claims Dominion over the Herb, yet Iwonder why it may not be applied to
the privities in a Priapismus, or continual standing of the Yard, it being very
beneficial for that Diseas; I suppose my Authors Judgment was first upon the
opposite Disposition of Saturn to Venus in those Faculties, and therefore he
forbid the applying of it to those parts that it might not cause Barrenness, or
spoil the Spirit Procreative, which if it do, yet applied to the Privities it
stops lustful thoughts. Lechery.


Hemp.
THis is so well known to every good Huswife in the Country, that I shall not
need to write any Description of it.

Time.
It is sown in the end of March, or beginning of April, and is ripe in August
or September.

Virtues and use.
The Seed of Hemp consumes Wind, Wind,
and by the much use there of disperseth it so much that it dries up the
natural Seed, for Procreation; yet being boiled in Milk and taken, helps such
as have a hot dry Cough. Cough,
The Dutch make an Emulsion out of the Seed, and give it with good success to
those that have the Jaundice, Jaundice,
especially in the beginning of the Diseas if there be no Ague accompanying it,
for opens Obstructions of the Gall, Gall., Choler,
and causes digestion of Choler. The Emulsion or Decoction of the Seed
staieth Lasks and continual Fluxes, eases the Chollick, Flux, Chollick,
Bleeding,
and allayeth the troublesome Humors in the Bowels, and staieth bleeding at the
Mouth, Nose, or other place, some of the Leaves being fried with the Blood of
that bleed, and so given them to eat. It is held very good to kill the Worms
Worms,
in man or Beast, and the Juice dropped into the Ears kills Worms in them,
and draws forth Earwigs, Earwigs,
or other living Creatures gotten into them. The Decoction of the Root allayeth
Inflammations Inflammation,
in the Head or any other parts; the Herb it self, or the Distilled Water
thereof does the like. The Decoction of the Roots eases the pains of the Gout,
Gout,
the hard Tumors, or Knots in the Joints, the pains and shrinking of the
Sinews, Sinews shrunk.
and the pains of the Hips: The fresh Juice mixed with a little Oil and Butter,
is good for any place that has been burnt with fire being thereto applied.

It is a Plant of Saturn, and good for something else you see than to make
Halters only.

Henbane.
Description.
OUr common Henbane has very large, thick, soft, woolly Leaves lying upon the
ground, much cut in or torn on the edges of a dark ill grayish green color,
among which rise up diverse thick and short Stalks two or three foot high,
spread into diverse smaller Branches with lesser Leaves on them, and many hollow
Flowers scarce appearing above the Husks, and usually torn on the one side,
ending in five round points growing one above another, of a deadish yellow
color, somewhat paler toward the edges, with many purplish Veins therein, and
of a dark yellowish purple in the bottom of the Flower, with a small pointel of
the same color in the middle, each of them standing in hard close Husk, which
after the Flower is past, grows very like the Husk of Asarabacca, and somewhat
sharp at he top Points, wherein is contained much small Seed very like Poppy
Seed, but of a dusky grayish color. The Root is great, white and thick,
branching forth diverse ways under ground, so like a Parsnip Root (but that it
is not so white) that it has deceived diverse. The whole Plant more than the
Root has a heavy ill soporiferous smell somewhat offensive.

Place.
It commonly grows by the way sides, and under Hedge sides and Walls.

Time.
It Flowreth in July, and springs again yearly of its own Seed.

I doubt my Author mistook July for June, if not for May.

Virtues and Use.
The Leaves of Henbane do cool all hot Inflammations Inflammation, Cods, Women's
Breasts,
in the Eyes or any other part of the Body; and are good to assuage all manner
of Swellings of the Cods or Women's Breasts, or else where, if they be boiled in
Wine, and either applied themselves or the Fomentation warm; it also asswageth
the pain of the Gout, the Sciatica and all other pains in the Joints Gout,
Sciatica, Joints,
which arise from an hot cause. And applied with Vinegar to the Forehead and
Temples, helps the Headache and want of sleep in hot Fevers. Watching,
The Juice of the Herb or Seed, or the Oil drawn from the Seed does the like.
The Oil of the Seed is helpful for the Deafness, Nois, and Worms in the Ears,
Deafness, Noise in the Ears,
being dropped therein; the Juice of the Herb, or Root does also the same. The
Decoction of the Herb, or Seed, or both, kills Lice in Man and Beast. The
fume of the dried Herb Stalks and Seed burned, quickly heals Swellings,
Chilblains,, or Kibes Chilblains Kibes,
in the Hands or Feet, by holding them in the fume thereof. The Remedy to help
those that have taken Henbane is to drink Goats Milk, Honyed Water or Pine
Kernels, with Sweet Wine: or in the absence of these, Fennel Seed, Nettle Seed,
the Seed of Cresses, Mustard, or Radish, as also Onions, or Garlic taken in
wine, do all help to free them from danger, and restore them to their due
temper again.

Take notice that this Herb must never be taken inwardly, outwardly, an Oil,
Ointment, or Plaster of it, is most admirable for the Gout, to cool the
Venerial heat of the Reins in the French Pox, FrenchPox.
to stop the Toothach being applied to the aching side, to allay all
Inflammations, and to help the Diseases before premised.

I wonder in my Heart how Astrologers could take on them to make this an Herb
of Jupiter, and yet Mizaldus, a man of a penetrating Brain, was also of this
Opinion as well as the rest, the Herb is indeed under the Dominion of Saturn,
and I prove it by this Argument.

All the Herbs which delight most to grow in Saturnine places, are Saturnine
Herbs.

But Henbanc delights most to grow in Saturnine places, and whole Cart loads of
it may be found near the places where they empty the common Jakes, and scarce a
stinking Ditch to be found without, it growing by it.

Ergo it is an Herb of Saturn.

Herb Robert.
Description.
THis rises up with a reddish stalk two foot high, having diverse leaves
thereon upon very long and reddish footstalkes, divided at the ends into three
or five divisions, each of them cut in on the edges some deeper then others,
and all dented likewise about the edges, which often tims turn reddish: At the
tops of the stalk come forth diverse flowers made of five leaves, much larger
then the Doves foot, and of a more reddeish color after which come beak heads
as in others: The Root is small and threddy, and smells as the whole plant
very strong, almost stinking.

Place.
This grows frequently every where by way sides, upon ditch banks, and wast
grounds whersoever one goes.

Time.
It flowreth in June and July chiefly, and the seed is ripe shortly after.

Virtues and use.
Herb Robert is commended not only against the stone, Stone, Bleeding, Terms
stops, wounds, Ulcers in the Privities.
but to stay blood, where or howsoever flowing; it speedily heals all green
wounds, and is effectual in old ulcers in the peivy parts or else where.

You may persuade your self this is true and also conceive a good reason for
it, if you you do but consider it is an herb of Venus for all it has gotten a
man's name.

Herb True-love, OR One-berry.
Description.
THe ordinary Herb True-love, has a small creeping Root running under the
upper crust of the ground, somewhat like a Coutchgrass Root but not so white,
shooting forth stalks with leaves, some whereof carry no berries, though others
do; every stalk smooth without Joints and blackith green, rising about half a
foot high if it bear berries otherwise seldom so high, bearing at the top four
leaves set directly one against another in manner of a Cross or a Riband tied
(as it is called) on a True-loues Knot: which are each of them a part: somewhat
like unto a Nightshade Leaf, but somewhat broader, having sometimes but three
Leaves, sometimes five, sometimes six, and these sometimes greater than in others.
In the middle of the four Leaves fiseth up one small slender Stalk about an inch
high, bearing at the top thereof one Flower spread open like a Star consisting
of four small and narrow long pointed Leaves of a yellowish green color, and
four other lying between them lesser than they; in the middle whereof stands a
round dark purplish B^tton or Head, compassed about with eight small yellow
Mealy the eds, with three colors make it the more conspicuous and lovely to
behold: This Button or Head in the middle, when the other Leaves are withered,
becomes a blackish Purple Berry full of Juice of the bigness of a reasonable
Grape, having within it many white Seeds: The whole Plant is without any
manifest taste.

Place.
It grows in Woods and Copse^, and sometimes in the corners or borders of
Fields and wast Grounds in very many places of this Land; and abundantly in the
Woods, Gopses, and other places about Chisselhurst and Maidstone in Kent.

Time.
They spring up in the middle of April or May, and are in Flower soon after;
The Barries are ripe in the end of May, and in some places in June.

Virtues and Use.
The Leaves or Berries hereof are effectual to expel poison Poison, Pestilences,
of all sorts, especially that of the Aconites, as also the Plague, and other
Pestilential Diseases. Some have been helped thereby says Mathiolus, that have
lien long in a lingering sickness, and others that by Witchcraft Fevers,
Witchcraft
(as it was thought) were become half foolish, by taking a dram of the Seed or
Berries hereof in Powder every day for twenty days together, they were
restored to their former health. The Roots in Powder taken in Wine eases the
pains of the Chollick Chollick,
speedily: The Leaves are very effectual as well for green Wounds, Wounds,
Ulcers, Swellings in the Groyn, Cods, and Privities, Inflammations, Aposthumes.
as to clens and heal up old filthy Sores and Ulcers; and is very powerful to
discuss all Tumors, and Swellings in the Cods, privy Parts, or Groyn, or in any
part of the Body, and speedily to ally all Inflammations. The Leaves or their
Juice applied to Felons, or those Nails of the Hands or Toes that have
Imposthumes or Sotes gathered together at the Roots of them, heals them in
short space.

The Herb is not to be described for the premises, but is fit to be noutished
in every good Woman's Garden.

Venus owns it.

Hysop.
THis is so well known to be an Inhabitant in every Garden, that it will save me
Labor in writing a Description thereof. The Virtues are as follows.

Virtues and use.
Dioscorides says that Hysop boiled with Rue and Honey, and drunk, helps
those that are troubled with Coughs, shortness of breath, wheesing, Cough,
shortuess of breath, Wheesing, Gross Humors, Worms, yellow Jaundice, Dropsy,
Spleen, Inflammations, black and blue spots, Quinsie, Toothach, Noise in the
Ears, Venomous Beasts, Lice, Itching of the Head Fallingsickness, Wounds.
and Rhewmatick Distillations upon the Lungs: Taken also with Oximel, it
purges gross Humors by the Stool; and with Honey kills Worms in the Belly;
and with fresh or new Figs bruised, helps to loosen the Belly, and more
forcibly if the Root of Flower-de-luce and Cresses be added thereto. It amendeth
and cherishes the Native color of the Body spoiled by the yellow Jaundice,
and being taken with Figs and Nitre helps the Dropsy and the Spleen. Being
boiled with Wine, it is good to wash Inflammations: and takes away black and
blew Spots and Marks that come by Strokes, Bruises, or Falls, being applied with
warm Water. It is an excellent Medicine for the Quinsie, or Swelling in the
Throat, to wash and gargle it, being boiled with Figs. It helps the Toothach,
being boiled in Vinegar, and gargled therewith. The hot Vapors of the Decoction
taken by a Funnel in at the Ears, eases the Inflammations and singing nois of
them: Being bruised and Salt, Honey, and Cummin Seed put to it, it helps
those that are stung by Serpents. The Oil thereof being anointed kills Li^e,
and takes away Itching of the Head: It helps those that have the
Falling Sickness which way soever it be applied: It helps to expectorate
tough Phlegm, and is effectual in all cold Griefs, or Diseases of the Chest and
Lungs, being taken either in a Syrup or licking Medicine. The green Herb
bruised and a little Sugar put thereto, does quickly heal any cut, or green
Wound, being thereunto applied.

The Herb is Jupiters, and the Sign Cancer; It strengthens all the parts of the
Body under cancer and Jupiter, which what they be may be found amply discoursed
of in my Astrological Judgment of Diseases.

Hops.
THese are so well known that they need no Description, I mean the manured kind
which every good Husband or Huswife is acquainted with.

The wild Hop grows up as the other does, ramping upon Trees or Hedges that
stand next unto them, with rough branches, and Leaves like the former; but it
gives smaller Heads and in far less plenty than it, so that there is scarce a
Head or two seen in a year on diverse of this wild kind; wherein consists the
chief difference.

Place.
They delight to grow on low moist grounds, and are found in all parts of this
Land.

Time.
They spring not up until April, and Flower not until the latter end of June,
the heads are not gathered until the middle or latter end of September,

Virtues and use.
This Physical operation is to open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen to
clens the Blood, Obstructions, Liver Spleen, Blood, Reins cleanses, French Pox,
Scabs, Itch, Tetters, Ringworms, Morphen Poison, Worms, Terms provokes Disury,
yellow Jaundice Liver, Stomach, Agues.
to loosen the Belly, to clens the Reins from Gravel, and provoke Urine. The
Decoction of the tops of Hops, as well of the tame as the wild, works the
same effects. In cleansing the Blood they help to cure the French Diseas, and
al manner of Scabs, Itch, and other breakings out in the Body, as also al
Tetters, Ringworms, and spreading Sores, the Morphew, and all discolorings of
the Skin. The Decoction of the Flowers and tops, do help to expel poison that
any one has drunk: Half a dram of the Seed in Powder taken in drink, kills
Worms in the Body, brings down Women's Courses, and expels Urin: A Syrup
made of the Juice and Sugar, cures the yellow Jaundice, eases the Headache
that comes of Heat, and tempereth the heat of the Liver and Stomach, and is
profitably given in long and hot Agues that rise of Choler and Blood. Both the
wild and the manured are of one property, and alike effectual in all the
aforesaid Diseases.

By all these Testimonies, Beer appears to be better than Ale.

Mars owns the Plant, and then Dr. Reason will tell you how it performs these
actions.

Horehound
Description
COmmon Horehound grows up with square hoary Stalks, half a yard or two foot
high, set at the Joints with two round crumpled rough Leaves, of a sullen hoary
green color, of a reasonable good scent, but a very bitter taste: The Flowers
are small, white and gaping, set in rough, hard, prickly Husks, round about the
Joints with the Leaves from the middle of the Stalk upwards, wherein afterward
is found small round blackish Seed. The Root is blackish, hard, and woody, with
many strings there eat, and abides many years.

Place.
It is found in many parts of this Land, in dry grounds and wast green places.

Time.
It Flowreth in or about July, and the Seed is ripe in Augst.

Virtues and Use.
A Decoction of the dried Herb with the Seed, or the Juice of the green Herb
taken with Honey, is a Remedy for those that are pursie or short winded, or
have a Cough or are fallen into a Consumption either through long sickness, or
thin Distillations of Rhewm upon the Lungs. Difficulty of breath, Cough,
Consumption, Phlegm, Terms provokes, Afterbirth, Weariness, Poison, Venomous
Beasts, Ulcers, Sides, Eyes, Yellow Jaundice, Ears, Obstructions of the Liver
and Spleen. Liver, Itch, Tetters, Worms, Dogs bitings, Women's Breasts, Thorns,
Asthmaes.
It helps to expectorate tough Phlegm from the Chest, being taken with the
Roots of Iris or Orris. It is given to Women to bring down their Courses, to
expel the Afterbirth, and to them that have sore and long Travails, as also to
those that have taken Poison, or are stung or bitten by Venomous Serpents: The
Leaves used with Honey purge foul Ulcers stay running or creeping sores, and the
growing of the Flesh over the Nails. It also helps pains of the sides. The
Juice thereof with Wine and Honey helps to clear the Eyesight, and snuffed up
into the Nostrils, purges away the yellow Jaundice, and with a little Oil of
Roses dropped into the Ears eases the pains of them. Galen says it opens
Obstructions both of the Liver and Spleen, purges the Breast and Lungues of
Phlegm; and used outwardly, it both cleanses and digesteth. A Decoction of
Horchound (says Mathiolus) is available for those that have bad Livers, and
for such as have Itches and running Tetters; The Powder hereof taken, or the
Decoction, kills Worms. The green Leaves bruised and boiled in old Hogs Greas
unto an Ointment, heals the biting of Dogs abateth the Swellings of Women's
Breasts, and takes away the Swelling and Pains that come by any pricking of
Thorns, or such like means, and used with Vinegar it cleanses and heals
Tetters. There is a Syrup made of Horehonnd to be had at the Apothecaries, very
good for old Coughs, to rid the tough Phlegm, as also to avoid cold Rhewm from
the Lungs of old Folks, and for those that are Astmatick or short winded.

Horstail.
Description.
OF this there are many kinds, but I shall not trouble you nor my self with any
large Description of them, which to do, were but as the Proverb is, to find a
knot in a Rush; All the kinds hereof being nothing else but knotted Rushes,
some with Leaves and some without: Take the Description of the most eminent sort
as follows.

The greater Horstail at the first springing has Heads somewhat like those of
Asparagus, and after grow to be hard, rough, hollow Stalks, joynted at sundry
places up to the top, a foot high, so made as if the lower part were put into
the upper, whereat grow on each side a Bush of small, long, Rush-like hard
Leaves, each part resembling a Horse Tail (from whence it was so called) At the
tops of the Stalks come forth small Catkins like to those of Trees. The Root
creeps under ground having Joints at sundry places.

Place.
This (as most of the other sorts hereof) grows in wet grounds.

Time.
They spring up in April, and their blooming Catkins in July, seeding for the
most part in August, and then perish down to the ground, rising afresh in the
Spring.

Virtues and use.
Horstail, the smoother rather than the rough, and the Leaved rather than the
Bare, are most Physical: It is very powerful to stanch bleedings Bleeding,
Flux, Terms stops, Pissing Blood, Inward ulcers, Excoriations of the Bladder,
Ulcers, Wounds, Ruptures, Dis^ry, Stone, S^angury, Cough, Inflammations,
Pimples, Red Faces
whersoever, either inward or outward, the Juice or Decoction thereof being
drunk, or the Juice, Decoction, or distilled Water applied outwardly: It
staieth also al sorts of Lasks and Fluxes in Man or Woman, and the pissing of
Blood, and heals also not only the inward Ulcers, and excoriations of the
Entrails, Bladder, etc. but al bther sorts of foul, moist, and running Ulcers,
and soon sodereth together the tops of green Wounds; It cures also Ruptures in
Children. The Decoction hereof in Wine being drunk, provokes Urin, and helps
the Stone and the Strangury; and the distilled Water thereof drunk two or three
times in a day, a small quantity at a time; as also eases the Intrails or Guts,
and is effectual against a Cough that comes by distillation from the Head. The
Juice or distilled Water being warmed, and hot Inflammations, Pustules, or red
Wheals, and other breakings out in the Skin, being bathed therewith does help
them, and does no less eas the Swellings, heat, and Inflammations of the
Fundament or Privy parts in Man or Woman.

The Herb is belonging to Saturn yet is very harmless, and excellent good for
the Premises.

Houfleeks, or Sengreen.
THese are so well known unto my Country Men that I shall not need to write any
Description of them.

Place.
It grows commonly on Walls and Houssides, and flowreth in July.

Virtues and use.
Our ordinary Housleek is good for all inward heats, Heat, Eyes,
, as well as outward, and in the Eyes or other parts of the Body: A Posset made
with the Juice of Housleek is singular good in all hot Agues, Agues, Thirst,
Salt Rhewms, Ears, Terms, stops, Fluxes, Inflammations, St.Anthonies Fire,
Burnings, Scaldings, Tetters, Ringworms, Corns on the Hands and Feet, Headache,
Frenzy, Watching, Bleeding,
for it cools and tempereth the Blood and Spirits, and quench the thirst; and
is also good to stay al hot Defluxions of sharp and salt Rhewms in the Eyes,
the Juice being dropped into them, or into the Ears helps them; It helps
also other Fluxes of Humors into the Bowels, and the immoderate Courses of
Women. It cools and restrains also all other hot Inflammations. St.
Anthonies Fire, Scaldings and Burnings, the Shingles, fretting Ulcers, Cankers,
Tetters, Ringworms and the like, and much eases the pain of the Gout
proceeding from an hot cause. The Juice also takes away Warts and Corns in the
Hands or Feet, being often bathed therewith, and the Skin of the Leaves being
laid on them afterward. It eases also the Headache, and distempered heat of
the Brain in Phrensies, or through want of sleep, being applied to the Temples
and Forehead. The Leaves bruised and laid upon the Crown or Seam of the Head
staieth bleeding at the Nose very quickly. The distilled Water of the Herb is
profitable for all the purposes aforesaid: The Leaves being gently rubbed on any
place stung with Nettles or Bees, Nettles, Bees, etc.
does quickly take away the Pain.

It is an Herb of Jupiter, and it is reported by Myzaldus to preserve, it grows
upon from Fire and Lightning.

Houndstongue.
Description.
THe great ordinary Houndstongue has many long and somewhat narrow, soft, hairy
darkish green Leaves, lying on the ground somewhat like unto Bugloss Leaves, from
among which rises up a rough hairy Stalk about two foot high, with some
smaller Leaves thereon, and branched at the top into diverse parts, with a small
Leaf at the Foot of every Branch, which is somewhat long, with many Flowers set
along the same, which Branch is crooked or turned inwards before it Flowreth
and opens by degrees as the Flowers do blow, which consist of four small
purplish red Leaves of a dead color, scarce rising out of the Husk wherein they
stand, with some threads in the middle: It has sometimes a white Flower. After
the Flowers are past there comes rough flat Seed, with a small pointel in the
middle, easily cleaving to any Garment that it touches, and not so easily
pulled off again: The root is black, thick, and long, hard to break, and full of
a clammy Juice, smelling somewhat strong, of an evil scent as the Leaves also do.

Place.
It grows in most places of this Land, in wast grounds, and untilled places
by high way sides, Lanes, and Hedge sides.

Time.
It Flowreth about May and June, and the Seed is ripe shortly after.

Virtues and Use.
The Root is very effectually used in Pills, as well as in Decoctions, or
otherwise, to stay al sharp and thin Defluxions of Rhewm from the Head into the
Eyes or Nose, or upon the Stomach or Lungs, as also for Coughs or shortness of
breath. Eyes, Nose, Stomach, Lungs, shortness of breath,
The Leaves boiled in Wine (says Dioscorides) but others do rather appoint it
to be made with Water, and to ad thereto Oil and Salt, mollifieth or opens
the Belly downwards; it also helps to cure the biting of a mad Dog, Mad dogs
some of the Leaves being also applied to the Wound: The Leaves bruised, or the
Juice of them boiled in Hogs Lard, and applied, helps the falling away of the
Hair which comes of hot and sharp humors; as also for any place that is
scalded or burnt: Scaldings, Burnings,
The Leaves bruised and laid to any green Wound does heal it up quickly. The
Root baked under the Embers wrapped in Past, or wet Papers, or in a wet double
Cloth, and thereof a Suppository made and put up into, or applied to the
Fundament, does very effectually help the painful Piles or Hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids, Wounds, Ulcers, French Pox.
The distilled Water of the Herb and Roots, is very good to all the purposes
aforesaid, to be used as well inwardly to drink, as outwardly to wash any sore
places, for it heals al manner of Wounds and Punctures and those foul Ulcers
that arise by the French Pox.

Mizaldus ads to this, that the Leaves laid under the Feet will keep the Dogs
from barking at you, Houdstongue because it ties the Tongue of Hounds, whether
it be true or not I never tried yet I have cured the biting of a mad Dog with
this only Medicine.

St. John's Wort
Description
THe common St. John's Wort shoots forth brownish, upright, hard, round
Stalks, two foot high, spreading many Branches from the sides up to the tops of
them with two small Leaves set one against another at every place, which are of a
deep green color, somewhat like the Leaves of the lesser Centaury, but narrower,
and full of small holes in every Leaf, which cannot be so well perceived as when
they are held up to the light: At the tops of the Stalks and Branches stand
yellow Flowers made of five Leaves apiece, with many yellow threads in the
middle, which being bruised do yield a reddish Juice like blood, after which
come small round Heads, wherein is contained small blackish Seed smelling like
Rozin: The Root is hard and woody with diverse strings and fibers at it, and of
a brownish color which abides in the ground many years, shooting anew every
Spring.

Place.
This grows in Woods and Copses, as well those that are shady, as open to the
Sun.

Time.
They Flower about Midsummer, and in July, and their Seed is ripe in the latter
end of July or in August.

Virtues and use.
St. John's Wort, is as singular a Wound Herb as any other whatsoever, either
for inward Wounds, Hurts, Wounds, Bruises,
or Bruises, to be boiled in Wine and drunk, or prepared into Oil or Ointment,
Bath or Lotion outwardly: It has power to open Obstructions, Obstructions,
Swellings,
to dissolve Swellings to close up the Lips of Wounds, and to strengthen the
parts that are weak and feeble. The Decoction of the Herb and Flowers, but of
the Seed especially in Wine being drunk; or the Seed made into Powder and drunk
with the Juice of Knotgrass, helps al manner of spitting and Vomiting of
Blood, Spitting and Vomiting blood, Venomous Beasts, Disury,
be it by any Vein broken inwardly, by Bruises, Falls, or howsoever: The same
helps those that are bitten or stung by any Venomous Creature: And is good
for those that are troubled with the Stone in their Kidneys, or that cannot
make water; and being applied provokes Women's Courses. Two drams of the Seed
of St. John's Wort made into Powder and drunk in a little Broth, does gently
expel Choler, Choler,
or congealed Blood in the Stomach; The Decoction of the Leaves and Seeds being
drunk somewhat warm before the Fits of Agues, Agues,
whether they be Tertians, or Quartanes, does alter the fits, and by often
using does take them quite away: The Seed is much commended being drunk for
forty days together, to help the Sciatica: Sciatica, Fallingsickness, Palsy.
the Falling sickness, and the Palsy.

It is under the Celestial Sign Leo, and under the Dominion of the Sun, it may
be if you meet with a Papist that is an Astrologer, he will tell you St. John
made it over to him by a Letter of Attorney, especially if withal he be a
Lawyer also.

Ivy.
Description.
THis is so well known to every Child also to grow in Woods upon the Trees, and
upon the stone Walls of Churches, Houses, etc. and sometimes to grow alone of it
self, though but seldom.

Time.
It Flowreth not until July, and the Berries are not ripe til Christide that
they have felt the Winter Frosts.

Virtues and use.
A pugil of the Flowers, which may be about a dram (says Dioscorides) drunk
twice a day in red Wine, helps the Lask and Bloody Flux. Flux, Bloody Flux,
It is an enemy to the Nerves and Sinews being much taken inwardly, but very
helpful unto them being outwardly applied. Pl^^y says that the yellow Berries
are good against the Jaundice, Jaundice,
and taken before one be set to drink hard, preserves from drunkenness, and
helps those that spit Blood: and that the white Berries being taken inwardly,
or applied outwardly kills the Worms in the Belly. Spitting Blood, Worms,
Drunkenness, Pestilence,
The Berries are a singular Remedy to prevent the Plague, as also to free them
from it that have got it, by drinking the Berries thereof made in Powder, for
two or three days together: They being taken in Wine do certainly help to
break the Stone, Stone, Disury, Terms provokes, Spleen, Stitch,
provoke Urine and Women's Courses. The fresh Leaves of Ivy boiled in Vinegar,
and applied warm to the sides of those that are troubled with the Spleen, Ach,
or Stitch in the sides, does give them much eas: The same applied with some
Rosewater and Oil of Roses to the Temples and Forehead, eases the Headache
Headache,
though it be of long continuace. The fresh Leaves boiled in Wine, and old
filthy Ulcers Ulcers,
that are hard to be cured washed therewith, does wonderfully help to clens and
heal them, it also quickly heals green Wounds Wounds, Burnings, Scaldings,
salt Phlegm,
, as also it is effectual to heal al Burnings and Scaldings, and all kind of
ezuicerations coming thereby. or by Salt Phlegm or hot Humors in other parts of
the Body. The Juice of the Berries or Leaves snuffed up into the Nose, purges
the Head and Brain of thin Rhewm that makes Defluxions into the Eyes and Nose,
and cures the Ulcers and Stench therein: The same dropped into the Ears helps
the old and running Sores of them. Those that are troubled with the Spleen shall
find much eas by continual drinking out of a Cup made of Ivy, so as the drink
may stand some small time therein before it be drunk. Cato says, that Wine put
into such a Cup will soak through it, by reason of the Antipathy that is between
them. Rhewm, Sore Ears.


There seems to be a very Antipathy between Wine and Ivy, for if any have got a
surfeit by drinking Wine, his speediest cure is to drink a draught of the same
Wine wherein a handful of Ivy Leaves being first bruised have been boiled.

Kidneywort, or WallPenyroyal.
Description.
THis has many thick, flat, and round Leaves growing from the Root, every one
having a long Footstalk fastened underneth about the middle of it and a little
unevenly waved sometimes about the edges, of a pale green color, and somewhat
hollow on the upper side like a Sawcer; from among which rise one or more
tender smooth hollow Stalks half a foot high with two or three small Leaves
thereon, usually not round as those below, but somewhat long and divided at the
edges: The tops are sometimes divided into long Branches, bearing a number of
Flowers, set round about a long spike one above another, which are hollow and
like a little Bell, of a whitish green color, after which come small Heads
containing very small brownish Seed,, which falling on the ground, will
plentifully spring up before Winter, if it have moisture. The Root is round and
most usually smooth, grayish without and white within, having small fibers at
the head of the Root, and bottom of the Stalk.

Place.
It grows very plentifully in many places of this Land, but especially in all
the West parts thereof, upon stone and mud Walls, upon Rocks also, and in stony
places upon the ground, at the Bottom of old Trees, and sometimes on the Bodies
of them that are decayed and rotten.

Time.
It usually Flowreth in the beginning of May and the Seed is ripening quickly
after, sheddeth it self: so that about the end of May usually, the Leaves and
Stalks, are withered, dry, and gone until September, that the Leaves spring up
again, and so abide all Winter.

Virtues and Use.
The Juice or the distilled water being drunk is very effectual for all
Inflammations Inflammations Pimples, Redness, St. Anthonies fire, Kidneys ^urt by
the Stone, Disury, Dropsy, Stone, Bloodyflux, Piles, Hemorrhoids, Gout,
Sciatica, Cods, Kings Evil, Kibes, Chilblains.
and unnatural heats, to cool a fainting hot Stomach, or a hot Liver or the
Bowels: The bruised Herb or the place bathed with the Juice or distilled Water
thereof and outwardly applied heals Pimples, Redness, St. Anthonies Fire, and
other outward heats and Inflammations. The said Juice or Water helps much also
to heal sore Kidneys, torn or fretted by the Stone, or exulcerated within, and
eases the p^ns; It also provokes Urine, and is available for the Dropsy, and
helps to break the Stone, cooling the Inflamed parts and other pains of the
Bowels, and the bloody Flux; It is singular good to cool the painful Piles, or
Hemorrhoidal Veins, the Juice being used as a Bath unto them, or made into an
Ointment: It is no less effectual to give eas of pains to the hot Gout,, the
Sciatica, and the Inflammations and Swellings in the Cods; It helps the
Kernels or Knots in the Neck or Throat, called the Kings Evil; heals Kibes
and Chilblains if they be bathed with the Juice, or anointed with an Ointment
made thereof, and some of the skin of the Leaf laid upon them; It is also used
in green Wounds to stay the Blood, and to heal them quickly.

Venus challenges the Herb, under Libra.

Knapweed.
Description.
The common sort hereof has many long and somewhat broad dark green leaves,
rising from the Root deeply dented about the edges, and sometimes a little rent
or torn on both sides in two or three places, and somewhat hairy withal among
which rises up a strong round stalk four or five foot high, divided into many
branches: at the tops whereof stand great scalygreen heads, and from the middle
of them thrust forth a number of dark purplish red thrumms or threads, which
after they are withered and past, there is found diverse black Seeds: lying in a
great deal of down, somewhat like unto a Thistle Seed, but smaller: The Root is
white, hard and woody, with diverse fibers annexed thereunto, which perishes not
but abides with leaves thereon all the winter, shooting out fresh every Spring.

Place.
It grows in most Feilds and Meadows, and about their borders and Hedges and
in many wast grounds also, almost every where.

Time.
It usually flowreth in June and July, and the seed is ripe shortly after.

Virtues and Use.
This Knaproeed helps to stay Fluxes, both of blood at the mouth or nose, or
other outward parts, and those veins that are inwardly broken, or inward
wounds, as also the Fluxes of the belly; It stays the distillations of thin
and sharp humors from the head upon the stomach and Lungs: it is good for those
that are bruised by any fall, blows, or otherwise. Fluxes, Bleeding, Veins
broken, Phtisick, Falls, Blows, Ruptures, Sores, Cankers, Fistulaes. Scabby
head, Sore throat Voula, Jaws.
It is very profitable for those that are bursten and have a Rupture, by
drinking the decoction of the Herb and roots in wine. and applying the same
outwardly to the place. It is singular good in all running sores, cankrous and
fistulous drying up the moisture and healing them up gently, without sharpness;
it does the like to running sores or scabs of the head or other parts. It is of
special use for the soreness of the Throat, swelling of the Uvula and Jawa; and
excellent good to stay the bleeding and heal up all green wounds.

Saturn challenges the herb for his own.

Knot-grass.
Description.
THis is generally so well known that it needs no Description.

Place.
It grows in every County of this Land, by the Highway sides and by foot
paths in Fields, as also by the sides of old Walls.

Time.
It springs up late in the Spring, and abides until Winter, when all the
branches perish.

Virtues and Use.
The Juice of the common kind of Knot-grass, is most effectual to stay
bleeding Bleeding, Heat, Flux, Bloody Flux, Courses stops, Disury, Gravel,
Venomous Beasts, Rhewm, Worms, Heat,
at the mouth, being drunk in steeled or red Wine: and the bleeding at the
Nose, to be applied to the Forehead and Temples or to be squirted up into the
Nostrils. And no less effectual to cool and temper that heat of the blood,
and stomach and to stay any Flux of the blood or humers, as Lask, Bloodyflux,
Women's courses, and Running of the Reins. It is singular good to provoke Urine,
help the strangurie, and allay the heat that comes thereby; and it is
powerful by Urin to expel the Gravel, or stone in the kidneys or Bladder, a
dram of the powder of the Herb being taken in wine for many days together:
Being boiled in wine and drunk, it is profitable to those that are stung or
bitten by venomous creatures, and very effectual to stay al defluxions of
rhewmatick humors upon the stomach, and kills Worms in the belly or stomach,
quieteth inward pains that arise from the heat, sharpness and corruption of
blood and Choler: Choler, Inflammations; Apostums, Gangrenes Fistulaes,
Cankers, Ulcers, Wounds Ears.
The distilled water hereof taken by it self, or with the powder of the Herb or
seed, is very effectual to all the purposes aforesaid, and is accounted as one
of the most Sovereign remedies to cool all manner of inflammations, breakings
out through heat, hot Swellings, and Impostumations Gangrenes, and Fistulous
Cankers, or foul filthy Ulcers, being applied or put into them; but especially
for all sorts of Ulcers and sores happening in the privy parts of men or
women. It helps all fresh and green Wounds, and speedily helps them: The
Juice dropped into the Ears. cleanses them being soul and having running
matter in them.

Saturn seems to me to own the Herb, and yet some hold the sun, out of doubt
it is Saturn, it is very prevalent for the premises: as also for btoken Joints,
and Ruptures.

Ladies-Mantle.
Description.
THis has many leaves rising from the Root, standing upon long hairy
footstalkes, being almost round, but a little cut in on the edges, into eight
or ten parts more or less, making it seem like a Star, with so many corners and
points, and dented round about, of a light green color somewhat hard in
handling, and as if it were folded, or plaited at first, and then crumpled in
diverse places, and a little hairy as the Stalk is also, which rises up among
them to the height of two or three foot, with such like Leaves thereon but
smaller, and being weak is not able to stand upright, but bends down to the
Ground, divided at the top into two or three small Branches, with small yellowish
green Heads, and Flowers of a whitish color, breaking out of them; which being
past, there comes small yellow Seed like Poppy Seed: The Root is somewhat long
and black with many strings or fibers thereat.

Place.
It grows naturally in many Pastures, and Wood sides, in Harfordshire,
wiltshire, and Kent, and other places of this Land.

Time.
It Flowreth in May and June, and abides after Seed time green all the Winter.

Virtues and Use.
Ladies-Mantle is very proper for those Wounds that have Inflammations,
Inflammations,
and is very effectual to stay Bleedings, Vomitings, Fluxes Bleeding, Vomiting,
Fluxes, Bruises, Ruptures, Flagging Breasts, Barrenness women with child.
of al sorts in man or woman, and Bruises by Falls or otherwise, and helps
Ruptures, and such Women or Maids as have over great Flagging Breasts, causing
them to grow less and hard, being both drunk, and outwardly applied: The
distilled water drunk for twenty days together helps Conception, and to
retain the Birth, if the Woman do sometimes also sit in a Bath made of the
Decoction of the Herb. It is one of the most singular Wound Herbs that is, and
therefore highly prized and praised by the Germans, who use in all Wounds inward
and outward, to drink the Decoction thereof and wash the Wounds therewith, or
dip Tents therein and put them into the Wounds, which wonderfully dries up al
humidity of the Sores, and abateth Inflammations therein. It quickly heals al
green Wounds, not suffering any corruption to remain behind, and cures old
Sores though Fistulous and hollow.

Venus claims the Herb as her own.

Lavender.
THis is so well known, being an Inhabitant in almost every Garden, that it
needs no Description.

Time.
It flowreth about the end of June and beginning of July.

Virtues and Use.
Lavender is of special good use, for all the Griefs and pains of the Head and
Brains, Head, Brains, Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Lethargy, Cramps,
Convulsions, Palsy both dead and shaking, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Terms
provokes, Chollick, Vertigo, loss of voice, Trembling, Fainting.
that proceed of a cold cause, as the Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, the drowsy or
sluggish Malady, Cramps, Convulsions, Palseys, and often Faintings. It
strengthens the Stomach, and freeth the Liver and Spleen from Obstructions,
provokes Women's Courses, and expels the dead Child and Afterbirth. The
Flowers of Lavender steeped in Wine helps them to make water that are
stopped, or are troubled with the Wind or Chollick, if the places be bathed
therewith. A Decoction made with the Flowers of Lavender, Horehound, Fennel,
and Asparagus Roots, and a little Cinnamon is very profitably used to help the
Falling Sickness, and the giddiness or turning of the Brain. To gargle the
Mouth with the Decoction thereof is good against the Toothach. Two spoonfuls of
the distilled Water of the Flowers taken, helps them that have lost their
voice; as also the tremblings and passions of the Heart, and faintings and
swounings, not only being drunk, but applied to the Temples, or Nostrils to be
smelt unto but it is not safe to use it where the Body repleat with Blood and
Humors, because of the hot and subtle spirits wherewith it is possessed. The
Chimical Oil drawn from Lavender, usually called Oil of Spike, is of so fierce
and piercing Spirits that it is cautiously to be used: some few drops being
sufficient to be given with other things, either for inward or outward Griefs.

Mercury owns the Herb, and it carries his effects very potently.

Lavender Cotton has the same Virtues with Southernwood, which shall be showed
you when I come to speak of it.

Lettice.
THis is so well known being generally used as a Sallet Herb, that it is
altogether needless to write any Description thereof.

Virtues and Use.
The Juice of Lettice mixed or boiled with Oil of Roses, and applied to the
Forehead and Temples procures Sleep, and eases the Headache proceeding of an
hot cause; being eaten boiled, it helps to loosen the Belly. Watching,
Headache, Indigestion, Thirst, Milk increases, choler, Bowels, Lust,
Venerious Dreams,
It helps digestion, quenches thirst, increases Milk in Nurses, eases
griping pains of the Stomach or Bowels, that come of Choler. It abateth Bodily
lust, represseth Venereous Dreams, being outwardly applied to the Cods with a
little Camphire: Applied in the same manner to the Region of the Heart, Liver
or Reins, or by bathing the said place with the Juice or distilled Water,
wherein some white Sanders and red Roses are put also, it not only represseth
the heat and Inflammation Inflammation, Heat of Urire.
therein, but comforts and strengthens those parts, and also tempereth the heat
of Urine. Galen advises old men to use it with Spices, and where Spices are
wanting to ad Mints, Rocket and such like hot Herbs, or else Citron, Lemmon, or
Orange Seeds, to abate the cold of one, and heat of the other. The Seed and
distilled Water of the Lettice work the like effects in all things: but the use
of Lettice is chiefly forbidden to those that are short winded, or have any
imperfection in their Lungs; or spit Blood.

The Moon owns them, and that is the reason they cool and moisten what heat and
dryness Mars causes, because Mars has his fall in Cancer, and they cool the
Heart, because the Sun rules it, between whom and the Moon is a Reccption in the
Generation of Man, as you may so in my Guide for women.

The VVater-Lilly.
Description.
OF these there are two principally noted kinds, Viz. Thewhite, and the Yellow.

The white Lilly has very large, round and thick dark green Leaves lying on the
Water, sustained by long and thick Footstalks, that rise from a great thick,
round and long tuberous black Root, spungy or loos with many Knobs thereon like
Eyes, and whitish within, from amidst the which rise other the like thick and
great Stalks, sustaining one large white Flower thereon, green on the outside,
but as white as Snow within, consisting of diverse rows of long, and somewhat
thick and narrow Leaves, smaller and thinner the more inward they be,
encompassing a head within with many yellow threads, or thrums in the middle,
where after they are past, stand round Poppylike Heads full of broad, Oily, and
bitter Seed.

The yellow kind is little different from the former save only it has fewer
Leaves on the Flowers, greater and more shining Seed, and a whitish Root, both
within and without: The Roots of both being somewhat sweet in taste.

Place.
They are sound growing in great Pools and standing Waters, and sometimes in
slow running Rivers and lesser Ditches of Water, in sundry places of this Land.

Time.
They Flower most commonly about the end of May, and their Seed is ripe in
August.

Virtues and use.
The Leaves and Flowers of the Water Lillies are cold and moist, but the Root
and Seed is cold and dry: The Leaves do cool al Inflammations, Inflammations,
Agues,
and both outward and inward heats of Agues, and so does the Flowers also,
either, by the Syrup or Conserve; The Syrup helps much to procure rest, and
to settle the Brains of Frantic persons, by cooling the hot distemperature of
the Head. Watching, Frenzy,
The Seed as well as the Root is effectual to stay Fluxes Flux,
of Blood or Humors, either of Wounds, or of the Belley; Belly,
but the Roots are most used, some choosing the one, and some the other to be
more effectual to cool, bind and restrain all Fluxes in Man or Woman, as also
the running of the Reins, Running of the Reins, Venery,
and the passage away of the Seed when one is asleep: but the frequent use
hereof extinguisheth Venereous actions: The Root is likewise very good for
those whose Urine is hot and sharp to be boiled in Wine or Water, and the
Decoction drunk. The Distilled water of the Flowers is very effectual for all
the Diseases aforesaid, both inwardly taken and outwardly applied, and is much
commended to take away Freckles, Spots, Sunburn, and Morphew from the Face, or
other parts of the Body. The Oil made of the Flowers as Oil of Roses is made,
is profitably used to cool hot Tumors, and the Inflammations of Ulcers and
Wounds and to ea^ the pains, and help the Sores.

The Herb is under the Dominion of the Moon, and therefore cools and moistens
like the former.

Liquoris.
Description.
OUr English Liquoris rises up with diverse woody Stalks, whereon are set at
several distances, many narrow long green Leaves, set together on both sides of
the Stalk, and an od one at the end, very well resembling a young Ash-tree sprung
up from the Seed: This by many years continuance in a place without removing,
and not else, will bring forth Flowers, many standing together Spike fashion
one above another upon the Stalks, of the form of Pease Blossoms, but of a very
pale blue color, which turn into long somewhat flat and smooth Rods, wherein is
contained small, round hard Seed: The Root runs down exceeding deep into the
ground, with diverse other smaller Roots and Fibers growing with them, and shoot
out Suckers from the main Roots al about, whereby it is much increased, of a
brownish color on the outside, and yellow within:

Place.
It is planted in Fields and Gardens in diverse places of this Land, and thereof
good profit is made.

Virtues and use.
Liquoris boiled in fair Water with some Maidenhair and Figs, makes a good
Drink for those that have a dry Cough, or Hoarceness, Cough, Hoarsness,
Phtisick, Consumption, Reins, Strangury, Heat of Urine, Eyes, Bladder.
Wheesing, shortness of breath; and for all the Griefs of the Breast and Lungs,
Phtisick or Consumptions caused by the Distillation of Salt humors on them. It
is also good in all pains of the Reins, the Strangury, and heat of Urine: The
fine Powder of Liquoris blown through a Quil into the Eyes that have a Pin and
Web (as they call it) or Rhewmatick Distillations into them, does clens and help
them: The Juice of Liquoris is as effectual in all the Diseases of the Breast
and Lungs, the Reins and Bladder, as the Decoction. The Juice dissolved in Rose
Water with some Gu^-Tragacanth, is a fine licking Medicine for Hoarceness,
Wheesings, etc.

Liverwort.
Description.
THe Common Liverwort, grows close and spreads much upon the ground in
moist and shadowy places, with many sad green leaves, or rather (as it were)
sticking flat one to another, very unevenly cut in on the edges, and crumpled,
from among which arise small slender stalks an Inch or two high at most, bearing
small Starlike Flowers at the tops: The Roots are very fine and small.

Virtues and use.
It is a singular good Herb for all the diseases of the Liver, Liver,
Inflammation, yellow Jaundice, Spleen, Running of the Reins, whites, Tetters,
Ringworms, Surfets.
both to cool and cleanse it, and helps the Inflammations in any part, and the
yellow Jaundice likewise: Being bruised and boiled in small Beer and drunk, it
cools the heat of the Liver and Kidneys, and helps the running of the Reins
in men, and the Whites in Women: It is a singular remedy to stay the spreading
of Tetters, Ringworms, and other fretting and running Sores and Scabs, and is
an excellent remedy for such whose Livers are corrupted by sursets which causes
their bodies to break out, for it fortifies the Liver exceedingly and make it
impregnable.

It being under the command of Jupiter, and under the sign Cancer.

Loos-strife or WillowHearb.
Description.
THe Common yellow Loos-strife grows to be four or five foot high or more,
with great round stalks a little crested, diversely branched from the middle of
them to the tops, into great and long Branches, on al which at the Joints there
grow long and narrow Leaves, but broader below, and usually two at a Joint, yet
sometimes three or four somewhat like Willow Leaves, smooth on the edges, and of
a faint green color from the upper Joints of the branches, and at the tops of
them also stand many yellow Flowers of five Leaves a piece, with diverse yellow
threeds in the middle, which turn into small round heads, containing small
cornered Seeds: The Root creeps under ground, almost like Couchgrass, but
greater, and shoots up every Spring, brownish heads, which afterward grow up
into stalks: It has no scent nor taste but only astringent.

Place.
It grows in many places of this Land in moist Meadows and by water sides.

Time.
It Flowreth from June to August.

Virtues and use.
This Herb is good to stay all manner of Bleeding at Mouth or Nose or Wounds,
and all Fluxes of the Belly, and the bloody Flux, given either to drink, or
taken by Clyster; it stays also the abundance of Women's Courses: It is a
singular good wound Herb for green wounds, to stay the bleeding, Bleeding,
Flux, Bloody Flux, Terms stops, Wounds, Sore, Mouth, Privities, Gnats.
and quickly to close together the lips of the Wound, if the herb be bruised
and the Juice only applied: It is often used in Gargles for sore mouths, as
also for the secret parts: the smoke hereof being burned drives away Flies and
Gnats which use in the nightime to molest people inhabiting near Marshes and
in the Fenney Countries.

Loos-Strife, with Spiked Heads of Flowers.
Description.
THis grows with many woody square stalks, full of Joints about three foot
high at least, at everyone whereof stand two long Leaves, shorter, narrower, and
of a deeper green color than the former; and some brownish. The stalks are
branched into many long stemmes of spiked Flowers, half a foot long, growing in
Rundles one above another, out of small husks very like the Spiked heads of
Lavender, each of which Flowers have five round pointed Leaves of a Purple
Violet Color, or somewhat inclining to redness, in which husks stand small round
heads, after the Flowers are fallen, wherein is contained small seed: The Root
creeps under ground like unto the yellow, but is greater than it; and so is
the heads of the Leaves when they first appear out of the ground and more brown
than the other.

Place.
It grows usually by Rivers, and Ditches sides in wet grounds, as about the
Ditches at and near Lambeth: and in many other places of this Land.

Time.
It Flowreth in the months of June and July.

Virtues and Use.
This Herb is no whit inferior unto the former; it having not only all the
virtues which the former has, but some particular virtues of its own found out
by experience, as namely.

The distilled water is a present remedy for hurts and blows on the eyes and
for blindness, Eyes, Blindness,
so as the Christaline humor be not perished or hurt; and this has been
sufficiently proved true by the experience of a man of judgment, who kept it
long to himself as a great sccret. It also clears the Eyes of dust or any
other thing gotten into them, and preserves the Sight: It is also very much
available against Wounds Wounds,
and Thrusts, being made into an Ointment on this manner; To every ounce of the
Water, ad two drams of May Butter without Salt, and of Sugar and Wax of each as
much also, let them boil gently all together: Let Tents be dipped in the Liquor
that remains after it is cold, and put into the Wounds, and the place covered
with a Linen cloth doubled and anointed with the Ointment, and this is also an
approved Medicine. It likewise cleanses and heals all foul Ulcers and Sores
wheresoever, and staieth their Inflammations Ulcers, Inflammations,
by washing them with the Water, and laying on them a green Leaf or two in the
Summer, or dry Leaves in the Winter. This Water gargled warm in the Mouth, and
sometimes drunk also does cure the Quinsie, Quinsie, Kings Evil, Spots, Marks,
Scars.
or Kings Evil in the Throat. The said Water applied warm takes away all
Spots, Marks, and Scars in the Skin: And a little of it drunk quenches thirst
when it is extraordinary.

The Herb is an Herb of the Moon, and under the Sign. Cancer, neither do I know
a better Preserver of the Sight when it is well, nor a better Curer of sore Eyes
than Eyebright taken inwardly, and this used outwardly, it is cold in quality.

Lovage.
Description.
THis has many long and great Stalks, of large winged Leaves divided into many
parts like Smallage, but much larger and greater, every Leaf being cut about
the edges broadest forwards, and smallest at the Stalk, of a sad green color,
smooth and shining, from among which rise up sundry strong hollow green Stalks,
five or six foot, yea sometimes seven or eight foot high, full of Joints, but
lesser Leaves set at them than grow below, and with them toward the tops come
forth long Branches, hearing at their tops large Umbels, of yellow Flowers, and
after them flat brownish Seed: The Root grows thick, great and deep,
spreading much and enduring long, of a brownish color on the outside, and
whitish within: The whole Plant, and every part of it smells strong, and
Aromatically, and is of an hot sharp biting taste.

Place.
It is usually planted in Gardens, where if it be suffered it grows huge and
great.

Time.
It Flowreth in the end of July, and seedeth in August.

Virtues and Use.
It opens, cutteth and digesteth Humors, Humors, Terms provokes, Disury, Cold
Stomach, Indigestion, Wind, Poison, Epidemical Diseases.
and mightily provokes Women's Courses and Urine. Half a dram at a time of the
dried Root in Powder taken in Wine, does wonderfully warm a cold Stomach,
helping digestion, and consuming all raw and superfluous moisture therein;
eases al inward gripings and pains dissolveth wind, and resists Poison and
infection: It is a known and much practiced Remedy to drink the Decoction of
the Herb for any sort of Ague, Agues, Belly-ach, Quinsie, Pleuresie, Spots,
Freckles, Boyls.
and to help the pains and Torments of the Body and Bowels coming of cold. The
Seed is effectual to all the purposes aforesaid (except the last) and works
more powerfully, The distilled water of the Herb helps the Quinsie in the
Throat, if the Mouth and Throat be gargled and washed therewith, and helps
the Pluresie, being drunk three or four times. Being dropped into the Eyes it
takes away the redness or dimness of them, it likewise takes away Spots or
Freckles in the Face. The Leaves bruised and fried with a little Hogs Lard and
laid hot to any Botch or Boil, will quickly break it.

It is an Herb of the Sun under the Sign Taurus, if Saturn offend the Throat
(as he always does if he be occasioner of the Malady and in Taurus in the
Genesis) this is your cure.

Lungwort.
Description.
THis is a kind of Moss, that grows on sundry sorts of Trees, especially
Oaks, and Beeches, with broad grayish tough Leaves, diversely folded, crumpled,
and gashed in on the edges, and sometimes spotted also, with many small spots on
the upper side: It was never seen to bear any Stalk or Flower at any time.

Virtues and Use.
This is of great use with many Phystians to help the Diseases of the Lungs,
and for Coughs, Wheesings, and shortness of breath, Lungues, Coughs, Wheesings,
shortness of breath, Ulcers in the Privities and elsewhere.
which it cures both in Man and Beast: It is very profitably put into Lotions
that are taken to stay the moist Humors that flow to Ulcers, and hinder their
healing, as also to wash all other Ulcers in the privy parts of Man or Woman.

It is an excellent Remedy boiled in Beer for broken-winded Horses.

Iu^^ seems to own the Herb.

Madder.
Description.
THe Garden Madder shoots forth many very long, weak four square reddish
Stalks trailing on the Ground a great way, very rough or hairy and full of
Joints; At every of those Joints come forth diverse long, and somewhat narrow
Leaves, standing like a Star about the Stalks, rough also and hairy, toward the
tops whereof come forth many small pale yellow Flowers: after which come small
round Heads, green at first, and reddish afterward, but black when they are
ripe, wherein is contained the Seed. The Root is not very great, but exceeding
long, running down half a man's length into the grouund, red and very clear
while it is fresh, spreading diverse ways.

Place.
It is only manured in Gardens or larger Fields for the profit that is made
thereof.

Time.
It Flowreth toward the end of Summer, and the Seed is ripe quickly after.

Virtues and Use.
It has an opening quality, and afterward to bind and strengthen. It is an
assured Remedy for the yellow Jaundice by opening the Obstructions of the Liver
and Gall, and clensing those parts: It opens also the Obstructions of the
Spleen, and diminishes the Melanchollick humor. It is available for the Palsy
and Sciatica, and effectual for Bruises inward or outward, and is therefore much
used in Vulnerary Drinks. Yellow Jaundice, Obstructions of the Liver and Gall,
Spleen, Melancholy, Palsy, Sciatica, Bruises inward and outward, Terms
provokes, Freckles, Morphew, Scurf.
The Root for all those aforesaid purposes, is to be boiled in Wine or Water,
as the cause requires, and some Honey or Sugar put thereunto afterward. The
Seed hereof taken with Vinegar and Honey, helps the Swellings and Hardness of
the Spleen. The Decoction of the Leaves and Branches is a good Fomentation for
Women to sit over thar have not their Courses. The Leaves and Roots beaten and
applied to any part that is discolored with Freckles, Morphew, the white
Scurf, or any such deformity of the Skin, cleanses them thoroughly, and takes
them away.

Maidenhair.
Description.
OUr common Maidenhair does from a number of hard black Fibers send forth a
great many blackish shining brittle Stalks, hardly a span long; in many not
half so long, on each side set very thick with small round dark green Leaves, and
spotted on the back of them like other Ferns.

Place.
It grows much upon old Stone Walls in in the West parts, and Wales, in Kent
and diverse other places of this Land; It joyeth likewise to grow by Springs,
Wels, and rockie moist and shadowy places; and is always green.

Wall-Rue; Or ordinary White Maidenhair.
Description.
THis has very fine pale green Stalks, almost as fine as hairs, set confusedly
with diverse pale green Leaves on very short Footstalks, somewhat near unto the
color of Garden Rue, and not much differing in form, but more diversely cut in
on the edges, and thicker, smooth on the upper part and spotted finely
underneath.

Place.
It grows in many places of this Land, as at Dartford, and the Bridge at
Ashford in Kent, at Beconsfield in Buckinghamshire, at Wolley in
Huntingtonshire, on Frammingham Castle in Suffolk, on the Church walls at
Mayfield in Sussex, in Summerset Shire and diverse other places of this Land,
and is green in Winter as well as in Summer.

Virtues and use.
The Virtues of both these are so near alike; that although I have described
them, and their places of growing, severally; yet I shall in writing the
Virtues of them join them both together: as follows.

The Decoction of the Herb Maidenhair being drunk, helps those that are
troubled with the Cough, shortness of breath, the yellow Jaundice, Cough,
shortness of breath, the yellow Jaundice, Spleen, Disury, Stone, Terms
provokes, Bleeding, Fluxes, Lungs, Swellings, Ulcers, Scursf Sores, Bal^lness.
diseases of the Spleen, stopping of Urin, and helps exceedingly to break the
Stone in the Kidneys: (in all which Diseases the Wall Rue is also very
effectual) It provokes Women's Courses, and staieth both Bleedings and Fluxes
of the Stomach and Belly, especially when the Herb is dry, for being green, it
loosneth the Belly, and avoideth Choler and Phlegm from the Stomach and Liver
it cleanses the Lungs, and by rectifying the Blood causes a good color to the
whole Body: The Herb boiled in Oil of Chamomel, dissolveth Knots, allayeth
Swellings, and dries up moist Ulcers. The Ly made there of is singular good to
clens the head from Scurf, and from dry and running Sores; stays the falling
or shedding of the Hair, and causes it to grow thick, fair, and well colored;
for which purpose some boil it in Wine putting some Smallage Seed thereto, and
afterward some Oil. The Wall Rue is as effectual as Maidenhair in all Diseases
of the Head, and falling or the recovering of Hair again; and generally for all
the aforementioned Diseases: and besides, The Powder of it taken in drink for
forty days together, helpteh the burstings in Children.

Golden Maidenhair
Description.
TO the two former give me leave to ad this, and I shall do no more but only
describe it unto you, and for the Virtues refer you unto the former, since
whatsoever is said of them, may be also said of this:

It has many small brownish red hayres to make up the form of Leaves growing
about the ground from the Root, and in the middle of them in Summer, rise small
Stalks. of the same color, set with very fine yellowish green hairs on them,
and bearing a small gold yellow head, lesser than a Wheat Corn standing in a
great Husk. The Root is very small and threddy.

Place.
It grows on Bogs and Moorish places, and also on dry shadow places at
Hampstead Heath and elsewhere.

Mallows, and MarshMallows.
THe Common Mallows are generally so well known that they need no Description.

Our common Marshmallows have diver^ soft hoary white stalks rising to be
three or four foot high, spreading forth many Branches the Leaves whereof are
soft and hairy, somewhat lesser then the other Mallow Leaves but longer pointed,
cut (for the most part) into some few deivisions, but deep: The Flowers are
many but smaller also then the other Mallows and white, or tending to a blush
color. After which come such like round cases and Seed as in the other
Mallows. The Roots are many and long, shooting from one Head, of the bigness of
a Thumb or Finger, very pliant, tough and bending like Liquoris, of a whitish
yellow color on the outside, and more white within, full of a slimy juice
which being, laid in water will thicken it as if it were gelly.

Place.
The Common Mallows grow in every country of this Land.

The Common Marsh Mallows in most of the Salt Mashes from Woolwich, down to
the Sea, both on the Kentish and Essex Shoares and in diverse other places of
this Land.

Time.
They Flower all the Summer Months, even until the Winter do pull them down.

Virtues and Use.
The Leaves of either of the sorts above named, and the Roots also boiled in
Wine or Water, or in Broth, with Parsley or ^ennel Roots, does help to open the
Body, and is very convenient in hot Agues Agues,
or other distempers of the Body to apply the Leaves so boiled warm to the
Belly; It not only voideth hot Chollerick Choler, Gripings in the Belly, Milk,
and other offensive Humors but eases the pains and torments of the Belly
coming thereby; and are therefore used in all Clysters conducing to those
purposes: The same used by Nurses, procures them store of Milk.

The Decoction of the Seed of any of the common Mallows, made in Milk or Wine
does Merveilously help excoriations, Excoriation, Phtisick, Pleuresie,
the Phtisick, Plurisie, and other Diseases of the Chest and Lungues that
proceed of hot causes, if it be continued taking for some time together: The
Leaves and Roots work the same effects: They help much also in the excoriations
of the Guts and Bowels and hardness of the Mother, and in all hot and sharp
diseases thereof. The Juice drunk in Wine, or the Decoction of them therein
does help Women to a speedy and easy Delivery. Travail in Women,
Pliny says, That whosoever shall that take a spoonful of any of the Mallows,
shall that day be free from all Diseases that may come unto him; and that it is
special good for the Falling Sickness. Falling sickness,
The Syrup also and Conserve made of the Flowers are very effectual for the the
same Diseases, and to open the Body being costive: The Leaves bruised and laid
to the Eyes Eyes,
with a little Honey, takes away the Impostumations of them. The Leaves bruised
or rubbed upon any place stung with Bees, Wasps Bees, Wasps etc.
or the like, presently takes away the pains, redness, and Swellings that rise
thereupon: and Dioscorides says, The Decoction of the Leaves and Roots helps
all sorts of Poison, Poison,
so as the Poison be presently voided by Vomit. A Pultis made of the Leaves
boiled and bruised, whereunto some Bean or Batley Flower and Oil of Roses is an
especial Remedy against all hard Tumors and Inflammations of Impostums and
Swellings of the Cods and other parts, and eases the pains of them; as also
against the hardness of the Liver or Spleen, being applied to the places.
Hardswelling inflammation, Cods Liver, Spleen, Roughness of the skin
The Juice of the Mallows boiled in old Oil and applied, takes away al
roughness of the Skin, as also the Scurf, Dandrif, Scurff, Dandrif, Scabby
Heads, Scalding, Burning, St. Anthonies Fire,
or dry Scabs in the Head or other parts if they be anointed therewith or
washed with the Decoction, and preserves the Hair from falling off. It is also
effectual against Scaldings and Burnings, St. Anthonies fire, and all other
hot, red, and painful Swellings in any part of the Body. sore Mouth and Throat,
The Flowers boiled in Oil or Water (as every one is disposed) whereunto a
little Honey and Alum is put, is an excellent Gargle to wash, clens, and heal
any sore Mouth or Throat in a short space. If the Feet be bathed or washed with
the Decoction of the Leaves, Roots, and Flowers, it helps much the Defluxions
of Rhewm from the Head. If the Head be washed therewith, it staieth the falling
and shedding of the Hair. Baldness,
The green Leaves (says Pliny) beaten with Nitre and applied draws out
Thorns, Thorns,
or Pricks in the Flesh.

The Marsh Mallows are more effectual in all the Diseases before mentioned: The
Leaves are likewise used to loosen the Belly Belly,
gently, and in Decections for Clysters, to eas al pains of the Body, opening
the strait Passages, and making them slippery, whereby the Stone Stone,
may descend the more easily and without pain, out of the Reins, Kidneys, and
Bladder, Reins, Kidneys, Bladder, Coughs, Hoarsness, shortness of Breath,
Wheesing, Excrriation of the Guts,
and to eas the torturing pains thereof: But the Roots are of more especial use
for those purposes, as well as for Coughs, Hoarsness, shortness of Breath, and
Wheesings, being boiled in Wine or Honeyed Water and drunk. The Roots and Seeds
hereof boiled in Wine or Water, is with good success used by them that have
Excoriations in the Guts, or the bloody Flux, by qualifying the violence of the
sharp fretting Humors, easing the pains, and healing the Soreness: It is
profitably taken of them that are troubled with Ruptures, Cramps, or
Convulsions of the Sinews; Ruptures, Cramps, Convulsions, The Kings Evil,
Kernels, Chincough
and boiled in white Wine for the Impostumes of the Throat, commonly called the
Kings Evil, and of those Kernels that rise behind the Ears, and inflammations or
Swellings in Women's Breasts. The dried Roots boiled in Milk and drunk is
special good for the ChinCough. Hippocrates used to give the Decoction of the
Roots, or the Juice thereof to drink to those that were wounded, and ready to
faint through loss of Blood, and applied the same, mixed with Honey and Rozin
to the Wounds: Wounds,
As also the Roots boiled in Wine to those that had received any Hurt by
Bruises, Falls, or Blows, Bruises, Falls, Blows, Muscles,
or had any Bone or Member out of Joint, or any Swelling pain, or ach in the
Muscles, Sinews, or Arteries. The Muccilage of the Roots, and of Linseed, and
of Fennugreek put together, is much used in Pultises, Ointments, and Plasters,
to mollify and digest all hard. Swellings, and the Inflammation of them and to
eas pains in any part of the Body. The Seed either green or dry mixed with
Vinegar cleanses the Skin of the Morphew, Morphew, sunburning.
and al other discolorings, being bathed therewith in the Sun.

You may remember that not long since there was a raging Diseas called the
Bloody Flux, the College of Physicians not knowing what to make of it, called
it the Plague in the Guts, for their wits were at ne plus ultra about it. My
son was taken with the same Diseas, and the excoriation of his Bowels was
exceeding great; my self being in the Country was sent for up, the only thing I
gave him was Mallows bruised and boiled both in his Milk and Drink, in two
days (the blessing of God being upon it) it cured him, and I here to show my
thankfulness to God in communicating it to his Creatures, leav it to posterity.

Sweet Marjerom.
THis is so well known being an Inhabitant in every Garden, that it is needless
to write any Description thereof, neither of the Winter Sweet Marjerom, nor Pot
Marjerom.

Place.
They grow commonly in Gardens; some sorts there are that grow wild in the
Borders of Corn Fields, and Pastures in sundry places of this Land, but it is
not my purpose to insist upon them: The Garden kinds being most used and useful.

Time.
They Flower in the end of Summer.

Virtues and use.
Our common Sweet Marjerom is warming and comfertable in cold Diseases of the
Head, Stomach, Head, Stomach,
Sinews, and other parts, taken inwardly, or outwardly applied: The Decoction
thereof being drunk helps all the Diseases of the Chest which hinder the
freeness of breathing; and is also profitable for the Obstructions of the Liver
and Spleen: Breast, Obstructions, Liver, Spleen, Womb, Wind,
It helps the cold Griefs of the Womb, and the windiness thereof, and the
loss of Speech, by resolution of the Tongue. The Decoction thereof made with
some Pellitory of Spain, and long Pepper, or with a little Acorus or Origanum,
being drunk, is good for those that are beginning to fall into a Dropsy,
Dropsy, Bellyach, Terms provokes,
for those that cannot make Water, and against pains and torments in the Belly;
it provokes Women's Courses if it be put up as a Pessary. Being made into
Powder and mixed with Honey, it takes away the black marks of Blows Marks of
Blows,
and Bruises, being thereto applied. It is good for the Inflammations and
watering of the Eyes, being mixed with fine Flower and laid unto them. The
Juice dropped into the Ears Noise in the Ears,
eases the Pains and singing nois in them. It is profitably put into those
Ointments and Salves that are made to warm and comfort the outward parts, as
the Joints and Sinews, for Swellings also and places out of Joint. Joints,
Sinews, Swellings, Ne^sing,
The Powder thereof snuffed up into the Nose, provokes neezing, and thereby
purges the Brain; and chewed in the Mouth draws forth much Phlegm. Phlegm.
The Oil made thereof is very warming and comfortable to the Joints that are
stiff, and the Sinews that are hard to mollify and supple them. Marjerom is
much used in all odoriferous Waters, Pouders, etc. that are for Ornament or
delight.

It is an Herb of Mercury and under Aries, and is therefore an excellent Remedy
for the Brain and other parts of the Body and Mind, under the Dominion of the
same Planet.

Marigolds.
THese being so pelentifull in every Garden are so well known that they need no
Description

Time.
They Flower all the Summer long, and sometimes in the Winter if it be mild.

Virtues and Use
The Flowers either green or dried are used much in Possets, broths, and
drinks, as a comforter of the Heart and spirits, Heart, Vital Spirits,
Pestilence, small Pox, Meazles, Hot swellings,
and to expel any malignant or pestilential quality which might annoy them.

It is an Herb of the Sun and under Leo they strengthen the heart exceedingly,
and are very expulsive, and little less Effectual in the small pox and measles
than Saffron: The Juice of Marigold Leaves mixed with Vinegar, and any hot
swelling bathed with it, instantly gives ease and asswageth it.

A plaster made with the dry Flowers in powder, hogs greas, Turpentine and
Rozin, and applied to the breast, strengthens and succors the heart infinitely
in fevers whether pestilential or not pestileutiall. Fevers, Pestilence.


Masterwort.
Description.
Common Masterwort has diverse stalks of winged Leaves divided into sundry
parts, three for the most part standing together at a small footstalk on both
sides of the greater, and three likewise at the end of the stalk, somewhat broad
and cut in on the edges, into three or more devisions all of them dented about
the brims, of a dark green color, somewhat resembling the Leaves of Angelica,
but that these grow lower to the ground, and on lesser stalks: among which rise
up 2. or 3. short stalks about 2. foot high, and slender, with such like Leaves
at the Joints as grow below, but with lesser and fewer devisions, bearing
Umbels of white Flowers, and after them small, thin, flat, blackish seed
bigger than Dil seeds: The Root is somewhat greater and grows rather sideways
than down deep into the ground, shooting forth sundry heads, which taste sharp,
biting on the Tongue, and is the hottest and sharpest part of the Plant, and
the seed next unto it, beiug somewhat blackish on the outside, and smelling
well.

Place.
It is usually kept in Gardens with us in England.

Time.
It Flowreth and seedeth about the end of August.

Virtues and Use.
The Root of Masterwort is hotter than Pepper and very available in all cold
Grelfes and Diseases both of Stomach and body, dissolving very powerfully
upward and downward: It is also used in a decoction with wind against all cold
rhewms, Cold Griefs, Stomach, Wind, Cold Rhewms, Urine, Stone, Gravel, Women's
Comses, Dead Child, Mother, Dropsy, Cramps, and Fallingsickness, Cold Poisons,
Sweat,
or distillations upon the Lungs, and shortness of breath, to be taken morning
and evening; it also provokerh Urin and helps to break the Stone, and expel
the Greavell from the Kidneys, procuereth women's Courses, and expels the
dead birth; is singular good for the strangling of the Mother, and other such
like Feminine Diseases. It is effectual also aganist the Dropsy, Cramps, and
the Falling sickness, for the decection in wine being gargled in the Mouth
draws down much water and phlegm from the brain, purging and easing it of what
oppresses it. It is of a rare quality against al sorts of cold poison, to be
taken as there is cause, It provokes sweat. But left the taste hereof, or of the
seed (which works to the like effect though not so powerfully) should be too
offensive; the best way is to take the water distilled both from the Herb and
Root. The Juice hereof dropped or Tents dipped therein, and applied either to
green wounds, or filthy rotten Ulcers Green Wounds, Rotten ulcers, Gout.
and those that come by invenomed Weapons, does soon clens and heal them, or
isthey be bathed with the distilled water. The same is also very good to help
the Gout coming of a cold cause.

It is an Herb of Mars.

Sweet Maudlin.
Description.
COmmon Maudlin have somewhat long and narrow Leaves, snip'd about the edges the
stalks are two foot high, bearing at the topps many yellow flowers Set round
together and all of an equal height ^in umbles tufts like unto Tansy after
which flowereth small whitish Seed almost as big as Wormseed The whole Herb is
sweet and bitter.

Place and Time.
It grows in Gardens, and Flowreth in June and July.

Virtues and use.
The Virtues hereof being the same with Costmary, or Alecost, I shall not
trouble you to make any repetition thereof, left my Book grow too big: but
rather refer you unto Costmary for satisfaction.

The Medlar.
Description.
THis Tree grows near the bigness of the Quince Tree, spreading Branches
reasonable large, with longer and narrower Leaves than either the Apple or
Quince, and not dented about the edges: At the end of the Sprigs stand the
Flowers made of Five white, great broad pointed Leaves, nicked in the middle,
with some white threads also: after which comes the Fruit, of a brownish green
color, being ripe, bearing a Crown as it were on the top, which were the five
green Leaves; and being rubbed off or fallen away, the head of the Fruit is
seen to be somewhat hollow. The Fruit is very harsh before it be mellowed, and
has usually five hard Kernels within it.

There is another kind hereof differing nothing from the former, but that it
has some Thorns on it in several places, which the other has not, and the
Fruit is small and not so pleasant.

Time.
They grow in this Land; and Flower in May for the most part, and bear ripe
Fruit in September, and October.

Virtues and use.
They are very powerful to stay and Fluxes Fluxes.
of Blood or Humors in Man or Woman: the Leaves have also the like quality. The
Fruit eaten by Women with Child, stays Stays Women's Longings Hinders
Miscarriage, Gargle,
their longings after unusual meats, and is very effectual for them that are
apt to miscarry, and be delivered before their time, to help that malady, and
make them joyful Mothers. The Decoction of them is good to gargle and wash the
Mouth, Throat and Teeth, when there is any defluxion of Blood to stay it, or of
Humors, which causes Pains and Swellings: It is a good bath for Women to sit
over that have their Courses Women's Courses, Piles,
flow too abundantly; or for the Piles when they bleed too much. If a Pultis or
Plaster be made with dried Medlars beaten and mixed with the Juice of red
Roses, whereunto a few Cloves and Nutmeg may be added, and a little red Correl
also, and applied to the Stomach that is given to casting, or loathing of meat,
Loathing of Meat, or Casting, Bleeding, Fresh wounds, Sone in the Kidneys,
it effectually helps. The dried Leaves in Powder, strewed on fresh, bleeding
Wounds, restrains the Blood, and heals up the Wound quickly ^^ The Medlar
stones made into Powder and drunk in Wine, wherein some Parsley Roots have lien
infused all night, or a little boiled, do break the Stone in the Kidneys,
helping to expel it.

The Fruit is old Saturns, and sure a better Medicine he hardly has to
strengthen the retentive faculty; therefore it stays Women's Longings, the good
old Man cannot endure Women's minds should run a gadding: Also a Plaster made
of the Fruit dried before they be rotten, and other convenient things, and
applied to the Reins of the Back, stops Miscarriage Miscarriage.
in Women with Child.

Melilot, or Kings Claver.
Description.
THis has many green Stalks two or three foot high, rising from a tough long
white Root, which dies not every year; set round about at the Joints with small
and somewhat long well smelling Leaves set three together, unevenly dented about
the edges: The Flowers are yellow, and well smelling also, made like other
Trefoyls, but small, standing in long Spikes, one above another, for an hand
breath long, or better, which afterward turn into long crooked Cods, wherein
is contained flat Seed, somewhat Brown.

Place.
It grows plentifully in many places of this Land, as in the edg of Susfolk
and in Essex, as also in Huntingtoushire, and in other places, but most usually
in Corn Fields, in corners of Meadows.

Time.
It Flowreth in June and July and is ripe quickly after.

Virtues and Use.
Melilot boiled in Wine and applied mollifieth all hard Tumors and Inflammations
that happen in the Eyes or other parts of the Body, Hard Tumors and
Inflammations in the Eyes, or elsewhere. Ulcers in the Head, Stomach pained,
as the Fundament: or privy parts of Man or Woman; and sometimes the Yolk of a
roasted Egg, or fine Flower or Poppy Seed, or Endive is added unto it: It
helps the spreading Ulcers in the Head, it being washed with a Ly made
thereof; It helps the pains of the Stomach being applied fresh, or boiled
with any of the aforenamed things. It helps also the pains of the Ears being
dropped into them; and steeped in Vinegar and Rose Water it mitigateth the
Headache. Hiadach, wind, Spleen, Dimness of sight, stupidity of senses,
strengthen Memory, Apoplexy.
The Flowers of Melilot and Chamomel are much used to be put together in
Clisters to expel Wind, and to eas pains; also into Pultices for the same
purpose, and to assuage Swellings or Tumors in the Spleen or other parts; and
helps Inflammations in any part of the Body. The Juice dropped into the Eyes
is a singular good Medicine to take away any Film or Skin that cloudeth or
dimmeth the Eyesight. The Head often washed with the distilled Water of the
Herb and Flowers, or a Ly made therewith, is effectual for those that have
suddenly lost their senses; as also to strengthen the Memory, to comfort the
Head and Brains, and to preserve them from pains and the Apoplexy.

French, and Dogs Mercury.
Description.
THis rises up with a square green stalk full of Joints two foot high or there
abouts, with two Leaves at every Joint and branches likewise from ^oth sides of
the stalk, set with fresh green Leaves somewhat broad and long, about the
bigness of the Leaves of Bassell finely dented about the edges: toward the
topps of the stalks and branches come forth at every Joint in the Male Mercury
two small round green heads, standing together upon a short footstalk which
growing ripe are the seeds; not having any Flower: In the female; The stalk is
longer, spike fashion, set round about with small green husks, which are the
Flowers made like small branches of Grapes which give no seed, but abide long
upon the stalks without shedding: The Root is composed of many small Fibers,
which perishes every year at the first approach of winter, and rises again of
its own sowing, and where it once is suffered to sow it self, the ground will
never want it afterward even both sorts of it.

Dogs Mercury.
Description.
HAving described unto you that which is called French Mercury, I come now to
show you in a Description this kind also.

This is likewise of two kinds, Male and Female, having many stalks slenderer
and lower than Mercury and without any branches at all upon them: The Male is
set with two Leaves at every Joint somewhat greater than the Female, but more
pointed and full of Veins, and somewhat harder in handling, of a darker green
color, and less dented or snip'd about the edges: At the Joints with the Leaves
come forth longer Stalks than the former, with two hairy round Seeds upon them
twice as big as those of the former Mercury: The taste hereof is Herby, and the
smell somewhat strong and Virulent: The Female has much harder Leaves standing
upon longer Footstalks, and the stalks are also longer: From the Joints come
forth Spikes of Flowers, like the French Female Mercury, The Roots of them both
are many, and full of small Fibers, which run under ground, and mat themselves
very much, not perishing as the former Mercuries do, but abiding the Winter,
and shoot forth new Branches every year (for the old die down to the ground.

Place.
The Male and Female French Mercury are found wild in diverse places of this
Land; as by a Village called Brookland in Rumney Marsh in Kent.

The Dogs Mercury in sundry places of Kent also, and elsewhere; but the Female
more seldom than the Male.

Time.
They flourish in the Summer months, and therein give their Seed.

Virtues and Use.
The Decoction of the Leaves of Mercury, or the Juice thereof in Broth, or Drunk
with a little Sugar put to it, purges Chollerick and waterish Humors. Purges
Chollerick Humors, Women's sickness, Mother, Women's Courses, strangury, sore
Eyes, Agues, Phlegm, Rhewms and Catarrhes, Melancolly Humors,
Hippocrates commends it wonderfully for Women's Diseases; and applied it to
the secret parts to eas the pains of the Mother; and used the Decoction of it
both to procure Women's Courses, and to expel the Afterbirth: And gave the
Decoction thereof with Mirrh or Pepper, or used to apply the Leaves outwardly
against the Strangury, and Diseases of the Reins and Bladder. He used it also
for sore and watering Eyes, and for the Deafness and pain in the Ears, by
dropping the Juice thereof into them, and bathing them afterward in white Wine.

The Decoction thereof made with Water and a Cock Chicken, is a most safe
Medicine against the hot fits of Agues: It also cleanses the Breast and Lungs
of Phlegm, but a little offends the Stomach: The Juice or distilled Water
snuffed up into the Nostrils purges the Head and Eyes of Catarrhes and Rhewms.
Some use to drink two or three ounces of the distilled water with a little
Sugar put to it, in the morning fasting, to open and purge the Body of gross
viscuous and Melancholy Humors. It is wonderful (if it be not Fabulous) that
Dioscorides and Theophrastus do relate of it: Viz. That if Women use these
herbs either inwardly or outwardly for three days together after Conception,
and their Courses be past, they shall bring forth Male or Female Children,
according to that kind of Herb they use. Mathiolus says, That the Seed of both
the Male and Female Mercury boiled with Wormwood and drunk, cures the yellow
Jaundice Yellow Jaundice, Warts, Scabs, Tetters, and Ringworms, Swellings,
Inflammations, Waterish and Melancholy Humors.
in a speedy manner: The Leaves or the Juice rubbed upon Warts, takes them
away: The Juice mingled with some Vinegar, helps all running Scabs, Tetters,
Ringworms and the Itch. Galen says that being applied in manner of a Pultis,
to any Swelling or Inflammation, it digesteth the Swelling and allayeth the
Inflammation; and is therefore given in Clysters to evacuate the Belly from
offensive Humors.

The Dogs Mercury, although it be less used yet may serve in the same manner to
the same purpose to purge waterish and Melanchollick Humors.

Mercury they say owns this Herb, but I rather think' it is Venus, and am partly
confident of it too, for I never read that Mercury ever minded Women's
businesses so much, I beleev he minds his study more.

Mint.
Description.
OF all the kinds of Mints, the SpearMint or Heart-Mint, being most useful; I
shall only describe it: as follows.

Spear-Mint, has diverse round Stalks, and long, but narrowish Leaves set
thereon; of a a dark green color. The Flowers stand in Spiked Heads at the
tops of the Branches, being of a pale blush color. The smell or scent hereof is
somewhat near unto Bassil^ It increases by the Root under ground, as all the
others do.

Place.
It is an usual Inhabitant in Gardens; And because it seldom gives any good
Seed, the defect is recompensed by the plentiful encreas of the Root, which
being once planted in a Garden will hardly be^rid out again.

Time.
It Flowreth not until the beginning of August, for the most part.

Virtues and Use.
Dioscorides says, It has an heating, binding and drying quality, and
therefore the Juice taken with Vinegar staieth Bleeding: It stirs up Venery
or Bodily lust: Two or three Branches thereof taken with the Juice of sour
Pomegranates stays the Hiccough, Vomiting, and allayeth Choler: It
dissolveth Impostumes being laid too with Barley Meal. Provokes Venery, stays
Vomiting, Allayeth Choler, Impostums great Breasts, Mad Dogs biting, Pains of
the Ears,
It is good to repress the Milk in Women's Breasts, and for such as have
swollen, flagging, or great Breasts: applied with Salt, it helps the biting
of a Mad Dog; with Mead or Honeyed Water, it eases the pains of the Ears. and
takes away the roughness of the Tongue, being rubbed thereupon. It suffers
not Milk to curdle in the Stomach if the Leaves hereof be steeped or boiled in
it before you drink it. Briefly it is very profitable to the Stomach: The often
use hereof is a very powerful Medicine to stay Women's Courses, and the Whites.
Good for the Stomach, Pains of the Head, Sores and Scabs, Chops of the
Fundament, Poison,
Applied to the Forehead or Temples, it eases pains of the Head. And is good
to wash the Heads of young Children therewith, against all manner of breakings
out, Sores, or Scabs therein; and heals the chops of the Fundament. It is
also profitable against the Poison of Venomous Creatures. The distilled Water
of Mints is available to all the purposes aforesaid, yet more weakly.

But if a Spirit thereof be rightly and Chimically drawn, it is much more
powerful than the Herb it self. Simeon Sethi says, It helps a cold Liver,
strengthens the Belly and Stomach, causes digestion, Helps Liver and
Stomach, stays Vomiting and Hiccough, provokes Lust, Spleen, Gravel, Stone,
and Strangury, comforts the Head, sore Mouth, ill Breath, Pallet down,
staieth Vomit and the Hiccough, is good against the Gnawings of the Heart,
provokes Appetite, takes away Obstructions of the Liver, and stirs up
Bodily Lust: But thereof too much must not be taken, because it makes the Blood
thin and wheyish, and turns it into Choler, and therefore Chollerick persons
must obstain from it.

It is is a safe Medicine for the biting of a Mad Dog, being bruised with Salt
and laid thereon. The Powder of it being dried and taken after Meat helps
digestion, and those that are Splenetick: taken with Wine it helps Women in
their Sore Travail in Childhearing; It is good against the Gravel and and Stone
in the Kidneys, and the Strangury. Being smelled unto, it is comfortable for
the Head and Memory. The Decoction thereof gargled in the Mouth cures the Gums
and Mouth that is sore, and mendeth an ill savoured Breath: as also with Rue
and Coriander, causes the Pallat of the Mouth that is down to return to his
place, the Decoction being gargled and held in the Mouth.

The Virtues of the wild or Horse Mints, such as grow in Ditches (whose
Description I purposely omitted in regard they are well enough known) are
especially to dissolve wind Wind, Venereal Dreams, and Nightly pollutions, Ears
pained, biting of Serpents, Kings Evil, stinking Breath,
in the Stomach, to help the Chollick, and those that are short winded, and are
an especial Remedy for those that have Venerious Dreams and pollutions in the
Night being outwardly applied to the Testicles or Cods. The Juice dropped into
the Ears eases the pains of them, and destroys the Worms that breed therein.
They are good against the Venomous biting of Serpents. The Juice laid on warm
helps the Kings Evil, or Kernels in the Throat: The Decoction or distilled
Water helps a stinking Breath proceeding from the corruption of the Teeth;
and snuffed up into the Nose purges the Head. Pliny says, That eating of the
Leaves has been found by experience to cure the Lepry, Lepry,
and applying some of them to the Face: and to help the Scurf or Dandrif
Dandrif.
of the Head used with Vinegar.

They are extreme bad for wounded people, and they say a wounded man that eats
Mints his Wound will never be cured, and that is a long day.

Misselto.
Description.
THis rises up from the Branch or Arm of the Tree whereon it grows, with a
woody Stem, parting it self into sundry Branches, and they again divided into
many other smaller Twigs, interlacing themselves one within another, very much
covered with a grayish green Bark, having two Leaves set at every Joint, and at
the end likewise, which are somewhat long and narrow, small at the bottom but
broader toward the end: At the Knots or Joints of the Boughs and Branches, grow
small yellowish Flowers, which turn into small round white transparant Berries
three or four together, full of glutinous moisture, with a blackish Seed in
every of them, which was never yet known to spring being put into the ground or
any where else to grow.

Place.
It grows very rarely on Oaks with us, but upon sundry other, as well Timber
as FruitTrees, plentifully in Woods, Groves, and the like through all this Land.

Time.
It Flowreth in the Spring time, but the Berries be not ripe until October, and
abide on the Branches all the Winter, unless the BlackBirds, and other Birds do
devour them.

Virtues and Use.
Both the Leaves and Berries of Misleto do heat and dry, and are of subtle
parts: The Birdlime does mollify hard Knots, Tumors, and Impostumes, Impostums
ripeneth and discusseth them; and draws forth thick as well as thin Humors
from the remote places of the Body, digesting and separating them: And being
mixed with equal parts of Rozin and Wax, does mollify the hardness of the
Spleen, Spleen, Ulcers,
and heals old Ulcers and Sores: Being mixed with Sandarack, and O^^ment, it
helps to draw off-foul Nails: and if quicklime and Wine Lees be added
thereunto it works the stronger. The Milleto it self of the Oak (as the best)
made into Powder and given in drink to those that have the Falling Sickness;
Fallingsickness,
does assuredly heal them as Mathiolus says, but it is fit to use it for forty
days together. Some have so highly esteemed of the Virtues hereof that they
have called it Lignam Sanctae Crucis, Wood of the holy Cross, believing it to
help the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, and Palsy, Apoplexy, Palsy,
very speedily, not only to be inwardly taken, but to be hung at their Necks.
Tragus says, That the fresh Wood of any Misleto bruised, and the Juice drawn
forth and dropped into the Ears that have Impostumes Impostums
in them, does help and eas them within a few days.

That it is under the Dominion of the Sun, I do not question, and can also take
for granted that that which grows upon Oaks participates something of the Nature
of Jupiter, because an Oak is one of his Trees; as also that which grows upon
Pear Trees and Apple Trees, participates something of the Nature, because he
rules the Trees, and it draws sap from the Trees, it grows upon having no Root
of its own, but why that should have most virtues that grows upon Oaks I know
not, unless because it is rarest, and hardest to come by, and our Colleges
Opinion is in this contrary to the Scripture which says, Gods tender Mercies
are over all his Works, and so it is, Let the College of Physicians walk as
contrary to him as they pleas, and that is as contrary as the East is to the
West. Clusius affirms that which grows upon Pear Trees to be as prevalent, and
give order that it should not touch the ground after it is gathered, and also
says, That being hung about the Neck, it remedies Witchcraft.

Money-wort, or Herb Twopence.
Description.
THe common Money-wort, sends forth from a small threddy Root, diverse long,
weak, and slender Branches lying and running upon the ground two or three Foot
long or more, set with Leaves two at a Joint one against another at equal
distances, which are almost round, but pointed at the ends, smooth and of a
good green color: At the Joints with the Leaves from the middle forward come
forth at every Joint sometimes one yellow Flower, and sometimes two, standing
each on a small Footstalk, and made of five Leaves, narrow, and pointed at the
ends, with some yellow thredssn the middle: which being past, there stand in
their places small round Heads of Seed.

Place.
It grows plentifully in almost all places of this Land; commonly in moist
grounds by Hedge sides, and in the middle of grassy Fields.

Time.
They Flower in June; and July, and their Seed is ripe quickly after.

Virtues and use.
Moneywort is singular good to stay all Fluxes in Men or Woman, whether they be
Lasks, Bloody Fluxes, Fluxes, Ulcers, Green Wounds Oldulcers.
the Flowing of Women's Courses, Bleedings inwardly or outwardly, and the
weakness of the Stomach that is given to casting. It is very good also for all
Ulcers, or Excoriations of the Lungs or other inward parts. It is exceeding
good for all Wounds, either fresh or green to heal them speedily; and for old
Ulcers that are of a spreading nature: For all which purposes, The Juice of the
Herb, or the Powder drunk in Water, wherein hot Steel has been often quenched:
Or the Decoction of the green Herb in Wine or Water drunk; Or the Seed, Juice
or Decoction used to the outward places to wash or bath them, or to have Tents
dipped therein and put into them, are effectual.

Moonwort.
Description.
This rises up usually but with one dark green thick and fat Leaf standing
upon a short footstalk, not a bove two fingers breadth; but when it will flower
it may be said to bear a small slender stalk about four or five Inches high,
having but one leaf set in the middle thereof, which is much divided on both sides
into sometimes five or seven parts on a sid, sometimes more, each of which parts
is small next the middle rib, but broad forwards and round pointed, resembling
therein an half Moon from whence it took the name, the uppermost parts or
divisions being less than the lowest: The Stalk rises above this Leaf two or
three inches, bearing many Branches of small long Tongues, every one like the
spiky Head of Adders-Tongue, of a brownish color, which whether I shall call
them Flowers or the Seed, I well know not^ which after they have continued a
while resolve into a Mealy dust: The Root is small and Fibrous. This has
sometimes diverse such like Leaves as are before Described, with so many branches
or tops arising from one Stalk each divided from the other.

Place.
It grows on Hills, and Heaths, yet where there is much Grass, for therein it
delights to grow.

Time.
It is to be found only in April and May, for in June when any hot weather
comes for the most part it is withered and gone.

Virtues and use.
Moonwort is cold and drying more than Adders-tongue, and is therefore held to
be more available for all Wounds both inward and outward: The Leaves boiled in
red Wine and drunk stays the immoderate Flux of Women's Courses Women's
Courses, Bleedings, Vomiting, Fluxes, Broken and disioynted Bones, Green Wounds.
and the Whites: It also staieth Bleeding, Vomitings, and other Fluxes; It
helps all Blows and Bruises, and to consolidate all Fractures and
Dislocations. It is good for Ruptures: But it is chiefly used by most, with
other Herbs to make Oils or Balsoms to heal fresh or green Wounds (as I said
before) either inward or outward, for which it is excellent good.

Moonwort is an Herb which they say will open Locks, and unshoo such Horses as
tread upon it, this some laugh to scorn, and those no small Fools neither, but
Country people that I know, call it [Unshoo the Horse] besides I have heard
Commanders say, That on White Down in Devon. near Tiverton, there was found
thirty Horse shoos, pulled off from the feet of the Earl of Essex his Horses
being there drawn up in a Body, many of them being but newly shod, and no
reason known, which caused much admiration; and the Herb described usually
grows upon Heaths. The Moon owns the Herb.

Mosses.
I Shall not trouble the Reader with any Description of these, since my intent is
to speak only of two kinds as the most principal, Viz. Ground-Moss, and
Tree-Moss, both which are very well know.

Place.
The Ground-Moss, growing in our moist Woods, and the bottoms of Hills, in
boggy grounds, and in shadowy Ditches, and many other such like places.

The Tree-Moss grows only on Trees.

Virtues and use.
The Ground-Moss, is held to be singular good to break the Stone, Stone,
Inflammations; Fluxes, Vomiting, Bleeding, Women's Courses,
and to expel and drive it forth by Urin, being boiled in Wine and drunk: The
Herb bruised and boiled in Water and applied eases all Inflammations and pains
coming of an hot cause ^ and is therefore used to eas the pains of the hot Gout.

The Tree-Mosses are cooling and binding, and partake of a digesting and
mollifying quality withal, as Galon says. But each Moss does partake of the
Nature of the Tree from whence it is taken; therefore that of the Oak is more
Binding: and is of good effect to stay Fluxes in man or Woman, as also
Vomitings or Bleedings, the Powder thereof being taken in Wine: The Decoction
thereof in Wine is very good for Women to be hathed with, or to sit in that are
troubled with the overflowing of their Courses: The same being drunk stays
the Stomach that is troubled with casting, or the Hiccough; and as A^^i^^nna
says, it comfort the Heart: The Powder thereof taken in Drink for some time
together, is thought available for the Dropsy. Dropsy,
The Oil of Roses that has had fresh Moss steeped therein for a time, and after
boiled and applied to the Temples and Forehead, does Merveilously eas the
Headache Headache,
coming of a hot cause, as also the Distillations of hot Rhewm or Humors to the
Eyes or other parts: The Ancients much used it in their Ointments and other
Medicines against Lassitude, and to strengthen and comfort the Sinews. Sinews.
For which, if it was good then, I know no reason but it may be fonnd so still.

Motherwort.
Description.
THis has a hard, square, brownish, rough, strong Stalk, rising three or four
foot high at the least, spreading into many Branches, whereon grow Leaves ou
each side with long Footstalks, two at every Joint, which are somewhat broad and
long as it were, rough, or crumpled, with many great Veins therein; of a sad
green color, and deeply dented about the edges, and almost divided: From the
middle of the Branches up to the tops of them (which are very long and small)
grow the Flowers round about them at distances in sharp pointed rough hard
Husks, of a more red or purple-colour than Balm or Horehound, but in the same
manner and form as the Horehounds: after which come small round blackish Seed in
great plenty: The Root sends forth a number of long Strings and small Fibers,
taking strong hold in the Ground; of a dark yellowish or brownish color, and
abides as the Horehound does; the smell of this being not much different from
it.

Place.
It grows only in Gardens with us in England.

Virtues and use.
Motherwort, is held to be of much use for the trembling of the Heart, and in
faintings and swounings Swonnings, Sore Travail, Mother, Urine, Women's Courses,
Phlegm, Cold Phlegm, Cramps, Convulsions, Melancholy. Vapors.
from whence it took the name Cardiaca. The Powder thereof to the quantity of a
spoonful drunk in Wine is a wonderful help to Women in their Sore Travails, as
also for the suffocations or risings of the Mother; and from these effects it
is likely it took the name of Motherwort with us. It also provokes Urine and
Women's Courses, cleanses the Chest of cold Phlegm oppressing it, and kills the
Worms in the Belly: It is of good use to warm and dry up the cold Humors, to
digest and dispers them that are settled in the Veins Joints, and Sinews of the
Body, and to help Cramps, and Convulsions.

Venus owns the Herb, and it is under Leo, there is no better Herb to drive
Melancholy Vapors from the Heart, to strengthen it, and make a merry cheerful
blithe soul, than this Herb, it may be kept in a Syrup or Conserve, therefore the
Latins called it Cardiaca: Besides, it makes Women joyful Mothers of Children,
and settles their Wombs as they should be, therefore we call it Motherwort.

Mousear.
Description.
THis is a low Herb creeping upon the ground by small strings like the
Strawberry Plant, whereby it shoots forth small Roots, whereat grow upon the
Ground many small and somewhat short Leaves set in a round form together,
hollowish in the middle where they are broadest, of an hoary color all over,
and very hairy, which being broken do give a white Milk: From among these Leaves
spring up two or three small hoary Stalks about a span high, with a few smaller
Leaves thereon; At the tops whereof stands usually but one Flower, consisting
of many paler yellow Leaves broad at the points, and a little dented in, set in
three or four rows, the greater outermost, very like a Dandelyon Flower, and a
little reddish underneath about the edges, especially if it grow in a dry
ground: which after they have stood long in Flower, do turn into Down, which
with the Seed is carried away with the Wind.

Place.
It grows on Ditch Banks, and sometimes in Ditches if they be dry and in sandy
Grounds.

Time.
It Flowreth about June and July, and abides green all the Winter.

Virtues and Use.
The Juice hereof taken in Wine or the Decoction thereof drunk does help the
Jaundice Jaundice, Stone, Bellyach, Dropsy, Flux, Wounds, Bloody Flux, Terms
stops,
although of long continuance, to drink thereof morning and evening, and
abstain from other drink two or three hours after: It is a special Remedy
against the Stone, and the tormenting pains thereof; as also other Tortures and
griping pains of the Bowels; The Decoction thereof with Succory and Centaury,
is held very eflectual to help the Dropsy, and them that are inclining
thereunto, and the Diseases of the Spleen. It stays the Fluxes of Blood
either at the Mouth or Nose, and inward Bleedings also, for it is a singular
Wound Herb for Wounds both inward and outward; It helps the Bloody Flux and
stays the abundance of Women's Courses: There is a Syrup made of the Juice
hereof and Sugar by the Apothecaries of Italy, and other places, which is of
much account with them, to be given to those that are troubled with the Cough
or Phtisick: Cough, Phtisick, Ruptures, Canker, ulcers, spreading sores.
The same also is singular good for Ruptures or Burstings. The green Herb
bruised and presently bound to any fresh cut or Wound, does quickly soder the
lips thereof. And the Juice, Decoction, or Powder of the dried Herb, is most
singular to stay the Malignity of spreading and fretting Cankers and Ulcers
wheresoever, yea in the Mouth, or secret parts: The distilled Water of the
Plant is available in all the Diseases aforesaid, and to wash outward Wounds
and Sores, and to apply Tents, or Clothes wet therein.

The Moon owns the Herb also, and though Authors cry out upon Alchymists for
attempting to fix Quick Silver by this Herb and Moonwort: A Roman would not
have judged a thing by the success, if it be to be fixed at all, it is by Lunar
Influence.

Mugwort
Description.
THe common Mugwort have diverse Leaves lying upon the ground, very much divided,
or cut deeply in about the Brims somewhat like Wormwood but much larger, of a
dark green color on the upper side and very hoary white underneath. The stalks
rise to be four or five foot high, having on it such like Leaves as those below,
but somewhat smaller, branching forth very much toward the top, whereon are set
very small pale yellowish Flowers like Buttons, which fall away, and after them
come small Seed enclosed in round Heads: The Root is long and hard with many
small Fibers growing from it, whereby it takes strong hold in the ground, but
both Stalk and Leaf do die down every year, and the Root shoots anew in the
Spring. The whole Plant is of a reasonable good scent, and is more easily
propogated by the Slips, than by the Seed.

Place.
It grows plentifully in many places of this Land, by the way sides, as also
by small WaterCourses, and in diverse other places.

Time.
It Flowreth and Seedeth in the end of Summer.

Virtues and Use.
Mugwort is with good success put among other Herbs that are boiled for Women
to fit over the hot Decoction, to draw down their Courses, to help the Delivery
of the Birth, and expel the Afterbirth, as also for the Obstructions and
Inflammations of the Mother. Terms provokes, Birth, Afterbirth Womb Inflamed,
wens, Kings Evil, pains in the Neck, Opium, Sciatica, Sinews pained, Cramp,
It breaks the Stone, and causes one to make water where it is stopped: The
Juice thereof made up with Mirrh, and put under as a Pessary, works the same
effect, and so does the Root also, being made up with Hogs Greas into an
Ointment, it takes away Wens and hard Knots and Kernels that grow about the
Neck and Throat, and eases the pains about the Neck and more effectually, if
some Field Daisies be put with it. The Herb it self being fresh or the Juice
thereof taken, is a special Remedy upon the overmuch taking of Opium. Three
drams of the Powder of the dried Leaves taken in Wine, is a speedy and the best
certain help for the Sciatica. A Decoction thereof made with Chamomel and
Agrimony, and the place bathed therewith while it is warm, takes away the
pains of the Sinews and the Cramp.

This is an Herb of Venus, therefore maintains the parts of the Body she
rules, and Remedies the Diseases of the parts that are under her Signs, Taurus
and Libra.

The Mulberry-Tree.
THis is so well known in the places where it grows, that it needs no
Description.

Time.
It bears Fruit in the Months of July and August.

Virtues and Use.
The Mulberry is of different parts; the ripe Berries by reason of their
Sweetness and slippery moisture, opening the Belly, and the unripe binding it,
especially when they are dried, and then they are good to stay Fluxes, Lasks,
Binding, Fluxes, Lasks, Terms stops, Inflammation Uvula, sore Mouth and Throat,
Toothach, Bleeding, Hemorrhoids,
and the abundance of Women's Courses. The Bark of the Root kills the broad
Worms in the Body. The Juice, or the Syrup made of the Juice of the Berries,
helps all Inflammations and Sores in the Mouth or Throat, and the Pallet of
the Mouth when it is fallen down. The Juice of the Leaves is a Remedy against
the biting of Serpents, and for those that have taken Aconite: The Leaves beaten
with Vinegar is good to lay on any place that is burnt with fire. A Decoction
made of the Bark and Leaves, is good to wash the Mouth and Teeth when they ach.
If the Root be a little slit or cut, and a small hole made in the ground next
thereunto, in the Harvest time, it will give out a certain Juice, which being
hardened, the next day is of good use to help the Toothach, to dissolve Knots,
and purge the Belly: The Leaves of Mulberries are said to stay bleeding at Mouth
or Nose, or the Bleeding of the Piles, or of a Wound being bound unto the
places. Acurious secret.
A Branch of the Tree taken when the Moon is at the full and bound to the Wrist
of a Woman's Arm whose Courses come down too much does stay them in a short
space.

Mercury rules the Tree, therefore are its effects variable as his are.

Mullein.
Description.
THe common white Mullein has many fair large woolly white Leaves lying next
the ground, somewhat longer than broad, pointed at the ends, and as it were
dented about the edges: The Stalk rises up to be four or five Foot high,
covered over with such like Leaves, but lesser, so that no Stalk can be seen for
the multitude of Leaves thereon up to the Flowers, which come forth on all sides
of the Stalk, without any Branches for the most part, and are many set together
in a long spike, in some of a gold yellow color, in others more pale,
consisting of five round pointed Leaves, which afterward give small round Heads,
wherein is small brownish Seed contained: The Root is long, white, and Woody,
perishing after it has born Seed.

Place.
It grows by the way sides, and in Lanes in many places of this Land.

Time.
It Flowreth in July, or thereabouts.

Virtues and use.
A small quantity of the Root given in Wine, is commended by Dioscorides against
Lasks and Fluxes Flux, Ruptures, Cramp, Convulsion, Cough, Toothach,
Hemorrhoids, Bloody Flux, Obstrnctions, Reins, Bladder, Sinews,
of the Belly: The Decoction thereof drunk is profitable for those that are
Bursten, and for Cramps and Convulsions, and for those that are troubled with
an old Cough. The Decoction thereof gargled caseth the pains of the Toothach:
An Oil made by the often Infusion of the Flowers, is of very good effect for
the Piles. The Decoction of the Root in Red Wine, or in Water (if there be an
Ague) wherein red hot Steel has been often quenched, does stay the Bloody
Flux. The same also opens Obstructions of the Bladder and Reins when one
cannot make water. A Decoction of the Leaves hereof, and of Sage, Marjetom and
Camomil Flowers and the places bathed therewith that have Sinews stark with
cold, or Cramps, does bring them much eas, and comfort. Three ounces of the
distilled water of the Flowers drunk morning and evening for some days
together is said to be the most excellent Remedy for the hot Gout, Gout, Warts,
The Juice of the Leaves and Flowers being laid upon rough Warts, as also the
Powder of the dried Roots rubbed on does easily take them away; but does no
good to smooth Warts. The Powder of the dried Flowers is an especial Remedy for
those that are troubled with belly-aches or the pains of the Chollick.
Bellyach, Chollick, Inflammation, Thorns, Splinters, Boyls, Groyn, Disjunctures.
The Decoction of the Root, and so likewise of the Leaves is of great effect to
dissolve the Tumors, Swellings, or Inflammation of the Throat. The Seed and
Leaves boiled in Wine, and applied, draws forth speedily Thorns, or Splinters
gotten into the Flesh, eases the pains, and heals them also. The Leaves
bruised and wrapped in double papers, and covered with hot Ashes and Embers to
bake a while and then taken forth and laid warm on any Botch or Boil happening in
the Groyn or share, does dissolve and heal them. The Seed bruised, and boiled
in Wine and laid on any Member that has been out of Joint and is newly set
again, takes away all Swellings and pains thereof.

Mustard.
Description.
THe common Mustard has large and broad rough Leaves, very much jagged with
uneven, and unorderly gashes, somewhat like Turnip Leaves, but lesser and
rougher: The Stalk rises to be more than a foot high, and sometimes two foot
high, being round, rough, and branched at the top, bearing such like Leaves
thereon as grow below, but lesser, and less divided; and diverse yellow Flowers
one above another at the tops; after which come small rough pods, with small lank
flat ends, wherein is contained round yellowish Seed, sharp, hot, and biting
upon the Tongue: The Root is small, long, and woody, when it bears Stalks and
perishes every year.

Place.
This grows with us in Gardens only, and other manured places.

Time.
It is an annual Plant, Flowring in July, and their Seed is ripe in August.

Virtues and use.
Mustard Seed has the Virtue of Heating, Heats, Dries, Splinters, Thorns,
Terms provokes, Fallingsickness, Lethargy, Sneezing,
discussing, rarefying and drawing out Splinters of Bones, and other things out
of the Flesh. It is of good effect to bring down Women's Courses, for the
Falling sickness or Lethargy, drousie forgetful evil, to use it both inwardly
and outwardly to rub the Nostrils, Forehead, and Temples, to warm and quicken
the Spirits, for by the fierce sharpness it purges the Brain by sneezing, and
drawing down Rhewm and other Viscuous Humors, which by their Distillations upon
the Lungs and Chest procure coughing, and therefore with some Honey added
thereto does much good therein. The Decoction of the Seed made in Wine and
drunk, provokes Urine, resists the force of Poison, the Malignity of
Mushroms, Disury, Poison, Mushroms Venomous Beasts, Agues, Lu^^, provokes,
Spleen, Uvula, Sciatica, Toothach, Pains, Hair, Bruises, Black and blue spots,
roughness, Leprosy, Low (e Evil MorFreckles, WryNecks.
and the Venom of Scorpions, or other Venomous Creatures, if it be taken in
time: and takes before the cold fits of Agues, alters, lesseneth, and cures
them. The Seed taken either by it self or with other things either in an
Electuary or Drink, does mightily stir up Bodily lust, and helps the Spleen
and pains in the sides, and gnawing in the Bowels. And used as a Gargle,
draws up the Pallat of the Mouth being fallen down, and also it dissolveth
the Swellings about the Throat, if it be outwardly applied. Being chewed in the
Mouth, it oftentimes helps the Toothach: The outward application hereof upon
the pained place of the Sciatica, discusseth the Humors, and eases the pains,
as also of the Gout, and other Joint aches. And is much and often used to eas
pains in the sides or loins, the shoulders or other parts of the Body, upon the
applying thereof to raise Blisters, and cures the Diseas by drawing it to the
outward part of the Body: It is also used to help the falling of the Hair: The
Seed bruised, mixed with Honey and applied, or made up with Wax, takes away
the Marks, and black and blue spots of Bruises or the like, the roughness or
Scabbedness of the Skin, as also the Leprosy and lousy evil: it helps also
the crick in the Neck. The distilled Water of the Herb when it is in Flower is
much used to drink inwardly to help in any the Diseases aforesaid, or to wash
the Mouth when the Pallat is down, and for the Diseases of the Throat to
gargle, but outwardly also for Scabs, Itch, or other like Infirmities, and
cleanses the Face from Morphew, Spots, Freckles, and other Deformities.

It is an excellent Sauce for such whose Blood wants clarifying and for weak
Stomachs being an Herb of Mars, but naught for Chollerick people, though as
good for such as are aged or troubled with cold Diseases, Aries claims something
to do with it, therefore it strengthens the heart and resists poison, let such
whose Stomachs are so weak, they cannot digest their meat or appetite it, take
of Mustard Seed a dram, Cinnamon as much, and having beaten them to Powder ad
half as much Mastich in Powder, and with Gum Arabic dissolved in Rose Water,
make it up into Troches, of which they may take one of about half a dram weight
an hour or two before meals, let old men and women make much of this medicine,
and they will either give me thanks, or manifest ingratitude.

Hedg-Mustard.
Description.
THis grows up usually but with one blackish green Stalk, tongh, easy to
bend but not break, branched into diverse parts, and sometimes with diverse
Stalks set full of Branches, whereon grow long, rough, or hard rugged Leaves,
very much torn and cut on the edges into many parts, some bigger, and some
lesser, of a dirty green color: The Flowers are small and yellow, that grow at
the tops of the Branches, in long Spikes, flowring by degrees, so that
continuing long in Flower the stalks will have small round Cods at the bottom,
growing upright and close to the Stalk, while the top Flowers yet show
themselves; in which are contained small yellow Seed, sharp and strong, as the
Herb is also: The Root grows down slender and woody, yet abiding, and
springing again every year.

Place.
This grows frequently in this Land by the Ways and Hedge sides, and sometimes
in the open Fields.

Time.
It flowreth most usually about July.

Virtues and Use.
It is singular good in all the Diseases of the Chest and Lungs, hoarceness of
voice, and by the use of the Decoction thereof for a little space, those have
been recovered who had utterly lost their voice, and almost their Spirits also.
The Juice threof made into a Syrup, or licking Medicine with Honey or Sugar is
no less effectual for the same purpose, and for all other Coughs, Weesings, and
shortness of Breath. The same is also profitable for those that have the
Jaundice, the Pluresie, pains in the Back and Loins, and for torments in the
Belly or the Chollick, being also used in Clysters. The Seed is held to be a
special Remedy against Poison and Venom: It is singular good for the Sciatica,
the Gout, and all Joyntaches, Sores and Cankers in the Mouth, Throat, or behind
the Ears; and no less for the hardness and Swelling of the Testicles, or of
Women's Breasts. Breast, Lungs, Hoarceness Cough, shortness of breath, Jaundice,
Pleuresie, Back, Loins, Belly, Chollick, Poison, Sciatica, Gout, Joints,
Fistulaes, ulcers, Cankers, Testicles, Women's Breasts.


Mars owns this Herb also.

Nep, or Catmint.
Description.
THe common garden Nep shoots forth hard four square Stalks with a hoariness
on them, a yard high or more, full of Branches, bearing at every Joint two
broad Leaves, somewhat like Balm but longer pointed, softer, whiter, and more
hoary, nicked about the edges, and of a strong sweet scent. The Flowers grow in
large tusts at the tops of the Branches, and underneath them likewise on the
Stalks many together, of a whitish Purple color. The Roots are composed of
many long strings or Fibers, fastening themselves strongly in the ground, and
abide with green Leaves thereon all the Winter.

Place.
It is only nursed up in our Gardens.

Time.
And it flowreth in July or thereabouts.

Virtues and Use
Nep is generally used for Women to procure their Courses, being taken inwardly
or outwardly, either alone or with other convenient Herbs in a decoction to
bath them, or sit over the hot fumes thereof, and by the frequent use thereof it
takes away barrenness, and the wind and pains of the Mother. Terms provokes,
Barrenness Womb, Wind, Mother, Cough, Rhewms, Vertigo, Cramp, Cold ach,
Difficulty of breath, Bruises, Hemorrhoids, Scabby Heads.
It is also used in pains of the Head coming of any cold cause, as Catarrh's,
Rhewms, and for swimming and giddiness thereof, and is of especial use for the
windiness of the Stomach and Belly. It is effectual for any Cramps or cold
aches to dissolve the cold and wind that afflicts the place, and is used for
Colds, Coughs, and shortness of breath. The Juice thereof drunk in Wine is
profitable for those that are bruised by any accident. The green Herb bruised
and applied to the Fundament, and lying there two or three hours, eases the
pains of the Piles. The Juice also being made up into an Ointment, is effectual
for the same purpose: The head washed with a Decoction thereof, it takes away
Scabs; and may be effectual for other parts of the Body also.

It is an Herb of Venus.

Nettles.
THese are so well known that they need no Description at all, they may be
found by the feeling in the darkest night.

Virtues and Use.
The Roots or Leaves boiled or the Juice of either of them, or both, made into
an Electuary with Honey or Sugar, is a safe and sure Medicine to open the Pipes
and passages of the Lungs, Lungs, Wheezing, shortness of breath, Pleuresie,
Almonds of the Ears Ears, Throat, Mouth, Uvula, Terms provokes, Mother, Disury,
Gravel, Worms, Spleen, Bleeding, Venomous Beasts, MadDogs, Hemlock, Henbane,
Nightshade, Mandrakes, Lethargy, Morphew, Leprosy, Bleeeing, Polipus, ulcers,
Fistulaes, Gangrenes Scabs, Itch, Wounds, Weariness, Disjunctures, Gout,
Sciatica, Joints.
which is the cause of wheesing and shortness of breath, and helps to
expectorate tough Phlegm, as also to raise the impostumated Pleurefie, and spend
it by spitting; The same helps the swelling of the Almonds of the Throat, the
Mouth and Throat being gargled therewith: The Juice is also effectual to settle
the Palate of the Mouth in its place, and to heal and temper the Inflammations
and soreness of the Mouth and Throat. The Decoction of the Leaves in Wine being
drunk is singular good to provoke Women's Courses, and settle the suffocation or
strangling of the Mother, and all other Diseases thereof, as also applied
outwardly with a little Mirrh. The same also, or the Seed provokes Urine, and
expels the Gravel and Stone in the Reins or Bladder often proved to be
effectual in many that have taken it. The same kills the Worms in Children
eases pains in the sides, and dissolveth the windiness in the Spleen, as also
in the Body, although others think it only powerful to provoke Venery. The
Juice of the Leaves taken two or three days together, staieth bleeding at the
Mouth: The Seed being drunk is a Remedy against the stinging of Venomous
Creatures, the biting of Mad Dogs The poysonful qualities of Hemlock, Henbane,
Nightshade, Mandrake, or other such like Herbs that stupifie or dull the
senses, as also the Lethargy, especially to use it outwardly to rub the
Forehead and Temples in the Lethargy, and the places bitten or stung with
Beasts, with a little Salt. The distilled water of the Herb is also effectual
(although not so powerful) for the Diseases aforesaid, as for outward Wounds
and Sores to wash them, and to clens the Skin from Morphew, Lepry, and other
discolorings thereof: The Seed or Leaves bruised and put into the Nostrils,
staieth the bleeding of them, and takes away the Flesh growing in them called
Polipus. The Juice of the Leaves, or the Decoction of them, or of the Roots, is
singular good to wash either old rotten and stinking sores, or Fistulaes and
Gangrenes, and such as are fretting, eating, or corroding Scabs, Mainginess and
Itch in any part of the Body, as also green Wounds by washing them therewith, or
applying the green Herb bruised thereunto, yea although the Flesh were
separated from the Bones: The same applied to our wearied Members refreshes
them, or to places that have been out of Joint being first set again,
strengthens, dries and comfort them, as also those places troubled with
Aches and Gouts, and the Defluxion of Humors upon the Joints or Sinews, it
eases the pains, and dries or dissolveth the Defluxions. An Ointment made of
the Juice, Oil, and a little Wax, is singular good to rub cold and benumbed
Members. An handful of the Leaves of green Nettles, and another of Wallwort, or
Danewort; bruised and applied simply of themselves to the Gout, Sciatica, or
Joyntaches in any part has been found to be an admirable help thereunto.

This also is an Herb Mars claims Dominion over, you know Mars is hot and dry,
and you know as well that Winter is cold and moist; then you may know as well
the reason why Nettle tops eaten in Spring consume the Phlegmatic superfluities
in the Body of man, that the coldness and moisture of Winter, has left behind.

Nightshade.
Description.
COmmon Nightshade has an upright, round, green, hollow stalk, about a Foot or
half a yard high, bushing forth into many Branches, whereon grow many green
Leaves, somewhat broad and pointed at the ends, soft and full of Juice, somewhat
like unto Bazil, but larger, and a little unevenly dented about the edges at
the tops of the Stalks and Branches, come forth three or four or more white
Flowers made of five small pointed Leaves apiece, standing on a Stalk together,
one above another with yellow pointels in the middle, composed of four of five
yellow threads set together which afterward turn into so many pendulous green
Berries of the bigness of small Pease, full of green Juice, and small whitish
round flat Seed lying within it. The Root is white and a little woody when it
has given Flower and Fruit with many small Fibers at it; The whole Plant is of a
waterish insipide taste, but the Juice within the Berries is somewhat viscuous,
and of a cooling and binding quality.

Place.
It grows wild with us, under old Walls, and in Rubbish, the common paths,
and sides of Hedges and Fields, as also in our Gardens here in England without
any planting.

Time.
It dies down every year, and arises again of its own sowing, but springs
not until the latter end of April at the soonest.

Virtues and Use.
This Common Nightshade is wholly used to cool all hot Inflammations
Inflammations,
either inwardly or outwardly, being no way dangerous to any that shall use it,
as most of the rest of the Nightshades are; yet it must be used mode^^ly: The
distilled water only of the whole Herb is fittest and safest to be taken
inwardly. The Juice also clarified and taken being mingled with a little
Vinegar, is good to wash the Mouth and Throat that is inflamed: Inflammations,
Eyes, Shingles, Ringworms, Terms stops, Testicles, Gouts, Ears.
But outwardly the Juice of the Herb or Berries with Oil of Roses, and a little
Vinegar and Ceruss labored together in a leaden Mortar, is very good to anoint
all hot Inflammations in the Eyes; It does also much good for the Shingles,
Ringworms, and in all running fretting, and corroding Ulcers, and in moist
Fistulaes, if the Juice be made up with some Hens dung and applied thereto: A
Pessary dipped in the Juice, and put up into the Matrix stays the immoderate
Flux of Women's Courses: A Cloth wet therein and applied to the Testicles or
Cods, upon any Swelling therein gives much eas, as also to the Gout that
comes of hot and sharp Humors. The Juice dropped into the Ears, eases pains
therein that arise of heat or Inflammation. And Pliny says, it is good for hot
Swellings under the Throat.

Have a care you mistake not the deadly Nightshade for this; if you know it
not, you may let them both alone and take no harm, having other Medicines
sufficient in the Book.

The Oak.
THis is so well known (the Timber thereof being the Glory and Safety of this
Nation by sea) that it needs no Description.

Virtues and use.
The Leaves and Bark of the Oak, and the Acorn Cups, do bind and dry very much:
The inner Bark of the Tree, and the thin Skin that covers the Acorn, are most
used to stay the spitting of Blood, Dry, Bind, Spitting Blood, Bloody Flux,
Vomiting, Venerious Acts, Disury, Poison, Venomous Beasts, Cantharides, Ulcers
of the Bladder, Mother, Wounds,
and the Bloody Flux: The Decoction of that Bark and the Powder of the Cups, to
stay Vomitings, spitting of blood, bleeding at Mouth, or other Flux of Blood in
man or woman, Lasks also, and the involuntary Flux of Natural Seed. The Acorns
in Powder taken in Wine, pravoketh Urine, and resists the Poison of Venomous
Creatures. The Decoction of Acorns and the Bark made in Milk and taken
resists the force of Poisonous Herbs and Medicines, as also the Virulency of
Cantharides, when one by eating them, has his Bladder exulcerated, and pisseth
Blood.

Hippocrates says, he used the fumes of Oak Leaves to Woman that were troubled
with the strangling of the Mother; and Oalen applied them being bruised to cure
green Wounds. The Distilled water of the Oaken Buds before they break out into
Leaves, is good to be used either inward, or outwardly, to assuage Inflammations
Inflammation, Flux, Pestilences, Epidemical Diseases, Liver, Stone, Terms stops,
Scabs.
and stop all manner of Fluxes in man or woman: The same is singular good in
Pestilential and hot burning Fevers, for it resists the force of the
infection, and allayeth the heat; it cools the heat of the Liver, breaks
the Stone in the Kidneys, and staieth women's Courses: The Decoction of the
Leaves works the same effects. The water that is found in the hollow places of
old Oaks, is very effectual against any foul or spreading Scab.

The Distilled Water (or Decoction which is better) of the Leaves is one of the
best Remedies that I know for the Whites Whites
in Women.

Jupiter owns the Treo.

Oats.
THese are also so well known that they need no Description.

Virtues and Use.
Oats fried with Bay Salt, and applied to the sides, takes away the pains of
Stitches and Wind Stitch, wind, Itch, Leprosy, Fistulaes, Apostums, Freckles.
in the sides or Belly: A Pultis made of the Meal of Oats, and some Oil of Bays
put thereto, helps the Itch, and the Leprosy, as also the Fistulaes of the
Fundament, and dissolveth hard Imposthumes The Meal of Oats boiled with Vinegar
and applied, takes away Freckles and Spots in the Face, or other parts of the
Body.

One-blade.
Description.
THis small Plant never bears more than one Leaf, but only when it rises up
with his Stalk, which thereon bears another, and seldom more, which are of a
bluish green color, pointed, with many Ribs or Veins therein, like Plantane:
At the top of the Stalk, grow many small white Flowers, Star-fashion, smelling
somewhat sweet; after which come small reddish Berries when they are ripe. The
Root is small of the bigness of a Rush, lying and creeping under the upper
crust of the Earth, shooting forth in diverse places.

Place.
It grows in moist, shadowy, and grassy places of Woods, in many places of
this Land.

Time.
It ^^^wreth about May, and the Berries be ^ipe in June, and then quickly
perishes until the next year, it springs from the same Root again.

Virtues and use.
Half a Dram, or a Dram at most in Powder of the Roots hereof taken in Wine and
Vinegar, of each equal parts, and the party laid presently to sweat thereupon,
is held to be a Sovereign Remedy for those that are infected with the Plague,
and have a Sore upon them, by expelling the poison and infection, and defending
the Heart and Spirits from danger. Pestilence, Poison, Epidemical Diseases,
Wounds, Sinews cut.
It is a singular good Wound Herb; and is thereupon used with other the like
effects in making Compound Balms for the curing of Wounds, be they fresh and
green, or old and Malignant, and especially if the Sinews be hurt.

Onions.
THese are so well known that I need not spend time about writing a Description
of them.

Virtues and Vices.
Onions are Flatulent or Windy, yet they do somewhat provoke appetite, encreas
thirst, eas the Belly and Bowels; provoke Women's Courses, help the biting of a
mad Dog, Mad Dogs, Worms, Cough, Lethargy, Epidemical Diseases.
and of other Venomous Creatures to be used with Honey and Rue, and increases
Sperm, especially the Seed of them: They also kill the Worms in Children if
they drink the Water fasting wherein they have been steeped all night. Being
roasted under the Embers and eaten with Honey, or Sugar and Oil they much
conduce to help an inveterate Cough, and expectorate the tough Phlegm. The Juice
being snuffed up into the Nostrils, purges the Head and helps the Lethargy
(yet the often eating of them is said to procure pains in the Head) It has
been held with diverse Country people a good preservative against Infection to
eat Onions fasting with Bread and Salt: as also to make a great Onion hollow,
filling the place with good Triacle, and after to roast it well under the
Embers, which after taking away of the outermost skin thereof, being beaten
together, is a Sovereign Salve for either Plague Sore, or any other putrid
Ulcer. The Juice of Onions is good for either scalding, or burning by fire,
water, or Gunpouder, and used with Vinegar, takes away all Blemishes, Spots,
and Marks in the Skin, and dropped into the Ears, eases the pains and nois of
them. Applied also with Figs beaten together, he^peth to ripen and break
Impostumes and other Sores.

Leeks are as like them in quality as a Pomewater is like an Apple: They are a
Remedy against a Surfeit of Mushroms, being baked under the Embers and taken;
and being boiled and applied warm helps the Piles; In other things they have
the same property as the Onions, although not so effectual.

Mars owns them, and they have gotten this quality, to draw any corruption to
them, for if you pill one and lay him upon a Dunghill, you shall find him rotten
in half a day, by drawing putrefaction to it, then being bruised and applied to
a Plague Sore it is very probable 'twill do the like.

Orpine.
Description.
COmmon Orpine rises up with diverse round brittle Stalks, thick set with fat
and fleshy Leaves without any order, and little or nothing dented about the
edges, of a pale green color; The Flowers are white or whitish growing in
tufts, after which come small chaffy Husks, with Seed like dust in them. The
Roots are diverse thick, round white tuberous clogs; and the Plant grows not
so big in some places as in others where it is found.

Place.
It is frequent almost in every Country of this Land, and is cherished in
Gardens with us, where it grows greater than that which is wild, and grows
in the shadowy sides of Fields and Woods.

Time.
It Flowreth about July and the Seed is ripe in August.

Virtues and Use.
Orpine is seldom used in inward Medicines with us, although Tragus says from
experience in Germany that the distilled water thereof is profitable for
gnawings, or excoriations Excoriation of Bowels, Phtisick, Womb, Bloody Flux,
Wounds, Instamation, Scalding, Burnings, Quinsie, Ruptures.
in the Stomach or Bowels, and for Ulcers in the Lungs, Liver, or other inward
parts, as also in the Matrix, and helps all those Diseases, being drunk for
certain days together: And that it stays the sharpness of Humors in the
Bloody Flux, and other Fluxes in the Body, or in Wounds: The Root, thereof also
performs the same effect. It is used outwardly to cool any heat or
Inflammation upon any Hurt or Wound, and eases the pains of them: as also to
heal Scaldings or Burnings: The Juice thereof beaten with some green Sallet
Oil, and anointed: The Leaf also bruised and laid to any green Wound in the
Hands or Legs, does heal them quickly; and being bound to the Throat, much
helps the Quinsie, It helps also Ruptures and Burstiness.

If you pleas to make the Juice into a Syrup with Honey or Sugar, you may
safely take a spoonful or two at a time (let my Author say what he will) for a
Quinsie, and you shall find the Medicine more pleasant, and the Cure more
speedy, than if you took a Dogs-turd which is the Learned Colleges vulgar Cure.

The Moon owns the Herb, and he that knows but her Exaltation, knows what I say
is true.

Parsley.
THis is so well known to be an Inhabitant in every Garden, that it is needless
to write any Description of it. The virtues of it being many are as follows.

Virtues and use.
It is very comfortable to the Stomach, Stomach, Disury, Terms provokes, Liver,
Spleen, Fallingsickness, Stone, Wind, Venomous Beasts, Cough, Sucking Children,
Eyes, Women's Breasts, Curdled Milk, Black and blue marks Jaundice,
Fallingsickness, Dropsy,
and helps to provoke Urine and Women's Courses, and to break wind both in the
Stomach and Bowels, and does a little open the Body, but the Root much more,
and opens Obstructions both of the Liver and Spleen, and is therefore
accounted one of the five opening Roots; Galen commends it against the
Falling Sickness, and to provoke Urine mightily, especially if the Roots be
boiled and eaten like Parsnips. The Seed is effectual to provoke Urine and
Women's Courses, to expel wind, to break the Stone, and eas the pains and
torments thereof, or of any other part in the Body occasioned by Wind. It is
also effectual against the Venom of any poysonfull Creature, and the danger
that comes to them that have taken Litharge, and is good against the Cough.
The distilled water of Parsley is a familiar Medicine with Nurses to give their
Children when they are troubled with wind in the Stomach or Belly, which they
call the frets, and is also much available to them that are of greater years.
The Leaves of Parsley laid to the Eyes that are inflamed with heat or swollen,
does much help them, if it be used with Bread or Meal; and being fried with
Butter and applied to Women's Breasts that are hard through the curdling of
their Milk, it abateth the hardness quickly, and also it takes away black and
blue marks coming of Bruises or Falls. The Juice thereof dropped into the Ears
with a little Wine eases the pains. Tragus sets down an excellent Medicine
to help the Jaundice and Falling Sickness, the Dropsy, and Stone in the
Kidneys, in this manner: Take of the Seeds of Parsley, Fennel, Annis, and
Caraways of each an ounce; of the Roots of Parsley, Burnet, Saxifrage, and
Carawaies, of each one ounce and an half, let the Seeds be bruised, and the
Roots washed and cut small: Let them lie all night in sleep in a pottle of white
Wine, and in the morning be boiled in a close earthen Vessel until a third part
or more be wasted, which being strained and cleared: take four ounces thereof
morning and evening first and last, abstaining from drink after it for three
hours: This opens Obstructions Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen.
of the Liver and Spleen, and expels the Dropsy and Jaundice by Urine.

Parsnip.
THe Garden kind hereof is so well known (the Root being commonly eaten) that I
shall not trouble you with any Description of it. But the wild kind being of more
Physical use, I shall in this place describe unto you.

Description.
The wild Parsnip differs little from the Garden kind, but grows not so
fair and large, nor has so many Leaves; and the Root is shorter, more woody and
not so fit to be eaten, and therefore the more Medicinable.

Place.
The name of the first shows the place of its growth, Viz. In Gardens.

The other grows wild in diverse places, as in the Marshes by Rochester and
elsewhere, and flowreth in July; the Seed being ripe about the beginning of
August, the second year after the sowing: for if they do flower the first year
the Country people call them Madneps.

Virtues and use.
The Garden Parsnep nourishes much, and is good and wholesome Nourishment, but a
little windy, whereby it is thought to procure bodily lust but it fatneth the
Body much if much used. ^ust^ ^rovokes, ^sisury, ^ense, ^pen, ^enemous ^easts,
^bollick, ^isury.
It is conducible to the Stomach and Reins, and provokes Urine. But the wild
Parsnep has a cutting, attenuating, clensing and opening quality therein: It
resists and helps the bitings of Serpents, eases pains and Stitches in the
sides, and dissolveth wind both in the Stomach and Bowels, which is the
Chollick, and provokes Urine. The Root is often used, but the Seed much more.

The wild being better than the tame shows Dame Nature is the best Physician.

Cow-Parsnep.
Description.
THis grows with three or four large spread, winged, rough, Leaves, lying
often on the Ground, or else raised a little from it, with long, round, hairy
footstalks under them, parted usually into five devisions, the two couples
standing each against other, and one at the end, and each Leaf being almost
round, yet somewhat deeply cut in on the edges in some Leaves, and not so deep in
others, of a whitish green color, smelling somewhat strongly: among which
arises up a round crested hairy Stalk two or three foot high with a few Joints
and Leaves thereon, and branched at the top, where stand large Umbels of white,
and sometimes reddish Flowers, and after them, flat, whitish, thin winged Seed,
two always joined together. The Root is long and white with two or three long
strings growing down into the ground, smelling likewise strongly, and
unpleasant.

Place.
It grows in moist Meadows, and the borders and corners of Fields, and neet
Ditches, generally through this Land.

Time.
It Flowreth in July, and Seedeth in August.

Virtues and Use.
The Seed hereof as Galen says is of a sharp and cutting quality, and is
therefore a fit Medicine for the Cough and shortness of Breath, the
Falling Sickness and the Jaundice. Cough, Difficulty of breath,
Fallingsickness, Jaundice, Fistula, Phlegm, Liver, Mother, Lethargy, Frenzy,
Headache, Scabs, Shingles.
The Root is available to all the purposes aforesaid, and is also of great use
to take away the hard skin that grows on a Fistula, if it be but scraped upon
it. The Seed hereof being drunk cleanses the belly from tough Phlegmatic matter
therein: eases them that are Liver-grown, and Women's passions of the Mother,
as well being drunk as the smoke thereof received underneath, and likewise
raises such as are fallen into a deep sleep, or have the Lethargy, by burning
it under their Nose: The Seed and Root boiled in Oil, and the Head rubbed
therewith, helps not only those that are fallen into a Frenzy, but also the
Lethargy or Drowsy evil; and those that have been long troubled with the
Headache, if it be likewise used with Rue: It helps also the running Scab and
the Shingles: The Juice of the Flowers dropped into the Ears that run and are
full of matter, it cleanses and heals them.

The Peach-tree.
Description.
THe Peach-tree grows not so great as the Apricock-tree, yet spreads
Branches reasonable well, from whence spring smaller reddish twigs, whereon are
set long and narrow green Leaves dented about the edges. The Blosloms are
greater than the Plum, and of a light Purple color. The Fruit round, and
sometimes as big as a reasonable Pippin, others are smaller, as also differing
in colors and tastes, as russer, red, or yellow, waterish or firm, with a
frieze or Cotton all over, with a cleft therein like an Apricock, and a rugged
surrowed great Stone within it, and a bitter Kernel within the Stone: It sooner
waxes old, and decays, than the Apricock, by much.

Place.
They are nursed up in Gardens and Orchards through this Land.

Time.
They Flower in the Spring, and Fructify in Autumn.

Virtues and use.
The Leaves of Peaches bruised and laid on the Belly kills Worms; and so they
do also being boiled in Ale and drunk, and open the Belly likewise; and being
dried is a safe Medicine to discuss Humors. Worms, Open, Humors, Wounds,
The Powder of them strewed upon fresh bleeding Wounds, stays their bleeding
and closes them up. The Flowers steeped all night in a little Wine standing
warm, strained forth in the morning and drunk fasting, does gently open the
Belly and move it downwards: A Syrup made of them as the Syrup of Roses is
made, works more forcibly than that of Roses, for it provokes Vomiting, and
spends waterish and Hydropick Humors by the continuance thereof. The Flowers
made into a Conserve works the same effect. The Liquor that droppeth from the
Tree being wounded, is given in the Decoction of Coltsfoot, to those that are
troubled with the Cough or shortness of breath, Dropsy, Cough, shortness of
Breath, Vomiting, and spitting of Blood, Stone, mind, Chollic^^
by adding thereto some sweet Wine; and putting some Saffron also therein, it
is good for those that are hoarce or have lost their voice, helps all defects
of the Lungs, and those that vomit or spit blood. Two drams thereof given in
the Juice of Lemmons or of Radish, is good for those that are troubled with the
Stone. The Kernels of the Stones do wonderfully eas the pains and wringings of
the Belly through wind or sharp Humors, and help to make an excellent Medicine
for the Stone upon all occasions, on this manner! Take fifty Kernels of Peach
Stones, and one hundred of the Kernels of Cherry Stones, a handful of Eldor
Flowers, fresh or dried, and three pints of Muscadine, set them in a closed pot
into a bed of Horse dung for ten days, which after distill in Glass with a
gentle fire, and keep it for your use; you may drink upon occasion three or
four ounces at a time. The Milk or Cream of these Kernels being drawn forth
with some Vervain Water, and applied to the Forehead and Temples, does much
help to procure rest and sleep to sick persons wanting it. Watching,
The Oil drawn from the Kernels, the Temples being therewith anointed does the
like: The said Oil put into Clysters eases the pains of the wind Chollick, and
anointed on the lower part of the Belly does the like, and dropped into the
Ears Ears,
caseth the pains of them: The Juice of the Leaves does the like: being also
anointed on the Forhead and Temples, it helps the Megrim and all other pains
in the Head. If the Kernels be bruised and boiled in Vinegar until they become
thick, and applied to the Head, it merveilously procure the Hair to grow again
upon bald places or where it is too thin. Baldness.


Lady Venus owns this Tree, and by it opposes the ill effects of Mars, and
indeed for Children and young people, nothing is better to purge Choler, and
the Jaundice, than the Leaves and Flowers of this Tree, being made into a Syrup
or Conserve, let such as delight to please their lust regard the Fruit, but
such as love their health and their Childrens, let them regard what I say, they
may safely give two spoonfuls of the Syrup at a time, it is as gentle as Venus
her self.

The Pear Tree.
THese are so well known that they need no Description.

Virtues and Use.
For their Physical use they are best discerned by their tastes: All the sweet
or lushious sorts whether manured or wild, do help to move the Belly downward
more or less: Those that are harsh and sour do on the contrary bind the Belly
as much; and the Leaves do so also. Those that are moist do in some sort cool,
but harsh or wild sorts much more, and are very good in repelling Medicines: as
if the wild sorts be boiled with Mushroms, Mushroms
it makes them the less dangerous. The said Pears boiled with a little Honey,
helps much the oppressed Stomach, Stomach,
as al sorts of them do, some more, some less; but the harsher sorts do most
cool and bind, serving well to be bound to green wounds to cool and stay the
Blood, and heal up the wound without further trouble or Inflammation;
Inflammations, Cool, Bind, Wounds.
as Galen says he has found by experience. And wild Pears do sooner close up
the Lips of green Wounds than the others.

Schola Salerni advises to drink much Wine after Pears, or else (they say) they
are as bad as poison, nay and they curs the Tree for it too, but if a poor man
find his Stomach oppressed by eating Pears it is but working hard and it will do
as well as drinking Wine. The Trce belongs to Venus, and so does the Apple Tree.

Pellitory of the Wall.
Description.
THis rises up with many brownish, red, tender and weak, clear, and almost
transparent stalks about two foot high, upon which grow at the several Joints,
two Leaves somewhat broad and long, of a dark green color, which afterward turn
brownish, smooth on the edges, but rough and hairy as the Stalks are also At
the Joints with the Leaves from the middle of the stalks upwards, where it
spreads into some branches, stand many small pale, purplish Flowers, in hairy
rough Heads or Husks; after which come small black and rough Seed, which will
stick to any cloth or Garment that shall touch it. The Root is somewhat long
with many small Fibers thereat, of a dark reddish color, which abides the
Winter, although the Stalks and Leaves perish and spring afresh every year.

Place.
It grows wild generally through this Land, about the borders of Fields, and
by the sides of Walls, and among Rubbish; It will endure well being brought
into Gardens, and planted on the shady side, where it will spring of its own
sowing.

Time.
It flowreth in June and July, and the Seed is ripe soon after.

Virtues and Use.
The dried Herb Pellitory made up into an Electuary with Honey, or the Juice of
the Herb, or the Decoction thereof made up with Sagar or Honey, is a singular
Remedy for any old or dry Cough, Old or dry Cough, shortness of Breath, Stone
and Gravel,
the shortness of breath, and Wheesing in the Throat. Three ounces of the Juice
thereof taken at a time, does wonderfully help stopping of the Urine, and to
expel the Stone or Gravel in the Kidneys or Bladder^ and is therefore usually
put among other Herbs, used in Clisters to mitigate pains in the Back, Sides,
or Bowels proceeding of wind, stopping of Urine, the Gravel or Stone as
aforesaid: If the bruised Herb sprinkled with some Muskadine be warmed upon a
Tile; or in a Dish upon a few quick coals in a Chasing-dish, and applied to the
Belly, it works the same effect. The Decoction of the Herb being drunk,
eases pains of the Mother, Mother, Women's Courses, Obstructions, Sore Throat,
Teeth,
and brings down Women's Courses; it also eases those griefs that arise from
Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Reins: The same Decoction with a little
Honey added thereto is good to gargle a sore Throat. The Juice held a while in
the Mouth, eases pains in the Teeth. The distilled water of the Herb drunk
with some Sugar works the same effects; and cleanses the Skin from Spots,
Freckles, Freckles, H^beals, Sunbnrn, Morphew, pain in the Ears, Impostums
Burnings and Scaldings, inflammations Ulcers, Scabs, Falling of the Hair, Piles,
Gout, Fistulaes, Green Wounds, Bruised, Tendon or Muscle.
Purples, Wheals, Sunburn, Morphew, etc.

The Juice dropped into the Ears eases the noise in them, and takes away the
pricking and shooting pains therein: The same or the distilled Water, asswageth
hot and swelling Impostumes, Burnings and Scaldings by fire or Water, as also
all other hot Tumors and Inflammations, or breakings out of Heat, being bathed
often with wet Clothes dipped therein. The said Juice made into a Liniment
with Ceruss and Oil of Roses and anointed therewith, cleanses foul rotten
Ulcers, and stays spreading or creeping Ulcers, and the running Scabs or
Sores in Childrens Heads: and helps to stay falling of the Hair from off the
Head. The said Ointment, or the Herb applied to the Fundament opens the Piles
and eases their pains; and being mixed with Goats Tallow, helps the Gout.
The Juice is very effectual to clens Fistulaes, and to heal them up safely; or
the Herb it self bruised, and applied with a little Salt. It is likewise so
effectual to heal any green Wound, that if it be bruised and bound thereto for
three days, you shall need no other Medicine to heal it further. A Pultis made
hereof with Mallows, and boiled in Wine, with Wheat Bran, and Bean Flower; and
some Oil put thereto, and applied warm to any bruised Sinew, Tendon, or Muscle,
does in a very short time restore them to their strength, taking away the pains
of the Bruises; and dissolveth the congealed Blood coming of Blows or Falls
from high places.

The Juice of Pellitory of Wall clarified and boiled into a Syrup with Honey,
and a spoonful of it drunk every morning, by such as are subject to the
Dropsy, if continuing that course though but once a week, if ever they have the
Dropsy, let them come but to me, and I will cure them gratis.

Peny-royal.
Description.
THis is so well known unto all (I mean the common kind) that it needs no
Description.

There is a greater kind than the ordinary sort found wild with us, which so
abides being brought into Gardens, and differs not from it but only in the
largeness of the Leaves and Stalks, in rising higher, and not creeping upon the
ground so much. The Flowers whereof are Purple, growing in Rundles about the
Stalk like the other.

Place.
The first which is common in Gardens, grows also in many moist and watery
places of this Land.

The second is sound wild in Essex in diverse places by the Highway from London
^to Colechester, and thereabouts more abundantly than in other Countries, and
is also planted in their Gardens in Essex.

Time.
They Flower in the latter end of Summer, about August.

Virtues and Use.
Dioscorides says, That Peny-royal makes thin, tough Phlegm, Tough Phlegm,
Terms provokes, Dead Child, and Afterbirth Vomiting, Melancholy, Venomous
Beasts, Fainting and Swouning, Gums, ^out, Marks in the Face, Toothach, Pains
in the Joints, Headache, pains of the Belly and Breast, Fallingsickness,
Stinking Water, Cramps and Convulsions,
warmeth the coldness of any part whereto it is apylied, and digesteth raw or
corrupt matter: Being boiled and drunk, it provokes Women's Courses and
expels the dead Child and afterbirth, and staieth the disposition to Vomit,
being taken in Water and Vinegar mingled together. And being mingled with Honey
and Salt it avoideth Phlegm out of the Lungs, and purges Melancholy by the
Stool. Drunk with Wine it helps such as are bitten or stung with Venomous
Beasts: and applied to the Nostrils with Vinegar, reviveth those that are
fainting and swouning. Being dried and burnt it strengthens the Gums; It is
helpful to those that are troubled with the Gout being applied of it self to
the place until it wax red: and applied in a Plaster, it takes away spots or
marks in the Face: Applied with Salt, it profits those that are Splenetick or
Liver-grown. The Decoction does help the Itch, if washed therewith: Being put
into Baths for Women to sit therein, it helps the Swelling and hardness of
the Mother. The green Herb bruised and put into Vinegar cleanses foul Ulcers,
and takes away the marks and bruises of blows about the Eyes, and all
discolorings of the Face by fire, yea and the Leprosy, being drunk and
outwardly applied: Boiled in Wine with Honey and Salt, it helps the Toothach.
It helps the cold Griefs of the Joints, taking away the pains, and warming
the cold parts, being fast bound to the place after a bathing, or sweating in
an hot house. Pliny adds that Pennyroyal and Mints together help faintings or
swounings, being put into Vinegar, and put to the Nostrils to be smelled unto,
or a little thereof put into the Mouth. It eases the Headache, and the pains of
the Breast and Belly, stays the gnawing of the Stomach, and inward pains of
the Bowels; being drunk in Wine it provokes Women's Courfes, and expels the
dead child and afterbirth: Being given in Wine it helps the Falling Sickness:
Put into unwholsom or stinking Water that men must drink (as at Sea, and where
other cannot be had) it makes them the less hurtful: It helps Cramps or
Convulsions of the Sinews being applied with Honey, Salt, and Vinegar. It is
very effectual for the Cough, being boiled in Milk and drunk, and for Ulcers or
Sores in the Mouth. Sore Mouth, Jaundice, Dropsy, pains of the Head and
Sinews, Eyesight, Lethargy, Burnings.
Mathiolus says, The Decoction thereof being drunk, helps he^Jaundice and
Dropsy, and all pains of the Head and Sinews that come of a cold cause, and
that it helps to clear^ and quicken the Eyesight. Applied to the Nostrils of
those that have the Falling-sickness^ or the Lethargy, or put into the Mouth,
it helps them much, being bruised and with Vinegar applied. And applied with
Barley Meal, it helps Burnings by fire, and put into the Ears, eases the
pains of them.

The Herb is under Venus.

Peony, Mas. and Femina.
Description.
THe Male Peony rises up with many brownish Stalks, whereon grow many fair
green and sometimes reddish Leaves, one set against another upon a Stalk without
any particular devision in the Leaf at all. The Flowers stand at the tops of
the Stalks, consisting of five or six broad Leaves, of a fair purplish red
color, with many yellow threads in the middle standing about the Head, which
after rises to be the Seed Vessels, divided into two, three, or four rough
crooked Pods like Horns, which being full ripe, open, and turn themselves down
one edge to another backward, showing within them diverse round, black shining
Seed, having also many red or Crimson grains, intermixed with the black,
whereby it makes a very pretty show. The Roots are great, thick, and long,
spreading and running down reasonable deep in the Ground.

The ordinary Female Peony has many Stalks and more Leaves on them than the
Male: the Leaves not so large but nicked diversely on the edges, some with great
and deep, others with smaller cuts and devisions, of a dark or dead green
color. The Flowers are of a strong heady scent, most usually smaller and of a
more purple color than the Male, with yellow thrums about the Head as the Male
has. The Seed Vessels are like Horns as in the Male, but smaller, the Seed
also is black but less shining. The Roots consist of many thick and short
tuberous clogs, fastened at the ends of long strings and all from the Head of
the Root which is thick and short, and of the like scent with the Male.

Place and Time.
They grow in Gardens; and Flower usually about May.

Virtues and Use.
The Root of the Male Peony fresh gathered, has been found by experience to
cure the Falling Sickness; Falling sicknsess,
but the surest way is (besides hanging it about the Neck, by which Children
have been cured) to take the Root of the Male Peony washed clean and stamped
somewhat small, and lay it to infuse in Sack for twenty four Hours, at the least,
after strain it, and take first and last, morning and evening a good draught
for sundry days together before and after a full Moon, and this will also cure
older persons, if the Disease be not grown too old and past cure, especially if
there be a due and orderly preparation of the Body, with Posset drink made of
Betony etc. The Root is also effectual for Women that are not sufficiently
cleansed after Childbirth, and such as are troubled with the Mother; for which
likewise the black Seed beaten to Powder and given in Wine, is also available.
Women not cleansed in Cildbirth, Mother, Ephialtes, or, the NightMare,
Melanchollick Dreams.
The black Seed also taken before bed time, and in the morning, is very
effectual for such as in their sleep are troubled with the Diseas called
Ephialtes or Incubus, but we do commonly call it the Nightmare; a diseas which
Melancholy persons are subject unto; It is also good against Melanchollick
Dreams. The Distilled water, or Syrup made of the Flowers, works the same
effects that the Root and the Seed do, although more weakly. The Female is
often used for the purposes aforesaid, by reason the Male is so scarce a Plant
that it is possessed by few, and those great Lovers of Rarities in this kind.

It is an Herb of the Sun, and under the Lion, Physicians say Male Peony Roots
are best, but Dr. Reason told me, male Peony was best for men, and female Peony
for women, and he desires to be judged by his brother Dr. Experience. The Roots
are held to be of most Virtue, then the Seeds next the Flowers, and last of all
the Leaves.

Pepperwort, or Dittander.
Description.
OUr common Pepper-wort sends forth somewhat long and broad Leaves, of a light
bluish green color, finely dented about the edges, and pointed at the ends,
standing upon round hard Stalks three or four foot high, spreading many
Branches on all sides, and having many small white Flowers at the tops of them,
after which follow small Seed in small Heads: The Root is slender running much
under ground, and shooting up again in many place; and both Leaves and Root, are
very hot and sharp of taste like Pepper, for which cause it took the name.

Place.
It grows Naturally in many places of this Land, as at Clare in Essex, near
also unto Exceter in Devonshire, upon Rochester common in Kent; in Lancashire
and diverse other places; but is usually kept in Gardens.

Time.
It Flowreth in the end of June, and in July.

Virtues and Use
Pliny and Paulus AEgineta say that Pepperwort is very effectual for the
Sciatica, Sciatica, Gout, pains in the Joints, Discolorings of the Skin, Marks
and Scars by Burning, Speedy Delivery.
or any other Gout or pain in the Joints, or any other inveterate grief; the
Leaves hereof to be bruised and mixed with old Hogs grease and applied to the
place; and to continue thereon four hours in Men, and two hours in women, the
place being afterward bathed with Wine and Oil mixed together, and then
wrapped with Wool or Skins after they have sweat a little. It also amendeth the
Deformities or discolorings of the Skin, and helps to take away Marks,
Scars, and Scabs, or the foul marks of burning with fire or iron. The Juice
hereof is in some places used to be given in Ale to drink to women with child,
to procure them a speedy delivery in Travail.

Here Is another Martial Herb for you, make much of it.

Perwinkle.
Description.
THe common sort hereof has many Branches trayling, or running upon the ground
shooting out small Fibers at the Joints as it runs, taking thereby hold in
the ground and Rooteth in diverse places, At the Joints of these Branches stand
two small dark green shining Leaves, somewhat like Bay Leaves, but smaller, and
with them come forth also the Flowers (one at a Joint standing upon a tender
Footstalk) being somewhat long and hollow, parted at the brims, sometimes into
four sometimes five Leaves, the most ordinary sort are of a pale blue color,
some are pure white, and some of a dark reddish Purple color. The Root is
little bigger than a Rush, bushing in the ground, and creeping with his
Branches far about, whereby it quickly possesses a great compass, and is
therefore most usually planted under Hedges, where it may have room to run.

Place.
Those with the pale blue, and those with the white Flowers grow in Woods and
Orchards by the Hedge sides in diverse places of this Land. But those with the
Purple Flowers in Gardens only.

Time.
They Flower in March and April.

Virtues and Use.
The Perwincle is a great binder, staying bleeding both at Mouth and Nose, if
some of the Leaves be chewed: The French use it to stay Women's Courses.
Dioscorides, Galen, and AEgineta commend it against the Lask, and Fluxes of the
Belly to be drunk in Wine. Stanch bleeding, Women's Courses, Flux of the Belly.


Venus owns this Herb, and says that the Leaves eaten by man and wife together,
causes love between them.

St. Peters-wort.
Name.
IF Superstition had not been the Father of Tradition, as well as Ignorance the
Mother of Devotion, this Herb as well as St. John's wort had found some other
name to be known by; but we may say of our Forefathers as St. Paul of the
Athenians, I perceive that in many things you are too Superstitious: Yet seeing
it is come to that pass, that Custom having gotten possession pleads
Prescription for the name, I shall let it pass, and come to the Description of
the Herb, which take as follows.

Description.
It rises up with square upright Stalks for the most part, somewhat greater and
higher than St. John's wort (and good reason too, St. Peter being the greater
Apostle (ask the Pope else) for though God would have the Saints equal, the
Pope is of another Opinion) but brown in the same manor, having two Leaves at
every Joint, somewhat like, but larger than St. John's wort, and a little rounder
pointed with few or no Holes to be seen therein, and having sometimes some
smaller Leaves rising from the Bosom of the greater, and sometimes a little hairy
also: At the tops of the Stalks stand many Starlike Flowers, with yellow threads
in the middle very like those of St. John's wort, insomuch that this is hardly
discerned from it but only by the largeness of height, the Seed being also
alike in both. The Root abides long sending forth new shoots every year.

Place.
It grows in many Groves and small low Woods, in diverse places of this Land,
as in Kent, Huntington, Cambridg, and Nothampton shires, as also near water
Courses in other places.

Time.
It Flowreth in June and July, and the Seed is ripe in August.

Virtues and Use.
It is of the same property with St. John's wort, but somewhat weak, and
therefore more seldom used. Two drams of the Seed taken at a time in Honeyed
water, purges Chollerick Humors Chollerick Humors, Sciatica, Burnings.
(as says Dioscorides, Pliny, and Galen) and thereby helps those that are
troubled with the Sciatica: The Leaves are used as St. John's wort, to help those
places of the Body that have been burnt with Fire.

There is not a straw to choose between this and St. John's wort, only St. Peter
must have it, lest he should lack Pot Herbs.

Pimpernel.
Description.
COmmon Pimpernel has diverse weak square Stalks lying on the ground beset all
along with two small and almost round Leaves at every Joint one against another,
very like Chickweed, but has no Footstalks, for the Leaves do as it were
compass the Stalk: The Flowers stand singly each by themselves at them and the
Stalks, consisting of five round small pointed Leaves of a fine pale red color,
tending to an Orange, with so many threads in the middle, in whose places
succeed, smooth round Heads, wherein is contained small Seed. The Root is small
and fibrous perishing every year.

Place.
It grows every where almost, as well in the Meadows and Cornfields, as by
the Waysides, and in Gardens arising of it self.

Time.
It Flowreth from May unto August, and the Seed ripeneth in the mean time and
falls.

Virtues and Use.
This is of a clensing and attractive quality, whereby it draws forth Thorns
or Splinters, Thorns or Splinters, purges the Head, Wounds and Ulcers,
Cleanses Face, Plague and Pestilential Fevers Venomous Beasts, Mad Dogs
biting, Obstructions, Urine, Stone and Gravel,
or other such like things gotten into the Flesh, and put up into the Nostrils
purges the Head; and Galen says also they have a drying faculty, whereby they
are good to soder the lips of Wounds, and to clens foul Ulcers. The distilled
Water or Juice is much esteemed by French Dames to cleanse the Skin from any
roughness, deformity, or discoloring thereof: Being boiled in Wine, and given
to drink, it is a good Remedy against the Plague, and other Pestilential
Fevers, if the Party after taking it warm lie in his bed and sweat for two
hours after, and use the same twice at least. It helps also all stingings and
bitings of Venomous Beasts or mad Dogs, being used inwardly and applied
outwardly: The same also opens the Obstructions of the Liver, and is very
available against the Infirmities of the Reins, it provokes Urine, and helps
to expel the Stone and Gravel out of the Kidneys and Bladder, and helps much
in all inward Wounds and Ulcers. Wounds and Ulcers, Clouds or Mists in the
Eyes, Toothach, Hemorrboids.
The Decoction or distilled Water is no less effectual to be applied to all
Wounds that are fresh and green, or old filthy fretting and running Ulcers,
which it very effectually cures in short spaces. A little Honey mixed with the
Juice and dropped into the Eyes cleanses them from cloudy mists, or thick Films
which grow over them and hinder the sight: It helps the Toothach being
dropped into the Ear on the contrary side of the pain. It is also effectual to
eas the pains of the Hemorrhoids or Piles.

Ground Pine, or Chamepitys.
Description.
OUr common Ground Pine grows low, seldom rising above an handbreadth high,
shooting, forth diverse small Branches, set with slender small long narrow grayish
or whitish Leaves somewhat hairy; and divided into three parts many times many
bushing together at a Joint, and sometimes some growing scatteredly upon the
Stalks, smelling somewhat strong like unto Rozin; the Flowers are somewhat small
and of a pale yellow color growing from the Joints of the Stalks all along
among the Leaves, after which come small, long, and round Husks: The Root is
small woody perishing every year.

Place.
It grows more plentifully in Kent than in any other Country of this Land; as
namely, in many places from on this side Dartford, along to Southfleet, Cotham,
and Rochester, and upon Chattam down hard by the Beacon, and half a mile from
Rochester in a Field nigh a House called Salsey.

Time.
It Flowreth and gives Seed in the Summer Months.

Virtues and Use.
The Decoction of Ground Pine drunk, does wonderfully prevail against the
Strangury Strangury, Obstructions, Mother, Women's, Courses, Dead Child and
Afterbirth
or any inward pains arising from the Diseases of the Reins and Urine, and is
especial good for all Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen and gently opens
the Body, for which purpose they were wont in former times to make Pills with
the Powder thereof, and the Purple Figs. It marveilously helps all the
Diseases of the Mother used inwardly, or applied outwardly, procuring Women's
Courses, and expelling the dead Child and afterbirth, yea it is so powerful
upon those Feminine parts that it is utterly forbidden to Women with Child, in
that it will cause abortment or delivery before the time: It is as effectual
also in all pains and Diseases of the Joints, as Gouts, Cramps, Palseys,
Sciatica, and Aches; Gouts, Cramps, Palseys, Sciatica, Aches etc. Dropsy,
poison of the Aconites, Venomous, Creatures, Cold Cough Palsy, Hard Breasts,
and hard Swellings, Ulcers, and old Sores, Green Wounds.
either the Decoction of the Herb in 'Wine taken inwardly, or applied
outwardly, or both for some time together, for which purpose the Pills made
with the Powder of Ground Pine, and of Hermodactils with Venice Turpentine are
very effectual. These Pills also are special good for those that have the
Dropsy, to be continued for some time. The same is a special good help for the
Jaundice, and for griping pains in the Joints, Belly, or inward parts; It
helps also all Diseases of the Brain proceeding of cold and Phlegmatic Humors
and Distillations, as also for the Falling Sickness. It is an espcial Remedy
for the Poison of the Aconites of all sorts, and other poisonful Herbs, as also
against the stinking of any Venomous Creature. It is a good Remedy for a cold
Cough, especially in the beginning. For all this purposes aforesaid, the Herb
being tunned up in new Drink and drunk is almost as effectual, but far more
acceptable to weak and dainty Stomachs. The Distilled Water of the Herb has
the same effects, but more weakly. The Conserve of the Flowers does the like,
which Mathiolus much commends against the Palsy. The green Herb or the
Decoction thereof being applied, dissolveth the hardness of Women's Breasts, and
all other hard Swellings in any other part of the Body. The green Herb also
applied, or the Juice thereof with some Honey, not only cleanses putrid,
stinking foul and Malignant Ulcers and Sores of all sorts, but heals and
sodereth up the lips of green Wounds in any part also.

Let Women forbear it if they be with Child, for it works violently upon the
Foeminine part; and Mars owns it, I tell them but so.

Plantane.
THis grows so familiarly in Meadows and Fields, and by Pathways, and is so
well known that it needs no Description.

Time.
It is in its beauty about June, and the Seed ripeneth shortly after.

Virtues and Use.
The Juice of Plantane clarified and drunk for diverse days together, either of
it self or in other drink prevails wonderfully against all torments or
Excoriations in the Guts Pains in the Guts, Distiilation of Rhewm, Fluxes, and
Women, Courses,
or Bowels, helps the distillations of Rhewm from the Head, and staieth all
manner of Fluxes even Women's Courses when they flow too abundantly; It is good
to stay spitting of Blood, and all other Bleedings at the Mouth, or the making
of foul or bloody water by reason of any Ulcer in the Reins or Bladder, and
also staveth the too free bleeding of Wounds. spitting Blood or Bleeding at
Mouth, or Nose or of Wounds, phtisick, Consumption or Ulcers in the Lungs,
Tertian Ague, Dropsy, and Fallingsickness, Toothach, pin and web in the ^yes,
pains in the Ears, Instamations, Burning or Scalding, Hollow Ulcers, Cankers,
and sore Mouth, or privy parts, Piles, pains of the Head, Lunacy and frenzy,
Biting of Serpents, or Mad Dogs, HotGouts Bones out of Joint, Worms in the
Belly, or in Ulcers, Scabs and Itch, Tetters, Ringworms, shingles, and fretting
sores, Wounds.
It is held an especial Remedy for those that are troubled with the Phtisick,
or Consumption of the Lungs, or Ulcers in the Lungs, or Coughs that come of
heat. The Decoction or Powder of the Roots or Seed, is much more binding for
all the purposes aforesaid than the Leaves. Dioscorides says, That three Roots
boiled in Wine and taken helps the Tertian Ague, and four the Quartan Ague:
But (letting pass the number as Fabulous) I conceive the Decoction of diverse
Roots may be effectual. The Herb (but especially the Seed) is held to be
profitable: against the Dropsy, the Falling Sickness, the yellow Jaundice, and
stoppings of the Liver and Reins. The Roots of Plantane and Pellitory of Spain
beaten to Powder and put into hollow Teeth, takes away the pains of them: The
clarified Juice or distilled Water dropped into the Eyes cools the
Inflammations in them, and takes away the Pin and Web; and dropped into the
Ears eases pains in them, and helps and restores the Hearing: The same also
with Juice of Housleek is profitable against all Inflammations and breakings out
in the skin, and against Burnings or Scaldings by fire or Water. The Juice or
Decoction made either of it self or other things of like nature is of much use
and good effect for old and hollow Ulcers that are hard to be cured, and for
Cankers and Sores in the Mouth or privy parts of Man or Woman; and helps also
the pains of the Piles in the Fundament. The Juice mixed with Oil of Roses, and
the Temples and Forhead anointed therewith, eases the pains of the Head
proceeding from heat, and helps Lunatic, and Phrenetick persons very much;
as also the bitings of Serpents or a Mad Dog: The same also is profitably
applied to all hot Gouts in the Feet or Hands, especially in the beginning. It
is also good to be applied where any Bone is out of Joint to hinder
Inflammations, Swellings and Pains that presently rise thereupon. The Powder of
the dried Leaves taken in drink, kills Worms of the Belly, and boiled in Wine
kills Worms that breed in old and foul Ulcers. One part of Plantane Water,
and two parts of the brine of powdered Beef boiled together and clarified, is a
most sure Remedy to heal all spreading Scabs and Itch in the Head or Body, all
manner of Tetters, Ringworms, the Shingles, and all other running and fretting
Sores. Briefly the Plantanes are singular good Wound Herbs to heal fresh, or
old Wounds and Sores either inward or outward.

Its true Myzaldus and others yea almost all Astrologo-Physitians hold this to
be an Herb of Mars, and they give a verisimile of a truth for it too, Viz.
because it cures diseases of the Head and privities which are under the Houses
of Mars, Aries, and Scorpio: All Diseases of the Head coming of heat are
caused by Mars, for Venus is made of no such hot mettle, or at least deals in
inferior parts. The truth is, it is under the command of Venus, and cures the
Head by Antipathy to Mars, and the Privities by Sympathy to Venus, neither is
there hardly a Martial Diseas but it cures, If I were to fortisie my Body
against a Martial Diseas I would do it by this Herb as soon as by any,and may
do it (it may be) when time shall serve.

Plums.
THese are so well known that they need no Description.

Virtues and Use.
As there is great diversity of the kinds, so is there in the operations of
Plums, for some that are sweet, moisten the Stomach and make the Belly soluble;
those that are sour quench thirst more and bind the Belly; the moist and
waterish do soonest corrupt in the Stomach, but the firm do nourish more and
offend less: The dried Fruit sold by the Grocers under the name of Damask
Prunes, do somewhat loosen, the Belly, and being stewed are often used both in
health and sickness, to relish the Mouth and Stomach to procure Appetite, and
a little to open the Body, allay Choler, and cool the Stomach: Plum-tree Leaves
boiled in Wine, is good to wash and gargle the Mouth and Throat to dry the Flux
of Rhewm coming to the Pallat, Gums, or Almonds of the Ears. Open the Belly,
Quench Thirst, and pind the Belly, Procure Appetite, Allay Choler, Cool the
Stomach, Rhewin, Stone, Tetters, and Ringworms, Piles, Ulcers, Hoarsness, and
pains in the Ears Stone and Chollick.
The Gum of the Trees is good to break the Stone. The Gum or Leaves boiled in
Vinegar and applied, kills Tetters and Ringworms. Mathiolus says, The Oil
pressed out of the Kernels of the Stones, as Oil of Almonds is made, is good
against the inflamed Piles, the Tumors or Swellings of Ulcers, Hoarsness of the
voice, roughness of the Tongue and Throat, and likewise the pains in the Ears.
And that five ounces of the said Oil taken with one ounce of Muscadine, drives
forth the Stone, and helps the Chollick.

All Plums are under Venus, and are like Women, some better, some worse.

Pollipody of the Oak.
Description.
THis is a small Herb consisting of nothing but Roots and Leaves: bearing neither
Stalk, Flower, nor Seed as it is thought. If has three or four Leaves rising
from the Root, every one singly by it self, of about a hand length, which are
winged, consisting of many small narrow Leaves, cut into the middle rib standing
on each side of the Stalk, large below, and smaller up to the top, not dented
or notched on the edges at all, as the Male Fern has; of a sad green color
and smooth on the upper side, but on the underside somewhat rough, by reason of
certain yellowith spots set thereon: The Root is smaller than ones little
finger lying aslope, or creeping along under the upper drust of the earth,
brownish on the outside, and greenish within, of a sweetish harshness in taste,
set with certain rough Knags on each side thereof, having also much Mossiness
or yellow hairiness upon it, and some Fibers underneath it, whereby it is
nourished.

Place.
It grows as well upon old rotten stumps, or trunks of Trees, as Oak, Beech,
Hazel; Willow, or any other, as in the Woods under them; and upon old Mud Walls,
as also in Mossie, Stony, and gravelly places, near unto Woods; That which
grows upon Oaks is accounted the best, but the quantity thereof is scarce
sufficient for the common use.

Time.
It being always green, may be gathered for use at any time.

Virtues and Use.
Mesues (who is called the Physicians Evangelist, for the certainty of his
Medicines, and the truth of his Opinions) says, That it dries up thin Humors,
Dries Humors, purges burnt Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, Quartan Agues,
Spleen, Chollick,
digesteth thick and tough, and purges burnt Choler, and especially tough and
thick Phlegm, and thin Phlegm also, even from the Joints; and is therefore good
for those that are troubled with Melancholy, or Quartan Agues, especially if
it be taken in Whey, or Honeyed Water, or in Barley water, or the Broth of a
Chicken with Epithimum, or with Beets and Mallows. It is also good for the
hardness of the Spleen and for prickings or Stitches in the sides, as also for
the Chollick, some use to put to it some Fennel Seeds, or Annis Seeds or Ginger
to correct that loathing it brings to the Stomach, which is more than
needs, it being a safe and gentle Medicine fit for all persons at al seasons,
which daily experience confirmith; And an ounce of it may be given at a time in
a Decoction, if there be not Saena or some other strong purger put with it.
Adram or two of the Powder of the dried Roots, taken fasting in a cup of
Honeyed water, works gently, and for the purposes aforesaid. The distilled
water both of Roots and Leaves is much commended for the Quartan Ague, to be
taken for many days together, as also against Melancholy, or fearful or
troublesome sleeps Troublesome sleeps, Cough, shortness of Breath, and Wheesings,
Lungs, phtisick, Member, out of Joint, pollipus o^ Diseas in the Nose, Chops in
the Fingers or Toes.
or Dreams, and with some Sugar Candy dissolved therein, is good against the
Cough, shortness of breath and Wheesings, and those distillations of thin
Rhewin upon the Lungs, which cause Phtisicks, and oftentimes Consumptions. The
fresh Roots beaten small: or the Powder of the dried Roots mixed with Honey and
applied to any Member that is out of Joint, does much help it: Applied also to
the Nose cures the Diseas called Polipus, which is a piece of Flesh growing
therein which in time stops the passage of breath through that Nostril; And
it helps those clefts or Chops that come between the fingers or Toes.

And why I pray must Pollipodium of the Oak only be used, Gentle College of
Physicians, can you give me but a glimps of a reason for it? is it only because
it is dearest? will you never leave your coverousness till your lives leave
you? The Truth is, that which grows upon the Earth is best ('it is an Herb of
Saturn and he seldom climbs trees) to purge Melancholy, if the humor be
otherwise, choose your Pollipodium accordingly.

The Poplar-Tree.
Description.
THere are two sorts of Poplars which are most familiar with us, Viz. The
Black, and the White, both which I shall here describe unto you.

The white Poplar grows great and reasonable high, covered with a thick
smooth white Bark, especially the Branches, having large Leaves cut into several
devisions almost ^ a Vine Leaf, but not of so deep a green on the upper side,
and hoary white underneath, of a reasonable good scent, the whole form
representing the Leaf of Coltsfoot. The Catkins which it brings forth before
the Leaves, are long, and of a faint reddish color, which fall away bearing
seldom good Seed with them. The Wood hereof is smooth, soft, and white, very
finely waved, whereby it is much esteemed.

The Black Poplar grows high ^ straiter than the White, with a grayish Bark
bearing broad and green Leaves somewhat like Ivy Leaves not cut in on the edges
like the White, but whole and dented, ending in a point, and not white
underneath, hanging by slender long Footstalks, which with the Air are
continually shaken like as the Aspin Leaves are: The Catkins hereof are greater
than of the White, composed of many round green Berries as it were set together
in a long Cluster, containing much downice matter, which being ripe is blown
away with the wind, The clammy Buds hereof before they spread into Leaves, are
gathered to make the Unguentum Populeon, and are of a yellowish green color
and small, somewhat sweet, but strong. The Wood is smooth, tough, ^and white, and
easy to be cloven: On both these Trees grows a sweet kind of Musk, which in
former times was used to be put into sweet Ointments.

Place.
They grow in moist Woods and by water sides in sundry places of the Land, yet
the white is not so frequent as the other.

Time.
Their time is likewise expressed before, The Catkins coming forth before the
Leaves and ripen in the end of Summer.

Virtues and Use.
The White Poplar, says Galen, is of a clensing property: The weight of one
ounce in Powder of the Bark thereof being drunk says Dioscorides is a Remedy
for those that are troubled with the Sciatica, or the Strangury: Sciatica,
Strangury, pain in the Ears, Dull sight, Gout, Fallingsickness, Warts, Pushes,
and Wheals, Heat, and Inflammations, Dries Women's Milk.
The Juice of the Leaves dropped warm into the Ears eases the pains in them:
The young clammy Buds or Eyes before they break out into Leaves, bruised, and a
little Honey put to them, is a good Medicine for a dull Sight. The Black Poplar
is held to be more cooling than the White, and therefore the Leaves bruised with
Vinegar and applied, helps the Gout; The Seed drunk in Vinegar is held good
against the Falling Sickness. The Water that droppeth from the hollow places of
this Tree, takes away Warts, Pushes, Wheals, and other the like breakings out
in the Body. The young black Poplar Buds, says Mathiolus, are much used by
Women to beautify their hair, bruising them with fresh Butter and straining
them after they have been kept for some time in the Sun. The Ointment called
Populeon, which is made of this Poplar, is singular good for all heat, or
Inflammation in any part of the ^^^^^y, and tempereth the heat of Woun^ ^his
much used to dry up the Milk in Women's Breasts, When they have weyned their
Children.

Poppy.
OF this I shall describe three kinds, Viz. The Whites and Black, of the Garden,
and the Erratick, wild Poppy, or Corn Rose.

Description.
The white Poppy hasth at first four or five whitish green Leaves lying upon the
ground, which rise with the Stalk, compassing it at the bottom of them, and are
very large, much cut or torn in on the edges, and dented also besides: The
Stalk which is usually four or five foot high, has sometimes no Branches at the
top, and usually but two or three at most bearing every one but one Head,
wrapped in a thin Skin, which boweth down before it be ready to blow, and then
rising and being broken, the Flower within it spreads it self open, and
consists of four very large White round Leaves, with many whitish round threads
in the middle, set about a small round green Head, having a Crown, or Star-like
cover at the Head thereof, which growing ripe becomes as large as a great
Apple. wherein are contained a great number of small round Seed, in several
partitions or devisions next unto the shell, the middle thereof remaining
hollow and empty. All the whole Plant, both Leaves, Stalks and Heads, while they
are fresh, young, and green, yield a Milk when they are broken, of an unpleasant
bitter taste, almost ready to provoke casting, and of a strong, heady smell,
which being condensate is called Opium. The Root is white, and woody, perishing
as soon as it has given ripe Seed.

The Black Poppy little differs from the former, until it bears his Flower,
which is somewhat less, and of a black Purplish color, but without any purple
spots in the bottom of the Leaf. The Head of Seed is much less than the former,
and opens it self a little round about the top under the Crown, so that the
Seed which is very black will fall out if one turn the Head thereof downwards.

The wild Poppy, or Corn Rose, has long and narrow Leaves very much cut in on
the edges into many devisions, of a light green color, and sometimes hairy
withal; The Stalk is blackish and hairy also, but not so tall as the Garden
kinds, having some such like Leaves thereon as grow below, parted into three or
four Branches sometimes, whereon grow small hairy Heads bowing down before the
Skin break, wherein the Flower is enclosed, which when it is full blown open, is
of a fair yellowish red or crimson color, and in some much paler, without any
spot in the bottom of the Leaves, having many black soft threads in the middle
compassing a small green Head, which when it is ripe, is not bigger than ones
little finger end, wherein is contained much black Seed, smaller by half than
that of the Garden.The Root perishes every year, and springs again of its
own sowing. Of this kind there is one lesser in all the parts thereof, and
differs in nothing else.

Places.
The Garden kinds do not naturally grow wild in any place, but are all sown in
Gardens where they grow.

The Wild Poppy, or Corn Rose is plentiful enough, and many times too much in
the Corn Fields of all Countries through this Land, and also upon Ditch Banks,
and by Hedge sides: The smaller wild kind is also found in Corn Fields, and also
in some other place, but not so plentiful as the former.

Time.
The Garden kinds are usually sown in the Spring, which then Flower about the
end of May, and somewhat earlier, if they spring of their own sowing.

The Wild Kinds Flower usually from May until July, and the Seed of them is
ripe soon after the Flowring.

Virtues and use.
The Garden Poppy Heads with Seeds made into a Syrup, is frequently and to good
effect used to procure rest and sleep in the sick and weak, and to stay
Catarrh's and Defluxions of hot thin Rhewms from the Head into the Stomach, and
upon the Lungs, causing a continual Cough, the Forerunner of a Consumption. It
helps also Hoarsness of the Throat, and when one has lost their voice, which
the Oil of the Seed does likewise. The black Seed boiled in Wine and drunk; is
said also to stay the Flux of the Belly and Women's Courses. The empty thels of
the Poppy Heads are usually boiled in water and given to procure rest and
sleep; so do the Leaves in the same manner; as also if the Head and Temples be
bathed with the Decoction warm, or with the Oil of Poppies, the green Leaves or
Heads bruised and applied with a little Vinegar, or made into a Pultis with
Barley Meal, or Hogs Greas, it cools and tempereth al Inflammations, as also
the Diseas called St. Anthonies Fire. It is generally used in Treacle and
Methridate, and in all other Medicines that are made to procure rest and sleep,
Procuresleep, Catarrhs, and defluxions of Rhewmstayeth, Hoarsness, Flux of the
Belly and women's courses, Inflammations and St. Anthonies Fire, paints in the
Head, Phrensies, Toothach,
and to eas pains in the Head as well as in other parts; It is also used to
cool Inflammations, Agues, or Phrensies, and to stay Defluxions which cause a
Cough or Consumption: and also other Fluxes of the Belly, or Women's Courses; It
is also put into hollow Teeth to eas the pain, and has been found by
experience to eas the pain of the Gout.

The Wild Poppy, or Corn Rose (as Mathiolus says) is good to prevent the
Fallingsickness. Falling Sickness, Plurisie, Surfets Agues and Inflammations.
The Syrup made with the Flowers is with good effect given to those that have
the Pluresie; and the dried Flowers also, either boiled in water, or made into
Powder and drunk either in the Distilled Water of them, or in some other Drink
works the like effect. The Distilled Water of the Flowers, is held to be of
much good use against Surfets, being drunk evening and morning; It is also more
cooling than any of the other Poppies, and therefore cannot but be as effectual
in hot Agues, Phrensies, and other Inflammations either inward or outward, the
Syrup or Water to be used therein, or the green Leaves used outwardly, either in
an Ointment, as it is in Populeon, a cooling Ointment, or any other wales
applied. Galen says the Seed is dangerous to be used inwardly.

The Herb is Lunar, and of the Juice of it is made Opium, only for lucre of
Money they cheat you, and tell you it is a kind of Tear, or some such like thing
that drops from Poppies when they weep, and that is some where beyond the Sea,
I know not where, beyond the Moon.

Purslane.
THe Garden Purslane (being used as a Sallet Herb) is so well known that it
needs no Description; I shall therefore only speak of its Virtues, as
follows.

Virtues and use.
It is good to cool any heat in the Liver, Blood, Reins, and Stomach, and in
hot Agues, nothing better; It stays hot and Chollerick Fluxes of the Belly,
Women's Courses, the Whites, and Gonorrhea, or running of the Reins, the
Distillations from the Head, and pains therein proceeding of heat, want of
sleep, or the Frenzy. Cools heat of Blood in hot Agues, Chollerick Fluxes,
women's Courses, the whites and Genorrhea, Distillations, Frenzy, Heat of
Urine, Lust, and Venercoue Dreams worms, Vomiting, old, ^dry cough, Short
Breath, and Phtisick Ulcers, in the secret parts,
The Seed is more effectual than the Herb, and is of singular good use to cool
the heat and sharpness of Urine, and the outrageous Lust of the Body, Venerious
Dreams, and the like, insomuch that the overfrequent use hereof, exinguisheth
the Heat and Virtue of Natural Procreation. The Seed bruised and boiled in Wine
and given to Children, expels the Worms. The Juice of the Herb is held as
effectual to all the purposes aforesaid, as also to stay Vomitings; and taken
with some Sugar or Honey, helps an old and dry Cough, shortness of Breath,
and the Phtisick, and stays immoderate Thirst. The Distilled water of the
Herb is used by many (as the more pleasing) with a little Sugar, to work the
same effects. The Juice also is singular good in the Inflammations and Ulcers of
the secret parts in man or woman, as ^^ of the Bowels and Hemorrhoids, ^hen
they are Ulcerous, or Excoriations in them. The Herb bruised and applied to the
Forehead and Temples, allayeth excessive heat therein, hindering rest and sleep;
and applied to the Eyes takes away the redness Redness of the Eyes, and
Inflammations, Crick, or pain in the Neck, Blastings by Lightning Burning by
Gunpouder, Sore Breasts, Childrens Navils, Sore Mouths, and swollen Gums,
Fastneth Teeth, Toothach, Bloody Urine, Gout, cramp, and stifness of the Sinews.
and Inflammation in them, and those other parts, where Pushes, Wheals, Pimples,
St. Anthonies Fire and the like break forth, especially if a little Vinegar be
put to it: And being laid to the Neck with as much of Galls and Linseed
together, takes away the pains therein, and the Crick in the Neck. The Juice
is used with Oil of Roses for the said causes, or for Blastings by Lightning,
and Burnings by Gun-Pouder, or for Women's sore Breastss, and to allay the heat
in all other Sores or Hurts: applied also to the Navels of Children that stick
forth, it helps them: It is also good for sore Mouths, and Gums that are
swollen to fasten loos Teeth. Camerarius says, That the distilled water used
by some, took away the pain of their Teeth when all other Remedies failed, and
that the thickened Juice made in Pills with the Powder of Gum Tragacanth, and
Arabic, being taken prevails much to help those that make a bloody water.
Applied to the Gout, it eases pains thereof, and helps the hardness of
Sinews if it come not of the Cramp, or a cold cause.

It Is an Herb of the Moon. See Lettice.

Primroses.
THese are so well known that they need no Description.

Of the Leaves of Primroses is made as fine a Salve to heal green Wounds as any
is that I know: you shall be taught to make Salves of any Herb at the latter
end of the Book, make this as you are taught there, and do not (you that have
any Ingenuity in you) see your poor Neighbors go with wounded Limbs when a
Halfpenny cost will heal them.

Privet.
Description.
OUr common Privet is carried up with many slender Branches, to a reasonable
height and breadth, to cover Arbours, Bowrs, and Banqueting Houses, and
brought, wrought, and cut into many forms, of Men, Horses; Birds, etc. which
though at first supported, grows afterward strong of it self: It bears
long and narrow green Leaves by couples, and sweet smelling white Flowers in
tufts at the ends of the Branches, which turn into small black Berries that have
a Purplish Juice within them, and some Seeds that are flat on the one side,
with a hole or dent therein.

Place.
It grows in this Land in diverse Woods.

Time.
Our Privet Flowreth in June and July; The Berries are ripe in August and
September.

Virtues and Use.
It is little used in Physic with us in these times, more than in Lotions to
wash Sores, and Sore Mouths, and to cool Inflammations and dry up Fluxes.
Lotions to wash sore Mouths and Throats, Cool Inflammations, Dry Fluxes,
Inflammation in wounds Headache, Fluxes, and women's courses, Voiding Blood, Rhewm
in the Eyes
Yet Mathiolus says it serves to all the uses for which Ciprus or the East
Privet is appointed by Dioscorides and Galen. He further says, That the Oil
that is made of the Flowers of Privet infused therein, and set in the Sun, is
singular good for the Inflammations of Wounds, and for the Headache coming of an
hot cause. There is a sweet water also distilled from the Flowers that is good
for all those Diseases that need cooling and drying, and therefore helps all
Fluxes, of the Belly or Stomach. Bloody Fluxes, and Women's Courses, being
either drunk or applied, as also for those that void Blood at their Mouth or at
any other place, and for Distillations of Rhewms into the Eyes especially if it
be used with Tutiae.

Queen of the Meadows, Meadow-sweet, or Mead-sweet.
Description.
THe Stalks of this are reddish, rising to be three foot high, sometimes four or
five foot, having at the Joints there of large winged Leaves, standing one above
another at distances, consisting of many and somewhat broad Leaves, set on each
side of a middle rib, being hard, rough, or rugged, crumpled much like to Elm
Leaves, having also some smaller Leaves with them (as Agrimony has) somewhat
deepiy dented about the edges, of a sad green color on the upper side, and
graish underneath, of a pretty sharp scent and taste, somewhat like unto Burnet,
and a Leaf hereof put into a Cup of Claret Wine gives also a fine relish to
it: At the tops of the Stalks and Branches stand many tusts of small white
Flowers, thrust thick together. which smell much sweeter than the Leaves: and in
their places, being fallen, come crooked and cornered Seed; The Root is somewhat
woody, and blackish on the outside and brownish within, with diverse greater
strings, and lesser Fibers set thercat, of a strong scent, but nothing so
pleasant as the Flowers and Leaves and perishes not, but abides many years,
shooting forth anew every Spring.

Place.
It grows in moist Meadows, that lie much wet, or near the Courses of Water.

Time.
It Flowreth in some place or other all the three Summer Months, that is, June,
July, and August, and their Seed is ripe quickly after.

Virtues and Use.
It is used to stay all manner of Bleedings, Fluxes, Vomitings, and Women's
Courses, Bleedings, Fluxes, Vemitings Women's Courses, and the u bites, Quartan
Ague, Chollick, Opens the Belly, Old ulcers heals, Sore Mouths, or Secrets,
Raise Blisters, Inflammation in the Eyes.
and also their Whites, It is said to alter and take away the fits of Quartan
Agues, and to make a merry heart, for which purpose some use the Flowers, and
some the Leaves. It helps speedily those that are troubled with the Chollick,
being boiled in Wine; and with a little Honey taken warm, it opens the Belly:
but boiled in red Wine and drunk it stays the Flux of the Belly. Being
outwardly applied, it heals old Ulcers that are Cankrous or eaten, or hollow
and Fistulous, for which it is by many much commended, as also for the Sores in
the Mouth or secret parts.

The Leaves when they are full grown being laid upon the Skin, will in a short
time raise Blisters thereon, as Tragus says. The water thereof helps the
heat and Inflammation in the Eyes.

Venus claims dominion over the Herb.

The Quince-Tree.
Description.
THe Ordinary Quince-tree grows often to the height and bigness of a
reasonable Apple Tree, but more usually lower and crooked with a rough Bark,
spreading Arms and Branches far abroad. The Leaves are somewhat like those of the
Apple Tree, but thicker, harder, and fuller of Veins, and white on the under
side, not dented at all about the edges, The Flowers are large and white,
sometimes dashed over with a Blush: The Fruit that follows is yellow, being
near ripe, and covered with a white Freez or Cotton, thick set on the younger,
and growing less as they grow to be through ripe; bunched out often times in
some places, some being liker an Apple and some a Pear, of a strong heady
scent, and not durable to keep, and is sour, harsh, and of an unpleasant taste
to eat fresh, but being scalded, roasted, baked, or preserved, becomes more
pleasant.

Place and Time.
It best likes to grow near Ponds and Watersides, and is frequent through this
Land; and Flowreth not until the Leaves be come forth. The Fruit is ripe in
September or October.

Virtues and Use.
Quinces when they are green, helps all sorts of Fluxes Fluxes, Lasks, etc.
Provokes Appetite, stays Vomiting, Fainting Spirits, choler, Phlegm, Poison,
women's Breasts, Plague Sores, Preserves Hair.
in man or Woman, and Chollerick Lasks, Castings, and whatsoever needs
Astriction more than any way prepared by fire: Yet the Syrup of the Juice, or
the Conserve, are much conducible, much of the binding quality being consumed
by the fire: If a little Vinegar be added, it stirs up the languishing
Appetite, and the Stomach given to casting; Some Spices being added, it
comfort and strengthens the decayed and fainting Spirits, and helps the
Liver oppressed; that it cannot perfect the digestion, and corrects Choler
and Phlegm: If you would have them Purging, put Honey to them instead of Sugar;
and if more Laxative, for Choler, Rubarb; for Phlegm, Turbith; for warery
Humors, Scammony, but if more forcibly to bind, use the unripe Quinces with
Roses, and Acacia, or Hypocistis, and some torrefied Rubarb. To take of the
crude Juice of Quinces, is held a Preservative against the force of deadly
poison; for it has been found most certain true, that the very smell of a
Quince has taken away all the strength of the Poison of White Hellebore. If
there be need of any outward binding and cooling of any hot Fluxes; The Oil of
Quinces, or other Medicines that may be made thereof are very available to
anoint the Belly, or other parts therewith: It likewise strengthens the
Stomach and Belly, and the Sinews that are loosned by sharp Humors falling on
them, and restrains immoderate sweatings. The Muccilage taken from the Seeds
of Quinces boiled a little in Water, is very good to cool the Heat and heal the
Sore Breasts of Women. The same with a little Sugar is good to lenefie the
harshness and hoarsness of the Throat, and roughness of the Tongue. The Cotton
or Down of Quinces boiled and applied to Plague Sores, heals them up; and
said as a Plaster made up with Wax, it brings hair to them that are bald,
and keeps it from falling if it be ready to shed.

Radish and HorseRadish.
THe Garden Radish is so well known that it needs no Description.

Description.
The Hors-Radish has his first Leaves that rise before Winter, about a foot and
a holf long, very much cut in or torn on the edges into many parts of a dark
green color, with a great Rib in the middle: After these have been up a while,
others follow, which are greater, rougher, broader, and longer whole, and not
divided as the first, but only somewhat roundly dented about the edges: The
Stalk when it bears Flowers (which is but seldom) is great rising up with
some few lesser Leaves thereon to three or four foot high, spreading at the top
many small Branches of whitish Flowers, made of four Leaves apiece after which
come small Pods like those of Shepheards-Purs, but seldom with any Seed in them.
The Root is great, long, white, and rugged shooting up diverse Heads of Leaves,
which may be parted for encreas, but it does not creep within ground nor run
above ground, and is of a strong sharp and bitter taste, almost like Mustard.

Place.
It is found wild in some places of this Land, but is chiefly planted in
Gardens where it joyeth in a moist and shadowy place.

Time.
It Flowreth but seldom, but when it does, it is in July.

Virtues and Use.
The Juice of Hors-Radish given in drink is held to be very effectual for the
Scurvy. Scurvy, Worms, Sciatica, Liver, and Spleen,
It kills the Worms in Children being drunk, and also laid upon the Belly.
The Root bruised and laid to the place grieved with the Sciatica, Joynt-ach, or
the hard Swellings of the Liver and Spleen. does wonderfully help them all. The
Distilled water of the Herb and Roots is more familiar to be taken with a
little Sugar for all the purposes aforesaid.

Garden Radishes are in wantonness by the Gentry eaten as Sallet, but they
breed but scurvy Humors in the Stomach, and corrupt the Blood, and then send
for a Physician as fast as you can, this is one cause, makes the owners of such
nice Pallars so unhealthful, yet for such as are troubled with the Gravel,
Stone, Stone, Disury.
or stoppage of Urine, they are good Physic if the Body be strong that takes
them, you may make the Juice of the Roots into a Syrup if you pleas for that
use, they purge by Urine exceedingly.

I Know not what Planet they are under, I think none of all the Seven will own
them.

Ragwort.
Description.
THe greater common Ragwort has many large and long dark green Leaves lying on
the ground, very much rent and torn on the sides into many pieces, from among
which rise up sometimes but one, and sometimes two or three square or crested
blackish or brownish Stalks three or four foot high, sometimes branched bearing
diverse such like Leaves upon them at several distances unto the tops, where it
brancheth forth into many Stalks bearing yellow Flowers, consisting of diverse
Leaves set as a Pale or Border, with a dark yellow thrum in the middle, which
do abide a great while, but at last are turned into Down, and with the small
blackish gray Seed are carried away with the wind. The Root is made of many
Fibers, whereby it is firmly fastened into to the ground, and abides many years.

There is another sort hereof different from the former only in this, That it
rises not so ^igh; the Leaves are not so finely jagged, nor of so dark a green
color, but rather somewhat whitish, soft and woolly, and the Flowers usually
paler.

Place.
They grow both of them wild in Pastures, and untilled grounds in many places,
and oftentimes both of them in one Field.

Time.
They Flower in June,and July, and the Seed is ripe in August.

Virtues and Use.
Ragwort, Cleanses, Digesteth, and Discusseth. The Decoction of the Herb to
wash the Mouth or Throat that have Ulcers or Sores Sore Mouth or Throat
Swellings and Impostumes, Quinsie and Kings Evil, Catarrbs and Defluxions,
Green Wounds and ulcers in the privy Parts, Running Cankers, and hollow
Fistulaes, Aches and pains, Sciatica.
therein; and for Swellings, hardness, or Impostumations, for it thoroughly
cleanses and heals them; as also the Quinsie and the Kings Evil: It helps
to stay Catarrrhes, thin Rhewms and Defluxions from the Head into the Eyes,
Nose, or Lungs. The Juice is found by experience to be singular good to heal
green Wounds, and to cleanse and heal all old and filthy Ulcers in the Privities
and in other parts of the Body; as also inward Wounds and Ulcers, and stays
the Malignity of fretting or running Cankers and hollow Fistulaes, not
suffering them to spread further. It is also much commended to help Aches and
pains either in the Fleshy parts or in the Nervs and Sinews; as also the
Sciatica, or pain of the Hips or Huckle-Bone, to bath the places with the
Decoction of the Herb, or to anoint them with an Ointment made of the Herb
bruised and boiled in old Hogs Suet, with some Mastich and Olibanum in Powder,
added unto it after it is strained forth.

In Sussex we call it Ragweed.

Rattle-grass.
OF this there are two kinds, which I shall speak of, Viz. The Red and yellow.

Description.
The common red Rattle, has sundry reddish hollow Stalks, and sometimes green
ris^ng from the Root, lying for the most part on the ground, yet some growing
more upright, with many small reddish or greenish Leaves set on both sides of a
middle Rib finely dented about the edges: The Flowers stand at the tops of the
Stalks and Branches, of a fine purplish red color, like small gaping hoods,
after which come flat blackish Seed in small Husks, which lying loos therein,
will Rattle with shaking. The Root consists of two or three small whitish
strings, with some fibers thereat.

The common Yellow Rattle has seldom above one round green Stalk rising from
the Root, about half a yard or two foot high, and but few Branches thereon
having two long and somewhat broad Leaves set at a Joint, deeply cut in on the
edges, resembling the Comb of e Cock, broadest next to the Stalk and smaller to
the end: The Flowers grow at the tops of the Stalks with some shorter Leaves
with them, hooded after the same manner that the others are, but of a fair
yellow color in most, or in some paler, and in some more white. The Seed is
contained in large Husks, and being ripe will rattle or make a nois with lying
loose in them. The Root is small and slender perishing every year.

Place.
They grow in our Meadows and Woods, generally through this Land.

Time.
They are in Flower from Midsummer until August be past sometimes.

Virtues and use.
The Red Rattle is accounted profitable to heal up Fistulaes, Fistulaes, and
hollow Ulcers, women's Courses, Fluxes,
and hollow Ulcers and to stay the Flux of Humors to them, as also the
abundance of Women's Courses, or any other Flux of Blood, being boiled in red
Wine and drunk.

The Yellow Rattle or Cocks Comb is held to Be good for those that are troubled
with a Cough, or with Dimness of Sight, Cough, Dim sight.
if the Herb being boiled with Beans, and some Honey put thereto, be drunk, or
dropped into the Eyes. The whole Seed being put into the Eyes draws forth any
skin, Dimness, or Film from the sight without trouble or pain.

Rest-Harrow, or Cammoak.
Description.
THe common Rest-Harrow rises up with diverse rough woody twigs, half a yard,
or a yard high, set at the Joins without order, with little roundish Leaves
sometimes more than two or three at a place, of a dark green color, without
thorns while they are young, but afterward armed in sundry places with short
and sharp Thorns. The Flowers come forth at the tops of the twigs and Branches
whereof it is full, fashioned like Peace, or Broom Blossoms, but lesser, flatter,
and somewhat closer, of a faint purplish color; after which come small Pods,
containing small, flat, and round Seed: The Root is blackish on the outside and
whitish within, very tough and hard to break when it is fresh and green, and as
hard as an Horn when it is dried, thrusting down deep into the ground, and
spreading likewise, every piece being apt to grow again if it be left in the
ground.

Place.
It grows in many places of this Land, as well in the Arable as wast ground.

Time.
It Flowreth about the beginning or middle of July, and the Seed is ripe in
August.

Virtues and use.
It is singular good to provoke Urine when it is stopped, Urine stopped, Stone,
and to break and drive forth the Stone, which the Powder of the Bark of the
Root taken in Wine performs effectually. Mathiolus says, the same helps
the Diseas called Hiernia Carnosa, the Fleshy Rupture Fleshy Rupture,
by taking the said Powder for some Months together constantly, and that it
has cuted some which seemed incurable by any other means than by cutting or
burning. The Decoction thereof made with some Vinegar and gargled in the Mouth,
eases the Toothach, Toothach,
especially when it comes of Rhewm; and the said Decoction is very powerful to
open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Liver and Spleen Obstructed
and other parts. A Distilled Water made in Balneo Mariae with four pound of
the Roots hereof first sliced small, and afterward steeped in a Gallon of
Canary Wine, is singular good for all the purposes aforesaid and to clens the
passages of the Urine. The Powder of the said Root made into an Electuary or
Lozenges with Sugar: as also the Bark of the fresh Roots boiled tender and
afterward beaten Into a Consetve with Sugar, works the like effect. The
Powder of the Roots strewed upon the Brims of Ulcers, Ulcers.
or mixed with any other convenient thing and applied consumes the hardness
and canseth them to heal the better.

Rocket.
IN regard the garden Rocket is rather used as a Sallet Herb than to any
Physical purposes, I shall omit it, and only speak of the common wild Rocket:
The Description whereof take as follows.

Description.
The common wild Rocket, has longer and narrower Leaves much more divided into
slender cuts and jags on both sides of the middle Rib, than the Garden kinds
have, of a sad overworn green color, from among which rises up diverse stiff
Stalks two or three foot high, sometimes set with the like Leaves but smaller,
and smaller upwards, branched from the middle into diverse stiff Stalks, bearing
sundry yeilow Flowers on them made of four Leaves apiece, as the others are,
which afterward yield small reddish Seed, in small long Pods, of a more bitter
and hot biting taste than the Garden kinds, as the Leaves are also.

Place.
It is found wild in diverse places of this Land.

Time.
It Flowreth about June and July, and the Seed is ripe in August.

Virtues and Use.
The Wild Rocket is more strong and effectual to encreas Sperm and Venereous
qualities, whereunto also the Seed is more effectual than the Garden kinds: It
serves also to help Digestion and provokes Urine exceedingly. The Seed is
used to cure the bitings of Serpents, the Scorpion, and the ShrewMouse, and
other Poisons, and expels Worms and other noisome Creatures that breed in the
Body. The Herb boiled or stewed, and some Sugar put thereto, helps the Cough
in Children being taken often. Increases Sperm and Venery, Helps Digestion,
Provokes Urine, Biting of Serpents etc. Cough in Children, Increases Milk,
Cleanses the Face, Scars, Blue spots, Marks of small Pox.
The Seed also taken in drink takes away the ill scent of the Armpits,
increases Milk in Nurses, and wastes the Spleen. The Seed mixed with Honey,
and used on the face, cleanses the Skin from Spots, Morphew and other
discolorings therein: and used with Vinegar takes away Freckles and redness
in the Face or other parts, and with the Gall of an Ox, it amendeth foul Scars,
black and blew Spots, and the marks of the small Pox.

The Wild Rockets are forbidden to be used alone in regard their sharpness
fumeth into the Head, causing ach and pain therein: and are no less hurtful to
hot and Chollerick persons, for fear of inflaming their Blood, and therefore
for such we may say, a little does but a little harm. For angry Mars rules
them, and he sometimes will be testy when he meets with Focls.

Winter Rocket, or Cresses.
Description.
VVInter Rocket, or winter Cresses, has diverse somewhat large sad green Leaves
lying upon the ground, torn or cut into diverse parts, somewhat like unto Rocket,
or Turnep Leaves with smaller pieces next the bottom, and broad at the ends
which so abide all Winter (if it spring up in Autumn, when it is used to be
eaten) from among which rises up diverse small round Stalks full of branches,
bearing many small yellow Flowers of four Leaves apiece, after which come small
long Pods with reddish Seed in them: The Root is somewhat stringy, and perishes
every year after the Seed is ripe.

Place.
It grows of its own accord in Gardens and Fields by the way sides in diverse
places, and particularly in the next Pasture to the Conduit-Head behind
Grayes-Inne that brings Water to Mr. Lamb's Conduit in Holbourn.

Time.
It Flowreth in May, and Seedeth in June, and then perishes.

Virtues and Use.
This is profitable to provoke Urine, and helps the Strangury. Strangury,
Gravel and Stone, Scurvy, Wounds, Ulcers, and Sores.
and to expel Gravel and the Stone; It is also of good effect in the Scurvey:
It is found by experience to be a singular good Wound Herb, to cleanse inward
Wounds, the Juice or Decoction being drunk, or outwardly applied to wash foul
Ulcers and Sores, clensing them by sharpness, and hindering or abating the dead
Flesh from growing therein, and healing them by the drying quality.

Roses.
I Hold it altogether needless to trouble the Reader with a Description of any
of these, since both the Garden Roses, and the Wild Roses of the Briars are well
enough known; Take therefore the Virtues of them as follows: And first I shall
begin with the Garden kinds.

Virtues and Use.
The White and the Red Roses are cooling and drying, yet the White is taken to
exceed the Red in both those properties, but is seldom used inwardly in any
Medicine. The bitterness in the Roses when they are fresh, especially the Juice
purges Choler, and watery Humors, Choler, and Waterish Humors, Headache,
Pains in the Ears, Eyes, Throat and Gums, Fundament, Bowels, and Matrix. St
Anthonies fire, stomach, Women's Courses, Defluxions, fastneth Teeth, Lask and
spitting of Blood, Heat and Inflammations, Rest and sleep, whites and Reds in
Women, Choler and Phlegm, Redness and watering of the Eyes,
but being dried and that heat which caused the bitterness being consumed, they
have then a binding and astringent quality; Those also that are not full blown
do both cool and bind more than those that are full blown, and the White Roses
more than the Red. The Decoction of Red Roses made with Wine and used, is very
good for the Headache, and pains in the Eyes, Ears, Throat, and Gums, as also
for the Fundament, the lower Bowels, and the Matrix, being bathed, or put into
them. The same Decoction with the Roses remaining in it is profitably applied
to the Region of the Heart to eas the Inflammation therein; as also St. Anthonies
fire, and other Diseases of the Stomach. Being dried and beaten to Powder, and
taken in steeled Wine or Water, it helps to stay Women's Courses. The yellow
threads in the middle of the red Roses (Which are erroniously called the Rose
Seeds) being poudered and drunk in the distilled water of Quinces, stays the
overflowing of Women's Courses, and does wonderfully stay the Defluxions of
Rhewm upon the Gums and Teeth, preserving them from corruption, and fastening
them if they be loose, being washed and gargled therewith, and some Vinegar of
Squils added thereto. The Heads with Seed being used in Powder or in a
decoction, stays the Lask, and spitting of Blood. Red Roses do strengthen the
Heart, the Stomach, and the Liver, and the retentive Faculties, they mitigate
the pains that arise from Heat, assuage Inflammations, procure rest and sleep,
stay both Whites and Reds in Women, the Gonorrhea, running of the Reins, and
the Fluxes of the Belly; The Juice of them does purge and clens the Body from
Choler and Phlegm: The Husks of the Roses with the Beards and Nails of the
Roses are binding and cooling, and the Distilled Water of either of them is
good for the Heat and redness in the Eyes, and to stay and dry up the Rhewms
and watering of them. Of the Red Roses are usually made many Compositions all
serving to sundry good uses; Viz. Electuary of Roses; Conserve both moist and
dry, which is more usually called Sugar of Roses; Syrup of dried Roses, and
Honey of Roses; The Cordial Powder called Diarhodon Abhatis', and Aromatica
Rosarum; The Distilled Water of Roses, Vinegar of Roses, Ointment and Oil of
Roses, and the Rose Leaves dried, which although no Composition, yet of very
great use and effect.

To write at large of every one of these would make my Book swel too big, it
being sufficient for a Volum by it self to speak fully of them: But briefly;
The Electuary is purging, whereof two or three Drams taken by it self in some
convenient Liquor is a Purge sufficient for a weak Constitution; but may be
increased to six drams according to the strength of the Patient. It purges
Choler A Purge for Choler, Hot Fevers, Pains of the Head, Heat of the Eyes,
Jaundice, and Joint Aches, Distillations, and Defluxions of Rhewm, Fluxes, and
Lasks, running of the Reins, Faintings, swounings and trembling of the Heart,
Helps Digestion, Stays casting, Infection, Cools the Liver and Blood,
resists Putrefaction, and Infection, sore Mouths, Throats, etc. Comfort the
Heart and stomach, stay Vomiting, Faint spirits, Redness of Eyes,
without trouble, and is good in hot Fevers, and pains of the Head arising
from hot Chollerick Humors, and heat in the Eyes, the Jaundice also, and Joint
Aches proceeding of hot Humors. The moist Conserve is of much use, both binding
and Cordial, for until it be about two years old it is more binding than
Cordial, and after that, more Cordial than Binding: Some of the younger Conserve
taken with Methridatum mixed together, is good for those that are troubled with
Distillations of Rhewm from the Brain to the Nose, and Defluxions of Rhewm into
the Eyes, as also for Fluxes, end Lasks of the Belly; and being mixed with the
Powder of Mastick is very good for the Running of the Reins, and for other
looseness of Humors in the Body. The old Conserve mixed with Aromaticum Rosarum
is a very good Cordial against Faintings, Swounings, Weakness, and Tremblings
of the Heart, strengthening both it, and a weak Stomach, helps digestion,
stays casting, and is a very good Preservative in the time of Infection. The
dry Conserve which is called Sugar of Roses, is a very good Cordial to
strenthen the Heart and Spirits; as also to stay Defluxions. The Syrup of dried
Red Roses strengthens a Stomach given to casting, cools an overheated Liver
and the Blood in Agues, comforreth the Heart and resists putresaction and
infection, and helps to stay Lasks and Fluxes. Honey of Roses is much used in
Gargles and Lotions to wash Sores either in the Mouth, Throat, or other parts,
both to clens and heal them, and to stay the Fluxes of Humors falling upon
them; it is also used in Clisters both to cool and clens. The Cordial Pouders
called Diarhodon Abbatis and Aromaticum Rosarum do comfort and strengthen the
Heart and Stomach, procure an Appetite, help Digestion, stays Vomiting; and
is very good for those that have slippery Bowels to strengthen them, and to dry
up their moisture. Red Rose Water is of well known and familiar use in all
occasions (and better than Damask Rose Water) being cooling and Cordial,
refreshing and quickening the weak and faint Spirits, used either in meats or
broths, to wash the Temples, or to smell to at the Nose, or to smell the sweet
vapors thereof out of a perfuming Pot or cast on a hot Fire-shovel: It is also
of much good use against the redness and Inflammations in the eyes to bath them
therewith, and the Temples of the Head also against pain and ach. for which
purpose also Vinegar of Roses is of much good use, and to procure rest and
sleep, Procure Sleep,
if some thereof and Rosewater together be used to smell unto, or the Nose and
Temples moistened therewith, but more usually to moisten a piece of Red Rose
Cake cut fit for the purpose, and heated between a double folded Cloth, with a
little beaten Nutmeg and Poppy Seed strewed on the side that must lie next to
the Forehead and Temples, and so bound thereto for all night. The Ointment of
Roses is much used against heat and Inflammations in the Head, to anoint the
forhead and temples, and being mixed with Vnguenium Populeon, to procure rest;
as also it is used for the heat of the Liver, of the Back and Reins, Heat of
the Liver, Back and Reir Pushes, Whe^ls and Pimples, Fluxes of Humors,
and to cool and heal Pushes, Wheals and other red Pimples rising in the Face
or other parts. Oil of Roses is not only used by it self to cool any hot
Swellings or Inflammations, and to bind and stay Fluxes of Humors unto Sores,
but is also put into Ointments and Plasters that are cooling and binding, and
restraining the Flux of Humors. The dried Leaves of the Red. Roses are used both
inward and outwardly, both cooling, binding, and Cordial, for with them are
made both Aromaticum Rosarum, Diarhodon Abbatis, and Saccharum Rosarum, each of
whose Properties are before declared. Rose Leaves and Mints heated and applied
outwardly to the Stomach, stays castings, and very much strengthens a weak
Stomach; Weak stomach,
and applied as a Fomentation to the Region of the Liver and Heart, does much
cool and temper them, and also serves instead of a Rose Cake (as is said
before) to quiet the over hot spirits and cause rest and sleep. The Syrup of
Damask Roses is both Simple and Compound, and made with Agrick. The Simple
Solutive Syrup, is a familiar, safe, gentle, and easy Medicine, purging
Choler, Purge Choler,
taken from one ounce to three or four; yet this is remarkable herein, That the
distilled Water of this Syrup should notably bind the Belly; Bind the Belly,
The Syrup with Agrick is more strong and effectual, for one ounce thereof by
it self will open the Body more than the other, and works as much on Phlegm as
Choler. The Compound Syrup is more forcible in working on Melanchollick
Humors, and available against the Lepry, Itch, Tetters, Melanchollick, Humors,
Lepry, Itch Tetters, French Pox,
etc. and the French Diseas: Also Honey of Roses Solutive is made of the same
infusion that the Syrup is made of, and therefore works the same effect both
in opening and purging, but is ostener given to Phlegmatic than Chollerick
persons, and is more used in Clysters than in Potions, as the Syrup made with
Sugar is. Opens the Belly,
The Conserve and Preserved Leaves of these Roses are also operative, in gently
opening the Belly. The Simple Water of the Damask Roses is chiefly used for
fumes to sweeten things, as the dried Leaves thereof to make sweet Pouders, and
fill sweet Bags, and little use they are put to in Physic, although they have
some purging quality; The wild Roses also are few or none of them used in
Physic, but yet are generally held to come near the Nature of the Manured
Roses. The Fruit of the wild Bryar which are called Heps being thoroughly ripe
and made into a Conserve with Sugar besides the pleasantness of the taste does
gently bind the Belly, Bind the Belly, and stay Defluxions,
and stay Defluxions from the Head upon the Stomach, drying up the moisture
thereof, and helps digestion. The Pulp of the Heps dried unto a hard
consistence, like to the Juice of Liquoris, or so dried that it may be made
into Powder and taken in drink stays speedily the Whites in Women. Whites in
Women, Stone, provoke urine, Chollick,
The Bryar Ball is often used being made into Powder and drunk to break the
Stone, to provoke Urine when it is stopped, and to eas and help the Chollick;
some appoint it to be burnt, and then taken for the same purpose. In the middle
of these Balls are often found certain white Worms, Worms.
which being dried and made into Powder, and some of it drunk, is found by
experience of many to kill and dry forth the Worms of the Belly.

What a quarter have Authors made with Roses, what a racket have they kept? I
shall ad, Red Roses are under Jupiter, Damask under Venus, and White under the
Moon, and Province under the King of France.

RosaSolis, or Sun-dew.
Description.
THis has diverse sinal round hollow Leaves, somewhat greenish, but full of
certain red hairs, which makes them seem red, every one standing upon its own
Fooststalk, reddish hairy likewise. The Leaves are continualty moist in the
hottest day, yea the hotter the Sun shines on them the moister they are, with a
certain sliminess that will rope (as we say) the small hairs always holding
this moisture: among these Leaves rise up small slender stalks, reddesh also,
three or four fingers high, bearing diverse small white Knobs one above another
which are the flowers, after which in the Heads are certain small Seeds. the
Root is a few small hairs.

Place.
It grows usually on Bogs, and in wet places, and sometimes in moist Woods.

Time.
It Flowreth in June, and then Leaves are fittest to be gatrhered.

Virtues and Use.
Rosa Solis is accounted good to help those Distillatithat have salt Rhewm
distilling on their Lungs ons o^^ which breeds a Consumption, and therefore
Rhewm, the Distilled water thereof in Wine is held fit and profitable for such
to drink, which Water will be of a gold yellow color: The same Water is held
to be good for all other Diseases of the Lungs, as Phtisicks, Wheesing,
shortness of Breath, or the Cough; as also to heal the Ulcers that happen in
the Lungs, Phtisick, ^ beesings: Shortness of breath, Cough, Ulcers in he
Lungs, comfort the Heart, Raise Blisters. Passions of the Heart.
and it comfort the Heart and fainting Spirits; The Leaves outwardly applied
to the Skin will raise Blisters, which has caused some to think it, dangerous
to be taken inward; but there are other things which will also draw Blisters,
yet nothing dangerous to be taken inwardly. There is an usual Drink made hereof
with Aqua vitae and Spices freuently, and without any offense or danger, but to
good purpose used in qualms and passions of the Heart.

The Sun rules it, and it is under the Sign Cancer.

Rosemary.
OUr Garden Rosemary is so well ^^own, that I need not here describe it.

Time.
It Flowreth in April and May with us, and sometimes again in August.

Virtues and Use.
It is an Herb if as great use with us in these days, as any whatsoever, not
only for Physical but Civil purposes. The Physical use of it (being my present
Task) is very much, both for inward and outward Diseases; For by the warming
and comforting heat thereof it helps all cold Diseases, Cold Diseases, Rhewm,
Swimming of the Head, Drowsiness Stupidity, DumbPalsey, Lethargy and
Fallingsickness Toothach, stinking breath, Weak Memory. stomach, Retention of
Meat, Wind, Livergrown, Dim sight,
both of the Head, Stomach Liver and Belly. The Decoction thereof in Wine
helps the cold Distillations of Rhewm into the Eyes, and all other cold
Diseases of the Head and Brain, as the Giddiness or swimming therein
Drowsiness, or Dullness of the mind and senses, like a stupidness, the dumb
Palsy, or loss of speech, the Lethargy, and Falling Sickness, to be both drunk
and the Temples bathed therewith. It helps the pains in Gums and Teeth, by
Rhewm falling into them, or by putrefaction causing an evil smell from them, or
a stinking Breath. It helps a weak Memory, and quickneth the Senses. It is
very comfortable to the Stomach in all the cold Griefs thereof, helping both
retention of meat, and digestion, the Decoction or Powder being taken in Wine:
it is a Remedy for the windiness in the Stomach or Bowels, and expellerh it
powerfully, as also Wind in Spleen. It helps those that are Livergrown, by
opening the Obstructions thereof. It helps dim Eyes, and procures clear
sight, the Flowers thereof being taken all the while it is Flowring, every
morning fasting with bread and Salt. Both D^oscorides and Galen say. That if a
Decoction be made thereof with Water and they that have the yellow Jaundice
Yellow Jaundice,
do exercise their Bodies presenty after the taking thereof, it will certainly
cure it: The Flowers and the Conserve made of them, is singular good to comfort
the Heart, and to expel the contagion of the Pestilence; Pestilence,
to burn the Herb in Houses and Chambers corrects the Air in them: Both the
Flowers and the Leaves are very profitable for Women that are troubled with the
Whites, if they be daily taken. Whites in Women, Cough, Phtisick, or
Consumption,
The dried Leaves shred small and taken in a Pipe like as Tobacco is taken,
helps those that have any Cough or Phtisick, or Consumption, by warming and
drying the thin Distillations which cause those Diseases. The Leaves are much
used in Bathing, and made into Ointments or Oils, is singular good to help cold
benumbed Joints, benumbed Joints,
Sinews, or Members. The Chimical Oil drawn from the Leaves and Flowers, is a
Sovereign help for all the Diseases aforesaid; to touch the Temples and
Nostrils with two or three drops, for all the Diseases of the Head and Brains
spoken of before; as also to take a drop two or three as the cause requires for
the inward griefs, yet must it be done with Descretion, for it is very quick
and piercing, and therefore but a very little must be taken at a time. There is
also another Oil made by insolation in this manner: Take what qunatity you will
of the Flowers, and put them into a strong Glass close stopped, tie a fine
linen cloth over the Mouth, and turn the Mouth down into another Strong Glass,
which being set in Sun, an Oil will distill down into he lower Glass,to be
preserved as precious for diverse uses, both inward and outward as a Sovereign
Balm to heal the diseases before mentioned, to clcer a dim sight, and to take
away spots, marks and scars in the skin. spots and scars in the Skin.


The Sun claims Privilege in it and it is under the Celestial Ram.

Rubarb, or Rhapontick.
DO not start, and say this grows you know not how far off; and then ask me,
How it comes to pass that I bring it among our English Simples: for though name
may speak it Foreign yet it grows with us in England, and that frequent enough
in our Gardens, and when you have thoroughly perused its Virtues, you will
conclude it nothing inferior to that which is brought us out of China, and by
that time this has been as much used as that has been, the name which the
other has gotten will be eclipsed by the same of this: Take therefore a
Description at large of it, as follows.

Description.
At the first appearing out of the ground when the Winter is past, is has a
great round brownish head rising from the middle or sides of the Root, which
opens it self into sundry Leaves one after another, very much crumpled or
folded together at the first, and brownish, but afterward it spreads it self
and becomes smooth very large and almost round, every one standing on a
brownish Stalk of the thickness of a man's Thumb, when they are grown to their
fullness, and most of them two foot and more in length, especially when they
grow in any moist or good Ground; and the Stalk of the Leaf also from the
bottom thereof to the Leaf it self, being also two Foot, The breadth thereof
from edg to edg in the broadest place, being also two foot, of a sad or dark
green color, of a fine tart, or sowrish taste, much more pleasant: than the
Garden or Wood sorrel. From among these rises up some but not every year, a
strong thick Stalk, not growing so high as the Patience or Garden Dock, with
such round Leaves as grow below, but smaller, at every Joint up to the top, and
among the Flowers which are white spreading forth into many Branches, and
consisting of five or six small white Leaves apiece, hardly to be discerned from
the white threads in the middle, and seeming to be all threads after which come
brownish three square Seed like unto other Docks, but larger whereby it may be
plainly known to be a Dock. The Root grows in time to be very great, with
diverse and sundry great spreading Branches from it, of a dark, brownish, or
reddish color on the outside, with a pale yellow skin under it which covers
the inner substance or Root, which ^ind and Skin being pared away, the Root
appears of so fresh and lively a color, with fleshcolour'd Veins running
through it, that the choicest of that Rubarb that is brought us from beyond the
Seas cannot excel it: Which Root if it be dried carefully and as it ought
(which must be in our Country by the gentle heat of a fire in regard the Sun
is not hot enough here to do it, and every piece kept from touching one
another) will hold his color almost as well as when it is fresh; and has been
approved of and commended by those who have oftentimes used them.

Place.
It grows in Gardens, and Flowreth about the beginning or middle of June, and
the Seed is ripe in July.

Time.
The Roots that are to be dried and kept all the year following, are not to be
taken up before the Stalk and Leaves be quite withered and gone, and that is not
until the middle or end of October; and if they be taken a little before the
Leaves do spring, or when they are sprung up, the Roots will not have half so
good a color in them.

I have given the precedence unto this, because in virtues also it has the
pre-eminence; I come now to describe unto you that which is called Patience, or
Monks Rubarb; and next unto at, the great round Leaved Dock, or Bastard Rubarb;
for the one of these may happily supply in the absence of the other; being not
much unlike in their Virtues, only one more powerful and efficacious than the
other; And lastly; shall show you the Virtues of all the three Sorts.

Garden Patience, or Monks Rubard.
Description.
THis is a Dock, bearing the name of Rubarb, for some purging quality therein,
and grows up with large tall Stalks, set with somewhat broad and long fair
green Leaves, not dented at all; The tops of the Stalks being divided into many
small Branches, bear reddish or purplish Flowers, and three square Seed like
unto other Docks. The Root is long, great and yellow like unto the wild Docks
but a little redder, and if it be a little dried shows less store of
discolored veins, than the next does when it is dry.

Great round leaved Dock, OR, Bastard Rubarb.
Description.
THis has diverse large, round, thin, yellowish with green Leaves, rising from
the Root, a little waved about the edges, every one standing on a reasonable
thick, and long brownish Footstalk; from among which rises up a pretty big
Stalk about two foot high, with some such like Leaves growing thereon, but
smaller. At top whereof stand. In a long spike many small brownish Flowers,
which turn into hard three square shining brown Seed, like the Garden Patience
before described. This Root grows greater than that, with many Branches or
great Fibers thereat, yellow on the outside, and somewhat pale yellow within,
with some discolored veins like to the Rubarb which is first described, but
much less than it, especially when it is dry.

Place and Time.
These also grow in Gardens, and Flower and Seed at or near the same time that
our true Rubarb does, Viz. they Flower in June, and the Seed is ripe in July.

Virtues and use
A dram of the dried Root of Monks Rubarb, with a seruple of Ginger made into
Powder and taken fasting in a draught or mess of warm Broth, purge^ Choler and
Phlegm Purge Choler and Phlegm, stay Las ks and bloody Flux, Scabs and ulcerous
Sores, Running Sores, Pains of the Ears, Toothach, Jaundice, pains of the
Stomach and loathing of Meat, Kings Evil, Stone, Urine, Dim sight, Liver and
Blood, Choler and Phlegm, Obstructions Jaundice, Dropsy, Spleen, Agues, pains
of the sides, and spitting of Blood, Running of the Reins, Swelling in the
Head, Sciatica, Gout,
downward very gently, and safely without danger: The Seed thereof contrarily
does bind the Belly, and helps to stay any sort of Lask or Bloody Flux. The
distilled water thereof is very profitably used to heal Scabs, as also foul
Ulcerous Sores, and to allay the Inflammations of them. The Juice of the Leaves
or Roots, or the Decoction of them in Vinegar is used as a most effectual
Remedy to heal Scabs and running Sores.

The Bastard Rubarb has all the properties of the Monks Rubarb, but more
effectual for both inward and outward Diseases. The Decoction thereof with
Vinegar dropped into the Ears, takes away the pains gargled in the Mouth,
takes away Toothach, and being drunk heals the Jaundice. The Seed thereof
taken eases the gnawing and griping pains of the Stomach, and takes away the
loathing thereof unto Meat: The Root thereof helps the ruggedness of the
Nails, and being boiled in Wine helps the Swellings of the Throat, commonly
called the Kings evil, as also the Swellings of the Kernels of the Ears: It
helps them that are troubled with the Stone; provokes Urine, and helps the
dimness of the Sight. The Roots of this Bastard Rubarb are used in opening and
purging Diet Drinks with other things, to open the Liver, and to clens and cool
the Blood.

The poperties of that which is called the English Rubarb, are the same with
the former, but much more effectual, and has all the properties of the true
Indian Rubarb, except the force in purging, wherein it is but of half the
strength thereof, and therefore a double quantity must be used: it likewise has
not that bitterness and astriction; in other things it works almost ^n an
equal quality, which are these: It purges the Body of Choler and Phlegm, being
either taken of it self, made into Powder and drunk in a draught of white Wine,
or ste^ped therein all night and taken fasting, or put among other Purgers, as
shall be thought convenient, clensing the Stomach, Liver, and Blood, opening
Obstructions, and helping those griefs that come thereof; as the Jaundice,
Dropsy, swelling of the Spleen, Tertian and day Agues, and the pricking pain
of the sides, and also it stayerh spitting of Blood. The Powder taken with
Cassia dissolved, and a little washed Venice Turpentine, cleanses the Reins and
strengthens them afterward, and is very effectual to stay the running of the
Reins or Gonorrea. It is also given for the pains and swellings in the Head,
for those that are troubled with Melancholy, and helps the Sciatica, the
Gout, and the Cramp. Cramp, Clotted Blood, Ulcers in the Eyes, or Eyelids,
swellings and Inflammations, Black and blue spots, Purge the Liver and Stomach.
The Powder of Rubarb taken with a little Mummia and Madder Roots in some red
Wine, dissolveth clotted Blood in the Body, happening by any fall or bruise, and
heals burstings and broken parts as well inward as outward: The Oil likewise
wherein it has been boiled, works the like effects, being anointed. It is
used to heal those Ulcers that happen in the Eyes and Eyelids, being steeped
and strained; as also to assuage the Swellings and Inflammations; and applied
with Honey, or boiled Wine, it takes away all black and blue Spots or Marks
that happen therein. Whey, or white Wine are the best Liquors to steep it in,
and thereby it works more effectually in opening Obstructions, and purging
the Stomach and Liver. Many do use a little Indian Spicknard as the best
Correcter thereof.

Mars claims Predominancy over all these wholesome Herbs, you cry out upon him
for an infortune, when God created him for your good (only he is angry with
Fools) what dishonor is this, not to Mars, but to God Himself.

Meadow Rue.
Description.
THis rises up with a yellow stringy Root, much spreading in the ground, and
shooting forth new sprouts round about, with many Herby green Stalks two foot
high, crested all the length of them, set with Joints here and there, and many
large Leaves on them as well as below, being divided into smaller Leaves, nicked
or dented in the forepart of them, of a sad green color on the upperside, and
pale green underneath: Toward the top of the Stalk there shoots forth diverse
short Branches, on every one thereof there stand two, three, or four small round
Heads or Buttons, which breaking the skin that incloseth them show forth a tuft
of pale greenish yellow threads, which falling away there comes in their places
small three cornre'd Cods, wherein is contained small; long, and round Seed. The
whole Plant has a strong unpleasant scent.

Place.
It grows in many places of this Land; in the Borders of moist Meadows, and
by Ditch sides.

Time.
It Flowreth about July or the beginning of August.

Virtues and Use.
Dioscorides says that this Herb bruised and applied perfectly heals old
Sores: Old sores
and the distilled water of the Herb and Flowers does the like. It is used by
some among other Potherbs to open the Body Open the Body, Lice and Vermin,
Plague, Jaundice.
and make it soluble; but the Roots washed clean, and boiled in Ale and drunk
provokes to the Stool more than the Leaves; but yet very gently. The Root
boiled in Water, and the places of the Body most troubled with Vermin or Lice,
washed therewith while it is warm, destroys them utterly. In Italy it is used
against the Plague, and in Saxony against the Jaundice, as Camerarious says.

Garden Rue.
THis is so well known, both by this name, and the Name Herb of Grace, that I
shall not need to write you any further Description of it; But shall only show
you the Virtues of it as follows.

Virtues and Use.
It provokes Urine and Women's Courses, Urine, Women's Courses, Poisons, Plague,
Abate Venery, pains of the chest and Sides, Cough, Hard breathitg, Sciatica,
and Joint aches, Agues, Wind Chollick, Mother, Worms, Gout, Dropsy, Bleeding,
Swelling of the Cods Wheals and Pimples,
being taken either in Meat or Drink. The Seed thereof taken in Wine, is an
Antidote against all dangerous Medicines or deadly Poisons. The Leaves taken
either by themselves, or with Figs and Walnuts is called Metbridates his
Counter poison, against the Plague and causes all Venomous things to become
harmless: Being often taken in Meat or Drink it abateth Venery, and destroys
the ability to beger Children. A Decoction made thereof with some dried Dill
Leaves and Flowers, eases all pains and torments inwardly to be drunk, and
outwardly to be applied warm to the place grieved. The same being drunk helps
the pains both of the Chest and Sides, as also Coughs, hardness of breathing,
the Inflmations of the Lungs, and the tormenting pains of the Sciatica, and the
Joints, being anointed or laid to the places, as also the shaking Fits of
Agues, to take a draught before the Fit come: Being boiled or infused in Oil it
is good to help the wind Chollick, the hardness or windiness of the Mother, and
freeth women from the strangling or suffocation thereof, if the Share and the
Parts thereabouts be anointed therewith: It kills and drives forth the Worms
of the Belly, if it be drunk after it is boiled in Wine to the half with a
little Honey: It helps the Gout or pains in the Joints of Hands, Feet, or
Knees applied thereunto: and with Figs it helps the Dropsy being bathed
therewith: being bruised and put into the Nostrils it staieth the Bleeding
thereof. It helps the swelling of the Cods it they be bathed with a Decoction
of Rue and Bay Leaves. It takes away Wheals and Pimples if being bruised with
a few Myrtle Leaves, if it be made up with Wax, and applied: It cures the
Morphew Morphew and Warts, Scab, Tetter and Ringworm, Pains of the Ears,
Dimsight, St. Anthonies sire, Running sores of the Head, Vlce^s of the Nose,
Antidote, pains of the Chest, Stomach, Spleen, Belly Obstructions,
and takes away all sorts of Warts, if boiled in Wine with some Pepper and
Nitre and the places rubbed therewith: and with Alum and Honey, helps the
dry Scab or any Tetter or Ringworm: The Juice thereof warmed in a Pemegranate
Shel or Rind, and dropped into the Ears helps the pains of them. The Juice of
it and Fennel with a little Honey, and the Gall of a Cock put thereto, helps
the dimness of the Eyelight. An Ointment made of the Juice thereof with Oil of
Roses, Ceruss, and a little Vinegar, and anointed cures St. Anthonies Fire,
and all foul running Sores in the Head; and the stinking Ulcers of the Nose, or
other parts. The Antidote used by Methridate^ every morning fasting to secure
himself from any Poison or Infection, was this. Take twenty Leaves of Rue, a
little Salt, a couple of Walnuts, and a couple of Figs beaten together into a
Mass with twenty Juniper Berries, which is the quantity appointed for every
day. Another Electuary is made thus; Take of Nitre, Pepper, and Cummin Seed, of
each equal Parts, of the Leaves of Rue clean picked, as much in weight as all
the other three weighed, beat them well together, and put to as much Honey as
will make it up into an Electuary; (but you must first steep your Cummin seed
in Vinegar twenty four hours, and then dry it, or rather toast it in a hot
Fireshovel, or in an Oven) and it is a Remedy for the pains or griefs of the
Chest or Stomach, of the Spleen, Belly or Sides, by Wind or Stitches; of the
Liver by Obstructions, of the Reins and Bladder by the stopping of Urine, and
helps also to extenuate fat corpulent Bodies.

What an Infamy is cast upon the Ashes of Methridates (or Methradates, as the
Augustanes read his name) by unworthy people; they that deserve no good report
themselves, love to give non^ to others, Viz. That that renowned King of Pontus
fortified his Body by Poison against Poison (He cast out Devils by Beelzebub
the Prince of Devils) what a sot is he that knows not if he had accustomed his
Body to cold Poisons hot Poisons would have dispatched him, or the contrary if
not, corrosions would have done it, the whole world is at this very time
beholding to him for his Studies in Physic, and he that uses the quantity of
but a Hazel Nut of that Recept every morning, to which his name is adjoined
shall to admiration preserve his Body in health, if he do but consider that Rue
is an Herb of the Sun and under Leo, and gather it and the rest accordingly.

Rupture wort.
Description.
THis spreads very many threddy Branches round about upon the ground, about a
span long, divided into many other smaller parts, full of small Joints set very
thick together, whereat come forth two very small Leaves of a fresh yellowish
green color branches and all, where grows forth also a number of exceeding
small yellowish Flowers, scarce to be discerned from the Stalks and Leaves, which
turn into Seed as small as the very dust: The Root is very long and small,
thrusting down deep into the ground: This has neither smell nor taste at first,
but afterward has a little astringent taste, without any manifest heat, yet a
little bitter and sharp withal.

Place.
It grows in dry, sandy, and Rockie places.

Time.
It is fresh and green all the Summer.

Virtues and use.
Rupture wort has not his name in vain, for it is found by experience to cure
the Rupture, Ruptures, Fluxes, Running of the Reins, Strangury, Stone or
Gravel, Stitches, Yellow Jaundice, Worms, Wounds, Defluxions, Foul Ulsers.
not only in Children but also in Elder Persons, if the Diseas be not too
inveterate, by taking a dram of the Powder of the dried Herb every day in Wine
for certain days together; Or the Decoction made in Wine and drunk: Or the
Juice or distilled water of the green Herb taken in the same manner; and
helps all other Fluxes either in men or Women; Vomitings also, and the
Gonorrhea or running of the Reins, being taken any of the ways aforesaid. It
does also most assuredly help those that have the Strangury, or have their
Urine stopped, or are troubled with the Stone or Gravel in their Reins or
Bladder. The same also helps much all Stitches in the Side, all griping pains
in the Stomach or Belly, the Obstructions of the Liver, and cures the yellow
Jaundice likewise: It kills also the Worms in Children: Being outwardly
applied it conglutineth Wounds notably, and helps much to stay Defluxions of
Rhewm from the Head to the Eyes, Nose, and Teeth, being bruised green and bound
thereto; Or the Decoction of the dried Herb, to bath the Forehead and Temples,
or the Nape of Neck behind: It also dries up the moisture of Fistulous Ulcers,
or any others that are foul and spreading.

They say Saturn causes Ruptures, if he do, he does no more than he can cure,
if you want wit he will teach you though to your cost, this Herb is Saturns
own, and is a notable Antivenerian.

Rushes.
ALthough there are many kinds of Rushes, yet I shall only here insist upon
those which are best known, and most Medicinal, as the Bulrushes, and other of
the so^t and smooth kinds; which grow so commonly in almost every place of this
Land, and are so generally noted, that I suppose it needless to trouble you
with any Description of them: Briefly then take the Virtues of them as
follows.

Virtues and Uices.
The Seeds of these soft Rushes, says Dioscorides and Galen, toasted (says
Pliny) being drunk in Wine and Water, stays the Lask and Women's Courses, when
they come down too abundantly: but it causes Headache: It provokes sleep
likewife but must be given with caution, lest the party that takes it wake not
until the Resurrection: Pliny says, The Root boiled in water to the
consumption of one third, helps the Cough.

Thus you see that Conveniences have their Inconveniences, and Virtue is seldom
unaccompanied with some Vices. What I have written concerning Rushes is to
satisfy my Country-mens Question, Are our Rushes good for nothing? Yes, and as
good let alone as taken; There are Remedies enough without them for every
Diseas, and therforo as the Proverb is, I care not a Rush for them, or rather
they will do you as much good as if one had given you a Rush.

Rye.
THis is so well known in all the Countries of this Land, and especially to the
Country people who feed much thereon, that if I should describe it, they would
presently say, I might well have spared that Labor: Its Virtues follow.

Virtues and use.
Rye is more digesting than Wheat; The Bread and the Leaven thereof ripeneth
and breaks Impostumes, Boyls, and other Swellings: Impostums Boyls and
Swellings, Pains of the Head, Chops of the Hands or Feet.
The Meal of Rye put between a double cloth, and moistened with a little
Vinegar, and heated in a Pewter dish, set over a Chafingdish of coals, and
bound fast to the Head while it is hot, both much eas the continual pains of
the Head: Mathiolus says, That the ashes of Rye straw put into Water and
suffered therein a day and a night, and the Chops of the Hands or Feet washed
therewith, does heal them.

Saffron.
THe Herb needs no Description it being known generally where it grows.

Place.
It grows frequently at Walden in Essex, and in Cambridg-sbire

Virtues and use.
It is an Herb of the Sun, and under the Lion, and therefore you need not demand
a reason why it strengthens the heart so exceedingly: Let not abov ten grains
be given at one time, for if the Sun which is the Fountain of Life, may dazzle
the Eyes and make them blind, a Cordial being taken in an immoderate quantity
may hurt the Heart instead of helping it. It quicken the Brain, for the Sun is
exalted in V as well as he has his House in SL it help Consumption of the
Lungs, help difficulty of breathing: it is an excellent thing in Epidemical
Diseases, as Pestilences, small Pox, and Measles: It is a notable expulsive
Medicine, and a notable Remedy for the yellow Jaundice. My own Opinion is (but
I have no Author for it) that Hermodactils is nothing else but the Roots of
Saffron dried, and my reason is, that the Roots of all Crocus both white and
yellow purge Phlegm as Hermodactils do, and if you please to dry the Roots of
any Crocus, neither your eye nor your taste shall distinguish it from
Hermodactils.

Sage.
OUr ordinary Garden Sage needs no Description.

Time.
It Flowreth in or about July.

Virtues and use.
A Decoction of the Leaves and Branches of Sage made and drunk, says
Dioscorides provokes Urine, Provoke Urine, women's Courses, Expel the Dead
Child and After birth, stanch Bleeding, Cleanse Ulcers and sores, Itching of the
Cods,
brings down Women's Courses, helps to expel the dead Child, and causes the
hairs to become black; It staieth the bleeding of Wounds, and cleanses foul
Ulcers or Sores; The seid Decoction made in Wine takes away the itching of the
Cods if they be bathed therewith. Agrippa says, That: if Women that cannot
conceive by reason of the moist slipperiness of their Wombs shall take a
quantity of the Juice of Sage with a little Salt for four days before they
company with their Husbands, it will help them not only to Conceive, but also
to retain the Birth without miscarrying. Orpheus says, Three spoonfuls of the
Juice of Sage taken fasting with a little Honey, does presently stay the
spitting or casting up of Blood. For them that are in a Consumption, these
Pills are much commended. Take of Spicknard and Ginger of each two drams; of
the Seed of Sage toasted at the fire, eight drams, of long Pepper twelve drams,
all these being brought into fine Powder, put thereto so much Juice of Sage as
may make them into a Mass for Pills, taking a dram of them every morning
fasting, and so likewise at night, drinking a little pure Water after them.
Help Conception and hinder Miscarriage, spitting Blood, consumption, Pains of
the Head and Joints, Fall^^gsickness, Lethargy, Dullness of spirit, Palsy,
Defluxions of Rhewm, Impostume behind the Ears. Hoarsness and cough, Bloody
Flux, Ricing of Serpents, Worms in the Ears, or Sores, Quincken the senses, and
help Memory, Sore Mouths and Throats, Cankers, Palsy or cramp, Stitch in the
side.
Mathiolus says, it is very profitable for all manner of pains of the Head
coming of cold and Rhewmatick Humors, as also for all pains of the Joints,
whether used inwardly or outwardly, and therefore helps the Falling Sickness,
the Lethargy, such as are dull and heavy of spirit, the Palsy, and is of much
use in an Defluxions of Rhewm from the Head, and for the Diseases of the Chest
or Preast. The Leaves of Sage and Nettles bruised together, and laid upon the
Impostume that rises behind the Ears, does aslwage it much: The juice of Sage
taken in warm water, helps a Hoarsness and the Cough. The Leaves sodden in
Wine and laid upon the place affected with the Palsy helps much, if the
Decoction be drunk also. Sage taken with Wormwood is used for the bloody Flux.
Pliny says, it procures Women's Courses, and stays them coming down too
fast, helps the stinging and biting of Serpents, and kills the Worms that
breed in the Ears and in Sores. Sage is of excellent use to help the Memory,
warming and quickening the senses; and the Conserve made of the Flowers is used
to the same purpose, and also for all the former recited Diseases. The Juice of
Sage drunk with Vinegar has been of good use in the time of Plague at all
times. Gargles likewise are made with Sage, Rosemary, Honeysuckles, and
Plantane boiled in Wine or Water, with some Honey and Alum put thereto, to
wash sore Mouths and Throats, Cankers, or the secret parts of man or woman as
need requires. And with other hot and comfortable Herbs. Sage is boiled to
bath the Body or Legs in the Summer time, especially to warm cold Joints or
Sinews troubled with the Palsy or Cramp, and to comfort and strengthen the
parts. It is much commended against the Stitch or pains in the side coming of
Wind, if the place be fomented warm with the Decoction thereof in Wine, and the
Herb after the boiling be laid warm also thereunto.

Jupiter claims this, and bid me tell you it is good for the Liver, and to
breed good Blood.

VVood-Sage.
Description.
VVood-Sage rises up with square hoary Stalks two foot high at the least, with
two Leaves set at every Joint, somewhat like other Sage Leaves, but smaller,
softer, whiter, and rounder, and a little dented about the edges and smelling
somewhat strongly: At the tops of the Stalks and Branches stand the Flowers on a
slender long Spike turning themselves all one way when they blow, and are of a
pale and whitish color, smaller than Sage, but hooded and gaping like unto
them: The Seed is blackish and round, four usually set in a husk together: The
Root is long and stringy, with diverse Fibers thereat, and abides many years.

Place.
It grows in Woods, and by Wood-sides, as also in diverse Fields and by-Lanes
in this Land.

Time.
It Flowreth in June, July, and August.

Virtues and Use.
The Decoction of Wood-Sage provokes Urine and Women's Courses: Provokes Urine,
and Women's courses, and sweat, Swellings in the flesh, French Pox, Vein broken,
Bursteness, Palsy, Ulcers and Sores, Green Wounds.
it also provokes Sweat, digesteth Humors, and discusseth Swellings, and Nodes
in the Flesh, and is therefore thought to be good against the French Pox. The
Decoction of the green Herb made with Wine is a safe and sure Remedy for those
who by falls, bruises, or Blows, doubt some Vein to be inwardly broken, to
disperse and avoid the congealed blood, and to consolidate the Vein; It is also
good for such as are inwardly or outwardly bursten, the drink used inwardly,
and the Herb applied outwardly: The same used in the same manner is found to be
a sure Remedy for the Palsy: The Juice of the Herb or the Powder thereof
dried, is good for moist Ulcers and sores in the Legs or other parts, to dry
them, and cause them to heal the more speedily: It is no less effectual also in
green Wounds to be used upon any occasion.

Solomon's Seal.
Description.
THe common Solomon's Seal rises up with a round Stalk about half a yard high,
bowing or bending down to the top, set with single Leaves one above another,
somewhat large and like the Leaves of the LillyConvalley, or May Lilly, with an
eye of bluish upon the green, with some ribs therein, and more yellowish
underneath: At the foot of every Leaf almost from the bottom up to the top of
the Stalk come forth small long white and hollow pendulous Flowers, somewhat
like the Flowers of May-Lilly, but ending in five long points, for the most
part two together, at the end of a long Footstalk, and sometimes but one, and
sometimes also two Stalks with Flowers at the Foot of a Leaf, which are without
any scent at all, and stand all on one side of the Stalk: After they are past,
come in their places, small round Berries, green at the first, and blackish
green, tending to blewness when they are ripe, wherein lie small white hard and
stony Seed: The Root is of the thickness of ones finger or Thumb, white and
knobbed in some places, with a flat round circle representing a Seal, whereof
it took the name, lying along under the upper crust of the Earth, and not
growing downward but with many fibers underneath.

Place.
It is frequent in diverse places of this Land, as namely in a Wood two miles
from Canterbury, by Fishpool-Hill: as also in a bushy Close belonging to the
Parsonage of Alderbury near Clarindon, two miles from Salisbury; in Chesson
Wood, on Chesson Hill, between Newington and Sittingborn in Kent, and in
diverse other places, in Essex and other Counties.

Time.
It Flowreth about May, The Root abides, and shoots anew every year.

Virtues and Use.
The Root of Solomon's Seal is found by experience to be available in Wounds,
Wounds and Sores, Vomiting and Bleeding, Fluxes, Running of the Reins, Knit
Joints; and broken Bones in man and beast, Ruptures,
Hurts, and outward Sores, to heal and close up the lips of those that are
green, and to dry up and restrain the Flux of Humors to those that are old: It
is singular good to stay Vomitings, and Bleedings wheresoever, as also al
Fluxes in man or woman, whether the Whites or Reds in Women, or the running of
the Reins in men; also to knit any Joint which by weakness uses to be often
out of place, or will not stay in long, when it is set: also to knit and join
broken Bones in any part of the Body, the Roots being bruised and applied to
the place: Yea it has been found by late experience that the Decoction of the
Root in Wine, or the bruised Root put in Wine or other drink, and after a
nights infusion strained forth hard and drunk, has helped both man and Beast
whose Bones have been broken by any occasion, which is the most assured refuge
of help to people of diverse Countries of this Land, that they can have: It is
no less effectual to help Rupture and Burstings, the Decoction in Wine, or the
Powder in Broth or Drink being inwardly taken and outwardly applied to the
place: The same is also available for inward or outward Bruises, Falls or
Blows, Bruises and Falls, black and blew Marks, Beautify the Face.
both to dispel the congealed blood, and to take away both the pains and the
black and blew Marks that abide after the hurt. The same also or the distilled
water of the whole Plant used to the Face or other part of the Skin, cleanses it
from Morphew, Freckles, Spots; or Marks whatsoever, leaving the place, fresh,
fair, and Lovely, for which purpose it is much used by the Italian Dames.

Saturn owns this Plant for he loves his Bones well.

Sampire.
Description.
THe Rock Sampire grows up with a tender green Stalk, about half a yard or
two foot high at the most, branching forth almost from the very bottom, and
stored with sundry thick, and almost round somewhat long Leaves, of a deep green
color, sometimes three together, and sometimes more on a Stalk, and are sappy,
and of a pleasant; hot, or spicy taste: At the tops of the Stalk and Branches,
stand Umbels of white Flowers, and after them come large Seed bigger than
Fennel Seed, yet somewhat alike. The Root is great, white, and long, continuing
many years, and is of a hot spicy taste likewise.

Place.
It grows on the Rocks that are often moistened at the least, if not
overflown with the Sea water.

Time.
And it Flowreth and Seedeth in the end of July and August.

Virtues and Use.
It is a safe Herb, very pleasant both to the taste and Stomach, helping
digestion, Helps digestion, Opens Obstructions, provokes Urin Expel Gravel and
the Stone.
and in some sort opening the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, provoking
Urine, and helping thereby to wash away the Gravel and Stone engendered in the
Kidneys or Bladder.

Sanicle.
Description.
THe ordinary Sanicle sends forth many great round Leaves standing upon long
brownish stalks, every one somewhat deeply cut or divided into five or six
parts, and some of those also cut in, somewhat like the Leaf of a Crowfoot, or
Doves-foot, and finely dented about the edges, smooth, and of a dark green
shining color, and sometimes reddish about the Brims, from among which rises
up small round green Stalks without any Joint or Leaf thereon, saving at the
top, where it brancheth forth into Flowers, having a Leaf divided into three or
four parts at that Joint with the Flowers, which are small and whit, starting
out of small round greenish yellow heads, many standing together in a tuft; in
which afterward are the Seeds contained, which are small round rough Burs,
somewhat like the Seeds of Cleavers, and stick in the same manner upon any thing
that they touch: The Root is composed of many black strings or fibers set
together, at a little long head, which abides with the green Leaves all the
Winter and perish not.

Place.
It is found in many shadowy Woods, and other places of this Land.

Time.
It Flowreth in June, and the Seed is ripe shortly after.

Virtues and Use.
It is exceeding good to heal all green Wounds speedily, or any Ulcers,
Impostumes, or bleedings inwardly: Green Wounds, Ulcers, Impostums Inward
Bleedings, Swellings, ulcers in the Mouth Throat, and Privities, Women's
Courses, Fluxes of Blood, Lasks, Ulcers in the Kidneys, Running or the Reins,
Rupture.
It does wonderfully help those that have any Tumors in any part of their
Bodies, for it represseth and dissipateth the Humors, if the Decoction or Juice
thereof be taken, or the Powder in drink, and the Juice used outwardly; For
there is not found any Herb that can give such present help either to Man or
Beast when the Disease falls upon the Lungs or Throat, and to heal up all the
putrid Malignant Ulcers in the Mouth, Throat, and Privities, by gargling or
washing with the Decoction of the Leaves and Root, made in Water, and a little
Honey put thereto. It helps to stay Women's Courses, and all other Fluxes of
Blood either by the Mouth, Urine or Stool, and Lasks of the Belly, the
Ulceration of the Kidneys also, and the pains in the Bowels, and the Gonorrhea
or running of the Reins, being boiled in Wine or Water, and drunk: The same
also is no less powerful to help any Ruptures or Burstings, used both inwardly
and outwardly, and briefly it is effectual in binding; restraining,
consolidating, heating, drying, and healing; as Comfry, Bugle, Self-heal, or
any other of the Consounds, or Vulnerary Herbs whatsoever.

This is one of Venus her Herbs to cure either Wounds, or what other mischiefs
Mars inflicteth upon the Body of Man.

Sarasens Consound.
Description.
THis grows very high sometimes with brownish Stalks, and other whiles with
green and hollow to a man's height, having many long and narrow green Leaves
snip'd about the edges, somewhat like those of the PeachTree,

Tree, or Willow Leaves, but not of such a white green color: The tops of the
Stalks are furnished with many pale yellow Starlike Flowers standing in green
heads, which when they are fallen, and the Seed ripe, which is somewhat long,
small, and of a yellowish brown color wrapped in down, is therewith carried
away with the wind: The Root is composed of many strings or fibers, set
together at a head, which perish not in Winter, but abide, although the Stalks
dry away, and no Leaf appears in Winter. The taste hereof is strong and
unpleasant, and so is the smell also.

Place.
It grows in moist and wet grounds by Wood sides, and sometimes in the moist
places of shady Groves, as also by the water side.

Time.
It Flowreth in July, and the Seed is soon ripe, and carried away with the wind.

Virtues and Use.
Among the Germans, this Wound Herb is preferred before all others of the same
quality. Being boiled in Wine and drunk, it helps the indispos^ion of the
Liver, and freeth the Gall from Obstructions, whereby it is good for the yellow
Jaundice, Obstructions yellow Jaundice, Dropsy, Ulcers of the Reins, Inward
Wounds and Bruises, Pains in the Body, Mother, Agues, Green Wounds, Old Sores
or Ulcers, Ulcers in the Mouth or Throat, Sores in the Privy Parts.
and for the Dropsy in the beginning of it; for all inward Ulcers of the
Reins; or elsewhere, and inward Wounds and Bruises: And being steeped in Wine
and then distilled, the Water thereof drunk is singular good to ease all
gnawings in the Stomach, or other pains of the Body, as also the pains of the
Mother: And being boiled in Water it helps continual Agues; And this said
Water, or the simple Water of the Herb distilled, or the Juice or Decoction,
are very effectual to heal any green Wound or old sore or Ulcer whatsoever,
clensing them from corruption and quickly healing them up: It is no less
effectual for the Ulcers in the mouth or Throat, be they never so foul or
stinking, by washing and gargling them therewith; and likewise for such Sores
as happen in the privy parts of man or Woman: Briefly whatsoever has been said
of Bugle or Sanicle, may be found herein.

Saturn owns this Herb, and it is of sober condition like him.

Sauce alone, or Jack by the Hedge.
Description.
THe lower Leaves of this are rounder than those that grow toward the tops of
the Stalks, and are set singly one at a Joint, being somewhat round and broad,
and pointed at the ends, dented also about the edges, somewhat resembling Nettle
Leaves for the form but of a fresher green color, and not rough or pricking:
The Flowers are very small and white, growing at the tops of the Stalks one
above another, which being past, there follow small and long round pods, wherein
are cantained, small round Seed somewhat blackish: The Root is stringy and
threddy, perishing every year after it has given Seed, and raises it self
again of its own sowing: The Plant or any part thereof being bruised, smells
of Garlic, but more pleasantly, and tastes somewhat hot and sharp, almost like
unto Rocket.

Place.
It grows under Walls, and by Hedge sides, and Pathwaies in Fields, in many
places.

Time.
It Flowreth in June, July, and August.

Virtues and Use.
This is eaten by many Country people as Sauce to their Salt-fish, and helps
well to digest the crudities and other corrupt Humors engendered thereby, it
warmeth also the Stomach, and causes digestion: The Juice thereof boiled with
Honey, is accounted to be as good as Hedg-Muster for the Cough, to cut and
expectorate the tough Phlegm. Helps digestion, Cough, Tough Phlegm, WindChollick,
Stone, Ulcers in the Legs.
The Seed bruised and boiled in Wine is a singular good Remedy for the Wind
Chollick, or the the Stone, being drunk warm; It is also given to Women
troubled with the Mother, both to drink, and the Seed put into a Cloth and
applied while it is warm is of singular good use. The Leaves also or Seed boiled
is good to be used in Clysters to ease the pains of the Stone: The green Leaves
are held to be good to heal the Ulcers in the Legs.

VVinter and Summer Savory.
BOth these are so well known (being entertained as constant Inhabitants in our
Gardens) that they need no Description.

Virtues and Use.
They are both of them hot and dry, especially the Summer kind, which is both
sharp and quick in taste; expelling Wind Expels Wind, Mother, provokes Urine
and Women's Courses, Tough Phlegm, Lethargy, Dull sights
in the Stomach and Bowels, and is a present help for the rising of the Mother
procured by Wind, provokes Urine and Women's Courses, and is much commended for
Women with Child to take inwardly, and to smell often unto. It cutteth tough
Phlegm in the Chest and Lungs, and helps to expectorate in the more easily; It
quenches the dull spirits in the Lethargy, the Juice thereof being snuffed, or
cast up into the Nostrils: The Juice dropped into the Eyes clears a dull
sight, if it proceed of ^^^ cold humors distilling from the Brain: The Juice
heated with a little Oil of Roses, and dropped into the Ears eases them of the
noise and singing Singing in the Ears and Deafness, Sciatica and Palsy,
stinging of Bees etc.
in them, and of deafness also: Outwardly applied with white flower in manner of
a Pultis, it gives ease to the Sciatica, and Palsey'd Members, heating and
warming them, and takes away their pains: It also takes away the pain that
comes of stinging by Bees, Wasps, etc.

Mercury claims the Dominion over this Herb, neither is there a better Remedy
against the Chollick and Illiack passions Chollick, Illiack passion.
than this Herb, keep it dry by you all the year if you love your selves, and
your ease, as it is an hundred pound to a penny if you do not: keep it dry, make
Conserves and Syrups of it for your use; and withal, take notice that the
Summer kind is the best.

The common white Saxifrage.
Description.
THis has a few small reddish Kernels or Roots, covered with some Skins lying
among diverse small blackish Fibers, which send forth diverse round, faint, or
yellowish green Leaves, and grayish underneath, lying above the ground unevenly
dented about the edges, and somewhat hairy, every one upon a little footstalk
from whence rises up a round brownish hairy green stalk, two or three foot
high, with a few such like round Leaves as grow below, but smaller, and somewhat
branched at the top, whereon stand pretty large white Flowers of five Leaves
apiece, with some yellow threads in the middle, standing in long crested
brownish green Husks: After the Flowers are past there arises sometimes a round
hard head by, forked at the top, wherein is contained small blackish Seed, but
usually they fall away without any Seed; and it is the Kernels or grains of the
Root which are usually called the white Saxifrage Seed, and so used.

Place.
It grows in many places of our Land, as well in the lower moist, as in the
upper dry corners of Meadows, and graffy sandy places; It used to grow near
Lambs Conduit, on the back side of Grayes-Inn.

Time.
It Flowreth in May, and is then gathered as well for that which is called the
Seed, as to distill, for it quickly perishes down to the ground when any hot
weather comes.

Virtues and use.
It is very effectual to cleanse the Reins Cleanses the Reins, Stone,
and B^dder, and to dissolve the Stone engendered in them, and to expel it and
the Gravel by Urine, to provoke Urine Gravel, provoke Urine,
also being stopped, and to help the Strangury: for which purposes the
Decoction of the Herb or Roots in white Wine, or the Powder of the small
Kernelly Roots which is called the Seed taken in white Wine, or in the same
Decoction made with white Wine is most usual. The Distilled water of the whole
Herb, Roots, and Flowers, is most familiar to be taken: It provokes also
Women's Courses, Women's Courses Tough Phlegm.
and freeth and cleanses the Stomach and Lungs from thick and tough Phlegm that
troubles them. There is not many better Medicines to break the Stone than this.

Burnet Saxifrage.
Description.
YHe greater sort of our English Burnet Saxifrage grows up with diverse long
Stalks of winged Leaves, set directly opposite one to another on both sides,
each being somewhat broad, a little pointed and dented about the edges, of a sad
green color. At the tops of the Stalks stand Umbels of white Flowers, after
which comes small and blackish Seed: The Root is long and whitish, abiding long.

Our lesser Burnet Saxifrage, has much finer Leaves than the former, and very
small, and set one against another, deeply jagged about the edges, and of the
same color as the former: The Umbels of Flowers are white, and the Seed very
small, and so is the Root, being also somewhat hot and quick in taste.

Place.
These grow in most Meadows of this Land, and are easy to be found, being well
sought for among the Grass, wherein many times they lie hid scarcely to be
discerned.

Time.
They Flower about July, and their Seed is ripe in August.

Virtues and use.
These Saxifrages are as hot as Pepper, and Tragus says by his experience they
are more wholesome: They have the same properties that the Parsleys have, but in
provoking Urine, Provoke Urine, Ease Wind and Colic, Mother, Women's Courses,
Stone, Tough Phlegm, Venom,
and easing the pains thereof, or of the Wind and Chollick, are much more
effectual; The Roots or Seed being used either in Powder, or in Decoction, or
any other way; and likewise helps the Windy pains of the Mother, and to
procure their Courses, to break and avoid the Stone in the Kidneys, to digest
cold, viscuous, and tough Phlegm in the Stomach, and is a most especial Remedy
against all kind of Venom. Caftoreum being boiled in the distilled water
hereof, is singular good to be given to those that are troubled with Cramps and
Convulsions: Cramps and Convusions; Wounds in the Head, Freckles and spots.
some do use to make the Seed into Comfits (as they do Caraway Seed) which is
effectual to all the purposes aforesaid. The Juice of the Herb dropped into the
most grievous Wounds of the Head, dries up their moisture and heals them
quickly. Some Women use the distilled Water, to take away Freckles or Spots in
the Skin or Face: and to drink the same sweetened with Sugar for all the
purposes aforesaid.

Scabious, three sorts.
Description.
THe common Field Scabious grows up with many hairy soft, whitish green
Leaves, some whereof are but very little, if at all jagged on the edges, others
very much rent and torn on the sides, and have threads in them, which upon the
breaking may be plainly seen: from among which rise up diverse hairy green
Stalks three or four foot high, with such like hairy green Leaves on them, but
more deeply and finely divided, branched forth a little: At the tops hereof
which are naked and bare of Leaves for a good space, stand round Heads of
Flowers, of a pale bluish color set together in a head, the outermost whereof
are larger than the inward, with many threads also in the middle, somewhat flat at
the top, as the Head with Seed is likewise: The Root is great, white, and thick
growing down deep into the ground, and abides many years.

There is another sort of Field Scabious, different in nothing from the former,
but only it is smaller in all respects.

The Corn Scabious, differs little from the first, but that it is greater in
all respects and the Flowers more declining to Purple: And the Root creeps
under the upper crust of the Earth, and runs not deep in the ground as the
first does.

Place.
The first grows most usually in Meadows, especially about London every where.

The second in some of the dry Fields about this City, but not so plentiful as
the former.

The third, in the standing Corn, or Fallow Fields, and the borders of such
like Fields.

Time.
They Flower in June and July, and some abide Flowring until it be late in
August, and the Seed is ripe in the mean time.

There are many other sorts of Scabious, but I take those which I have here
described to be most familiar with us; The virtues both of these and the rest
being much alike, take them as follows.

Virtues and Use.
Scabious is very effectual for all sorts of Coughs, shortness of Breath, and
all other Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, ripening and digesting cold Phlegm,
Coughs and shortness of Breath, Cold Phlegm, Inward Ulcers and Impostumes,
Plurisie, Infection, Carbuncle or Plague sores; Pains or stitches in the side;
Scabs, tetters, Ringworms, Itch, inward Wounds, Cold swellings, shrunk Sinews;
Freckles and Pimples Morphew and Lepry, Dandriff and Scurf, Green Wounds, Old
sorcs and Ulcers, Splinters, Thorns, and broken Bones etc.
and other tough humors, voiding them forth by Coughing and spitting: It
ripeneth also all sorts of inward Ulcers and Impostimes, the Plurisie also, if
the Decoction of the Herb dry or green, be made with Wine, and drunk for some
time together; four ounces of the clarified Juice of Scabious taken in the
morning fasting; with a dram of Methridate, or Venice Treacle, freeth the heart
from any infection of Pestilence if after the taking of it, the party sweat two
hours in their Beds; and this Medicine be again and again repeated if need
require: The green Herb bruised and applied to any Carbuncle or Plague sore, is
found by certain experience to dissolve or break it in three hours space. The
same Decoction also drunk, helps the pains and Stitches in the sides. The
Decoction of the Roots taken for forty days together, or a dram of the Powder
of them taken at a time in Whey, does (as Math^olus says) wonderfully help
those that are troubled with running or spreading Scabs, Tetters, or
Ringwornis; yea though they proceed of the French Pox, which he says he has
tried by experience: The Juice or Decoction drunk, helps also Scabs and
breakings out in Itch and the like: The Juice also made up into an Ointment and
used, is effectual for the same purpose. The same also helps all inward
Wounds by the drying, clensing, and healing quality therein: A Syrup made of the
Juice and Sugar is very effectual to all the purposes aforesaid, and so is the
distilled water of the Herb and Flowers made in due season; especially to be
used when the green Herb is not in force to be taken. The Decoction of the Herb
and Roots outwardly applied, does wonderfully help al sorts of hard or cold
Swellings in any part of the Body; and is as effectual for any shrunk Sinew or
Vein. The Juice of Scabiaus made up with the Powder of Borax and Camphl^e,
cleanses the Skin of the Face or other part of the Body, not only from Freckles
and Pimples, but also from Morphew and Lepry. The Head washed with the same
Decoction, cleanses it from Dandrif, Scurf, Sores Itches, and the like, being
used warm. Tents also dipped in the Juice or Water thereof not only heals all
green Wounds, but old Sores and Ulcers also: The Herb also bruised and applied
does in short time loosen, and cause to be drawn forth any Splinter, broken
bone, Arrow head, or other such like thing lying in the Flesh.

Scurvy Grass.
Description.
OUr ordinary English Scurvygrass has ^^any th^^ fat Leaves, more long than
broad, and sometimes longer and narrower, sometimes also smooth on the edges, and
sometimes a little waved, sometimes plain, smooth, and pointed, sometimes a
little hollow in the middle and round pointed, of a sad green, and sometimes
brownish color, every one standing by it self upon a long Footstalk, which is
brownish or greenish also: from among which rise small slender Stalks, bearing a
few Leaves thereon like the other, but longer and lesser for the most part: At
the tops whereof grow many whitish Flowers, with yellow threads in the middle,
standing about a green head which becomes the Seed Vessel, which will be
somewhat flat when it is ripe, wherein is contained reddish Seed tasting somewhat
hot: The Root is made of many white strings, which stick deeply in the mud,
wherein it chiefly delighteth^ yet it will well abide in the more upland and
dryer grounds, and tastes a little brackish or Salt, even there, but not so
much as where at has the Salt water to feed upon.

Place.
It grows all along the Thames side, both on the Esseae and Kentish Shoars,
from ^oolwich round about the Sea Coasts to Dover, Portsmouth, and even to
Bristol, where it is had in plenty: The other with round Leaves grows in the
Marshes in Holland in Lincolnshire, and other places of Lincolnshire by the Sea
side.

Description.
There is also another sort called Dutch Scurvy Grass, which is most known and
frequent in Gardens, which has diverse fresh green, and almost round Leaves
rising from the Root, nothing so thick as the former, yet in some rich ground,
very large, even twice so big as others, not dented about the edges, nor hollow
in the middle, every one standing upon a long Footstalk: from among these rise
up diverse long slender weak Stalks higher than the former, and with more white
Flowers at the tops of them, which turn into smaller pods, and smaller brownish
Seed than the former: The Root is white, small, and threddy: The taste of this is
nothing Salt ar all, but has an hot Aromatical spicy taste.

Time.
They Flower in April or May, and give their Seed ripe quickly after.

Virtues and Use.
The English Scurvey-grass is more used for the Salt taste it bears, with does
somewhat open and cleanse, but the Dutch Scurvey-grass is of better effect, and
chiefly used (if it may be had) by those that have the Scurvey, Scurvy, Liver
and Spleen,
especially to purge and cleanse the Blood, the Liver, and the Spleen, for all
which Diseases it is of singular good effect by taking the Juice in the Spring
every morning fasting in a cup of Drink: The Decoction is good for the same
purpose, and the Herb tunned up in new Drink, either by it self or with other
things, for it opens Obstructions, evacuateth cold clammy and Phlegmatic
Humors both from the Liver and the Spleen, wasting and consuming both the
swelling and hardness thereof, and thereby bringing to the Body a more lively
color. phlegmatic Humors, Foul ulcers and sore Mouths, Spots and Scars in the
Skin.
The Juice also helps all foul Ulcers and Sores in the Mouth, if it be often
gargled therewith; and used outwardly, cleanses the Skin from spots, marks, or
Scars, that happen therein.

Self-heal.
Description.
THe common Self-heal is a small low creeping Herb, having many small roundish
pointed Leaves somewhat like the Leaves of Wild Mints, of a dark green color
without any dents on the edges, from among which rise diverse square hairy
Stalks scarce a foot high, which spread sometime into Branches with diverse such
small Leaves set thereon, up to the tops, where stand brown spiked Heads, of
many small brownish Leaves like scales and Flowers set together, almost like the
Head of Cassidony, which Flowers are gaping, and of a bluish purple, or more
pale blew, in some places sweet, but not so in others: The Root consists of
many strings or fibers downward, and spreads strings also, whereby it
increases: The small stalks with the Leaves creeping upon the ground, shoot
forth sibres taking hold of the ground, whereby it is made a great ruft in short
time.

Place.
It is found in Woods and Fields every where.

Time.
It Flowreth in May, and sometimes in April.

Virtues and Use.
As Self-heal is like Bugle in form, so also in the Qualities and Virtues
serving for all the purposes whereto Bugle is applied with good success either
inwardly or outwardly, for inward Wounds or Ulcers Inward Wounds and Ulcers,
Bruises,
wheresoever within the Body, for Bruises and Falls and such like hurts: if it
be accompanied with Bugle, Sanicle, and other the like Wound Herbs it will be
the more effectual, and to wash or inject into Ulcers in the parts outwardly
where there is cause to repress the heat and sharpness of Humors flowing to any
sore Ulcer, Inflammation, Swelling or the like, or to stay the Flux of blood
Flux of Blood; Foul sores Green wounds;
in any Wound or Part, this is used with good success, as also to cleanse the
foulness of Sores, and cause them more speedily to be healed. It is an especial
Remedy for all green Wounds to soder the lips of them, and to keep the place
from any further inconveniences: The Juice hereof used with Oil of Roses to
anoint the Temples and Forehead, is very effectual to remove the Headache:
Headache; Sores in the Mouth or Throat and secret parts.
and the same mixed with Honey of Roses, cleanses and heals all Ulcers in the
Mouth and Throat, and those also in the secret parts. And the Proverb of the
Germans, French, and others is verified in this, That he needs neither
Physician nor Chyrurgion, that has Selfheal and Sanicle to help himself.

Here is another Herb of Venus, Self-heal whereby when you hurt, you may heal
your self, it is indeed a special Herb for inward and outward Wounds, take it
inwardly in Syrups for inward Wounds, outwardly in Unguents and Plasters for
outward.

The Service-tree.
THis is so well know in the places where it grows that it needs no
Description.

Time.
It Flowreth before the end of May, and the Fruit is ripe in October.

Virtues and use.
Services when they are mellow are fit to be taken to stay Fluxes, Scowring,
and Castings, Fluxes, Scowrings and Casting;
yet less than Medlars: if they be dried before they be mellow, and kept all
the year, they may be used in Decoctions for the said purpose, either to drink,
or to bath the parts requiring it: and is profitably used in that manner to
stay the bleeding of Wounds, Bleeding of wounds or at Mouth and Nose.
and at the Mouth or Nose, to be applied to the Forehead and Nape of the Neck.

Smallage.
THis also is very well known, and therefore I shall not trouble the Reader
with any Description thereof.

Place.
It grows naturally in wet and Marsh grounds, but if it be sown in Gardens it
there prospers very well.

Time.
It abides green all the Winter, and Seedeth in August.

Virtues and Use.
Smallage is hotter, dryer, and much more Medicinable than Parsley, for it much
more opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen Liver and spleen; Urine and
women's Courses, Yellow Jaundice, Agues;
rarifieth thick Phlegm, and cleanses it and the Blood withal. It provokes
Urine and Women's Courses, and is singular good against the yellow Jaundice: It
is very effectual against Tertian and Quartan Agues, if the Juice thereof be
taken; but especially made into a Syrup. The Juice also put to Honey of R^^es,
and Barley Water, is very good to Gangle the Mouth and Throat of those that
have Sores sore Mouths and Throats Ulcers and Cankers wind worms stinking
Breath.
and Ulcers in them, and will quickly heal them: The same Lotion also cleanses
and heals all other foul Ulcers and Cankers elsewhere if they be washed
therewith. The Seed is especially used to break and expel wind, to kill Worms
and to help a stinking Breath: The Root is effectual to all the purposes
aforesaid, and is held to be stronger in operation than the Herb, but
especially to open Obstructions, and to rid away an Ague, if the Juice thereof
be taken in Wine, or the Decoction thereof in Wine be used.

Sopewort, or Bruisewort.
Description.
THe Root creeps under ground far and near, with many Joints therein, of a
brown color on the outside and yellowish within, shooting forth in diverse
places many weak round Stalks, full of Joints, set with two Leaves apiece at
every one of them on the contrary side, which are ribbed somewhat like unto
Plantane, and fashioned like the common field white Campion Leaves, seldom
having any Branches from the sides of the Stalks, but set with diverse Flowers
at the top standing in long Husks like the wild Campions, made of five Leaves
apiece, round at the ends, and a little dented in the middle, of a pale Rose
color, almost white, sometimes deeper, and sometimes paler, of a reasonable good
scent.

Place.
It grows wild in many low and wet grounds of this Land, by the Brooks, and
sides of running Waters.

Time.
It Flowreth usually in July, and so continues all August, and part of
September before they be quite spent.

Virtues and use.
The Country people in diverse places do use to bruise the Leaves of Sopewort,
and lay it to their Fingers, Hands, or Legs when they are cut, Cut Fingers,
provokes Urine, Expels Gravel and Stone, Dropsy, French Pox.
to heal them up again. Some make great boast there of that it is Diuretical to
provoke Urine, and thereby to expel Gravel and the Stone in the Reins or
Kidneys: and do also account it singular good to avoid Hydropical waters
thereby to cure the disease of the Dropsy: And they no less extol it to
perform an absolute cure in the French Pox, more than either Sarsaparilla,
Gujacum, or China can do, which how true it is, I leave to others to judge.

Sorrel.
OUr ordinary Sorrel, which grows in Gardens, and also wild in the Fields, is
so well known that it needs no Description.

Virtues and Use.
Sorrel is prevalent in all hot Diseases, to cool any Inflammation and heat of
Blood in Agues Pestilential or Chollerick, or other sicknesses and sainting,
rising from heat, and to refresh the overspent Spirits with the violence of
furious or fiery fits of Agues, to quench Thirst, and procure an Appetite in
fainting or decayed Stomachs: for it resists the putrefaction of the Blood,
kills Worms, and is as a Cordial to the heart which the Seed does more
effectually being more drying and binding, and thereby stays the hot Fluxes
of Women's Courses, or of Humors in the Bloody Flux, or Flux of the Stomach.
Cools Inflammations, and heat of Blood; Agues, Quench thirst, Provoke
Appetite, Killworms Women's Courses; Fluxes Poison Jaundice, Gravel and stone
Black Jaundice, Inward ulcers; Itch, Tetters and Ringworms Kernels in the
Throat sore Mouth Impostume Boil or Plague sore.
The Roots also in a Decoction, or in Powder, is effectual for all the said
purposes. Both Roots and Seed as well as the Herb is held powerful to resist
the poison of the Scorpion. The Decoction of the Roots is taken to help the
Jaundice, and to expel Gravel and the Stone in the Reins or Kidneys. The
Decoction of the Flowers made with Wine and drunk helps the black Jaundice,
as also the inward Ulcers of the Body or Bowels. A Syrup made with the Juice of
Sorrel and Fumitary is a Sovereign help to kill those sharp Humors that cause
the Itch. The Juice thereof with a little Vinegar serves well to be used
outwardly for the same cause, and is also profitable for Tetters, Ringworms
etc. It helps also to discuss the Kernels in the Throat, and the Juice
gargled in the Mouth helps the Sores therein. The Leaves wrapped up in a
Colewoort Leaf, and roasted under the Embers, and applied to a hard Impostume,
Botch, Boil, or Plague Sore, both ripeneth and breaks it. The Distilled water
of the Herb is of much good use for all the purposes aforesaid.

Venus owns it, and she will never deny the Herb that follows.

Wood Sorrel.
Description.
THis grows low upon the ground, having a number of Leaves coming from the
Root, made of three Leaves like a Trefoyl but broad at the ends and cut in the
middle, of a faint yellowish green color, every one standing on a long
Footstalk, which at their first coming up are close folded together to the
Stalk, but opening themselves afterward, and are of a fine sour relish, and
yielding a Juice which will turn red when it is clarified, and makes a most
dainty clear Syrup: Among these Leaves rises up diverse slender weak
Footstalks, with every one of them a Flower at the top, consisting of five
small pointed Leaves Star fashion, of a white color in most places, and in
some dashed over with a small show of blush, on the back side only: After the
Flowers are past follow small round heads, with small yellowish Seed in them:
The Roots are nothing but small strings fastened to the end of a small long piece,
all of them being of a yellowish color.

Place.
It grows in many places of our Land, in Woods and Wood sides, where they be
moist and shadowed, and in other places not too much open to the Sun.

Time.
It Flowreth in April and May.

Virtues and Use.
Wood Sorrel, serves to all purposes that the other Sorrels do, and is more
effectual in hindering the putrefaction of Blood, and Ulcers Ulcers Inflammations
procure Appetite stay Vomiting Pestilential Fevers Hot swellings Canker or
Ulcer in the Mouth ^ ounds o^ seabs Destuxions.
in the Mouth and Body, and in cooling and tempering heats and Inflammations, to
quench thirst, to strengthen a weak Stomach, to procure an appetite, to stay
Vomiting, and very excellent in any contagious sickness, or Pestilential
Fevers. The Syrup made of the Juice is effectual in all the causes before said,
and so is the Distilled Water of the Herb also. Spunges or Linen Clothes wet
in the Juice and applied outwardly to any hot Swellings or Inflammations, does
much cool and help them: The same Juice taken and gargled in the Mouth, and
after it is spit forth, fresh taken, does wonderfully help a foul stinking
Canker, or Ulcer therein. It is singular good in Wounds, Thrusts, and Stabs in
the Body, to stay bleeding, and to cleanse ^ and heal the Wounds speedily; and
helps to stay any hot Defluxions into the Throat or Lungs.

Sow-Thistles.
THese are generally so well known that they need no Description.

Place.
They grow in our Gardens and manured Grounds, and sometimes by old Walls, the
path sides of Fields and Highways.

Virtues and use.
Sow-thistles are cooling and somewhat binding, and are very fit to cool an hot
Stomach, and to ease the gnawing pains Pains and heat of the Stomach, short
wind and Wheesing, Gravel and Stone, stinking Breath, speedy Delivery,
Strangury, Milk increased, Deafness and singing in the Ears, Inflamed Eyes,
Wheals, and Blisters Hemorrhoids, Clear the Face.
thereof; The Herb boiled in Wine is very helpful to stay the dissolutions of
the Stomach: And the Milk that is taken from the Stalks when they are broken,
given in drink, is beneficial to those that are short Winded and have a
wheesing withal: Pliny says that it has caused the Gravel and Stone to be
voided by Urine, and that the eating thereof helps a stinking breath: Three
spoonfuls of the Juice thereof taken in white Wine warmed, and some Oil put
thereto causes Women in Travel to have so easy and speedy delivery, that they
may be able to walk presently after: The said Juice taken in warm drink,
helps the Strangury and pains in making water.

The Decoction of the Leaves and Stalks, causes abundance of Milk in Nurses,
and their Children to be well colored, and is good for those whose Milk does
curdle in their Breasts. The Juice boiled or thoroughly heated with a little Oil
of Bitter Almonds in the Pill of a Pomegranate, and dropped into the Ears, is a
sure Remedy for Deafness, singings, and all other Diseases in them. The Herb
bruised or the Juice is profitably applied to all hot Inflammations in the Eyes,
or wheresoever else; and for Wheals, Blisters, or other the like eruptions of
heat in the Skin; as also for the heat and itching of the Hemorrhoids, and the
heat and sharpness of Humors in the Secret parts of man or Woman: The distilled
water of the Herb, is not only effectual for all the Diseases aforesaid to be
taken inwardly with a little Sugar (which Medicine the daintiest Stomach will
not refuse) but outwardly, by applying Clothes or Spunges wetted therein: It
is wonderful good for Women to wash their Faces therewith, to clear the Skin,
and give a luster thereto.

Southernwood.
THis is so well known to be an Ordinary Inhabitant in our Gardens, that I
shall not need to trouble you with any Description thereof. The Virtues are as
follows.

Time.
It Flowreth for the most part in July and August.

Virtues and use.
Dioscorides says, That the Seed bruised, heated in warm Water and drunk,
helps those that are Bursten, Bursten, Cramps and Convulsions, Sciaticae,
Strangury, Women's Courses, Toyson, Agues, Inflamed, Eyes, Pimples, Pushes and
Wheals, Worms, Splinters and Thorns, Old Ulcers Sores in the Privities,
Baldness, French pox, Stone, Spleen and Mother.
or troubled with Cramps, or Convulsions of the Sinews, the Sciatica, or
difficulty in making water, and brings down Women's Courses. The same taken in
Wine is an Antidote or Counter poison against all deadly Poison, and drives
away Serpents, and other Venomous Creatures; as also the smell of the Herb being
Burnt, does the same. The Oil thereof anointed on the Backbone before the Fits
of Agues come takes them away: it takes away Inflammations in the Eyes, if it
be put with some part of a roasted Quince and boiled with a few crumbs of bread
and applied. Boiled with Barely Meal it takes away Pimples, Pushes, or Wheals,
that rise in the Face or other part of the Body. The Seed as well as the dried
Herb is often given to kill the Worms in Children: The Herb bruised and laid
to, helps to draw forth Splinters, and Thorns out of the Flesh. The Ashes
thereof dries up and heals old Ulcers that are without Inflammation, although
by the sharpness thereof it biteth sore and puts them to sore pains: as also
the Sores in the privy Parts of man or woman. The Ashes mingled with old Sallet
Oil, helps those that have their hair fallen and are bald, causing the hair
to grow again either on the Head or Beard. Di^rantes says, That the Oil made
of Southernwood and put among the Ointments that are used against the French
Diseas, is very effectual, and likewise kills Lice in the Head. The Distilled
Water of the Herb is said to help them much that are troubled with the Stone,
as also for the Diseases of the Spleen and Mother. The Germans commend it for a
singular Wound Herb, and therefore call it Stabwort. It is held by all Writers,
Ancient and Modern to be more offensive to the stomach than Wormwood.

Spignel.
Description.
THe Roots of common Spignel do spread much and deep in the ground, many
strings or branches growing from one Head which is hairy at the top, of a
blackish brown color on the outside and white within, smelling well, and of an
Aromatical taste, from whence rise sundry long stalks of most fine cut Leaves
like hairs smaller than Dill, set thick on both sides of the Stalks, and of a
good scent. Among these Leaves rise up round stif stalks, with few Joints and
Leaves at them, and at the tops an Umbel of fine pure white Flowers, at the
edges whereof sometimes will be seen a show of reddish blush color, especially
before they be full blown, and are succeeded by small somewhat round Seed, bigger
than the ordinary Fennel, and of a browner color, divided into two parts, and
crested on the back, as most of the Umbelliferous Seeds are.

Place.
It grows wild in Lancashire, Yorkshire, and other Northern Countries, and is
also planted in Gardens.

Virtues and Use.
Galen says, The Roots of Spignel are available to provoke Urine and Woman's
Courses Provokes Urine and Women's Courses, Strangury, pain in the stomach,
Mother, Joint aches; Tough phlegm, Venomous Creatures.
but if too much thereof be taken it causes Headache: The Roots boiled in Wine
or Water and drunk, helps the Strangury, and stoppings of the Urine, the
Wind, swellings and pains in the Stomach, pains of the Mother, and all Joint
Aches. If the Powder of the Roots be mixed with Honey, and the same taken as a
licking Medicine, it breaks tough Phlegm, and dries up the Rhewm that falls
on the Lungs. The Roots are accounted very effectual against the stinging or
biting of any Venomous Creature, and is one of the Ingredients in Meth^idate,
and other Antidotes for the same,

Spleenwort, or Ceterach.
Description.
THe smooth Spleenwort from a black, threddy and bushy Root, sends forth many
long single Leaves, cut in on both sides into round dents, almost to the
middle, which is not so hard as that of Pollipodie, each devision being not
always set opposite unto the other, but between each, smooth, and of a light
green on the upper side, and a dark yellowish roughness on the back, folding or
rolling it self inward at the first springing up.

Place.
It grows as well upon stone walls as moist and shadowy places about Bristol
and other the West parts plentifully; as also on Framingham Castle, on
Beckonsfield Church in Bakshire, at Strowde in Kent, and elsewhere, and abides
green all the Winter.

Virtues and Use.
It is generally used against infirmities of the Spleen, Spleen, strangury
stone, yellow, Jaundice; Running of the Reins, Melancholy Diseases.
it helps the strangury and wastes the Stone in the Bladder, and is good
against the yellow Jaundice and the Hiccough; but the use of it in Women
hinders Conception. Mathiolus says, That if a dram of the dust that is on the
back side of the Leaves, be mixed with half a dram of Amber in Powder, and
taken with the Juice of Purslane or Plantane, it will help the running of the
Reins Speedily, and that the Herb and Root being boiled and taken, helps all
Melanchollick Diseases, and those especially that arise from the French
Disease. Camerarius says, That the Distilled water thereof being drunk is very
effectual against the Stone in the Reins and Bladder: and that the Ly that is
made of the Ashes thereof being drunk for some time together, helps
Splenetick persons: It is used in outward Remedies for the same purpose.

Star-thistle.
Description.
THe common Star-thistle has diverse long and narrow Leaves lying next the
ground, cut or torn on the edges, somewhat deeply, into many almost even parts,
soft or a little woolley all over the green, among which rise up diverse weak
stalks parted into many Branches all lying, or leaning down to the ground, that
it seems a pretty Bush, set with diverse the like divided Leaves up to the
tops, where severally do stand long and small whitish green heads, set with
very sharp and long white pricks (no part of the Plant being else prickly)
which are somewhat yellowish: out of the middle whereof rises the Flower
composed of many small reddish purple threads; and in the Heads after the
Flowers are past, come small whitish round Seed lying in down, as others do.
The Root is small, long, and woody, perishing every year, and rising again of
its own sowing.

Place.
It grows wild in the Fields about London in many places, as at
Mile-end-Green, in Finsbury Fields beyond the Wind-mils, and many other places.

Time.
It Flowreth early, and Seedeth in July, and sometimes in August.

Virtues and use.
The Seed of this Star-thistle made into Powder and drunk in Wine, provokes
Urine, Provokes Urine, stone, plague, fistula, french pox Obstructions, Agues.
and helps to break the Stone, and drive it forth. The Root in Powder and
given in Wine and drunk, is good against the Plague or Pestilence, and drunk in
the mornings fasting for some time together, is very profitable for a Fistula
in any part of the Body. Baptista Sardus does much commend the distilled Water
hereof being drunk, to help the French Disease, to open Obstructions of the
Liver, and cleanse the Blood from corrupted Humors, and is profitably given
against Quotidian or Tertian Agues.

Strawberries.
THese are so well known through this Land, that they need no Description.

Time.
They Flower in May ordinarily, and the Fruit is ripe shortly after.

Virtues and use.
Strawberries when they are green, are cold and dry, but when they are ripe
they are cold and moist: The Berries are excellent good to cool the Liver, Cool
the Liver, spleen, and stomach, Quench Thirst, Inflammations, Provoke Urine,
stay the Bloody flux and Women's Courses, panting of the heart Yellow Jaundice,
Ulcers, sore Mouths or Ulcers in the privities Loos teeth, Cata^^hs and
Desfluxions, Inflamed Eyes pushes and Wheals Red face, Deformities in the skin,
films over the Eyes.
the Blood and the Spleen, or an hot Chollerick stomach, to refresh and comfort
the fainting Spirits, and to quench Thirst: They are good also for other
Inflammations, yet it is not arniss to refrain them in a Fever, lest by their
putrefying in the Stomach they increase the Fits. The Leaves and Roots boiled in
Wine and Water and drunk, do likewise cool the Liver and Blood, and assuage all
Inflammations in the Reins and bladder, provokes Urine, and allayeth the heat
and sharpness thereof: The same also being drunk stays the Bloody Flux, and
Women's Courses, and helps the Swellings of the Spleen. The Water of the
Berries carefully distilled is a Sovereign Remedy and Cordial in the panting
and beating of the Heart, and is good for the yellow Jaundice. The Juice
dropped into foul Ulcers, or they washed therewith, or the Decoction of the
Herb and Root, does wonderfully cleanse, and help to cure them Lotions and
Gargles for sore Mouths, or Ulcers therein, or in the privy Parts, or elsewhere,
are made with the Leaves and Roots hereof; which is also good to fasten loose
Teeth, and to heal spungy soul Gums: It helps also to stay Catarrhs or
Desluxions of Rhewm into the Mouth, Throat, Teeth, or Eyes; The Juice or Water
is singular good for hot and red Inflamed Eyes, if dropped into them, or they
bathed therewith; it is also of excellent property for all Pushes, Wheals, and
other breakings forth of hot and sharp Humors in the Face and Hands, or other
parts of the Body, to bath them therewith; and to take away any redness in the
Face, or Spots, or other Deformities in the Skin, and to make it clear and
smooth. Some use this Medicine, Take so many Strawberries as you shall think
fitting, and put them into a Distillatory or body of Glass fit for them, which
being well closed, set it in a bed of Horsdung for twelve or fourteen days,
and afterward distill it carefully and keep it for your use: It is an
excellent water for hot inflamed Eyes, and to take away any film or Skin that
begins to grow over them, and for such other defects in them as may be
helped by any outward Medicine.

Venus owns the Herb.

Succory.
Description.
THe Garden Succory has longer and narrower Leaves than Endive, and more cut
in or torn on the edges, and the Root abides many years: It bears also blew
Flowers like Endive, and the Seed is hardly distinguished from the Seed of the
smooth or ordinary Endive.

The wild Succory has diverse long Leaves lying on the ground very much cut in
or torn on the edges, on both sides even to the middle rib ending in point;
sometimes it has a red Rib down the middle of the Leaves, from among which
rises up a hard, round, woody stalk spreading into many Branches, set with
smaller and lesser divided Leaves on them up to the tops where stand the
Flowers, which are like the Garden kind as the Seed is also (only take notice
that the Flowers of the Garden kind are gone in one Sunny day, they being so
cold that they are not able to endure the Beams of the Sun; and therefore most
delight in the shadow.) The Root is white, but more hard and woody than the
Garden kind: The whole Plant is exceeding bitter.

Place.
This grows in many places of our Land, in wast, untilled, and barren Fields.
The other only in Gardens.

Virtues and Use.
Garden Succory as it is more dry, and less cold than Endive, so it opens
more: An handful of the Leaves or Roots boiled in Wine or Water, and a draught
thereof drunk fasting, drives forth Chollerick and Phlegmatic Humors; opens
Obstructions of the Liver Gall, and Spleen, helps the yellow Jaundice, the
Heat of the Reins and of the Urine, Chollerick and phlegmatic Humors,
Obstructions, Yellow Jaundice, Hot Reins and Urin,
the Dropsy Dropsy,
also, and those that have an evil disposition in their Bodies by reason of
long sickness, evil Diet etc. which the Greeks call (...), Cachexia. A
Decoction thereof made with Wine and drunk, is very effectual against long
lingering Agues: Agues,
and a dram of the Seed in Powder drunk in Wine before the Fit of an Ague,
helps to drive it away: The Distilled Water of the Herb and Flowers (if you
can take them in time) has the properties, and is especial good for hot
Stomachs, and in Agues, either Pestilential or of long continuance, for
swounings and Passions of the Heart, passions of the Heart, Headache, Swellings
and Inflammations, St. Anthonies fires, pushes, wheals and pimples, Inflamed
Eyes, Too much Milk.
for the heat and Headache in Children, and to the blood and Liver. The said
water or the Juice, or the bruised Leaves applied outwardly, allayeth
Swellings, Inflammations, St. Anthonies Fire, Pushes, Wheals, and Pimples,
especially used with a little Vinegar, as also to wash pestiferous Sores. The
said Water is very effectual for sore Eyes that are inflamed with redness, and
for Nurses Breasts that are pained by the abundance of Milk.

The wild Succory as it is more bitter, so it is more strengthening to the
Stomach and Liver.

English Tobacco.
Description.
THis rises up with a thick round Stalk about two foot high, whereon do grow
thick fat green Leaves, nothing so large as the other Indian kinds, somewhat
round pointed also, and nothing dented about the edges: The Stalk brancheth
forth, and bears at the tops diverse Flowers set in green Husks, like the
other but nothing so large, scarce standing above the Brims of the Husks, round
pointed also, and of a greenish yellow color. The Seed that follows is not
so bright, but larger, contained in the like great Heads. The Roots are neither
so great, nor woody, and perishing every year with the hard Frosts in Winter,
but rises generally of its own sowing.

Place.
This came from some parts of Brassiile, as is thought, and is more familier to
our Country, than any of the other sorts, early giving ripe Seed, which the
others seldom do.

Time.
It Flowreth from June sometimes to the end of August, or later, and the Seed
ripeneth in the mean time.

Virtues and Use.
It is found by good experience to be available to expectorate tough Phlegm
Tough Phlegm,
from the Stomach, Chest, and Lungs: The Juice thereof made into a Syrup, or
the distilled water of the Herb drunk with some Sugar, or without if you will:
Or the smoke taken by a Pipe as is usual, but fasting. The same helps to
expel Worms Worms, Meagrim, pains in the Bowels Gravel and Stone, wind, Mother,
toothach, Kings Evil, Venomous Creature, Ague, Cramps and Aches, Sciatica,
Itch, Scabs and Ulcers, Cankers and soul Sores, Lice, Fresh wound, Old sores,
Impostums and hard Swellings.
in the Stomach and Belly, and to case the pains in the Head or Meagrim, and
the griping pains in the Bowels: It is profitable for those that are troubled
with the Stone in the Kidneys, both to ease pains and by provoking Urine to
expel Gravel and the Stone engendered therein, and has been found very
effectual to expel windiness and other Humors which cause the strangling of the
Mother: The Seed hereof is very effectual to help the Toothach, and the Ashes
of the burnt Herb, to cleanse the Gums, and make the Teeth white. The Herb
bruised and applied to the place grieved with the Kings Evil (as they call it)
helps it in nine or ten days effectually: Monardus says it is a
Counter-poyson for the biting of any Venomous Creature; the Herb also being
outwardly applied to the hurt place: The distilled water is often given with
some Sugar before the Fit of an Ague to lessen them, and take them away in
three or four times using. If the Distilled fieces of the Herb having been
bruised before the Distillation, and not distilled dry be set in warm dung for
fourteen days, and afterward hung up in a Bag in a Wine Celler; that liquor
that distilleth therefrom is singular good to use for Cramps, Aches, the Gout,
and Sciatica, and to heal Itches, Scabs, and running Ulcers, Cankers, and foul
Sores whatsoever: The Juice is also good for all the said griefs, and likewise
to kill Lice in Childrens Heads. The green Herb bruised and applied to any
green Wound, cures any fresh Wound or cut whersoever: and the Juice put into
old Sores both cleanses and heals them. There is also made hereof a singular
good Salve to help Impostumes, hard Tumors, and other swellings by blows or
falls.

The Tamarisk-Tree.
THis is so well known in the places where it grows that it needs no
Description.

Time.
It Flowreth about the end of May, or in June, and the Seed is ripe and blown
away in the beginning of September.

Virtues and Use.
If the Root, Leaves, or young Branches be boiled in Wine or Vinegar and drunk,
and applied outwardly, it is very powerful against the hardness of the spleen.
Spleen, Hemorrhoids, spitting Blood, women's Courses, Jaundice, and Chollick
The Leaves boiled in Wine and drunk is good to stay the bleeding of the
Hemorrhoidal Veins, the spitting of Blood, and Women's too abounding Courses,
and helps the Jaundice, the Chollick, and the bitings of all Venomous
Serpents, Venomous Serpents,
except the ^^p. The Bark is as effectual if not more to all the purposes
aforesaid; and both it and the Leaves boiled in Wine, and the Mouth and Teeth
washed therewith helps the Toothach; Toothach, Pain in the Ears, watering
Eyes, Gangrenes and V^^^s, Nits and Lice, Spleen, Burning and Scalding, French
Pox, Lepry and Scabs, Dropsy, Melancholy, Black Jaundice.
being dropped into the Ears eases the pains, and is good for the redness and
watering of the Eyes. The said Decoction with some Honey put thereto is good to
stay Gangrenes and sretting Ulcers, and to wash those that are subject to Nits
and Lice. The Wood is very effectual to consume the Spleen, and therefore to
drink out of Cups and Cans made thereof is good for Splenetick persons. The
Ashes of the Wood are used for all the purposes aforesaid, and besides does
quickly help the Blisters raised by Burnings or Scaldings, by fire or water.
Alpinus and Veslingius do affirm, That the Egyptians do with as good success
use the Wood hereof to cure the French Disease, as others do Lignum Vitae, or
Gujacum; and give it also to such as are possessed with Lepry, Scabs, Pushes,
Ulcers, or the like, and is available also to help the Dropsy, arising from
the hardness and Obstruction of the Spleen, as also for Melancholy, and the
black Jaundice that arises thereof.

Garden Tansie.
THis also is so well known, that it needs no Description.

Time.
It Flowreth in June and July.

Virtues and Use.
Thee Decoction of the common Tansie, or the Juice drunk in Wine is a singular
Remedy for all the griefs that come by stopping of the Urine, helps the
Strangury and those that have weak Reins and Kidneys: Disury, Strangury, Reins,
Kidneys, wind, womb, Miscarriage,
It is also very profitable to dissolve and expel Wind in the Stomach, Belly,
or Bowels, to procure Women's Courses, and expel windiness in the Matrix. If it
be bruised and often smelled unto, as also applied to the lower part of the
Belly, it is very profitable for such Women as are given to miscarry in
Childbearing, to cause them to go out their full time: It is used also against
the Stone Stone,
in the Reins, especially to men. The Herb fried with Eggs (as is accustomed in
the Spring time) which is called a Tansie, helps to digest, and carry
downward those bad Humors that trouble the Stomach: Stomach,
The Seed is very profitably given to Children for the Worms, Worms,
and the Juice in Drink is as effectual. Being boiled in Oil it is good for the
sinews shrunk by Cramps, Cramps.
or pained with cold, if thereto applied.

Dame Venus was minded to pleasure Women with Child by this Herb, for there
grows not an Herb fitter for their uses than this is, it is just as though it
were cut out for the purpose, the Herb bruised and applied to the Navil stays
miscarriage, I know no Herb like it for that use; boiled in ordinary Beer, and
the Decoction drunk, does the like, and if her Womb be not as she would have,
this Decoction will make it as she would have it, or at least as she should
have it; let those Women that desire Children love this Herb, it is their best
Companion, their Husband excepted. (...) Also it consumes the Phlegmatic
Humors, the cold and moist coustitution of Winter most usually infects the Body
of Man with, and that was the first reason of eating Tansies in the Spring, at
last the world being over run with Popery, a Monster called Superstition perks
up his head, and as a just Judgment of God obscures the bright beams of
Knowledge by his dismal looks (Pysitians seeing the Pope and his Imps selfish
they began to be so too) and now forsooth Tansies must be eaten only on Palm
and Easter Sundaies, and their neighbor days; as last Superstion being too hot
to hold, and the selfishness of Physicians walking in the clouds, after the
Friars and Monks had made the people ignorant, the Superstion of the time was
found out, but the Virtue of the Herb hidden, and now it is almost, if not
altogether, left off: Surely our Physicians are beholding to none so much as
they are to Monks and Friars, for want of eating this Herb in Spring, make
people sickly in Summer, and that makes work for the Physician. If it be
against any man or woman's Conscience to eat a Tansie in the Spring, I am as
unwilling to burden their consciences as I am that they should burden mine,
they may boil it in Wine and drink the Decoction, it will work the same effect.

VVild Tansie, or Silverweed.
THis also is so well known that it needs no Description.

Place.
It grows almost in every place.

Time.
It Flowreth in June and July.

Virtues and Use.
Wild Tansie stays the Lask, and all Fluxes Flux,
of Blood in men or women, which some say it will do if the green Herb be worn
in the shoos, so it be next the Skin, and it is true enough that 'twil stop the
Terms if worn so, and the Whites too for ought I know. It stays also spitting
or Vomiting of Blood. Terms, stops, Spitting Vomiting of Blood,
The Powder of the dried Herb taken in some of the distilled Water helps the
Whites Whites, Ruptures, Belly-ach, Sciatica, Joints, toothach, Loos teeth
Gums, Ulcers in the Mouth wounds, Sore Legs, Pimples, Freckles, Sunbursing.
in women, but more especially if a little Coral and Ivory in Powder be put to
it: It is also much commended to help Children that are bursten, and have a
Rupture being boiled in Water and Salt. Being boiled in Wine and drunk, it
eases the griping pains of the Bowels, and is good for the Sciatica and Joint
Aches. The same boiled in Vinegar with Honey and Alum, and gargled in the
Mouth, eases the pains of the Toothach, fastneth loose Teeth, helps the Gums
that are sore, and setleth the pallat of the Mouth in its place when it is
fallen down: It cleanses and heals the Ulcers in the Mouth or secret parts,
and is very good for Inward Wounds, and to close the lips of green Wounds; as
also to heal old, moist, corrupt running Sores in the Legs or elsewhere: Being
bruised and applied to the Soles of the Feet, and the Hand-wrests, it
wonderfully cools the hot fits of Agues, be they never so violent. The
distilled water cleanses the skin of all discolorings therein, as Morphew,
Sunburning etc. as also Pimples, Freckles, and the like; and dropped into the
Eyes or clothes wet therein and applied, takes away the heat, and Inflammations
in them.

Now Dame Venus has fitted women with two Herbs of one name, one to help
Conception, the other to maintain beauty, and what more can be expected of her?
What now remains for you but to love your Husbands, and not to be wanting to
your poor Neighbors.

Thistles.
OF these there are many, kinds growing here in England, which are so well
known that they need no Description: Their difference is easily known by the
places where they grow: Vi^.

Place.
Some grow in Fields, some in Meadows, and some among the Corn: others, on
Heaths, Greens, and wast grounds in many places.

Time.
They all Flower in July and August, and their Seed is ripe quickly after.

Virtues and Use.
All these Thistles are good to provoke Urine, and to amend the stinking smell
thereof; as also the rank smell of the Armpits, or of the whole Body, being
boiled in Wine and drunk; and are said also to help a stinking breath and to
strengthen the Stomach. Pliny says that the Juice bathed on the place that
wants hair, it being fallen off, will cause it to grow again speedily.
Disury, Ill smell, stinking Breath, Stomach.


Sure Mars rules it, it is such a prickly business.

The Melancholy Thistle.
Description.
THis rises up with a tender single hoary green Stalk, bearing thereon four or
five long hoary green Leaves, dented about the edges, the points whereof are
little or nothing prickly, and at the top usually but one Head, yet sometimes
from the bosom of the uppermost Leaf there shoots forth another smaller Head,
scaly and somewhat prickly, with many reddish Purple Thrums or Threads in the
middle, which being gathered fresh will keep the color a long time, and fades
not from the Stalk in a long time, while it perfecteth the Seed, which is of a
mean bigness lying in the Down: The Root has many long Strings fastened to the
Head, or upper part, which is blackish and perishes not.

There is another sort little differing from the former, but that the Leaves
are more green above and more hoary underneath; and the Stalk being about two
foot high bears but one large scaly Head, with threads and Seeds as the former.

Place.
They grow in many moist Meadows of this Land, as well in these Southern, as in
the Northern parts.

Time.
They Flower about July, or August, and their Seed ripeneth quickly after.

Virtues and Use.
Their Virtues are but a few, but those not to be despised, for the Decoction
of the Thistle in Wine being drunk, expels superfluous Melancholy out of the
Body, and make a man as merry as a Cricket, superfluous Melancholy causes
care, fear, sadness, despair, envy, and many evils more besides, but Religion,
teaches to wait upon Gods Providence, and cast our care upon Him, who cares
for us; what a fine thing were it if men and women could live so? and yet seven
years care and fear makes a man never the wiser, nor a farthing the richer.
Dioscorides says, the Root born about one does the like, and removes all
diseases of Melancholy. Modern Writers laugh at him, let them laugh that wins,
my Opinion is, that it is the best Remedy against all Melancholy Diseases that
grows, they that please may use it: it is under Capricorn, and therefore under
both Saturn and Mars, one rids Melancholy Melancholy.
by Sympathy, the other by Antipathy.

Our Ladies Thistle.
Description.
THis has diverse very large and broad Leaves lying on the ground, cut in, and
as it were crumpled, but somewhat hairy on the edges, of a white green shining
color, wherein are many lines and strakes of a milky white color, running all
over, and set with many sharp and stift prickles all about; Among which rises
up one or more strong, round, and prickly stalks, set full of the like Leaves
up to the top, where at the end of every Branch, comes forth a great prickly
Thistle like head, strongly armed with pricks, and with bright purple Thrums
rising out of the middle of them; after they are past, the Seed grows in the
said heads, lying in a great deal of soft white Down, which is somewhat flattish
and shining, large and brown. The Root is great, spreading in the ground, with
many strings, and small fibers fastened thereto. All the whole Plant is bitter in
taste.

Place.
It is frequent on the Bank of almost every Ditch.

Time.
It Flowreth and Seedeth in June, July, and August.

Virtues and Use.
Our Ladies Thistle is thought to be as effectual as Carduus Benedictus for
Agues, Agues, Plague, Obstructions, Liver Spleen, Stone, Dropsy, Stitches in
the side, Liver, Blood.
and to prevent and cure infection of the Plague, as also to open Obstructions
of the Liver and Spleen, and thereby is good against the Jaundice; It provokes
Urine, breaks and expels the Stone, and is good for the Dropsy: It is
effectual also for the pains in the sides, and many other inward pains and
gripings: The Seed and distilled water are held powerful to all the purposes
aforesaid; and besides, it is often applied both inwardly to drink, and
outwardly with Clothes or Spunges to the Region of the Liver to cool the
distemperature thereof, and to the Region of the Heart, against swounings and
passions of it.

It cleanses the blood exccedingly, and in Spring if you please to boil the
tender Plant, (but cut off the Prickles, unless you have a mind to choke your
self) it will change your blood as the season changes, and that is the way to be
safe, as to change as the times change is the way to live secure, and that
Flatterers and Weather-cocks know well enough.

The Woolley, or Cotton Thistle.
Description.
THis has many large Leaves lying on the ground, somewhat cut in, and as it
were crumpled on the edges, of a green color on the upper side, but covered
over with long hairy Wool or Cottony Down, set with most sharp and cruel
pricks; from the middle of whose heads of Flowers come forth many purplish
crimson threads, and sometimes white, although but seldom: The Seed that
follows in these white downy heads is somewhat large, long, and round,
resembling the Seed of Ladies Thistle, but paler: The Root is great, and thick,
spreading much, yet usually dies after Seed time.

Place.
It grows on diverse Ditch Banks, and in the Cornfields and Highways,
generally throughout the Land; and is often found growing in Gardens.

Time.
It Flowreth and bears Seed about the end of Summer, when other Thistles do
Flower and Seed.

Virtues and Use.
Dioscorides and Pliny write, That the Leaves and Roots hereof taken in drink,
helps those that have a Crick in their Neck, that they cannot turn it unless
they turn their whole Body. Galen says, That the Root and Leaves hereof are
good for such persons that have their Bodies drawn together by some Spasm or
Convulsion, or other Infirmities, as the Rickets' (or as the College of
Physicians would have it, the Rachites, about which name they have quarreled
sufficiently) in Children; being a Disease that hinders their growth, by
binding their Nerves, Ligaments, and whole structure of their Body.

The Fullers Thistle, or Teasel.
THis is so well known that it needs no Description, being used by the
Cloathworkers.

The wild Teasel is in all things like the former but that the prickles are
small, soft, and upright, not hooked or stiff; and the Flowers of this are of
fine blush or pale Carnation color, but of the Manured kind whitish.

Place.
The first grows being sown in Gardens or Fields for the use of
Cloathworkers: The other near Ditches and Cills of water in many places of this
Land.

Time.
They Flower in July, and are ripe in the end of August.

Virtues and Use.
Dioscorides says, That the Root bruised and boiled in Wine until it be thick,
and kept in a brazen Vessel or Pot, and after spread as a Salve and applied to
the Fundament, does heal the clefts thereof, as also Cankers and Fistulaes
therein, as also takes away Warts and Wers: The Juice of the Leaves dropped
into the Ears, kills Worms in them. The distilled water of the Leaves dropped
into the Eyes, takes away redness and mists in them that hinder the sight; and
is often used by women to preserve their beauty, and to take away redness and
Inflammations, and all other heat or discolorings.

Treacle Mustard.
Description.
THis rises up with a hard round stalk about a foot high, parted into some
branches, having diverse soft green leaves somewhat long and narrow set thereon,
waved, but not cut in on the edges, broadest toward the ends, end somewhat
round pointed: The flowers are white that grow at the tops of the branches,
spike fashion one above another, after which come large round pouches, parted
in the middle with a furrow, having one blackish brown seed in either side,
somewhat sharp in taste, and smelling of Garlic, especially in the fields where
it is natural, but not so much in gardens: The roots are small and threddy,
perishing every year. And here give me leave to add Methridate Mustard,
although it may seem more properly by the name ^^ belong to the Alphabet M.

Methridate Mustard.
THis grows higher then the former, spreading more and longer branches, whose
leaves are smaller and narrower, sometimes unevenly dented about the edges; the
Flowers are small and white, growing on long branches, with much smaller and
rounder seed vessels after them, and parted in the same manner, having smaller
brown seeds then the former, and much sharper in taste: The root perishes
after seed time, but abides the first winter after the springing.

Place.
They grow in sundry places of this Land, as half a mile from Hatfield by the
river side under a hedge as you go to Hatfield, and in the street of Peckham on
Surry side.

Time.
They flower and seed from May to August.

Virtues and Use.
These Mustards are said to purge the body both upwards and downwards, and
procures Women's Courses so abundantly, that it suffocateth the birth: It
breaks inward Imposthumes being taken inwardly, and used in Glisters, helps
the Sciatica, the seed applied outwardly does the same. It is an especial
ingredient unto Methridate and Treacle, being of it self an Antidote resisting
poison, venom, and putrefaction: It is also availeable in many causes for
which the common Mustard is used, but somewhat weaker.

The Black-Thorne, or, Sloe-Bush.
THis is so well known, that it needs no description.

Place.
It grows in every place and Country, in the hedges and borders of fields.

Time.
It flowreth in April, and sometimes in March, but ripeneth the fruit after
all other plums whatsoever, and is not fit to be eaten until the Autumn frost
have mellowed it.

Virtues and Use.
All the parts of the Sloe-Bush are binding, cooling, Binds, cools, dries
Bleeding Flux, Bloody Flux, gnawings in bowels and stomach.
and drying, and all effectual to stay bleeding at the nose and mouth, or any
other place; the Lask of the beily, or stomach, or the Bloody Flux, the two
much abounding of women's Courses, and helps to ease the pains in the sides,
bowels, and guts, that come by overmuch scowring, to drink the decoction of
the bark of the roots, or more usually the decoction of the Berries either
fresh or dried. The Conserve is also of very much use, and most familiarly
taken for the purposes aforesaid: But the distilled water of the Flowers first
steeped in Sack for a night, and drawn therefrom by the heat of Balneum
Angliceabaths, is a most certaineremedy tried and approved to ease all manner
of gnawings in the stomach, the sides and bowels, or any griping pains in any
of them, to drink a small quantity when the extremety of pain is upon them: The
Leaves also are good to make Lotions, to gargle and wash the Mouth and Throat,
Sore Mouth and Throat, Headache.
wherein are Swellings, Sores, or Kernels, and to stay the Defluxions of Rhewm
to the Eyes or other parts, as also to cool the heat and Inflammations in them,
and to ease hot pains of the Head, to bath the Forehead and Temples therewith.
The simple distilled water of the Flowers is very effectual for the said
purposes, and is the condensate Juice of the Sloes. The distilled water of the
green Berries is used also for the said effects.

Thoroughwax.
Description.
THe common Throughwax sends forth one straight round Stalk, and sometimes
more, two foot high and better, whose lower Leaves being of a bluish green
color are smaller and narrower than those up higher, and stand close thereto,
not compassing it, but as they grow higher, they do more and more encompass the
Stalk, until it wholly (as it were) pass through them, branching toward the top
into many parts, where the Leaves grow smaller again, every one standing
singly, and never two at any Joint: The Flowers are very small and yellow,
standing in tufts at the heads of the Branches, where afterward grow the Seed,
small and blackish, many thick thust together: The Root is small, long, and
woody, perishing every year after Seed time, and rising again plentifully of
its own sowing,

Place.
It is found growing in many Corn Fields, and Pasture grounds in this Land.

Time.
It Flowreth in July, and the Seed is ripe in August.

Virtues and Use.
Thoroughwax is of a singular good use, for all sorts of Bruises and Wounds
Bruises, Wounds, Ulcers,
either inward or outward, and old Ulcers and Sores likewise, if the Decoction
of the Herb with water or Wine be drunk, and the places washed therewith, or the
Juice or green Herb bruised or boiled either by it self, or with other Herbs in
Oil or Hogs Grease, to be made into an Ointment to serve all the year: The
Decoction of the Herb, or the Powder of the dried Herb taken inwardly, and the
same or the green Leaves bruised and applied outwardly, is singular good to
cure Ruptures Ruptures, Navils sticking out.
and Burstings, especially in Children, before it be two old. Being also
applied with a little Flower and Wax to Childrens Navils that stick forth it
helps them.

Tormentil.
Description.
THis has many reddish slender weak Branches rising from the Root, lying upon
the ground, or rather leaning than standing upright, with many short Leaves
that stand closer to the Stalks than Cinkfoyl does (which this is very like)
with the Footstalk encompassing the Branches in several places, but those that
grow next to the ground are set upon long Footstalks, each whereof are like the
Leaves of Cinkfoyl, but somewhat longer and lesser, and dented about the edges,
many of them divided but into five Leaves, but most of them into sevens whence
it is also called Setfoyl; yet some may have six and some eight, according to
the fertility of the Soil: At the tops of the Branches stand diverse small
yellow Flowers consisting of five Leaves, like those of Cinkfoyl, but smaller.
The Root is smaller than Bistort, somewhat thick, but blacker without, and not
so red within, yet sometimes a little crooked, having many blackish fibers
thereat.

Place.
It grows as well in Woods and shadowy places, as in the open Champion
Country, about the borders of Fields in many places of this Land, and almost in
every Broom Field in Essex.

Time.
It Flowreth all the Summer long.

Virtues and Use.
Tormentil is most excellent to stay all kind of Fluxes of Blood Flux,
Bleeding, Veins cut, terms stops, Fevers, Pestilence, Small pox Measels Purples,
or Humors, in man or woman, whether at Nose, Mouth, Belly, or any Wound in the
Veins or elsewhere: The Juice of the Herb or Root taken in drink, not only
resists all Poison and Venom of any Creature, but of the Plague it self, and
Pestilential Fevers, and contagious Diseases, as the Pox, Measels, Purples,
etc. expelling the Venom and Infection from the Heart by sweating, if the green
Root be not at hand to be had, the Powder of the dry Root is as effectual, a
dram thereof being taken every morning: The Decoction likewise of the Herbs and
Roots made in Wine and drunk works the same effect; and so does the distilled
water of the Herb and Root being steeped in Wine for a night, and then
distilled in Balneo Mariae. This Water thus distilled taken with some Venice
Treacle, and the party presently laid to sweat will certainly (with Gods help)
expel any Venom or poison, Poison
or the Plague, Fever, etc. for it is an ingredient of especial respect in all
Antidotes or Counterpoysons. There is not found any Root more effectual to help
any Flux of the Belly, Stomach, Spleen, Speen, Blood Inflamed, Liver, Lungs,
Yellow Jaundice,
or Blood than this, to be taken inwardly, or applied outwardly. The Juice
taken does wonderfully open Obstructions of the Liver and Lungs, and thereby in
short space helps the yellow Jaundice. Some use to make Cakes hereof as well
to stay all Fluxes, as to restrain all Chollerick Belchings, and much Vomitings
with Loathings in the Stomach: The Powder of the d^^ed Root made up with the
white of an Egg and baked upon a hot Tile will do it.

Andreus Valesius is of opinion, That the Decoction of this Root is no less
effectual to cure the French Pox, French Pox
than Guajacum, or China and it is not unlikely, because it so mightily
resists putrefaction: Lobel says, That Rondelitius used it as Hermodactils
for Joynt-aches: The Powder also, or Decoction to be drunk, or to sit therein
as a Bath is an assured Remedy against abortion in Women, if it proceed from
the over Fluxibility or weakness of the inward retentive faculty: as also a
Plaster made therewith and Vinegar applied to the Roins of the Back, does much
help not only this but also those that cannot hold their Water, the Powder
being taken in the Juice of Plantane; and it is also commended against the
worms in Children. Miscarriage,
Diabetes, Worms, Ruptures,
It is very powerful in Ruptures and Burstings: as also for Bruises and Falls,
to be used as well outward as inwardly. The Root hereof made up with Pellitory
of Spain and Alum, and put into an hollow Tooth, toothach,
not only asswageth the pain, but staieth the Flux of Humors which caused it,
Tormentil is no less effectual and powerful a Remedy for outward Wounds, Sores,
Wounds, Sores, Hurts,
and Hurts, than for inward, and is therefore a special Ingredient meet to be
used in all Wound drinks, Lotions, and Injections for foul corrupt rotten Sores
and Ulcers, of the Mouth, Secrets, or other parts of the Body. And to put
either the Juice or Powder of the Root into such Ointments, Plasters, and such
things that are to be applied to Wounds and Soes: it also dissolveth all Knots,
Kernels, and hardness gathered about the Ears, the Throat, and Jaws and the
Kings Evil if the Leaves and Roots be bruised and applied thereto: The same
also eases the pains of the Sciatica or Hip-gout Gout,
by restraining the sharp Humors that flow thereto. The Juice of the Leaves and
Roots used with a little Vinegar, is also a special Remedy against the running
Sores of the Head or other parts, Scabs also and the Itch, or any such
eruptions in the Skin proceeding of Salt and sharp Humors: Srabby Heads.
The same also is effectual for the Piles or Hemorrhoids if they be washed and
bathed therewith, or with the Distilled water of the Herb and Roots: It is found
also helpful to dry up any sharp Rhewm that distilleth from the Head into the
Eyes causing, redness, pain, waterings, Itchings, or the like, if a little
prepared Tutia, or white Amber be used with the Distilled water hereof: Many
Women use this Water as a secret to help themselves and others when they are
troubled with the too much flowing of the Whites or Reds, both to drink it, and
inject it with a Syringe. And here is enough, only remember, the Sun challenges
the Herb.

Turnsole, or Heliotropium.
Description.
THe greater Turnsole rises up with one upright Stalk about a foot high or
more, deviding it self almost from the bottom into diverse smaller Branches of
a hoary color: at each Joint of the Stalk and Branches grow two small broad
Leaves somewhat white or hoary also: At the tops of the Stalks and Branches
stand many small white Flowers consisting of four and sometimes five very small
Leaves, set in order one above another, upon a small c^ooked spike which turns
inwards like a bowed finger, opening by degrees as the Flowers blow open; after
which in their places come small cornered Seed, four for the most part standing
together. The Root is small and threddy perishing every year, and the Seed
shedding every year, raises it again the next Spring.

Place.
It grows in Gardens, and Flowreth and Seedeth with us in England,
notwithstanding it is not natural to this Land, but to Italy, Spain, and
France, where it grows plentifully.

Virtues and Use.
Dioseorides says, That a good Handful of this, which is called the greater
Turnsole, boiled in Water and drunk, pnrgeth both Choler and Phlegm: Choler,
Phlegm, Stons, Disury, Terms provokes, Gout, Warts, Wens, Disjunctures.
And boiled with Cummin and drunk, helps the Stone in the Reins, Kidneys, or
Bladder, provokes Urine and Women's Courses, and causes an easy and syeedy
delivery in Childbirth. The Leaves bruised and applied to places pained with
the Gout, or that have been out of joint and newly set are full of pain, do
give much case. The Seed, and the Juice of the Leaves also being rubbed with a
little Salt upon Warts, Wens, and other hard Kernels in the Face, Eyelids, or
any other part of the Body, will by often using take them away.

It Is an Herb of the Sun, and a good one too.

Meadow Trefoyl, or Honeysuckles.
THese are so well known, especially by the name of Honeysuckles, White and
Red, that I need not describe them.

Place.
They grow almost every where in this Land.

Virtues and Use.
Dodoneus says, The Leaves and Flowers are good to ease the griping pains of
the Guts, the Herb being boiled and used in a Clyster: Belly-ach,
If the Herb be made into a Pultis and applied to Inflammations, Inflammations,
Pin and Web, Eyes,
it will ease them. The Juice dropped into the Eyes is a familier Medicine with
many Country people to take away the Pin and Web (as they call it) in the Eyes,
it also allayeth the Heat and bloodshooting of them: Country people do also in
many places drink the Juice hereof against the biting of an Adder, and having
boiled the Herb in water, they first wash the place with the Decoction, and
then lay some of the Herb also to the hurt place. The Herb also boiled in
Swines Grease and so made into an Ointment, is good to apply to the biting of
any Venomous Venomous Beast,
Creature. The Herb also bruised and heated between two Tiles, and applied hot
to the share, causes them to make water who had it stopped before: Disury,
It is held likewise to be good for Wounds, and to take away Scars. Wounds,
Scars,
The Decoction of the Herb and Flowers with the Seed and Root taken for some
time, helps Women that are troubled with the Whites. Whites,
The Seed and Flowers boiled in Water, and after made into a Pultis with some
Oil and applied, helps hard Swellings and Impostumes. Swellings, Apostums.


Of Tefoyl or three leaved Grass, there are very many sorts described by
Authors, but one I have found out which I never red of, the Leaf is but small
and it bears a small yellow Flower, in the midst of each Leaf of the Herb, is
a perfect picture of a Heart in red color, it grows plentifully in a Field
between Longford and Bow; also I found one Root in the Highway between Chadwel
and Rumford in Essex, as also another in the Highway between Horn-Church and
Upminster in the same County, the taste is something more hot and spicy than the
taste of the rest is.

Tutsan, or Park Leaves.
Description.
THis has many brownish shining round Stalks, crested all the length thereof,
rising to be two and sometimes three foot high, branching forth even from the
bottom, having diverse Joints, and at each of them two fair large Leaves
standing, of a dark bluish green color on the upper side, and of a yellowish
green underneath, turning reddish toward Autumn, but abiding on the Branches
all the Winter: At the tops of the Stalks and Branches stand large yellow
Flowers, and Heads with Seed, which being greenish at the first, and afterward
reddish, turn to be of a blackish purple color when they are through ripe,
with small brownish Seed within them, and then yield a reddish Juice or Liquor,
of a reasonable good scent, somewhat resinous, and of an harsh or stiptich taste,
as the Leaves also and the Flowers be, although much less, but do not yield
such a clear Claret Wine Liquor as some say it does: The Root is brownish,
somewhat great, hard, and woody, spreading well in the ground.

Place.
It grows in many Woods, Groves, and Woody Grounds, as Parks and Forests,
and by Hedge sides in many places of this Land, as in Hampsted Wood, by Railey
in Essex, in the Wild of Kent, and in many other places needless to recite.

Time.
It Flowreth later than St. John's, or St. Peter's wort.

Virtues and Use.
Tutsan purges Chollerick Humors as St. Peter's wort is said to do, for therein
it works the same effects, both to help the Sciatica and Gout, and to heal
burnings by fire: It stays also the bleeding of Wounds, if either the green
Herb be bruised, or the powder of the dry be applied thereto. Choler,
Sciatica, Gout, Burning, Bleeding, Wounds, Ulcers.
It has been accounted and certainly is a sovereign Herb to heal any Wound or
Sore either outwardly or inwardly, and therefore always used in Drinks,
Lotions, Balms, Oils, Ointments for any sort of green Wound, or old Ulcers and
Sores, in all which the continual experience of former Ages has confirmed the
use thereof to be admirable good, though it be not so much in use now as when
Physicians and Surgeons were so wise as to use Herbs more than now they do.

It is an Herb of Saturn and a most noble Antivenerian.

Garden Valerian.
Description.
THis has a thick short grayish Root lying for the most part above ground,
shooting forth on all sides other such like small pieces or Roots, which have
all of them many long and great strings or fibers under them, in the ground,
whereby it draws nourishment. From the Heads of these Roots spring up many
green Leaves, which at first are somewhat broad and long without any devision
at all in them, or denting on the edges, but those that rise up after are more
and more divided on each side, some to the middle Rib, being winged, as made of
many Leaves together on a Stalk, and those upon the Stalk in like manner are
more divided, but smaller toward the top than below: The Stalk rises to be a
yard high or more, sometimes branched at the top, with many small whitish Flowers,
sometimes dashed over at the edges with a pale purplish color, of a little
scent: which paffing away there follows small brownish white Seed that is
easily carried away with the wind. The Root smalleth more strong than either
Leaf or Flower, and is of more use in Medicine,

Place.
It is generally kept with us in our Gardens.

Time.
It Flowreth in June and July, and continues Flowring until the Frosts pull it
down.

Virtues and Use.
Dioscorides says, That the Garden Valcrian has a warming Faculty, and that
being dried and given to drink, it provokes Urine and helps the Strangury:
Disury Strangury
The Decoction thereof taken does the like also, and takes away pains of the
sides, provokes Women's Courses and is used in Antidotes. Stitch terms provokes
Pliny says, That the Powder of the Root given in drink, or the Decoction
thereof taken, helps all stoppings and stranglings in any part of the Body,
whether they proceed of pains in the Chest or sides, and takes them away. Breast
The Root of Valerianboyled with Liquoris, Raisons, and Annis Seed, is singular
good for those that are short winded, and for those that are troubled with the
Cough, and helps to open the passages, and to expectorate Phlegm easily. Short
wind Cough Phlegm
It is given to those that are bitten or stung by any Venomous Creature, being
boiled in Wine. Pestilence
It is of especial Virtue against the Plague, the Decoction thereof being
drunk, and the Root being used to smell unto; It helps also to expel the wind
in the Belly. Wind
The green Herb with the Root taken fresh, being bruised and applied to the
Head takes away the pains and prickings therein, staieth Rhewms and thin
Distillations, and being boiled in white Wine, and the drop thereof put into
the eye, takes away the dimness of the sight, or any Pin or Web therein: It is
of excellent property to heal any inward Sores or Wounds, as also for outward
Hurts or Wounds, and draws any Splinter or Thorn out of the Flesh. Headache
Eyes Pin and Web Wounds Splinters thorn.


Vervain.
Description.
THe common Vervain, has somewhat long and broad Leaves next the ground deeply
gash'd about the edges and some only deeply dented or cut all alike, of a
blackish green color on the upper side, and somewhat gray underneath: The Stalk
is square branched into several parts, rising about two foot high, especially
if you reckon the long spike of Flowers at the tops of them, which are set on
all sides one above another, and sometimes two or three together, being small
and gaping, of a Purplish blew color, and white intermixed; after which come
small round Seed in small and somewhat long Heads: The Root is small and long,
but of no use.

Place.
It grows generally throughout this Land in diverse places by the Hedges and
way sides, and other wast grounds.

Time.
It Flowreth about July, and the Seed is ripe soon after.

Virtues and Use.
Vervain is hot and dry, bitter, opening Obstructions, clensing, and healing,
Obstructions Clensing Healing Yellow Jaundice, Venomous Beasts, Pestilence
Agues Worms Cough shortness of Breath Wheesing Stone Gravel Reins Bladder
It helps the yellow Jaundice, the Dropsy, and the Gout, the defects of the
Reins and Lungs, and generally, all inward pains and torments of the Body, the
Leaves being boiled and drunk; The same is held to be good against the bitings
of Serpents, and other Venomous Beasts; and against the Plague, and both
Tertian and Quartane Agues, kills and expels Worms in the Belly, and
causes a good color in the Face and Body, strengthens as well as corrects
the Diseases of the Liver and Spleen, is very effectual in all Diseases of the
Stomach and Lungs, as Coughs, shortness of Breath and Wheesings, and is
singular good against the Dropsy, to be drunk with some Peony Seeds, bruised
and put thereto; and is no less prevalent for the defects of the Reins and
Bladder, to cleanse them of those Humors that engender the Stone, and helps to
break the Stone and to expel Gravel: It consolidateth and heals also all
Wounds both inward and outward, and stays bleedings, and used with some Honey
heals all old Ulcers and Fistulaes in the Legs or other parts of the Body, as
also those Ulcers that happen in the Mouth,; or used with old Hogs grease it
helps the Swellings and pains of the secret parts in man or Woman, as also
for the Piles and Hemorrhoids^: Applied with some Oil of Roses and Vinegar unto
the Forehead and Temples, it eases the inveterate pains and ach of the Head,
and is good for those that are Frenetick. Womb, Dropsy, Bleeding, Wounds,
Ulcers, Fistulaes, Headache, Frenzy, Morphew, Freckles, Eyes.
The Leaves bruised, or the Juice of them mixed with some Vinegar does
wonderfully cleanse the Skin, and takes away Morphew, Freckles, Pustulaes, and
other such like Inflammations and deformities of the Skin in any part of the
Body. The distilled water of the Herb when it is in his full strength, dropped
into the Eyes, cleanses them from Films, Clouds, or mists that darken the
sight, and wonderfully strengthens the Optic Nerves; The said Water is very
powerful in all the Diseases aforesaid either inward or outward, whether they
be old corroding Sores, or green Wounds.

This also is an Herb of Venus, and an excellent Herb for the Womb, to
strengthen it and remedy all the cold griefs of it, as Plantane does the hot,
the Herb bruised and hung about the Neck helps the Headache.

The Vine.
THe Leaves of the English Vine (I do not intend to send you to the Canaries
for a Medicine) being boiled make a good Lotion for sore Mouths, Sore Mouth,
Inflammations,
being boiled with Barley Meal into a Pultis, it cools Inflammations of Wounds,
the droppings of the Vine when it is cut in the Spring, which Country people
call Tears, being boiled into a Syrup with Sugar and taken inwardly, is
excellent to stay Women's longings Women's Longing,
after every thing they see, which is a Disease many Women with Child are
subject too; the Decoction of Vine Leaves in white Wine does the like: also the
Tears of of the Vine drunk, two or three spoonfuls at a time, breaks the Stone
Stone,
in the Bladder: This is a very good Remedy, and it is discreetly done to kill
a Vine to cure a Man, but the Salt of the Leaves is held to be better.

The Ashes of the burnt Branches will make Teeth Teeth black.
that are as black as a coal to be as white as snow if you do but every morning
rub them with it.

Violets.
THese, both Tame and Wild, are so well known that they need no Description.

Time.
They Flower until the end of July, but are best in March and the beginning of
April.

Virtues and Use.
All the Violets are cold and moist while they are fresh and green, and are
used to cool any heat or distemperature of the Body, either inwardly or
outwardly, as Inflammations Inflammation, Eyes, Womb,
in the Eyes, in the Matrix or Fundament, in Impostumes also and hot Swellings,
to drink the Decoction of the Leaves or Flowers made with Water or Wine, or to
apply them Pulti^ wise to the grieved place, it likewise eases pains in the
Head, Headache, Watching,
caused through want of sleep; or in any other place arising of heat, being
applied in the same manner, or with Oil of Roses. A dram weight of the dried
Leaves of the Flowers of Violets (but the Leaves more strongly) does purge the
Body of Chollerick Humors, and asswageth the heat being taken in a draught of
Wine or any other Drink: The Powder of the purple Leaves of the Flowers only
picked and dried, and drunk in Water is said to help the Quinsie, and the
Falling Sickness Quinsie, Falling Sickness, Swellings,
in Children, especially in the beginning of the Disease. The Flowers of the
White Violets ripeneth and dissolveth. Swellings. The Herb or Flowers while
they are fresh, or the Flowers when they are dry, are effectual in the
Plurisie, Pleuresie, Phlegm, Hoarceness, Throat, Back, Reins, Bladder,
and all Diseases of Lungs, to lenesie the sharpness of hot Rhewms, and the
Hoarsness of the Throat, the heat also, and sharpness of Urine, and all pains
of the Back, or Reins and the Bladder: It is good also for the Liver and the
Jaundice, and in all hot Agues to cool the Heat and quench the Thirst: But the
Syrup of Violets is of most use and of better effect, being taken in some
convenient Liquor; and if a little of the Juice or Syrup of Lemmons be put to
it, or a few drops of the Oil of Vitriol, it is made thereby the more powerful
to cool the heat and to quench the Thirst, Thirst, Heart.
and gives to the drink a Clarret Wine color, and a fine tart ^ellish,
pleasing the taste. Violets taken, or made up with Honey does more cleanse than
cool, and with Sugar contrary-wise. The dried Flowers of Violets are accounted
among the Cordial Drinks, Pouders, and other Medicines especially where cooling
Cordials are necessary: The green Leaves are used with other Herbs, to make
Plasters and Pultisces for Inflammations and Swellings, and to ease pains
wheresoever, arising of heat, and for the Piles also, being fried with Yolks of
Eggs and applied thereto.

Pansies or Heartsease are like unto Violets in all their operations but
somewhat hotter and dryer, yet very temperate, and by viscuous Juice therein
does somewhat mollify, yet less than Mallows: It is conducing in like manner as
Violets to the hot Diseases of the Chest and Lungs: for Agues, Convulsions, and
Falling Sickness in Children: The Decoction helps Itch and Scabs being bathed
therewith: It is said also to soder green Wounds, and to help old Sores, the
Juice or distilled Water thereof being drunk.

Vipers Buglofs.
Description.
THis has many long rough Leaves lying on the ground, from among which rise up
diverse hard round Stalks, very rough, as if they were thick set with prickles
or hairs, wherein are set such like long rough hairy or prickly sad green Leaves,
somewhat narrow; the middle Rib for the most part being white. The Flowers stand
at the tops of the Stalks, branched forth into many long spiked Leaves of
Flowers, bowing or turning like the Turnsole, all of them opening for the most
part on the one side, which are long and hollow, turning up the Brims a little,
of a Purplish Violet color in them that are fully blown, but more reddish
while they are in the Bud, as also upon their decay and withering; but in some
places of a paler purple color,, with a long pointel in the middle, feathered
or parted at the top: After the Flowers are fallen the Seeds growing to be
ripe, are blackish, cornered and pointed somewhat like unto the Head of a Viper.
The Root is somewhat great and blackish, and woolly, when it grows toward Seed
time; and perishes in the Winter.

There is another sort little differing from the former, only in that it
bears white Flowers.

Place.
The first grows wild almost every where. That with white Flowers, about the
Castle Walls of Jews in Sussex.

Time.
They Flower in Summer, and their Seed is ripe quickly after.

Virtues and Use.
It is an especial Remedy against the biting of the Viper, and of all other
Venomous Beasts Venomous Beasts, Poison,
or Serpents, as also against poison and poysonful He^^s. Dioscorides and
others say, That whosoever shall take of the Herb or Root before they be
bitten, shall not be hurt by the poison of any Serpent. The Roots or Seeds are
thought to be most effectual to comfort the Heart, Heart, Sadness, Melancholy,
Agues, Milk, Loins, Back, Kidneys.
and expel Sadness, or cause less Melancholy, it tempers the Blood, and
allayeth the hot Fits of Agues: The Seed drunk in Wine procures abundance of
Milk in Women's Breasts. The same also being taken caseth the pains in the Loins,
Back, and Kidneys: The distilled Water of the Herb when it is in Flower, or his
chiefest strength, is excellent to be applied either inwardly or outwardly for
all the Griefs aforesaid. There is a Syrup made hereof very effectual for the
comforting of the Heart, and expelling Sadness and Melancholy.

VVall-Flowers, or Winter Gilly-flowers.
THe Garden kinds are so well known that they need no Description.

Description.
The common single Wall-Flowers which grow wild abroad, has sundry small long,
narrow, and dark green Leaves, set without order upon small round whitish woody
Stalks which bear, at the tops diverse single yellow Flowers one above another,
every one having four Leaves apiece, and of a very sweet scent: after which
come long Pods containing reddish Seed. The Root is white, hard and threddy.

Place.
It grows upon old Church Walls, and old Walls of many Houses, and on the
other stone Walls in diverse places. The other sorts in Gardens only.

Time.
All the single kinds do Flower many times in the end of Autumn, and if the
Winter be mild, all the Winter long, but especially in the Months of February,
March, and April, and until the heat of the Spring do spend them: But the
double kinds continue not Flowring in that manner all the year along, although
they Flower very early sometimes, and in some places very late.

Virtues and Use.
Galen in his seventh Book of Simple Medicines says, That the yellow
Wall-flowers works more powerfully than any of the other kinds, and is
therefore of more use in Physic; It cleanses the Blood and freeth the Liver
and Reins from Obstructions, Obstructions, Liver, Terms provokes, Afterbirth
Dead Child, Spleen, Weakness Disjuncture, Gout, Sinews, Apoplexy, Palsy.
provokes Women's Courses, expels the Secondine and dead Child, helps the
hardness and pains of the Mother, and of the Spleen also, stays Inflammations
and Swellings, comfort and strengthens any weak part, or out of Joint:
helps to cleanse the Eyes from mistiness and Films on them, and to cleanse foul
and filthy Ulcers in the Mouth or any other part, and is a singular Remedy for
the Gout, and all Aches and Pains in the Joints and Sinews. A Conserve made of
the Flowers is used for a Remedy both for the Apoplexy and Palsy.

The VValnut-Tree.
THis is so well known, that it needs no Description.

Time.
It Blossometh early, before the Leaves come forth, and the Fruit is ripe in
September.

Virtues and Use.
The Bark of the Tree, does bind and dry Binds, Dries,
very much, and the Leaves are much of the same temperature, but the Leaves
when they are older, are heating and drying the Second Degree, and harder of
digestion than when they are fresh, which by reason of their sweetness are more
pleasing and better digesting in the Stomach, and taken with sweet Wine they
move the Belly downwards; but being old, they grieve the Stomach, and in hot
Bodies cause Choler to abound, and the Headache, and are an enemy to those that
have the Cough: But are less hurtful to those that have colder Stomachs, and
are said to kill the broad Worms Worms,
in the Belly or Stomach. If they be taken with Onions, Salt, and Honey, they
help the biting of a Mad Dog, or the Venom or infectious poison of any Beast
etc. Oneus Pompeius found in the Treasury of Methridates King of Pontus, when
he was overthrown, a Scrowl of his own Handwriting, containing a Medicine
against any Poison and Infection, which is this: Take two dry Walnuts, and as
many good Figgs, and twenty Leaves of Rue bruised and beaten together with two
or three Corns of Salt, and twenty Juniper Berries, which taken every morning
fasting, preserves from danger of Poison Poison, Epidemical Diseases,
Inflammation in the Throat, wounds of the Sinews Gangrenes Carbuncles Flux,
Terms stops, Baldness,
or Infection, that day it is taken. The Juice of the outer green Husks, boiled
up with Honey, is an excellent gargle for sore Mouths, the Heat and
Inflammations in the Throat and Stomach: The Kernels when they grow old are more
Oily, and therefore not so fit to be eaten, but are then used to heal the Wounds
of the Sinews, Gangrenes, and Carbuncles; The said Kernels being burned, are
then very astringent, and will then stay Lasks and Women's Courses, being taken
in red Wine; and stay the falling of the Hair and make it fair, being anointed
with Oil and Wine; The green Husks will do the like being used in the same
manner. The Kernels beaten with Rue and Wine, being applied, helps the
Quinsie; Quinsie,
and bruised with some Honey and applied to the Ears, eases the pains and
Inflammations of them: A piece of the green Husk put unto a hollow Tooth,
Toothach,
eases the pains. The Catkins hereof taken before they fall off, dried and
given a dram thereof in Powder with white Wine, wonderfully helps those that
are troubled with the rising of the Mother. Mother,
The Oil that is pressed out of the Kernels, is very profitably taken inward
like Oil of Almonds, to help the Chollick, Chollick, Wind,
and to expel wind very effectually, an ounce or two thereof may be taken at a
time. The young green Nuts taken before they be half ripe and preserved with
Sugar, are of good use for those that have weak Stomachs, or Defluxions
thereon. The distilled water of the green Husk before they be half ripe, is of
excellent use to cool the heat of Agues Agues,
being drunk an ounce or two at a time, as also to resist the Infection of the
Plague, if some thereof be also applied to the Sores thereof: The same also
cools the heat of green Wounds and old Ulcers, and heals them being bathed
therewith: The distilled Water of the green Husks being ripe when they are
shelled from the Nuts, being drunk with a little Vinegar, is also found by
experience to be good for those that are infected with the Plague, so as before
the taking thereof a Vein be opened. The said Water is very good against the
Quinsin being gargled and bathed therewith, and wonderfully helps Deafness,
Deafness, Ears.
the Noise, and other pains in the Ears. The Distilled water of the young green
Leaves in the end of May performs a singular cure on foul running Ulcers and
Sores, to be bathed with wet Clothes or Spunges applied to them evening and
morning.

Would, VVeld, or Dyers Weed.
Description.
THe common kind grows bushing with many Leaves, long, narrow, and flat upon
the ground, of a dark, bluish, green color, somewhat like unto Woad, but
nothing so large, a little crumpled and as it were round pointed which do so
abide the first year: And the next Spring from among them rise diverse round
Stalks two or three foot high, beset with many such like Leaves thereon, but
smaller, and shooting forth some small: Branches, which with the Stalks carry
many small yellow Flowers in a long spiked Head at the tops of them where
afterward come the Seed, which is small and black enclosed in Heads that are
divided at the tops into four parts. The Root is long, white, and thick,
abiding the Winter: The whole Herb changes to be yellow after it has been in
Flower a while.

Place.
It grows every where by the way sides in moist grounds as well as dry, in
Corners of Fields and by Lanes: and sometimes all over the Field; in Sussex and
Kent they call it Greenweed.

Time.
It is in Flower about June.

Virtues and Use.
Mathi^lus says, That the Root hereof cutteth tough Phlegm, digesteth raw
Phlegm, thinneth gross Humors, Phlegm, Humors, Tumors, Venomous Beasts,
Pestilence, Worms.
dissolveth hard Tumors, and opens Obstructions. Some do highly commend it
against the bitings of Venomous Creatures, to be taken inwardly and applied
outwardly to the hurt place; as also for the Plague or Pestilence. The People
in some Countries of this Land do use to bruise the Herb and lay it to Cuts or
Wounds in the Hands or Legs to heal them.

Wheat.
THe several kinds hereof are so well known unto almost all people that it is
altogether needless to write any Description thereof.

Virtues and Use.
Dioscorides says, That to eat the Corns of green Wheat is hurtful to the
Stomach, and breeds Worms. Pliny says, That the Corns of Wheat toasted upon
an Iron Pan and eaten, is a pleasant Remedy for those that are chilled with
cold. Cold,
The Oil pressed from Wheat between two thick Plates of Iron or Copper heated,
heals all Tetters and Ringworms Tetters, Ringworms,
being used warm, and hereby Galen says he has known many to be cured.
Mathiolus commends the same Oil to be put into hollow Ulcers Ulcers, Chops in
the Hands and Feet, Mad Dogs
to heal them up, and it is also good for Chops in the Hands or Feet, and to
make a rugged Skin smooth.

The green Corns of Wheat being chewed, and applied to the place bitten by a
mad Dog, heals it: Slices of Wheat Bread soaked in Red Rose Water, and
applied to the Eyes Eyes,
that are hot, red, and inflamed, or blood-shotten, helps them. Hot Bread
applied for an hour at a time three days together, perfectly heals the
Kernels in the Throat commonly called the Kings Evil. Kings Evil,
The Flower of Wheat mixed with the Juice of Henbane, stays the Flux of
Hurhors to the Joints being laid thereon: The said Meal boiled in Vinegar
helps the shrinking of the Sinews Sinews,
says Pliny; and mixed with Vinegar and Honey boiled together, heals all
Freckles, Spots, and Pimples on the Face. Wheat Flower, mixed with the Yolk of
an Eg, Honey, and Turpentine, does draw, cleanse, and heal, and Boil, Plague
Sore, or foul Ulcer. The Bran of Wheat Meal steeped in sharp Vinegar, and then
bound in a Linen Cloth, and rubbed on those places, that have the Scurf,
Morphew, Scabs, or Leprosy, Scabs, Leprosy,
will take them away, the Body being first well purged and prepared. The
Decoction of the Bran of Wheat or Barley, is of good use to bath those places
that are Bursten by a Rupture: and the said Bran boiled in good Vinegar, and
appled to swollen Breasts, helps them, and stays all Inflammations; it
helps also the bitings of Vipers (which I take to be no other but our English
Adder) and all other Venomous Venomous, Beasts,
Creatures. The Leaves of Wheat Meal applied with some Salt, takes away
hardness of the Skin, Wharts, and hard Knots in the Flesh. Starch moistened with
Rosewater and laid to the Cods takes away their Itching. Cods,
Wafers put in Water and drunk, stays the Lask and Bloody Flux, and is
profitably used both inward and outwardly for the Ruptures in Children: Boiled
in Water unto a thick Gelly and taken, it stays spitting of Blood: and boiled
with Mints and Butter it helps the hoarsness of the Throat. Hoarceness.


The VVillow-tree.
THese are so well known that they need no no Description: I shall therefore
only show you the Virtues thereof.

Virtues and Use.
Both the Leaves, Bark, and the Seed are used to stanch bleeding Stanch
Bleeding, Spitting of Blood, Fluxes of Blood, Vomiting, Distillations on the
Lungs, Wind Chollick, Heat of Lust, Dimness of sight, and other Diseases in the
Eyes, Clear the Face, Dry up Humors,
of Wounds, and at Mouth and Nose, spitting of Blood, and all other Fluxes of
Blood in man or woman, and to stay Vomiting, and provocation thereunto, if the
Decoction of them in Wine be drunk. It helps also to stay thin, hot, sharp,
salt Distillations from the Head upon the Lungs causing a Consumption: The
Leaves bruised with some Pepp^r and drunk in Wine, much helps the wind
Chollick. The Leaves bruised and boiled in Wine and drunk staieth the heat of
Lust in man or woman, and quite extinguisheth it, if it be long used; The Seed
is also of the same effect. The Water that is gathered from the Willow when it
Flowreth, the Bark being slit, and a fitting Vessel set to receive it, is very
good for redness and dimness of Sight, for films that grow over the Eyes, and
stay the Rhewms that fall into them, to provoke Urin being stopped if it be
drunk, and to clear the Face and Skin from Spots and Discolorings. Galen
^aith, The Flowers have an admirable faculty in drying up Humors, being a
Medicine without any sharpness or corrosion: You may boil them in white Wine,
and drink as much as you will (so you drink not your self drunk.) The Bark work
the same effects, if used in the same manner, and the Tree has always Bark
upon it though not always Flowers: The Burnt ashes of the Bark, being mixed
with Vinegar takes away Warts, Warts, Corns and superfluous flesh, Scurf or
Dandriff
Corns, and Superfluous Flesh being applied to the place. The Decoction of the
Leaves or Bark in Wine, takes away Scurf or Dandrif by washing the place with
it: It Is a fine cool Tree, The Boughs of which are very convenient to be placed
in the Chamber of one sick of a Fever. Fever.


Woad.
Description.
IT has diverse large Leaves, long, and somewhat broad withal, like to those of
the greater Plantaue, but larger, thicker, of a greenish color and somewhat
blew withal: From among which Leaves rises up a lusty Stalk three or four foot
high, with diverse Leaves set thereon; The higher the Stalk rises, the smaller
are the Leaves, at the top it spreads into diverse Branches, at the ends of
which appear pretty little yellow Flowers, and after they pass away like other
Flowers of the Field, come Husks, long, and somewhat flat withal, in form they
resemble a Tongue, in color they are black, and they hang bobbing downwards.
The Seed contained within these Husks (if it be a little chewed) gives an Azure
color. The Root is white and long.

Place.
It is sowed in Fields for the benefit of it, where those that sow it cut it
three 'times a year.

Time.
It Flowreth in June, but is long after before the Seed is ripe.

Virtues and Use.
Some People affirm the Plant to be destructive to Bees, which if it be I
cannot help it: They say it possesses Bees with a Flux, but that I can hardly
believe, unless Bees be contrary to all other Creatures, I should rather think
it possesses them with the contrary Disease, the Herb being exceeding drying
and binding. However, if any Bees be diseased thereby, the cure is to set Urine
by them, but set it in such a Vessel that they cannot drown themselves, which
may be remedied if you put pieces of Cork in it. I told you before the Herb was
drying and binding, and so drying and binding that it is not fit to be given
inwardly. An Ointment made thereof stancheth Bleeding: Bleeding Spleen^ Ulcers
Inflammations, St. Anthonies fire defluxions of Blood.
A Plaster made thereof and applied to the Region of the Spleen (and I pray
you take notice, that the Spleen lies on the left side) takes away the hardness
and pains thereof: The Ointment is excellent good in such Ulcers as abound with
moisture, and takes away the corroding and fretting Humors: It cools
Inflammations, quenches St. Anthonies fire, and stays Defluxions of Blood to
any part of the Body.

Woodbind, or Honeysuckles.
THe Plant is so common that every one that has Eyes knows them, and he that
has none cannot read a Description if I should write it.

Time.
They Flower in June, and the Fruit is ripe in August.

Virtues and Use.
Doctor Tradition, that grand Introducer of Errors, that Hater of Truth, that
Lover of Folly, and that mortal Foe to Doctor Reason, has taught the common
People to use the Leaves and Flowers of this Plant in Mouth Waters, and by long
continuance of time has so grounded it in the Brains of the Vulgar that you
cannot beat it out with a Beetle: All Mouth Waters ought to be cooling and
drying, but Honeysuckles are clensing, consuming, and digesting, and therefore
no ways fit for Inflammations, Thus Doctor Reason. Again, If you please we will
leave Dr. Reason a while and come to Dr. Experience, a learned Gentleman, and
his Brother; Take a Leaf and chew it in your Mouth, and you will quickly find
it likelier to cause a sore Mouth or Throat than to cure it. Well then, if it
be not good for this, What is it good for? It Is good for something: For God and
Nature made nothing in vain: It is an Herb of Jupiter and apropriated to the
Lungs, Lungs afflicted Asthma Spleen provokes Urine and speedy Delivery in
Childbirth Cramps Convulsions and Palseys^
the Celestial Crab claims Dominion over it; neither is it a Foe to the Lion:
If the Lungs be afflicted by Mercury, this is your Cure: It is fitting a
Conserve made of the Flowers of it were kept in every Gentlewomans House; I
know no better cure for an Asthma than this; Besides, It takes away the evil of
the Spleen, provokes Urine, procures speedy Delivery to Women in Travail, helps
Cramps, Convulsions and Palseys, and whatsoever griefs comes of cold or
stopping: If you please to make use of it in an Ointment, it will clear your
Skin of Morphew, Freckles, and Sunburning, Freckles, and Sunburning,
or whatsoever else discolours it, and then the Maids will love it. I have
done, when I have told you what Authors say, and cavelled a little with them,
They say the Flowers are of more effect than the Leaves, and that is true; but
they say, The Seeds are of least effect of all: But Dr. Reason told me, That
there was a Vital Spirit in every Seed to beget its like; and Dr. Experiense
told me, That there was a greater heat in a Seed than there was in any other
part of a Plant, and withal, That Heat was the Mother of action, and then judge
if old Dr. Tradition (who may well be honored for his Age, but not for his
Goodness) have not so poisoned the World with his Errors before I was born,
that it was never well in its wits since, and there is great fear it will die
mad.

Wormwood.
Description.
THree Wormwoods are familiar with us; One I shall not descsrabe, another I
shall describe, and the Third be Critical at. And I care not greatly if I begin
with the last first.

Sea Wormwood has gotten as many Names as Virtues (and perhaps one more)
Scriphion, Santonicon, Belgicum, Narbonense, Xantomicum, Misnense, and a matter
of twenry more, which I will not blot Paper withal: A Papist got the Toy by the
end, and he called it Holy Wormwood; and in truth I am of Opinion, Their giving
so much holiness to Herbs is the Reason there remains so little in themselves.

The Seed of this Wormwood is that which usually Women give their Children for
the Worms: Of all Wormwoods that grow here, this is the weakest; I but Doctors
commend it, and Apothecaries sell it, the one must keep his Credit, and the
other get Money, and that is the key of the work. The Herb is good for something,
because God made nothing in vain; Will you give me leave to weigh things in the
Balance of Reason; Then thus, The Seeds of the common Wormwood are far more
prevalent than the Seed of this, to expel Worms in Children, or People of ripe
age: Of both, some are weak, some are strong. The Seriphian Wormseed is the
weakest, and happily may prove to be fittest for weakest Bodies (for it is weak
enough in all conscience) Let such as are strong take the common Wormseed, for
the other will do but little good. Again, near the Sea many people live, and
Seriphium grows near them, and therefore is more fitting for their Bodies
because nourished by the same Air; and this I had from Dr. Reason. In whose
Body Dr. Reason dwells not, dwells Dr. Madness, and he brings in his Brethren,
Dr. Ignorance, Dr. Folly, and Dr. Sickness, and these together make way for Dr.
Death, and the latter end of that man is worse than the beginning. Pride was
the cause of Adam's Fall, Pride begat a Daughter, I do not know the Father of
it unless the Divil, but she christened it, and called it Appetite, and sent her
Daughter to taste these Wormwoods, who finding this the least bitter, made the
sqeamish Wench extol it to the Skies, though the Virtues of it never reached to
the middle Region of the Air. Its due praise is this; It is weakest, therefore
fitter for weak Bodies, and fitter for those Bodies that dwell near it than
those that live far from it: my reason is, The Sea (as those that live far from
it, know when they comt near it) casts not such a smell as the Land does: The
tender Mercies of God being over all his Works, has by his eternal Providence
planted Seriphium by the Sea side, as a fit Medicine for the Bodies of those
that live near it. Lastly, It is known to all that know any thing in the Course
of Nature, That the Liver delights in sweet things; if so, it abhors bitter;
then if your Liver be weak, it is none of the wisest courses to plague it with
an Enemy: if the Liver be weak a Consumption follows; Would you know the
Reason? it is this, A man's Flesh is repaired by Blood, by a third concoction
which transmutes Blood into Flesh ('it is well I said [Conction] for if I had
said [Boyling] every Cook would have understood me.) The Liver makes Blood, and
if it be weakened that it makes not enough the Flesh wastes, and why must Flesh
always be renewed? Because the eternal God when he made the Creation, made one
part of it in continual dependency upon another: And why did he so? Because
Himself is only Permanent, to teach us, That we should not fix our affections
upon what is transitory, but upon what endures for ever. The result of all is
this, If the Liver be weak and cannot make Blood enonough (I would have said
[Sanguifie] if I had written only to Scholars) The Seriphian which is the
weakest of Wormwoods is better than the best. I have been Critical enonough (if
not too much.

Place.
It grows familiarly in England by the Sea side.

Description.
It starts up out of the earth with many round woody hoary Stalks from one
Root, its height is four foot high, or three at the least. The Leaves in
Longitude are long, in Latitude narrow, in Color white, in Form hoary, in
Similitude like Southernwood, only broader and longer, in Taste, rather salt
than bitter, because it grows so near the Salt Water: At the joints with the
Leaves toward the tops it bear little yellow Flowers. The Root lies deep and is
woody.

Common Wormwood I shall not describe, for every Boy that can eat an Eg knows
it.

Roman Wormwood; And why Roman, seeing it grows familiarly in England? It may
be it was so called because it is special good for a stinking Brcarh, which the
Romans cannot be very free from maintaining so many Baudy Houses by Authority
of his Holiness.

Description.
The Stalks are slenderer and shorter than the common Wormwood by one foot at
least; the Leaves are more finely cut and divided than they are but something
smaller; both Leaves and Stalks are hoary; the Flowers of a pale yellow color,
it is altogether like the common Wormwood, save only in bigness, ^or it is
smaller; in taste, for it is not so bitter, in smell, for it is spicy.

Place.
It grows upon the tops of the Mountains (it seems it is aspiring) there it is
Natural; but usually nursed up in Gardens for the use of the Apothecaries in
London.

Time.
All Wormwoods usually Flower in August, a little sooner or later.

Virtues and Use.
Will you give me leave to be Critical a little? I must take leave; Wormnwood
is an Herb of Mars, and if Pontanus say otherwise he is beside the Bridge. I
prove it thus: What delights in Martial places is a Martial Herb, But Wormwood
delights in Martial places, (for about Forges and Iron Works you may gather a
Cart load of it) Ergo it is a Martial Herb. It is hot and dry in the first
degree, Viz, Just as hot as your Blood and no hotter: It remedies the evils
Choler Choler,
can inflict on the Body of man by Sympathy. Venery,
It helps the evils Venus and her wanton Girls produce, by Antipathy; and it
does something else besides; It cleanses the Body of Choler (and who dares say
Mars does no good?) It provokes Urine, helps Surfets, Swellings Provokes urine,
Helps Surfets, Swellings, Appetite lost, Yelloow Jaundice,
in the Belly; it causes an Appetite to meat, because Mars rules the
Attractive faculty in Man: The Sun never shone upon a better Herb for the
yellow Jaundice than this is: Why should men cry out so much upon Mars for an
Infortue (or Saturn either?) Did God make Creatures to do the Creation a
mischief? This Herb testifies that Mars is willing to cure all the Diseases he
causes; the truth is, Mars loves no Cowards, nor Saturn Fools, nor I, either.
Take of the Flowers of Wormwood, Rosemary, and black Thorn, of each a like
quantity, half that quantity of saffron, boil this in Renish Wine, but put not
in the Saffron till it is almost boiled; Preserve Health,
This is the way to keep a Man's Body in health, appointed by Camerarius in his
Book entitled, Hortus, Medicus, and it is a good one too. Besides all this,
Wormwood provokes the Terms. Terms provokes^
I would willingly teach Astrologers, and make them Physicians (if I knew how)
for they are most fitting for the Calling, if you will not believe me, ask Dr.
Hippocrates, and Dr. Galen, a couple of Gentlemen that our College of
Physicians keep to vapor with, not to follow. In this one Herb I shall give the
Pattern of a Rule to the Sons of Art, rough caft, yet as near the Truth as the
men of Benjamin could throw a stone; whereby my Brethren of the Society of
Astrologers may know by a penny how a shilling is coined: (as for the College
of Physicians they are too sta^ely to learn, and too proud to continue, They
say a Mouse is under the Dominion of the Moon, and that is the reason they feed
in the night: The House of the Moon is Cancer: (Rats are of the same nature
with Mice but that they are a little bigger.) Mars receives his fall in Cancer
Erga^ Wormwood being an Herb of Mars is a present Remedy for the biting of Rats
and Mice. Biting of Rats and Mice.
Mushroms (I cannot give them the title of Herba, Frutex, or Arbor) are under
the Dominion of Saturn (and take them one time with another they do as much
harm as good:) if any have poisoned himself by eating them, Wormwood an Herb of
Mars cures him, because Mars is exalted in Capricorn the House of Saturn, and
this it does by Sympathy as it did the other by Antipathy. Mushroms
Wheals, Pushes black and blew Spots Wheals, Pushes, Black and blew Spots,
coming eitheir by bruises or beatings, Wormwood an Herb of Mars helps, because
Mars (as bad as you love him, and as ill as you hate him) will not break your
Head, but he will give you a Plaster. If he do but teach you to know your selves,
his Courtesy is greater than his Discourtesie: The greatest Antipathy between
the Planets is between Mars and Venus, one is hot, the other cold, one Diurnal,
the other Nocturnal; one dry, the other moist, their Houses are opposite, one
Masculine the other Feminine, one public the other private, one is valiant,
the other effeminate, one loves the light, the other hates it, one loves the
Field, the other the Sheets; then the Throat is under Venus, the Quinsie
Quinsie,
lies in the Throat and is an Inflammation there: Venus rules the Throat (it
being under Taurus her Sign) Mars eradicates all Diseases in the Throat by his
Herbs (of which Wormwood is one) and send them to Egypt on an errand never to
return more; this by Antipathy. The Eyes are under the Luminaries, the right
Eye of a Man, and the left Eye of a Woman, the Sun claims Dominion over: The
left Eye of a Man, and the right Eye Eyes;
of a Woman, are the privilege of the Moon, Wormwood an Herb of Mars cures
both: What belongs to the Sun by Sympathy because he is exalted in his House;
but what belongs to the Moon by Antipathy, because he has his Fall in hers.
Suppose a man be bitten or s^ung Biting or, stinging by Venomous Beasts.
by a martial Creature, imagine a Wasp, a Hornet or Scorpion, Wormwood an H^^b
of Mars gives you a present cure: Then Mars as Chollerick as he is, has
learned that Patiences, to pass by yenr evil speeches of him, and tells you by
my Pen, That he gives you no Affliction but he gives you a Cure; You need not
run to Apollo nor AEsculapius; and if he were so Chollerick as you make him to
be, he would have drawn his Sword for Anger ^o see the ill conditions of those
people that can spy his Vices and not his Virtues. The eternal God when he made
Mars, made him for a public good, and the Sons of Men shall know it in the
latter end of the world. Et caelum Mars solus habet. You say Mars is a
Destroyer, mix a little Wormwood an Herb of Mars with your Ink, and neither
Rats nor Mice will touch the Paper is written with it, and then Mars is a
Preserver. Astrologers say Mars causes Scabs and Itch, and the Virgins are
angry with him, because wanton V^nus told them he desorms their Skin: But quoth
Mars, my only desire is they should know themselves; my Herb Wormwood will
restore them to the beauty they formerly had, and in that I will not come an
inch behind my opposite Venus; for which does the greatest evil, he that takes
away an innate beauty, and when he has done knows how to restore it again; or
she that teaches a company of wanton Lasses to paint their Faces? If Mars be in
the Virgin in a Nativity, they say he usually causes the Chollick ('it is well
God has set some body to pull down the pride of Man) He in the Virgin troubles
none with the Chollick but them that know not themselves (for who knows himself
may easily know all the world:) Wormwood an Herb of Mars is a present cure for
it: and whether it be most like a Christian to love him for his good, or hate
him for his evil, judge ye. I had almost forgotten that Charity thinks no evil,
I was once in the Tower and viewed the Wardrobe, and there was a great many
fine Clothes (I can give them no other title, for I was never neither Linen
or Woollen Draper) yet as brave as they looked, my opinion was, the Moaths
might consume them (yea Henry the eighth his Codpiece.) Moaths are under the
Dominion of Mars, his Herb Wormwood being laid amongst Clothes will make a
Moath scorn to meddle with the Cloth, as much as a Lion scorns to meddle with
a Moule, or an Eagle a Fly. You say Mars is angry, and it is true enough, he is
angry with my Countrymen for being such Fools to be led by the Noses by a
College of Physicians, as they lead Bears to Paris-Garden. Melancholy men
cannot endure to be wronged in point of good name, and that has ^orely
troubled old Saturn, because they called him the greatest Infortune: In the
Body of Man he rules the Spleen Spleen
(and that makes Covetous men so Splenetick.) The poor old man lies crying cut
of his left side, Father Sarwn's angry, Mars comes to him, come Bic^^er, I
confess thou an evil spoken of, and so am I the know I have my exaltation in
thy House, I Will give him an Herb of mine, Wormwood, to cure t^^ poor man;
Saturn consented but spoke but little, and so Mars cured him by Sympathy. When
Mars was free from War (for he loves to be fighting, and is the best friend a
Soldier has) I say when Mars was free from War he called a Council of War in
his own Brain to know how he should do poor sinful man good, (desiring to
forget his in being called an Infortune) He musters up his own Forces and
places them in B^ttalia, ^h, quoth he, why do I hurt a poor silly Man or Woman?
His Angel Answers him, It Is because they have of^ended their God [Look back to
Adam] Well, says Mars, though they speak evil of me, I Will do good to them;
Death's cold, my Herbs shall heat them, They are full of ill Humors (else they
would never have spoken ill of me) my Herb shall cleanse them and dry them: They
are poor weak Creatures, my Herb shall threngthen them; they are dull witted, my
Herb shall fortify their Apprehensions; and yet amongst Astrologers, all this
does not deserve a good word; ^h, the Patience of Mars.

Faelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas
Inque domus superum scandere cura fi^t.
Oh happy he that can the Knowledge gain,
To know the eternal God made naught in vain.
To this I add,

I know the reason causes such a Dearth
Of Knowledge, it is, because men love the Earth.
The other day Mars told me he met with Venus, and he asked her what the Reason
was that she accused him for abusing Women, he never gave them the Pox, in the
Dispute they fell out, and in anger parted, and Mars told me that his brother
Saturn told him, that an Antivenerial Medicine was the best against the Pox.
French Pox,
Once a Month he meets with the Moon, Mars is quick enough of speech, and the
Moon not much behind hand (neither are most Women) The Moon looks much after
Children, and Children are much troubled with the Worms, she desued a Medicine
of him, he bad her take his own Herb Wormwood: He had no sooner parted with the
Moon but he met with Venus, and she was as drunk as a Bitch, Al^s poot Venus
quoth he^ What, thou a Fortune and be drunk? I Will give thee an Antipathetical
Cure, take my Herb Wormwood, thou shall never get a Surfeit Surfeit,
by drinking. A poor silly Countryman has got an Ague and cannot go about his
business, he wishes he had it not, and so do I, but I Will tell him a Remedy
whereby he may prevent it. Take the Herb of Mars Wormwood, and if Infortunes
will do good what will Fortunes do? Some say the Lungs are under Jupiter, and
if the Lungs, then the breath, and yet a man sometimes gets a stinking Stinking
Breath,
breath, and yet Jupiter is a Fortune forsooth; up comes Mars to him, Come
Brother Jupiter, thou know I sent thee a couple of Trines to thy Houses last
night, the one from Aries, and the other from Scorpio, give me thy leave by
Sympathy to cure the poor man by drinking a draught of Wormwood Beer every
morning. The Moon was weak the other day, and she gave a man two terrible
mischiefs, a dull Brain, and a weak sight, Dull Brain, weak Sight.
Mars l^ies by his Sword and comes to her, Sister Moon says he, This man has
angered thee, but I beseech thee take notice he is but a Fool, prithee be
patient, I will with my Herb Wormwood cure him of both Infirmities by
Antipathy, for thou know, thou and I cannot agree; with that the Moon began
to quarrel; Mars (not delighting much in Women's Tongues) went away, and did it
whether she would or no.

He that reads this and understands what he reads, he has a Jewel more worth
then a Diamond: He that understands it not, is as little fit to give Physic.
There lies a Key in these words, which will unlock (if it be turned by a wise
hand) the Cabbinet of Physic: I have delivered it so plainly as I durst; it is
not upon Wormwood only that I wrote, but upon all Plants, Trees, and Herbs: He
that understands it not, is unfit (in my Opinion) to give Physic. This shall
live when I am dead; and thus I leave it to the World, not caring ^ Halfpenny
whether they like or dislike it. The Grave equals all men, and therefore shall
equal me with the Princes, until which time the Eternal Providence is over me;
then the ill tongue of a pra^ling Priest, or of one who has more Tongue than
Wit, or more Pride than Honesty, shall never trouble me. Wisdom is justified of
her Children; and so much for Wormwood.

Yarrow.
Description.
IT has many long Leaves spread upon the ground and fine cut, and divided into
many small parts, Its Flowers are white but not all of a whiteness, and stayed
in Knots, upon diverse green Stalks which rise from amongst the Leaves.

Place.
It is very frequent in all Pastures.

Time.
It Flowers late even in the latter end of August.

Virtues and Use.
An Ointment of them cures Wounds Wounds, Inflammations, Terms stops, Bloody
Flux, Baldnss, Ulcers, Fistulaes, Retentive Faculty, Running of the Reins,
Whites, Diabetes, Toothach.
and is most fit for such as have Inflammations, it being an Herb of Dame Venus;
It stops the Terms in Women being boiled in white Wine and the Decoction drunk,
as also the Bloody Flux; the Ointment of it is not only good for green Wounds,
but also for Ulcers and Fistulaes, especially such as abound with moisture; It
stays the shedding off of Hair, the Head being bathed with the Decoction of
it; inwardly taken, it helps the retentive faculty of the Stomach, it helps the
running of the Reins in men, and the whites in women, and helps such as cannot
hold their water; and the Leaves chewed in the Mouth ease the Toothach; and
these Virtues being put together show the Herb to be drying and binding.
Achilles is supposed to be the first that le^t the Virtues of this Herb to
posterity, having learned them of his Master Chyron the Centaure, and certainly
a very profitable Herb it is in the Camp, and perhaps therefore called Militaris.

DIRECTIONS.
HAving in diverse places of this Treatise promised you the way of making
Syrups, Conserves, Oils, Ointments, etc. of Herbs, Roots, Flowers etc. whereby
you may have them ready for your use at such times when otherwise they cannot
be had; I come now to perform what I promised, and you shall find me rather
better than worse than my word.

That this may be done Methodically, I shall devide my Directions into two
grand Sections, and each Sections into several Chapters, and then you shall see
it look with such a Countenance as this is.

Sect. 1. Of gathering, drying, and keeping Simples and their Juyces.
Chap. 1. Of Leaves of Herbs etc. Chap. 2. Of Flowers. Chap. 3. Of Seeds. Chap.
4. Of Roots. Chap. 5. Of Barks. Chap. 6. Of Juyces.
Sect. 2. Of making and keeping Compounds.
Chap. 1. Of Distilled Waters. Chap. 2. Of Syrups. Chap. 3. Of Juleps. Chap. 4.
Of Decoctions. Chap. 5. Of Oils. Chap. 6. Of Electuaries. Chap. 7. Of
Conserves. Chap. 8. Of Preserves. Chap. 9. Of Lohochs. Chap. 10. Of Ointments.
Chap. 11. Of Plasters. Chap. 12. Of Pultisses. Chap. 13. Of Troches. Chap. 14.
Of Pills. Chap. 15. The way of fitting Medicines to Compound Diseases.
Of all these in order.

SECT. 1. The way of gathering, drying, and preserving Simples and their Juyces.
Chap. 1. Of Leaves of Herbs or Trees.
1. OF Leaves, choose only such as are green and full of Juice, pick them
carefully, and cast away such as are any way declining, for they will putrify
the rest, so shall one handful be worth ten of those you buy in Cheap side. 2.
Note in what place they most delight to grow in, and gather them there, for
Bettony that grows in the shadow is far better than that which grows in the
Sun, because it delights in the shadow; so also such Herbs as delight to grow
near the Water, let such be gathered as grow near the Water, though happily you
may find some of them upon dry ground, the Treatise will inform you where every
Herb delights to grow. 3. The Leaves of such Herbs as run up to Seed, are not
so good when they are in flower as before (some few excepted, the Leaves of
which are seldom or never used) in such cases, if through ignorance they were
not known, or through negligence forgotten, you had better take the top and the
Flower^ than the Leaf. 4. Dry them well in the Sun, and not in the shadow as
the swinge of Physicians is, for if the Sun draw away the Virtues of Herbs, it
must needs do the like by Hay^ by the same Rule, which the experience of every
Country Farmer will explode for a notable piece of nonsense. 5. Such as are
Artists in Astrology (and indeed none else are fit to make Physicians) such I
advi^e, let the Planet that governs the Herb be Angular, and ^he stronger the
better, if they can in Herbs of Saturn, let Saturn be in the Ascendent, in the
Herbs of Mars, let Mars be in the Mid-heaven, for in those Houses they delight,
let the Moon apply to them by good A^pect^ and let her not be in the Houses of
their Enemies: If you cannot well stay till she apply to them, let her apply to
a Planet of the same Triplicity, if you cannot wait that time neither, let her
be with a fixed Star of their Nature. 6. Having well dried them put them up in
brown Papers, sewing the Paper up like a Sack, and press them not too hard
together, and keep them in a dry place near the fire. 7. As for the duration of
dried Herbs, a just time cannot ^e given, let Authors p^ate their pleasures:
For, First, Such as grow upon dry grounds will keep better than such as grow on
moist.

Secondly, Such Herbs as are full of Juice will not keep so long as such as are
dryer.

Thirdly, Such Herbs as are well dried will keep longer than such as are ill
dried.

Yet this I say, by this you may know when they are corrupted, viz. By their
loss of color, or smell, or both, and it they be corrupted, reason will tell
you that they must needs corrupt the Bodies of those people that take them.

8. Gather all Leaves in the hour of that Planet that governs them.
Chap. 2. Of Flowers.
1. THe Flower which is the beauty of the Plant, and of none of the least use
in Physic, grows yearly, and is to be gathered when it is in its prime. 2.
As for the time of gathering them, let the Planetary hour, and the Planet that
rules the Plant they come of, be observed, as we showed you in the foregoing
Chapter; as for the time of the day let it be when the Sun shines upon them
that so they may be dry, for if you gather either Herbs or Flowers when they
are wet or dewy, they will not keep, and this I forgot before. 3. Dry them well
in the Sun, and keep them in Papers near the fire, as I showed you in the
foregoing Chapter. 4. So long as they retain their color and smell they are
good, either of them being gone so is the Virtue also.
Chap. 3. Of Seeds.
1. THe Seed is that part of the Plant which is endewed with a vital faculty
to bring forth its like, and it contains potentially the whole Plant in it. 2.
As for place let them be gathered from the plants where they delight to grow.
3. Let them be full ripe when they are gathered, and forget not the Celestial
Harmony before mentioned, for I have found by experience that their Virtues are
twice as great at such times than at others: There is an appointed time for
every thing under the Sun. 4. When you have gathered them dry them a little,
and but a little in the Sun before you lay them up. 5. You need not be so
careful of keeping them so near the fire as the other before mentioned, because
they are fuller of Spirit, and therefore not so subject to corrupt. 6. As for
the time of their duration it is palpable they will keep good many years, yet
this I say, they are best the first year, and this I make appear by a good
argument, They will grow soonest the first year they be set, therefore then are
they in their prime, and it is an easy matter to renew them yearly.
Chap. 4. Of Roots.
1. OF Roots choose such as are neither rotten nor wormeaten, but proper in
their rast, color, and smell, such as exceed neither in softness nor hardness.
2. Give me leave to be a little critical against the Vulgar received Opinion,
which is, That the Sap falls down into the Root in Autumn, and rises again in
Spring, as men go to Bed at night and rise in the morning; and this idle tale
of untruth is so grounded in the Heads not only of the Vulgar but also of the
Learned, that a man cannot drive it out by Reason: I pray let such Sap-mongers
answer me to this Argument, If the Sap fall into the Root in the fall of the
Leaf, and lie there all the Winter, then must the Root grow only in the Winter,
as experience witnesses, but the Root grows not at all in the Winter, as the
sa^c experience teaches, but only in the Summer. Ergo, If you set an Apple
Kernel in the Spring, you shall find the Root to grow to a pretty bigness in
that Summer, and be not a whit bigger next Spring: What does the Sap do in the
Root all that while? pick straws? For God's sake build not your faith upon
Tradition, it is as rotten as a rotten Post.

The truth is, when the Sun declines from the Tropic of Cancer, the Sap begins
to congeal both in Root and Branch, when he touches the Tropic of Capricorn
and ascends to us ward, it begins to wax thin again, and by degrees as it
congealed: But to proceed:

3. The dryer time you gather your Roots in the better they are^ for they have
the less excrementitious moisture in then. 4. Such Roots as are soft, your best
way is to dry in the Sun, or else hang them up in the Chimney corner upon a
string; as for such as are hard you may dry them any where. 5. Such Roots as
are great will keep longer than such as are small, yet most of them will keep a
year. 6. Such Roots as are soft it is your best way to keep them always near
the fire, and take this general Rule, If in Winter time you find any of your
Roots, Herbs or Flowers begin to grow moist, as many times you shall,
especially in the Winter time (for it is your best way to look to them once a
month) dry them by a very gentle fire, or if you can with convenience keep them
near the fire, you may save your self the labor. 7. It is in vain to dry such
Roots as may commonly be had, as Parsley, Fennel, Plantane etc. but gather them
only for present need.
Chap. 5. Of Barks.
1. BArks which Physicians use in Medif cines are these sorts, of Fruits, o
Roots, of Boughs. 2. The Barks of Fruits is to be taken when the Fruit is full
ripe, as Orrenges, Lemmons. etc. but because I have nothing to do with Exoticks
here, I shall pass them without any more words. 3. The Barks of Trees are best
gathered in the Spring, if it be of great Trees, as Oaks or the like, because
then they come easiest off, and so you may dry them if you please, but indeed
your best way is to gather all Barks only for present use. 4. As for the Bark
of Roots, it is this, and thus to be gotten, Take the Roots of such Herbs as
have a pith in them, as Parsley, Fennel, etc. slit them in the middle, and when
you have taken out the pith (which you may easily and quickly do) that which
remains is called (though something improperly) the Bark and indeed is only to
be used.
Chap. 6. Of Juyces.
1. Juyces are to be pressed out of Herbs when they are young and tender, and
also out of some Stalks, and tender tops of Herbs and Plants, and also out of
some Flowers. 2. Having gathered your Herb you would preserve the Juice of,
when it is very dry (for otherwise your Juice will not be worth a Button)
bruise it very well in a stone Mortar with a wooden Pestle, then having put it
into a Canvas Bag (the Herb I mean, not the Mortar for that will yield but
little Juice) press it hard in a press, then take the Juice and clarify it. 3.
The manner of clarifying of it is this, put it into a Pipkin or Skillet, or
some such thing and set it over the fire, and when the Scum rises, take it
off, let it stand over the fire till no more Scum rise, then have you your
Juice clarified, cast away the Scum as a thing of no use. 4. When you have thus
clarified it, you have two ways to preserve it all the year.
First, When it is cold put it into a Glass, and put so much Oil on it as will
cover it the thickness of two fingers, the Oil will swim at top, and so keep
the Air from coming to it to purrifie it; when you in^end to use it, do no more
but so, power out into a Porrenger, a little more than you intend to use, and if
any Oil come out with it (as if the Glass be not full it is a hundred to one it
there do) you may easily scum it off with a Spoon, and put the Juice you use
not, into the Glass again it will quickly sink under the Oil: This is the first
way.

Secondly, The second way is a little more difficult, and the Juice of Fruits
is usually preserved this way, when you have clarified the Juice as before,
boil it over the fire, till (being cold) it be of the thickness of Honey, this
is most commonly used for Diseases of the mouth, and is called R^b and Sapa.

And thus much for the first Section, the Second follows.

SECT. 2. The way of making and keeping all Necessary Compounds.
Chap. 1. Of Distilled Waters.
HItherto we have spoken of Medicines which consist in their own Nature, which
Authors vulgarly call Simples, though something improperly, for indeed and in
truth, nothing is Simple but the pure Elements; all things else are compounded
of them: We come now to treat of the Artificial Medicines, in the front of
which (because we must begin somewhere) we place distilled Waters; In which
consider, 1. Waters are distilled out of Herbs, Flowers, Fruits, and Roots. 2.
We treat not here of strong Waters but of cold, as being to act Galen's Part
and not Paracelsus. 3. The Herbs ought to be distilled when they are in their
greatest vigor, and so ought the Flowers also. 4. The vulgar way of
Distillation which people use, because they know no better, is in a Peuter
Still, and although Distilled Waters are the weakest of all Artificial
Medicines, and good for little unless for mixtures of other Medicines, yet this
way distilled they are weaker by many degrees than they would be, were they
distilled in Sand: If I thought it not impossible to teach you the way of
distilling in Sand by writing, I would attempt it. 5. When you have distilled
your Water put it into a Glass, and having bound the top of it over with a
Paper pricked full of holes, that so the excrementitious and fiery vapors may
exhale (which indeed are they that cause that settling in distilled Waters
called the Mother, which corrupts the Waters and might this way be prevented)
cover it close and keep it for your use. 6. Stopping distilled Waters with a
Cork makes them musty, and so will a Paper also if it do but touch the Water,
your best way then is to stop them with a Bladder, being first wet in Water,
and bound over the top of the Glass.


Such cold Waters as are distilled in a Peuter Still (if well kept) will endure
a year, such as are distilled in Sand, as they are twice as strong, so will
they endure twice as long.

Chap. 2. Of Syrups.
1. A Syrup is a Medicine of a Liquid form, composed of Infusion, Decoction and
Juice; and 1. for the more grateful taste, 2. for the better keeping of it, with
a certain quantity of Honey or Sugar, hereafter mentioned boiled to the
thickness of new Honey. 2. You see at the first view then that this Aphorism
devides it self into three Branches, which deserve severally to be treated of,
viz. 1. Syrups made by Infusion. 2. Syrups made by Decoction. 3. Syrups made by
Juice.
Of each of these (for your Instruction sake kind Country men and women) I
speak a word, or two or three apart.

First, Syrups made by Infusion are usually made of Flowers, and of such
Flowers, as soon lose both color and strength by boiling, as Roses, Violets,
PeachFlowers. etc. my Translation of the London Dispensatory will instruct you
in the rest: They are thus made, having picked your Flowers clean, to every
pound of them ad three pound (of three pints, which you will for it is all one)
of Spring Water made boiling hot by the fire, first put your Flowers in a
Peuter Pot with a cover, then power the Water to them, then shutting the Pot,
let it stand by the fire to keep hot twelve hours, then strain it out (in such
Syrups as p^^ge, as Da^ask Roses, Peach-Flowers, etc. the usual and indeed the
best way is to repeat this Infusion, adding fresh Flowers to the same Liquor
diverse rimes that so it may be the stronger) having strained it out, put the
Infusion into a Peuter Basin, or an Eartlien one well glassed, and to every
pint of it, ad two pound of fine Sugar, which being only melted over the fire
without boiling, and scummed, will produce you the Syrup you desire.

Secondly, Syrups made by Decoction are usually used of Compounds, yet may any
Simple Herb be thus converted into Syrup; Take the Herb, Root, or Flower you
would make into Syrup and bruise it a little, then boil it in a convenient
quantity of Spring Water, the more water you boil it in the weaker will it be,
a handful of the Herb, Root, etc. is a convenient quantity for a pint of Water;
boil it till half the water be consumed, then let it stand till it be almost
cold, and strain it (being almost cold) through a woollen cloth, letting it run
out at leisure without pressing, to every pint of this Decoction ad one pound
of Sugar and boil it over the fire till it come to a Syrup, which you may know
if you now and then cool a little of it in a spoon, scum it all the while it
boyls, and when it is sufficiently boiled, whilst it is hot strain it again
through a woollen cloth, but press it not; thus have you the Syrup perfected.

Thirdly, Syrups made of Juyces are usually made of such Herbs as are full of
Juice, and indeed they are better made into a Syrup this way than any other;
the Operation is thus, having beaten the Herb in a stone Mortar with a wooden
Pestle, press out the Juice and clarify it as you were taught before in the
Juyces, then let the Juice boil away till a quarter of it (or near upon) be
consumed, to a pint of this ad a pound of Sugar, and boil it to a Syrup,
always scumming it, and when it is boiled enough, strain it through and
woollen cloth as we taught you before, and keep it for your use.

3. If you make Syrups of Roots that are any thing hard, as Parsley, Fennel,
and grass Roots etc. when you have bruised them, lay them in steep some time in
that Water which you intend to boil them in, hot, so will the Virtue the better
come out. 4. Keep your Syrups either in Glasses or stone Pots, and stop them
not with Cork, nor Bladder, unless you would have the Glass break and the Syrup
lost, ^ and as many Opinions as there are in this Nation, I suppose there are
but few or none of this, only bind a Paper about the Mouth. 5. All Syrups if
well made will continue a year, with some advantage yet of all, such as are
made by Infusion keep the least while.
Chap. 3. Of Juleps.
1. Juleps were first invented as I suppose in Arabia, and my reason is because
that word Juleb is an Arabic word. 2.It signifies only a pleasant Potion, and
was vulgarly used (by such as were sick and wanted help, or such as were in
health, and wanted no money) to quench thirst. 3. Now a days it is commonly
used, 1. To prepare the Body for Pi^gation. 2. To open Obstructions and the
Pores. 3. To digest tough Humors. 4. To qualify hot distempers etc.
4. It is thus made (I mean Simple Juleps for I have nothing to say to
Compounds here; all Compounds have as many several Idea's as men have crotchets
in their Brain) I say Simple Juleps are thus made: Take a pint of such
distilled Water as conduces to the cure of your distemper, which this Treatise
will plentifully furnish you withal, to which add two ounces of Syrup conducing
to the same effect (I shall give you Rules for it in the last Chapter) mix them
together and drink a draught of it at your pleasure; If you love tart things ad
ten drops of Oil of Vitriol to your pint and shake it together, and it will
have a fine grateful taste. 5. All Juleps are made for present use, and
therefore it is in vain to speak of their duration.
Chap. 4. Of Decoctions.
1. ALL the difference between Decoctions and Syrups made by Decoction is this,
Syrups are made to keep, Decoctions only for present use, for you can hardly
keep a Decoction a week at any time, if the weather be hot, not half so long.
2. Decoctions are made of Leaves, Roots, Flowers, Seeds, Fruits, or Barks,
conducing to the cure of the Disease you make them for; in the same manner are
they made as we showed you in Syrups. 3. Decoctions made with Wine last longer
than such as are made with Water, and if you take your Decoction to cleanse the
passages of Urine, or open Obstructions, your best way is to make it with white
Wine instead of Water, because that is most penetrating. 4. Decoctions are of
most use in such Diseases as lie in the Passages of the Body, as the Stomach,
Bowels, Kidneys, Passages of Urine, and Bladder, because Decoctions pass
quicker to those places than any other form of Medicines. 5. If you will
sweeten your Decoction with Sugar, or any Syrup fit for the occasion you take
it for which is better, you may and no harm done. 6. If in a Decoction you boil
both Roots, Herbs, Flowers, and Seeds together, let the Roots boil a good while
first, because they retain their Virtue longest, then the next in order by the
same Rule; viz. 1. The Barks, 2. the Herbs, 3. the Seeds, 4. the Flowers, 5.
the Spices if you put any in, because their virtue comes soonest our. 7. Such
things as by boiling cause sliminess to a Decoction, as Figs, Quince Seeds,
Linseed etc. your best way is, after you have bruised them, to tie them up in a
linen rag, as you tie up a Calves Brains, and so boil them. 8. Keep all
Decoctions in a Glass close stopped, and in the cooler place you keep them, the
longer will they last ere they be sour.
Lastly, The usual Dose to be given at one time, is usually two, three, four,
or five ounces, according to the age and strength of the Patient, the season of
the year, the strength of the Medicine, and the quality of the Discase.

Chap. 5. Of Oils.
1. OIL Olive, which is commonly known by the name of Sallet Oil, I suppose
because it is usually eaten with Sallets by them that love it; If it be pressed
out of ripe Olives, according to Galen is temperate, and exceeds in no one
quality. 2. Of Oils, some are Simple, and some are Compound. 3. Simple Oils are
such as are made of Fruits or Seeds, by expression, as Oil of sweet and bitter
Almonds, Linseed, and Rapeseed Oil etc. of which see my Dispensatory. 4.
Compound Oils are made of Oil of Olives and other Simples, imagine Herbs,
Flowers, Roots, etc. 5. The way of making them is this, Having bruised the
Herbs or Flowers you would make your Oil of, put them in an Earthen pot, and to
two or three handfuls of them, power a pint of Oil, cover the pot with a paper,
and set it in the Sun, about a Fortnight or less according as the Sun is in
hotness; then having warmed it very well by the fire, press out the Herbs etc.
very hard in a press, and ad as many more Herbs to the same Oil, bruised (the
Herbs I mean not the Oil) in like manner, set them in the Sun as before, the
ostner you repeat this the stronger will your Oil be; at last when you conceive
it strong enough, boil both Herbs and Oil together till the Juice be consumed
which you may know by its leaving its bubling, and the Herbs will be crisp,
then strain it, whilst it is hot, and keep it in a stone or Glass Vessel for
your use. 6. As for Chemical Oils, I have nothing to say in this Treatise. 7.
The General use of these Oils is for pain in the Limbs, roughness of the Skin,
the Itch etc. as also for Ointments and Plasters. 8. If you have occasion to
use it for Wounds or Ulcers, in two ounces of Oil, dissolve half an ounce of
Turpentine, the heat of the fire will quickly do it, for Oil it self is
offensive to Wounds, and the Turpentine qualifies it.
Chap. 6. Of Electuaries.
Physicians make more a quoil than needs behalf about Electuaries: I shall
prescribe but one general way of making them up, as for the Ingredients you may
vary them as you please, and according as you find occasion by the last
Chapter. 1. That you may make Electuaries when you need them, it is requisite
that you keep always Herbs, Roots, Seeds, Flowers etc. ready dried in your
House, that so you may be in readiness to beat them into powder when you need
them. 2. Your better way is to keep them whole than beaten, for being beaten
they are the more subject to lose their strength, because the Air soon
penetrates them. 3. If they be not dry enough to beat into powder when you need
them, dry them by a gentle fire till they are so. 4. Having beaten them, sift
them through a fine Tiffany Searce, that so there may be no great picces found
in your Electuary. 5. To on ounce of your Powder, ad three ounces of clarified
Honey, this quantity I hold to be sufficient; I confess Authors differ about
it: If you would make more or less Electuary, vary your proportions
accordingly. 6. Mix them well together in a Mortar, and take this for a truth,
you cannot mix them too much. 7. The way to clarify Honey is to set it over
the fire in a convenient vessel till the scum arise, and when the scum is taken
off it is clarified. 8. The usual Dose of Cordial Electuaries is from half a
dram to two drams, of purging Electuaries from half an ounce to an ounce. 9.
The manner of keeping them is in a pot. 10. The time of taking them, is either
in the morning fasting, and fasting an hour after them, or at night going to
bed three or four hours after supper.


Chap. 7. Of Conserves.
1. THe way of making Conserves is twofold one of Herbs and Flowers, and the
other of Fruits. 2. Conserves of Herbs and Flowers are thus made, If you make
your Conserves of Herbs, as of Scurvy Grass, Wormwood, Rue, or the like, take
only the Leaves and tender tops (for you may beat your heart out before you can
beat the Stalks small) and having beaten them, weigh them, and to ^^ pound of
them ad three pound of Sugar, beat them very well together in a Mortar, you
cannot beat them too much. 3. Conserves of Fruits, as of Barberries, Sloes, and
the like is thus made; First scald the Fruit, then rub the pulp through a thick
hair Sieve made for the purpose, called a pulping Sieve, you may do it for a
need with the back of a Spoon, then take this Pulp thus drawn, and ad to it its
weight of Sugar and no more, put it in a Peuter Vessel, and over a Charcoal
fire stir it up and down till the Sugar be melted, and your Conserve is made.
4. Thus have you the way of making Conserves, the way of keeping of them is in
Earthen pots. 5. The Dose is usually the quantity of a Nutmeg at a time morning
and evening, or (unless they be purging) when you please. 6. Of Conserves, some
keep many years, as Conserves of Roses, others but a year, as Conserves of
Borrage, Bugloss, Cowslips and the like. 7. Have a care of the working of some
Conserves presently after they are made, look to them once a day and stir them
about; Conserves of Borrage, Bugloss, and Wormwood have gotten an excellent
faculty at that sport. 8. You may know when your Conserves are almost spoiled
by this, you shall find a hard crust at top with little holes in it as though
Worms had been eating there.
Chap. 8. Of Preserves.
OF Preserves are sundry sorts, and the Operations of all being something
different we will handle them all apart.

There are preserved with Sugar; 1. Flowers. 2. Fruits. 3. Roots 4. Barks.


1. Flowers are but very seldom preserved, I never saw any that I remember save
only Cowslip Flowers, and that was a great fashion in Sussex when I was a boy;
It is thus done, first, take a flat Glass, we call them jarr Glasses, strew in
a lain of fine Sugar, on that a lain of Flowers, on that another lain of Sugar,
on that another lain of Flowers, do so til your Glass be full, then tie it over
with a paper, and in a little time you shall have very excellent and pleasant
Preserves. There is another way of Preserving Flowers, namely with Vinegar and
Salt, as they pickle Capers and Broom Buds, but because I have little skill in
it my self I cannot teach you.

2. Fruits, as Quinces and the like are preserved two ways, First, Boil them
well in Water, and then pulp them through a Sieve as we showed you before, then
with the like quantity of Sugar boil the Water they were boiled in to a Syrup,
viz. a pound of Sugar to a pint of Liquor, to every pound of this Syrup ad four
ounces of the Pulp, then boil it with a very gentle fire to the right
consilience, which you may easily know if you di^p a dr^p of it upon a
Trencher, if it be enough it will not stick to your fingers when it is cold.

Secondly, Another way to preserve Fruits is this, First pare off the ^ind,
then out them in halves and take cut the Core, then boil them in Water till
they are soft, It you know when Beef is boiled enough you may easily know when
they are; the^^ boil the Water with its like weight of Sugar into a Syrup, put
the Syrup into a Pot, and put the boiled Fruit as whole as you left it when you
cut it into it, and let it so remain till you have occasion to use it.

3. Roots are thus preserved, First, scrape them very clean, and cleanse them
from the Pith if they have any, for some Roots have not, as Eringo and the
like, boil them in Water till they be soft as we s^ew you before in the Fruits,
then boil the Water you boiled the Roots into a Syrup as we showed you before,
then keep the Roots whole in the Syrup till you use them. 4. As for Barks we
have but few come to our hands to be done, and those of those few that I can
remember, are Orrenges, Lemmons, Citrons, and the outer Bark of Walnuts which
grows without the Shell, for the Shells themselves would make but scurvy
Preserves, there be they I can remember, if there be any more put them into the
number. Th^^ of Preserving these is nor all one is Authors, for some are
bitter, some are not, such as are bitter, say Authors, must be soaked in warm
Water, often times changed till their bitter taste be fled, but I like not this
way, and my reason is, because I doubt when their bitterness is gone, so is
their Virtue also; I shall then prescribe one common way, namely the same with
the former, viz. First boil them whole till they be soft, then make a Syrup with
Sugar and the Liquor you boiled them in, and keep the Barks in the Syrup.

5. They are kept in Glasses or glassed Pots. 6. The preserved Flowers will
keep a year if you can forbear eating of them, the Roots and Bark much longer.
7. This Art was plainly and cl^erly as first invented for delicacy, yet came
afterward to be of excellent use in Physiak; For, 1. First, Hereby Medicines
are made pleasant for sick and queazy Stomi^^s, which else would ^^ them. 2.
Hereby they are preserved from dccaying a long time.

Chap. 9. Of Lohochs.
1. THat which the Arabians call Lohoch, and the Greeks Eclegma, the Latins
call Linctus, and in plain English, signifies nothing else but a thing to be
licked up. 2. Their first invention was to prevent and remedy afflictions of
the Breast and Lungs, to cleanse the Lungs of Phlegm, and make it fit to be cast
out. 3. They are in Body thicker than a Syrup, and not so thick as an
Electuary. 4. The manner of taking them is often to take a little with a
Liquoris stick, and let it go down at leisure. 5. They are easily thus made,
make a Decoction of any pectoral Herbs, the Treatise will furnish you with
enough, and when you have strained it, with twice its weight of Honey or Sugar,
boil it to a Lohoch; If you are molested with tough Phlegm, Honey is better than
Sugar, and if you ad a little Vinegar to it you will do well, if not, I hold
Sugar to be better than Honey. 6. It is kept in Pots and will a year and
longer. 7. Its use is excellent for roughness of the Windpipe, Inflammations of
the Lungs, Ulcers in the Lungs, difficulty of Breath, Asthmaes, Coughs and
distillation of Humors.
Chap. 10. Of Ointments.
1. VArious are the ways of making Ointments which Authors have left to
posterity, which I shall omit and quote one which is easiest to be made, and
therefore most beneficial to people that are ignorant in Physic, for whose
sakes I write this; It is thus done, Bruise those Herbs, Flowers, or Roots you
would make an Ointment of, and to two handfuls of your bruised Herbs ad a pound
of Hogs Grease tried, or cleansed from the skins, beat them very well together
in a stone Mortar with a wooden Pestle, then put it in a stone Pot (the Herbs
and Grease I mean, not the Mortar) cover it with a paper, and set it either in
the Sun or some other warm place three, four, or fivs days, that it may melt,
then take it out and boil it a little, then whilst it is hot, strain it out,
pressing it out very hard in a Press, to this Grease ad as many more Herbs
bruised as before, let them stand in like manner as long, then boil them as you
did the former, if you think your Ointment be not strong enough you may do it
the third and fourth time; yet this I tell you, the fuller of Juice your Herbs
are, the sooner will your Ointment be strong, the last time you boil it, boil
it so long till your Herbs be crisp and the Juice consumed, then strain it,
pressing it hard in a press, and to every pound of Ointment, ad two ounces of
Turpentine, and as much Wax, because Grease is offensive to Wounds as well as
Oil,

2. Ointments are vulgarly known to be kept in Pots, and will last above a
year, above two year.
Chap. 11. Of Plasters.
1. THe Greeks made their Plasters of diverse Simples and put Metals in most
of them if not in all, for having reduced their Metals into Powder they mixed
them with that fatty substance, whereof the rest of the Plaster consisted,
whilst it was yet hot, continually stirring it up and down lest it should sink
to the bottom, so they continually stirred it till it was stiff, then they made
it up in rolls, which when they need for use they could melt by the fire again.
2. The Arabians made up theirs with Meals, Oil, and Fat, which needed not so
long boiling. 3. The Greeks Emplasters consisted of these Ingredients, Metals,
Stones, diverse sorts of Earths, Feces, Juyces, Liquoris, Seeds, Roots, Herbs,
Excrements of Creatures, Wax, Rozin, Gums.
Chap. 12. Of Pultisses.
1. PUltisses are those kind of things which the Latins call Cataplasmata, and
our learned Fellows that if they can read English that's all, call them
Cataplasms, because it is a ^rabbed word few understand; it is indeed a very
fine kind of Medicine to ripen Sores, 2. They are made of Herbs and Roots
fitted to the Disease and Member afflicted, being chopped small and boiled in
Water almost to a Jelly, then by adding a little Barley Meal or Meal of
Lupines, and a little Oil or rough Sheep Suer, which I hold to be better,
spread upon a cloth and applied to the grieved place. 3. Their use is to case
pains, to break Sores, to cool Inflammations, to dissolve hardness, to ease the
Spleen, to concoct Humors, to dissipate Swellings. 4. I beseech you take this
Caution along with you, Use no Pultisses (if ^^an help it) that are of a
heating Nature ^^re you have first cleansed the Body, be^^ey are subject to draw
the Humors to them from every part of the Body.
Chap. 13. Of Troches.
1. THe Latins call them Placentulae, or little Cakes (and you might have seen
what the Greeks call them too, had not the last Edition of my London
Dispensatory been so hellishly printed, that is all the Commonwealth gets by one
Stationer's printing another Coppies, viz. To plague the Country with false
Prints, and disgrace the Author) the Greeks (...), (...), and (...) they are
usually little round flat Cakes, or you may make them square it you will. 2.
Their first invention was, that Pouders being so kept might resist the
intromission of Air and so endure pure the longer. 3. Besides, they are the
easier carried in the Pockets of such as travel; many a man (for example) is
forced to travel whose Stomach is too cold, or at least not so hot as it should
be, which is most proper, for the Stomach is never cold till a man be dead; in
such a case it is better to carry Troches of Wormwood or of Galanga, in a Paper
in his Pocker and more convenient behalf than to lug a Gally-pot along with
him. 4. They are thus made, At night when you go to bed, take two drams of fine
Gum Tragacanth, put it into a Gally-pot, and put half a quarter of a pint of
any distilled Water fitting the purpose you would make your Troches for, to it,
cover it, and the next morning you shall find it in such a Jelly as Physicians
call Mussilage, with this you may (with a little pains taking) make any Powder
into Past, and that Past into little Cakes called Troches. 5. Having made them,
dry them well in the shadow and keep them in a Pot for your use.
Chap. 14. Of Pills.
1. THey are called Pilule because they resemble little Balls, the Greeks call
them Catapotia. 2. It is the Opinion of Modern Physicians that this way of
making up Medicines was invented only to deceive the Pallat, that so by
swallowing them down whole, the bitterness o^ the Medicine might not be
perceived or a^ least it might not be unsufferable, and indeed most of ^^ills
though not all are very bitter. 3. I am of a clean contrary Opinion to this, I
rather think they were done up in this hard form that so they might be the
longer in digesting, and my Opinion is grounded upon Reason too, not upon Fancy
nor Hearsay; The first invention of Pills was to purge the Head, now as I told
you before, such Infirmities as lay near the passages, were best removed by
Decoctions, because they pass to the grieved part soonest, so here, if the
insirmity lie in the Head or any other remote part, the best way is to use
Pills, because they are longer in digestion, and therefore the better able to
call the offending Humor to them. 4. If I should tell you here a long Tale of
Medicines working by Sympathy and Antipathy, you would not understand a word of
it, they that are fit to make Physicians may find it in the Treatise: All
Modern Physicians know not what belonged to a Sympatherical Cure, no more than
a Cookoo knows what belongs to Flats and Sharps in Music, but follow the
vulgar road, and call it a hidden quality because it is hid from the Eyes of
Dunces, and indeed none but Astrologers can give a reason of it, and Physic
without Reason is like a Pudding without Fat. 5. The way to make Pills is very
easy, for with the help of a Pestle and Mortar and a little diligence, you may
make any Powder into Pills, either with Syrup or the Jelly I told you of
before.
Chap. ult.
The way of mixing Medicines according to the Cause of the Disease and part of
the Body afflicted.
THis being indeed the Key of the Work, I shall be something the more dilligent
in it: I shall deliver my self thus; 1. To the Vulgar. 2. To Such as study
Astrology, or such as study Physic Astrologically.


First to the Vulgar: Kind souls I am sorry it has been your hard mishap to
have been so long trained in such Egyptian darkness, even darkness which to
your sorrows may be felt; the vulgar road of Physic is not my practice, and I
am therefore the more unfit to give you advice; and I have now published a
little Book which will fully instruct you not only ^^ the knowledge of your own
Bodies but ^^ fit Medicines to remedy each part of it when afflicted, mean
season take these few Rules to stay your Stomachs. Galen's Art of Physic.


1. With the Disease regard the Cause and part of the Body afflicted, for
example, suppose a Woman be subject to miscarry through wind, thus do, 1. Look
[ Abortion] in the Table of Diseases, and you shall be directed by that how
many Herbs prevent miscarriage. 2. Look [ Wind] in the same Table, and you
shall see how many of those Herbs expel wind.
These are the Herbs Medicinal for your Grief.

2. In all Diseases strengthen the part of the Body afflicted. 3. In mixed
Diseases there lies some difficulty, for sometimes two parts of the Body are
afflicted with contrary Humors the one to the other, sometimes one part is
afflicted with two contrary Humors, as sometimes the Liver is afflicted with
Choler and Water, as when a man has both a Dropsy and the yellow Jaundice,
and this is usually mortal.
In the former, suppose the Brain be too cold and moist, and the Liver too hot
and dry, thus do, 1. Keep your Head outwardly warm. 2. Accustom your self to
smell of hot Herbs. 3. Take a Pill that beats the Head at night going to bed.
4. In the morning take a Decoction that cools the Liver, for that quickly
passes the Stomach, and is at the Liver immediately.


You must not think (Courteous People) that I can spend time to give you
examples of all Diseases, these are enough to let you see so much light as you
without Art are able to receive, If I should set you to look upon the Sun I
should dazzle your eyes and make you blind.

Secondly, To such as study Astrology (who are the only men I know that are fit
to study Physic, Physic without Astrology, being like a Lamp without Oil) you
are men I exceedingly respect, and such Documents as my Brain can give you at
present (being absent from my study) I shall give you, and an example to show
the proof of them.

1. Fortify the Body with Herbs of the Nature of the lord of the Ascendent,
it is no matter whether he be a Fortune or an Infortune in this case. 2. Let
your Medicine be something Antipathetical to the lord of the sixth. 3. Let your
Medicine be something of the Nature of the Sign ascending. 4. If the lord of the
Tenth be strong, make use of his Medicines. 5. If this cannot well be, make use
of the Medicines of the light of time. 6. Be sure always fortify the grieved
part of the body by Sympathetical Remedies. 7. Regard the Heart, keep that upon
the Wheels because the Sun is the Fountain of Life, and therefore those
Universal Remedies Aurum potabile, and the Philosophers Stone, cure all
Diseases by only fortifying the Heart.
But that this may appear unto you as clear as the Sun when he is upon the
Meridian, I here quote you an Example, which I performed when I was as far off
from my study as I am now, yet am I not ashamed the world should see how much
or little of my Lesson I have learned without Book.

On July, 25. 1651. there came a Letter to me out of Bedfordshire, from a
Gentleman (at that time) altogether to me unknown, though since well known, who
was a Student both in Astrology and Physic: The words which are these; Mr.
Culpeper,
My Love remembered unto you, although I know you not by face; yet because I do
much respect that pretty little Lark, you so lately let fly into the world,
which you call Semeiotica Uranica, which I have lately taken into my cage; I am
therefore imboldned to write unto you in the behalf of a Neighbors wife, who is
taken with a very violent Disease which began in the lowr parts of her Body,
but is now ascended upwards, and tormenteth her in her Breast, Throat, Tongue,
and Lips: This Disease took possession of her (as she relates to me) about a
fortnight before Michaelmas last, but the certain day and hour she is not able
to nominate; she sent for me, and enquired whether she were not under an ill
Tongue or not, or of what nature the Disease was: I have sent you the enclosed
Scheam, I could find but one testimony of Fascination or Witchcraft, which was
one Sign possessing the Cusps of the Twelfth and First Houses, which to me
holds forth no more than a strong suspicion of it by the Querent; However I am
confident there is a Natural Diseas which hurts much, because the Lord of the
Sixth, which usually gives signification of Natural Diseases, is now placed in
the Ascendent; but at present I forbear to make any large discourse of mine own
Opinions, being desirous that you would endeavor your Skill in this Cure, for
there is not a Doctor of them all far or near that have been so skilful to find
out the Diseas, much less to effect the Cure. Sr. I expect your Answer; mean
time bid you farewell, and remain yours in Affection, etc.


The enclosed Scheam,


My Answer to the Letter, was to this effect.

Sir,
I received yours, July 25. wherein I find your enclosed Scheam, and (I
suppose) the nature of the Disease, and have sent you such an Answer as I
could, being far from my Study, which I entreat you to take in good part, being
Festinaxi calamo Conscripta. As for the ignorance of your Country Doctors, they
wanting the true Judgment of Astrology, is to me no ways admirable; I perceive
you to be a young man by the time of your Genesis, which you also sent me,
beware whom you trust with that, he that knows your Nativity knows when ill
Directions operate, and if he be an Enemy, knows when to do you a mischief; If
Cecil had not had Essex his Nativity, he had never gotten his Head off, but to
instruct you being a young Student, I shall give you my Judgment Methodically.

Diacritica.
You say you can find no Arguments of Witchcraft, but only one Sign possessing
the Cusps of both Twelth and Ascendent, but if you had regarded the Propinquity
of Venus to Saturn you would have made another of that, yet do not I think she
is bewitched, because of other more prevalent restimonies; the Moon passing
from the beams of Mars to the beams of Venus may seem to give some suspicion of
Honesty, and the Disease to come that way, which is increased by Mars his being
in the Ascendent in Scorpio, and the Dragons Tail upon the Cusp, yet I can
hardly believe this, for Cauda in a humane Sign usually gives Slanders and not
Tales of Truth, it is a hundred to one if she suffer not in point of good name
by the vulgar [this was too true] Besides, the neerness of Venus to Saturn may
well show trouble of mind, and it being in the ninth House, pray enquire
whether she have not been troubled about some tenants in Religion [the trouble
of mind was true, but it was about a stranger, which the ninth House also
signifies.]

Diagnostica.
Venus, Lady of the Twelfth, and Ascendent, and Eigth, shows her always to be
her own foe in respect of Health; and truly I believe the original of the
Disease was a Surfeit either by eating moist Fruits, or else by catching wet in
traveling; Venus with Saturn who is in square to the Ascendent troubles her
Breast with tough Phlegm and Melancholy: Besides, there being a most forcible
reception between the Moon and Venus from fruitful Signs, I question whether
she be not with Child or not, the Moon being in the fifth House, Mars is lord
of the Disease, really in the Scorpion, and accidentally in the Ascendent,
together with Aries on the sixth, show the Disease keep his Court in the Womb,
and accidentally afflicts the Head from thence, so that heat of the Womb must
needs be cause of the present distemper, and Mars in a moist Sign in the first
near the second may well denote heat, and breaking out about her Face and
Throat.

Prognostica.
Whether she be curable or not, or how or when the Disease will end is our next
Point; Truly I can see no danger of death the Moon being strong in her hain,
and applying by Trine with a strong reception to the Lady of the Ascendent; yet
this is certain, Mars strong in a fixed Sign will maintain the Disease stoutly,
her hopes will be but small when Venus comes to the Body of Saturn. viz. August
2. for she will be overpressed with Melancholy, the time I suppose of her Cure
may be (if good courses be taken) when Mars leaves the Sign he is in, and comes
to the place where the Body of Jupiter is, or at least then it may turn to
another Disease more propitious; the Sun strong in the Tenth shows she may be
cured by Medicine, and he being exalted in the seventh, and caput there, I do
not know but you are as likely a man to do it as any.

Indicationes Curativae.
It is confessed here that the Sun being exceeding strong in ^^^ ^^^^ House,
should naturally signify the curative Medicine, and as true that the evils of
Mars, viz. heat in the Womb, and a salt humor in the blood ought to be removed
before you meddle with the tough Phlegm in the Breast, but yet seeing the
Disease seems rather to participate of offending heat than any other Simple
quality, you must have a care of hot Medicines left you go about ignem oleo
extinguere, the Medicines must 1. be cool, 2. strengthening the Womb, 3.
repressing the vapors, 4. of the nature of Sol and Venus.

Therapeutice.
To this intent I first commend unto you stinking Arrach, a pattern whereof I
have sent you enclosed, you may find it upon Dunghils, especially such as are
made of Horse-dung: It is cold and moist, an Herb of Venus in the Scorpion;
Also Ros Solis an Herb of the Sun and under the Celestial Crab, may do very
well, and the better because Venus is in Cancer: It grows upon Bogs in untilled
places, and is in flower about this time, it grows very low, with roundish
green Leaves full of red hairs, and is fullest of dew when the Sun is hottest,
whence it took its name; to these you may ad Tansie, which I take to be an Herb
of Venus in Libra, and Lettice if you please which is an Herb of the Moon, Mars
having his fall in Cancer they are all harmless, you may use them according to
your own descretion: also Orpine, another Herb of the Moon is very good in this
case.

Sir, I wish you well, and if you esteem of my Lark above his deserts, I pray
trim his Feathers for him (correct the Errors by the Errata) else will he make
but unpleasing Music. Thus remain yonrs, etc.

I the rather chose this Figure to judge of, because none should have just
occasion to say of us Astrologers that we do as Physicians vulgar practice is,
when they judge of Piss; first pump what they can out of the Querent, and then
judge by his words; of which I will rehearse you one merry story, and so I will
conclude the Book.

A Woman whose Husband had bruised himself, took his Water, and away to the
Doctor trots she; the Doctor takes the Piss and shakes it about, How long has
this party been ill (says he) Sr. says the Woman, He has been ill these two
days, This is a man's water quoth the Doctor presently, this he learned by the
word HE; then looking on the water he spied blood in it, the man has had a
bruise says he, I indeed says the woman, my Husband fell down a pair of
stairs backwards, then the Doctor knew well enough that what came first to
danger must needs be his back and shoulders, said, the Bruise lay there; the
woman she admired at the Doctors skill, and told him, that if he could tell her
one thing more she would account him the ablest Physician in Europe; well, what
was that? How many Stairs her Husband fell down, this was a hard Question
indeed, able to puzle a stronger Brain than Mr. Doctor had, to pumping goes he,
and having taken the Urinal and given it a shake or two, enquires whereabout
she lived, and knowing well the place, and that the Houses thereabouts were but
low built Houses, made answer) after another view of the Urine for fashion
sake) that probably he might fall down some seven or eight stairs; ah, quoth
the woman, now I see you know nothing, my Husband fell down thirty; thirty!
quoth the Doctor, and snatching up the Urinal, is here all the water says he?
no says the woman, I spilt some in putting of it in, look you there quoth Mr.
Doctor, there were all the other stairs spilt.

Yet mistake me not, I do not deny but such whose daily experience is to judge
Waters, and usually judge a hundred in a day may know something by them: If any
thing may be known by Urine, I am sure it may be Art, put them both together,
vis unita fortior. Thus I take my leave of you; be diligent and I am yours.


AN ALPHABETICAL CATALOGUE OF THE DISEASES SPECIFIED IN THIS TREATISE: Together
with the Page where to find the Cure.
A
ABortion, 17. Adders, 9. Afterbirth, 3 5 11 20 32 34 41 43 50 53 67 86 192 195
212 234. Aconitum, 195 Agues, 2 5 6 8 10 11 15 16 22 26 27 30 34 37 47 49 50 54
55 58 62 66 73 75 77 81 88 196 199 201 209 210 215 219 220 223 224 227 232 234
235. Andicomes,7 12 20. Aposthumes, 2 11 32 49 54 58 65 71 91 231. Appetite
lost, 3 10 14 16 31 32 196 201 220 239. Arteries, 10 12 25 61. St. Anthonies
fire, 14 3 4 37 45 62 63 70 78 199 205 210 224 237. Almonds of the Ears, 17 89
Ach, 27 195 202 205 210 222 224. Adust Choler, 44. Adust Melancholy, 57.
Asthma, 67 237. Apoplexy, 72 81 83 235.
B
Baldness, 14 47 190. Barrenness, 28 72 89. Belly, 2 8 27 59 77 78 85 87 192
201 206 220 226 231. Belching, 14 24 Binding, 2 3 15 17 38 53 62 86 196 206
228. Beauty, 29 38 47 59. Breath, 12 13 14 24 26 36 48 51 66 67 76 89 189 190
199 217 221 226. Bleeding, 1 6 13 15 17 24 28 53 54 65 67 68 71 72 84 86 194
196 200 220 213 219 228 229 231. Blood, 18 21 36 39 44 45 69 205 209 212 230.
Bloody Flux, 2 10 17 34 35 37 53 54 56 59 60 61 71 92 228. Black and blew
Spots, 17 20 24 26 41 53 59 66 88 204 214 239. Bowels, 1 40 92. Bees, 216.
Black Jaundice, 22. Bladder, 8 22 25 31 38 50 52 73. Blisters 14. Breast, 1 2 3
8 10 41 55 78 88 192. Back, 34 38. Brain, 8 10 27 49 72. Burning, 3 5 7 13 14
25 28 37 42 47 68 69 78 92 192 193 194 200 231. Birth, 50 86. Bruises, 7 12 14
15 22 32 34 37 42 43 50 52 76 78 88 89. Boyls, 10 12 41 220 221. Bees, 11.
Breasts 8 12 53 61 82 89 194 200 201. Broken Bones 20 21 37 49 50 52 54 84 213.
C
Cachexia, 38 42. Cancers 2 29 36 53. Cantharides 17. Cankers 17 24 25 28 33 42
48 53 54 56 60 86 88 196 212 219 220. Childbirth 12 14 52 237. Chops 5 82 197
236. Clensing 2 13 51 56 189 194 214. Chincough 78. Chollick 2 5 9 27 28 45 47
49 50 61 62 64 65 72 87 189 190 197 210 215 235 236. Cough 2 4 12 15 16 18 19
34 36 41 48 50 53 54 58 62 63 66 67 73 75 76 86 87 88 89 91 92 189 190 191 195
199 213 214 210 212 215 232. Choler 2 3 8 10 28 30 37 41 46 50 54 57 64 69 72
77 81 82 194 196 199 210 214 215 209 223 230 233 239. Cold 4 15 27 79 89 236.
Chilblains 64. Cods 13 45 64 65 77 210 236. Congealed Blood 7. Cools 9 15 25 53
62 190 196 199 214 220 223 228. Convulsion 9 15 19 26 30 38 48 54 58 59 62 72
78 85 87 192 221. Cramp 9 19 26 27 30 38 48 54 58 59 62 72 78 85 86 87 89 192
195 209 212 221. Consumption 18 25 42 46 67. Corns 68 237. Clotted blood 33 43
209. Costiveness 33. Corrosion 53. Curdled Milk 92.
D
Dandriff 14 43 78. Dead child 21 53 79 192 195 212 235. Deformity 50 52 193.
Deafness 2 64 216 217 221 235. Diabets 17 230. Digests 33. Dissolves 33. Disury
8 9 12 13 15 21 22 24 25 26 28 31 32 37 39 41 42 45 47 49 50 52 53 55 57 58 59
61 62 66 67 70 75 76 89 90 92 201 226 231. Dislocations 21. Dogs 66. Dropsy 3
8 9 11 20 22 27 28 30 46 49 53 55 58 62 63 66 70 78 79 85 92 190 192 195 196
209 210 215 225 227. Dimness of Sight, 49 81 197 202 207 209 215. Dullness, 39
213. Drying 2 4 15 62 90 197 198 235. Drunkenness 69. Dreams 72 82 199.
Disjunctures 87 89 235.
E
Ears, 2 10 12 14 18 31 35 47 52 68 70 82 89 190 197 205 235. Errwigs 64.
Epidemical Diseases, 4 14 20 24 32 75 91. Eyes 6 8 10 11 12 18 31 34 41 45 47
51 53 56 63 68 73 77 81 205 215 223 224 236 239.
F
Fainting 5 10 72 192. Falling Sickness, 18 20 33 38 56 58 61 66 72 77 79 83 92
192 195. Falls 21 32 34 52 78. Felones 7 12. Fatness, 51. Phlegm, 3 5 8 19 21 22
25 31 32 40 50 58 67 69 79 81 85 189 192 197 209 215 217 224. Fleas 4 7.
Fevers 10 54 65 79 229. Fistulaes 21 28 33 45 53 55 71 88 189 203. Flux, 2 3 5
9 10 12 14 21 25 33 37 8 44 53 54 56 60 67 69 71 72 75 84 85 194 199 201 209
213 225 328 229. Forgetfulness 57. Freckles, 5 20 31 39 41 44 53 75 76 88 191
226 238. Frenzy, 18 38 73 198. French Pox, 49 64 66 206 230. Fundament, 17 41
52.
G
Gall, 2 27 42 44 45 64. Gangrenes, 20 23 37 42 71 89. Gauls, 13. Gnats, 50.
Gout, 2 5 7 8 10 11 12 15 25 34 37 39 41 48 54 55 59 63 64 79 89 90 191 192 193
196 198 200 209 230 231. Gums, 17 23 192 205 226. Guts, 195. Gravel, 17 20 21
28 31 52 57 59 79 82 89 191 194 204 211 214 216 220. Griping, 2. Groyn, 66 87.
H
Headache, 21 47 54 58 72 85 189 192 205 209 224 232. Head, 28 34 72. Heart, 9
10 47 205 233. Hemorrhoids, 30 33 52 54 55 86 89 195 224. Horses tired, 7.
Hortnets, 11. Hoarceness, 25 31 34 73 233. Humors, 31 75 81 82 190 194 197 206
236. Hypochondria, 42 44. Hiccough, 43.
I
Jaundice, 2 3 8 9 10 11 15 26 27 44 55 57 63 85 88 189 220 223 230. Jaws, 41.
Joints, 7 12 13 22 37 59 88 207 220 222 226. Illiack Passion, 216.
Inflammations, 1 4 5 7 12 17 20 21 26 31 34 37 45 47 53 54 62 63 64 67 68 71 72
73 74 77 89 82 90 91 92 190 191 199 220 223 233. Imposthumes, 7 83 191 214 220.
Itch, 2 3 11 12 29 32 41 44 57 59 66 196 206. Indigestion, 9 10 28 72 75.
K
Kings Evil, 7 11 30 35 52 56 59 70 75 78 86 202. Kidneys, 70 225.
L
Leprosy, 9 11 26 43 47 52 53 83 88 91. Lethergy, 39 51 72 87 91 192 207 212
215. Liver, 35 10 11 13 15 27 29 30 38 41 42 49 57 61 66 74 76 78 92 189 202
203 209 219 227 230. Lice, 3, 210. Lechery, 63. Loathing of meat, 44. Looseness,
5 43. Loose teeth, 48. Longings, 80. Lungs, 3 11 32 53 68 75 197 230 237. Lust
provokes, 189. Lust stop, 199.
M
Mare, 23 193. Madness, 57 193. Mad-dogs, 5 10 15 25 47 57 82 89 91. Meazles,
17 229. Megrim, 12 224. Melancholy, 5 6 10 24 26 42 50 57 58 76 81 82 85 192
193 197 206 226 234. Memory, 8 49 57 212. Mother, 6 9 12 15 17 24 28 29 43 48
50 79 85 89 90 191 193 215 223 235. Mineral Vapors, 58. Mind, 10. Milk in
Nurses, 18 50 72 77 234. Milk in Cattle, 36. Mouth, 16 18 23 33 59 78 192 196
200 205 215 219 220 229 233. Morphew, 20 42 43 44 47 48 62 66 73 88 191 210
233. Muscles cut, 37 78 191. Miscarriage, 80 212 225. Mushroms, 88 190 239.
N
Navil, 200. Nails in the Flesh, 2. Nepples, 54. Nerves, 12 17 37. Nightshade
eaten, 89. Noise in the Ears, 2 14 64 66 78. Nits, 225. Nose, 6 15 68 196. --
Nolime tangere, se Polipus.
O
Obstructions, 3 9 10 11 15 20 21 28 29 30 37 42 44 49 51 53 56 57 66 69 78 87
189 195 210 215 223 227. Opening, 33 42 51 189 190 201 214. Opium, 51 86.
P
Pain, 2 12 15 35 37 43 63 82 192 195 199 205 209 210 211 221. Palsy, 15 20 32
34 38 47 51 58 67 72 76 83 216 217. Piles, 17 37 41 70 80 191 196. Pissing
Blood, 15 22 67. Pin and Web, 63 231 232. Plague, 2 4 9 17 18 19 20 24 32 33 41
42 43 48 57 58 65 69 79 91 194 201 210 217 220 223 232 236. Pleuresy, 4 32 33
54 75 77 88 89 197 217 233. Poison, 2 4 9 11 17 18 19 20 41 43 48 58 65 67 77
79 88 90 91 194 201 210 220 221 229 234 235. Phthisick, 16 32 37 62 71 73 77 92
196 197 199 207. Purples, 17 54 229. Pushes, 37 206 221 223 239. Pimples, 39 43
53 57 67 206 210 217 224. Polipus, 41 53 89 197. Privities, 2 37 65.
Q
Quartan Agues, 2 49 197. Quotidian Agues, 49. Quinsie, 33 38 75 92 202 233
239. Quickens the Senses, 212.
R
Raw Humors, 43. Rhewm, 38 39 40 71 81 89 195 196 199 200 205 207 212. Reds, 19
205. Red Faces, 67 70. Reins, 9 49 50 52 66 86 216 223 225. Rickets, 9.
Ringworms, 10 19 20 29 63 66 68 74 82 196 210 217 220 236. Roughness of the
skin, 74. Running of the Reins, 18 74 209 211 213 214 222. Ruptures, 9 15 17 26
34 36 37 38 40 45 47 50 59 7^ 92 211 213 214 226 229.
S
Scaldheads, 9. Scaldings, 5 10 47 68 69 78 92 191. Scabs, 2 3 9 10 12 14 15 19
23 25 34 39 44 53 57 59 66 189 191. Scars, 39 218 231. Sciatica, 2 5 7 8 12 25
30 34 36 39 51 55 59 61 64 69 70 88 89 198 202 220 226. Scurff, 14 15 39 41 52
76 78 217. Serpents. 3 8 26 50 82. Seed increases, 33 49. Scurvy, 20 39 202
226. Sides, 22 32 55 67. Stifness, 13. Shingles, 34 189 196. Smelling, 14. Small
pox, 17. Sneezing, 55. Sores, 20 23 24 25 26 28 55 71 76 82 215 220 230.
Spitting blood, 18 36 37 44 48 69 90 196 212. Splinters, 2 20 34 42 59 63 232.
Spleen, 2 3 6 8 10 11 13 15 26 27 30 42 50 57 58 59 61 62 66 69 72 77 78 81 83
88 202 220 221 227 230 235 237. Spots, 5 9 12 20 38 39 41 48 52 62 73 75 218.
Stitches, 9 15 20 22 27 28 91 212 227 232. Stomach, 2 3 5 11 12 15 16 22 32 37
40 48 50 55 62 66 68 72 78 80 190 209 220. Stoppings, 45. Surfets, 25 74 239.
Swellings, 4 7 21 25 26 27 32 34 37 41 42 43 65 69 82 202 220 224 231 233 239.
Strangury, 4 8 21 49 52 60 67 73 198 221 232. Stone, 9 11 12 13 15 16 17 20 21
22 25 27 28 31 36 39 45 47 48 49 60 63 65 67 70 78 80 84 85 91 190 191 202 203
221 214 215 216 221 227. Sunburning 14 38 47 73 191 226. Swoonings 10 44 89.
Sinews 12 15 25 27 33 51 55 61 64 87 200.
T
Teeth loose 3 59. Teeth 52 191 200 233. Tertian Agnes, 2. Terms stops, 1 14 18
24 33 53 54 59 62 65 66 67 74 86 91 194 195 219 203 225 235. Terms provokes 11
15 21 24 25 28 33 34 41 43 48 50 55 57 58 59 66 76 81 85 86 87 89 92 192 210
213 215 221 230 232 239, Tetters, 15 29 66 67 74 196 290 220 236. Thorns 2 20
34 49 52 78 217 232, Thirst 196 22 233. Throat 2 41 43 191 205 213 219 220 221
229 233 235. Toothach 3 7 8 14 18 22 34 55 192 196 200 203 225. Travail in
Women 36 77. Trembling 72.
V
Venomous Beasts 11 13 18 25 30 47 48 50 51 55 59 61 66 67 69 71 88 89 192 236
240. Vertigo 12 13 20 38 50 72. Vipers 9. Veins 36 71. Ulcers 5 7 15 18 19 20
25 26 28 31 33 38 39 41 43 45 47 52 53 55 60 65 75 76 79 80 86 89 90 194 196
201 203 210 211 214 215 217 220 221 226 229 236 Venery 973 82 90 189 219 204.
Vomiting 1 8 17 22 24 26 36 45 72 82 90 190 192 219 201 220 225 230.
W
Watching 68. Warts 29 82 87 230. Weariness 13 15. Wens 230. Wind 12 32 43 48
50 51 63 79 81 82 89 91 215 232 235. Witchcraft 14 65. Whites, 1 7 14 18 34 37
74 205 206 207. 91. be Whitloes 20. Worms, 5 7 24 29 43 54 69 91 202 211 215
225. Womb 17 20 50 89 233. Wounds 1 2 7 9 15 17 20 22 23 24 26 31 35 36 37 38
39 43 45 47 50 52 56 60 65 69 74 75 79 80 84 85 90 190 191 200 204 213 214 215
217 219 220 224 229 230. Wry Necks 46. Wrinkles 62.
Y
Yellow Jaundice 10 21 49 53 57 61 66 67 74 76 207 211 215 223 239.
FINIS.

