THE USEFULNESS OF SPIRITVAL WISDOM WITH A TEMPORAL INHERITANCE.

IN A SERMON Preached March, 11th. 1688/9. At the Entrance of a Young Man upon
his Habitation and particular Calling.

And at his Request Published By T. CRVSO.

I CORINTH vii. 30. -- And they that buy, as though they possessed not.

LONDON, Printed by J.R. for John Salusbury, at the Rising Sun, near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, 1689.

To his Esteemed Friend. MR. R. G.
SIR,
YOU cannot blame the inscribing of these Papers to your self, as their just
and proper Patron, because through your own solicitation, the matter contained
in them was first delivered, and is now after this more public manner
recorded, principally for your own use. If any others received any benefit by
the Hearing, or if any should hereafter by the Reading of it, as they ought to
return the chief praise to God, (whose Spirit, I hope, assisted in the
Composure, and from whom his servants have all their furniture for every good
word and work) they do in the next place owe their Thanks to you. For you have
(especially) by putting me upon such a second service, manifested your
unwillingness to reap the Fruit of this labor alone, as well as your charitable
hopes, that it may produce some through the blessing of heaven; in which I
heartily wish, that you be not disappointed. All the I can say to encourage
you, is only this, that I have not here stepped out of the road of the common
Faith, Tit. 1.4.
but written the plainest Truths in the plainest method, and therefore it is so
far fitted (though defective in many other respects) to answer the end of
common Edification; nor is your Case so peculiar, but that Others may
frequently be in the same, and stand in need of the like instructions.

But I do not flatter you, when I tell you, that I am persuaded better things
of you, than I can expect from this discourse upon every ordinary superficial
Reader; men do seldom consider, that the word which sounds in their Ear, or is
presented to their Eye, John 12.48.
shall help to Judge them at the last day; and so, a trifling cursory perusal
of the most serious and important things, aggravates their account hereafter,
though it does not influence their practice here. Multitudes, when they are at
that Age, which you have arrived to, lay the foundation of a late and ineffual
Repentance, and of remediless everlasting misery: Psalm. 58.3.
They are estranged from the Womb, and in that state they continue, till they
are falling into the Grave, under the heavy load of the sins of their Youth; if
they do take care to thrive and prosper in this World by heaping up Riches,
they will be sure to make their condition most wretched in the next by
Treasuring up Wrath; the neglect of their Souls, is as notorious, as the
(perhaps) unnecessary Provision which is made for their Bodies; when they lanch
into the business of their several Professions, the getting of an Estate is
their only Aim, and in the pursuit of this, they lose that which is more worth
than the whole World. The Wisdom recommended in the following Sermon, will be
but foolishness to all such, unless God is pleased to give them other Spirits.

You on the other hand, have begun so well with God, that I therefore
cheerfully expect your happy progress: I doubt not but that you have fixed your
eye, and set your heart, aright, by proposing the best End, and choosing the
best Part; nevertheless seeing your lot is cast into such a time of Temptation,
and every circumstance of humane Life is so full of Snares, and there is a
special vanity in youth, Eccl. 11.10.
there is need of constant watchfulness and care, and frequent renewing your
Holy Resolutions, as well as Invocation of God for help, that your Bow which
yet abides in strength, may never Break or Slacken, through the enticements of
evil Company, the Deceitfulness of Riches, or power of Indwelling Sin. You may
meet with some who think it strange, Pet. 4.4.
that you run not with them to the same Excess of Riot, and other debauchery;
and the Flesh is still Lusting against the Spirit in the most improved and
mortified Christians; and there is scarcely any lawful Employment, but what by
an undue behavior in it, may become sin. I must therefore, while I take
Comfort in your Pious beginnings, give you this Council and Caution against a
dangerous Revolt.

I lift up an hearty prayer for you, that the blessing of God out of Sion may
rest upon you, and all your concerns; that he may not be to you as the Moth,
Hos. 5.12.
or as Rottenness, but as the cherishing Sun and fructifying Dew; that neither
your Root, nor Leaf may wither; that the Fear of God may be always before your
face, and his secret upon your Tabernacle; Job 29.4.
that your Soul may be like a watered Garden, and an Hedge of Providence
Planted about all which you have on every side; and that after you are carried
through the several Changes and Periods of time, the God whom you serve, may be
your Inheritance and Portion to Eternity. So praying, and by all other possible
means, which my Station or Capacity will afford for your Assistance, in any
Spiritual matters, I shall very readily approve my self,

Your Most Faithful Friend and Servant, T. C.
May 22. 1689.
The Usefulness of Spiritual Wisdom with a Temporal Inheritance.
ECCLES. 7.11. Wisdom is good with an Inheritance: and by it there is profit to
them that see the Sun.


IT is an old Observation of Solomon, the Author of this Book, chap. 1.9.
that there is no new thing under the Sun. Among the many Instances, which
there are of the Truth of it, This may be reckoned for One, that there are no
New Complaints. Every Generation is apt to repeat the same murmuring Question,
chap. 7.10.
What is the Cause that the former Days were better than these? (as in the
words immediately preceding the Text) Our Streets were never free from this
Complaining, and probably never will be; the Mouths of our Progenitors were
full of it heretofore, and so are Ours now, and they that come after us, are as
likely to continue it to the end of the World. Solomon tells us here, that this
springs from a foolish Impatience; Men do not enquire wisely in this matter. It
is certain, that since the entrance of Sin into the World, which is the Root
and Foundation of all Calamities, the Days have been always Evil, more or
less; and yet every Age, through the Mercy of Gods Providence, has enjoyed
some Good to balance the Evil; therefore instead of finding fault with the
Times in which we live, (which is indeed to quarrel with God's casting of our
Lot, and guiding of Events) we should rather consider and censure what is amiss
in our selves. If we were as we ought to be, we might very well improve the
worst of Times, but our own defects and disorders will make us miscarry in the
best. From hence the Wise Man seems to take the occasion of recommending Wisdom
in this place, ver. 11.

Four Questions are necessary to be resolved in the Opening of the Words.

I. What is meant by Wisdom here? Ans. In three things.

1. 1 King. 4.29.
It does not signify such a largeness of heart, as Solomon himself had, who
could search into the Nature and Reason of things, beyond any that were before
him. Genesis 2.19, 20.
( Adam only excepted, who gave names to every Creature.) Such a comprehensive
Mind, and vast understanding was Gods peculiar Gift to him; and besides, it
must be owned, that the great Intellectual Abilities of others many times prove
their Snare, and they go to Hell with such extraordinary Light. 1 Cor. 1.26.
The Apostle says, that Not many wise men after the flesh are called; persons
of the meanest parts do very commonly go into the kingdom of God before the
learned.

2. The Holy Ghost here does not mean that Skill and Prudence, which is
exercised in the getting, increasing or preserving of Estates. Luke 16.8.
So the children of this world are wise, in their generation, and usually
prosper most with it. It Is true, a fit measure of such Wisdom is very necessary
in the managing of every ones particular Employment and Vocation; it is no
prejudice to a Good Man, that he guides his affairs with discretion, Psalm.
112.5.
but a part of his just commendation; for else by his ignorance and folly he
may soon ruin himself, and all that belong to him. But men may be thus Wise,
and yet be Miserable. And therefore

3. The Wisdom here meant, is no other than serious Religion. This is the most
general sense of the word in the Holy Scripture, and more particularly in the
Books of this Inspired Author. All other Wisdom is insignificant without this,
and this of it self is useful to the best purposes. We learn from Moses, Deuteronomy.
4.6.
that those Nations which keep and do the commandments of God, are indeed a
wise and understanding people. Job mentions it as Gods immediate saying to Man,
Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, etc. Job 28.28.
And the Psalmist agrees with both, in telling us, that the fear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom, etc. Psalm. 111.10.
Wicked Men, whatever other Qualifications and Endowments they may have, which
are valuable in their kind, must be looked upon as the Real Fools in Israel. We
cannot judge any one truly wise, who wants Grace, whereby to serve God, and his
Generation.

II. What are we to understand by an Inheritance in this place? Answ. In two
things.

1. It must not be restrained literally and strictly to such an Estate only,
as descends upon us from others by Legal right, or by their free and Arbitrary
Bounty; the Inheritance here intended may be gotten by a man's own industry and
Care, though Relatives and Friends may have left him as little in the World, as
they carried out of it.

2. Therefore it must be taken in the largest sense, to signify a moderate
share of worldly or Temporal possessions; whatsoever will comfortably maintain
and support us in this life. And this is expressed by an [Inheritance,] because
that is accounted the best, the most solid, and Real Estate: But there is no
mention of any limited quantity, because God gives to every one a portion of
such good things according as he pleases, and Grace will teach us the
improvement of a Lesser portion, when Lust will abuse a Greater.

III. What is the meaning of the Conjunction of these Two? Wisdom is good with
an Inheritance. Answ. In Three things.

1. It must not be understood so, as if Wisdom were not good without an
Inheritance. A man rich toward God is safe and happy, though he be poor in this
World. Grace is a good treasure in the Heart, though God do cut us short in
things that are without, which concern the body. It is not absolutely and
indispensibly necessary to our main and principal blessedness, Prove. 30.8.
that we should be fed with food convenient for us, (if we have necessary food,
that will suffice) though it conduce very much to our present well being.

2. The meaning is not, that Wisdom and an inheritance are equally good. The
Holy Ghost does not design to set these two upon one Level; for an Inheritance
is not to be compared with wisdom, but wisdom ought to be preferred to the
largest Inheritances in the World. My fruit is better than Gold, Prove. 8.19.
yea than fine Gold, and my Revenue than choice Silver. Solomon puts them in
the balances together, and shows us which weighs most, in the words following
the Text. Wisdom is a defense, and money is a defense, but the excellency of
knowledge is, that it gives Life to them that have it. verse 12.


3. Therefore the scope and sense of this passage is, that when wisdom is
joined with an Inheritance by the Spirit of God, and an Inheritance with wisdom
by the Providence of God, it is best for the person himself, and for all those,
who are within his influence and reach. They are neither of them so good, when
they are divided and apart, as when they happen to be linkt in the same hand.
It Is an happy dispensation when (like righteousness and peace, Psalm. 85.10.
) they kiss each other; for their Union is both most beautiful, and most
advantageous.

IV. Why is the profit of these two limited to them that see the Sun? Answ. The
wise man does plainly intend by that expression, such as are alive upon the
Earth; for it is during this mortal life alone, that we either enjoy or need
the benefit of that glorious Luminary; there is no Sun or Moon, Rev. 21.23.
which shines to the inhabitants of the next World. But two things seem to be
especially hinted by this clause here.

1. That, Our time of service ends at death. We must work the works of God,
while it is day; John 9.4.
all our opportunities of working cease, when the night comes. Solomon
admonishes us in this Book to set about our duty with all possible diligence,
because there is no knowledge nor wisdom in the Grave, c. 9.10.
whither we go. Our works indeed are said to follow us, Rev. 14.13.
when we dye in the Lord; because then we shall be finally recompensed
according to them; but to speak properly, all that we do for God, for our own
Souls, or those that are our Contemporaries, it must be done on this side of
Eternity. That which is neglected now, cannot be performed hereafter.

2. No Earthly things can be of any advantage to us, beyond the present Life.
Therefore they are called this Worlds goods. 1 John 3.17. 1 Timothy 6.7.
As we brought them not into the World with us, so neither can we carry them
out; and if we could, they would avail us nothing; they cannot add to the
happiness of the glorified in Heaven, nor take away from the misery of the
damned in Hell. They profit not in the day of wrath; Prove. 11.4.
they will neither prevent, nor alter the sentence, at the particular or
universal judgment. The rust of men's Silver and Gold may eat their Flesh like
Fire, Jam. 5.3.
but nothing is sufficient to purchase them so much as a drop of water. The
substance which we leave behind us, does then perish to us, in respect of its
Use: and however serviceable or helpful it may be to those that survive, it is
utterly insignificant to them that are departed.

The Observation which the words thus explained, do offer to our further
Thoughts, is this, That

Holy Wisdom with a competent Inheritance, is a very profitable good.

In the handling of this, I shall endeavor four Things.









first thing, is to show, wherein holy spiritual wisdom must be chiefly
exercised and acted. There are Eight remarkable instances or discoveries of it,
which all persons should look to.

First, a regular and seasonable performance of duties. Many actions, which as
to the Matter of them has been good, for want of Christian wisdom, have lost
much of their beauty, through the ill management of their particular
circumstances. The ordering and disposing of good actions well, is a great
thing in Religion. We may say of a work done, as well as of a Word spoken in due
season, how good is it? Prove. 15.23.
This adds a goodness to it, which if done at another less convenient time, it
would not have. We should learn to put every thing into method, which our Hand
finds to do: That all our Duties may fall in their proper place, one after
another, and not one disturb or hinder another. As God appoints a time to every
purpose, so should we, Eccl. 3.1.
and such a time as is most fit and agreeable to it.

avoiding, or vigorous resisting of temptations. Many temptations may be
avoided by a prudent care, and by circumspect walking, which is a great
evidence of wisdom: ( see that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise: says the Apostle. Ephesians. 5.15.
) And this we are obliged to, that we may not sin against our own prayers; for
if we pray that God would not lead us into temptation, it is but reasonable that
we should not foolishy run into it our selves. We may shun a multitude of
entangling snares, if we tread with CAution. And those temptations which are
avoidable, should be vigorously withstood; we must not yield, or comply with
them in the least, but after the most steady resolute manner oppose our selves
to their first assaults. This is the way to come off with victory, and keep our
consciences pure. Without doing so, we give great advantages to Satan, and it
will be impossible to escape or overcome the various difficulties which beset
us in every condition of life.

meek and patient bearing of afflictions. Much wisdom is seen in this; for it
is the grossest folly in the world, to make our load at any time the greater by
uneasy strugglings under it. A great deal of the art and mystery of practical
Christianity, lies in suffering according to the will of God. 1 Pet. 4.19.
All that are afflicted, do not suffer so: they suffer indeed what God in his
providence thinks fit to inflict, (and they cannot do otherwise) but they do
not suffer, as God in his word is pleased to direct; many suffer according to
the disposing will of God, who in their sufferings regard not his commanding
will. In the most prosperous state there oftentimes happens a mixture of
disappointments and losses, and personal evils, (if we are freed from Public
ones) which one who is truly and savingly wise, will quietly and calmly
undergo; whereas it is one of the Characters of a Fool, Prove. 14.16.
to Rage. We cannot make our case the better by fretting and striving against
God, but shall certainly make it worse.

diligent improving of mercies for the Glory of God, and good of our Brethren.
This is surest course of thriving in this world, and laying up a good
foundation for the next. The rule of the Gospel does not bind any to wast and
consume their Estates by an imprudent Prodigality (for this is not to honor
God) but yet it warns them against a base and sinful Covetousness in Hording up
of what they are called to Lay out. The Charitable man is wise for himself,
when the wretched niggard is only wise for a doubtful posterity. And, is there
not more wisdom in scattering upon Earth, that we may reap in Heaven, than in
gathering for we know not whom? Is it not better to make to our selves friends
of the mammon of unrighteousness, than to leave it perhaps to such, Luke 16.9.
who may curse our memory, while they rejoice in our labor? When God gives us
richly to enjoy, it is no sign of discretion for us to give sparingly. If we
believe the Scripture (Confirmed by the Experience of many) this is more likely
to impair our wealth, than to increase it. There is that withholdeth more than
is meet, Prove. 11.24, 25.
and it tends to poverty: Whereas the liberal soul shall be made fat. The
bountiful giver wisely prevents what the sordid worldling fears.

Curbing and restraining of our affections and appetites to lawful things. It
is unsafe, and therefore an unwise thing, to go to the utmost bounds of what we
may do. Solomon tells us in this Book, which is the memorial of his Repentance,
that whatsoever his eyes desired, he kept not from them, chap. 2.10.
and he withheld not his heart from any joy. For ought we know, the taking of
so great a liberty, might be an Introduction to his fall; because the passage
is quick and easy many times from lawful fruitions to unlawful sensualities.
Mortification and Self-denial should not be strange things to us; the more we
indulge our flesh, the more insolent and unruly it will be; and that which it
seems now modestly to crave, hereafter it may imperiously command. It Is best
always to abridge our selves a little, even of innocent enjoyments and
delights, lest at length our Back or our Belly should come to be our God, Isa.
46.6.
and we lavish gold out of the bag as much upon our lusts, as they whom the
Prophet speaks of, did upon their Idols.

watching over our senses, and strict Government of our Tongues. It Is a main
branch of holy wisdom to make and keep a Covenant with our eyes and ears, Job
31.1.
that they may not betray us into sin on a sudden, and before we are aware.
They prove two often In lets to the Devil, and out lets to abundance of
corruption, if they are not narrowly observed, and constantly guarded. It Is no
unheard of thing, for the eye and ear not only to Affect the heart but to make
way for Polluting it; and therefore the heart should be very vigilant with
respect to them. Nor is there any thing will discover more or greater wisdom,
than the bridling of our Tongues; the Apostle James recommends this as one of
the most important matters in Religion: Jam. 3.2.
if any man offend not in word, Prove. 10.19.
the same is a perfect man. Solomon (a very able and sufficient Judge) tells
us, he that refraineth his lips, is wise; not he that is always silent, but he
whose speech is not infected with vanity or sin. A fool's voice (says the same
Author) is known by the multitude of words; Eccles. 5 3.
if there be nothing else to distinguish him, he commonly carries this mark in
his mouth. The greatest quickness of apprehension should be accompanied with a
slowness to speak; for the little member many times does no little mischief.
The managing of it, is of mighty consequence, as to our standing or falling
before the bar of God: Matthew. 12.37.
By thy words (says our Savior) thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou
shall be Condemned.

Suitable to those Relations wherein we stand. David is commended by the Holy
Ghost for behaving himself wisely in all his ways, 1 Samuel 18.5, 14.
with reference to Saul, that is, both as a Son-in-law, and a Subject. And
afterward, when he came to the Throne he kept his resolution of behaving
himself wisely in a perfect way, Psalm. 101.2.
and walking within his House (as a Master, and within his Kingdom as a
Magistrate) with a perfect heart. No one stands so alone and so independently
by himself in this world, but that he is clothed with one relation or other
toward some of his Fellow creatures; we are not like Melchisedeck, without
descent, not dropped out of Heaven, Heb. 7.3.
as Enoch was translated into it. Every one is either in authority or under it,
a Superior or an Inferior; and to deport our selves agreeably to our
particular state, is a considerable part of Spiritual wisdom. This will teach
us how to carry it as we ought, with respect to those that are above us, below
us, and equal with us.

unexceptionable and inoffensive conversation before all, even strangers and
enemies. It Is a great Apostolical precept, Colos. 4.^.
walk in wisdom toward them that are without; do not furnish them with dirt
to cast upon you, by any foul unjustifiable action. It was a sad slip both of
Abraham and Sarah to give such an occasion of reproving them to Abimelech, Genesis
20.16.
an Heathen Prince. Whatever calumnies are framed by our observers, we should
live so, as that nothing may be found in us; that though their malice may
prompt them to Accuse, they may not be able to Convince us of sin. The exactest
Righteousness and integrity in all our dealings, is the best prudence; the gain
of a false balance is in a special sense, deceitful riches. He that gets
wealth and not by right shall leave it in the midst of his days, Jerem. 17.11.
and at his End shall be a fool: i. e. he shall then appear to be so. But as we
should be wisely careful to do nothing which may really injure, so nothing
which may needlessly offend another: besides the law of Equity, there is a law
of kindness to be observed, that our conversations may be blameless; we must
beware not only of the smallest violation of justice, but of the neglect of
civil courtesy to the worst of men. A rough and a peevish temper is both a
greivance to our selves, and reproach to Religion: the churl who cannot be
spoken to, 1 Samuel 25.17.
is more like a Son of Belial, than a child of God.

Second Thing, is to enquire, what may be reasonably looked upon as a competent
Inheritance. In General, Prove. 30.8.
it is easily determined by Agur's prayer; that which comes up to his point, and
sets us in a middle state between Poverty and Riches, is a full answer to the
present Question. Pressing Indigency, and overflowing Abundance are the
extremes on both hands, and attended with dangerous Temptations. Men's
circumstances and occasions indeed are very different and various; so that what
is sufficient to one, may not be so to all; but every one may take his measures
by the Three following Rules.

most conveniences with the fewest burdens, is a truly competent Inheritance.
They that are in continual streights, and always seek their Bread as out of
desolate places, Psalm. 109.10.
are apt to be sunk and bowed down on one hand; and they that live in
extraordinary fullness, are as much distracted and perplexed on the other hand,
and their souls cut asunder (as it were) and torn in pieces by multitude of
Thoughts. The case lies plainly thus; they that have too little, are oppressed
with necessary cares, and they that have too much are tormented with
unnecessary ones; but they that have enough (and no more) are most free from
both sorts of cares, and enjoy most comfort.

below Envy, and above Contempt, is a true competency. If we are too high, we
shall be objects of more spite and malice; many will look upon us with an Evil
eye, and be oftentimes prone to censure and condemn us for our most innocent
and lawful actions; it may be, our prosperity will provoke some to endeavor
our ruin, and seek our destruction; as Joseph's brethren hated him, and would
not speak peaceably unto him, Genesis 37.4.
but plotted his overthrow, and that which was next to his Murder, because he
inherited most of his Fathers Love. If we are too low, every one will be apt to
trample upon us, and treat us with scorn; Job, that was reverenced so much in
his time of plenty, was equally slighted in his poverty: If he entreated his
Servants, they would give him no Answer; Job 19.16.
nay (which was yet worse) young children despised him, verse 18.
and when he arose, they spoke against him. It is best to be in such a
condition betwixt excessive Greatness and Meanness, that we may be safe both
from the blasts of Envy, and from the foot of Pride; that others may not be
tempted to repine at us, nor be able to insult over us.

necessity of receiving, and furnishes us with an ability of giving, is a very
desirable State, and a really sufficient Inheritance. Men are commanded to work
with their hands the thing which is good, Ephesians. 4.28.
that they may have to give to him that needs. It is not so good to live upon
Alms as to have the power of bestowing them; and our Savior has told us, Acts
20.35.
that It is more blessed to give, than to receive. It is troublesome and
uneasy to be in the condition of Beggars our selves, or to have crowds of
Beggars always at our doors; the best is, to be capable of releiving a few, and
not to stand in want of releif from any. He that can dispense his own Charity
sometimes, and is never forced to crave it from others, may very well sit down
with satisfaction.

Third thing, is to show, wherein the Profitableness of Wisdom and an
Inheritance together does appear. This may be opened distinctly under two
Branches.

Inheritance is profitable with Wisdom. The Crown of the wise, (says Solomon)
is their Riches. i. e. They are a singular ornament and advantage to them. And
that in two respects.

Reputation to what men say and do. The World will have no regard to them that
sit at the Footstool. If real worth have not the accession of outward things to
recommend it, it is as nothing to the generality of Men. Eccles. 9.16.
The poor man's Wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard. Solomon was the
more famous for his wisdom, because he was a Prince; his prudence was the more
extolled, because his person was in honor. Prove. 19.7.
If a poor man pursues even his Friends with words, they seldom prevail; and
upon Strangers much less. An Inheritance will procure us some Credit and
Esteem, and by that means our words and actions will have the greater
acceptance and success.

serving God and their Generation better than others. They may be made the
instruments of advancing God's name, promoting his interest, and of doing much
good to others, as well as helps in the working out of our own Salvation. When
wisdom is without a competency of Wealth, it is a great inconvenience and
obstruction to the exercise of several Graces, and discharge of several duties,
which would be profitable not only to our selves, but to the Public. There may
be pious inclinations and desires, but the man's wings are clipped, and his hands
tied from executing of them; as the Apostle said in another case, to will is
present with me, but how to perform that which I would, Romans 7.18.
I find not. The narrowness of a man's Estate does of-often hinder the discovery
of the largeness of his Heart.

wisdom is very beneficial with an Inheritance. Nabal, a rich Fool, was an
unsociable Churl, and the burden of the Earth; though his belly was filled with
considerable Treasures, yet his Heart being hid from understanding, it almost
unfitted him to live among Mankind. Two Things will evince this more
particularly.

prevents the mischief which Riches alone might do. How often are they hurtful
to the Owners, as well as to others, when Folly is with them! Eccles. 5.13.
As, when they make Men arrogant and High-minded, or vain and wanton, or
sensual and Earthly. What ill effects do they produce, when they encourage Men
to oppress and wrong their Inferiors; when they become instruments of cruelty
to pierce the hearts, and to grind the faces of the poor! Then it must be
acknowledged, that they are like heavy talents, which weigh Men down the sooner
to Hell, and sink them the deeper in it: 2 Samuel 18.9.
Or like Absalom's hair, which proved the means of his death, while he was
seemingly lifted nearer toward Heaven. Holy wisdom is the only powerful remedy
against all such fatal abuses of our Temporal good things.

positively useful. Wisdom is profitable to direct; Eccles. 10.10.
it teaches Men how to employ their wealth in the best and most advantageous
manner, and to lay it out so, as to receive their own again with the most
plentiful increase, by a kind of sacred Usury. It shows Men how to turn their
riches into a Treasure which can neither be lost, nor corrupted; to exchange
their Silver and Gold for a Crown of Life, and an eternal inheritance in the
Kingdom of God. Christian wisdom does indeed consecrate that to God, which
corrupt Nature would sacrifice to the Devil, and writes Holiness to the Lord
upon those Estates, which might otherwise be framed into weapons of
unrighteousness. The flesh is very apt to manage them against God, but Grace
renders them serviceable for him. Then may the brother of low degree rejoice in
being exalted, Jam. 1.9.
and apply that part of Jobs Thanksgiving very justly to his own case, The Lord
has given, blessed be the name of the Lord. Job 1.21.


Fourth and last Thing, is to make some Application of the present Truth. It is
improvable two ways.

Confutation and Reproof. Two Things may be instanced in, which fall under the
Edge of this Doctrine.

Popish principle, which magnifies voluntary poverty. It is beside my purpose
here, to insist upon the Juggle and the Cheat which there is commonly in this;
(for under the Veil, and Cloak of pretended Mortification to the World, they
not only subsist by Idleness, but many times raise unseen Estates,) nor does
it concern me now to lay open the absurd contradiction which there is in this,
to some of their other received opinions; (as particularly, that outward
grandeur and prosperity is a mark of the true Church) but upon this occasion
which the Text fairly gives, I would only intimate how false and unagreeable it
is to the Scripture-account. Voluntary poverty is not only against the Dictate
of Nature, (because it is the choosing of a real evil) but against the stream of
the Word of God. It is an excluding of our selves from the benefit of all those
promises which perhaps God might think good for us to reap; As, that the
Righteous shall inherit the Land, Psalm. 37.29.
and the meek shall inherit the Earth. Matthew. 5.5.
It is to make our selves such a Curse as wicked Men are often threatened to be;
as, to be clothed with rags, reduced to a morsel of bread, etc. If it be
reckoned as one of the Characters (though not an essential one) of a good man,
that he leaves an Inheritance to his Childrens Children, Prove. 13.22.
it cannot be our duty to cast it away from us, and thereby to deprive them of
the hopeful reversion, as well as our selves of the comfortable possession.
Riches are not things so utterly inconsistent with Salvation, as that they must
be necessarily relinquish't and renounced in order to it.

general practice on the other hand, of over-valuing a Temporal Estate, even to
the contempt of Religion. It is a very easy and common mistake, to set an
extravagant price upon the good things of this Life, and at the same time to
disparage, and think meanly of what is infinitely better. When Men put the
World in their hearts, a Title of Honor shall be preferred to the New Name,
and to be clad in Scarlet shall be reckoned a greater privilege, than to have
Robes washed white in the Blood of the Lamb. Indeed there can be no Righteous
Judgment, no discerning or approving of things that are excellent, where the
Love of the World prevails; for the mind is always so far blinded by Satan
(the God of this World) that every thing is seen in a false Light. Some men are
so fond of being deceived, that they seem to please themselves with the fancy
of Money answering all things; Eccl. 10.19.
not considering, that though the expression is unlimited, it must have a
limited signification; for our principal wants cannot be supplied by Silver and
Gold. 1 Timothy 4.8.
Godliness is profitable for all things, in the largest sense, because it has
the promises of the present and future Life; it extends to the relief of our
Earthly and our Heavenly part, our outward and our inward Man. But there are
many calls (especially those that are most loud and urgent) which Money cannot
answer to; the hungry and thirsty and naked Soul cannot be fed, or satisfied,
or clothed by it, though in such cases it may assist and refresh the Body.
Mammon is fit, as a Servant to minister to us, but cannot be a God to Save us.

Exhortation. Two things ought to be pressed, as consequent upon what has been
said.

Riches increase, or decrease, do not think of them above what is written. If
they come in like a flood upon you, let not that lift you up; if they Ebb and
decline as much, let not that cast you down. Remember still, how far the true
estimate and value of them will reach, that you may not judge your condition
bettered by the smiles of Providence, nor made worse by its frowns, beyond what
really it is. It it our duty to be thankful, when god prospers us in the World,
and to be contented when he does not; but the sinful Lovers of abundance, are
always least sensible of Gods goodness in bestowing it, and yet most
impatient, whenever he does diminish it. In every state therefore bear this
upon your thoughts, that the having of an Inheritance is not the chiefest good,
and the loss of it is not the greatest evil.

Religion be the main business and employment of your Lives. Consider that your
General Calling, as Christians, is of more concern, than your particular
Vocation, as Men. Let Spiritual things have the constant precedence to
Temporal. Matthew. 6.33.
Seek first the Kingdom and Righteousness of God, and then you may cheerfully
expect that other things will be added unto you. The way to obtain every thing
in a fit Measure, is to seek every thing in the right order. Be most careful
and sollicitous about the one thing needful, before the other many things, Luke
10.41, 42.
which are of far less importance; choose the good part, and do your utmost to
secure it. It Is better, that your whole worldly portion should be neglected and
hazarded, than this. With all thy gettings (says the Wiseman) get
understanding. Prove. 4.7.
Without it, though you should heap up silver as the dust, you are the poorest
and most miserable creatures upon Earth; and the Apostle's Motto must be
inverted, if it be transferred to you; As having nothing indeed, 2 Cor. 6.10.
when you seem to possess all things. Therefore in order to the Acquiring and
Improving of Holy wisdom, follow these Six Directions.

prayer. This is both a necessary and successful means; the regular appointed
way of receiving every gift which comes down from above. There is ('it is true) a
natural humane wisdom which may be increased and perfected by a man's own
Industry; and there is a fleshly Devilish wisdom, which is learned with too
much ease and speed; but real saving wisdom is first infused at the New birth,
and further degrees of it freely communicated afterward by the spirit of God.
Folly is born and bred with us; it is bound up in our hearts, when we are
children, grows up with us, when we are young men; and as we increase in age
and stature, we increase our foolishness, till God renews and enlightens our
minds. Jam. 1.5.
If any of you lack wisdom (as there is none that does not) let him ask it of
God, who gives to all men liberally ( i. e. to all that ask) and upbraideth
not; and it shall be given him. Men that contrive and labor to be rich, are
not sure that they shall prosper; Eccles. 9.11.
for Bread is not to the wise; there is a great uncertainty of event in all
such cases; but he that cries after knowledge, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5.
and lifts up his voice (with his Heart too Heaven) for understanding, ought to
be confident of prevailing; he sins, if he doubts of his success; if he be
denied, it is because he questions his being heard. 1 King. 3.11, 12, 13.
God liked Solomon's petition so well, that he gave him in answer to it, not
only good measure, but running over; both that which he asked, and a great deal
more.

Meditate in the Word. This is that which makes the simple wise; Psalm. 19.7.
which made David himself wiser than his Enemies, (notwithstanding their
subtilty), Psalm. 119.98, 99, 100.
and his Teachers (notwithstanding their Learning), and the Ancients
(notwithstanding their large Experience.) This made Timothy wise to salvation,
and he is therefore commended, 2 Timothy 3.15.
that from a Child he had known the Holy Scriptures. The more Men make use of
this Lamp, the more Light will shine every day into their minds, and upon their
ways. Those hearts in which the word of Christ dwells most richly, contain the
greatest Treasures of the best wisdom. If Gods Testimonies be your
Counselors, and the Bible your Oracle, and continual Companion, your
profiting will appear to all. The reason of that damning Ignorance which
abounds even in the Reformed Christian World, is men's shameful unacquaintedness
with the Word of God.

Society of those, who are most instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven. Converse
with the children of Light; not with those whose understandings are darkened,
who love simplicity, and love to propagate it, who live in error, and would
lead others into it. He that walks with wise men, Prove. 13.20.
shall be wise; one spark of Light may help to kindle another. But expect not
to receive good from those who are evil themselves; that saying of our Savior
to the Pharisees, is a sufficient discouragement, Matthew. 12.34.
Oh generation of Vipers, how can you being evil, speak good things? Their
discourses are not likely to minister Grace, but to infect with sin. He who is
in pursuit of that understanding which is a well spring of Life, must not go
and seek it among the Dead. It Is dangerous to be their Familiars, who are
strangers to God.

take the Counsels and reproofs of those that are wise and good. This will be
an evidence, Prove. 9.9.
that God has given us some wisdom already, and it is the proper course to be
yet wiser, and increase in Learning. Prove. 12.1.
Whosoever loves instruction, loves knowledge, but he that hates reproof, is
brutish. q. d. he is not a reasonable Creature, but a Beast. They are no better
than Swine that trample upon Pearls, when cast before them. A poor and a wise
Child is preferred to an old and foolish king, Eccles. 4.13.
who will not be admonished. The stubbornness of Rehoboam, in opposition to the
advice of his Fathers Counselors, ended in the loss of the far greater part
of his Kingdom; and in more private cases many times, men's leaning to their own
judgments and walking after the sight of their own eyes, has been very fatal.
Seasonable and prudent rebukes should be accepted always with all thankfulness,
as the truest, and most valuable acts of Friendship.

pride and passion; because both of them are great Enemies to sound Wisdom.
Humility makes men teachable; therefore be not wise in your own eyes, Prove. 3.7.
learn this rule both from Solomon, Romans 12.16.
and the Apostle Paul. Strive to see your own blindness, and be not dazzled with
a false reflection of your own abilities. It Is easy to observe, that they who
are most pufft up, are least enlightened, and men who think that they have the
clearest knowledge, are generally clouded with the grossest ignorance. 1 Cor.
8.2.
Take heed also of giving place to wrath; for this is a Devil, which above all
others, will soonest deface the Image of God on the understanding. What mad
unadvised actions do men's furious unbridled passions hurry them into! How do
they put men beside themselves, and expose them to the just scorn of their
fellow creatures? The Scripture does not say in vain, or without cause, that He
who is hasty of spirit, Prove. 14.29.
exaltteth folly, i. e. he lifts it up, as it were, in the open view of others.
Jam. 3.13.
Meekness of wisdom is recommended by the Holy Ghost; as if there could be no
wisdom, where Meekness is not. A cool head, and understanding heart are linkt
together; so that if we do not suppress the heat of Anger, we shall extinguish
the light of knowledge.

vigorous sense of approaching death. If any thing will make men apply their
hearts to wisdom, (for the wisdom which we speak of, is the wisdom of the
Heart, more than of the Head) it must be a right numbering of their days. Psalm.
90.12.
The common follies of mankind, who mind nothing but buying and selling and
getting of gain, Jam. 4.13, 14.
do spring from hence that they do not consider what a thin vanishing vapor
our life is. The Religiously prudent men of this World, are such as always
reckon themselves to be upon the borders of another; we cannot be truly wise,
without understanding our latter end. Deuteronomy. 32.29.
According as every one is sensible of, and seriously Thoughtful about, his
present mortality, he will be wise for a future Eternity; that Man who walks
among the Tombs, and makes the Grave his House, is best fitted both to Use the
World, and to Leave it; he will be a blessing to others while he lives, and he
himself shall be blessed with God, when he comes to Dye.

THE END.
Books Printed for John Salusbury.
THE Period of Humane Life, determined by the Divine Will, by T. Cruso.

The Mighty Wonders of a Merciful Providence, in a Sermon Preached on January
the 31th. 1688. Being the day of public thanksgiving to God for the great
Deliverance of this Kingdom, by His Highness the Prince of Orange, by T. Cruso.

A Rational Defense of Nonconformity, wherein the practice of Non-Conformists
is vindicated from promoting Popery, and Ruining the Church, imputed to them by
Dr. Stillingfleet, in his unreasonableness of Separation. Also his Arguments
from the Principles and way of the Reformers, and first Dissenters are
Answered, and the case of the present Separation, truly stated, and the blame
of it laid where it ought to be; and the way to Union a mong Protestants is
pointed at, by Dr. Rule.

Four grand Questions proposed and briefly answered; wherein is discoursed the
Authority and Duty of the Magistrates, in the Matters of Religion; the
unlawfulness of a Toleration and general Liberty of Conscience, the
Divine-Right of Christian Liberty in things indifferent, the unlawfulness of
repealing the Laws against Popery and Idolatry, quarto, price 6 d.

Seventy five Sermons by the Right Reverend Father in God Ralph Browrigg late
Lord Bishop of Exeter, published by W. Martin M. A. sometimes Preacher, at the
Rolls, 2 Vol. Folio.


