In Effigium Nicholai Culpeper Equitis.
The shadow of that Body here you find
Which serves but as a case to hold his mind,
His Intellectual part be pleased to look
On (...) lines described in the Book.
(...)



A PHYSICAL DIRECTORY OR A translation of the LONDON DISPENSATORY Made by the
College of Physicians in London.

Being that book by which all Apothicaries are strictly commanded to make all
their Physic with many hundred additions which the reader may find in every
page marked with this letter A.

Also there is added the use of all the simples beginning at the first page and
ending at the 78 page.

By Nich. Culpeper Gent.

Persius. Disce, sed ira cadat naso, rugosaque sanna. Cicere. Non nobis solum
nati sumus sed etiam patria. LONDON,

Printed for Peter Cole and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the
Printing-presse near to the Royal Exchange 1649.

The TRANSLATOR to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT is a proverb not more vulgar than true, That he that looks on in a game may
see as much into it as he that plays. It cannot but be confessed, that this
Nation has been playing a sad game a long time; yet no other than God has
determined by his Divine providence, for all the Nations in Europe to be
partakers of. God gave Tyrants in his Wrath, and will take them away in his
Displeasure. The Prize which We now, and They within a few years shall play
for, is, THE LIBERTY OF THE SUBJECT: This is the part which some think is so
sluggishly acted. But I am of opinion will speedily be ended with a joyful
Plaudite upon the English Stage. So far as I can see by the help of my Indeed
the discerning of these things belongs to the Internal, not the External senses.
Optic Nerves, (whether it be Intromittendo Species, or Extramitendo Radios,
it matters not much) the Liberty of our Commonwealth (if I may call it so
without a Solecisme) is most infringed by three sorts of men, Priests,
Physicians, Lawyers; (yet I accuse not all of those Faculties, Trades, or (if I
may be so bold without offense) Monopolies, for that were a devilish trade
that had never an honest man in it) The one deceives men in matters belonging
to their Souls, the other, in matters belonging to (...) Bodies, the third in
matters belonging to their Estates. Amongst these, Physitianswalk in the
Clouds, their ways being not so discernable to a vulgar view as the ways of
the other two are; and that is the reason men are led by the noses (worse than
beasts, as though oppression had already made them mad) by a company of proud,
insulting, domineering Doctors, whose wits were born above five hundred years
before themselves. Would it not pity a man to see whole estates wasted in
Physic, ( all a man has spent upon Physicians) both body and purse consumed
upon outlandish rubbish? Would it not make both a man's ears glow to hear a man
affirm, that God has created no remedy for such a disease nearer than the
East Indies? Is it handsome and wel-beseeming a Commonwealth to see a Doctor
ride in State, in Plush with a footcloath, and not a grain of Wit but what was
in print before he was born? Send for them into a Visited House, they will
answer, They dare not come. How many honest poor souls have been so cast away,
will be known when the Lord shall come to make Inquisition for Blood. Send for
them to a poor man's house, who is not able to give them their Fee, then they
will not come, and the poor Creature for whom Christ died must forfet his life
for want of money.

Est Medicinalis Medicorum regula, talis
Vt dicant da, da, dum dicit (...), ah, ah.
The Doctors practice is to ask for Gain,
Even at the time when men cry out for Pain.
I am informed that Physicians in Italy may not deny to go to any patient (if
at leisure) that sends for them, provided they have their fee, which (if they
go alone) is but eighteen pence, and yet by visiting many patients they get as
much money if not more than ours do, and by visiting so many patients cannot
choose but better their judgments abundantly, besides they carry their Scholars
with them, and instruct them by the symptoms what the disease is, in what part
of the body it lies, how strong it is etc. for which they have a shilling more,
which is but half a crown in all, and out of question viewing the patient is a
better way to find the disease than viewing the piss, though a man should view
as much as the Thames will hold. I cannot conceive (if the State saw it
fitting) that such a course could be prejudicial to our Commonwealth; But some
self seekers (of whom I expect to be traduced, for the Translation of this
book) will be objecting against me for quoting the virtues of the recepts, of
which I meet with one in the Epistle of the College to the Reader, viz. It
tends to the destruction of the Commonwealth, because thereby ignorant fellows
will be induced to the practice of Physic, and therefore they say they wrote
it only to the nurslings of Apollo. But 1. If Apollo had served the nine Muses
so as they serve the Apothecaries, viz. hid all his art from them, they would
have had no more wit than nine Geese. 2. All the Nation are already Physicians,
If you ayl any thing, every one you meet, whether man or woman will prescribe
you a medicine for it. Now whether this book thus translated will make them
more ignorant or more knowing, any one that has but a grain of understanding
more than a horse, may easily judge, 3. All the Ancient Physicians wrote in
their own mother tongues, and native language. Mesue Avicenna, Averrois,
Rhazis, Serapio etc. in Arabic. Galen, Hippocrates etc. in Greek. (...) in
Highdutch; Did these do their countries good or harm think ye? What reason can
be given why England should be deprived of the benefit of other Nations? Worthy
country men the College does in effect say, that you are the greatest fools
under the Sun: Are you not much engaged to them think you? As for Apothecaries
they have least reason of all to complain, because it tends to the advancement
of their trade, If they have not wit enough to know, that private men cannot
make up most of these compositions themselves, but knowing the virtues of the
virtues of them, will resort the more to them for physic, they deserve the
name of a company of Dunces. I am confident there be those in this Nation that
have wit enough to know that the Papists and the College of Physicians will not
suffer Divinity and Physic to be printed in our mother tongue, both upon one
and the same grounds, and both color it over with the same excuses.

For my own part I am now in the prime of my age, therefore not affected with
the lightness and vanity of youth, nor the dotage of old age, I call the Heavens
to witness and all the powers therein, that I aim not at any private interest
in doing this Work, but purely the good of my country, I never received (that I
know of) the least prejudice by any of the College which might procure desire
of revenge in a melancholy breast. And last of al, not the least of all my
respects kind Gentlewomen to you (who freely bestow your pains brains and cost,
to your poor wounded and diseased neighbors) mnst not be for gotten, I humbly
salute you with many thanks, and present these the beginnings of my labors at
your feet, far be it from me to boast of them, praise them as you find them,
and rest assured of me, that during life I shall never cease to employ that
talant God has given me, to my countries good: I cannot boast as the College
did, that no errors are committed by the Printer or my Self, If it be childish
it is the liker to my Copy. I hope the ingenious will favorably pass by my
failings. Charity usually dwells in generous breasts, if this be kindly
accepted it shall be an engagement to me further to open this famous (though
too much abused) art of Physic to you, and withal always to remain

Your Servant NICH. CULPEPER.

THE NAMES OF THE DOCTORS OF THE SOCIETY OF PHYSICIANS LONDON, The Authors of
this WORK.
HENRY ATKINS, Docter of Physic, the Kings Physician in Ordinary, and
President of the College of Physicians. THEODORE DE MAYERNE, Doctor of
Physic, and chief Physician to both their Majesty's. 7. of the 8. chosen.
the Kings Physicians in Ordinary.
JOHN CRAIG. WILL. PADDY Gent.
THOMAS FREAR. THOMAS MOVNDEFORD. MARK RIDLEY. EDWARD LISTER. RICHARD PALMER.
JOHN CRAIG the younger, Chief Physician to Prince Charles. JOHN ARGENT. EDWARD
JORDAN. JOHN GIFFORD. FRANCIS HERRING. MATTHEW GWINN, the Kings Physician to
the Tower. MATTHEW LISTER. WILLIAM HARVEY, the Kings sworn Physician. WILLIAM
CLEMENT. SIMEON FOX. LEONARD POE, the Kings Physician to His Household. ROBERT
FLUDD. RICHARD ANDREWS. THOMAS PATTISON. THEODORE GOULSTON. JOHN COLLINS.
SIMON BASKERVILE. THOMAS WINESTONE. EDMUND WILSON. GEORGE ROGERS. JOHN RAVEN,
the Queens sworn Physician. PAUL DE LAUNE. ELEAZER HODSON. OTTUEL MEVEREL.
ALEXANDER RAMSEY.
The COLLEGE to the Candid READER.
PHYSIC which gives thee health wishes good health to thee. And that it may
the better provide for thy health, it bath built up this new Apothecaries shop,
which it has not only stored with a rich Magazine of wholesome medicines, but
has also taken so much care for thy safety, that they should be compounded
faithfully without deceit, safely without error: But thou will say, What need
is there of this, seeing there is scarce a foreign City or University of any
fame, but have abundantly performed this, both ancient and modern. Perhaps it
is true: But if so many Ancients as Mesue, Myrepsus, Alexandrinus and others
rested not satisfied in this, but every one of them would have his own
Dispensatory, the Romans theirs, the Venetians theirs, the Florentine theirs,
the Bergomenses theirs, the Augustan theirs, and others which we pass by in
(...). Why should not the Londoners have theirs? as their own proper garment,
the praise of which consists not in that it is Gorgeous, but in that it is
their Own; not in that it is made of Purple or Pall, but in that it is some
wise men question that extremely.
fitted to English bodies. Besides, it happens that we are rather distracted
than furnished with such varieties, this plenty has set us to seek, and that
disease we meet withal here arises altogether of fullness. The vaster the wood
is and the more paths is has, the sooner may the passenger lose his way. The
more spacious the Sea is, the more need of a Pilot. And this our Apothecaries
having been a long time distitute of, are tossed up and down with diverse
waves, and suffer a thousand distractions, one in making up his Medicines
running in one path another in another; one follows Cordus, another Fernelius,
a third the Augustane Physicians, and a fourth his own Fancy, so that a
medicine comes to have so many several Ideas as there are shops, which mischief
that it may not turn Epidemical, to the great hazard both of Physicians and
sick people, We intend by this work, like as by an anchor cast, to settle the
floating course of compounding medicines, and to restrain it within its proper
bounds and Channels, whilst we do not only teach one and the same rule and
method of compounding, but also impose and command it, from which men ought not
to err a hairs breadth (as they say) that so both Physicians and Apothecaries
being guided by one and the same thread, they may unanimusly proceed these in
prescribing, those in compounding medicines.

There is another grievous plague also which calls aloud for a Dispensatory, to
wit, The deceit and impostures of men, who to get a little gain, sell filthy
dregs instead of good drugs, nay even those which are of most value, Treacle,
Mitbridate, and Alkermes, are adulterated, so that they are no longer Antidotes
but Poisons, not a help but a destruction to the sick, such abominable
man-slayers though they deserve the whip or gallows rather than our Censure,
yet all may happily be salved (for English men) by benefit of this Book and
poor sick peoples health provided for, The happy and salubrious Counsel, the
glory and praise of which we do not ascribe to our selves, but (that we may
confess the very truth) its original came higher, and its rise was more divine,
the beginning came from Jupiter, we mean from our most sovereign, and (which is
more rare) most learned, and (which is more grateful) most vigilant for the
public safety, KING JAMES; who as he has always studied and happily settled,
peace in the Christian Orb, unity in the Brittan Orb, conformity in the
Eclesiastical Orb, So he has vouchsased to illustrate our Apollinary Orb and
physical Sphere with his light, and to appoint wholesome laws to us, for a
physical concord and certain harmony of making medicines, so that as before he
had respect to the salvation of souls, so here to the health of bodies; before
to the dignity of the subject, here to their life and health, so that it may be
truly spoken of him which the divine Prophet spoke of the Sun, Nothing is hid
from his heat, nothing secluded from his care, and the same motto seems to be
engraven by a divine hand upon his breast which is upon his coin, the safety of
the people is the supreme Law. For when he had granted new Liberties, new
Privileges to the Apothecaries of London, by his Letters patents, he
inculcales upon this above all, that when this Dispensatory comes out to
public view, they should religiously bind themselves to that as to a sacred
rule, and should obey the decrees of the College of Physicians, to which royal
mandate it was but equal for us to obey, and at length we brought the matter so
about to it this London Dispensatory is brought forth to public (...), in a
(...) neither slovenly nor proud, neither wanting nor redundant, in which
although we reverence the learned gray hairs of the ancient, and have placed
their recepts as it were in the front, yet we neither reject nor (...) the
supplies of modern assusions, but we have left them a place and corner in the
rear that so they may serve as auxiltaries to the moddel of Physic, Neither
have we superfiously tied our selves to the sleps of the Ancient so, as that we
bring nothing new of our own, for all here described is not transcribed, we
have not furnished our Apothecaries shop altogether, with foreign wares, but
we have added some new ones and of our own, which we bring forth into the
public, as aproved by frequent use, some we have changed in the ancient forms,
both the sense and name of the Author being preserved, not moved thereto so
much through desire of novelty as compelled thereto by necessity, especially
where such simples as are prescribed cannot easily be had, in the place of
which we prescribe others, like unto them in virtue. The like we have done in
the composition of pills, which if they were made into a mass after the ancient
manner with juyces or waters, they would soon be too dry, therefore we have
appointed it to be done with syrups, also whereas in most Authors, some things
are totally left to the judgment of the Artificer, especially in the quantity
of Honey and Sugar, under these two letters, q. s. or words, [so much as is
suffient] whence it comes to pass that the same medicine has neither the same
consistence nor the same virtue, we have for the future in a hopsack
taken away this power from the Artificer, and for this cause have taken some
of the most skilful Apothecaries into counsel with us, by whose help and pains
we have agreed upon a certain manner of composition, and have designed a
certain quantity and dose, which they may not ad to nor take from. And lastly
seeing in most Dispensatories both ancient and modern, the use and virtue of
every medicine is described whence ignorant fellows and Mountebanks may arm
themselves for the practice of physic, and so put a sword into a madmans hand
for the destruction of the Commonwealth, we have added nothing at all of the
virtues, for we write this to the learned only, and to the (...) rsiings of
Apollo, for the health, not the understanding of the vulgar, we need not give a
reason why we dispose of it in this order, we have placed the simple before the
compound, the internal before the external, the liquid before the sollid. We
have digested them all into several Classes, that so they may be brought into
use and practice with little search. Thus (Courteous Reader) thou have both
what we have done and why we have done it so, It is a work to which all the
College have brought their Talents as all the gods did to Pandora in the play,
But under the auspicy of a most worthy President, by whom not only as President
but by whose counsel help and indefatigable study, this building was finished,
which as it is (friendly Reader) we vow it to thine and the public good, and
hope it will be commodious for thee, and if it please thy palate, use it and
fare well.

From the College of London December. Anno. 1618
A brief of his MAJESTY'S Royal Proclamation Commanding all Apothecaries of
this Realm to follow this PHARMACOPOEIA lately compiled by the College of
Physicians of LONDON
WHere is by Our especial Commandment the e has been of late compiled in the
Latin tongue by the College of Physicians of London a Book entitled
Pharmac^poeia Londinensis, etc. And whereas through the great care and
industry of the said College, the foresaid Pharmacopoeia Londin, is now
perfected, and is a work greatly tending t the public good of our subjects,
and we minding that all falsehood, differences, varieties, or incertainties in
making or composing of Medicines, and distilling of Oils, or Waters, bereafter
be utterly taken away and abolished: and that in the time to come the manner
and form prescrited in the said book should be generally and solely practiced
by Apothecaries in their compositions of Medicines, and distillation of Waters
for all such things as are therein named and prescribed: we therefore desirous
in all things to provide for the common good of our subjects, and intending to
settle and establish the general use of the said Book in this (...) of ENGLAND,
do hereby signify and declare our Royal Will and pleasure to be, and hereby
straightly require, charge, and command all and singular Apothecaries, within
this our Realm of England or the dominions thereof, that they and every of
them, immediately after the said Pharmacop. Londin. shall be printed and
published, do not compound, or make any Medicine or medicinable receipt, or
prescription; or distill any Oil, or Waters, or other Extractions that are or
shall be in the said Pharmacop, Londin. mentioned and named after the ways or
means prescribed or directed, by any other Books or Dispensatories whatsoever,
but after the only manner and form that hereby is, or shall be directed,
prescribed, and set down by the said book, and according to the weights and
measures that are or shall be therein limited, and not otherwise, etc. upon
pain of Our high displeasure, and to incur such penalties and punishment as may
he inflicted upon offenders herein for their contempt or neglect of this our
Roial commandment. Willing and commanding also hereby all Majors, Sheriffs,
Justices of peace, Constables, etc. to be aiding and assisting. Given at Our
Palace of White Hall 26. of April in the 16. year of Our Reign of England
France, and Ireland, and of Scotland 51. 1618.

WEIGHTS.
TWenty grains do make a scruple, three scruples, a dram commonly called a
dram. Eight drachms, an ounce. Twelve ounces a pound

MEASVRES.
AS for the Colleges measures I know not well what English names to give them.
Cochlearium holds in syrups half an ounce, in distilled waters three drachms.
Cyaibus, holds an ounce and an half. Hemina (which also they call Cotyla)
contains nine ounces. Libra holds twelve ounces. A Sextary contains eighteen
ounces. A Congy six Sextaries

These measures amongst the Romans contained not just the same quantities, for
their Cyathus contained an onnce and an half, a dram and a scruple, Their
Sextary, contained but 14. ounces 3. quarters and half a quarter, and amongst
the Grecians not so much, it is called a Sextary because it is the six part of
a Congy. Neither did the Roman Hemina contain altogether 7. ounces and an half,
Their Libra I suppose to that which Galen calls (...), viz. a vessel to measure
with, it was made with clear horn and by certain lines drawn round it like
rings, was divided into twelve equal parts, each part containing an ounce.

Besides these, the College have gotten another foolish and uncertain way of
measuration not here set down, viz. by handfuls and pugills, what ahandful is,
is known to all, but how much it is, is known to none, but is as different as
men's hands are in bigness or their fingers in length. A pugil is properly so
much as you can take up with your thumb and two fingers, and is very uncertain,
not only in respect of the length of the finger, but also in respect of the
matter you take up, for your mothers wit will tell you, you may take up more
hay in that manner than bran.

DIRECTIONS
ALthough I did what I could throughout the Book to express my self, in such a
language as might be understood by all, and therefore avoided terms of are so
much as might be, yet it could not sometimes be avoided but some words were
quoted which stand in need of some explaining, such of which as are obvious to
my eye are -- 1. Balneum Mariae, is a double vessel, the one of which holds
water, the other holds the matter to be distilled, conveniently placed in the
water, that which contains the matter to be distilled is made of glass, which
ought to be put in whilst the water is cold, neither to be taken out whilst the
water is hot, for fear of breaking, in this manner are all gross bodies
distilled.

2. Manica Hippocratis, Hippocrates his sleeve is a strainer made of woolen
cloth, sewed together in the form of a Sugar Loaf.

3. Calcination is the burning of a thing in a Crucible or other such
convenient vessel that will endure the fire.

4. Filtation is straining a thing through a brown paper, viz. make up the
paper in form of a funnel, which having placed in a funnel let the liquor pass
through it.

5. Coagulation is curdling or hardening, it is used here for reducing a liquid
body to hardness by boiling.

6. Whereas vital, natural, and animal Spirits are often mentioned in the
virtues, I shall here explain the meaning of them.

The actions of the animal virtue are, 1. sensitive, 2. motive, the sensitive
is, 1. external, 2. internal, External are seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling,
feeling. The Internal senses are, Imagination, Judgment, Memory, this proceeds
from the brain.

The vital spirit proceeds from the heart, and causes in man, Mirth, Joy,
Hope, Trust, Humanity, Mildness, Courage, as also their opposites, Care, Fear,
Sadness, Sorrow, Despair, Envy Hatred, Stuborness, Revenge etc.

The natural virtue alters, Nourishment into Chyle, Chyle into Blood, Blood
into Flesh, it also Forms, Engendereth, Nourishes, and increases the body.

7. Infusion, is steeping a gross substance in one more liquid.

8. Decoction, is the liquor in which any thing is boiled.

A CATALOGVE OF THE SIMPLES CONDUCING TO THE DISPENSATORY.
The PREFACE.
BEfore I begin the Catalogue I thought good to premise a few words to the
Reader:

1. Let him have a care he mistake not one thing for another, viz. Herbs for
Roots, or either of them for Flowers: If he cast but his eye up to the top of
the Page, he shall there see which it is.

2. Let a due time be observed (cases of necessity excepted) in gathering all
Simples; for which take these few Rules: All Roots are of most virtue when the
sap is down in them, viz. toward the latter end of summer, or beginning of the
spring, for happily in winter many of them cannot be found; you may hang up
many of them a drying, by drawing a string through them and so keep them a whole
year.

Herbs are to be gathered when they are fullest of juice, before they run up to
seed; and if you gather them in a hot sunshine day, they will not be so subject
to putrify; the best way to dry them, is in the sun, according to Dr. REASON,
though not according to Dr. TRADITION: Such Herbs as remain green all the year,
or are very full of juice, it were a folly to dry at all, but gather them only
for present ufe, as Houseleek, Scurvy-grasse, etc.

Let Flowers be gathered when they are in their prime, in a sunshine day, and
dried in the sun. Let the seeds be perfectly ripe before they be gathered.

3. Let them be kept in a dry place, for any moisture, though it be but a moist
air, corrupts them, which if perceived in time, the beams of the sun will
refresh them again.

4. Take notice, that only the Latin names, were quoted by the College and are
to be seen at the beginniug of each Simple in a different letter, the English
name together with the Temperature and Virtues were added by the Translator, he
hopes for the public good.

5. All the Lattin names to one Herb are not set down, that would have done no
other good in the world than took up more paper, and by consequence made the
Book the dearer.

ROOTS.
ACanthi, Brancae ursinae. Of Bears breech, or branck-ursine; it is meanly hot
and dry, it helps ach and numnesle of the joints, and is of a binding quality,
good for wounds and broken bones. Dioscorides says, they are profittable for
Ruptures, or such as are bursten, or burnt with fire.

Acori, Very, Peregrini, Vulgaris. etc. See Calamus, Aromalicus. I shall not,
nor dare not make a long paraphrase about the sorts of it, one of which is the
water-flag, or flower de luce, which is hot and dry in the second degree,
binds, strengthens, stops fluxes of the belly, and the immoderate flowing of
the terms in women.

Allium. Garlic. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree, breeds naughty and
corrupt blood, yet is an enemy to all poisons, and such as are bitten by viz.
Adders, Toads, Spiders, etc.
cold venomous beasts, it provokes urin, and expels wind.

Alcanuae. Of privet. See the leaves.

Althaeae Of marshmallows, are meanly hot, of a digesting softning nature, ease
pains, help bloody-fluxes, the stone and gravel.

Angelicae. Of Angelica, is hot and dry in the third degree, strengthens the
heart exceedingly, and is a singular remedy against pestilence and poison.

Anchusae. Of Alkanet, cold and dry, binding, good for old ulcers.

Anthorae. An outlandish root, the counterpoison for Monkshood, it is an
admirable remedy for the wind-cholick, and (...) poison. They that would know
more of it, let them read Guainerius, and Solerius, both which lived near the
places where it plentifully grew.

Apii. Of smallage, see the Barks.

Aristolochiae. Of Birthwort: of which are three sorts, long, round, and
climing. All hot and dry in the third degree.

The long, being drunk in wine, brings away both birth Dioscorides.
and afterbirth, and whatsoever a careless Midwife has left Gallen.
behind.

The round, being drunk with wine, helps (besides the former) stuffings of the
lungues, hardness of the spleen, ruptures, convulsions; both of them resist
poison.

I never read any use of the climing Birthwort.

Artanitae, Cyclaminis etc. of Sow-bread: hot and dry in the third degree, a
most violent purge, dangerous; outwardly applied to the place it profits much
in the bitings of venomous beasts, also being hung about women in labor, it
causes speedy deliverance. See the herb.

Arundinis, Vallatoriae, and Sacchatinae. Of common Reeds and sugar Reeds, the
roots of common reeds, draw out thorns, ease sprains, the ashes of them mixed
with vinegar: Take scurf or dandrif off from the head, and prevent the falling
off of the hair, they are hot and dry in the second degree according to Gallen.

I never read any virtue of the root of Sugar Cane.

Ari etc. of Cuckow-pints, or Wake-Robin, I would not have the Reader build to
much confidence upon the degrees of temperature (or more properly intemperature
neither of this, or any other simple, because most of them are quoted by
OutlandishAuthors; and out of question the differrence of the climate may
something alter their temperature in degree. Dioscorides. AEtius. Gallen.
hot and dry in the third degree. I know no great good they do inwardly taken,
unless to play the rogue withal, or make sport: outwardly applied, they take
off Scurf, Morphew, and Freckles from the face, and clear the skin, and cease
the pains of the Gout. See Gersa serpentaria.

Asclepiadis, vincetoxici. Of Swallow wort, hot and dry, good against poison,
and gripings of the belly, as also against the bitings of mad-dogs.

Asari. Of Asara bacca, the roots are a safer purge than the leaves and not so
violent, they purge by vomit, stool, and urine, they are profitable for such as
have agues, dropsies, stoppings of the liver, or spleen, green sickness.

Asparagi. Of Sparagus, or Sperage: they are temperate in quality, opening,
they provoke urine, and cleanse the reins and bladder.

Asphodeli, hastae Regiae, foem. Of Kings spear or foemal Asphodel. I know no
physical use of the roots, probably there is: for I do not believe God created
any thing of no use.

Asphodeli, Albuci, maris, of male Asphodel. Hot and dry in the second degree.
Inwardly taken, they provoke vomit, urine, and the terms in women; outwardly
used in ointments, they cause hair to grow, cleanse ulcers, take away morphew
and freckles from the face.

Bardanae etc. Of Bur, Clot-bur, or Bur-dock, temperately Dioscorides. Apuleius.
hot and dry. Helps such as spit blood and matter, bruised and mixed with salt
and applied to the place, helps the bitings of mad dogs. It expels wind, eases
pains of the teeth, strengthens the back, helps the running of the reins and
the whites in women.

Behen. alb. Rub. Of Valerian, white and red. Mesue, Serapio and other Arabians
say they are hot and moist, in the latter end of the first or beginning of the
second degree, and comfort the heart, stir up lust. The Graecians held them to
be dry in the second degree, that they stop fluxes and provoke urine.

Bellidis. Of Dazies, see the leaves.

Betae, nigrae, albae, rubrae. Of Beets, black, white, and red, as for black
Beets I have nothing to say, I doubt they are as rare as black Swans. The red
Beet root boiled and preserved in vinegar makes a fine cool, pleasing,
cleansing, digesting sauce. See the leaves.

Bistortae etc. Of Bistort, or snakeweed, cold and dry in the third degree,
binding, resists pestilence and poison, helps ruptures, and bruises, stays
fluxes, vomiting, and the immoderate flowing of the terms in women, helps
inflammations and sornes of the mouth, and fastens loose teeth.

Borraginis. Of Borrage, hot and moist in the first degree, Dioscorides.
cheers the heart, and helps drooping spirits.

Brioniae etc. Of Briony both white and black, they are both hot and dey, some
say in the third degree, and some say, but in the first, they purge phlegm and
watery humors, but they trouble the stomach much, they are special good for
dropsies, the white is most in use, and is admirable good for the fits of the
mother, both of them externally used, take away freckles, sun-burning and
morphew from the face, and cleanse filthy ulcers.

Buglossi. Of Bugloss, its virtues are the same with Borrage, and the roots of
either sildom used.

Bulbus vomitorius. a vomiting root. I never read of it else where by this
general name.

Calami Aromatici. Of Aromatical reed, or sweet garden flag, It provokes urine,
strengthens the lungues, helps bruises, refists poison etc. In beating of it be
very speedy, for the strength will quickly fly out.

Capparum. Of Caper roots, are hot and dry in the second degree, cutting and
cleansing, they provoke the terms, help malignant ulcers, ease the toothache,
aswage swellings, and help the rickets.

Caryophillatae etc. Of Avens, or herb Bennet, The roots are dry, and
something hot, of a cleansing quality, they keep garments from being motheaten.
See the leaves.

Caulium, Of Coleworts. I know nothing the roots are good for, but only to bear
the herbs and flowers.

Centaurij major is, Of Centaury the greater, the roots help such as are
bursten, such as spit blood, shrinking of sinnews, shortness of wind, coughs,
convulsions, cramps.

Cepae, Of Onions, are hot and dry (according to Gallen) in the fourth degree,
they cause dryness, and are extremely hurtful for chollerick people, they breed
but little nourishment, and that little is naught, they are bad meat, yet good
physic for phlegmatic people, they are opening, and provoke urine, and the
terms, if cold be the cause obstructing, bruised and outwardly applied they
cure the bitings of mad dogs, roasted and applied they help boils, and
Aposthumes, raw they take the fire out of burnings, but ordinaryly eaten they
cause headache, spoil the sight, dull the senses, and fill the body full of
wind.

Chameleontis Albi, nigri etc. Of Chameleon white and black. Tragus calls the
Carline Thistle by the name of white Chameleon, the root whereof is hot in the
second degree, and dry in the third, it provokes sweat, kills worms, resists
pestilence and poison, it is given with success in pestilential fevers, helps
the tooth ach by being chewed in the mouth, opens the stoppings of the liver
and spleen, it provokes urine, and brings down the terms. As for the black
Chameleon, All Physicians hold it to have a kind of venomous quality, and unfit
to be used inwardly, Both Gallen, Clusius, Nicander, Dioscorides, and AEgineta.
Outwardly in ointments it is profitable for scabs, morphew, tettars etc. and
all things that need clensing.

Chelidonij, majoris, minoris. Of Celondine the greater and lesser, The greater
is that which we usually call Celondine, the root is manifestly hot and dry,
clensing and scouring, proper for such as have the yellow Jaundice, it opens
obstructions of the liver, and if chewed in the mouth it helps the toothache.

Celondine the lesser is that which usually we call Pilewott, which though
Gallen, and Dioscorides teach to be hot in the fourth degree, and might happily
be so in those countries where they lived, yet with us it scarce exceeds the
first degree, the Juice of the root mixed with honey and snuffed up the nose
purges the head, helps the Hemorrhoyds or Piles being bathed with it, as also
does the root only carried about one, being made into an ointment helps the
(...)
disease in the neck commonly called the Kings Evil.

China, wonderfully extenuateth and dries, provokes sweat, resists
putrefaction, it strengthens the liver, helps the dropsy and malignant ulcers,
leprosy, itch, and the French-pocks, and is profitable in diseases coming of
fasting.

Cichorij. Of Succory, cools and dries in the second degree strengthens the
liver and veins, it opens obstructions, stoppings of the liver and spleen.

Colchici. Of medow-saffron, the roots are held to be hurtful to the stomach,
therefore I let them alone.

Consolidae, majoris, minoris, Consolida major, is that which we ordinarily
call Comfry, it is of a cold quallity, yet pretty temperate, of such a
gluttenous quallity that according to Discorides they will join meat together
that is cut in sunder, if they be boiled with it, it is excellent for all
wounds both nternal and external, for spitting of blood, ruptures or
iburstness, pains in the back, it strengthens the reins, it stops the terms,
and helps the hemorrhoyds.

Consolida minor is that we call, Self-heal, and the Lattins Prunella. See the
herb.

Costi utriusque. Of Costus both sorts, being roots coming from beyond sea, hot
and dry, break wind, being boild in oil it is held to help the gout by
anointing the greived place with it.

Cucumer is a gresiis. Of wild cucumer roots, or cowcumber as the vulgar call
them, they purge phlegm and that with such violence, that I would advise the
country man that knows not how to correct them to let them alone.

Cinarae etc. Of Artichokes, the root purges by urine whereby the rank savor
of the body is much amended.

Cynoglossae etc. Of Houndstongue, cold and dry, being roasted and laid to the
fundament helps the Hemorrhoyds, is also good against burnings and scaldings.

Curcumae. Of Turmerick, hot in the third degrree, opens obstructions, is
profitable against the yellow jaundice, and cold distempers of the liver and
spleen.

Cyperiutriusque, longi, rotundi. Of Cyperus grass or English Galanga, both
sorts, long and round, is of a warming nature provokes urine, breaks the stone,
provokes the terms, the ashes of them (being burnt) is used for Ulcers in the
mouth, Cankers etc.

Dauci. Of Carrots, are moderately hot and moist, breed but little nourishment
and is extreme windy, I omit what virtues Gallen writes of them, as being
confident there was such a difference between them that our Carrots will never
answer those effects.

Dentariae majoris etc. Of Toothwort, toothed violets, or Coralwort, they are
drying, binding, and strengthening, are good to ease pains in the sides and
bowels, also being boiled the decoction is said to be good to wash green wounds
and ulcers with.

Dictamni. Of Dittany, is hot and dry in the third degree, hastens travail in
women, provokes the terms. See the leaves. Mathiolus.


Doronici. Of Doronicum, a supposed kind of wolf-bane, I Dioscorides.
am of opinion that Serapio and Avicenna and other Arabian Physicians did not
intend that root we now use for Doronicum when they wrote so much against it, I
shall adhear to the judgment of Gesner, which is verified by daily experience,
It is hot and dry in the third degree, strengthens the heart, is a sovereign
cordial, and preservative against the pestilence; It helps the vertigo or
swimming of the head, is admirable against the bitings of venomous beasts, and
such as have taken to much opium, as also for Lethargies, the juice helps hot
rhewns in the eyes.

Dracontij, Dracunculi. Diverse Authors attribute diverse herbs to this name,
it is most probable to me, that they mean Dragons, the roots of which cleanse
mightily, and take away proud or dead flesh, the very smell of them is hurtful
for women with child, outwardly in ointments they take away scurf, morphew and
sunburning, I would not wish any unless very well read in Physic to take them
inwardly.

Ebuli. Of Dwarf Elder, Walwort, or Danewort, hot and dry in the third degree,
the roots are as gallant a purge for the dropsy as any is under the Sun, which
besides the Authority of the Ancient, was often proved by the never dying Dr.
Butler of Cambridge, as my self have it in a manuscript of his.

Echij. Of Vipers Bugloss, or Wild Bugloss: I warrant you if Authors had not
differed about this herb, the College would have set down five or six names
to have explained their meaning, as they usually do where they need not, I have
set down the most usual name, and always quote the virtues to what I set down:
They say the root of this being carried in ones hand, no venomous beast will
bite him, (and so they say of Dragons which I forgot before) so that you may
walk without danger amongst adders, vipers, and serpents, (but I believe you
had best have a care you do not tread upon them) this root is cold and dry,
good for such as are bitten by venomous beasts, either being boiled in wine and
drunk, or bruised and applied to the place, being also boiled in wine and
drunk, it increases milk in nurses.

Ellebori, Veratri, albi. nigri. Of Hellebore white and black. The root of
white Hellebore, or Sneezwort, being grated and snuffed up the nose, causes
Sneezing, kills Rats, and Mice being mixed with their meat: it is but a scurvy,
churlish medicine being taken inwardly, and therefore better let alone than
used; and yet Dr. Bright co^mends it for such as are mad through Melancholy.

Black Hellebore, Bears-foot, or Christmas-flower; both this and the former are
hot and dry in the third degree. This is nothing so violent nor dangerous as
the former: Both Gal. len and Julius Alexandrinus report the roots of this
boiled in vinegar to be an admirable remedy against inveterate Scabs, Itch and
Leprofie, the same helps the Tooth-(...) held in the mouth, and dropped into
the ears helps deafness coming of Melancholy, and noise in the ears, You must
boil them but very little, for the strength will soon fly away in vapor.
corrected with a little Cinnamon (in powder) it purges Melancholy, resists
Madness. Also Pliny, Absyrtus, and Columella, affirm that a piece of the root
put into a hole made in the ear of a beast troubled with the Cough, or that
has taken any poison, and drawn quite through next day about that time,
helps them: out of question it is a special thing to rowel cattle withal.

Enulae Campanae, Helenij. Of Elecampane, is hot and dry in the third degree,
wholesome for the stomach, resists poison, helps old coughs and shortness of
breath, helps ruptures and provokes lust: in ointments, it is good against
scabs and itch.

Endiviae etc. Of Endive, Garden Endive which is the (...) here specified, is
held to be somewhat colder, though not so dry and cleansing as that which is
wild, it cools hot stomachs hot livers, amends the blood corrupted by heat, and
therefore must needs be good in fevers; it cools the reins, and therefore
prevents the stone, it opens obstructions and provokes urine

Eringij. Of Eringo, or Sea holly, the roots are moderately hot, something
drying and cleansing, bruised and applied to the place they help the Scrophula,
or disease in the throat called the Kings Evil, they break the stone, increase
seed, stir up lust, provoke the terms etc.

Esulae, majoris, minoris. Of Spurge the greater and lesser, they are both
(taken inwardly) too violent for a vulgar use, outwardly in ointments they
cleanse the skin, and take away sunburning.

Filicis etc. Fearn, of which are two grand distinctions, viz male and foemale,
I suppose they intend the male here, because they adjoyn some other names to
it, which the Greeks attributed only to the male, the foemale is that which we
call Brakes, both of them are hot and dry, and excellent good for the Rickets
in children, and diseases of the spleen, but dangerous for women with child.

Filipendulae. Of Dropwort, the roots are hot and dry, in the third degree,
opening, cleansing, yet somewhat binding, they provoke urine, ease pains in the
bladder, and are a good preservative against the falling sickness.

Foeniculi. Of Fennel, the root is hot and dry, some say in the third degree,
opening, it provokes urine, and the terms, stregthens the Liver, and is good
against the Dropsy.

Fraxini. Of Ash-tree, I know no great virtues in Physic of the roots.

Galangae, majoris, minoris. Galanga commonly called Galingal, the greater and
lesser, they are hot and dry in the third Mathiolus.
degree, and the lesser are accounted the hotter, it strengthens the stomach
exceedingly, and takes away the pains thereof coming of cold or wind, the smell
of it strengthens the brain, it releeves faint hearts, takes away windiness of
the womb, heats the reins, and provokes lust.

Gentianae. Of Gentian, called so from Gentius a Prince.
his name that first found it out, some call it Felwort, and Baldmoney. It is
hot, cleansing, and scouring, a notable Counterpoyson, it opens obstructions,
helps the bitings of venomous beasts, and mad dogs, helps digestion, and
cleanses the body of raw humors, our Chyrurgians use the root in form of a
tent, to open the sore they are also very profitable for ruptures or such as
are burst.

Glycyrrhizae. Of Liquoris, the best that is grows in England, it is hot and
moist in temperature, helps the roughness of the windpipe, Hoarceness, diseases
in the Kidneyes and bladder, and ulcers in the bladder, (which in my opinion is
a very difficult thing to cure, although curable) it concocts raw humors in the
stomach, helps difficulty of breathing is profitable for all salt humors, the
root dried and beaten into powder and the powder put into the eye, is a special
remedy for a pin and a web.

Graminis. Of Grass such as in London they call Coutchgrasse, and
Squitch-grasse, in Sussex Dog-grasse. It gallantly provokes urine, and eases
the Kidneyes oppressed with gravel, gripings of the belly, and difficulty of
urine. bruised Gallen Discorides
and applied to the place they speedily help green wounds.

Hermodactyli. Of Hermodactils, they are hot and dry, purge phlegm, especially
from the joints, therefore are good for goues, and other diseases in the
joints. their vices are corrected with long peppar, Ginger, Cinnamon, or
Mastick.

Hyaointhi. Of Jacinths, the roots are dry in the first degree, and cold in the
second, they stop looseness, bind the belly.

Iridis, vulgaris, et Florentinae etc. Orris, or flower-deluce (after the
French name) both that which grows with us, and and that which comes from
Florence. They are hot and dry in the third degree, resist poison, help
shortness of breath, provoke the terms, the root being green and bruised takes
away blackness and blewness of a stroke being applied to it.

Imperatoriae etc, Of Masterwort, the root is hot and dry in the third degree,
mitigates the rigor of Agues, helps Dropsies, provokes Sweat, break,
Carbuncles, and Plague-sores being applied to them, it is very profitable being
given inwardly in bruises.

Isatidis, Glasti. Of Woad, I know no great Physical virtue in the Root, see
the herb.

Labri veneris, Dipsaci. Fullers-Thistle, Teazle. The Root boiled in wine till
it be thick (quoth Dioscorides) helps by unction the clefts of the fundament,
as also takes away warts and wens. Gallen says they are dry in the second
degree, and I take it all Authors hold them to be cold and dry.

Lactucae. Of Lettice, I know no Physical virtue residing in the roots.

Lauri. Of the Bay Tree. The bark of the root drunk with wine, provokes urine,
breaks the stone, opens obstructions of the liver and spleen, But according to
Dioscorides is naught for women with child. Gallen.


Lapathi acuti, Oxylapathi. Sorrel, according to Gallen, But Sharp pointed
dock, according to Dioscorides, But which the College intends, I know not, The
Roots of (...) are held to be profitable against the Jaundice, of
Sharp-pointed-dock, cleanse, and help Scabs and Itch.

Levistici. Of Lovage, they are hot and dry and exceeding good for any diseases
coming of wind.

Lillij Albi. Of white Lillies, the root is something hot and dry, helps
burnings, softens the womb, provokes the terms, if boiled in wine, is given
with good success in Fevers, Pestilences, and all diseases that require
suppuration, it (being outwardly applied) helps Ulcers in the head, and amends
the ill color of the face.

Malvae. Of Mallows, they are cool, and digesting, resist poison, and help
Erosions, or Gnawing of the bowels or any other part, as also Ulcers in the
bladder.

Mandragorae. Of Mandrakes, a root dangerous for its coldness, being cold in
the fourth degree, the root is scarcy, and dangerous for the vulgar to use,
therefore I leave it to those that have skill.

Mechoachanae etc. Of Mechoacan, It is corrected with Cinnamon, is temperate,
yet drying, purges phlegm chiefly from the head and joints, it is good for old
diseases in the head, and may safely be given even to Feverish bodies, because
of its temperature; It is also profitable against Coughs and pains in the
Reins, as also against the French Pox.

Mei etc. Spignel, the roots are hot and dry in the second or third degree, and
send up unwholsom vapors to the head, and therefore seeing God has allotted
such plentiful remedy for those maladies, this root conduces to the cure of; I
pass it by with silence.

Mezerei etc. Of Spurge-Olive, or Widdow-wail. See the Herb, if you think it
worth the seeing.

Mororum Celsi. Of the Mulberry tree, The bark of the root is bitter, hot and
dry, opens stoppings of the liver and spleen, purges the belly, and kills
worms, boiled in vinegar helps the toothache.

Morsus Diaboli, Succisae etc. Devils-bit. See the herb.

Nardi Spicae, Indicae, Celticae. Of Spiknard, Indian, and Celtique. Celtick
Nard, according to Rondeletius wonderfully provokes urine, They are both hot
and dry, but I (...) the degree alone, till the learned are agreed about it,
the Indian also provokes urine and stops fluxes, helps windiness of the
stomach, resists the pestilence, helps gnawing pains of the stomach, and
dries up rewms that molest the head, the Celtick Spiknard, performs the same
offices though in a weaker measure.

Nenupharis, Nymphaeae. Of Water Lillies, they are cold and dry, and stop lust,
I never dived so deep to find any other virtue the roots have.

Ononidis, Arrestae Bovis etc. Of Cammock, or Rest-Harrow, so called because it
makes the Oxen stand still when they are ploughing, The roots are hot and dry
in the third degree, it breaks the stone, (viz the bark of it) the root it
self, according to Pliny, helps the falling sickness, according to Mathiolus,
helps ruptures.

Ostrutij. Masterwort, given once before under the name of Imperatoria. But I
have something else to do than to write one thing twice as they did.

Pastinacae, Sativae, et silvestris. Garden and wild Parsnips, they are of a
temperate quality enclining something to heat, the Garden Parsnips provoke
lust, and nourish as much and more too, than any root ordinarily eaten, the
Wild are more physical, (and so usually are all wild plants, I could give
reasons for it if I durst spend time and paper) being cutting, cleansing, and
opening, they resist the bitings of venomous beasts, ease pains and stitches in
the sides, and are a sovereign remedy against the Wind chollick.

Pentaphylli. Of Cinkfoyl, commonly called five-leaved or five-fingered-grass,
the root is very drying, but very moderately hot, It is admirable against all
fluxes, and stops blood flowing from any part of the body, it helps infirmities
of the Liver and Lungues, helps putrified ulcers of the mouth, the root boiled
in vinegar is good against the Shingles, and appeaseth the rage of any fretting
sores.

Petasitae, Of Butter-bur, the roots are hot and dry in the second degree, they
are exceeding good in violent and pestilential Fevers, they provoke the terms,
expel poison, and kill worms.

Peucedani, foeniculi porcini, Of Sulphurwort, (...) fennel, or Horestrange, it
is very good applied to the navils of children that stick out, ruptures, held
in the mouth it is a present remedy for the fits of the mother, it being taken
inwardly gives speedy deliverance to women in travail, and brings away the
after birth.

Poeoniae, maris, foemellae. Of Peony, male and foemale, they are meanly hot,
but more drying, the male is more effectual in operation than the foemale, the
root helps women not sufficiently purged after travail, it provokes the terms,
and helps pains in the belly, (...) also in the reins and bladder,
Fallingsickness, and convulsions in children, being either taken inwardly or
hung about their necks.

Phu, Valerianae, majoris, minoris. Valerian, or Setwal, greater and lesser.
They are temperarely hot the greater provokes arine and the terms, helps the
strangury, flaies new (...) in the Dioscorides.
head, and takes away the pricking pains thereof, The lesser resists poison,
aswageth the swellings of the cods, coming either through wind or cold, helps
cold taken after sweating or labor, Wind (...), outwardly it draws out thorns,
Mathiolus.
and cures both wounds and ulcers.

(...) etc. Of (...), It does this good, to bring forth a gallant physical
herb.

Plantaginis. Of Plantane, the root is something dryer than the leaf, but not
so cold, it opens stoppages of the liver helps the Jaundice and ulcers of the
reins and bladder. (...) affiirmeth that one root helps a quotidian ague, three
a tertian, and four a quartan, which though our late Writers hold to be
fabulous, yet there may be a greater truth in it than they are aware of, yet am
I as loath to make superstition a foundation to build on as any of them, let
experience be judge, and then we weigh not modern Jury men.

Polypodij. Of Polypodium, or Fearn of the Oak, It is a gallant though gentle
purger of Melancholy, Also in the opinion of Mesue (as famous a Physician as
ever I read, for a Gallenist) it dries up superfluous humors, takes away
swellings from the hands, feet, knees, and joints, stitches, and pains in the
sides, infirmities of the spleen, rickets: correct i t with a few Annis seeds,
or Fennel seeds, or a little Ginger, and then the stomach will not loath it.

Poligonati, sigilli Solomonis etc. Of Solomon's Seal, Let it be no dishonor to
Gallen nor Dioscorides that English men have found out in late days that these
roots may safely be given inwardly, Intruth they may be excused if the
difference of the climates they and we lived and now live in be but considered,
neither I hope will my country men blame me for following only Dr. Experience
in the virtues of this root, stamped and boiled in wine it speedily helps
(being drunk I mean for it will not do the deed by looking upon it) all broken
bones, it is of an incredible virtue that way, as also being stamped and
applied to the place, it soon heals all wounds, and quickly takes away the
black and blew marks of blows, being bruised and applied to the place, and for
these, I am persuaded there is not a better medicine under the Sun, or as
Copernicus and Kepler will have it, above the Sun.

Porri. Of Leeks, they say they are hot and dry in the fourth degree, they
breed but ill favored nourishment at the best, they spoil the eyes, heat the
body, cause troublesome sleep, and are noisome to the stomach, yet are they good
for something else, than only to stick in Welchmens hats, for the joyce of them
dropped into the ears, takes away the noise of them, mixed with a little
vinegar and snuffed up the nose, it stays the bleeding of it, they are (...)
of the two boiled than raw, but both ways, exceeding hurtful for ulcers in the
bladder, and so are Onions and Garlic.

Prunellorum Silvestrium. Of Sloe-bush, or Sloe tree, I think the College set
this amongst the roots only for fashion-sake, and I did it because they did.

Pyrethri Salivaris etc. Pelitory of Spain, it is hot and dry in the fourth
degree, chewed in the mouth, it draws away Rewm in the toothache, bruised and
boiled in oil, it provoke; sweat by unction, inwardly taken, they say it helps
Palsyes and other cold effects of the brain and nerves.

(...). Reupontick, or Reubarb of Pontus, it takes away windiness, and weakness
of the stomach, (...), sobbings, spittings of blood, diseases of the liver and
spleen, rickts etc.

Rhabarbari. Of Reubarb, It gently purges choler from the stomach and liver,
opens stoppings, withstands the dropsy, and Hypocondriack melancholy, a
little boiling takes away the virtue of it, and therefore it is best given by
infusion only, it leaves a binding quality behind it, therefore dried a little
by the fire and beaten into powder it is usually given in fluxes.

Rhaphani, Domesticae et sylvesiris. Of Radishes, Garden and Wild. Garden
Radishes provoke urine, break the stone, and purge by urine exceedingly, yet
breed very bad blood, are offensive to the stomach, and hard of digestion, hot
and dry in quallity. Wild or Horse Radishes, such as grow in ditches, are
hotter and drier than the former, and more effectual in the premises.

Rhodiae, rad. Rose root, called (I suppose) by that name because of its
sweetness. Stamped and applied to the head it mitigates the pains thereof,
being somewhat cool in quality.

Rhabarbari-Monachorum. Patience, Monks-Reubarb, or Bastard-Reubarb, it also
purges, cleanses the blood, opens obstructions of the liver.

(...). Of Maddir, In this were Gallen and Dioscorides quite beside the
cushion, in saying this root was opening, and cleansing, when clean contrary,
it is both drying, and binding, yet not without some opening quality, for it
helps the Yellow Jaundise, and therefore opens the obstructions of the liver
and gall, it is given with good success to such as have had bruises by falls,
stops looseness, the Hemorrhoids, and the Terms in women.

Rusci. Of Knee-holly, or Butchers-broom, or Bruscus, they are meanly hot and
dry, provokes urine, break the stone, and help such as cannot piss freely.

Sambuci. Of Elder, I know no wonders the root will do.

Sarsae-Parigliae. Of Sarsa-Parilla, or Bindweed, somewhat hot and dry, helpful
against pains in the head, and joints, they provoke sweat, and are used
familiarly in drying Dietdrinks.

Saetyrii utriusque. Of Satyrion, each fort, they are hot and moist in temper,
provoke lust, and increase seed, each branch bears two roots, both spongy,
yet the one more solid than the other, which is of most virtue, and indeed only
to be used, for some say the most spongy root is quite contrary in operation to
the other, as the one increases the other decreaseth, yet if in your eye they
contend for dignities, put them both in water, and the most solid which is for
use will sink, the other swim.

Saxifragiae albae. Of white Saxifrage, in Sussex we call them Lady-smocks, the
roots powerful break the stone, expel wind, provoke urine and cleanse the reins.

Sanguisorbae. A kind of Burnet.

Scabiosae. Of Scabious, the roots either boiled or beaten into powder and so
taken, helps such as are extremely troubled Mathiolus.
with scabs and itch, are medicinal in the French-pocks, hard swellings, inward
wounds, being of a drying, cleansing and healing faculty.

Scordii. Of Scordium, or water-Germander: see the herb.

Scillae. Of Squills, see the vinegar, and wine of Squills in the compounds.

Scrophulariae. etc. Of Figwort, The roots being of the same virtue with the
herb, I refer you thither.

Scorzonerae. Of Vipers-grass, The root cheers the heart and strengthens the
vital spirits, resists poison, helps passions and Monardus.
tremblings of the heart, faintness, sadness, and melancholy, opens stoppings
of the liver and spleen, provokes the terms eases women of the fits of the
mother, and helps swimmings in the head.

Seseleos. Of Seleli, or Hart-wort, The roots provoke urine helps the
falling sickness.

Sisari, secacul. Of Skirrets, they are hot and moist of good nourishment,
something windy as all roots are, by reason of which they provoke lust, they
stir up apetite and provoke urine.

I hope I may without offense forbear mentioning, Comfry, and black Briony,
twice, though the College did not.

Sonchi. Of Sowthistles, see the herb.

Spinae Albae, Bedegnar. I scarce know what name to give it, that will please
the College, our English, both Physicians and Apothecaries, call that ball of
thread that grows upon briars, Bedeguar, but the Arabians called our Ladies
thistles, by that name, The roots of which are drying and binding, stops
fluxes, bleeding, takes away cold swellings, and ease the pains of the teeth.

Spatulae foetidae. Stinking gladon, a kind of flowerdeluce, called so for its
unsavory smell; it is hot and dry in the third degree: outwardly they help the
King's Evil, soften hard swellings, draw out broken bones: Inwardly taken, they
help Convulsions, Ruptures, Bruises, Infirmities of the Lunges.

Tamarisci. Of Tamaris. See the Herbs, and Barks.

Tanaceti. Of Tansie. The root Eaten is a singular remedy for the Gout; the
rich may bestow the cost to preserve it.

Thapsiae etc. A venomous root, outlandish: therefore no more of it.

Tormentillae. Of Tormentil. A kind of sink-foyl, dry in the third degree, but
moderatly hot; exceeding good in Pestilences, provokes sweat, stays vomiting,
chears the heart, expels poison.

Trifolii. Of Trefoyl. See the Herb.

Tribuli Aquatici. Of water-Caltrops: The roots lie too far under water for me
to reach to.

Trachelli. Of Throatwort: by some called CanterburyBels: by some
Coventry-Bells. They help Diseases and Ulcers in the throat.

Trinitatis herbae. Hearts-ease, or Pansies: I know no great virtue they have.

Tunicis. I shall tell you the virtues when I know what it is.

Tripolii. The root purges Phlegm, expels Poison.

Turbith. The root purges Phlegm, (being hot in the third degree) chiefly from
the exterior parts of the body; it is corrected with Ginger, or Mastick.

Tuberum. Of Toads-stools: Whether these be roots or no it matters not much:
for my part I know little need of them, either in food or physic.

Victorialis. An Outlandish kind of Garlic, they say being hung about the
necks of cattle that are blind suddenly, it helps them, and defends those that
bear it, from evil spirits.

Swallow wort, and Teazles were handled before.

Ulmariae, Reginae prati etc. Mead-sweet, is cold and dry, binding, stops
Fluxes, and the immodderate flowing of the terms in women.

Urticae. Of Nettles, see the leaves.

Zedoariae. Of Zedoary, or Set-wall, this and Zurumbet, according to Rhazis and
Mesue, are all one, Avicenna thinks them different, I hold with Mesue, indeed
they differ in form, for the one is long the other round, they are both hot and
dry in the second degree, expel wind, resist poison, stop Fluxes and the Terms,
stay Vomiting, help the Chollick, and kill Worms.

Zingiberis. Of Ginger, helps digestion, warms the stomach cleers the sight,
and is profitable for old men, heats the joints and therefore is profitable
against the Gout, expels wind, it is hot and dry in the third degree.

BARKS
Apii rad. Of the Roots of Smallage. Take notice here, that the Barks both of
this Root, as also of Parsley, Fennel etc. is all that of the Root which is in
use, neither can it properly be called Bark, for it is all the root the hard
pith in the middle excepted, which is always thrown away, when the roots are
used. It is something hotter and dryer than Parsley, and more medicinal, it
opens stoppings, provokes urine, helps digestion, expels wind, and warms a cold
stomach.

Avellanarum. Of Hazel, the rind of the tree provokes urine, breaks the stone,
the husks and shells of the nuts, dried and given in powder, stay the
immoderate flux of the terms in women.

Aurantiorum. Of Orrenges, both these and also Lemmons and Citrons, are of
different qualities, the outward bark, viz, what looks red, is hot and dry, the
white is cold and moist, the juice colder than it, and the seeds hot and dry,
the outward bark is that which here I am to speak to, it is somewhat hotter
than that either of Lemmons or Citrons, therefore it warms a cold stomach more,
and expels wind better, but it strengthens not the heart so much.

Berber etc. Barberries, the rind of the tree according to Clusius, being
steeped in wine, and the wine drunk, purges choler, and is a singular remedy
for the Yellow Jaundice.

Cassia Lignea etc. It is something more oily than Cinnamon, yet the virtues
being not much different, I refer you thither.

Capparis Rad. Of Caper Roots, see the roots.

Castanearum. Of Chestnuts. The bark of the Chestnut-tree is dry and binding,
and stops fluxes.

Cinnamomum. Cinnamon, and Cassia Lignea, are hot in the second degree,
strengthens the stomach, helps digestion, causes a sweet breath, resists
poison, provokes urine and the terms, causes speedy delivery to women in
travail, helps coughs and defluxions of humors upon the lungues, dropsies and
difficulty of urine, In ointments it takes away red pimples, and the like
deformities of the face.

Citrii. Of Pome Citrons, the outward pill which I suppose is that which is
meant here, strengthens the heart, resists poison, amends a stinking breath,
helps digestion, comforts a cold stomach.

Ebuli rad. Of the Roots of Dwarf-Elder, or Walwort, see the root.

Enulae. Of Elicampane, see the roots.

Esulae Rad. See the roots.

Fabarum. of Beans. Bean cods, (or pods as we in Suffex call them) being
burned, the ashes are a sovereign remedy for aches in the joints, old bruises,
gouts, and sciaticaes.

Focniculi rad. Of Fennel roots, see the roots, and remember the observation
given in Smallage at the beginning of the barks,

Fraxini rad. Of the bark of Ash-tree roots, that the virtue lies only in the
bark of the root, I suppose it to be only nicity, but the bark of the tree,
helps the rickets, is moderately hot and dry, stays vomiting, being burnt the
ashes made into an ointment helps Leprosy and other deformity of the skin,
eases the pains of the spleen.

Granatorum. Of Pome granates, the rind, or pill cools, and forcibly binds,
stays fluxes and the terms in women, helps digestion, strengthens weak
stomachs, fastens the teeth, and are good for such whose gummes wast.

Guajaci. See the wood.

Juglandium virid. Of Green Walnuts, as for the outward green bark of Walnuts,
I suppose the best time to take them is before the Walnuts be shelled at all,
and then you may take nuts and all (if they may properly be called nuts at such
a time) you shall find them exceeding comfortable to the stomach, they resist
poison, and are a most excellent preservative against the Plague, inferior to
none, they are admirable for such as are troubled with consumptions of the
lungues, the rich may keep them preserved, they that cannot do as they would
must be content to do as they may, viz, dry them and so keep them. As for the
shells of Walnuts I know nothing they are good for but only to make sport, for
if you fill four of them full of pitch, and shoe a cat with them, and put her
into a chamber, she will make pretty sport to please a melancholy fancy.

Lauri. Of Bay Tree, see the root.

Limonnm. Of Lemmons, the outward pill is of the nature of Citron, but held not
so effectual, however let the poor country man that cannot get the other, use
this.

Mandragorae rad. Be pleased to look back to the root.

Myrobalanorum. Of Myrobalans, see the fruits.

Macis. Of Mace, it is hot in the third degree, strengthens the stomach and
helps concoction.

Maceris etc. It is held to be the inner Bark of the Nutmegtree, helps fluxes
and spitting of blood.

Petroselini rad. Of Parsley roots, opens obstructions, provokes urine and the
terms, warms a cold stomach.

Prunelli sylvesiris. Of Sloe-tree, I know no use of it.

Pineaerum putamina. Pine-shucks, or husks, I suppose they mean of the cones
that hold the seeds, both those and also the bark of the tree stop fluxes, and
help the lungues.

Querci. Of Oak-tree, both the bark of the Oak, and Acorn cups are drying and
cold, binding, stop fluxes and the terms, as also the running of the reins.

Rhaphani. Of Rhadishes, I could never see any bark they had.

Suberis. Of Cork, it is good for something else besides to stop bottles, being
dry and binding, stancheth blood, helps Paulus. fluxes, especially the ashes of
it being burnt.

Sambuci etc. Of Elder roots and branches, purges water, helps the dropsy.

Cort. Medius Tamaricis. The middle Bark of Tamaris eases the spleen, helps
the Rickets.

Tilliae. Of Line-tree, boiled, the water helps burnings.

Thuris. Of Frankincense. I must plead Ignoramus.

Vlmi. Of Elm, moderately hot and cleansing, very good for wounds, burns, and
broken bones.

WOODS AND THEIR CHIPS OR Scobs, properly signifies Saw.dust.
RASPINGS.
(...), Lignum Aloes. Wood of Aloes; is moderatly hot and dry: a good Cordial:
a rich perfume: a great strengthener to the stomach.

Aspalathus. Rose-wood: There are diverse bushes called by the name of
Aspalathus: But because the College have set it down amongst the Woods, (I
suppose they mean the tree) it is moderatly hot and dry, stops looseness,
provokes urine, and is excellent to cleanse filthy ulcers.

Bresilium, Brassil, All the use I know of it is to dye cloth, and make red
ink.

Buxus. Box, many Physicians have written of it, but no Physical virtue of it,
and I suppose the College quoted it only as a word of course.

Cypressus. Cypress, the wood laid amongst clothes secures them from moths. See
the leaves.

Ebenum. Ebeny; It is held by Dioscorides to clear the sight, being either
boiled in wine, or burned to ashes.

Guajacum, lignum (...); Dries, attenuates, causes sweat, resists
putrefaction, is admirable good for the French pocks as also for Ulcers, Scabs
and Leprosy.

Juniperus. Juniper; the smoke of the wood drives away Serpents; the ashes of
it made into ly, cures Itch and Scabs.

Nephriticum. It is a light wood and comes from Hispaniola, being steeped in
water will soon turn it to a blew color; it is hot and dry in the first degree,
and so used as before is an admirable remedy for the stone, as also for
obstructions of the liver and spleen.

Rhodium, increases milk in nurses.

Santalum, album, rubrum, citrinum. White, red, and yellow Sanders; they are
all cold and dry in the second or third degree; The red stops defluxions from
any part, and helps inflammations; the white and yellow (of which the yellow is
(...)) cool the heat of fevers, strengthen the heart and cause cheerfulness.

(...), Is hot and dry in the Second degree, it opens obstructions or
stoppings, it strengthens the breast exceedingly, if it be weakened through
cold, it breaks the stone stays vomiting, provokes urine, and is very
profitable in the French pocks.

Tamaris, is profitable for the Rickets, and burnings.

Xylobalsamum, Wood of the Balsam-tree, Is hot and dry in the second degree
according to Gallen. I never read any great virtues of it.

HERBS AND THEIR LEAVES.
ABrotanum mas, foemina. Southernwood male and foemale is hot and dry in the
third degree, resists poison, kills worms, provokes lust, outwardly in
plasters it dissolves cold swellings, helps the bitings of venomous beasts,
makes hair grow.

Absinthium etc. Wormwood, it is several sorts, are all hot and dry in the
second or third degrees, the common Wormwood is thought to be hottest, they all
help weakness of the stomach, cleanse choler, kill worms, opens stoppings,
helps surfets, cleers the sight, resists poison, cleanses the blood, and
secures clothes from moths.

Abugilissa etc. Alkanet, the leaves are something drying and binding, but
inferior in virtue to the roots to which I refer you.

Acetosa. Sorrel, is moderately cold and dry, binding, cutteth tough humors,
cools the brain, liver, and stomach, cools the blood in fevers, and provokes
apetite.

Acanthus. Bears-breech or brank ursine, is temperate, something moist, see the
root.

Adiantum, album, nigrum. Maidenhair, white and black. They are temperate, yet
drying, white Maidenhair is that we usually call wall-rue, they both open
obstructions, cleanse the breast and lungues of gross slimy humors, provoke
urine help ruptures and shortness of wind.

Adiantum Aureum, Polytricum. Golden Maidenhair it is temperature and virtues
are the same with the former, helps the Spleen, burned and ly made with the
Ashes, keeps the hair from falling off from the head.

Agrimonia. Agrimony, Gallens Eupatorium, it is hot and Gallen, Pliny.
Dioscorides, Serapio.
dry in the first degree, binding, it amends the infirmities of the liver,
helps such as piss blood, helps inward wounds, opens obstructions, outwardly
applied it helps old sores, ulcers etc. Inwardly it helps the Jaundice and the
Spleen.

Ageratum. Mesue his Eupatorium. Maudlein, is hot and dry in the Second degree,
provokes urine and the terms, dries the brain, opens stoppings, helps the green
sickness, and profits such as have a cold weak liver, outwardly applied it
takes away the hardness of the matrix, and fills hollow ulcers with flesh.

Agnus Castus etc. Chast-tree, the leaves are hot and dry in the third degree,
expel wind, consume the seed, cause Chastity being only born about one, it
dissolves swellings of the cods being applied to them, headache, Lethargy, Also
Dioscorides says a branch of it preserves a traveller from weariness.

Alleluja, Lujula etc. Wood Sorrel, it is of the temperature of other Sorrel,
and held to be more cordial, cools the blood helps ulcers in the mouth, hot
defluxions upon the lungues, wounds ulcers etc-

Alcea. Vervain Mallow, the root helps fluxes and burstness. Dioscorides.
AEtius.


Allium. Garlic is hot and dry in the fourth degree, troublesome to the
stomach, it duls the sight, spoils a clear skin, resists poison, eases the
pains of the teeth, helps the bitings of mad-dogs and venomous beasts, helps
ulcers, leprosies, provokes urine, is exceeding opening, and profitable for
dropsies.

Althaea etc. March-mallows, are moderately hot and drier than other mallows,
they help digestion, and mitigate pain, ease the pains of the stone, and in the
sides.

Alsine. Chickweed, is cold and moist without any binding, Gallen.
aswages swelling, and comforts the sinnews much, and therefore is good for
such as are shrunk up, it dissolves Aposthumes, hard swellings and helps mangy
hands and legs.

Alchymilla. Ladies-mantle, is hot and dry; some say in the second degree, some
in the third: Outwardly it helps wounds, reduces women's breasts that hang
bagging: inwardly helps bruises and ruptures, stays vomiting, and the whites
in women, and is very profitable for such women as are subject to miscarry
through cold and moisture.

Alcanna. Privet, has a binding quality, helps ulcers of the mouth, is good
against burnings and lcaldings, cherrisheth the nerves or sinnews.

Amaracus, Majorana. Marjoram, some say it is hot and dry in the second degree,
some advance it to the third. Sweet Marjora^, is an excellent remedy for cold
diseases in the brain, helps such as are given to much sighing, eases pains in
the belly, provokes urine, outwardly in oils or salves, it resists (...) that
are shrunk, limbs out of Joint, all aches and swellings coming of a cold cause.

Angelica. is hot and dry in the third degree, opens, digesteth makes thin,
strengthens the heart helps fluxes, and loathsomness of meat, it is an enemy to
poison and pestilence provokes the terms in women, and brings away the
afterbirth. Gallen.


Anagallis, mas, foemina. Pimpernel, male and foemale, they are something hot
and dry, and of such a drawing quality that they draw thorns and splinters out
of the flesh, amend the sight, cleanse ulcers, help infirmities of the liver
and reins.

Anethum. Dill, is hot and dry in the second degree. Dioscorides says, it
breeds milk in Nurses. But Gallen he denies it: Howsoever, it stays vomiting,
eases hiccoughs, asswageth swellings, provokes urine, helps such women as are
troubled with the fits of the mother, and digests raw humors.

Apium. So it is commonly used; but indeed all parsley is called by the name of
Apium; of which this is one kind.
Smallege. It is somewhat hotter and drier than Parsley, and more efficacious;
it opens stoppings of the liver, and spleen, cleanses the blood, provokes the
terms, helps a cold stomach to digest its meat, and is singular good against
the yellow Jaundice.

Aparine. Coose-grasse, or Clevers; they are meanly hot and dry, cleansing;
helps the bitings of venomous beasts, Dioscorides.
keeps men's bodies from growing too fat, helps the yellowjaundice, Pliny.
stales bleeding and fluxes, and helps green wounds. Gallen.


Aspergula odorata. Woodroof: chears the heart, makes Tragus.
men (...), helps melancholy, and opens the stoppings of the liver.

Aquilegia. Columbines, help sore throats, are of a drying, binding quallity.

Argentina. Silver-weed, or Wild Tansie, cold and dry almost in the third
degree; stops lasks, fluxes, and the terms, good against ulcers, the stone, and
inward wounds, it stops the immoderate flux of the terms in women if it be but
worn in their shoos; eases gripings in the belly, fastneth loose teeth;
outwardly it takes away freckles, morphew, and sunburning, it takes away
inflammations; and bound to the wrests stops the violence of the fits of an ague.

Artanita. Sow-bread: hot and dry in the third degree; it is so dangerous a
purge that I dare not take it my self, therefore would I not advise others:
outwardly in ointments it takes away freckles, sunburning, and the marks which
the smal-pocks leave behind them: dangerous for women with child, yea so
dangerous, that both Dioscorides and Pliny say, it will make a woman miscarry
if she do but stride over it.

(...), longa, rotunda. Birthwort long and round: see the Roots.

Artemisia. Mugwort, is hot and dry in the second degree; binding: an herb
apropriated to the foeminine sex, it brings down the terms, brings away both
birth and after birth, eases pains in the matrix.

Asparagus, see the Roots.

Asarum, etc. Asarabacca, hot and dry, provokes vomiting and urin, and are good
for dropsies; they are corrected with mace or cinnamon.

Atriplex. etc. Orach, or Arrach; it is cold in the first degree, and moist in
the second: says Gallen, and makes the belly soluble. Dioscorides says, they
cure the yellow-jaundice. Lycus Neop. says, they help such as have taken
Cantharides. Mathiolus says, I doubt he was mistaken,
it purges upwards and downwards. Hypocrates says, it cools hot aposthumes,
and St. Anthonies fire.

Auricula muris, major. Mouse-ear, hot and dry, of a bindding quality, it is
admirable to heal any wounds, inward or outward, as also ruptures or
burstnesse, edge-tools quenched in the juice of it, will cut Iron without
turning the edg, and lastly it helps the swelling of the Spleen, Coughs, and
Consumptions of the lungues.

Attractilis hirsuta, Wild Bastard-saffron, distaff thistle or Spindle-thistle,
is dry and moderately digesting. helps the Gallen. Dioscorides.
bitings of venomous beasts, Mesue says it is hot in the first degree, and dry
in the second, and cleanses the breast and lungues of tough phlegm, but if the
College do intend Cardnus Bened, bythis, we shall talk with that by and by.

Balsamita etc. Costmary, Alecost: See Maudlin, of which I take this to be one
sort or kind.

Barba jovis, sedum majus. Housleek or Sengreen, cold in the third degree,
profitable against the Shingles and other hot Gallen. Dioscorides.
creeping ulcers, inflammations, St. Anthonies fire, frenzyes, it cools and
takes away hot rhewms in the eyes, it takes away corns from the toes being
bathed with the juice of it, and a skin of the leaf laid over the place, stops
fluxes, helps scalds and burnings.

Bardana. Clot bur, or Burdock, temperately dry and wasting, something cooling,
it is held to be a good remedy against shrinking of the sinnews, they ease
pains in the bladder, provoke urine. Also Mizaldus says that a leaf applied to
the top of the head of a woman draws the Matrix upwards but applied to the
soles of the feet draws it downwards, and is therefore an admirable remedy for
suffocations, precipitations, and dislocatious of the Matrix, if a wise man
have but the using of it.

Beta, Alba, nigra, rubra. Beets, white, black, and red, black Beets I have as
yet as little skill in as knowledge of, The white are something colder and
moister than the red, both of them loosen the belly but have little or no
nourishment, Simeon Sethi tells a large story of several diseases they breed in
the stomach, I scarce believe him, this is certain, the white, provoke to
stool, and are more cleansing, open stoppings of the liver and spleen, help the
vertigo or swimming in the head The red stay fluxes, help the immoderate
flowing of the terms in women, and are good in the yellow Jaundice.

Benedicta, Caryophyllata. Avens, hot and dry, help the chollick and rawnesse
of the stomach, stitches in the sides, help bruises, and take away clotted
blood in any part of the body.

Betonica vulgaris, Common or wood Bettony, hot and dry in the second degree,
helps the falling sickness, and all headaches Gallen.
coming of cold, cleanses the breast and lungues, opens stoppings of the liver
and spleen, as the rickets etc. procures appetite, helps sour belchings,
provokes urine, breaks the stone, mitigates the pains of the reins and bladder,
helps cramps, and convulsions, resists poison, helps the gout, such as piss
blood, madness and headache, kills worms, help bruises, and cleanses women
after their labor.

Betonica Pauli etc. Paul's betony, or male Lluellin, to which ad Elatine or
foemale Lluellin which comes afterward, they are pretty temperate, stop
defluxions of humors, that fall from the head into the eyes, are profitable in
wounds, helps filthy foul eating Cankers, Pena tells of a man whose nose was
almost eaten off, that was cured by it, I believe the industrious may find it
an admirable herb for such uses.

Betonica Coronaria etc. Is clove gilliflowers: see the flowers.

Bellis. Daisyes, are cold and moist in the second degree, they ease all pains,
and swellings coming of heat, in Clysters they loose the belly, are profitable
in Fevers, and inflammations of the stones, they take away bruises and
blackness and blewness: if a woman of a turbulent spirit should chance to
stumble against her husbands fists, they are admirable in wounds, and
inflammations of the lungus or blood.

Bli^um. Blites, some say they are cold and moist, others cold and dry, none
mention any great virtues of them.

Borrago. Porrage, hot and moist, comforts the heart, cheers the spirits,
drives away sadness, melancholy, they are rather laxitive than binding, help
swooning and heart qualms, breed special good blood help consumptions,
madness, and such as are much weakened by sickness.

Bonus Henricus. good Henry, or all good, hot and dry, cleansing, and scouring,
inwardly taked it loosens the belly, outwardly it cleanses old sores and
ulcers.

Botrys. Oak of jerusalem, hot and dry in the second degree, such as are short
winded, cuts and wastes gross and tough phlegm, laid amongst clothes they
preserve them from moaths and give them a sweet smell.

Branca ursina. Bears breech.

Brionia etc. Briony white and black: both are hot and dry in the third degree,
purge violently, yet are held to be wholesome Physic for such as have dropsyes,
vertigo or swimming in the head, falling sickness, etc. Certainly it is a
scurvy strong troublesome purge, therefore ill to be tamperd with by the
unskilful, outwardly in ointments it takes away freckles, whrinkles, morphew,
scars, spots, etc. from the face.

Bursa pastoris, Shepheards-purse, is manifestly cold and dry, though Lobel and
Pena thought the contrary, it is binding and stops blood, the terms in women,
spitting and pissing of blood, cools inflammations.

Buglossum. in Sussex (because they must be Francified) called Langue-debeef:
in plain English Ox tongue
Buglosse, its virtues are the same with Borrage.

Bugula. Bugle, or middle Comfry, is temperate for heat, but very drying,
excellent for falls or inward bruises for it dissolves congealed blood,
profitable for inward wounds, helps the rikets and other stoppings of the
liver, outwardly it is of wonderful force in curing wounds and ulcers, though
festered, as also gangrenes and fistulaes, it helps broken bones and Memb(...)
of joint.
dislocations. To conclude, let my country men esteem it as a Jewel.

Buphthalmum etc. Ox-eye, Mathiolus says they are commonly used for black
Hellebore, to the virtues of which I refer you.

Buxus. Box-tree, the leaves are hot, dry, and binding, they are profitable
against the bitings of mad-dogs, both taken inwardly, and boiled and applied to
the place, besides they are excellent to cure horses of the bots.

Calamintha, Montana, palustris. Mountain, and Water Calamint, for the water
Calamint: see Mints, then which it is accounted stronger. Mountain Calamint, is
hot and dry in the third degree, provoke urine and the terms, hasten the birth
in women; brings away the after birth, helps cramps and convulsions, difficulty
of breathing, kills worms, helps Gallen. Dioscorides Apuleius.
the Leprosy, outwardly used, it helps such as holds their necks on one side.

Calendula etc. Marigolds, the leaves are hot in the second degree, and
something moist, loosen the belly, the juice held in the mouth, helps the
toothach, and takes away any inflammation, or hot swelling being bathed with it
mixed with a little viniger.

Callitricum. Maidenhair. See Adianthum. Caprifolium. Honysuckles: The leaves
are hot, and therefore naught for inflammations of the mouth and throat, for
which the ignorant people often give them, and Gallen was true in this, let
modern Writers write theirpleasure, If you chew but a leaf of it in your
mouth, experience will tell you, that it is likelier to cause than to cure a
sore throat, they provoke urine, and purge by urine, bring speedy delivery to
women in travail, yet procure barrenness, and hinder conception, outwardly
they dry up foul ulcers, and cleanse the face from morphew, sunburning and
freckles.

Carduncellus etc. Groundsel, cold and moist according to Tragus, helps the
Chollick, and pains or gripins in the belly, helps such as cannot make water,
cleanses the reins, purges Choler and sharp humors, outwardly it eases
women's AEgineta.
breasts that are swollen and inflamed, (or as themselves say) have gotten an
ague in their breasts, as also inflammation of the joints, nerves, or sinnews.

Carduus B. Alariae. Our Ladies-thistles, they are far more temperate than
Carduus benedictus, open obstructions of the liver, help the Jaundice and
Dropsy, provoke urine, break the stone.

Carduus benedictus. In plain English, Blessed thistle. though I confess it be
better known by the lattin name, it is hot and dry in the second degree,
cleansing and opening, helps swimming and giddiness in the head, deafness,
strengthens the memory, Camerarius. Arnoldus villanovanus.
helps griping pains in the belly, kills worms, provokes sweat, expels poison,
helps inflammation of the liver, is very good in pestilences, and the French
pocks, outwardly applied it ripens Plague-sores, and helps hot swellings, the
bitings of mad-dogs, and venomous beasts, and foul filthy ulcers.

Carlina. Se the roots under the name of white Chameleon.

Corallina. A kind of Sea-Mosse, cold, binding, drying, good Gallen.
for hot gouts, inflammations, also they say it kills worms, and therefore by
some is called Maw-(...).

Cassutha, cuscuta, podagra lini. Doddar: See Epithimum.

Caryophyllata. Avens, or herb Bennet, hot and dry, they help the Chollick,
Rawnesse of the stomach, Stitches in the sides, Stoppings of the liver, and
bruises.

Cataputia minor. A kind of Spurge: See Tithymalus.

Cattaria, Nepeta. Nep, or Cat-mints, the virtues are the same with Calaminth.

Cauda Equina. Horse-tail, is of a binding drying quality, cures wounds, and is
an admirable remedy for sinnews that are shrunk, yea, Gallen says it cures
sinnews though they be cut in sunder: but Columbus holds that is incurable
unless they be cut within the Muscle; well then we will take Gallen in the
charitablest sense, however this is certain, it is a sure remedy for bleeding
at the nose, or by wound, stops the Terms in women, Fluxes, Ulcers in the Reins
or Bladder, Coughs, Ulcers in the Lungues, Difficulty of breathing.

Caulis, Brassica hortensis, silvestris. Coleworts, or Cabbages garden and
wild. They are drying and binding, help dimness of the sight, help the spleen,
preserve from drunkenness and help the evil effects of it, provoke the terms,
and if you will believe Cato, being laid on the top of the head, they draw the
matrix upward, and therefore are good for the falling out of the womb.

Centaurium, majus, minus. Centaury the greater and lesser, They say the
greater will do wonders in curing wounds: see the root. The lesser is that
which is commonly in Sussex known by the name of Centaury, a present remedy for
the yellow Jaundice, opens stoppings of the liver, gall, and spleen purges
choler, helps the gout, cleers the sight, purges the stomach, helps the
dropsy and green-sicknesse.

Centinodium etc. Knotgrasse, cold in the second degree, helps spitting and
pissing of blood, stops the terms and all other fluxes of blood, vomitting of
blood, gonorrhaea or running Brassavolus. Camerarius.
of reins, weakness of the back and joints, inflammations of the privities, and
such as piss by drops, and it is an excellent remedy for hogs that will not
eat their meat.

Cerefolium vulgar et Myrrbis, Common and great Chervil. Take them both
together and they are temperately hot and dry, provoke urine, they stir up lust
and desire of copulation, comfort the heart and are good for old people, help
pleuresies and pricking in the sides.

Caepaea, Anagallis aquatica. Brooklime, hot and dry, but not so hot and dry as
watercreases, Tragus says they are hot and moist, they help mangy horses: see
watercreases.

Ceterach etc. Spleenwort, moderately hot, wastes and consumes the spleen, in so
much that Vitruvius affirms he has known hogs that have fed upon it, that have
had (when they were killed) no spleens at all, it is excellent good for
melancholy people, helps the strangury, provokes urine, and breaks the stone
in the bladder.

Chamaepitis. Ground Pine, hot in the second degree, and dry in the third,
helps the Jaundice, Sciatica, stoppings of the liver, and spleen, provoks the
terms, cleanses the entrails dissolves congeled blood, resists poison, cures
wounds and ulcers.

Chamaemelum, sativum, sylvestre. Garden and wild Chamomel, Garden Chamomel is
hot and dry in the first degree, and as gallant a medicine against the stone in
the bladder as grows upon the earth, it expels wind, helps belchings, and
potently provokes the terms, used in baths it helps pains in the sides,
gripings and gnawings in the belly.

Chamaedris etc. Germander, hot and dry in the third degree, cuts and brings
away tough humors, opens stoppings of the liver and spleen, helps coughs and
shortness of breath, strangury and stopping of urine and provokes the terms.

Chelidonium utrumque. Celondine both sorts, Small Celondine is usually called
pilewort, it is something hotter and dryer than the former, but not in the
fourth degree as Gallen and Dioscorides would have it, they say it helps the
Hemorrhoids or Piles, by only carrying it about one, (but if it will not,
bruise it and apply it to the grief) and from thence it took its name.
Celondine the greater is hot and dry (they say in the third degree) any way
used, either the joyce, or made into an oil or ointment is as great a preserver
of the sight and as excellent a help for sore eyes as any is.

Cinara etc. Artichokes, they provoke lust, and purge by urine.

Cichorium. Succory, to which ad Endive which comes after, they are cold and
dry in the second degree, cleansing and opening, they cool the heats of the
liver and are profitable in the yellow jaundice, and burning fevers, help
excoriations in the yard, hot stomachs, and outwardly applied help hot rewms in
the eyes.

Cicuta. Hemlock, cold in the fourth degree, poisonous, outwardly applied it
helps priapgismus, or continual standing of the yard, the shingles, St.
Antbonies fire or any eating ulcers, as also the gout.

Clematis Daphnoides, Vinca pervinca. Peruinkle, hot in the second degree,
something dry and binding, stops lasks, spitting of blood, and the terms in
women.

Consolida major. Comfry, I do not conceive the leaves to be so virtuous as the
roots.

Consolida media. Bugles of which before.

Consolida minima. Dazies.

Consolida rubra. Golden rod, hot and dry in the second degree, cleanses the
reins, provokes urine, brings away gravel, an admirable herb for wounded
people to take inwardly, stops blood etc.

Consolida Regalis. Delphinium. Larks heels, resist poison, help the bitings of
venomous beasts,

Saracenica Solidago. Saracens Consound, helps inward wounds, sore mouths, sore
throats, wastings of the lungues and liver.

Coronopus. Buckhorn plantane, or Sea plantane, cold and dry, helps the bitings
of venomous beasts, either taken inwardly or applied to the wound, helps the
Chollick, breaks AEgineta,
the stone.

Cotona ia. has got a many English names, Cottonweed, Cudweed, Chaffweed, and
petty-cotton, of a drying and binding nature, boiled in ly it keeps the head
from nits and lice, being laid among clothes it keeps them safe from moths,
kills worms, helps the bitings of venomous beasts, taken in a tobacco pipe, it
helps coughs of the lungues, and vehement head aches.

(...). Crosse-wort, (there is a kind of Gentian called also by this name,
which I pass by) is dry and binding, exceeding good for inward or outward
wounds, either inwardly taken, or outwardly applied, and an excellent remedy
for such as are bursten.

(...). Orpine, very cool, outwardly used with vinegar it cleers the skin,
inwardly taken, it helps gnawings of the stomach and bowels, ulcers in the
lungues, bloody flux, and Quinsie in the throat.

Critbamus, etc. Sampier; hot and dry, helps difficulty of urine, the
yellow-jaundice, provokes the terms, helps digestion; Gallen.
opens stoppings of the liver and spleen.

Cucumis Asininus. Wild Cucumers: see Elaterium.

Cyanus major, minor. Blew-bottle great and small; a fine coolingherb, helps
bruises, wounds, broken veins, the juice dropped into the eye helps the
inflammations thereof.

Cynoglossum. Hounds-tongue, cold and dry; applied to the Fundameut, helps the
Hemorrhoids, heals wounds, and ulcers, and is a present remedy against the
bitings of Dogs, Dioscorides.
burnings, and sealdings.

Cypressus. Chamae cyparissus. Cypress tree, the leaves are hot and binding,
helps ruptures, and Polypus, or flesh growing in the nose.

Chamaecyparissus. Is Lavender-Cotton: resists poison, kills worms.

Dictamnus, Cretensis. Dictamny, or Dittany of Creet, hot and dry, brings away
dead children, hastens women's travel, brings away the afterbirth,, the very
smell of it drives away venomous beasts, so deadly an enemy is it to poison;
it is an admirable remedy against wounds and Gun shot, wounds made with poisoned
weapons, it draws out splinters, broken bones etc. They say, the Goats and
Deers in Creet, being wounded with Arrows, eat this herb, which makes the
Arrows fall out of themselves: And from thence came the tale in Virgil Virg.
AEniad. lib. 12.
about AEneas.

Dipsacus, sativ. sylv. Teazels, garden and wild: The leaves bruised and
applied to the temples, alay the heat in fevers, Gallen,
qualify the rage in frenzies: the juice dropped into the ears, kill worms in
them, (if there be any there to kill;) dropped into the eyes, cleers the sight,
helps redness and pimples in the face, being anointed with it.

Ebulus. Dwarf-Elder, or Walwort: hot and dry in the third degree, wastes hard
swellings, being applied in form of a pultis; the hair of the head being
anointed with the juice of it turns black; the leaves being applied to the
place, help inflammations, burnings, scaldings, the bitings of mad dogs; mingled
with Bulls suet is a present remedy for the gout; inwardly taken, is a singular
purge for the dropsy and gout. Dr. Butler.


Echium. Vipers-buglosse, Vipers herb, Snake-buglosse, Wall-buglosse,
Wild-buglosse, several countries give it these several names, it is a singular
remedy being eaten, for the biting of venomous beasts.

Empetron, Calcifraga, Herniaria etc. Rupture-wort, or Burstwort, the English
name tells you it is good against ruptures, and so such as are bursten shall
find it if they please to make trial of it, either inwardly taken or outwardly
applied to the place or both. Also the lattin name; hold it forth to be good
against the stone, which who so tries shall find true.

Enula campana. Elicampane, provokes urine: See the root.

Epithimum. Dodder of Time, to which ad common Dodder which is usually that which
grows upon flax, indeed every dodder retains a virtue of that herb, or plant it
grows upon, as dodder that grows upon broom, provokes urine forcibly, and
loosens the belly, and is moister than that which grows upon flax, that which
grows upon Time, is hotter and dryer than that which grows upon flax, even in
the third degree, opens AEtius.
obstructions, helps infirmities of the spleen, purges melancholy, Melue.
releeves drooping spirits, helps the rickets; that Actuarius.
which grows on flax, is excellent for agues in young children, Serapio.
strengthens weak stomachs, purges choler, provokes urine, Avicenna
opens stoppings in the reins and bladder; that which grows upon nettles,
provokes urine exceedingly.

Eruca. Rocket, hot and dry in the third degree, being (...).
eaten alone, causes headache by its heat, procures lust.

Eupatorium. See Ageratum.

Euphragia. Eybright: something hot and dry, the very sight of it refreshes
the eyes; inwardly taken, it restores the (...) and makes old men's eyes young;
a dram of it taken in the morning is worth a pair of Spectacles, it comforts
and strengthens the memory, outwardly applied to the place it helps sore
eyes, and hurts in the eyes.

See the Roots.
(...) foemina. Filicula polypodium. Filipendula.
Malabathrum. Indian-leaf, hot and dry in the second degree, comforts the
stomach exceedingly, helps digestion, provokes urine, helps inflammations of the
eyes, secures clothes from moths.

Foeniculum. Fennel, Increases milk in Nurses, provokes urin, breaks the
stone, eases pains in the reins, opens stoppings, breaks wind, provokes the
terms.

Fragaris. Strawberry leaves, are cold, dry, and binding, a singular remedy for
inflammations in wounds, hot diseases in the throat, they stop fluxes, and the
terms, cool the heat of the stomach, and inflammations of the liver.

Praxinus etc. Ash-trees: the leaves are moderatly hot and dry, cure the
bitings of Adders, and Serpents, by a certain antipathy (they say) there is
between them, they stop looseness, and stay vomiting, help the rickets, open
stoppages of the liver and spleen.

Fumaria. Fumitory: Cold and dry, it opens and cleanses by urine, helps such
as are itchy, and scabbed, clears the skin, opens stoppings of the liver and
spleen, helps rickets, hypocondriack melancholy, madness, frenzies, quartan
agues, looseneth the belly, gently purges melancholy, and addust choler.

Galega. Goats-rue: Temperate in quality, resists poison, kills worms, helps the
falling sickness, resists the pestilence.

Galion. Ladies-Bedstraw: dry and binding, stancheth blood: boiled in oil, the
oil is good to anoint a weary traveller; inwardly it provokes lust.

Gentiana. See the Root.

Genista. Broom, hot and dry in the second degree, cleanse and open the
stomach, break the stone in the reins and bladder, help the green sickness:
see the Flowers.

Geranium. Cranebill, the diverse sorts of it, one of which is that which is
called Muscata, and in Sussex barbarously Muscovy, it is thought to be cool and
dry, helps hot swellings, and by its smell amends a hot brain.

Geranium Columbinum. or Doves foot, helps the wind Chollick, pains in the
belly, stone in the reins and bladder, and is singular good in ruptures, and
inward wounds. I suppose these are the general virtues of them all.

Gramen. Grass: see the root.

Gratiola. Hedge Hysop, purges water and phlegm, but works very churlishly,
Gesner commends it in dropsies.

Asphodelus foem. see the root.

Hepatica, Lichen. Liverwort, cold and dry, excellent good for inflammations of
the liver, or any other inflammations, yellow Jaundice.

Hedera Arborea, Terrestris. Tree and Ground Ivy, Tree-Ivy helps ulcers,
burnings, scaldings, the bad effects of the spleen, the juice snuffed up in the
nose purges the head, it is admirable for surfets, or headache, or any other
ill effects coming of drunkenness, and therefore the Poets feigned Bacchus to
have his head bound round with them.

Ground Ivy is that which usually is called Alehoof, hot and dry, the juice
helps noise in the ears, fistulaes, gouts, stoppings of the liver, it
strengthens the reins and stops the terms, helps the yellow Jaundice, and other
diseases coming of stopping of the liver, and is excellent for wounded people.

Herba Campborata. Stinking Ground Pine, is of a drying faculty, and therefore
stops defluxions either in the eyes or upon the lungues, the gout, cramps,
palsies, aches, strengthens the nerves.

Herba Moschata. Mentioned even now, me thinks the College should not have
forgotten themselves so soon, how can a man that forgets himself remember his
patient?

Herba Paralysis, Primula veris. Primroses, or Cowslips, which you will, the
leaves help pains in the head and joints, see the flowers which are most in use.

Herba Paris. Herb True-love, or One-berry, Pena and Lobel, (...) it resists
poison, Mathiolus says it takes away evil done by witchcraft, and affirms it
by experience, as also long lingering sickness, however it is good for wounds,
falls, bruises, aposthumes, inflammations, ulcers in the privities, Herb
True-love is very cold in temperature.

Herba Roberti.. A kind of Cranebil.

Herba venti, Anemone. Wind flower, the juice snuffed up the nose purges the
head, it cleanses filthy ulcers, increases milk in nurses, and outwardly by
ointment helps Leprosyes.

Herniaria. The same with Empetron.

Helxine, Pellitory of the wall, cold moist cleansing, helps the stone and
gravel in the kidnyes, difficulty of urine, sore throats, pains in the ears the
juice being dropped in them, outwardly it helps the shingles and Saint
Anthonies fire.

Hippoglossum. Horsetongue. Tongue-blade or doubletongue, the roots help the
(...), provoke urine, ease the hard labor of women, provoke the terms, the herb
helps ruptures and the fits of the mother, it is hot in the second degree, dry
in the first.

Hippolapathum. Patience, or Monks Reubarb: see the roots.

Hipposelinum. Alexanders, or Alisanders, provoke urine expel the after birth,
help the strangury, expel wind.

Horminum. Clary, hot and dry in the third degree, helps weakness in the back,
stops the running of the reins and the whites in women, provokes the terms, and
helps women that are barren through coldness, or moisture, or both, causes
fruitfulness, but is hurtful for the memory.

Hydropiper. Arsmart, hot and dry, consumes all cold swellings and blood
congealed by bruises or stripes, applied to the place it helps that Aposthume
in the joints commonly called a felon (but in Sussex an Andicom) if you put a
handful of it under the saddle upon a tired horses back it will make him
travail fresh and lustily, strewed in a chamber, soon kills all the fleas there,
this is the spotted or hottest Arsmart, and is unfit to be given inwardly,
there is a milder sort, called Persicaria, which is of a cooler milder quality,
drying, excellent good for putrified ulcers, kill worms, I had almost forgot
that the former is an admirable remedy for the gout, being roasted between two
Tiles and applied to the grieved place, and yet I had it from Dr. Butler too.

Hysopus. Hisop, help coughs, shortness of breath, wheezing, distillations
upon the Lungues, it is of a cleansing quality, kill worms in the body, amends
the whole color of the body, helps the dropsy and spleen, sore throats and
noise in the ears.

Hyoscyamus etc. Henbane, the white Henbane is held to be cold but in the third
degree, the black or common Henbane and the yellow, in the fourth, they
stupifie the senses and therefore not to be taken inwardly, outwardly applied
they help inflammations, hot gouts, applied to the temples they provoke sleep.

Hypericon. St John's wort, is as gallant a wound herb as any is, either given
inwardly, or outwardly applied to the wound, it is hot and dry, opens
stoppings, helps spitting and vomiting of blood, it cleanses the reins,
provoks the terms, helps congealed blood in the stomach, and meseraick veins,
the Falling sickness, Palsy, Cramps, and Aches in the joints.

Hypoglottis Laurus Alexandrina. I aurel of Alexandria provokes urine and the
terms, and is held to be a singular help to women in travail.

Hypoglossum, the same with Hippoglossum before, only different names given by
different Authors, the one deriving his name from the tongue of a horse of
which form the leaf is, the other from the form of the little leaf, because
small leaves like small tongues grow upon the greater.

Iberis Cardamantice. Sciatica cresses, I suppose so called because they help
the Sciatica, or Huckle-bone-gout.

Inguinalis, Asler. Starwort, or sharewort, being bruised and applied they help
swellings, botches, and venerious buboes in the groy ne, whence they took their
name, as also inflammation and falling out of the fundament.

Iris. See the roots.

Isatis, Glasium. Woad, is drying and binding, the side being bathed with it,
it eases pains in the spleen, cleanses filthy corroding gnawing ulcers.

Iva Arthritica. The same with Camaepytis.

Juncus odoratus. The same with Schoenantbus.

Labrum veneris. The same with Dipsacus. Thus you see the College will be as
SURE as the Miller was when he took his toll twice.

Lactucs. Lettice, cold and moist, cool the inflammation of the stomach commonly
called heart-burning, provoke sleep, resist drunkenness and take away the ill
effects of it, cool the blood, quench thirst, breed milk, and are good for
chollerick bodies, and such as have a frenzy, or are frenitique, or as the
vulgar say frantic.

Lagobus, Herba Leporina. A kind of trefoil growing in France and Spain, let
them that live there look after the virtues of it.

Lavendula. Lavender, hot and dry in the third degree, The temples and fore
head bathed with the juice of it, as also the smell of the herb helps swoonings,
catalepsis, falling sickness, provided it be not accompanied with a Fever: see
the flowers.

Laureola. Laurel, the leaves purge upward and downward they are good for
rhewmatick people to chew in their mouths for they draw forth much water.

Laurus. Bay Tree, the leaves are hot and dry, resist drunkenness, they gently
bind amd help diseases in the bladder, help the stinging of bees and wasps,
mitigate the pain of the stomach, dry and heal, open obstructions of the liver
and spleen resist the (...).

Lappa minor. The lesser Burdock.

Lentiscus. Mastick-tree, both the leaves and bark of it stop fluxes, (being
hot and dry in the second degree) spitting and pissing of blood, and the
falling out of the fundament.

Lens palustris. Duckmeat, cold and moist in the second degree, helps
inflammations, hot swellings, and the falling out of the fundament.

Lepidium, Piperites. Dittander, Pepper-wort, or scarwort, (...).
a hot fiery sharp herb, admirable for the Gout being applied Pliny.
to the place, being only held in the hand it helps the toothach, Rondeletius.
and withal leaves a wan color in the hand that holds it.

Levisticum. Lovage: Clears the sight, takes away redness and freckles from the
face.

Libanotis Coronaria, see Rosemary.

Linaria. Toad-flax, or wild-flax, hot and dry, cleanse the reins and bladder,
provoke urine, open the stoppings of the liver and spleen, and helps diseases
coming thereof: outwardly they take away yellowness and deformity of the skin.

Lillium convallium. Lilly of the vallie: see the flowers.

Lingua Cervina. Hart's-tongue, drying and binding, stops blood, the terms and
fluxes, opens stoppings of the liver and spleen, and diseases thence arising.

Limonium. Sea-Buglosse, or Marsh-Buglosse, or as some will have it Sea
Lavender: the seeds being very drying and binding, stop fluxes and the terms,
help the chollick and strangury.

(...). Authors make some flutter about this herb, (...) the best take it to be
Trifolium Odoratum, Sweet (...), which is of a temperate nature, cleanses the
eyes gently of such things as hinder the sight, cures green wounds, ruptures,
or burstnesse, helps such as piss blood or are bruised, and secures garments
from moths.

Lupulus. Hops, opening, cleansing, provoke urine; the young sprouts open
stopings of the liver and spleen, cleanse the blood, clear the skin, help scabs
and itch, help agues, purge choler.

Lychnitis coronaria. Or as others more properly from the Greek write it
Lychnis. Rose Campion, I know no great physical virtue it has.

Maeis. See the Barks.

Magistrantia etc. Masterwort, hot and dry in the third degree, it is singular
good against poison, pestilence, corrupt and unwholsom air, helps windiness in
the stomach, causes an appetite to one victuals, very profitable in falls,
bruises, congealed and clotted blood, the bitings of mad-dogs, the leaves
chewed in the mouth cleanse the brain of superfluous humors, thereby preventing
Lethargies and apoplexies.

Malva. Mallows, the best of Authors account wild Malto be best, and hold them
to be cold and moist in the first degree, they are profitable in the bitings of
venomous beasts, the stingings of Bees and Wasps etc. inwardly they resist
poison, provoke to stool, outwardly they aswage hard swellings of the
privities, or other places, in clysters they help roughness and frettings of
the guts, bladder, or fundament.

Majorana, see Amaracus.

Mandragora. Mandrakes, fit for no vulgar use but only to be used in cooling
ointments.

Marrubium, album, nigrum, foetidum. Marrubium Album is the common Hore-hound,
hot in the second degree and dry in the third, opens the liver and spleen,
cleanses the breast and lungues, helps old coughs, pains in the sides,
Phtisicks, or Ulceration of the lungues, it provokes the terms, eases hard
labor in child bearing, brings away the afterbirth.

Marrubium nigrum and foetidum. Black and stinking Horehound, I take to be all
one, hot and dry in the third degree, cure the bitings of mad-dogs, wast and
consume hard knobs in the Fundament and Matrix, cleanse filthy ulcers.

Unless by stinking Horehound the College should mean that which Fuchsius
calls Staechys, if they do, it is hot and dry but in the first degree, and a
singular remedy to keep wounds from inflammation.

Marum. Herb Mastich, hot and dry in the third degree: good against Cramps and
Convulsions.

Matricaria. Featherfew, hot in the third degree, dry in the second, opens,
purges, a singular remedy for diseases incident to the matrix, and other
diseases incident to women, eases their travel, and infirmities coming after
it; it helps the vertigo or dissines of the head, melancholy sad thoughts,
applied to the wrests it help the ague.

Matrisylva. The same with Caprisolium.

Melilotus. Melilot: Inwardly taken provokes urine, breaks the stone, cleanses
the reins and bladder, cutteth and cleanses the lungues of tough phlegm, the
juice dropped into the eyes clears the sight, into the ears mitigates pain and
noise there, the head bathed with the juice mixed with vinegar takes away the
pains thereof; outwardly in pultisses it asswageth swellings in the privities
and else where.

Melissa. Bawm, is hot and dry; outwardly mixed with salt and applied to the
neck, helps the King's Evil, bitings of Gallen.
mad-dogs, and venomous beasts, and such as cannot hold their Avicinna,
necks as they should do; inwardly, it is an excellent remedy for a cold and
moist stomach, cheers the heart, refreshes the mind, takes away grief, sorrow,
and care, instead of which it produces joy and mirth.

Mentha sativa. Garden Mints, Spear Mints; are hot and dry in the third degree,
provoke hunger, are wholesome for the stomach, stay vomiting, stop the terms,
help sore heads in Pliny.
children, strengthen the stomach, cause digestion; outwardly Gallen.
applied, they help the bitings of mad-dogs. Yet they hinder conception, and
are naught for wounded people, they say by reason of an antipathy between them
and Iron.

Mentha Aquatica. Water-Mints: ease pains of the belly, headache and vomiting,
gravel in the kidneys, and stone.

Menthastrum. Horse Mint: I know no difference between them and Water Mints.

Mercurialis, mas, foemina. Mercury male and foemale: they are both hot and dry
in the second degree, cleansing, digesting, they purge watery humors, and
further conception.

Mezereon. Spurge Olive, or Widdow-wail: a dangerous Gallen
purge; better let alone than meddled with.

Millefolium. Yarrow, meanly cold and binding, a healing herb for wounds,
stancheth bleeding, and some say the juice snuffed up the nose causes it to
bleed, whence it was called, Nose-bleed, it stops lasks, and the terms in
women, helps the running of the reins, helps inflammations and excoriations of
the yard, as also inflammations of wounds.

Muscus. Moss, is something cold and binding, yet usually retains a smatch of
the property of the tree it grows on, therefore that which grows upon Oaks is
very dry and binding, Scrapio says that it being infused in wine and the wine
drunk, it stays vomiting and fluxes, as also the whites in women.

Myrtus. Mirtle-tree, the leaves are of a cold earthy quality, drying and
binding, good for Fluxes, spitting, vomiting, and pissing of blood, stop the
Whites and Reds in women.

Nardus. See the root.

Nasturtium, Aquaticum, Hartnesse, Watercresses and Garden-cresses.

Garden-cresses are hot and dry in the fourth degree, good for the Scurvy,
Sciatica, hard swellings, yet do they trouble Dioscorides.
the belly, ease pains of the spleen, provoke lust.

Watercresses are hot and dry, cleanse the blood, help the Scurvy, provoke
urine and the terms, break the stone help the green sickness, cause a fresh
lively color.

Nastuctium Album, (...). Treacle-mustard, hot and dry in the third degree,
purges violently, dangerous for women with child. Outwardly it is applied with
profit to the Gout.

Nicotiana, Tobacco, and in reciting the virtues of this herb, I will follow
Clusius, that none should think I do it without an Author. It is hot and dry in
the second degree, and of a cleansing nature, the leaves warmed and applied to
the head are excellent good, in (...). I know not what better name to give it,
Old headaches, continual headaches. Take which ye will.
inveterate head aches and megrims, if the diseases come through cold or wind,
change them often till the diseases be gone, help such whose necks be stiff, it
eases the faults af the breast, Asthmaes or hard Phlegm in the lappets of the
lungues, eases the pains of the stomach and windiness thereof being heat hot
by the fire and applied to it, eases the pains of the spleen being moistened
in vinegar and applied hot to the side, they loosen the belly and this I know
by experience even where many other medicines have failed.
kill worms being applied to it in like manner, they break the stone being
applied in like manner to the region of the bladder, help the rickets, being
applied to the belly and sides, applied to the navil they give present ease to
the fits of the mother, they take away cold ach in the joints applied to them,
boiled, the liquor absolutely and speedily cures scabs and itch, neither is
there any better salve in the world for wounds than may be made of it, for it
cleanses, fetches out the filth though it lie in the bones, brings up the
flesh from the bottom, and all this it does speedily, it cures wounds made with
poisoned weapons, and for this Clufias brings many experiences to tedious here
to relate, It is an admirable thing for Carbuncles, and Plague-sores, inferior
to none, green wounds 'twill cure in a trice, ulcers and gangrenes very
speedily, not only in men but also in beasts, therefore the Indians dedicated
it to their god. Taken in a pipe it has almost as many virtues, it eases
weariness, takes away the sense of hunger and thirst, provokes to stool, he
says, the Indians will travail four days without either meat or drink, by
only chewing a little of this (made up like a Pill) in their mouths, It eases
the body of superfluons humors, opens stoppings. Monardus also confirms this
judgment, and indeed a man might fill a whole volumn with the virtues of it.

Nummularia. Money-wort or Herb-twopence, cold, dry, binding, helps Fluxes,
stops the Terms, helps (...) in the lungues, outwardly it is a special herb for
wounds.

Nymphaea. See the flowers.

Ocymum. Basil, hot and moist, Simeon Sethi, says the smell of Basil is good
for the head, but Hollerius (and he no mean Physician neither) says the
continual smell of it hurts the brain and breeds Scorpions there and affirms
his own knowledge of it, and that is the reason (says he) there is such an
Antipathy between it and Rue, which I am confident there is, the truth is, it
will quickly putrify and breed worms. Hollerius says, they are venomous, and
that is the reason the name Basilicon was given to it: The best use that I know
of it, is, it gives speedy deliverance to women in travel.

Oleae folia. Olive-leaves, they are hard to come by here.

Ononis. Rest harrow. See the roots.

Ophioglosson. Adders-tongue: the leaves are very drying, being boiled in oil
they make a dainty green balsome for green wounds: taken inwardly, they help
inward wounds.

Origanum. Organy, a kind of wild Marjoram, hot and dry in the third degree;
helps the bitings of venomous beasts, such as have taken Opium, Hemlock, or
Poppy; provokes urine, brings down the terms, helps old coughs; in ointment it
helps scabs and itch.

Oxylapathum. Sorrel, see Acetosae.

Papaver etc. Poppyes; white, black, or erratick. I refer you to the Syrups of
each.

Parietaria. Given once before under the name of Helxine.

Pastinaca. Parsnips, see the Roots.

Persicaria. See Hydropiper: this is the milder sort of Arsesmart I described
there: If ever you find it amongst the Compounds, take it under that notion.

Pentaphyllum. Cynkfoil: very drying, yet but meanly hot, if at all; helps
ulcers of the mouth, roughness of the windpipe, (whence comes hoarsnesse and
coughs etc.) helps fluxes, creeping ulcers, and the yellow-jaundice; they say
one leaf cures a quotidian ague, three a tertian, and four a quartan: I know it
will cure agues without this curiosity if a wise man have the handling of it;
otherwise a Cart load will not do it.

Petroselinum. Parsley: see Smallage.

Pes Columbinus. See Geranium.

Persicorum folia. Peach Leaves: they are a gentle, yet a complete purger of
choler, and diseases coming from thence, fit for children because of their
gentleness.

Pilosella. Mouseare, once before, and that is often enough.

Pithyusa. A new name for Spurge, of the last edition.

Plantago. Plantane, cold and dry, an herb though common, yet let none despise
it, for it prevails mightily against tormenting pains and excoriations of the
guts, bloody fluxes, it stops the terms and spitting of blood, (...), or
Consumptions Tragus.
of the lungues, the running of the reins, the whites Dioscorides.
in women, pains in the head, and frenzies, outwardly it cleers the sight,
takes away inflammations, scabs, itch, the shingles, and all spreading sores,
and is as wholesome an herb as can grow about a house.

Polium etc. Poley, or Pellamountain, all the sorts are hot in the second
degree and dry in the third, helps dropsyes the Yellow Jaundice, Infirmities of
the Spleen, and provoke Dioscorides.
urine.

Polygonum. Knotgrasse.

Polytrichum. Maidenhair.

Portulaca. Purslain, Cold and moist in the second or third degrees, cools hot
stomachs, and (I remember since I was a child that) it is admirable for one
that has set his teeth on edge by eating sour apples, it cools the blood,
liver, and is good for hot diseases, or inflammations in any of these places,
stops fluxes and the terms, and helps all inward Inflammations whatsoever.

Porrum. Leeks: See the roots.

Primula Veris. See Cowslips, or the flowers which you will.

Prunella. Self-heal, Carpenters-herb, and (in Sussex) Sickle-wort, moderately
hot and dry, binding: See Bugle. So shall I not need write one thing twice, the
virtues being the same.

Pulegium. Penyroyal, hot and dry in the third degree, provokes urine, breaks
the stone in the reins, (for I take it, the herb is chiefly apropriated to
those parts) strengthens women's backs, provokes the terms, eases their labor
in childbed, brings away the afterbirth, stays vomiting, strengthens the
brain, (yea the very smell of it) breaks wind and helps the vertigo.

Pulmonaria, arborea, et Symphytum maculosum. Lunguewort, I confess I
searching Authors for these, found out many sorts of Lungueworts, yet all
agreed that both these were one and the same, and helps infirmities of the
lungues, as hoarcenesse, coughs, wheezings, shortness of breath etc.

Pulicaria. Fleabane, hot and dry in the third degree, helps the bitings of
venomous beasts, wounds and swellings, the yellow Jaundice, the
Falling Sickness, and such as cannot piss, it being burnt, the smoke of it
kills all the gnats and fleas in the chamber, as also serpents if any be there,
it is dangerous for women with child.

Pyrus sylvestris. Wild Pear Tree, I know no virtue in the leaves.

Pyrola. Wintergreen, cold, dry, and very binding, stops fluxes and the terms
in women, and is admirable good in green wounds.

Quercus folia. Oak-leaves, are much of the nature of the former, stay the
whites in women: see the bark.

Ranunculus. Has got a sort of English names, Crow-foot, King Kob, Gold-cups,
God-knobs, Butter-flowers, etc. they are of a notable hot quality, unfit to be
taken inwardly, (...) you bruise the roots and apply them to a Plague Sore,
they are notable things to draw the venom to them, Also Apulieus says, that if
they be hanged about the neck of one that is lunatic, in the wane of the Moon,
the Moon being in the (...) degree of Taurus or Scorpio, it quickly rids him of
his disease.

Raparum folia. If they do not mean Turnep-leaves, I know not what they mean,
Rapum is a Turnep, but surely (...) is a word seldom used, If they do mean
Turnep-leaves, when they are young and tender, they are held to provoke urine.

Rosmarinum. Rosemary, hot and dry in the second degree, binding, stops fluxes,
helps stuffings in the head, the yellaw Serapio.
Jaundice, helps the memory, expels wind: See the Dioscorides.
Flowers.

Rosa Solis. See the Water.

Rosa alba, rubra, Damascena. White, red, and Damask-Roses, the white are held
to be good for sore eyes, the red bind and comforts the heart, refresh the
spirits, the Damask purge, all are cool in temperature.

Rumex. Dock: all the ordinary sort of Docks are of a cool and drying
substance, and therefore stops fluxes; the leaves are seldom used in physic.

Rubus, Idaeus. Raspis, Rasberries, or Hindberries: I know no great virtue in
the leaves.

Ruta. Rue, or Herb-of-grace: hot and dry in the third degree, consumes the
seed, and is an enemy to generation, helps difficulty of breathing, and
inflammations of the lunges, pains in the side, inflammations of the yard and
matrix, is naught for women wirh child: An hundred such things are quoted by
Dioscorides. This I am sure of, no herb resists poison more. And some think
Mithridates, that renowned King of Pontus, fortified his body against poison
with no other medicine. It strengthens the heart exceedingly, and no herb
better than this in Pestilential times.

Ruta Muraria. See Adianthum.

Sabina. Savin; hot and dry in the third degree, potently provokes the terms,
expels both birth and afterbirth, they (boiled in oil and used in ointments)
stay creeping ulcers, scour away spots, frekles, and sunburning from the face,
the belly anointed with it kills worms in children.

Salvia. Sage: hot and dry in the second or third degrees, binding, it stays
abortion in such women as are subject to come before their times, it causes
fruitfulness, it is singular AEtius. Agrippa.
good for the brain, strengthens the senses and memory, helps spitting and
vomiting of blood; outwardly, heat hot with a little vinegar and applied to the
side, helps stitches and pains in the sides.

Salix. Willow-leaves, are cold, dry, and binding, stop spitting of blood and
fluxes, the boughs stuck about a chamber wonderfully cool the air and refresh
such as have fevers, the leaves applied to the head help hot diseases there,
and frenzies.

Sampsucum. Marjoram.

Sanicula. Sanicle, hot and dry in the second degree, cleanses wounds and
ulcers.

Saponariae. Sope-wort, or Bruise wort, vulgarly used in bruises and cut
fingers, and is of notable use in the Frenchpocks.

Satureia. Savory, Winter-savory is hot and dry in the third degree,
Summer-savory is not so hot, both of them expel wind gallantly, and that (they
say) is the reason why they are boiled with Pease and Beans, and other such
windy things.

Saxifragia alba. White Saxifrage breaks wind, helps the chollick and stone.

Scabiosa. Scabious, hot and dry in the second degree, cleanses the breast and
lungues, helps old rotten coughs, and difficulty of breathing, provokes urine
and cleanses the bladder of filthy stuff, breaks Aposthumes, and cures Scabs
and Itch.

Scariola. An Italian name for Succory.

Schoenanthus. Schaenanth, Squinanth, or Chamels-hay, hot and binding, Gallen
says it causes headache, believe him that list, Dioscorides says it digests
and opens the passages of the veins, surely it is as great an expeller of wind
as is.

Scordium. Water-Germander, hot and dry, cleanses ulcers in the inward parts,
it provokes urine and the terms, opens stoppings of the liver, spleen, reins,
bladder, and matrix, it is a great counterpoyson and eases the breast
orepressed with phlegm.

Scrophularia. Fig-wort, so called of Scrophula the Kings Evil, which it cures,
they say by beingonly hung about the neck, if not, bruise it and apply it to
the place it helps the piles or Hemorrhoids, and (they say) being hung about
the neck preserves the body in health.

(...), And all his sorts, see Barba Jovis.

Senna. In this give me leave to stick close to Mesue, as an imparaleld Author:
it heats in the second degree and dries in the first, cleanses, purges and
digesteth, it carries downwards both choler, phlegm, and melancholy, it
cleanses the brain, heart, liver, spleen, it cheers the senses, opens
obstructions, takes away dullness of sight, preserves youth, helps deafness (if
purging will help it) helps melancholy and madness, keeps back old age, resists
resolution of the nerves (...)
pains in the head, scabs, itch, falling sickness, the windiness of it is
corrected with a little Ginger.

Serpillum. Mother-of-Time, Wild Time, it is hot and dry in the third degree,
it provokes the terms gallantly, as also AEtius.
helps the strangury or stoppage of urine, gripings in the Gallen.
belly, ruptures, convulsions, inflammations in the liver, lethargy, and
infirmities of the spleen.

Sigillum Solomonis. Solomons-Seal: see the Root.

Smyrnium. Alexanders of Creet.

Solanum. Nightshade, very cold and dry, binding, it is somewhat dangerous
given inwardly, unless by a skilful hand, outwardly it helps the shingles, St.
Anthonies fire, and other hot inflammations.

Soldanella. Bindweed, hot and dry in the Second degree, it opens obstructions
of the liver, and purges watery humors, and is therefore very profitable in
dropsies, it is very hurtful to the stomach, and therefore if taken inwardly it
had need be well corrected with Cinnamon, Ginger, or Annisseeds etc. Yet the
German Physicians affirm that it cures the dropsy being only bruised and
applied to the navill and something lower, and then it needs not be taken
inwardly at all.

Sonchus, levis, Asper. Sowthistles smooth and rough, they are of a cold watery,
yet binding quality, good for frenzies, Gallen.
they increase milk in nurses, and cause the children which they nurse to have
a good color, help gnawings of the stomach coming of a hot cause, outwardly
they help inflammations, and hot swellings, cool the heat of the fundament and
privities.

Sophia Chirurgorum. Flix-weed, drying without any manif est heat or coldness,
it is usually found about old ruinous buildings, it is so called because of its
virtue in stopping fluxes. Paracelsus highly commends it, nay elevates it up to
the skies for curing old wounds and fistulaes; which though our modern
Chyrurgians despise, yet if it were in the hands of a wise man, such as
Paracelsus was, it may do the wonders he says it will.

Spinachia. Spinach: I never read any physical virtues of it.

Spina alba. See the Root.

Spica. See Nardus.

Staebe. Silver Knapweed: The virtues be the same with Scabious, and some think
the Herbs too, though I am of another opinion.

Staechas. French-Lavender, Cassidony, is a great counterpoyson, opens
obstructions of the liver and spleen, cleanses the matrix and bladder, brings
out corrupt humors, provokes urine. There is another Staechas mentioned here by
the name Amaranthus, in English, Golden-flower, or Flower-gentle; the flowers
of which expel worms; being boiled, the water kills lice and nits.

Succisa, Morsus Diaboli. Devils-bit, hot and dry in the second degree:
inwardly taken, it eases the fits of the mother and breaks wind, it takes away
swellings in the mouth and slimy phlegm that sticks to the jaws, neither is
there a more present remedy in the world for those cold swellings in the neck,
which the vulgar call, the Almonds of the ears, than this herb bruised and
applied to them.

Suchaba, An Egyptian thorn, very hard if not impossible to come by here.

And here the College make another racket about the several sorts of Comfrys;
which I pass by with silence, having spoke to them before.

Tanacetum. Tansie: hot in the second degree, and dry in the third; the very
smell of it stays abortion, or miscariages in women; so it does being bruised
and applied to their navills, it provokes urine, and eases pains in making
water, and is a special herb against the gout.

Taraxacon. Dandelion, or to write better French, Dentde-lion, for in plain
English it is called Lions-tooth, it is a kind of Succory, and thither I refer
you.

Tamariscus. Tamaris, it has a dry cleansing quality, and Gallen, Dioscorides.
has a notable virtue against the rickets and infirmities of the spleen,
provokes the terms.

Telephium. A kind of Orpine.

Thlaspi. See Nasturtium.

Thymbra. A Wild Savory.

Thymum. Time; hot and dry in the third deghee, helps coughs, and shortness of
breath, provokes the terms, brings away dead children and the afterbirth,
purges phlegm, cleanses the breast, lungues, reins, and matrix, helps the
Sciatica, pains in the breast, expels wind in any part of the body, resists
fearfulness and melancholy, continual pains in the head, and is profitable for
such as have the Falling Sickness to smell to.

Thymelaea. The Greek name for Spurg-Olive: (...) being the Arabic name.

Tithymalus, Esula etc. Spurge, hot and dry in the fourth degree, a dogged
purge, better let alone then taken inwardly, hair anointed with the juice of it
will fall off, it kills fish being mixed with any thing that they will eat,
outwardly it cleanses ulcers, takes away freckles, sunburning, and morphew
from the face.

Tormentilla. See the root.

Trinitatis herba. Pansies, or Hearts-ease, they are cold and moist both herbs
and flowers, excellent against inflammations of the breast or lungues,
Convulsions, and Falling Sickness, also they are held to be good for the
French-pocks.

Trifolium. Trefoil, dry in the third degree, and cold, the ordinary meadow
trefoil, (for their word comprehends all sorts) cleanses the guts of slimy
humors that stick to them, being used either in drinks or Clysters, outwardly
they take away inflammations, Pliny says the leaves stand upright before a
storm, which I have observed to be true oftener then once or twice, and that in
a clear day, 24. hours before the storm came.

Tussilago. Coltsfoot, something cold and dry, and therefore good for
inflammations, they are admirable good for coughs and consumptions of the
lunges, shortness of breath, etc.

Valeriana. Valerian, or Setwal: see the Roots.

Verbaseum. Thapsus Barbatus. Mullin, or Higtaper: It is something dry, and of
a digesting, cleansing quality, stops fluxes, and the hemorrhods, it cures
hoarses, the cough and such as are broken-winded; the leaves worn in the shoos
provoke the terms, (especially in such virgins as never had them) but they must
be worn next their feet: also they say that the herb being gathered when the
Sun is in Virgo and the Moon in Aries, in their mutual Antiscions, helps such
of the falling sickness as do but carryit about them: worn under the feet it
helps such as are troubled with the fits of the mother.

(...). Vervain: hot and dry, a great opener, cleanser, and healer, it helps
the yellow-jaundice, defects in the reins and bladder, pains in the head if it
be but bruised and hung about the neck, al diseases in the secret parts of men
and women; made into an ointment it is a sovereign remedy for old headaches,
called by the name of (...), as also frenzes; it clears the skin, and causes a
lovely color.

Veronica. See Betonica Pauli.

Violaria. Violet-leaves: they are cool, ease pains in the head proceeding of
heat, and frenzes, either inwardly taken, or outwardly applied, heat of the
stomach, or inflammation of the lungues.

(...) Vinisera. The Manured Vine: Vines of different climats have different
operations. I write of English Vines.
the leaves are binding, and cool withal; the burnt ashes of the sticks of a
Vine, scour the teeth, and make them as white as snow; the leaves stop
bleeding, fluxes, heartburnings, vomitings, as also the longing of women with
child.

Vincitoxicum. Swallow-wort: A Pultis made with the leaves helps sorebrests,
and also soreness' of the matrix.

Virga Pastoris; see Dipsacus.

Virga auria: see Consolid.

Vlmaria. See the root. Mead-sweet.

Vmbilicus Veneris. Navil-wort: cold, dry, and binding, therefore helps al
inflammations; they are very good for kib'd heels being bathed with it and a
leaf laid over the sore.

Vrtica. Nettles; an herb so well known, that you may find them by the feeling
in the darkest night. They are something hot, not very hot, the juice stops
bleeding, they provoke lust exceedingly, help difficulty of breathing,
pleuresies, inflammations of the lunges, that troublsome cough which women call
the Chin-cough; they exceedingly break the stone and provoke urine, and help
such as cannot hold their necks upright.

Vsnea. Moss: once before

FLOWERS.
COurteous Reader, being now passed ever the Roots, and Herbs, and arived
safely at the Flowers; I thought it best, and most advantageous for the public
good, to abreviate the rest of the Simples, and only note such as may be easily
gotten, or are familiarly known to the Commonality of this Land; the Curious
may satisfy themselves with what has been written, being the names of all, or
almost all the Herbs, Plants, Roots, etc. used in the Dispensatory: In truth I
am loath the curiosity of any, should make the Book swel to that bigness that it
should be out of the command of a poor man's purse. So much for the Prologue:
now to the purpose.

BOrrage, and Buglosse flowers strengthen the heart and brain, and are
profitable in fevers.

Chamomel flowers, heat and assuage swellings, inflammations of the bowels,
disolve wind, are profitable given in clysters or drink to such as are troubled
with the chollick, or stone.

Staechas, opens stoppings in the bowels, and strengthens the wholebody.

Saffron powerfully concocts, and sends out whatever humor ossends the body,
drives back inflammations, being applied outwardly, increases lust, provokes
urine.

Clove-Gilliflowers resist the pestilence, strengthen the heart, liver, and
stomach, and provoke lust.

Schoenanth (which I think I touched slightly amongst the herbs) provokes urine
potently, provokes the terms, breaks wind, helps such as spit or vomit blood,
eases pains of the stomach, reins, and spleen, helps dropsies, convulsions,
and inflammations of the womb.

Lavender-flowers resist all cold afflictions of the brain, convulsions,
falling sickness, they strengthen cold stomachs, and open obstructions of the
liver, they provoke urine and the terms, bring forth the birth and afterbirth.

Hops opens stoppings of the bowels, and for that cause Beer is better than Ale.

Bawm-flowers cheer the heart and vital spirits, strengthen the stomach.

Rosemary-flowers strengthen the brain exceedingly, and resist madness, clear
the sight.

Stock-Gilliflowers, or Wall-flowers (as some call them) help inflammations of
the womb, provoke the terms, and help ulcers of the mouth.

Hony-suckles, provoke urine, ease the pains of the spleen, and such as can
hardly fetch their breath.

Mallows help Coughs.

Red-roses, cool, bind, strengthen both vital and animal virtue, restore such
as are in consumptions, strengthen: there are so many compositions of them
which makes me the briefer in the simples.

Violets (to wit the blew ones, for I know little or no use of the white in
physic) cool and moisten, provoke sleep, loosen the belly, resist fevers,
help inflammations, correct the heat of choler, ease pains in the head, help
the roughness of the windpipe, diseases in the throat, inflammations in the
breast, and sides, pluresies, open stoppings of the liver, and help the
yellow-Jaundice.

Cichory (or succory as the vulgar call it) cools and strengthens the liver: so
does Endive.

Water Lillies ease pains of the head coming of Choler and heat, provoke
sleep, cool inflammations, and the heat in fevers.

Pomegranate-flowers, dry and bind, stop fluxes, and the terms in women.

Cowslips, strengthen the brain, senses, and memory, exceedingly, resist all
diseases there, as convulsions, falling sickness, palsies etc.

Centaury, purges choler and gross humors, helps the yellow jaundice, opens
obstructions of the liver, helps pains of the spleen, provokes the terms,
brings out the birth and afterbirth.

Elder-flowers, help dropsies, cleanse the blood, clear the skin, open
stoppings of the liver and spleen, and diseases arising therefrom.

Bean-flowers, clear the skin, stop humors flowing into the eyes.

Peach-tree-flowers, purge choler gently.

Broom-flowers, purge water, and are good in dropsies.

The temperature of all these differ either very little or not at all from the
herbs, and now I think I have done full out as well as the College, that named
three times as many and gave the virtues of none.

FRVITS AND THEIR BVDS.
GREEN Figs, are held to be of ill juice, but the best is we are not much
troubled with them in England; dry figs help coughs: cleanse the breast, and
help infirmities of the lungues, shortness of wind, they loose the belly, purge
the reins, help inslamations of the liver and spleen; outwardly they dissolves
swellings, some say the continual eating of them makes men lousie.

Pine-Nuts restore such as are in Consumptions, amend the failings of the
lungues, concoct fiegm, and yet are naught for such as are troubled with the
headache.

Dates, are binding, stop eating ulcers being applied to them, they are very
good for weak stomachs, for they soon digest, and breed good nourishment, they
help infirmities of the reins, bladder, and womb.

Sebestens, cool choler, violent heat of the stomach, help roughness of the
tongue and windpipe, cool the reins and bladder.

Raisons of the Sun, help infirmities of the breast and liver, restore
Consumptions, gently cleanse and move to stool

Walnuts, kill worms, resist the pestilence, (I mean the green ones, not the
dry.)

Capers, eaten before meals, provoke hunger.

Nutmegs strengthen the brain, stomach, and liver, provoke urine, ease the
pains of the spleen, stop loosnesse, ease pains of the head, and pains in the
joints, ad strength to the body, take away weakness coming of cold, and cause
a sweet breath.

Cloves help digestion, stop looseness, provoke lust, and quicken the sight.

Pepper, binds, expels wind, helps the chollick, quickens digestion oppressed
with cold, heats the stomach, (for all that old women say, it is cold in the
stomach.)

Quinces, see the Compositions.

Pears are grateful to the stomach, drying, and therefore help fluxes.

All Plums that are sharp or sour, are binding, the sweet are loosning.

Cucumers, or (if you will) Cowcumbers, cool the stomach, and are good against
ulcers in the bladder.

Gauls, are exceeding binding, help ulcers in the mouth, wasting of the gums,
eases the pains of the teeth, helps the falling out of the womb and fundament,
makes the hair black.

Pompions are a cold and moist fruit, of small nourishment, they provoke urine;
outwardly applied, the flesh of them help inflammations and burnings, being
applied to the forehead they help inflammations of the eyes.

Melones, called in London Musk-millions, have few other virtues.

Apricocks are very grateful to the stomach, and dry up the humors thereof,
Peaches are held to do the like.

Cubebs, are hot and dry in the third degree, they expel wind, and cleanse the
stomach of tough and viscus humors, they ease the pains of the spleen, and help
cold diseases of the womb, they cleanse the head of phlegm and strengthen the
brain, they heat the stomach and provoke lust.

Bitter Almonds, are hot in the first degree and dry in the second, they
cleanse and cut thick humors, cleanse the lungus; and eaten every morning they
are held to preserve from drunkenness.

Bay Berries, heat, expel wind, mitigate pain, are excellent for cold
infirmities of the womb, and dropsies.

Cherries, are of different qualities according to their different taste, the
sweet are quickest of digestion, but the sour are most pleasing to a hot
stomach, and procure appetite to ones meat.

Medlars, are strengthening to the stomach, binding and the green are more
binding than the rotten, and the dry than the green.

Olives, cool and bind.

English-Currance, cool the stomach, and are profitable in acute fevers, they
quench thirst, resist vomiting, cool the heat of choler, provoke appetite, and
are good for hot complexions.

Services, (or as we in Sussex call them) Checkers, are of the nature of
Medlars, but something weaker in operation.

Barberries, quence thirst, cool the heat of choler, resist the pestilence
stay vomiting and fluxes, stop the terms, kill worms, help spitting of blood,
fasten the teeth, and stengthen the gums.

Strawberries, cool the stomach, liver, and blood; but are very hurtful for
such as have agues.

Winter-Cherries, potently provoke urine, and break the stone.

Cassia-fistula, is temperate in quality, gently purges choler and phlegm,
clarrifies the blood, resists fevers, cleanses the breast and lungues, it
cools the reins, and thereby resists the breeding of the stone, it provokes
urine, and therefore is exceeding good for the running of the reins in men, and
the the whites in women.

All the sorts of Myrobalans, purge the stomach, the Indian Myrobalans are held
to purge melancholy most especially, the other phlegm; yet take heed you use
them not in stoppings of the bowels: they are cold anddry, they all strengthen
the heart, brain, and sinnews, strengthens the stomach, releeve the senses,
take away tremblings and heart-qualms.

Prunes, are cooling and loosning.

Tamarinds, are cold and dry in the second degree, they purge choler, cool the
blood, stay vomiting, help the yellow-jaundice, quench thirst, cool hot
stomachs, and hot livers.

SEEDS OR GRAINS.
COriander seed heat and dry, expels wind, but is hurtful for the head, and
send up unwholesome vapors to the brain, dangerous for mad people, therefore let
them be prepared as you shall be taught toward the latter end of the Book.

Fenugreek-seeds are of a softening discussing nature, they cease inflammations
be they internal or external, bruised and mixed with vinegar they ease the
pains of the spleen, being applied to the sides, help hardness and swellings of
the matrix, being boiled, the decoction helps scabby heads.

Linseed has the same virtues with Fenugreek.

Gromwel seed provokes urine, helps the chollick, breaks the (...), and exels
wind.

Lupins eases the pains of the spleen, kills worms and casts them out;
outwardly, they cleanse filthy ulcers and gangrenes, help scabs, itch, and
inflammations.

Dil-seed increases milk in nurses, expels wind, stays vomitings, provokes
urine; yet it duls the sight, and is an enemy to generation.

Smalledg seed, provokes urine and the terms, expels wind, resists poison, and
eases inward pains, it opens stoppings in any part of the body, yet it is
hurtful for such as have the falling sickness, and for women with child.

Rocket-seed, provokes urine, stirs up lust, increases seed, kills worms,
eases the pains of the spleen.

Basil-seed, if we may believe Dioscorides and Crescentius, chears the heart,
and strengthens a moist stomach, drives away melancholy, and provokes urine.

Nettle-seed provokes lust, opens stoppages of the womb, helps inflammations of
the sides and lungues, purges the breast.

The seeds of Ammi or Bishops-weed, heat and dry, help difficulty of urine, and
the pains of the chollick, the bitings of venomous beasts, they provoke the
terms, and purge the womb.

Annis-seeds, heat and dry, ease pain, expel wind, cause a sweet breath, help
the dropsy, relist poison, breed milk, and slop the whites in women, provoke
lust, and ease the headache.

Cardamoms, heat, kill worms, cleanse the reins, and provoke urine.

Fennel-seeds break wind, provoke urine, and the terms, increases milk in
nurses.

Commin-seeds, heat, bind and dry, stop blood, expel wind, ease pain, help the
bitings of venomous beasts: outwardly applied ( viz. in plasters) they are of
a discussing nature.

Carrot Seeds are windy, provoke lust exceedingly and increase seed, provoke
urine and the terms, cause speedy delivery to women in travail, and bring away
the after birth.

Nigella seeds boiled in oil and the forehead anointed with it, ease pains in
the head, takes away leprosy, itch, scurff, and helps scald heads; Inwardly
taken they expel worms, they provoke urine and the terms, help difficulty of
breathing: the smoke of them being burned drives away Serpents and venomous
beasts.

Stavesager, kills lice in the head, I hold it not fitting to be given inwardly.

The Seeds of Water-creases heat, yet trouble the stomach and belly, ease the
pains of the spleen, are very dangerous for women with child, yet they provoke
lust, outwardly applied, they help leprosies, scald heads, and the falling off
of hair, as also Carbuncles, and cold ulcers in the joints,

Mustard Seed, heats, extenuates, and draws, it draws moisture from the brain,
the head being shaved and anointed with mustard is a good remedy for the
lethargy, it helps filthy ulcers and hard swellings in the mouth, it helps old
aches coming of cold.

French Barley is cooling, nourishing, and breeds milk.

Sorrel Seeds potently resists poison, helps fluxes, and such stomachs as loath
their meat.

Succory Seed, cools the heat of the blood, extinguisheth lust, open stoppings
of the liver and bowels, it allayes the heat of the body and produces a good
color, it strengthens the stomach, liver, and reins.

Poppy Seeds, ease pain, provoke sleep.

Mallow Seeds ease pains in the bladder.

Cich-pease, are windy, provoke lust, increase milk in nurses, provoke the
terms; outwardly they help scabs, itch, inflammations of the stones, ulcers, etc,

White-Saxifrage Seeds, provoke urine, expel wind, and break the stone.

Rue Seeds, help such as cannot hold their water.

Lettice Seed cool the blood restrains lust.

Also Gourds, Citruls, Cucumers, Melons, Purslain, and Endive seeds, cool the
blood, as also the stomach, spleen, and reins, and allay the heat of fevers.

Wormseed expels wind, kills worms.

Ashtree keys, ease pains in the sides, help the dropsy, releeve men weary
with labor, provoke lust, and make the body lean.

Peony Seeds, help the Ephialtes or the disease the vulgar call the Mare, as
also the fits of the mother, and other such like infirmities of the womb, stop
the terms, and help convulsions.

Broom Seed, potently, provokes urine breaks the stone.

Citron Seeds strengthen the heart, cheer the vital spirit, resist pestilence
and poison.

TEARS, LIQVORS, AND ROZINS
LAdanum, is of a heating molifying nature, it opens the mouths of the veins,
stays the hair from falling off, helps pains in the ears, and hardness of the
womb.

Asa foetida is commonly used to allay the fits of the mother by smelling to
it, they say inwardly taken it provokes lust, and expels wind.

Benzoin, or Benjamin, makes a good perfume.

Sanguis Draconis, cools and binds exceedingly.

Aloes, purges Choler and phlegm, and with such del beration that it is often
given to withstand the violence of other purges, it preserves the senses and
betters the aprehension, it strengthens the liver, and helps the yellow
Jaundice, yet it is naught for such as are troubled with the Hemorrhoids or
have agues.

Manna. is temperately hot, of a mighty dilative quality, cleanses
Chollergently, also it cleanses the throat and stomach.

Scamony or Diagridium, call it by which name you please, is a desperate purge,
hurtful to the body, by reason of its heat, windiness, corroding, or gnawing,
and violence of working, therefore let it be well prepared according to the
directions in the latter end of the book, and administered by a skilful hand.

Opopanax, is of a heating, mollifying, digesting quality.

Gum Elemi, is exceeding good for fractures of the skul, as also in wounds, and
therefore is put in plasters for that end.

Tragacanthum, commonly, called Gum Traganth, and Gum Dragon, helps coughs,
hoarsnesse, and distillations upon the lungues.

Bdellium, heats and softens, helps hard swellings, ruptures, pains in the
sides, hardness of the sinnews.

Galbanum, hot, dry, discussing, applied to the womb, it hastens both birth and
afterbirth, applied to the navil it stays the strangling of the womb, commonly
called the fits of the mother, helps pains in the sides, and difficulty of
breathing, being appled to it, and the smell of it helps the vertigo or
dissines in the head.

Mirrhe, heats, and dries, opens and softens the womb, provokes the birth and
afterbirth; inwardly taken, it helps old coughs, and hoarsnesse, pains in the
sides, kills worms and helps a stinking breath, helps the wastings of the gums,
fastens the teeth, outwardly it helps wounds and fills up ulcers with flesh.

Mastich; strengthens the stomach exceedingly, helps such as vomit or spit
blood, it fastens the teeth and strengthens the gums, being chewed in the mouth.

Frankincense and Olibanum, heat and bind, fill up old ulcers with flesh, stops
bleeding, but is extreme bad for mad people.

Turpentine purges, cleanses the reins, helps the running of them.

Styrax calamitis helps coughs and distillations upon the lungues, hoarcenesse,
want of voice, hardness of the womb, but is bad for headaches.

Amoniacum, applied to the side, helps the hardness and pains of the spleen.

Camphire, eases pains of the head coming of heat, takes away inflammations and
cools any place it is applied too.

IVYCES.
THAT all Juyces have the same virtues with the herbs or fruits whereof they
are made, I suppose few or none will deny, therefore I shall only name a few of
them and that briefly.

Sugar is held to be hot in the first degree, strengthens the lungues, takes
away the roughness of the throat, succors the reins and bladder.

The juice of Citrons cools the blood, strengthens the heart mitigates the
violent heat of fevers.

The juice of Lemmons works the same effect but not so powerfully as Authors
say.

Juice of liquoris strengthens the lungues, helps coughs and colds.

I am loath to trouble the reader with Tautology, therefore I pass to --

THINGS BRED OF PLANTS
OF these, the College names but few, and all of those few have been treated
of before, only two excepted, the the first of which is. --

Agaricus, Agrick, it purges phlegm, choler, and melancholy from the brain,
nerves, muscles, marrow (or more properly brain) of the back, it cleanses the
breast, lungues, liver, stomach, spleen, reins, womb, joints, it provokes urine
and the terms, kills worms, helps pains in the joints, and causes a good color,

Lastly, Viscus Quercinus, Or Misleto of the Oak, helps the falling sickness,
being either taken inwardly, or hung about ones neck.

LIVING-CREATVRES
MIllepedes (so called from the multitude of their feet, though it cannot be
supposed they have a thousand) Sows, Hoglice, in Sussex they call them
woodlice, being bruised and mixed with wine they provoke urine, help the yellow
Jaundice, outwardly being boiled in oil, help pains in the ears a drop being
put into them.

The flesh of I (...) our English Adder to be the true Viper, though happily
not so venomous as they are in hotter Countries.
Vipers being eaten, clear the fight, help the vices of the nerves, resist
poison exceedingly, neither is there any better remedy under the Sun for their
bitings than the head of the viper that bit you, bruised and applied to the
place, and the flesh eaten, neither any comparable to the stinging of bees and
wasps etc. than the same which stung you, bruised and applied to the place.

Land Scorpions cure their own stingings, by the same means, the ashes of them
(being burnt) potently provokes urine and breaks the stone.

Earthworms, (the preparation of which you may find toward the latter end of
the book) are an admirable remedy for cut nerves being applied to the place,
they provoke urine, see the oil of them, only let me not forget one notable
thing quoted by Mizaldus, which is, that the powder of them put into a hollow
tooth, makes it drop out.

Eels being put into wine or beer, and suffered to die in it, he that drinks
it, will never endure that sort of liquor again.

Oytlers applied alive to a pestilential swelling, draw all the venom to them.

Crab-fish, burnt to ashes, and a dram of it taken every morning helps the
biting of mad-dogs, and all other venomous beasts.

Swallows being eaten clear the sight, the ashes of them (being burnt) eaten
preserves from drunkenness, helps sore throats being applied to them, and
inflammations.

Grasshoppers being eaten ease the Chollick and pains in the bladder.

Hedg-Sparrows, being kept in salt, or dried, and eaten raw, are an admirable
remedy for the stone.

Young pigeons being eaten, help pains in the reins, and the disease called
Tenasmus.

PARTS OF LIVING CREATVRES AND EXCREMENTS.
THE brain of Sparrows being eaten provoke lust exceedingly.

The brain of an Hare being roasted helps trembling, it makes children breed
teeth easily, their gums being rubbed with it, it also helps scald heads and
falling off of hair the head being anointed with it.

The head of a cole black Cat being burnt to ashes in a new pot, and some of
the ashes blown into the eye every day, helps such as have a skin growing over
their sight, if there happen an inflammation, moisten an Oak leaf in water and
lay over the eye, Mizaldus says he has (by this one only medicine) cured such
as have been blind a whole year.

The head of a young Some countries call them Gleads, and others Puttoks.
Kite, being burned to ashes and the quantity of a dram of it taken every
morning, in a little water, is an admirable remedy for the gout.

Crab's-eyes breaks the stone, and open stoppings of the bowels.

The lungues of a Fox well dried (but not burned) is an admirable strengthner
to the lungucs: See the Lohoch of fox lungues.

The liver of a Duck stops fluxes and strengthens the liver exceedingly.

The liver of a Frog, being dried and eaten, helps quartane Agues, or as the
vulgar call them, third day agues.

Cocks stones nourish mightily, and refresh and restore such bodies as have
been wasted by long sickness, they are admirable good in Hectic fevers, and
(...) Gallens supposed incurable) Marasmus, which is a consumption attending
upon a Hectic fever, they increase seed and help such as are weak in the
sports of Venus.

Castorium resists poison, the bitings of venomous beasts, it provokes the
terms, and brings forth both birth and afterbirth, it expells wind, eases
pains and aches, convulsions, sighings, lethargies, the smell of it allayes the
fits of the mother, inwardly given, it helps tremblings, falling sickness, and
other such ill effects of the brain and nerves

The yard of a Stag helps fluxes, the bitings of venomous beasts, provokes
urine, and stirs up lust exceedingly.

A Sheeps or Goats bladder being burnt, and the ashes given inwardly, helps the
Diabetes, or continual pissing.

Unicorns horn, resists poison and the pestilence, provokes urine, restores
lost strength, brings forth both birth and afterbirth.

Ivory, or Elephants tooth, binds, stops the whites in women, it strengthens
the heart and stomach, helps the yellowJaundice, and makes women fruitful.

The virtues of Hartshorn, are the same with Unicorns horn.

The bone that is found in the heart of a Stag is as sovereign a Cordial, and
as great a strengthner to the heart as any is, being beaten into powder and
taken inwardly, also it resists Pestilences and Poison.

The Skull of a man that was never buried, being beaten to powder and given
inwardly, the quantity of a dram at a time, in bettony water, helps palsyes
and falling sickness.

That small Triangular bone in the Skul of a man, Called Ostriquetrum, so
absolutely cures the falling sickness that it will never come again says
Paracelsus.

Those small bones which are found in the fore feet of a Hare being beaten into
powder and drunk in wine, powerfully provoke urine.

A Ring made of an Elks claw, being worn helps the cramp.

The fat of a man is exceeding good to anoint such limbs as fall away in flesh.

Goose grease and Capons grease are both softning, helps gnawing sores, and
stifness of the womb.

I am of opinion that the suet of a Goat, mixed with a little Saffron is as
excellent an ointment for the gout, especially the gout in the knees as any is.

Bears grease stays the falling off of the hair.

Fox grease helps pains in the ears.

Elks Claws or hoofs are a Sovereign remedy for the falling sickness, though
it be but worn in a ring, much more being taken inwardly, but (says Mizaldus)
it must be th choof of the right foot behind.

Milk is an extreme windy meat, therefore I am of the opinion of Dioscoriaes,
viz, that it is not profitable in headaches, yet this is for certain, that it
is an admirable remedy for inward ulcers in any part of the body, or any
corrosions or excoriations, pains in the reins and bladder, but it is very bad
in diseases in the liver, spleen, the falling sickness, vertigo, or dissines
in the head, fevers, and headaches, Goats milk is held to be better than Cows
for hectic fevers, Phtisicks, and consumptions, and so is Asses also.

Whey, attenuateth and cleanses both choler and melancholy, wonderfully
helps melancholy and madness coming of it, it opens stoppings of the bowels,
helps such as have the dropsy, and are troubled with the stoppings of the
spleen, rickets, and hypocondriack melancholy: for such diseases you may make
up your physic with Whey. Outwardly it cleanses the skin of such deformities
as come through choler or melancholy, as scabs, itch, morphew, leprosy, etc.

Honey, is of a gallant cleansing quallity, exceeding profitable in all inward
ulcers, in what part of the body soever, it opens the veins, cleanses the
reins and bladder: he that would have more of the virtues of it, let him read
Butler his Book of Bees, a gallant experimental work. I know no vices belonging
to it, but only it is soon converted into choler.

Wax, softens, heats, and meanly fills sores with flesh, it suffers not the
milk to curdle in women's breasts; inwardly it is given (ten grains at a time)
against bloody-fluxes.

Raw-Silk, heats and dries, cheers the heart, drives away sadness, comforts
all the spirits, both Natural, Vital, and Animal.

As for the virtues of Excrements, for some reasons (best known to my self) I
shall be silent in.

BELONGING TO THE SEA
SPerma-Caeti, is well applied outwardly to eating-ulcers, the marks which the
small pocks leave behind them, it clears the sight, provokes sweat; inwardly it
troubles the stomach and belly, helps bruises, and fretching of the nerves, and
thereforc is good for women newly delivered.

Amber-greese, heats and drys, strengthens the brain and nerves exceedingly, if
the infirmity of them come of cold, resists pestilence.

Sea-sand, a man that has the dropsy being set up to the middle in it, it
draws out all the water.

Red Corral is cold dry and binding, stops the immoderate flowing of the terms,
bloody fluxes, the running of the reins, and the whites in women, helps such as
spit and piss blood, helps witchcraft being carried about one, it is an
approved remedy for the falling sickness, Also if ten grains of red Corral be
given to a child in a little breast-milk so soon as it is born before it take
any other food, it will never have the falling sickness nor convulsions.

Pearls are a wonderful strengthener to the heart, increase milk in nurses and
amend it being naught, they restore such as are in consumptions, both they and
red Correl preserve the body in health, and resist fevers.

Amber (viz, yellow Amber) heats and dries, therefore prevails against moist
diseases of the head, it helps violent coughs helps consumptions of the
lungues, spitting of blood, the whites in women, it helps such women as are out
of measure unwealdy in their going with child, it stops bleeding at the nose,
helps difficulty of urine

The froath of the Sea, it is hot and dry, helps itch, scabs, leprosy, scald
heads etc. it cleanses the skin, helps difficulty of urine, makes the teeth
white, being rubbed with it, the head being washed with it, it helps baldness,
and trimly decks the head with hairs.

METALS, MINERALS AND STONES.
GOLD is temperate in quality, it wonderfully strengthens the heart and vital
spirits, which one perceiving very wittily inserted in these verses.

For Gold is Cordial; and that is the reason,
Your raking Misers live so long a season.
However this is certain, in Cordials, it resists melancholy, faintings,
swounings, fevers, falling sickness, what those be, see the directions at the
beginning.
and all such like infirmities incident, either to the vital or animal spirit.

Alum, heats, binds, and purges, scours filthy ulcers, and fastens loose teeth.

Brimstone, or flower of Brimstone, which is brimstone refined, and the better
for Physical uses, helps coughs and rotten phlegm, outwardly in ointments it
takes away leprosies, scabs, and itch, inwardly it helps the yellow Jaundice,
as also worms in the belly especially being mixed with a little Saltpeter, it
helps lethargies being snuffed up into the nose, the truth is I shall speak
more of this, and many other Simples which I mention not here when I come to
the Chemical Oils of them.

Litharge, both of Gold and silver, binds, and dries much, fills up ulcers with
flesh, and heals them.

Lead, is of a cold dry earthly quality, of an healing nature,, applied to the
place it helps any inflammation, and dries up humors,

Pompholix, cools, dries, and binds.

( the stone, not the herb.
) Jacynth, strengthens the heart being either beaten into powder and taken
inwardly, or only worn in a ring, Cardanus says it increases riches and
wisdom.

Sapphire, resists Necromantick apparitions, and by a certain divine gift, it
quickens the senses, helps such as are bitten by venomous beasts, ulcers in the
guts, Gallen, Dioscorides, Garcias, and Cardanus are my Authors.

Emerald, called a Chaste stone, because it resists lust, and will break (as
Cardanus says) if one has it about him when he deflowrs a virgin, moreover
being worn in a ring, it helps or at least mitigates the falling sickness, and
vertigo, it strengthens the memory and stops the unruly passions of men, it
Garcias.
takes away vain and foolish fears, as of Devils, Hobgoblins etc. it takes away
folly, anger etc. and causes good conditions, and if it do so being worn about
one, reason will tell him that being beaten into powder and taken inwardly, it
will do it much more.

Ruby or ( Carbuncle, if there be such a stone) restrains lust, resists
Cardanus.
pestilence, takes away idle and foolish thoughts, makes men cheerful.

Granate, strengthens the heart but hurts the brain, causes Cardanus.
anger, takes away sleep.

Diamond, is reported to make him that bears it unfortunate, It makes men
undaunted (I suppose because it is a stone of the nature of Mars) it makes men
more secure or fearlesse Cardanus.
than careful, which it does by over-powring the spirits, Garcias.
as the Sun though it be light it self, yet it darkens the sight in beholding
its body.

Amethist, being worn makes men sober and stayed, keeps them from drunkenness,
and too much sleep, it quickens the Cardanus.
wit, is profitable in huntings, and fightings, and repels vapors from the
head.

Bezoar, is a notable restorer of nature, a great cordial, no way hurtful nor
dangerous, is admirable good in fevers, pestilences, and consumptions, viz.
taken inwardly, for this stone is not used to be worn as a Jewel, the powder of
it being put upon wounds made by venomous beasts, draws out the poison.

Topas, (If Epiphanius spoke truth) if you put it into boiling water, it does
so cool it that you may presently put your hands into it without harm, if so,
then it cools inflammations of the body by touching of them.

Toadstone, being applied to the place helps the bitings of venomous Lemnius.
beasts, and quickly draws all the poison to it, it is known to be a true one
by this, hold it near to any toad, and she will make proffer to take it away
from you, if it be right, else not.

There is a stone of the bigness of a bean found in the gizzard of an old
Cock, which makes him that bears it, beloved Lemnius.
constant, and bold, valiant in fighting, beloved by women, potent in the
sports of Venus.

Nephriticus lapis, helps pains in the stomach, and is of great force in
breaking and bringing away the stone and gravel, concerning the powerful
operation of which I shall only qnote you one story of many, out of Monardus, a
Physician of note. A certain noble man (quoth he) very well known to me, by
only bearing this stone tied to his arm, voided such a deal of gravel, that he
feared the quantity would do him hurt, by avoiding so much of it, wherefore he
laid it from him, and then he avoided no more gravel; but afterward being
again troubled with the stone, he ware it as before, and presently the pain
eased, and he avoided gravel as before, and was never troubled with the pain of
the stone so long as he ware it.

Jasper, being worn stops bleeding, eases the labor of women, Mathiolus.
stops lust, resists fevers and dropsies.

AEtites, or the stone with child, because being hollow in Pliny.
the middle, it contains another little stone within it, it is Dioscorides.
found in an Eagles nest, and in many other places, this stone being bound to
the left arm of women with child, stays their miscarriage or abortio^, but
when the time of their labor comes, remove it from their arm, and bind it to
the inside of their thigh, and it brings forth the child, and that (almost)
without any pain at all.

Young swallows of the first brood if you cut them up between the time they
were hatched, and the next full moon, you shall find two stones in their
ventricle, one reddish, the other blackish, these being hung about the neck in
a piece of Albersus.
stags leather, help the falling-sickensse, and fevers. The truth is, I have
found the reddish one my self without any regard to the lunation, but never
tried the virtues of it.

Lapis Lazuli, purges melancholy being taken inwardly, the Florentine
Physicians.
outward worn as a Jewel, it makes men cheerful fortunate and Dioscorides.
rich.

And thus I end the stones, the virtues of which if any think Cardanus.
incredible, I answer, 1. I quoted the Authors where I had them, 2. I know
nothing to the contrary but why it may be as possible as the sound of a trumpet
is to incite a man to valor, or of a fidle to dancing, and if I have added a
few Simples which the College left out, I hope my fault is not much, or at
least wise, venial.

A CONCLUSION to the Catalogue of SIMPLES.
THVS Courteous Reader have I led thee by the band through the Catalogue of
Simples contained in this Dispensatory: For what intent the College quoted
them, I cannot tell; considering they quoted neither English names nor Virtues;
and the Lattin names (most part of them) may be found here and there throughout
the Dispensatory: It is true, I willingly omitted the virtues of many of them,
partly because I would not have the Book too big, partly because they are not
easily gotten, and many of the operations I buried in silence for fear knaves
should put them in practice to do mischief: Remembering a speech once in a
Sermon of Bishop Latimers, I could (says he) reprove other sins from this
text, but I will not; for fear you knowing what they be, should practice them.
Thus I send this Treatise of Simples into the merciless world, being not
careful of the Slanders, or Envy of traducing tongues, or brains of ill
Commonwealths men; my own Conscience bearing me witness that I sincerely aimed
at the Public good of my Country in it; and to all ingenious people shall
never cease to remain theirs whilst my own,

NICH. CULPEPER.

COMPOVNDS CONTAINED IN THE DISPENSATORY
A PREFACE.
I Shall desire only to give the Reader notice:

1. That I left out all the Simple distilled waters, quoted by the College;
many of which were ridiculous, the simples being not to be obtained green in
this Land: And sure none in Bedlam are so mad as to go about to distill simple
water out of dry things.

2. If any desire to know the virtues of distilled waters, let them repair to
the Herbs themselves, part of the virtues of which the Waters have, though (I
am of opinion) not so much as people think they have.

3. The best way (that I know) to distill Simple Waters, is, To bruise the Herbs
or Flowers, of what you would distill, and having pressed out the juice, distill
it in a Glass-stil in sand; and so will the Water be better by odds than if
distilled in a Peuter-stil as usually they do.

4. Only and barely the Receipts themselves were quoted by the College; the
Virtues of them, as also the Marginal Notes, and whatsoever sentences are
marked with a capital A. are Additions. The College when they made this
Dispensatory, never intending their Country so much good as to quote the
Virtues.

AN INTERPRETATION OF CERTAIN COMMON NAMES.
The five Cordial Flowers. The five Capillary Herbs. Of Roses, Violets,
Borrage, Buglosse, Rosemary, or Bawm-flowers. The four sorts of Maidenhair,
Cetrach. The five Emollient Herbs. The four Pluretical Waters. Marshmallows,
Mallows, Beets or Brank-Ursine, Mercury, Violets, or Pellitory of the wall. Of
our Ladies-Thistle, Dandelion, Carduus-Benedictus, Scabios. The four greater
hot Seeds. Common hot flowers. Of Annis, Fennel, Caraway, Commin. Of Chamomel,
Meliot, Orris The four lesser hot Seeds. Three stomach Oils. Of Bishops-weed,
Amomum, Smallage, Carrots. Of Wormwood, Quinces, Mastich. The four greater cold
Seeds. Four hot Ointments. Of Gourds, Cittuls, Cucumers, Melons. Of Agrippa,
Althea, Aregon, Martiatum. The four lesser cold Seeds. Four cold Ointments. Of
Endive, Succory, Lettice, Purslain. Album Camphoratum, Populion, Refrigerans
Galeni, Rosatum. The five greater opening Roots. Four Ointments fit for
Chyrurgians. Of Smallage, Sparagus, Fennel, Parsley, Bruscus. Basilicon, to
digest. The two Roots. Viride Apostoloru^, to cleanse. Of Fennel, Parsley.
Aurium, to breed flesh. The five lesser opening Roots. Album, to skin. Of
Grass, Eringo, Capers, Rest-harrow, Madir. Precious Fragments. Of Sapphire,
Granate, Emerald, Jacynth, Sardine, Ruby, Pearls, Amethist.

COMPOVND WATERS.
Wormwood Water, the lesser Composition.
TAKE of dried take common wormwood, but you may use which you will, for their
prescript gives you latitude enough.
Wormwood two pound, Annis seeds bruised half a pound, infuse them in six
congius among the Romans contained about five pints and an half: but our
Phvsitians use the word for 6. sextaries: the meaning of which you shall find
in the beginning of this book.
congies of A strongwater-stiller will tell you what it is.
small wines for 24. hours, then draw out the spirit with an Alembick, adding to
the distillation so much Sugar as is sufficient.

After the same manner is drawn Water of Angellica Roots, Annis-seed Water,
Orrange pill Water, Lemmon-pill Water, Bawm Water, Mint Water, Rosemary Water,
Sage Water, etc.

A. If you desire the virtues of these waters see the virtues of the herbs and
pills etc. and then your reason will tell you the waters have the same
opperations, and may happily produce a better effect upon cold stomachs.

Wormwood Water the greater Composition.
Take of Roman and common Wormwood, of each a pound, Sage, Mints, Bawm, of each
two handfuls, Galanga, Ginger, Aromarical reed, Alicampane roots, of each three
drachms, Liquoris, an ounce, Raisons of the Sun three ounces, Annis seeds,
sweet Fennel seeds of each six drachms, Cinnamon, Cloves, Natmegs, of each two
drachms, Cardamoms, Cubebs, of each one dram, Let the things be cut that are
to be cut, and the things bruised that are to be bruised, all of them infused
in 20. pints of Spanish wines, for the space of 24. hours, and then distilled
in an Alembick according to (...), and sweetened with Sugar.

A. This water is excellent good for cold stomachs, and (taken with discretion)
helps digestion in such in whom it is weak, it kills worms in the belly, eases
pains in the teeth, and given in convenient mixtures, is profitable in fevers.

Angelica Water the greater Composition.
Take of to wit, The leaves.
Angelica two pounds, Annis-seed half a pound, Coriander and Carawaies of each
four ounces, Zedoary bruised, three ounces, infuse them 24. hours in six
congies of small wines, then draw out the spirit, and sweeten it with sugar.

A. It comforts the heart, cherishes the vital spirits, resists if there be
such a thing.
the Pestilence and Infection.

Langius his Bezoar Water.
Take of Sullendine commonly called by the vulgar.
Chelondine with the roots, three handfuls and an half, Rue a handful, Scordium
two handfuls, Dittany of Creet, Carduus Benedictus of each one handful and an
half, Zedoary and Angelica roots of each three drachms, Citron and Lemmon pills
of each two drachms and an half, Clovegilliflowers, Roses of each two drachms,
Cinnamon, Cloves of each five drachms and an half, Venice treacle three ounces,
Mithridate an ounce and an half, Camphire two scruples, Troches of Vipers, Mace
of each a dram and an half, Wood of Aloes two scruples, Yellow sanders a
dram and an half, Conserves of Clove-gilliflowers two ounces, Carduus seeds
an ounce, Powder of Electuary see the way to make it, which the Table at the
latter end of the Book will direct you to.
Liberantis five scruples, Filings of Unicorns-horn, or Hearts horn a dram and
an half: Let these Ingredients (being cut and bruised) be infused for three
days in the spirit of Wine and Malaga Wine, of each three pound, then styled
in a Glasse-Stil in what that is, see the directions in the beginning of the
book.
Balneo Mariae according to art.

After it is half stilled, that which remains in the Still may be strained
through a linen cloth, and by evaporation reduced to the thickness of Honey,
and called by the name of Bezoartick Extraction.

After the same manner may Extractions be made of almost all Compound Waters.

A. Fxtracts have the same virtues with the waters they are made from, only the
different form is to please the quaint pallates of such whose fancy loathes any
one particular form.

A. This Bezoar water strengthens the heart, Arteries and spirit vital. It
provokes sweat, and is exceeding good in pestilential fevers, in health it
withstands melancholy and consumptions, and makes a merry blithe cheerful
creature.

Mathiolus, his Bezoar Water.
Take of Mathiolus his great Antidote, syrup of Citron pills, of each one
pound, spirit of wine distilled five times over, five pound, put all these in a
glass that is much to big to hold them, stop it close that the spirit fly not
out, then shake it together, that the Electuary may be well mingled with the
spirit, so let it stand a month, shaking it together twice a week (for the
Electuary will settle to the bottom.) The month being ended, power off the clear
water into another glass to be kept for your use, stopping it very close with
wax and parchment else the strength will easily fly away in vapors.

A. Mathiolus is very large in commendation of this water, for (quoth he) four
drachms (that is half an ounce) of this water being taken, either by it self or
in the like quantity of good wine, or any other cordial water, so absolutely
and speedily cures the bitings of any venemos beasts whatsoever that although
the danger of death be such that the patient has lost his speech, sight, and
almost all the rest of his senses, yet will he be roused up like a man out of his
sleep, to the wonderful admiration of the beholders, which he says he has
proved a if it want nine hundred of it, it matters not much it is but a figure
called an Hyperbole: which is as much as tosay in English, an Elequent lie.
thousand times. It draws away poison from the heart, and cures such as have
drunk poison, it casts poison out of the stomach by vomit, and helps such as
have the pestilence.

A. For my own particular part, thus much I can testify by experience in the
commendations of it. I have known it given in acute, in peracute fevers, with
gallant success as also in consumptions, yea, in Hecticks, and in Gallens
supposed which had it been so, my (...) had never been alive to have written
this Book.
Marasmos, neither has it missed the desired effects, and therefore out of
question it strengthens the heart exceedingly, and the spirit vital.

And then your own genius will tell you, this is fittest for cold complexions,
cold diseases, and such diseases as the heart is most afflicted in.

Capon Water.
Take a Capon, (the bowels and fat being taken away) cut him in bits, and boil
him sufficiently in a here is latitude beyond the Zodiac. In this case I can
advise you no better than to make the broth strong or weak according to the
strength or weakness of the patient.
sufficient quantity of water, according to art.

Take of this broth being strained, two pound and an half, Borrage, and
Buglosse water, white Wine, of each one pound and an half, Flowers of Roses,
Violets, Borrage, and Buglosse of each two drachms, Crumbs of new bread, half a
pound, bruised Cinnamon an ounce, distill it in Glass Still according to art.

A. Diverse Physicians have written several recepts of this water, as Gesner,
Andr. e Lacuna, Med. Florent. and Coloniens. But the truth is this recept
(although our Physicians conceal it) was borrowed from the Augustan Physicians,
and only because they thought (as I suppose) a Gapon must not be eaten without
bread, they added the bread to it, the rest is verbatim from the Augustan
Physicians.

A. The Simples are most of them apropriated to the heart, and in truth the
Composition greatly nourishes and strengthens such as are in consumptions,
and restores strength lost, either by fevers or other sickness, It is a
sovereign remedy for Hectic fevers, and marasmos which is nothing else but a
consumption coming from them, let such as are subject to these diseases hold it
for a Jewel.

Cinnamon Water.
Take of bruised Cinnamon a pound and an half, Spanish wine 12. pints: Infuse
the Cinnamon in the wine 24. hours, then distill them in an Alimbick; draw out
three pints of strong waters, (and small as much as you think sufficient)
sweeten it with sugar sufficiently, and so keep it for your use.

A. The virtues are the same that Cinnamon it self has, to which I refer you.

Mathiolus his Cinnamon Water.
Take of bruised Cinnamon a pound, put it into a GlasseStill, pouring upon it
four pints of Rose water, a pint and an half of Spanish wine, stop the Still
body close, and place it in a warm bath 24. hours, then put on the Still-head,
lute it well and distill it according to art.

A. Mathiolus appoints Wine of Creet 4. pints, and that is all the alteratton.

A. The Authors own Judgment is, That it strengthens the brain, heart, liver,
stomach, lunges spleen and nerves, quickens the sight, resists poison,
helps bitings by venomous beasts, causes a sweet breath, brings down the
terms in women, and has virtue, attenuating, opening, digesting and
strengthening.

A. The truth is, I believe it prevails in cold diseases, being orderly
regulated in quantity, according to the nature of the disease, the age and
strength of the patient, and the season of the year.

Cinnamon Water made by Infusion.
Take of Cinnamon bruised, four ounces, Spirit of Wine, two pints, infuse them
together 4. days, in a large glass close stopped with cork and a bladder,
shaking the glass twice a day.

Dissolve half a pound of white sugar Candy, in a quart of Rose Water, then mix
both these liquors together, then put into them four grains of musk, and half a
scruple of Ambergreese tied up in a fine rag and hung to the top of the glass.

A. In my opinion this latter water is more prevalent for heart-qualms, and
faintings than Mathiolus his.

Aqua Ceolestis. Mathiolus.
Take of Cinnamon an ounce, Ginger half an ounce, white red and yellow Sanders,
of each six drachms, Cloves, Gallanga, Nutmegs, of each two drachms and an
half; Mace, Cubebs of each one dram, both sorts of Cardamoms, Nigella seeds
of each three drachms, Zedoary half an ounce, seeds of Annis, Sweet-Fennel,
Wild-Parsneps, Bazil, of each a dram and an half, Roots of Angelica, Avens,
Calamus Aromaticus, Liquoris, Valerian the less, the leaves of Clary, Time,
Calaminth, Peny-royal, Mints, Mother of Time, Marjoram, of each two drachms;
the flowers of RedRoses, Sage, Rosemary, Betony, Stoechas, Bugloss, Borrage, of
each one dram and an half; Citron pills, three drachms: Let the things be
bruised that are to be bruised and infused 15. days in 12 pints of the best
spirit of wine, in a glass body well stopped, and then let it be distilled in
Balneo Mariae according to art. Adding to the distilled water, Pouders of
Diambra, Diamoscu dulce, Armaticum Rosatum, Diamargariton frigidum, Diarhodon
Abbatis, powder of Electuary de gemmis, of each three drachms; yellow Sanders
bruised two drachms, Musk, Ambergreese, of each a scruple tied up in a fine
ragg, clear Julip of Roses a pound; shake them well together, stopping the
glass close with wax and parchment till it grow clear to be kept for your use.

A. It comfort and cherishes the heart, reviveth drooping spirits,
prevails against the plague and al malignant Fevers, preserves the senses,
and restores such as are in Consumptions.

A. Only take this Caution, both concerning this and al other strong waters;
They are not safely given by themselves in Fevers, (because by their hot
quallity they inflame the blood and ad fuel to the fire) but mixed with other
convenient cordials, and consideration had to the strength, complexion, habit,
age, and sex of the patient, for my own part, I aim sincerely at the public
good in writing of this, and (...) as I would not have Physicians domineer; so
I would not have fools turn Physicians.

A Cordial Water.
Take of Angelica leaves half a pound, Carduus leaves six ounces, Bawm, and
Sage, of each four ounces, Angelica seeds six ounces, sweet fennel seeds nine
ounces, let the herbs (being dry) and the seeds be bruised grossly, to which
add, the pouders of Aromaticum Rosatum, and Diamoseu Dulce, of each an ounce
and an half, Infuse these two days in 32. pints of Spanish wine, then distill
them according to art, draw out ten pints of strong spirit, which sweeten
(after two days standing) with a pound and an half of Sugar, dissolved in me
thinks they might have taken the pains to have prescribed what Rosewater, both
in this and other receipts; but out of question it is red Rosewater.
Rosewater over the fire.

Of the smaller spirit you may draw out six pints or more if you please for the
I know not what better word to give it, for their word Vehiculum signifies any
thing to carry in, even from a chariot to a wheelbarrow.
mixtures of other Cordials.

A. The chief end of composing this medicine was to strengthen the heart, and
resist infection, and therefore is very wholesome in pestilentiall times, and for
such as walk in stinking aires.

Aqua Cordialis frigida Saxoniae
Take of the juice of Borrage, Buglosse, Bawm, Bistort, Vervain, Oxylapathum.
Gallen calls Sorrel by that name by reason of its sharp taste: but Dioscorides,
Fuchsius, and Mathiolus derive the name from the sharp point of the leaf, who^
it seems our Physicians follow, because here they join Sorrel with it, for the
Greek word' (...) signifies only sharp Dock.
Sharp pointed Dock, Sorrel, Goats-Rue, Mirrhis, or sweet Chervil, Blew-bottle
great and small, or the double quantity of the small, Roses, Marigolds, Lemmons,
Citrons, of each six ounces, juice of Burnet and Cinkfoyl, of each three
ounces, white wine Vinegar a pint, Purslain-seeds, Water-lillie Flowers, of
each two ounces, Earth of Lemnos, Silecia, and Samos, of each an ounce and an
half, Powder called Diatrion Santalon, six drachms, Pearl prepared with juice
of Citrons, three drachms, Infuse all the Pouders, Flowers, and Seeds, (the
Earths and Pearls excepted) in the juyces, and Vinegar, for three days, then
distill it in water in a glasse-Still, and add to the distilled water, the
Earths and Pearls in fine powder, shake it together, and let it stand till it
be clear, and keep it for your use.

A. It mightily cools the blood, and therefore profitable in fevers, and all
diseases proceeding of heat of blood, it provokes sleep.

Langius his Ant-Epileptical Water.
Take of the Flowers of Tilia.
Line tree, three handfuls, Lillies of the valley five handfuls, peony seeds
half an ounce, infuse them eight days, in five pints of the best White Wind,
then distill them in Balneo Mariae, with a gentle fire, Afterward

Take of the flowers of Rosemary, half a handful, of the flowers of Lavender a
handful, Rue a handful, Betony half a handful, Stoechas of Arabia one pugil,
Peony roots two drachms and an half, Dictamny two drachms, Squils prepared one
dram and an half, Pellitory of Spain half a dram, Misletoe of the Oak two
drachms, Castorium one dram, Cubebs, Cardamoms of each one scruple, Mace half
a dram, Cloves two scruples, Nutmegs one scruple, let al these being bruised,
be infused in the water aforesaid, (and shaken well together) for six days,
then distilled again in Balneo Mariae, and the water kept in a glass stopped.

You may with one and the same labor prepare an extract which will be very
efficacious.

A. If the authority of Erasius, or daily experience will serve the turn, then
was this reciept chiefly compiled against the convulsion fits, but the
derivation of the word notes it to be prevalent against the falling sickness
also, for (...) in Greek signifies the Falling sickness, and indeed Erastus
and experience pleads for this also: It is true the composition of Erastus
differs from this, and so does another recited by Johannes Langius, but it
seems our Physicians, for some reasons best known to themselves, esteemed this
the best.

A. Well then, having now learned the virtues of the water, a word or two of
the use will not be amiss. Erastus was of opinion that both these diseases
were caused by the Moon (and so am I of that opinion also, for I know some at
this time that are constantly troubled with the Falling Sickness, only at the
new and full Moons, I could give reasons for this judgment of Erastus, but I am
unwilling to be tedious.) Then says he, if the disease come daily, let a
spoonful to it be taken morning and evening, if weekly, then let it be taken
only at the new and full Moon, and at her quartiles to the Sun, if it begin to
wear away, then only twice a month, viz. at the new and full Moon will suffice.
It profits also in time of the fit, by rubbing their temples, nostrils, and
jaws with it.

Aqua Hysterica.
Take of the Juice of Briony roots four pints, the juice of Rue and Mugwort, of
each a quart, dried Savin leaves three handfuls, Featherfew, Cat-mints.
Nep, Penyroyal, of each two handfuls, Basil, Dictamny of Creet, of each a
handful and an half, fresh the outward bark of the pill, take it in that sense
always, both in Orange, Lemmon, and Citron pills, unless the other be noted.
Orange pills four ounces, Mirrh two ounces, Castorium one ounce, Canary Wine
twelve pints, Infuse the simples in the Wine four days, then distill them in a
bath, and keep the distilled water for your use, When it is half stilled you
may prepare an Extraction of the residue, for the same use the water is.

A. It wonderfully prevails against the fits of the mother and such like
diseases incident to women, and is a most excellent remedy to bring away dead
children and the after birth, a spoonful or two of it, being given: and
therefore let Midwives make much of it.

Imperial Water.
Take of Citron pills dried, Orange pills, Nutmegs, Cloves Cinnamon, of each
two ounces; Cyperus, Orris Florentine, Calamus Aromaticus of each an ounce,
Zedoary, Galanga, Ginger, of each one ounce, Tops of Rosemary, Lavender, of
each two handfuls, The leaves of Bay, Marjoram, Hysop, Bawm, Mints, Sage, Time,
of each one handful, fresh Roses White, and Damask, of each half a handful.
Rosewater four pints, of the best white Wine eight pints, The things to be
bruised, being bruised, let them be infused twenty four hours in a glass Still
over hot (...), his more usual.
ashes, and then distilled according to art.

A. You must distill it in a bath and not in sand, It seems the College were
but mean practicioners in Alchymy, but in this and many other recepts, (...) to
that monster called Tradition, therefore take this for a general Aphorism, All
gross bodies, stilled in sand will stinkegregiously.

A. It comforts and strengthens the heart against faintings and swoonings, and
it is held to be a preservative against consumptions and apoplexies.

Bawm Water: The greater Composition
Take of Bawm a pound, Time, Penyroyal, of each three drachms, Cinnamon, two
drachms, Cardamoms the less one dram: and they are the greater Cardamoms, as
most of the Arabian Physicians held.
Grains of Paradise, half an ounce: Sweet Fennel seeds an ounce, Nutmegs,
Ginger, of each a dram, Galanga, six drachms, Calamus Aromaticus, Cyprus, of
each a dram and an half, Dictamni, half a dram, let all of them be bruised
and infused in eight pints of Spanish Wine and six pints of strong Ale, for 24.
hours together, and then distilled by an Alembick, draw out of the stronger
water three pints.

A. The Simples seem chiefly apropriated to the stomach, and therefore must
needs strengthens cold and weak stomachs, and help digestion, besides Authors
say, It restores memory lost, quickens all the senses, keeps away gray hairs
and baldness, strengthens the brain, makes the heart cheerful, and helps the
lisping of the tongue, eases the pains of the teeth, and causes a sweet
breath.

Aqua Mariae.
Take of Sugar Candy a pound, Canary Wine six ounces, Rose Water four ounces,
boil them to a Syrup, to which ad Aqua Coelestis two pound, Ambergris, and
Musk, of each eighteen grains, Saffron fifteen grains, Yellow Sanders two
drachms, make of them a clear water. viz. Ty up the Ambergreese, Musk, Saffron,
and Sanders in a rag and hang it in the water by a string.


A. It is of more virtue than Aqua Coelestis to resist fevers, to strengthen
the heart, to releeve Languishing nature.

Aqua Mirabilis.
Take of Cloves, Galanga, Cubebs, Mace, Gardamoms, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each one
dram, juice of Chelondine, half a pound, Aqua-vitae, a a pint weighs just a
pound.
pound, White Wine three pints (or three pound which you please) Infuse them
twenty four hours, and then draw a quart of water from them, by an Alembick.

A. The Simples also of this regard the stomach, and therefore the water heats
cold stomachs, besides Authors say it preserves from Apoplexies, and restores
speech lost.

Rosa-Solis.
Take of Nutmegs, Annis seeds, Coriander seeds, of each an ounce, Galanga,
Ginger, Cloves, of each half an ounce, Red-rose leaves a handful, Ros-solis six
handfuls, Liquoris two ounces, Cardamoms, Zedoary, Grains of Paradise, Calamus,
Aromaticus, of each a dram, Yellow Sanders two drachms, Red Sanders,
Cinnamon, of each an ounce and an half, Of the best Aqua-vitae, twelve pints,
make an infusion of them for eight days, then strain it and ad to the liquor,
a pound and an half of Sugar.

A. The Basis of this medicine, seems to be the herb Rossolis, which is of a
drying and binding quality and apropriated to the lungues, and therefore must
needs be available for Phtisicks, or consumptions of the lungues, and because
this herb provokes lust exceedingly, I suppose therefore the rose leaves were
added, which according to a Schol. Salern.
Authors resist lust.

Dr. Stephens Water.
Take of Cinnamon, Ginger, Galanga, Cloves, Nutmegs, Grains of Paradise, seeds
of Annis, Fennel, Caraway, of each one dram, Herbs of Time, Mother of Time,
Mints, Sage, Pennyroyal, Pellitory of the wall, Rosemary, Flowers of Red roses,
Chemomel, Origanum, Lavender, of each one handful, infuse them twelve hours in
twelve pints of Gascoign Wine, then with an Alembick, draw three pints of
strong water from it.

A. Authors hold it profitable for women in labor, that it provokes the terms,
and brings away the afterbirth.

Aqua Protheriacalis.
Take of the leaves of Scordium, Scabious, Carduus Benedictus, Goats Rue, of
each two handfuls, Citron pills, and Orrenge pills dried, of each two ounces,
the seeds of Citrons, Carduus, Seseli.
Hartwort, Thlaspi.
Treacle, Mustard of each one ounce, The Flowers of Marigolds and Rosemary, of
each a handful, Let the things to be cut, be cut, the things to be bruised be
grossly bruised, and infused in four pints of White Wine, and a quart of Carduus
Water, and (being put into a convenient glass) digested either by the heat of
the sun or of the fire certain days, often shaking it, Then distilled in
Balneo Mariae, reserve the two first pints by it self, and the remainder by it
self, at last with every pound mix an ounce of Julapium Alexandrinum and a
spoonful of Cinnamon Water.

It is not bid from our eyes that there are very many Simples in the The
Docters Apology, which how wise it is, let others judge.
Composition^ of Treacle, the virtues of which cannot be exactly drawn out by
distillation in Balneo Mariae, and therefore we of purpose subscribed this,
that the rational Physician may at the time of giving it, appoint Treacle, or
Diascordium, or any convenient syrup: notwithstanding lest we should seem
different from all, we have added on recept of Treacle water by distillation.

A. Aqua Protheriacalis, signifies a Water for Treacle, so then if you put
Diascordium to it, it is a water for Diascordium, well then, we will take it
for a general water for all Physic.

Aqua Theriacalis: by infusion.
Take of the best distilled Wine, Wine of Creet, sharp Vinegar (in which half
an ounce of Rue seeds have been boiled) of each two pound, Venis Treacle, and
Methridate, of each half a pound, mix them all together and warm them a little
either in the Sun or in a bath, and keep the tincture for your use.

Aqua Theriacalis: distilled.
Take of the juice of green Walnuts four pound, the juice of green Rue three
pound, juyces of Carduus Benedictus, Marigolds, Bawm, of each two pound, The
roots of Patasites or Butter burs fresh and green, a pound and an half, the
Roots of Burs one pound, Roots of Angelica and Masterwort green, of each six
ounces, Scordium four handfuls, old Venis Treacle and Methridate, of each eight
ounces, Canary Wine twelve pints, white Wine Vinegar six pints, Juice of
Lemmons a quart, Digest them for two days in horse dung, or else in a bath,
let the vessel be well stopped, then distill it in sand, and in the
distillation you may make an Extract called Extractum theriacale.

A. That this latter water far exceeds the former, in virtues every way, I
think no man that is well in his wits will deny, therefore I quote only the
virtues of this, if any will use the former, I will not burden their conscience.

A. This water is exceeding good in all Fevers, especially pestilential, it
expels venomous humors by sweat, it strengthens the heart and vitals, it
is an admirable counterpoyson, special good for such as have the Plague, or are
poisoned, or bitten by venomous beasts, and expels virulent humors from such
as have the French Pocks, If you desire to know more virtues of it, see the
virtues of Venis Treatle.

Ordinary Aqua vitae.
Distill Ale and lees of Wine in an Alembick (whose worm runs through cold
water) into small Wine, in ten Congies of which infuse a pound of bruised Annis
seeds, for twenty four hours then still it again into strong water.

Aqua vitae compound.
Is made of small Wines, in six congies of which, infuse Annis seeds half a
pound, seeds of Fennel, and Caraway, of each two ounces, Cloves, Cinnamon, and
Ginger, of each one ounce, and then draw the strong spirit from it.

A. This is excellent good in my opinion for such as are troubled with wind.

Spirit of Castorium
Take of Castorium four ounces, Lavender flowers, one ounce, the Tops of Sage
and Rosemary, of each half an ounce, Cinnamon six drachms, Mace, and Cloves, of
each two drachms, Spirit of Wine rectified six pints: Digest all these in a
glass being filled only to the third part, stopped close with cork and
bladder, in warm ashes, or sand, then still it in a glass Alembick in Balneo
Mariae well luted, and let it be kept close stopped.

A. It resists poison and helps such as are bitten by venomous beasts, it
causes speedy delivery to women in travail, and casts out the afterbirth,
it provokes the terms in women, and helps the fits of the mother, it helps
lethargies, convulsions, and in some cases is profitable for mad people, but in
all, let it be mixed with convenient medicine for the purposes.

Usquebach.
Take of strong Aqua vitae 24. pints, in which, for four days infuse a pound
of Liquoris, Raisons of the Sun half a pound, Cloves half an ounce, Mace,
Ginger, of each two drachms, strain it and keep it for your use.

A. It strengthens the stomach, and helps indigestion coming of phlegm and cold.

Fallopius his Allum-Water.
Take of Plantane and Red-rosewater, of each a pound, viz. a pint, Roch Alum,
Quick silver, and Sublimatum, of each two drachms, grind the Alum and the
Sublimate very fine, then let them boil altogether in a you must set the glass
in water and so boil it, else the glass will break.
glass with a narrow mouth till half be consumed, then let it stand five days
that the Sublimate, and the dross of the Alum may sink to the bottom, then
pour off the clear water and keep it for your use.

A. Fallopius invented this for an unction for the Frenchpocks, but in my
opinion it is but a childish recept, for the Quicksilver, will most assuredly
fly out in boiling.

PHYSICAL VVINES
Wormwood Wine.
PUT a handful of dried Wormwood into every Congie of Wine, stop the vessel
close and so let it stand in infusion.

A. It helps cold stomachs, breaks wind, helps the Windchollick, strengthens
the stomach, kills worms and helps the green sickness.

Rosemary-flower-Wine is made after the same manner that Wormwood Wine is made.

A. It is good against all cold diseases of the head, consumes phlegm,
strengthens the gums and teeth.

Eyebright-Wine is also made after the same manner.

A. It wonderfully cleers the sight being drunk, and revives the sight of
ancient men, a cup of it in the morning is worth a pair of Spectacles

All other Wines are prepared in the same manner, when the Physician shall see
fit, [quoth the College.]

A. But what if there be never a Physician worth a (...) in 20. 30. 40. or 50.
miles, (as some such places may be found in this Nation) must the poor country
man lose his cure? truly this charity is according to the saying of the vulgar
Fervent cold: in such cases let them veiw the virtues of the Simple the Wine is
made of, and then let them know the Wine of that Simple is far better and
fitter for cold bodies and weak stomachs, than the Simple it self.

A. And now I have veiwed the next recept a little, you shall have first the
recept, 2. my opinion of it, 3. the virtue of it.

Gallens Wine of Squils.
Take of white Squills of the some hold they grow by the Sea, and so do (...).
mountains, gathered about the rising of the Dog Star, and cut in thin pieces,
one pound; dry them in the shadow for ten days, then put them in a glass and
put to them twelve see the meaning of the word in the measures at the beginning
of the book.
sextaries of old French Wine, let it stand so forty days, then take out the
Squils and throw them away.

A. If admiration were not the daughter of ignorance I should most assuredly
have admired at two things in this recept. 1. At the time of gathering this
same Squil, It seems the whole College laid al their learned heads together to
hammer out the time when this Squil must be taken out of the earth, and the
result of their consultations was, That it must be gathered [ circiter Canis
ortum] about the rising of the Dog Star, but which of the two Dog-stars they
mean, whether Syrius or Procyon, or what rising of either, whether Cosmical,
Acronyct, or Heliacal, I know not, nor I think themselves neither, a child in
Astronomy cannot choose but smile at their learned ignorance, It seems they well
observe that excellent maxim of Hippocrates, in his Praefat ad Astron nemo
debet etc. No man ought to commit his life into the hands of that Physician who
is ignorant of Astrology because he is a Physician of no value. Indeed the
truth is, the roots are brought to us from beyond sea, and we must be content
with such as we can get.

A. 2. It seems something strange to me why this Squill must be dried in the
shadow, In truth I cannot but wonder at the folly not only of the Physicians
of our times, but also of the ancient, who build their faith upon tradition,
though as opposite to the truth as the East is to the West, viz. that all herbs
must or ought to be dried in the shadow, because they suppose the Sun draws
away their virtue, were it not (I pray) a notable piece of policy for a Farmer
to dry his hay in the shadow, for fear the Sun should draw away the virtue of
it? does noth not Experience (a master worth ten 'of Tradition) teach that the
hotter Sun the Hay is dried in, the more virtue is in it? and is Hay any thing
else but a confusion of herbs, he who dries his herbs in the Sun shall find
them, 1. of a better color, 2. of a better taste, 3. to yield more salt, and
therefore must needs be best.

A. Now a word or two to the virtues, according to Gallen, from whom this
recept was taken.

A. It conduces wonderfully to health, for it attenuateth the humors, chiefly
phlegm, neither does it suffer it to remain in the stomach, head, belly, liver,
spleen, nerves, or bones, it suffers no obstruction to be in the body, it
purges the head, loosens the belly, and provokes urine, it is given with good
success to such as have the gout, or the fallingsicknesse, thus Gallen.

A. It is true our Physicians have written the recept verbatim out of Gallen,
but yet me thinks they who boast they have taken so much pains in compiling
this book, might have taken a little more, to have corrected the Authors
failings.

PHYSICAL VINEGERS.
Distilled Vinegar.
FILL a glass body to the third part with the best Vinegar still it in sand,
at first with a gentle fire, till the phlegm be drawn off, then increase the
fire, and draw out the spirit.

Vinegar of Roses. Mesue.
Take of Rose buds (the whites being cut away, gathered in a clear dry day, and
dried in the here you may palpably see which is the best Physician, Dr. Reason,
or Dr. Tradition.
shade three or four days) one pound, Vinegar eight sextaries, set them forty
days in the Sun; then strain them, and keep the vinegar, if you then put in
fresh rose leaves, and set it in the Sun 40. days longer it will have the
better smell.

After the same manner is prepared Vinegar of Elder flowers, Rosemary flowers,
Sage flowers; Marigold flowers, Clove gilliflowers etc. let all the flowers be
dried.

A. For the virtues of all vinegers take this one only observation, they carry
the same virtues with the flowers whereof they are made, only as we said of
wines, that they were better for cold bodies than the bare simples whereof they
are made, so are vinegers for hot bodies. Besides vinegars are often, nay most
commonly used externally, viz. to bath the place, then look amongst the
simples, and see what place of the body the simple is apropriated to, and then
you cannot choose but know (if you have but a grain of understanding, more than
a beast) both what vinegar to use, and to what place to apply it.

Treacle Vinegar. Norimb.
Take of the roots of Chelondine the greater, an ounce and an half, of the
roots of Angelica, Masterwort, Gentian, Bistort, Valerian, Burnet, Dictamni,
Elicampane, Zedoary, of each a dram, Plantan the greater one dram and an
half; the leaves of Mousear, Sage, Scabious, Scordium, commonly called Dittany
by the vulgar.
Dictamni of Creet, Carduus Benedictus of each half a handful, Pills and Seeds
of Citrons, of each a dram and an half, Bole Armenick one dram, Saffron
three drachms, Hartshorn a dram and an half: of these, let the Saffron,
Dictamni, Hartshorn and Bole Armenick be tied up in a linnin cloth, and
infused with the things prescribed, in 5. pints of strong Vinegar, for certain
days, in a glass well stopped, and by a temperate heat; then strain them out,
and dissolve in the Vinegar, five drachms of the best treacle, shake them often
together, and so keep them for your use.

Treacle Vinegar.
But the best Treacle-Vineger is prepared. If you add to the Confection of
Treacle-Water, discribed in its proper place, Cloves two ounces, Lavender
flowers an ounce and an half, power to it, Vinegar of Roses, and of Elder
flower, of each four pints, digest it in Hors-dung eight days, and then strain
it through which what it is, see the directions in the beginning.
Hippocrates his Sleeve.

A. If you desire the virtues of these, look both Treacle it self, and
Treacle-Water. Only take notice, that this is cooler.

Vinegar of Squils.
Take of the flakes of a Squill which are between the outward bark and the
root, cut them into small pieces, either with a Wooden or Ivory knife, and lay
them in the (...) Sun or other remise heat for 30. or 40. days, then put a
pound of them into c there the College hit the nail at head.
a glass, and put six pounds of strong Vinegar to them, stop the glass close
that nothing exhale out, and set it in the Sun 30. or 40. days, then strain it
and keep it close stopped for your use.

A. Although they say they borrowed the receipt of Mesue, yet be pleased to
accept the Virtues of it from Gallen.

A. A little of this Medicine being taken in the morning fasting, and walking
half an hour after, preserves the body in health, to extreme old age, (as
Samius tried, who using no other medicine but this, lived in perfect health
till an hundred and seventeen years of age) it makes the digestion good, along
wind, a clear voice, an acute sight, a good color, it sufiers no offensive
thing to remain in the body, neither wind, phlegm, choler, melancholy, dung
nor urine, but brings them forth, it brings forth filth though it lie in the
bones, it takes away salt and sour belchings, though a man be never so I would
not have Gallen's judgment tried in this particular, it is far safer to take it
upon his word.
licentious in diet, he shall feel no harm: It has cured such as have the
Phtisick, that have been given over by all Physicians: It cures such as have
the Falling Sickness, Gouts, and diseases and swellings of the Joints; It takes
away the hardness of the Liver and Spleen. We should never have done if we
should reckon up the particular benefits of this Medicine; Therefore we commend
it, as a wholesome medicine for soundness of body, preservation of health, and
vigor of mind.

DECOCTIONS
A Carminative Decoction.
TAke of the you must bruise the seeds, else the Decectio^ will be but little
the better for them.
seeds of Annis, Carrots, Fennel, Co^min, and Carraway, of each three drachms;
Camomel flowers, half a handful; Raisons of the Sun an ounce and an half, boil
them in two pints of water, till almost half be consumed.

A. It is commonly used in Clisters, to such whose bodies are molested or
oppressed with wind.

The common Decoction for Clisters.
Take of Mallows, Violets, Pellitory of the wall, Beets, understand the herb
called Mercury always unless the contrary be specified.
Mercury, of each a handful, Fennel seeds, half an ounce, boil them in a if you
know not what is a sufficient quantity, keep a quart.
sufficient quantity of water to a pound.

A. This is the common decoction for all Clisters, according to the quality of
the humor abounding, so you may ad what simples, or syrupes, or electuaries
you please.

A common Decoction for a Medicine.
Take of Barley husk't is usually called by that name.
French Barley a pugil, six if you can get any such, all those that ever I
tasted were sour.
sweet Prunes, Raisons of the Sun, Tamarinds, Liquoris, of each half an ounce,
Annis seeds, sweet Fennel seeds, of each two drachms, in Summer time ad of the
four greater cold seeds, of each two drachms, of each of three of the cordial
Flowers, a see Directions in the beginning.
pugil and an half, boil these in two pints of water till half be consumed.

A. This was Guainerius his recept, whose works I neither have, nor know where
to borrow, and therefore I can give you no other virtues of this Medicine than
what the title affords, it is a composition, which with addition of other
Medicines is fit for every thing, but in it self is good for little.

A Decoction of Epithimum: Mesue.
Take of Indian Myrabolans, Stoechas of Arabia, Raisons of the Sun, Epithimum
or Doddar of time, of each an ounce, Myrabolans chebs, Fumitory, of each half
an ounce, Senna, an ounce, Polypodium of the Oak, six drachms, White Turbith
half an ounce, the Eupatorum of Mesae, for so you must take this the receipt
being his; is the herb we call Maudlin, and not Agrimonv: The Greeks call it
(...); that is, not growing old, because the flowers gathered in due time,
decay not by age. ging quality.
Eupatorium five drachms, Whey made of Goats or Heifers milk, three pints, let
them all (the you had not best boil the Senna altogether so much, left it lose
its (...)
Epithimum excepted) boil to the consumption of two pints, then ad the
Epithimum, let it boil a little together, and having taken it from the fire, ad
to it, black Hellebore a dram, Agrick half a dram, if you lack Sal-Indi,
you may take Sal-Gem.
Sal Indi a dram and an half, let it stand close stopped in infusion eight or
ten hours, then strain it for your use.

A. It purges melancholy gallantly, as also addust Choler, It resists
madness, and all diseases coming of melancholy, and therefore let melancholy
people esteem it as a Jewel.

A Decoction of Flowers and Fruits.
Take five Figs, fifteen Prunes, Jujubes and Sebestens, of each twenty,
Tamarinds an ounce, the flowers of Roses, Violets, Borrage, Buglos, of each a
dram, Maidenhair, Hops, Endive of each half a handful, Liquoris two drachms,
being cut and bruised, boil them in three pints of spring water to the
consumption of the third part.

A. It strengthens the lungues, and opens obstructions.

A Pectoral Decoction.
Take of Raisons of the Sun stoned, an ounce, Sebesten Jujubes, of each 15.
Dates 6. Figs 4. French-Barly an ounce, Liquoris half an ounce, Maiden hair,
Hysop, Scabious, Coltsfoot, of each half a handful, cut them, and boil them in
three pints of spring water, till one pint be consumed.

A. The Medicine is chiefly apropriated to the lungues, and therefore causes a
clear voice, a long wind, resists Coughs hoarsness, Asthmaes etc.

A Decoction of Senna.
Take of Senna two ounces and an half, Ginger a dram, The flowers of Borrage,
Violets, red Roses, and Rosemary-flowers, of each 2. drams, Polipodium of the
Oak half an ounce, Sebesten, Prunes, of each 12. Raisons of the Sun stoned, two
ounces, make a decoction of them, in four pints of spring water, till half be
consumed, yet so as the Senna may boil but little, let it stand off from the
fire close stopped six hours after it is boiled, then strain it out, for your
use.

A. It is a common decoction for any purge, by adding other Simples or
Compounds to it, according to the quality of the humor you would have purged,
yet in it self it chiefly purges melancholy.

Lac Virgineum.
Take of Alum, four ounces, boil it in a quart of spring water, to the third
part: Afterward,

Take of beaten into very fine powder.
Litharge half a pound, white wine Vinegar, a pint and an half, boil it to a
pint, strain both the waters, then mix them together and stir them about till
they are white.

A. It takes away pimples, redness, freckles, and sunburning the face being
washed with it.

A Drink for wounded men.
Take of Crabs of the river burnt
calcined, and beaten into very fine powder two drachms, the roots of round
birthwort.
Aristolochiah and of Comfry the greater, a sort of Comfry.
Self-heal, Bay Berries lightly bruised of each a dram, ty them all up in a
linen cloth, and boil them in three pints of white Wine, till the third part
be consumed, adding about the middle of the decoction, one pugil of the herb,
not the fish.
Perewincles, then strain it for your use.

This decoction must be prepared only for the present when the Physician
appoints it, as also must almost all the rest of the decoctions,

A. And therefore least my poor wounded Country man should perish for want of
an angel to fee a too many Physicians in England being like Balaams Ass, they
will not speak unless they see an Angel: yet I accuse not al.
Physician, or if he have it, before the Physician (which in some places is
very remote) can come at him, I have taken the pains to write the recept in his
own mother tongue, he may get any friend to make it.

SYRVPS BOTH SIMPLE AND COMPOVND WHICH ARE IN USE.
Syrup of Vinegar Simple, of London.
TAke of white Sugar five pound, White-Wine-Vineger a quart, melt them into a
Syrup according to art.

A. That is, Only melt the Sugar with the Vinegar over the fire, scum it, but
boil it not.

Syrup of Vinegar Simple, of Mesue.
Take of White Sugar five pound, Clear Water sour pints, boil it. into a Syrup,
scumming it well, then put a quart of Vinegar to it, and boil it again to a
Syrup.

A. Of these two Syrups let every one use which he finds by experience to be
best; the difference is but little, I hold the last to be the best of the two,
and would give my reasons for it, but that I fear the Book will swell too big:
They both of them cut phlegm, as also tough, hard, viscous humors in the
stomach; they cool the body, quench thirst, provoke urine, and prepare the
stomach before the taking of a vomit.

Syrup of Vinegar Compound, Mesue.
Take of the roots of Smallage, Fennel, and Endive, of each three ounces; the
seeds of Smallage, Fennel, and Annis, of each one ounce, Endive seeds half an
ounce, Clear Water six pints; boil them in a vessel well glazed over a gentle
fire, till half the water be consumed, then strain it, and ad to to the liquor
I mean, not to the foeces.
it, three pound of Sugar, clarify it, and then ad a pint and an half of
white-wine-Vinegar to it, and boil it to a syrup.

A. This in my opinion is a gallant syrup for such whose bodees are stuffed
either with phlegm or tough (...), for it opens obstructions or stoppings both
of the stomach, liver, spleen, and reins, it cuts and brings away tough phlegm
and choler, and is therefore a special remedy for such as have a stuffing at
their stomach.

Syrup of the juice of Citrons. Mesue.
Take of the juice of Citrons strained without expression, and clarified, a
pint, Sugar two pound and an half, melt it into a syrup over the fire.

A. It prevails against all diseases proceeding from choler or heat of blood,
fevers, both pestilential and not pestilential, it resists poison, cools the
blood, quenches thirst, cures the vertigo or dissines in the head.

After the same manner is made, syrup of that is, Grapes not ripe.
sour Grapes, a this is the right ground Ivy, it may be I may sometimes use the
word permiscuously.
Cherries, Quinces, Pomegranates, Lemmons, Wood Sorrel, Sorrel; Ribes.
English Currance, and other sour juyces clarified.

A. If you look the Simples you may see the virtues of them they all cool and
comfort the heart and strengthen the stomach, syrup of Quinces stays vomiting,
so does also syrup of Grapes. a called also Lluellin by some Welchman or
another, and that's. the reason that Welchmen vapor so much of the virtues of
this herb, which is a quality most of that generation are excellent at.


Syrup of Betony Simple.
Take of the juice of Betony clarified three pound, white Sugar three pound,
boil them to a Syrup.

After the same manner is made syrup of the juyces of Borrage, Bugloss, Carduns
benedictus, Chamomel, Endive, Succory, Strawberries, Fumitory, Alehoof, St.
John's Wort, Hops, Mercury, Plantane, Apples, Scabious, Coltsfoot, (...) or
Paul's Bettony.

A. Reader, before we pass any further I thought good to advertise thee of
these few things, which indeed I had inserted at the beginning of the surups,
had I not forgotten it. A. 1. A syrup is a Medicine of a liquid body,
compounded of decoction, infusion or juice, with Sugar or honey, and brought by
the heat of the fire, into the thickness of honey. A. 2. Because all honey is
not of a thickness, understand new honey which of all other is thinnest. A. 3.
The reason why decoctions, infusions, and juyces are thus used is, because
thereby, 1. They will keep the longer. 2. They will taste the better.
A. 4 In boiling syrups have a great care of their just consistence, for if you
boil them too much, they will candy, if too little they will sour. A. 5. All
Simple syrups have the virtues of the simples they are made of, and are far
more convenient for weak people, and queazy stomachs.
Syrup of Bettony compound.
Take of Betony three handfuls, Marjoram a handful and an half, Time, Roses, of
each a handful, Violets, Staechas, Sage, of each half a handful, the seeds of
Fennel, Annis Ammi.
Bishopsweed of each half an ouuce, the roots of Peony, Polipodium, and Fennel,
of each five drachms, boil them in six pints of water, till half be consumed,
strain it, and ad to the decoction, Juice of Bettony, a quart, Sugar, three
pound and an half, boil them into a syrup according to art.

A. It helps diseases coming of cold, both in the head and stomach, as also
such as come of wind, vertigoes, madness, it concocts melancholy, it provokes
the terms in women, and so does the Simple syrup more than the Compound.

A. This composition was borrowed word for word from the Augustan Physicians,
though our Physicians absconded it, contrary to their promise in the epistle to
the reader.

Syrupus Bizantinus Simple. Mesue
Take of the juice of Endive and Smallage, of each a quart, Juice of Hops and
Buglosse, of each a pint, boil them and clarify them then to four pound of
Juyces remaining, ad four pound of the best Sugar, boiling it to a syrup, over
agentle fire.

Syrupus Bizantinus Compound. Mesue.
In four pound of the same Juyces as they are set down in the Simple syrup,
boil red Rose leaves two ounces, Liquoris half an ounce, the seeds of Annis,
Fennel, Smallage, of each three drachms, Spicknard two drachms, strain it, and
ad to the decoction a quart of Vinegar, Sugar four pound, boil it to a syrup
according to art.

A. They both of them (viz. both Simple and Compound) opens stopping in the
stomach, cuts and brings away tough phlegm, and helps the yellow Jaundice, Mesue
says the Compound syrup is of more effect than the Simple for the same uses.

Syrup of Quinces. Mesue.
Take of the Juice of Quinces six pound, boil it over a gentle fire till half
be consumed, scumming it well, then add to it three pints of red Wines, four
pound of Sugar, boil it again to the consistence of a syrup, into which put a
dram and an half of Cinnamon, Cloves and Ginger of each two scruples, tied up
in a fine linen cloth, and hung into the syrup.

A. It strengthens the stomach, and retains the food in it, It stays vomiting,
it stops the looseness of the belly, and helps the bloody flux, it stops the
immoderate flux of the terms in women, and is a gallant astringent medicine, no
less pleasant then profitable.

Syrup of Fumitory the Compund. Fernelius.
Take of Endive, Roman Wormwood, Hops, Cassutha, the Arabic name of Dodder,
Dodder, Hearts tongue, of each a handful, Epithimum or Dodder of Time, an ounce
and an half, boil them in four pints of water, till half be if you boil the
Dodder and (...) but (...) to long, you had as good never put it in, for a very
little boiling takes out the virtues of them.
consumed, to the liquor being strained out, ad of the juice of Fumitory
clarified, a pint and an half, of the juice of both sorts of Buglosse, of each
half a pint, white Sugar four pound, boil it into a syrup, according to art.

A. The recept is a pretty concocter of melancholy, and therefore a rational
help for diseases (...) thence, both internal and external, It helps diseases
of the skin, as Leprosies, Cancers, Warts, Corns, Itch, Tetters, Ringworms,
Scabs, etc. and it is the better to be liked because of its gentleness, for in
my experience, I could never find a violent medicine do good, but ever harm in
a melancholy is a sad sullen humor, you had as good vex a nest of wasps asvex
it
melancholy disease. It also strengthens the stomach, and liver, opens
obstructions, and is a sovereign remedy for Hypochondriack melancholy.

Syrup of Purslain. Mesue.
Take of the seeds of Purslain grossly bruised, half a pound, of the juice of
Endive boiled and clarified two pound, Sugar two pound, Vinegar nine ounces,
infuse the seeds, in the juice of Endive twenty four hours, afterward, boil it
half away with a gentle fire, then strain it and boil it with the Sugar to the
consistence of a syrnp, adding the Vinegar, toward the latter end of the
decoction.

A. It is a pretty cooling syrup, fit for any hot diseases, incident to the
stomach, reins, bladder, matrix, or liver, it thickens phlegm, cools the blood
and provokes sleep.

Compound Syrup of Coltsfoot. Renodaeus.
Take six handfuls of green Coltsfoot, two handfuls of Maidenhair, one handful
of Hysop, and two ounces of Liquoris, boil them in four pints, either of if I
durst spend paper about it; I cold easily prove spring water to be the best by
far.
rain or spring water, till the fourth part be consumed, then strain it and
clarify it, to which ad three pound of white Sugar, boil it to the perfect
consistence of a syrup.

A. The composition is apropriated to the lungues, and therefore helps the
infirmities, weaknesses, or failings thereof, as want of voice, difficulty of
breathing, coughs, hoarsness, cathars etc.

Julep of Alexandria.
Take of red Rose water four pints, Sugar two pound, make a Julep of them
according to art.

Julep of Roses. Mesue
Ad three pound of Rose water to three pound of Sugar and boil them to a Julep
according to art.

Julep of Violets is made after the same manner.

A, It is confessed both Arabian and Grecian Physicians have written of these
Juleps, they are fine cooling drinks in the heat of Summer, for such as are
rich and have nothing else to do with their money.

Oxysaxccharum symplex. Nicholaus.
Take of white Sugar a pound, of the juice of Pomegranates eight ounces, white
wine Vinegar four ounces, boil them into a syrup with a gentle fire.

A. Whether it were Nicholaus Monardus, or Nicholaus Myrepsus that wrote this
recept, or any other Nicholas, I know not neither have I time to look, but if
you would know the virtues of it, look the virtues of Pomegranates, amongst the
Simples and you have it.

Syrup of Maidenhair. Mesue.
Take of Liquoris two ounces, Maidenhair five ounces, infuse them in four
pints of spring water, boil them gently, strain the decoction strongly, and
with a pound and an half of white Sugar, boil it unto a syrup according to art.

A. It opens stoppings of the stomach, strengthens the (...), and helps the
infirmities of them.

Syrup of Cinnamon.
Take of Cinnamon grossly bruised, four ounces, infuse it in a pint of white
wine, for three days, in a glass, by a you may do it in warm water or a bath.
gentle heat, then having strained out the Cinnamon ad to it, a pound and an
half of white sugar, boil it gently to a syrup.

A. It has the same virtues with Cinnamon water, and being not so hot, must
needs be far better for hot bodies.

After the same manner may be made syrup of Annis seeds, sweet Fennel seeds,
Ginger, Cloves, Nutmegs etc.

A. If any will be so nice to make such, it is but veiwing the Simples and there
you have the virtues of them.

Syrup of Corrall Simple. o the eross excepted which will never dissolve while
the world (...).

Take of Red Corral finely poudered as much as you will, dissolve it in a
glass, in Balneo Mariae in such a quantity of the clarified juice of
Barberries, that the juice may swim above it the breath of four fingers,
stopping the glass cloose, with cork or wax, when it has stood in the glass
three days, pour off what is dissolved, and pour in fresh juice of Barberries
clarified, set it in the bath again till all the you must first beat it into
powder, else you may grind till your heartachs, before you ob ain your purpose.
Correl be dissolved, Then to one pound of this juice, ad one pound of Sugar,
and boil it to the consistence of a syrup: but in the Preparation of this Syrup
it requires a great deal of skill and dexterity, lest you er.

Syrup of Corral Compound.
Take of Red Corral six ounces, bring it into a I know not what fitter term to
give that Arabic word Alkool.
powder by you must first beat it into powder, else you may grind till your
heartachs, before you ob ain your purpose.
grinding it upon a marble with a little rose water, Then add to it, Juice of
Lemmons clarified from the phlegm in Balneo Mariae, sixteen ounces, juice of
Barberries clarified, eight ounces, sharp wine Vinegar, juice of wood Sorrel
clarified, of each six ounces, digest them in a bath or else in horsedung eight
days, in a large glass, stopped close with cork and bladder, shaking it every
day then let it make the paper handsomely in form of a sunnel, and so stick it
in a su^nel, and put the sunnel in another glass: this is that they call
filtring.
run through a brown paper, of which take a pound and an half: juice of Quinces
half a pound, Sugar of Roses twelve ounces, mix them all together, and with the
gentle heat of a bath, draw off the superfluous liquor, till it be left of the
consistence of a Syrup, to which ad Syrup of Clove-Gilliflowers sixteen ounces,
together with half a dram of Amber greece, and four grains of Musk, tied up
in a cloth and hung into the glass by a string.

A. Syrup of Corral, both Simple and compound restore such as are in
consumptions, are of a gallant cooling nature especially the last, and very
cordial, special good for Hectic fevers, it stops fluxes, the running of the
reins and the whites in women, helps such as spit blood, and such as have the
falling sickness, it stays the terms in women, and indeed it had need be good
for something, for it is exceeding costly.

Syrup of the Infusion of Clove-Gilliflowers.
Take a pound of Clove-Gilliflowers, the white being cut off, infuse them at
whether one one pound at three times, or three pounds at three times might be
some question, yet not so great an one but experience will decide it: howsoever
let it pass for one of the Colleges misty recepts.
3. times in three pints of spring water al night, afterward with two pound of
Sugar, boil it into a Syrup according to art.

A. Which if you do, it will be scarce worth your labor, but will lose both
color and taste, and by consequence virtue in boiling, and then the College
themselves would say it is naught: for in all syrups which you would have keep
color, of which this is one, add two pound of Sugar, to each pint of insusion,
and only melt it over the fire, in a peuter vessel, and I assure you if in
prescribing this and many other medicines, the College did make use of the
ablest Apothecaries for the manner of composition of the medicines, either the
ablest were very weak or very negligent, but enough of this.

A. The Syrup is a fine temperate syrup, it strengthens the heart, liver, and
stomach, it refreshes the vital spirits, and is a good cordial in fevers.

Syrup of Citron pills. Mesue.
Take of the thin outward pills of Citrons, dried, five ounces, of the berries
of Kermes or the I rest coufident that the juice (if right) is better by 20
parts, and my confidence is built upon the rock of reason, and not upon the
sand of tradition.
juice of them brought over from beyond sea, two drachms, spring water four
pints, set them in infufiou all night, and the next morning boil it till half
be consumed, strain it and add to the decoction, two pound and an half of very
good sugar, boil it into a syrup according to art, which perfume, with six
grains of the best Musk, wrapped up in fine linen and hung into the syrup by a
string.

A. It strengthens the stomach, resists poison, strengthens the heart, and
refists the passions thereof, palpitation, faintings, swoonings, It strengthens
the vital spirit, restores such as are in consumptions and hectic fevers, and
strengthens nature much.

Syrup of Water-Lillie-flowers Simple. Nicholaus.
Take of the whitest part of White-water-Lilly-flowers a pound, infuse them for
seven hours in three pound of warm water, then boil it a little, and strain it,
and add the like quantity of fresh flowers, use them in like manner as you did
the former; repeat this infusion three times, then clarify the infusion, and
having added the like quantity of sugar to it, boil it into a syrup according
to art.

Syrup of Water-lillie-flowers, the Compound. Fernelius.
Take of Water-lillie-flowers half a pound, the flowers of Violets two ounces,
Lettice two handfuls, the seeds of Lettice, Purslain, and Gourds, of each half
an ounce; boil all these in four pints of water, to the consumption of one
pint, and having strained it, ad to the decoction, Red Rose Water half a pint,
White Sugar four pound, boil it to a Syrup according to art.

A. They both are fine cooling Syrups, they allay the heat of choler, and
provoke sleep, they cool the body, both head, heart, liver, reins, and matrix,
and therefore are profitable for hot diseases in either.

Syrup of Meconium. Mesue.
A. Meconium: The blush of which this Receipt carries in its frontispice, is
nothing else but the juice of English Poppies boiled til it be thick; as I am
of opinion that Opium is nothing else but the juice of for such Opium as
Authors talk of, comes from Utopia.
Poppies growing in hotter countries (and therefore in all reason is colder in
quality) and therefore (I speak purely of Meconium and Opium, not of these
Syrups) though they be no edge-tools, yet it is ill jesting with them.

Take of the heads of white Poppies meanly ripe and green eight ounces; of the
heads of black Poppies meanly ripe and green, six ounces, spring water is
better.
Rainwater four pints, boil them in the water til half of it be consumed, then
strain it, and with in all conscience (especially as conscience goes now
adays) here is too little sugar by half.
fixteen ounces of Sugar, boil it into a Syrup according to art, and when you
have done so, you may use it (if you please) for Diacodium.

Syrup of (...), the lesser Composition
Take the heads of white Poppies and black, when both of them are green, of
each six ounces; the seeds of Lettice, the flowers of Violets, of each one
ounce, boil them in eight pints of water, till the virtue is out of the heads,
then strain them, and with four pound of Sugar boil the liquor to a Syrup.

Syrup of Popplyes, the greater Composition. Mesue.
Take of the heads of both white and black Poppies, seeds and all, of each 50.
drachms, Maidenhair 15. drachms, Liquoris 5. drachms, Jujubies 30. by number,
Lettice seeds 40. drachms; of the seeds of Mallows and Quinces (tied up in a
thin linen cloth) of each a dram and an an half; boil these in eight pints
of water til five pints be consumed; when you have strained out the three pints
remaining, add to them, Penidies and White Sugar of each a pound, boil them
into a Syrup according to art.

A. All these former Syrups of Poppies provoke sleep, but in that, I desire
they may be used with a great deal of caution and wariness, such as these are,
are not fit to be given in the beginnings of Fevers, nor to such whose bodies
are costive; ever remember my former Motto, Fools are not fit to make
Physicians. Yet to such as are troubled with hot sharp Rheums, you may safely
give them; and note this, the last, which is borrowed from Mesue is apropriated
to the Lungus, whose own words (translation excepted) of it are these, It
prevails against dry coughs, Phtisicks, hot and sharp gnawing Rhewms, and
provokes sleep.

Syrups of Red, or Erratick Poppies: A. by many called Corn-Roses.
Tak of flowers of red Poppies two pound, infuse them 24. hours in four pints
of spring let the water be warm, else you may happen to lose your labor.
water, and with three pound of Sugar boil it into a syrup.

A. Some are of opinion that these Poppies are the coldest of all other:
believe them that list: I know no danger in this syrup, so it be taken with
moderation; and bread immoderatly taken, hurts; the syrup cools the blood,
helps surfets, and may safely be given in Frenzies, Fevers and hot agues.

Syrup of Peach flowers.
Take of fresh Peach-flowers a pound, infuse them in three pints of warm water
for the space of twelve hours, then let them boil a little and press them out,
adding the like quantity of Peach-flowers, and use them as the former, do so
five times, at last, to three pound of the infusion add two pound and an half
of Sugar, boil it to a syrup.

A. It is a gentle purger of choler and may be given even in fevers to draw
away the sharp chollerick humors, according to the opinion of Andernacus whose
recept (all things considered) differs little from this.

Syrup of dried Roses. Mesue.
Take four pound of spring water, in which being warm, infuse a pound of dried
red Rose leaves for the space of twenfour hours, then press them out, and with
two pound of white sugar, boil the infusion to a syrup.

A. I pray take a caution or two a long with you, concerning this syrup, and
there is need enough unless it were penned more wisely than it is.

A. 1. You cannot infuse all the rose leaves at one time because there will not
be water enough to wet them hardly, you must then infuse them at diverse. A man
had need have a head as deep as a Colepit to reach their meaning in some of
their recepts.

A. 2. If you boil it, it will lose both color and virtue, and then who but the
College would first cry out against such in syrups made o. decoctions, the
color is not so material.
paltry stuff, I am weary with noting this in every receipt, therefore be
pleased to accept of this one general rule, It is not best to boil any syrup
made of infusions, but by adding the double weight of Sugar (viz. two pound of
Sugar to each pint of Infusion) melt it over a fire only.

A. Syrup of dried Roses, strengthens the heart, comforts the spirits, binds
the body, helps fluxes and corrosions, or gnawings of the guts, it strengthens
the stomach, and stays vomiting.

Syrup of Roses Solutive. Mesue
Take of the infusions of Rofes made with fresh pick the roses.
Damask Roses, let the infusion be repeated nine times, (let it be made in that
proportion, that one pound of Rose flowers may be infused in four pints of
water, and those being taken out, infuse as many more in the same water, do so
nine times) six pound, with four pound of Sugar boil it into a syrup.

A. It loosneth the belly, and gently brings out choler and phlegm.

Syrup of Roses with Agrick.
Take of choice Agrick sliced thin, an ounce, Ginger sliced two drachms, Sal
gem. one dram, Polipodium grossly bruised two ounces, sprinkle them with
white. Wine, then infuse them two days in such infusion of damask Roses, as
you were taught to make the former receipt, a pound and an half, warm by the
fire, then press it out, and with one pound of Sugar boil it into a Syrup,
according to art.

A. You had better ad twice so much Sugar as is of the infusion, for fear the
strength of the Agrick be lost in boiling.

A. It purges phlegm from the head, releeves the senses oppressed by it, it
provokes the terms in women, It purges the stomach and liver, and provokes
urine.

Syrup of Roses Solutive with Hellebore. Montanus.
Take of the bark of all the Myrobalans, of each four ounces, bruise them
grossly, and infuse them in twelve pints of the infusion of Roses, before
prescribed 24. hours, adding of Senna, Epithimum, and Polipodium of the Oak, of
each four ounces, Cloves an ounce, Citron seeds, liquoris, of each four ounces,
of the take the roots themselves, for if the bark be to be had it is very rare.
bark of black Hellebore roots, six drachms boil them all to the consumption of
the fourth part, to which ad five pound of white Sugar, choice Rhubarb tied up
in a linen cloth, sixteen drachms, boil them into a syrup according to art.

A. You must not boil the black Hellebore at al, or but very little, if you do
you had as good put none in, me thinks the College should have had either more
wit or honesty, than to have left recepts so woodenly penned to posterity, or
it may be they wrote as they say only to the learned, or in plain English for
their own ends, or to satisfy their covetousness, that a man must needs run to
them every time his finger aches.

A. The Syrup rightly used purges melancholy, resists madness.

Syrup of Violets.
Take of picked blue violets not white.
Violet flowers a pound, Spring water heat hot, a pound and an half, or else a
which is (...) pints if your violets be good.
sufficient quantity, infuse the Violets in the water, and let it stand warm
and close stopped 24. hours, then press them very hard out, and to one pound
of the expression add two pound of fine Sugar, only dissolve the Sugar, and so
keep the Syrup for your use.

Syrup of the juice of Violets.
Make it up with just so much juice of the flowers of violets as will dissolve
the Sugar into a Syrup without boiling.

A. Which is two pound of Sugar to one pound of Juice.

A. This latter Syrup is far more chargable than the former, and in all reason
the better, although I never knew it used, they both of them cool and moisten,
and that very gently, they correct the sharpness of choler, and give ease in
hot vices of the breast, they quench thirst in acute fevers, and resist the
heat of the disease, they comfort hot stomachs exceedingly, cool the liver and
heart, and resist putrefaction, pestilence and poison.

COMPOUND SYRUPS, WHOSE SIMPLES ARE NOT IN USE.
Syrup of Wormwood. Mesue.
Take of Roman Wormwood half a pound, red Rose leaves two ounces, Indian
spicknard three drachms, old white Wine, juice of Quinces of each two pound and
an half, infuse them 24. hours in an earthen vessel, then boil them till half
be consumed, strain out the decoction, and with two pound of Sugar, boil it
into a syrup, according to art.

A. Mesue is followed verbatim in this, and the recept is apropriated to cold
and phlegmatic stomachs, and in my opinion it is an admirable remedy for it, for
it strengthens both stomach and liver, as also the instruments of concoction, a
spoonful taken in the morning is admirable for such as have a weak digestion,
it provokes an Appetite to ones victuals, it prevails against the yellow
Jaundice, breaks wind, purges humors by urine.

Syrup of Marshmallows. Fernelius
Take of Marsh-Mallow roots, two ounces, red (...) some call (...) in English
Cich pease.
Cicers an ounce, the roots of Grass, Sparagus, and Liquoris, Raisons of the
sun stoned, of each half an ounce, the branches of Marshmallows, pellitory of
the wall, Burnet, Plantane, Maidenhair both white and black, of each a handful,
of the sea in the beginning of the book what they are.
four greater and four lesser cold seeds of each three drachms, boil them in
six pints of water, till only four remain, to which ad four pounds of Sugar and
boil it to a syrup.

A. It is a fine cooling, opening, slippery syrup, and chiefly commendable for
the chollick, stone, or gravel, in the kidneys or bladder.

A. I shall only give you a caution or two concerning this syrup, which for the
forenamed effects, I hold to be exceellent.

A. 1. Be sure you boil it enough, for if you boil it never so little too
little it will quickly be sour.

A. 2. For the chollick, (which is nothing else but an infirmity in the gut
called Colon, and thence it takes its name) you had best use it in Clisters,
but for gravel or the stone, drink it in convenient midicines, or by it self,
If both of them afflict you use it both ways, I assure you this midicine will
save those that are subject to such diseases, both money and pain.

Syrup of Mugwort. Matheus De Grad.
Take of Mugwort two handfuls, Penyroyal, Chamomel, Origanum, Bawm, Ars-smart,
Dittany of Creet, Savin, Marjoram, Germander, St. John's Wort, ground pine:
Chamepytis, Matricaria. let others translate it by what name they will, I (...)
that name I supose to be true.
Featherfew with flowers, Centaury the less, Rue, Bettony, Buglosse, of each
one handful, the roots of Fennel, Smalledge, Parsley, Sparagus, Bruscus,
Saxifrage, Alicampane, Cyperus, Madder, Orris, Peony, of each an ounce, Juniper
berries, the seeds of Lovage, Parsley, Small age, Annis, Nigella, Carpobal samum
or Cubebs, Costus or Zedoary, the roots of Asarabacca and Pellitory of Spain,
Cassia Lignea, Cardamoms, Calamus a called by some (...) broom, in Suffix
Kneeholly.
Aromaticus, Valerian, of each half an ounce, Let these being bruised be
infused for 24. hours in twelve pints of water, afterward boiled till half the
water be consumed, when it is pretty cool, strain it and ad to the decoction,
Honey and sugar, of each two pound, sharp vinegar four ounces, boil them into a
syrup, perfuming it with Cinnamon and Spicknard of each three drachms, tied up
in a rag, and boiled a little in the syrup.

A. It helps the passions of the matrix, and retains it in its place, it
dissolves the coldness, wind, and pains thereof, it strengthens the nerves,
opens the pores, corrects the blood, it corrects and provokes the terms in
women.

Syrupus Augustanus: Or, Syrup of Rhubarb of the Augustane Physicians.
Take of the best Rhubarb, of Senna of each two ounces and an half; Violet
flowers a handful, Cinnamon a dram and an half, Ginger half a dram, the
waters of Betony, Succory, and Bugloss of each a pound and an half, infuse hot
or else you do nothing.
them all night, in the morning strain it, and boil it into a Syrup with two
pound of white Sugar, adding to it four ounces of the Syrup of Roses solutive
following.

A. It cleanses Choler and Melancholy very gently, and therefore is fit for
children, old people, and weak bodies.

Syrup of Roses solutive, without Helibore.
Take of all the Myrobalans of each two ounces, bruise them grolly, and rub
them with a little oil of sweet Almonds, then infuse them in fifteen pound of
infusion of Roses for 24. hours space, then add to them, Polypodium two ounces
and an half, the seeds of Carthamus or bastard Saffron an ounce and an half,
Annis, sweet Fennel, seeds of each six drachms, Senna three ounces, Epithimum
an ounce and an half, Citron pills an ounce, Cloves half an ounce, Nutmegs
three drams, infuse them again 24. hours, which being elapsed, strain them
hard, and ad one pound of sugar to every two pound of the liquor, boil it into
a syrup: This is the syrup which should be added to the former Syrup of Rhubarb.

Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb.
Take of viz. not husked.
whole Barley, the roots of Smallage, Fennel, Sparagus, of each two ounces;
Succory, Dandelion, Endive, smooth Sow-thistle, of each two handfuls; Lettice,
Liverwort, Fumatory, tops of Hops, of each a handful; both sorts of
Maidenhair, Cetrach, Liquoris, winter-Cherries, Dodder, of each six drachms,
boil them in 12. pints of springwater til the third part be consumed, then
strain it, and with six pound of Sugar boil it to a syrup, in which, whilst it
is bovling, hang by a string six ounces of sliced thin; or else you had almost
as good hang in, a stone.
Rhubarb, six drams of Spicknard, tied up in a rag, let it boil a walm or two,
pressing it often, and let it hang into the syrup perfectly boiled.

A. This Recept (without a name) was borrowed from Nicholaus Flo^ entinus; the
difference is only in the quantity of the Rhubarb, and Spike, besides the order
inverted, whose own approbation of it runs in these terms.

A. It cleanses the body of venomous humors, as Boyles, Carbuncles and the
like, it prevails in pestilential Fevers, it strengthens the heart and
nutritive virtue, purges by stool and urine, it makes a man have a good
stomach to his meat and provokes sleep.

A. But by my Authors leave, I never yet accounted purges to be proper physic
in Pestilential Fevers; this I believe, the Syrup cleanses the liver well,
and is exceeding good for such as are troubled with Hypocondriack melancholy.

Syrupus Diasereos. Andernacus.
Take of Endive and Succory of each a handful, Maidenhair both white and black,
Agrimony, Cetrach, Hops, Fumitory of each half a handful, winter Cherries,
Doddar, of each three drachms, The roots of Smalledg, Fennel, Sparagus, of each
half an ounce, Polipodium of the Oak an ounce, Liquoris six drachms, the seeds
of Bastard Safiron, or Carthamus an ounce, the four greater cold seeds of each
two drachms, French Barley a pugil, of seeds of Endive, and Succory, of each a
dram and an half, Raisons of the sun an ounce, Damask Prunes twenty, The
flowers of Borrage, Buglosse, Violets, of each a pugil, Myrobalans Citrons and
Chebs, of each an ounce and an half, boil them all in we want the terminus a
quo, unless we be as wise as Angels: And the 1 Author has t also in the very
same words. Howsoever if you boil it away but to a pint and an half, and
according to their rule, you will not have water enough at the first, to wet
all the Simples, they that are used to make Decoctionsknow how to make one for
strength, and this recept is not much in use.
water till the third part be boiled away, then in a pint and half of this
decoction infuse all night, Rubarb two ounces and an half, Agrick, the manner
shall be showed in its proper place. a would I could see the^, truly if you
would have them I doubt yon must go to Arabia for them, where Mesue (...).
Trochiscated, an ounce, Senna an ounce and an half, Ginger, Cinnamon, of each
a dram, strain it the second time, and with a pound of the best Sugar, and 3.
ounccs of syrup of Roses solutive, boil it gently to a syrup.

A. It purges choler and opens obstructions in the bowels, kills worms, but
let it not be given in fevers.

Syrup of Epithimum. Mesue.
Take of Epithimum twenty drachms, Myrobalans Citrons and Indian, of each 15.
drachms, Doddar, Fumitory, of each ten drachms, Time, Calaminth, Buglosse,
Staechas, Liquoris, Polipodium, Agrick, Myrobalans Emblicks and Belliricks, of
each six drachms, red Roses, sweet Fennel seeds and Annis seeds, of each two
drachms and an half, would I could see the^, truly if you would have them I
doubt you must go to Arabioa for them, where Mesuedwel^t.
sweet Prunes 20. Raisons of the sun the stones picked out, four ounces,
Tamarinds two ounces and an half, after they have been infused 24. honrs, boil
them in ten pints of water till four pints be consumed, then let it be
strained, and ad to the decoction, white Sugar five pounds, boil it to a syrup.

A. It is best to put in the Doddar, Stoechas and Agrick, toward the latter
end of the decoction.

A. This recept was Mesue's only in stead of five pound of sugar, Mesue
appoints four pound of Sugar and two pound of Sapa (the making of which shall
be showed in its proper place) and truly of my opinion the recepts of Mesue are
generally the best in all the Dispensatory, because the simples are so pertinent
to the purpose intended, they are not made up of a mess of hodg-podg as many
others are, but to the purpose.

A. It purges melancholy and other humors, it strengthens the stomach and
liver, cleanses the body of addust choler and addust blood, as also of salt
humors, and helps diseases proceeding from these, as scabs, itch, tetters,
ringworms, leprosy etc. and the truth is I like it the better for its
gentleness, for I never fancied violent medicines in melancholy diseases.

Syrup of Eupatorium (or Maudlin.) Mesue.
Take of the roots of Smallage, Fennel, and Succory, of each two ounces,
Liquoris, Schaenanth, Dodder, Wormwood, Roses, of each six drachms, Maiden
hair, Bedeguar or instead thereof, the roots of Carduus Mariae, A kind of thorn
growing in Egypt and Arabia.
Suchaha or instead thereof the roots of Avens, the flowers or roots of
Buglosse, Annis seeds, sweet Fennel seeds, Ageratum or Maudlin, of each five
drachms, Rhubarb, Mastich of each three drams, Spicknard, Indian leaf, or
instead of it put Roman Spike, of each two drachms, boil them in eight pints of
water, till the third part be consumed, then strain the decoction, and with
four pound of Sugar, clarified juice of Smallage and Endive, of each half a
pound, boil it into a syrup.

A. It Is a strange clause, and the stranger because it comes from a College of
Physicians, that they should set Bedeguar, or instead thereof Cardnus Mariae,
It is well known that the Bedeguar used here with us, or rather that which the
Physicians of our times use for Bedeguar is a kind of wild Rose, but the
Bedeguar of the Arabians was it is that we call our Ladies thistle, having white
veins in the leaf, and used to be eaten in the spring time.
Cardnus Mariae, and they knew well enough Mesue whose recept this was, was an
Arabian, truly this is just as though they should say, they would have ten
shillings for a visit, or instead of that an angel, there being in deed and in
truth as much difference between Bedeguar and Carduus-Mariae as between
eight-pence and two groats.

A. It amends infirmities of the liver coming of cold, opens obstructions,
helps the dropsy and evil state of the body, it extenuates gross humors,
strengthens the liver, provokes urine, and is a present succor for
hypocondriack melancholy.

Syrup of Liquoris. Mesue.
Take of green Liquoris scraped and bruised two ounces, white Maidenhair an
ounce, dried Hysop half an ounce, Infuse them together for the space of 24.
hours in four pints of warm spring water is better.
rain water, then boil it till half the water be consumed, strain the decoction
and clarify it, and with eight ounces of honey, and sixteen ounces of sugar,
boil it to a syrup, adding toward the latter end of the decoction, six ounces
of red rose water.

A. It cleanses the breast and lungues, and helps continual coughs and
Pleuresies.

Syrup of Hysop. Mesue.
Take of spring water eight pints, in which boil half an ounce of French. Barley
the space of half an hour, then put in the roots of Smallage, Parsley, Fennel,
Liquoris, of each ten drachms, let these bruise (...) I the roots you boil,
take that for a general rule, unles the contrary be mentioned.
boil very gently about a quarter of an hour, then add Jujubes and Sebestens of
each thirty, Raisons of the sun stoned, an ounce and an half, dry Figs and
Dates of each ten; afterward put in the seeds of Mallows, Quinces, and Gum
Traganth, tied up in a linen rag, of each three drachms; afterward put in of
Hysop meanly dried ten drachms, Maiden hair six drachms, boil it to three pints
and having clarified the decoction, with two pound and an half of sugar boil it
into a syrup.

A. It mightily strengthens the by the breast I always mean that which is
called Thorax.
breast and lungues, causes long wind, clear voice, is a good remedy against
coughs.

Syrup of Jujubes. Mesue.
Take of Jujubes sixty, Violets, and Mallow seeds of each five drachms, Maiden
hair, Liquoris, and French-Barly of each an ounce, the seeds of white Poppies,
Mallows, Lettice, and Quinces, Gum Traganth tied up in a rag, of each three
drachms, boil them in six pints of rain or spring water till half be consumed,
strain it, and with two pound of sugar boil it into a syrup.

A. It is a fine cooling syrup, very available in coughs, hoarsness, and
pleurefies, ulcers of the lungues, and bladder, as also in all inflammations
whatsoever.

Syrup of Chamepitys: or Iva Arthritica.
Take of Chamepitys two handfuls, Sage, Rosemary, Darnel, Origanum, Calaminth,
wild Mints, Peny-royal, Hysop, Time, Garden and Wild Rue, Betony, and Mother of
Time of each a handful; the roots of a flag of a sweet smell, some take it for
Calamus Aromaticus.
Acorus, Aristolochia or Birth wort both long and round, Briony, Dictamni,
Gentian, Peucedanum
Hogs-Fennel, Valerian, of each one ounce and an half; the roots of Smallage,
Sparagus, Fennel, Parsley, Bruscus of each one ounce, Stoechas, the seeds of
Annis, Bishops weed, Caraway, Fennel, Lovage, Seseli.
Hartwort of each three drachms, Pellitory of Spain half an ounce, Raisons of
the Sun three ounces, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, and with
honey and sugar of each two pounds, prepare it, and perfume it with Cinnamon,
Nutmegs, and Cubebs, according to art.

A. The Anthor is here concealed, neither do I remember that ever I read it in
any other, or ever knew it made, I know not the meaning of that word,
sufficient quantity of water, nor how much it must be boiled to, here wants
both the terminus a quo and the terminus ad quem, as also the quantity of the
Aromaticks, so that if it had not been signed by the College, I should have
thought it had been a pure piece of nonsense, I would modestly desire the
College to look back to their Epistle to the Reader wherein they shall find
that they have promised (but how truly performed in this and others, let
themselves judge) to appoint a certain measure or weight in all compositions,
which ought not to be added to, nor taken from, and their reason is very
commendable, viz. that the same medicines in all shops, might have the same
operation as being the self same composition ad unguem that so the Physician
may know what to prescribe, but why this and others are not so, I dare not say,
it was negligence, for then I should offend the College, I dare not say it was
forgetfulness, for that ought not to be in a Physician, much less in a
College, well then, I know not what to say, and so I leave it.

A. When I look upon the Simples, me thinks the composition (if it be any thing
handsomely made) is opening, expels wind, provokes the terms in women, hastens
the afterbirth, and is very profitable for such women as are not well cleansed
after labor.

A Magisterial Syrup against Melancholy.
Take of the Juice of those sweet sented Apples which we in England usually
call Permains a pound and an half, the juice of Borrage and Bugloss of each
nine ounces, choice Senna half a pound, Annis seeds and sweet Fennel seeds, of
each three drachms, Epithimum of by all means let it be brought from thence,
and yet some are of opinion that things growing in England are fitter for
English bodies, and can give reasons for it too
Creet two ounces, of the best Agrick and Rhubarb of each half an ounce,
Ginger, Mace, of each four scruples, Cinnamon, two scruples, Saffron half a
dram.

Let the Agrick, Senna, seeds, Ginger, Mace, and Epithimum, be grossly viz slice
the Agrick, cut the Epithimu^, bruise the seeds, ginger and mace.
bruised and cut, and so infused in the juyces for the space of 24. hours, then
let them boil over a gentle fire till the scum rises, then strain them through
Hippocrates his sleeve, to the decoction ad a pound and an half of white Sugar,
boil them according to art, (scumming them all the while) to the consistence of
a syrup, whilst it boyls, let the Saffron being tied up in a linen rag be
often crushed into it, then let the Rhubarb being sliced thin, and the Cinnamon
which ought to be ready infused all this while, in white Wine and the juycs of
the Apples of each two ounces, and now strongly pressed out, be mixed with it,
warm them a little together by the fire for the syrup.

A. Out of doubt this is a gallant syrup to purge addust choler and
melancholy, and to resist madness.

Syrup of Bawm. Fernelius.
Take of the Roots of Dittany, Cinkfoil, Bettony, one kind of wolsebain.
Doronicum of each half an ounce, The leaves of Bawm, Scabious, Devils bit, the
flowers of both sorts of I suppose Fernelius means Borrag and Bugloss, the
natures of which are alike, neither according to the opinion of some, was the
name Borrage known to the Ancient but called Bugloss, and indeed it resembles
an Neats tongue (from whence the word was derived) more than that we call
Bugloss does.
Bugloss, and Rosemary, of each a handful, the seeds of Citrons, Sorrel,
Fennel, Carduus Benedictus, Bazil, of each three drachms, boil these in four
pints of water till two be consumed, strain out the decoction and ad to it
three pound of white Sugar, juice of Bawm and Rose water of each half a pound,
boil them into a syrup, which perfume with Cinnamon, and yellow Sanders, of
each half an ounce.

A. Always tie perfumes up in a rag, and hang them into the syrup by a string
when it boyls, and hang them by a string in the vessel, (be it pot or glass)
that you keep the syrup in being boiled.

A. It is an excellent cordial, and strengthens the heart, breast, and stomach,
it resists melancholy, revives the spirits, is given with good success in
fevers, it strengthens the memory, and releeves languishing nature.

Syrup of Mints, the greater. Mesue.
Take of the juice of Quinces between sweet and sour, of the juice of
Pomegranates between sweet and sour, of each a pound and an half, and when you
have mixed both these juyces together, infuse in them, for the space of 24.
hours, dried mints, a pound and an half, Red Roses dried two ounounces, boil it
till half be consumed, then strain it, and with four pound of Sugar boil it
into a syrup after it is boiled and cool, perfume it with a dram of see the
making of it among the Troches.
Gallia moschata beaten and tied up in fine linen, and hung by a third into
the vessel you keep your syrup in.

A. The Syrup is in quality binding, yet it comforts the stomach much, helps
digestion, stays vomiting, and is (in my opinion) as excellent a remedy
against sour or offensive belchings, as any is in the Dispensatory.

Syrup of Mirtles. Nicholaus.
Take of Myrtle berries two ounces and an half, Sanders both white and red,
Sumach, Balaustines, Barberries, red Roses, of each half an ounce, Medlars half
a pound, bruise all these, and having bruised them, boil them in eight pints of
water, till half be consumed, strain it, and ad to the decoction, juice of
Quinces, and sour Pomegranates, of each six ounces, Sugar three pound, boil it
into a syrup according to art.

A. The syrup is of a very binding yet of a comforting nature, it helps such as
spit blood, all fluxes of the belly, or corrosions of the internal parts, It
strengthens the retentive faculty, and stops the immoderate flux of the terms
in women.

Syrup of Apples. Fernelius.
Take of the juice of our Apples commonly called Permains, or Pippins four
pound, the juice of both sorts of Buglosse, Rose water, the juice of Violet
leaves of each a pound, boil them together and clarify them, then with six
pound of Sugar, boil them into a syrup.

A. It is a fine cooling syrup for such whose hearts and stomachs are
overpressed with heat, and may safely be given in fevers, for it rather
loosens than binds, it breeds good blood, and isprofitable in hectic fevers,
and for such as are troubled with palpitation of the heart, it quenches thirst
admirably in fevers, and stays hiccoughs.

Syrupus de Pomis Regis Saporis. Mesue.
Take of the juice of Apples, two pound, the juice of Borrage and Buglosse of
each a pound and an half, Senna two ounces, Annis seeds half an ounce, Saffron
a dram, Infuse the Senna 24. hours in the juyces, then let it boil a walm or
two, then strain it, and with two pound of Sugar boil it into a syrup, let the
Saffron being tied up in a rag, be crushed in the boiling.

A. Mesue appoints Senna cods, viz. the husk that holds the seeds and the
College altered that, and added the Annis seeds, I suppose to correct the
Senna, and in so doing they did well.

A. The Syrup is a pretty cooling purge, and tends to rectify the distempers
of the blood, it purges choler and melancholy, and therefore must needs be
effectual both in yellow and black Jaundice, It is very gentle, and for that I
commend both the Receipt and Mesue the Author of it.

Syrup of Horehound. Fernelius
Take of white Horehound fresh, two ounces, Liquoris, Polipodium of the Oak,
the roots of Smallage and Fennel, of each half an ounce, white Maidenhair,
Origanum, Hysop, Calaminth, Time, Scabious, Savory, Coltsfoot of each six
drachms, the seeds of Annis and Cotton of each three drams, Raisons of the sun
stoned, two ounces, fat Figs ten, boil these altogether in water and honey
boiled together, til it be scummed.
Hydromel eight pints, till half be consumed, then when you have strained it,
boil it into a syrup with Honey and white Sugar of each two pound, perfume it
with an ounce of the roots of Orris Florentine.

A. It is apropriated to the breast and lungues, and is a fine cleanser, to
purge them from thick and putrified phlegm, it helps Phthisicks and coughs, and
diseases subject to old men and cold natures.

Syrup of Rhadishes. Fernelius.
Take of Radish roots both Garden and I think they mean horse rhadishes. Bruise
the roots and seeds, and cut the herbs, else you had almost as good boyla chip.
Wild, of each an ounce the roots of white Saxifrage, Bruscus, Lovage, Fringo
Rest harrow, Parsley, Fennel, of each half an ounce, the leaves of Bettony,
Burnet, Pennyroyal, the tender Tops of Nettles, Watercresses, Samphire, Maiden
hair, of each a handful, Winter cherrics, Jujubes of each twenty, the seeds of
Bazil, Burs, Parsley of Macedonia, Seseli. Caraway, Carrots, Gromwell, the bark
of the roots of the bay tree of each two drams, Raisons of the sun stoned,
Liquoris, of each six drachms, boil them according to art, in twelve pints of
water till eight remain, in which being strained dissolve four pound of Sugar,
and two pound of Honey, and boil them into a clear syrup, the which perfume with
an ounce of Cinnamon, and half an onnce of Nutmegs.

A. The syrup is apropriated to the reins and bladder, both which it powerfully
cleanses, it breaks and brings forth the stone, it purges the reins of
gravel, it helps all supression and stopping of urine, as Dysuria, Iscuria
etc.

Syrups of the five opening Roots. Mesue.
Take of the roots of Smallage, Fennel, Parsley, Brusous, and Sparagus, of each
two ounces, bruise them first.
boil them in six pints of spring water till the third part be consumed, strain
it, and with three pound of Sugar, boil it into a syrup, adding eight ounces of
white-Wine-Vineger, toward the latter end of the decoction.

A. It cleanses and opens very well, is profitable against obstructions,
provokes urine, cleanses the body of (...), and is safely and profitably given
in the beginning of Fevers.

A Magisterial syrup of Scabious Compound.
Take of the roots of Alicampane, and Polipodium of the Oak of each two ounces,
infuse them 24. hours in white Wine. Raisons of the sun stoned an ounce,
Sebesten 30. Coltfsoot, Lunguewort, Savory, Calaminth, of each a handful and an
half, Liquoris half an ounce, one whole leaf of the best Tobacco, the seeds of
Nettles and Cotton of each three drachms, boil them in a sufficient quantity of
Aqua mulsa
wine and water, to eight ounces, to which being strained, ad of the juice of
Scabious clarified four ounces, white Sugar ten ounces, boil it into a syrup
clarified according to art, adding to it twenty drops of have a little patience
and you shall be taught, not only the way to make it, but also the virtues of
it, which are not a few.
oil of Sulphur.

A. It is a cleansing syrup, apropriated to the breast and lungues, when you
perceive them oppressed by phlegm cruditiesor stoppings, here is your remedy.

Syrup of Hartstongue. Fernelius.
Take of Polypodium of the Oak, the roots of both sorts of Buglosse, bark of
Cappar roots, bark of Tamaris, of each two ounces, Hartstongue three handfuls,
Hops, Doddar, Maidenhair, Bawm of each two handfuls, boil them in nine pints of
water, till there remains but five, strain it, clarify it, and with four pound
of white Sugar boil it into a syrup.

A. It helps stoppings of melancholy, opens obstructions of the liver and
spleen, and is profitable against splenetick evils, and therefore is a choice
remedy for the disease which the vulgar call the rickets, or livergrown.

Syrup of Stoechas. Mesue.
Take of the flowers of Stoechas four ounces, Time, Calaminth, Origanum, of
each an ounce and an half, Sage, Bettony, Rosemary flowers, of each half an
ounce, the seeds of Rue, Peony, and Fennel of each three drachms, boil them in
ten pints of water, till half be consumed, strain it, and boil the decoction
into a syrup, with Honey and Sugar of each two pound, perfume it with Cinnamon,
Ginger, and Calamus Aromaticus of each two drachms, tied up in a thin rag, and
hung into the Syrup.

A. This recept looks like Mesue, because the Simples are composed with such
harmony. I confess I have found in his works one or two syrups of this name,
but not this same composition, yet am I willing to think it his, not so much
because the College says it, as because I can judge of the tree by the fruit.

A. Surely, surely, was this recept penned against cold infirmities of the
brain, Spinalis Medulla and their Handmaids, (or rather Officers) the nerves,
helps both sense and motion anoyed by cold or melancholy, I am curbed for
being so larg, therefore in general, you (if you try it) shall find it an
admirable remedy, against palsies, or tremblings of the limbs, convulsions,
cramps, falling sickness, and all other infirmities of the brain, arising from
cold, moisture or melancholy, and the composition is husbanded with such
discreation, and moderation, that without all question, it was distilled from
the brain of a Mesue.

Syrup of Comfry. Fernelius.
Take of the roots and branches, both of the greater and lesser see the simples
if at any time you be put to a nonplus about them in the Compositions.
Comfry, of each three handfuls, red Roses, Bettony, Plantane, Burnet, Knot
grass, Scabious, Coltsfoot, of each two handfuls, let the joyce be pressed
from them all, being fresh and green, and well else you had as good press a
log of wood
beaten, boil it away to three pound, scumming it well; and with two pound and
an half of Sugar, boil it to a syrup.

A. Were it not for fear my book would grow bigger than I would willingly have
it, I could easily prove, that the syrup would be far better, if the juyces
were only clarified, and not boiled at all, but with their double weight in
sugar, melted only into a syrup.

A. The syrup is excellent for all inward wounds and bruises, excoriations,
vomitings, spittings or piffing of blood, it unites broken bones, helps
ruptures, and stops the terms in women.

A Cordial syrup or Julep. Norimberg.
Take of Rhenish wine a quart, Rose water two ounces and an half, Cloves two
scruples, Cinnamon half a dram, Ginger two scruples, of the best Sugar three
onnces and an half, boil it to the consistence of a Julep, which perfume with
three grains of Ambergris, and one grain of musk.

A. He that has read thus far in this book, and does not know he must first
boil the Simples in the wine and then strain them out before he puts in the
Sugar, is a man that in my opinion has not wit enough to be taught to make up
a medicine.

A. If you would have this Julep keep long, you may put in more Sugar, and yet
if close stopped, it will not easily corrupt, because it is made up only of
wine, indeed the wisest way is to order the quantity of Sugar according to the
that latitude may be given safely in all compositions.
pallat of him that takes it.

A. It restores such as are in consumptions, comforts the heart, cherishes
drooping spirits, and is of an opening quality, thereby carrying away those
vapors which might otherwise anoy the brain.

SYRUPS MADE WITH HONEY, AND VINEGAR AND HONEY.
Diacaryon, Or Dianucum. Gallen.
Take of the juice of before the shells be hard.
green Walnuts, two pound, clarify it, and with a pound of Honey boil it into a
syrup.

A. It is an excellent preservative in pestilential times.

Diacodium. Gallen.
Take of the heads of white Poppies, neither too green nor too ripe, by number
twenty, rain or spring water three pints, infuse them twenty four hours, then
boil them till the if your eyes be in your head they will teach youthat.
virtue be out of the heads, then strain it, and with two pound of Honey boil it
to the consistence of a syrup, some ad to it, Sapa, two pound, juice of
Liquoris two ounces.

A. It works the same effects with the former syrups of Poppie.

Diamoron. Nicholaus.
Take of the juice of Mulberries, and Blackberries, neither of them being fully
ripe, of each a pound and an half, boil them with two pound of Honey, over a
gentle fire, into a syrup.

A. It is vulgarly known to be good for sore mouths, as also to cool
inflammations there.

Honey of Rosemary flowers. Mesue.
Take of Rosemary flowers a pound, clarified Honey three pound, put them
together in a glass that has not a very wide mouth, set them in the Sun to
digest, and being digested keep it for your use.

A. It has the same virtues with Rosemary flowers, to which I refer you, only
by reason of the honey it may be somewhat cleansing.

Honey of Mercury.
Take of the juice of Herb Mercury, three pound, with two pound of Honey boil it
into a syrup.

A. It is used as an Emollient in Clisters.

Honey of Raisons. Nicholaus.
Take of Raisons of the Sun stoned two pounds, infuse them 24. hours in fix
pints of warm water, then boil them till half the water be consumed, strain
them, and with two pound of Honey boil it into a syrup.

A. It is a pretty pleasing medicine for such as are in consumptions, and are
bound in body.

Honey of Roses Common. Mesue
Take of red Rose buds, picked, two pound, Honey fix pound, digest them in the
sun, like the Honey of Rosemary flowers.

Honey of Roses. Nicholaus.
Take of the best Honey clarified, ten pounds, the Juice of fresh red Roses one
pound, put them in a pan, over the fire, and when they begin to boil, ad four
pound of fresh red Roses, the whites being cut off, let it boil till the juice
be consumed; continually stirring it, and so keep it for your use, being
strained.

A. They are both used for diseases in the mouth.

Honey Roses Solutive.
Take of the infusion of Damask Roses, (as you have formerly been showed to
make it) five pounds, clarified Honey four pounds, boil it into the consistence
of a syrup.

A. It is used as a laxative in Clisters, and some Chyrurgians use it to
cleanse wounds.

In the same manner may be prepared Honey of red Roses.

Honey of Violets is made in the same manner.

Oximel Simple. Mesue.
Take of the best clarified honey three pound, pure water, and of the best
Vinegar of each two pound, boil them into the consistence of a syrup.

A. Your best way is to boil the water and honey first into a syrup, and
Observe, that the later it be before you ad the vinegar to any syrup, the
sourer will it be, so may you please yourself and not offend the College for
they give you latitude enough.
add the Vinegar afterward, and then boil it again into a syrup.

A. It cuts phlegm, and is a good preparative before a vomit.

Oximel Compound. Mesue.
Take of the viz. Only throw away the hard pith in the middle and so you ought
to do every time you use the roots.
bark of the roots of Fennel, Smallage, Parsley Bruscus, Sparagus of each two
ounces, The seeds of Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, Annis of each one ounce, and
with six pound of water, one pound and an half of vinegar, and three pound of
Honey, make it into a syrup.

A. First, having bruised the roots and seeds, boil them in the water till half
be consumed, then strain it and ad the honey, and when it is almost boiled
enough, add the vinegar.

A. It cuts thick and gross humors, and cleanses the body of them, it opens
the stoppings both of the liver and spleen, it purges the reins, provokes
urine and sweat.

Heleborated Oximel the greater. Gesner.
Take of Rue, true it differs a little from our ordinary Garden time: an Herbal
will show you the difference.
Time, Dittany of Creet, Hysop, Penyroyal, Horehound, Carduus Benedictus, the
roots of Spicknard Celtick without leaves, the inner bark of Elders, of each a
handful, Mountain Calaminthacattaria.
Nepp, two pugils, The seeds of Annis, Fennel, Basil, Roman Nettles, Dill, of
each two drachmas; the roots of Angelica, marsh Mallows, Aron, Squils you shall
be taught how to prepare the^ in its proper place.
prepared, Aristolochiah or Birth wort, long, round, and climing, Turpeth,
whether this Orris be English or of that country where Gesner lived, is some
question.
our Orris, Costus smelling like Violets, or else Zedoary, Polypodium, Lemmon
pills, of each an ounce, of the strings of the roots of Black Hellebore, Esula
or Tythymal, in sussex we call it Spurg, and so I english it
Spurge, of each two drachms, the bark of the root of white Hellebore half an
ounce, Agrick two drachms, and so you must both the Hellebores also, or else
you had as good put in a rush.
which you must put in toward the latter end of the decoction, let all of them
being dried and bruised be infused in eight pints of Posca, (viz. equal parts
of water and vinegar) Sapa, two ounces, either in the Sun or in a Furnace,
either in a glass or earthen vessel, then boil it either in an earthen or
stone vessel, till almost half be consumed, strain it out but gently, and ad to
it honey roses, in which two ounces of Citron pills have been infused, a pound
and an half, then boil it till the Posca be consumed. and so it come to the
body of a syrup, the which perfume with Cloves, Saffron, Ginger, Galanga, and
Mace of each a a dram, tied in a rag, keep it either in a glass or a pot for
your use.

A. It is such a mess of altogether, that a man scarce knows what to do with
it, here are many Simples very cordial, many provoke the terms, some purge
gently, some violently, and some cause vomiting; being all put together I
verily think (if warily given) it may be a fit purge in some cases, for madness
coming of melancholy, provided they be not Phrenitick, or as the vulgar say
frantic, for then purges are not fitting.

Oximel Julianizans.
Take of the bark of Cappar roots, Orris roots, the roots of Fennel, Parsley,
Bruscus, Succory, Sparagus, Cyperus, of each half an ounce, the leaves of
Hartstongue, Schoenanth, Tamaris, of each a handful, sweet Fennel seeds half an
ounce, first bruise the roots.
first infuse-them, and then boil them, in three pints of sharp Posca to a pint
and an half, which boil into the body of a syrup, with Honey and course
Saccharum dispumarum, it may be they mean Molossus, viz. that which the vulgar
call Treacle.
Sugar of each half a pound.

Posca is made of water and vinegar, and is either more or less sharp according
to the intention of the Physician.

A. This medicine is very opening, very good against Hypocondriack Melancholy,
and as fit a medicine as can be for that disease in Children called the Rickets.

Oximel of Squils Simple. Nicholaus.
Take of clarified Honey three pound, Vinegar of Squils two pound, boil them
into a syrup according to art.

A. They say they borrowed this receipt of Nicholaus, but of what Nicholaus I
know not, the self same receipt is word for word in Mesue whose commendations of
it is this, It cuts and divides humors that are tough and viscus, and therefore
helps the stomach and bowels afflicted by such humors, and helps sour belchings.

A. View the Vinegar of Squils and then your reason will tell you this is as
wholesome and somewhat more toothsom.

Democritus his Vinegar of Squills. Mesue
Take of Origanum, dried Hysop, Time, Loyage, Cardamoms Stoechas of each five
drachms, boil them in three pints of water till two of them be consumed, strain
it, and with two pound of honey, half a pound of honey of Raisons, juice of
Briony five ounces, Vinegar of Squils a pound and an half, Boil it into a
syrup, always scumming it.

A. Mesue says this is good against the falling sickness, Megrim, headache,
vertigo, or swimming in the head, and if these be occasioned by the stomach as
many times they are, I believe it is, it helps the lungues obstructed by
humors, and is good for women not well cleansed after labor, it opens the
passage of the womb.

Honey of Anacardium. Azaravius.
Take of Anacardia or Beans of Malacca, where shall we in England get such? out
of question the dried ones are far more hot and worse the the green.
fresh, bruise them, and boil them in water till a kind of raddish substance
like honey swim at top, take off that, and keep it for your use.

A. See the Fruit.

Honey of Emblicks. August.
Take sifty Emblick Myrobalans, bruise them and boil them in three pints of
water till two be consumed, strain it, and with the like weight of honey boil
it into a syrup.

A. It is a fine gentle purger both of phlegm and melancholy, it strengthens
the brain and nerves, and senses both internal and external, helps trembling of
the heart, stays vomiting, provokes appetite.

ROB OR SAPA AND IVYCES
A. ROB is something an uncouth word, and happily formidable to the Ignorant
Countryman, and therefore in the first place, I will explain the word. A. 1.
Rob or Sapa, is the juyces of a fruit, made thick by the heat either of the Sun
or the fire, that so it is capable of being kept safe from putrefaction. A. 2.
Its use was first invented for diseases in the mouth, (however or for
whatsoever it is used now, it matters not.) A. 3. It it usually made, in
respect of body, something thicker than new honey. A. 4. It may be kept about a
year, little more or less.
Simple Rob or Sapa.
Take twelve pints of new White Wind, boil it over a gentle fire, till but four
remain, or else till it be of the thickness of honey, keep it either in a
glass or in an earthen pot glazed.

A. When ever you read the word Rob or Sapa throughout the Dispensatory,
simply quoted in any medicine, without any relation of what it should be made,
this is that you ought to use.

Rob of Barberries.
Take of the juice of Barberries, well strained, eight pound boil it with a
gentle fire to the consistence of Honey, and so lay it up in a glass or
earthen vessel, you may also prepare it with Sugar, by adding a pound of Sugar,
to every pound of Juice, and so boiling it to the thickness of Honey.

A. It quenches thirst, closes the mouth of the stomach, thereby staying
vomiting, and belching, it strengthens stomachs weakened by heat, and procures
appetite.

Rob of Cornels.
Take of the juice of Cornels, two pound, if these be boiled with sugar, I
would know but one yea the least difference between it and a syrup, if none,
then if you please it shall run thus, a syrup called Rob of Cornels.
Sugar a pound and an half, boil it to the consistence of Honey.

A. Of these Cornel trees, are two sorts, male and foemale, the fruit of the
male Cornel or Cornelian Cherry is here to be used, for the foemale is that
which is called Dogberry, in the North country they call it Gatter-wood, and we
in Sussex Dog-wood, I suppose because the berries will make Dogs mad as some
hold, also it is very unwholsom wood, specially for such as have been bitten by
mad dogs.

A. The fruit of male Cornel, binds exceedingly, and is therefore good in
fluxes, bloody fluxes, and the immoderate flowing of the terms in women.

Rob of Quinces.
Take six pound of the juice of Quinces clarified, boil it till two oh Heavens!
was ever the like seen! two parts of how many? to that I must write Ignoramus.
parts be consumed, adding to it two pound of Sugar, boil it to the thickness
of Honey, or you may prepare it without Sugar.

A. Its effects are the same with the former, only I suppose it to be more
cordial, and not so cool, but more strengthening to the stomach.

A Rob of the juice of I know not how better to translate sogeneral a word as
prunum,
sour plums is made in the same manner as Rob of Quinces.

Rob of English Currance.
It is prepared as Rob of Barberries.

But that it may be well clarified, first heat it, then let it stand and grow
clear, and use only what is clear.

A. The effects are the same with that of Barberries.

Juice of Sloes which is used for Acacia.
Take of the juice of sloes, clarify it, with the gentle heat of a bath,
adduce it to its just thickness.

A. It stops fluxes of the belly.

The juyces of wormwood, Eupatorium
Maudlin, Fumitory, and other herbs, are made of the herbs when they are
tender, not too rank, Beaten and pressed, clarified, and then boiled to their
due height.

A. The virtue is the same with the herbs, only here is diversity of ways, to
please diversity of palats.

Juice of Liquoris.
Take of the roots of green Liquoris, well scraped and well bruised, infuse
them in so much spring water that the water may over top them the breadth of two
or three fingers, for three days, then boil them a little and strain them,
then boil the decocton to a due thicknes, and make it into what form you please.

A. It is vulgarly known to be good against coughs colds, etc. and a
strengthener of the lungues.

an Arabic word, and in English is plain Juice.
Miua of Quinces. Mesue
Take of the juice of Quinces clarified twelve pound boil it till half be
consumed, then add to it five pints of old white Wine, boil it over a gentle
fire often scumming it, till the third part be consumed, then let it cool, then
strain it, and with three pound of Sugar, boil it to its due thickness.

A. It is something better for cold stomachs than Rob of Quinces, and less
binding, else the effects are the same.

LOHOCHS.
A. BEcause this word also is understood but by few, we will first explain what
it is. A. The word Lohoch is an Arabic word, called in Greek (...); in Latin,
Linctus, and signifies a thing to be licked up. A. 2. it is in respect of body,
something thicker then a syrup, and not so thick as an Electuary. A. 3. Its use
it was invented for, was against the roughness of the windpipe, diseases, and
inflammations of the lungs, difficulty of breathing, colds, coughs etc. A. 4.
Its manner of reception is with a Liquoris stick, bruised at end, to take up
some and retain it in the mouth, till it melt of its own accord.
Lohoch of Coleworts Gordonius.
Take a pound of the juice of Coleworts, clarified, Saffron three drachms,
clarified Honey and Sugar of each half a pound, make of them a Lohoch,
according to art.

A. It helps hoarsness, and loss of voice, eases surfets, and headache coming
of drunkenuess, and opens obstructions of the liver and spleen, and therefore
is good for that disease in children which women call the Rickets.

Lohoch of Pappies. Mesue
Take of I supose the seeds: It is confessed Mesue has it word forword as it
is here.
white Poppies twenty five drachms, sweet Almonds, Pinenuts, Gum Arabic, and
Traganth, juice of Liquoris of each ten drachms, white Starch three drachms,
the seeds of Purslain, Lettice, Quinces of each half an ounce, Saffron one
dram, have a special care they be nor black ones.
white Penidies four ounces, syrup of Poppies the lesser composition, (which
you may find page 112) three pounds, cut them and bruise them all, and with the
syrup make them into a Lohoch, according to art.

A. It helps coughs and cathars proceeding of hot and sharp rheum, it eases
pains in the stomach coming of heat, Pleuresies, and the same that we call
Consumption of the lungues.
Phthisicks, and provokes sleep.

Lohoch of Raisons. Augustan.
Take of male peony roots, half an ounce, Hysop, Bawm, Hartstongue or Cetrach
of each half a handful, Liquoris half an ounce, boil them in a sufficient
quantity of or springwater, else in a dry summer you cannotget the Lohoch if it
were to save your life.
rain water, strain it strongly, and ad a pound of Raisons of the sun stoned
and well beaten in a (...), boil it again and strain it strongly, and with a
pound of Sugar boil the decoction into a Lohoch.

A. Although this medicine be seldom in use with us in England, yet by report
of Foreign Physicians, it is very prevalent, both against coughs, consumptions
of the lungues, and other vices of the breast, and is usually given to children
for such diseases, as also for the the difference of which two diseases is not
much.
convulsions and fallingsickness, and indeed the Simples testify no less.

Lohoch of Pinenuts. Mesue.
Take of Pinenuts thirty drachms, sweet Almonds, HasselNut-kernels roasted, Gum
Traganth, and Arabic, powder of Liquoris, and juice of Liquoris, white Starch,
Maidenhair, Orris roots, of each half an ounce, of the pulp of Dates, thirty
five drachms, Bitter Almonds three drachms, Honey of Raisons, white Sugar
Candy, fresh Butter of each four ounces, of the best Honey three pound, or else
so much as is sufficient, let the things which are to be disolved be disolved
in a sufficient quantity of the decoction of Maidenhair, and the rest added
according to art that they may be made into a Lohoch.

A. The powder of Liquoris is only added by the College, and the manner of
making of it up, both which are useful.

A. The medicine is excellent for continual coughs, and difficulty of
breathing, it succors such as as are Asthma is a disease when thick tough
phlegm sticks in the lappets of the lungues.
Asthmatick for it cuts and attenuates tough humors in the breast.

Lohoch of Fox lungues. Mesue.
Take of Fox lungues prepared, juice of Liquoris, Maidenhair, Annis seeds,
sweet Fennel seeds of each an ounce, Sugar clarified with Coltsfoot water
fifteen ounces, the things being beaten which may be beaten, and brought into
very fine powder, let them be made into a Lohoch, with the Sugar.

A. Mesue appoints sixteen ounces of Honey, and no Sugar nor uncertain quantity
of Coltsfoot water, and reason it self will tell you Honey is most cleansing.

A. It cleanses and uniteth ulcers in the lungues and breast and is a present
remedy in Phtisick is an ulceration of the lungues, and the very same disease
usually called a consumptio^ of the lungues
Phtisicks.

Lahoch sanum et expertum. Mesue.
Take of Cinnamon, dry Hysop, Liquoris of each half an ounce, Jujubes,
Sebestens, of each thirty, Raisons of the sun stoned, I take those we call
bluefigs to be intended by the College, but not by Mesue for he apoints fat
figs.
dry Figs of each two ounces, fat Dates two ounces, Lin seed, Foenugraeck seed
of each five drachms, Maidenhair, a handful, Annis seeds, sweet Fennel seeds,
those which we in Sussex call flour-deluce.
Orris roots, Calaminth of each half an ounce, boil them according to art in
four pints of clear water, till half be consumed, strain it, and with two pound
of white Sugar boil the decoction to a syrup, afterward sprinkle in these
following things being cut and beaten small, viz. the kernels only, nonhusks
and all, for that would make a composition sooner to choke than to help a man's
throat.
Pinenuts, sweet Almonds, liquoris, Gum traganth, and Arabic, white Starch of
each three drachms, Orris roots two drachms, stir them all about dilligently
and swiftly till it looks white.

A. Only Mesue appoints one dram less of Lin-seeds, and whereas they appoint
white Sugar, he appoints Penids, else the recept is verbatim.

A. It succors the breast, lungues, throat, and or windpipe
Trachaea b blanched.


Arteria oppressed by cold, it restores the voice lost by reason of cold, and
attenuates thick and gross humors in the breast and lungues.

Eclegma of Squils. Mesue.
Take of the juice of Squils and Honey, both of them clarified of each two
pound, boil them together according to art to the consistence of honey.

A. How the name of Mesue came to be obtruded upon this receipt I know not, this
I am confident of, Gallen was the Author of it, neither is it probable the
College would have given it the name of Eclegma but Lohoch, had it been the
receipt of an Arabian; neither can it be the Printers faule, for he vapors at
the latter end of the Book, that he has made none, and he has done it in
English that the vulgar may understand THAT in the book though nothing else.

A. For the Virtues of it, see Vinegar of Squils, and Oximel of Squils, only
this is more mild and not so harsh to the throat, because it has no vinegar in
it, and therefore is far more fitting for Asthmaes, and such as are troubled
with difficulty of breathing, it cuts and carries away humors from the breast
be they thick or thin, and wonderfully helps indigestion of victuals, and
eases pains in the breast; and for this I quote the Authority of Gallen,
always take this as a general Aphorism in physic, Sour things are offensive
to the mind-pipe.

PRESERVES
THere are condited or preserved with sugar dilligently clarified according to
art,

The stalks of Angelica, Artichoaks, Lettice:

The or pills.
barks of Orrenges, Cinnamon, Citrons, or Lignum vitae, such as they make Bowls
of the wood of.
Guajacum, Lemmons.

The flowers of Orrenges, Borrage, Citrons, Broom-buds, Prim-roses, Rosemary,
Roses.

The fruits of Almonds, Barberries, Capers, Cloves, Cherries, Cornels, Citrons,
Quinces, Apricocks, Peaches, Apples, Medlars, all the five sorts of Myrobalans,
Hassel-Nuts, Walnuts, Nutmegs, Raisons of the Sun, Pine-nuts, Fistick-Nuts,
Olives, Pepper in the branch from India, Plums garden and wild, Pears, Grapes.

The pnlp of Cassia, Citrons, Guords, Quinces.

The roots of Acorus, Calamus aromaticus, Galanga, Angelica, Borrage, Bugloss,
Succory, Sampier, Alicampane, Eringo, Burnet, Satyrion, Artichoak, Skirrets,
Comfry the greater, Ginger, Zedoary.

Others, both young Branches and Seeds are preserved besides these.

The way or manner of conditing or preserving, is this,

I am of opinion that it you would learn to preserve neatly, your best way is
to learn of a Consumaker.
Such as are bitter in taste or hard in substance, let them be steeped a while
in clear Lys, made of wood-ashes, afterward in warm spring water till their
bitterness be taken away, or they begin to be tender, then boil them in water
and sugar to a syrup, and keep them in the syrup, either in a glass or stone
pot glazed, and you may perfume them with Musk and Amber greece if you please.

Those that are soft and not so bitter; need no Ly to be infused in, but only
boil them gently that they may drink in the sugar, and preserve them in the
like manner.

A. I am of opinion that this art of preserving was first invented for Delicacy
sake, yet is it of great moment in physic, for hereby such simples as before
were loathed by the stomach, are made delicious and pleasing; also many simples
are better kept by far this way.

A. For the Virtues of them, see the simples.

CONSERVES AND SVGARS, OF HERBS, LEAVES, FLOWERS, AND FRUITS.
COnserves of Wormwood, Sorrel, Woodsorrel, Maiden * I suppose they mean the
flowers.
hair, Orrenges, Bettony, Borrage, Bugloss, Carduus Benedictus, Centaury,
Ceterach, Germander, Clove Gilliflowers, Succory, Scurvigrass, Comfry the
greater Cynosbatus, some hold it to be whitethorn, of which judgment are Tragus
and Dodonenus: others hold it to be sweet-Bryar. Truly I know no other way to
know what the College intend by it, than to ask them.
Citraria, Elicampane, Eyebright, Fumitory, Brooms not quite open,
Pomegranates, white Lillies, Lillies of the valley, Mallows, Water lillies,
Peaches, Primroses, Prunella
Self heal, Roses Red and Damask, Rosemary flowers, Sage, Elder, Scabious,
Stoechas, Linetree, Coltsfoot, Violets, Goats rue, Hedge Hysop, common Hysop,
Marjoram, Bawm, Mints, Rue, Savory, Scordium, Comfry.

A. Thus have I given you the Colleges Conserves, (or rather their confusion)
in English, wherein they have made such a chaos of herbs and flowers, that to
unweave it, would unweave the Rete mirabile of my brain, the truth is I want
time, only take notice of the Catalogue of Simples, and there e I know not what
they mean by it, unless they mean Bawm.
you may see whether the herb or flower be most in use, as also what the use of
it is, A word is enough to a wise man. I proceed.

Let the leaves and flowers be not cut as they prescribe
beaten very small, and to every, pound of them, add three pound of white
Sugar, and beat them well together into a conserve.

But Barberries, [ Prunella] and other sour fruits are not made into conserves
after this manner, for example

Take of Barberries as many as you will, let them boil so long in a sufficient
quantity of clear water till the pulp may be drawn out, by rubbing it through a
sieve, Then take six pounds of this same pulp thus strained, which put in an
earthen pan well glazed, (because if you do it in brass it will retain an
illfavoured smatch of the metal) boil away the watery moisture of them, with a
gentle fire, stirring it about continually six pound will serve the turn.
with a stick, lest the juice burn, then mix it with ten pound of white Sugar
according to art, boiling it to its due consistence.

A. [ Prunella] indeed and in truth is Self-heal, not Sloes, as I am confident
they intend it here, because they place it among the sour juyces, I was jealous
they intended it so before, therefore when I translated it self-heal, I set the
word Prunella in the margin, Is it possible so many grave heads should so
grossly mistake an herb for the fruit of a tree, Prunella for Prunellus, The
Printer has vindicated himself from so foul an Error, in the Latter end of
their Dispensatory, it remains in the College, to do the like, it being a
thing if not very preposterous, I am sure extremely dangerous, to prescribe one
thing for another in Physic, If they can but produce an Author, An Author
though from Utopia where ever Prunella was taken for a Sloe or Sloe-tree, I
shall be content to bear the blame my self.

A. The virtues of al Conserves are the same with the herbs, flowers, or fruits
whereof they are made, and they are thus mixed with Sugar, 1. to preserve them
the longer, 2. that they may be more pleasing to the pallat.

Lozenges of Poppies called Diacodium Solidum, or Tabulatum.
Take twenty white Poppy heads of a mean bigness, nei^^^^ too green nor too
ripe, spring water three pints, infuse them four and twenty hours, then boil
them till the virtue is out of the heads, then strain them out, and with a
sufficient quantity of Sugar, boil the liquor to that hardness, that you may
make Lozinges of it.

A. This recept is transcribed verbatim from the Augustan Physicians, though
the College (through forgetfulness or something else) hide it, the virtues are
the same with the common Diacodium, viz. to provoke sleep and help thin rewms
in the head etc.

Manus Christi Simple and Pearled.
Take of the best Sugar a pound, Damask-rose-water half a pint, boil them
together according to art, to that thickness that it may be made into
Lozenges, and if toward the latter end of the decoctiom, you ad half an ounce
of Pearls prepared in powder, together with eight or ten leaves of gold, it
will be Manus Christi with pearls.

A. It is naturally cooling, apropriated to the heart, it restores lost
strength, takes away burning fevers, and false imaginations, (I mean that with
pearls, for that without Pearls is ridiculous) it has the same virtues Pearls
have.

Manus Christi against Worms.
Take of Rhubarb four scruples, Agrick you shall be taught hereafter how to
make it.
Trochiscated, Corallina, burnt Hartshorn, Dittany of Creet, Wormseed,
Sorrelseed, of each a scruple, Cinnamon, Zedoary, Cloves, Saffron, of each half
a Scruple, white Sugar a pound, dissolve the Sugar in four ounces of Wormwood
water, and one ounce of Wormwood Wine, and one spoonful of Cinnamon Water, and
then with the forenamed pouders make it into Lozenges.

A. The title shows you the virtues of it, for my part I think in penning of
it, they made a long Harvest of a little Corn.

Penidies.
Are made of Sugar and Barley water, boiled in such a proportion, and with such
an art, that it will not stick to ones fingers, and yet one may draw it (like
birdlime) into what form one will.

A. I remember country people were wont to take them for coughs, and they are
sometimes used in other compositions.

Confection of Frankincense. Norimberg.
Take of Coriander seeds prepared half an ounce. Nutmegs white Frankincense of
each three drachms, Liquoris, Mastich, of each two drachms, Cubebs, Hartshorn
prepared of each one dram, Conserves of red Roses an ounce, with a sufficient
quantity of white Sugar, make it into a Confection, in bits of two drachms
weight.

A. I cannot boast much neither of the rariety nor virtues of this receipt.

Sugar of Roses.
Take of red Rose flowers not fully open, an ounce, cut off the white from
them, then dry them in the shadow, afterward beat them in a and why will not a
brassemorter serve the turn.
stone mortar, and with twelve ounces of the best Sugar dissolved in red Rose
water, boil it according to and this is but a slovenly art take my word for it.
art till the water be consumed, then put the mass out upon a marble stone, and
make it into what form you please, there be some that whilst it is boiling ad
to it four ounces of Conserve of red Roses, dilligently mixing them together,
by which means the Sugar will be both of the better color, and the pleasanter
taste.

A. I am verily persuaded that the College appoint this to be beaten in a
stone mortar for fear a brass mortar should take away the color of the Roses,
which is but the Embrion of an ignorant brain, it is the boiling of it takes
away the color and nothing else, if you do but boil the rose water and Sugar
to a sufficient height before you put in the Roses in powder, the Sugar will be
of color good enough never fear it, without the addition of conserves to it.

A. As for the virtues of this, it strengthens weak stomachs weak hearts and
weak brains, restores such as are in consumptions, restores lost strength,
stays fluxes, eases pains in the head, ears, and eyes, helps spitting,
vomiting and pissing of blood.

After the same manner is made Sugar of Violets, Bugloss, Maiden hair, Succory,
Orris Florentine, Elicampane roots, Comfry and other things.

SPECIES OR POVDERS
A. GIve me leave to premise three or four things before come to the matter.

A. 1. Pouders are called by the Arabians Suffuf and Alkool: it is strange the
College inserted not these two strange names, to puzzle the brains of the
unlearned and make them believe wonders. A. 2. I know not well what English
name to give the word [Species] only thus, the ancients used the word for such
Pouders as were ready prepared for an Electuary but not yet mixed with any
liquid substance, but they called those [Pouders] which were always kept dry
for use. A. 3. I would desire such as intend to take the pains themselves to
make these pouders, that they would make great have in beating them, lest the
strength fly away in vapor, through long keeping them in the air. A. 4. That
they would sift them through a very fine tiffany, left the powder be too gross
and so part of its operation lost. A. 5. That they would (in keeping of them)
stop them very close in a glass with a narrow mouth, lest the strength fly out
in vapors after it is beaten.
Aromaticum Caryophyllatum. Mesue.
Take of Cloves seven drachms, Mace, Zedoary, Galanga the lesser, yellow
Sanders, troches Diarhodon, Cinnamon, wood of Aloes, Indian Spicknard, long
pepper, Cardamoms of each a dram, red Roses four drachms, Gallia moschata,
Liquoris of each two drachms, Indian leaf, Cubebs of each two scruples,
Ambergreece a dram, Musk half a scruple, white Sugar as much as is
sufficient, make a powder of them all being dilligently beaten, and with as
much syrup of Citrons as is sufficient, you may make it into an Electuary.

A. It would make a horse break his halter to hear some of their recepts, a boy
of seven years old deserves to be whipped if he should transcribe a recept so
scurvily, as the College has done this, I would fain know of them (if they
can tell me) how much this sufficient quantity of Sugar is, or of what use
any'at all is amongst the powder, the truth is Mesue appoints the Sugar to help
make it up into an Electtuary, and they go and place it amongst the powder,
whether there be an Electuary made of it or not.

A. Again, seeing they vapor that they have taken so much pains in compiling
the book, (the greatest part of which was in print above a hundred years before
they were born) they might (I say) have taken the pains to have explained Mesue
his meaning, viz. what syrup must be used: whether syrup of the juice of
Citrons, or of Citron pills, but I shall let that pass as a matter either of
ignorance or carlesness in them, out of question it is syrup of Citron pills
that Mesue here intended.

A. This powder strengthens the heart and stomach, helps digestion, expels
wind, stays vomiting, and cleanses the stomach of putrified humors.

Aromaticum Rosatum. Gabriel.
Take of Red-Roses fifteen drachms, Liquoris seven drams, wood of Aloes, yellow
Sanders of each three drachms, Cinnamon five drachms, Cloves, Mace of each two
drachms and an half, Gum Arabic and Traganth of each two drachms and two
scruples, Nutmegs, Cardamoms the lesser, Galanga, of each one dram, Indian
Spicknard, Ambergris of each two scruples, Musk one scruple, beat them all
into powder according to art, and keep the powder for your use, in a glass or
stone pot glazed.

By reason of the ill taste of the Spicknard you may prepare the powder without
it, and so may you any other Cordial powder in which Spicknard is.

A. It strengthens the brain, heart, and stomach, and all such internal members
as help toward concoction, it helps digestion, consumes the watery excrements
of the bowels, strengthens such as are pined away by reason of the violence of
a disease, and restores such as are in a consumption.

The lesser Cordial Powder. Fernelius.
Take of Hearts horn, Unicorns-horn, Pearls, Ivory of each six grains, beat them
into fine powder; if you mean to keep it, you may increase the quantity
analogically.

The greater Cordial Powder. Fernelius.
Take of the roots of Tormentil, Dittany, Clove gilliflowers, Scabious, the
seeds of Sorrel, Coriander prepared, Citron, Carduus Benedictus, Endive, Rue of
each one dram, of the three sorts of viz. white, red, and yellow.
Sanders, Been white and red, (or if you cannot get them, take the roots of
Avens and Tormentil in their heads) Roman a kind or wolf-bane,
Doronicum, Cinnamon, Cardamoms, Saffron, The flowers of both sorts of viz.
Borrage and Bugloss.
Bugloss, Red-Roses and Water Lillies, wood of Aloes, Mace, of each two
scruples, Ivory, Spodium, Bone of a Stags heart, red Corral, Pearls, Emerald
(...), Cranate of each one scruple, Raw Silk viz. Borrage and Bugloss.
torrefied, Bole-Armenick, Earth of Lemnos, of each half c dried or roasted by
the fire.
a dram; Camphire, Amber greece, Musk, of each six grains, beat them into
powder according to art; and with eight times their weight in white sugar,
disolved in Rose water, you may make them into Lozinges, if you please.

A. Both this and the former powder are apropriated to the heart, (as the
titles show) therefore do they strengthen that and the vital spirit, and
relieve languishing nature.

A Powder for such as are bruised by a Fall. The Augustan Physicians.
Take of a new name for earth of Lemnos.
Terra sigillata Dragons blood, so called, though it be nothing less, but only
the gum of a tree.
Sanguis Draconis, Mummy of each two drachms, Sperma Ceti one dram, Rhubarb
half a dram, beat them into powder according to art.

A. You must beat the rest into powder and then add the Sperma Ceti to them
afterward, for if you put the Sperma Coci and the rest altogether, and go to
beat them in that fashion, you may as soon beat the mortar into powder, as the
Simples. Indeed your best way is to beat them severally, and then mix them
altogether, which being done, makes you a gallant medicine for the infirmity
specified in the title, a dram of it being taken in Muskadel, and (...) after
it.

Species cordiales Temperatae.
Take of wood of Aloes and Spodium of each a dram This receipt is borrowed
from: Alex. Bened. only the name is absconded and some of the quantities (not
considerable) are changed.
Cinnamon, Cloves, bone of a Stags heart, Angelica roots, both sorts of Been
(or in their stead the roots of Avens and Tormentill) of each a dram and an
half, Pearls prepared six drachms, raw silk torrefied, both sorts of Corral of
each two drachms, Jacinth, Emerald, Saphir of each half a dram Saffron a
scruple, Ambergreece, Musk of each half a dram, leaves of Gold and Silver of
each but how big must they (...)
ten, make a powder of these according to art. a there is nothing (...) than
that all their pouders will keep better in Electuarys than they will in
pouders, and most part of them were quoted Electuaries by the Authors whence
they had them.


A. The recept is questionless a great cordial, a great strengthener, both of
the heart and brain.

Diacalaminthes Simplex. Gallen.
Take of Calaminth of the mountains, Penyroyal, Origanum, The seeds of
Macedonian Parsley, common Smallage, Seseli, of each two drachms, the seeds of
Parsley, the cops of Time, the seeds of Lovage, black Pepper of each an ounce,
beat them into powder according to art, also you may make it into an Electuary,
with two pound and an half of white Sugar, dissolved in Rose or Violet water.

A. It heats and comforts, cold bodies, cuts thick and gross phlegm, provokes
urine and the terms in women, I confess this differs something from Gallen, but
is better at least wise for our bodies in my opinion than his.

Species Electuarii Diacalaminthes Compositi. Fernelius
Take of powder of the Electuary called Diacalaminthes simplex, half an ounce,
the leaves of Horehound, Bawm, Marjoram, Mugwort, Savin dried, of each one
dram, Cyperus roots, the roots of Maddir and Rue, Mace and Cinnamon of each
two scruples, all these being finely beaten and mixed together, may be made
into an Electuary, with twelve times their weight in Sugar, dissolved in
distilled water of Featherfew.

A. This seems to be more apropriated to the foeminine gender them the former,
viz. to bring down the terms in women, to bring away the birth and afterbirth,
to purge them after labor, yet is it dangerous for women with child.

Dianisum. Mesue.
Take of Annis seeds 2. ounees and an half, Liquoris, Mastich, of each one
ounce, the seeds of Caraway and Fennel; Galanga, Mace, Ginger, Cinnamon, of
each five drachms, of the three sorts of viz. black, long, and white.
Pepper, Cassia lignea, Calaminth, Pellitory of Spain of each two drachms,
Cardamoms, Cloves, Cubebs, Indian Spicknard, Saffron of each a dram and an
half, white Sugar five ounces, and with clarified Honey you may make it into an
Electuary.

A. This Electuary is chiefly apropriated to the stomach, and helps the cold
infirmities thereof, raw phlegm, wind, continual coughs, and other such diseases
coming of cold.

Species Electuarii Diacymini. Nicholaus
Take of cummin seeds, infused a natural day in vinegar, one ounce and one
scruple, Cinnamon, Cloves, of each two drachms and an half, Galanga, Savory,
Calaminth of each one dram and two scruples, Ginger, black Pepper of each two
drachms and five grains, the seeds of Lovage and Bishopsweed.
Ammi of each one dram and eighteen grains, long pepper a dram, Spicknard,
Nutmegs, Cardamoms, of each two scruples and an half, beat them and keep them
dilligently in powder for your use.

A. It heats the stomach and bowels, expels wind exceedingly, helps the wind
chollick, helps digestion hindered by cold or wind, is an admirable remedy for
wind in the guts, and helps quartan agues.

Species Electuarii Diagalangae. Mesue.
Take of Galanga, wood of Aloes of each six drachms, Cloves, Mace, seeds of
Lovage of each two drachms, Ginger long and white Pepper, Cinnamon, Calamus
Aromaticus of each a dram and an half, Calaminth and Mints dried, Cardamoms
the greater, Indian Spicknard, the seeds of Smallage, Annis, Fennel, Caraway of
each one dram, beat them into powder according to art, also it may be made
into an Electuary with white Sugar, dissolved in Malaga wine, or twelve times
the weight of it of clarified honey.

A. I am afraid twelve times the weight of the Simples is to much by half if
not by three parts, Honest Mesue appoints only a sufficient quantity, and
quotes it only as an Electuary, which he says prevails against wind, sour
belchings and indigestion, gross humors and cold afflictions of the stomach
and liver.

Species Electuarii De Gemmis frigidi.
Take of Pearls prepared three drachms, Spodium, Ivory, both sorts of Corral,
of each two drachms, the flowers of red Roses a dram and an half, Jacinth,
Sapphire, Emerald, Sardine, Granate, Sanders white red and yellow, the flowers
of Borrage and Bugloss, the seeds of sorrel and Bazil, both sorts of Been (for
want of them the roots of Avens and Tormentil) of each one dram, bone of a
Stags heart half a dram, Leaves of Gold and Silver of each fifteen, make of
all a powder according to art, and let it be diligently kept.

Species Electuarii de Gemmis Calidi. Mesue
Take of Troches Diarhodon, wood of Aloes of each five drams, white Pearls,
Zedoary, Doronicum, Citron pills, Mace, the seeds of Bazil, Amber greece of each
2 drachms, red Corral, white Amber, Ivory of each five scruples, Sapphire,
Jacinth Sardine, Granate, Emerald, Cinnamon, Galanga, round Zedoary.
Zurumbet of each one dram and an half, Been of both sorts (or in lieu of
them the roots of Avens and Tormentil) Cloves, Ginger, long Pepper, Indian
Spicknard, Indian leaf or Celtick Spicknard, Saffron, Cardamoms the greater of
each a dram, leaves of Gold and Silver of each two scruples, Musk half a
dram, make them all into a Powder and keep them close stopped from the air.

A. The truth is both these pouders are of too heavy a price for a vulgar man's
purse, they help afflictions of the heart, stomach, brain and liver, vain
fevers, melancholy, tremblings of the heart, and faintings, they help
digestion and take away sadness, and because the latter seems to be something
hotter than the former, though neither of them exceed in heat or coldness, if
you find the body afflicted by cold, you may give the hotter, if feverish the
cooler.

Species Electuarii Diaireos Simplicis. Nicholai
Take of Orris roots half an ounce, Sugar Candy and Diatragacanthum frigidum of
each two drachms, beat them into The College made a great cry of a little
wool: here is a title as big as the recept.
powder.

A. I do not mean the Diatragacanthum frigidum, for that is in powder before,
It comforts the breast, is good in colds, coughs, and hoarsness.

Species Dialaceae. Mesue.
Take of Gum lacca prepared, Rhubarb, Schoenanthus, of each three drachms,
Spicknard, Mastich, juice of Roman Wormwood and Maudlin.
Eupatorium, the seeds of Small age, Ammi, Fennel, Annis, Savin, Bitter
Almonds, Mirrh, Costus or Zedoary, the roots of Maddir, Asarabacca, Birthwort
long and round, and Gentian, Saffron, Cinnamon, dried Hysop, Cassia lignea,
Bdelium of each a dram and an half, Pepper, Ginger of each one dram, make
of these a powder according to art.

A. According to Mesue you ought to dissolve the Mirrh and Bdellium in wine,
and together with the Simples, beaten in fine powder make it into an Electuary
with a sufficient quantity of clarified Honey, the College give you more
latitude but all to as little if not less purpose, (...) strengthens the
stomach and liver, opens obstructions, helps dropsies, yellow Jaundice,
provokes urine, breaks the stone in the reins and bladder.

Species Electuarii Diamargariton Calidi. Avicenna.
Take of Pearls and Pellitory of the wall of each one dram, Ginger, Mastich of
each half an ounce, Doronicum, Zedoary, Smallage seeds, both sorts of
Cardamoms, Nutmegs, Mace of each two drachms, Been of both sorts (if they
cannot be procured take the roots of Avens and Tormentil) black and long Pepper
of each three drachms, Cinnamon five drachms, beat them into powder and keep
them for your use.

A. Avicenna prescribes this as an Electuary, and so are most of all the
Colleges pouders prescribed by those by whom they borrowed them as I told you
before, and they will keep longer and better in Electuaries than in Pouders,
but people must be fantastical.

A. This (quoth Avicenna) is apropriated to women, and in them to diseases
incident to their matrix, but his reasons I know not, It is Cordial and heats
the stomach.

Species Electuarii Diamargariton frigidi. Nicholaus
Take of the four greater cold seeds cleansed, the seeds of Purflain, white
Poppies, Endive, Sorrel, Citrons, the three sorts of Sanders, Lignum Aloes,
Ginger, the flowers of red Roses, water Lillies, Bugloss, Violets, the berries
of Myrtle the bone of a Stags heart, Ivory, Roman Doronicum, Cinnamon of each a
dram, both sorts of Corral of each half a dram, Pearls three drachms, Amber
greece, Camphire of each 6. grains, Musk two grains, make of them a powder
according to art.

You must observe, that the Poppie seeds and the four greater cold seeds ought
not to be added before the powder be appointed for use by the Physician,
otherwise they will make the composition sour, and so must you do in other
pouders in which these seeds are.

A. Here may you see what a labarinth the College have run themselves into
through their fantasticalness, viz. because they would seem to be singular in
sailing contrary to wiser Physicians, they run upon two dangerous rocks in this
one recept, 1. It is a costly cordial and not usually above a dram of it
(very seldom half so much) given at one time, and these seeds excepted against
in their caution, and upon grounds just enough are not the tenth part of the
composition, which (a dram being prescribed) is but six grains, which six
grains must be divided into five equal parts (a nice point) one part for each
seed. 2. If this rock were put off, yet then can you not beat them into powder
alone because they are so moist.

A. As for the virtues of it, Authors hold it to be restorative in
consumptions, to help such as are in hectic fevers, to restore strength lost,
to help coughs, Asthmaes and consumptions of the lungues, and restore such as
have labored long under languishing or pining diseases.

Species Electuarij Diambrae. Mesue.
Take of Cinnamon, Doronicum or Zedoary, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Indian leaf,
Galanga of each three drachms, Indiand Spicknard, Cardamoms both greater and
lesser of each one dram, Ginger a dram and an half, wood of Aloes, yellow
Sanders, long pepper of each two drachms, Ambergreece a dram and an half,
Musk half a dram, beat them into powder.

A. Mesue apropriates this to the head, and says, it heats and strengthens the
brain, causes mirth, helps concoction, cherrisheth the animal vital and
natural spirit, it strengthens the heart and stomach, and resists all cold
diseases, and is therefore special good for women and old men.

Species Electuarij Diamoscu dulcis. Mesue.
Take of Saffron, Doronicum or Galanga, Zedoary, wood of Aloes, Mace of each
two drachms, white Pearls, raw Silk torrefied, Amber, red Corral, Gallia
moschata, Bazil of each two drachms and an half, Ginger, Cubebs, Long Pepper of
each one dram and an half; both sorts of Been (or if they be wanting take the
roots of Avens and Tormentil in their stead) Indian leaf or Cinnamon, Indian
Spicknard, Cloves of each a dram, Musk two scruples, beat them into powder
Mesue appoints honey.
according to art; and then if you please you may make it into an Electuary, by
adding four times the weight of the whole, in Sugar dissolved in white Wine.

A. It wonderfully helps cold afflictions of the brain, that come without a
fever, melancholy and its attendance, viz. sadness without a cause etc.
Vertigo or dissines in the head, Falling Sickness, Palfies, resolution of the
Nerves, Convulsions, Heart-qualms, afflictions of the lungues, and difficulty
of breathing.

Species Electuarij Diamoscu amari. Mesue.
To the former Mesue something alters the proportion but not much
Ingredients in the same proportion add Wormwood, Roses, of each three
drachms; the best Aloes washed half an ounce, Cinnamon two drachms and an half,
Castorium, Lovage of each one dram, make of them all a powder.

A. Besides the virtues of the former, it purges the stomach of putrified
humors.

Species Electuarij Diantbon. Nicholaus.
Take of Rosemary flowers an ounce, red Roses, Violets, Liquoris of each six
drachms; Cloves, Indian Spicknard, Nutmegs, Galanga, Cinnamon, Ginger, Zedoary,
Mace, wood of Aloes, Cardamoms, the seeds of Dill and Annis of each four
scruples, beat them all into powder according to art.

A. It strengthens the heart and helps the passions thereof, it causes a
joyful and cheerful mind, and strengthens such as have been weakened by long
sickness, it strengthens cold stomachs, and helps digestion notably.

Diapenidion. Nicholaus.
Take of Penidies two ounces, Pine-Nuts, sweet Almonds blanched, white Poppie
seeds of each three drachms and one scruple, Cinnamon, Cloves, Ginger, juice of
Liquoris, Gum Traganth, and Arabic, white starch, the four greater cold seeds
husked of each a dram and an half, Camphire seven grains, white Sugar so much
as is sufficient, make it into a powder, and with syrup of Violets you may make
it up in form of an Electuary.

A. I could tell Mr. Printer (if I durst be so bold) that he had more tongue
than wit, when he made that Apology at the latter end of the Colleges
Masterpiece; for at the last sentence of this recept, here are certain words
left out, and amongst them the principal verb, which how gross an Error it is,
Ileave to the consideration of every Scholar who is able to translate a piece
of Latin into English.

A. It helps the vices of the breast, coughs, colds, hoarsnesse and
consumptions of the lungues, as also such as spit matter.

Diarhodon Abbatis. Nicholaus.
Take of white and red Sanders of each two drachms and an half, Gum Traganth
and Arabic, Spodium of each two scruples, Asarabacca, Mastich, Indian
Spicknard, Cardamoms, Liquoris, Saffron, wood of Aloes, Cloves, Gallia (...),
Annis-seeds, and sweet Fennel seeds, Cinnamon, Rhubarb, the seeds of Bazil, the
stones of Barberries, the seeds of Endive, Purslain, Gourds, Cucumers, Citruls,
Mellons, and white Poppies of each a scruple; Pearls, Bones of a Stags Heart of
each half a scruple; Sugar Candy, Red Roses of each an ounce and three drachms;
Camphire seven grains, Musk four grains, beat them all into a powder; also with
eight times their weight in Sugar dissolved in Rose Water you may form it into
an Electuary.

A. It cools the violent heat of the heart and stomach, as also of the liver,
lungues, and spleen, eases pains in the bowels, and most infirmities coming to
the body by reason of heat.

Diaspoliticum. Gallen.
Take of Cummin seeds prepared, Long-Pepper, dried Rue, of each ounce, salt
Niter half an ounce, beat them into powder.

A. It is an admirable remedy for such whose meat is putrified in their
stomachs, it helps cold stomachs, cold bellies and windy.

Species Electuarii Diatragacanthi frigidi Nicholaus.
Take of Gum Arabic one ounce and two drachms, Gum Traganth two ounces, white
Starch half an ounce, Liquoris, the seeds of Melons, white Poppies, Citruls,
Cucumers, Gourds, of each two drachms, Penidies three ounces, Camphire half a
scruple, beat them into powder according to art.

Also you may make an Electuary of them with a sufficient quantity of syrup of
violets; but have a care of what was told you before, Of the cold seeds, (quoth
the College.)

A. If you please to put in the cold seeds (which the Reverend College
appoints to be left out till the powder come to be used, and then it is
impossible to put them in, as I showed before page 156.) and so make it up into
an Electuary, then I can tell you, the virtues are, It helps the faults of the
breast and lungues coming of heat and dryness, it helps consumptions, leaness,
inflammations of the recept, pleuresies etc. hot and dry coughs, roughness of
the tongue and jaws; but how to make ought of the recept as the College have
ordered it, belongs to another Oedipus and not to me.

Species Electuarij Diatrion Piperion. Galeni.
Take of the viz. long, white, and black.
three sorts of Pepper, of each six drachms and fifteen grains, Annis seeds,
Time, Ginger, of each one dram, beat them into powder, and with Sugar
dissolved in Rose-mary-flower-water, or Honey (as the case shall require) it
may be made into an Electuary.

A. It heats the stomach, and expels wind.

Species Electuarii Diatrionsantalon. Nicholaus.
Take of the red, white, and yellow.
three sorts of Sanders, red Roses, Sugar Candy of each three drachms, Rhubarb,
Spodium, juice of Liquoris, Purslain seeds of each two drachms and fifteen
grains white Starch, Gum Arabic and Traganth, the seeds of Melones, Cucumers,
Citruls, Gourds, Endive of each a dram and an half, Camphire a scruple, beat
them all into powder, and with eight times their weight in Sugar dissolved in
Rose water you may make it into an Electuary.

A. It is very profitable against the heat of the stomach and liver, besides it
wonderfully helps such as have the yellow Jaundice, and consumptions of the
lungues.

Pulvis Haly
Take of white Poppy seeds ten drachms, Gum Arabic, white Starch, Traganth of
each three drachms, the seeds of Purslain, marsh Mallows, Mallows of each five
drachms, the seeds of Cucumers, Melons, Guords, Citruls, Quinces, of each seven
drachms, Spodium, Liquoris of each three drachms, Penidies the weight of them
all, beat them into a powder.

A. It is a gallant cool powder, fit for all hot imperfections of the breast
and lungues, as consumptions, pleurefies etc.

Laetificans ascribed to Gallen.
Take of the flowers of I take that to be the greatest sort of Bazill, called
once before Ocimum Citratum, and here Caryophillatum Citron or Clove Bazil.
Clove Bazil, or else the seeds thereof, Saffron, Zedoary, wood of Aloes,
Cloves, Citron pills, Galanga, Mace, Nutmegs, Styrax Calamitis, of each two
drachms and an half, shavings of Ivory, Annis seeds, Time, Epithimum, of each
one dram, bone of a Stags heart, Pearls, Camphire, Amber greece, Musk, of each
half a dram, leaves of Gold and Silver of each half a scruple, beat them into
powder according to art, and so steep them dilligently for your use.

A. It causes a merry heart, a good color, helps digestion and keeps back old
age.

Species confectionis Liberantis.
Take of the roots of Tormentil, the seeds of Sorrel, Endive, Coriander
prepared, Citrons of each a dram and an half, the three sorts of Sanders,
white Dictamni, of each one dram, Bole Armenick, Terra Lemnia of each three
drachms, Pearls both sorts of Corral, white Amber, Ivory, Spodium, bone of a
Stags heart, both sorts of Been (or in heiu of them, the roots of Avens and
Tormentil) Angelica roots, Cardamoms, Cinnamon, Mace, wood of Aloes, Cassia
lignea, Saffron, Zedoaary of each half a dram, Penidies, Sugar Candy, raw
silk torrified, Emeralds, Jacinth,, Granate of each two scruples, the flowers
of water Lillies, Bugloss, and red Roses of each a scruple, Camphire seven
grains, Musk and Amber greece, of of each three grains, beat them into powder
according to art.

A. It is exceeding good in pestilential fevers, and preserves from ill airs
and keeps the humors in the body from corruption, it cools the heart and
blood, and strengthens such as are oppressed by heat, to conclude, it is a
gallant cool cordial though costly.

Lithontribon Nicholaus according to Fernelius.
Take of Spicknard, Ginger, Cinnamon, black Pepper, Cardamoms, Cloves, Mace of
each halfa dram, Costus, Liquoris, Cyperus, Traganth, Germander of each two
scruples, the seeds of Ammi.
Bishops weed, Smallage, Sparagus, Bazil, Netles, Citrons, Saxifrage, Burnet,
Caraway, Carrots, Fennel, Bruscus, Parsley of Macedonia, Burrs, or hartwort.
Seseli, Asarabacca of each one dram. Lapis spongiae, Lyncis, Cancri,
Judaici, of each a dram and an half, Goats blood prepared an ounce and an
half, beat them all into powder according to art.

A. The truth is, the College have altered this recept much, and I am persuaded
have made it much better, Neque enim benfact a malign, detract are meum est.

A. It heats the stomach and helps want of digestion coming through cold, it
eases pain in the belly, and loins, the a disease that causes men to vomit
up their excrements.
Iliack passion, powerfully breaks the stone in the reins and bladder, it
speedily helps the chollick, strangury and dysury.

Pulvis Saxonicus.
Take of the roots of both sorts of Angelica; Swallowwort, Garden Valerian,
Polipodium of the Oak, the roots of marsh Mallows, Nettles of each half an
ounce, the bark of German widdowwail Ielt out by Gesner, Crato, and others; and
in my opinion it makes the recept the the worse and not the better.
Mezereon two drachms, the berries of herb True Love or One-berry, by number
twenty four, The flowers of the same, whether they intend the flower, thereby
distinguishing it from one leaf of the flower, or whether they mean the flower
and branch, is very difficult if not impossible to judge, for their word ( cum
toto] comprehends all, both root, branch, leaf and flower.
branch and all, by number thirty six: steep the roots in Vinegar, then dry
them and beat them all into powder.

A. It seems to be as great an expeller of poison and as great a preservative
against it, and the pestilance as one shall usually read of.

A Powder against the bitings of Mad-dogs.
Take of the leaves of Vervain, Rue, Sage, Plantan, Polipodium, Common
Wormwood, Mints, Mugwort, Bawm, Bettony, St John's wort, Centaury, of each equal
parts, let all these be gathered at what time they are in their greatest
strength, which is usually about the who dares affirm that our Collegiates ar
no Astrologers?
full Moon in June, then let them be dried severally in brown papers, in such a
place, where neither Learnedly written.
sun nor rain comes, and when you have dried them then keep them for the use
above said, but upon this condition that you renew them every year.

When you have need to use them beat an equal weight of them into powder.

A. A Dram of this powder is sufficient to take every morning.

Pleres Arconticon. Nicholaus.
Take of Cinnamon, Cloves, Galanga, wood of Aloes, Indian Spicknard, Nutmegs,
Ginger, Spodium, Schoenanthus, Cyperus, Red-roses out of question, yet it seems
the College either did not know, or did not care which.
Roses, Violets, of each one dram, Indianleafe or Mace, Liquoris, Mastich,
Styrax Calamitis. Marjoram, Costmary, or water Mints, Bazil, Cardamoms, long
and white Pepper, Myrtle berries and Citron pills, of each half a Dram and
six grains, Pearls, Been white and red (or if they be wanting take the roots of
Avens and Tormentill in their steads) red Corral, torrified silk of each
eighteen grains Musk six grains, Camphire four grains, beat them into powder
according to art, and with ten times their weight of Sugar dissolved in Bawm
water you may make them into an Electuary.

A. It is exceeding good for sad, melancholy, lumpish, pensive, greiving,
vexing, pining, sighing, sobbing, fearful, careful spirits, it strengthens weak
stomachs exceedingly, and helps such as are prone to faimings and swoonings, it
strengthens such as are weakened by violence of sickness, it helps bad
memories, quickens all the senses, strengthens the brain, and Animal spirit,
helps the falling sickness, and succors such as are troubled with Asthmaes or
other cold afflictions of the lungues.

A Preservative Powder against the Pestilence. Montagnan.
Take of all the white, red and yellow.
Saunders, the seeds of Bazil of each an ounce and an half, Bole Armenick,
Cinnamon of each an ounce, The roots of Dittany, Gentian and Tormentil of each
two drachms and an half, the seeds of Citron and Sorrel of each two drachms,
Pearls, Sapphire, bone of a Stags heart of each one dram, beat them into
powder according to art.

A. The title tells you the virtue of it. besides it cheers the vital spirit and
strengthens the heart.

Species Electuarii Rosatae Novellae. Nicholaus.
Take of red-roses. where was the Colleges care?
Roses, Sugar, Liquoris, of each one ounce, one dram, two scruples and an
half, Cinnamon, excellently penned.
two drachms, two scruples and two grains, Cloves, Galanga, Indian Spicknard,
Ginger, Nutmegs, Zedoary, Styrax, Cardamoms, Smallage of each one scruple and
eight grains, Sugar so much as is sufficient, make it first of all into a
powder, then into an Electuary according to art.

A. Sure it was Dr. forgetfulness.
Oblivion and not the College that was the Author of such a sleepy business to
set Sugar twice in one receipt.

A. It quenches thirst and stays vomiting, and the Author says it helps hot
and dry stomachs, as also heat and dryness of the heart, liver and lungues,
(yet is the powder it self hot) it strengthens the vital spirit, takes away
heart qualms, provokes sweat, and strengthens such as have labored long under
Cronical diseases.

A Powder to stop blood. Gallen.
Take of Frankincense one dram, Aloes half a dram, beat them into powder,
and when you have occasion to use it, mix so much of it with the white of an
beat the white of the egg well first.
Eg, as will make it of the thickness of Honey, then dip the wool of a Hare in
it, and apply it to the sore or part that bleedeth, binding it on.

A. In my opinion this is a pretty medicine, and will stick on till the sore be
thoroughly healed, and then will come off of it self. I remember when I was a
child we applied such a medicine, (only we left out the Aloes and Frankincense
and used only Coneys wool and the white of an Eg) to kibed heels and always
with good success.

A Powder for Scabs.
Take of Sulphur Vivum, Niter, the leaves of Marjoram of each two drachms,
Letharge of Gold, black Hellebore roots of each one dram, Burnet half a
dram, beat them into powder according to art.

A. I cannot speak much in commendations of it, and I dare not dispraise it
because it comes from the College, therefore I will let it alone.

Pulvis Radulphi Hollandi. Commonly known by the name of Holland Powder
Take of the seeds of Annis, Caraway, Fennel, and Cummin, of Spicknard,
Cinnamon, Galanga of each half an ounce, Liquoris, Gromwell of each one ounce,
Senna the weight of them all, beat them all into powder.

A. That this recept is gallantly composed none can deny and is an excellent
purge for such bodies, as are troubled with the wind Chollick, or stoppage
either of the guts or kidneyes, two drachms taken in White Wind will work
sufficiently with any ordinary body.

Pulvis Sanctus. Brasavola.
Take of Senna, and Cremor tartar of each two ounces, Cloves, Cinnamon,
Galanga, Bishops weed of each two drachms, Diagrydium half an ounce, beat them
into powder according to art.

In the want of seeds of Bishops Weed, of which such as are fresh and good are
many times not to be had, you may put in Annis seeds in lieu of them.

Pulvis Senne.
Take of the best Senna two ounces, Cremor tartar half an ounce, Mace two
scruples and an half, Ginger, Cinnamon, of each one dram and an half, Sal
Indi. one dram, beat them into powder according to art.

A. Both this and the former powder purge melancholy, and cleanse the head,
Montagnanus was the Author of this latter only the College something altered the
quantities of the Simples, the former powder works something violently by
reason of the Scammony that is in it, the latter is more gentle, and may be
given without danger, even two dram at a time to ordinary bodies, I would not
have the unskilful meddle with the former.

Diaturbith the greater without Rhubarb.
Take of the best Turbith an ounce, Diagrydium, Ginger, of each half an ounce,
Cinnamon, Cloves, of each two drams, Galanga, long Pepper, Mace of each one
dram, beat them into powder, and with eight ounces and five drachms of white
Sugar, dissolved in succory water, it may be made into an Electuary.

A. It purges phlegm, being rightly administered by a skilful hand.

Diaturbith with Rhubarb. Montagnanus.
Take of the best Turbith, and Hermodactills of each an ounce, Rhubarb ten
drachms, Diagrydium half an ounce, white and red Sanders, Violets, Ginger, of
each a dram and an half, Mastich, Annis seed, Cinnamon, Saffron, of each half
a dram, beat them all into powder, and with white Sugar this is notable: they
should have added two grains and an halt and half a quarter.
one pound, two ounces, and two drachms, dissolved in Succory water, you may
make it into an Electuary according to art.

A. This also purges phlegm and choler, Once more let me desire such as are
unskilful in the rules of Physic, not to meddle with purges of this nature
(unless prescribed by a skilful Physician) lest they do themselves more
mischief in half an hour, than they can claw off again in half a year.

A Powder for the Worms.
Take of Worm seeds four ounces, Senna one ounce, Coriander seed prepared,
Hartshorn of each half a dram, Rhubarb half an ounce, dried Rue two drachms,
beat them into powder.

A. I like this powder very well, the quantity (or to write more
scholastically, the dose) must be regulated according to the age of the
patient, even from ten grains to a dram, and the manner of taking it, by
their pallat; It is something purging.

ELECTVARIES.
Antidotus Analeptica. Or, Electuarium Resumptivum. Fernelius.
TAke of Red-roses and Liquoris of each two drachms and five grains, Gum
Arabic and Traganth of each two drachms and two scruples, Sanders white and
red of each four scruples, juice of Liquoris, white Starch, the seeds of of
white Poppies, Purslain, Lettice, Endive of each three drachms, of the four
greater cold seeds, the seeds of Quinces, Mallows, Cotton, Violets, and could
they not have given the Latin name as well as the Greek name (...).
Pine-Nuts, fresh Pistacia.
Fistick-Nuts, sweet Almonds, pulp of Sebestens of each two drachms, Cloves,
Spodium, Cinnamon of each one dram, Saffron five grains, Penidies half an
ounce, let all of them being beaten into powder be made into a soft Electuary
with three times their weight in syrup of Violets.

A. Besides the inverting of the Order which is a matter of nothing, here is
Zedoary, Ginger, and Styrax calamitis of each two drachms, left quite out by
the College, or (as I am of opinion) rather by the Transcriber, which is an
easy thing (together with want of a careful Corrector) to be done: I weigh not
the vaporing of the Printer at the latter end of the book, being confident if a
thing were left out, he knew it no more than a Hog knows how to fiddle.

A. It restores Consumptions, and Hectick-feavers, strength lost, it nourishes
much, and restores radical moisture, opens the pores, resists Choler, takes
away coughs, quenches thirst, and resists fevers.

Confectio Alkermes. Mesue.
Take of the juice of sweet-sented an hundred to one but it is Permains they
mean, or else Pippins, for they quote no other Apples.
Apples, sweet Rosewater of each a pound and an half, in which infuse the space
of 24. hours, raw Silk four ounces, strain it out strongly, and to the former
juyces ad of the juice of the berries of Kermes brought over to us, a pound,
Sugar two pounds, boil it to the thickness of Honey, then (it being removed
from the fire) whilst it is yet hot, ad to it half an ounce of Amber greece cut
very small, which being well melted, put in these following things, beaten into
powder, choice Cinnamon, wood of Aloes of the best, Lapis lazuli burnt in a
Crucible, (then beaten into powder and washed first of all in common water,
then in Rose or Borrage water, and that very often, drying of it, and washing
of it again, and let this be so often repeated till the water remain clear
after the washing) of each six drachms, Pearls prepared three drachms, Leaves
of Gold, of the best Musk of each one dram; make them all up into an
Electuary according to art.

A. Questionless this is a great Cordial, and a mighty strengthener of the
heart and spirit vital, a restorer of such as are in Consumptions. a resister
of Pestilences and Poison, a great releef to languishing nature; it is given
with good success in fevers, but give not too much of it at a time, lest it
prove too hot for the body, and too heavy for the purse.

Electuary of Bay Berries. Rhasis.
Take of dried Rue ten drachms, the seeds of Bishops-weed, Cummin, Lovage,
Origanum, Nigella, Carrawaies, Carrots, Parsley, of bitter Almonds, Pepper black
and long, Hors-Mints, Calamu, Aromaticus, Bay berries, Castorium of each two
drachms; Sagapenum half an ounce, Opopanax three drachms, Clarified honey one
pound and an half; the things which are to be bruised, being bruised let them
al be made into an Electuary according to art, the Gums being dissolved in
Wine, and added to it.

A. It is exceeding good either in the Chollick, or Iliack passion, or any
other disease of the bowels coming of cold or wind, it generally eases pains
in the bowels.

Athanasia Mithridatis. Gallen.
Take of Cinnamon, Cassia, Schaenanth, of each an ounce and an half, Saffron,
Mirrh, of each one ounce, Costus, Meum.
Spignel, water-flag perhaps they mean: see the Roots in the Catalogue of
Simples.
Acorus, Agrick, Scordium, Carrots, Parsley, of each half an ounce, white
Pepper, eleven grains, Honey so much as is sufficient to make it up into an
Electuary according to art.

A. It prevails against poison and the bitings of venomous beasts, and helps
such whose meat putrifies in their stomachs, stays vomiting of blood, helps
old coughs, and cold diseases in the liver, Spleen, bladder, and matrix, The
College has made some petty alterations in the quantities of the Simples, but
not worth the speaking of.

Diacapparis. Gilbert of England.
Take of Capers four ounces, the roots of Agrimony, Nigella seeds, Squills,
Asarbacca, Centaury, Pellitory of Spain, black Pepper, Smallage, Time of each
one ounce, Honey so much as is sufficient, make it into an Electuary according
to art.

A. They say it helps infirmities of the Spleen, and indeed the name seems to
promise so much; it may be good for cold bodies if they have strength of Nature
in them, me thinks it is but odly composed, the next looks more lovely in my
eyes which is --

Diacinnamomu. Mesue.
Take of Cinnamon fifteen drachms, Cassia lignea, Elicampane roots of each half
an ounce, Galanga seven drachms, Cloves, long Pepper, both sorts of Cardamom
Ginger, Mace, Nutmegs, wood of Aloes, of each three drachms, Saffron a dram,
Sugar Candy five drachms, Musk two scruples, with clarified Honey, two pound,
and eight ounces, boil it, and make it into an Electuary according to art.

A. There is in the recept of Mesue Cummin seeds half an ounce, which is here
left out, whether wittingly or unwittingly I neither know nor care, out of
question the recept is better they being in than being out, also I can give no
reason why it should be boiled, if the Musk and Saffron be boiled they will be
spoiled, you had ten times better not boil them at all, it may do harm, cannot
do good, if there be too much Honey to make it up, take less, I cannot stand
calculating the due proportion in every recept.

A. Diacinnamomum, or in plain English a composition of Cinnamon, heats the
stomach, causes digestion, provokes the terms in women, strengthens the
stomach and other parts that distribute the nourishment of the body, a dram
of it taken in the morning fasting, is exceeding good for ancient people and
cold bodies, such as are subject to dropsies and diseases, of phlegm, or wind,
for it comforts, and strengthens nature much.

Diacorallion. Coloniens.
Take of Corral both white and red, Bole Armenick, Dragons blood of each a
dram, Pearls half a dram, wood of Aloes, red Roses, Gum Traganth, Cinnamon
of each two scruple, white and red Sanders of each a scruple, beat them at into
powder, and when you have so done you may make them into an Electuary according
to art, with a sufficient quantity of white Sugar dissolved in small Cinnamon
water.

A. It comforts and strengthens the heart exceedingly, and restores such as are
in consumptions, it is cooling, therefore good in Hectic fevers, very
binding, and therefore stops tuxes, neither do I know a better medicine in all
the Dispensatory for such as have a consumption, accompanied with a looseness,
It stops the terms and whites in women, if administered by one whose wits are
not a woolgathering.

Diacorum. Mesue.
Take of the roots of see the Simples.
Sicers, Calamus Aromaticus, Pinenuts of each a pound and an half, let them all
be cleansed, in water says Mesue, though the College left it out: you might
boil them in piss and yet not swerve from theit recept. I hope they do not hold
Arbitrary Government, they make such Arbitrary receipts.
boiled and beaten till they be like a Pultis, then put to them Honey being
clarified, ten pounds, boil them, continually stirring them, till it be come to
the just thickness, then ad the roots of Acorns beaten, and the Pinenuts
chopped small, and when you have well mixed them together, ad to them, these
pouders following, Take of black Pepper an ounce, long Pepper, Cloves, Ginger,
Mace, of each half an ounce, Nutmegs, Galanga, Cardamoms of each three drachms,
mix them with the roots and Honey I know no reason why this might not have been
left out, considering the quantity of Honey was prescribed before.
so much is sufficient, stirring it left the ingredients stick to the bottom,
and make them into an Electuary according to art.

A. The Electuary provokes lust, heats the brain, strengthens the nerves,
quickens the senses, causes an acute wit, eases pains in the head, helps the
falling sickness and convulsions, Coughs, Catharres, and all diseases
proceeding from coldness of the brain.

Electuarium e Scoria ferri is properly those flakes which Smiths beat off from
iron when it is red hot.
scoria ferri. Rhasis.
Take of the flakes of Iron infused in Vinegar seven days and dried, three
drachms, Indian Spicknard, Schoenanth, Cyperus, Ginger, Pepper, Bishops Weed,
Frankincense of each half an ounce, Myrobalans Indian, Bellericks, and
Emblicks, Honey boiled with the decoction of Emblicks, sixteen ounces, mix them
together and make of them an Electuary.

A. I wonder how the quantities of the Myrobalans escaped the great care,
labor, pains, and industry of the honorable Society the Authors of that book,
or the vigilance of the vapouring Printer, Rhasis an Arabian Physician, the
Author of the recept appoints a dram of each, the medicine heats the spleen
gently purges melancholy, eases pains in the stomach and spleen, and
strengthens digestion.

Diacidonium. Simple.
Take of the pulp of Quinces boiled in fresh water, to a sufficient thickness,
eight pound, white Sugar scummed and boiled to its just thickness, six pounds,
boil them both together to a just thickness.

Diacydonium with Pouders. Gallen.
Take of the juice of Quinces, and white Sugar, of each two pound, white wind
Vinegar half a pound added in the end of the decoction, let them boil over a
gentle fire, and let the scum be taken off, then ad Ginger two ounces, white
Pepper ten drachms and two scruples, boil them again over a gentle fire to the
thickness of Honey.

A. Is not this then more like a syrup than an Electuary? Surely either the
College or I dote.

Diacydonium Compound of London.
Take of white Sugar six pound, spring water four pound clarify it with the
white of an Egg, and scum it dilligently, then take of ripe Quinces, the
outward pill and the seeds being taken away, and cut in four parts eight pound,
boil them in the said syrup till they be tender, then strain the syrup through
a Boulter, boil them again in it, to the consistence of a gelly, adding toward
the latter end, four ounces of whit wine Vinegar, the syrup being removed from
the fire, put in these pouders following being but grossly bruised, viz. Ginger
an ounce, white Pepper, Cinnamon, Nutmegs of each two drachms, keep it in
diverse boxs.

After the same manner may you make Diacydonium Simple.

A. If a man void of partiality should compare this and the former recept
together, he would find but little difference between them, only a little
Cinnamon and Nutmegs added.

A. The virtues of all these three are, they comfort the stomach, help
digestion, stay vomiting, belching etc. stop fluxes and the terms in women.

Confectio De Hyacintho.
Take of Jacinth, red Corral, bole Armenick, Terra sigillata.
earth of lemons, of each half an ounce, the berries of Kermes, the roots of
Tormentil and Dictamni, Citron seeds husked, the seeds of Sorrel, Purslain,
Saffron, Mirrh, red Roses, all the sorts of Sanders, Bone of a Stags heart,
Hartshorn, lvory of each four scruples, Sapphire, Emerald, Topas, Pearls, arw
Silk, the leaves of Gold and Silver, of each two scruples, Camphire, Musk,
Amber greece, of each five grains, with syrup of Lemmons make them into a
Confection according to art,

A. It is a great cordial and cool, exceeding good in acute fevers, and
pestilences, it mightily strengthens and cherrisheth the heart.

Confectio Humain. Mesue.
Take of Eyebright two ounces, Fennel seeds five drachms, Cloves, Cinnamon,
Cubebs, long Pepper, Mace of each one dram, beat them all into powder, and
with clarified Honey a pound, in which boil juice of Fennel an ounce, juice of
Chelondine and Rue of each half an ounce, and with the pouders make it up into
an Electuary.

A. It is chiefly apropriated to the brain and heart, quickens the senses,
especially the sight, and resists the pestilence.

Antidoum Haemagogum. Romans
Take of Lupines two drachms, black Pepper five scruples, and fix grains,
Liquoris four scruples, long Birthwort, Mugwort, Cassia lignea, the seeds of
Macedonian Parsley, Pellitory of Spain, the seeds of Rue, Spicknard, Mirrh,
Penyroyal, of each two scruples and fourteen grains, the seeds of Smallage,
Savin of each two scruples and bare weight
thirteen grains, Centaury the greater, I suppose they mean the seeds of these
following.
Carrots of Creet, Nigella, Caraway, Annis, Cloves Alum of each two scruples,
Bay leaves one scruple one half scruple and three grains, wood of Aloes one
scruple and fourteen grains, Schoenanth one scruple and thirteen grains,
Asarabacca, Acorus, that is common Calamus Aromacicus, Amomus, Peony, Centaury
the less, the seeds of Arrach and Fennel of each one scruple and six grains,
Cyperus, Elicampane, Ginger, Capper roots, Cummin, Orobus of each one scruple
beat them all into very fine powder, and with four times their weight of Honey,
make them up into an Electuary according to art.

A. It provokes the terms, brings away both birth and afterbirth, the dead
child, purges such as are not sufficiently purged after travail, it provokes
urine, breaks the stone in the bladder, helps the strangury, dysury, iskury
etc. helps indigestion, the chollick, opens any stoppings in the body, it heats
the stomach, purges the liver and spleen, consumes wind, stays vomiting, but
let it not be taken by women with child, nor such people as have the
Hemorrhoyds.

A. Nicholaus I take to be the Author of this fantastical medicine, (though the
College give it a more general term) and the virtues allo are quoted from him.

Diaireos Salomonis. Nicholaus.
Take of Orris roots an ounce, Penyroyal, Hysop, Liquoris of each six drachms,
Traganth, white Starch, bitter Almonds Pinenuts, Cinnamon, Ginger, Pepper of
each three drachms, fat Figs, the pulp of Raisons of the sun, and Dates of each
three drachms and an half, Styrax Calamitis two drachms and an half, Sugar
dissoved in Hysop water, and clarified Honey of each twice the weight of all
the rest, make them into an Electuary according to art.

A. The Electuary is chiefly apropriated to the lungues, and helps cold
infirmities of them, as Asthmaes, Coughs, difficulty of breathing etc.

Diasatyrion. Nicholaus.
Take of the roots of look the roots in the Simples, and there you shall find
these directions you have need enough of.
Satyrion fresh and sound, GardenParsnips, Eringo, Pine-Nuts, Indian-Nuts, or
if Indian Nuts be wanting, take the double quantity of Pine Nuts, Fistick-Nuts
of each one the Author appoints but seven drams.
ounce and an half; Cloves, Ginger. the seeds of Annis, Rocket, viz the seeds
within them.
Ash keys, of each five drachms, Cinnamon, the tayls and loins of Scincus, the
seeds of I know not what English name to give it,
Bulbus, Nettles of each two drachms and an half, Musk seven grains, of the
best Sugar dissolved in Malaga Wine, three pounds, make it into an Electuary
according to art.

A. Either the College or the Printer left out Cicer roots seven drachms,
which I think are proper to the recept; they also added the loins of Scincus
and the Nettle seeds, and in so doing they did well.

A. It helps weakness of the reins and bladder, and such as make water with
difficulty, it provokes lust exceedingly, and speedily helps such as are
impotent in the acts of Venus, being indeed compiled to that end.

Diasatyrion more pleasant. Coloniens.
Take of Satyrion roots three ounces, the pulp of Dates, sweet Almonds, Indian
Nuts, Pine Nuts, Fistick Nuts, green Ginger, Eringo roots preserved of each one
ounce, Ginger, Cloves, Galanga, long and black Pepper, of each 3. drams, Amber
greece one scruple, Musk two scruples, Penidies four ounces, Cinnamon, Saffron
of each half an ounce, Malaga Wine three ounces, Nutmegs, Mace, grains of
Paradise of each two drachms, Ash-tree seeds, the bellies and loins of Scincus,
Borax, commonly called Benjamin.
Benzoin of each three drachms, wood of Aloes, Cardamoms of each two drachms,
Been white and red, or in leiu of them the roots of Avens and Tormentil of each
one dram and an half: Let all the Simples being beaten into powder be made up
into an Electuary with two pound and an half of syrup of green Ginger according
to art.

A. This also increases Seed, causes desire of Copulation, and breaks wind.

Electuarium Diaspermaton. Fernelius.
Take of the four greater and four lesser cold seeds, The seeds of Sparagus,
Burnet, Bazill, Parsley, the berries of winter-Cherries, of each two drachms; I
suppose the seeds.
Gromwel, juice of Liquoris, of each three drachms, Cinnamon, Mace of each one
dram, white Sugar dissolved in distilled water of march-Mallows, eight times
their weight, make of them an Electuary according to art.

A. It breaks the Stone, and provokes Urine.

A Pectoral Electuary. August.
Take of the juice of Liquoris, sweet Almonds, Hazel-Nuts, of each half an
ounce, Pine Nuts an ounce, Hysop, Maidenhair, Orris, Nettle seeds, round
Birthwort, of each one dram and an half, black Pepper, the seeds of
Watercresses, the roots of Elicampane of each half a dram, Honey fourteen
ounces; make them up into an Electuary according to art.

A. It strengthens the stomach and lungues, and helps the vices thereof.

Micleta. Nicholaus.
Take of all the Myrobalans of each two drachms and an half, the seeds of
Watercresses and Fennel, Cummin, Bishops weed, Annis, Carraway of each one
dram and an half; let them al be bruised and sprinkled with sharp
White-Wine-Vineger, then beaten into powder, after add these things following,
Spodium, Balaustins.
Pomegranate flowers, Sumach, Mastich, Gum Arabic of each one dram and
fifteen grains, let them all be mixed with three times their weight of syrup of
Mirtles boiled to the thickness of Honey, ( i.e. ten ounces more or less) make
them np into an Electuary according to art.

A. It gently eases the bowels of the Wind-Chollick, wringing of the Guts,
infirmities of the Spleen, it stops fluxes, the Hemorrhoids, as also the terms
in women.

Theriaca Diatessaron. Mesue.
Take of the roots I suppose are intended.
Gentian, Bay berries, Mirrh, round Birthwort of each two ounces, Honey two
pound, mix them together and make of them an Electuary according to art.

A. You must first beat them into powder before you mix them with the Honey,
else you will make an Electuary to choke Daws with.

A. This is a gallant Electuary, like the Author, It wonderfully helps cold
infirmities of the brain, as Convulsions, falling sickness, dead Palseyes,
shaking Palseyes etc. as also the stomach, as pains there, wind, want of
digestion, as also stoppings of the liver, dropsies, it resists the pestilence,
and poisons, and helps the bitings of venomous beasts.

(...) his great Antidote against Poison and Pestilence.
Take of Rhubarb, Rhu-pontick, Valerian roots, the roots of Acorus or Calamus
Aromaticus, Cyperus, Cinkfoil, Tormentil, round Birthwort, male Peony,
Alicampane, Costus, Illirick Orris, white Chamelion, or Avens of each three
drachms, the roots of Galanga, Masterwort, white Dictamni, Angelica, Yarrow,
Filipendula or dropwort, Zedoary, Ginger of each 2. drachms, Agrick 3. drams,
Rosemary, Gentian, Devils-bit of each two drachms and an half, the seeds of
Citrons and Agnus Castus, the berries of Kermes, the seeds of Ash tree, Sorrel,
wild Parsneps, Navew, Nigella, Peony the male, Bazil, Irio.
hedge Mustard, Treacle Mustard, Fennel, Bishops weed of each two drachms, the
berries of Bay-Juniper and Ivy, I think they mean that by smilax aspera.
Sarsaparilla (or for want of it the double weight of Cubebs) Cubebs of each a
dram and an half, the leaves of Scordium Germander, Chamaepitys, Centaury the
less, (...), Celtick Spicknard, Calaminth, Rue, Mints, Bettony, Vervain,
Scabious, Carduus Benedictus, Bawm, of each a dram and an half, Dirtany of
Creet three drachms, Marjoram, St. John's wort, Schoenanth, Horehound, Goats
Rue, Savin, Burnet of each two drachms, Figs, Walnuts, Fistick nuts, of each
three ounces, Emblick Myrobalans half an ounce, the flowers of Violets,
Borrage, Buglosse, Roses, Lavender, Sage, Rosemary, of each four scruples,
Saffron three drachms, Cassia lignea ten drachms, Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace of each
two drachms and an half, black Pepper, long Pepper, all the three sorts of
Sanders, wood of Aloes of each one dram and an half, Hartshorn, half an
ounce, Unicorns horn or in its stead Beazor stone one dram, bone in a Stags
heart, Ivory, Stags pizzle, Castorium of each four scruples, earth of Lemons
three drachms, Opium one dram and an half, Orient Pearls, Emerald, Jacinth,
red Corral of each a dram and an half, Camphire two drachms, Gum Arabic,
Mastich, Frankincence, Styrax, Turpentine, Sagapenum, Opopanax, Laserpitium or
Mirrh of each two drachms and an half, Musk, Ambergreece of each one dram, Oil
of Vitriol half an ounce, see the way to make these in their proper places.
Species cordiales temperatae, Diamargeriton, Diamoschu, Diambra, Electuarii De
gemmis, troches of Camphire, of Squils of each two drachms and an half, Troches
of Vipers two ounces, the juice of Sorrel, Sowthistles, Scordium, Ecchium
Vipers Bugloss, Borrage, Bawm of each half a pound, Hypocistis two drachms, of
the best Treacle and Mithridate of each six ounces, Old wine three pound of the
best Sugar or choice a wise man will take Honey
Honey eight pound six ounces, these being all chosen and prepared with
Diligence and Art, let them be made into an Electuary, just as Treacle or
Mithridate is

A. The Title shows you the scope of the Author in compiling it, I believe it
is excellent for those uses, I want time to examine what alterations the
College has made in it, or whether any or none, for particular virtues, (to
avoid Tautology) I refer you to his Bezoar water page twenty eight.

Diascordium. Fracastorius,
Take of Cinnamon, Cassia lignea of each half an ounce, Scordium an ounce,
Dittany of Creet, Tormentil, Bistort, Galbanum, Gum Arabic of each half an
ounce, opium a dram and an half, Styrax Calamitis four drachms and an half,
Sorrel seeds one dram and an half, Gentian half an ounce, Bole Armenick one
ounce and an half, Terra Lemnis half an ounce, long Pepper, Ginger of each two
drachms, clarified Honey two pound and an half, conserves of Roses a pound,
Canary Wine half a pound, make them into an Electuary according to art.

A. It is a well composed Electuary something apropriated to the nature of
women, for it provokes the terms, hastens their labor, and helps their usual
sickness at the time of their lying in, I know nothing better; it stops fluxes,
mightily strengthens the heart and stomach, neither is so hot but it may
safely be given to weak people, and besides they say it provokes sleep, but I
believe it is per accidens then, not perse, viz. by removing what causes
watching, for the composition looked upon in the bulk is hot and not cold, and
hot things seldom or never provoke sleep.

Mithridate. Damocrates.
Take of Mirrh of Arabia, Saffron, Agrick, Ginger, Cinnamon, Spicknard,
Frankincense, the seeds of Treacle-mustard of each ten drachms, the seeds of
Seseli or Hartwort, Opobalsamum or oil of Nutmegs by expression, Scaenanth,
Stoechas, Costus, Galbanum, Turpentine, long Pepper, Castorium of Pontus, the
juice of Hypocystis, the best Styrax, Opopanax, fresh Indian leaves, or for
want thereof Mace of each an ounce Cassia lignea, Poley, white Pepper,
Scordium, Carrot seeds, Carpobalsamum, or Cubebs, Trochisci Cypheos, Bdellium
of each seven drachms, Celtich Spicknard, Gum Arabic, Macedonian, Parsley,
Opium, Cardamoms the less, Fennel seeds, Gentian, the leaves of red Roses and
Dictamni of Creet, of each five drachms, Annis seeds, Asarabacca, Acorus, or
Calamus Aromaticus, Orris, Valerian the greater, Sagapenum of each three
drachms, Spignel Acacia, the belly of Scineus, the tops of St. John's wort of
each two drachms and an half, so much wine as is sufficient to dissolve the
Gums and Juyces, then with three times the weight of all (the wine excepted) in
Honey make it up into an Electuary.

A. I have not time to search whether there be any difference in the
Composition between Damocrites and the College, It was also corrected
afterward by Bartholomew Maranta, Also Andromacus has another sort of
Mithridate, It may be it is that usually called with us [Venis Mithridate] but
because the Electuary is very chargable to be made and cannot be made but in
great quantites, and only that here prescribed is to be gotten, or at least,
easily to be gotten, I am willing to spare my pains in any further search.

A. It is good against poison, and such as have done themselves wrong by taking
filthy medicines, it provokes sweat, it helps continual watrings of the
stomach, ulcers in the body, consumptions weakness of the limbs, rids the body
of cold humors, and diseases coming of cold, it remedies cold infirmities of
the brain, and stopping of the passage of the senses (viz. hearing, seeing,
smelling etc.) by cold, it expels wind helps the Chollick, provokes appetite to
ones victuals, It helps ulcers in the bladder if Gallen say true, as also
difficulty of urine, It casts out the dead child, and helps such women as
cannot conceive by reason of cold, It is an admirable remedy for melancholy
and all diseases of the body coming through cold, it would fill a whole sheet of
paper to reckon them all up particularly.

Philonium Persicum. Mesue.
Take of white Pepper, the seeds out of question.
white Henbane of each 'twenty drachms, Opium, Terra Lemnia of each ten
drachms, Lapis Hematitis prepared, Saffron of each five drachms, Castorium,
Indian Spicknard, Euphorbium, Amber, Zedoary, Doronicum, Troches of Ramich,
Pellitory of Spain, Pearls, of each a dram and an half, Camphire one scruple,
Honey Roses the triple weight of all, mix them together into an Electuary
according to art.

A. All the difference is Mesue appoints Honey, whose commendations of it is,
it stops blood flowing from any part of the body, the immoderate flowing of the
terms in women, the Hemorrhoyds in men, spitting of blood, bloody fluxes, and
is profitable for such women as are subject to miscarry.

Philonium Romanum. Nicholaus.
Take of white Pepper the seeds of white Henbane, of each five drachms, Opium
two drachms and an half, Cassia lignea one dram and an half, the seeds of
Smallage one dram, the seeds of Macedonian Parsley, Fennel, and Carrots of
Creet of each two scruples and five grains, Saffron a scruple and an half,
Indian Spicknard, Pellitory of Spain, Zedoary, of each fifteen grains, Cinnamon
a dram and an half, Euphorbium, Mirrh, Castorium, of each one dram, with
three times the weight of them all in clarified Honey make them into an
Electuary according to art.

A. It is a most exquisite thing to ease vehement and deadly pains, in what
part of the body so ever they be, whether internal or external, that vehemence
of pain will bring a fever, and a fever, death, no man well in his wits will
deny, therefore in such diseases which cause vehemence of pain, as Chollicks,
the Stone, Strangury etc. this may be given (ordered by the discretion of an
able brain, for it conduces little to the cure) to mitigate the extremity of
pain, while convenient remedy may be had, (as men pump the water out before
they can stop the hole in a leaking vessel) As for other virtues which Authors
say this Electuary has, I shall pass them by, resting confident that other
remedies may be found out for them in this book, as effectual and less
dangerous, and because the former Electuary is not much unlike to this in some
particulars, take the same caution in that also.

Electuarium De Ovo: Maximilian the Emperor.
Take an Hens Eg new laid, and a small hole being made in the top, take out the
white, leaving the yolk still in, then fill up the void place with Saffron not
beaten into powder, then cover over the hole with a little hard wax will serve
if you make not the hole too large.
another cover, then roast it with a there is nothing like to hot Embers.
gentle fire till all the shel begin to look black, attending it diligently,
lest the Saffron burn, (for then is all the medicine spoiled) then take the
matter out, and dry it, that so it may be beaten into fine powder, ad to it,
its weight in white Mustard seed, in powder, Then take the roots of white or
bastard Dittany, Tormentil of each two drachms, Mirrh, Hartshorn, Butter-bur,
it growscom monly by ditcnes sides, and bears no stalks at all, but broad
leaves, and the flower apears before the leaf.
Petasitis roots, of each one dram, the roots of Angelica, and Burnet,
Juniper berries, Zedoary, Camphire, of each half an ounce; let all these being
beaten into powder be diligently mixed with the other in a mortar, and add to
them their weight of the best Treacle, mixed together, with a pestel for three
hours, pouring in syrup of Lemmons so much as is sufficient, till it be made
into an Electuary according to art.

A. A dram of it given at a time, is as great an help in a pestilential
fever as a man shall usually read of in a Galenist.

Requies. Nicholaus.
Take of Red-Rose leaves the whites being cut off, blue Violets of each three
drachms, Opium of Thebes dissolved in Wine, the seeds of white Henbane, Poppies
white and black, the bark of the roots of Mandrakes, the seeds of Endive,
Purslain, Garden Lettice, I take it to be (...)-wort, not (...)-bane, the (...)
look (...).
Psyllium, Spodium, Gum Traganth of each 2. (...) and 5. grains, Nutmegs,
Cinnamon, Ginger of each one dram and an half; Sanders yellow white and red,
of each one dram and an half, Sugar three times their weight dissolved in
Rose Water mix them together and make of them an Electuary according to art.

A. Requies the title of this prescript, signifies Rest; but I would not advise
you to take too much of it inwardly, for fear in stead of Rest it bring you to
Madness, or at best to folly; outwardly I confess being applied to the temples
as also to the insides of the wrests, it may mitigate the heat in fevers and
provoke the rest, as also mitigate the violent heat and raging in Frenzies.

This is that which commonly is called Venice-treacle.
Andromacus his Treacle.
Take of Troches of Squils eight and forty drachms, Troches of Vipers, long
Pepper, Opium of Thebes, (...) os each twenty four drachms, dried Take it
always for redRoses when the other are not mentioned.
Rose leaves the whites being cut off, Illyrick Orris, juice of Liquoris, the
seeds of sweet Navew, Scordium, Opobalsamum, Cinnamon, Agrick of each twelve
drachms, Mirrh, sweet (...) or Zedoary, Saffron, Cassia lignea, Indian
Spicknard, Schaenanth, Pepper white andblack, (...).
Male Frankincense, Dittany of Creet, Rhubarb, Stoechas, Horehound, the seeds
of Macedonian Parsley, dried Calaminth, Turpentine, the roots of Cinkfoyl and
Ginger of each six drachms, the branches of Poley mountain, Camaepitys, Celtick
Spicknard, Amomus, Styrax Calamitis, the roots of Spignel, the tops of
Germander, the roots of Rhapontick, Earth of Lemnos, Indian Leaf, Chalcitis, or
in stead thereof Roman Vitriol, burnt, Gentian roots, Gum Arabic, juice of
Hypocistis, Carpobalsamum or Nutmegs or Cubebs, the seeds of Annis, Fennel,
Seseli, or Heartwort, Cardamoms, Acacia, or in leiu thereof the juice of Sloes
made thick, the seeds of Treacle Mustard, the tops of St. John's wort, the
seeds of Bishop's weed, Sagapenum, of each four drachms, Castorium, the roots
of long Birthwort, bitumen Judaicum, the seeds of Carrots, Opopanax, Centaury
the less, Galbanum of each two drachms; old Canary Wine sufficient to dissolve
the things that can be dissolved, pure Honey three times the weight of the dry
Simples, mix them together according to art.

A. It is confessed many Physicians have commented upon this recept, as
Bartholomaeus Maranta, Galen, Medici Romani, and (...) Bononienses, cum multis
aliis: But with little differencs. The virtues of it are, It resists poison and
the biting of venomous beasts, inveterate headaches, vertigo, deafness, the
falling sickness, astonishment, appoplexes, dullness of sight, want of voice,
Asthames, old and new Coughs, such as spit or vomit blood, such as can hardly
spit or breath, coldness of the stomach, wind, the Chollik and Iliak passion,
the Yellow Jaundice, hardness of the Spleen, stone in the reins and bladder,
difficulty of urine, ulcers in the bladder, Fevers, Dropsies, Leprosies, it
provokes the terms, brings forth both birth and afterbirth, helps pains in the
joints, it helps not only the body but also the mind, as vain fears,
melancholy etc. and is a good remedy in pestilential fevers Thus Galen.

London Treacle.
Take of Hartshorn two ounces, the seeds of Citron, Sorrel Peony, Bazil of each
one ounce, Scordium, Corallina of each six drachms, the roots of Angelica,
Tormentil, Peony, the leaves of Dictamni, the berries of Juniper and Bay of
each half an ounce, the flowers of Marigolds, Clovegilliflowers, Rosemary
flowers, the tops of St. John's wort, Nutmegs, Saffron, of each three drachms,
the roots of Gentian, Zedoary, Ginger, Mace, Mirrh, the leaves of Scabious,
Devils bit, Carduus Benedictus of each two drachms, Cloves, Opium of each one
dram, Canary Wine, so much as is viz. dissolve the Opium.
sufficient, Honey three times the weight of the rest, mix them together
according to art.

A. The recept is a pretty cordial, resists the pestilence, and is a good
antidote in pestilential times, it resists poison, strengthens cold stomachs,
helps digestion, and crudities of the stomach.

Benedicta Laxativa. Nicholaus.
Take of choice Turbith 10. drams, Diagridium, the bark of the roots of Spurg
prepared, Hermodactils, Red Roses of each five drachms, Cloves, Spicknard,
Ginger, Saffron, Saxifrage, long Pepper, Amomus, or for want of it Calamus
Aromaticus, Cardamoms the less, the seeds of Smallage, Parsley, Caraway,
Fennel, Sparagus, Bruscus, Gromwel, Sal. Gem. Galanga, Mace, of each one
dram, clarified Honey three times their weight, make them into an Electuary
according to art, Also you may conveniently keep the Species by it self.

A. It purges phlegm, chiefly from the joints, also it purges the reins and
bladder.

A. I willingly omit the quantity of these purges, because I would not have
foolish women and dunces do themselves and others a mischief.

Carycostimum. Bayr. e Gal.
Take of Cloves, white Costus or Zedoary, Ginger, Cummin of each two drachms,
Hermodactils, Diagrydium of each half an ounce, with their double weight of
Honey clarified in white wine, mix them together and make them into an
Electuary.

A. Authors say it purges hot Rewms, and takes away inflammations in wounds, I
assure you the Electuary works violently, and may safest be given in Clisters.

Cassia extracted for Clysters. Augustani.
Take of the leaves of Violets, Mercury, Mallows, Beets, Pellitory of the wall,
the flowers of Violets, of each a handful, boil them in a sufficient quantity
of water, by the benefit of which let the Cassia be drawn with this decoction
and the Canes washed and boiled again to a height, a pound, boil it to
perfection according to art.

A. It is no more than breaking the Canes of the Cassia, and pick out the pulp
(casting away the seeds) boil the pulp in a little of this decoction; then
press it through a pulping Sive, the title shows the use of it: or if you will
take an ounce of it inwardly, you shall find it work with great gentleness.

Electuarium Amarum Magistrale majus.
Take of white Agrick, choice Turbith, Species hiera simplex Galeni, of the
best Rhubarb of each a dram, choice Aloes washed two drachms, Ginger, Cremor
Tartar of each two scruples, Orris Florentine, sweet Fennel seeds of each one
scruple, syrup of Roses solutive as much as is sufficient to make it into a
bitter Electuary.

Electuarium Amarum minus.
Take of Epithimum half an ounce, the roots of Angelica three drachms, of
Gentian, Zedoary, Acorus of each two drachms, Cinnamon a dram and an half,
Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Saffron of each a dram, Aloes six ounces, with syrup
of Fumitory and Scabious, with it is something mysterious why sugar should be
added to the syrups.
Sugar so much as is sufficient, make them up into a soft Electuary according
to art.

A. Both these purge choler, the former phlegm and this melancholy, the former
works strongest and this strengthens most, and is good for such whose brains
are anoyed.

Diacassia with Manna.
Take of damask Prunes two ounces, Violet flowers a handful and an half,
spring water a pound and an half, let them boil according to art till half the
water be consumed, then strain it, and dissolve in the decoction, pulp of
Cassia six ounces, Sugar of Violets, Syrup of Violets, of each four ounces,
pulp of Tamarinds one ounce, Sugar Candy one ounce and an half, of the best
Manna two ounces, mix them together and make of them an Electuary according to
art.

A. It is a fine cool purge for such as are bound in body, for it works gently
and without trouble, it purges choler, and may safely be given in fevers
coming of choler, but in in such cases, if the body be much bound, the best
way is first to administer a Clyster, and then the next morning an ounce of
this will cool the body and keep it in due temper.

Cassia Extracted without the leaves of Senna.
Take of Prunes by number twelve, Violet flowers a handful, French Barley, the
seeds of Annis and Bastard Saffron, Polipodium of the Oak of each five drachms,
Maidenhair, Time, Epithimum, of each half a handful, Raisons of the Sun stoned
half an ounce, Fennel seeds two drachms, the seeds of Purslain and Mallows of
each three drachms, Liquoquoris half an ounce, boil them in a sufficient
quantity of water, strain it, and in the decoction dissolve pulp of Cassia two
pounds, Tamarinds one ounce, must the Cinnamon be dissolved too:
Cinnamon three drams of the best Sugar a pound, boil them to a perfection
according to art.

Cassia Extracted with the leaves of Senna.
Take of the Electuary of Cassia extracted without the leaves of Senna, two
pound, the leaves of Senna in powder two ounces, mix them together according to
art.

A. This is also a fine cool purge, gentle, cleansing the bowels of choler and
melancholy, without any griping, very fit for feverish bodies, and yet the
former is gentler than this.

Diacarthamum or Diacnicum. Arnoldus de villa nova.
Take of Species diatragacanthi frigidi half an ounce, pulp of preserved
Quinces an ounce, pulp of seeds of Carthamus or bastard Saffron, half an ounce,
Ginger two drachms, Diagrydium beaten by it self three drachms, white Turbith
six drachms, Manna two ounces, Honey Roses solutive, Sugar Candy of each one
ounce, Hermodactils half an ounce, white Sugar ten ounces and an half, make of
them a Liquid Electuary according to art.

A. I wonder what art it must be, wherewith a man should make up an Electuary
and have not wherewithal, I tell you truly, that to make up an Electuary of
this without more moisture (for here is not a quarter enough) is a task harder
than all Hercules his twelve labors, abate me but his fetching Cerberus out of
Hell, or it may be they intend you should go back to Species Electuarii
Diagalangae to fetch Honey from thence where they have appointed three times
more than needs, for my part I shall trouble the reader no further, but leave
the recept to Arnoldus and the College for a pure piece of nonsense.

Diaphoenicon. Mesue together with Feruelius.
Take of the pulp of Dates boiled in water and honey.
Hydronel, and strained through a pulping Sive, Penidies of each half a pound,
sweet Almonds blanched three ounces and an half, let all of them be bruised and
mixed, then ad clarified Honey 2. pound, boil them a little, then sprinkle in
Ginger, Pepper, Mace, Cinnamon, dried Rue, the seeds of Fennel and Carrots, of
each two drachms, Turbith four ounces in fine powder, Diagrydium an ounce and
an half, beat them first into powder.
make of them an Electuary according to art.

A. I cannot believe this is so profitable in fevers taken downwards as
Authors say, for it is a very violent purge, Indeed I believe being mixed in
Clysters, it may do good in chollicks and infirmities of the bowels coming of
Raw humors.

Diaprunum Simple, more rightly called Lenitive. Nicholaus.
Take a hundred Damask Prunes fresh and ripe, boil them in a sufficient
quantity of water till they be soft, then draw the pulp of them through a Sive,
and in the liquor they were boiled in, boil an ounce of Violet flowers, strain
it, and in the they might have been a little plainer and set down howmuch
decoction there must be; I suppose you may boil the violets in three pints till
one be consumed.
Decoction dissolve two pound of Sugar and boil it into a syrup, then add of
the pulp spoken of before, a pound, pulp of Cassia and Tamarinds of each an
ounce, then put in these following pouders, of white and red Sanders, Spodium,
Rhubarb, of each three drachms, Roses, Violets, the seeds of Purslain, endive
Barberries, Gum Traganth, Liquoris, Cinnamon of each two drachms, of the four
greater cold seeds of each one dram, make them into an Electuary according to
art.

A. It may safely, and is with good success given in acute, burning, and all
other fevers, for it cools much and loosens the body gently, it is good in
agues, hectic fevers and Marasmos.

Diaprunum Solutive. Nicholaus.
Take of Diaprunum lenitive whilst it is yet warm four pound, Scammony
prepared, two ounces and five drachms, mix them together and make of them an
Electuary according to art.

Seeing the Dose of the Scammony is increased according to the Author in this
medicine, you may use a less weight of Scammony if you please.

A. And therein the College said true, for the medicine according to this
recept is too strong, violent, corroding, gnawing, fretting, and yet this is
that which is commonly called Duaprunes which simple people take to give
themselves a purge, being fitter to do them mischief (poor souls) than good,
unless ordered with more discretion than they have, it may be they build upon
the vulgar proverb, that no carrion will kill a Crow.

Diacatbolicon. Nicholaus.
Take of the pulp of Cassia and Tamarinds, the leaves of Senna of each two
ounces, Polypodium, Violets, Rhubarb, Annis Seeds, Penidies, Sugar Candy, of
each one ounce, Liquoris, the seeds of Guords, Citruls, Cucumers, Melons of
each three drachms. Let the things to be beaten be beaten, and take of fresh
bruise the Polipodium else you had as good boil a (...).
Polipodium three ounces, Fennel seed six drams boil them in four pints of rain
or spring water, to the consumption of the third part, strain it and ad to the
decoction two pound of the best Sugar, boil it again, with the pulps of Cassia
and Tamarinds, and the pouders being added in theend, make it into an Electuary
according to art.

A. It is a fine cooling purge for any part of the body, and very gentle, it
may be given (an ounce or half an ounce at a time, according to the strength of
the patient) in acute, in peracute diseases, for it gently looseneth the belly
and adds strength, it helps infirmities of the liver and spleen, gouts of all
sorts, quotidian; tertian, and quartan agues, as also headaches. It is usually
given in Clysters.

Diacrocuma, or Species Electuarii de Croce. Mesue.
Take of Saffron, the roots of Asarabacca, the seeds of Parsley, Carrots, Annis,
Smallage of each half an ounce, Rhubarb, the roots of Spignel, Indian Spicknard
of each six drachms, Cassia lignea, Costus, Mirrh, Schoenanth, Cubebs, the
roots of Maddir, the juice of Wormwood and Ageratum.
Maudlin, made thick, Opobalsamum or oil of Nutmegs of each two drachms,
Cinnamon, Calamus Aromaticus of each a dram and an half, Scordium, Stoechas,
juice of Liquoris of each two drachms and an half, Traganth one dram, make it
up into an Electuary with eight times their weight in Sugar, dissolved in
Endive water and clarified according to art.

A. Mesue appoints clarified Honey, it is exceeding good against cold diseases
of the stomach, liver, or spleen, corruption of humors and putrefaction of
meat in the stomach, ill favored color of the body, dropsies, cold faults in
the reins and bladder, provokes urine.

Electuarium de Citro Solutive.
Take of preserved viz. the middle bark which is thick.
Citron pills, conserves of Violets and Bugloss, Diatragacanthum frigidum,
Diagridium of each half an ounce, Turbith five drachms, Ginger half a dram,
the the leaves of Senna six drachms, sweet Fennel seeds a dram; white Sugar
dissolved in Rose water, and boiled according to art ten ounces, make them all
into a sollid Electuary according to art.

A. Here are some things very cordial, others purge violently, both put
together make a composition no way pleasing to me, therefore I account it a
pretty recept, good for nothing.

Electuarium Elescoph. Mesue.
Take of Scammony, and the best Turbith of each six drams Cloves, Cinnamon,
Ginger, Emblick Myrobalans, (...) Polypodium of each two drachms and an half,
Sugar six ounces, clarified Honey ten ounces, mix them and make them into an
Electuary according to art.

A. Mesue appoints only clarified Honey one pound and four ounces, to make it
up into an Electuary, and says it purges choler, and phlegm, and wind from
all parts of the body, helps pains of the joints and sides, the chollick, it
cleanses the reins and bladder, yet I advise you not to take too much of it at
a time, for it works pretty violently though well corrected by the pen of a
Mesue, let half an ounce be the most, for such whose bodies are strong, always
remembering that you had better ten times take too little then once to much.

Confectio Hamech. Fernelius.
Take of the that is only the stones cast away
barks of Citron Myrobalans two ounces, Myrobalans, chebs and black, Violets
colocynthis, Polipodium of the Oak, of each an ounce and an half, Wormwood,
Time of each half an ounce, the seeds of Annis and Fennel, the flowers of red
Roses of each three drachms, let all of them being bruised be infused for one
day in four pints is little enough: I assure you, you shall as soon eat a load
of loggs as make it into an Electuary with two pints boiled away to one.
two pints of Whey, then boil it to one pound, rub it with your hands and then
press it out, and ad to the decoction, juice of fumitory, pulp of Prunes, and
Raisons of the sun of each half a pound, white take the double quantity of them
also.
Sugar, clarified Honey of each a pound, boil them to the thickness of Honey,
sprinkled in toward the end, Agrick Trochiscated, Senna of each two ounces,
Rhubarb an ounce and an half, Epithimum an ounce, Diagridium six drachms,
Cinnamon half an ounce, Ginger two drachms, the seeds of Fumitory, Annis,
Spicknard, of each one (...), make an Electuary of them according to art.

A. The recept is chiefly apropriated as a purge for melancholy, and salt
phlegm, and diseases thence rising, as Scabs, Itch Leprosies, Cancers,
infirmities of the skin, it purges addust humors, and is good against
madness, melancholy, forgetfulness, vertigo etc.

Electuarium Indum Minus. Mesue.
Take of Turbith, Sugar of each a hundred drachms, Mace Pepper, Ginger, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Cardamoms, Nutmegs of each seven drachms, Scammony prepared twelve
drachms, mix them with three times their weight (the Sugar excepted) of
clarified Honey, and so make them into an Electuary according to art.

A. It purges the bowels as also the joints of putrified phlegm, it breaks
wind, is therefore profitable for the Chollick.

A. The College have much altered the quantity of the Turbith and Sugar, it
purges violently.

Lenitive Electuary.
Take of Raisons of the sun stoned, Polypodium of the Oak Senna of each two
ounces, Mercury one handful and an half Jujubes, Sebestens by number twenty,
Maidenhair, Violets, French Barley of each a handful, Damask Prunes stoned,
Tamarinds of each six drachms, Liquoris half an ounce, boil them according to
art, strain them out and dissolve in the decoction pulp of Cassia, Tamarinds,
and fresh Prunes, Sugar of Violets of each six ounce, of the best Sugar two
pound, lastly ad an ounce and an half of Senna in powder, to every pound of the
Electuary, so bring it into a form according to art.

A. It gently opens and mollifies the bowels, bringing forth choler, phlegm,
and melancholy, and that without trouble, It is cooling and therefore is
profitable in Pleuresies, and for wounded people, a man of reasonable strength
may take an ounce of it going to bed, which will work next morning.

Electuarium Passulatum.
Take of Polypodium of the Oak three ounces, the leaves of Senna, the roots of
marsh Mallows fresh of each two ounces, Annis two drachms, infuse them all in
spring water a sufficient quantity, in a glazed vessel and boil them according
to art, then strain them out and ad to the decoction pulp of Raisons of the Sun
drawn through a Sive half a pound, white Sugar and Manna of each four ounces,
boil them again to the thickness of Marmilade, and renew it four times a year.

A. The College are so mysterious in this recept, a man can hardly give
directions how to make it, for they give only incertainties.

A. You had best first boil the roots in three pints of water to a quart, then
put in the Senna, and seeds, boil it to a pint and an half, then strain it and
ad the rest, the Manna will melt of it self as well as the Sugar, indeed you
had best dissolve the Manna by it self in some of the decoction, and so strain
it because of its dross.

A. It gently purges both choler and melancholy, cleanses the reins and
bladder, and therefore is good for the stone and gravel in the kidneys.

Electuary of the juyces of Roses. Nicholaus Myrepsus.
Take of Sugar, and the juce of Red Roses of each one pound and four ounces, of
the three sorts of Sanders of each six drachms, Spodium three drachms,
Diagrydium twelve drachms, Camphire a scruple, make of them an Electuary
according to art, let the juyces be boiled with the Sugar to a just thickness,
then ad the other things in powder.

A. It purges choler and is good in tertian agues and diseases of the joints,
it purges violently, therefore let it be warily given.

Electuarium Reginae Coloniens.
Take of the seeds of Saxifrage and Gromwel, Juice of Liquoris of each half an
ounce, the seeds of Caraway, Annis, Smallage, Fennel, (...) of Macedonia,
Broom, Carrots, Bruscus, Sparagus, Lovage, Cummin, Juniper, Rue, Siler
Mountain, the roots of Acorus, Penyroyal, Cinkfoyl, Bay Berries of each two
drachms, Indian Spicknard, Schoenanth, Amber, Valerian, Hogs Fennel, Lapis
Lincis, of each a dram and an half, Galanga, Ginger, Turbith, of each two
drachms, Senna an ounce, Goats blood prepared half an ounce, mix them together,
first beat them into a powder, then make them into an Electuary according to
art with three times their weight in Sugar dissolved in white Wine.

A. It is an excellent remedy for the stone and wind chollick, a dram of it
being taken every morning, I assure such as are troubled with such diseases, I
cannot but commend it to them as a Jewel.

Hiera Picra Simplex. Galeni.
Take of Cinnamon, Xylobalsamum or wood of Aloes, Asarabacca, Spicknard,
Mastich, Saffron of each six drachms, Aloes unwashed twelve ounces and an half,
clarified Honey four pound and three ounces, make it up into an Electuary
according to art, also the Species is kept by it self in shops.

A. It is an excellent remedy for vicious juyces which lie furring the tunicle
of the stomach, and such idle fancies and symtomes which the brain fuffers
thereby, whereby some think they see, others that they hear strange things,
especially when they are in bed and between sleeping and waking, besides this,
it very gently purges the belly and helps such women as are not sufficiently
purged after their travail.

Hiera with Agriok.
Take of Species Hiera Simple without Aloes, Agrick trochiscated of each half
an ounce, Aloes not washed an ounce, clarified Honey six ounces, mix them
together into an Electuary.

A. Look but the virtues of Agrick and add them to the virtues of the former
receipt, so is the business done without any further trouble.

Hiera Logodii. Nicholaus.
Take of the which is the whole apple as they are bought at the Apothecaries the
seeds only cast away.
pulp of Colocynthis Polypodium of each two drachms, Euphorbium, Poley
mountain, the seeds of Thymelea of each one dram and an half and six grains,
Wormwood, Mirrh of each one dram and twelve grains, Centaury the less,
Agrick, Gum Amoniacum, Indian leaf or Mace, Spicknard, Squils prepared, (...)
of each one dram, Aloes, the leaves of Time, Germander, Cassia Lignea, b
Spurge-flax, see the simples.
Bdellium, Horehound of each one scruple and fourteen grains, Cinnamon,
Opopanax, Castorium, long-Birthwort, the three sorts of Pepper, Saffron,
Sagapenum, Parsley of each half a dram, Hellebore black and white of each six
grains, clarified Honey a pound and an half, mix them together and make them
into an Electuary according to art, also you may keep the Species by it self.

A. It takes away by the roots daily evils coming of melancholy,
falling sickness, vertigo, convulsions, megrim, leprosy, and many other
infirmities, for my part I should be loath to take it inwardly unless upon
desperate occasions, or in Clysters.

Hiera Pachii, or Diacolocynthides. Nicholaus Alexandrinus.
Take of Colocynthis, Agrick, Germander, Horehound, Stoechas of each ten
drachms, Opopanax, Sagapenum, Parsley seeds, round Birthwort roots, white Pepper
of each five drams, Spicknard, Cinnamon, Mirrh, Indian Leaf, Saffron of each
four drachms, let the Gums be bruised in a mortar, the rest fiefted, all of
them made into an Electuary with clarified Honey, which is indeed the triple
weight.
three pound, three ounces and five drachms.

A. It helps the falling sickness, madness, and the pain in the head called
(...), pains in the breast and stomach whether they come by sickness or
bruises, pains in the loins and backbone, hardness of women's breasts,
putrefaction of meat in the stomach and sour belchings.

Tryphera minor Foenon. Mesue.
Take of Myrobalans, Chebs, Bellericks, Indian, and Emblicks, Nutmegs of each
five drachms, the seeds of (...), the roots of Asarabacca, Origanum of Persia,
or Dictamni of Creet, black Pepper, Olibanum, Bishops weed, Ginger, Tamaris,
Indian Spicknard, Schoenanthus, Cyperus roots of each half an ounce Steel
prepared twenty drachms, let the Myrobalans be roasted a little with fresh
butter, let the rest being poudered be sprinkled with a little oil of sweet
Almonds, then ad to them, Musk a dram, and with three times their weight in
clarified Honey make them into an Electuary according to art.

A. It helps the imoderate flowing of the terms in women, and the Hemorrhoyds
in men, it helps weakness of the stomach and restores color lost, It frees the
body from crude humors, and strengthens the bladder, helps melancholy, and
rectifies the distempers of the speen.

Tryphera Solutive, Renodeus.
Take of Diagrydium ten drachms, of the best Turbith an ounce and an half,
Cardamoms the less, Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace, of each three drachms, Yellow
Sanders, Liquoris, sweet Fennel seeds of each half an ounce, Acorus, Schaenanth
of each a dram, preserved Citron pills, Roses of each three drachms; Violets
two drachms, Penedies four ounces, SugarCandy half a pound, Honey well
clarified in juice of Apples a pound, make an Electuary of them according to
art.

A. The Diagrydium and Turbith are purging, the rest are all cordial, but what
to make of them put together I know not, therefore I leave them and pass to --

PILLS.
A. PILLS in Greek are called (...). in Lattin Pilulae, which signifies little
Balls, because they are made up in such a form, that they may be the better
swallowed down, by reason of the offensiveness of their taste.

A. They were first invented for the purging of the head, (however Physicians
have since ordered the business) because the matter there offending is not so
soon taken away by any other physic.

Pilulae Alephanginae, or Aromatical Pills. Mesue
Take of Cinnamon, Cloves, Cardamoms, Nutmegs, Mace, Calamus Aromaticus,
Carpobalsamum, or the seeds of Angelica, Schaenanth, wood of Aloes, yellow
Sanders, red Roses, dried Wormwood of each half an ounce, let these being
grossly bruised be infused twenty four hours in four pints of water, then boil
them over a gentle fire till the third part be consumed, strain them and in the
liquor dissolve a pound of Aloes, then having drawn off the water, either in
hot ashes or a bath, ad to it Mirrh and Mastich of each half an ounce, Saffron
two drachms, syrup of Wormwood so much as is sufficient to make it up into a
mass.

A. This recept differs much from that which Mesue left to posterity, perhaps
the College followed Renodaeus more closely in it than they did Mesue, but
some question whether Renodaeus or the College either can amend the recepts of
Mesue; the chief alterations are, Mastich, Asarabacca roots, and Indian
Spicknard, of each an ounce, is totally left out, besides all the Simples till
you come to the Wormwood are set down but half so much in quantity as Mesue
prescribed them, some other small alterations are also in most of the
quantities, But I must return to my scope.

A. It cleanses both stomach and brain of gross and putrified humors, and
sets the senses free when they are thereby troubled, it cleanses the brain
offended by ill humors, wind etc. helps vertigo, and headaches, and
strengthens the brain exceedingly, helps concoction, and strengthens the
stomach, I have often made experience of it upon my own body, and alwales with
good success in such occasions, and therefore give me leave to commend it to my
country men, for a wholesome cleansing medicine, strengthening, no ways violent,
one dram taken at night, going to bed, will work gently next day, if the
party be weak you may give less, if strong, more.

Aloe Rosata. Hier. Fabr. ab Aqua^p.
Take of clear Aloes succotrina in powder four ounces, the juice of Damask
Roses clarified four pound, mix them together, and digest them in the sun or
else in a bath, till all the moisture is drawn away, then infuse it again in so
much more juice, and evaporate away the moisture again, do so four times, then
keep the by mass, always understand the composition brought into such a
thickness, that you may easily with your fingers make it into pills.
mass to be made into pills.

A. It is a gallant gentle purger of choler, frees the stomach from
superfluous humors, opens stoppings, and other infirmities of the body,
proceeding from choler or phlegm, as yellow Jaundice etc. and strengthens the
body exceedingly.

Pills of washed Aloes. Augustani.
Take of Aloes washed with the juice or Damask Roses, an ounce, Agrik
trochiscated three drachms, mastich two drams, Species Diamoschu dulce half a
dram, syrup of Damask Roses so much as is sufficient to make it into a mass
according to art.

A. It purges both brain, stomach, bowels and eyes of putrified humors, and
also strengthens them.

Pilulae Assaireth. Avicenna.
Take of Species Hiera Picra Galeni an ounce; Mastich, Citron Myrobalans of
each half an ounce, Aloes two ounces, the syrup of Stoechas as much as is
sufficient, make of them a mass according to art.

A. It purges choler and phlegm.

Pills of Bdellium. Mesue.
Take of Bdellium ten drachms, Myrobalans, Bellericks, Emblicks, and blacks of
each five drachms, flakes of Iron, Leek seeds of each three drachms, a kind of
seashel to be had at the Apothecaries.
Conchula Veneris burnt, Corral burnt, Amber of each a dram and an half,
Pearls half an ounce, not (insuse) as the College prescribe.
dissolve the Bdellium in juice of Leeks, and with so much syrup of juice of
Leeks as is sufficient make it into a mass according to art.

Pills of Eupatorium. Mesue.
Take of Citron Myrobalans, the juice of Eupatorium that is Maudlin.
Ageratum, of the juice of Wormwood of each three drams Rhubarb three drachms
and an half, Mastich one dram, Saffron half a dram, of the best Aloes five
drachms, syrup of the juice of Endive as much as is sufficient to make it into
a mass, into which form it according to art.

A. Having compared this recept of Mesue, with reason I find it a gallant
gentle purge, and strengthening, fitted for such bodies as are much weakened by
diseases of choler, The Author apropriates it to such as have tertian agues,
the yellow Jaundice, obstructions or stoppings of the liver, half a dram
taken at night going to bed, will work with an ordinary body, the next day by
noon; the truth is, I am sparing in relating the doses of most purging physics
because they are to be regulated according to the strength of the patient etc.
Physic is not to be presumed upon by Dunces, lest they meet with their matches
and overmatches too.

Pilulae de Hiera cum Augarrico: from the Agustine Physicians. Mesue.
Take of Galens species hiera Picra, Agrick Trochiscated of eace half an ounce,
of the best Aloes an ounce, Honey-Roses as much as is sufficient to make it
into a mass according to art.

A. I refer you to Species Hiera Picra Galeni, and to Agrick in the simples for
the virtues of them.

Pilulae Imperialis. Fernelius.
Take of the best Aloes two ounces, choice Rhubarb an ounce and an half, Agrick
trochiscated, the leaves of Senna of each an ounce, Cinnamon three drachms,
Ginger two drachms, Nutmeg, Cloves, Spicknard, Mastick of each one dram, with
syrup of Violets make it into a mass according to art.

A. It cleanses the body of mixed humors, and strengthens the stomach
exceedingly, as also the bowels, liver and natural spirit, it is good for cold
natures, and cheers the spirits.

Mastich Pills. Fernelius.
Take of Mastich two ounces, Aloes four ounces, Agrick trochiscated, Species
hiera simplicis Galeni of each one ounce and an half, bring them into a mass
with Malaga wine according to art.

A. They purge very gently, but strengthen much, both head, brain, eyes, belly
and reins.

Pestilential Pills. Ruffus.
Take of the best Aloes two ounces, choice Mirrh and Saffron of each one ounce,
with syrup of the juice of Le^mons make them into a mass.

A. A scruple of these taken at night going to bed is a notable preservative in
pestilential times.

Stomach pills. Mesue.
Take of Aloes six drachms, Mastich, red Roses of each two drachms, with syrup
of Wormwood, make them into a mass according to art.

A. They cleanse and strengthen the stomach, they cleanse but gently,
strengthen much, help digestion.

Pilulae de Succino. Andreas, Aurif.
Take of white Amber, Mastich of each two drachms, Aloes five drachms, Agrick a
dram and an half, long Birthwort half a dram, syrup of Wormwood so much as
is sufficient to make it into a mass according to art.

A. It amends the evil state of a woman's body, strengthens conception, and
takes away what hinders it, it gently purges choler and phlegm, and leaves a
binding strengthening quality behind it. You may take the pains in all such
small recepts to look the Simples and then your reason will tell you the
Compositions have the same effects, I am unwilling to write tautology, and as
unwilling my book should swell too big.

Pills of Rhubarb. Mesue.
Take of choice Rhubarb three drachms, Citron Myrobalans, Trochisci Diarrhodon
of each three drachms and a half juice of Liquoris and juice of Wormwood,
Mastich of each one dram, the seeds of Smallage and Fennel of each half a
dram, Species Hiera picra Simp. Galeni ten drachms, with juice of Fennel and
why not clarified? can they give but a piece of a reason for it? I am deceived
it Mesue appoint not Fennel water.
not clarified and Honey so much as is sufficient, make it into a mass.

A. It purges choler opens obstructions of the liver help the yellow Jaundice
and dropsies in the beginning, strengthens the stomach and lungues.

Pilulae extribus. Fernelius.
Take of Mastich two ounces, Aloes four ounces, Agrick trochiscated, Species
Hiera simplex of each an ounce and an half, choice Rhubarb two ounces, Cinnamon
half an ounce, with syrup of Cichory, make it into a mass according to art.

A. View the Simples, it may be in searching for this you may meet with
something else may do you good.

Pills of Agrick. Mesue.
Take of Agrick three drachms, Orris roots, Mastich, Horehound of each a
dram, Turbith five drachms, Species Hiera Picra Galeni, half an ounce,
Colocynthis, Sarcocolla, of each two drachms, Mirrh one dram, Sapa so much as
is sufficient to make it into a mass.

A. It was invented to cleanse the breast and lungues of phlegm, it works pretty
tithly therefore requires a good headpiece to direct it.

Agregative Pills, or Polychrestae. Mesue.
Take of Citron Myrobalans, of the best Rhubarb of each half an ounce, juice of
Maudlin.
Eupatorium and of Wormwood made thick, of each two drachms, Diagrydium five
drachms, Myrobalans, Chebs, and Indian, Agrick, Colocynthis, Polypodium, of
each two drachms, Turbith, Aloes of each six drachms, Mastich, Roses, Sal. Gem.
Epithimum, Annis seeds, Ginger of each one d achm, with syrup of Damask Roses
so much as is sufficient, make it up into a mass according to art.

A. It purges the head of Choler, phlegm, and melancholy and that stoutly, it
is good against quotidian agues, and faults in the stomach and liver, yet
because it is well corrected if you take but half a dram at a time, and keep
your self warm, I suppose you may take it without danger.

Pilulae Arabica. Nicholaus.
Take of the best Aloes four ounces, Briony roots, Myrobalans, Citrons, Chebs,
Indian, Bellerick, and Emblick, Mastich Diagrydium, Asarabacca, Roses of each
an ounce, Castorium three drachms, Saffron one dram, with syrup of Wormwood
make it into a mass according to art.

A. It helps such women as are not sufficiently purged in their labor, helps
to bring away what a careless Midwife has left behind, purges the head, helps
headache, megrim, vertigo, and purges the stomach of vicious humors, besides
Author; say it preserves the sight and hearing and preserves the mind in vigor,
and causes joyfulness, driving away melancholy, it is like it may, but have a
care you take not to much of it

Pilulae Arthriticae. Nicholaus.
Take of Hermodactills, Turbith, Agrick of each half an ounce, Cassia lignea,
Indian spicknard, cloves, Xylobalsamu^, or wood of Aloes, Carpobalsamum or
Cubebs, Mace Galanga, Ginger, Mastich, Assafaetida, the seeds of Annis, Fennel,
Saxifrage, Sparagus, Bruscus, Roses, Gromwel, Sal. Gem. of each two drachms,
Scammony an ounce, of the best Aloes the weight of them all, Juice of
Chamepytis made thick with Sugar so much as is sufficient, or syrup of the
juice of the same so much as is sufficient to make it into a Mass.

A. As I remember the Author appoints but a dram of Scammony, which is but
the eight part of an ounce, and then will the recept be pretty moderate,
whereas now it is too too violent, I know well enough it is the opinion of
Doctors that Aloes retards the violent working of Scammony, I could never find
it, and I am the worst in the world to pin my faith upon another man's sleeve,
and I would as willingly trust my life in the hands of a wild Bear as in the
hands of that monster called TRADITION, If but a dram of Scammony be put in,
then may a man safely (if not to much weakened) take a dram of it at a time,
It helps the gout and other pains in the joints, comforts and strengthens both
brain and stomach, and consumes diseases whose original comes of of phlegm.

Pilulae Auriae. Nicholaus.
Take of Aloes, Diagrydium of each five drachms, red Roses, the seeds of
Smallage of each two drachms and an half, Annis and Fennel seeds of each one
dram and an half, Mastich, Saffron, Troche, Alhandal of each one dram,
being all beaten, let them be made into a mass with Honey of Roses according to
art.

A. They are held to purge the head, to quicken the senses, especially the
sight, and to expel wind from the bowels, but works something harshly.

Pilulae Cochiae. Rhasis.
Take of Species Hiera picra Galeni ten drachms, Colocynthis three drachms and
one scruple, Diagrydium two drams and an half, Turbith, Stoechas of each five
drachms, syrup of Stoechas so much as is sufficient to make it into a mass.

A. Gesner and Math. de Grad put in only two scruples and an half of
Diagrydium, belike because they would not have it work so violently, but Mesue,
Rhasis, and Nicholaus Myrepsus prescribe two drachms and an half as is here in
the Dispensatory, only Mesue appoints it to be made up with syrup of wormwood.

Pilulae Cochiae with Hellebore
Take of the powder of the pills before prescribed the powder of the bark of
the roots of black Hellebore an ounce, make it into a mass with (...) of
Stoechas according to art.

A. The former purges the head of phlegm, and therefore is fit for Lethargies,
this of melancholy, and is therefore fit for mad folks, if melancholy be the
cause.

Pilulae foetide majores. Mesue.
Take of Sagapenum Amoniacum Opopana^x, Bdellium, Colocynthis, the seeds of
wild Rue, or garden Rue dried, Aloes, Epithimum of each five drachms, Turbith
half an ounce, Scammony three drachms, Spurg prepared, Hermodactils of each two
drachms, Ginger a dram and an half, Cinnamon, Spicknard of India, Saffron,
Castorium of each one dram, Euphorbium two scruples, dissolve the Gums in
juice of Leeks, and make them into a mass with syrup made with the juice of
Leeks and Sugar according to art.

A. They purge gross and raw phlegm, and diseases thereof arising, Gouts of all
sorts, pains in the backbone and other joints, is good against Leprosies and
other such like infirmities of the skin.

Pills of Fumitory. Avicenna.
Take of Myrobalans, Citrons, Chebs and Indian, Diagrydium of each five
drachms; Aloes seven drachms; let all of them being bruised, be thrice
moistened with juice of Fumitory and thrice suffered to dry, then brought into
a mass with syrup of Fumitory.

A. It purges melancholy from the liver and spleen, sharp, Chollerick, and
addust humors, salt phlegm, and therefore: helps scabs, and itch.

Pills of Hermodactills the greater. Mesue.
Take of Sagapenum six drachms, Opopanax three drams, dissolve them in a
sufficient quantity of the juice of Coleworts warmed, and strain them through a
convenient linen rag, then boil them a little; then take of Hermodactils,
Aloes, Citron Myrobalans, Turbith, Colocinthis, soft Bdellium of each six
drachms, Castorium, Sarcocolla, Euphorbium, the seed either of wild or garden
Rue, and of Smallage of each three drachms, Saffron a dram and an half, with
syrup of the juice of Coleworts made with Honey, make it into a mass according
to art.

A. They are good against the Gout and other cold afflictions of the joints.

Pilulae Indae. Mesue out of Haly.
Take of Indian Myrobalans, black Hellebore, Polypodium of the Oak of each five
drachms; Epithimum, Stoechas of each six drachms, Agrick, Lapis Lazuli often
washed, Troches Alhandal, sal indi of each half an ounce, juice of Maudlin made
thick, Indian Spicknard of each two drachms, Cloves one dram, Species hiera
picra simplex Galeni twelve drachms, with syrup of the juice of Smallage make
it into a mass according to art.

A. It wonderfully prevails against afflictions coming of melancholy, Cancers
which are not ulcerated, Leprosy, Evils of the mind coming of melancholy, as
sadness, fear etc. quartan agues, jaundice, pains and infirmities of the spleen.

Pills of Lapis Lazuli. Mesue.
Take of Lapis Lazuli oftentimes washed five drachms, Epithimum, Polipodium,
Agrick of each an ounce, Scamony, black Hellebore, Sal Indi of each two drachms
and an half, Cloves, Annis seeds of each half an ounce, Hiera picra Galeni
fifteen drachms, with syrup of the juice of Succory make it into a mass
according to art.

A. It has the same effects against melancholy with the former.

Pilulae Lucis majores Mesue.
Take of Roses, Violets, Wormwood, Colocinthis, Turbith Cubebs, Calamus
Aromaticus, Nutmegs, Indian Spicknard, Epithimum, Carpobalsamum or instead
thereof Cardamoms, Xylobalsamom or wood of Aloes, the seeds of (...) or
Hartwort, Rue, Annis, Fennel and Smallage, Scoenanthus, Mastich, Asarabacca
roots, Cloves, Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, Saffron, (...) of each two drachms,
Myrobalans Citrons Chebuls, Indian, Bellerick and Emblick. Rhubarb of each half
an ounce, Agrick, Senna of each five drams, Eyebight six drachms, Aloes
succotrina the weight of them all with syrup of the juice of Fennel make it
into a mass according to art.

A. It purges mixed humors from the head, and cleers it of such excrements as
hinder the fight.

Pills of Mechoacan. Renodaeus.
Take of Mechoacan half an ounce, Turbith three drachms, the leaves of
Spurgeflax,
Thymelaae steeped in Vinegar and dried, the seeds of dwarf-Elder or Walwort,
Agrick trochiseated of each two drachms, the roots of Spurge prepared, Mastich
of each one dram and an half, Mace, Cinnamon, Sal Gem of each two scruples,
beat them all into powder, and with syrup made with sugar and the juice of
Orris roots, make it into a mass for pills according to art.

A. They purge phlegm very violently.

Pilulae Rudij.
Take of Colocynthis six drachms, of the best Agrick, Diagridium, black
Hellebore, Turbith of each four drachms, Aloes Succotrina one ounce, Species
diarhodon abbatis half an ounce; let al be beaten (the species excepted) and
but grossly neither, and it must be close stopped, else the Composition will not
be worth a louse at the 8, days end.
infused in the sun in the best Aqua vitae so much that it may overtop the
pouders the breadth of eight fingers, then infuse the Diarhodon abbatis in Aqua
vitae in like manner for four days, then strain them strongly and mix both
these liquors together, and put them in a glass Alembick, and by distillation
draw off the moisture till the substance at bottom be left of a fit thickness
to make pills.

A. As this is the dearest, so in my opinion is it most excellent in operation
of all the pills in the Dispensatory, being of a quick searching nature, it
cleanses both head and body of Choler, phlegm, and melancholy, it must not be
taken in any great quantity, half a dram is sufficient for the strongest body,
let the weaker take less.

Pilulae Sine quibus esse Nelo. Nicholaus.
Take of washed Aloes fourteen drachms, Myrobalans, Citrons, Chebuls, Emblick,
Bellericks, and Indian, Rhubarb, Mastich, Wormwood, red Roses, Violets, Senna,
Agrick, Doddar of each a dram, Diagrydium fix drachms and an half, with syrup
of the juice of Fennel made with Honey make it into a mass according to art.

A. It purges phlegm, choler, and melancholy from the head, makes the sight
and (...) good, and gives ease to a burdened brain.

Pills of Spurge. Fernelius.
Take of the bark of the roots of Spurge the less, steeped twenty four hours
in vinegar and juice of Purslain two drachms, grains of a kind of Spurg, three
of the seeds of which some Authors (and they good ones too) say, will give a
man a sufficient purge
Palma Christi torrefied, by number forty, Citron Myrobalans a dram and an
half, Germander, Chamepitys, Spicknard, Cinnamon of each two scruples, being
beaten into fine powder with an ounce of Gum Traganth dissolved in Rose waeer,
and syrup of Roses so much as is sufficient let it be made into a mass.

A. I could say if I would and prove it too, that the ounce of Gum Traganth so
dislolved is enough to make six times so much into a mass, but because the
receipt (in my eyes) seems more fitting for a horse than for a man, I leave it.

Pills of Eupborbium. Mesue.
Take of Euphorbium, Colocynthis, Agrick, Bdellium, Sagapenum of each two
drachms, Aloes five drachms, with syrup made of the juice of Leeks make it into
a mass.

A. The pills are exceeding good (...) dropsies, pains in the loins and gouts
coming of a moist cause.

Pills of Opopanax. Mesue.
Take of Opopanax, Sagapenum, Hermodactils, Bdellium Ammoniacum, Colocynthis of
each five drachms, Saffron, Castorium, Mirrh, Ginger, black and long Pepper,
(...) lignea Myrobalans, Citrons, Bellericks, and Emblicks, of each one dram,
Scammony two drachms, Turbith half an ounce, Aloes twelve drams, the Gums being
infused in Colewort water make them up into a mass with syrup of the juice of
Coleworts.

A. It helps tremblings, palfies, gouts of all sorts, cleanses the joints, and
is helpful for such as are troubled with cold afflictions of the nerves.

Pilulae turpeti Aurioe. Mesue.
Take of the best Turbith sixteen drachms, Aloes an ounce and an half, Citron
Myrobalans ten drachms, red Roses, Mastich of each six drams, Saffron three
drams, beat them into powder, and with syrup of Wormwood make it-into a mass.

A. They purge choler and phlegm and that with as much gentleness as can be
desired, also they strengthen the stomach and liver, and help digestion.

Pilulae de Cynoglosso. Fernelius.
Take of Mirrh six drams, Olibanum five drams, Opium, the seeds of Henbane, the
roots of Houndstongue dry, of each half an ounce, Saffron, Castorium, of each a
dram and an half, with syrup of Stoechas make it into a mass according to art.

A. It stays hot rewms that fall down upon the lungnes, therefore is good in
Phthisicks, also it mitigates pain, a scruple is enough to take at a time going
to bed.

Landanum.
Take of Thebane of Opium extracted in spirit of wine one ounce, Saffron
extracted in like manner, a dram and an half, Castorium one dram, then let
them all be taken with the tincture of half an ounce of the Species of Diambra
new made in spirit of wine, adding (for pleasantness sake) Amber greece and
musk of each six grains, oil of (...) ten drops, then evaporate away the
moisture in a warm bath and leave the (...) for use.

A. It was invented (and a gallant invention it is) to mitigate have a care how
you be too busy with such medicines lest you make a man sleep till doomsday,
violent pains, stop the (...) that trouble the brain in fevers, (but beware
of Opiates in the beginnings of (...)) to provoke sleep, take not above two
gnains of it at a time, going to bed, if that provoke not sleep, the next night
you may make bold with three.

Pilulae Scribonii.
Take of Sagapenum and Mirrh of each two drachms, Opium, Cardamoms, Castorium
of each one dram, white pepper half a dram, Sapa so much as is sufficient
to make it into a mass according to art.

A. It is apropriated to such as have phthisicks and such as spit blood, but
ought to be newly made, a scruple is sufficient taken going to bed, Galen was
the Author of it.

Pills of Styrax. Mesue.
Take of liquid Styrax, Frankincense, Mirrh, juice of Liquoris, Opium, of each
equal parts, make them into a mass for pills, with a sufficient quantity of
syrup of Poppies according to art.

A. They help such as are troubled with defluxion of Rewm, Coughs, and provoke
sleep to such as cannot sleep for coughing.

A. I have now done with pills, only take notice that such as have Diagrydium
(otherwise called Scammony) in them, work violently and are to be taken early
in the morning, with discretion and administered with due consideration, the
other work more gently so that you may take a scruple of them at night going to
bed and follow your emploiments next day without danger.

TROCHES.
A. IF any cavil at this name and think it hardly English, let them give a
better and I shall be thankful, I know no other English name but will fall far
below it.

A. They have gotten many Greek names, almost as many as a Welsh man, (...),
(...), and (...), The Latins besides the Greek names Trochisci call them
Pastilli and Placentula.

A. Although a man may make them into what form he pleases, yet they are
usually made into little flat thin oaks of a (...) or twenty grains in weight,
plus minus, some print images (as of a serpent upon troches of vipers) upon
them, some gild them with leaf gold, some do neither.

A. They were first invented by the Ancients that pouders being brought into
this form may be kept pure the longer, for the virtues of pouders will soon
exhale by intromission of air, which the thick body of Troches resist, also
such as are pectoral (...) he easier carried in ones pocket.

Traches of Wormwood. Mesue.
Take of red Roses, it seems the (...) give the name Absinthium ponticum with
some other distinctions not herementioned, both to Roman and Common wormwood.
Wormwood, Annis of each two drams, Rhubarb, juice of (...) or Mandlin, (...),
the seeds of (...), bitter Almonds, Indian Spicknard, (...), Indian leaf, or
(...) of eaah a dram, juice of Succory as much as is sufficient to make it
into Troches according to art.

A. They strengthen the stomach exceedingly, open (...), or stoppings of the
belly or bowels, strengthen digestion, open the passages of the liver, help the
yellow Jaundice, and consume (...) of the body.

Trocbisci Alexiterii. Renodaeus.
Take of the roots of Gentian, Tormentill, Orris Florentine, Zedoary of each
two dracums, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace of each half a dram, Ginger a dram,
Angelica roots three drachms, Coriander seeds prepared, Roses, of each one
dram, dried Citron pills, two drachms, (...) all into powder, and with juice
of Liquoris softened in Hippocras, six ounces, make them into a soft past which
you may form into either Troches or small rowles which you please.

A. It preserves and strengthens the heart exceedingly, helps fainting and
failings of the vital spirits, resists poison, and and the pestilence, and is
an excellent medicine for such to carry about them whose occasions are to
travail in pestilential places or corrupt air, only taking a very small
quantity now and then.

Trocbisci Aliptae Moschatae. Nicholaus.
Take of pure called sometimes (...).
Labdanum bruised three ounces, (...) an ounce and an half, Benzoin an ounce,
wood of Aloes two drachms, Ambergreece one dram, Camphire half a dram, Musk
half a scruple, Rofe water so much as is sufficient to make it into Troches.

A. It is singular good for such as are Asthmatick and can hardly fetch their
breath, as also for young children, whose throat is so narrow, that they can
hardly swalow down their milk.

Troches of Annis seeds. Mesue.
Take of Annis seeds, the juice of Maudlin made thick of each two drachms, the
seeds of Dil, Spicknard, Mastich, Indian leaf or Mace, the leaves of Wormwood,
Asarabacca, Smallage, bitter Almond of each half a dram, Aloes two drachms,
juice of Wormwood so much as is sufficient to make it into Troches according to
art.

A. They open obstructions of the liver, and that very gently, and therefore
diseases coming thereof, help quartan agues.

Trocbisci (...) albi, or Pectoral Rowls.
Take of white Sugar a pound, white Sugar Candy, Penidies of each four ounces,
Liquoris six drachms, the roots of Orris Florentine half an ounce, white Starch
an ounce and an half, Mussilage of Gum Traganth made with Rose water, so much
as is sufficient to make it into Troches, three grains of Musk and four grains
of Amber greece being added to it, also you may make it iuto rowls which they
commonly call pectoral rowls, and if you please you may make it without Musk
and Amber greece.

Trocbisei (...) nigri. Rhafis.
Take of juice of Liquoris, white Sugar of each ten (...), Gum Traganth, sweet
Almonds blanched of each six drams, Mussilage of Quinces as much as is
sufficient to make it into Troches.

A. Both this and the former will melt in ones mouth, and in that manner to be
used by such as are troubled with coughs colds, (...) or want of voice, the
former is most in use, but in my opinion the last is most effectual.

Troches of Barberries. Mesue.
Take of dried Barberries, juice of Liquoris, Spodium, Purslain seeds of each
three drachms, red Roses six drachms, Indian Spicknard, Saffron, white Starch,
Gum Traganth of each one dram, Citrul seeds three drachms and an half,
Camphire half a dram, make it up with Manna made soft with the juice of
Barberries, according to art.

They wonderfully cool the heat of the liver, reins, and bladder, breast and
stomach, and stop looseness, cools the heat in fevers.

Troches of Camphire. Mesue
Take of red Roses four drachms, Spodium, Liquoris of each two drachms, of the
four greater cold seeds, Gum Traganth, Saffron, Gum Arabic, Indian Spicknard
of each one dram, yellow Sanders two drachms and an half, wood of Aloes, *
Psyllium.
Cardamoms the greater, white starch, Camphire, of each two (...), white Sugar,
Manna of each three drams, Muisialage of the seeds of flea wort, made with Rose
water as much as is sufficient to make it into Troches.

A (...) exceeding good in burning fevers, heat of blood and chollen together
with hot distempers of the stomach and liver, and extreme thirst coming
thereby, also it is good against the yellow Jaundice, Phthisicks and Hectique
fevers.

Troches of Capers. Mesue.
Take of the bark of Caper roots, the seeds of Agnus Castus of each six drams,
Gum Ammoniacum, Nigella seeds, Calaminth, Acorus, juice of Maudlin made thick,
bitter Almonds, the leaves of Rue, round Birthwort roots, the seeds of Water
cresses of each two drachms, Coterach, (...) of Cyperus of each one dram,
dissolve the (...) in sharp Vinegar, then mix the rest of the pouders with it
that so they may be made up into Troches.

A. They open stoppings of the liver and spleen, and help diseases thereof
coming as Rickets, Hypocondriack melancholy etc.

Trochisci Cypheos. Damocrat.
Take of the pulp of Raisons of the Sun, Turpentine boiled, of each three
ounces, Mirrh, Schoenanthus of each one ounce and an half, Calamus Aromaticus
nine drachms, Cinnamon half an ounce, Bdellium, Indian Spicknard, Cassia
lignea, Cyperus, Juniper berries of each three drachms, Aspalathus or Lignum
Aloes, two drachms and an half, Saffron one dram, clarified Honey so much as
is sufficient, let the Mirrh and Bdellium be ground so long in a mortar with a
little wine till it be brought to the thickness of Honey, then ad the Honey
with the pulp of Raisons, last of all, all the rest beaten into fine powder,
and so make them into Troches according to art.

A. It is excellent good against inward ulcers in what part of the body so ever
they be.

Trochisci Diarhodon. Mesue.
Take of the flowers of red Roses six drams, Spicknard, wood of Aloes of each
two drachms, Liquoris three drachms, Spodium one dram, Saffron half a dram,
Mastich two drachms, make them up into Troches with White Wind according to art.

A. They wonderfully ease fevers coming of phlegm, as quotidian fevers, agues,
Epialos etc. pains in the belly.

Trochisci de Eupatorio. Mesue.
Take of Manna, the juice of Maudlin made thick of each an ounce, red Roses
half an ounce, Spodium (that is burnt Ivory) three drachms and an half, Indian
Spicknard three drachms, Rhubarb, (...), Annis seeds, of each two drachms, with
Doddar water let them be made into Troches, let the Manna be dissolved with the
juice, then the rest of the pouders sprinkled in by degrees.

A. Obstructions or stoppings and swellings above nature, both of the liver and
spleen, are cured by the inward taking of these Troches, and diseases thereof
coming, as yellow and black Jaundice, the beginning of dropsies etc.

Trochisci De Gallia Moschata. Mesue.
Take of wood of Aloes five drachms, Amber greece three drachms, Musk one
dram, with a sufficieut quantity of mussilage of Gum Traganth made in Rose
water, make them into Troches according to art, and dry them in the shadow.

A. They strengthen the brain and heart, and by consequence both vital and
animal spirit, and cause a sweet breath.

Trochisci Gordonii.
Take of the four greater and four lesser cold seeds cleansed, the seeds of
white Poppies, Mallows, Cotton, Purslain, Quinces, Mirtles, Gum Traganth and
Arabic, Pinenuts, fistick Nuts, Sugar Candy, Penids, Liquoris, French Barley,
mussilage of a psyllium.
Fleawort, sweet Almonds of each an ounce, Bole Armenick, Dragons blood,
Spodium, Roses, Mirrh, of each two ounces, let them being beaten into powder be
made into Troches with viz. water and honey.
Hydromel.

A. They are held to be very good in ulcers of the bladder, and all other
inward ulcers whatsoever, and ease fevers coming thereby, being of a fine
cooling, slippery, heating nature.

Trochisci (...). Andromacus out of Galen.
Take of Marum.
herb Mastich, Asarabacca, Marjoram, Aspalathus or yellow Sanders, of each two
drachms, Schoenanth, Calamus Aromaticus, Valerian, Xylobalsamum, or wood of
Aloes, Opobalsamum or oil of (...) by expression, Cinnamon, Costus of each
three drachms, Mirrh, Indian leaf or Mace, Indian Spicknard, Saffron, Cassia
lignea, of each six drams, Amomus, or Cardamoms the smaller an ounce and an
half, Mastich a dram, Spanish wine as much as is sufficient, first let the
Saffron being in powder be dilligently ground with the Wine, let then the Mirrh
and Mastich both in fine powder be added, then the Opobalsamum, (...) last of
all the rest of the pouders, and so made up into troches, and dried in the
shadow.

A. They are very seldom or never used but in other compositions, yet naturally
they heat cold stomachs, help digestion, strengthen the heart and brain.

Trochisci Hysterici. Renodaeus.
Take of Assa foetida, Galbanum of each two drachms and in half, Mirrh two
drachms, Castorium a dram and an half, Asarabacca, Birthwort, Savin,
Featherfew, Nep of each one dram, Dittany half a dram, either with juice of
Rue, or decoction of the same make it into troches according to art.

A. These troches are applied to the foeminine gender, help fits of the mother,
expel both birth and afterbirth, cleanse women after labor, and expel the
relicts of a careless Midwife.

Trochisci de Lacca. Mesue.
Take of Gum Lacca cleansed, the juyces of Liquoris, Maudlin, Wormmood and
Barberries all made thick, Rhubarb, long Birthwort, Costus, Asarabacca, bitter
Almonds, Maddir, Annis, Smallage, Schoenanth of each a dram, with the
decoction of Birth wort, or Schoenanth, or the juice of Maudlin or Wormwood
make them into Troches according to art.

A. It helps stoppings of the liver and spleen, and fevers thence coming, it
expels wind, purges by urine and resists dropsies.

Troches of Terra Lemnia, Mesue according to Fernelius.
Take of Dragons blood, Gum Arabic torrefied, Troches of Ramich, red Roses,
the seeds of Roses, white starch torrefied, Spodium, Acacia, Hypocystis, lapis
Haematitis, Pomegranate flowers.
Balaustines, Bolarmenick, terra Lemnia, red Corral, Amber of each two drachms,
Pearls, Gum Traganth, black Poppy seeds of each a dram and an half, Purslain
seeds a little torrefied, Hartshorn burnt, Frankinsense, Cypres nuts, Saffron
of each two drachms, either with juice or water of Plantane make it into
Troches according to art.

A. If you will have it with Opium (says Mesue) you may add two drachms of it
to the composition, and indeed in external applications if any inflammation, or
fever be, I think it better with Opium than without.

A. It was invented to stop blood in any part of the body, and for it, it is
excellent well then, for the bloody flux take half a dram of them inwardly
(being beaten into powder) in red wine every morning, for spitting of blood use
it in like manner in Plantane water, for pissing of blood (...) it into the
bladder, for bleeding at the nose, either snuff it up, or anoint your forehead
with it mixed with oil, for the immoderate flowing of the terms, inject it up
the womb with a syringe, but first mix it with plantane water, for the
hemorrhoids or wounds apply it to the place bleeding.

Troches of Mirrh. Rhasis.
Take of Mirrh three drachms, the flower of Lupines five drachms, the leaves of
(...), Horse minus, Penyroyal, the seeds of Cummin, the roots of Maddir,
Assafoetida, Sagapenum, Opopanax of each two drachms, dissolve the (...) in
Vinegar of Squils, and with juice of Mugwort make it up into Troches.

A. They provoke the terms in women, and that with great ease to such as have
them come down with pain.

Trochisci Polyidae Sphragis. Andromacus out of Galen.
Take of Balaustins.
Pomegranate flowers twelve drachms, Alum three drachms, Frankincense, Mirrh
of each half an ounce, Copperis two drachms, Bulls gall six drachms, Aloes an
ounce, austere Wine so much as is sufficient to make it into Troches according
to art.

A. They are very good being outwardly applied, both in green wounds and ulcers.

Pastilli Andronis. Galen.
Take of Pomegranate flowers ten drachms, Copperis twelve drachms, unripe
Galls, Birthwort, Frankincense, of each an ounce, Alum, Mirrh of each half an
ounce, it may be they mean white Copperis.
Misy two drachms, with eighteen ounces of austere Wine make it into Troches
according to art.

A. This also is apropriated to wounds ulcers and fistulaes, it cleers the ears
and represseth all excressences of flesh, cleanses the filth of the bones.

Trochisci Musae. Galen.
Take of Alum, Aloes, Copperas, Mirrh, of each six drams, Crocomagma, Saffron
of each three drachms, Pomegranate flowers half an ounce, Wine and Honey of
each so much as is sufficient to make it up into Troches according to art.

A. Their use is the same with the former.

Crocomagma of Damocrates. Galen.
Take of Saffron a hundred drachms, red Roses, Mirrh of each fifty drachms,
white Starch I think they mean GumArabick.
Gum of each thirty drams, Wine so much as is sufficient to make it into
Troches.

A It is very expulsive, heats and strengthens the heart and stomach.

Troches of wood of Aloes.
Take of wood of Aloes, red Roses of each two drachms, Mastich, Cinnamon,
Cloves, Indian Spicknard, Nutmegs, Cardamoms greater and lesser, Cubebs, Gallia
Moschata, Pasneps, Citron pills, Mace of each a dram and an half, Amber
greece, Musk of each half a Scruple, with Honey of Raisons make them into
Troches.

A. It strengthens the heart, stomach and liver, takes away heart-qualms,
faintings, and stinking breath, and resists the (...).

Trochisci (...). Mesue.
Take of the juice of Sorrel sixteen ounces, red Rose leaves one ounce, Myrtle
berries two ounces, boil them a little together, and (...) them, add to the
decoction, Gall well beaten three ounces, boil them again a little, then put in
these following things in fine powder, take of red Roses an ounce, yellow
Sander ten drachms, Gum Arabic an ounce and a half, (...), Spodium of each an
ounce, Myrtle berries four ounces, wood of Aloes, Cloves Mace, Nutmegs, of each
half an ounce, sour Grapes seven drachms, mix them all together and let them
dry upon a stone, and grind them again into powder, and make them into small
Troches with one dram of Camphire, and so much Rose water as is sufficient,
and perfume them with fifteen grains of Musk.

A. They strengthen the stomach, heart and liver, as also the bowels, they help
the Chollick and fluxes of blood as also bleeding at the nose if you snuff but
up the powder of them, disburden the body of salt fretting chollerick humors.

Troches of Bases. Mesue.
Take of red Roses half an ounce, wood of Aloes two drachms, Mastich a dram
and an half, Roman Wormwood, Cinnamon, Indian Spicknard, Cassia lignea,
Schoenanth of each one dram, old Wine, and decoction of the five opening roots,
so much as is sufficient to make it into Troches according to art.

A. They help pains in the stomach and ill digestion, the Iliack passion,
Hectic fevers, and dropfies in the beginning, and cause a good color.

Troches of Squils. Galen.
Take a Squill gathered about the beginning of July, of a mean bigness, white
and full, the outward pill and that hard part to which the little roots stick,
being taken away, wrap it up in past and roast it in an oven, till the past be
dry, and Squill tender, which you may know by searching it with a scuer or
bodkin, then take it out and beat it in a mortar, and mix with it of the powder
of A kind of Vetch.
white Orobus or instead thereof red Cicers eight ounces to each pound of
Squills, make it into Troches of the weight of two drachms a piece, dry them in
the upper part of the house, looking toward the south, often turning of them
till they be dry, keep them in a peuter or glass vessel, not in lead.

Troches of Spodium. Mesue.
Take of red Roses twelve drachms, Spodium ten drachms, Sorrel seeds six
drachms, Purslain seeds, Coriander seeds prepared, pulp of Sumach of each two
drachms and an half, white Starch, Balaustines, Barberries, of each two
drachms, Gum Arabic torrefied a dram and an half, with juice of Grapes make
them into Troches.

A. They are of a fine cooling binding nature, excellent in fevers coming of
Choler, especially if they be accompanied with a looseness, they also quench
thirst.

Troches of Sanders. Mesue.
Take of the three sorts of Sanders of each an ounce, the seeds of Cucumers,
Gourds, Citruls, Purssain, Spodium of each half an ounce, Roses seven drachms,
Juice of Barberries fix drachms, Bole Armenick four drachms, Camphire one
dram, with Purslain water make it into Troches.

A. The virtues are the same with the former.

Troches of Vipers. Andromacus out. of Galen.
Take of the flesh of Vipers, the skin, bowels, and fat, head, and tail being
taken away, boiled with Dill and a little salt, eight ounces, the crumbs of
pure white bread, two ounces, make them into Troches with the broth in which
the Vipers were boiled, if you need liquor, and anoint them with Opobalsamum or
oil of (...) by expression, and dried in the shadow, in an open place, fifteen
days, or something longer, often turning them, till they be well dried, then
lay them up in a glass or stone vessel glazed, so may they be kept (close
stopped) a whole year, yet it is better to make Treacle so soon as you have
them, They which will keep them longer let them wipe off the dust which usually
sticks to them, which in time will eat them through and through, so may you
keep them three years.

Trochisci Viticis, sive Agni Casti. Renodaeus.
Take of the seeds of Agnus Castus, Roses, Lettice, Balaustins of each a
dram; Ivory, Amber, of each a dram and an half; Bole Arminick washed in the
water of (...) grass two drachms; Plantan seed (...), Sassafras two scruples;
with Mussilage of Quince seeds made with the water of water Lilly flowers, make
them into Troches according to art.

Trochisci albi. Rhasis.
Take of Ceruss washed in Rose water ten drachms, Sarcocolla three drachms,
white Starch two drachms, (...) Arabic and (...) of each one dram. Camphire,
Opium of each half a dram, let them be made up into Troches, with milk
according to art. Also if you please you may make them up without Opium.

A. They are cool without Opium, but cooler with it, as also very drying, and
are used in injections in Ulcers in the yard, and the running of the reins, etc.

Troches of Winter-Cherries. Mesue.
Take of the berries of Winter-Cherries three drachms, the seeds of Melons,
Cucumers, Citruls, Gourds, of each three dram and an half; Gum Arabic
Traganth, Olibanum, Dragons blood, Pine nuts, bitter Almonds, white Poppy
seeds, white Starch, juice of Liquoris, Bole Armenick of each six drams, the
seeds of Smallage and Henbane, Amber, Earth of Lemnos, Opium of each two drams,
with juice of the berries of fresh winter Cherries, or else with their
decoction make them up into Troches according to art. Also you may prepare them
without Opium.

A. They potently provoke urine, and break the stone.

Trochisci de Carabe. Mesue.
Take of Amber six drams, burnt Hartshorn, Gum Arabic torrefied, red Correl
burnt, Gum traganth, Acacia, Hypoci stis, (...), Mastich, Gum Lacca washed,
black Poppy seeds torrefied, of each two drams; Frankincense, Saffron, Opium of
each one dram and an half; Missilage of the seeds of Psyllium
Flea-wort so much as is sufficient to make it up into Troches.

A. They were invented to stop fluxes of blood in any part of the body, the
terms in women, the (...) or piles, they also help ulcers in the breast and
lungues.

Trochisci Diacorrallion. Galen.
Take of Bole Armenick, red Corral of each an ounce, Balaustins, terra Lemnia,
white Starch, of each half an ounce, Hypocystis, the seeds of Henbane, Opium of
each two drachms, juice of Plantane so much as is sufficient to make them into
troches according to art.

A. These also stop blood, help the bloody flux, stop the terms, and are a
great help to such whose stomach loathes their victuals

Trochisci Diaspermaton. Galeni.
Take of the seeds of Smallage, and Bishops weed of each an ounce, Annis and
Fennel seeds, of each half an ounce, Opium, Cassia lignea of each two drams,
with rainwater make it into troches according to art.

A. These also bind, ease pain, help the pleuresie.

Haemoptoici pastilli. Galen.
Take of white Starch, Balaustins, earth of Samos, juice of Hypocistis, if it
be (...) Gum (...) I know not what it is,
Gum, Saffron, Opium of each two drams, with (...) of Plantane make them into
troches according to art.

A. The operation of this is like the former.

Sief de Plumbo. Mesue.
Take of Lead burnt and washed, Brass burnt, Antimony, Tutty washed, Gum
Arabic and Traganth of each an ounce, Opium half a dram, with a sufficient
quantity of rainwater make them up into troches.

A. It fills up and cures ulcers in the eyes.

Trochisci de Succino. Galen.
Take of Illirick, Orris, Amber, Mastich, Saffron, of each two drachms, Opium
five drachms, with mussilage made of the seeds of Psyllium
Fleawort make it into Troches according to art.

A. They cool, bind, and strengthen the stomach, and provoke sleep.

Sief of Frankincense. Rhasis.
Take of I think they mean that by Cadmia.
Lapis (...), Pompholix, Frankin sense of each ten drachms, Ceruss forty
drachms, Gum Arabic, Opium, of each six drachms, rain water so much as is
sufficient to make it into balls according to art.

A. Sief is a general term which the Arabians give to all medicines apropriated
to the eyes, of which this is one, and a good one to dry up rewms there.

Agrick Trochiscated. Mesue.
Take of choice Agrick four ounces, with infusion of Ginger made in wine, make
it into Troches,

Troches of Agrick.
Take of choice Agrick three ounces, Sal. Gem. six drachms Ginger two drachms,
with Oxymel Simplex so much as is sufficient make it into Troches according to
art.

A. The virtues of both these are the same with Agrick, only it may be more
safely given this way than the other, they cleanse the brain of phlegm, and the
stomach of tough thick viscous humors.

Trochisci Alhandal. Mesue
Take of Colocynthis cleansed from the seeds ten ounces, cut them small with a
pair of shears and rub them a little with an ounce of oil of Roses, then first
beat (...) into powder.
make them into Troches with Mussilage made with Gum Arabic and Traganth, and
Bdellium, of each six drachms, then steep them four days in Rosewater, dry
them in the shadow, then beat them into powder again, and with mussilage as
you had before, make them again into Troches.

A. They purge slegm violently, but may more safely be given than the troches
themselves

Troches of (...). Mesue.
Take of Rhubarb ten drachms, the juice of Maudlin made thick, bitter Almonds
of each half an ounce, Roses three drachms, Indian Spicknard, Wormwood, the
seeds of Annis and Smallage, the roots of Maddir and Asarabacca of each
adrachm, make them into Troches according to art, either with Succory water or
juice of Maudlin clarified.

A. They gently cleanse the liver, help the yellow Jaundice and other diseases
coming of Choler and stoppage of the liver.

Troches of Violets Solutive. Mesue.
Take of Violets meanly dried six drachms, Turbith half an ounce, juice of
Liquoris, Scammony, Manna, of each two drachms, make them into troches with
syrup of Violets.

A. They purge phlegm very violently.

SIMPLE OILS MADE BY EXPRESSION.
Oil of Sweet Almonds. Mesue.
TAKE as many sweet Almonds as you will, that are dry and not sour, beat them
very well and press out the oil, in a press, without fire.

A. It helps roughness and soreness of the throat and stomach, helps
pleuresies, increases seed, eases Coughs, and Hectic fevers, by injection
it helps such whose water scalds them, ulcers in the bladdeer, reins and matrix.

Oil of bitter Almonds. Mesue.
It is made in the same manner as oil of sweet Almonds.

A. It opens stoppings, helps such as are deaf being dropped into their ears,
it helps the hardness (...) the nerves, and takes away spots in the face.

Oil of Hazel Nuts. Mesue
Take a sufficient quantity of Hazel nuts, and cleanse them, then bruise them
well, place them in a warm bath five or six hours, then press out the oil in a
press.

A. You mast put them in a vessel, (viz. a glass or some such like thing) and
stop them close that the water come not to them when you put them into the bath.

A. The Oil is good for cold afflictions of the nerves, the gout in the joints
etc.

After the same manner is made oil of Been called Oleum Bolaninum. Of Mace,
Indian Nuts, Nutmegs, Walnuts.

Of the kernels of Cherries, Apricocks, Pears, Pinenuts, Prunes, Fistick nuts.

Of the seeds of Orrenges, Hemp, Carthamus or: bastard It Is not requisite to
set Pine nuts twice as the College did.
Saffron and is called Oleum Cnicinum, Citrons, Cucumers, Guords, Citruls,
dwarf Elder, or Walwort, Henbane, Lettice Flax, Melons, Poppies, Parsley,
Rhadishes, Turnips, Palma Christi and is called Oleum de Cherva, Cicinum, and
Ricininum, Sesami, Mustard seed, and of the stones of Grapes.

A. Because most of these oils are out of use, I took not the pains to quote
the virtues of them, if any lift to make them let them look the Simples and
there they have them, if the Simples be not to be found in the book, there are
other plentiful medicines conducing to the cure of al usual diseases which are.

Oil of Bays. Mesue.
Take of Bay berries fresh and ripe, so many as you please, bruise them
sufficiently, then boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, till the oil
swim at top, which separate from the water and keep for your use.

A. It helps the Chollick, and is a sovereign remedy for any diseases in any
part of the body coming either of wind or cold.

Common oil of Olives, is pressed out of ripe Olives:
Oil of Olives Omphacine, is pressed out of unripe Olives.
Oil of the Yolks of Eggs. Mesue.
Take of the yolks of Eggs boiled hard, warm them well with a gentle fire in a
glazed vessel but have a care you burn them not then press out the oil with a
press, and if whilst they are warming, you sprinkle them with a little Wine the
Oil will come out the better.

A. It is profitable in (...) and malignant ulcers, it causes the hair to
grow, it cleers the skin and takes away deformities thereof, viz. Tettars,
Ringworms, Morphew, Scabs.

SIMPLE OILS BY INFUSION OR DECOCTION.
Oil of Roses Omphacine.
Take of oil Omphacine a pound, in which infuse red Rose buds bruised, four
ounces, put them in a glass or stone pot glazed, stop them close, and set them
in the sun seven days, shaking them every day, then boil them gently in a
double vessel, and casting away those Roses (viz having strained them out) put
in fresh Roses, set it in the sun seven days more, then boil it again, cast
away those also and infuse fresh Roses, and when they have also been digested
in the sun seven days, and gently boiled according to art, strain the oil from
them, and keep it for your use.

Oil of Roses complete. Mesue.
It is made in the same manner with the former, only with sweet oil, Not
Omphacine, and red Roses full blown, boiled twice as the former was, only the
third time that the Roses are put in, let it stand forty days in the sun, and
then if you please you may keep the oil and Roses in it, and not press them out
at all.

After the same manner is made oil of Wormwood, of the tops of Wormwood (...)
ounces, Oil three pound, repeating the infusion three times, adding at the
last, juice of Wormwood four ounces, boil it gently till the juice be consumed.

Also oil of Dill, of one pound of oil and four ounces of the leaves and
flowers of Dill, infused three times.

Oil of Castorium, of one ounce of Castorium, one pound of Oil, Wine so much as
is the College might havetaken the pains to set down how much that is.
sufficient, boil it to the consumption of the Wine.

Oil of Chamomel. Of Oil, and the flowers of Chamomel, let them be set in the
sun forty days.

In the same manner is Oil of Meliot prepared.

Oil of Winter-Gilliflowers (or Wall flowers as we call them in Sussex) is made
as oil of Dill is.

Oil of Quinces, is made of un-ripe Quinces, pills and all, and juice of Quinces
of each six ounces, oil Omphacine three pound, let them stand in the sun in a
glass fifteen days, then boil them in a double vessel four hours, afterward
chang the quinces and the juice, ( viz put in fresh, having strained out the
former) at viz. having boiled it to the consumption of the juice.
last strain it and keep it for your use.

Oil of Elicampane is made of the roots of Elicampane bruised, and of the juice
of them, and oil of Almonds, of each half a pound, sweet wine three ounces,
boiled to the consumption of the wine.

Oil of Euphorbium is made of Euphorbium half an ounce, oil of
winter-Gilliflowers, Wine of each five ounces, boiled to the consumption of the
wine.

Oil of Emmats is made of winged Emmets two ounces, some countries call them
Ants. some Pismires, and some Pisants, we in Sussex Emments.
oil eight ounces, set in the sun for forty days and so kept for your use.

Oil of St. John's wort.
Take of the tops of St. John's wort four ounces, steep them in a pound of old
oil Olive, and six ounces of Wine for three days, either in the sun, or in the
heat of a bath, then strain them out, renew the infusion with fresh tops of
Saint John's wort the second and third time, the last time let it be boiled
almost to the consumption of the wine, strain it out, and ad to the oil three
ounces of Turpentine, one scruple of Saffron, boil it a little, and so keep it
for vour use.

Oil of Jasmine is made of the flowers and clear oil, as oil of Boses is.

Oil of Orris.
Take of the roots of Orris Florentine a pound, the flowers of white Lillies
half a pound, water in which other roots of Orris Florentine have been boiled,
so much as is sufficient, sweet oil six pound, boil them in a double vessel,
then put in fresh roots and flowers, the former being cast away as in oil of
Roses.

Oil of Earthworms.
Take of Earthworms half a pound, wash them well in Wine, then add oil of Olives
two pound, Wine eight ounces, boil them in a double vessel to the consumption
of the Wine.

Oil of Marjoram Simple is made of four ounces of the Herb infused in six
ounces of Wine, and a pound of oil, with insolation and two other infusions (as
in oil of Roses) evaporate away the Wine in a bath.

Oil of Mastich.
Take of oil of Roses Omphacine a pound, Mastich three ounces, Wine four
ounces, boil them in a double vessel to the consumption of the Wine.

Oil of mints is made of the herb and Oil Omphacine as Oil of Roses.

Oil of Mirtles is made of the berries of Mirtles bruised (and sprinkled with
red Wine) a pound, oil Omphacine three pound, let them be set in the sun eight
days, then boiled, infuse fresh ones, and repeat both the infusion and
insolation three times, then boil them in a double vessel and keep the oil for
your use.

Oil of Mirrh.
Take certain new laid Eggs and boil them till they be hard, then cut them
through the middle, the longest way, take out the yolks and fill the hollow
place half full of mirrh, then join the whites together again and bind them
gently with a string, then place them between two dishes, a small grate being
between, that they fall not to the bottom, then place them in a wine Cellar or
some other cool place under ground, so will the melted liquor of the Mirrh
distill down into the inferior dish.

Oil of Daffadils is made of the flowers and oil, as oil of Roses

Nard oil Simple is made of Spicknard three ounces, sweet oil a pound and an
half, Wine and Water of each two ounces and an half, boil them in a double
vessel till the Wine and Water be consumed.

Oil of water Lilly flowers is made of oil Omphacine a pound, white water Lilly
flowers four ounces, three times repeated as in oil of Roses.

Oil of Poppies is made of the heads, flowers, and leaves of Poppies, and oil
Omphacine, as oil of Dill.

Oil of Rue simple, of Rue boiled and sweet oil, as oil of Roses.

Oil of Savin is made as oil of Roses.

So also is oil of Elder flowers.

Oil of Scorpions, of Scorpions by number thirty (...); of bitter Almonds two
pound, let them be infused for forty days in a warm place in a glass, then
strained out and the oil kept for your use.

Oleum Sicyonium of wild Cucumerroots and their juice, of each six ounces, oil
of ripe Olives a pound, boil them in a double vessel to the consumption of the
juice.

Oil of Nightshade is made of the ripe berries of Nightshade four ounces boiled
in a pint of oil.

Oil of Styrax is made of a pound of oil Olive and three ounces of Styrax, Wine
so much as is sufficient, boil them after a sufficient maceration to the
consumption of the Wine.

Oil of Vervain is made of the herb and oil, as oil of Mints is.

Oil of Violets of the flowers of Violets and oil Omphatine as oil of Roses.

A. That most of these oils if not all of them are used only externally is
certain, and as certain that they retain the virtues of the simples whereof
they are made, therefore the ingenious might help themselves, but because we
live in a frigid age I shall vouchsefe to quote the virtues of the chiefest of
them.

A. Oil of Roses (the stomach being anointed with it) strengthens it, cools the
heat of it, thickens, takes away inflammations, abates swellings.

A. Oil of Wormwood does moderatly heat and strengthen the stomach being
anointed with it, it procures apetite, opens obstructions, furthers digestion,
and kills worms.

A. Oil of Dill does moderatly digest, aswage the pains of the head and nerves,
and procures sleep.

A. Oil of Castorium helps cold diseases of the nerves, deafness being dropped
into the ears, and noise there.

A. Oil of Chamomel strengthens the sinnews, greatly aswageth pain and breaks
the stone.

A. Oil of melilot has the same effects.

A. Oil of Walflowers aswageth pains in the breast and reins, sinnews, joints,
and bladder.

A. Oil of Quinces, cools, binds, and strengthens, stops vomiting, looseness and
sweating.

A. Oil of Euphorbium has the same effects with that of Castorium, but works
more forcibly, being (...) up the nose it purges the head of phlegm.

A. Oil of Emmets the privities being anointed with it provokes lust.

A. Oil of St. John's wort, is as good a thing in green wounds as a man can use.

A. Oil of Orris does concoct and dissolve, aswage pain of the womb, liver, and
joints, also it strengthens the breast.

A. Oil of Earthworms mollify heat, and aswage pains, and is special good for
such as (...) been bruised or hurt in their joints.

A. Oil of Marjoram, helps weariness, cold diseases of the brain, noise in the
ears being dropped into them, the bitings of venomous beasts, and provokes the
terms in women.

A. Oil of Mastich strengthens the brain, stomach, and liver, sinnews, and
veins, stays vomiting, and fluxes.

A. The stomach being anointed with oil of Mints, stays the weakness of it,
heats and strengthens it, stays vomiting, helps digestion and provokes
appetite.

A. Oil of Mirtles has the same effects with Quinces.

A. Oil of Mirrh preserves any thing from putrefying that is anointed with it,
makes the face fair and youthful.

A. Nard oil does heat digest, and strengthen, resists all cold and windy
diseases throughout the body.

Oil of water Lillies cools and asswageth the violent heat especially of the
head, reins, and bladder, thereby mitigating frenzies, procuring sleep, and is
a good preservative against the stone, and helps such women (their backs being
anointed with it) as are subject to miscarry through heat of their reins, which
they may easily know by continual pains in their backs, and swelling of their
legs. Also oil of Poppies have the same virtue.

A. Oil of Rue, heats, and makes thin, gross humors, expels wind, helps
palsies, cramps, coldness of the womb and bladder.

A. Oil of Violets cools inflammations, eases the pleuresie, and pains of the
breast.

A. Oil of Nightshade has the same effects with that of water Lillies.

A. Then remember that these oils must not be given inwardly as men take drink,
but outwardly applied or cast in as injections or Clysters.

COMPOUND OILS.
Oleum Aparicii Benedictum. Hier. Fab. ab Aq.
Take of old oil three ounces, pure Turpentine eight ounces, pure wheat flower
an ounce and an half, of the flowers of St. John's wort two ounces, the roots of
Carduus Benedictus and Valerian of each an ounce, Frankincense in powder two
ounces, let the roots and herbs be grossly bruised and put into a pot, and so
much white Wine put into them that it may cover them all, let them stand in
infusion three days, then add the oil and the flower, boil them all to the
comsumption of the Wine, then having strongly strained it out add the
Turpentine and Frankincense, let it boil a little, and so keep it in a glass
for your use.

A. It is apropriated to cleanse and consolidate wounds especially in the head,

Oil of Cappers.
Take of the bark of Cappar roots an ounce, the bark of Tamaris, the leaves of
Tamaris, the seeds of Agnus Castus, Ceterah, Cyperus roots, of each two
drachms, Rue one dram, oil of ripe Olives one pound, strong wine Vinegar, and
white Wine of each two ounces, the things to be bruised being bruised let them
be all infused together a while, then boiled in a double vessel to the
consumption of the Wine and Vinegar, then strained, pressed out and kept for
your use.

A. The oil is opening, and heating, absolutely apropriated to the spleen,
hardness and pains thereof, and diseases coming of stoppings there, as
Hypocondriack melancholy, the rickets etc.

Oil of Castorium. Jacobus de Manliis.
Take of Castorinm, Styrax Calamitis, Galbanum, Euphorbium, Cassia lignea,
Saffron, Opopanax, Carpobalsamum or Cubebs, Spicknard, Costus of each two
drachms, Cyperus, Schoenanthus, Pepper long and black, Savin, Pellitory of
Spain of each two drachms and an half, Oil three pound, Spanish Wine two pound,
let the Galbanum and Opopanax be dissolved by themselves in the Wine, then let
all the rest being bruised be boiled with the oil and Wine, and strained, then
the Opopanax and Galbanum, dissolved in oil and strained let them be mixed with
the oil, and boiled again often stirring it, that the Opopanax and Galbanum
which is subject to settle to the bottom may be mixed with the oil, let the
Styrax be dissolved by it self in Wine, afterward add a dram and an half of
Turpentine that so the Styrax may the better mingle with the oil.

A. The virtues are the same with the Simple, only it is held to be more
effectual in the premises.

Oleum Costinum. Mesue.
Take of bitter Costus two ounces, Cassia lignea one ounce, the tops of
Marjoram eight ounces, being bruised let them be infused two days in a
sufficient quantity of Wine, then boil them with two pound of oil of Olives
washed in Wine, in a double vessel to the consumption of the Wine, according to
art.

A. It heats, opens obstructions, strengthens the nerves and all nervous parts,
as muscles, tendons, ligaments, the ventricle besides these, it strengthens the
liver, it keeps the hairs from turning gray, and gives a good color to the
body.

Oleum Crocinum. Mesue.
Take of Saffron an ounce, pure Mirrh half an ounce, Cardamoms nine drachms,
Calamus Aromaticus one ounce, let them all be infused in Vinegar (except the
Cardamoms) for five days, the sixth day put in the Cardamoms and let them
strand one day longer, the morning following add a pound and an half of oil to
them, and boil them with a gentle fire till the Vinegar be consumed according
to art: Some put in Wine instead of Vinegar.

A. It helps pains in the nerves and strengthens them, mollifies their
hardness, helps pains in the matrix and causes a good color.

Oil of Euphorbium the Compound. Nicholaus.
Take of Stavesager, Sopewort of each half an ounce, Pellitory of Spain six
drachms, Mountain Calaminth dried an ounce and an half, Costus ten drams,
Costorium five drams, being bruised and three days steeped in three pound and
an half of Wine, let them be boiled with one pound and an half of oil of
Walflowers till the Wine be almost consumed, then put in half an ounce of
Euphorbium fresh and white in fine powder mix them together and boil it to
perfection.

A. It has the same virtue only is something more effectual than the Simple.

Oleum Excestrense. Commonly called Oil of Exceter.
Take of the leaves of Wormwood, Centaury the less, whether here they mean
Maudlin, or Agrimony I know not.
Eupatorium, Fennel, Hysop, Bay leaves, Marjoram, Bawm, Nep, Penyroyal, Savin,
Sage, Time, the flowers of Chamomel, Broom, white Lillies, Elders, the seeds of
Cummin and Foenugreek, the roots of white and black Hellebore, the bark of Ash
and Lemmon tree, of each four ounces, the leaves of Southernwood, Eettony,
Chamepitys, Lavendar of each six ounces, Rosemary a pound, Euphorbium, Mustard
seed, Gastorium, Pellitory of Spain of each an ounce, Oil sixteen pound, Wine
three pound, the herbs seeds and Euphorbium being bruised and the roots, bark,
and Castorium cut, the Wine and Oil being put to them, let them stand in a warm
bath twelve hours, afterward boiled over a gentle fire, to the consumption of
the Wine, and humidity of the herbs, then strain out the Oil and keep it for
your use.

Oil of Swallows.
Take sixteen Swallows whole and alive, Chamomel, Rue, Plantane the greater and
lesser, the leaves of Bay, Penyroyal, Dill, Hysop, Rosemary, Sage, St. John's
wort, some countries call it Alecost; it is a kind of Maudlin.
Costmary of each a handful, common Oil four pound, Spanish Wine one pound,
make it up according to art: but if instead of Oil you will put so much May
Butter to it as here is appointed Oil, and boil it with the foregoing Simples,
then will it have both the name and consistence of an ointment.

A. Both this and the former are apropriated to old bruises and pains thereof
coming, as also to Sprains.

Oil of St. John's wort Compound: or A Magisterial Balsam. Florent.
Take of strong white Wine three pound, the tops of St. John's wort being ripe
four handfuls, bruise the St. John's wort and infuse it in the Wine, in a glass
close stopped, two days, then boil it in a double vessel, a whil, strain it
strongly, and having cast away the former ad other flowers, do so the second
time as you did the first, and the third time, then strain it out and to every
pound of infusion, add four pound of old Oil, Turpentine six ounces, oil of
Wormwood three ounces, Dittany, Gentian, Carduus Benedictuus, Tormentil, or
Ladies Thistle, or Carline Thistle, Calamus Aromaticus of each two drachms,
Earthworms often washed in Wine, two ounces, the things to be bruised being
grossly bruised, let them be set in the sun thirty or forty days, and being
well strained be kept for your use.

A. Besides the virtues of the Simple Oil of St. John's wort, which this
performs more effectually, it is an excellent remedy for old bruises aches and
sprains.

Oil of Orris Compound. Nich. Alex.
Take of old oil fifteen pound, water four pound and an half, the roots of
Orris Florentine, three pound and four ounces, white Lilly flowers fifteen
ounces, fresh Cyperus roots six ounces, Alicampane roots three ounces, Alkanet
roots two ounces, Cinnamon, Spicknard, Benzoin, or which in a some men's
opinions are two things.
Asadulcis, of each an ounce, let the roots and the rest of the Simples be
bruised and infused in the oil and water five days either in the Sun or some
warm place, afterward boiled in a double vessel till the water be consumed
then let it cool, strain it out and keepit for your use.

A. The effects are the same with the Simple.

Oil of Marjoram Compound. Actuarius.
Take of the leaves of Marjoram four handfuls, Mother of Time two handfuls, the
flowers of Mirtles, or else their berries one handful, Southernwood, watermints
of each a handful, Cassia lignea two ounces, Oil Omphacine three pound, all of
them being cut and bruised, and put into a glass and the oil poured to them,
and the mouth of the glass stopped, let them beset in the sun or another hot
place eight days, then let them be pressed out and fresh Simples put to the
Oil, use it in like manner, repeat their infusion three times, then keep it for
your use.

A. It helps weariness and diseases of the brain and nerves, coming of cold, it
helps the dead palsy, the back (viz. the region along the back bone) being
anointed with it, being snuffed up in the nose it helps Spasmus Cynicus, which
is a wrying the mouth aside, it helps noise in the ears being dropped into
them, it provokes the terms and helps the bitings of venomous beasts.

Oil of Mandrakes. Nicholaus.
Take of common oil two pound, the juice of the Apples of Mandrakes (or if you
cannot get them take the juice of Mandrake leaves) the juice of white Henbane
two ounces, the juice of the heads of black Poppies three ounces, the juice of
Violets and Hemlock of each one ounce, Opium, Styrax Calamitis of each half an
ounce, let the Juyces and Oil be infused ten days in the sun, then boiled in a
double vessel to the consumption of the juyces, strain it, then let the Opium
being dissolved in some of the juyces and the Styrax being dissolved in a little
Turpentine be well mixed with it according to art.

A. It is probable the Author studied to invent an Oil extremely cold when he
invented this, I am of opinion it may be used safely no way but only to anoint
the temples and noses of such as have a frenzy.

Oleum Moschelinum.
Take two Nutmegs, Musk a dram, Indian leaf or Mace, Spicknard, Costus,
Mastich of each six drachms, Styrax Calamitis, Cassia lignea, Mirrh, Saffron,
Cinnamon, Cloves, Carpobalsamum or Cubebs, Bdellium of each two drachms, pure
oil three pound, generous Wine three ounces, the things to be beaten being
beaten according to art, and mixed let them boil to the consumption of the
Wine, and having strained the Oil keep it for your use.

A. It is exceeding good against all diseases of cold, especially those of the
stomach, it helps diseases of the sides they being anointed with it, the
strangury, chollick, and vices of the nerves, and afflictions of the reins.

A. The recept was made by Nicholaus Alexandrinus only the College something
altered the quantities and that not worth speaking of.

Nard Oil. Mesue.
Take of Spicknard three ounces, Marjoram two ounces, Wood of Aloes,
Elicampane, Indian leaf or Mace, Calamus Aromaticus, Bay leaves, Cyperus,
Schoenanthus, Cardamoms of each an ounce and an half, let them be grossly
bruised, then infused in Wine and Water of each fourteen ounces, and oil of
Sesanus or oil Olive, four puund and an half, for 24. hours, then boiled in a
double vessel, with a gentle fire six hours continually stirring it.

A. It heats, attenuates, digests, and moderately binds, and therefore helps
all cold and windy afflictions of the brain stomach, reins, spleen, liver,
bladder, and womb, being snuffed up the nose it purges the head, and gives a
good color and smell to the body.

Oleum. Nicodemi.
Take of the seeds or tops of St. John's wort, old Turpentine of each a pound,
Licharge six drams, Aloes Hepatick, Tuty of Alexandria of each three drachms,
Saffron an ounce, of the best white Wine four pound, old Oil two pound, boil
them all together in a double vessel till the fourth part be consumed, then
bury them in sand, in the I am of opinion any time in the heat of summer will
serve the turn, and my reason is because the dog stars have so much south
latitude that their influence is very little or nothing at al in these northen
climats.
dogdaies, for ten days, afterward strain them through a clean rag, separate
the Wine from the oil and keep them both apart.

A. Both Wine and Oil are exceeding drying, (that the Wine is more cleansing,
and the Oil best to skin a sore, your genius (though never so dull) will tell
you) and therefore excellent for sores and ulcers that run much, as for scabs,
itch small pocks, swine pocks etc.

Oil of Tobacco.
Take of juice of Tobacco, common oil of each a pound, boil them together to
the consumption of the juice.

A. It is as gallant a remedy for deep wounds, scabs or itch as any is under
the Cope of Heaven, and no way prejudicial.

Oil of Peppers. Mesue.
Take of long, black and white Pepper of each three drams, Myrobalans, Chebul,
Bellerick, Emblick and Indian of each five drachms, the roots of Smallage and
Fennel, of each three drachms and an half, Sagapenum, Opopanax, Ammoniacum,
white Henbane of each to drachms and an half, Turbith two drachms, Ginger three
drachms, the branches of green Time and green Rue of each a handful, insuse
them according to art, in a sufficient quantity of Aquavitae, oil of
Wallflowers otherwise called Winter Gilliflowers two pound, then boil them to
the consumption of the Aquavitae.

A. It helps cold diseases of the nerves, as Palsies falling sickness,
convulsions, wry-mouths, trembling or shaking palsy, likewise cold afflictions
of the reins and bladder, yard and womb, gouts and all diseases of the joints,
it heats, makes thin, and cleanses, and therefore it opens obstructions or
stoppings and breaks the stone.

Cleuon Populeum. Nichol.
Take of fresh Poplar buds three pound, Wine four pound, common oil seven pound
two ounces, beat the Poplar buds very well, then steep them seven days in the
oil and Wine, then boil them in a double vessel til the Wine be consumed (if
you infuse fresh buds once or twice before you boil it, the medicine will be
the stronger) then press out the oil and keep it.

A. It is a fine cool oil, but the Ung. Popules
ointment called by that name which follows hereafter is far better.

Oil of Foxes. Mesue.
Take a fat Fox of a middle age, wearied with hunting, and new killed, the skin
and bowels being taken away and the bones broken, cut into many parts, boil him
in white Wine and Conduit water of each six pound, till almost half be
consumed, scumming it dilligently, then mix with it four pound of old sweet
Oil, common Salt three ounces, the flowers of Sage, Time, of each a pound, let
it boil till almost all the water be consumed, then ad water (wherein a handful
of Dill and Time have been boiled) eight pound, boil it again over a gentle
fire to the consumption of the water, then press out the Oil, and if any watery
substance remain amongst it, separate it with a Funnel and keep the Oil for
your use.

A. It is exceeding good in pains of the joints, gouts, pains in the back and
reins.

OINTMENTS.
OINTMENTS MORE SIMPLE.
Unguentum album. Rhasis.
TAKE of oil of Roses nine ounces, good Ceruss washed in Rose water three
ounces, white Wax two ounces, make them into an Ointment according to art, and
if you ad two drachms of Camphire, then will it be camphorated.

A. Some hold it impossible to make it into an Ointment this way, others hold
it not convenient, but instead of oil of Roses they ad so much Hogs grease, and
leaving out the white Wax they make it into an Ointment without the help of the
fire.

A. It is a fine cooling drying Ointment, eases pains, and itching in wounds
and ulcers, and is a hundred times better with Camphire than without it.

Unguentum Aegiptiacum. Mesue.
Take of Vert-de-greece five drachms, Honey fourteen drachms sharp Vinegar
seven drachms, boil them all together till they come to be a thick Ointment of
a reddish color.

A. It cleanses filthy ulcers and fistulaes forcibly, and not without pain, it
takes away dead or proud flesh, and dries: the Chyrurgian of our days use it
commonly instead of Apostolorum, to cleanse wounds, it cleanses more potently
indeed, and therefore may be sitter in sanious ulcers, but it strengthens not
so much.

Unguentum Anodinum.
Take of oil of white Lillies six ounces, oil of Dill and Chamomel of each two
ounces, sweet Almonds one ounce, Ducks grease and Hens grease of each two
ounces, white Wax three ounces, mix them together according to art.

A. I take the Augustan Physicians to be the Authors of this for there it is to
be found verbatim only they prescribe no certain quantity of Wax, its use is to
aswage pains in any part of the body, especially such as come by inflammations,
whether in wounds or tumors, and for that it is admirable.

Unguentum sive Linimentum. Arceus.
Take of Gum Elenni, Turpentine of the firr tree of each an ounce and an half,
sheep Suit tried two ounces, hogs grease tried two ounces, mix them together
and make them into an Ointment according to art.

A. Although our Chyrurgians usually use this only for wounds and ulcers in the
head, yet he that makes trial shall find it excellent for ulcers if not too
sanious in any part of the body, though in the feet, and they are at the
greatest distance from the head, it gently cleanses, and fills up an ulcer
with flesh, it being of a mild nature and friendly to the body.

Unguentum Aureum, Mesue.
Take of yellow Wax half a pound, oil two pound and an half, Turpentine two
ounces, Rozin of the Pine tree, commonly called Perrozin, Colophonia of each an
ounce and a half, Frankincense, Mastich of each an ounce, Saffron a dram,
make them up according to art.

A. If you remember the College commends this Ointment to engender flesh in the
beginning of the Compounds, page 79. and indeed it does so, but if you please
to take counsel of Dr. EXPERIENCE he will tell you that the former is worth two
of it for that use.

Unguentum Basilicon majus. Mesue.
Take of white wax, Per-rozin, Heifers Suit, greek pitch, Turpentine, Olibanum,
Mirrh of each an ounce, Oil a pound, or else a sufficient quantity to make it
up into an Ointment.

Unguentum Basilicon minus. Or, Tetrapharmacum. Mesue.
Take of yellow Wax, Rozin, greek Pitch of each half a pound, Oil two pound and
four ounces, only melt them that so they may be mixed together into the
consistence of an Ointment.

A. Both this and the former heat, moisten and digest, procure matter in
wounds, I mean bring the filth or corrupted blood from green wounds, they
cleanse and ease pain.

Ointment of Bdellium. Mesue.
Take of Bdellium six drachms, Euphorbium, Sagapenum, of each four drachms,
Castorium three drachms, Wax fifteen drachms, Oil of Elder or Walflower ten
drachms, the Bdellium and (...), being dissolved in the water of wild Rue, let
the rest be united with warm water, and made into an Ointment according to art.

A. I confess Mesue appoints it to be made up in the same manner, I do not well
know whether it be possible or not, If not; it may be done with the oil.

A. It is exceeding good against palsies, wry-mouths, falling sickness, and
other cold of afflictions of the nerves.

Unguentum de Calce. Foesius.
Take of I do not well know whether they mean Lime or not, for the latin word
Calx I take it) fignifies both.
Chalk at least seven times washed half a pound, Oil of Roses a pound, (...)
them about well in a leaden mortar, then ad to them three ounces of Wax.

A. It is exceeding good, in burnings and scaldings.

Ointment of Marshmallows Simple. Nicholaus.
Take of Marsh mallow roots fresh and bruised two pound, Linseed and flax seed
is all one.
Linseed and Fenagreek seed bruised of each a pound, steep them in eight pound
of Water, then boil them a little gently and press out their mussilage, of
which take two pound and oil four pound, boil them together till the mussilage
be consumed, then ad Wax a pound, Rozin half a pound, Turpentwo ounces, boil
them into the consistence of an Ointment.

Ointment of Marshmallows Compound. Nichol.
Take of Marshmallow roots two pound, the seeds of Flax and Fenugreek of each
one pound, pulp of Squils half a pound, Oil four pound, Wax one pound,
Turpentine, Gum of (...); Galbanum of each two ounces, Colophonia, Rozin of
each half a pound; let the roots be well washed and bruised, as also the
Linseed; Foenugreek seed and Squils, then steep them three days in eight pints
of water, the fourth day boil them a little upon the fire and draw out the
Mussilage, of which take two pound and boil it with the oil to the consumption
of the juice, afterward ad the Wax, Rozin and Colophonia, when they are melted
ad the Turpentine, afterward the Galbanum and gum of lvy, dissolved in
Vinegar, boil them a little, and having removed them from the fire, (...) them
til they are cold that so they may be well incorporated.

A. They both ( viz. this and the former) heat and moisten, the latter helps
pains of the breast coming of cold and pleuresies.

Unguentum Enulatum.
Take of Elicampane roots while they are soft, bruised and boiled in Vinegar
(and drawn through a pulping sieve) one pound, Hogs Greas without salt one
pound, Common Oil four ounces, Wax two ounces, Salt one ounce, Quicksilver
killed either with fasting spittle or juice of Lemmons, Turpentine washed with
the decoction the Elicampane roots were boiled in, of each two ounces, let the
(...) and Wax be melted in the oil, then ad the pulp of Elicampane and Salt
being finely poudered, last of all ad the Quick silver killed labored much in a
mortar with the Turpentine and a little Crease, make them into an ointment
according to art. Also it ought to be prepared without Quicksilver.

A. My opinion of this ointment is (briefly) this, It was invented for the
Itch, without Quick silver it will do no good, with Quicksilver it may do harm.

Unguentum Diapompholigos nihili. Nichol.
Take of Oil of Roses sixteen ounces, Juice of Nightshade six ounces, let them
boil to the consumption of the juice, then ad white Wax five ounces, Cerus
washed two ounces, Lead burnt and washed, Pompholix prepared, pure
Frankincense, of each an ounce; let them be brought into the form of an
Ointment according to art.

A. It cools and binds, dries, and stays fluxes either of blood or humors in
wounds, and fills hollow ulcers with fiesh.

Unguentum Refrigerans. Galenus. It it also called a Cerecloath.
Take of white Wax four ounces, Oil of Roses Omphacine a pound, melt it in a
double vessel, then power it out into another, by degrees putting in cold water,
and often pouring it out of one vessel into another, stirring it till it be
white, last of all wash it in Rose water, adding a little Rose water and Rose
vinegar.

A. It is a fine cooling thing, (for what denomination to give it I scarce
know) and exceeding good, yea superexcellent to cure inflammations in wounds or
tumors.

Unguentum de Minio: Or Rubrum Camphoratum.
Take of oil of Roses a pound and an ounce, red Lead three ounces, Litharge two
ounces, Ceruss an ounce and an half, Tutty three drams, Camphire 2. drams, Wax
in summer two ounces, in winter one ounce, make them into an ointment in a
leaden mortar with a leaden pestel, the wax being first melted in the oil over
a gentle fire, then the rest added in fine powder.

A. This ointment is as drying as a man shall usually read of one, and withal
cooling, therefore good for sores, and such as are troubled with defluxions: I
remember once Dr. Alexander Read applied it to my Mothers breast when she had a
Cancer, before it brake long time, but to as much purpose as though he had
applied a (...) apple; yet in the forgoing infirmities I believe it seldom
fails.

Ointment of Tobacco. Joubertus
Take of Tobacco leaves two pound, fresh Hogs Grease dilligently washed one
pound, let the herb being bruised be infused a whole night in red Wine, in the
morning let it boil with a gentle fire to the consumption of the Wine, strain
it and ad to the Ointment, of the juice of Tobacco clarified half a pound,
Rozin four ounces, boil it to the consumption of the (...), adding toward the
end round (...) roots in powder two ounces, new Wax so much as is sufficient to
make it into an Ointment.

A It would ask a whole Summers day to write the particular virtues of this
Ointment, and my poor Genius is too weak to give it the hundredth part of its
due praise, It cures Tumors, Aposthumes, wounds, ulcers, Gunshot, botches,
scibs, itch, stinging with nettles, bees, wasps, hornets, venomous beasts,
wounds made with poisoned arrows etc. Tush! this is nothing -- paulo majora
canamus. It helps scaldings though made with oil, burnings though with
lightening and that without any scar, It helps nasty rotten stinking putrified
ulcers though in the legs, whither the humors are most subject to resort, in
fistulaes though the bone be afflicted it shall scale it without any instrument
and bring up the flesh from the very bottom, Would you be fair? your face being
anointed with this, soon will the redness, pimples, sunburning vanish, a wound
dressed with this will never putrify, a wound made with so small a weapon that
no tent will follow, anoint but with this and you need fear no danger, If your
head ache anoint your templss with this and you shall have ease, The stomach
being anointed with it, no infirmity dares harbor there, no not Asthmaes, nor
consumptions of the lungues, The belly being anointed with it, helps the
chollick and Iliack passion, the worms, and what not? it help the Hemorrhoids
or piles, and is the best Ointment that is for gouts of all sorts: finally
there may be as universal a medicine made for all diseases, of Tobacco as of
any thing in the world, the Philosophers stone excepted. O Joubertus! thou
shall never want praise for inventing this medicine, by those that use it, so
long as the Sun and the Moon endures.

Unguentum (...), or Crudum, or of Litharge, or Tripharmacum. Mesue.
Take of Litharge of Gold beaten into very fine powder, half a pound, Oil of
Roses a pound, Vinegar four ounces, put in sometimes Oil and sometimes Vinegar,
stirring it about in a mortar, so long till the Litharge have drunk up all the
liquor and be made in the form of a whitish Ointment.

A. It is of a cooling drying nature, good for itching of wounds, Itch and
Scabs and such like deformities of the skin, as Tetters, Ringworms etc.

Unguentum Ophthalmicum. Renodaeus.
Take of Bole Armenick washed in Rose water an ounce, Lapis Calaminaris washed
in Eyebright water, Tutty prepared of each two drachms, Pearls beaten into very
fine powder half a dram, Camphire half a scruple, Opium five grains, Ointment
of Roses fifteen ounces, Oil of Roses so much as is sufficient to make it into
an Ointment according to art.

A. It is exceeding good to stop hot Rhewms that fall down into the eyes the
eyelids being but anointed with it.

Cuilielmus Placentinus his Liniment Simple.
Take of washed Cerus eight ounces, white Wax seven ounces, Litharge washed,
juice of Nightshade of each five ounces, Frankincense in powder ten drachms,
oil of Roses often washed in common water two pound, make of them a Liniment
according to art.

A. It is cooling and also drying, if you cast an eye to some of the former
Ointments of that nature, you may see its use.

Ointment of Lead. Foesius.
Take of Lead burnt with Brimstone, Litharge of each two ounces, Ceruss,
Antimony of each one ounce, Oil of Roses so much as is sufficient to make it
into an Ointment.

I et the Lead being filed to dust be burned in a pot with Brimstone.

Pomatum.
Take of the Suet of a Stag or else of a Kid, two ounces, the fat of a Sow a
pound and an half, Apples being cut and pared by number eight, let the fats
being cleansed from their skins be washed in white Wine, then put them into an
earthen vessel glazed, which is half full of Rose water, let it boil gently
till almost all the water be consumed, strain it into another earthen vessel
sprinkled with Rose water, and ad to it oil of sweet Almonds six ounces, white
Wax four ounces, melt it again by the fire, and having strained it and washed
it with Rose water keep it for your use.

A. I have seen many other receipts to make Pomatum, and all better than this,
which is very difficult if not impossible to be gotten in many places of this
Nation, but I have not that Latitude given me, to quote any receipts that are
not in the Dispensatory, only take notice that its general use is to soften and
supple the roughness of the skin, and take away the chops of the lips, hands,
face or other parts.

Unguentum Potabile. Foesius.
Take of fresh Butter, whithout Salt a pound and in half, Maddir, Castorium,
Sperma Caeti, Tormentil roots of each half an ounce, let them boil in a
sufficient quantity of Wine til the Wine be consumed and so made into an
Ointment.

An Ointment against Scabs and Itch. Renodaeus.
Take of Sows grease often washed in juice of Scabious half a pound, the roots
of sharp-pointed Dock, boiled very soft in Vinegar and pulped through a sieve,
Brimstone washed in the juice of Lemmons of each an ounce and an half,
Vnguentum Populeon washed in juice of Elicampane, half an ounce mix them all
together in a mortar, unto an Ointment according to art.

A. It is a wholesome though troublesome medicine for what the Title specifies.

Ointment of Roses. Mesue.
Take of Hogs grease well cleansed from the skins a pound, wash it 9. be sure
you miss not one of them.
times in warm water then as often in cold water, fresh red Roses a pound, mix
them together and so let them stand seven days, then boil them over a gentle
fire, and strain out the Roses, then mix with the Ointment the like quantity of
fresh red Roses, and then let them stand together as many days, then strain
them out having first boiled them, at the last add juice of red Roses six
ounces, boil them over a gentle fire till the juice be consumed, then strain
it, and make of it an Ointment according to art.

A. You need do no more than let it stand till it is cold, and you shall see it
is an Ointment alone without any further making.

A. It is of a fine cooling nature, exceeding useful in all gaulings of the
skin, and frettings accompanied with chollerick humors, angry pushes, tetters,
ringworms, it mitigates diseases in the head coming of heat, as also the
intemperate heat of the stomach and liver.

Unguentum Rubrum Desiccativum. Nicholaus.
Take of oil of Roses Omphacine a pound and an half, white Wax five ounces melt
them together and put them into a leaden mortar, then put to them earth of
Lemnos or else Bole Armenick, Lapis Calaminaris exquisitely beaten into powder
of each four ounces, Litharge of Gold, Ceruss of each two ounces, Camphire a
dram, make them into an Ointment according to art.

A. It binds and restrains fluxes of humors and is as gallant an ointment to
skin a sore as any is in the Dispensatory.

Common Ointment of Tutty.
Take of Tutty prepared two ounces, Lapis Calaminaris, often heat red hot and
as often quenched in Plantane water, an ounce, let them be beaten into very
fine powder, and with Hogs grease often washed in Rose water a pound and an
half let it be made into an Ointment according to art.

Also you may prepare it with Ointment of Roses instead of Hogs grease.

A. It is a cooling drying Oyntmet apropriated to the eyes, to dry up hot and
salt humors that flow down thither, the eye lids being anointed with it.

OINTMENTS MORE COMPOUND.
A Binding Ointment. Fernelius.
Take of Oil of Roses often times washed in Alum water a pound and an half,
white Wax four ounces, unripe Galls, Cypress nuts, Myrtle berries, Balaustins,
Pomegranate pills, Acorn cups, Acacia, Sumach, Mastich of each an ounce, let
all of them being exactly beaten into powder, be steeped in the juyces of
unripe Medlars and Checkers. called in (...)
Services, for four days, then dried by a gentle fire, so with the oil and wax
let them be made into an Ointment according to art.

A. Me thinks these are but wooden directions, you had best (as I suppose)
after they have been infused to boil the Oil and Juyces till the Juyces be
consumed, then put in the Wax.

A. It binds and brings together the open parts of the body, and compacteth
the pores, it stops fluxes, stays issues, of blood, the falling out of the
womb and fundament.

Unguentum Agrippe. Nicholaus.
Take of Briony roots two pound, wild Cucumer roots one pound, Squills half a
pound, fresh Orris roots three ounces, male Fearn roots, dwarf Elder, Water
Caltrop, or Aron of each 2. ounces, let all of them being bruised be infused
for six or eight days, in four pounds of sweet oil, then boiled over a gentle
fire till the roots begin to be crisp, then pressed out and in the Oil melt
fifteen ounces of white Wax and so bring it into the form of an Ointment.

A. It purges exceedingly and is good to anoint the bellies of such as have
dropsies, and if there be any humor of (...) in any part of the body that you
know not how to remove (provided the part be not two tender) you may anoint it
with this.

Unguentum de Alabastro. Ben. Vict. Favent.
Take of the juice of Chamomel four ounces, the juice of red Roses two ounces,
the juice of Rue and Bettony of each an ounce and an half, the juice of Marsh
mallow roots two ounces, Oil of Roses Omphacine a pound and an half, pure
Alablaster beaten into fine powder three ounces, infuse them all night, then
boil them to the consumption of the juice, and with six ounces of white Wax
make it an ointment according to art.

Unguentum Apostolorum. Avicenna.
Take of Turpentine, Rozin, white Wax, (...) of each fourteen drachms, long
Birthwort roots, Olibanum, Bdellium, of each six drachms, Mirrh, Galbanum, of
each half an ounce, Opopanax, Vert-de-greece, of each two drams, Litharge nine
drachms, Oil if in but what if it be in the spring or (...)?
summer time two pound, if in winter three pound, Vinegar so much as is
sufficient to dissolve the Amoniacum, Opopanax, and Galbanum, make it up into
an ointment according to art.

A. It consumes corrupt and dead flesh, and makes flesh soft which is hard, it
cleanses wounds ulcers and fistulaes and restore, flesh where it is wanting.

Unguentum Aregon Adjutorium. Nicholaus.
Take of Rosemary, Marjoram, Mother of Time, Rue, Aron-roots, the roots of wild
Cucumers of each four ounces (...).
and an half, the leaves of Bay, Sage, Savin, the roots of Briony a Fleabane
the greater and lesser, (or in defect of the lesser take the double quantity of
the greater) of each four ounces, Laurel nine ouunces, the leaves of wild
Cucumers and Nep of each half a pound, all of them being gathered in the month
of May, let them be beaten when they are green and steeped seven days in six
pound of the best oil, and one pound of Aqua vitae, then boiled till the water
be consumed, let the Oil be strained, in which melt sixteen ounces of Wax,
Bears grease and Oil of Baies of each three ounces, Oleum Moschellinum half an
ounce, Petroleum an ounce, Butter four ounces, these being stirred together,
sprinckle in these pouders, Mast, (...), Olibanum of each seven drachms,
Pellitory of Spain, Ginger, Euphorbium, Pepper of each an ounce, bring them all
into the form of an Ointment according to art.

A. It mightily digesteth and makes thin, and that not without some purging
quality, and is very commodious against cold afflictions of the body, but
especially of the sinews convulsions, falling sickness, pains of the joints and
great guts.

Unguenivm e succis Aperitivis primum. Foesius.
Take of the juice of Smallage, Endive, Mints, Wormwood common Parsley, Valerian
of each three ounces, oil of Wormwood and Mints of each half a pound, yellow
Wax three ounces, mix them together over the fire and make of them an Ointment:
sometimes is added also the pouders of Calamus Aromaticus, Spicknard of each
one dram, a little oil of Cappars.

A. It opens stoppages of the stomach and spleen, eases the Rickets the breast
and sids being anointed with it.

Unguentum Aperitivum Secundum. Foesius.
Take of the juice of Dwarf Elder or Walwort eight ounces, the juyces of Parsley
and Smallage of each four ounces, the juyces of Wormwood and Orris of each five
ounces, common Oil half a pound, oil of white Lillies ten ounces, oil of
Wormwood and Chamomel, of each six ounces, the fat of Ducks and Hens of each
two ounces, boil them all together to the consumption of the juyces, afterward
strain them, and with seven ounces of white Wax, and a little Vinegar make it
into an Ointment according to art.

Unguentum de Artanita majus. Mesue.
Take of the juice of Artanita or Sow bread, or for want of it a strong
decoction of the roots, three pound; the juice of wild Cucumers, Butter of each
one pound, Oil of Orris two (...), pulp of Colocynthis four ounces, Polipodium
six ounces, (...) half an ounce; let the things to be bruised, be bruised, and
infused in the juyces and oil, for eight days in a glazed vessel well stopped,
then boiled in a double vessel, almost to the consumption of the juyces, strain
them, and add to the liquor, Wax two ounces, Bulls Gall seven drachms and an
half, let them boil together till the wax be melted, then ad Sagapenum seven
drachms and an half, Mirrh three drachms, being dissolved in Vinegar, stir
them together till they are almost cold, then sprinkle in by degrees the
pouders of these following simples being well mixed together, Scammony, Aloes,
Colocynthis, the leaves of (...) or spurgolive.
Mezereon or the berries thereof, Turbith of each seven drachms and an half,
Sal. Gem. four drachms and an half, Euphorbium, long Pepper, Ginger, Chamomel
of each three drachms, mix them together and make of them an Ointment according
to art.

A. The stomach being anointed with it, it purges by vomit, the belly anointed
with it, it purges by stool, the truth is, it is a desperate kind of purge,
yet I hold it as sitting as can be to anoint the bellies of such as have
dropsies, because I conceive it especially purges water, and the water in
dropsies lies near the skin.

Unguentum Catapsoras.
Take of Ceruss washed first in Purslain water, then in Vinegar, mixed with the
juice of wild Rhadishes and then strained, Lapis Calaminaris, Chalcitis of each
six drachms, Litharge of lead two ounces, burnt lead, goats blood of each two
ounces, Mercury Sublimate an ounce, the juyces of Sengreen or Housleek,
Nightshade, Plantane, of each two ounces, Hogs grease cleansed from the skins
two pound, oil of (...), (...), and Mandrakes of each an ounce, first let the
Sublimatum and Hogs grease be well mingled and incorporated, then add the oil
and juyces and last of all the pouders, and of all of them mixed, make an
oyutment according to art.

A. The Title shows it to be invented against scabs and itch.

Unguentum Citrinum. Nichol.
Take of Borax an ounce, Camphire a dram, (...) Coral half an ounce, I know
not how better to translate the word Gypsum.
Plaster of a wall an ounce. Vmbilicus marinus, Gum Traganth, white Starch of
each three (...), Cristal, two seashels
Entalis, Dentalis, Olibanum, Salt Niter, white Marble of each two drachms,
Gersa serpentaria an ounce, common Ceruss six ounces, fresh Hogs grease
cleansed, a pound and an half, Goats suet prepared an ounce and an half, Hens
grease two ounces and an half, let the things to be poudered be brought into
very fine powder, according to art, many of them will be best beaten by
themselves, then make up the ointment thus, put the Hogs grease and Hens grease
into an earthen pot that is glazed, into which put two Citrons of a middle
bigness, together with the pulp and juice, cut in bits, stop the vessel and
place it in a warm bath for seven days, then strain out the Citrons, and cast
them away, then the Goats grease being melted with the other, sprinkle in the
pouders by degrees, (but let the Camphire and Borax be put in last) always
stirring it till it come into the form of an ointment.

A. It takes away pimples, redness, freckles and other deformities of the face,
scabs in any part of the body, it takes away the redness of the eyes and makes
a rough skin smooth.

Unguentum (...). Varignan.
Take of the middle bark of (...), Chestnuts, Oak, and beans, Myrtle berries,
(...) the herb so called, not the real tail of an Horse.
Hors-tail, Gauls, the stones of Grapes, unripe Services, (or Checkers) dried,
unripe Medlars dried, the leaves of Sloe tree, the roots of Bistort and
Tormentill of each an ounce and an half, let them be grossly bruised and boiled
in eight pints of Plantane water, til half be consumed, strain it then take of
yellow Wax eight ounces and an half, (...) it with simple oil of Mirtles two
pound and an half, then wash it nine times with the foregoing (...), putting in
fresh decoction so often as you wash it, afterward sprinkle in these following
Simples being beaten into fine powder, take of the middle bark of Acorns,
Chestnuts, and Oak, Galls of each an ounce, juice of (...), ashes of the bones
of an Ox leg, Myrtle berries, the stones of unripe Grapes, unripe Services or
Checkers dried of each half an ounce, Trochisci de (...) two ounces, mix them
with the aforesaid wax and oil of Myrtle being washed adding oil of Mastich not
washed, so much as is sufficient to bring it into the form of an ointment,
according to art.

A. It seems in my eyes a gallant binding ointment composed neatly by a
judicious brain, the belly and reins being anointed with it, it stays (...),
or miscarriage in women though already begun, it strengthens weak backs
exceedingly and stops the immoderate flowing of the terms, and Hemorrhoids,
falling out of the fundament and womb, finally, for every occasion that
requires binding, I would if I were Eloquent, commend it in the superlative
degree.

Unguentum ad (...). Norimberg.
Take of white starch, Ceruss washed, Litharge prepared Lead burnt, Gum
Traganth of each a dram and an half, Thebane Opium, Camphire of each a
scruple, the white of one Egg, oil of Roses and Violets of each an ounce and an
half, Wax so much as is sufficient to make it into an ointment.

A. It is apropriated to the Hemorrhoids as the title shows.

Unguentum Hemorrhoidale. Saxoniae.
Take of mussilage of the seeds of Psyllium.
Fleawort, and Quinces drawn in the water of Nightshade of each an ounce, oil
of Roses complete an ounce, the yolk of one Egg let them be stirred together in
a leaden mortar with a leaden pestel, adding a little melted Wax, mix them
together and make of them an ointment according to art.

A. Its use is the same with the former.

Common ointment of Baies.
Take of Bay leaves a pound, Bay berries half a pound, Cabbage leaves four
(...), Neats foot oil five pound, (...) suet two pound, the leaves and berries
being bruised and boiled with the oil and suet till their juice be consumed let
it be strained and kept.

A. It heats, and expels wind, it profitable for old aches, and sprains, but
what good it should do in the itch for which simple people buy it, I cannot
imagine.

Unguentum Martiatum. Nichol.
Take of the leaves of Bay and Rosemary of each eight ounces, Rue seven ounces,
Tamaris six (...); the leaves of Dwarf-Elder, Marjoram, Savin, Costmary, or
else, Watermints, Sage, Bazil, Poley mountain, Calaminth, Mugwort, Elicampane,
Bettony, Brank-Ursine Goose grass or Cleavers, Anemone or Wind flower, or for
want of it Pellitory of the wall Burnet, Agrimony, Wormwood, Cowslips, garden
Costus, Elders, Orphine the greater, (...) the greater and lesser, Yarrow,
Germander, Centaury the less, Plantain, Strawberries, called also (...), and
Iron-wort, because of its excellency to cure wounds.
Tetrahit or for which in London cannot be, becauseir grows almost in (...)
ditch.
want of it Golden-rod, Cvnkfoyl, of each four ounces and an half; the roots of
(...), the seeds of Cummin, (...), of each three ounces, (...) an ounce and an
half, the seeds of the greater Nettles, of Violets, red or errattick Poppies,
commonly called Corn-roses, Garden Mints, (...), wild Mints, Maidenhair,
Carduus Benedictus, Woodbind or Honey suckles, Va lerian the greater, sweet
Cranebill or Muschata, wood Sor rel, Hart's-tongue, (...).
Ox-eye, Southern wood, Marrow of a Stag, Styrax Calamitys, of each half an
ounce, Butter ten drachms, Bears and Hens (...), Mastich, Frankincense, of each
one ounce, Nard oil two ounces, Wax two pound, let the herbs being green be
cut, and infused in eight pounds of oil with wine for seven days, on the
eighth day let them be boiled almost to the consumption of the wine, then being
removed from the fire, let it be strained and the oil put into the pan again,
to which (being a little warmed) (...) the butter, marrow, fat, nard oil and
wax, then the styrax dissolved in wine and mixed with a little turpentine, but
let the Mastich, Mirrh and Frankincense being beaten into powder be put in last
of al, and when they are all well mixed together, keep the ointment in a vessel.

A. This long recept of Nich Myrepsus, is held to be profitaagainst cold
afflictions of the brain nerves, and joints as shaking palsy, dead palsy,
Convuliions etc. it helps numbness of the joints, the gout and hard tumors of
the spleen.

Mundificativum ex (...)
Take of the juice of Smallage a pound, Honey nine ounces, Wheat flower three
ounces, boil them over the fire to the thickness of an ointment, according to
art.

A. It is a fine gentle cleansing ointment.

Unguentum Neapolitanum. Renodaeus.
Take of Sows grease be sure it be not hogs grease.
washed with juice of Sage one pound, quicksilver strained through a cloth and
well killed with falling spittle four ounces, oil of Bays, Chamomel and
Earthworm of each two ounces, oil of Spike an ounce and an half, Aqua vitae an
ounce, yellow wax two ounces, Turpentine washed in juice of Elicampane three
ounces, powder of Camaepitys and Sage of each two drachms, make them into an
ointment according to art.

Unguentum Resinum.
Take of Per-rozin, Turpentine, yellow Wax, pure Oil, of each equal parts mix
them together.

A. It is as pretty a Careoloath for a new sprain as most is, and cheap.

Unguentum Nervinum.
Take of the leaves and flowers of Cowslips, Sage, Camaepytis, Rosemary,
Lavender, Bay with the berries, Chamomel, Rue, Smallage, Melilot with the
flowers, Wormwood of each a handful, Mints, Bettony, Penyroyal, Parsley,
Centaury the less, St. John's wort of each half a handful, Neats or sheeps foot
Oil five pound, Sheep or Ox suet, or else their marrow two pound, Oil of Spike
half an ounce, bruise the herbs, and boil them with the oils and suet and make
an ointment of them according to art.

A. It is apropriated to the nerves, and helps their infirmities coming of
cold, (which you may find often enough related, I do not love always to harp
upon the same string) as also old bruises.

Unguentum Pactorale. Nich.
Take of fresh butter often washed in Violet water six ounces, oil of sweet
Almonds four ounces, oil of Chamomel and Violets of each three ounces, Goose
and Ducks grease of each three ounces, Orris roots two drachms, Saflron half a
dram, white Wax three ounces, let the Wax and fats be melted together in the
oil, then often washed either in Barley or Hysop water, add the Orris and
Saffron being brought into fine powder, then bring them into an Ointment
according to art.

A. If you let the Butter boil it will stink, but the College never thought of
that, having forgotten the old Grammar phraze (...) est etc.

A. It strengthens the breast and stomach, eases the pains thereof, helps
pleuresies and consumptions of the lungues.

Unguentum Populneum. Nich.
Take of the buds of Poplar fresh gathered, a pound and an half, fresh Hogs
grease three pound, let the Poplar-buds be beaten and mixed with the grease
till these following herbs can be gotten.

Take of the leaves of black Poppies and Mandrakes, the tender branches of
Maddir, the leaves of Henbane, Nightshade, Lettice, Sengreen the lesser and
greater, Violets, Penywort, or Kidneywort, Burs of each three ounces, let all
of them being bruised be mixed with the grease and Poplar buds, after ten days
put to them a pound of Rose water, and boil them with a gentle fire till the
water and all the liquor be consumed, strain it and press it out, and if need
be boil it again till it come to the consistence of an ointment.

A. It is exceeding good in burnings, scaldings, and inflammations, it aswageth
the heat of the head and kidneyes, the temple being anointed with it, it
provokes sleep.

Unguantum Resumptivum. Nicholaus.
Take of fresh Hogs grease three ounces, Hens, Goose, and Ducks grease of each
two ounces, you shall be taught what it is and how to make it before the book
be at an end.
Oesypus an ounce, oil of Violets, Chamomel, and Dill of each two ounces, fresh
Butter a pound, white Wax six ounces, mussilage of Gum Traganth, the seeds of
Quinces and Linseeds, the roots of Marshmallows, and Gum Arabic of each half
an ounce, let the mussilages be made in Rose water, and the rest added and so
made into an ointment according to art.

A. It mightily molllfies without any manifest heat and is therefore a fit
ointment for such as have agues, asthmaes, hectic fevers, or consumptions.

Unguentum splenicum.
Take of Oil of Capers an ounce, oil of Lillies and Chamomel, fresh Butter,
juice of Briony and Sowbread of each half an ounce, let the oil boil to the
consumption of the juyces, adding Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar two drachms
and an half, Hens grease, the marrow of the leg of a Calf, Oesypus of each half
an ounce, the bark of the roots of Tamaris, and Cappars, Cetrach, the roots of
Fearn of each one dram, powder of the seeds of Agnus Castus, and Broom of each
one scruple, Wax so much as is sufficient to make it into the form of an
Ointment.

Unguentum aliud splenicum Magistrale.
Take of the barks of Cappar roots six drachms, Briony roots, Crris Florentine,
Fennel seed in powder, Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar of each half an ounce,
the tops of Wormwood, the flowers of Chamomel, of each one dram, Vng e succis
aperitiois Foesius, viz. the second description, Ointment of Orrenge flowers,
of each six drachms, oil of Oris and Cappars of each an ounce and an half, let
the things to be beaten being beaten and sifted, and the rest added let it be
made into an ointment in a hot mortar.

There are some that cannot abide ointments, yet can easily bear plasters,
therefore when occasion is given, you may make up the ointment in form of a
plaster, by adding a little Wax, Ship Pitch, Cyperus, Turpentine.

A. Both these ointments are apropriated to the spleen and ease the pains
thereof, the sides being anointed with them.

Valentia Scabiosa. John Ardern of Newark.
Take of the juice of Scabious, in the Summer time strained through a Linen
cloth, and with Hogs grease cleared from the skins, let them be beaten in a
mortar (not ground) always pouring in the juice by little and little, that the
grease may drink it in well and be green, which done, put it in some vessel,
and so much juice to it that it may cover the grease, let it stand so nine
days, after the ninth day take the said grease with the juice and beat it
again, and pour off the thin watery substance, which has lost its color, and
so let it stand five days, after the (...) day, take new juice of Scabious,
and beat again with the aforesaid juice, let it stand in some vessel fiften
other days, which being ended beat it again, and purge it from the watery
substance as before, then putting fresh juice to it, let it stand other fifteen
days, and if it be green enough after it is well beaten, keep it in an earthen
or glass vessel for your use.

A. Thus the Author, now comes the Colleges animadversions upon it.

Of the quantity both of the Hogs grease and juice, you need not doubt, every
Apothecary may use what quantity he pleases, let it be done in that
proportion, and so often till he see the Ointment look very green, Only thus
much we would warn him of, that so much the more green it is, so much the more
effectual it is, Also if the Scabious be gathered a day or two before it be
beaten, that so it may loose some of its watriness, Also if it be set in the
sun so many or more days than the Author appointed, provided that the (...)
swim above the grease the breadth of two fingers and the vessel be well stopped,
we a learned experience for a boy of a dozen years old.
protest we are taught by experience, the ointment will be the greener and the
virtues the greater.

Tapsivalentia. Of the same Author
Take of Tapsus Barbatus, or Mullen, and with Hogs suet cleansed from the skin,
let it be well beaten in a mortar till the grease be well mixed with the juice,
which when you have done let it stand nine days or more till the grease look
green, which when (...) does, let it be beaten with new juice, and (...) it is
well colored with the juice, power off the juice which is superfluous and beat
it again with other juice and keep it for your use in an earthen vessel, but
you must note, this medicine ought to be beaten once a month, and in beating of
it, put in a little oil of Roses, Violets, and Chamomel, that the ointment may
drink it in, and if you add a little Populeon it will be the stronger.

A. It is no more than looking the Simples, viz. Scabious and Mullen and then
you have the virtues of both these ointments. But here follows another strange
one of the same Author, how true it is I know not, which is --

Tapsimel.
Take of the juice of Sullondine and Mullen of each a like, clarified Honey so
much as is of the juyces, let them boil to the consumption of the juice, then
take them from the fire and keep them for your use, and when you would use it
for the itch, take of it and mix it with burnt Coperis.
vitriol, and burnt Alum in powder, and if there be necessity boil it till it
be (...), then put a little of it up in your fundament, and certainly the itch
will cease in every part of the body, and this Oyntmet is called Tapsimel from
Tapsus Barbatus and Mell and is for certain a noble Ointment.

This is word for word from the old Manuscript (quoth the College.)

Let the Apothecary take heed he burn not the Honey in boiling it.

A Stomach Ointment. Norimberg.
Take of Oil of Wormwood, Mastick, Spicknard of each an ounce, red Roses, red
Corral, Cloves, Cinnamon, wood of Aloes, Mastich. Mints, Schoenanth of each a
dram, Wax so much as is sufficient to make it into an Oynmtent according to
art.

A. It strengthens the stomach and liver provokes appetite and help, digestion.

An Ointment for the Worms. Foesius
Take of Oil of Rue, Savin, Mints, Wormwood, and bitter Almonds, of each an
ounce and an half, juice of the flowers or leaves of Peaches, and Wormwood of
each half an ounce, powder of Rue, Mints, Gentian, Centaury the less, Tormentil
of each a dram, the seeds of Coleworts, the pulp of Colocynthis of each two
drachms, Aloes Hepatick, three drachms, the meal of Lupines half an ounce,
Mirrh washed in grasswater a dram and an half, Bulls gall an ounce and an
half with juice of Lemmons so much as is sufficient, and an ounce and an half
of Wax, make it into an Ointment according to art.

A. The belly being anointed with it, kills the Worms.

PLASTERS AND CERECLOATHS.
A Plaster of Ammoniacum.
Take of Ammoniacum an ounce, Ointment of Marshmallows and Melilot plaster of
each half an ounce, Bran or (as we in Sussex call it) Cheezel of corn well
fiefted, an ounce, the powder of Briony and Orris root of each half an ounce,
the fat of Ducks, Geese and Hens of each three drachms, Bdellium, Galbanum of
each three drachms and an half, Per rozin, wax of each five ounces, oil of
Orris, Turpentine of each an ounce and an half, let the fats and oil boil with
a sufficient quantity of mussilage of Lin and (...) seeds, and that it may be
brought to the due form of a plaster, ad the Wax and Turpentine, afterward
the Oynment of Marsh mallows and Melliot Plaster, then the Gums dissolved in
Vinegar, and lastly the pouders and per-Rozin in powder, mix them all well
together and make it into plaster according to art.

A. By [Plaister] always understand not a plaster spread upon a cloth, but a
roll made to spread such a one withal.

A. It softens and aswageth hard swellings, and scatters the humors offending,
applied to the side it softens the hardness of the spleen and aswageth pains
thence arising.

Album Coctum de Cerussa. Ulms.
Take of Ceruss ground into very fine powder, yellow Wax, oil of Olives of each
equal parts, the Ceruss being put into a brass pan let the oil be added by
degrees, set it over a gentle fire, stir it continually til they be
incorporated, then put in the Wax thin scraped, neither put it in altogether at
one time neither let it boil til it be all melted, then boil it all according
to art till it begin to look black, and be of a just thickness.

A. It helps burns, dry scabs, and hot ulcers, and in general what ever sores
abound with moisture.

A Plaster of Bayberries. Mesue.
Take of Bayberries two ounces, Frankincense, Mastich, Mirrh of each one ounce,
Cyperus, Costus of each half an ounce, Turpentine an ounce, clarified Honey so
much as is sufficient to make it into a plaster according to art.

A. It is an excellent plaster to ease any pains coming of cold or wind, in
any part of the body whether stomach, liver belly reins or bladder.

Emplastrum Barbarummagnum. Galen.
Take of stonepitch sure enough.
dry pitch eight pound, yellow Wax six pound eight ounces, Per-Rozin five pound
four ounces, Bitumen Judaicum or else Mummy four pound, Oil a pound and an
half, Vert-de-greece, Litharge, Ceruss, of each three ounces, Frankincense half
a pound, roch Alum not burnt an ounce and an half, roch Alum burnt four
ounces, Opopanax, Scales of brass, Galbanum of each twelve drachms, Aloes,
Opium, Mirrh of each half an ounce, juice of Mandrakes, or else the bark of the
roots of them dried six drachms, Vinegar five pound, let the Litharge, Ceruss,
and Oil be boiled to the thickness of Honey, the Pitch melted and incorporated
with the powder of the Bitumen, then the other things added and boiled
according to art till the Vinegar be consumed, and the composition brought to a
due thickness.

A. It helps the bitings of men and beasts, eases the inflammations of wounds,
and helps infirmities of the joints, and gouts in the beginning.

A Plaisier of (...). Andernacus.
Take of green Bettony, Burnet, Agrimony, Sage, Penyroyal, Yarrow, Comfry the
greater, Clary of each (...) ounces, Frankincense, Mastich of each three
drachms, Orris, round Birthwort of each six drachms, white Wax, Turpentine of
each eight ounces, Gum Elemni two ounces, per-Rozin six ounces, know no other
(...) of (...)-tree.
Venis Turpentine two ounces, white Wine three pound, let the herbs being
bruised be boiled in the Wine, strained, and all the rest being added to the
decoction boil it to a plaster according to art.

A. It is a gallant plaster to unite the skul when it is cracked, to draw out
pieces of broken bones and cover the bones with flesh, it draws filth from the
bottom of deep ulcers, restores flesh lost, cleanses, digesteth, and dries.

Emplastrum (...).
Take of Bistort roots, Cyperus, Nuts, red Roses, the three (...) of Sanders,
Mints, Coriander seeds, of each three drams, (...) half an ounce, Hypocistis,
Acacia, Dragons blood, Terra Lemnia, Bole Armenick, red Corral of each two
drams, Turpentine washed in Plantane water, four ounces, oil of (...) twelve
ounces, the juice of (...), Plantane, and Orpine of each an ounce, yellow Wax a
pound and an half, let the Hypocistis and Acacia be dissolved with the juyces,
and boiled to a due height, then add the rest, and make them into a plaster
according to art.

A. It is of a fine cool binding, strengthening nature, excellent good to
repel hot rhewms or vapors that ascend up to the head, the hair being shaved
off and it applied to the crown.

Emplastrum Catagmaticum. Vigo.
Take of the juice of Marshmallow roots six ounces, the bark of the root of Ash
tree and the leaves of the tree, the roots (...) Comfry the greater and lesser
with the leaves and al of each two ounces, Myrtle berries an ounce and an half,
the leaves of Willow, the tops of St. John's wort, of each a handful and an
half, the things to be bruised being bruised, let them boil together in red
Wine, and water in which Smiths quench their (...) of each two pound, till half
be consumed, (...) it and ad oil of Mirtles, Roses and Omphacine, of each a
pound and an half, Goats suet melted, eight ounces, Litharge of gold and
silver, red Lead of each four ounces, yellow Wax a pound, Colophonia half a
pound, let them boil again to the consumption of the decoction, then add
toward the end (...), Frankincense, Mastich of each half an ounce, clear
Turpentine two ounces, Boie Armenick, Earth of Lemnos, of each an ounce, stir
them together till they are boiled enough to be made into a plaster according
to art.

Catagmaticum. Renodaeus.
Take of the roots of Comfry the less and Marshmallows, (...) of the Oak of
each two ounces, Plantane, Chamaepitys, St. John's wort, of each a handful, boil
them in equal (...) of red Wine and Water wherein Smiths quench their Iron,
(...) half be consumed, strain it, and to the decoction ad (...) of Quince
seeds extracted in decoction of I know not what better word to give Omazum than
tripes (...) chitterlings.
Tripes, Oil (...) and Roses of each four ounces, Virgins Wax a pound, (...) of
Gold two ounces, Turpentine three ounces. Balaustins, Roses, Mirtles, Acacia of
each half an ounce, (...), the seeds of Tutsan, Colophonia, (...), Amber of
each six drachms, Ship Pitch an ounce and an half, Bole Armenick Farina
volatilis.
fine flower, Frankincense of each twelve drachms, Dragons blood two ounces,
let the water and mussilage be boiled together till the moisture be consumed,
then put in the oil, then the Wax, afterward the Litharge, which being boiled,
united, stirred and removed from the fire, let first the Turpentine be added,
then the pouders, so let all of them be mixed stirred and brought into the form
of an Emplaster according to art.

A. Both this and the former are of a binding nature.

Emplasirum Cephalicum.
Take of clear Rozin two ounces, black Pitch one ounce, Ladanum half an ounce,
Mirrh, Mastich of each a dram and an half, Juniper Gum two drachms, the
flower of Beans and Orobus of each half an ounce, Nigella three drachms,
Nutmegs two dram, Pigeons dung two ounces, let the Mirrh be dissolved in
Malaga Wine, and the rest being mixed in a hot mortar let them be made into a
Plaster according to art.

If you would have it stronger add of the pouders of Euphorbium, Pellitory of
Spain, and black Pepper of each two scruples.

A. It is proper to strengthen the brain and repel such vapors as anoy it,
and those pouders being added it dries up the superfluous moisture thereof, and
eases the eyes of hot scalding vapors that anoy them.

Emplastrum Ceroma or Ceroneum. Nich. Alex.
Take of pitch scraped from a Ship that has been a long time at Sea, yellow
Wax of each seven drachms, Sagapenum six drachms,, Ammoniacum, Turpentine,
Colophonia, Saffron of each four drachms, Aloes, Olibanum, Mirrh of each three
drachms, Styrax Calamitis, Mastich, Opopanax, Galbanum, Alum, the seeds of
Faenugreek of each two drachms, the settlings or dreggs.
feces of Liquid Styrax, Bdellium of each one dram, Litharge half a dram.

A. It is of a gentle emollient nature, prevails against stoppings of the
stomach coming of cold, hardness of the spleen, coldness of the liver and
matrix.

A Plaster of Hemlock with Ammoniacum.
Take of Hemlock four handfuls, Ammoniacum half a pound, infuse them in sharp
Vinegar eight days, then boil them till the Ammoniacum be dissolved, then
strain out the liquor strongly, afterward let it boil awhile, then with Wax
and Oil of sweet Almonds make it into a Plaster according to art.

A. I suppose it was invented to mitigate the extreme pains, and allay the
inflammations of wounds, for which it is very good.

Emplasirum de Crusta Panis.
Take of Mastich, Mints, Spodium, red Corral, all the three sorts of Sanders of
each one dram, a Crust of bread to asted and infused in Rose Vinegar for half
an hour, two ounces, oil of Mastich and Quinces of each an ounce, Wax two
ounces, Liquid styrax, Ladanum, of each three drachms, Barley meal so much as is
sufficient to make it into an Emplaster according to art.

A. I shall commend this for as gallant a plaster to strengthen the brain as
any is in the Dispensatory, the hair being shaved off and it applied to the
crown, also being applied to the stomach it strengthens it, helps digestion,
stays vomiting and putrefaction of the meat there. Montagnana was the Author
of it, not the College.

Emplastrum de (...).
Take of Cummin seeds, Bayberries of each a pound, PerRozin two pound, common
Rozin three pound, oil of Dill half a pound, Wax a pound, make a plaster of
them according to art.

A. I am of opinion here is not half oil enough to make it into a plaster,
they that make of it, know better than I, I judge but by reason they know by
experience.

A. It asswageth swellings, takes away old aches coming of bruises, and applied
to the belly, is an excellent remedy for the wind chollick.

Diachylon simplex. Mesue.
Take of Mussilage of Foenugreek seed, Linseed, and Mirshmallow roots of each a
pound, old Oil three pound, Litharge one pound and an half, let the Litharge be
ground very (...), and boiled with the oil, over a gentle fire, always
stirring it till it be well mixed, then being removed from the fire let it cool
a little, afterward put in the Mussilages, mix them and boil them to their
just thickness according to art.

A. It is an exceeding good remedy for all swellings without pain it softens
hardness of the liver and spleen, it is very gentle like the Author of it [
Mesue] and very moderate and harmless, and it may be therefore neglected by the
Fantastical Chyrurgians of our age.

Diachilon Ireatum.
Ad an ounce of powder of Orris to every pound of Diachylon simplex.

Diachylon magnum. Mesue.
Take of (...) of Gold very finely ground, one pound; Oil of Orris, (...), and
Chamomel, of each eight ounces, mussilage of (...) roots, Linseeds, and
Foenugreek seeds, (...) of (...), fat figs, (...)-grass, the juice of Orris,
and (...), (...) or oil of sheeps feet, of each twelve drams and an half, (...)
three ounces, Per-rozen, yellow Wax of each two onces, make them into a
plaster according to art.

A. It dissolves hardness and inflammations.

Diachylon magnum cum gummi. Renodaeus.
Take of Bdellium, Sagapenum, Ammoniacum of each an ounce, being dissolved in
white Wine, let them be added to the mass of Diachylon magnun, being first
strained and boiled to the thickness of Honey, so will it be Diachylon with
gams.

A. This is the best to dissolve hard swellings of all the three.

Diachylon Compound: or a Plaster of Mussilages. Mesue.
Take of Mussilages of Marshmallow rooes, Linseeds, Foenugreek seeds, the
middle barks of Elm of each four ounces and an half, oil of Chamomel, Lillies,
and Dill of each one ounce and an half, Ammoniacnm, Galbanum, Opopanax,
Sagapenum of each half an ounce, new Wax twenty ounces, Turpentine two ounces,
Saffron 2. drachms, let the gums be dissolved in Wine, and make of them a
plaster according to art.

A. It ripens swellings and breaks them, and cleanses them when they are
broken.

Diapalma or Diachalciteas. Gallen.
Take of old Hog's Grease cleansed from the skin; 2. pound, old Oil, Litharge of
silver ground very small of each three pound, (...) burnt, or else white (...)
iol burnt and beaten into powder 4. ounces; It is made in this manner, first
let the Litharpe boil with the oil and grease along time, continually sttirring
it with the branch of a Palm or other tree of a binding nature, as Oak, Box, or
Medler, which is new cut, that so the virtue of the Spatula may be mixed with
the plaster, cutting off the top and the rind, even to the wood it self, the
mixture (...) made thick by boiling and stirring, and removed from the fire,
put in white Copperis, for want of true (...) in powder, and so make it into a
laudable mass for an (...).

A. It is a very drying binding plaster, profitable in green wounds to hinder
putrefaction, as also in pestilential sores after they are broken, and
ruptures, as also in burnings and scaldings.

Emplastrum Diaphoenicon Calidum. Mesue.
Take of Wax two ounces, oil of Roses and Spicknard of each four ounces, melt
them together, then take of dry dates by number forty, white bread an ounce,
steep them in Wine two days, then take of the pulp of Quinces boiled in red
Wine an ounce, bruise it and mix it with the former, then ad these things that
follow, beaten into fine powder, take of Mastich, Frankincense, Roman Wormwood
of each two drams and an half, wood of Aloes, Mace, Mirrh, Aloes washed,
Spicknard, Acacia, Gallia Moschata, Trochisci Ramich, Calamus Aromaticus, of
each a dram, Ladanum two drachms, mix them together and make them into a
plaster according to art.

A. It strengthens the stomach and liver exceedingly, helps fluxes.

Diaphoenicon Frigidum. Mesue.
Take of ripe Dates boiled in austere Wine five ounces, white Bread an ounce,
the flesh of Quinces boiled in Austere Wine an ounce and an half, Styrax
Calamitis, Mastick, Ladanum, Acacia, the juice of sour Grapes, the flowers of a
Vine that bears sour Grapes, red Roses, Yellow Sanders, Trochisci Ramich,
Mirrh, Wood of Aloes of each half an ounce, Wax four ounces, Turpentine washed
with Rose water, an ounce and an half, oil of Roses ten ounces, Austere Wine so
much as is sufficient, make it into a plaster according to art.

It strengthens the belly and liver, helps concoction in those parts, and
distribution of humors, stays vomiting and fluxes.

Emplastrum Divinum. Nich.
Take of Loadstone four ounces, Ammoniacum three ounces and three drachms,
Bdellium two ounces, Galbanum, (...) of each ten drachms, Olibanum nine
drachms, Opopanax, Mastich, long Birthwort, Vert-de-greece of each an ounce,
Litharge a pound and an half, common Oil a pound and an half, new Wax eight
ounces, mix them according to art, first let the Litharge be stirred with the
Oil a long time, then boiled to a thickness, then let the Wax be added, that
being melted let it be taken from the fire, and put in the Gums dissolved
either in Wine or Vinegar, boiled and strained, then the powder of the Mastich,
Mirrh, Frankincense, Birthwort, and Loadstone, last of all the Vert-de-greece,
lest that being too much boiled make the plaster black, thus make it into a
Plaster according to art.

A. It is of a cleansing nature exceeding good against malignant ulcers, it
consumes corruption engenders new flesh, and brings them to a scar.

Emplastrum de gummi Elemni.
Take of Gum Elemni three ounces, Per-Rozin, pure Wax, Ammoniacum of each two
ounces, Turpentine three ounces and an half, Malaga Wine so much as is
sufficient, boil the rest to the consumption of the Wine, then ad the
Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar.

A. The operation is the same with Linimentum Arceus before mentioned.

Emplastrum Gracia Dei. Nicholaus.
Take of Turpentine half a pound, Rozin a pound, white Wax four ounces, Mastich
an ounce, fresh Bettony, Vervain, and Burnet of each a handful, let the herbs
being bruised be sufficiently boiled in white Wine, the liquor pressed out in
which let the Wax and Rozin be boiled, to the consumption of the liquor, being
taken from the fire let the Turpentine be mixed with it, lastly the Mastich in
powder and so make of them a plaster according to art.

A. It is excellent good in wounds and green ulcers, for it keeps back
inflammations, cleanses and joyneth wounds, fills up ulcers with flesh.

Emplastrum Griseum, of Lapis Calaminarie.
Take of Lapis Calaminaris an ounce, Litharge two ounces, Ceruss half an ounce,
Tutty a dram, Turpentine six drams, white Wax an ounce and an half, Stags
Suet two ounces, Frankincense five drachms, Mastich three drachms, Mirrh two
drachms, Camphire a dram and an half, Wax and Stags suet so much as is
sufficient to make it into a Plaster according to art.

A. I wonder of thirty four Physicians the compiler of this book, not one of
them could see, Stags suet was set down twice, would not a sober man think they
minded much what they were about?

A. It dries, fills, and skins ulcers.

Emplastrum ad Hirniam. Fernclius.
Take of Galls, Cypress nuts, Pomegranate pills, Balaustins Acacia, the seeds of
Plantane, Psyllium.
Fleawort and Watercresses, Acorn cups, Beans roasted, long and round
Birthwort, Myrtle Berries of each half an ounce, let all these being poudered
be steeped four days in Rose Vinegar, then dried, then take Comfry the greater
and lesser, Hors-tail, Woad, Cetrach, Osmond royal, fearn of each an ounce,
Frankincense, Mirrh Aloes, Mastich, Mummy of each two ounces, Bole Armenick
washed in Vinegar, Lapis Calaminaris prepared, Litharge of Gold, Dragons blood
of each three ounces, Ship pitch two pound, Turpentine six ounces or so much as
is sufficient to make it up into a plaster according to art.

A. The plaster is very binding and knitting, apropriated to ruptures or
burstness, as the title of it specifies, it strengthens the reins and womb, and
stays abortion or miscariage in women, it consolidates wounds, and helps all
diseases coming of cold and moisture.

Emplastrum Hystericum. Nichol. Praep. according to Renod.
Take of Bistort roots a pound, wood of Aloes, yellow Sanders, Nutmegs,
Barberry kernels, Anthera of each an ounce, Cinnamon, Cloves, Schoenanthus,
Chamomel flowers of each half an ounce, Frankincense, Mastich, Alipta Moschata,
Gallia moschata, Styrax Calamitis of each a dram, of the best (...) half a
dram, Wax a pound and an half, Turpentine half a pound, Oleum Moschelinum
four ounces, Ladanum four pound, Ship pitch three pound, let the Wax and pitch
be melted, the Ladanum and Turpentine added to them, then the Styrax, and last
of all the rest beaten into powder and so made into a plaster according to art.

A. I know not justly what they mean by that word [ Anthera] in the recept,
unless they mean the hairy threeds in the middle of the Rose, which usually
country people call (though falsely) Rose seeds, as I take it Apothecaries call
them by an apish name Anthera Rosarum, of the Greek words, (...), the flowers
of Roses, But indeed the Ancients as Galen etc. gave the word [ Anthera] to
many compound medicines that had no roses at all in them, but I cannot stand to
dispute the story here, The plaster being applied to the navil (...) a means
to withstand the fits of the mother in such women as are subject to them.

Emplastrum de Janua, or of Bettony. Nicholaus.
Take of the Juice of Bettony, Plantane, and Smallage of each a pound, Wax,
Pitch, Rozin, Turpentine of each half a pound, boil the Wax and Rozin in the
Juyces with a gentle fire, continually stirring them till the juice be
consumed, then add the Turpentine and Pitch continually stirring it till it be
brought into the consistence of a plaster according to art.

A. I take Mesue indeed to be the Author of it (or else I am mistaken) it
matters not much which, it is a gallant plaster for pains in the head, and to
recruit an addle brain, helps green wounds, cease inflammations, strengthens
the liver.

A Plaster of Mastich. Renodaeus.
Take of Mastich three ounces, Bole Armenick washed in red Wine an ounce and an
half, red Roses six drachms, Ivory, red Corral of each half an ounce,
Turpentine two ounces, Wax, oil of Mirtles of each half a pound, make of them a
plaster according to art by adding Colophonia or else Tacamahaca, Ladanum of
each two ounces.

A. It is a binding Plaster, strengthens the stomach.

A. Plaster of Melilot. Mesue.
Take of Melilot flowers six ounces, Chamomel flowers, (...) seed, Marsh-mallow
roots, Bayberries, Marjoram, tops of Wormwood of each three drachms, Smallage
seed, Cardamoms, Orris, Cyperus, Spicknard, Cassia lignea, the seeds of Bishops
weed of each a dram and an half Ammoniacum ten drachms, Styrax Calamitis,
(...) of each five drachms, Turpentine one ounce and an half fat Figgs by
number twelve, Goats suet, Rozin, of each two ounces and an half, Wax six
ounces, oil of (...) and Spicknard of each so much as is sufficient, then take
of fresh Melilot, Foenugreek, and Chamomel of each so much as is (...), boil it
in a quart of water till half be consumed, then having strained it, the things
to be beaten being beaten into very fine powder, the roots and figs boiled and
pulped, and added to the decoction, let them boil, always stirring them that
they burn not, then the Oils, Turpentine, Wax, Suet, and Rozin being melted
together and the Gums dissolved in Vinegar, make up all into an Emplaster
according to art.

A. It mollisies the hardness of the stomach, liver, spleen, bowels and other
parts of the body, it wonderfully aswageth pain and eases Hypocondriack
melancholy, and the rickets.

Emplastrum de Minio Compositum. Vigo
Take of oil of Roses a pound and an half, oil of Mirtles, Vnguentum Populeon
of each four ounces, Hens grease two ounces, the suet of a Weather and a
Heiser, of each half a pound, Hogs grease seven ounces, Litharge of Gold and
Silver of each three ounces and an half, Ceruss four ounces, red lead three
ounces, Turpentine ten ounces, Wax so much as is sufficient to make it into a
plaster tending to blackness according to art.

A. It potently cures wounds, old and malignant ulcers.

Another plaster of Red Lead simple. London.
Take of red Lead nine ounces, oil of red Roses one pound and an half, white
Wine Vinegar six ounces, boil them to the perfect consistence of a plaster.

Also it is prepared without Vinegar in this manner: Take of red Lead a pound,
oil of Roses a pound and an half, Wax half a pound, make it into, a plaster
according to art.

A. It is a fine cooling healing plaster.

Emplastrum Isis Epigoni. Galen.
Take of yellow Wax an hundred drachms, Turpentine two hundred grams, scales of
Copper, Vert-de greese, round Birth wort, Frank in sense, Sal Armoniack,
Ammoniacum, burnt Brass of each eight drachms, burnt Alum six drachms, Aloes,
Mirrh, (...) of each an ounce and an half, old Oil a pound, sharp Vinegar so
much as is sufficient, let the metals be dissolved in the sun with the
Vinegar, then put in those things that may be melted, last of all the pouders,
and make them al into (...) Emplaster.

A. Galen Apropriates it to the head and ulcers there: I know no reason but why
it may as well serve for other parts of the body.

A Plaster of Mastich. Nich. Alex.
Take of Mastich, Ship Pitch, Sagapenum, Wax of each SI drachms, Ammoniacum,
Turpentine, Colophonia, Saffron, Aloes, Frankincense, Mirrh, of each three
drachms, Opopanax, Galbanum, Styrax Calamitis, Alum ( Rondeletius appoints and
we from him) Bitumem, Foenugreek, of each two drachms, the feces of liquid
Styrax, Bdellium, Litharge, of each half a dram, Let the Litharge being
beaten into powder be boiled in a sufficient quantity of water, then add the
pitch, which being melted, ad the wax and Ammoniacum, afterward let the
Sagapenum, Opopanax and Galbanum be put in, then the Styrax and feces being
mixed with the Turpentine, last of all the Colophonia, Mastich, Frankincense,
Bdellium, Alum, Mirrh, and Foenugreek in powder, let them be made into a
plaster.

A. It strengthens the stomach and helps digestion.

Emplastrum Metroproptoticon.
Take of Mastich an ounce and an half, pure Galbanum dissolved in red Wine and
strained, six drachms, Cypress Turpentine two drachms, Cypress-Nuts, Gals of
each a dram and an half, Oil of Nutmegs by expression a dram, ShipPitch two
drachms and an half, Musk two grains and an half, let the Mastich, Pitch,
Galbanum, and Turpentine be lightly beaten in an hot mortar, with an hot
pestel, in the end add the oil of Nutmegs, then the pouders sprinkled in by
degrees, then the Musk dissolved upon a marble with a little oil of mastich,
mix them together exactly and make of them an Emplaster.

A. It was invented (as I suppose) to comfort and strengthen the retentive
faculty in the stomach and belly, and therefore stays looseness and vomiting,
and helps the fits of the mother.

Emplastrum nigrum. August. Called in High Dutch (...).
Take of Colophonia, Rozin, Ship Pitch, White Wax, Roman Vitriol, Ceruss,
Olibanum, Mirrh of each eight ounces, oil of Roses seven ounces, oil of Juniper
berries three ounces, oil of Eggs two ounces, oil of Spike one ounce, white
Vitriol, red Coral, Mummy, of each two ounces, Earth of Lemnos, Mastich,
Dragons blood of each one ounce, the fat of an Heron one ounce, the fat of a
kind of fish.
Timallus three ounces, Loadstone prepared two ounces, Earthworms prepared,
Camphire, of each one ounce, make them into a plaster according to art.

A. It is very good (say they) in green wounds and pricks.

Emplaistrum Nervinum. Vigo.
Take of oil of Chamomel and Roses of each two ounces, oil of Mastich, Linseed
and Turpentine, of each one ounce and an half, boiled Turpentine four ounces,
the suet of a by all means
gelded Calf, and an hee-Goat, of each two ounces and an half, the herbs of
Rosemary, Bettony and Horse tail, Centaury the less, of each one handful,
Earthworms washed in Wine and cleansed three ounces, the leaves and seeds of
St. John's Wort, of each a handful, Mastich in powder, Gum Elemni of each ten
drachms, Maddir roots ten drachms, ShipPitch, Rozin of each an ounce and an
half, Litharge of Gold and Silver of each two ounces and an half, red lead two
ounces, Galbanum, Sagapenum, Ammoniacum of each three drachms, let the herbs
roots and worms be boiled in a pint and an half of Wine, till half be consumed,
then pressed out, in the liquors boil the oil, suets, Litharge, and red Lead,
til the Wine be consumed, then ad the Gums dissolved in Wine, afterward the
Turpentine, Rozin, Pitch, and Mastich, and make of them a plaster according to
art.

A. It strengthens the brain and nerves.

Emplastrum Oxycroceum. Nicholaus.
Take of Saffron, Ship-Pitch, Colophonia, Wax of each four ounces, Turpentine,
Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Mirrh, Olibanum, Mastich of each an ounce and three
drachms, let this be the manner of making of it, let the wax, Colophonia and
Turpentine be melted together, then taking it from the fire ad the Pitch, then
the Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Frankincense, and Mirrh dissolved in Vinegar,
afterward the Mastich, then the Saffron in powder, well moistened in Vinegar,
and so make them into a plaster according to art.

A. It is of a notable softening and discussing quality, helps broken bones,
and any parts molested with cold, old aches, stifness of the limbs by reason of
wounds, ulcers, fractures, or dislocations.

Vigonis Oxycroceum (in quo nil croci) Prestantius. In plain English thus Vigo
his more excellent Plaster of Vinegar and Saffron, in which is no Saffron.
Take of oil of Mirtles and Roses Omphacine of each a pound and an half, juice
of Marsh-mallow roots two pound, the roots and leaves of Ash tree and Comfry
the lesser, the the leaves of Myrtle of each a handful, let all of them being
bruised be boiled a little in red wine, even till half be consumed, with Mirrh
and Frankincense, of each half an ounce, strain it strongly, and ad to the
decoction Goats suit half a pound, Turpentine two ounces, Mastich one ounce,
boil them again with the Oils to the consumption of the decoction, strain it
and then add Litharge of Gold and Silver of each three ounces, Bole Armenick,
earth of Lemnos of each two ounces, red Lead ten drachms, boil it with a gentle
fire always stirring it, and with a sufficient quantity of wax make it into a
plaster according to art.

A. Surely the College quoted this recept, (which more properly might be
called Vign his nonsense) for Apothecaries to laugh at, not to make, the way of
making of it up being almost as childish as the title, it dries and binds.

Emplastrum de Ranis. Vigo.
Take of oil of (...), Dil, Spicknard, Lillies of each two ounces, oil of
Saffron ( the College send you to page 132. and if you look look there, there is
no such thing as oil of Saffron.
see page) an ounce, Hogs grease a pound, the fat of a Calf half a pound,
Euphorbium five drachms, Frankincense ten drachms, oil of Eaies an ounce and an
half, Vipers fat or for want of it take a Snakes, two ounces and an half, live
Frogs by number six, earth worms washed in Wine, three ounces and an half, the
juice of the roots of Walwort and Elicampane of each two ounces, Schoenanth,
Stoechas, Mugwort, of each a handful, Wine a quart, Litharge of Gold a pound,
Turpentine two ounces, yellow wax so much as is sufficient, Liquid Styrax an
ounce and an half, Quicksilver killed either with fasting spittle or juice of
Le^mons four ounces, This is the manner of making it, let the frogs, worms, and
herbs with their juyces, the oils of Dil, Cha^momel, Lillies, grease and suet
be boiled in a pound and an half of Wine, strain it, then ad the Litharge, Wax
4. ounces, and the remainder of the Wine, then boil it till all the Wine be
consumed and it stick not to your fingers, then ad the oil of Baies, Saffron,
and Spike, and the fat, afterward the Euphorbium and Frankincense, last of all
the quick Silver, well mixed (...) the liquid Styrax and Turpentine, stir them
all (...) till they be incorporated, take heed you put not in the quick Silver
while the mass is too hot lest it fly out.

A. I have known it applied to the swelling in the throat called the Kings
Evil, but for my part I fancy not the recept, neither for that nor any thing
else.

Emplastrum Sanctum. Andr. e Cruce.
Take of per-Rozin twelve ounces, oil of Baies, Turpentine of each two ounces,
Gum Elemni four ounces, let the Rozin and Gum be melted over the fire in a
brass pan, stirring it with a brass instrument, then add the oil of Baies and
Turpentine, boil it a little, then put it in a linen bag and that which drops
through keep in a glazed pot for your use.

A. The virtues are of the same with Arceus his Liniment.

Sparadrapum seu Tela. Gualt. de Renod.
Take of oil of Roses half a pound, Rams suet four ounces, Wax ten ounces,
Litharge, Per-Rozin, Frankincense, Mastich of each two ounces, Bole Armenick,
fine flower of each an ounce, boil the Oil, Suet, and Litharge together till
the Litharge be well incorporated, in which being warm, you may dip your tents.

Emplastrum Stephaniaion.
Take of Ladanum half an ounce, Styrax Calamitis, Juniper Gum of each two
drachms, Amber, Cypress, Turpentine of each one dram, red Coral, Mastich, of
each half a dram, the flowers of Sage, red Roses, Orris Florentine of each one
scruple, Rozin washed in Rose water half an ounce, let the Rozin, Ladanum, and
Mastich, the Styrax, Juniper Gum, and Turpentine, be lightly beaten with a hot
pestel in a hot mortar according to art, so long (putting in a little red Wine,
the while) till you see them well incorporated, then put in the pouders and
make them up being well mixed into an Emplaster.

Emplastrum sine Pari.
Take of Frankincense, Bdellium, Styrax of each (...) drachms, Ammoniacum,
Galbanum of each one dram and an half, Ship Pitch six drachms, the marrow of
a Stag, (...) Hens and Geese, of each two drachms, Sulphur vivum (...) in milk,
Hermodactils in powder of each a dram and an half, let the Gums be dissolved
in white Wine (not in Vine ger because that is inimical to the nerves) and with
two parts of oil of Roses complete, and one part of oil of Eggs and little oil
of Turpentine make it into a plaster according to art.

Slicticum. Paracelsus.
Take of oil of Olives six ounces, Wax one ounce and an half, Litharge four
ounces and an half, Ammoniacum, Bdellium of each half an ounce, Galbanum,
Opopanax, (...) Calaminarius, oil of Bays, both sorts of birthwort, Mirrh,
Frankincense of each two drachms, pure Turpentine one ounce, let the Oil, Wax
and Litharge be boiled together till it will not stick to your fingers, then
being removed from the fire let it cool a little, adding the gums dissolved in
whiteWine Vinegar, which evaporate away by boiling, then strain them, last of
all ad the pouders, turpentine, and oil of bays, make them into a plaster
according to art.

A. Both this and the former, strengthen the nerves, draw out corruption, take
away pains and aches, and restore strength to members that have lost it, the
last is most effectual.

A Plaster for the Stomach. Mesue
Take of wood of Aloes, Wormwood, Gum Arabic, Mastick, Cyperus, Costus, Ginger
of each half an ounce, Calamus Aromaticus, Olibanum, Aloes, of each three
drachms, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Spicknard, Nutmegs, Gallia Moschata,
Schaenanthus, of each one dram and an half, with (...) of Quinces make it
into an Emplaster; and when you have spread it upon a cloth perfume it with
wood of Aloes, and apply it to your stomach.

Another plaster for the Stomach.
Take of Mints, Wormwood, Stoechas, Bay leaves, of each one dram, Marjoram,
red Roses, yellow Sanders of each two drachms, Calamus Aromaticus, wood of
Aloes, Lavender flowers, Nutmegs, Cubebs, Galanga, long Pepper, Mace, of each a
dram, Mastich three drachms, Cloves two drachms and an half, oil of Mints an
ounce and an half, (...) oil an ounce, oil of Spike one dram, Rozin, Wax, of
each four ounces, Ladanum three ounces, liquid styrax half an ounce, make them
into a plaster according to art.

A. Both this and the former strengthen the stomach exceedingly, help
digestion, and stay vomiting.

CERECLOATHS.
A Cerecloath of Ammoniacum.
Take of Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar an ounce, Vnguentum de (...), Melilot
plaster of each half an ounce, Bran an ounce, powder of the roots of Briony
and Orris, of each half an ounce, the grease of Ducks, Geese and Hens, of each
three drachms, oil of Orris one ounce and an half, let them boil gently in the
mussilages of Lin and Foenugreek seeds so much as is sufficient, by adding Wax
four ounces make it into a Cerecloath according to art.

A. It assawageth swellings, or ripens and breaks them, and eases pains
thereby coming.

A Cerecloath of Galbanum.
Take of Galbanum prepared one ounce and an half, Affa foetida half an ounce,
Carrot seeds one scruple, Mirrh two drachms, Bdellium one dhachm, Matricaria.
Featherfew, Mugwort of each half a dram, let the Gums be dissolved in
Vinegar, and with a sufficient quantity of Wax made into a Cerecloath according
to art.

A. Being applied to the belly of a woman after labor, it cleanses her of any
relicts accidentally left behind, helps the fits of the mother and other
accidents incident to women in that case.

Ceratum Oesypatum. Galen.
Take of Oesypus ten ounces, oil of Chamomel and Orris, of each half a pound,
yellow Wax two pound, Rozin one pound, Mastich, Turpentine of each one ounce,
Spicknard two drachms and an half, Saffron a dram and an half, Ammoniacum an
ounce, Styrax Calamitis half an ounce, make them into a Cerecloath according to
art.

A. It mollifies and digests hard swellings of the liver, spleen, womb, nerves,
joints and other parts of the body, and is a great easer of pain.

Ceratum Santalinum. Mesue.
Take of Rose; twelve drachms, red Sanders ten drachms, white and yellow
Sanders of each six drachms, Bole Armenick seven drachms, Spodium four drachms,
Camphire two drachms, white Wax washed thirty drachms, oil of Roses six ounces,
make it into a Cerecloath according to art.

A. It wonderfuly helps hot infirmities of the stomach, liver, and other parts
being but applied to them.

Ceratum Stomachicum. Galen.
Take of red Roses, Mastich of each twenty drachms, dried Wormwood fifteen
drachms, Spicknard ten drachms, Wax four ounces, Rose water, so much as is
sufficient, oil of Roses a pound and an half, let it boil so till it be like an
ointment, then ad oil of Roses eight ounees, Wax fourteen ounces, the pouders
before mentioned (excepting the Mastich which must be melted in the oil of
Roses) of all them used in this manner make a Cerecloath according to art.

A. It strengthens the stomach and liver, eases their pains, provokes apetite
to ones meat, and helps digestion.

Emplastrum a Nostralibus: Commonly called, Flower of Ointments.
Take of Rozin, Per-Rozin, Wax, Sheeps suet of each half a pound, Olibanum four
ounces, Turpentine two ounces and an half, Mirrh, Mastich, of each one ounce,
Camphire two drachms, white Wine half a pint, boil them together into the form
of a Cerecloath.

A. I found this recept in an old manuscript written in the year 1513. the
quantity of the ingredients but very little altered (except analogically) and
the virtue of it thus described verbatim.

Yt is well clensande and well sowdande and generande the flesh, and heland
more in eight days then any other (...) woll do in a monyth, for yt will
soffer noe corrupcion in a wound, ne noe dead flesh to bide (...), also yt is
good for headache and for wind in the brain, and for all mannyr posthymes in
the head, or in the body, for swelling of the ears, or of the cheeks, for all
mannyr of synowes that is greived, or breysyd or sprung, and yt woll draw out
yrne or splynts of trees, or thorns, or broken bones, or any other things that
may grow in a wound, and yt is good for bytyng of venemos (...), and yt rotts
and healls all mannyr of boches without fawt, and yt is good for fester or
canker, and for nolime (...), 2nd yt drawys out al mannyr of akyng in the lyver
or reins, or mylt, and helpyth the emerauds.

CHEMICAL OILS
A. 1. I Desire you to take notice before I begin, that Chemical oils generally
are not to be taken alone by themselves by reason of their vehement heat and
burning, but mixed with other convenient medicines.

A. 2. They carry the very same virtue the Simples do, but are far more
prevalent, as having far more spirit in them and far less earthly dross.

OIL OF HERBS.
Oil of Wormwood.
Take of dried Wormwood a pound, spring water twenty pound, infuse the Wormwood
in the water twenty four hours, then distill it in a great Alembick with his
refrigeratory, so shall you draw out the oil with the water, which you may
separate with a funnel, keep the water for another distillation.

A. Your best way to learn to still Chemical oil is to learn of an Alchymist,
for I rest confident the greatest part of the College had no more skill in
Chemistry than I have in building houses, but having found out certain models
in old rusty Authors, tell people SO they must be done. I can teach a man SO,
how to build a house, first he must lay the foundation, then rear up the sides,
then join the rasters, then build the chimneyes, tile the top and plaster the
walls, but how to do one (...) of this I know not: And so play the College
here, for the Alchymists have a better way by far to draw them, the truth is; I
am in a manner tied to their method here, from which I may not step aside, if
my country kindly accept this, (which is the beginning of my labors) I may
happily put forth something else for the Ingenious to whet their (...) upon,
Only here I quote the oils in the College order, and then quote the virtue of
the (...) of them that so the reader may know by a penny how a shilling is
coined.

After the same manner is prepared oil of Chamomel flowers, Chelondine,
Eyebright, Hysop, Lavender, Marjoram, Mints, Watercresses, Origanum, Penyroyal,
Roses, Rosemary, Rue, Savin, Sage, Savory, Time, Verbascum and all other
flowers and hot herbs.

A. I (...) instance here only in oil of Lavender, commonly called oil of
Spike, which helps the ranning of the reins they being anointed with it, it
expels worms, two drops of it being taken in Wine, the region of the back being
anointed with it, it helps the palsy, for all the rest see the virtues of the
herbs themselves.

OIL OF SEEDS.
Oil of Dill Seeds.
Take of Dill seeds bruised two ponnd, spring water sixteen pints, steep them
for twenty four hours, then distill them in a great Allembick with his
Refrigeratory, draw out the water and oil which you may separate with a funnel.

In the same manner is prepared oil of the seeds of Annis, Caraway, Cmmmin,
Carrots, Fennel, Wheat, Parsley, Rue, Saxifrage etc.

A. Oil of Annis seeds although it be often given and happily with good success
in vertigoes ordissines in the head, yes its chief operation is upon the breast
and lungues, it helps narrowness of the breast, rawness and wind in the
stomach, all infirmities there, coming of cold and wind, strengthens the
nerves, six drops is enough at a time, taken in broth or any other convenient
liquor.

A. As Annis seeds are apropriated to the breast, so are Fennel seeds to the
head, the oil of which cleanses the brain of cold infirmities, lethargies,
indisposition of the body, numbness, want of motion, also it helps the stomach
and expels wind.

A. Cummin seeds, the oil of them is a great expeller of wind, nothing better,
it also wonderfully eases pains of the spleen, pains in the reins and bladder,
stopping of urine especially if it come of wind, and is a present remedy for
the chollick, for the way of taking of them see Annis seeds.

OIL OF BERRIES.
Oil of Juniper Berries.
Take of fresh Juniper berries fifty pound, bruise them and put them in a
wooden vessel with twenty four pints of water, adding to them a pound of sour
Leven, stop the vessel close, and let them stand in a Cellar three months, then
distill them in an Alembick with a sufficient quantity of water, separate the
oil and reserve the water for another distillation.

In the same manner is made oil of Bay berries, and Ivy berries.

A. Oil of Juniper berries, prevails wonderfully, in pains of the yard, and
running of the reins, (...) falling sickness, it is a mighty preservative
against the pestilence, and all evil airs, it purges the reins, provokes
urine, breaks the stone, helps the dropsy, the quantity to be taken at a time
in any convenient liquor is three or four drops, outwardly by unction it helps
the gout, two or three drops dropped upon the navil helps the Chollick.

A. Oil of Bay berries helps the Chollick and Iliack passion.

A. Oil of Ivy berries helps cold diseases of the joints, the stone, and
provokes the terms in women.

OIL OF SPICES.
Oil of Cinnamon.
Take of bruised Cinnamon five pound, spring water fifty pints, steep them
twenty four hours, then distill them with an Alembick.

After the same manner is made Oil of (...), Mace, Nutmegs, Pepper.

A. One or two drops of Oil of Cinnamon is enough to take at a time, and is
exceeding good for such as are in Consumptions. See [Cinnamon] among the
simples.

A. Oil of Mace is excellent good for Rheums in the head: and oil of Pepper for
the Chollick.

OIL OF BARKS.
Oil of the dried Barks of Orrenges, (...), Lemmons, is prepared as oil of
Herbs.

OIL OF WOODS.
Oil of Guajacum.
Oil of Guajacum is made of the wood by a retort in a close Reverberatory, let
the sweeter and thinner part be separated from the grosser, and rectified with
salt, or Tartar (...), or Colcolthar, or sand.

After the same manner is made oil of Box, Oak and other sollid woods.

Oil of Sassafras is made like oil of Cinnamon, and so is made oil of Rhodium,
Juniper, Rosemary, Ivy.

OIL OF THINGS TO BE MELTED.
Oil of Wax.
Take of yellow Wax one pound, melt it, and ad to it three pound of Tiles
beaten into powder, mix them, and put them into a retort, and draw out the oil
with a convenient fire; it is rectified in a retort without tiles, adding water
to it.

After the same manner is prepared Oil of all (...).

A. I am of opinion that oil of Wax, is as singular a remedy for burns, and
burning ulcers as any is, or need to be.

OIL OF GUMS AND ROZINS.
Oil of Mirrh.
Take of Mirrh bruised six pound, Conduit Water thirty pound, Bay salt six
pound, mix them together and distill them in an Alembick.

A. It keeps wounds (and all things else says Fior avantus) from putrefaction,
it makes the face fair and youthful, quickly cures wounds, and deafness being
dropped into the ears.

Oil of Turpentine.
Take of Venice Turpentine eight and twenty pound, spring water ninety six
pound, distill them in a Copper vessel with his Refrigeratory, so will the Oil
come out thin and white, and the Colophonia will remain at bottom if the fire
be increased. This white Oil may commodiously be drawn in Balneo Mariae without
burning.

A. It is wonderful good in cold afflictions of the nerves, and al diseases
coming of cold and wind, it corrects the cold afflictions of the lungues, as
Asthmaes, difficulty of breathing etc. A dram being taken in the morning,
outwardly it adorns the body, takes away the prints of (...), and the small
pocks, chops in the skin and breasts of women, and deafness being dropped into
the ears.

Oil of Balsum.
Take of Mirrh, Aloes, Spicknard, Dragons blood, (...), Mummy, Opopanax,
Carpobalsamum or Cubebs, Bdellium, Ammoniacum; Sarcocolla, Saffron, Mastich,
Gum Arabic, liquid Styrax of each two drachms, Ladanum, Castorium of each two
drachms and an half, Musk half a dram, Turpentine the weight of them all: the
things to be bruised being bruised let them be mixed and distilled in an
Alembick according to art.

A. It (...) lost strength and preserves carkases from putrefaction, the region
of it.
the back bone being (...) with it keeps back the rigor of fevers, it takes
away the falling sickness and such diseases, the fits of the mother,
melancholy and sadness without a cause etc.

Oleum Latiricium, (...). Mesue.
Take of Bricks made of red earth, beaten into pieces of the bigness of an
Apple, these being heat red hot, quench in oil (...) Rosemary, or old Sallet
oil, letting them remain in till they are full, then take them out and beat
them into powder, then still them in a (...) retort, well luted, stop the oil
close and keep it for your use.

A. The oil will quickly penetrate and is a sovereign remedy for the gout, and
all cold afflictions in the joints or nerves, cramps, epilepsies, or falling
sickness, (...), it mollifies hard (...), dissolves cold swellings, as also
cold distempers of the spleen, reins and bladder.

I wonder how (...) gross oyies (...). ping in (...) the Chymicals.
Oil of Lovage (...) made of the flowers of Lovage, four ounces, old oil ten
ounces.

Oil of white Lillies, of the flowers of white Lillies and (...) as oil of
Roses, but (...) off what is yellow.

Oil of Lillies of the valley is made like to it.

Oil of Frankincense.
Take as much Frankincense (...) will, put it in a (...) and draw (...) the oil
with a convement (...), then rectify (...) either by it self or with sand, or
salt.

In the same manner is made oil of Ammoniacum Benzoin, Caranna Hold Learned
(...)! you (...) an (...) Jet (...) whilst your (...) open.
Jet, Mastich, Opopanax; Sagapenum (...) Styrax, (...).

OIL OF MINERALS AND STONES.
A. Having perused these oils following, I would willingly have left them quite
out, I mean the manner allotted by the College to make them.

1. Because I fear they and truth are Separatists.

2. Because the ignorant will (...) as well how to make them as they did
before, when I have done what I can.

3. As to Alchymists (to whose profession the making of them belongs) I shall
seem like Phormio the Philosopher who having never seen battle, undertook to
read a Military lecture before (...) who was the best Soldier in the world,
but I am in a manner forced to it, He that is able to understand the recepts is
as able to understand that the failings are not mine but the Colleges.

Oil of Antimony.
Take of crude Antimony, Mercury Sublimate, of each a pound, beat them into
powder and put them in a glass retort, with a wide neck, give fire to them by
degrees in a Reverberatory, so will a fat distill into a receiver, part of
which sticking to the neck of the retort will easily be melted, a gentle fire
being held under it, let this fat be rectified in a small Allembick or retort,
and let the (...), I know not (...) better English word to (...) it.
curd be kept, if you would have it liquid set it in a Cellar in an open glass
and it will turn to water or oil which keep in a glass well stopped.

Oil of Arsenick.
Take of Christalline Arsenick (first (...) with Colcothar) mix it with an
equal part of Salt (...), and (...) tartar, let them be calcined between two
little (...), (the uppermost having a hole (...) it) (...) they have done
smoking, dissolve the (...) thus calcined in warm water, that so the Salt may
be (...) out, the powder which remains at bottom, moisten with oil of Tartar
and dry it by the fire, do so three (...), again dissolve it in warm water that
you may take out the salt, then will there remain a very white powder and
fixed, which being set in a moist place will dissolve into an oil much like
butter.

Oil of Salt.
Take of French bay salt made with the heat of the sun, not of the fire, as
much as you will, dry it by the fire, to which ad its weight in burnt bricks,
beat them together in a mortar before they be altogether cold, put them into a
retort with a long neck, lute a capacious receiver very well to it, give fire to
it by degrees, and in twelve or fourteen hours you shall have the oil in the
Receiver, when the furnace is cold and the smoke well ceased, power out the oil
and keep it from the air in a glass well stopped, and rectify it from the
phlegm.

But the best oil of salt is better made, if you make the salt into brine of
such strength that it will bear an eg, then quench the Bricks being red hot in
this brine til they have drunk up all the liquor, then beat them into powder and
put them into a Retort well luted, and give fire to it even to the highest
degree, and then rectify it from the phlegm.

A. Being mixed with Turpentine and applied outwardly, it helps the gout, three
drops taken every morning in convenient liquor, preserves youth, consumes the
dropsy, resists fevers, convulsions and the falling sickness, being mixed
with ointments, it is exceeding good in ruptures and dislocations.

Oil of Amber.
Take of yellow Amber four ounces, beat it into powder, to which being put in a
large Viol or a Retort, pour as much sharp wine vinegar, digest it eight days
in horse dung, then add to it twice its weight in dry sand, distill it in sand,
adding the fire by degrees, rectify it from the sand with salt or Tartar
calcined, then with water.

A. It speedily helps all afflictions of the nerves, as Convolsions,
Falling Sickness etc. Being given in convenient liquors, it is a singular
remedy against poison and pestilent air, diseases of the reins and bladder, the
fits of the mother, the nose being anointed with it, the chollick, it causes
speedy labor to women in travail being taken in Vervain water, it strengthens
the body exceedingly, as also the brain and senses and is of an opening nature.

Oil of Sulphur.
Take a glass bel-still, which will hold sixteen pound at least (for the larger
it is so much the better it is) place it upon an earthen Metreta, I know not
what English name to give it.
vessel which has three or four upholders to which the bell may be
commodiously fitted, then putting a sufficient quantity of Brimstone into the
earthen vessel, burn it under the bell, putting in fresh Brimstone when the
first is consumed, let this be done in some obscure place where neither wind
nor sun comes.

The oil will be more in quantity if the vessel that holds the Brimstone stand
upon a furnace, and a fire be under it.

Before you put on the bell perfume it with the smoke of Sage.

A. Prevails against diseases coming of cold, putrefaction or wind, fevers,
agues tertian, quartan or quotidian, Pestilence, wounds and ulcers, affects of
the brain, mouth, teeth, liver, stomach, spleen, matrix, bladder, entrails and
arteries coming of abundance of humors or putrefaction, outwardly applied it
helps fistulaes, ulcers of the mouth, and gangrens, the way to take it inwardly
is thus, dip the top of a feather in the oil and wash it in the liquor, or
decoction you give it in, in (...) agues give it in wines, in which rosemary or
mints or both have been boiled, in tertian agues, in Wine, in which centaury
has been boiled, in quartan agues, in Bugloss water, in all of them a little
before the fit come, in pestilences, in Wine in which Rhadishes have been
boiled, mingled with a little Venice Treacle, in the falling sickness with
decoction of Bettony or Peony, in coughs with decoction of Nettle seed and
Hysop both of them made with Wine, for phlegm in Wormwood water, for the wind
chollik in Chamomel flower water, for dropsies and cold livers in Selondine
water and Honey, for the rickets and stoppage of the spleen in Tamaris water,
for the French pocks in Fumitory or Broomflower water, against worms, in Grass
or Wormwood water, for the fits of the mother in decoction of Bettony or
Featherfew in Wine, for suppression of urine, in decoction of Garlic with
wine, for the gout in decoction of Chamepitys with Wine, in wounds and ulcers
the place is lightly to be touched with a feather wet in the oil, it a hollow
tooth ache put a drop into it, if all your teeth ache make a decoction of mints
in Wine and put a drop or two of this oil to it, and hold it warm in your mouth.

Oil of Tartar.
Take of Tartar so much as you will, put it into a large retort, with that
proportion, that but the third part of the vessel be filled, distill it in sand
with a strong fire, afterward (the oil being first separated from the water or
spirit of Tartar) rectify it with much water, to correct the smell of it, let
it stand open a long time in the sun.

Liquor Tartari commonly called oil of Tartar.
Take of Tartar so much as is sufficient, fill an earthen vessel not glazed,
almost full of it, let it be calcined in a furnace twelve hours, when it is
cold put it in Manica Hippocratis, which hang in a moist Cellar that it may
dissolve, placing a vessel under it to receive it, that which remains and will
not dissolve in the hanging, dissolve in water, and evaporate away the moisture
till it begin to look like Alum.

A. This is common to be had at every Apothecaries, and Virgins buy it to take
away the sunburn and freckles from their faces, it takes off the rust from
Iron, and preserves it bright a long time.

Oil of vitriol.
Take of the best Vitriol as much as you will, melt it in a pan, then divide it
into thick pieces, the which burn in the fire till they look reddish, then beat
them into powder and sprinkle them with the best spirit of Wine, put them into
earthen retorts which will bear the fire, increase the fire to them by degrees
for three days, till the receivers which were obscured with smoke come to be
clear, rectify that distilled liquor, and separate by themselves, the spirit
of Wine, the sour spirit of Vitriol, and the strong and ponderous oil.

A. It must be mixed with other medicines, for it kills being taken alone, it a
swageth thirst, allaieth the violent heat in fevers and pestilences, and a few
drops of it gives a pleasant grateful taste to any medicine.

Aqua Mettis.
Take of pure Honey four pound, dry sand two pound, still them in a Cueurbita.
glass Still, so capacious that the matter may fill only the fist part of the
vessel, first draw away the phlegm, then increasing the fire draw off the water,
yellowish in color and sharp in taste.

Paracelsus advises it to be drawn five times over, and calls it Quintessence
of honey, and extols the virtues of it to the skies, says it will revive dying
men, which Mr. Charles Butler of Hamshire also affirms.

Aqua Fortis.
Take of dried Vitriol two pound, Salt Peter cleansed one pound, bruise them
and place them in a reverberatory, in a retort, a large receiver being placed
under it, still it by degrees for twenty four hours together, clarify it with
a dram of silver according to art.

CHEMICAL PREPARATIONS MORE USUAL.
Steel prepared by the Sun.
A. It is just so prepared as shall be hereafter showed, only here they appoint
it to be set in the sun, there in the shadow, a parles difference.

Steel prepared by the fire.
Take of Steel cleansed from the filth, heat it red hot and quench it a dozen
times in sharp white Wine Vinegar, and as often in Canary or Malaga Wine, then
dry it and grind it upon a stone with oil of Cinnamon and keep it for your use.

Cremor Tartar.
Take of Tartar made of White or Rhenish Wine as much as you will, beat it into
fine powder and sieft it, then wash it in cold water three or four times til
the filth be washed off from it, then boil it in clear water in a large pan or
earthen vessel gently take off the scum, but the crust which is one the top
after it has covered the whole top, take off with a wooden scummer, spread it
upon a brown paper, wash it again in cold water and dry it well, then grind it
into fine powder, and keep it in a glass close stopped that it may touch no
metal.

Crocus Martis.
Take of a bar of Iron or Steel which being heat very hot thrust into a great
heap of brimstone, a basin being placed underneath with cold water in it, the
Iron will run out like wax, which being separated from the brimston, grind it
to powder in an Iron mortar, put the powder in square earthen dishes which are
not of above a fingers breadth in deepnesse, place them at the hot fire of a
Reverberatory for three or four days, so will the substance be reddish and
like a sponge, let the top be taken away with an Iron instrument, and the rest
driven up by the fire til it may be brought into a very fine powder: Also you
may prepare it by the fire of a Reverberatory without brimstone.

Crocus Metallorum.
Take of Antimony shining with long veins, saltpeter, of each equal parts,
beat them into powder severally, then mix them together, and put them into a
brass or iron mortar, then set fire to them by putting a coal in, which will
burn with great noise, on the top place a tile or an iron plate at least three
fingers breadth distant from the matter burning, when the noise is ceased, let
the metal which will look of a deep red color, be separated from that whitish
crust at top, and kept for your use, being sweetened with clean distilled water.

Flos Sulphuris.
Take of yellow Brimstone, which when you have rubbed it if you hold it to your
ear will make an noise, grind it with its equal part of a strange name for
terredamnata.
Colcolthar of Vitriol, viz. the residue of the distillation of the oil, put it
in a long earthen pot, putting to it a glass head large enough, give fire to it
in sand by degrees, and drive up the flower, stirring it with an hares foot.

It will be the better if you sublime it again with fresh Colcothar.

Lapis infernalis septicus
Take of the lie in which black Soap is boiled, burn it in a pan to a stone,
but yet take heed all the moisture be not consumed and it wax too dry, when it
is cold cut it in the form of dice and keep it close stopped.

Otherwise,

Take of Vitriol calcined to redness two ounces, Sal Armoniack, Tartar calcined
to whiteness, quick Lime of each three ounces, put to them being bruised, ly
made of Fig Tree, or Spurge or Soap dissolve them in it, strain it and in a
brass vessel boil it to the consumption of the moisture, keep the residence in
a vessel close stopped.

Lapis prunellae or Niter purged with Brimstone.
Take of pure saltpeter a pound, put it in a crucible with coals round about
it, let it not burn but run like metal, that being melted put in two ounces of
flower of Brimstone in little bits as big as hazel nuts, which when it is
consumed, pour out the Niter into a brass basin, and when it is cold keep it in
a glass close stopped that the air come not to it to dissolve it.

Magisterium, Perlarum et Corallorum in quo etiam sales eorum continentur.
Take of Pearls or Coral as much as you will, grind them into exceeding fine
powder, then pour upon them so much Radical Vinegar, that it may overtop them
three or four fingers breadth, digest them in ashes till they are dissolved,
pouring off the old liquor and pouring in fresh till all of them be dissolved,
filter the liquor through a broun paper, and putting a little oil of Tartar
into it, the Pearls which were dissolved will fall down to the bottom in white
powder, which is to be separated from the liquor and washed with clear water
till it be sweet, at last washed with Cordial waters.

Radical Vinegar is that which is distilled in sand with Bay salt.

Mercurius Dulcis sublimatus.
Take of Sublimatum prepared with salt and Vitriol, two ounces, Quicksilver
crude Mercury purified with salt and Vinegar and ground upon a Marble an ounce
and an half, let the Sublimatum be exactly mixed with the crude Mercury upon
the same Marble, then put the powder into a phial of a foot in length, place
the phial (being stopped well with Cotton or Bumbast) up to the middle in sand,
at first let the fire be gentle, then increased by degrees for six hours, that
which arises up to the middle of the glass let it be taken, for that which
ascends up to the top is of an exceeding poisonous nature, fit for nothing but
in horses the not in men.
ulcers, that which remains in the bottom is of no use, if that which is in the
middle be sweet without any acrimony it is well made, if not you must sublime it
again the second time, that so you may separate again what is at the top, and
the oftener you do it the more perfect will your medicine be.

Mercurius Dulcis precipitated.
Take of crude Mercury distilled in a retort with Bay salt, or revived with
common I take that to be the native vermilion
Cinnabarum, one part, Aqua fortis (of two parts of Vitriol calcined and one
part of salt Peter) two parts, dissolve them in a phial over warm ashes, make
brine of rain water and Baysalt as much as the water will dissolve, filter it
through a broun paper, into this brine (which must be strong enough to bear an
eg) put the former solution of the Mercury, and forth with a white powder will
fall down to the bottom, which is to be washed in clear water till it have no
taste, then in cordial waters, so dried and kept in a glass.

Mercurius vitae.
Take of oil of Antimony before mentioned whilst it is in fat, put it into
clear water, and forth with it will appear like milk, and a white powder will
fall down to the bottom, which must be made sweet with much washing and kept
for use.

Sacharum Saturni.
Take of red I ead as much as you will, which being put into a phyal put so
much distilled Vinegar to it that it may overtop it the breadth of four fingers,
digest it in a bath or in dung, twenty four hours, separate the sweet Vinegar
and put in fresh, so long till no more sweetness can be drawn from it, mix all
the liquors together in a stone vessel which will endure the fire, with a
gentle fire exhale it so long away till there appear a skin at the top, then
set the vessel in a Cellar, and take away the Christalline congealation, then
exhale it again till another skin be on the top, and do as before till there
grows no more there, at last dissolve the sugar in distilled water, filter it
and coagulate it, to a sweet christalline sugar.

Salt of Vitriol of a fleshy color.
Take of Vitriol so much as you will, put it in a wide Crucible and place the
sire round about it, till it come into a powder of the color of Violets, let
this be put into a large glass viol into common water distilled, continually
stirring it with a stick till the water which before was hot, be cold, so let
it stand twenty four hours, filter the liquor and exhale it away till it be dry
and of a fleshy color.

Salt of Vitriol white.
Let white Vitriol be dissolved in distilled water, filtred and coagulated as
the Sacharum Saturni was.

Turbith Minerale.
Take of crude Mercury, oil of Vitriol separated from the phlegm of each equal
parts, put them into a phial, which being placed first of all in hot ashes,
then fire being added by degrees, lest all the oil of Vitriol fly away, a
white mass remaining in the bottom which being separated from that portion of
crude Mercury, let it be put into rain water or else distilled water, and forth
with it will come yellow, let it be often washed in warm water, till it be
sweet, then in cordial waters, then dried and kept.

Oleum Antimonij.
Take of bright Antimony as much as you will, let it be beaten in very fine
powder, and put into a large earthen vessel, stirring it over the fire with an
iron instrument till it grow into clots, then beat it again, set it over the
fire as before, repeat this till all the splendour of it be gone and it smoke no
more, and the Stibium be like white ashes, let this powder be put upon a red
hot plate; take a pound and an half of it, Borax half an ounce, or take three
ounces of it and half a dram of Sal gem, put it into a Crucible which being
covered with a Tile set in a very hot fire, til there flow a matter like water,
put that into a basin and keep it.

Tartarum Vitriolatum.
Take of Liquor Tartar prepared four ounces, Oil of Vitriol well rectified two
ounces, drop it by drops upon the Liquor of Tartar, so will there a white powder
fall down to the bottom, let the moisture swimming above be taken away by a
gentle heat, and the salt reserved for use.

Nepenthes Opiatum.
Take of tincture of Opium made with distilled Vinegar, then with spirit of
Wine, extraction of Saffron made with spirit of Wine, of each an ounce, Salt of
Pearls and Coral, of each half an ounce, Tincture of the specics of Diambra of
each seven drachms, Ambergreece one dram, mix them together and with the heat
of a bath make them into the form of pills.

THE WAY OF MAKING EXTRACTS.
Seeing many extol the praises of Extracts up to the skies, I am as far from the
Colleges opinion in this particular as the Zenith is from the Nadir.
l'though WE by daily experience see they never answer to those effects, yet
that He may not altogether be wanting to the desires of others, We chose rather
to give this general way of making of them, than to stuff up (...) with as thez
have done already.
idle and needless Recepts, and out of vian glory impose then upon the
unskilful.

Take of the mass of any pill or powder what soever, as much as you will,
infuse them or any of them in distilled water, A blind order.
such as the Physician shall prescribe, a sufficient quantity, let them stand
two days in a bath, or if the species be hard, three days, til the tincture
have drawn out all the virtue, which if you would try, let the first liquor i.
e. filter it.
run through a brown paper, and put in new liquor digesting it again, which
having received its tincture, proceed as before, let the liquors so gathered be
placed in Balnes Mariae, and the moisture evaporated, so will the matter remain
in the bottom of the thickness of honey, which keep for your use; that the
extract may remain moist a long time, put a little salt to it, viz two scruples
or half a dram to an ounce of extract.

If you draw it with distilled water, put in a little oil of Vitriol or oil of
Sulphur, so the extract will be the better drawn, and the pleasanter to the
taste, for the liquor being thereby made sharp will sooner penetrate the hard
substances of the species, and set a stop to the unbridled violence of a
purging medicine.

Cordial Extracts, Opiates and violent purges are usually drawn with spirit of
Wine.

THE WAY OF MAKING SALTS OF ANY KIND OF VEGETABLES.
THE Salt which is made of plants is twofold, the one Volatle which is (...)
discussed by the violence of the fire (and this is (...), The other fixed,
which endures the fire and is left in the (...).

The way to make Volatle or Essential Salt.
Take a large quantity of any convenient plant which is fresh and full of
juice, beat it in a wooden or stone mortar, and (...) poured clear spring water
to it, boil it till half be consumed, strain it and press it strongly, then
boil the decoction to the thickness of Honey, then set it in a glass or stone
(...) glazed, in a cold place for eight days at the least, and you shall find
a crystal line salt at the top of it, like Sal gem, take that and wash it in
the water of the herb whereof it was made and dry it.

In this manner is made salt of Wormwood, Carduns (...), (...), and other
bitter herbs very easily, but of (...) herbs not (...) much difficulty.

The way of making Fixed or Elementary Salt.
The method of making this consists in these four things, (...), (...), (...),
(...). * see the directions at the beginning of the Book.


That this may be rightly done, (...) of all the ashes of (...) herbs you would
make salt of, must be made white by burning.
calcination, and herein have a care lest by too much burning either they go to
glass or else the most subtle part fly out, which often chances in the
calcining of scurvy grass and other plants of like nature.

Then make a ly of the ashes by pouring to them clear water and hot, till all
the saltness be drawn from them, filter the ly, and boil it by a gentle fire
till all the water be evaporated away, and the salt left at the Bottom, to
which a further cleansing is requisite, therefore dissolve it again in water
and filter it and coagulate it again, for by often so doing, the salt will be
cleansed from all its impurity and remain white and clean.

Thus are salts prepared of herbs, fruits and trees of any kind, as also of
parts of living creatures calcined and some stones, But this by the by.

Amongst fixed salts these excel, salt of Wormwood, Time, Rosemary, Centaury
the less, Mugwort, Carduus Benedictus Masterwort, Parsley, Best-harrow, Ash,
dwarf Elder or Walwort, Guajacum, Box, Chamomel, St. John's wort, Succory,
Sullondine, Scurvy Grass, Bettony, Eupatorium, Bawm, Cetrach etc.

PREPARATIONS OF CERTAIN MEDICINES VERY NECESSARY FOR APOTHECARIES.
The burning of Brass.
TAKE flakes of Brass, put them in an earthen vessel putting between every thin
plate, either common Salt or Brimstone in powder, in this manner lay flake upon
flake till the pot be full, then burn it sufficiently and sweeten it with warm
water, it will be reddish if prepared with salt, black if with Brimstone.

The way to wash Aloes
Take of Aloes beaten into very fine powder as much as you will, put it into a
glazed pot, and stir it up and down with a spatula in a so much that it may
swim above the Aloes the breadth of 2. or three fingers.
sufficient quantity of boiling hot water, so as the purer part of the Aloes
may be mixed with the water, pour off that and put in other warm water, do so
till nothing but the dross is left at bottom, all the waters being added
together, evaporate away the moisture, that the pure Aloes may be left in a
mass at bottom.

The preparation of Spodium.
Take of choice Ivory cut in big pieces, burn them in an earthen pot in a
furnace till they look white then being beaten into fine powder wash it in
Rosewater, (let there be two pound of the water to one pound of the Ivory, dry
it and wash it again thrice, the last time diffolve four drachms of Camphire in
the Rose water, then having dried it, grind it fine upon a marble, and make it
into troches to be kept for your use.

In the same manner may you prepare Hartshorn.

The Preparation of Bole Armenick.
The preparation of this is performed by many with Rose water, by some with
Vinegar, by others with Wine, The Role being in fine powder they wash so often
till all the dross and sand be taken from it then they dry it in the air or in
the sun, and keep it close covered.

(...) Brionie.
Take of (...) roots as many as you will, scrape them with a knife, and press
out the juice strongly with a press, which being kept without motion in a
vessel after a few hours white foeces like Starch will settle, the water
swimming at top being poured off dry those Foeces, in glazed vessels.

May Butler.
Take of sresh Putter without any salt at all, about the middle of May or
toward the latter end of them month, place it in the sun in a broad earthen
vessel well glazed, that so it may be melted on every side, which being well
melted when the sun is at the hottest strain it through a thick linen rag but
press it not, then set it in the san again, at last when it is white, you may
keep it all the year.

(...) of quick Lines
The Lime being beaten let it be mixed with much sweet water, especially in the
Dog days and much stirred, and when it is settled at the bottom, change the
water and mix it again with other, do so seven or eight times, filtring it
every time, at (...) put Rose water to it, and so dry it and keep it for your
use.

The way to burn River Crabs.
Take of River Crabs alive, stew them in a brass pan over a temperate fire so
long, then having beaten them to powder keep them in a clean box in a dry
place, so will they continue good a whole year.

The common preparation of filings of Steel.
Take of filings of Steel cleansed from the filth by a Loadstone, washing them
in clean water, and drying them, then sprinkle them well, with sharp Wine
Vinegar, stirring them well, dry them in the shadow often putting fresh
Vinegar to them, so let it stand thirty days, afterward beat it into very
fine powder and keep it for your use.

In such steel as is prepared by the fire with Brimstone, you must note that
unless after the burning it retain a smatch of the taste of Vittiol, it has
lost all its opening saculty, and is good for nothing.

The preparation of Coriander (...).
Steep Coriander seeds in sharp Vinegar for twenty sour hours, and then dry
them, and so if you please you may prepare Cummin seeds also.

The preparation of (...).
Take of wild Cucumers (...) ripe as many as you will, cut them (...) in the
(...) and (...) the juice gently with your (...) singers, (...) which let run
through a very fine sive, then let it stand (...) the (...) part be settled at
the bottom, (...) off (...) and (...) into another earthen glazed vesel, ser
the (...) at the bottom, being covered with a linen cloth, in the son till it
be dry, then keep it for your use.

The preparation of Spurge roots.
Infuse the bark of spurge roots, being well cleansed, in sharp wine Vinegar,
then dry them and keep them for your use.

In the same manner is prepared the leaves of Laurel, Merereon, or spurge
olive, and the fruit of Thymelaea.

The preparation of Euphorbium.
Take of Euphorbium beaten into very fine powder, grind it upon a stone with
oil of sweet Almonds till it be like an unguent then let it be put into a
Quince or Citron made hollow, rolled up in past and baked in an oven, keep the
Euphorbium so prepared in a glass well stopped.

The manner of making Gersa or Cerussa Serpentaria.
Take of Aron roots in the beginning of the spring, before their strength run
up to leaves, as many as you will, wash them and cleanse them from the outward
bark, then being beat in a stone mortar, and the juice pressed through a sive,
which being covered with a linen cloth, let it be dried in the sun afterward
washed in Rose water, dried again and kept for your use.

The preparation of black Hellebore.
Take of black Hellebore roots as we have them with us, the woody pith being
taken away, steep the^ in juice of Quinces three days, with a moderate heat,
then dry them and keep them.

The preparation of Goats blood.
Take a Goat of a middle age, feed him a month with burnet, Smallage, Parsley,
Lovage, Mallows and such like things, then take the blood which flows out of
his Arteries being opened, let it settle, then pour the water from it, and dry
the blood in a furnace; the Goat must be killed toward the latter end of the
summer about the Dog days.

The way to burn Swallows.
Let young Swallows be so killed that the blood may run upon their wings, then
sprinkle them with a little salt, and burn them in an earthen vessel well
glazed, and keep the Ashes for your use.

After the same manner are burnt Hedgehogs, Toads, and Frogs, but without salt.

The preparation of Gum Lacca.
Take of Gum Lacca which is foul, (for it were labor in vain to wash what is
clean) bruise it a little, and boil it in water (in which Schaenanth and
Birthwort of each equal parts have been boiled) til the purer part swims at top
and the dross is sunck to the bottom, evaporate away the moisture from that
purer part, either in the sun or in a bath, and so keep it for your use.

The preparation of Lapis Lazuli.
Take of Lapis Lazuli finely bruised, and wash it in so many waters till the
water remain clear after washing, and this preparation is enough, when you put
it in pills, but when you use it in Confectio Alkermes, it must first be burnt.

The preparation of Earth worms.
Take of Earth worms cut and cleansed, as many as you will, wash them so often
in Wine till they are cleansed from their filth, then dry them and keep them
for your use.

The common way of preparing Pearls.
Beat Pearls into very fine powder in an Iron or Steel mortar putting to them a
little Rose water, that so the more subtle parts may not fly away.

In like manner is Coral and other precious stones prepared.

The preparation of Sows or Woodlice.
Take of Sows as many as you will, wash them in white Wine, then put them into
a new glazed pot, dry them in a furnace that so they may be (...) into powder.

The way to make Oesipus.
Take of wool cut off from the neck, ribs, and under the pits of the forelegs
of a Sheep not washed, but well wearied, wash it in warm water so long till it
have left all its (...) in the water. then press it out and lay it by, let that
fat and foul water be poured from on high out of one vessel into another, a
long time (...) it be froathy, then let the froath settle and take off the fat
that swims on the top, then pour the water to and fro again, till neither more
fat nor froath appears, then wath the froath with the fat, in clear water, till
it be cleansed from the dross and will not bite your tongue if you touch it
with it, then keep it in a thick earthen clean pot, in a cold place.

Washed lead. Dioscorides.
I (...) water being put in a leaden mortar be stirred up and down with a
leaden pestel, painfully till it look black and grow thick like lime, then
strain it through a linen cloth, putting (...) to it, that so whatsoever is
dissolved may pass through when it is settled pour off that water and wash it in
other (...) water till no blackness remain in it, at last make it up into balls
to be kept for your use.

Furnt Lead. Dioscorides.
Take very thin plates of lead put them in an earthen pot, putting (...) one
between every plate so pile them up till the pot be (...) then set (...) in the
fire, (...) the lead up and down till it be brought into ashes, then shut your
(...) (lest the steem either of the Brimstone or of the lead do you mischief)
take it off from the fire, then wash it as you wash Ceruss.

Powder of raw lead. Fernelius.
Take very thin plates of Lead and cut them very small, then steep them three
(...) in sharp Vinegar, changing the Vinegar every day, then dry them by the
fire but burn them not, so beat them into a fine powder.

The preparation of Fox lungues.
Take of Fox lungues being fresh the Aspera Arteria being taken away, wash them
diligently with white Wine, wherein Hysop and Scabious have been boiled, dry it
gently in an oven but burn it not, then lay it up wrapped in Wormwood,
Horehound or Hysop dried.

Simple preparation of Scammony.
Take of Scammony in fine powder, a pound, juice of Quinces eight ounces, mix
them together and having stood in infusion twenty four hours, evaporate away
the juice.

2. Or take of Scammony in powder and put it in a Quince the core being taken
out, and so roast it in the ashes or in an oven, then take out the Scammony and
keep it for your use.

Or 3. Take four ounces of Scammony, put it in a glass viol, cover it over with
juice of Quinces the breadth of three fingers, let it stand in a bath till it
look like milk, then put out that and put in other juice, do so till it look no
longer white, let this liquor stand and settle, and dry the setlings in the sun.

A. The College here set down a way to prepare Squils for troches, which they
say is not unlike the former, and comparing them together I find them as like
as a Permain is like a Apple, therefore I pass it.

The way to boil Turpentine.
Take a pound of Venice Turpentine, to which add a great quantity of water, (to
wit twenty four pound) in which let it be boiled so long, till it loose its
smell, and be as hard as Rozin, brittle as glass, and white.

The preparation of Tutty.
Take of Tutty heat red hot three times in a crucible, and as often quenched in
Rose water, then grind it very small and put it in a clean linen cloth, swing
it up and down this way and that way in a vessel full of clear water, that the
fine and profitable part thereof may come through into the water, and the gross
and filthy part remain still in the cloth, let it settle and then pour off the
water, let this operation be repeated till nothing worth any thing be left in
the cloth.

A CONCLUSION.
THus Courteous Reader have I gone through the whole Work, I am not conscious to
my self that I have justly given offense to any by translating this Work, If
any take offense, it is to be shrewdly suspected it arises from self
interests. Once more let me advise the ignorant not to be too busy with what
they have no skill in, for as Physic (as the never dying Hippocrates truly
says) was never ordained for disorderly and disobedient persons, so was the
administration of it never ordained for dunces, therefore let every one that
administers physic, seriously consider the great account must be made another
day before God and the Lord Jesus Christ and the holy Angels, and do nothing
rashly but upon serious consideration, as he desires it should fare well with
him when the Lord comes to make inquisition for blood.

Pure pity to the Commonalty of England (I assure you) was the motive, the
prevailing argument that set my brain and pen a work about this subject, many
of whom to my knowledge have perished either for want of money to fee a
Physician, or want of knowledge of a remedy happily growing in their garden, and
if any be angry, because I have stripped the Daw out of his borrowed feathers, I
am not careful, all ingenuous people that love their country will judge like
themselves, of whom I rather be deservedly reproved, then of others ignorantly
commended.

FINIS.
AN EXACT ALPHABETICAL TABLE TO THE ENGLISH NAMES IN THE CATALOGUE of SIMPLES.
ROOTS of
A
ALKANET. Page 3 Angelica 3 Anthora 3 Asarabacca 4 Asphodel male and foemale. 4
Avens. 6 Artichokes. 8

B
Bay Tree. 12 Bears-breech. 3 Birthwort, long, 3 Round. 4 Brank-Ursine 3 Beets.
5 Bistort. 3 Borrage. 5 Bur-Burdock. 5 Briony white and black. 5 Bugloss. 5
Brakes. 10 Butter-bur. 14 Bruscus. 17 Butchers-broom. 17

C
Calamus Aromaticus 6 Cappers 8 Carrots 8 Chamelion white and black 6
Chelondine greater 6 Lesser 7 China 7 Coleworts 6 Centaury 6 Costus 7
Corralwort 8 Cucumers wild 8 Cyperus 8 (...) 14 Cinkfoyl 14 Canterbury or
Coventry bells 19

D
Danewort 9 (...) 8 Dictamni Dittany 8 Dragons 9 Dwarf Elder 9 Dropwort 11

E
Elicampane 10 Endive 10 Eringo 10

F
Fearn 10 Fennel 11 (...) 11 Flower-de-luce 12 Fullers thistle 12 Figwort 18

G
Garlic 3 Galanga 11 Gentian 11 Grass 12 Ginger 20 Gladon stinking 19

H
Hartwort 18 Hermodactils 12 Hellebore white 9 black 10 (...) (...) Hoar
strange 15 Hogs fennel 15

I
Jacinth 12

K
Knee holly 17

L
Ladies thisles 19 Liquoris 11 Lillies white 13 Lovage 13 Leeks 16

M
Marshmallows 3 Meddow Saffron 7 Masterwort 12 Mallows 13 Mandragues 13
Mechoacan 13 Mezereon 13 Mulberrie 13 Monks Rhubarb 17 Meadsweet 20

O
Onions 6 Orris 12

P
Parsnips 14 Patience 17 Petasitis 14 Peony 15 Pellitory of Spain 16 Plantane
15 Polypodium 15

R
Reeds 4 Rest-harrow 14 Rhapontick 16 Rhubarb 17 Rhadishes 17 Rose-root 17

S
Sarsaparilla 17 Satyrion 18 Saxifrage white 18 Scabious 18 (...) 18 Set-wall
20 Seseli 18 Skirrets 18 Sow-bread 4 Swallow-wort 4 Sparagus 4 Snakeweed 5
Sullendine 7 Succory 7 Spurge 10 Sorrel 12 Sharp pointed-Dock 12 Spignel 13
Spurge-Olive 13 Spicknard 13 Sulphur wort 16 Solomon's seal 16

T
Tansy 19 Teazles 12 Toothwort 8 Turmerick 8 Tormentil 19 Throatwort 19
Toadstools 19 Tripolium 19 Turbith 19

V
Valerian white and red 5 Vipers bugloss 9 Valerian great and small 15 Vipers
grass 18 Victorialis 20

W
Water flag, or flower-de-luce 3 Wake-Robin 4 Walwort 9 Waterlillies 14
Widdow-wail 15

Z
Zedoary 20

BARKS of
A
Ash-tree 21

B
Barberries 21 Beans 21

C
Caffialignea 21 Chestnuts 21 Cinnamon 21 Citrons 21 Cork 23

E
Elder 23 Elm 23

H
Hazel 20

L
Lemmons 21 Line-tree 23

M
Mace 22

O
Oak 23 Orrenges 21

P
Parsley roots 23 Pine-nuts 23 Pomegranate 22

S
Smallage roots 20

T
Tamaris 23

W
Walnut 22

WOODS.
B
Brazil 24 Cypress 24 Ebeny 24 Guajacum 24 Juniper 24 Nephriticum 24 Rhodium 24
Rose-wood 23 Sanders, red white and yellow. 24 Sassafras 24 Tamaris 24 Wood of
Alocs 23

HERBS.
A
Adders tongue 48 Agrimony (...) Agnus Castus 26 Alkanet 25 Angelica 27
Asarabacca 28 Arrach 28 Alecost 29 Avens 29. 33 Artichokes 35 Ashtree leaves 38
Alehoof 39 Alexanders 40 Arsemart 41

B
Bay Tree 43 Bawm 45 Bazil 48 Bears-breech 25 Bastard-Saffron 29 Beets 29
Burdock 29 Bettony 30 Blites 30 Borrage 30 Briony 31 Bugloss 31 Bugle 31
Box-tree 31 Brook lime (...) Buckhorn Plantan 35 Bluebottle 36 Burstwort 37
Broom 39 Butter-flowers 50 Bruisewort 52 Bindweed 53 Cabbages 33 Calamint 31
Carduus Benedictus 32 Cassidony 54 Catmints 33 Centaury 33 Cetrach 34 Chamomel
34 Chelondine 34 Chervil 34 Chickweed 26 Clevers 27 Columbines 28 Costmary 29
Corallina 33 Coleworts 33 Chamepitis 34 Comfry 35 Cottenweed 36 Cudweed 36
Crosswort 36 Cypress tree 36 Cranebill 39 Cowslips 40 Clary 41 Cinkfoyl 48
Crowfoot 50 (...) hay 52 Coltsfoot 56

D
Dandelion 55 Dazies 30 Dill 27 (...) thistle 29 Dictamni Dittany 36 Dwarf
Elder 37 Dodder 37 Dovesfoot 39 Double-tongue 40 Dittander 43 Duckmeat 43 Docks
51 Devils bit 54

E
Elicampane 37 Epithimum 37 Eyebright 38

F
Fennel 38 Fumitory 38 Featherfew 45 Fleabane 50 Figwort 52 Flixweed 53

G
Garlic 26 Goosegrass 27 Good-Henry 30 Groundsel 32 Germander 34 Groundpine 34
Golden rod 35 Goats rue 39 Gold knobs 50

H
Herb twopence 47 Hartstongue 43 Hearts ease 55 Housleek 29 Honey suckles 32
Herb bennet 33 Horsetail 33 Hemlock 35 Houndstongue 36 Hedge Hysop 39
Horsetongue 40 Henbane 41 Hysop 41 Herb Maslich 45 Hops 44 Horehound 44 Hig
taper 50

I
Indian leaf 38 Ivy 39

K
King Cob 50 Knapweed 54 Knotgrass 34

L
Ladies mantle 26 Lluellin 30 Ladies thistle 32 Larks heels 35 Lavender Cotton
36 Ladies Bedstraw 39 Liverwort 39 Laurel of Alexandria 42 Lavender 42 Laurel
42 Lettice 42 Lovage 43 Lunguewort 50

M
Marygolds 32 Maiden hair 25 Maudlin 26 Marshmallows 26 Marjorum 27 Mouseare 28
(...) 28 Moschata 39 Masterwort 44 Mastich tree 43 Mallows 44 Mandrakes 44
Mililot 45 Mints 45 Mercury 46 Mezereon 46 Moss 46 Mirtle-tree 46 Moneywort 47
Mother of Time 53 Mullin 56

N
Navil wort 56 Nep 33 Nettles 57 Nightshade 53

O
Oak of Jerusalem 30 Ox eye 31 Orpine 36 Ontberry 40 Origany. (...) 48

P
Pansies 55 Patience 40 Paul's bettony 30 Pimpernel 27 Perewinkle 35 Primroses
40 Pellitory of the wall 40 Pepparwort 43 Penyroyal 49 Peach leaves 49 Plantane
49 Poppies 48 Poley mountin 49 Purslain 49

R
Rocket 38 Rupture wort 37 Rosemary 50 Roses 51 Rue 51

S
Sampire 36 Sarazens Consound 35 Sage 51 Sanicle 52 Savin 51 Savory 52
Saxifrage 52 Schoenanth 52 Southernwood 25 Sorrel 25 Smallage 27 Silverweed 28
Sowbread 28 Sengreen 29 Sheapheards purse 31 Spleenwort 34 Sullondine 34
Succory 35 Strawberry leaves 38 Stinking groundpine 40 St. John's wort 41
Sciatica cresses 42 Starwort 42 Sharewort 42 Sea (...) 43 Sea (...) 43 Sweet
Trefoyl 43 Stachys 45 Selfeheal 49 Sicklewort 49 Sopewort 52 Scordium 52 Senna
53 Sowthistles 53 Spinach 54 Stoechas 54 Spurge 55 Swallow wort 56

T
Tamaris 55 Tansy 54 Teazles 37 True Love 46 Toungblade 40 Toad flax 43 Treacle
mustard 46 Tobacco 46 Turnips 50 Time 55 Trefoyl 55

V
Vervain mallows 26 Vipers bugloss 37 Vervain 56 Violet leaves 56 Vine leaves
56

W
Watercresses 46 Walwort (...) Wormwood 25 Woodsorrel 26 Woodroofe 27 Wild
Tansy 28 Windflower 40 Woad 42 Widow wail 46 Wintergreen 50 Willow leaves 51

Y
Yarrow 46

FLOWERS of
B
Bawm 58 Balauffins 59 Borrage 57 Bugloss 57 Beans 59 Broom 59

C
Centaury 59 Chamomel 57 Clovegilliflowers 58 Cowslips 59

E
Elder flowers 59

H
Hops 58 Honey suckles 58

L
Lavender flowers 58

M
Mallows 58

P
Peach tree 59

R
Rosemary 58 Roses (...) 58

S
Saffron 58 Stoechas 57 Schaenanth 58 Succory 58

W
Walflowers 58 Water Lillies 59 Winter Gilliflowers 58

FRUITS, BUDS.
A
Apricocks 61

B
Bayberries 61 Barberries 61 Bitter Almonds 61

C
Capers 60 Cassia fistula 62 Checkers 61 Cherries 61 Cloves 60 Cucumers 60
Cubebs 61 Currance English 61

D
Dates 60 Figs 59 Galls 60

M
Melones 61 Medlars 61 Myrobalans: 62 Nutmegs 60

O
Olives 61

P
Pepper 60 Pears 60 Plums 60 Pinenuts 60 Pompions 61 Prunes 62

Q
Quinces 60

R
Raisons 60

S
Sebestens 60 Services 61 Strawberries 62

T
Tamarinds 62

W
Walnuts 60 Winter cherries 62

SEEDS of
A
Annis 63 Ash-tree 65

B
Bazil 63 Bishopsweed 63 Broom 65

C
Cardamoms 63 Carrots 63 Coriander 62 Cummin 63 Cich pease 64 Citrons 65

D
Dill 63

F
Fenugreek 62 Fennel 63 French barley 64 Four greater cold seeds 64

G
Gromwel 63

L
Linseed 63 Lupines 63 Lettice 64

M
Mallows 64 Mustard seed 64

N
Nettles 63 Nigella 64

P
Peony 65 Poppy 64 Purslain 64

R
Rocket 63 Rue 64

S
Smallage 63 Stavesager 64 Sorrel 64 Succory 64

W
Watercresses 64 White Saxifrage 64 Worm seed 65

GUMS, ROZINS.
A
Aloes 65 (...) 65 Ammoniacum 67

B
(...) 66 Benzoin 65

C
Camphire 67

D
Diagridium 66

E
(...) (...)

F
Frankincense ibid

G
Galbanum ibid

L
Ladanum 65

M
Manna ibid (...) 66 (...) ibid

O
Olibannm ibid Opopanax ibid

S
Sanguis (...) 65 (...) 66 (...) ibid

T
Traganth (...) Turpentine ibid

JUYCES of
Citrons 67 Lemmons 67 Liquoris 67 Sugar 67

Of PLANTS.
Agrick 68 Misleto of the Oak 68

LIVING CREATURES.
Crabfish 69 (...) 68 Eels 69 (...) ibid Hedge. sparrows ibid Oylters ibid
Pigeons ibid Sows 68 Swallows 69 Vipers 68 Wood-lice ibid

PARTS OF LIVING CREATURES.
Bears grease 71 Bone in a Stags heart 71 Bones of a Hares forehead ibid Brain
of Sparrows 69 Brain of Hares ibid Cats head 70 Crabs eyes ibid Cocks stones
ibid Castorium ibid Ducks liver ibid Ducks grease 71 Elks claws ibid Fox
lungues 70 Frogs liver ibid Fox grease 71 Goats bladder 70 Goose grease 71
Goats suet ibid Hartshorn 70 Honey 73 Ivory 70 Kites head ibid Man's skull 71
Man's fat ibid Milk ibid Os triquetrum 71 Stags pisle 70 Sheeps bladder ibid Raw
silk 72 Unicorns horn 70 Wax 72 Whey ibid

BELONGING TO THE SEA.
Amber 73 Ambergreece ibid Foam of the Sea ibid Pearls ibid Red Coral ibid
Sea-sand ibid Spermacati 72

METALS. STONES.
AErites 76 Alum 74 Amethist 75 Bezoar ibid Carbuncle ibid Cocks-stone ibid
Diamond ibid Emerald 74 Granate 75 Gold 73 Jacinth 74 Jasper 76 Iazuli ibid
Lead 74 Litharge ibid (...) 75 Pompholix 74 Ruby 75 Saphir 74 Swallows stone 76
Toadstone 75 Topas ibid

I quoted not the lattin (...) because they lie (...) in the Treatise.

A CATALOGVE OF THE COMPOVNDS IN THE ORDER THEY ARE set down in every CLASSES.
COMPOUND WATERS.
THE common way of making Waters 80 Wormwood water ibid Angelica water 81
Langius his Bezoar water ibid Mathiolus his bezoar water 82 Capon water 83
Cinnamon water ibid Mathiolus his Cinnamon water 84 Cinnamon water by infusion
ibid Aqua Caelestis 85 A cordial water 86 Aqua cordialis frigida Saxonia ibid
Langius his Ant-Epileptical water 87 (...) 88 Imperial water (...) Pawm water
89 Aqua Mariae ibid Aqua (...) 90 Rosa Solis ibid Dr. Stephens water ibid Aqua
Protheriacalis 91 Aqua Theriacalis by infusion ibid Aqua Theriacalis distilled
92 Ordinary Aqua vitae ibid Aqua vitae compound 93 Spirit of (...) ibid
Usquebach ibid Fallopius his Alum water 94

PHYSICAL WINES.
The common way of making Wines 64 Wormwood wine ibid Galen's wine of Squils 95

PHYSICAL VINEGERS.
The common way of making Vinegers. 97 Distilled Vinegar 97 Vinegar of Roses
ibid Treacle Vinegar 98 Vinegar of Squils ibid

DECOCTIONS.
A Carminative decoction 99 The common decoction for Clisters 100 A common
decoctiom for a medicine 100 A decoction of Epithimum ibid A decoction of
flowers and fruits 101 A pectoral decoction ibid A decoction of Senna ibid Lac
Virgineum 102 A drink for wounded men ib.

SYRUPS.
Syrup of Vinegar London 103 Syrup of Vinegar Mesue ib. Syrup of Vinegar
compound ib. Syrup of the juice of Citrons 104 Syrup of Bettony 105 Syrupus
Bizantinus ib. Syrup of Quinces 106 Syrup of fumitory ib. Syrup of (...) 107
Syrup of Coltsfoot ibid Julep of Alexandria 108 Julep of Roses ibid
Oxysaccharum simplex ib. Syrup of Maiden hair ib. Syrup of Cinnamon 109 Syrup
of Coral ibid Syrup of Clovegilliflowers. 110 Syrup of Citron pills 111 Syrup
of water Lillies ib. Syrup of Meconium 112 Syrup of Poppies ibid Syrup of Corn
roses 113 Syrup of Peach flowers ib. Syrup of dried Roses ib. Syrup of Roses
solutive 114 Syrup of Roses with Agrick ibid Syrup of Roses with Hellebore 115
Syrup of Violets ibid

COMPOUND SYRUPS.
Syrup of Wormwood 116 Syrup of Marshmallows ib. Syrup of Mugwort 117 Syrupus
Augustanus, or Syrup of Rhubarb 118 Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb 119 Syrupus
Diasereos ibid Syrup of Epithimum 120 Syrup of Maudlin 121 Syrup of Liquoris
122 Syrup of (...) 122 Syrup of Jujubes 122 Syrup of Camepiys 123 A Magisterial
syrup against Melancholy 124 Syrup of Bawm 125 Syrup of Mints ibid Syrup of
Mirtles 126 Syrup of Apples ibid Syrupus de pomis Regis Saporis ib. Syrup of
Horehound 127 Syrup of Rhadishes ib. Syrup of the 5. opening roots 128 Syrup of
Scabious 128 Syrup of Hart's-tongue 129 Syrup of (...) 129 Syrup of Comfry 130 A
Cordial julep 130

SYRUPS MADE WITH HONEY.
(...) 131 Diacodium 131 Diamoron 131 Honey of Rosemary flowers. 131 Honey of
Mercury 132 Honey of Raisons 132 Honey of Roses 132 Oxymel simple 133 Oximel
compound 133 Oximel Heleborated 133 Oximel Julianizans 134 Oximel of Squils 135
Honey of Anacardium ib. Honey of Emblicks 136

ROB.
The meaning of the word 136 Simple Rob ibid Rob of Barberries 137 Rob of
Cornels ib. Rob of Quinces ib. Rob of English Currance 138 Juice of Sloes ibid
Juice of Liquoris ibid Miva of Quinces ibid

LOHOCHS.
The signification of the word 139 Lohoch of Colworts ibid Lohoch of Poppies
ib. Lohoch of Raisons 140 Lohoch of Pinenuts ibid Lohoch of Fox lungues 141
Lohoch Sanum and expertum ibid Eclegma of Squills 142

PRESERVES.
The way to make them 143

CONSERVES
The way to make them 144 Lozinges of Poppies 145 Manus Christi 146 Penidies
ibid Confection of Frankincense. 147 Sugar of Roses ibid

POUDERS.
Aromaticum Cariophylatum. 148 Aromaticum Rosatum. 149 Cordial powder 150 A
powder for such as are bruised by falls 151 Species cordiales temperatae ib.
Diacalaminthes Simplex ib. Compositum 152 (...) ib. Species Elect. Diacymini
152 Species Elect Diagalaxgae 153 Species Elect. de Gemmis 153 (...) Simplex
154 Dialacca 155 Diamargariton 155 (...) 157 Diamoscu 157 Dianthon 158 Dia
penidion 158 Diarrhodon Abbatis 159 Diaspoliticum ibid Diatragac (...) ibid
Diatrion Pipereon 160 Diatrion Santalon ibid Pulvis Haly ibid Laetificans 161
Species Confectionis Liberantis. 161 (...) 162 Pulvis Saxonicus ibid A powder
against the bitings of mad dogs. 163 Pleres Arconticon ib. A preservative
powder against the pestilence 164 Rosata Novella ibid A powder to stop blood
ibid A powder for scabs 165 Holland powder ibid Pulvis Sanctus ibid Pulvis
Sennae 166 Diaturbith ibid A powder for the worms 167

ELECTUARIES.
Electuarium Resumptivum, 167 Confectio Alkermes 168 Electuary of Bayberries
169 Athanasia Mithridatis ibid Diacapparis ibid Diacinnamomu 170 Diacorrallion
ibid Diacorum 171 Elect. e scorri ferri ibid Diacydeniun. 172 Confectio de
Hyacyntho 173 Confectio Humain ibid Antiditum Haemagogum 174 (...) Salomonis
ibid Diasatyrium 175 Diaspermaton 176 A pectorial Electuary ibid Miclets ibid
Theriaca (...) 177 Mathiolus his great Antidote against poison and pestilence
ibid Diascordium 179 Mithridate ibid Philonium Persicum 180 Philonium Romanum
181 Electuarium de Ovo ibid Requies 182 Venice Treacle 183 London Treacle 184
Benedicta Laxativa. ibid Caryocostinum 185 Cassia extracted for Clisters. ibid
Electuarium Amarum ibid Diacassia with Manna 186 Cassia extracted without the
leaves of Senna ibid -- With the leaves of Senna 107 Diacarthamum ibid
Diaphoenicon 188 Diaprunum lenitive ibid -- solutive 189 Diacatholicon ibid
Diacrocuma 190 Electuarium de Citro ibid Electuarium Elescoph ibid Confectio
Hamech 191 Indum minus 192 Lenitive Electuary ibid Elect. Passulatum ibid
Electuary of the juice of Roses 193 (...) Reginae 193 Hicra picra simplex. 194
Hiera with Agrick ibid Hiera Logodii 195 Hierapachii ibid (...) 196

PILLS.
Pilulae Alephanginae 197 (...) Rosata 198 Pills of washed Aloes ibid Pilulae
Assaireth ibid Pills of Bdellium 199 Pills of Eupatorium ibid Pills of Hiera
with Agrick 200 Pilulae Imperialis ibid Mastich pills ibid Pestilential pills
ibid Stomach pills 201 Pilulae de Succino ibid Pills of Rhubarb ibid Pilulae ex
tribus 202 Agregative pills ibid Pills of Agrick ibid Pilulae Arabicae 203
Pilulae Artbriticae ib. Pilulae Auriae 204 Pilulae Cochiae ib. Pilulae foetidae
205 Pills of Fumitory 205 Pills of Hermodactils ib. Pilulae Indae 206 Pills of
Lapis Lazuli ib. Pilulae Lucis majores ib. Pills of Mechoacan 207 Pilulae rudii
ibid Pilulae sine quibus 208 Pills of Spurge ibid Pills of Euphorbium ib.
Pilulae Turpeti Auriae 239 Pilulae de Cynoglosso ibid Laudanum ib. Pilulae
scribonii 240 Pills of Styrax ib.

TROCHES.
Troches of Wormwood 241 Trochisci Alexiterii 242 Trochisci Aliptae moschatae
ib. Troches of Annis seeds ib. Trochisei Bechici albi 243 nigri ibid Troches of
Barberries ib. Troches of Camphire 244 Troches of Capers ibid Trochisci Cypheos
ibid Trochisci diarhodon 245 Trochisci de (...) ibid Troch sci de Gallia
Moschata ib. Trochisci Gordonii 246 Trochisci Hedichroi ib. Trochisci Hysterici
247 Trochisci de Lacca ib. Troches of Terra Lemnia ib. Troches of Mirrh 248
Trochisci Polyidae ibid Pastilli Andronis ibid Trochisci Musae 249 Crocomagma
Damocrites ib. Troches of wood of Aloes ibid Trochisci Ramich ibid Troches of
Roses 250 Troches of Squills ibid Troches of Spodium 251 Troches of Sanders
ibid Troches of Vipers ib. Trochisci Viticis 252 Trochisci albi ibid Troches of
Wintercherries. ibid Trochisci de Carabe 253 Trochisci Diacorrallien ibid
Trochisci Diaspermaton ib. Haemoptoici pastilli ib. Sief de Plumbo 254
Trochisci de succino ibid Sief of Frankincense ib. Agrick trochiscated ib.
Troches of Agrick ib. Trochisci Alhandal 255 Troches of Rhubarb ib. Troches of
Violets ib.

OILS.
The way to make oils by expression 256 The way to make simple oils by (...)
258

COMPOUND OILS
Oleum (...) 263 Oil of Capers 264 Oil of Castorium ibid Oleum (...) ibid Oleum
(...) 265 Oil of Euphorbium ibid Oil of Exeter 266 Oil of Swallows ibid Oil of
St. John's wort ibid Oil of Orris. 267 Oil of Marjoram ibid Oil of Mandrakes 168
Oleum (...) ibid Nard Cyl 269 Oleum (...) ibid Oil of Tobacco 270 Oil of Peppar
ibid (...) n (...) ibid Oil of Foxes 271

OINTMENTS.
Vnguentum album 271 Vnguentum (...) 272 Vnguentum Anodinum ibid Liuimentum
Arcei ibid Vnguentum Aureum 273 (...) ibid Ointment of Bdellium ibid Vnguentum
de Calce 274 Ointment of Marshmallows. ibid Vnguentum enulatum 275 Vnguentum
diapompholigos. ib. Vnguentum refrigerans 276 Vnguentum de minio ibid Ointment
of Tobacco ibid Nutritum 277 Vnguentum (...) 278 Placentinus his Liniment ib.
Ointment of Lead ib. Pomatum 279 Vnguentum Potabile. 179 An Ointment against
the Itch ibid Ointment of Roses 280 Vnguentum (...) rubr. ib. Ointment of Tutty
ib. A binding Ointment 281 Vnguentum Agrippae ib. Vnguentum de Alabasiro 282
Vnguentum Apostolorum ib. Vnguentum (...) ib. Vnguentum ex succis aperitivis.
283 Vnguentum de Artanita 284 Vnguentum (...) ib. Vnguentum Citrinum 285
Vnguentum Comitissae. ib. Vnguentum ad Hemorrhoidas. 286 Ointment of Bays 287
Vnguentum Martiatum ib. (...) ex Apio. 288 Vnguentum (...) 288 Vnguentum
Resinum 289 Vnguentum Nervinum ib. Vnguentum Pectorale ib. Vnguentum Populneum
290 Vnguentum Resumptivum ib Vnguentum Splenicum 291 (...) Scabiosa ib. tap
sivalentia 292 Tapsimel 293 A stomach Ointment 293 An ointment for the Worms
293

PLASTERS.
A plaster of Ammoniacum 294 Album castum de Cerussa 295 A plaster of
Bayberries ibid Emplastrum Barbarum magnum ibid A plaster of Bettony 296
Emplastrum (...) ibid Emplastrum Catagmaticum 297 Emplastrum Cephalicum 298
Emplastrum Ceroma ib. A plaster of Hemlock with Ammoniacum 299 Emplastrum de
crusta panis ib. Emplastrum de Cymino ib. Diachylon simplex 300 Diachylon
magnum ib. -- cum gummi 301 A plaster of Mussilages ib. Diapalma ib.
Emplastrum (...) 302 Emplastrum Divinum ib. (...) degum Flenni 303 Emplastrum
gratia Dei ib. Emplastrum Gryseum 304 Emplastrum ad (...) 304 Emplastrum (...)
305 A plaster of Bettony ib. A plaster of Mastich 306 A plaster of Mililot
ib. A plaster of red Lead 307 Emplastrum Isis ib. A plaster of Mastich 303
Emplastrum Metroproptoticon. 308 Emplastrum nigrum 309 Emplastrum nervinum ib.
Oxycroccum 310 Emplastrum de Ranis 311 Emplastrum (...) ib. (...) 312 Empl.
Steph iniaion ibid Empl. sine pari ibid Sticticum Paracelsus 313 A plaster for
the stomach ib.

CERECLOATHS.
A Cerecloath of Ammoniacum 314 A Cerecloath of Galbanum ibid Ceratum Oesipatum
314 Ceratum Santalinum 315 Ceratum stomachicum ib. Flower of ointments ib.

CHEMICAL OILS.
The way to make Chemical oil of herbs 317 Of Seeds 318 Of Berries 319 Of
Spices ibid Of Barks 320 Of Woods ibid Of things to be melted ibid Of Gums and
Rozins 321 Of Minerals and stones 323 Oil of Salt 324 Oil of Amber ibid Oil of
Sulphur 325 Oil of Tartar 326 Oil of Vitriol 327 Quintessence of Honey 327 Aqua
sortis ibid

CHEMICAL PREPARATIONS.
Steel prepared 328 (...) martis ibid Cremor tartar ibid Crocus metallorum 329
Flower of Brimstone ibid Lapis infernalis ibid Lapis prunella 330 Magisterium
of Pearl and Corral ibid Mercurius Dulcis ibid Mercurius vitae 331 Sacharum
Saturni ibid Salt of Vitriol 332 (...) Minerale ibid Oil of Antimony ibid (...)
333 Nepenthes Opiatum ibid

EXTRACTS.
The way of making extracts 334

SALTS.
The way of making Salts 335

PREPARATIONS.
The burning of Brass 337 Washing of Aloes ibid Preparation of Spodium ib.
Preparation of Bole Armenick 338 Foecula Brioniae ib. May Butter ibid The
washing of quicklime ib Burning of Crabs 339 Preparation of Steel ibid
Preparation of Coriander seed ibid Preparation of Flaterium ib. Preparation of
Spurge roots 340 Preparation of Euphorbium ibid Gersa serpentaria ibid
Preparation of Goats blood ibid Preparation of black Hellebore ibid Burning of
Swallows 341 Preparation of gum Lacca ib. Preparation of Lapis Lazuli ibid
Preparation of Earthworms ibid Preparation of Pearls ib. Preparation of
Woodlice 342 Way to make Oesipus ibid Washed lead ibid Burnt Lead ibid Powder
of raw Lead 343 Preparation of Fox lungues ibid Preparation of Scammony ib. The
way to boil Turpentine 344 The preparation of Tutty ib.

AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF THE VIRTUES BOTH OF SIMPLES and Compounds contained
in this BOOK.
A
Abortion, causes, Page 28. 46. 50. 152. 174. Abortion, stays, p. 51. 54.
76. 181. 263. 286. 304. Aches, 3. 21. 27. 40. 41. 47. 70. 267. 286. 310. 313.
See Pain, After birth, 3. 15. 27. 28. 31. 36. 41. 44. 50. 51. 55. 59. 66. 70.
88. 91. 92. 93. 124. 152 153. 164. 174 184. 188, 189. 246. Agues, cause, 62.
Agues, help, 4. 12. 15. 27. 28. 31. 36 41 44. 50. 51 55. 59. 60. 66. 70. 88.
91, 93. 124. 152. 153. 168. 174. 184. 188. 189. 193. 199. 243. 245. 246. 290.
325. Anger, (...) St. Anthonies fire, 28. 35. 40. 53. Appetites, 25. 44. 45.
61. 216. 119. (...). 262. (...). See (...). Apostaumes, 6. 28. 40 52. 277.
Appoplexes, 89. 183. Asthma, 47. 142. 156. 175, 183. 142, 277. 290. See Cough.

B
Back, 7. 34. 41. 268. see pain. Baldness, 5. 69. 65. 71. 73. 25. 257.
Belching, 30. 34. 99. 125. 137. 153 173, 195. Belly, 32. 168. see pain.
Barranness, causes, 32. Barrenness takes away, 41. 70. see Lust, Seed. Black
Jaundice, 127. 206. See Jaundice. Bladder, 11. 29. 43. 52. 54. 56. 58. 60. 71.
128. 184. 256. 262. See Cleanse. Bloody flux, see flux. Blood Clotted, 30.
Binds, 8. 74. 137. 285. 304. 307. See Flux, Terms, and Hemorrhoids. Birth, 3.
4. 28. 31. 36. 40. 44. 48. 50. 55. 59. 66. 70. 76. 152. 174. 184. 246. 277.
290. 295. 325. See Travail. Botches, 42. Bots, 31 Boyls, 6. 119. Blackness and
blewness of a stroke, 12. 16. 20. See Bruises. Bleeding, 14, 16, 19, 23, 27,
31, 46, 57, 248, Bones broken, 16, 19, 23, 31, (...), 296. Brain, 11, 27, 39,
51, 58, 59, 61, 73, 129, 131, 136, 147, 150, 157, 163, 171, 198, 246, Brain
hurts. 75. Se Senses. Animal virtues. Breast. 32. 55. 72. 122. 127. 160. 318.
Bruises, 5. 6. 12. 17. 19. 30. 33. 36. 52. 72. 151. 316. Buboes, 42. Burnings,
3. 6. 8. 13. 23. 27. 29. 39. 61. 301. Burstness, 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 10. 11. See
Ruptures.

C
Cancers, 107. 205. Cankers, 8. 30. Carbuncles, 12. 47. Catalepfis, 42.
Chollick, 3. 14. 20. 32. 33. 36. 43. 47. 63. 117. 152. 162. 165. 168. 177. 191.
250. 257. 277. 300. 318. See Wind. Choler, 42. 61. 62. 72. 99. 140. 250.
Choler increases, 6. Chollor, purges, 17. 25. 33. 43. 49. 53. 65. 113. 115,
120. 121. 127. 185. 187. 192. 193. 198. 205. 255. Chops, 279. Chops in the
fundament, 12. Chin cough, 57. Cleanse, 14. 72. 201. 207. (...) women after
labor, 30. 124 72. 174. 194, 203. 247. 314. Cleanses the reins and bladder, 4.
18. 32. 55. 72. 190. 191 See Reins and bladdder Cools, 5. 52. 62. 67. 74. 87.
103. 112. 113. 116. 159. 161. 162. 164. 171. 243. 252. 254. 262. 263. Coughs,
6. 10. 13. 28. 34. 48. 50. 52. 56. 58. 59. 67. 107. 122. 123. 127. 140. 141.
146. 152. 156. 158. 66. 240. 169. 171. 175. 183. 143. 156. Convulsion, 6. 15.
19. 30. 32. 53. 58. 55. 59. 88. 93. 129. 130. 157. 171. 195. 270. 281. 324.
Cold. 11. 318. see cough and hoarsness. Color, 13, 56, 99, 196, 250, 269,
Consumption, 29, 56, 60, 71, 73, 82, 83, 89, 91, 111, 147, 150, 156, 160, 161,
168, 171, 177, Conception, 46, See Abortion, Concocts, 58, See Digestion Corns,
107, Cramp, 6, 30, 32, 40, 41, 71, 129, 263.

D
Dead child, 55, 88, 180, See Birth, Dead flesh, 9, 280, Deafness, 10, 256,
262, 321, Deformity, 43 See Freckles, Morphew etc. Diabetes, 70, Difficulty of
breath, 25, See shortness of breath, Dislocations, 31, 310, 324, Digestion, 5,
27, 38, 61, 93, 116, 125, 149, 152, 154, 157, 158, 161, 170, 173, 177, 198,
239, 241, 246, 250, 262, 293, Dries, 8, 74, 285, 304. Dropsy, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11,
12, 28, 31, 32, 37, 41, 53, 58, 59, 61, 65, 72, 73, 76, 121, 155, 170, 177,
201, 208, 284, 319, 184, 245, 247, 324, Drunkenness, 33, 42, 69, 139, Dying
men, 327.

E
Eyes, spoils, 6, 16, 63, Eyes helps, 9, 20. 30, 33, 35, 36, 38, 40, 43, 51,
58, 69, 72, 94, 99, 147, 173, 198, 208, 254, 278, 298, Evil spirits, 20,
Excoriations, 35, 46, 49, 130, Ears, 68, 71, Ephialts, 194, Ephialos, 245,
Excressence of flesh, 249,

F
Fainting, 11, 18, 74, 154, Falling sickness, 11, 14, 15, 30, 31, 39, 41, 42,
50, 53, 55, 59, 63, 68, 70, 71, 73, 74, 76, 88, 99, 110, 129, 157, 163, 171,
177, 183, 195, 270, 273, 281, 322, 324. Fallingsickness, bad, 71. Fevers, 13,
25, 30, 35, 37, 57, 59, 67, 74, 75, 76, 85, 87, 104, 113, 126, 128, 146, 168,
188, 243, 244, 251, 324, 327. Fluxes, 3, 5, 12, 14, 19, 20, 21, 23, 28, 29, 33,
43, 46, 47, 51, 56, 59, 60, 70, 73, 106, 126, 137, 173, 177 181, 253, 262.
Freckles, 4, 5, 28, 31, 31, 43, 51, 55, 102, 284. (...), 6. see Purge. 31, 54,
103, 104, 128. 152. French-pocks, 7, 13, 18. 24, 52, 55, 92. (...) of the
Mother, (...), 27, 33, 40, 47. 66, 88, 93, 246. 305, 308, 314, 322, 326.
Fistulaes, 31. 39, 54, 257, 277, 280. Frenzies, 37, 39 42. 49, 52, 53, 113,
268. Fleas, 41. 50. Falling out of the Fundament, 42. 43. Frettings, 44,
Fundament. 45, 60. 285. Fractures, 66. Fear, 74, 75, 206. Folly, 74.

G
Gravel, (...). (...), 40. 117, (...). Green Sickness, 4, 26. 39, 46 94. (...),
8, 12, 19, 20, 21. (...). 33, 37, 39. 41, 54. 70. 71. 96. 204. 205. 206, 208,
239, 256, 270. 271, 296, 319 (...), 13, 14. 34. 36, 115. Gangreens, 31. 63.
325. Gunshot, 37. 277. Gnats 50. Gums, 61. 94. Generation hinders, 63.
Gaulings, 280.

H
Headache, causes, 6. 66. Headache helps. 15. 26. 30. 39. 40. 47. 49. 56. 58.
60, 67. 135, 195. 198. 203. Head strengthens, 94. 262, 320. Head purges, 7.
269. Hemorroids, hurts, 65. 174. Hemrroids, 7. 8, 17, 52, 56. 177, 181. 196.
283. 285. Hoarceness, 11, 48. 50, 56, 66. 107, 123, 139. 159 143. Heart qualms,
18. 19. 27. 30. 57. 62. 63. 89. 126. 147. 177, 249. Humors, 25. 34. Hichoughs.
27, 126. (...). 34. Horses, 34, 41. Hearrburning. 42. Hunger. 47, Hectic
fevers. 70, 71, 82, 83. 111. 156, 168. 171. 188, 243, 256, 290:

I
(...) purges. 12. (...). 5, 28 29. 30. 31. 32. 34 37. 38. 40. 41. 46. (...).
53. 57, 58. 59. 61. 123. 160. 263. 272. 299. 300. 306. Itch. 10, 13. 18. 44. 48
49. 52. 53. 63. 72. 74. 107. 121. 205. 269. 270, (...). (...). 293. Jaundice.
15. 24. 32. 34. Joints heat. 20. Joints, 27. 40. 60. 193. (...).

I
ILl Airc 86 162 142 In disgestion 93. Se digestion 172 Iliaack passion 162 168
250 277 319 Itching of wounds 272

K
King's Evil 7 10 19 Kibes 165

L
Lust provokes 5 10 14 18 34 35 39 57 58 61 63 69 175 262 Lunges 6 14 19 21 41
52 60 67 70 101 108 122 138 158 160 176 318 Liver 6 7 8 11 12 13 14 15 16 24 27
29 33 34 38 52 59 62 (...) 121 127 169 190 247 265 300 306 Liver, hurts 71
Leprosy 7 10 22 26 32 40 107 195 205 Lethargy 9 26 53 64 74 204 313 Loosnesse
35 60 Lice 36 57 Lice cause 60 Love causes 75 Loosens 115 Leanness 160 Limbs
180 Ligaments 265

M
Madness hurt full 62 Madness helps 9 10 30 39 50 58 72 93 101 116 124 195
204 Mad dogs their bitings, 5 6 31 32 45 69 163 Matrix 26 28 29 33 45 53 55 60
62 71 118 169 256 262 265 285 (...) 70 82 83 188 Melancholy 10 15 18 27 30 38
39 53 62 63 72 74 82 99 101 105 107 115 116 121 124 127 180 184 185 125 129 130
135 136 145 151 154 163 187 192 193 196 204 205 206 208 244 264 307 322 Megrim
47 135 195 203 Memory burts 41 Memory helps 38 51 59 125 Mice 9 Milk increases
9 27 53 Morphew 4 5 7 9 10 28 31 55 257 316 Moaths 6 25 31 36 38 44 Muscles 265

N
Numbnesse 3 318 Naught for women with child 9 11 12 Noise in the ears 10 16 39
41 262 Navill 15 Nerves 27 62 73 118 129 136 262 318 321 Nose 30 Nits 36 Nature
125

O
OBstructions 7 11 12 17 43 53 101 104 107 121 128 155 201 143 265 Old age 89
161 324

P
Poison 3 4 5 6 12 13 14 19 20 21 22 25 27 32 34 37 39 44 51 68 70 71 75 82 92
104 111 116 119 162 169 177 180 183 142 324 Pain in the head 3 17

See Headache
Pestilcnce 3 5 6 9 12 13 14 19 22 27 32 39 43 44 47 51 61 69 70 71 73 75 81 82
85 86 92 104 116 131 162 168 173 177 182 184 142 319 324 326 Purge 4 13 53 280
Purges all parts of the body gallantly 68 Purge (...) 5 12 13 19 53 54 65 96
99 115 115 136 166 185 187 192 204 208 255 Pleuresies 34 57 122 123 140 160
(...) 192 253 256 275 Piles 78 Se Hemorrhoids Priapismus 35 Purge by Urine 78
35 Pimples 37 102 285 326 Pain in the sides and bowels 8 Pain in the stomach 11
Phtisicks 44 49 71 91 127 140 141 240 243 Pin and Web 11 Palseyes 16 40 41 71
157 177 239 268 273 318 Pain in the joints 17 Pissing of blood 25 31 34 43 44
46 130 147 248 Pain 30 181 253 272 295 Putrefaction 159 169 190 277 299 301

Q
QUinsic 36

R
RAwhumours 11 27 Ruptures 3 4 5 6 7 10 11 14 15 19 28 36 37 39 44 53 130 301
324 Running of the reigns 5 23 34 41 49 62 110 Rickets 6 11 15 16 22 47 55 72
129 135 139 170 244 307 Rank savor 8 Rats 9 Rowelling of cattle 10 Reins 11
12 13 15 27 56 58 60 71 128 265 Rewmes 15 29 43 Riches 74 Redness 102 285
Ringworms 107 121 257 288 270 Rust 326

S
STone 3 8 10 12 14 17 18 20 26 32 34 36 39 40 47 49 53 56 57 63 69 70 76 117
128 155 162 174 176 194 193 253 262 270 Spleen 4 6 8 11 12 13 16 22 24 26 29 33
34 38 41 42 47 52 53 55 58 59 60 62 72 129 169 170 172 177 184 190 196 247 264
291 295 300 318 Scurf 45 9 Stopping 4 17 33 43 106 165 198 Spitting blood 5 6 7
16 22 31 34 35 46 51 58 61 73 100 126 130 147 181 183 240 248 Spitting matter
534 Soremouth 5131

Se Ulcers.
Sunburniug 5 8 10 28 32 51 55 102 326 Swellings 6 15 19 25 30 44 54 57 301 314
315 Shortness of breath 6 10 11 12 25 31 32 33 34 50 52 56 57 59 66 157 175
321 Shrinking of sinnews 6 26 27 33 Senses duls 6 Senses strengthens 59 85 89
171 173 180 198 325 Sweat provokes 6 7 12 17 19 81 180 285 291 Scabs 7 10 13 18
24 31 38 43 48 49 52 53 62 63 72 74 107 121 205 269 270 278 321 Scaldings 8 27
29 39 277 290 301 Strengthens 8 57 84 200 201 239 302 313 Stomach hurts 16 22
Strengthensthe stomach 10 61 62 84 86 108 110 111 125 150 158 179 180 190 198
241 249 250 254 307 313 Strengthens the heart 8 84 90 92 110 111 115 125 150
158 179 161 164 168 242 245 249 250

See heart.
Strengthens the spirit Vital 72 73 81 84 92 110 115 125 147 150 168 242 246
Natural 72 84 147 157 Animal 72 84 129 147 157 163 246 Sneezing 9 Suppuration
13 Stitches 14 29 33 Shingles 14 29 35 40 53 Strangury 15 34 40 41 43 53 162
174 Sigtbings 16 17 163 Sobbings 16 163 Seed increases 18 63 256 Diminishes
26 51 Scarrifieth 280 Sadness 18 30 154 206 322 Swimming in the head, se
Vertigo Stinking breath 21 66 89 249 Small-pocks 28 72 269 321 Spots 31 51 256
Sciatica 34 42 See Gout Surfeit 39 139 Sprains 266 267 286 Swoonings 42 89 111
163 Scurvy 46 Scald heads 69 73 See Leprosy Swine pocks 269 Naught for the
Spleen 71 Sleep takes away 75 Provokes 86 112 140 145 240 254 262 290 Stuffings
4 104 106 165 See stoppings and obstructions.

T
Terms stops 3 5 17 20 22 23 28 29 31 33 35 39 47 56 59 61 73 106 110 126 130
137 171 173 196 293 262 Toothach 5 6 7 10 13 16 19 26 32 60 69 81 326 Teeth
loose 5 22 28 61 66 74 Terms provokes 6 8 10 11 12 13 14 15 18 21 27 31 34 36
42 50 105 116 118 124 152 170 179 248 268 319 Tettars 7 107 121 256 278 280
Travaill in women 8 15 21 42 See birth 179 Thorns 15 27 Throat 19 28 35 41 67
142 256 Thirst 47 61 62 103 104 116 137 168 251 327 Teeth on edge 49 Teeth to
draw them without instrument 68 Tenasmus 69 Teeth to cut 69 Tremblings 70 154
239 270 Teeth black 73 Teeth strengthen 94 Teudons 265 Tumors 277

V
Valor causes 75 Vain fears 146 See fears Venemons beasts 3 4 8 9 11 14 25 27
32 36 38 43 44 48 50 68 74 82 92 169 262 268 277 Urine provokes 3 4 5 6 11 12
14 15 17 18 20 21 26 27 31 32 36 42 43 44 49 50 53 58 68 70 116 152 176 253
Vomiting causes 4 Vomiting stays 5 14 20 22 27 46 50 51 104 106 125 137 149
173 262 299 301 Ulcers 5 6 8 13 14 15 24 32 33 34 36 42 47 52 55 60 66 74 123
45 246 248 249 273 277 280 295 308 325 Vertigo 9 18 31 32 66 104 135 157 195
198 318 Ulcers in the bladder, hurt 16 Veins broken 36 Vomiting blood 58 130
147 169 183 Voice 99 143

W
VVArts 12 107 Wens 12 Weakness 30 Wisdom 74 Witchcraft 40 73 Weariness 39 65
268 Whites 5 46 49 62 73 110 171 Wind causes 86 Wind eases 3 5 8 11 14 20 41
51 52 54 57 63 65 70 93 94 116 124 149 153 159 170 177 192 (...) 257 263 286
318 Women with child 73 See Abortion Wouuds 3 7 8 12 15 18 23 27 28 30 34 35 36
37 40 41 44 47 48 52 54 66 102 130 248 249 262 263 273 275 277 278 296 299 304
308 316 Wry necks 32 Wry mouths 268 270 273

Y
YEllow Jaundice 7 8 13 21 27 28 29 35 36 39 48 50 51 56 65 68 70 106 116 127
155 160 184 198 199 201 141 243 245 255

FINIS.
Reader through mistake the figures from page 184 to page 208 (being 24 pages)
are false printed: which to rectify, you must add to every of the said 24
pages 70 as to 115 add 70 which makes 185 and so for the rest. So you shall
find this table right.


