AN EXPOSITION WITH PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS Upon the three first CHAPTERS of the
Book of JOB.

Delivered in XXI. Lectures, at MAGNUS near the Bridge, London.

By JOSEPH CARYL, Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincolnes-Inne.

JAMES 5. ver. 10, 11. Take my brethren the Prophets, who have spoken in the
Name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience.

Behold we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of
Job, and have seen the end of the Lord: that the Lord is very pitiful, and of
tender mercy.

LONDON, Printed by G. Miller, for Henry Overton in Popes-head-Alley, and Luke
Fawn, and John Rothwell in Paul's Churchyard. M.DC.XLIII.

IT is this eleventh Day of May, 1643. Ordered by the Committee of the House of
Commons in Parliament, concerning Printing, that this Book, entitled ( An
Exposition upon the three first Chapters of JOB) be printed for Henry Overton.
Luke Fawn. John Rothwell.


JOHN WHITE.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, To those especially of this City, who have bin the
Movers and Promoters of this work.
THis Book of JOB bears the Image of these times, and presents us with a
resemblance of the past, present, and (much hoped for) future condition of this
Nation. As the personal prosperity of Job, so his troubles look like our
National troubles; and why may not the parallel be made up, by a likeness in
our Restoration? Job was the most flourishing, the greatest man, of all the
men of the East. We are the greatest, and lately were the most flourishing
Nation, of all the Nations of the North. Our Oxen (like his) were strong to
labor, our Sheep brought forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets,
our garners were full, affording all manner of store; our sons (like his) as
plants grown up in their youth, our daughters as corner stones polished after
the similitude of a palace. There was no breaking-in nor going out, no
complaining (in reference to outward wants) in our streets. We washed our steps
with butter, and the rock powered us out rivers of oil. The Candle of God shined
upon our Heads, and the secret of God was upon our Tabernacles: Our roots were
spread out by the waters, and the dew (of blessings) lay all night upon our
branches. Unto us the Nations gave ear and waited, and kept silence at our
counsel; After our words, they spoke not again, and our speech dropped upon
them; If we laughed on them, they believed it not: our glory was fresh in us,
and the light of our countenance they cast not down: we chose out their way,
and sat chief and dwelt as a King in the army, as one that comfort the
Mourners. Surely, a happy people were we, being in such a case, yea most happy
were we, having the Lord (many ways declaring himself) for our God. And had we
(as these mercies did oblige us) filled up, or labored to fill up the other
part, the better part of Jobs character? Had we been a People perfect and
upright, fearing God and eschewing evil? We might (according to the promised,
and often experienced tenor of Gods dealing with his people) have continued
and increased in all that happiness unto this day.

But We (herein unlike to Job, and) like a foolish Nation and unwise, have
ill-requited the Lord, yea, we have requited the Lord with evil, for, and in
the midst of all this Goodness. Our Provocations have bin many, and our
Backe-slidings have bin multiplied. Our sins have put a Sword into the Hand
of God: And God in Justice, has put a Sword into the Hands of unjust men, men
skillful to destroy. He has made Babylonians the rod of his anger and the
staff of his Indignation against us. He has given Commission to Caldeans and
Sabeans, who rob and spoil us. Our young men are slain by the edge of the
Sword, and the stink of our Camps comes up into our Nostrils. How many sad
Messengers have hastened unto us (as unto Job) with the Reports of Cities
surrendered and plundered, of Towns fired and pillaged, of Villages and
Countries laid waste, and almost desolate. Now seeing all this is come upon us,
is it not time for us (with Job) to rent our Garments (yea our hearts with
godly sorrow) and falling upon the ground, worship God and say, The Lord has
(freely) given, and the Lord has (justly) taken; Blessed be the Name of the
Lord. Our sins have brought these sorrows, let not our sorrows bring in
more sin, by causing us to murmur against, or charge God foolishly.

God never sends such troubles upon a Nation, (he does sometimes upon a Person
and did upon Job) without cause; that is, without respecting sin as a cause.
Job might say (in one sense) My Uprightness and my Integrity have procured
these things unto me; But we must say, our way and our doings have procured
these things unto us: This is our wickedness.

Yet (though all this evil has been done by us, though all these evils are
come upon us, yet) there is hope in our Israel concerning this thing, yea, I
believe, there is mercy in and from all these evils, to us and all the Israel
of our God. Only, what Integrity we have, let us still hold it steadfastly,
what evils are (and what evils almost are not?) amongst us, let us reform them
speedily; Without this, at least, without hearty desires, and faithful
endeavors after this, we may presume, but we cannot believe or hope our
Deliverance. I grant, that whenever God restores us, he must restore us
freely, and must both make us good, and do us good, for his own Name sake, in
Jesus Christ: For as he has punished us less then our sins deserve, so
whenever, or in what degree soever he restores us, it will be more then any,
or all our repentings and reformings can deserve: yet he commands us to repent
and reform, that we may be restored. God never delivered any people for their
Repentance, and rarely any (if any) without Repentance. Yea I may say it
plainly, that he never delivered any (in Mercy) without Repentance, for
either he gave them Repentance, before they were delivered, or Repentance
(which is far the greater blessing of the two) with the Deliverance. Better
have our troubles continue, then our sins continue. To have Peace return and
our hearts unturned, were infinitely worse then war.

And as Repentance is better then Peace, so it will be an argument, that we
shall have Peace: May we not well conclude that God is upon the giving-hand,
when he gives a new heart? And that he has somewhat else to give, when he
has given a love unto, and a longing after his Truth?

When God feeds us with (and we have a right taste of) this Manna in our
Wilderness, we may rest assured that God has humbled us all this while (and
all the while his Wisdom shall see fit to humble us yet, will be) only to
prove us, that he may do us good at our latter end, and make this Nation (at
least) like Job, in the end, which he will make.

Ye have heard of the Patience of Job, and what end the Lord made? Could we
but hear of the Repentance of England, all the world (I am persuaded) should
hear and wonder at the end, which the Lord would make: Even such an end as he
made for Job, if not a better; he would give us twice as much in Temporals,
double Riches, double Oxen and Sheep, double Bracelets and Earings, double
Gold and Silver, double Sons and Daughters: And he would give us (which is
not specified in the Inventorie of Jobs repair) sevenfold more in Spirituals,
sevenfold more knowledge of his Truth, purity in his worship, order in his
house; he would make the light of our Moon to be like the light of the Sun,
and the light of our Sun to be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in
the day, wherein he binds up our outward breaches, and heales the stroke of
our wound. Thus, we may look to be restored (not only as Job) to more in kind,
but to better in kind, I am sure to better in degree: We may look, that, for
brass we shall have Gold, or our Gold more refined; that, for Iron we shall
have Silver, or our Silver more purified; that, for wood we shall have Brass,
or our Brass better furbished; that, for Stones we shall have iron, or our
Iron better tempered; We may look, that, our Officers shall be peace, and our
Exactours righteousness, that violence shall no more be heard in our Land,
wasting nor destruction within our borders, but men shall call our Walls
salvation and our Gates praise.

When these glorious issues of our troubles shall be, is in his hand, who held
Jobs estate in his hand, so fast, that Satan could not touch a Sheep nor a
shoe-lachet, till himself willed: and who, when his time came, restored Jobs
estate double, to a Sheep and a shoe-lachet, whether Satan and his Sabeans
would or no. We have already seen, in Job, an Epitome of our former prosperity
and of our present troubles, the good Lord hasten the latter part of our
National likeness unto him, in the doubled (and O that it might be a sevenfold)
restoration of our Peace and Truth.

In the mean time these Meditations upon this Scripture, well digested and
taken-in, may be (through the blessing of God upon them) a help to our
patience, in bearing these afflictions upon the Land, a help to our faith in
believing, and to our hope inwaiting for the Salvations of the Lord. Whatsoever
things were written afore-time, were written for our learning (but this Book
was purposely written) that we through patience and comfort of this Scripture
might have hope. Nor do I doubt, but that the Providence of God (without which
a Sparrow falls not to the ground) directed my thoughts to this Book, as (not
only profitable for all times, but) specially seasonable for these times. It
is a word in season, and therefore should as a word upon the Wheels, making a
speedy passage into all our hearts: And how should it not? While we remember
that these Wheels are oiled with blood, even with the heart-bloud of thousands
of our dearest friends and brethren.

I find, that this is not the first time, that this Book has been
undertaken by way of Exposition, in such a time as this. Lavater a faithful
Minister of the Tigurine Church, opened this Scripture in preaching, and
printed it in the Germane tongue, which was afterward published in Latin by
Hartmanus Sprunglius (as himself expresses in the Title) to support and
refresh the afflicted minds of the godly in that last (as he then supposed)
and saddest decliyyning Age of the world.

Ferus (a Popish Friar, but very devout according to the Devotion of that
Religion) Preacher at Ments, Anno 1552.
chose this Scripture in the time of War and public Calamity, (as the Title
also of his Book holds forth) to comfort his Citizens. In his fourth Sermon
he makes this observable digression. You know (says he to his Hearers) that
I began to expound this History of Job, to the end I might comfort and exhort
you to patience in these troublesome times. This was and is my Intendment, this
moved me to handle and explain this Book. But now in my very entrance upon
it, the Storm grows so black, that I see you amazed, dejected, and almost
desperate: Some are flying, others are preparing to fly; and in this great
Calamity, no man is found to comfort his Brother: But every one increases his
Neighbors fear, by his own fearefullnesse. He prescribes (as far as their
Principles will admit) Cordials for the reviving of their spirits, and medicine
for the cure of these distempers. The whole Book of JOB, is a sacred Shop,
stored with plenty and variety of both: that you may open your hearts to
receive, and with wisdom to apply the Consolations and Instructions here
tendered from this part of it, is, (and through the strength of Christ) shall
be, the desire and prayer of

November 8th, 1643. Your very loving Friend and Servant for the help of your
Faith JOSEPH CARYL.

ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 33. for more particulars, read in particular. Page 5. l 24, for
sin ^. sin. p. 9 l. 2. for distinctions r distinct ones. p 27. l 39. for
whence r. whom. p. 30 l. 21. for all grace goes r. all graces go, p. 40. l.
21. dele But. p. 106. l. 8. r. former. p. 118. l. 34. r. and, before in such.
p. 124 l. 1. dele the. p. 179. l. 40. for garments r. garment. p. 1^3. l. 21
for we r. he. p 206 l. 39. r. less love. p. 207. l. 5. r. of a Fathers love.
p. 239 l. 39. for si r. as. p 273. l. 39. for troublers r. troubler. p. 306. l.
15. misplaced. p. 323 l. 34 for ceise r. seize. p. 338. l. 38. for sight r.
site. page 371. l. 16. for the r. then. p. 402. l. 40. for interrupted r.
uninterrupted. p. 424. l. 8. add, that. p. 452. l. 38. for utmost his r. his
utmost. p. 454. l 35. for was r. were. Diverse errors have escaped in the
Poyntings, which the understanding Reader may easily correct, where the sense
is obscured, as p. 321. l. 11, there wants a Colon, after the word Counsel,
etc.

AN EXPOSITION Upon the three first Chapters of the BOOK of JOB.
The Introduction opening the Nature, Parts, and Scope of the whole Book.
IT was the personal wish and resolution of the Apostle Paul, I had rather
speak five words with my understanding, 1 Cor. 14.19.
then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. And surely it is far better to
speak or hear five words of Scripture with our understandings, than ten
thousand words, yea, than the whole Scriptures, while we understand them not.
Now, what an unknown tongue, about which the Apostle there disputes, is, in
reference unto all, the same is the Scripture unto most, even in their own
tongue, that which they understand not. For as an unknown tongue does always
hide the meaning of words from us: so do often times the spiritualnesse, and
mysteriousnesse of the matter. While a man speaks in a strange language we
hear a sound, but know not the words; and while a man speaks in our own
language, though we know the words, yet we may not understand the meaning; and
then he that speaks is to us in that reference (so the Apostle calls him) a
Barbarian. While the leaves of the book are opened and read to such or by
such, the sense is shut up and sealed.

When the Apostle Philip heard the Ethiopian Eunuch read the Prophet Isaiah as
he traveld in his Chariot, he said to him, Act. 8.31.
understandest thou what thou read? The Eunuch answered, How should I
unless some man would guide me? He understood the language; but the meaning
was under a veil. The very same may we say to many, who read the Scriptures,
understand you what you read? And they may answer as the Eunuch did, How can
we except we had some man to guide us? Yea, and alas, for all the guiding of
man, they may answer, How can we except we have the Spirit of God to guide us?
He has his Pulpit in heaven, who teaches hearts, the heart of Scripture.

Paul (we know) was a learned Pharisee, and much verst in the Law, and yet he
says of himself before his conversion, that he was without the Law: but when
Christ came to him, then the Commandment came to him. Romans 7.9.
I was once alive without the Law, but when the Commandment came; that is, when
Christ came, and his Spirit came in or after my conversion, and expounded the
Commandment to my heart, then the Commandment came, sc. to my heart in the
power of it, and I understood to purpose what the Law was. So that the
teachings of the Spirit, the teachings of God himself, are chiefly to be
looked after and prayed for, that we may know the mind of the Spirit, the will
of God in Scripture.

But he has set up this ordinance, the ordinance of interpretation to do it
by; ^. Cor. 14.13.
both that the Scripture might be translated out of the Original into the
common language of every Nation (which the Apostle calls interpreting in that
place before cited) and also that the original sense of the Scripture might be
translated into the mind and understanding of every man; which is the work we
aim at and now have in hand.

Before I begin that, give me leave to beseech you in the Name of Christ, to
take care for the carrying on of this work a degree further: I mean to
translate the sense of Scripture into your lives, and to expound the word of
God by your works, Interpret it by your feet, Pro. 6.13.
and teach it by your fingers; (as Solomon speaks to another sense) that is,
let your working and your walkings be Scripture explications. It is indeed a
very great honor unto this City, that you take care for a Commentary on the
Scripture in writing; but if you will be careful and diligent to make a
Commentary upon the Scripture by living, or to make your lives the Commentary
of Scripture, this will make your City glorious indeed.

2. Cor. 3.2, 3.
It is the Apostles testimony of his Corinthians, Ye (says he) are our
Epistle, for as much as ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of
Christ, ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the
living God, not in tables of stone, but in fleshie tables of the heart. Give us
we beseech you, the same occasion of glorying on your behalf, that we may say,
You are our Expositions, for as much as you are manifestly declared in your
practice to be the exposition of the mind of Christ ministered unto you by us. A
walking, a breathing Commentary goes infinitely beyond the written or spoken
Commentary. And as the Apostle makes his conclusion (before noted) I had
rather speak five words with my understanding, than ten thousand words in an
unknown tongue. So I say, I had rather know five words of Scripture by my own
practice and experience, than ten thousand words of Scripture, yea than the
whole Scripture, by the bare Exposition of another. And therefore let the word
of Christ by these verbal Explications, dwell richly in your understandings in
all wisdom: And by a practical application, let it be held forth plentifully
in your lives in all holiness. Add Commentary to Commentary, and Exposition
to Exposition: add the Comment of works to this Comment of words, and an
Exposition by your lives to this Exposition by our labors.

Surely if you do not, these Exercises will be costly indeed, and will come to
a deep account against you before the Lord. If you are lifted up to heaven by
the opening of the Scripture (which is either a carrying of you up to heaven,
or a bringing of heaven down to you) and then walk grovelling upon the earth;
how sore will the judgment be! But it is to me an argument and an evidence
from heaven; that God has put it into your hearts to be more glorious in the
practice of holiness, because he has put it into your hearts to desire more
the knowledge of holiness.

To draw in my speech nearer to the business. Having a book full of very
various matter before me, give me leave to premise some things in the
general, and some thing more particulars, by way of Preface concerning the
book, before we come to the handling of the text.

First, for the general. That which God speaks concerning the whole work of
Creation, Can. 1.3.
We may speak concerning the whole book of Scripture, It is very good.
Solomon observes, that wheresoever the wisdom of God spoke, it spoke of
excellent things. Pro, 8.6.
And David, to quicken our endeavors and excite our diligence to the study of
the word, prefers it in worth above thousands of gold and silver, and in
sweetness above the honey and the honey comb. And when he cease to compare,
he begins to admire, Wonderful are thy Testimonies. And well may that be
called Wonderful, 2 Timothy 3.16.
which proceeds from the God of Wonders. All Scripture is given by divine
inspiration, or by inspiration from God; and I need not stay to show you the
excellency of any part, when I have but pointed at such an original of the
whole.

As therefore the whole Scripture, (whether we respect the majesty of the
Author, the height or purity of the matter, the depth or perspicuitie of the
style, the dignity or variety of occurrences; whether we consider the Art of
compiling, or the strength of arguing) disdaines the very mention of
comparison, with any other humane Author whatsoever: so are comparisons in it
self, as Book with Book, Chapter with Chapter, dangerous. There is not in
this great volume of holy counsel, any one Book or Chapter, Verse or Section,
of greater power or authority than other. Moses and Samuel, the writings of
Amos the Shepherd, and of Isaiah a Descendant of the blood Royal; the writings
of the Prophets and Evangelists, the Epistles of Paul, and this history of
Job, must be received (to use the words of the Trent Council in the fifth
Session, but to far better purpose) Pari pietatis affectu, with the same holy
reverence and affection. They use it about Traditions, matching Traditions with
the Scriptures; but we may fully match all Scripture together, and say, all
must be received with the same devotion and affection.

Yet notwithstanding, as the parts of Scripture were penned by diverse
Secretaries, published in diverse places, in diverse ages, on diverse occasions,
for diverse ends: so the argument and subject matter, the method and manner of
composing, the texture and the style of writing are likewise different. Some
parts of Scripture were delivered in Prose, others in Verse or numbers: some
parts of the Scripture are Historical, showing what has been done; some are
Prophetical, showing what shall be done; others are Dogmaticall or Doctrinall,
showing what we must do, what we must believe. Again, some parts of Scripture
are clear and easy, some are obscure and very knotty: Some parts of Scripture
show what God made us, others, how sin spoiled us: A third, how Christ
restored us. Some parts of Scripture show forth acts of mercy to keep us from
sinking; others record acts of judgment to keep us from presuming. And
because the way to heaven is not strewed with Roses, but, like the Crown of
Christ here upon earth, set with thorns; because not smiles and loving
imbracements from the world, but wounds, and strokes, and temptations, do
await all those that have received the presse-money of the Spirit, and are
enrolled for the Christian warfare: because every true Israelite must expect
that which Jacob upon his deathbed spoke of Joseph, that the Archers will shoot
at him, Genesis 49 23.
hate him and grieve him: In a word, because many are the troubles of the
righteous; therefore the Scripture does present us with sundry plat-formes of
the righteous conflicting with many troubles.

Now these considerations that are scattered severally through the whole
Scripture, seem all concentered, and united together in this book of Job:
which if we consider in the style and form of writing, is in some part of it
Prose, as the two first Chapters and part of the last, and the rest is Verse.
If we consider it in the manner of deliverie, it is both dark and clear. If
we consider the subject matter of it, it is both Historical, Prophetical, and
Doctrinall. In it is a mixture of mercy tendered unto, of judgments threatened
against, and inflicted upon the wicked. In it is a mixture of the greatest
outward blessings, and the greatest outward afflictions upon the godly,
con^luding in the greatest deliverances of the godly from affliction. In this
last the book is chief: there was never any man under a warmer sin of
outward prosperity than Job was; neither was there ever any man in a hotter
fire of outward affliction then Job was, God seeming to give charge concerning
this trial of Job, as king Nebuchadnezzar did concerning the three children,
to have the furnace heated seven times hotter than ordinary. This in the
general concerning the book.

Now more particularly. I will not detain you in that Proemiall disquisition
about the Author and Penman of this Book, there is great variety of Judgment
about it, some say it was one of the Prophets; but they know not who; some
ascribe it to Solomon, some to Elihu, not a few to Job himself; but most give
it to Moses. That resolution of Beza in the point shall serve me, and may
satisfy you. Qui^ libri scriptor fuit incertum est, nec nisi levissimis
conjecturis nititur quicquid de ea redi^i potest. Beza.
It is very uncertain who was the Writer of this Book (says he) and
whatsoever can be said concerning it, is grounded but upon very light
conjecture. And therefore where the Scripture is silent, it can be of no great
use for us to speak, especially seeing there is so much spoken as will find
us work, and be of use for us: neither need we trouble our selves (being
assured that the Spirit of God indicted the Book) who it was, that held the
pen. Only take this, that it is conceived to be the first piece of Scripture
that was written: take it to be written by Moses, and then it is most probable
that he writ it before the deliverance of the people of Israel out of Egypt
while he was in Midian.

Neither will I stay you in the second place about the inquiry into, or rather
about the refutation of that fancy: that this whole Book is a Parable rather
than a History; like that of Lazarus in the Gospel, Luke 15. and 16.
not a thing really acted; but only a representation of it. Now this (which was
the dream of many of the Jews and Talmudists, and is fastened with no small
clamor upon Luther by the Jesuits) may clearly be convinced both by the names
of places and persons (which we shall have occasion to open when we come to
the book it self) and also by those allegations of the Prophets and of the
Apostles concerning Job; the Prophet Ezekiel quoting him with Noah and Daniel,
Ezekiel. 14.14.
two men that unquestionably were extant, and acted glorious parts in the
world, and therefore Job also.

All that I will say in particular, shall be in these three things.

1. To show you more distinctly the subject of this Book. 2. The parts and
division of it. 3. The use or scope and intendment of it.
1. For the subject of this Book, we may consider it, either as principal, or
as collateral.

The maine and principal subject of this Book is contained, (and I may give it
you) in one verse of the 34. Psalm. Many are the afflictions of the righteous,
Isal. 34.19.
but the Lord delivers him out of all.

Concerning this subject, there are two great Questions handled and disputed
fully and clearly in this Book. The first is this. Whether it does consist
with the Justice and goodness of God to afflict a righteous and sincere
person, to strip him naked, to take away all his outward comforts. Or whether
it does consist with the Justice and goodness of God, that it should go ill
with those that are good, and that it should go well with those that are evil.
This is one great debate, the maine Question thoroughout the Book. And then
secondly, here is another great dispute in reference to the former. Namely,
whether we may judge of the righteousness, or unrighteousness, of the
sincerity or hypocrisy of any person, by the outward dealings and present
dispensations of God toward him. That is a second Question here debated.

The friends of Job maintained the first Question negatively, the latter
affirmatively. They denied that God in Justice could aflict a righteous and a
holy man. They affirmed, that any man so afflicted is unrighteous, and may so
be judged, because afflicted. And so the whole argument and dispute, which the
friends of Job brought, may be reduced to this one Syllogism. He that is
afflicted and greatly afflicted, is certainly a great open sinner or a
notorious hypocrite: But Job, thou art afflicted, and thou art greatly
afflicted. Therefore certainly thou art, if not, a great open sinner, yet a
notorious hypocrite.

Job, as constantly and as vehemently maintains both those questions in the
contrary sense. He acknowledged himself to be a sinner, yet he stiffely denied
that he was a hypocrite; he disclaimed his own righteousness in point of
Justification, yet he justified himself in point of uprightness. And as for
the sinfulness of his nature and of his life, he was willing (except known or
wilful insincerity) to own both, and charge himself faster, then his friends
could, appealing to, and triumphing in Free Grace, for full pardon.

This one Syllogism (I say) is the sum of all the dispute, between Job and
his three friends; This is (as it were) the hinge, upon which the whole matter
turned.

But besides these, there are many discourses falling in collaterally, which
concur to make up the subject of this book: For, as it is with those that
study the Philosophers-stone, the great thing they aim at, is to make gold,
etc. that is the principal, the chief end: yet collaterally they find out many
excellent things, many profitable experiments have been made, many rare
secrets have been discovered in prosecuting of that great design. So although
this be the principal subject of the book, yet collaterally for the carrying
on of these disputes, many other rare and excellent, heavenly, spiritual and
useful truths are handled and discovered. As to give you some particular
instances.

First, We have the Character of a discreet and faithful Master and Father in
a family, and the special duties which concern those relations; The doctrine
of the Oeconomicks is often touched in this Book.

Secondly, We have here the Character of a faithful, zealous and just
Magistrate in the Commonwealth, how he ought to behave himself, and what his
duty is, set down also plainly and clearly by occasion of this dispute.

Thirdly, We have a great discovery made in the secrets of nature. The bowels
of nature are as it were ripped open, and the great works of Creation are here
displayed. In this you have discourses of the Heavens, of the Earth, of the
Sun, Moon and Stars: of those Meteors, the Hail, the Snow, the Frost, the
Ice, the Lightning and the thunder. In this you have discourses of Jewels, of
Minerals and of Metalls; In this, of Beasts, and Birds, and creeping things. So
that by occasion of this dispute, a discourse is carried about all the world,
in the whole circuit of natural knowledge or Philosophy.

Fourthly, Here are discourses of Christian Moralls, of the duties of equity
from man to man: Of the duties of piety which man owes to God, of the duties
of sobriety and temperance toward a man's own self. Yea here we find the great
duty of Faith, the matter of believing in the Redeemer of the world, our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Lastly, Here are many discoveries made of God, in Himself and in his
Attributes: in his Power, Wisdom, Justice, Goodness and Faithfulness, yea,
whatsoever may be known of God in any of these, is some way or other here
discovered. So then, all being summed up together, it may well be said
concerning this Book, that it is (...), a Book containing all excellencies, of
wisdom and holiness: and what (as some of the Jews and Rabbis say of it) in
other Books, is here a little and there a little, is all plentifully gathered
together in this. In a word, it is a Summary, a Compendium of all knowledge,
both humane and divine, both concerning our selves, and concerning God. So much
of the subject of this Book, both principal and Collateral.

The second general to be considered is the division of this Book. We may
consider it in reference to the division; First, as it is a Dialogue (for so
some call the whole Book) which is an interchangeable discourse concerning any
subject or matter whatsoever. And taking it in that notion, we may divide it
by the Collocutors or Speakers, and by the several speeches which they made.

The Collocutors or Speakers in this Book, are Eight.

1. God. 2. Satan. 3. Job. 4. Jobs wife. Jobs three friends.
5. Eliphaz. 6. Bildad. 7. Zophar.
8. Elihu, Who comes in as a Moderatour of that dispute.
Their Speeches which they make, are in the whole compass of of the Book, 32.
distinctions.

There are two Dialogues between God and Satan. One between Job and his
wife. Three between Job and Eliphaz. Three between Job and Bildad. Two
between Job and Zophar. Two between God and Job. And then we have Elihu
making four distinct Speeches or Orations which have no Answer. And lastly,
two several Speeches or Parables (as they are called) of Job, one in Chapt.
27.1. and the other in Chapt. 29.1. So that sum up all these together, and
you may divide the whole Book into 32. distinct or several Speeches, either
by way of position, or answer, or reply, or determination. God speaks four
times, Satan twice, Jobs wife once, Job thirteen times, Eliphaz thrice, Bildad
thrice, Zophar twice, Elihu four times.

Or if we should consider the Book as a Disputation, (which is higher then a
Dialogue,) so you may distinguish it, by the Opponents, by the Respondent, and
by the Moderators.

The Opponents are three. Jobs three friends.

Job himself is Respondent. The Moderators are,

First, Elihu, he comes in first as an Vmpire between them.

Secondly, God himself at last, out of the whirle-winde gives the decisive
determinative voice and sentence. He states the question fully for Job, and
reproves Jobs friends, as not having disputed and argued aright concerning him.

Yet further. We may divide the Book into five Sections, whereof

The first does set forth the happiness and fulness of Jobs outward estate;
and the integrity and perfection of his spiritual estate. And that is
contained in the first 5 verses.

The second presents Jobs affliction, Jobs fall, the great and sore calamity
which in a moment did overtake him, with the occasion of it. And this you have
set forth from that 5th. verse exclusively to the 9th. verse of the second
Chapter.

Thirdly, We have the questions, the debates and disputes which did arise upon
and about the fall of Job into that sad condition: which are contained from
that 9th. verse of the second Chapter, to the end of the 31. Chapter.

Fourthly, We have the Moderation or determination of this dispute and of this
argument, first by Elihu, and then by God himself, from the beginning of the
32. Chapter, to the 7th. verse of the 42. All which is but as a determination
or stating of the Question.

Fifthly and lastly. We have the restitution of Job, his restoring and setting
up again, and the repairing of his estate and making of it double to what
formerly it had bin. And that is begun and continued from the 7th. verse of the
42. Chapter, to the end of the Book. So here you have a five-fold division of
the Book.

Once more. We may divide the Book into theee parts. And so it sets forth;

1. Jobs happy condition, both in regard of externalls and internalls, in the
first 5. verses.

2. Jobs fall, Jobs calamity, Jobs trouble, from that to the 7th. verse of the
42. Chapter.

3. Jobs restitution or restoring, from thence to the end.

Take the Book in this division, and it seems to hold forth to us such a
representation of Job, as is given us in the three first Chapters of Genesis
concerning man. In those 3. first Chapters, we have man set forth;

1. In the excellency and dignity of his Creation, being Lord and Sovereign of
all, adorned with that integrity and purity of nature which God had planted in
and stamped upon him at his creation. And in the beginning of this Book, we
have Job like a man in innocence, shining in all his dignity, compassed about
with blessings of all sorts, blessings of the body, blessings of the soul,
blessings of this life and of that which is to come.

2. There we find the Devil plotting the ruin of man, and we find his plot
taking for a while, and in a great measure prevailing. So here in this Book we
have the Devil begging Jobs ruin, and having obtained leave, so far as
concerned his outward estate and body, quickly puts it in execution.

3. There we have Adam by Gods free mercy and promise restored to a better
estate in Christ through the grace of Redemption, then he had before in
himself, by the goodness of Creation. So here we have Job, through the mercy,
power and faithfulness of God, restored to all he had, and more, we see him
repaired and set up again after his breaking, not only with a new stock, but a
greater: his estate being doubled, and his very losses proving beneficial to
him. This may suffice for the division or parts of the Book, which I conceive
may shed some light into the whole.

Now for the third thing which I proposed, which was the use, or scope, or
intendment of this Book. For that is a special thing we are to carry before us
in our eye in the reading of Scripture. It is possible for one to understand
the subject, and to know the parts, and yet not to be attentive to find out, or
distinctly to find out what the mind of God is, or whereat he specially drives
and aims. Therefore it will be very profitable to us likewise, to consider
what the tendency and intendment, or (as I may so speak) the Uses of this
Book are.

First, It aims at our Instruction, and that in diverse things.

First, (Which much concerns every Christian to learn,) it instructs us how
to handle a Cross. How to behave our selves when we are in a conflict, whether
outward or inward. What the Postures of the Spiritual War are; and with what
patience we ought to bear the hand of God and his dealings with us. This I say
is set forth by the Scripture in other places to be the maine and one of the
principal ends or intendments or Uses of this Book. This the Apostle James
speaks of. James 5.11.
You have heard of the patience of Job. As if he should say, do you not know
why the Book of Job was written? Why God in his providence did bring such a
thing to pass concerning Job? It was that all men should take notice of his
patience, and might learn the wisdom of suffering, that noble art of
enduring.

Job was full of many other excellent graces, and indeed he had all the graces
of the Spirit of God in him. But the Patience of Job was the principal grace.
As it is with natural men, they have every sin in them, but there are some
sins which are the Master sins, or some one sin it may be does denominate
a wicked man; sometimes he is a proud man, sometimes he is covetous, sometimes
he is a deceiver, sometimes he is an oppressor, sometimes he is unclean,
sometimes he has a profane spirit, and so the like; some one great Master lust
does give the denomination to the man, he has all other sins in him, and
they are all reigning in him, but one as it were reigns above the rest, and
sits uppermost in his heart. So it is with the Saints of God (and here with
Job) every Saint and servant of God has all grace in him, every grace in some
degree or other, for all the limbs and liniaments of the new man are formed
together in the soul of those that are in Christ. But there is some special
grace which does give (as it were) the denomination to a servant of God. As
that which gave the denomination to Abraham was faith, and that which gave the
denomination to Moses was meekness; and so this which gives the denomination
to Job, is Patience; and so the denomination too of this whole History, as if
that were the great lesson that were to be taken out, the lesson of suffering
and of patience: So that what the Apostle makes to be the Use of all Scripture,
whatsoever things (says he) were written afore-time were written for our
learning, Romans 15.4.
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. That
I say which the Apostle there makes to be the end and scope of the whole
Scripture, does seem to be in special the principal and chief end of
writing this Book of Job.

2. Another Instruction which we are to take from the whole Book, is this. God
would have us learn, that, afflictions come not by chance, that they are all
ordered by providence, in the matter, in the manner, and the measure, both for
the kinds and for the degrees, they are all ordered even the very least by the
wisdom, by the hand and providence of God.

3. Another thing which we are to learn generally from this Book is this, The
Soveraignety of God; that he has power over us, over our estates, and over our
bodies, and over our families, and over our spirits: that he may use us as he
pleases, and we must be quiet under his hand; when he comes and will take
all from us, all our comforts, we must give all glory to him. This Book is
written for this especially, to teach us the Sovereignty of God, and the
submission of the creature.

4. It teaches us, That God does sometimes afflict his children out of
prerogative, that-though there be no sin in them which he makes the occasion
of afflicting them, (such was Jobs case,) yet for exercise of his graces in
them, for trial of their graces, or to set them up for patterns to the world,
God may and does afflict them. Though no man be without sin, yet the
afflictions of many are not for their sins.

5. There is this general Instruction which God would have us learn out of
this Book, namely that the best gotten, and the best founded estate in outward
things, is uncertain; that there is no trusting to any creature comforts. God
would unbottome us quite from the creature, by holding forth this History of
Job unto us.

6. God would also show forth this for our learning, viz. The strength, the
unmoveablenesse of faith, how unconquerable it is, what a kind of omnipotency
there is in grace. God would have all the world take notice of this in the
Book of Job, that a godly person is in vain assaulted by friends or enemies,
by men or devils, by wants or wounds: Though he be even benighted in his
spirit, though God himself take away the light of his countenance from him,
yet God would have us learn and know, that over all these a true believer is
more then a conqueror. For here is one of the greatest battles fought, that
ever was between man and man, between man and hell, yea between God and man;
yet Job went away with the victory, True Grace is often assaulted, it never was
or ever shall be overthrown.

7. This also we may learn. That God never leaves or forsakes his totally or
finally.

8. Lastly, The book teaches this general lesson: That the judgments of God
are often times very secret, but they are never unjust. That though the
creature be not able to give a reason of them, yet there is infinite reason for
them.

These are the general Uses from the general scope and intendment of this
book by way of Instruction.

Secondly, This book serves to convince and reproove that slander of worldly
men and of Satan: who say that the people of God serve him for their own ends,
that they follow him for loaves, that they attend upon him for an estate, for
creature comforts and concernements. The Lord did on purpose cause these things
to be acted, and this History to be penned for ever to stop the mouth of Sa^an
and of all iniquity, and to show that his people follow him for love, for the
excellency they find in him and in his service. Though he strip them naked of
all they have, yet they will cleave to him. Here is one Confutation.

2. It is to convince and reprove all those, who judge of the spiri^uall estate
of those that are under the hand of God in sore afflictions ^y some unbecoming
and rash speeches, which may fall from them ^n the time of those their
conflicts, when troubles and sufferings are upon them.

3. To convince and confute those who judge of men's spiritual e^^ates by Gods
dealing with them in their outward estates.

4. To convince and confute that cursed opinion, that a man ^ay fall finally
and totally away from grace and from the favor of God. God has showed by this
History, that such an opinion is a ^e. If ever any man were in danger of
falling quite away from ^race received, or might seem to have lost the favor
of God, for^erly showed, surely it was Job: and if he were upheld in the grace
^ holiness, and continued in the grace of Gods love, notwithstanding all that
came upon him. Certainly God would have all the world know that free grace will
uphold his for ever.

5. To convince all those of pride and extreme presumption, who think to find
out and to trace the secrets of Gods counsel, the secrets of Gods eternal
decrees, the secrets of all his works of providence: Whereas God shows them
in this Book, that they are not able to find out or comprehend his ordinary
works, those which we call the works of nature, the things of creation, the
things that are before them, which they converse with every day, which they see
and feel, and have in their ordinary use. They are not able to find out the
secrets of the air, of the Meteors, of the waters, of the earth, of beasts or
birds, every one of these puts the understanding of man to a stand and pose his
reason; they are no^ able to comprehend the works of Creation, how are they
abl^ then to find out the counsels of God in his Decrees and purposes an^
judgments? And for that end it is that God sets forth here s^ much of the
works of nature, that all men may be stopped in tha^ presumptuous way of
searching too far into his counsels. Here^ another Use or scope of this Book.

Thirdly, there is much for Consolation.

1. That all things do work for the good of those that lo^^ God.

2. Consolation is this; That no temptation shall ever take ho^^ of us, but
such as God will either make us able to bear, or make way to escape out of it.

We can be in no condition cast so low, but the hand of Go^ can reach us, find
us out, send in deliverance, and raise us up a^gaine.

Lastly, here are two general Exhortations.

1. We are exhorted to the Meditation and Admiration of t^^ power and wisdom
of God from all the Creatures. This is a du^^ which this Book leads us unto,
for that is the end why so much spoken concerning the works of Creation, Romans
1.20.
that (as the Apos^ says) The invisible things of him from the Creation of the
Wor^ may be clearly seen, being understood by the things that are man even his
eternal power and Godhead.

2. To glorify God in every condition, to have good thoughts God, to speak
good words for God in every condition. We (...) drawn to this, by considering
how Job (though sometimes in ^hemency of spirit he over-shot himself, yet he
recovers again and) breaths sweetly concerning God, showing that his spirit was
full of sweetness toward God, even when God was writing bitter things against
him; as when he says, Though he kill me yet I will trust in him; than which,
what could express a more holy and submissive frame of heart, in reference to
the dealings of God with him: Surely he thought God was very good to him, who
had that good thought of God, To trust him, even while he slew him.

These things being proposed concerning the Book in general, will help to
cast a light thorough the whole at one view. And though at this time I shall
not enter upon expounding of the Text it self, yet you have had in some sense,
the Exposition of the whole Text. If you carefully lay up these Rules, they
will much advantage and advance your profiting, when we come to the Explication
of any part.

JOB 1.1, 2. There was a man in the land of Vz, whose name was JOB, and that
man was perfect and upright, and one that feared GOD and eschewed evil.

And there were borne unto him seven sons and three daughters, etc.


THis Chapter may be divided into three parts; whereof the first contains a
description of Job in his prosperous estate, from the first to the end of the
fifth verse.

In the second we have the first part of Jobs affliction, set down from the
sixth verse to the end of the nineteenth.

In the third Jobs carriage and behavior in, or his Conquest and Victory over
that first trial are discovered; this concludes in the three last verses of
the Chapter.

The description of his prosperous estate is given us in three points.

First, What he was in his person, verse. 1.

Secondly, What in his possessions; we have an Inventory of his goods, verse. 2,
3, 4.

Thirdly, What in his practice of holiness, verse 5. Where one example or
instance is set down for all the rest.

The Book begins with the description of his person in the first verse: where
Job is described by that which is accidental, and by that which is essential.

By accidentals, so he is described by the place where he dwelt, There was a
man in the land of Uz. 2. By his name, whose name was Job.

The essentials are four qualifications, which were essential to him, not as
a rational man, but as a holy man. And that man was.

1. Perfect. 2. Upright. 3. One that feared God. 4. Eschewed evil.
As they who write the Acts or Stories of great men, usually give us some
description of their persons before they set down their undertakings or
achievements (as you see in the 1 Samuel 17.4, 5, 6, 7. how the great Giant
Goliath is described) So here the Holy Ghost by the Penman of this Book, being
to record a glorious combat, a combat not with flesh and blood alone, but
with Principalities and Powers, a wrestling with mighty and strong temptations:
first gives us (if we may so speak) the Prosopographie of this divine Heroes
soul, the lineaments and abilities of his spirit. This was the height, and
this the stature of the Combitant, such were his limbs, and such his weapons,
there he dwelt, and this was his name.

There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job. There was] That referrs
us, either to the truth of the Story, or to the time of the Story. Such a man
there was, that is certain. Such a man there was, but the time when is
uncertain. It referres us to the time only indefinitely. There was such a
man, but when, is not exactly and precisely set down. The Scripture (we know)
does often keep an exact account of years (the Scripture is the guide and key
of all Chronology) and sometimes it leaves things in general for the time, and
only says thus much, such a thing was, or such a person was. So here. Yet
some have undertaken to define, An. 2230. from the creation 574 years after
the flood 282. years after Abraham Bolduc. in loc.
(what the Spirit of God has left at large) the precise time wherein Job
lived; and tell us in what year of the world these things were done. But I
desire not to be so accurate, unless the Rule were so too. Only thus much we
may safely say, that Job lived between the times of Abraham and Moses, and
nearer Moses than Abraham, and for that I conceive there is ground sufficient.
There are these two special Reasons, why it should be circumscribed within
that limit.

1. Because Job offered Sacrifice at that time in his own Country: which after
the giving of the law, and setting up of a public worship, was forbidden all,
both Jews and Proselytes. They that were acquainted with the ways of God,
knew they must not worship by Sacrifice any where, but before the Tabernacle,
or (after the Temple was built) at the Temple.

2. Because in the whole book there is not the least print, or the least
mention of any thing, which did concern those great and glorious passages of
Gods providence toward the people of Israel, either in their going out of
Egypt, or in their journey thorough the wilderness to Canaan. Now in a
dispute of this nature (such as was between Job and his friends) there would
have been frequent occasion to have considered and instanced some of those
things. There is scarce any book in Scripture, that bears date after that
great and wonderful dispensation of God, but it makes mention of or referrs to
some passages concerning them.

Again for the time, that which some collect to clear it, is from the
Genealogy of Job, there are three special opinions concerning the line of his
pedigree.

One that he descended from Nahor, who was brother to Abraham, Genesis 22.21. It
was told Abraham, behold Milcah she has borne children to thy brother Nahor,
Uz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, etc. This Vz who was the firstborn
of Nahor Abraham's brother, is conceived to have given denomination to the land
of Vz, and so from him, Job to be descended.

Another opinion there is (maintained by many) that Job was of the line of
Esau, and that he was called Jobab by Moses, Genesis 36.33. And Bela died and
Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead. This Jobab, who was a
descendant or one of the Dukes of the line of Esau, they say was Job. But why
the name Jobab should be contracted into Job, I see little reason offered.

A third opinion for his descent is, that he came from the children of Abraham
by his second wife Keturah, Genesis 25. where it is said, that Abraham by her had
diverse sons, and that he gave them portions and sent them Eastward into the
East country; and from Midian (who was the fourth son of Abraham by that
second marriage) our Genealogies do positively and directly affirm, that Job
was descended.

That may suffice for the time, for bringing of him within a narrower limit, I
have no grounds but conjecturall.

A man.] He is not called, A man (here) barely as the Philosophers Animal
rationale, etc. as man is opposed to a Beast: Nor barely is he called a man to
distinguish his Sex, as a man is opposed to a woman. But there is somewhat more
in the expression, he is called a man by way of excellency. And for the
clearing and opening of that, we may consider that there are 3. words in
Scripture original by which man is expressed.

(...)
1. Man is called Adam. That was the proper name of the first man, and it became
the common name for all men since. So man was called from the matter of which
he was made, Adam, from Adamah, because (as the reason is given, Genesis 2.7.) God
made man dust out of the earth, or (as we translate) of the dust of the earth.

(...)
2. Man is called Enosh: So he is called in regard of the infirmities,
weaknesses and sorrows, which he has contracted by sin, since the fall,
sin made the red earth weak and brittle earth indeed, earth moystened with
tears, and mixed with troubles.

(...)
3. He is called Ish, which the Critticks in that language, say, comes from and
has alliance with two words: One signifying, Being or existence, and the
other heat or fire. So that the excellency of man's being, the heat, courage and
spirit that flames in him is set forth in that word; and that is the word here
in the Text, There was a man, it is Ish, an excellent, a worthy man, a man of
an excellent spirit, a man of men, a man fitted to honor God and govern men.
And that it is so used in Scripture, I will give you an instance or two, that
you may see it is not a bare conjecture.

In the 49. Psalm, David, as it were, summons and divides mankind. In the
first verse he summons, Hear this all ye people, give ear all ye inhabitants
of the world. In the second verse he divides, (...)
Both low and high, rich and poor together. The word in the Hebrew for high,
is Bene-Ish, sons of Ish, and the word for low, is Bene-Adam, sons of Adam.
If we should translate the Text directly, according to the letter, the words
must run, sons of men and sons of men, for, sons of Adam and sons of
Ish are both translated sons of men. Yet when they are set together in a way
of opposition, the one signifies low and the other high; and so our
Translators render it according to the sense, not sons of men and sons of
men, but low and high. Junius translates to this sense, though in more words,
as well they who are borne of mean men, as they who are borne of the
honorable.

A like instance we have, Isa. 2.9. The mean man boweth down, and the great
man humbles himself. The mean man, that is, the son of Adam, and the great
man, the son of Ish; the great man in regard of his excellency, is by such a
circumlocution described to be more then a man: not only the son of man, but
the son of an honorable and great man. So I find the word diverse times used
to signify the excellency and greatness of the person.

Then further, it signifies not only a man that is great, but it signifies a
man in authority. There was a man, that is, an excellent man, a man of worth;
There was a man, that is, a man in authority. It signifies a Magistrate, and so
in diverse places of Scripture, Man is put for a Magistrate, especially when it
is expressed as here, by Ish, Genesis 43.11. Carry a present to the man, scil. to
the Governor of the Country, Jer 5.1. Go thorough Jerusalem and search, and
see if you can find a man. What were men so scarce in Jerusalem at that time?
Was there such a dearth of men, that a man could not be found? Surely no.
Jerusalem had throngs of men in every street. The meaning then is explained in
the words following, if there be any that executes judgment, that is, if
there be a Magistrate, a public man, that is the man I mean.

So in Numb. 27.16. We find the word to signify a Magistrate, Let the Lord,
the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the Congregation. A man,
that is, a Magistrate, for there that is ^he business, if you read the Text
you will find it, a man in au^^^rity, a man fit to rule. And that is it, which
is meant in Act. ^.31. concerning Christ. God (says he) has appointed a day
^^rein he will judge the world by that man, whom he has ordai^ed. It notes
Christ the man in power, in authority, Homer begins with (...). Virgil like
him, Arma virumque cano.
because all ^ower in Heaven and in Earth is committed to him. So you know ^was
usual among the Romans to call their Magistrates by the ^ame of The men, as
the Triumviri, the Septemviri, the Decem^iri, to call them sometime the
three-men, sometime the seven ^en, sometime the ten-men. Those who were the
special men in ^uthority, that were men in place and eminency, they carried
away the Name of men (as it were) from all men, as if they were the only men.

So that we have these two things to take notice of, when it is said here, that
Job was a man, you must carry it further then the word is ordinarily taken; He
was a great man, he was a man in authority, a Magistrate. Some carry the
Magistracy so high, as to set him on a Throne, affirming that he was a King, a
point very much contended for by diverse Expositors; but that he was a
Magistrate in Authority, a Chief in his Country, is clear by that which is
expressed of him in Chapt. 29. where he speaks of his deciding men's rights and
executions of Justice.

In the Land of Uz.] I will not trouble you with any Geographicall discourse:
In a word we may consider 3. things about Vz.

1. Why it was called so. 2. Where it was seated. 3. What manner of people they
were that dwelt in Vz.
1. For the Name, let it be taken from Vz, the Name of a Man. And there were
three called by that Name in Scripture, Genesis 10.23. Genesis 22.21. Genesis 36.28.
from either of these Jobs Country might derive its name, but from which of
these, would be (^ think) a nice debate; yet it is rather ascribed to Vz or
Huz, the eldest Son of Nahor, Genesis 22.21.

2. For the place where it was seated, it is clear that it was up^on the
borders of the Sabeans, and of the Caldeans, and of the Arabians, those
Eastern people. Some affirm that the lot (...) the half Tribe of Manasses on
the other side Jordan, which wa^ set forth for them when the people of Israel
came into Canaan was the very place where Job lived, and that was called Vz.
Its clear that it was near those parts above mentioned. First, from Lament
4.2^. There the Prophet Jeremy speaking of Vz, sai^ Rejoice and be glad O
daughter of Edom, that dwell in (...) Land of Uz. And Ier. 25.20. he speaks
again of the Lan^ Uz, All the mingled people, and all the Kings of the Land of
(...) they shall drink of the Cup: he mentions the Cup also in t^^ place, Lam.
4. Rejoice and be glad O daughter of Edom (...) dwell in the Land of Uz, the
Cup also shall pass thorough (...) thee. Secondly, Vz bordered upon those
Countries, for the people made out their Parties, invaded, slew and took
(...) Jobs Estate, Cattle and servants; therefore the place in all
pro^^^bility lay near these Countries.

For the Condition and manners of the people; It is generally received, that
they were a people profane in their lives, and superstitious at least in their
worship: Edumeans and Edomites, the descendants of Esau, hear ill all the
Scripture over. Among these Job lived, among these Job governed, there he
exercised those precious graces, and practiced those excellent duties both of
holiness toward God, and of Justice toward men. It was in the midst of a
sinful and perverse nation, in the Land of Vz.

Then Observe. First,

God has his servants in all places, in the worst places.

There was never any air so bad but that a servant of God might breath in it.
Here God had a choice piece, even in the Land of Vz, a place of profaneness;
Here was Bethel in Bethaven, a House of God in a Land of wickedness. Lot dwelt
in Sodom, Joseph in Egypt, David in Mesech and in Kedar: There were Saints in
Caesar's (wicked Neroes) household. Babylon holds many of Gods people, yet let
them not make such places their refuge, much less their election. But remember
the call, Come out of her my people.

Secondly, We may observe from hence (this being spoken of Job to set him forth
in the excellency of his spiritual condition, that he lived in the Land of
Vz.) That

It is a great honor and a high commendation to be good and do good amongst
those that are evil.

You shall be recorded for it. This was one reason why the place is named, that
the honor of Job might be lifted up, that he was good, not by the example and
encouragement, but against the example of others: he was a leading man
himself: though he lived among those that were scoffers and wicked, yet Job
was holy. As they say concerning the affection of love, it is most unnatural
^or a man to hate those that love him. It is civil for men to love ^^ose that
love them, but this is truly Christian for a man to love ^^ose that hate him
and do him wrong. So in regard of living and ^^nversing, as of loving and
affecting, we may say, it is a most ^icked thing to be naught among those that
are good; that aggra^ateth a man's sinnefulnesse, to be unholy while he
converseth with those that are holy: It is a good thing to be good with the
good, to take example by them: but it is a most excellent thing, a glorious
thing to be good among those that are stark naught, to worship God aright
among Idolaters, to fear God among those that have no fear of God before
their eyes, to be perfect among hypocrites, to be upright among those that are
unjust, to eschew evil among those that are altogether wrapped about with evil;
This was the honor and commendation of Job. For a man to be as Lot in Sodom,
Phil. 2.15.
never touched with Sodomes wickedness, to keep himself pure and sincere and
without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, to shine as a
light in the midst of darkness; this brings honor both to God and man.

Thirdly, From the place where Job lived, we may observe, That

Grace will preserve it self in the midst of the greatest opposition. Its such
a fire as no water can wholly quench, or put out. True Grace will keep it self
sound and clean among those who are leaprous and unclean; it is such a thing
as overcomes and masters all the evil that is about it: God has put such a
mighty power into grace, that if it once possess the heart in truth, though
there be but a little of it, though there be but as much as a grain of
mustard seed, not all the wickedness in the world, no nor all the devils in
Hell can dispossess it. As all the water in the salt Sea cannot make the fish
salt, but still the fish retains its freshness, so all the wickedness and
filthiness that is in the world, cannot destroy, cannot defile true grace;
that will bear up its head and hold up it self for ever.

And this man was perfect and upright, one that feared God and eschewed evil.
(...)
Perfect.] Not that he had a legal perfection; such a perfection as the
Papists now contend for: and assert possibly attaineable, yea actually attained
by many in this life: For what is man that he should be clean? And Job
himself professes, Chap. 9.20. If I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me
perverse; h^ acknowledges, Chap. 7.20. I have sinned. The perfection
there^fore here spoken of is not an absolute, a legal perfection.

For the clearing of the word, we may consider there is a twofold perfection
ascribed to the Saints in this life. A perfection o^ Justification, A
perfection of Sanctification.

The first of these, in a strict sense, is a complete perfection: The Saints
are complete in Christ, they are perfectly justified, there is not any sin
left uncovered, not any guilt left unwashed in the blood of Christ, not the
least spot but is taken away; His gargarment is large enough to cover all our
nakedness and deformities. In this respect they may be called perfect, they
are perfectly justified, By one offering Christ has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14.

Then there is a perfection of holiness or of sanctification; and that is
called so, either in regard of the beginnings of, or in regard of desires after
and aims at perfection.

The Saints even in this life have a perfect beginning of holiness, because
they are begun to be sanctified in every part; they are sanctified throughout,
in soul and body and spirit, as the Apostle distinguishes, 1 These. 5.23.
though every part be not throughout sanctified, yet they are sanctified in
every part throughout; and this is a perfection. When the work of
sanctification is begun in all parts, it is a perfect work beginning.

They are likewise perfect in regard of their desires and intendments. Perfect
holiness is the aim of the Saints on earth, it is the reward of the Saints in
Heaven. The thing which they drive at here is perfection, therefore they
themselves are called perfect; As God accepts of the will for the deed, so he
expresses the deed by the will; he interprets him to be a perfect man who
would be perfect, and calls that person perfect, who desires to have all his
imperfections cured. That is a second understanding how Job was perfect.

A third way is this, He was perfect comparatively, comparing him with those
who were either openly wicked, or but openly holy, he was a perfect man; he was
a man without spot, compared with those that were either all over spotted with
filthiness, or only painted with godliness.

Or thus, We may say the perfection here spoken of, is the perfection of
sincerity. Job was sincere, he was sound at the heart, He did not act a part or
personate Religion, but was a religious person. He was not gilded, but gold.
So the word is interpreted. Some render it, Job was a simple man, (not as
simple is put for weak and foolish, but as simple is put for plain hearted;
one that is not (as the Apostle James phraseth it) a double minded man) Job was
a simple minded man, or a single minded man, one that had not a heart and a
heart, he was not a compound, speaking one thing and meaning another, he meant
what he spoke, and he would speak his mind. It is the same word that is used
in Jacobs character, Genesis 25.27. Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field,
and Jacob was Ish Tam, a plain man, So that to be a perfect man, is to be a
plain man, one whose heart you may know by his tongue, and read the man's
spirit in his actions. Some are such juglers, that you can see little of their
spirits in their lives, you can learn but little of their minds by their
words; Jacob was a plain man and so was Job; some translate it a sound man. It
is the same expression that is given of Noah, He was [Tamim] in his generation,
or he was sound, upright hearted or perfect with God, Genesis 6.9. And it is that
which God speaks to Abraham, Genesis 17.2. Walk before me and be thou [Tamim,]
be thou perfect, or sound, or upright, or plain in thy walking before me. In
the 28. of Exodus, v. 30. We read of the Vrim and the Thummim, on the
Breast Plate of the High Priest. Thummim comes from this root, and signified
the integrity of heart and life required in the High Priest, as Vrim did the
light and clearenesse of his knowledge.

(...)
And upright.] The former word which was translated perfect, in other Texts is
rendered upright; But when we have both the expressions together as here, we
must distinguish the sense. It is not a tautologie. Then, the former being
taken for inward soundness, plainness and sincerity; This latter (to be
upright) may be taken for outward justice, righteousness and equity,
respecting all his dealings in the world. He was a perfect man, that is, he was
plain hearted, and he was plain dealing too, which is the meaning of, He was
upright; So the one referres to the integrity of his spirit, the other to the
honesty of his ways, His heart was plain, and his dealings were square. This
he expresses fully in the 29. and 31. Chapters of this Book, which are as it
were a Comment upon this word upright. There you may read what is meant by
uprightness; his fairness in all parts, both of Commutative and Distributive
Justice. In those things that concerned Commutative Justice, when Job bought or
sold, traded or bargained, promised or covenanted, he stood to all uprightly.
Take him as he was a Magistrate, when Job sat in Judgment or had any
business brought before him, he gave every one his due, he did not spare or
smite upon ends; he did neither at any time justify the wicked or condemn the
godly, but was upright in Judgment: He was not byast by affection or
interests, he was not carried away by hopes or fears, but kept the path of
Justice in all his dispensations toward that people among whom he lived. This
is to be an upright man, and so the Prophet tells us, Isa, 26.7. The way of the
Just is uprightness, that is, they are upright in their ways, and more,
uprightness in the abstract. We have a like expression, Prove. 29.27. Those
that are upright in the way are an abomination to the wicked. Uprightness does
refer to the way wherein a man goes in his outward dealings and dispensations
toward men. There is a twofold uprightness of our ways. 1. Uprightness of
words. 2. Of works; so upright walking is expounded and branched forth, Psalm.
15.2, 3. He that walks uprightly and works righteousness and speaks the
truth in his heart. He that back-biteth not with his tongue. This is the second
part of Jobs description; He was perfect and upright.

Thirdly, He was One that feared God.

Fearing God] The fear of God is taken two ways. Either for that natural and
inward worship of God: and so the fear of God is a holy filial affection,
awing the whole man to obey the whole will of God: That is fear as it is an
affection. Or the fear of God is put for the external or instituted worship
of God. So that a man fearing God is as much as this: A man worshipping God
according to his own will, or according to his mind and direction. Now when as
Job is said to be a man fearing God, you must take it both these ways; He had
that holy affection of fear with which we must worship God, (as we are taught,
Heb. 12.28. Let us have grace whereby we may serve God with reverence and
godly fear; And serve the Lord with fear and rejoice before him with
trembling, Psalm. 2. Fear is that affection with which we must worship and
serve God.) And Job likewise did perform that worship to God which he
required* this is called Fear, and the exercise of it fearing God. Fearing God
is worshipping God; As you may see clearly by two Texts of Scripture compared
together. In the fourth of Math. v. 10. Christ says to the Devil, It is
written thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only thou shall serve;
Compare this with Deuteronomy. 6.13. and there you shall have it thus expressed, Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God; That which in the one place is worship, in the
other is fear. Again, Mat. 15.9. In vain (says Christ) do they worship
me, teaching for doctrine the commandments of men. Now the Prophet Isaiah
(from whence that is taken) Chapt. 29.14. expresses it thus. Forasmuch as
their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men. They worship me
according to the precepts of men, says Christ. Their fear is taught by the
precepts of men, says the Prophet: So that fear and worship are the same:
Fearing God does include both the affection of a worshipper, and the duty or
act of worshipping.

The fourth part or line of Jobs character, is, his Eschewing evil.

Evil is here taken for the evil of sin, before sin came into the world,
there was no evil in the world, God saw every thing that he had made, and
behold it was very good. But when sin came which was the first and is the
chiefest evil, it brought in with it all other evils: Sin has in it the
whole nature of evil, and all the degrees of evil, and from it proceed all
evil effects. Hence is eminently called evil. Sickness, and death, and Hell
are called evil; how much rather that, but for which these evils had never
bin? how much rather that with which these compared may be called good?
Further, evil is put here indefinitely, He was one that eschewed evil, not
this or that evil, but evil, that is all evil, this indefinite is
universal. And then further we are to take evil here, as himself afterward
expo^nds it in his practice, not only for the acts of evil, but all the
occasions, the appearances, the provocations and incentives of or unto evil,
for whatsoever might lead him into evil; for thus he instanceth in one
particular, I made a covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think upon a
maid? Chap. 31.1.

Eschewed.] In this word, the prudence of Job shines as bright as his
holiness, who having received a great stock and treasure of grace, now watches
to preserve it, and opposes whatsoever was destructive to the life or growth of
the inner man. That man shows he has both money and his wits about him, who
suspects and provides against Thieves.

Job eschewed evil. There is much in that expression. It is more to say a man
does eschew evil, then to say a man does not commit evil. It had bin too bare
an expression, to say, Job did not commit evil, but when it is said Job
eschewed evil, this shows, that not only the hand and tongue of Job did not
meddle with evil, but that his heart was turned from evil. For eschewing is a
turning aside with reluctance and abhorrency, so the Hebrew (Sar) imports; Job
did abhor evil as well as not commit evil. As there is a great deal of
difference between these two, the doing of good, and a delight in doing good,
between being at peace and following of peace. A man may do good and not be a
lover of good, a lover of the Commandments of God, a delighter in them: he may
be at peace and not be a lover and follower of peace. So a man may be one that
commits not such and such sins, he may do no hurt, and yet in the mean time
he may be one that loves those sins, he commits not: Such an one is not
presently a man that eschewes those sins, for to eschew evil notes the
activity of the spirit against those evils. That is the spiritualnesse and
strength of holiness. Jobs heart did (as it were) rise against evil. Some
expound it by war, as if under this expression were meant the enmity that Job
bare against evil, that it was such an eschewing, as when a man hates his
enemy and makes war against him, and does by all means oppose him; so there
was as it were a deadly feud, an irreconciliable emnity between Job and evil.
He was a man that feared God and eschewed evil. So much for the opening of
that first verse: wherein you have the first part of the description of Jobs
prosperous estate, and that is what he was in his person.

That man was perfect and upright. We will observe hence somewhat in the
general first, and then somewhat more particularly.

You see here when God comes to describe a man and to set him forth in his
glory and excellency, where the Spirit of God begins, what is the chief and
first thing which God takes notice of, it is his grace. When he would set forth
what a man Job was, how blessed and how happy, here he sets his pen first, to
describe what his spiritual estate was. Hence then this in the general.

1. Gracious habits and spiritual blessings are the choysest of all blessings.

If God have given a man grace, he has the best and the choysest of all that
which God can give. God has given us his Son, and God has given us his
Spirit, and God has given us the graces of his Spirit, these are the finest of
the flower, and the honey out of the rock of mercy. Though you should not come
to children, though you should not come to the other part of the Inventory to
Sheep and Camels and Oxen and Asses; if you are in the first part of the
description, that you have a perfect heart and upright life, and the fear of
God in your inward parts, and a holy turning against every evil, your lot is
fallen in a fair place, and you have a goodly heritage: they that have this
need not be discontented at their own, or envious at the condition of any
other, they have the principal Verb, the one thing necessary.

Again, When God describes a gracious man, you see he goes thorough, he sets
him forth in every thing that concerns his spiritual estate, Perfect and
upright, fearing God and eschewing evil. From hence this also in the general.

2. Where one grace is there is every grace.

Grace is laid into the soul in all the parts of it, and there is somewhat of
every grace laid into the soul. We have not one man, one grace, and another
man another grace, but every man has every grace that has any grace at all. I
do not say that every man has every grace: or that the same man has every
grace in the same height and degree: grace in some is more eminent than in
others, and the same man may have one grace more eminent than another, he may
have one grace (like Saul among the people) higher by head and shoulders then
the rest in his throng of graces; yet that man has somewhat of every grace
that has any grace, all grace goes together. Thus in the general.

Particularly: This man was perfect. That is (as we have explained it) he was
sincere and plain hearted. Observation hence,

1. It is sincerity that especially commends us unto God. As Jobs graces are
preferred in his description before his riches; so sincerity is preferred before
all his other graces.

Sincerity is that which makes us so acceptable and pleasing unto God: He was a
man that was perfect, you see that is put in the first place. And indeed
whatsoever a man has besides, be a man never so just in his dealings, could
you suppose a man worshipping God in all his ordinances, and avoiding all
manner of evil, yet i^ there be doubling and falsenesse in his spirit, all is
cast off, all is rejected of God as abominable. Therefore here the foundation
is laid, here is the bottom grace, perfection, sincerity. Whether i^ be a
distinct grace, or whether it be that which does accompany every grace, and
gives it life and beauty in the eye of God (for my own part I conceive
sincerity is not properly a distinct grace, b^ the perfection of every grace)
it is that which does commend (...) man unto God. Christ tells the Angel of the
Church of Sardi^ I have not found thy works perfect. Not full, says the
Greek Text. There wanted somewhat within. Sincerity is the filling up of all
our duties. Without that, they are but empty sounds, as sounding brass, and as
a tinckling cymball.

He was perfect, that is, he was sincere. Observe then,

2. Sincere and sound hearted persons are in Gods esteem perfect persons.

It is not all that you can do, or all that you can say, or all that you can
suffer, or all that you can loose, that can make you perfect in the esteem of
God without sincerity; add sincerity but to the least, and it gives you the
denomination of perfect. God accepts the very Goats hair, the least offering
from one that is sincere, he accounts it a rich present, and calls the presenter
perfect; but he will not receive the greatest riches, whole droves of cattle
for offerings, the greatest and mightiest services from one that is unsound.
Truth of grace is our perfection here, in Heaven we shall have perfection as
well as truth.

Further in that upon this perfectness and plainness of heart there is
presently added uprightness; observe from thence.

1. Where the heart is sincere toward God, the ways are just and honest
before men.

And 2. It is a great honor and an ornament unto our profession of godliness,
to be just and upright in our dealings toward men. This is put as a special
part of Jobs excellency, that he was upright, scil. in his dealings. There is
much scandal cast upon the profession of the name of God through a defect in
this. The world says, these men profess, they take the name of God upon them,
but they are as unanswerable to their promises, as unjust in their tradings,
etc. as any other. Then make proof of your perfection in profession, by the
uprightness of your Conversation.

Perfect and upright, one that feared God. Here we have fearing God, added to
perfect and upright. Observe hence,

1. Moral integrity and moral honesty without the fear of God, can never
render us acceptable unto God.

There are some that please themselves in this, that they are plain hearted.
(It is possible for a man in a sense to be so, and yet not to fear God) or
they give every man his due, etc. These are good. But in Job we may learn, on
what these must be founded, whence they come, when we please God in them; they
come from the fear of God, that must be the spring of uprightness and
perfection, else they are only Heathen virtues, not Christian graces.

God delights in nothing we do, unless we do it in his fear. As Joseph said
to his brethren when they feared some hard measure from him, Genesis 42.18.
I fear God: when this fear of God ties our hands it shows the love of God
fills our hearts. Not to wrong man, because we fear God is an argument of more
then man.

Fearing God; you may observe.

2. Holy fear contains in it every grace we receive from God, and all the
worship we tender up to God.

Fear is a comprehensive word; it is more then a particular grace. When
Abraham had offered up his son Isaac, that was a work of mighty faith, and
the faith of Abraham is wonderfully commended by it; but God speaks thus, Now
I know thou fear me. Fear contains faith, and fear contains love too.
Though perfect love cast out tormenting fear, 1 John 4.18. yet perfect love
calls in obeying fear. Hear the conclusion of all, says the Preacher, Eccl.
12.13, Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man,
or this is whole man. Fear is all duty, and every grace.

Fearing God and eschewing evil. Hence this from the connection.

3. Holy fear keeps the heart and life clean.

The fear of the Lord is clean, says David, Psalm. 19. Clean not only in it
self, formally clean, but effective, it makes clean and keeps clean the
heart and life. Fear is as an armed man at the gate, which examines all, and
stoppes every one from entering, that is unfit. It stands as a Watchman on the
Tower, and it looks every way to see what is coming to the soul; If evil
come, fear will not admit it. And therefore in Scripture you shall have these
two often put together, fearing God and eschewing evil. Nay eschewing evil is
not only put as an effect of the fear of God, but it is put into the very
definition it self of the fear of God, The fear of the Lord is to depart
from evil.

He eschewed evil. From hence observe also,

1. Godly persons do not only forbear sin, but they abhor sin.

They have not only their hands bound from it, but they have their hearts set
against it. Holy enmity against sin is the temper of a godly man's heart, he
eschew's evil.

2. A godly man's opposition of sin is universal: it is against all sin.

Job eschewed evil, all evil, there was no picking of this or that particular
evil to oppose, but whatsoever came under the name and notion of sin, Jobs
spirit turned against it: enmity is against the kind.

3. Godly persons do not only avoid the acts of evil, but all the occasions
of evil.

Job eschewed evil, whatsoever led him to evil, all the appearances of evil,
as the Apostle speaks; we cannot avoid the sin, if we will not avoid the
occasion. When Solomon cautions to take heed of the path of the wicked, he
uses four expressions and all to the same purpose, Avoid it (says he) pass
not by it, Prove. 4.1^.
turn from it, and pass away; to show unto us, that if we would keep from
the acts of^^n, we must keep from the way of sin.

The second thing whereby his prosperous estate is set out unto us, is what his
possessions were. You have a particular Inventory of his estate in the second
and third verses, and you have the total sum cast up after all the
particulars are set down, and it amounts to thus much, that Job was the
greatest of all the men in the East. In the second verse you have the first
part of his goods set down, his jewels, his children.

There were borne unto him seven sons and three daughters. This verse contains
the first part of Jobs outward happiness; the blessings of children.
Concerning whom we have 3. things offered. 1. Their number 10. 2. The
distinction of Sexes, Sons and Daughters. 3. Their mutual love and concord, v.
4.

There is little in the words that needs explication, therefore where the
Scripture is plain and clear, I will not spend time.

There were borne unto him.] His children were not borne against him, but borne
unto him, given as comforts and blessings to him.

Seven sons and three daughters.] The word Banim, sons, comes from Banab to
build; because sons and daughters build up their Fathers house, and continue
the family. Or because they are (as it were built, and framed out of their
parents.
The number seven and the number three, are numbers of perfection. Some trouble
themselves much about them: But I will not stay upon numbers.

Verse 2. And there were borne unto him seven sons and three daughters.

Here observe,

1. Children are the blessings of the Lord.

Psalm. 127.13.
They are put here as a part of his Inheritance. Children are an heritage of the
Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his reward. They are special blessings.
Children (as it is observed) are a resemblance of our immortality, because a
man revives again, lives anew (as it were) in every child: he is borne again
(in a civil sense) when others are borne to him. There be some who account
their children, but bills of charges, but God puts them upon the account of our
mercies; how holily and piously speaks Jacob concerning his children, Gen 33.5.
These (says he) are the children which God has graciously given thy servant.

2. Observe this, Children as they are blessings and great blessings, so they
are greater blessings than any outward thing else whatsoever.

When a description is made of Jobs goods, the best is put first. First, his
spiritual blessings are set down, then comes his outward; now children are
put in the very next degree to his graces. What our Savior Christ says of a
man's soul, may be said of children; Mat. 16.26.
What (says he) shall a man give in exchange for his soul? It is true, that
is spoken there of a man's own soul, that it is more to himself than the
world, but it is a truth here too, if one have a soul given him (and to have a
child is to have a soul bestowed on us) for the present it is more than to
have the whole world bestowed on him. A whole world of riches is not so good,
not such goods, as one child: therefore children are put in the first place, as
his choicest and chiefest outward blessings.

Then from the number of his children, he had many children, he had 7. sons and
3. daughters. Observe,

3. To have many children is a great blessing, and the more children the
greater the blessing.

Some think themselves blessed, if they may have one or two children; one to
inherit their estates, one or two to delight themselves in, to play with, or to
bear their name; but if they come to a number, to a great number, then they
think themselves exceedingly burdened, then they are troubles. When God casts
up the estate of a blessed man in outward things, he says not only that he
has a child, that he is not barren, but that he has many children, that he
has his quiver full of such arrows, as the expression is, Psalm. 127.5. and
that is made the blessedness of a man there. Happy is the man (says he) that
has his quiver full of them, that has many such arrows, such are children of
the youth, verse 4. There are some rich and covetous men, that are in this
point beyond others rich in folly. You shall hear them pride themselves, that
they have no children, or but few; this they conceive sets them off in the
opinion of the world for the richer men, whereas one child is more riches then
all the things that are in the world. And we know it is an ordinary thing
(though indeed it is a very sinful thing) to say, it is true such an one is a
rich man, he has a fair estate, but he has a great charge, a great many
children, as if that did take-off from his riches, or make him less happy: as
if he were the poorer, because he has a larger share of that ancient first
blessing upon man, Genesis 1.28.
Be fruitful and multiply and replenish the Earth.

4. Note this, To have many sons, to have most sons amongst our children, is
the greater outward blessing.

Job is described here in the most exact method of outward blessings; he had
sons, and his sons out-number his daughters, he had 7. sons and but three
daughters. And the reason why most sons among children are the greater
blessing, is clear, because sons bear up the name, and are a greater
support unto the family.

5. To have many sons and daughters too, is yet a compleater blessing.

For by daughters the family is increast, and other families are joined and
knit and united to that family. And to have sons and daughters both, is the
perfection of that natural blessing; because man was so made at the first, he
was made male and female. As it is with the soul and the body, though the
soul be more excellent than the body, yet the soul alone is not so perfect,
as when soul and body are together: because though the body be not so strong
in constitution and noble in condition as the soul, yet body and soul in
creation were joined together, therefore their greatest perfection consists in
their union. So likewise it is in a family, though sons in nature are more
perfect, yet because it was the first institution of a family, male and female,
therefore the fullnes and compleatnesse of the blessing is in the union of
both. Job had many sons and daughters likewise, this made the blessing more
complete.

And then lastly observe this,

Children, many children in the family are in themselves no impediments, either
of piety toward God or justice toward man.

As soon as ever Job was described in all his perfections, it is added he had
so many sons and so many daughters, though he had so many children to look
to, and provide for, yet he omitted neither duty toward God, nor duty toward
man. There are many who think it some excuse, if not excuse enough for their
neglect, for their sleighting holy duties, or sleightnesse in the holy duties
of hearing, praying and the like; oh, they have a great many children, and they
must rise early and they must work late, they can spare no time or but little
for the public or private or secret worship of God; specially for any thing
that is extraordinary: so that these cares steal away, not only those times
that might be bestowed in an extraordinary manner upon their souls, but even
the ordinary times are stolen away by them also. Further, some think
themselves by this in part excused for their injustice toward men, they have a
great family, and if they deal somewhat hardly, and stick as close as they
can in all businesses, they may be borne with, for they have a great many
children; and they must look to provide for them, they else were worse then
Infidels, and hence they take liberty to do what honest Infidels were ashamed
of. Job you see was upright, though he had so many sons and so many daughters
to provide for. It is ill with those whose gain for their children is any
loss to their souls; but woe, when any to gain for their children loose their
souls: doing like those in Na. 2.12. The Lion did tear in pieces enough for
his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his holes with prey,
and his dens with rapine. By the Lion there is meant those oppressors, that
lived in Nineveh, and by their whelps are meant their children, and by
Lionesses their wives; they had wives and children, and they must have means
and estates for them. Job as I may say had whelps and a lioness, wife and
children, yet he does not tear for them. Nay though he had so many to provide
for, yet he rather gives out to others. What hungry belly was not filled with
his meat? And what naked back was not clothed with his wool? He did not say
I have children to feed and to cloth, and therefore you can have nothing. You
see though he had many children and a great charge, yet how complete he was in
his duty to God and in his duty to man, he failed not either in the duties of
worship and holiness, nor in the duties of justice and uprightness.

JOB 1.3, 4, 5. His substance also was seven thousand Sheep, and three
thousand Camels, and five hundred Yoke of Oxen, and five hundred she Asses,
and a very great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the men of
the East.

And his Sons went and feasted in their houses, every one his day, and sent
and called for their three Sisters, to eat and to drink with them.

And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone about, that Job sent
and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning and offered burnt
offerings, according to the number of them all, etc.


THE Holy Ghost having showed us the qualities of Jobs person, in the first
verse, Psalm. 127. v. 4, 5.
the Olive-plants round about his Table (being the first outward blessing) in
the second: Now proceeds ^o show also his outward estate; his stock of Cattle,
His substance was seven thousand Sheep, etc.

Concerning the outward Estate of Job, we may note in this ^hird verse.

1. The several kinds of his stock, Sheep, Camels, Oxen and Asses.

2. The several numbers of each of these kinds. Seven thou^^nd Sheep, three
thousand Camels, etc.

It is said, His substance was seven thousand Sheep, etc. We (...) our
language, call the estate of a man his substance, and a rich ^an we call him a
substantial man, though indeed riches are but ^ternall and accidental, yet
they are called the substance of a man, (...) cause they make him subsist and
stand by himself, he needs not the ^op and help of others.

The word here in the Hebrew which we translate substance, is indifferent to
signify any possession; (...), Septuag.
but especially it signifies possession or substance by Cattle. Therefore in
those times wherein the estates of the great men of the earth were most in
Cattle, this expression was chiefly used; The Septuagint renders it, And his
Cattle were 7000. Sheep, etc. So then his substance, sc. of Cattle was seven
thousand Sheep.

Sheepe] Sheep for meat and Sheep for clothing, the flesh and the fleece
both are of great use.

And three thousand Camels The Hebrew word (...) comes from the root Gamal, to
render and make recompense: for this creature being used much for burden and
travel, does abundantly recompense his Master for his keeping, from this
Hebrew word Gamal, the Greeks derive the name (...) the Chaldeans Gamla, the
Latins Camelus, and we our English Camel.
. Camels were used in those Countries for burdens, and for travel especially
in long journeyes, Merchants traveled with Camels, as you may read, Genesis
37.25. Joseph's brethren beheld a company of Ishmaelites which came from Gilead
with their Camels, and these were very strong for travel, being able to abide
much hunger and thirst, (as the natural History affirms.) Some affirm they
will travel six days together in those hot Countries without drink, and
therefore those Eastern parts are stock't and stored with Camels, beasts so
fit for service there.

And five hundred yoke of Oxen. Oxen for the tillage of the ground: Their Oxen
are strong to labor, Psalm. 144.

The Asses were for ordinary travel, and for ordinary burdens about the house.

But you may say. We read in the Inventory which here is made of Jobs Estate,
that he had Sheep and Camels, Oxen and Asses, but where was the Silver and the
Gold, where was the goodly Housholdstuffe, the Jewels and the Plate? here is no
mention made of these.

I answer, first, that without doubt Job had silver and gold, an^ precious
things. It is clear that he had when he says, ( Chap. 31 24.) If I have made
gold my hope, or have said to the fine gol^ thou art my confidenee; it had not
been proper for him to de^ that gold was his hope (in this sense) if he had
not had gold (...) his possession; or to say he did not confide in fine gold,
when h^ had no gold to confide in: Then he had gold and silver. An^ for Jewels,
the holy story tells us ( Chap. 42.12.) That God ga^^ Job twice as much as he
had before; and a part of what was re^stored to him, was Jewels and Eare-rings;
Every man gave hi^ a piece of Money, and every one an Eare-ring of gold,
therefo^ he had Jewels also in his possession at first, or else they could
(...) be doubled to him in the day of his deliverance.

We find frequent mention in those ancient times, of the riches of the
Patriarcks and others in gold and silver. It is expressed concerning Abraham,
Genesis 13.2. That Abraham was very rich in cattle, in silver and in gold. And
Abraham's servant, Genesis 24.35. says of him, The Lord has blessed my Master
greatly, and he has given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold; And
verse 53. The servant brought forth Jewels of silver, and Jewels of gold, and
gave them to Rebeckah, he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious
things; And Genesis 23.16. we read of Abraham's paying four hundred shekels of
silver unto Ephron the Hittite, which was called current money with the
Merchants. So that it is plain, in those days, gold and silver, and Jewels
were substance.

But here the Estate of Job is reckoned and cast up by Cattle, there is no
mention of gold, and silver, and Jewels, and precious stones, and the like. His
substance was 7000. Sheep, etc. Two reasons may be given for this account.

The first is this, Because those ancient times were so much given to and
employed in the feeding of Cattle: therefore they did reckon their estates by
Cattle, as we now do by Money, by gold and by silver, or by yearly rents and
revenues: If a man had so many Cattle, so many Sheep, so many Oxen, etc. they
knew his Estate, what gold and silver or other riches he might have. When the
sons of Jacob came before Pharaoh, Genesis 46.32. they are called Shepherds,
The men are Shepherds, (...)
for their trade has been to feed Cattle; They are men of Cattle, as if he
should say, the special commodity, the maine thing these trade in, is about
Cattle, and that gives the denomination: They had gold and silver, but they
are men of Cattle.

And then again, for this reason, Cattle are living substance; Gold and
silver are dead substance. Cattle in their own nature are more excellent then
gold and silver, because they have life; Every thing that has life is better
in its degree then that which has no life: The lowest creature that has life
is better then the best without life; the lowest of a superior order, is
better then the highest of an inferior; Now all things without life are put
into a degree, into a Classis or form below and inferior to those that have
life. It is true, that Money answers all things, Eccles. 10.19.
Money is equivolently Sheep, and Oxen, and Asses, and Camels. Money is
equivolently bread, and meat, and drink, and clothing, and whatsoever you
need, it is virtually all that you may and can receive; so that by way of
commutation and exchange Money is all things: but formally and in it self, so
these things are the life and sustenance, and support of man, therefore these
go away with the name and the title of the estate; the estate or substance of
Job was in these natural and living riches, not in artificial or dead riches.
Hence it was that the Ancients gave the name Pecunia to Money, which comes a
Pecude, from Cattle (so the Critics observe) because they stamped the form
of a Sheep or an Ox upon Money, noting that Cattle were the riches and the
estate of a man properly and chiefly. This may suffice for the reasons why the
estate or riches of Job is set forth by Cattle, and not by gold and silver and
other like possessions.

Further, with this abundance of Cattle that Job had, we must understand
(though it is not expressed) that he had Land suitable to such a stock.

Pauperis est numerare pecus.
And when these Numbers are set down (because we usually say, he is but poor
that can number his Cattle,) we are not to stand strictly upon the precise
Number of seven thousand, or five hundred, etc. But here are great quantities
mentioned, to note, that Job had many, very many Cattle, but that he had great
numbers of all these.

(...)
Then it follows, He had these and a very great household.

The words in the Original, do signify Servants, or Tillage and Husbandry;
(...) ministerium, Sept. (...), Servitium, Aquil: (...), fami^litium, Sym.
concerning Isaac, Genesis 26. it is said, that he had possessions of flocks and
of herds, and great store or servants, so some read it; others that he had
great store of husbandry: It comes all to one purpose, for the greatness of
the household, or multitude of servants, were for those uses, to manage and
order those Flocks, that Tillage and Estate that God had blessed him with. He
had a very great household, many attendants upon the several services of his
estate.

Lastly, We have the sum and result (as it were) of all his estate, in the
close of the verse.

So that this man was the greatest of all the men of the East. He was the
greatest diverse ways, greatest in riches, greatest in power, greatest in
honor, greatest in grace, which is the best greatness of all. He was greatest
all these ways, but that which is here specially meant, is the greatness of
his honor and riches* He was the greatest man in outward estate of all the men
of the East.

Of all the men of the East. Heb: Sons of the East. In the 25. of Genesis,
v.6. Abraham gave gifts unto his Sons by the Concubines, and sent them away
from his Son Isaac Eastward into the East Country. Doubtless the blessing
of God followed these Sons of Abraham his friend, and they waxed Great, but
among them all Job was greatest. It had bin much to say, he was a great man
amongst the men of the East: for the men of the East were very great men, and
very rich men. As to say, one is a rich man in the City of London where there
are so many rich men; one that goes for a rich man there, is a rich man
indeed. But here is more in this, he was not only a rich man, or a great man
amongst the men of the East, but he was the greatest, he was the richest of
them: as to say, that one is the richest in the whole City, cries a man up to
the height of riches: this expression then heightens the sense of the Text
concerning Jobs greatness, he was not only great among the men of the East,
but the greatest man of them; as if the Holy Ghost should have said, I will not
stay reckoning up particulars or telling you this and that Job had: you know
the East was a large Country and full of rich men, his estate was the largest,
and himself the richest of all the men of the East.

A Question may here be raised, Why the Holy Ghost spends so many words, and is
thus accurate in the setting forth of Jobs outward estate.

I shall touch three reasons for it:

1. He is described to be a man of a very great estate, to the end that the
greatness of his aff^iction might appear afterward: the measure of a loss is
taken by the greatness of a man's enjoyment. If a man have but little, his
affliction cannot be great: but if a man have much, if he have abundance, then
the affliction does abound. After great enjoyments, want is greatest:
Emptiness presses those most, who once were full. I went out full (says
Naomi, Ruth. 1.21.) and the Lord has brought me home empty, therefore call me
not Naomi (which is pleasant,) but Marah which is bitter, for the Almighty has
dealt very bitterly with me.

2. The greatness of his estate is set forth, that the greatness of his
patience might appear: For a man to be made poorer, that was but poor and
mean before, it is no great matter though he bear it; Scimus quia majorem
dolorem commovent damna majora, Greg.
for a man to have but little that never had much, is no great trial of his
patience: but for a man to have nothing at all, that had as it were all things,
and to be patient under it, this shows the proof of patience. To a man that
is borne a slave, or a captive, captivity and bondage is no trouble: it does
never exercise his patience, he is scarce sensible of the evil, because he
never knew better. Multo facilius est non habita repudiare, qua^ possessa
amittere, Aug.
But for a King that is borne free and has power over others, for a King that
is in the height of freedom and liberty to become a slave and a captive, in
such a one patience has a perfect work, if he bear it. So for Job, a man
that once abounded in all manner of outward good things, to be outed and
emptyed of all, that tried his patience to the full.

3. It was to give to all the world, a testimony that Job was a through godly
and holy man; that he was a man of extraordinary strength of grace; why?
because he held his integrity, and kept up his spirit in the way of holiness,
notwithstanding he was lifted up with abundance of outward blessings. To be
very great and very good, shows that a man is good indeed: Great and good,
Rich and holy, are happy conjunctions, and they are rare conjunctions. Usually
riches impoverish the soul, and the world cares out all care of Heaven;
therefore Job was one of a thousand, being at once thus great in riches and
thus rich in goodness. He was rich in grace, that was so gracious in the
midst of so much riches, Exingentibus Jobi divitijs valde locupletatur ejus
Sanctitas, Pined. in loc. Deuteronomy 3.2.
the godliness of Job was enriched by his riches: It argued that Jobs
godliness was very great and very right, because he continued right in the
midst of all his greatness. How often do riches cause forgetfulness of
God, yea kicking against God? How often are they made the bellows of pride,
the fuel of uncleanenesse, the instruments of revenge? How often do rich men
contemn, despise and oppress their weak and poor brethren? but to make
riches the fuel of our Graces, and the Instruments of duty both to God and
man: To have the house full of riches, and the heart full of holiness, these
united are admirable. Extremes are very dangerous: to be extreme poor or
extreme rich, is an extreme temptation. Therefore the wise man Agur; Prove.
30.8. prays, Give me neither poverty nor riches, Lord says he, I would not be
in any of the extremes: It is a sore temptation to be far on either hand, to
be far on the hand of riches, or far on the hand of poverty. To be very
poor and very holy, is a rare thing; That man has great treasures and riches
of grace who is so. I remember the speech of a poor woman, who having a child
about 8. or 9. years of age, and being once in such a straight that hunger
began to pinch them both, the child looking upon the Mother said, Mother, do
you think that God will starve us? No child answers the Mother. The child
replied if he do, yet we must love him and serve him. Such language from the
heart, becomes and argues more then a Child in Grace, a grown Christian. They
are filled with Christ who can starve and serve him. So likewise are they who
being full fed yet serve him; and temptations are greater upon the full then
upon the empty, upon the rich then upon the poor: The reason of it is, because
as riches do stir up lust, so they give fuel, and administer instruments
for the obtaining and taking in of that which lust calls for: this poverty does
not.

The poor, says Christ, receive the Gospel; the lame and the blind make most
speed, and see their way clearest into the Kingdom of Heaven; Mat. 19.24.
but for rich men (he says) It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of
a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. We see now
the Miracle acted in Job, the Camel is got thorough the needles eye: Job a rich
man is got through the needles eye with three thousand Camels, etc. And the
reason was, because all his Camels, Cattle and riches, did not take up so much
room in his heart, they were not so thick in his spirit, as one single thread.
All his outward estate was kept without, not a shred, not a thread got into his
spirit. Take this for a third reason, why the Holy Ghost does thus exactly set
forth the estate of Job,.sc. that he might appear to be an exact holy man.

From the whole take these Observations:

First, We see here Job a holy man very full of riches; Then Observe, That
riches are the good blessings of God. God would never have bestowed them upon
his Job else. Least we should think riches evil, they are given to those who
are good: Divitiae, ne malae putentur dantur bonis, ne magnae vel summae dantur
and malis, Aug.
And least riches should be thought the chiefest good, they are given to those
that are evil. It is a certain truth, that God never gives any thing in it
self evil to those that are good; nor does he ever give the chiefest good to
those that are evil. Therefore it shows, that riches are good, because the
godly have them; and it shows that they are not the chiefest good, because the
wicked have them. When the Gospel calls us to renounce the world, to cast off
the world; it calls us to cast the world out of our affections, not out of our
possession. To hold and possess great riches is not evil, it is evil to set
our hearts upon them.

Secondly, Job was described before, A just man, an upright man, that is, a man
just in his dealing, a man that gave every one his own; He did not decline, no
not a hairs breadth (if possibly he could) from the line of Justice,
Commutative or Distributive; yet this Job is exceeding rich. Hence observe, That

Plain and honest dealing is no hinderance to the gaining or preserving of an
estate.

Honest dealing is no stop, no bar to getting. There is a cursed Proverb
amongst us, which some use, and it is to be feared, some walk by it, That he
which uses plain dealing shall die a Beggar. You see Job, that was a plain
man, a just dealing man, yet is full of riches; the nighest and the safest way
to riches, is the way of justice. Woe to those who by getting riches, get a
wound in their own consciences. What will it advantage any one to gather many
goods, when in the mean time his heart tells him, that all have a bad Master?
What will it advantage any to load, to freight his Ship by trading on forbidden
Coasts, when by doing this he splits and makes shipwreck of his soul. If you
would go the ready way to attain the things of this life, walk in the ways
of God. Honesty and Justice, Uprightness and truth will lead you to the
highest and greatest estate, with Gods blessing. All other riches are poverty,
all other gain is loss; There is a fire in an estate ill gotten, which will
at last consume it. A man builds with timber that has a fire in it, that lays
the foundation of his estate by sin, he lays up iniquity for his children.
And so does God, Job 21.19.

It is commonly said likewise, Dives aut iniquus aut iniqui haeres. A rich man
is either an unjust man, or the heir of an unjust man. In Psalm. 82. the wicked
are put for the rich, How long will you judge uniustly and accept the persons
of the wicked? That is, the persons, (Divitum aut Potentum) of rich or great
men; so it is to be understood; for Judges would never accept the persons of
wicked men, if they were poor, if they be in equal balance with others, in
regard of outward things: and then the opposition that is made in the next
words, Defend the poor and fatherless; shows that the rich are there meant.
These great ones are called wicked, because (says the Gloss) they usually get
and uphold their greatness by wickedness. Such is the course of the world,
and it is the shame of the world, much more of Christians. We see in Jobs
practice that riches may be attained and maintained too by righteousness, Job
was rich and just.

Thirdly, In that Job, a man fearing God, was thus rich, thus great. See here
the truth of the promises. God will make good his promise concerning outward
things to his people. 1 Timothy 4.8.
Godliness has the promises of this life, as well as of that which is to
come. As it has promises made to it, so it has promises performed to it; Job
a man fearing God, a godly man, is very rich. Indeed, not many rich, not many
mighty, not many honorable, not many great ones are called: and so not many of
those that are called, 1 Cor. 1.26.
are mighty, and rich, and great and noble: yet some such are, that the truth
of the promises may appear sometime in the very letter to the eye of sense, as
it always does to the eye of faith.

Do not fear that you shall be poor, if you turn godly, for godliness has
the promises of this life; and there was a rich Job, a rich Abraham, a rich
Isaac, a rich David, and many other godly, rich. God will perform when it is
good for them, the promises of outward good things to his children outwardly.

Fourthly, Here is another Observation from this place; Job was frequent in
holy duties; he was a man fearing God, that is (as we explained it in the first
verse) he was much verst in the ways of holy worship, he did not serve God by
fits or at his leisure, but continually, yet he was very rich. Note hence.

Time spent in holy duties, is no loss, no hinderance to our ordinary
callings, or to our thriving in them.

Job serves God so frequently, that it is called continually, yet he grows in
wealth abundantly. The time that he spent in the service of God did not rob his
purse, impoverish his family, or hinder him in his dealings and businesses of
the world; Job maintained both his callings, he maintained his general calling
in the ways and service of God: and his special or particular calling in his
relations unto men, both went on together, and they were no hinderance one to
another, but a furtherance rather. The time we spend in spiritual duties, is
time gained for secular. The pains we take in prayer, etc. whets our tools and
oils our wheels, promotes all we go about and gets a blessing upon all.

This meets with another blasphemy, very frequent in the world. If a man
professing godliness go backward in his estate, especially a man that is
taken notice of for his extraordinary zeal and constancy in holy duties: Then
the clamor is, O you see what hearing of Sermons has brought him unto, you
see what comes of his praying and fasting, he has followed these things you
see, till he is undone. I say two things unto these men.

First, Many are thought to go backward in their outward estate, because they
do so much in spiritual duties, when indeed they are so far from doing too
much that they do too little, and that rather is the reason why they thrive
not. The body may be exercised often, when the spirit works but seldom, if at
all in holy things; and this indeed provokes God many times to blast an outward
estate. It is a common fault, that when we see those whom we conceive godly
faling in outward things, we are taken up only in finding out answers how to
acquit the justice of God in his promises. What shall we say to such a promise,
Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall
be added unto you? We trouble our selves often to satisfy the point in
reference to the justice of God and the truth of his promise. We seldom
suspect whether or how they have performed the condition of the promise. We
should rather doubt that they have not evangellically performed the condition,
then trouble our selves so much with seeking how to satisfy the justice of God
in answering the engagement and promise on his part. For without all question,
they that do seek according to the tenor of that condition, God will
administer all things unto them.

Or secondly, we should say thus rather, that they who are so much exercised in
ways of communion with God, have surely gained a great spiritual estate. And
that now God brings them to the proof of it by losses in their temporal
estates. These or the like interpretations we ought to make, if we see them
going backward in outward things, who have been very forward in spiritual
things.

And so much concerning Jobs outward estate, in regard of his riches, both what
they were in the kind, and in the number.

In the next place his outward happiness is described by the unity and concord
of his children.

Verse 4. And his sons went and feasted in their houses, every one his day,
and sent and called for their three sisters, to eat and to drink with them.

This verse sets forth the third part of Jobs happiness in respect of his
outward estate. He had children, and many children in the second verse: Here in
the fourth we find all these children, sons and daughters agreeing and
feasting one with another. We may note from the words four things concerning
this Feasting.

1. Their alacrity and chearefullnesse, which most do observe out of that
expression, they went and feasted, which phrase in the Hebrew signifies the
doing of a thing with chearfulnes and readiness.

2. Their unanimity: It is not said that some two or three of his sons feasted,
but his sons indefinitely, all his sons: and not only his sons, but his
daughters, the three sisters were called too. So that they were all of one
mind, they all met together in love, though they were ten in number, they were
but one in heart, the same in spirit.

3. The place where they feasted, it was in their houses, they did not go to
suspected places, but in their own private houses and families, where it was
most convenient, and where they might celebrate those meetings with most
security, both for their bodies and for their souls.

4. The frequency of that feasting, it was not only once, but every one his
day. They did meet at every one of their houses upon a special and a set day.
Every one his day, some make the sense thus, they feasted in their houses one
every day, as if it had been a continual feast with them, they feasted all the
week long; and they would seem to allow it by the moderation used in their
feasting: out the words every one his day, note a course, a certain time
wherein they did feast, not a continued feasting. Some conceive it was upon
their birth-dayes: whether that be so or no there is nothing appears from the
Text, only it is said, They feasted every one his day.

And they sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with
them. In that we may observe 3. things.

1. The humanity of the brethren, they would not banquet alone and leave out
their sisters, but they sent and called them.

2. The modesty of the Sisters, that they would not come but upon special
invitation, they were not forward of themselves, but they were sent and called
for.

3. The end of this invitation, it was to eat and to drink with them. As under
the notions of bread and water, or bread and wine, all necessaries for food are
comprised; so under the actions of eating and drinking, the whole business of
feasting is contained, Luke 12.19. Isa. 22.15. Eccl. 2.24.

There is nothing further in the words, that we need stay longer in opening or
clearing of them. We shall only give you some few notes out of them.

His sons went and feasted in their houses, every one his day. This is set
forth as the third part of Jobs outward happiness. Then note we first, That

The love and mutual agreement of children is one of the greatest blessings to
a parent.

The love of children is the fathers blessing, and it is a great bles^sing. How
many fathers have their hearts rent and divided by the rents and divisions that
are amongst their children! It does bla^ and wither all the comfort the Parent
has, to see that there is no agreement of love, no correspondency of affection
amongst those that come all from the same bowels, Fratrum quoque gratia rara
est. Ovid.
from the same loins. The is a blessing which was not common in the world, no
not in thos^ times. Adam had not this blessing. Adam when he had only two
sons, Genesis 4.
they could not agree, but one murthereth the other Abraham enjoyed not this
blessing, when he had but 2 sons, one^ mocking the other, Genesis 21 9. Genesis
27.41. Genesis 3.4.
Ishmael is mocking Isaac. Isaac failed of the blessing, he had but two sons
and one threatened to murder the other, The days of mourning for my father are
at hand then will slay my brother Jacob. This was not Jacobs blessing, he had
(...) sons, there was one of them, Joseph the common Butt of a^ his brethrens
envy, they did all spite him, the Archers did sho^ at him and grieved him
sorely and hated him. Genesis 49 23.
They could not a^ agree, there were divisions among them. It is no ordinary
ble^^sing then. You see David a holy man, yet what divisions we^ there among
his children, 2 Samuel 13.28.
one murdereth another, Absalom cause Amnon to be murdered: Adonijah rises
up against Solomon he cannot bear it, 1 King. 1.
that his brother should have the Crown. Y^ see then that it is a blessing and
it is an extraordinary blessing. Therefore take notice of it, you that have an
agreeing family, children that live together in love and unity, look upon it
as a special blessing from God.

Secondly, We may observe, That

It is a very comely thing for brethren and sisters to live together in unity.

In Jobs children we have that of Psalm. 133. fullfilled, Numero plurimi erant,
consensu autem, and concordia quasi unus, unanimitate atque dilectione quasi
idem Orig.
Behold (he calls all to look upon it) how good and pleasant it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity. Such a sight may draw all eyes after it.
Jobs children were many in number, in heart but one, in love the same. And as
there is nothing more troublesome, so nothing more uncomely and unnatural than
rents and divisions in a family.

Thirdly, we may note: That

It is lawful to use feasting.

The children of Job here went and feasted at their houses, every one his day.
Tertul. Apol. c. 39.
The Christians in the Primitive Churches had their (...), Love Feasts. In a
Feast there are two things; extraordinary provision, and extraordinary company,
both are lawful. God has given us the creature, not only for necessity, but
for delight; Deus multo plura condidit, quibus facile carere possemus, quam
quibus necessario nobis opus est. Bez in loc.
and it is a clear argument that such using of the creatures in feasting, is
lawful, because God has made more creatures, serving for the delight of man,
than he has made for the necessity of man. If God had meant that men should
do nothing, but serve their own necessity and maintain their lives; so, as
they might go on in their places and callings, one half of the creatures
might have been spared. But God made nothing in vain. Therefore he is willing
we should use the creatures for moderate delight. Abraham made a great feast at
the weaning of Isaac; and Isaac makes a feast for Abimelech and Phicol the
chief Captain of his Army, Genesis 26. Genesis 21.8.
30. And the like examples we have in diverse other places: And our Savior
Christ himself was at a feast in Cana of Galilee, where when wine failed he
supplied it by miracle, Joh. 2.

But because feasting is so often abused and many turn this liberty into
wantonness; being then most wicked, when they should be most thankful, and
grieving God most, when he gives them means or occasion of rejoicing. I shall
therefore briefly discover the abuses of feasting, which will also hint rules
for the right ordering of it, That we may (as the Apostle speaks) eat and
drink, and do all to the glory of God.

1. Then feasting is sinful, when any over-charge their estates; and lavish
out what will but serve their necessities or conveniences upon delights and
superfluities; to such, Feasting is a sin.

2. When the rich feast the rich, and never think upon the poor, Luke 14.12,
13. When thou make a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends nor thy
brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors. Observe here, this is
not an absolute denial of calling brethren, and kinsfolks and friends, or
rich; for brethren may, yea ought to be called, but (says he) when thou make
a feast call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind; that is, when thou
make a feast be sure to remember these, do not bid thy brethren, or the rich
alone, let the poor have a portion with thee, and be refreshed at or from thy
Table. When the rich feast one another, and let the poor starve or pine, this
is very sinful.

3. When there is a studied curiosity and exactness in feasting. When all
things that can be thought on must be fetched in, strange meats and foreign
sauces, when there is a lusting after Quails, when men must have meat for
their lusts. Though we may have feasting for our delight, yet we must not have
feasting for our lusts; Such make their belly their god, as the Apostle
speaks; when there is so much art used, as destroys the nature of the meat,
this is a sin and an error. I remember Bernard speaks of his times, That a
man might be at a fish feast, and yet should not know whether he had eaten any
fish or no, all things were prepared with so much art, that the very nature of
the creature was lost. This is a sinful vanity.

4. When there is intemperance in feasting (whatsoever the provision be) when
there is excess; an over-charging of nature, which is surfeiting and
drunkenness. As by the former, man overthrowes the nature of meats or drinks.
So by this, meat and drink overthrowe the nature of man. A man may feast
himself into a beast, and we usually say of such persons, They are disguised.
For such feasting the land mournes.

5. When feastings are frequent: Feasts are not for every day, that was the
thing taxed in the glutton, Luke 16. that he fared deliciously every day.

6. When we spend too much of the day at any time, or too much time any day in
feasting, when we dine till night and sup all or a great part of the night:
this is chambering and wantonness, this is a woeful expense and waste of
time; and the expense of time is worse by far then the expense of money; you
may regaine the expense of your money, but you can never call back the expense
of your time, you may be at greater charges in your feasting for the waste of
time then for the waste of estate. All the world cannot give you back again
the expense of an hour. Indeed we often hear men complain they have spent
too much money in feasting and entertainments, but it is very rare that any
complain they have spent too much time: which is as if a man having received a
wound in his body should only be troubled for the hole which the Sword made in
his doublet. Prodigality of time, is the worst and most dangerous prodigality.

7. Feasting is sinful when unseasonable, I speak in regard of occasions and
opportunities: there are special times wherein it is unlawful to feast,
though we should spend but very little time in feasting, Isa. 22.12, 13. In
that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping and mourning, and to
baldness, and to girding with sackcloth, and behold joy and gladness,
slaying Oxen and killing Sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine, in the next
verse it is said, It was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of hosts, surely
this inquity shall not be purged from you till you die. To feast in that day
was sinful, and a sin that left such a stain as could not be got out, it
shall not be purged from you. What time was this wherein their feasting was so
sinful, what made this sin so deep grained? You shall find a resolution in
the beginning of the Chapter, It was a day of trouble and perplexity and of
treading down by the Lord God of hosts in the valley of vision, breaking down
the walls and crying to the mountains. It is a day of trouble and perplexity,
and will you now be feasting? (says God) Is this a time for you to feast in,
when my wrath is breaking forth amongst you? This feasting with men is a daring
of God, a sending (as it were) defiance unto Heaven. And such feastings Amos
reproves, Chap. 6.4, 5. They did eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the
Calves out of the midst of the Stall, they chaunt to the sound of the Violl,
and invent to themselves instruments of music like David, they drink wine in
bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, but they are not
grieved for the affliction of Joseph.

Then at this time feasting is unseasonable; for Joseph, the people and
Churches of God are in affliction: And this is such a day as the Prophet
describes, a day of trouble, and a day of perplexity from the Lord, the
Kingdom is full of trouble, and we are full of fears, therefore now fasting
is in season, not feasting, now humbling is in season, not rejoicing: Or if any
feast now, let them feast as if they feasted not, and rejoice as if they
rejoiced not, let them feast as remembering the affliction and bonds, the hunger
and wants of our distressed brethren. Therefore in those feastings which have
a kind of necessity in them, you should labor to have your hearts exceedingly
above your feasting, not to ye so low as the creature; it is ever very sinful
to have your hearts drowned in the creature, but now especially when you hear
the voice of the Sword threatening to take the creature from us, and see God
clashing them together, as if he meant to stain the beauty, and sour the
pleasures of them all.

Verse 5. And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone about, that
Job sent and sanctified them, etc.

This verse contains the holy practice of Job. You saw before that he had
grace in his heart, now you may see grace in his life. Holy practice makes
grace visible. There it lay in the habit, here it comes forth in the act.
Concerning this holy practice of Job, we may note these three things for the
division of the verse.

1. The Actions about which this holy care of Job was exercised: They are two.

1. He sent and sanctified them. And 2. Offered burnt offerings according to
the number of them all.
2. The ground of this holy practice of his, what moved Job after their
feasting, thus to send and sanctify them. The ground was this, For Job said,
it may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts.

3. The constancy of Job in this his holy practice, he did not this by fits,
now and then, but thus did Job continually.

And it was so, that when the days of their feasting were gone about, that Job
sent and sanctified them. That is the first thing that we are to explain and
open unto you, Job sent and sanctified them. How could Job sanctify his sons
or his daughters? A Parent indeed may provide riches for his children, but can
he provide grace also? A parent may put Money in their purses, but can he put
holiness in their hearts too, that it is said here, that Job sent and
sanctified them? Is not sanctification the proper work of the Spirit of God?
does not the Holy Ghost alone sanctify?

For the clearing of this, Whereas it is said that Job sent and sanctified
them; First, Some expound the meaning thus, that Job sent up prayers to God to
sanctify them. And indeed prayer is a sanctifying ordinance. As prayer
requires a holy heart, so prayer will make a holy heart; make the heart that
prays holy, yea many times get holiness into another heart. Secondly, Others
say, he sent and sanctified them, that is, he sent them to the place that was
appointed for sacrifice, where he intended to sanctify them; or where, in the
holy duty of calling upon the Name of God and of offering sacrifice, they were
to be sanctified: He sent and sanctified them, he sent them to the place where
the Sacrifice should be offered, that so they might be sanctified. But thirdly,
I rather take it thus, he sent and sanctified them, that is, he sent a message
to them, to command them to prepare and to fit themselves for the holy duty of
offering the burnt offering or sacrificing. For to sanctify, in Scripture
notes two things.

1. The infusion of a holy habit, the infusion of a new principle into the
soul.

2. A preparation of the soul to holy duties.

Now when it is said that Job sent and sanctified them, it is not meant as if
Job did infuse holy habits into his children, as if it were in his power to
make them gracious; Indeed that is impossible, it is only the work of the
Spirit of God, no man can come at the spirit of another but the Spirit of God.
But this is it, he sent to them to prepare themselves, to advise and warn
them to prepare themselves that they might be ready for that holy duty, for the
duty of sacrificing; And this preparation to holy duties, is often called
sanctifying, as Genesis 35. When Jacob was called to Bethel to offer sacrifice and
to build an Altar, he said to his household, verse 2. Put away the strange gods
that are among you and be clean, (that is sanctify you, or be you sanctified)
and let us arise and go up to Bethel, and I will make there an Altar unto God,
etc, The preparation to the sacrifice, was a cleansing or a sanctifying of
them. So Exodus 19.20. when the people were to be prepared to receive the Law,
the Lord says unto Moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify them to day and
to morrow, that is, prepare the people, or warn the people that they prepare
themselves for the receiving of the Law. And likewise in the 1 Samuel 16.5. it is
said, that Samuel did that which the Lord spoke, and came to Bethlem, and the
Elders of the Town trembled at his coming and said, Come thou peaceably?
And he said, Peaceably; I am come to Sacrifice unto the Lord, sanctify your
selves and come with me to the Sacrifice, that is, prepare your selves to come
to the sacrifice. So sanctification, is preparation. And Ioh. 11.55. (to name
no more) The Jews Passover was nigh at hand, and many went out of the
Country up to Jerusalem before the Passover to purify themselves, or to
sanctify themselves, that they might be fit and ready for the sacrifice. So
then this sanctifying of them, was a preparing of them for the sacrifice. There
were solemn rules given afterward when the form of the Church Order and
Discipline was established by Moses; but even now before that, the Law and
light of nature taught this, besides the teaching of God, that they must be
sanctified before they came to sacrifice, Job sent and sanctified them, then
they came to that holy service.

This is the first act of Job. We may here observe, first, the time when Job
sent to sanctify them, it was when the days of their feasting were gone
about; Job did not take them off from their feasting, or deny them the liberty
of their feasting: But when the days of their feasting were gone about, then
he sent and sanctified them. The point we may note from hence is this. That

It does well become godly Parents, to give their Children leave to take
moderate refreshing and recreation one with another.

Job did not severely and austerely forbid them and say, what do you feasting
and spending your time idly one with another? why do you spend so many days
in feasting? He never interrupted them till the days of their feasting were
gone about; It becomes Parents to loose the reins of government so far,
as to give them leave for their refreshing, to let themselves out in honest
ways of recreation by their mutual society. Job did not call them to this
holy service from their feasting, but when the days of their feasting were
gone about.

Secondly, Job sent to sanctify his children, though they were in their own
houses, though they were at their own disposing, (for it appears they had
families and households of their own) though they were men and women grown:
Yet Job sent to sanctify them. Observe hence, That

Parents must not cast off the care of their children, though they are grown
up, though they are men and women.

Some think, that if they look to their children at School, and breed them
up a while, and have given them some instructions in their youth, they need not
then trouble themselves any further. Whereas the care of parents ought to live
as long as they and their children live together. Jobs care went after his
children to their houses, He sent to them to bid them prepare themselves.

Thirdly, Though these were (as we say) men and women grown, yet as soon as
their Father sends the message to them, they all submit and all obey, then
Observe, That

Children that are grown up, or have houses and families of their own, ought
yet to yield all reverence and submission to the lawful commands, counsels
and directions of their Parents.

Do not think you have outgrowen obedience and honor to Parents, when you
are grown in years; still we see these thought themselves under their Fathers
command and counsel, there is not one of them replies, what need my Father
trouble himself about us? No, but all willingly prepared themselves and came,
for he offered burnt offerings aocording to the number of them all, therefore
certainly they all came.

Fourthly, From the matter of this Act, what it was that Job did, the text
says, he sent and sanctified them after their feasting; he did not send a
messenger to them, to ask them how they were in health, whether they had not
surfeted themselves, or had got any distemper; he did not send to know how the
accounts went in their families, whether they had not spent too much; but the
matter that he had his eye and his heart upon was, that they might be
sanctified and fitted for holy duties; From hence observe, That

A Parents maine and special care should be for the souls of his children.

The care of many Parents is only to enrich their children, to make them great
and Honorable, to leave them full portions and estates, to provide matches for
them, but for sanctifying their children there is no thought of that. Nay many
are afraid their children should be sanctified: some Parents cannot abide their
children, because they suspect them sanctified: Such Parents are the Devils
children. Jobs greatest care was that his children should be sanctified. And
every Parent ought to say of his natural children, as the Apostle John does of
his spiritual children, ( Ep. 3. v. 4.) I have no greater joy, then to hear
that my children walk in the truth.

Fifthly, Job was a holy person, and you see which way his care lies, that his
children may be holy, then take this Note in the general.

He that is a holy person himself, desires to make others holy too.

Holy Job would have all his children holy. As it is with the wicked, a wicked
man would feign have all wicked with him; he would feign scatter his
wickedness, and diffuse his poison unto others. The drunkard would feign have
companions with him in his drunkenness, etc. And so the man that is truly
godly, would make others godly too. As Paul said to K. Agrippa, I would to God,
that not only thou, Act. 26.29.
but also all that hear me this day, were both almost and altogether such as I
am. Grace is attractive, It desires to draw others into fellowship. A good man
would not be happy alone.

Sixthly, Sanctification you see here is ascribed unto Job, he sent and
sanctified them, and all that he did was but to give them counsel and warning
to sanctify themselves; As if he should have said, go to my children, and bid
them prepare themselves, warn them, that they may be ready against the
sacrifice, that they fit themselves for it, yet the text says, that Job
sanctified them. Then we may observe from this. That

The good which others do by our advice and counsel, is reckoned as done by
our selves.

While we provoke others to goodness, that good which they do, is set upon
our account, as if we had done it. As the wickedness, the sin which another
commi^s by the advice and counsel of any man, is set upon the score of that
man: If another do ill by thy advice, the ill is reckoned to thee; if one
should come and say as Absalom said to his servants, Mark ye now when Amnons
heart is merry with wine, and when I say unto you, smite Amnon, then kill him,
fear not, have not I commanded you? Not only did the servants kill Amnon, but
Absalom killed Amnon, because he commanded them to kill him. You know what is
said of David, he did but send a Letter concerning the death of Vriah, and the
charge comes, Thou have slain Uriah with the Sword of the children of Ammon.
All the evil others commit by thy counsel, direction, advice, command or
consent, is as done by thy self. So (on the other side) all the good others
do by our counsel, advice, promotion, admonition, instruction and the like,
that good shall all be reckoned to us. If another be holy by thy advise, it
will be said thou have made him holy, thou have sanctified him.

Lastly, Observe, That

Holy duties call for holy preparation.

We must not touch holy things with unholy hands, or with unholy hearts; I will
wash my hands in innocence, and so will I compass thine Altar O Lord, was
David's resolution, Psalm. 26.6. therefore Job intending a solemn duty, a
sacrifice, which did contain the sum of all Religion concerning the
external worship of God, sends solemnly to his children to prepare
themselves: O come not to the sacrifice except you be sanctified. It is a point
so clear, that I shall need but only to name it to you. How and wherein they
should sanctify themselves, and what course they took for the sanctifying and
preparing of themselves for that duty, does not appear in this place: but
afterward when God gave them the Law, he prescribed them a rule what they must
do that they might be sanctified; the Jews had special directions for their
preparations: Some things were outward, and some inward. I will but touch.

For the outward, they were commanded to wash their clothes, Exodus 19. that
place before quoted, Sanctify them to day and to morrow, and let them wash
their clothes: Not that God regarded clothes, but he aimed at somewhat
further; if the clothes must be washed, certainly then the heart must be
washed, he pointed at that in the washing of their clothes; In Leviticus and
Numbers, other outward preparations are commanded, as the abstaining from all
things that were unclean, they must not touch any thing that was unclean; and
then sometimes they were not only to wash their clothes, but to change their
clothes: you have the expression in that place concerning Jacob, be clean
(says he) and change your garments; It might be a changing by washing, but I
rather conceive, that it was a change by putting on of other clothes. There
was also another external requis^te to the preparing and sanctifying of
themselves; and that was by abstaining for a time from the lawful use of the
marriage bed; you have the command expressly in that 19th. Exodus 15. Be ready
against the third day, come not at your wives; and there are other the like
places, 1 Samuel 21.4. The Priest said, There is no common bread under mine hand,
but there is hallowed bread, if the young men have kept themselves at least
from women; if they have but that outward preparation: the meaning is, if they
had kept themselves from their Wives; David affirms it was so, in the words
following. The Apostle gives the same rule in 1 Cor. 7.5. speaking of that
point, Defraud not one another (says he) except it be with consent for a time,
that you may give your selves to fasting and prayer. So that the Holy Ghost
therein intimates such an abstaining as was preparatory to solemn duties, that
you may give your selves to fasting and prayer, extraordinary duties call for
extraordinary preparations. These outward preparations were so necessary, that
when the people failed in them, Hezekiah prayed for pardon, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19.
The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord
God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of
the Sanctuary: though their hearts were upright, though they had hearts rightly
prepared, yet he prays that God would pardon the want of those outward
preparations. The principal preparation is of the heart, and the washing of
our ways: therefore we find how the Lord contendeth with them in Isa. 1.10,
11, etc. where he speaks of those oblations and great services of the Jews, I
hate your solemn feasts, bring no more vain oblations, Ier. 7.8, 9.
etc. Why? your hands (sc. your lives) are full of blood, wash ye, make you
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do
evil, learn to do well, etc. As if he should say, What do you come to me in
these holy duties, except you prepare and fit your selves accordingly, I cannot
abide that unholy persons should come about holy things.

Tu Genitor cape sac^a manu patriosque penates.

Me bello extento digressu^* and caede recenti Attrect are nefas, donec me
flumine vivo Abluero-Virg. 2. Aenead.


The very Heathen had this Notion, they would not admit any to come to their
religious services unless they were prepared. That saying of Aeneas in the
Poet to his Father when he came from the War is a clear proof; Tu genitor,
etc. Father do you meddle with the sacrifices, but as for me it is a sinful
thing to touch them -- till I have washed my self in the fountain. This was
an outward external right amongst them for cleansing themselves. The very
Heathen saw they must not meddle with their holy things till they were
cleansed, therefore they had one that cried out to the people when they came to
sacrifice; All you that are unclean and profane, go far away from these
sacrifices. Not only the word of God, -- procul, hinc procul este praphani,
conclamat vates totoque absistite luco.
but the very light of nature taught them, not to meddle with holy things till
they were sanctified.

Therefore specially look to this, when you have any sacrifice, any duty to
perform, be prepared and sanctified within and without before you come to the
duty. It is true that the duty sanctifies, but it is seldom that the duty
sanctifies us unless, we be sanctified for the duty: They get most holiness
from the duty, who are most holy before they come to the duty: besides the
great danger of coming unprepared. Take heed how you hear, not only hear,
but take heed to prepare your selves for hearing: So look to thy feet (it
has the same sense) when thou come into the house of God, prepare thy self,
be not hasty, least thine be counted but the sacrifice of fools. So much of
the first act of Jobs holy care, He sent and sanctified them.

JOB 1. part of verse 5. and verse 6. And rose up early in the morning, and
offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all. For Job said, It
may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts; Thus did Job
continually.

Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before
the Lord, and Satan came also among them.


NOw follows the second Act of Jobs holy care, He rose up early in the
morning, and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all.

It is ill to perform a holy duty with neglect of preparation, It is as bad to
make preparation and then neglect the duty. We see both joined in Job, he is
careful to prepare, and he is as diligent to perform.

He rose up early.] This notes the extraordinary diligence and zeal of Job
toward God in this duty. He was so zealous, that he rises not only in the
morning, but early in the morning. In Scripture, to do a thing in the morning,
and to do a thing diligently, are the same; Psalm. 101.8. I will early destroy
the wicked of the Land, the word is, I will destroy the wicked of the Land in
the morning, and the meaning is only this, I will with all diligence and all
care root out of the Land all wicked persons. So there is an expression, Prove.
7.15. which illustrates this; where the wicked woman, the harlot tells the
young man, that she came forth to meet him and diligently to seek his face:
the original word there is, to seek thy face in the morning; and yet we know,
that in verse 9. it was in the twilight, in the evening that she met him. But
the Hebrew phrase is, I came forth in the morning to seek thy face, that is
(as it is rendered) I came forth diligently to seek thy face. So this coming
forth of Job in the morning, bebesides the time, that it was at such an hour,
the beginning of the day; notes the great diligence and exceeding care of Job
about this work.

Yet more exactly, it is not only said, he rose in the morning (for there is a
great latitude in the morning, there are diverse hours which all are called
morning) but it is said he rose early in the morning, in the very beginning or
first of the morning. As it is commanded, Exodus, 23.19^ The first of the first
fruits of the Land thou shall bring into the house of the Lord. God would not
only have the first fruits, but the first of the first fruits, if there were
any ripe sooner then others, God would have them; some fruits that ripened
after, were first fruits, but God would have the very first of them. So here,
Job gave God not only the first fruits of the day, but the earliest time, in
the morning, which is the first of the first fruits of the day.

Early in the morning. Then Observe,

1. That it is Gods due and our duty, to dedicate the morning, the first and
best of every day unto God.

Psalm. 5.3. My voice shall thou hear in the morning, in the morning will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. We have a saying among us, that
the morning is a friend to the Muses, that is, the morning is a good studying
time. I am sure it is as true, that the morning it is a great friend to the
Graces, the morning is the best praying time.

Again, In that Job did rise so early in the morning to offer sacrifice, and
did this because he was afraid that his sons had sinned (as we shall see
afterward,) Hence Observe,

2. That it is not safe to let sin lie a moment unrepented of or unpardoned
upon our own consciences or the consciences of others.

If a man's house be on fire, he will not only rise in the morning, or early in
the morning, but he will rise at midnight to quench it; certainly when you
have guilt on your souls, you have a fire in your souls, your souls are on a
flame: therefore you had need rise and rise early, and get up as soon in the
morning as you can to get it quenched and put out.

And offered burnt-offerings.] There were diverse sorts of Sacrifices among the
Jews, when the law or rules of sacrificing were established. There were,
first, Whole burnt-offerings. Lev. c. 1. c. 2. c. 3 etc. (...)
2. Trespasse-offerings. 3. Sinne-offerings. 4. Peace Offerings. That which Job
is here said to offer, was a burnt-offering, an Holacost or whole
burnt-offering, so called, because it was altogether consumed; there was no
part of it reserved for the Priest, or for the people, but all was offered up
unto God. Of other Sacrifices, as the sinne-offering and trespasse-offering,
there were parts and portions reserved for the Priest, and part of the
Peace Offerings for the people, as you may see by that expression of the
Harlot, Prove. 7.14. I have at my house Shelamim, Peace Offerings; now they did
feast upon the Peace Offering, for she invited him to a feast. But the
burnt-offering was wholly consumed; the word in the Hebrew does signify, an
ascension, or a thing lifted up. He offered burnt-offerings, word for word out
of the Hebrew, it is, (...)
He lifted-up an elevation, he caused an Ascension to ascend, elevabat
elevationem, or ascendere fecit ascensionem; And it was so called, because the
Sacrifice which was a whole burnt-offering was all consumed upon the altar. And
did as it were evaporate or ascend up unto God.

It was called a lifting-up, or a thing lifted-up for three Reasons.

1. Because when the Sacrifice was offered, the smoke of it did ascend, and
besides there were sweet odours put upon the Altar, which did fume up also with
the Sacrifice toward heaven, and so the Sacrifice took it is denomination from
ascending and going upwards.

2. Because the Priest when he offered the Sacrifice, did lift it up upon the
Altar, and hold it toward Heaven, to God.

3. Because at that time when the Sacrifice was a burning, all the people that
were present did lift-up their hands and their eyes, but especially their
souls* and their spirits heaven-wards, and powered themselves forth in prayer
unto God. That of David in Psalm. 141.2. will give some light to this, Let
(says he) my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, and the lifting up of
my hands as the evening Sacrifice. David at that time (as Interpreters note
upon the Psalm) was barred the enjoyment of the public ordinances, he could
not come to sacrificing as formerly he had done; now he seeks unto the Lord
that he would accept of the lifting up of his hands and heart, in stead of
Sacrifice; as if he should say, Lord I have not a Sacrifice now to offer unto
thee, I am hindered from that work, I cannot lift that up; but I will lift up
what I have, and what will please thee better then a Bullock that has horns
and hoofes, I will lift-up my hands and my heart unto thee, and let these be
accepted for sacrifice and all. Prayer (which is a Sacrifice of the Gospel) it
is nothing else but A lifting up of the soul, an elevation of the spirit unto
God: So some of the Ancients call prayer, an Ascending of the soul unto God;
And in allusion unto this, Hezekiah when he sent to Isaiah the Prophet to pray
for him in that time of distress and day of trouble, says, Go and desire the
Prophet to lift-up his prayer for the remnant that are left, alluding to the
sacrifices which were wont to be lifted up. 2 Kin. 19* 4,
The like expression of prayer you have, Psalm. 25.1. Lord (says David) I
lift-up my soul unto thee. Hence Prayers not answered, not accepted, are said
to be stopped from ascending, Lam. 3.44. Thou have covered thy self with a
cloud, that our prayer should not pass through. When you meet with such
expressions in the old Testament concerning prayer, you must still understand
them to be allusions to the Sacrifices, because the Sacrifices were lifted up
and did ascend. That for the Act.

For the person, It is said that Job offered these Sacrifices, Job rose early
and offered* etc. Was not this to usurp upon the Priests office? 2 Chro. 26.18.
Was it not this for which King Vzziah was reprehended and told by the Priests,
It appertains not to thee, to burn Incense unto the Lord, but to the
Priests, the sons of Aaron; and was he not smitten with leprosy for doing of
it?

I answer in a word by that rule of the Ancients. Distinguish the times and
Scriptures will agree: It was Job that offered and Job had right to offer. The
time wherein Job offered Sacrifice does reconcile this; it was before the
giving of the Law (as we have showed in the opening of the former points about
the time when Job lived) now in those times the Father or the elder of the
Family was as a Priest to the whole Family: and he had the power, and the right
to perform all holy family duties; as the duty of sacrificing and the like,
this you may see carried along in all the times before the Law was given, in
the holy Stories of the Patriarks, they still offered up the Sacrifice.

But it may here be further inquired, If it were before the Law was given, who
taught Job to offer Sacrifice? Where had he the rule for it?

I answer, this was not will worship, though it was not written worship. For
howsoever Job did offer Sacrifice before the Law of sacrificing was written,
yet he did not offer a Sacrifice before the Law of sacrificing was given; for
the Law of sacrificing was given from the beginning, as all the other parts of
worship used from the beginning were. God could never bear it, that men should
contrive him a service; therefore Job did not offer up an offering unto God,
according to his own will, a thing that he had invented to pacify and to
please God with: God had been so far from accepting, that he could not have
borne such a devised worship. God does never trust man with the making of holy
Institutions. There is nothing does please him in any act of worship, unless
he sees himself obeyed, Obedience is better then Sacrifice, and therefore a
Sacrifice which is not out of obedience cannot be accepted; he that sacrifices
does but offer up a beast, but he that obeys, offers up himself,
sacrifices his own will. It could not be therefore, but that Job had a word, a
word as all the world had at that time; a word given by God, and so carried
down from one to another by tradition (as it was for more then 2000. years)
All the will that God would reveal or had revealed to them was carried from
hand to hand, or from heart to heart, from the Fathers to the children, till at
the last the Law was written, and the Scripture penned by Moses. So then Job
offered Sacrifice according to an Institution, though it was not an Institution
written, yet it was an Institution sent forth and given by God Himself.

Yet there is a third Quere upon it. Suppose that there was an Institution of
God for sacrificing; why did God call for Sacrifices? What is his meaning?
Psalm. 51.26.
Does God delight in the blood of Bulls and Goats? Thou delightest not in
sacrifices (says David) thou desire not burnt offerings. And what was the
Sacrifice unto Job, or unto his sons? Could the killing of a Beast take away
sin? Why then does Job, when he fears that his sons had sinned, go
presently and offer Sacrifice?

For answer. It is true that the Sacrifices in themselves were nothing, either
to God or man; they could do no good, they had no power in them, either to
pacify God or to purge the souls of men, But look upon the Sacrifice, as it
was an Institution, and then God saw his Son Jesus Christ in it, and was
well-pleased: and likewise man beheld and believed Christ in it, and was
purged. When the Sacrifice was offering, man saw Christ suffering, this took
away his sin and pacified his conscience A Sacrifice in it self, as it was the
killing or burning of a Beast had no virtue in it, but as it had respect unto
Christ, so God saw the death of his son, and that satisfied him, and man saw
the death of his Savior, and that justified him.

Again, it was not the bare Sacrifice that was effectual, but the faith of
Job, and the faith of his sons carried up in prayer; these mingled with the
Sacrifice wrought the cure. Therefore we find in the time of the Sacrifice,
still the people were at prayer, they knew the Sacrifice, the Incense, could
do nothing, but as joined with the faith of the Sacrificer in prayer. We
read, Luke 1.10. when Zacharias the Priest was offering the Incense within in
the Temple, the Text says, that the whole multitude of the people were praying
without at the time of Incense. The Incense might burn long enough, and yet
the anger of God burn too, the Incense might burn, and yet the people not
purified, but consumed. But while the Incense was burning, while the Sacrifice
was offering, the people were praying and believing. These actings of faith,
and powrings out of prayer made the Sacrifice as effectual for man, so
acceptable unto God.

Then in that he offered burnt-offerings, which burnt-offerings were made when
he feared that his sons had sinned, these offerings typing out and leading them
to Christ and his death; We may note this,

That Christ was ever the only remedy and cure of sin.

As soon as ever there was any fear of sin, presently they had recourse to
a sacrifice; and what was that? They went to Christ. Christ has been the help
against sin in all the generations of the world from the first, 1 John 2.1.
and will be to the last. If any man sin (says the Apostle John) we have an
Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation
for our sins, He is the Propitiatory Sacrifice for our sins. It follows,

According to the number of them all] That is, he offered for each of his
sons a Sacrifice. There were some Sacrifices, which did serve for the whole
Congregation, as we may see in Levit. 4.13, 14. and in diverse other Chapters of
that book. Besides these there were personal Sacrifices, Levit. 1. where the
Laws about Sacrifices are set forth; If any soul had sinned, that particular
soul must come to the Priest, and bring a Sacrifice for his sin. So here, Job
does not offer only one general family sacrifice for them all, but he offers
up a distinct particular sacrifice for every particular son. This teaches us.

First, That every one is saved and pardoned by the special and particular
actings of his own faith, Every soul must believe for it self.

Every one must have a sacrifice. We have Congregationall prayers, and we have
personal prayers; now it is not enough for people to pray in public with the
Minister, or for the Minister (who is the mouth of the Congregation to God) to
offer up a prayer for the pardon of the people. But every one must apart and by
himself sue out his own pardon, which is, as it were, his own sacrifice, by
offering up and tendering of Jesus Christ unto God for the pardon of his sins.

Then again you may note, in that Job offered a Sacrifice for every one of his
sons.

That it is not enough for Parents to pray in general for their children, but
they ought to pray particularly for them.

As Parents who have many children, provide portions according to the number of
them all, and proportion out their care personally, according to the number of
them all; and in the Family they provide meat and clothing, according to the
particular number of them all. So likewise they ought to be at a proportionable
expense in spirituals, to lay out and lay up prayers and intercessions,
according to the number of them all; not only to pray in general, that God
would bless their children and their family, but even to set them one by one
before God, and so beg and sue out a special blessing upon the head of every
one of them, as without all question Job did, when the Sacrifice for every son
was made, he sent up a prayer to God for the pardon and acceptance of every
son. That for the opening of the second act in the Text, first he sent and
sanctified them; and secondly, he offered burnt-offerings according to the
number of them all.

Now follows the ground or the reason of this act of Job, both in sanctifying
them and in offering Sacrifices for them. For Job said it may be my sons have
sinned and cursed God in their hearts.

Holy duties must be grounded upon reason. There must be a reason why we pray,
before we pray, we must see cause for it, and great cause too. To pray out of
custom and formality, to offer sacrifice only, because it is a day of
Sacrifice, is not praying nor sacrificing. Job had a special reason, For Job
said it may be my sons have sinned.

Let us examine the reason a little, It may be my sons have sinned. What is it
come to an it may be with Job that his sons have sinned? What sons had Job?
Surely they were more than men, that the Father is but at a Question, whether
his sons have sinned or no? Solomon after an If concerning sin, resolves it
into a conclusion, 1 King. 8.46. If (says he) they sin against thee (here he
makes a supposition, but you see he goes not one step from it before he makes a
direct assertion) for (says he) there is no man that sins not: and yet Job
puts it with anuncorrected If, or, it may be my sons have sinned.

For the opening of this. Without all question Job was fully and thoroughly
studied in that point of the universal corruption of man; his disputings (as
we shall see afterward in this book) sufficiently evince it. What is man
(says he) that he should be perfect, (...) he that is borne of a woman that he
should be clean? Here, by sinning then, we are to understand something more
than ordinary sinning. To sin sometime is put for common and daily infirmities,
such as do inseparably and inevitably cleave unto us, such as considering the
state and condition wherein we are, having corrupt flesh and blood about us, we
cannot be freed from. As a man who in the morning washes his hands and goes
abroad about his business and affairs in the world, though he does not puddle
in the mire or take among dung-hils: yet when he returns home again to dinner
or at night, if he wash, he finds that he has contracted some uncleanness,
and that his hands are foul; we cannot converse in an unclean and dirty world
with our bodies, but some uncleanness will fasten upon them. So it is with the
soul, the souls of the best, of the purest, of the holiest, though they do
not rake in the dunghill, and wallow in the mire of sin basely and filthily,
yet they do from day to day, yea from moment to moment contract some filth and
uncleanness. And in this sense it is that there is no man that lives and
sins not. Every man has a Fountain of Uncleanness in him, and there will
be ever some sin, some filthiness bubbling and boiling up, if not flowing
forth.

Secondly, To sin is put for some special act of sin, that which in Scripture
is called a Fall; If any man be overtaken with a fault, you that are spiritual
restore him. And in this sense the Apostle John says (which is a clear answer
to this doubt, and does open the term) I write unto you little children, that
you sin not. 1 John 2.1.
He did not write to them an impossible thing, he writ to them, about that
which in a Gospel sense, they might attain unto.

There are 3 degrees of sinning.

1. There is one kind of sinning, which is called a daily infirmity, which the
Saints of God, the best in this life are not freed from.

2. There is another kind of sinning, 1 John 3.9.
which is to sin wilfully and with pure delight; and thus, he that is borne
of God cannot sin.

3. There is another kind of sinning, which is called falling into sin, or
the falls of the Saints, and sometimes we know they have fallen into great and
scandalous sins: In this sense it is that the Apostle says, Little children I
write to you that you sin not. That is; though you have daily infirmities,
yet take heed of scandalous sinnings. So here in the Text, where it is said, It
may be my sons have sinned. It is not meant either in the first or second
sense; it is not meant, as if he thought his sons were without infirmities, nor
is it meant that he did suspect them of those sins (which are indeed
incompatible with the state of grace) sins of perfect wilfulness and of malice
or the like: but it is of those sins in the middle sort. It may be my sons have
sinned, that is, have sinned so as to provoke God and scandalize men in this
their feasting, in their meeting together.

We may note from that first,

He that lives without gross sins, in a Gospel sense, lives without sin.

To be without great and gross sin is our holiness upon earth; to be
without any sin, is the holiness of Heaven. He that lives without fault,
sine querela (as it is said of Zachary and Elizabeth, that they lived
blamelesly) in Gospel account, is said to live without any sin at all.

Another point we may collect from this [ It may be my sons have sinned.]
Certainly then Jobs sons were godly. If Job be at a question whether they
have sinned, they were godly without question.

When a man lives so, that he leaves only a suspicion that he has sinned, we
may be at a conclusion that he is sanctified. For other persons can do nothing
else, but sin, even in holy actions, much more in civil or natural.

Again [ It may be my sons have sinned] it was a suspicion in Job concerning
his children. Hence observe,

It is no breach of charity to suspect ill of others, while we intend their
good.

Indeed upon an It may be, upon a peradventure to accuse and charge another, is
very uncharitable; but upon a peradventure, or an It may be, such a one, my
child, or my friend, or my brother has sinned, to be put to pray for him, this
is very charitable. A good heart turns it is suspicions of others sinnings and
failings into prayers and intercessions, that they may be pardoned; not into
accusations and slanders, that they may be defamed. The use which Job made here
of his suspicion of his sons sinning was to turn it into prayer and
supplication for the pardon of their sin.

One thing further from this, It may be my sons have sinned. Job knew of no
evil, that his sons had committed, he had no report that we read of that his
sons had behaved themselves unseemely in their meetings and feastings; he only
doubts, he only is jealous and afraid that they had: yet at this time he
prays and sacrifices and labors a reconcilement for them. Note from hence,

A suspiti^n that we our selves or others have sinned against God, is ground
enough for us to seek a reconcilement for our selves or others with God.

If you that are tender Parents have but a suspicion, if there be but all, it
may be, that your child has the Plague or taken the infection, will it not be
ground enough for you to go presently and give your child a good medicine? If
any one of you have but a suspicion, that either your selves or your friends
have taken poison, though you be not certain of it, will it not be ground
enough for you to take or to give an Antidote presently. Sin is as a plague,
it is as a poison, therefore while you have but a suspicion, either of your
selves or of others, that you have sinned or failed thus or thus; here is
ground enough for you to take an Antidote, to take a Preservative, to seek all
the means you can to heal your souls and to make your peace with God.

And if Job prayed thus, when he only suspected his sons had sinned: what shall
we say of those Parents, who are little troubled, when they see and know their
sons have sinned.

It is safest to repent even of those sins we only fear we have committed:
for then we shall be sure to repent of those we have committed. A scrupulous
conscience grieves for what it suspects, a feared conscience is not grieved for
what it is certain either it self or others have done amiss.

Lastly, Where had Jobs sons been that he is thus suspicious? Had they been
in any suspected place? No, it was only in their own houses. Had they been
about any unlawful thing? No, it was only at a friendly meeting, feasting of
brothers and sisters together. Yet Job is afraid least his sons had sinned.
Hence observe, That

We may quickly offend and break the Law while we are about things in their
own nature lawful, especially in feasting.

It is an easy matter to sin while the thing you are about is not sinful,
nay while the thing you are about is holy. We may suspect our selves that we
have sinned when we have been praying, much more then when we have been
feasting; We may suspect our selves that we have sinned when we have been
hearing the word, speaking the word, just cause then much more we have to
suspect our selves when we have been trading, buying or selling, and working
abroad in the world. Lawful things are oftentimes the occasion of unlawful.
All the sins of the old world are described thus, they eat, they drank,
they bought, they sold, Luke 17.27, 28.
they planted, etc. There is not one of these an act evil in it self, yet
they sinned away their peace, and sinned away their souls, in dealing about
these things. Therefore as you must be afraid of all things in their own
nature unlawful, so be jealous of your selves in things that are lawful. It
follows,

And cursed God in their hearts. Interpreters are much divided about the sense
of these words.

First, Some observe that the Hebrew word Barach, does signify not only to
bless, but to bow the knee; So it is used 2 Chronicles. 6.13. Solomon at the
dedicating of the Temple had made a brazen scaffold, and upon it he stood and
kneeled down upon his knees before all the Congregation. The word there
kneeled down upon his knees, in the Original is the same here used. But

(...)
Then further, the word Elohim, is used in Scripture, not only for the true God,
for God himself: but it is applied sometimes to Angels, and sometimes to
Idols, to Devil gods, to false gods. Exodus 18.11. Now I know that the Lord is
greater then all gods, sc. then all the Idols that the Egyptians did trust upon.

(...)
They observe further, that the Hebrew Leb, [in their hearts Bilebabbam] does
signify not only the heart, but the middle or center of a thing. As when it is
said in the Scripture, they went down into the midst of the Sea, Psalm. 46.2.
the word is, they went down into the heart of the Sea; and in the midst of
the earth, it is the heart of the earth; 2 Samuel 18.18.
And so when it is said that Absalom was hanging in the midst of the Oak,
the Original word is, he was left hanging in the heart of the Oak. From all
all these acceptions of the single terms, the sense is made up thus; It may be
my sons have sinned, etc. that is, It may be my sons have sinned, bowing
down to the false gods that are in the midst of them: I confess Feasting
and false-worship, sensuality and Idolatry go often together, Exodus 32.6. When
the Golden Calfe was made, they sat down to eat, etc. And Moses foretells,
Deuteronomy. 31.20. When they shall have eaten and filled themselves and waxen fat,
then will they turn unto other gods. Yet I cannot admit this of Jobs children:
surely he who had bestowed so much care in their institution, and had them
still under his eye, could not suspect them of degenerating so soon into such
palpable Idolatry.

Secondly, Others take the word [ Barach,] in the Original, in its proper
sense, It may be my sons have sinned, and blessed God; and they expound and
open it thus. It may be my sons have sinned, and instead of being humbled and
seeking to God for the pardon of their sins, they have rejoiced and blessed
God. Just as if a Thief that has sped well and has got a good prey, should
thank God that he has prospered so well in his wickedness: So here (as if
Job should say) my sons have done ill in their feastings, and they are so
far from being humbled, that they have blessed God in their hearts: they have
bin lifted up, they have given God thanks for the plenty of creatures, but have
not repented for their abuse of the creatures. So we may interpret it by that
place, Zach. 11.4. where there is such an expression, the Lord speaking to
Christ says. Feed the flock of the slaughter; whose possessours stay them and
hold themselves not guilty. (They that should have been the feeders of the
flock, instead of feeding them, have destroyed them; yea they do this and hold
themselves not guilty) and they that sell them say, blessed be the Lord, for I
am rich. They grew rich by selling souls, (as many since have lived by the
same trade, starving the people to feed themselves,) the just character of an
idle Idol shepherd, and then they said, Blessed be God we are grown very
rich, and have got much goods though we have done little good. This is a second
interpretation and a clear one, only me thinks it lays too high a stain of
wickedness on Jobs sons; It is one of the greatest wickednesses for a man to
bless himself in his sins: but for a man to bless God in his sins, is
far worse.

Thirdly, Others interpret Benedicere by Valedicere, blessing by departing.
Thus, It may be my sons have sinned and departed from God in their hearts:
and they bring some Texts of Scripture wherein the word [ Barach] signifies to
depart, or to take leave, and go away: as Genesis 47.10. Jacob blessed Pharaoh
and went out from before Pharaoh, he blessed him and departed: So it is said
likewise of Joab, 2 Samuel 14.22, when he had obtained what he desired, he fell
to the ground on his face and bowed himself, and thanked (or blessed) the King
and went out. Now they would interpret this, Blessed God in their hearts, to
the same sense, It may be my sons have sinned, and blessed God in their
hearts, that is, have departed from God in their hearts. Indeed every sin is
a departure from God, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 3.12.
Take heed least there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief to depart
from the living God. Sin is a turning away from God, yet every sin is not,
nay few sins are a farewell to God. But I shall lay by this interpretation, for
the proofs come not home, no nor near the point. In both those places,
blessing is not put barely for departing; and besides, departing in those Texts
is taken in a good sense: Jacob departed from Pharaoh, not in a way of
deserting him, but in a way of saluting him: So Joab departed from the King,
not that he did revolt from him, (as they would have the word to import a kind
of revolting, and apostatizing from God) but only he did obeisance and went
away about his business, therefore this interpretation cannot stand.

There is a fourth exposition much labored by Sanctius (and would it hold, it
were an excellent exposition) according to the letter of the Text; Thus, It may
be my sons have sinned, and not blessed God in their hearts; and so he makes
those words to be exegeticall, the explication of the former, what the sin of
Jobs sons was, It may be my sons have sinned, and if you would know what
they have sinned in, I fear they have forgot to give God the glory for the
refreshing they have had by the creatures, they have not blessed God. This were
an excellent and clear sense. But the way he takes to make it out, is very
obscure: For he does it only by this rule, when (says he) there is a negative
particle in the former, a negative likewise is to be understood in the
following clause. His rule he cleares by diverse instances. But we find in th^s
place no negative particle, as Non, or Ne, or the like, in the former part of
the verse; and how there should be a negative in the latter, I cannot
understand according to his rule: Ne fort^, (It is here said,) It may be my
sons have sinned, (that is a word of doubting not denial, rather an
affirmative then a negative,) and have not blessed; now says he, though that
particle (not) be not in the Hebrew, yet it must be understood of course,
because there is a negative particle in the former part: How he can make (ne
forte) peradventure, a negative particle, I do not well apprehend, yet the
sense in it self is very good, It may be my sons have sinned, and not
blessed God in their hearts.

Some would read it with an Interrogation, (though I question whether the
Grammar will allow it,) Thus, It may be my sons have sinned, and have they
blessed God in their hearts? As if he had said, I fear they have not blessed
God, or not blessed him cordially; Neglect of, or slightness in such a duty,
calls for sacrifice.

Lastly, That meaning which our Translation leads unto is most commonly taken
by Interpreters both Ancient and modern; Namely, That here in this Text the
word [ Barach] is to be expounded by cursing, It may be my sons have sinned
and cursed God in their hearts. I shall present you with the grounds of this
Interpretation, and how it is made good. And then leave it to the Readers
judgment, whether to choose this or those former which have had any
countenance showed them. For in a Scripture which may without impeachment of
any truth, admit diverse senses, I would not be so positive in one as to reject
all others.

Now this Translation is maintained by a figure, either by an Antiphrasis,
which is the speaking of a thing sounding one way when it is meant another way,
when there is an opposition between the letter of the word and the meaning of
the word. Thus 1 King. 21.13. Naboth is charged for blessing God and the King.
sc. cursing. Or by an Euphemismus, that is, when some filthy or execrable
matter is expressed, by a word of a fairer signification. So in Scripture, the
uncleanenesse of some things is covered with a word, that so the offensivenesse
of it may be removed both from the ear and fancy. As for example, that
vessel wherein nature does unburthen it self, it is called, a vessel wherein
there is no pleasure: and so the word that the Hebrews use for a Harlot, Ier.
22.28. Hos. 8.8.
signifies properly a Holy woman, as Genesis 38. when Judah asked whether they saw
the harlot, (...)
the word in the Hebrew ( Kedesah) signifies a holy woman, by an Antiphrasis,
or by an Euphemismus. Yet some think a harlot so called, because (holiness
being the dedication of a thing or person,) such dedicate and give themselves
up to, or are possessed with a spirit of uncleanenesse. But to the Text; take
it by an Euphemismus, or fair speaking. It may be my sons have sinned and
cursed God in their hearts: they even abhorring to use such a word concerning
God, express it by blessing, It may be my sons have sinned and blessed God
in their hearts. So the Latins use the word, Sacrum pro execrand^, that which
is the most execrable thing, Auri sacra s^mes.
they call a sacred thing.

Now taking it thus according to the common stream of Expositors upon the
place, it may yet be doubted, how Job could suspect his sons of this, that
they should curse God?

I answer to that. Here we are not to take cursing either for that abominable
act (at which Heathens blush,) the casting of open reproach upon the Name of
God: or for a malicious and virulent, though secret blaspheming of God, and
sending defiance to Heaven in their hearts. But to curse God in the heart, does
signify any irreverent, undue, unfit, unholy thought of God, any thought
unbecomming the Glory and Majesty of so great a God, which how quickly the
heart may send out, especially at a feast, who feels not, who finds not? God
is said to be cursed when he has not that reverence and honor which belongs
to him, whose Name is Holy and Reverent. In that sense only we are to
understand the word cursing here. And Mr. Broughton gives a translation which
lets in some light to this, It may be my sons have sinned, and little blessed
God in our hearts, that is, they have not had such high, such holy thoughts of
God as became them, they have little blessed God; careless thoughts of God are
little blessing of God, and both amount to a cursing of God.

So that the sense which results is this, As if Job should have said, I am well
enough satisfied concerning my sons, that they have not broadly blasphemed
God, that they have not been such as have torn his Name with oaths, cursings
and execrations: yet notwithstanding I know the heart is a deceitful thing,
there are many starting holes in it, it quickly conceives, and closely
conceales a sin; and therefore I am very doubtful, though my sons have
carried it fairly and well in their actions and words while they feasted, that
yet their hearts have been loose, and their affections vain, I am afraid they
have cursed, lightly regarded, or little blessed God in their hearts.

Observe, First,

That we ought to keep our hearts with all manner of keeping, in every thing
we go about.

If your hearts are disorderly, it is a kind of cursing God. Remember not only
to keep your hearts when you are praying and when you are hearing, and when
you are in holy duties; but remember to keep your hearts when you are feasting
and refreshing your selves, when you are in your callings, when you are buying
and selling, etc.

Secondly, Note,

That sins of the heart, sinful thoughts are very dangerous sins.

Job could not accuse his sons of load blasphemies, he only suspected the
silent sins of the heart, yet he offers sacrifice for them.

Again, When Job has nothing to charge his sons with, but only sins of
the heart, you see it is with an It may be my sons have cursed God in their
hearts, he does not speak directly or positively, that they have done so.
Whence note,

That no man can positively conclude what is wrought in the heart of another.

The heart is Gods peculiar, as he only has the lock and key of the heart, to
shut or open it, so he only has a window to look into it; we may guess at
the heart, we may say, it may be, further we cannot go. The hearts of men
often come forth at their mouths, and appear in their actions, and then
indeed we may conclude their hearts are naught, For out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks, and the hand works; but unless we have that
testimony, unless the heart give that witness against it self, we can only
suspect it; It may be thus or thus God alone can tell when we curse him in our
hearts, and (if we go on impenitently in them,) irreverent thoughts will be
interpreted a cursing of God.

Thus did Job continually. This is the third thing to be opened in this verse,
to wit the constancy of Job. We have seen the Acts of his spiritual care, and
the ground of it, his fear least his sons had sinned. Now we have the
constancy of this duty. Thus did Job continually.

Continually.] The Original is, all the days, thus did Job, (...)
Cunctis diebus, all days, that is all the days that this occasion did offer
it self. When his sons went to feasting, then ever Job went to praying and
to sacrificing. Continually, or all the days, does not import that Job did
offer sacrifice every day; This continually is to be understood in the renewed
seasons; All the days, are those days wherein occasion was given. We are then
said to do a thing continually when we do it seasonably, so those places of
Scripture are to be understood: Pray without ceasing; 1 These. 5.17. Ephesians. 6.18.
not that a man should do nothing else but pray, but that he should labor to
have his heart in a praying frame always, and should actually pray as often as
duty requires; such an one prays always. So here, Jobs offering sacrifice
continually, notes only the constancy and perseverance of Job in the duty,
that so often as there was an occasion renewed, Job renewed this service and
holy care concerning his sons, for reconciling them unto God. Job had many
other things to do in the world, he had a calling, yet he offered sacrifice
continually.

It is an excellent point of spiritual wisdom, to drive the two trades for
Heaven and Earth so, as that one shall not entrench upon another; for a man to
pray so as that it may be said he prays continually; and for a man to follow
his calling so, as that it may be said, he follows his calling continually. In
that he offered sacrifice as often as his sons did feast; Observe this,

That the heart of man is continually evil.

Do not think that one sacrifice will serve the heart of man, when it has
failed once in a duty, and thou have humbled thy soul for that, think not
thus, now my heart will forbear, when I come to such a duty or to such a
business again, now I have taken order with my heart, I need not fear any
more; no, the heart will sin over the same sin a thousand times, it will
sin continually. You see here Job sacrificing every time his sons feasted,
he knew their hearts were apt to conceive those sins at any time, therefore
he seeks God for them at all times.

Further Observe,

That renewed sins must have renewed repentance. Thus did Job continually.
Till you have done sinning you must never give over repenting. If there be a
leake in the Ship that lets in the water continually, the Pumpe must work
continually to carry it out: We are leaking vessels all of us, sin comes
in, sin is renewed, there must be the pump of repentance to carry it out again.

Lastly, We may note this; Job did it continually, Job was not good by fits.

That which a man does out of conscience, he will do with perseverance.

Nature will have good moods, but grace is steady. Thus did Job continually,
whatsoever his affairs or businesses were, whatsoever was laid by, he would
not lay by this duty of sacrificing.

Let this suffice for the 5th. verse, containing the care of Job over the
souls of his children. And so in these five verses already opened, we have,
First, Seen the dignity and sincerity of Jobs person. Secondly, The fulness
and prosperity of his condition. Thirdly, The holiness and piety of his life.
Certainly a man thus raised, thus glorious; set up thus in temporalls and in
spiritualls, thus furnished with substantialls and adorned with
circumstantials, abounding in whatsoever could make a man great and happy both
in the eye of God and man; surely such a man as this, a man thus complete,
wanted nothing but some want, to try his sincerity in this fullness. And now
behold this hastening upon him: God having thus fitted and qualified him, will
now try him, try him like gold in the furnace of affliction. You may see matter
gathering for this, and the fire kindling in the next part of the Chapter.

Verse 6. Now there was a day, when the sons of God, came to present
themselves before the Lord, etc.

Take this in the general from the connection of the two parts.

Usually where God gives much grace, he tryes grace much.

To whom God has given strong shoulders, on him for the most part he lays
heavy burdens. As soon as Job is spoken of thus prepared, the next thing that
follows is an affliction.

Now there was a day, etc. And so we are come to the second maine division of
the Chapter, which is the affliction of Job, and that is set forth from this
6th verse to the end of the 19th. And least we should conceive it to have come
upon him by chance, it is punctually described four ways.

1. By the causes of it. ver. 6, 7, etc, 2. By the instruments of it, ver. 15,
16. etc. 3. By the manner of it, ver. 14, 15, 16, etc. 4. By the time of it,
ver. 13.
First his afflictions are set forth in their causes, and that is done from the
sixth verse to the end of the twelfth. And the causes are threefold.

First, The efficient causes, and they were two.

1. The supreme and principal efficient cause, and that was God, ordering and
disposing the affliction of Job. 2. The subordinate efficient cause, and that
was Satan; he was an efficient but under God: Satan found out other instruments
and tools to do it by, but he was an efficient subordinate unto God. And the
Text discovers him three ways. 1. By his diligence in tempting, ver. 7. 2. By
his malice in slandering, ver 9, 10, 11. 3. By his cruelty in soliciting the
overthrow and affliction of Job. ver. 11.

Secondly, We have the material cause of Jobs affliction, or in what matter he
was afflicted; and that is laid down; first positively in those words, All
that he has is in thy power; that is, his outward estate, that was the matter
wherein he was afflicted. Then it is laid down negatively; in those words,
Only upon himself put not forth thy hand. God does set him out how far the
affliction shall go; in the things that he has thou shall afflict him, but
thou shall not meddle with his person, with his body or with his soul.

Thirdly, The final cause of Jobs affliction, and that is, the practical and
experimental determination, decision or stating of a great question that was
between God and Satan concerning Jobs sincerity. God tells Satan that Job was
a good and a just man; Satan he denies it, and says that Job was an hypocrite.
Now the determination of this question was the general final cause of Jobs
affliction. When on the one side God affirms it, and on the other side Satan
denies: how shall it be tried? Who shall be the Moderatour and Vmpire between
them? Satan will not believe God, and God had no reason to believe Satan: How
then should this be made out? It is as if Satan had said, Here is your yea and
my nay, this question will never be ended or decided between us, unless you
will admit some course to have Job soundly afflicted. This will quickly
discover what metal the man is made of; therefore let him come to the trial,
says Satan. Let him, says God, behold all that he has is in thy power, do
thy worst to him, only upon his person put not forth thy hand. So that I say
the general final cause of Jobs affliction is the determination of the
question, the decision of the dispute between God and Satan, whether Job was a
sincere and holy man or no.

And all this (to give you the sum of those 6. verses a little further,) is
here set forth and described unto us after the manner of men, by an
Anthropopathie: which is, when God expresses himself in his actions and
dispensations with and toward the world, as if he were a man. So God does here,
he presents himself in this business after the manner of some great King
sitting upon his Throne, having his servants attending him, and taking an
account of them, what they had done, or giving Instructions and Commissions to
them what they shall do. This I say God does here after the manner of men, for
otherwise we are not to conceive that God does make certain days of Session
with his creatures, wherein he does call the good and bad Angels together about
the affairs of the world; we must not have such gross conceits of God, for he
needs receive no information from them, neither does he give them or Satan any
formal Commission; neither is Satan admitted into the presence of God, to come
so near God at any time; neither is God moved at all by the slanders of Satan,
or by his accusations to deliver up his servants and children into his hands
for a moment. But only the Scripture speaks thus, to teach us how God carries
himself in the affairs of the world, even as if he sat upon his throne, and
called every creature before him, and gave each a direction, what and when and
where to work, how far and which way to move in every action.

So that these 6. verses following, which contain the causes of Jobs
affliction are (as we may so speak) the Scheme or draught of providence; (that
may be the title of them.) If a man would delineat providence, he might do it
thus; suppose God upon his throne, with Angels good and bad, yea all creatures
about him, and he directing, sending, ordering every one, as a Prince does his
Subjects, or as a Master his servants, do you this and do you that, etc. so
all is ordered according to his Dictate. Thus all things in Heaven and Earth
are disposed of by the unerring wisdom, and limited by the Almighty power of
God.

Such a representation as this we read in 1 King. 22.19. Where Micaiah said to
Ahab, Hear thou the word of the Lord, I saw the Lord sitting upon his throne,
and all the Host of Heaven standing by him. And so he goes on to show how a
spirit came and offered himself to be a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs
Prophets. This is only a shadow of providence; there was no such thing really
acted, God did not conveene or call together a Synod of spirits to advise with
( de Arduis Regni) about hard or doubtful cases; nor are wicked spirits
admitted into his presence, only by this we are instructed and assured that
God does as exactly order all things in Heaven and earth, as if he stood
questioning or interrogating good Angels, men and devils concerning those
matters.

Having thus given some light about these six verses in general. I shall open
the particulars.

Now there was a day. The Jewish Rabbis trouble themselves much to find out
what day this was. They say it was the first day of the year. Others that it
was the Sabbath day. But I account it a disadvantage to a clear truth when it
is proved by an obscure text. The Sabbath has proof enough before the law,
though this be spared. The holy Ghost has told us only that there was a day,
or certain time.

When the sons of God. Hic locus aperte refellit Chrysostomu^, qui negat
angelos unquam vocari filios Dei. Drus.
In Genesis 6.2. The posterity of Seth (who were the visible Church at that time)
are called the sons of God. The unanimous consent of all Expositors (I have met
with) is, that here the sons of God are the good Angels, so also they are
called, Cap. 38.7. of this book. Some it may be will object against this
Exposition that of the Apostle in Heb. 1.5: To which of the Angels said he at
any time, thou art my son? How then do you interpret here, Read more of
this point Chap. 2.1. where the whole verse is repeated.
that the sons of God are the Angels, when as the Apostle has expressed, to
which of the Angels, etc.

I answer that the Angels are not the sons of God, as the Apostle there
expresses, they are not the sons of God by eternal Generation; but they are
the sons of God by temporal Creation, for so he speaks there, To which of
the Angels said he, thou art my son this day have I begotten thee? They are
not the begotten sons of God, but they are the created sons of God. And the
Angels are called the sons of God in 3 respects.

First, Because of their great and mighty power, therefore Ephesians. 1.21. they are
called, Principalities and powers; far above principalities and powers, and
might and dominions, that is, far above all Angels. They are called the
sons of God, because they are like God in power and dignity.

Then again they are called the sons of God, because they serve God as
sons, cheerfully, willingly, readily. They do not obey as slaves, as
servants, as the best of servants, they obey better than the best of servants,
they obey as children: they go about their work with filial and sonne-like
chearfullnes and delight.

Thirdly, they are called sons, because of the great privilege that God does
vouchsafe them, he does use them as his children, as his sons, they are his
Courtiers, they are near him always attending him, and continually see his
face. They have the privilege of sons.

Came to present themselves before the Lord. Not that the Angels are at any
time out of the presence of God, for Christ is express in that, Mat. 18.10.
Their Angels do always behold the face of my Father. But they are then said
to come and present themselves before God, when they come upon some special
business, or upon some special occasion. As it is with us here upon the
Earth, we are never out of the presence of God, for Psalm. 139. Whether shall I
go from thy presence? Yet when we come to pray and are in other holy duties we
are said to present our selves before God, and to draw near unto God, and God
is said to draw near unto us at such a time, and yet God is ever with us, and
we ever with him. So when it is said here, that the Angels came and presented
themselves before the Lord, it notes only this, their readiness, either to
give an account of what they had done, or to receive directions from God what
to do. The Angels are most willing to go about the service and work of God,
and that is all that is here meant by their presenting themselves before the
Lord, for otherwise they are ever in his presence: as Luke 1.19. The Angel
answered and said, I am Gabriel that stand in the presence of God, and am sent
to speak unto thee. I am Gabriel that stand, he speaks in the present time,
even now while I am speaking unto thee, I stand in the presence of God. The
Angel while he goes into the world, is not absent from God, he beholds the
face of God always. The Schoolmen have an odd distinction, they say there
are assisting Angels and there are ministering Angels: Those Angels that are
assistants stand always before God and never are sent out about the world upon
any occasion; Others are ministering spirits, as Heb. 1.14. Are they not
ministering spirits sent forth to minister for them who are the heirs of
salvation? This is School doctrine. But there needs no such distinction of
some to be assisting or attending and some to be ministering Angels, for
wheresoever they are, they are always in the presence of God: and their
presenting themselves before God, notes only their preparedness to attend the
Lords service in whatsoever he shall employ them.

And Satan came also among them. That is, the chief of the evil Angels, as it
is conceived. The word [ Satan] signifies an Adversary, and so it is often
times applied to men; as concerning Solomon, it is said that while he did walk
exactly with God, there was neither adversary nor evil occurrant; 1 King. 5.4.
the word in the original is, there was no Satan in his kingdom; and in the 1
King. 11.14. it is said, The Lord stirred up Satan an Adversary against
Solomon; and that accusation which those wretches in Ezra c. 4. sent against
the building of Jerusalem, is called Sitna, they sent Sitna an accusation or an
opposing letter: It comes from the same root, any kind of opposition is called
Sitna from Satan who is an opposer. It is sometimes used more generally
concerning any opposition, as the Angel that came to oppose Baalam, Numb.
22.34. I wist not (says Baalam) that there was an adversary that stood in the
way.

But how can it be said that Satan should come among the sons of God?

I said before that it was but an alluding speech to the dealings of men in
their sessions and assemblies, and there is no necessity to make every
particular of it hold. We may conceive it thus.

Satan came also among them. It is not said that the sons of God and Satan,
came and presented themselves before the Lord; Satan did not join himself in
with them. Satan did not offer himself for any good service: but thither he
came being so ordered by the overruling power of God.

But can Satan come into the presence of God?

No otherwise than a blind man can come into the Sun: he comes into the Sun and
the Sun shines upon him, but he sees not the Sun. Satan comes so into the
presence of God, that he is always seen of God, he is never so in the
presence of God as to see God. It is questioned whether the lapsed Angels ever
saw God at all while they stood; because if they had seen God, it is conceived
that vision would have been their confirmation. But it is most certain that
the lapsed Angels since their fall never saw God, nor ever shall; though it be
said here Satan came among the sons of God; you know what the Apostle Jude
teaches, That the devils kept not their place, but are reserved in chains of
darkness against the judgment of the great day; We shall open that afterward,
when we come to speak of his compassing the earth, how he does compass the
earth, and yet is reserved in chains of darkness. But I say there is his
seat, there is his place, and all that is spoken of him in this does not
infer any the least glimpse or fruition of God or communion with the Angels.
In regard of his nature, he is still a spirit; but in regard of his sin, he is
a miserable spirit, he has lost his excellency, though he has not lost his
nature. And being a spirit, he has power to pass and repasse, to go up and
down the world, to ascend and descend at his pleasure (as good Angels may and
can) when God does permit him.

We see here the good Angels are called the sons of God; in this learn the
privilege of believers, they partake with the Angels in this title; the
Apostle says, Behold what manner of love the Father has showed that we should
be called the sons of God; if you would know what manner of love it is, it is
as great as the Angels in Heaven have: Christ took not upon him the nature of
Angels but has given us the honor of Angels. Fallen Angels could not share
with us in the benefit of redemption, but we share with the Angels that stand
in the privilege of Sonship. We are the sons of God as well as they, and in
somewhat beyond them; they are created sons, but not (as we) adopted sons.

Came and presented themselves before God. This should teach us to imitate
Angels; this we pray for, That the will of God should be done on Earth, as it
is done in Heaven. The Angels always present themselves, they always stand
before God, ready to do his will; we should be ever in the presence of God in
this sense, that is, presenting our selves, standing as in the presence of God,
ready to take and receive instruction, to do his will, what ever it is. Lord
what will thou have me to do? Is as it were the voice of an Angel standing
before the throne of God. It should be the voice of every soul, Lord what will thou have me to do? This is the presenting of the soul before God.

Then consider here, who Satan was; Satan was as good in his Creation, as any
of those who are called the sons of God, They are called the sons of God,
and he is now called nothing but Satan an adversary. His condition was once as
good as theirs. Note hence,

There is no created excellency, but if it be left to it self, will quickly
undo it self.

These Angels were as good at the first as any of those that were here called
the sons of God. They were not confirmed, they stood upon their own bottom,
they fell and had no tempter at all; they turned about upon the freedom of
their own will, and left their habitation (says the Scripture.) There is no
trusting to any estate out of Christ.

Further note this, what was the difference between those sons of God and this
Satan? only sin: one was as good as the other in the creation; nothing else
made an Angel a Devil, but only sin.

Sin despoyles the creature of all it is comfort and honor at once.

Again note this, the Angel falling and becoming sinful, has his name
presently changed, he is called Satan an Adversary. An adversary to God, an
adversary to man.

He that is wicked himself will quickly be an adversary, an opposer of all
goodness: no sooner a sinner, but a Satan.

Lastly, Note this,

To be an opposer of good is to be conformable to the devil.

The devil is the Adversary, the Satan, and so proportionably as any one is an
opposer of good, so much of Satan, so much of the devil he has in him:
Therefore Christ said to a chief Apostle, when he did oppose him in that
greatest good of all, the working out of our redemption in dying for us, get
thee behind me Satan, Mat. 16. All opposition of goodness is a spice of the
devil. So the Apostle Paul, Act. 13.10. when he speaks to Elymas the
sorcerer, says, O thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all goodness. To be
an enemy of goodness is to be the child of the devil; it is the very
character of the devil. He is a Satan in respect of all goodness and good
persons.

And surely (my brethren) if this be a character of the devil, and to be
conformable unto Satan, how conspicuous is that conformity in this age? How
many thousands bear this mark of the devil, not only in their hands closely,
but in their foreheads openly? How many visible walking Satan's are there among
us, enemies of all goodness, oppressors of all righteousness, opposers of
our peace, opposers of our liberty, opposers of the Gospel, opposers of
Christ? These are all as so many Satan's in the world, so many enemies. Now is a
time that Satan's are let loose in the world; the devil now if ever works
mightily in the hearts and spirits, in the hands and tongues of these children
of disobedience. It becomes us then, that as there are many adversaries and
opposers of goodness, to show our selves friends and patrons of goodness.
Christ has many challenges, let him find some Champions. Now it is time to
raise your spirits, not only to love the truth, but to maintain the truth; as
it is the height of wickedness, not only to do evil, but to oppose good, so
it is the height of holiness, not only to do good, but to oppose evil. This
is just to be on the contrary point to Satan, he does wickedness and opposes
good, let us do good and oppose all evil, To be a Satan against Satan, is the
glory of a Christian. Now set your selves against the Satan's, be adversaries
to that Adversary and all his adherents, so shall you approve your selves the
friends of Christ.

JOB 1.7, 8. And the Lord said unto Satan, whence come thou? Then Satan
answered the Lord and said, From going to and fro in the earth; and from
walking up and down in it.

And the Lord said unto Satan, have thou not considered my servant Job, that
there is none like him in the earth? a perfect and an upright man, one that
fears God and escheweth evil?


IN the former verse we showed you that great and glorious Session, the Lord
with his holy Angels about him, and Satan too coming among them. In the
verses following to the end of the 12th. We have the business or acts of the
Session recorded. God Interrogates, Satan answers: Satan moves, God grants.
This is the sum of all the business that passed in this Session. God puts
two Interrogatories to Satan, one concerning his travells or where he had bin,
verse. 7. The other concerning his observations or what he had done, verse. 8.

In the 7th. verse we have the first qustion, the Lord begins with Satan,
And the Lord said unto Satan, whence come thou?

How the Lord speaks is a point almost unspeakeable. There are many disputes
about it, I will not stay upon them: only to open this, that you may take in
all Scripture of the like kind wherein the Lord is said to speak. We must know
that as in Scripture God is said to have a mouth and a voice, alluding unto man
by that common figure; so likewise when the Lord speaks we must understand it
by the same figure, it is but an allusion to the manner of men. God is said to
speak, as men are said to speak: but God does not speak, as men speak,
forming a voice by such organs or instruments of speech: But when the Lord
speaks* it is either by forming and creating a voice in the air, so God is
said to speak sometimes, As when Christ was babtized, there came a voice from
Heaven saying, Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son, etc. So Joh. 12.28. There came a voice from Heaven
saying, I have glorified thee; which all the people heard sounding in the air.
Secondly, God is said to speak, when he manifests and declares himself either
to the spirits of men, or unto Angels who are spirits. God does speak unto the
spirits of men, sometimes without any forming of a voice: so the phrase is
usual in the Prophets, The word of the Lord came unto me, which is to be
understood, that the Lord did secretly reveal himself to the spirits of his
Prophets, and not by any external audible voice; it was an inward, not an
outward word. So when the Lord speaks unto Spirits or Angels, be they good or
evil Angels, you must not understand it of a voice formed or fashioned into
audible words and syllables, but it is a manifestation or a declaration of Gods
will and mind unto the Angels mind, good or bad as God wills. For the will of
God to declare himself unto an Angel, is the speech of God unto an Angel. So
much as God intends of his mind should be known to the Devil, is a speaking
to the Devil. The intention of one spirit is as plain to another spirit, as
the voice of one man is to another man, there is the very same proportion. So
here in this place where it is said, the Lord said unto Satan, this was only a
manifestation of Gods will, as he willed unto Satan; God did manifest himself
thus far to Satan, that it was his pleasure to know of him whence he came;
this will, was his speech.

To pass from the manner of speaking, we will look upon the matter spoken,
And the Lord said unto Satan, whence come thou? That Is the first question.

This question is here put, not for information, as if the Lord did not know
whence he came, as men usually question that they may be informed. But
questions in Scripture (especially when the Lord puts them) are to be
understood in some of these senses.

First to exact a confession from the mouth of the party. He said unto Satan
whence come thou? Not that he needed an information, but that he might
receive a confession from the mouth of Satan. So he questioned Adam, Genesis 3.
Adam where art thou? who told thee that thou wast naked? Have thou eaten of the
tree whereof I commanded thee thou should not eat? These questions were not
to inform God, but only that Adam might give a confession out of his own
mouth concerning those things. So he questioned Cain, Genesis 4. Where is Abel thy
brother? It was a question only to draw a confession from Cain of what he had
done. There is a like question of Elisha to his servant Gebazi when he had
run after Naaman and had got a reward from him, 2 King. 5.25. Elisha says to
him, whence come thou? or where have thou bin? He asked him this only to
draw a confession from him, for says he afterward, went not my spirit with
thee when the man turned again from his charet to meet thee? He knew before
where his servant had been, God had revealed the thing unto him, only he
questions him to make him acknowledge it. So here the Lord questions Satan,
whence come thou? that he might have a confession from himself. Though the
Lord does know all the actions ways and thoughts of every creature, yet God at
the last will question every man, that he may judge every man upon his own
confession.

Secondly, this question may be understood, as intimating a dislike of the
thing or of the business that Satan had been about. Questions are many times
put, not out of ignorance or nescience of what has bin done, but out of a
dislike or abhorrence of the thing done. When the man or the thing is not
approved, then God carries himself toward him and his action as if he knew
not what he had bin doing, and he must have it out by confession. Thus Hiram, 1
King. 9.13. puts the question upon Solomon, What Cities are these which thou
have given me my brother? He saw and knew before what Cities they were, but
thus he questioned, because they pleased him not, verse. 12. In the 8th. of Hos.
4. God is said not to know that they set up Kings; They have set up Kings but
not by me, they have made Princes and I knew it not: That is, I did not like
them, I took no notice of them by way of approbation. So God questions about
things, as if he did not know them, when he does not like them; and we may
conclude that this question holds out to us Gods dislike of the ways and
works or Satan.

Thirdly, Questions and this question may be understood in a way of objurgation
or chiding. Satan whence come thou? Thou have been a tempting, thou art
come now from murders, and thefts, and adulteries, and blasphemies, from
provoking men to all these wickednesses. As that question, Jona 4.4. was a
chiding of Jonah, Do thou well to be angry? So, Whence come thou? As many
times when you are angry with your servants, you ask, where have you been?
There is a reprehension in the question: So God full of wrath toward Satan,
says, whence come thou? Thou have been doing all the mischief thou can
abroad in the world I am sure.

Lastly, For the better conceiving of the matter of this question proposed,
whence come thou? There is more to be understood then is expressed, For God
does not only inquire here concerning the places where he had bin, but
concerning the business and the work which he had done, all is included in it.
Whence come thou? what have thou bin doing in the world? what has thy
business bin abroad? Every man, every creature, every Angel good or bad, must
give an account of themselves unto God. So much of the Lords question, now let
us examine Satan's answer.

Then Satan answered the Lord and said, from going to and fro in the earth,
and from walking up and down in it. If I am enquired (says Satan) whence I
come, I answer, I come from walking up and down in the earth, from going to
and fro in it. Here again it may be doubted, How Satan speaks to the Lord,
as before it was about the Lords speaking unto Satan. The speaking of Satan
and all spirits, is according to the manner before explained of Gods speaking.
Then Angels speak one to another or unto God, when they direct or intend such
or such things to be known. As a thought, a conception in the mind, is a word
in the mind; so the directing or putting forth, or an intending to put forth
that word or that thought, is the speaking of the mind, then the mind speaks.
As we know in our selves, A man meditates he conceives such and such things, he
forms them all in his spirit under some words into such notions: And he can
put forth these by desires, though he does not speak. And so we are said often
in Scripture to speak unto God in our hearts, when the mouth does not speak
at all, as Moses, Exodus 14.15. is said to cry unto God, that was nothing but
the directing or actual intending of such and such secret desires unto God;
that was a crying unto God. So it is said of Hannah, (1 Samuel 1.13.) that she
spoke to the Lord in her heart. After this manner do Angels and spirits
speak. As we can speak to God in our spirits, by our hearts, when we intend
or lift up such and such thoughts unto God; so they speak in the same manner
by making known and revealing so much of their minds to God, as they desire he
should take notice of: For if a man have such and such thoughts, and only
reserve them to himself, he is said to speak to himself, to speak within
himself: So Angels, though they have such and such thoughts, they do speak to
themselves, and not to God, while they keep those thoughts within themselves:
how ever God knows them all before, yet an Angel is said to speak no more to
God, then he does intentionally and obedientially (as some express it) make
known and declare to God his desire, that God may take notice of it. So here
Satan answers and says unto God, or he speaks to God these things, that
is, he does actually intend that God should know thus much of him what he had
been about, that he was come now, from going to and fro in the earth, from
walking up and dawne in it.

From going to and fro, etc. It may be doubted, how Satan can be said to go
to and fro in the earth, and to walk up and down in it, whereas it is
express in the Epistle of Jude, verse. 6. that the Angels which kept not their
first estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Now if Satan, if
the Angels that fell be in chains, and in chains of everlasting darkness,
and reserved unto the judgment of the great day, how does Satan here speak
of himself as being at liberty, going to and fro in the earth, and walking up
and down in it?

I answer, That though the devil goes up and down, yet he is ever in
chains. He is in a double chain, even when he goes and circuits the whole
earth abroad, he is in a chain of Justice, and in a chain of Providence. He
is in a chain of Justice, that is, under the wrath of God, and he is in a
chain of Providence, that is, under the eye of God, he can go no further then
God gives him leave, then God lets out and lengthens his chain. So that still
he is reserved under chains, even chains of darkness, when he goes abroad he
goes like a prisoner with his fetters upon his heels.

But it may be here enquired further, if Satan be thus under the wrath of God,
and be a condemned spirit, if he be in such darkness, how can he intend or
attempt, plot or execute those designs of temptation for the overthrow of
souls, and disturbance of the Churches of God throughout the world. Will not
such torment and horror of darkness, disable and unfit him for such curious
methods of doing mischief? can he have his thoughts upon any thing but upon
his own woeful condition and miserable estate?

For this likewise (to clear it) we may conceive, that Satan although he be
at the present under the wrath of God, yet he is not under the fulness of the
wrath of God, he is not yet in extremity, he is not yet in that degree of
judgment which hereafter he shall receive. Satan is now as full of discontent
as he can be, but he is not so full of torment as he can be, This we see
expressly in Mat. 8.29. where the devils say to Christ, Art thou come to torment
us before our time? as noting that there will be a time wherein they shall have
more torment, their fill of torment; such torment, as what they now endure,
compared with it, may pass for no torment if not for pleasure. Then they shall
drink the very dreggs of the cup of Gods wrath, now they do (as it were) but
sip or taste it. The devils, though they are already cast down from their
glorious estate, yet they are not cast into such a woeful state as hereafter
they shall be; therefore they may walk up and down in the world, and
uncessantly set themselves about the destruction of others.

For the words, From going to and f^ro in the earth, and from walking up and
down in it. Satan here speaks like a Prince, therefore some conceive that
this is the Prince of devils that is here mentioned in this Text; Beelzebub the
chief of the devils, for here he speaks of himself as some great Prince that
had gone about his Countries to view his Provinces, his Kingdoms and Cities;
I come says he from visiting my several places and Dominions, I come from
going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.

These expressions are not to be understood properly, for properly spirits,
such as Satan is, cannot be said to go or to walk: A spirit moves, that is
proper to a spirit: but properly a spirit does not walk or go, that is proper
only to bodies: But the word which we translate, from going to and fro, is
translated by some, from compassing the earth, or from compassing about in the
world, and then it is proper; (...)
the Original signifying to compass or circuit about by any king of motion as
well as by going.

Further, For the understanding of Satan's going to and fro in the earth. We
must not not conceive that this is all that Satan does, to walk up and down in
the world, to go to and fro: he is no idle peripateticke, but by going to and
fro in the earth is noted.

First, The exact discovery which Satan makes of all things in the earth. For
the word [ Shut] signifies to enquire, to search diligently into a thing. It
is not a bare going about, Proprie est attente discurere, circumspicere and
explorare.
but it is a going about as a spy, to search, to enquire, to observe and
consider diligently all things as one passes along. The same word is used (
Dan. 12.4.) for discoursing, we translate it thus, Many shall run to and fro
and knowledge shall be increased: now, we may wonder how knowledge should be
increased by running to and fro, up and down, they that would increase
knowledge, should rather sit still and consider, and debate things; but the
word (so some translate it) signifies to discourse or dispute of things, they
shall discourse or go about to enquire into things and knowledge shall be
increased. Thus Satan's going to and fro in the earth, is a discoursing upon
every thing, a disputing upon every point and person: he does as it were debate
every man's condition as he goes, and every man's estate, every man's temper, and
every man's calling, he considers what is fittest to be done against him, and
how he may assault him with greatest advantage. That is the running or going to
and fro which is here meant in the Text, it is a going to and fro to increase
his knowledge, and inform himself of all things as he goes. The same word is
used concerning the good Angels, Zach. 1.10. It is said there, that they were
sent to walk to and fro through the earth; it was not a bare passing through
the earth, but a curious observing and prying into all things as they went: we
translate it a walking to and fro, but it is a walking so as to bring God in
intelligence, for these were sent out as Christ's intelligencers, to bring him
in a report of the state of things abroad: for so there in the vision it is
expressed after the manner of men; Though Christ needs none to inform him about
the estate of his Church and people, yet he alludes to the custom of Princes,
who maintain Intelligencers in all Courts and Kingdoms, to advise them how
the affairs of other nations are transacted. The very same Original word is
used of God himself, ( Zach. 4.10.) The eyes of the Lord run to and fro
through the whole earth, he is his own Intelligencer, exactly discovering and
taking notice of every thing that is done in the world. So then this is the
meaning, I have been going to and fro in the earth, says Satan, that is, I
have fully and thoroughly taken notice of all passages, of all persons in all
places, of all conditions and sorts of men, that is the thing I have been
doing; Thus Mr. Broughton translates, From searching to and fro in the earth,
noting his exactness of enquiry in his travels.

Then secondly, it notes the unquietnes of Satan. He is an unquiet, a
restless spirit, being cast out of Heaven he can rest no where. A soul that
is once displaced and out of the favor of God, has no place to repose in
afterward. Now says he, all my business is walking to and fro, going up and
down, Satan has no rest. As the sentence of Cain was, Genesis 4. when God had
cast him out of his presence, thou shall be a fugitive and a vagabond, thou
shall do nothing but run up and down the world as long as thou live.
Satan is such a fugitive, a vagabond, one that runs up and down in the
world, he is an unsettled, an unquiet spirit. They who are once departed from
God, can never find rest in any creature, but running to and fro is their
condition and their curse.

Thirdly, Some understand it thus, that Satan makes (as it were) a recreation
of his tempting and drawing men to Hell. Satan cannot possibly in a proper
sense, take any comfort or be refreshed, but as one does well express it, he
himself being lost, undone and damned, seeks to comfort himself by undoing
and damning others. Ipse perditus perdendis hominibus solatia quaerit.
It is a joy to some to have companions in sorrow. All Satan's delight (if we
may conceive he has any delight) is in this, in making others as bad and
miserable as himself. Therefore it may be he calls his trade of seduction and
destruction, walking up and down in the earth, as men are said to walk up and
down for refreshing and recreation; he speaks of it, not as of some toilesome
hard journey, but as of walking for delight. But I conceive the former to be
more proper.

Take two or three Notes from this.

First, Here we may observe, That there is no place in the world that can
secure a man from temptation, or be a sanctuary from Satan's assault. For Satan
goes to and fro thorough the earth, he is an ubiquitary, he stays no where
but runs every where. It is the folly of Popish Votaries, that think to shut
themselves up in walls from the temptations of Satan; Cloisters are as open to
Satan as the open field. Satan walks to and fro through the earth.

Secondly, We may note here the wonderful diligence of Satan, Satan is very
active to do mischief, He walks to and fro, As Peter expresses it, 2 Pet.
5.8. He goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. There is
his diligence, and there is his intent. Satan speaks nothing of his intent
here, he conceales that, he speaks only as if he went about like a pilgrim
walking thorough the earth, his maine business, that he went about, to devour
souls is kept in silence; but the holy Ghost unmaskes him and discovers the
design of his walking to and fro, He seeks whom he may devour. If Satan be
thus diligent going about to tempt, we ought to be as diligent standing always
upon our watch, to prevent his temptations. Mr. Latimer in one of his Sermons,
where he taxes the Clergy, especially the Bishops of those times for their
idleness, proposes to them the example of the Prophets and Apostles and of
Christ himself, their diligence in going about to preach should quicken those
idlers: but (says he) if you will not follow their example, follow the example
of Satan, he goes about in his Diocese to and fro continually. Take example
from him in doing evil, how to do good, we may take example thus far from
Satan, to be as forward to do good, as he is to do hurt, to be as watchful
against him as he is watchful against us. If this be his business to go to and
fro thorough the earth and his intent be to devour souls, then where ever we
go in the world up and down, we ought to be careful to keep our own souls,
and gain the souls of others.

Thirdly, We may observe from it, that Satan is confined in his business to
the earth, he can get no farther than the earth or to the ayereall part; he is
called the Prince of the air. Satan being once cast out of heaven can never
get into Heaven more. There is no tempter in heaven, there is no Serpent shall
ever come into the caelestiall Paradise; there was one in the earthly Paradise,
but there shall never be any in the caelestiall. Therefore when we are once
beyond the earth, we are beyond the reach of all temptations, we are then at
rest from Satan's snares and practices, as well as from our own labors.

Let us now consider what the Lord replyeth, or his second Question to Satan.
Well, thou have been walking to and fro in the earth, says God, Have thou
considered my servant Job? Tell me, have thou taken notice of such an one? Have
thou considered? The word is, Have thou put thy heart upon Job? (...)
So it is word for word in the Original, have thou laid Job to thy heart? Have
thou seriously, fully and exactly considered my servant Job? (...) Just.
And so it is rendered out of the Septuagint, Have thou attended with thy mind
upon my servant Job? To put a thing upon the heart, is to have serious and
special regard to it; as when the Scripture speaks of not putting a thing upon
the heart, it notes a sleighting and neglecting of it. When the wife of
Phineas was delivered, and they told her that she had brought forth a son, the
Text says, she answered not, 1 Samuel 4.20.
neither did she regard; the Hebrew is, neither did she put her heart upon it,
the same word is here in the Text. Thus Abigail speaks unto David, As for this
son of Belial, let not my Lord put his heart upon him, or (as it is
translated) let not my Lord regard this man of Belial; 1 Samuel 25.25.
take no notice of such an one as he is, he is a fool name and thing, do not
regard him, do not put him upon thy heart. There are diverse such expressions
where putting upon the heart is expressed by regarding, and not putting upon
the heart, by not regarding. Then here, have thou put Job upon thy heart? that
is, have thou seriously weighed and considered Job? As if God had said, I am
sure in thy travels and wanderings about the world, thou could not choose but
take notice of Job, he is my jewel, my darling, a special man among all the
sons of men: He is such a spectacle as may justly draw all eyes and hearts
after him: when thou walkedst did thou not make a stand at Jobs door. I
cannot but look upon him my self and consider him, Psalm. 34 15.
therefore surely thou have considered him. The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, and his heart is upon them too. A wicked man has not the eye of
God, a godly man has his heart, and shall have it to all eternity. The sum
is.

This Question teaches us; That amongst all the men that dwell on the face of
the earth, Job was the most considerable.

Have thou not considered my servant Job. It is as if one should say to a man
come from this City into the Country, were you at Court, or have you seen the
King? Because he is the most eminent and considerable person. So God here
speaks to Satan upon his account of walking about the earth, have thou taken
notice of Job? A godly man is the most considerable man in the world. But then
you must put your heart upon him, not your eye only, for then as it was said
of Christ, ( Isa. 53.3.) you may perhaps see no beauty in him, his inside is
the most considerable thing in the world. As a wicked man is the most
unconsiderable, not worthy the looking unto, though he be never so great, 2
Kin. 3.14.
as Elisha said to the King of Israel, Surely as the Lord of hosts lives,
before whom I stand, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehosaphat the
King of Judah, I would not look toward thee nor see thee; thou art not a man
says he, that deserves so much as to be looked upon; Psalm. 15.4.
A godly man is therefore described to be one, in whose eyes a vile person, a
wicked man, is despised.

But secondly, in reference to Satan. Some read these words not by way of
question, but by way of affirmation; thus, thou have considered my servant Job.
Thou have been abroad in the world, surely then thou have taken notice of my
servant Job, thou have considered him; that is, of all men in the world, thou
have set thy self about Job to tempt him and to try him, when thou came to
Jobs house, there thou made an assault, there thou tryest the uttermost of
thy strength to overcome him; thou consideredst him what to do against him, how
to overthrow him, and tell me, have thou not found him a tuffe piece? Did
thou ever meet with such an one in the world before? To consider a thing is to
try all ways how to gain it, or how to compass such a thing: 1 Samuel 9.20.
as Samuel said to Saul when he was seeking his fathers Asses, As for thine
Asses that were lost, set not thy mind on them; that is, do not trouble thy
self, do not beat thy brains to consider which way to go to find them, or
where it is most probable to get them. So here thou have set thy mind or
considered my servant Job, that is, thou have beat thy brains, and set all thy
wits on work what course to take with greatest advantage to destroy my servant
Job.

Take the words in that sense, and they yield us this Instruction. That Satan's
main temptations, his strongest batteries are planted against the most eminent
godly persons. When Satan sees a man that is eminent in grace, against him he
makes his hottest and subtilest assaults: he sets his heart upon such a man,
yea and vexes his heart too about him. Satan is most busy at holy duties (one
said he saw in a vision ten devils at a Sermon, and but one at the market) and
about holy persons. As for others, he does not trouble himself about them, for
they (as the Apostle shows) are led captive by the devil at his will, 2 Timothy
2.26.
if he do but whistle (as it were) they easily follow him and come after him
presently, so that he needs not set his heart or vex himself about them. But
when he comes to a Job, he sets all his wits and all his strength a work,
bends all his thoughts to consider what course to take to assault such a strong
hold of grace. If he can get such a man down then there is triumph indeed, he
sings victoria. Then (if we may so speak) there is joy in hell, as there is
joy indeed in heaven at the conversion of a sinner. So there is a kind of joy
in hell, when one sins that is converted. If any thing can make the devils
merry, it is this, to give a godly man the foil; though they see he is past
their reach to destroy him, yet if they can but blemish or disgrace him, if
they can but trouble and disquiet him; this is their delight. Hence it is that
General Satan with his legions of darkness, those infernal spirits encampe
about such persons with deadly hatred. As when an Army meets with a strong
Castle or City, they sit down and there consider what course to take for the
besiedging and gaining of it.

Have thou considered my servant Job. The title which God gives Job is very
observable, My servant Job. A Servant (you know) is one, that is not at his
own dispose, but at the call and beck of another; so the Centurion describes
a servant; For (says he) I am a man under authority and I have servants, and I
say to this man go and he goes, and to another come and he comes. Servants
are at the word of another, they are not ( sui juris) in their own power
therefore Aristotle calls Servants, (...)
living tools, or living instruments, breathing instruments, because they are
at the will of another, to be used and employed at the discretion of their
Master. Here God calls Job his servant. And he calls him so, First, by way
of distinction or difference; my servant, that is, mine not his own; many are
their own servants, they serve themselves, as the Apostle says, They serve
not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, they serve their own lusts, Romans
16.
diverse lusts and pleasures; Job is not such an one, he is my servant.

Many are Satan's servants; as if God should have said to Satan here; Satan thou
have gone about the world, and thou have found a great family of thine own,
thou have found many servants in all places, but have thou considered my
servant? There is one I am sure that owes thee no service, and by his good
will, will do thee none; have thou not found my servant?

Some are the servants of men; but Job is my servant; not a servant of men, to
subject himself to their lusts, either for hope or fear. He is not (as the
Apostle speaks) the servant of men (in that sense) to please men, with sinning
against and provoking God.

Secondly, My Servant, by way of special right and property; So Job and all
godly persons are called Gods servants: First, by the right of election they
are Gods chosen servants, as Paul is called a chosen vessel, that is, a chosen
servant, to carry the name of God. 2. They are Gods servants by the right of
purchase; my servant whom I have bought and purchased; so in the 1 Cor. 6. You
are bought with a price, be not the servants of men, that is, you are bought
with a price to be my servants, therefore be not the servants of men in
opposition to me, or to my disservice in any thing. So Job was Gods servant by
way of purchase; God buyeth every one of his servants with the blood of his
son.

Thirdly, My servant, by way of Covenant, Job was Gods Covenant servant, God
and he had (as it were) sealed Indentures. Job entered into Covenant with God,
that he would perform the duty of a servant, and God entered into Covenant
with him that he should enjoy the privilege of a servant. Now that which is
Gods by right of Covenant, is his by special right.

Then again, We may further understand this, and all such like expressions:
When God says, my servant, he does as it were glory in his servant. God speaks
of him, as of his treasure, my servant, as a man does of that which he glories
in. As the Saints glory in God, when they use this expression, my God and my
Lord, my Master and my Christ, this is a kind of glorying and triumphing in
God. So this expression carries such a sense in it, Have thou not considered my
servant Job, there is one that I have honor by, one that I rejoice and glory
in, one that I can speak of with much more, then content, even with triumph,
my servant Job: There Is a man.

It is man's honor to be Gods servant, and God thinks himself honored by the
service of man. It was once a curse, and it is a great curse still to be the
servant of servants, as it is said of Cham; Genesis 9.
but it is an honor, the great honor of the creature to be a servant to God.
He that is a servant of Christ, is not only free, but noble. And Christ
reckons that he has not only work done him, but honor done him by his
willing people, and therefore he glories in any such, my servant.

My servant Job. There is somewhat also to be considered in that. When God
speaks of his people by name, it notes two things in Scripture.

First, A special care that God has over them.

Secondly, A special love that God has to them, Joh. 10.3. He calls his
own Sheep by name; this notes a special care Christ has of his sheep, and
a special love that he bears to them. So Isa. 49.1. The Lord has called me
from the womb, from the bowels of my mother has he made mention of my name,
it notes the special care, and the special love that God had of and bare to
Christ. See it eminently in that place, Exodus 33.12. where Moses speaks thus
unto God, Yet thou have said I know thee by name; now what it is to know by
name, is by way of Exposition added in the end of the verse, And thou have also
found grace in my sight. So that to be known by name, is in a special manner
to find grace in the sight of God, when it is said here, My servant Job, it
shows that God did take an extraordinary care of, and did in an extraordinary
manner love Job above all that were upon the Earth.

There is a great deal of difference between these two expressions; to know
the name of a man, and to know a man by name. It is a truth, that God knows
all your names, and the names of all the men in the world, but he does not know
all by name. Therefore the Scripture assures us, that God has the names of
none written, but the names of his own, as Moses says in the former Chapter,
If thou will not forgive the sin of this people, blot me, I pray thee, out of
thy Book which thou have written. Thou know me by name, my name is written
in thy book: So Luke 10. Christ bad his Disciples that they should not rejoice
so much that they had the spirits subject unto them, but in this they should
rejoice that their names were written in heaven.

Note from hence,

That God does take care of his elect children and servants in a special
manner above all other men in the world. The names of Princes or Emperors or
Potentates, if they belong not to God, are not vouchsafed a place in his book,
but the names of the meanest of his Saints, are recorded for ever, and shall be
had in everlasting remembrance.

Have thou not considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the
Earth, etc. We read before at the end of the 3d. verse, that Job in reference
to his riches was the greatest of all the men of the East: Now he goes beyond
that, in reference to his holiness, he is the greatest upon the earth, there is
none like him in the earth.

This we may understand first as a cause or reason why Job fell under the
special consideration or observation of Satan, Have thou not considered my
servant Job, because (so some render that particle) or in a much, or for that,
there is not the like to him in the Earth. As if God should say, there is
reason why he must needs be taken into thy consideration; because there is not
such another man as he in the earth. You know that a man is quickly taken
notice of, when there are none like unto him, in the place or company where he
is. If a man walk in the streets, or come into a house, who is of an
extraordinary tallnesse, some will ask the question, did you not observe such
a man, for there was never a man in the company, never a man in the street so
tall as he? So one that is extraordinary in beauty, or extraordinary in rich
apparel, every one has an eye upon such. The reason why many are observed,
is, because they are not like to others, they are beyond others in quality or
in habit. So here, Have thou not considered my servant Job, that there is none
like unto him in the Earth, thou must needs take notice of him.

Or again, it may be understood thus; as the matter which Satan should
consider and observe in Job. Have thou not considered my servant Job, sc. in
this thing, that there is not a man upon the earth like to him? Have thou not
taken notice of this in him? Thou who have looked over all men, and have (as it
were) sifted all men's manners, have thou not observed thus much, that there is
not such a man upon the earth as Job? Has not that fallen under thy
observation.

So now in the words [ There is none like him] there is a secret advancing of
the praise of Job. For there is nothing that can be spoken more to the praise
of a man then this, Est quasi quaedam Aposiopesis maximarum laudum.
to say that there is none like him. Though you say no more you have said all.
As the Scripture (we know) sets forth the wonderful praises of God, Exodus
15.11. Who is like unto thee O Lord, amongst the gods? Who is like thee? Which
is resolved into the negative, there is none amongst the gods like unto thee,
there is none like unto thee. This is the high praise of God. Mic. 7.18. Who is
a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity? It is the highest commendation
of God to say, there is none like him, to set him above all creatures. In like
manner here in the Text, when it is affirmed, that there was none like Job;
this sets him up in all praises and excellencies to the highest: though
particulars be concealed, yet whatsoever may make for the honor of a man is
included in this, that there is none like him.

But how should we understand this of Job, that there was none like to him upon
the earth?

We must understand it, not only in reference to wicked men, that there was no
mere natural man, no wicked man like unto him: as if God had said to Satan,
there is none in the earth which is thy inheritance, no earthly man like my
servant Job; look over all thy servants thou have not such an one in the earth.
That Is too low. We will take it therefore in reference to all the Saints that
were then upon the earth, there was not such a godly man upon the earth, none
like unto him: and then we must expound likeness by a distinction. There is a
double likeness; there is a likeness of Quality; and there is a likeness of
Equality. When it is said here, that in the Earth there was none like to Job,
you must not understand it of a likeness of quality, as if there were no man
that had such qualities as Job had: for all the Saints that are in the earth,
have the same kind of qualities, they are all alike in the maine and in the
general: namely in the Conformity of their nature to the will of God, which is
holiness, that is the general quality; and thus all the Saints upon the earth
are alike; there is not any man can have any other likeness upon him than
this, it is impossible. I say in this regard, the meanest and lowest Saint upon
the earth, is like to the highest and greatest Saint upon earth: yea not only
so, but the meanest Saint upon earth, is like to Jesus Christ in heaven, in
regard of quality; he has the same quality, 2 Pet. 1.4.
the same nature, he is made partaker of the divine nature: Phil. 2.5.
And the Apostle Paul exhorts the Philippians, Let, this mind be in you, which
was also in Christ. The meanest Saint has the same mind and the same quality
in reference to his new nature that is in God himself or in Christ, he is like
to God, God begets all his own children in his own likeness. But in
regard of the likeness of equality; thus Job was such a man as there was none
like him in the earth; no man like him in the degrees of those qualities, they
were not equal to him in this or that or the other grace. Job was a man above
them all. As we know it is with wicked and natural men, all wicked men upon
the earth are as like one to another as can be, As face answers to face in
water, so does the heart of man to man, Prove. 27.19.
the heart of one natural man to the other: but yet there are some wicked men
so wicked, that there is none like them in the earth. We have the very same
words applied to Ahab in wickedness, 1 King. 21.25. But there was none like to
Ahab, which did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord.
None like unto him, not I say (as in the former) that there were no wicked men
that had the same sinful qualities, for all have the same sinful qualities,
but there was none like him in equality of wickedness, Ahab was a Nonesuch,
he was a Giant in wickedness, none were grown to such a stature of
wickedness as Ahab. In the same manner we must understand this concerning Job,
none did reach to him in the equality of his graces, in the stature of the
inward man, Job had out-growne all the world in grace at that time.

Yet a little further for the understanding of this: We find sometimes when the
Scripture says of a man, that there is none like to him, the speech is to be
restrained to some one particular. And it may be a Question whether we are to
understand this of Jobs pre-eminence in the ganerall or in regard of some one
particular grace? We read of Solomon that there was none like him, Neh. 13.26.
Among many Nations was there no King like him who was beloved of his God. There
was no King like to Solomon, but he restrains it to this, who was beloved of
his God, none to whom God did so much communicate himself as to Solomon, none
like to Solomon in wisdom and knowledge, in those revelations and intimate
communions that God had with him, he was as it were Gods darling, as his other
Name Jedediah imports. Then it is said of Hezekiah (see another instance,) 2
King. 18.5. That he trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after him was
none like him among all the Kings of Judah. Now this we must understand of some
one particular especially, that is, of his trusting in the Lord, in regard of
his trusting so firmly in God, he went beyond all the Kings that came after
him, there was none did so perfectly trust in God: for it is said, he brake in
pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made, and stamped it to powder,
trusting in the Lord. Though some of his Counselors might tell him, 2 King.
18.4.
If you do those things you may bring a world of trouble upon your self and
the Kingdom, if you change these ancient customs you will make your people
mutiny, this serpent was of God, it was made in the wilderness, etc. Yet
says he, I see it is abused to Idolatry, I care not for all that you say, I
will trust in the Lord how ever it go. Here was an high, an unparalleled act of
confidence. Yet afterward it was said concerning Josiah, 2 King. 23. 25. That
like unto him was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all
his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might. Here it is said
after Hezekiah, that Josiah was such a King as there was none before him; and
it was said of Hezekiah that was before him, that he was such a one, that after
him there should be none like him. How shall we reconcile these two? Only by
applying those expressions to such and such particulars: Hezekiah was such a
man, as there was no King after him for trusting in God, and Josiah was such a
man, as there was no King before him for desire, care and zeal in reforming
the Church of God: Josiah's reformation was the most perfect reformation that
was made by all the Kings of Judah, and so in that particular, in regard of his
great zeal for God there was no King before him, like him. How shall we
understand this then concerning Job?

I answer in two Conclusions. First, When it is said, there was none like to
Job, we are to understand it in reference to that generation. Doubtless God
had as great ones in grace as Job, both before and afterward, Noah and Abraham
before him, were eminent ones; and afterward, Moses, and Joshua, and David, and
Samuel. But take Job in the time and the age wherein he lived, so there was
none like unto him in equality, we may understand it so; For Job is conceived
to be in the darker times, between Abraham and Moses, about the time that the
people of Israel were in captivity in Egypt; so that in reference to that time
Job lived in, he was the only man, the chief man, the greatest for grace in
that age: As it is said of Noah, he was a just man, and perfect in his
generations, he was the justest man of all that age, the most righteous of all
that generation: so was Job in his.

Secondly, We may understand it, not only concerning some particular grace
wherein he was most eminent: although it be a truth, that he had one grace, for
which he was cried up in Scripture more then for others, to wit, Patience, Have
you not heard of the patience of Job? But we may take it for the whole latitude
of Jobs holiness and graces, and there was not at that time such a man upon
the earth as Job: And so God himself seems to expound it, he does not
confine this to some one point, but says, Have thou not considered my servant
Job, that there is none like him in the earth? a perfect and upright man, one
that fears God and escheweth evil? God adds this by way of exposition,
what he means by a man to whom there was none like, who had no match upon the
earth. In those words the whole sum of godliness is comprised; whatsoever
goes, or may be conceived to go toward the making up of a godly man, falls
under one of those four members. And God says there is none like him, take
him in any or in all these.

I shall only give you two or three brief observations from hence. There is
none like unto him in the earth. Learn,

First, That God has servants of all statures and degrees. All his servants
come not to the like pitch, to the like hight, here is one that is beyond them
all, My servant Job, not a man like him upon the earth.

Secondly, Note this, We ought not to set up our rest in low degrees of grace;
or content our selves to be like others in grace, we should labor (if it be
possible) to go beyond all others in grace. It did not satisfy Job that he
had gotten to such a degree, to such a frame and temper of heart, to such a
course of holiness as his neighbors or brethren that were good, had attained
unto, but he labored to go beyond them all; Not such a man upon the earth as
Job. It is an holy ambition to labor to exceed all other in grace and
goodness. We have a great many in the world that desire to be so rich, as none
should be like them; to be so gay in their apparel, as none should be like
them, so beautiful, as none should be like them; but where are they that
desire and endeavor to have such a portion or stock of grace, that none should
be like them, to be above others in holiness, as Job was? True grace never
rests in any degrees or measures of grace, but labors to increase: he that
has any grace would have more; do not think it enough when you are like
others, you ought to labor to be beyond others.

Then see the Character that God gives of Job, A perfect and upright man, one
that fears God and escheweth evil.

These have been already opened in the first verse, and these are but a report
of the History before going, therefore I shall not need to stay upon his place;
only take these two Observations from it.

The first is this, God has a perfect Character of every soul. He knows
fully and clearly what the temper of your hearts and spirits are, just as the
history and relation of Job was, such is Gods testimony of him to a tittle.

Secondly this, God will give to every man a testimony according to his utmost
worth; God will not conceal any of your graces, or obscure your goodness, he
will make it known to the world to the full, what you are. When God comes to
give testimony, he gives it so, as his Saints can never loose by it.
Oftentimes man gives a testimony short of his Brothers goodness, and draws a
curtain before another man's worth; but God will draw the curtain quite back,
and unvaile every soul to the whole world. You shall see and hear a testimony
from God before men and Angels concerning your selves to the uttermost, what
you are in all godly and gracious perfections.

Job was an excellent man, a man commended indeed, who was commended of God: as
the Apostle concludes it, not he that commends himself is approved, but he
whom God commends. It is good for us to have our Letters Testimonial from
God, to have our Letters Commendatory from Heaven. It is not what a man says
in his own heart, what he flattereth himself; It is not what your neighbors
or others flatter you and say of you, but what God says of you, what testimony
he gives of you. He is not approved that commends himself, or that other
men commend only, but he whom the Lord commends. And if God speak well of
us, no matter though all the world be silent or slander.

JOB. 1.9, 10, 11. Then Satan answered the Lord and said, does Job fear God
for naught?

Have not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that
he has on every side? Thou have blessed the work of his hands, and his
substance is increased in the Land.

But put forth thy hand now and touch all that he has, and he will curse thee
to thy face.


IN the former verse Job receives testimony from God himself, in this, though
Satan cannot deny it, yet he calumniates, and misinterprets what he cannot
contradict. Satan grants indeed that Job fears God, but the latter words
embase the former, and fasten insincerity upon all his services. Does Job fear
God for naught? Fear is worth nothing unless in this sense it be for naught.
I have already showed you what it is to fear God, I shall now clear the other
term, and show how much evil Satan charges Job with, when he questions, does
Job fear God for naught?

Satan accuses with a question, does Job fear God for naught? The question
may be resolved into this Accusation. Job does not fear God for naught. The
word which we translate for naught, has a threefold sense from the Hebrew.

First, Some render it in vain. Does Job fear God (frustra, (...)
) in vain. We are then said to do a thing in vain, when we cannot attain
the end which we propose in doing of it. The Egyptians help in vain, that is,
they cannot procure that salvation and deliverance which was desired or
intended: and so the sense here may be, does Job fear God in vain? No he does
not, he has his end, he looked for riches, that he intended in taking up the
service of God, and that he has attained.

Secondly, It is interpreted by, without cause, Does Job fear God without
cause? so the word is translated, Psalm. 35.7. where David complaining of his
enemies, says, without cause have they hid for me their net in a pit, which
without cause they have dug for my soul. As if he should say, I never gave
them any cause why they should lay snares for me, I never wronged or hurt any
of them. According to this sense, when Satan says does Job fear God for
naught? namely, without cause, it is as if he had said, The Lord has given Job
reason enough, he has given him cause enough to do what he does; Job sees
reason in his Flocks and in his Herds, in his many Children, and in his great
Household, in his Substance, and in his Honor, he sees reason in all these,
why he should fear God, and be a very obedient servant, having so bountiful a
Master. Does Job fear God without cause?

Or thirdly, The word is translated by Gratis (as we express it) to do a
thing gratis, that is to do a thing without any reward, without any price, or
without pay. I shall instance Scriptures wherein the word is rendered in that
sense, Genesis 29.15. Laban says to Jacob when he was come to him, to serve him,
Thou art my kinsman, should thou therefore serve me for naught? that is,
should thou serve me gratis, or without wages, as he explaines his meaning
in the next words, tell me what shall thy wages be? So that to do a thing for
naught, is to do a thing without wages, without price. And so there is the
same interpretation of the word, Exodus 21.11. where Moses speaking of the Maid
that was taken into the family and was not married, says, If he do not these
three unto her, then she shall go out free without money, she shall pay
nothing, she shall go out gratis, or for naught. So here we may take in this
sense to fill up the form, does Job serve God gratis? does he serve God
without price or without pay? Surely no, thou have given him sufficient hyre,
wages sufficient for all his service, Job does not serve thee gratis, out of
good will and affection to thee, but he serves thee for hire, because thou
payest him so plentifully.

So the general sense of the words, Does Job fear God for naught? is as if
Satan had bespoken the Lord in such words as these. Lord thou do enquire of
me whether I had considered thy servant Job? I confess I have, and I must
needs acknowledge that he is a man very diligent and zealous in thy worship and
service; neither do I wonder that he is so, seeing thou have out-bid all his
labors and endeavors by heaps of benefits. There is no question but thou
may have servants enough upon such terms, at such rates as these: no
marvel if Job be willing to do whatsoever thou command, whenas thou
bestowest upon Job whatsoever he desires. Thou seem as it were to neglect
all other men, and only to intend the safety and prosperity of thy darling Job.
Is it any great matter, that he who has received a flock of seven thousand
Sheep from thee, should offer a few, 7. or 10. to thee in sacrifice? Is it any
great matter that he should give some of his fleeces to cloth the poor, who
has received from thee so many thousands to cloth and enrich himself? Is it
a strange thing that he should feed a few that has 500 yoke of Oxen? Is not
Job well hired to work for thee? does he fear God for naught who has recived
all these?

Yet a little more distinctly for the opening of this expression, I shall give
you Satan's sense in three notable falsities or lies, which he twists up
together in this one speech, Does Job fear God for naught?

First, That riches will make any man serve God, that it is no great matter to
be holy when we have abundance; a man that prospers in the world cannot choose
but be good. This Satan implies in these words, and this is an extreme lie;
for as there is no affliction, so there is no outward blessing can change the
heart or bring it about unto God, They did not serve the Lord in the abundance
of all things, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Abundance does not draw the heart unto God. Yet
Satan would infer that it does. This might well be retorted upon Satan
himself; Satan why diddestnot thou serve God then? thou did once receive
more outward blessings from God then ever Job did, the blessedness of an
Angel; yet that glorious Angelical estate wherein thou wast created, could
not keep thee in the compass of obedience, thou did rebel in the
abundance of all blessings, and did leave thy habitation, Satan thou
should not have served God for naught. Why then did not thou serve him?
thine own Apostasy refutes thy error in making so little of Jobs obedience,
because he had received so much.

Secondly, There is this in it; Does Job fear God for naught? Satan
intimates, that God could have no servants for love, none unless he did pay
them extremely; That, God is such a Master, and his work such as none would
meddle with, unless allured by benefits; As if Satan should say, you have
indeed one eminent servant, but you should not have had him unless you had
been at double cost with him. Here is another lie Satan windeth up closely in
this speech; For the truth is, Gods servants follow him for himself, the very
excellencies of God, and sweetness of his ways, are the argument and the
wages by which his people are chiefly moved and hired to his service. God
indeed makes many promises to those that serve him, but he never makes any
bargains with them: His obey him freely. Satan makes bargains to hire men to
his service, as he did with Christ, Mat. 4.9. All these things will I give
thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. God makes many large and
gracious promises, but he never makes any such bargain and agreement with men
for their obedience.

Then there is a third sense full of falsehood, which Satan casts upon Job,
Does Job fear God for naught? that is, Job has a byas in all that he does,
he is carried by the gain of godliness, not by any delight in godliness thus
to serve God. Job is mercinary, he serves God for hire; Job has not any
desire to please God, but to benefit himself; Job does not seek the glory of
God, but he seeks his own advantage. This is the sense which the words have
in reference to the person of Job; that as once Satan accused God unto man, so,
now he accuses this man unto God; He accused God unto man, Genesis 3. When God
had forbidden him to eat of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, and told
him that in the day he did eat thereof he should surely die; You shall not
surely die, says Satan, for God knows that in the day you eat thereof, then
your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. As
if he should say, God has not forbidden this tree, because it will do you any
hurt, but because he would be God alone, he would have all the knowledge to
himself, he has an ill intent: he knows that if you eat of it, you will be
like him, as gods knowing good and evil. So here he accuses man to God, Job
serves you indeed and offers you sacrifice and obeys you, but it is that
he may get by you, that he may receive more and more from you, he likes the
pay, the reward, not the work; he cares not for God, but for the good that
comes from him. This is the accusation which here the slanderer casts upon
all the holy services and duties of Job.

Thus in brief you see the sense, I shall give you some observations from it.

The first is this, It is an argument of a most malignant spirit, when a man's
actions are fair, then to accuse his intentions. The Devil has nothing to
say against the actions of Job, but he goes down into his heart and accuses
his intentions. Malice mis-interprets the fairest actions, but love puts the
fairest interpretation it can upon foul actions. Malice will say when a man
does well, it is true he does it, but it is for vain glory, it is to be seen
of men, it is for his own ends, it is for gain; But when a man does ill, love
will say, this he has done through ignorance, or inadvertency or violent
temptations, love covers a multitude of sins as fairly as possibly it may
with wisdom and with justice; How fair a cover did Christ himself put upon
the foulest act that ever was in the world, upon his own crucifying, Father
forgive them, they know not what they do; Luke 23.24.
they do it indeed, but they do it ignorantly: So Peter afterward, I wot
(says he) that through ignorance you did it, as did also your Rulers. Love
excuses what is ill done in another, and malice accuses what others do well.
Let such men learn from hence, that in so do. ^^^y are the mouth and tongue of
Satan.

Secondly, We may observe from hence; That it is an argument of a base and an
unworthy spirit to serve God for ends. Had this been true of Job in Satan's
sense, it had indeed spoiled and blemished all that he had done. Those that
come unto God upon such terms they are not holy, but crafty; they make a trade
with God, they do not serve God, it is not Obedientia, but Mercatura, as one
expresses it, it is merchandising with God, not obeying him. There is reward
enough in God himself, there is reward enough in the very duties themselves,
work and wages go together. Therefore for any to be carried out to the service
of God upon outward things, argues a base and an eartthly spirit. As sin is
punishment enough unto it self, though there were no other punishment, though
there were no hell to come after, yet to do evil is or will be hell enough
unto it self: Nec sacile Invenies multis in millibus unu^ virtutem pretium qui
putet esse sui.

-- Et gratis poenitet esse probum Ovid. de Pont.


So to do good is reward enough unto it self. A Heathen Poet observed it as a
brand of Infamy upon the age wherein he lived, that most did repent that they
had done good or were good gratis or for naught, that the price of all good
actions fell in their esteem, unless they could raise themselves. If a
Heathen condemned this, how damnable is it among Christians.

But here a Question will arise, and I shall a little debate it, because it
does further clear the maine point, May we not have respect to our own good
or unto the benefit we shall receive from God? Is it unlawful to have an eye
to our own advantage, while we do our duty? Must we serve God for naught in
that strict sense, or else will ^od account nothing of all our services?

I shall clear that in five brief Conclusions, and these will (I suppose)
fully state the sense of this Text and of this speech.

The first is this, There is no man does or possibly can serve God for naught.
God has by benefits already bestowed, and by benefits promised out-vyed and
out-bid all the endeavors and services of the creature. If a man had a
thousand pair of hands, a thousand tongues and a thousand heads, and should
set them all on work for God, he were never able to answer the engagements and
obligations which God has already put upon him. Therefore this is a truth, that
no man can in a strict sense serve God for naught. God is not beholden to any
creature for any work or service that is done unto him.

Again secondly, this is further to be considered. The more outward blessings
any one does receive, the more he ought to serve God, and the more service God
looks for at his hands. That is another Conclusion. Therefore we find still,
that when God has bestowed many outward blessings upon any, either persons or
Nations, he charge an acknowledgement upon them, Hos. 2.8. She did not know
that I gave her corn and wine and oil, and multiplied her silver and gold
which she bestowed upon Baal, therefore I will come and recover it, says God.
You having received this, you ought to have served me with it. You see how God
upbraideth David, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8. I anointed thee King of Israel, and I
delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, and I gave thee thy Masters house and
thy Masters wives into thy bosom, and if this had been too little, I would
moreover have given thee such and such things. How is it then that thou have
despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? As if he
should say, the more I bestowed upon thee, the more obligations thou should
feel thy self under to obey me faithfully.

In the third place, it is lawful to have some respect to benefits both
received and promised by way of Motive and encouragement to stir us up and
quicken us, either in doing or in suffering for God. Moses, Heb. 11.26. had
respect to the recompense of reward, therefore it is not unlawful; and Christ
himself, Heb. 12.2. looking at the joy that was set before him. These are
examples beyond all exceptions, that respect may be had to benefits and
blessings received or exspected.

Fourthly, Then reference unto benefit is sinful, when we make it either the
sole and only cause, or the supreme and chief cause of our obedience. This
makes any thing we do smell so of our selves that God abides it not, when we
respect our selves, either alone or above God, God has no respect at all to
us. As Christ taxes those, Joh. 6. You did not seek me but the loaves, to have
respect to the loaves more then to Christ, or as much as to Christ, is to have
no respect at all to Christ.

Thus when the Sichemites, Genesis 34.23. admitted of circumcision, and so gave up
themselves as a Vovenant People to God, here was all the argument they proposed
to themselves, Shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of
theirs be ours? What beasts were these Sichemites, what shadows of Religion,
who would take upon them this badge of Religion for the gain of beasts and
worldly substance? Such pure respects to our selves, defile all our services
and render our persons odious unto God.

Therefore in all our duties and holy services, we must set the glory of God in
the Throne, that must be above; and then we may set our desires of Heaven and
glory on the right hand, we may set the fear of hell and the avoiding of
misery on the left hand, we may set our desires of enjoying outward comforts
here in the world at the footstool. Thus we must marshall and rank respects
to God and our selves. And thus we may look upon outward things, as motives and
encouragements; we must not make them ends and causes; we may make them as
occasions, but not as grounds of our obedience.

Lastly, We may look upon them as fruits and consequents of holiness, yea as
encouragements unto holiness, but not as causes of our holiness, or we may
eye these as media, through which to see the bounty and goodness of God, not
as objecta on which to fix and terminate our desires. So much for the clearing
of the first part of Satan's answer, Does Job serve God for naught? Wherein you
see he casts dirt upon Jobs sincerest duties, and how we may carry our respects
in the service of God to outward blessings, whether received or promised. It
follows.

Verse 10. Have thou not made an hedge about him and about his house, and about
all that he has on every side? Thou have blessed the work of his hands and
his substance is increased in the land.

Here Satan more fully expounds himself, and what he means by Jobs not
serving God for naught. You shall see it is not for naught. He casts up the
particulars of Gods benefits conferred on Job, and they amount to a great
sum. 1. He has an hedge about him, that is somewhat. 2. He has blessed him
that is more: 3. He does increase and multiply, there is the highest degree of
outward happiness. Here are three degrees of Gods dealing with Job. These
Satan reckons up in this verse, that he may make Jobs goodness of no account,
and leave his person in no degree of acceptance with God.

Here is first Protection in the hedge, Have thou not made an hedge about him.

Secondly, Here is a Benediction upon that which was protected. It was not a
bare keeping of that from spoiling, but it was a blessing of it.

Thirdly, here is also an increase or multiplication, he was not only blessed
to keep himself and all he had in the state and plight wherein he stood, but
there was a daily increase and an augmentation. Thou protectest him, thou
blessest him, and thou do increase all that he has, he is increased in the
land. That is the sum and sense of the words. I shall now open them a little
more distinctly.

(...)
First, He speaks here of his protection, have thou not made an hedge about him?
Some render it, Have thou not made a wall about him? Or, Have thou not made a
trench about him? It is an elegant Metaphor frequent in Scripture, showing that
as when a field is well hedged, or a Town well walled and entrenched, then it
is safe. So when God is said to make an hedge or a wall about a man or about a
Nation, the safety of that man or Nation is assured by it, Isa. 5.2. We have
this word used, where God speaks of his vineyard, He planted a vineyard in a
very fruitful hill, and he fenced it, or he made a wall or a hedge about it.
So verse 5. when God is angry with his vineyard and will destroy i^, it is thus
expressed, I will (says he) take away the hedge thereof, that is, I will take
away my protection from it. In the same sense, Zach. 2.5. I will be (says God)
a wall of fire round about; that is, I will be a defense unto it. So when it is
said here, that God had made a hedge about Job, it notes divine Protection, he
was under the wing and safeguard of the Almighty.

This hedge of protection is twofold. It is said God made this hedge, Have
thou not made an hedge about him? First, There is an hedge which is made
immediately by the hand of God: Sometimes God makes the hedge immediately, yea
sometimes God expresses himself to be the hedge or wall, as Zac. 2.5. so Psalm.
18. (all those are words of protection) verse. Deus ipse arx est quae virum
innoxium ambit Po^dus babet immensum pronomen illud ^u, cujus sensus mirus ac
arcanus est, Deum ipsu^ essesepem etc. non hanc curam solis demandasti angelis.
2. Thou art my rock and my fortress, my deliverer, my strength, my buckler,
the horn of my salvation, and my high Tower, etc. There God was the hedge,
here God makes the hedge, God has not put out this hedge to others to make, but
he makes it himself; Satan observes as much. Have not thou made an hedge about
him.

Secondly, Sometime the hedge of protection is made by the hands of others. God
sends out his Angels to guard his people, Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord
encampeth round about them that fear him. Encamping and hedging are to the
same purpose, Gods hedge is as strong for safety as any wall, as any trench.
Sometime God does make one man to be a hedge or a defense to another. The
servants of Naball said of David, 1 Samuel 25.16. That he had been a wall unto
them both by night and day; that is, he had been a protection and a guard to
them, he had defended them all the while his Army was quartered in those parts.
God makes a good man to be as a wall to a wicked man. How much more will he
make men and Angels to be walls and hedges for the security of his own people?

The Text further goes on and shows the compass of this hedge, what ground it
takes in, how far it reaches: and here we shall find that it was a very
large hedge of a great extent. We know there are some Cities that have not only
a single wall, but a double wall, yea some strong Cities and places have a
treble wall about them: So we find a threefold hedge made about Job, and
they are all expressed here in this Text.

Here was a hedge, first about his Person, that was the inmost hedge, or the
inmost wall, in these words, Have thou not made an hedge about him? That is, an
hedge about the very person of Job, an hedge about his body least any
sickness, diseases or dangers should invade it, and an hedge about his soul,
least snares and temptations should take hold of, or prevail against that;
thou have made an hedge about him, so that I cannot come at the person of Job
to hurt him.

Again, Besides this inmost wall, and the nearest about his person, there is a
second wall or hedge, and that is expressed to be about his Family, Have thou not
made an hedge about him and about his house? By house we are not to understand
the material house of stone or timber, the edifice in which Job dwelt, but by
the house we are to understand the household, Job and his family, as oftentimes
in Scripture, the house is put for the family. This day (says Christ to
Zacheus) is salvation come to thy house; Act. 16.
and it is said of the Jailer, that he believed and all his house, that is all
his household; so here, thou have made an hedge about him, and about his house,
that is, about his Family, about his children especially: hence the Hebrew word
for a child, for a son, does signify an house, because children build up the
house or keep up the name of their Fathers. So that the house hedged about, is
the children, the family and the followers and servants of Job; as if Satan
should say, thou have made an hedge not only about his person, but about all
that belong unto him about his children and servants, I may not meddle with
them neither. There is the second hedge.

Lastly, There is a third hedge or wall, Have thou not made an hedge about him,
and about his house, and about all that he has? That is about his goods, about
his cattle and about his lands: so far as ever any thing of Jobs does
extend, Jobus nihil ta^ vile and exile habet quod non custodiendum in tuam
susceperis tutelam. Lavat. in loc.
so far the hedge goes; if Job have but the least thing abroad, God does
make an hedge about it, he has not the meanest thing belonging unto him, but
is under guard and protection. That is the meaning of it.

There is yet another thing to be observed in the words to make it more full.
Have thou not made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that
he has on every side? It is not only said, thou have made an hedge about him,
but thou have made an hedge about him on every side, which is a pleonasme or
redundancy of speech. Illud quod per circuitum vallatur, ex nulla part potest
pati insultum.
It was a sign of Gods care of Job, when he made an hedge about him, but to
say he made an hedge about him on every side, here is expressed an extraordinary
care, that God had not left the least gappe for Satan or for any annoyance to
come in unto Job. There is not the least breach, the least hole, thou have
hedged him round about on every side, Per circuitum circumcirca.
whereby the wonderful safety of Job, his family and estate is set out under
the protection of God. That for the opening of those words.

First, We may observe from the manner of this speech, Have thou not made an
hedge about him? Satan speaks very angerly. Questions as they ever express
quickness of spirit, so they many times express much passion and trouble of
spirit. Here. Satan in questioning, speaks as if he were vexed, Have thou not
made an hedge about him? Hence note.

That the protection which God gives to his people and servants is the vexation
of Satan and of all his Instruments. It troubles them extremely that God does
so guard and hedge up his people, that they cannot come at them. No man can
endure to see that defended, which he wishes were destroyed.

Then again, if we consider the matter of Satan's speech, it is a truth and a
most comfortable truth, a truth full of consolation to the people of God, Have
thou not made an hedge about him and about his house, and about all that he
has on every side? We may note hence,

That Satan the father of lies sometimes speaks truth for his own advantage.
For as it is said concerning Judas about his care for the poor, when he would
have had the ointment sold and given to the poor, This he said (says the
Text) not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and had the
bag and bare what was put therein. So we may say here, Satan sets forth the
care of God over his people in most exact terms; And why does he do this? Not
that he cares to speak well of God, or to advance God in the eyes of his
people, by telling his people and servants how watchful he is over them: but
he does this only for his own advantage, that hereby he may lessen the service
and blemish the obedience of Job, because he received so much care and love
from God. As it is many times with ungodly men, they will do good, not that
they care to do good, but only for some bie-end: So Satan will sometimes
speak that which is true, not that he regards the truth, or that he would
speak a word of truth (for he has nothing but lies in his heart, there is a
lie in his heart when there is truth in his mouth.) He never speaks truth but
to deceive and do hurt by it.

Thirdly, We may observe this, which lies plain in the words.

That the people and servants of God dwell in the midst of enemies, in the
midst of dangers; Why else need there be an hedge, a wall about them? What
need there be a guard about them, unless there were dangers about them? There
are none in the world so envyed and spighted, so aimed at and persecuted as the
people and servants of God; you may see it by the wall that is made about them;
God will not bestow cost and care in preserving and guarding where there is no
danger of invading. If you should come to a City and see it mightily fortified,
and see men make wall after wall about it, and bulwark after bulwark, you
will presently conjecture, that City stands in great danger and is in the
midst of enemies: So when we read that God was feign to make wall after
wall, to make hedge after hedge about the person, the family, the estate of
Job, it shows that the devil had an ill eye upon Job and upon all that was
Jobs; Satan and his instruments, had it not bin for this hedge, would quickly
have fallen upon him. No godly man should live a quiet moment, did not the Lord
stretch forth his hand to save and protect him.

Fourthly, We may observe,

That God himself does undertake the guarding and protecting of his people.
Thou have made an hedge about him and about all that he has. God himself
either does it immediately, or he does put those to do it to whom he gives
his power, strength and wisdom. There is no mere creature could be strength
and security enough for us against our great malicious and mighty enemies,
therefore God himself either is or makes the hedge. There is no strength in
man but Satan can over-match it, Satan can over power all the strength, and
out-wit all the wisdom that is in the creature. Flesh and blood are no match
for a spirit. And we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
Principalities and Powers and spiritual wickedness in high places, Ephesians.
6.12. But if God makes an hedge about us, it is not in the power of all the
enemies in the world, whether men or devils to make a gappe in it; they are
sure that are under the protection of God. They that dwell in the secret place
of the most high, they shall abide (safe) under the shadow of the Almighty, Ps.
91.1.

Fifthly, You see here how far the hedge goes, an hedge not only about his
person and household, but about all that he has. Take the meanest thing that
Job has, God protects it and hedgeth it about. Then we may note this, That God
has an especial care, and does exceedingly price even the meanest thing that
belongs to one of his servant. God would not bestow an hedge about it, if he
did not prize it: A man will not hedge or wall that about, which he does not
value. God highly values the meanest thing that belongs to one of his servants.
Psalm. 116.
The Psalmist says, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints. But not only is the blood, the life of the Saints, precious in the
sight of God, but every member, every hair of their head is precious. God
numbers these. Not only are their children precious, but every thing that is
called theirs, their servants, their household, their cattle, their Oxen, their
Asses, whatsoever they have is all precious in the sight of God.

Lastly, Observe,

That Satan has a deadly spite not only against the persons of the godly,
but against every thing that belongs unto a godly man. Satan would not only
hurt and annoy them in their persons, but in every thing that is theirs. If God
(if we may so speak with reverence) should leave but a dog that belongs unto
one of his servants unguarded, Satan would do it a mischief; Satan would be
doing at the least thing, rather then not do mischief. If he cannot destroy
our souls he would be at the very hair of our heads; therefore Christ to
comfort the Disciples in the time of trouble assures them, Mat. 10.30.
that the very hairs of their heads were numbered: As if he should say, God
will have an account of every hair, the enemies cannot pull off a hair, but
God will call them to a reckoning for it.

And it notes too that the enemies will take hold of any thing that belongs to
the people of God, if they cannot get all, they will get a hair if they can,
why else is it expressed that the very hairs of their heads are numbered? Those
words at once intimate, Gods care of all, and Satan's malice against all.

It follows, Have thou not made an hedge about him, etc. Thou have blessed
the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the Land.

Thou have blessed.] The root Barac which from the word here used, does
signify to bow the knee as well as to bless, because men used to how the knee
in blessing God or man. Blessings are carried three ways.

First, From man to man; one man blesses another. There were Prophetical or
extraordinary blessings, as Isaac blessed Jacob, and Jacob blessed his sons
upon his deathbed; and there is a popular or ordinary blessing, to wish well
to another is to bless another, every time we pray for our friends, we bless
our friends. So man from man.

Secondly, Man blesses God; and then man blesses God when he praises God,
when he takes notice of and returns thanks for the blessings received from
God. Bless the Lord O my soul, etc. (Psalm. 103.2.) and forget not all, (that
is,) forget not any of his benefits. Thankfully to remember benefits, is to
bless the Lord. The Cup in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is called the
Cup of Blessing, 1 Cor. 10.16. because therein we commemorate the death of
Christ, and render thanks to the Name of the Lord, for the unspeakeable
benefits conveyed to us by his blood.

Thirdly, as here in the Text, God blesses man. Now God blesses man, when he
causes that to prosper which man undertakes. Man's blessing unto man, it is
only a wish, an optative blessing, but Gods blessing unto man is an operative
blessing as Aquinas expresses it, Dei benedicere est benefacere, when God
wishes us good he does us good.

So then the sense is, Thou have blessed: that is, thou have caused him to
prosper and thrive in what he undertakes, as we shall see in the object of the
blessing, Thou have blessed the work of his hands.

The work of his hands.] We are not to understand it strictly for manual or
hand labors, as if Job were a man employed in ordinary manual services, in the
labor of his hands, but according to an ordinary use of speech amongst the
Hebrews, and likewise amongst other Nations, by the work of the hands, is
understood any kind of labor, any kind of business whatsoever. As it is said
of Christ, Isa. 53.10. that the pleasure of the Lord did prosper in his hands;
Now the work that Christ had to do was not a handy work, yet it did prosper
in his hands, that is, he managing and going about it, it did prosper and took
success; It was effectual for the redemption and salvation of his people;
This was prospering of the work in his hands. In this sense the work of the
head may be called the work of the hands, the work of the tongue, the work
of the hands; any work, any business that a man does, may be called the work
of his hands. So then, Thou have blessed the work of his hands, that is, thou
have blessed every thing that Job goes about, as a Magistrate, as a Minister,
or as a Master of a Family, in any of, in all his relations, thou have caused
his endeavors to prosper. In the 28th of Deuteronomie, an universal blessing
is thus promised verse. 6. Blessed thou shall be when thou come in, and
blessed shall thou be when thou go out: between those two are contained all
the labors and undertakings of that people: by their going forth is meant the
beginning of their labors, and by their coming in is meant the end and
conclusion of their labors, so that beginning and ending, when they set their
hands to a business, and when they took their hands from a business, they
should be blessed, that is, they should have a through blessing upon all their
labors. So here, Thou have blessed the work of his hands, that is, every
thing he puts his hands unto.

And his substance is increased in the Land. That is the third thing which
Satan does observe here concerning Job, that he was not only blessed in the
estate wherein he was, but God did mightily increase and multiply his estate.
(...)
He is increased in the Land. The word which we translate increased, signifies
not an ordinary increase, In immensum excrescere.
but such an increase as breaks the bounds; it signifies so to increase in
such and abundance, as that the former place where those things were, cannot
contain nor hold them, but they must seek some new place, more room for
them: such a kind of increase is here meant. So the word is used, Exodus 1.12.
concerning the people of Israel when they were in Egypt, when they were
afflicted, the Text says, The more they afflicted them, the more they
multiplied and grew; the same word is there used, to show the wonderful
increase of the people of Israel when they were in their affliction. It was
such as did break the bounds. As it is with a river, the more it is stopped,
the more it swells and breaks all the banks and bays, whatsoever is set to
hinder the course of it: So much is meant in that place of Moses when the
people of Israel were stopped and hindered from their increase, they like a
river did swell over all, they did increase so as they did break all the
bounds. Thus of Job, his substance is increased, it is as if we should say in
our language, he had so much that there was no end of, no room for his
substance: as the rich fool said, Luke 12. when his estate was increased, what
shall I do, my barnes are not big enough? I must pull them down and build
larger, that they may hold my estate. So Jobs estate was so increased that the
compass he had for that present could not contain it, he must make new folds
for his Sheep they increased so; and he must make greater barnes for his
Corn, his fields brought forth such plentiful croppes; he must make larger
stalles for his Oxen, he must build bigger houses for his family; he is
increased, he is broken forth in the Land. Genesis 38.29. When Tamar brought forth
twins, the Text says, that one put out his hand, and as he drew it back, his
brother came out, and therefore they called his name Pharez, Hebraica vox paraz
significat non solum crescere sed prae copia and abundantia disrumpi. Merc.
Ruperunt horrea messes. Virg.
(the same Original word that is here used) because of the breach that he
made. So this signifies the breaking forth of the estate of Job in the Land,
he increased wonderfully and exceedingly. Thus Satan by the most emphaticall
words, still hightens the dealings of God with Job, that he may the more debase
the services of Job toward God.

Thou have blessed (says he) the work of his hands, and his substance is
increased in the Land. We may observe here first, That all success in
business is from the blessing of the Lord. Satan speaks very good divinity
here, Thou have blessed: It is from the Lord. It is said of Joseph, Genesis 39.23.
That whatsoever he did the Lord made it to prosper. We may do much, we may set
our hands to do many things, but we cannot prosper any thing. Working is our
part, but prospering is the Lords part. Luke 5.
As it was with the Disciples, they could fish all night, but till Christ came
they could not catch: when Christ came the blessing came, and when the blessing
came, there was not only fishing but catching, and there was catching in
abundance. So it is in all the works of men's callings, men may be laboring,
and sweating, and toyling, but there is no prospering, no succeeding till God
come with a blessing. Thou have blessed the work of his hands. Some take all
to themselves, and thank their own labors, their own wisdom, policy and
parts. Others ascribe all to their good Fortune, etc. We see Satan himself
here preaches a truth that will confute them, he is more orthodoxe then these
practical Atheists. Satan acknowledges, Thou have blessed.

Then again, we may observe. Thou have blessed the work of his hands. Every
one ought to be a man of employment. Every one ought to have some business to
turn his hand unto. In the former part of this Chapter, we read of Jobs piety
and holiness, and of his zeal in the worship of God: Here now we see Jobs
care and diligence in his place and calling wherein God had set him, which is
called the work of his hands. Every one must have two callings, and the one
helps forward the other; Job feared God, and Job went on in the business
which God set him. Job is said to serve God continutlly, and yet Job did work
continually. These two continualls may well stand together: for both the
continualls are taken for their seasons; continually, that is seasonably
according to the several opportunities God called him to, and put into his
hands. This rebukes those who have no labor, who can show no work of their
hands. It was said to Adam, and in him to mankind, not only as a curse, but as
a command, In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread till thou return
to earth; Genesis 3.19.
this is laid upon all, In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread:
Not that every man is bound to labor in such an employment as causes the face
to sweat: But thereby is meant serious labor and employment in some honest
calling; so here the work of the hands, is taken not strictly, but for any
employment wherein Job was serviceable to God and his Country.

Put these 2 together, Thou have blessed, and thou have blessed the work of
his hands, and we may observe from both, That the Lord delights to bless
those who are industrious. It is seldom that there is an industrious hand but
there is a blessing of God upon it; Prove. 10. 4. Prove. 10.22.
Hence as we find in one place, The diligent hand makes rich, so in another,
The blessing of God makes rich. The blessing of God makes rich, and the
diligent hand makes rich, neither of them alone but both conjoined; the
blessing of God upon a diligent hand makes rich; a diligent hand cannot make
rich without God, and God does not usually make rich wit^ a diligent hand;
Therefore it is said here, that God blessed the work of Jobs hands. Up and be
doing, and the Lord shall be with you. God will not be with us unles we be
doing. God does not love to bless those that are idle; if we be doing, God
will be blessing, his being with us, is put for his assisting and prospering
us. So it is indeed in all things. God does not work, that we should sit
still, nor bless to the intent that we should do nothing. As it is in the
7th. of Judges, They proclaimed the Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, those two
must go together. Would you be blessed with protection? you must labor to
protect your selves. Do not think that the Lord will protect you with your
hands in your pockets, and your Swords rusting in your sheathes: while you
labor in these times of danger to defend your selves, you may expect defense
from the Lord; How unbecomming is it for you now to stand still and say, Lord
help us. We must indeed stand still (as Moses counseled the people, Exodus
14.13.) in regard of fear and diffidence, but beware of standing still in
regard of care and diligence, as ever you hope to see the salvation of the
Lord. The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon must be cried up at once; those two
must go together.

There is a fourth point that we must observe also from the connection of the
two sentences in the Text. Thou have blessed the work of his hands, and his
substance is increased in the Land. The blessing of God where it falls is
effectual. If God does but bless we shall increase, there is no question of
it; if God does but bless, we shall increase mightily. Thou have blessed him
and he is increased: It is the word that followed the first blessing after the
Creation, Genesis 1.28. God blessed them and said unto them be fruitful and
multiply. Blessing and multiplying go together; the blessing of God is a
powerful blessing, It is mighty in operation, and carries all before it. You
know what a strong opinion Balak had concerning the blessing of Balaam, Numb.
22.6. I wot (says he) that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou
cursest is cursed; A strong conceit, and but a conceit. As there are many at
this day as strongly conceited of the blessing of that Balaam of the seven
hills, that blessing, but cursed Prophet. If they can get but a blessing from
the Pope, they think all is safe. If they can but get a blessed Sword (such
some have obtained) to do a cursed act, to cut the throats of Gods people, or
of their Prince, it must needs be effectual; You know there was a blessed
Standard or Banner given to them that came against us in 88. and when that
Standard was lifted up that Banner displayed, with the Popes special blessing,
they accounted, nay called themselves Invincible. Such was their invincible
Ignorance, till they were taught better with Briars and Thorns, Judge. 8.16.
or rather with storms and winds fighting against them. And though they have
bin often cozzen'd, yet still they retain such an esteem of the Popes
blessing, that they travel and throng for it, as for their lives, more then
for all manner of riches; I may say to them as once that great Cardinal did on
the same occasion, seeing this people will be deceived, let them be deceived.
But I desire to raise your esteem of Gods blessing, for it is a certain
truth, That whom God blesses they are blessed, Gods blessings are fixed and
effectual blessings; if he bless we shall be blessed indeed: His blessings
are irreversible, as Balaam was forced to confess, Behold he has blessed and
I cannot reverse it. If once God has blessed, it is not in Satan, nor in all
his lying Prophets, nor in all the power of the creature to alter it, no nor to
retard or hinder it for a moment.

If God now give us the mercy of protection, if he make the hedge about us and
bless us in these times, we shall be continued and established in the Land;
yea we shall be increased in the Land, we shall break forth abundantly, to the
amazement of all hearers and beholders. Though Rome curse, though Hell plot,
yet if God bless, we are safe.

This is the thing therefore that we should labor for, to be under the
influence of the blessing of God. If we have but that, we have all; let means
be what they will, great or little, or none at all, if God bless he can make
any thing serve the turn; any thing with a blessing will do it; any thing
with a blessing will make us increase; yea make us a strong, a mighty, an
invincible people. So that Satan and his instruments, for very envy shall be
forced to acknowledge that there is a hedge about us, which they cannot break
through, that there is a wall about us, which they can neither scale nor batter
with all their Engines and Artillery.

In these two verses we have had the answer which Satan makes to the Lords
question. Have thou considered my servant Job? You see the slander that is in
it, and how he does advance the blessings of God upon Job, that he might debase
the services of Job toward God. Now lest God should take him off presently with
a denial, and tell him that all this is false; that Job is no such man as he
represents him to be, that he has most presumptuously intruded into Gods
peculiar, namely the secrets of the heart, (for Satan had nothing to accuse him
of, that was in sight, only he guesseth at his heart;) lest God I say should
presently come and check him thus, for his boldness and impudence, both in
contradicting his testimony and in charging Job with insincerity Satan makes a
motion in the next verse, Put forth thine hand now and tauch all that he has
and he will curse thee to thy face: As if Satan should have said, Lord if you
be not satisfied that thus it is with your servant Job, if you will not take my
word that he is an hypocrite, and that he does serve you only for ends; do but
stretch forth your hand, etc. Do but take away that which you have given him,
and you shall see presently he will take away that which he has given you; if
you will withdraw his riches, he will quickly withdraw his service.

JOB 1.11, 12. But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he has, and he
will curse thee to thy face.

And the Lord said unto Satan, behold all that he has is in thy power, only
upon himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan went forth from the presence
of the Lord.


THis 11th. verse contains Satan's motion which he subjoynes to his Answer,
verse. 10. But put forth thine hand now. By his Answer before he had wounded all
the holy services of Job, and now he seeks to wound his estate and
possessions. His answer was full of malice, and his motion is as full of
cruelty. Whom before he had falsely accused, he (in these words) desires may
be causlesly afflicted. Put forth thine hand now. As if he should have said.
There is great question concerning Jobs integrity, this one experiment will
quickly decide and determine it, Touch all that he has, etc. This motion is
grounded (as was before noted) upon on feared denial of his answer in the
former words. For there Satan had argued after this manner, That is an unsound
and an hypocritical profession which is grounded only upon outward benefits,
but all the profession of Job is grounded only upon the outward benefits,
therefore it is unsound. Does Job serve God for naught? This is the strength of
Satan's argument. Now he perceiving the weakness or rather indeed the
falsenesse, the extreme lie, that was in the Minor, in the Assumption (namely,
that the profession and holiness of Job was grounded only upon outward
things,) he (I say perceiving that) seeks to confirm what he had affirmed by
this motion. If you doubt (says he) whether it be so, or no, with Job, let
that come to the trial, touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy
face. The strength of the reason that lies in the motion may be thus conceived.
That profession is grounded upon outward things which a man lays down, when
outward things are removed and taken away; but if those outward things be
removed and taken away from Job, he will quicly lay down his profession, yea
he will take up blasphemy, he will curse thee to thy face; therefore the
profession of Job is grounded upon outward things. This now is the logic or
the reason, upon which Satan bottomes and inferres this motion, that so he may
bring Job upon a further trial.

Put forth thine hand now. (...)
The Hebrew is, send forth thy hand. To put forth the hand, signifies,
sometimes to help, and sometimes to hurt. So in Ps. 144.7. send forth thine
hand and deliver me. There is a sending forth the hand in a way of mercy. And
so Act. 4.30. there Peter prays that Christ would stretch forth his hand to
heal. So that stretching forth, or sending forth, or putting forth the hand
(for the words are all used in common to the same sense) signify to do a
thing for our good and preservation, But usually this putting forth, or
stretching forth of the hand, notes some affliction, some punishment. A man
that stands with his hand stretched out, is in a posture to strike. And so
God himself is often described by having his hand stretched forth, when he is
about to punish, as in the Prophecy of Isaiah diverse times, Chap. 5.25.
Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled against his people, and he has
stretched forth his hand against them, Ezekiel. 16.14.
and has smitten them: and Chap. 9. three times; verse. 12. For all this his
anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still: and so at the
17th. verse, and at the 21. verse, His anger is not turned away, but his hand
is stretched out still, that is, the Lord is still smiting and afflicting them.
In the 6th of Esther, verse 2. Two men were found in the Chronicle, who sought
to lay (or put forth) their hands on the King Ahasuerus, scil. they would have
slain him. Then the meaning of Satan here is, stretch forth thine hand, let
him feel the weight of thine hand, in smitings and sore afflictions.

Thy hand. The hand of God in Scripture signifies, First the purpose of God, as
that, Act. 4.28. They have done whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined
before to be done, that is, whatsoever according to thy purpose, thou did
determine. 2. The hand of God signifies the Spirit of God, in the mighty
actings and workings of it; so a Spirit of prophecy is called the hand of God,
Ezekiel. 1.3. The hand of the Lord was there upon me; And Ezekiel. 37.1. The hand of
the Lord was upon me, that is, the Spirit of the Lord, a mighty power of
prophecy was upon me: So likewise a spirit of strength that is upon a man, is
called the hand of God, 1 King. 18. ult. The hand of the Lord was upon Elijah
and he girt up his loins and ran before Ahab. Here the hand of the Lord is put
for the power of the Lord, put forth thy hand, that is, put forth thy power;
and so the hand of the Lord is used often, Isa. 59.1. The hand of the Lord is
not shortened, that is, the power of the Lord is not abated. The Lord has a
long hand, and his hand is always of the same length; so, stretch forth thine
hand now, that is, do thou put forth thy mighty power.

This hand of the Lords power (to clear that a little further) is taken 3
ways in Scripture.

First, For his protecting power. There is a protecting hand, as Joh. 10.28. No
man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand, says Christ. God has his
sheep in his hand, and he will protect and safeguard them so, that none shall
be able to pluck them away. This hand God put forth before, for Job.

Again, It is put for his correcting-power: as Psalm. 32.4. His hand was heavy
upon me, that is, the afflicting hand of God was heavy upon me. Let us fall
into the hand of God (David chose that, 2 Samuel 24.14.) that is, into the
afflicting hand of God, rather than into the hands of men.

It is put thirdly for a revenging hand, for a wrathful hand, by which he does
destroy and break in pieces those who are his enemies, Heb. 10.31. It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. David desires to
fall into the hands of God, sell. into his correcting hand, because he knew
there was mercy, but it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God,
when he comes in wrath to take vengeance of those who contemptuously despise
his mercy, as there it is expressed.

Now here when Satan says, Put forth thy hand, that is thine hand of power:
Satan intends not that God should put forth the hand of his power to protect,
nor barely to correct: He desires more then barely a correcting or chastising
hand upon Job, he would have his revenging hand, his breaking, his destroying
hand, as we shall see afterward.

Further, Thy hand, that is, Gods own hand, as if he did desire that God
himself would take Job into his own hand to chasten and punish him.

The hand of God, his correcting or chastising hand sometimes is an immediate,
and sometimes a mediate hand. Sometimes it is immediate, when God by himself
does chasten or punish or afflict, when no second cause does appear or
interveene. So it may seem Satan here means, when he says, put forth thine
hand, that is, do it thine own self, let no other have the handling of Job,
but thy self. God does send such immediate afflictions; a man is afflicted in
his body, in his estate and many other ways, and he cannot find any thing in
the creature, whence it should come; it is an immediate stroke of God, he
cannot see how or which way, or at what door this evil came in upon him:
therefore it is called a creating of evil, Isa. 45.7. I make peace and create
evil. Now creation is out of nothing, there is nothing out of which it is
wrought. So many times God brings evil upon a people or person, when there
is no appearance of second causes, no matter out of which it is made, but it
comes as a creature, formed by the only hand of God. Sometimes likewise it is
called Gods hands, when it is the hand of a creature, it is Gods hand in a
creatures hand; Gods hand when it is the hand of wicked men, Gods hand when it
is Satan's hand. So that place is translated, Psalm. 17.14. Deliver my soul from
the wicked which is thy Sword (you see a wicked man is Gods Sword) and from men
which are thy hand. So that thy hand may be understood of an instrument; Satan
himself is Gods hand to punish in that sense, as wicked men here are said to
be Gods hand; from the men that are thy hand: though there be other readings of
that place, some read it, deliver me from men by thy hand; and others, Deliver
me from men of thy hand: but our translation may very well carry the sense of
the Original in it, from men which are thy hand, as Nebuchadnezzar that wicked
King is called Gods servant, Jer. 43.10. I will send and take Nebuchadnezzar my
servant; God speaks of him as his servant, or as his hand in the thing. So
then, Put forth thine hand, it may be understood (I say) either immediately or
mediately, do it by thy self or do it by Instruments, strike him thy self,
or give me Commission, or give others Commission to strike.

There is one thing further in this expression, (...)
Put forth thine hand now. Now. Some read it, put forth thine hand a little;
Particula obsecrantis.
and some read it, I pray thee put forth thy hand. The Original word is
translated to all these senses; we translate it, referring to the present
importunity and instancy of Satan, put forth thine hand now, let not this
business sleep, let it not be deferred a minute, a moment, let commission go
out speedily to afflict Job.

And touch all that he has. To touch, notes sometimes a heavy and a sore
affliction, and sometime a light and a small affliction. In the Scripture we
find it both ways used. Sometimes (I say) to touch, does signify, the
greatest and the sorest affliction or punishment that can be; and so Job does
express all the afflictions that fell upon him at the last only by touching,
Job 19.21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the
hand of God has touched me. Whereas Job at that time lay under the sorest and
heaviest affliction that could be, all his estate was gone, and his body was
full of diseases, and his soul was full of horror, and all this he does
express by this, the hand of the Lord has touched me. So Psalm. 73.14. To be
touched signifies the greatest affliction, All the day long (says David) have
I been plagued. That which we translate plagued, is the same Original word
which we translate touch, in the Text; All the day long have I been touched,
that is, I have been touched with the sorest plagues, heavy afflictions have
been laid continually upon me. So that to touch signifies sometimes the
greatest or the sorest strokes of trouble.

Sometimes again we shall find it signifies only a light affliction, as Genesis
26. in two places of that Chapter, at the 11th verse. Abimelech charged all his
people, saying, he that touches this man or his wife, shall surely be put to
death, that is, he that does them the least hurt or wrong. So at the 19th
verse, in that agreement between Abimelech and Isaac, they conclude thus, That
thou will do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee, and as we have done unto
thee nothing but good: So that to touch notes the least ill or hurt that can
be, we have not touched thee, that is, we have done nothing to thee but good:
Any thing on this side doing of good to them, had bin touching of them. We find
the like expression in Ps. 105.15. where the Psalmist speaking of Gods
extraordinary care of his people. He suffered no man to do them wrong, he
rebuked Kings for their sakes, saying, touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm. Touch not mine anointed people, that is the meaning of that
place, though in many other places we know Princes are called the anointed of
God: yet here it is meant of the people of God in general, they are Gods
anointed (as the context clearly carries it) for they have all received
Unction from God, an Unction of grace, an Unction of the spirit, and an Unction
of Privilege. Touch not mine anointed, that is, do them not the least hurt.
And the sense that these words may bear, Put forth thy hand now and touch all
that he has, might be carried, as if Satan here intended, only a touch in the
latter sense; Give him but the least stroke, lay but the lightest affliction
upon him, do but touch him; you are so confident of your servant Job, that he
is such a man, do but give him the least touch, and you shall see how he will
discover himself. So some expound it.

He does not say, wound him, smite him, break him to pieces, but touch him
only. Si vel extremo digitulo levissi me tangas bona sua, ejus fictum animum
and simulatam probitatem manifest comperies.
Neither says he, touch him, but his: And if thou give him but a touch with
the top of thy little finger, thou shall presently find the rottennes of his
heart. In that sense the word imports an extenuation of Jobs sincerity or
heightning of Jobs hypocrisy: as if he had been so rotten in his profession
that the least touch would overthrow him, and make him discover himself to be
stark naught. Like the Apples growing about Sodom, which have fair
outsides, but if you touch them, they moulder away into dust and ashes.

Though the words have this sense in them, and Satan carries it cunningly,
expressing himself in such ambiguous terms, yet certainly Satan had a further
intendment whatsoever his language may bear: he had an intention that Job
should be touched in the former sense, namely that he should have a touch to
the quick, as we say, that he should have the sorest and deepest wound that
his estate was capable of: he would have him whippt, not with cords, but with
Scorpions, he would have the little finger of God heavier upon him, than his
loins upon others.

Destroy him, undo him by your touching. He speaks by the figure (...), which
is when we go less in our expressions then in our intentions, when our words
are lower then our spirits: and that is proper for Satan, who is the great
deceiver, the great jugler in word and deed; to desire that Job should only be
touched, when he meant he should be utterly undone and ruined. Touch all that
he has, that is, all his estate, all his possessions, his children, his
family, his cattle, whatsoever belongs unto Job, let all feel an undoing
stroke from thy hand.

Before I come to that which he undertakes upon the affliction, I shall observe
two or three things from the words, thus far opened.

Put forth NOW thine hand. We may note from that, The extreme importunity of
Satan to do mischief; He would not give God a minutes, not a moments respite
to consider this thing, but do it now, presently, let him presently be
afflicted, he makes haste to destroy, he makes haste to shed blood, their feet
are swift to shed blood, as the Psalmist speaks. So Satan, his feet are swift
to shed blood. when Satan, would have God to afflict us, do it presently,
says he. when Satan, would have us sin against God, do it presently, says
he, now sin, now provoke God, do not stay till the next day; but when we are
called to give up our selves to God, then to morrow will serve the turn, and
next year will serve to repent, yea when you are old, it is time enough to
repent; when he tempteh to do any mischief, any sin, then now, now sin, but
it is time enough to do good hereafter, to morrow will serve for that.

Put forth now thine hand, and touch all that he has. It is a truth which
Satan here speaks concerning the hand of God; That if God do but touch the
highest and greatest estate in the world, it will fall to pieces quickly. There
is a truth in it, take it in the easiest sense that can be, if God do but
lightly touch the estate of a man, it will soon fall in pieces. God is not put
to any stresse to afflict and punish, as Psalm. 81.14. I should soon have
subdued their enemies and have turned my hand against their adversaries: God
expresses the utter overthrow of the enemies of his people, but by the
turning of a hand, if God do but turn his hand, they are all gone presently,
soon subdued; If he do but touch the might the pomp the greatness, the
riches and the power of all those in the world that are opposers of his Church,
presently they fall to the ground: A touch from the hand of God will end our
wars. If he touch the Mountains they smoke (as it is in the Psalm) and
consume to ashes: they that are the mighty and great ones of the world, the
Mountains, by one touch of his hand fall as it were to nothing. So if God do
but touch our estates, they moulder away, no creature can uphold them.

Then again observe here, the cunning imposture of Satan that puts such sore,
such heavy afflictions into such light and easy expressions; he cloatheth his
malice, his utmost malice here in very fair words, do but touch him, says
this enemy; but you see what Satan's touches are, touch all that he has. Why
Satan, would nothing have made a trial, but only a touching of all? For Job to
have lost somewhat had been a trial, a touch: for Job to have lost half his
flocks of Sheep, or his Oxen, had been a trial and no very light one
neither; for Job to have lost a son, to have found one of his children
suddenly struck dead, had been an affliction and a heavy one too; such a touch
as that might well have touched the fathers heart: Would it not serve Satan
that a son should die or that some of his cattle should be destroyed, but he
must have all touched, all that he has? The malice of Satan is unsatiable,
there is nothing will serve him, unless he may devour all.

This touch of Satan, which he desires might be laid upon Job, is like the
touch that many have given to those, who have come into their hands amongst us;
they would but touch them, but they would touch them in all; when they put
forth their hands (as they pretended) in ways of justice, in their Courts;
they would touch men in all, touch them in their liberties by imprisonment, and
touch them in their estates by extreme vast fines, and touch them in their
names by disgrace, touch them in their bodies by whipping and cutting, and
touch them in their relations, by keeping all friends from sight of them. No
moderation, no bounds, but touch them in all that they had. And (O exactness
of Justice) when God came to touch that power, he gave them a touch, just after
the rate and proportion of their own touches; for when those Courts and
persons came to have their power and actions scanned, it was not moderating, or
regulating, or restraining, or abating, or limiting their power, that
satisfied, they must quite down and be taken away. God gave them a touch, just
as they touched others before: So that a man may say certainly, there is a God
that judges the earth. These are the touches of Satan and, the touches of
merciless men are as like his as themselves are, they think there is nothing
done unless men be undone: they never give over touching till they come to
ruining.

Touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face. Some render it
thus, Touch all that he has, (...)
if he curse thee not to thy face: So it is word for word out of the
Original, nisi, unless, or Si non, touch all that he has and see if he do
not curse thee to thy face. We give the sense of it in a direct affirmation,
touch all that he has and he will, etc. Others put the force of an imprecation
to it, Touch all that he has and see if he do not curse thee to thy face,
that is, as if he had said, let me never be believed, In particula si aliquid
subaudiendum, ut ubi legimus, Si Davidi Mentiar, si introibunt in requiem meam,
hic subint elligitur, Si^ vanus aut aliquid tale. Dru. in^^c.
and never be trusted. Indeed Satan is so far disgraced and damned already,
that he has nothing to loose, he cannot damn himself further, he cannot wish
any thing to himself worse than he already is, but yet here is a kind of
execration or imprecation upon himself in it; Do this, and if he do not
curse thee to thy face, let me never be accounted of, or (as many use to say)
let me never be trusted; or as some wretched hellish ones, Let me be damned, if
such or such a thing be not. There is such an emphasis in that manner of
speaking used in the Text. But we translate it by a direct affirmation, and
that is a good sense too, touch all that he has and he will curse thee to thy
face, that is certain, so says Satan, he will do it: it is as sure as done
already.

Curse thee. It is the same word which is used before, ver. 5. It may be my
children have cursed God. The word signifies properly to bless. It was showed
that probably in that place, it might be translated Curse; but in this Text
there is a necessity of translating it so, seeing a clear sense cannot be made
out, taking the word properly. In cursing another these three things concur.
First an ill opinion or conceit of that person. 2. Hatred or malice against
him. 3. A desire that some evil may befall him. This Satan means when he
undertakes that Job being afflicted, will curse God. So then to curse God is to
blaspheme God in our thoughts and words, to think or speak unworthily of God,
and the ways of God; see, if he curse thee not to thy face, that is, see if
his heart be not imbittered against thee, see if his tongue be not sharpened to
wound thy honor, to reproach thy goodness, to accuse thy providence: As it is
said of those, Isa. 8.21. They shall be hungry and hard bestead; And what then?
They shall fret themselves and curse their King and their God, and look
upward, that is, they shall speak basely of their King and of their God, in
whom they have trusted, and whom they have followed; he speaks of those
wretches that did seek to false gods, or worship the true God falsely, they
shall curse their King and their God. It is the very same, that here Satan
promises himself and undertakes with God that Job will do; Do but make him
hungry (says he) and hard bestead, and he will fret himself, and curse thee.

It was very ordinary among the Heathen to do so: when their gods did not
please them, then they would curse their gods. The Poets bring them in often
raging against their gods, as he speaks of the mother that found her son
dead. Cum complexa sui corpus miserabile nati Atque deos, atque astra vocat
crudelia matter. Virg. Eclog. 5. Quem non incusavit amens hominumque deumque.
Idem. lib. 2. Aeneid.
she calls the gods and the stars cruel, she flies in the face of heaven
presently, who would serve such gods as these are, that thus slay my son, etc.
Satan interprets Job to be a man of the same temper.

Aquinas takes the word properly, Touch all that he has and he will bless
thee to thy face: And endeavors to make out the sense thus, touch all that he
has and thou shall see he has blessed thee to thy face, he reads it in the
Preterperfect tense, that is, if thou afflict him thou shall find that all his
former Religion was nothing but mere outside formality: that he served thee
only from the teeth outward, served thee to thy face; he blessed thee, prayed
unto thee and honored thee only to thy face. He had no regard to thy worship
in his heart; he did not worship thee ex animo, because he loved thee or
delighted in thee, but gave thee an outward complemental blessing, because thou
did bless him outwardly. As the Apostle directs servants, Ephesians. 6.6. Not with
eye service as men pleasers. Satan makes Job an eye-servant to God, or as if,
like those of whom Christ complains, Math. 15. in the words of the Prophet,
He had drawn nigh to God with his lips, while his heart was far from him.
The heart of Job has been far enough from thee, he only blessed thee with
his lips and to thy face: Indeed this interpretation has a fair face, but
touch it by a serious examination, and it will be found without a heart. The
construction of Gramar is quite against it, and for us to change the Text, and
make it to speak in the Preterperfect tense, of a thing past, whereas the
words are in the future tense, of an act to be done for the time to come, is
too much boldness with Scripture. Therefore though that opinion has a
plausible sense in it, yet I shall lay it by and take the ordinary translation,
that he indeed intended this, that Job would break forth into blasphemous
revilings of God, if God did but try him with an affliction.

And when he says that Job would do it to his face, the meaning of it is,
that he would do it openly: he will curse thee openly, he will curse thee
boldly, he will not go behind the door to tell tales of thee, but he will
speak of it before all the world, that thou art a cruel God, an unjust God,
and a hard master, he will tell such tales of thee, even to thy very face. We
have a like speech, Gal. 2.11. When Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him
to the face (says Paul,) that is, openly, I did not go behind his back to
tell Peter his own, but I told him it to his face, plainly, openly before them
all, (as it is explained, verse. 14.) I said to Peter before them all, that were
then present. Jerome (because he would not have Peter receive such an open
repoofe, judging it would be a disparagement to Peter, to be rebuked by Paul)
gives a quite contrary sense of those words of Paul; I withstood him to his
face, that is says he, I did speak somewhat roughly to him before them, but
there was no such thing in my heart. I did it but to his face, very slightly,
least I should offend the Jews whose Apostle Peter was; and I did it to his
face, a little, that I might satisfy the Gentiles, who were scandalized by
Peter's walking: otherwise in my heart I had no quarrel with Peter: he and I
agreed well enough. As if Paul had made but a shadow fight (ad faciendum
populum) to delude the people. But we must not be thus wise, I withstood him to
his face, is not opposed to withstanding him cordially, but to a withstanding
of him secretly, or behind his back. So here he will curse thee to thy face,
that is, he will curse thee (as the Greek Scholiast has it) openly, (...).
and impudently; himself indeed was afraid least his sons had cursed God in
their hearts, but for all his niceness and seeming fear of his childrens
sinning in secret, he will curse thee with impudence, he will not only curse
thee in his heart, but the curse will break out at his lips: Out of the
abundance of his heart, his mouth will speak blasphemy against God. He will
curse thee to thy face.

We may give some exemplifications, what it is to curse God, to blaspheme God
thus to his face. You may read what it is, Mal. 3.14. Your words have been
stout against me, says the Lord, you have spoken to my very face: why, what
had they spoken to the Lord? What have we spoken say they so much against thee?
Ye have said, It is vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept
his Ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts?
etc. This is to curse God to his face: when the ways of God are blasphemed and
the worship of God reported as unprofitable, when men say it is in vain to
serve God, when they cast aspersions and bring up an evil name upon any holy
duty, this is to blaspheme God. They did only speak against the service of
God, and they thought they had not blasphemed God in it, Wherein have we spoken
against thee? yes says God, you have spoken against me, in that you have
spoken against and discredited my ways. So, if Job had said the ways of God
are unprofitable, and I see now it is in vain to serve God and to fear him,
this had been blasphemy and cursing of God to his face. David was near upon
the very brinke of this blasphemy, Psalm. 73.13. when he said, I have cleansed
my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence, because (says he) I am
plagued every morning; the judgments and afflictions that were upon him, began
to make him break out thus. But he presently be fools himself for such
speeches, and by that repaires God in his honor.

Secondly, To quarrel and be angry with the Providence of God, as if he were
not wise or just or good in his dispensations either to particular persons or
to the Church, This I say likewise is a cursing, a reproaching of God.

Thirdly, To curse the servants and people of God is to curse God; If he that
touches them touches God, then he that curses them curses God too. And God is
cursed in any of these senses two ways, first, by detracting from himself,
his worship, his works or his servants the good they have, or by fastening on
them and aspersing them with the evil which they have not.

He will curse thee to thy face. Observe two or three Points from this,

First, Note this, Satan can only guess at the hearts of men. He would
undertake and enter warranty with God that Job would blaspheme, if God did but
touch him, but he was deceived: Satan did but conjecture at most, and speak at
a venture, If he did not lie knowingly, I am sure he did but guess ignorantly.
Satan knows not what is in the heart, that is Gods peculiar, that is Gods
cabinet. God knew there lay sincerity in the heart of Job all the while,
although Satan would stand to it, that nothing was there but hypocrisy.

Secondly, We may note, seeing Satan accusing him of hypocrisy, would have
him afflicted, That affliction is the trial and touchstone of sincerity. When
God does afflict you, then he does bring you to the touchstone to see whether
you are good metal or no, he does bring you then to the furnace, to try
whether you be dross or gold, or what you are. Affliction is the great
discoverer, That unmaskes us. Satan was not out in the thing, he hit upon the
rightest way that could be, if any thing would discover Job, affliction would.
Indeed some are discovered by prosperity and outward abundance. The warm Sun
makes some cast off that cloak, which the wind and the cold caused them to
wrap closer about them. Some, when they have gotten enough from God, care not
for God; when the fish is caught, they lay by the net, for they do but go a
fishing with Holiness, and the profession of Religion, and when they have their
ends, there is an end of their profession. Affliction and the cross try others:
Some will hold on with God as long as the Sun shines, as long as it is fair
weather; but if the storm arise, if troubles come, whether personal or
public, then they pull in their heads, then they deny and forsake God, then
they draw back from and betray his truth; what they, such and such men? no not
they. Trouble makes the great trial; bring professors to the fire, and then
they show their metal. This course Satan took with Job. He knew Job had bin
abundantly tried by fulness and abundance, and these did not draw his heart
from God, he must therefore now try another way. It is an excellent passage in
the Church history, concerning Constantius the father of Constantine, that to
the end he might try the hearts of his Courtiers, he proclaimed, that all they
who would not forsake the worship of the true God, should be banished the
Court, and should have heavy penalties and fines laid upon them* presently
upon this (says the story) all that were base and came to serve him only for
ends, went away, forsook the true God, and worshipped Idols. by this means he
found out who were the true servants of God, and whom he meant to make his
own; such as he found faithful to God he thought would prove faithful to
him. What this exploratorie decree of Constantius effected in his Court, the
same did that which the Apostate Julian set forth in good earnest against the
Christians. (...). Socrat lib. 3. cap. 13.
He no sooner caused it to be proclaimed, that whosoever would not renounce the
Faith should be discarded his service, and forfeit both life and estate to his
high displeasure; But presently upon the publication of that decree, they who
were indeed Christians, and they who had only the title of Christians,
presented themselves, as it were on a common stage to the view of all men. Such
as these are Willows not Oaks. And as it was with Naomi and her two daughters
in law, Orpah and Ruth, All the while that she was Naomi, beautiful, and had
enough, they both stayed with her: but when once Naomi became Marah, bitter,
and empty, then Orpah took her leave of her, but Ruth abides with her. Here
was the trial whether Orpah or Ruth had the sincerer affection to Naomi; Ruth
loved her mothers person, Orpah her estate and outward preferments. While
Religion and prosperity go together it is hard to say which a man follows;
but when once they are forced to a separation, where the heart was will soon
be manifest. The upright in heart are like Ruth, whatsoever becomes of the
Gospel, they will be sharers with it in the same condition; be it affliction,
or be it prosperity, be it comfort or be it sorrow, be it fair weather or be
it foul, be it light or be it darkness they will take their lot with it. This
is a clear truth, that, whatsoever was the cause of our doing a thing, that
being removed we cease to do it: if outward comforts and accommodations in the
world, be the cause why we follow Christ in the profession of his Gospel, then
as soon as ever they fail our profession will fail too. When zeal is
kindled only with the beams of worldly hopes, when worldly hopes fail, our
zeal is extinct, and our endeavor is cut off with our expectation.

We are next to consider the Lords grant of Satan's motion, And the Lord said
unto Satan, behold all that he has is in thy power, only upon himself put not
forth thine hand. So Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord.

We have in this verse. First, Gods Commission or his permission unto Satan,
Behold all that he has is in thine hand. And Secondly, His limitation of the
Commission, Only upon himself put not forth thine hand. Thirdly, Satan's
speedy execution of his Commission, So Satan went forth from the presence of
the Lord.

The Lord said unto Satan, all that he has is in thy hand, in thy power, so we
translate it: the word in the Original is, all is in thy hand. Satan moved
that God would put forth his hand against Job; and God puts Job into Satan's
hand. Least Satan should cavil that God had touched him but lightly, he puts
him into Satan's power and lets him do it himself, who would do it thoroughly.
The hand (as we before noted) is put for power, and when any thing is put into
the hand, it is put into the power or disposition of another, Exodus 4.21. Thou
shall do all the wonders before Pharaoh which I have put into thy hand. And
Joh. 3.35. The Father loves the Son and has given all things into his hand.
This phrase of giving or putting into the hand, is taken either for good or for
evil. Sometime the putting of a thing into ones hand, is only for the managing
and disposing of it for good, As Genesis 39.7, 8. Joseph said that his master had
committed all that he had into his hand, that is, to take care of it, and to
order it for his masters benefit, profit, and honor: But often to put or to
give into the hand, is for evil, to do what you will, with persons or things,
to punish or to afflict them, Judge. 6.1. God delivered the Israelites into the
hand of Midian, that is, he left them to the power of the Midianites, to
tyrannize over and vex them: And verse 7. Dan. 1.2.
God delivered Midian into the hand of Israel, that is, he gave Israel power
over them to destroy or afflict them. So here, he gave all into the hand of
Satan, that is, he gave Satan leave to dispose of Jobs estate as he pleased. As
if God had said to Satan; Thou have leave to do what thou will with Jobs
outward estate, spoil it, plunder it, destroy it, consume it, fire it; thou
have free leave, all that he has is in thy hand.

We shall note a point or two from that. You see, as soon as ever Satan had
made his motion, God presently answers, all that he has is in thy hand. It
is not always an argument of Gods goodwill and love to have our motions
granted. Many are heard and answered out of anger, not out of love. The
children of Israel required meat for their lusts, Multi irato Deo exaudiuntur,
multis propitius Deus non tribuit quod volunt, ut quod utile est tribuat,
August. 2 Cor. 12.8.
and God gave it them, he did not withhold from them their desire, they were
not shortened of their lusts, they had it presently: many times his own
servants call and call again, move and move again, and obtain no grant: For
this thing I besought the Lord thrice, says Paul, yet Paul could not have what
he sought. Satan did but move once, and presently all that Job had was in his
hand.

But further, that which is chiefly here to be observed is, That until God
gives commission, Satan has no power over the estates or persons of Gods
people, or over any thing that belongs unto them. Neither our persons nor our
estates are subject to the will either of men or Devils; Christ must say, All
that he has is in thy hand, before Satan can touch a shoe-latchet: As Christ
said Joh. 19.11. unto Pilat, when he spoke so stoutly, know thou not that I
have power to crucify thee and power to release thee? He thought that he had
all power in his hand: but Christ tells him, Thou could have no power at all
against me unless it were given thee from above. If the Devils could not go
into the swine, much less can they meddle with a man, made after Gods Image,
till God gives them leave, Every soul that has interest in Christ may suck
comfort and consolation in the saddest, in the sorrowfullest day from the
breast of this truth. If Satan and wicked men cannot move till Christ says,
go, nor wound till Christ says strike, nor spoil nor kill, till Christ says
their estates, their lives are in your power, surely Christ will not speak a
word to their hurt, whom he lo^^, nor will he ever suffer his enemies to do a
real damage to his friends. Besides it may fill the soul with unspeakeable
joy, to remember, that while a man is suffering, the will of Christ is a doing.

Thirdly, Satan does very wickedly (according to his nature,) in moving that
Job may be afflicted. He moves in malice and in spite, God knew what his
heart and intent was, and yet grants it; We may note from hence.

That which Satan and evil men desire sinnefully, the Lord grants holily.

The will of God and the will of Satan joined both in the same thing; yet they
were as different as light and darkness, their ends were as different as
their natures. Though it were the same thing they both willed, yet there was an
infinite distance between them in willing it. The will of Satan was sinful,
but the power given Satan was just Why? Because his will was from (himself,
but his power was from the will of God; Satan had no power to do mischief but
what God gave him, but his will to do mischief was from himself. Therefore
we find that the same spirit is said to be an evil spirit, and to be a spirit
from the Lord, and yet the Lord does not partake at all in the evil of the
spirit, as 1 Samuel 16.14. The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul and an evil
spirit from the Lord troubled him. An evil spirit from the Lord, Vnus idemque
spiritus and Domini appellatur and malus Domini per licentiam potestatis justae
malus per desiderium voluntatis injustae, Greg.
how was it an evil spirit if it were from the Lord? can the Lord send forth
any evil from himself who is only good? In that he was evil that was from
his own will, but that he had power to trouble Saul that was from the Lord: So
here, Satan's will and intent were most wicked, these were from himself; his
power to afflict Job was from God, and that was good. Satan wills Job should
be afflicted for his destruction, God wills it only for his trial and
probation. Satan desires it that God may be blasphemed; but God wills it
that himself might be glorified. Satanae voluntas semper iniqua est sed
nunquam potest as injusta, Greg. Deus adeo bonus est ut nullo modo mala
permitteret nisi inde majora bona eliciturus esset.
Satan wills it, that so others in his example might be scandalized and
disheartened from entering into the service of God, seeing how ill he sped; But
God wills it that others might be strengthened and encouraged to enter into
his service, beholding a man under such heavy pressures, and yet not speaking
ill of God or of his ways. Satan wills it, hoping thereby Job would discover
his hypocrisy; but God wills it, knowing that he would therein discover his
integrity. So then, though the same thing was willed, yet there was a vast
disproportion in their ends and intentions; and though the power by which Satan
did afflict Job was from God, yet the evil intent with which he afflicted him
was from himself; Thus we see how God without any stain or touch of evil
grants this, which Satan did most wickedly desire. It follows Only upon
himself thou shall not put forth thy hand.

God gives a commission, but it is with a limitation, there is a restriction in
it; Only upon himself, etc. that is, not upon his person, not his body, thou
shall not afflict that with diseases, not his soul, thou shall not afflict
that with temptations. Hence note.

That God himself sets bounds to the afflictions of his people; he limits out
how far every affliction shall go, and how far every instrument shall
prevail: as he does with the Sea, Hitherto (says he) thou shall come and no
further, here thou shall stop thy proud waves; so he says to all the
afflictions of single persons, or whole Nations, hither you shall come and no
further, Only upon himself thou shall not put forth thine hand. This
limitation respects; First, The degree or measure, thus far you shall
afflict, that is, in such a degree, to such a height, and no higher. Secondly,
It respects the time, thus far, that is, thus long, so many years, or so
many days you shall have power and no longer. God leaves not either the
measure or the time, the degree or the continuance of any affliction in the
hand of Satan or his adherents: We read ( Rev. 6.10.) That the souls under
the Altar cry, How long Lord, how long? They cry to God how long? they knew
that he only had the time in his hand, he only could tell how long, and it
should be as long as he pleased, How long Lord? They cried not to cruel
tyrants, how long will ye persecute? but Lord how long will it be before thou
come to revenge? And so David, Psalm. 31.15. My time it is in thy hand, speaking
of his afflictions. There is no affliction, but it is in the hand of God, for
the continuance of it as well as for the manner of it; and as no enemy, man or
devil can make thy cross greater or longer, or heavier, so no friend man or
Angel can make thy cross lighter, or lesser, or shorter then God himself
has appointed; Only upon himself shall thou not put forth thine hand, thou
shall not move an inch further, not a hairs breadth further. As our afflictions
for the matter of them are by the will of God, (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet.
4.19. While you suffer (says he) according to the will of God: those words
according to the will of God, note not only the righteousness of suffering,
that it must be in a good cause, but also the spring from whence those
sufferings come, they are Ex voluntate Dei, so Mr. Beza translates it, they are
out of the will of God. Now I say as they are out of the will of God, or from
the will of God, springing from his will and flowing from his dispensation of
things in the matter of them) so also in every circumstance; God himself gives
thy cross length, and breadth, and thickness; he fills thy cup of sorrow, he
directs how many drops to a drop, shall be put into it, thou shall not have a
drop more then God prescribes, and (which is more comfortable) knows will be
for thy good.

Secondly, Observe, That Satan is boundless in his malice toward the people of
God. If God did not set him bounds, he would set himself no bounds, therefore
says God unto him, Only upon himself, etc. He had a mind to have gone
further, he would have been upon Job himself, as well as upon his estate, if
God had not stopped and curbed him. Therefore the Apostle gives that assurance
for the comfort of the people of God, 1 Cor. 10.13. God (says he) is faithful
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able: As if he should
say, Satan would with all his heart lay more upon you, than you are able to
bear; Satan would break your backs if he were let alone, but God will not
suffer it. Satan has a boundless malice against the people of God. Some
observe this from his name Leviathan, Isa. 27.1. In that day the Lord with his
great and strong Sword shall punish Leviathan the piercing Serpent. Leviathan
is put there for Satan and for all the instruments of Satan; now Leviathan
signifies in the Hebrew an augmentation, an addition, or an increase: Dicitur
Leviathan, i e. Additamentum sive augmentum, nam nullo nostro malo contentus
est, nullam potestatem sibi satis esse putat: plus sibi potestatis addi, nobis
maloru^ plus inserri semper postulat. Pineda.
And Satan is so called, because (say they) he ever desires to lay more burdens
upon, to increase the afflictions, troubles and temptations of Gods people, he
never thinks he has done enough against them. His thirst to work mischief
is never quenched, but still he desires to do more, he would feign have his
Commission enlarged to do more mischief in the world. Therefore God is said
not to strike after their stroke, in the 7th verse of that 27. of Isa. Has
he smitten him as he smit those that smote him? In the Hebrew it is, He has
not smitten him according to the stroke of those that smote him: according to
their stroke, noting that the stroke of Leviathan and the stroke of his
instruments is an unmeasurable stroke, a boundless stroke, they would never
give over striking: They think the wound is never deep enough, nor blood shed
enough; but says the Prophet, verse 8. God does it in measure, so that he
opposes their striking to Gods afflicting by the measure of it, God keeps
his afflictions in such a bound and compass, he afflicts in measure, but
Satan's stroke and the strokes of wicked men are without all measure, that is
without all moderation: unless God stop them, they would never make an end.

Lastly, Observe how Satan is by this proved a deceiver, he intended more than
he spoke; you may see it plainly in this, because God put a restraint upon him.
Touch all that he has, says Satan; that referred to his possessions and
outward estate, as if that had bin the mind of Satan in the motion, do but
afflict him in his outward estate, I desire no more to make this trial: now
when the Lord says, All that he has is in thy hand, there he grants him the
motion in the letter of it: but the Lord God saw that Satan had a further
reach, when he said, Touch all that he has, which words seem to extend no
further then his estate, but had not God limited and restrained him, he by an
indefinite grant to his motion had likewise fallen upon his person, that was
the great morsel he gaped after all this while, he would have been doing with
Job himself, else there was no need of this limitation, Only upon himself
put not forth thy hand; Satan's fingers itcht to be meddling with Job, though his
words called for what he had, not for himself.

And Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord. As soon as he has leave
and his Commission, he is gone presently, He went out from the presence of the
Lord. The word is, he went out from the face of the Lord: Now the face of the
Lord in Scripture it is taken sometimes for the essential glory of God, that
inaccessible Majesty of God, Exodus 33. ult. Thou can not behold my face.
Sometimes the face of God is put for the favor and love of God, Cause thy face
to shine upon thy Sanctuary which is desolate, Dan. 9.17. and cause thy face to
shine upon thy servant: So in many other places the face of God is put for the
favor of God, because as the favor and love of a man is seen and discovered
in his face, so there is somewhat in those dealings of God which discover God,
he is said to make his face to shine upon his people, when he does discover by
any act of his, that he loves and favors them; that is the shining of his face
upon them: The face interprets the heart and shows the meaning of the spirit:
so in those things which interpret somewhat of the love of God to us, Index
animi vultus.
God is said to make his face shine upon us. On the other side the face of God
is put sometimes for the anger and wrath of God, because anger is seen in the
face too, so in those things by which God discovers his anger, he is said to
set his face against men; there is an express place for it in this sense, Lam.
4.16. The anger of the Lord (the Hebrew is, the face of the Lord) has divided
them; that is, the Lord has done such things as have the character of anger
upon them, that do represent and hold forth nothing but the anger of the Lord
unto a people, and that anger of the Lord is called the face of the Lord unto a
people. Thirdly by the face of the Lord in Scripture, we may understand the
ordinances and the worship of God, because in them and by them God is revealed,
manifested and known to his people, as a man is known by his face: So in the
old Testament, coming to God in those institutions was called appearing before
God, because in them God had promised to manifest himself unto his people.
Lastly, the face of God is put for the common and general presence of God in
the world, by which he fills Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 139.7. Whether shall I
go from thy presence?

Now when it is said that Satan went forth from the face of God, or from the
presence of God, it cannot be understood in the first or in the second sense,
for he cannot so come into the presence of God or before the face of God:
before his face of glory, or before his face of favor Satan never came nor
ever shall. And as the presence of God is taken for his worship; so Satan cares
not to come into his presence. Lastly, as the face of God signifies his common
and general presence in the world, so Satan cannot possibly go out from his
face, Whether shall I go from thy presence? Psalm. 139.
nor men, nor devils are able to go out of the presence of the Lord in that
sense, for he fills Heaven and Earth.

Then these words, He went out from the presence of the Lord are spoken after
the manner of men. Hominum more loquitur, a quibus servi exeunt, ut mandata
exequantur quae ab illis acceperunt.
When a servant comes to his Master to receive Commission to do some
business and has his errand given him, then he goes out from the presence of
his Master about his business. So Satan comes here upon a business unto God,
he makes a motion, and desires to have such power put into his hand, to do
such and such things: the Lord grants it, and so soon as ever he had his
dispatch, he goes out of the presence of the Lord. So that the meaning is only
this, that Satan left off speaking with God, left off moving God any further at
that time, and went out to execute that which he got commission to do, as
servants go out from the presence of their Masters, when they have received
warrant or direction what to do. While a servant is in expectation of his
message or errand, so long his eyes are upon his Master, Our eyes wait upon
thee O God, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their Masters,
Psalm. 123.3. The eyes of servants wait upon the face of the Master till they
have received their message, and then they go out from their presence.

It notes the speed that Satan makes when he receives power from God to afflict
or to chasten and try any of his children, he makes no stay, presently he goes
out from the presence of the Lord. Satan is speedy and active in executing any
power that is committed unto him against the people of God, against any
particular member, or against the Church in general: As soon as ever he has
but his Commission to afflict he is gone about it instantly: As the good Angels
in Heaven are described to have wings, because as soon as ever they have
received a command from God, they are upon the wing, they fly as it were to
fulfill the will of God; and in that sense go out of his presence: So Satan
and the wicked Angels are upon the wing too in that sense, as soon as ever they
have received power, they presently put it in execution.

And we may in this make Satan himself our pattern. As we pray that the will
of God may be done on earth as it is in heaven, in heaven by the good Angels:
So in this sense (I say) we may desire that we may do the will of God with as
much speed as the evil Angels. It is not unwarrantable to learn from Satan
speedily to be doing about the will of God.

JOB 1.13, 14, etc. And there was a day when his sons and his daughters were
eating and drinking wine in their eldest brothers house.

And there came a messenger unto Job and said, The Oxen were plowing, and the
asses feeding besides them.

And the Sabeans fell upon them, etc.


IN the former context we showed you the affliction of Job, moved by Satan and
permitted by God, Touch all that he has, is Satan's motion, All that he has is
in thine hand is Gods permission. From this 13th. verse to the end of the 19th.
the afflictions of Job are particularly described; and we may observe 6
particulars in the Context concerning his afflictions.

1. The time or season of his afflictions, And there was a day when his sons
and daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brothers house,
ver. 13.

2. The instruments or the means of his afflictions. Satan who undertook the
afflicting of Job, stands as it were behind the door, he does not appear in
it, but sets on others. His instruments were first cruel and bloody minded
men, the Sabeans verse 15. The Chaldeans verse 17. Secondly, those active
creatures, devouring fire and stormy winds, the fire, verse 16. the wind,
verse 19.

3. The matter of his affliction, or in what he was afflicted, it was in his
outward estate.

4. The variety of his afflictions, he was not smitten in some one thing, in
some one part of his outward estate, but he was afflicted in all, his Oxen, his
Asses and his Camels violently taken away, his Sheep burnt up by the fire; his
sons and his daughters overwhelmed and crushed by the fall of an house, all
his servants attending upon these slain, consumed, destroyed, excepting only
one from every stroke, to be the sad relator or messenger of these calamities.

5. The suddenness of his afflictions, they came all upon him in one day.

6. The uncessantnesse of the report of these afflictions, the sound of them
all was in his ears at once: as they were all brought upon him in one day, so
they are all told him in one hour, yea by the story it does appear, there
were but very few moments between the first and the last. For the Text says
that no sooner had one messenger ended his doleful news, but another begins,
nay they did not stay so long as to let one another make an end; but the Text
says, While the former was yet speaking, there came another and said, and so
while the next was yet speaking, there came another and said, and while he was
yet speaking, another, etc. So that Satan did not give Job so much as the least
minute of intermission to breath a while or recollect himself. His troubles
both in the acting and in the reporting, were close linked together, like a
chain one within another, and he within them all fast bound, and yet free.

These are observable, thorough the whole Context concerning this great
affliction of Job. Now we will consider the afflictions themselves, their
several parts, and open the words in which they are presented to us.

Verse 13. And there was a day when his sons and daughters were eating and
drinking wine in their eldest brothers house.

And there was a day. Eccles. 3.1.
] To every thing there is a season (says Solomon) and a time for every purpose
under the Sun. God has a time for his purposes, God has his day: Man has a
time for his purposes, and so has Satan: any day will not serve his turn, he
picks and chooses. There was a day, it intimates a day extraordinary, (...)
and there is an express addition in the Original, which puts an emphasis
upon it, and makes it more then a day, there was that day, or that special
day: So it is used, 2 Kin. 4.8. And it fell on a day that Elisha passed to
Shunem, or upon that day, a notable day wherein so many great things were done.

But what day was this? It is explained in the words, in the latter part of the
verse. It was a notable day, for it was a day or that day, When his sons and
his daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brothers house.

There are three things in those words, which prove that this was an
extraordinary day.

1. It was a feasting day, and feasting days are extraordinary days.

2. It was an extraordinary, not an ordinary feasting day; For it is said, they
were eating and drinking wine. In the beginning of the Chapter (where the
feasts of Jobs children are described) it is said only, That his sons went
every one their day, to eat and to drink: But here it is said, that they did
eat and drink wine: which notes an extraordinary feast. For still in
Scripture, when we read of a banquet of wine, or of a feast of wine, an
extraordinary feast is meant: Esth. 5.6.
Queen Esther invited the King and Haman to a banquet of wine, not that there
was nothing but wine at the banquet, but that addition does imply, that it was
a plentiful banquet, a solemn banquet. It is more to make a banquet of wine,
then to make a banquet, though scarce any banquet is made without wine. Joh.
2.4.
So when there wanted wine, the solemnity and glory of the feast was thought to
be blemished, They have no wine, says the mother of Christ unto him at the
marriage feast in Cana. And when the Spouse would set forth the wonderful
fulness of spiritual delights, which she had from Christ, she expresses it
thus, Cant. 2.4.
He brought me into the banqueting house, the Hebrew word is, he brought me
into the house of wine; the house of wine notes extraordinary spiritual
refreshing. What a banquet had the Spouse for her soul there? Christ called
her to eat and drink abundantly, to be filled with his love. See the like
Isa. 25.6. So Jobs children were eating and drinking wine, sc. they were at a
plentiful and solemn feast that day.

3. It was a day of feasting in their eldest brothers house, that is another
thing which prooves it was an extraordinary feast day. It was a feast, and a
feast of wine, and a feast of wine in their eldest brothers house, who had a
larger estate, a fuller portion, and to answer the dignity of his primogenitor,
ought to make a more solemn feast then the rest did: This was the day that
Satan pickes out and chooses to bring all these sad afflictions upon Job, an
ordinary day would not serve his turn; without doubt this was not the
immediate day or time, after which he got that Commission from God, All that he
has is in thine hand; Satan went away, he would have been at it as soon as he
could, but yet he waits for a special time, wherein he might do it with
greatest advantage; and that is the point I shall observe from this,

That Satan observes and watches his time to fasten his temptations most
strongly upon the soul. He watches a day, there was a day, and there was not
a day in the whole year, upon which he could have done it with greater
advantage then upon that day. As the mercies of God are exceedingly endeared to
us by the season in which they come to us: When they come to us in our special
need; how sweet is a mercy then! And as our obedience is exceedingly commended
to the acceptance of God, when it is upon a fit day, when it is on the day,
wherein he calls for and expects it: And as our sins are exceedingly
aggravated, by the season and time wherein they are committed: What, sin upon
this day? A day of trouble, a day of humiliation? As Elisha rebuked Gehazi, 2
Kin. 5.26.
Is this a time to receive money, and to receive garments? etc. Is this a time
for thy heart to run out sinfully after the world? So likewise the
temptations of Satan and the afflictions which he brings upon the servants of
God, are exceedingly imbittered by the season, and he knows well enough, what
seasons will make them most bitter; And what can more imbitter a cup of sorrow,
then to have it brought us upon a day of rejoicing. Solomon tells us, that as
he that takes away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar upon nitre, so is
he that sings a song to an heavy heart; If joy be troublesome in our sorrows,
how troublesome is sorrow in the midst of our joys, Prove. 25.20. Then, Satan
could never have found out such a time as this; Must he needs be afflicting the
Father, when the children were a feasting? Could he find out no other time but
this? Must his tears be mingled with their wine? Must the childrens rejoicing
day be the Fathers mourning day? Must Satan needs show his malice against the
Father, when the children were showing their love one to another? It was a
love-feast. Mat. 4.2.
Thus he did with Christ; it is observed that when Christ had fasted 40. days
and 40. nights, and afterward was an hungry, then the Tempter came, he lays
hold of this advantage, he would not come till he was hungry, to persuade him
to turn stones into bread. What a strength had this temptation from the
season? Who would not make bread for himself if he can, when he is hungry?
Had Christ been full, there had not been such an edge upon, such a weight in
the temptation. How many does Satan provoke to turn stones into bread, when he
commes to them in their hunger? Thou art in a strait, like to starve and
perish, turn stones into bread, that is, procure thy self meat and provision
by unlawful and sinful ways; This is indeed to turn stones into bread. So
here at this time when Job was rejoicing (as doubtless he did) to see the love
and unity of his children; now at this time Satan attempts to turn their bread
into a stone, to bruise and break the heart of their tender Father.
Afflictions press most when they are least expected.

Let us observe then this mixture of malice and cunning in Satan, in choosing
his time. To carry a man from one extremity to another, puts him upon the
greatest extremity: To make the day of a man's greatest rejoicing to be the day
of his deepest sorrows, this is cutting, if not killing sorrow. To be brought
from extreme sorrow to extreme joy suddenly, does rather amaze then comfort
the spirit of a man: It is said that when the Lord turned again the captivity
of Zion, the people were like them that dream, Psalm. 126.1.
the change was so great, so sudden, that they were rather astonished and
amazed then comforted with it, for a while. So, much more to be hurried from
extreme joy to extreme sorrow, from the borders of comfort to the brinke of
death on a sudden, is not so much to afflict a man as to confound and distract
him. This course Satan takes with Job.

It were well if we could be wise in this respect to imitate Satan, to choose
out our day to do good when there is greatest probability of success, as he
chose out his day to do mischief! It is the Apostles rule, Gal. 6.10.
as you have opportunity do good; if we could be wise to lay hold upon
opportunities, it would be a wonderful advantage to us; as a word fitly spoken
is word upon the wheel, so a work fitly done, is a work upon the wheel, it
goes on, takes upon the heart both of God and man. Let us consider whether now
we have not a season, whether this be not a day that holds forth to us a
glorious opportunity. Surely we may present this day unto you, as a day to be
doing in. Let us therefore be as quick in this our day to do good, as Satan
was in that day to do hurt. This is a day wherein great things are a doing,
and grievous things are a suffering by many of our brethren, therefore you
should be working this day, make a day on it. This is a day in which sons of
Belial, men that will not bear Christ's yoke, are combining to break it, and
to cast his coards from them. Then join, this day to help Christ; else, as
Mordecai said to Esther, E^th. 4.14.
If thou altogether hold thy peace at this time (this was a day for Esther
to work in) then shall there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews
from another place, but thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed: So I may
say to you in reference to the present opportunity, if you altogether hold your
peace, hold your purses, and hold your hands at this time, at such a day as
this, enlargement will come to the Church some other way, but you may be
destroyed, who think to hold and keep your peace either by saying or doing
nothing: If ever you will appear, this is a day to appear in to do good. Let
us be wise to manage and improve our day; That it may never be said of us as
our Lord Christ did of Jerusalem: If ye had known, even ye, in this your day,
the things which belong unto your peace, Luke 19.42. It is a sadder thing to
have had a season and not to know it, ( sc. not to use it,) then not to have
had it. Solomon tells us, Eccles. 8.6. That, Because to every purpose there is
a time and judgment, therefore the misery of man is great upon him. Misery
cannot be great to a man, because there is a time for every purpose, but
because men are either so blind that they cannot see, or so sluggish that they
will not make use of the proper time for every purpose. Thus the preacher
himself expounds it, Chap. 9.12. For man also knows not his time, as the
fishes that are taken in an evil not, and as the birds are taken in a snare,
so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon
them. Consider what Solomon's experience taught him: Let not your inadvertency
of these times, make you a new experiment of that ancient truth, And leave men
that should be wise, especially that pretend to wisdom, to be numbered among,
and compared with a silly bird, a silent fish.

Then again, Forasmuch as it was the day of their great feast, of their feast
with wine, upon which this great affliction assaulted Job, Observe,

That the fairest and clearest day of our outward comfort may be clouded and
overcast before the evening. It was as fair a day as ever began in Jobs
family, a feast, and a feast with wine, and that in the eldest Brothers house,
and yet all was darkness before night.

This is true in reference to ungodly men, great and terrible judgments fall
suddenly upon them; their light is turned into darkness in a moment, as
Christ compares it to the days of Noah and the days of Lot; As it was (says
he) in the days of Noah, they did eat, they drank, they married wives, they
were given in marriage until the day that Noah entered into the Arc, and the
flood came and destroyed them all; and as it was in the days of Lot, etc. both
which are in two words set out by the Apostle; 1 These. 5.3.
when they shall say, peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes. Thus
it is with ungodly men, their Sun often sets at noone, when they say, yea
when they conclude all is well, then judgment mixed with wrath is at the door.
This is a truth also in reference unto godly men and the Churches of God, all
their outward comforts may be clouded in a day, while they are eating and
drinking, not sinfully but in a holy manner: suppose as the Apostle advises, 1
Cor. 10.31.
to the glory of God, yet even at that time all may presently be taken away.
And therefore as the Apostle says, rejoice as if you rejoiced not in the
creature, 1 Cor 7.30.
and eat as if you did not eat, and buy as if you possessed not, Why? For the
fashion of this world, the Scheme of this world passes away. You see it did
with Job; in what a goodly fashion was his worldly estate in the morning, how
was it dressed and adorned in perfect beauty in all its excellencies (as we heard
it before described,) yet before night all the fashion of it past away, and the
beauty of it was quite blasted: Therefore you that have great estates, and good
estates, estates well gotten, and well governed, be not high-minded, trust not
in uncertain riches; 1 Timothy 6.17. Psalm. 62.10.
If riches increase, and if they increase in a right way, yet set not your
hearts upon them, for the fashion of worldly things quickly passes away;
Riches make themselves wings to fly away, when thou art making doors and
locks, bolts and bars to keep them in. That for the time in the 13th. verse.

But what did Satan upon this day?

That is set forth in the 14th. v. and so on. And there came a messenger unto
Job and said, The Oxen were plowing, and the Asses feeding beside them.

There came a messenger.] The Jewish Rabbis and some of the Fathers, tell us
that these messengers were Devils, evil spirits in the likeness of men. But
surely the opinion has little likeness with the truth, therefore with Beza, I
lay it by and reject it amongst the tales of the Rabbis. These messengers were
really the escaped servants of Job, as we shall see afterward.

Now the messenger bespeaks Job thus, The Oxen were plowing, they were hard at
their work, and the Asses were feeding besides them. The word in the Hebrew is
this, the Asses were feeding at their hand, or at hand; to be at hand, does
note neerenesse; in our language we say, such a thing is at hand, or such a man
is at hand, the day of our fear is at hand, when we mean they are near; The
Lord is at hand, Phil. 4.5. sc. nigh unto us for our help. So 2 These. 2.2. It
is applied also to neerenesse of place as well as of time, Neh. 3.2. where the
building of the wall of Jerusalem is described, it is said, Next unto him built
the men of Jericho, the Hebrew is, at the hand of him built the men of Jericho,
that is next to him in place.

Now the messenger describes all in such a posture, The Oxen were plowing, and
the Asses feeding: by this to assure Job of the care and diligence of his
servants about his business, for the securing of his Cattle, and improving of
his ground: as if he should have said, This sad affliction which is come upon
thee, did not come through our negligence or improvidence, we were about our
business according to our several places, The Oxen were plowing, and the
Asses were feeding by them, they were not carelessly left to danger, but our eye
was upon them, yet notwithstanding they were all surprised and taken away.

From this relation of the posture of Jobs servants and Cattle at the time
when this affliction fell upon them, we may observe thus much;

That all our care and diligence cannot secure outward thing unto us.
Afflictions may take us in the midst of our best and most honest endeavors.
A man may be looking to and ordering his estate, and yet at the very time,
while his eye is upon it, he may see it take its flight like an Eagle toward
Heaven; while he is ordering of it, he may see disorder and confusion coming
upon it: while he is settling of it by honest care, he may quickly see it
unsettled, removed and all broken to pieces, as it was here with Job; he was in
a very good way, his servants were honestly employed, but suddenly all is gone;
The Oxen were taken away, and the Asses that fed by them. But who made this
attempt? The messenger informs that in the next words; And the Sabeans fell
upon them.

(...) from (...)
The Sabeans.] The Hebrew is, Saba fell upon them, the Country put for the
people, Saba for the Sabeans. As we use to say, Spain made war, and France
made war, that is, the Spaniards made war, or the French made war, so it
is such an expression, Saba fell upon them, that is, the people inhabiting Saba.

Fell upon them.] The word notes a mighty violence, they came upon them as
from above, they came pouring down upon them like a storm. There is such a
phrase in war, when they go violently upon a place, they are said to storm
the place, to storm the gates of a Castle or of a City; so here, they fell
upon them, that is, they came violently upon them like a storm. In Prove. 1.27.
destruction is described to come upon wicked men like a whirlwind.

Sabaeos autem Araba^ intellige, qui latrocinijs dedili erant: unde posterior
aetas eos Saracenos appellavit, non a Sara ut quida^ somniant^ sed ae Sarac.
verbo Arabico, quod surari and latrocinari significat. Vnde Saric. Fur Latro.
Drus. in loc.
The Sabeans were a people (as it is concluded by most interpreters) inhabiting
Arabia felix, near the Country where Job dwelt: And for the manners of this
people, it is observed by Historians, that they were a people famous only for
robberies, a people that lived by pillage and by plundering of their
neighbors. Such a people they were; These Sabeans fell upon them, they took
away thy Cattle, and have slain thy servants with the edge of the Sword.

Here it may be questioned, How or why these Sabeans at such a time should fall
upon the estate of Job? what hurt had Job done them? Job lived in a fair way
with all his neighbors, and kept good quarter and correspondence with them; he
was not a man of war or contention, how then comes it to pass that these
fell upon Jobs estate and took it away, and upon that day too, in this nick of
time?

As when the Widow of Tekoah had told a fair tale to David about the bringing
back of Absalom, the King asked her, Is not the hand of Joab with thee in all
this? 2 Samuel 14.19.
So when you see such men, Sabeans and Chaldeans falling upon the estate of
Job, you may demand, Is not the hand of Satan in all this? Yes no doubt. These
Sabeans fall upon Jobs estate, but Satan first fell upon the Sabeans, and by
strong temptations provoked them to do this service.

But how could he prevail upon the Sabeans, that they should come and do his
business now at this time?

The Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy 2.26.
that wicked men are led captive by Satan at his will. Satan does lead men
captive at his will, while they are as they conceive conquerours, riding in
triumph, doing their own will. These Sabeans came to execute their own
designs, but Satan had a design upon them, he brought them thus to spoil the
estate of Job.

But what could Satan do? How could Satan prevail with these? Can he force
men to be his instruments, to execute his designs upon the people of God? Or
has he Sabeans and Caldeans, Nations and people at his beck, or under his
command?

No, Satan cannot force or compel them against their wills, but as that
Scripture says, he leads them captive at his will; and as another Scripture,
he is a Prince of the power of the air, and he works in the children of
disobedience, yea he works like a Prince, mightily and powerfully in the
children of disobedience; Ephesians. 2.
Though he cannot constrain them, yet he can work mightily in them to effect
what he has to do.

But how does he bring them about thus readily and suddenly to act what he
projects,

Thus; First, He finds out the temper and disposition of the persons; That
Satan can do; he is a great Naturalist, and has a great deal of help to his
skill, long experience, by both he can go very far in discovering the
dispositions of men, which way their spirits tend; and he found out that these
Sabeans were a people given to robbery and spoil, and so fit ministers for him
to work by in his design of spoiling the estate of Job. Secondly, When he
has found out the natural temper or state of a man's heart, he can lay a bait
of temptation suitable to that inclination and desire: finding out a people
given to spoil, he presently sets before them rich spoils, these are a taking
object. See, yonder is a brave prize for you, yonder is a rich man, his estate
will be good plunder, yonder are Oxen and Asses store, there is good booty to be
had. Thus finding out their disposition, he presents or holds up an object to
them which hits it fully. Thirdly, Satan deals with man to draw him to his
purpose a degree further, sc. by injecting and casting into the mind the motion
to do this: He not only presents such and such a thing, such and such an
opportunity, but he casts in and injects the motion. As it is said of Judas,
Ioh. 13.2.
that the Devil put it into his heart to betray Christ; The Devil being a
spirit has access to our spirits, and can convey himself into them and
instill his suggestions: as the Lord Christ did breath upon his Disciples, and
so they received the Holy Ghost, and were filled with the Spirit; So Satan
breaths filthy suggestions into the spirits of men, and fills them with all
manner of wickedness, malice, unrighteousness, he fills them with the spirit
of Hell: Why has Satan filled thine heart, says Peter to Ananians? Acts 5.3.
Satan had filled his heart to lie to the Holy Ghost; Thus he instilled these
thoughts of gain by robbery and murder into the Sabeans and Caldeans, and
filled their hearts brim full: Then they resolve to act it with the hand, and
so they become his instruments. Lastly, Satan can do somewhat more then inject
and suggest such thoughts; he can mightily irritate and provoke, and stir up
the heart to be willing to give entertainment to such a motion. He not only
barely presents his temptation, but vehemently backs it, and will give no rest
to a man till he yields it: As it is said of his tempting David, that Satan
stood up and provoked David to number the people: 2 Chro. 21.1.
He did not only inject such a thought into David, but he provoked him, he
never let him alone, but followed him and solicited him to it. This Satan can
do; And yet he cannot press men to take up Arms for his designs, all those
that fight under Satan's colors are Volunteers, he never constraines any,
neither can he, the will is never forced by him, neither can it be. Satan uses
no compulsion beyond a moral persuasion well set on, he can but vex us (as
the Midianites did Israel.) with his wiles. He is an Achitophel, not an
Alexander, a Matchiavil, not a Caesar.

This is the manner of Satan's working in the children of disobedience. All
these things he can do; yet I believe he is not always put to do all these
upon every one over whom he prevails; Some come to this work on easier
terms then others. He needs not provoke and solicit them, a suggestion winnes
them. The very sight of an object overcomes them: Yea some stand ready offering
their service unto Satan, and selling themselves to work any wickedness he
will employ them in. I have showed you the most that Satan can do; I conceive
he had not much to do with these Sabeans to invite them to this war: That
which is in motion is easily moved. And as we say, He must needs run whom the
Devil drives, so the Devil needs not drive them who are running of themselves.

It being opened, what these Sabeans were, and how they came into the service
of Satan, what made them take up Arms, as it were, in his cause; we may
observe from hence,

First, That wicked and ungodly men while they satisfy their own lusts, are
but doing the work of Satan and executing his designs. These Sabeans, though
they did not think it, yet they came upon Satan's errand: So God, when he does
justly use wicked men to punish or correct his people, they do their own
will, and they have their own way; but God has his way too, he overrules them
to effect his business at that time; As it is said of the King of Assyria, O
Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, I will send him against an hypocritical
Nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him charge; How be it,
he means not so, neither does his heart think so, Isa. 10. he has purposes
of his own. So they that are agitated by Satan and provoked by him, they think
not so, they think not they are doing the will and work, the dirty drugery of
Satan, but the truth is, they do nothing else all the while: You are of your
father the Devil, and his lusts you will do, says Christ to the Jews, while
they do their own, Ioh. 8.
they fulfill the lusts and designs of Satan. As it is said in the Revelation,
The Devil shall cast some of you into prison; it was not the Devil in person,
it was the Devil in his seconds or servants; Revel. 2.10.
and these men little thought that they did the Devils service at that time,
if one should have come and told them, you are now doing the Devils work, and
undertaking a piece of service for him, you are as so many instruments and
agents for Hell; they would not have believed it, but the truth is, it was the
Devils work, and they did it so devellishly, that from both it is said the
Devil did it, he cast some of them into prison. It is a fearful thing to
persecute or oppress the people of God, such in serving their own lusts, are
indeed the right hand of Satan, the Devils hirelings.

Secondly, Forasmuch as Satan will have Sabeans and Caldeans to afflict Jobs
estate, (he could have destroyed all himself if he pleased. Good Angels have
mighty power, and so have wicked Angels too, if God will let them alone to put
out their power, therefore they are called Principalities and powers. Ephesians. 6.
Satan had leave, he might have taken what course he would with the estate of
Job: he does not call in the Sabeans and the Caldeans to this work, because he
could not do it himself; No, it is because he would work by others, he would
have instruments.) Note from hence;

That Satan loves to draw others to be partakers with him in his designs.
Though he can do his work alone, yet he will have man join with him in it if
he can: And in this he imitates God himself, who has an almighty power, is
able to do all things alone if he please, yet he usually calls in
instruments: He is able to convert alone by the motion of his Spirit, but he
will have Preachers to convert by the ministry of the Word: He is able to
protect his people from their enemies by his own strength, yet he will have
Armies mustered to do it by. And why does God choose to work thus? There is a
double good in it. He does it that he may do good two ways at once. First,
His creature is saved and relieved, that is one good. Secondly, Men who are
employed as instruments are honored and respected; They having given help to
God in such a cause, (so he interprets it, a coming forth to help the Lord
against the mighty) God gives them honor in the eyes of all his servants,
There is another good. So Satan, while he sets men a work, Sabeans,
Caldeans and others to do mischief, he does a double mischief at once; he
does mischief to Job or others whom he afflicts, and he does mischief to his
instruments, he makes these sin as he makes others suffer: If he carry on the
work alone, they suffer, but others do not partake in the guilt of the sin;
but now when he uses instruments to effect his wicked designs, he makes one
miserable and the other wicked. This is one of Satan's methods, he will work by
means, and do his business by the hands of men, that he may at once do a
double mischief.

Thirdly, In that these Sabeans and Caldeans are observed in Histories to be a
people given much to robberies and spoil, and these are the men whom Satan
picks out for this business. Observe;

That Satan suiteth his temptations to man's natural temper and inclination.
Whenever he tempts, he takes this advantage if he can discover or obtain
it. He is wiser then to set sail against wind and tide, to row against the
stream; Therefore he labors all he can, to find which way the stream of
every man's affections runs; and to what sins his relations, his calling or his
opportunities, lay him most open and obnoxious, accordingly he lays his
snares and spreads his net. When he meets with a proud man, him he tempts
with high thoughts: When he meets with a covetous man, him he tempts to the
love of the world, he lays a golden bait of profit before his eyes: The
adulterous he leads to the Harlots house. For howsoever it be true, that every
man has in him a principle suiting to every sin, yet it is a truth too, that
every man is not equally active for or disposed unto every sin, and every man
has not every particular sin predominant in him; now Satan when he sees
what is predominant in any man, then he fashioneth and frames a temptation
suitable: He perceived these Sabeans were given to rob and spoil, and he
shows them a desirable booty.

And have slain thy servants with the edge of the sword. This is a further
aggravation of the affliction, they did not only fall upon Jobs cattle and
took them away; but they slew his servants. A man's servants are nearer to him
then his Cattle, then his Oxen and his Asses; servants are next unto our
Children. So that this was an heightning of Jobs sorrow, not only are your
cattle gone, but your servants are slain, and they are slain (says he) with
the edge of the sword; the word in the Hebrew is, they are slain with the mouth
of the sword.

We read in Scripture sometimes of the face of the Sword, and sometime of the
mouth of the Sword. As Isa. 31.8. where we translate, they shall flee from the
Sword, the Hebrew is, they shall flee from the face of the Sword; The like Text
you have, Jer. 25.27. Now when the Scripture speaks of the face of the Sword,
it is meant of war coming, or war preparing and approaching. But the mouth
of the Sword is war inflicted, war acted. This phrase, the mouth of the
Sword is used to show that the Sword is a great devourer, Deuteronomy. 32.42. I will
make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my Sword shall devour flesh. War
has a terrible face, it has a wide mouth and sharp teeth, They have slain
thy servants with the edge of the Sword, the mouth of the Sword has devoured
them.

At this day we have great cause to have our hearts deeply affected with this
thing. There has been (as it were) the face of the Sword a great while looking
toward us, but now there is the very mouth of the Sword gaping at us, yea
tearing, gnawing, and devouring the flesh and bones of thousands amongst us.
Where the Sword comes it will devour; war is a great judgment, one of Gods
sore judgments, the sorest of all Gods outward judgments. David chooses the
pestilence rather then the Sword, the pestilence is a devourer, but the Sword
is a greater devourer. And though the Prophet Jeremiah in his Lamentations
makes famine a sorer judgment then the Sword ( Cap. 4.9.) They that be slain
with the Sword are better then they that be slain with hunger. Yet the Sword
is in this worse then famine, because usually it is the cause of famine. The
Sword cuts off food, the support of man's life, as well as the life of man.
While the Sword is making it self fat, it has famine in the belly of it.

We need not go to Jeremy or Josephus for the proof of this, in Jerusalems
Babylonian or Roman desolations, sad Germany, bleeding Ireland are near
woeful witnesses and spectacles of it at this day. The Sword has opened a way
for famine to enter both, and which of the two has eaten most flesh, is hard
to determine. Let us cry earnestly to God that the mouth of the Sword may be
stopped, or continued open only to devour those who would devour the man that
is more righteous then they; Let us pray that blood may be spared, or none but
corrupt blood spilt. Spare thy people O Lord; It is (I confess) one of the
saddest prognostics in my observation against this Nation: That God hitherto
has made little difference. Our Sword has not yet been taught from Heaven to
distinguish of men. Precious blood has been drawn; and men whose very hairs
were all numbered (that is highly prized) by God, have been numbered among the
slain. It must satisfy us that the will of God is so. The answer which David
gave Joabs messenger is good settling council now (2 Samuel 11.25.) Let not this
thing displease thee (He speaks this after the fall of noble Vrijah) for the
sword (not by accident but decree, not casually but providentially) devoureth
so and such (as the Hebrew elegance has it) one as well as another, so we
translate. It is mercy we are not all consumed by this eater, as in the Text
ye may read all the servants of Job were, excepting one, only one got out of
the mouth of the sword, it eat up all saving one, and he was saved, that by
the report of this destructive sword he might destroy Job himself.

And I only am escaped to tell thee. The word in the Original is double,
Tantum ego, solus ego, only I, I alone am escaped, (...)
as if the man should have said between horror and amazement, much ado I had
to get away without loosing somewhat of my self, I only single, single I got
away and escaped. The sword was very hungry, when but one man of all Jobs
servants escaped the teeth of it.

But how comes it to pass that this one man escaped?

Certainly, as I said before, the hand of Satan was in this also. For
howsoever the Lord ordered and disposed all these things, yet he let Satan
work in his circle, in his compass to contrive things, as he pleased himself
the most aptly he could imagine, to afflict and trouble Job, therefore there is
somewhat in it, no good will (I believe) to Job, that this one man had the
favor of quarter or the mercy of an escape.

It was not out of any compassionate respect to Job that one of his servants
comes home alive. It was rather to increase the affliction of Job, and for the
perfecting of his sorrows, this man was not slain, that Job might be more
deeply wounded. There are two reasons which may be assigned why one man escaped
out of every one of these calamities.

First, That the report of this affliction might come suddenly to him. A man
that escapes out of such a danger needs no driving; his fear will add wings
to his feet, he will run home amain.

Secondly, For the certainty of it. Reports fly abroad, they may be false, Fama
mendax, fame is a liar. Job might have had such reports from his neighbors in
the country, all your cattle are seized upon, and all your servants are
slain; and Job might slight it and say, this might be but a rumor, I give no
credit to it: therefore Satan lets one of his own servants come frighted home
with the news, one that was there, one that was an eye-witnes, one that Job
knew, one that had no reason, much less the boldness to bring false tales to
him; that so the report coming speedily and certainly his heart might be
smitten presently. It is some abatement of an evil to have but a color to
doubt of it. If we can but lay hold of any circumstance which renders an evil
report improbable, and may for a while strengthen our unbeleefe of it, we may
in that interim get more strength of faith to bear it, when we see it is
certain and unquestionable. There was no mercy in such a sparing.

And we may observe out of it, that which Solomon speaks of the mercies of the
wicked is most true of Satan's, The very tender mercies of Satan are cruel, the
best of his mercies, his sparings are woundings, he never spares but with an
intent to do further hurt. Jobs afflictions had not gone so deep, if this man
had not bin left to bring the message.

It follows, Verse 16. While he was yet speaking there came also another and
said, the fire of God is fallen from Heaven and has burnt up the Sheep and
the servants and consusumed them, and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.



In this verse we have the second charge which this great enemy gives Job,
While he was yet speaking there came also another. Afflictions seldom go
alone; And therefore when one affliction is ended, look another should begin
and labor to prepare for it. Job having received this message of the loss of
his cattle and death of his servants, while the messenger was yet speaking, a
second comes with a sadder story then that. Satan would not give him the least
breathing or intermission, while he was yet speaking, one evil treads upon
the heel of another; as wave overtakes wave in the sea; so it was here, here
was wave after wave, to overwhelme his spirit. And as it is said in the
Revelation, concerning him that sat on the white horse, that he rid out
conquering and to conquer, there was no intermission of his victories; so Satan
goes forth afflicting and to afflict, vexing and to vex, tempting and to
tempt, he will never give over. While he was yet speaking there came also
another, and said the fire of God is fallen upon thy sheep.

The fire of God. Why is it here called the fire of God. Some conceive it is
called the fire of God, because sent from God: that is ascribed to God, which
comes from God, as that Genesis 19.24. where it is said, that the Lord did rain
fire and brimstone upon Sodom out of Heaven from the Lord, or Jehovah did
rain from Jehovah fire upon Sodom to consume it: And Levit. 10.2. it is said,
That a fire went out from the Lord and consumed Nadab and Abihu. Elijah
procures fire from Heaven to consume the Captains that came from the King to
take him, 2 King. 1.10, 12. The Psalmist speaking of the plagues of Egypt
(Psalm. 105.32.) says that the Lord sent flames of fire in the land; So some
expound that place, Psalm. 104, 3. He makes his Angels spirits and his
ministers a flame of fire, that is, he uses flames of fire for his ministers,
for his messengers; God sometimes sends a fire on his errands, though we know
that place is applied to the Angels by the Apostle, Heb. 1.7.

But here rather it is called the fire of God in another regard; for howsoever
this fire was sent of God, as all afflictions are; yet because the immediate
kindler of it was Satan, he had the power put into his hand; therefore this was
not a fire (in that sense as those other fires are said to be) sent from God.
But it may be called (as usually in Scripture) the fire of God, because of the
strangeness of the fire, it was a wonderful, an extraordinary fire; and so it
is very ordinary in the Hebrew to use the name of God, El, Elohim or Jehovah,
as an Epithet, as an additionall word to heighten the excellence or rareness
of things. We find that phrase often, A man of God, the Hebrews say, to call
one a man of God, is as much as to say, he is an extraordinary man, a man of an
excellent spirit, a Prophet, a holy man: In that Psalm where the Church is
shadowed under the similitude of a Vine, It is said, She did send forth her
branches like the goodly Cedars: Psalm. 8.10.
So we translate it, the Original word is, She sent forth her branches as the
Cedars of God, that is, excellent Cedars, tall and extraordinary Cedars. In
Psalm 36.6. comparing the love of God to great Mountains, Thy loving kindness
is as the great mountains, the word is, like the mountains of God: Psalm
65.9. Thou refreshest it with the river of God, that is, with an excellent
River: Cant. 8.6. speaking of love and of jealousy, Love is strong as death,
jealousy is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are coals of fire, which
has a most vehement flame, the word in the Original is, a flame of God, the
coals thereof are coals of fire, the flame of God, that is, as we translate
it, a vehement flame. So here the fire of God, that is, a strange fire, an
unheard of, an unusual fire, a vehement fire, such a fire as had not been seen
nor observed before. Therefore the Hebrews call extraordinary things the
things of God; because indeed all the wonders and excellencies, all the glory
and goodness that is in creatures, is but a foot-step, a print or drop of that
excellency and glory and power that is in God; therefore every thing that is
most excellent, is ascribed unto God. It is most equal that his name should be
stamped upon all excellent things in the creature, who is the cause of all
creature excellence. This fire being a strange and extraordinary fire is said
to be the fire of God.

Fulgur maximum. Jun.
This fire of God is conceived to have been some terrible flash of lightning,
which in a moment destroyed and consumed the sheep and shepherds. And this is
more probable, because it is said, to fell down from heaven, that is, out of
the air; for so often in Scripture, heaven is put for the air, the middle
region of the air, where Satan has great power, therefore he is called, the
Prince of the air: and he can do mighty things, command much in that Magazin
of Heaven, where that dreadful Artillery, which makes men tremble, those fiery
Meteors, thunder and lightning are lodged and stored up. Satan let loose by God
can do wonders in the air; He can raise storms, he can discharge the great
Ordnance of Heaven, thunder and lightning, and by his art he can make them
more terrible and dreadful then they are in nature. If the skill and art of
man can heighten natural things, then much more the skill of Satan. I doubt
not but many fearful impressions are made in the air by devils, carrying
nature (by Gods permission) far above it is own course, and these are
properly marvels or wonders, (such as the Magitians wrought in Egypt by the
help of Satan) for miracles are quite out of the devils sphere. But he can
do wonders, and such was this fire falling from Heaven, etc. A marvel or
wonder is nature mightily improved, a miracle is nature totally crossed, if not
contradicted. Observe this for the nature of that fire; the effect of it
follows in the next words.

It has burnt up the sheep and the servants, and consumed them. The word in
the Original is, It did burn them and eat them up. Fire is a devouring
element. Devouring fire, as before a devouring Sword, these were devouring
judgments upon Job. Yet it does not necessarily infer that the sheep were
all burnt to ashes; but that the sheep were all killed by that flame of
lightning that came from Heaven; for it is said of Nadab and Abihu (of which we
spoke before) that a fire went out from God, and did consume them, it is the
same Original word that is here in the Text, A fire went out from God, and did
eat them up, yet we know their bodies were not consumed, for they were carried
out to their burial and their garments were upon them. So that this consuming
does not note the burning of things to ashes, but a striking of them to death;
it is a devouring fire, because it is a destroying fire, it takes away life:
and thus lightnings kill rather by piercing and penetrating than by consuming
and devouring.

But now here it will be questioned for the further opening of this, why Satan
chooses thus to consume the sheep with fire? why does he not rather use
spoylers to take them away? He could doubtless have got the Sabeans to have
fetched away the flocks of sheep, as well as the droves of greater cattle; he
could have procured them easily; why then does he cause fire from Heaven to
come down, the fire of God to consume them.

I answer, his reason for this was to put the greater sting into the
affliction. He would not have the sheep taken away after the same manner that
the Oxen and Camels were, that he might aggravate Jobs trouble, and provoke him
if he could to be passionate against God, yea and (for that was his great
design) to blaspheme God; therefore he procures fire from Heaven to fall upon
the sheep, thereby to beget an opinion in Job that God was now become his
enemy as well as man. When we suffer from man, then the afflicted soul flies
to God, makes his complaint and moan to him; as doubtless Job did when he
heard of those cruel Sabeans, and what they had done; but lest Job should
resort in his thoughts to Heaven, and comfort himself in God again, the next
messenger tells him that God is his enemy too, that the fire of God is fallen
upon the sheep, an extraordinary fire; as if he should say, God fights
against thee as well as the Sabeans; Alas now to whom should Job make his
moan! That speech of Eli concerning sin may well be applied to suffering, If
one man sin against another the Judge shall judge him, 1 Samuel 2.25,
but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? So if a man
suffer from men, he may go unto God, but if God himself do appear to be an
enemy and to fight against us, to whom shall we go? Indeed Job knew how to go
to God, though he did appear as an enemy; but that is the greatest straight,
and to do thus notes the greatest spiritual both skill and strength. Hence
observe,

That Satan's great design against the people of God or any servant of God is
to provoke them to ill thoughts of God; to persuade them that God is their
enemy, to bring the love and good will of God into suspicion; therefore he
causes this great fire, and (it is like) formed the servants language in that
cutting phrase, The fire of God is fallen upon the sheep. Thou can not put
this off, as thou might do the other, and say, this is but the malice or
the covetousness of the Sabeans, that robbed me of my goods, and slew my
servants; No, thou shall see now that God himself is angry, Heaven frowns
upon thee, the fire of God from Heaven consumes thee. Turn over the records of
all antiquity, and see whether God ever dealt thus with any, but those cursed
Sodomites upon whom God rained fire from Heaven; Thou who come so near them
in the punishment, have reason to judge thy self not far behind them in sin.

Secondly observe,

Those afflictions are most grievous wherein God appears to be against us. The
malice o^ devils and the rage of men may be endured, but who can stand before
God, when he is angry. If God does but withdraw his comforts, the soul sinkes
under smallest trials, how then can it stand if God should reveal his wrath
against us, when we are in great trials.

It may here be questioned, why the sheep were consumed with fire, rather than
any other of his cattle, rather then any other of his substance?

There are two things in that. First, the sheep were used in Sacrifice. When
the days of their feasting were ended, Job offered Sacrifice, and the sheep
chiefly were offered in Sacrifice. Now Satan by consuming the sheep hoped to
fasten this upon Job, if possibly he could, that God was angry with his very
Sacrifices. God was angry with his services. As if he should say, Do thou
think that the offering up of thy sheep in Sacrifice has been pleasing to
God? Certainly if the fire of those Sacrifices had delighted God, if he had
smelt a savor of rest in them (as he is said to have done, when Noah offered
Sacrifice after the flood, Genesis 8.21.) he would never have sent a fire from
Heaven to consume them. That is conceived by Expositors to be an especial
reason why the sheep were consumed, namely to cast Job upon this apprehension,
Prove. 15.8.
that his very Sacrifices were rejected of God: that he might conclude of
himself (as Solomon says of the wicked) that his Sacrifices were an
abomination to the Lord, and to show that God would now have no more of his
Sacrifices, God himself made one Sacrifice of them all. But Origin brings in
Job excellently retorting this suggestion upon Satan. I sacrificed now one and
then another of my Sheep to God, but now blessed be God, who has accepted all
my flock as one Burnt-offering.

Again, The Sheep were consumed by fire, as to make Job conceive that his
former services were rejected, so to take him off and discourage him from
offering any more such services; to make him despair of ever thriving in the
way of those duties: and conclude surely God is so angry now, that all my
services, all my sacrifices will never appease him nor profit me: therefore I
were as good lay by these duties as perform them, when I get no good. This is
a dangerous temptation; if Satan by such prejudices against holy duties, can
cause us to lay them by, the day is won: for then the soul is left naked and
unarmed. We have not then so much as a bulrush in our hands to smite him, or a
paper breast plate to secure our selves. If we give over praying and seeking,
we have no ground to expect Christ either assisting or protecting us. That for
the second affliction.

While he was yet speaking, there came also another and said, the Caldeans made
out three Bands, and fell upon the Camels, and have carried them away, etc.
This is the third affliction, the taking away of the Camels, the destroying of
the servants that waited upon them. There is not much to stay upon in this,
having before opened most of the passages of it in the 15th. verse.

While he was yet speaking, there came also another and said, the Caldeans made
out three Bands. Caldeans sometime note a condition or a rank of men, such as
were Diviners, Soothsayers and Astrologers, these are in Scripture called
Caldeans. As the Indians called such skillful persons Gymnosophistes, and the
Persians called them their Magi, and the Romans called them Augures, so the
Assyrians called them Caldeans. When Nebuchadnezzar dreamed a dream, it is
said, that he sent for the Diviners and the Astrologers, and the Caldeans; Dan.
2.3.
and afterward the Caldeans take up all, he said to the Caldeans, and the
Caldeans said to the King: The Caldeans were put for all those that undertook
the art of divining and interpreting dreams. But here by the Caldeans, are to
be understood, not a condition of men, but a Nation of men, or the people
inhabiting Chaldea: frequently spoken of by the Prophets, and described to the
life by the Prophet Habakkuk, Hab. 1.6, 7.
chap. 1. where the Lord threatened to send the Caldeans against his people, and
then describes them, That hasty and bitter Nation, their Horses are swifter
then the Leopard, and more ravening then the evening Wolves: Such a kind of
people they were who were stirred up by Satan to take away the Camels of Job.

These are said to make out three Bands to spoil; They were a people like the
Sabeans, delighting in war and robbery; so much the Etymology of their Name
Chasdim, (which is the word in the Original) implies, being derived from
Sadad, which signifies to rob and spoil. These were a wicked generation,
yet these prevail over the estate of Job; victory does not always attend a
just cause. The way of the wicked often prospers, and the way of these wicked
Caldeans prospered so often, that the Prophet Habakkuk complains to God as one
scandalized at it: Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not
look on iniquity, wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously
and hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous
then he. If ever we should be brought upon a like case, to argue it thus with
God, or (as Jeremie did, chap. 12.1.) to plead with God about his judgments,
let us remember to establish our hearts (before we open our mouths) with the
Prophet Jeremies conclusion in that place, Righteous art thou O Lord, though
the wicked devour the man that is more righteous then he. It is very rare that
God makes one good man his rod to scourge another: he usually makes the worst
of men his rod, his staff, his Sword, to inflict either trials or judgments
upon his people. The durty Scullion scowres the silver vessel, and makes it
both clean and bright for his masters use.

Verse 18. While he was yet speaking, there came also another and said, thy
Sons and thy Daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest Brothers
house.

Verse 19. And behold there came a great wind from the wilderness, and smote
the four corners of the house, and it fell upon the young men, and they are
dead; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.

THis was, as the fourth and last, so the greatest of all Satan's assaults, the
most fierce and terrible charge that Job had all the day, and Satan reserves
this until the evening, till Job was spent and spiritlesse as he hoped. I
shall note this in general from it.

That Satan usually keeps his greatest strength and most violent temptations
unto the last. When he thinks we are at the weakest, then he comes with his
strongest assaults. If Satan had sent Job word of the death of his children
first, all the rest would have been as nothing to him: he would not have
regarded the loss of his Cattle when he heard that all his children were
crushed to death by the fall of the house. As some one great evil falling upon
us, takes the heart off from having any sense or joy in a lesser good; so one
great evil swallows up the sense and feeling of a lesser evil: that great
evil which fell upon the Wife of Phineas, when she heard that the Ark of God
was taken, afflicted her so extremely, that she could not at all rejoice in
the birth of her son; she had no sense of that. Here was therefore the
cunning of Satan, lest Job should have lost the smart of the lesser
afflictions, least they should have been all swallowed up in the greater, he
brings them out in order, the least first, the greatest is reserved for the
last. We observe in war, that when once the great Ordnance are discharged,
the Soldiers are not afraid of the Musket; so when a great battery is made by
some thundering terrible judgment upon the soul, or upon the body or estate
of any man; the noise and fears of lesser evils are drowned and abated.
Therefore Satan keeps his greatest shot to the last, that the small might be
heard and felt, and that the last coming in greater strength might find the
least strength to resist it.

And that this was a greater affliction then any of, or then all the former, is
so clear that I shall not need to stay long in the confirming of it, only to
quicken the point a little, take notice of the greatness of it in 5 respects.

First, It appears without controversy to be the greatest of all, because it
was upon his children: a man's children are more then all that he has in the
world: a man's children are himself, every child is the father multiplied; A
son is the fathers bowels: and therefore when Paul wrote to Philemon
concerning Onesimus, whom (says he) I have begotten in my bonds; (sc. Philem.
v. 12.
to the faith of Christ) Receive him who is mine own bowels; A spiritual
son is the very bowels of a Minister; he does but allude to a natural
son, a son is the very bowels of the father; this affliction reached unto
the very bowels of Job himself; Satan had no leave to afflict the body of Job,
and yet you see he afflicts him in his very bowels.

Secondly, The greatness of it is seen in this, his children were all taken
away; To loose all our children, is a grievous as to loose an only child; Now
that is made a cause of the highest sorrows, Zach. 12.10. They shall mourn for
him, as one that mourns for an only son: that is, they shall mourn most
bitterly. Now as the measure of mercies may be taken by the comforts which they
produce, so we may take the measure of an affliction by the sorrow which it
produces, And that is the greatest affliction which causes the greatest
sorrow.

Thirdly, It was a further greatning of the affliction, that they were all
taken away suddenly. Had death sent them summons, by its usual messenger
sickness, but a day before to prepare themselves, it had much sweetened the
bitterness of this cup; but to hear they were dead before he knew they were
sick; yea when he thought they were merry and rejoicing, how sad was this.

Fourthly, That they died a violent death, by a mighty wind casting the house
down upon them. Had they dyed in their beds (though suddenly) it had bin some
ease to the Fathers heart: violent death has an impression of wrath upon it.
And men can hardly judge well of those, who fall by such judgments. Suspicion
will arise, if censure pass not, from better men then Barbarians, if they see
a viper on the hand of a Paul, Act. 28. It is more then probable from our
Saviors question, that those eighteen upon whom the Tower in Siloe fell, and
slew them, were commonly supposed greater sinners, or sinners above all men
that dwelt in Jerusalem, Luke 18.4.

Fifthly, They were all taken away when they were feasting; and this did
exceedingly aggravate the affliction upon Job, that his children were all
destroyed feasting; for you know what the thoughts of Job were concerning his
children at their feasting; after they had done, he offered burnt-offerings
according to the number of them all, for he said, it may be my sons have
sinned and cursed God in their hearts. Now at this time, when Satan knew that
Job was most solicitous lest his children should sin, at that time does he
destroy them; that so their father might be afflicted with the thought, that
his children died unreconciled to God, that they died with sin upon them
unrepented of: That they died a double death, death at once seasing upon both
soul and body. This then was a further degree of Satan's malice, to wound, vex
and grieve the spirit of Job unto the utmost. How sadly and pissionatly did
David lament Absoloms death? Some conceive this was the head of the Arrow that
pierced him, because he feared his son died in a sinful condition, he was
suddenly taken away in his rebellion, unreconciled either to God or man. Such a
thought might fall upon Jobs heart; my children are suddenly dead, and dead
feasting, it may be they forgot God, it is possible they sinned in feasting,
and cursed God in their hearts. Alas my children died before they could so much
as think of death: I fear they are gone rejoicing to Hell, where they shall
weep for evermore. Doubtless Satan did or might fasten such a temptation upon
his heart who was so tender of his childrens souls, and so fearful of their
sinning in feasting. So then it is clear from all these particular
considerations, that this was the greatest affliction.

Be prepared then, not only to receive another affliction, but to receive a
greater affliction, and have thoughts of receiving the greatest affliction at
the last. Satan will come with his strongest assaults when thou art weakest. At
the time of death when he sees he can do no more, but that he must then do
it, or never do it, then thou shall be sure to have the strongest temptations.

It should therefore stir up the people of God, still to look for more and
more strength to bear afflictions and tentations, and to beg from Christ, the
greatest strength at last, because they may justly fear the greatest
temptations at last. If as Satan does greaten his temptations Christ does
greaten his assistance, we shall be able to bear them and be more then
conquerours over them.

So much of this fourth charge in the general, I shall now open the words more
particularly, (for those in the 18th. verse I shall not need to say any thing
of them, they have been handled before at the 13th. verse, which runs thus;
And there was a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and drinking
wine in their Eldest brothers house.) The 19th. verse describes the manner of
this trial; And behold there came a great wind from the wilderness, etc.

And behold.] Ecce or behold, Ecce adverbiu^ demonstrandi usurpatur in rebus
notabilibus.
in Scripture ever notes more then ordinary matter following. 1. Great things
call for attention. 2. That which is sudden and unexpected, calls us to behold
it. 3. Rare things, things seldom seen, invite all to see and wonder at them.
Here is matter of admiration. What God threatens in the Law, he seems to
fulfill upon Job, Deuteronomy. 28.59.
I will make their plagues wonderful. There is no Ecce prefixed to any of the
former three affiictions; but this as being the most strange and terrible,
comes in with an Ecce, And behold --

There came a great wind.] It was a wind, and a great wind that came. The wind
is elegantly said to come (as the Sun) out of his chamber, and rejoicing as a
strong man to run a race, Psalm. 19.5. Hence the word which the Latins use
for the wind, is derived from a word that signifies, to come. Because the wind
comes with force and violence. Ventus a violentia and veheme^tia nomen habet,
quod veniat abunde, and magna vi irruat in unum aliquem locum. Magir. Phys.
The wind (in the nature of it) is an exhalation arising from the earth, drawn
upwards by the power of the Sun and other Heavenly bodies: but meeting and
conflicting a while with the cold of the middle region of the air, is beaten
back again; And being so light that naturally it cannot descend, and so
resisted that it cannot peaceably ascend, it takes a course between both,
slanting with mighty violence through the air. Thus Philosophers teach. This
wind is said to have bin a great wind: great in quantity, much wind, a large
wind, great also in quality, a vehement, boisterous, angry wind.

Further, This wind is described by the coast or quarter from which it breathed.

(...)
From the wilderness.] Or as the Hebrew is, from beyond the wilderness, from
the other side of the wilderness this wind came.

A regione deserti, vel a trans desertum.
Winds are differenced by the quarters or points of the Heavens out of which
they blow; This wind is described by the place from whence it came, from the
Coast out of which it was raised, it was from beyond the wilderness.

There were many wildernesses? Here wilderness is set down indefinitely.
There was the wilderness of Maon, and the wilderness of Ziph, and many other
wildernesses spoken of in Scripture. What wilderness was this?

It is conceived, that this was either the wilderness of Idumea, or Edom,
spoken of 2 King. 3.8. or else it was Arabia the Desert, which is by way of
eminency called The wilderness. It came from the wilderness, that is, it came
over that part which is called Arabia desorta, or Arabia the wild.

When it is said, this wind came from the wilderness, the coast is cleared,
but the cause and stirrer up of this wind is concealed. A wind came from the
wilderness; but how this wind was raised, and this storm was blown up, there
is no mention. We must charge it on him who was the contriver and directer of
all this mischief; Satan Prince of the air raised up this mighty wind.

Winds are said sometimes to come from God; As Exodus 10.13. The Lord brought
an East-winde upon the Land of Egypt that it was covered with Locusts, (one of
the plagues of Egypt,) And verse 19. The Lord turned a mighty West-wind which
took away the Locusts. And Numb. 11.31. There went forth a wind from the Lord,
and brought Quails from the Sea, Jonah 1.4. The Lord sent out a great wind
into the Sea. The Heathens (who divided the World among sundry gods) gave the
winds to Aeolus, whom they supposed to have them all shut up and locked close
in his lodge, till he gave them command to fly abroad. It is an argument of a
divine power to rule the winds. Who is this say those Seamen, Math. 8.27. that
even the winds and the Sea obey him. As God only causes the Sun to shine,
and the rain to fall, so the winds to blow. The wind is originally in the hand
of God, Prove. 30.4.
He gathers the wind in his fists (says Agur of God,) and sends it which way
he pleases. But the winds were put for that present into the hand of Satan,
and he had leave to raise a storm for this special purpose. So then, there
came a great wind from beyond the wilderness, that is, Satan stirred up a
mighty wind in those parts and quarters, which came --

And smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon the Young men, and
they are dead.] Here we see what was the work of this wind. As it is described
by the region from whence the wind came, so by the effects which it wrought
being come, It smote the four corners of the house; The Hebrew word is the
same used verse 11. Touch all that he has. According to Satan's sense this
wind, touched the four corners of the house. The corners of the house are the
strength of the house, and the four corners are all the strength. Christ is
called the corner stone, because he is the strength and binding of the Church,
he holds all together. This wind smote the four corners at once; It may seem
very strange, that one wind, a wind described to come out of one quarter, a
Southern wind, as this is conceived to have bin, coming from the wilderness,
that this one wind should strike all the four parts of the house together:
must it not be a wind from the four quarters of Heaven which strikes the four
corners of a house? I answer, This was an extraordinary wind, there was a
wonder carried on the wings of this wind, therefore you have an Ecce of
admiration, a Behold set in the beginning of this relation; This wind did not
work according to the ordinary rate of winds. Or we may say, It was a
whirlwind, that tempestuous whirlwind, which Philosophers call Typhon; Such
a wind, as whirles about in a circle, and so it might fetch-in or assault all
the parts and corners of the house with one blast. Further, We must take
notice, that Satan was in this wind: He acted and wrought mightily with it for
the sure and sudden effecting of this dreadful overthrow, the Devil
spirited this wind. The wind (though for the quickness and power of it, called
a spirit) is a dull and weak thing compared to a spirit.

There came a great wind from the wilderness, and smote the four corners of
the house, and it fell upon the Young Men and they are dead. But what became of
his three Daughters, did they escape? They are not named, but they also were
involved. It is usual in Scripture, under one Sex, the superior Sex to
comprise both. All Jobs children perished under the ruins of that falling
house. Hence Observe,

First, That Satan being left at his own dispose, can raise and enrage storms
and tempests. It is said, Psalm. 148.8. That stormy winds and tempests fulfill
the will of God; The winds go often on Gods errand; but as often as the Lord
gives leave, these stormy winds and tempests fulfill Satan's will; Not his
alone, much less against the will of God. Satan cannot raise so much wind by
his own power as will wave a feather, but when God says go do such and such
things, then the winds likewise fulfill his will: And then he can raise wind
enough to move Mountains, and raze the foundations of the proudest and
strongest buildings. It is reported that some wicked wretches trade with
witches for winds, they buy winds of the Devil; A most abominable
merchandise; and the Lord does answer them justly, to let them have what they
pay for, winds of the Devil; as he speaks in the Prophet, Isa. 66.4.
I also will choose their delusions, when men will be deluded, and go down to
hell for help, God will choose their delusions, saying in his wrath, you that
think the devil can give you a wind, the devil shall give you a wind: A wind
by which you shall sail at once to the port of your hope, and to the pit of
desperation. A vvind which (unles you repent) will carry you into that lake
vvherin there is no water, a lake burning for ever, And the breath of the Lord
like a stream of brimstone kindling it.

Secondly, observe here, from the effect of this wind,

That a violent and sudden death, it is no argument of Gods anger or disfavour.
Here all Jobs children were destroyed suddenly and violently, yet it was not in
wrath toward the children, but for a trial unto the father. When they told
Christ of some, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifices; Luke 13.1.
Think not (says he) that either these or those upon whom the Tower of Shiloe
fell and slew them, were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem, I tell
you except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. As there is no judging of
the sins of men, by such kind of exigents and events, so neither of the wrath
of God; yet how many by such appearances judge unrighteous judgments, being as
barbarous, as those Barbarians of Malta, Act. 28.3.
who seeing a Viper coming out of the heat and fastening on Paul's hand, they
(concluding he must die presently) censured him to be a murderer, whom though
he had escaped the Sea, yet vengeance followed on shore, and would not suffer
to live. We must not ground our judgment upon the works of God, but upon his
word. In externals there is the same event to all, Eccles. 9. Men cannot be
distinguished for eternity by what they suffer, but by what they do not by the
manner of their death, but by the tenor of their lives. This is a certain
truth, That man can never die an evil death, who has led a good life. There
is nothing makes death evil, but the evil which follows death, or the evil
that goes before death.

Thirdly, Here was death, a strange and sudden death surpised the children of
Job, and this when they were feasting, when they were eating and drinking wine
in their eldest brothers house. We may observe from that also by way of
admonition. Christians had need to take heed, and be holy in feasting. While we
are eating and drinking, we may be dying, Luke 21.34.
therefore eating and drinking, we had need be holy. Take heed to your selves
(says Christ) lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness; take heed lest at any time, because at any time the day may come
upon you unawares. That day, whether it be a day of general calamity or
personal, may come upon you unawares. It becomes us to be holy in all manner
of conversation, though we had an Assurance of our lives: But seeing in what
manner of conversing so ever we be, death may surprise us, and we have no
assurance of our lives in our greatest joys, how holy should we be? Whether
you eat or drink (says the Apostle) or whatsoever you do, 1 Cor. 10.31.
do all to the glory of God. Have God in your eye, let him be your aim. It is
prophesied concerning the latter times, Zach. 14.21.
That every pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be holiness unto the Lord. The
very pots in Jerusalem shall be holy, that is, men at their pots shall be holy,
to note that they should be holy in their eatings, in their drinkings: not holy
only when they were praying, and holy when they were hearing, but holy in
those ordinary natural actions of eating and drinking, holy at their Tables,
and in all their refreshings with the creature. Then indeed there is holiness
in the heart, when there is holiness in the pot; and it is but need, there
should be holiness in the pot, when there my bedeath in the pot.

We may observe somewhat more generally from all these four sore afflictions
considered together. As first, We see how quickly the beauty of all worldly
blessings may be blasted. Job in the morning had an estate, as great and as
good as his heart could desire in worldly things, there was luster and strength
in and upon all he had, but before night he had nothing but sorrow to sup upon;
He had no retinue of servants left, but four, reserved only to report his
losses. In one day all is gone. It is added as an aggravation of Babylons
downfall, that her judgments shall come upon her in one day, Revel. 18.8.
Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death and mourning and famine, and
she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God who judges
her. In one day all the beauty of Babylon shall be blasted. We need not now
trouble our selves to think Babylon is in a great deal of strength and beauty
and glory, surely there must be a long time spent in contriving and acting the
destruction of Babylon* no, the Lord can blast her beauty and destroy her power
in a day; and the Text says, he will do so, in one day all her plagues shall
come upon her. That which Babylon has been gathering many years shall be
scattered in a moment. She thinks that by her wisdom and policy she has laid
such a foundation of her own greatness as shall never be shaken; And
therefore concludes, I sit a Queen and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow.
Yet all her strength shall not hold out one day, when God in his displeasure
shall lay siege against her walls. So when ye look upon other great and
mighty, prosperous and flourishing enemies, such as flourish like green bay
trees, remember the Lord in one day can wither their branches and kill their
roots, ye root them up. Certainly the strength of the Lord is as mighty for
the destroying of his enemies, as it is for the afflicting of his own people:
If he sometimes gives commission to take away all their comforts in a day, when
their estates are highest and strongest built; Surely he will at last give
Commissions for as speedy a dispatch against the estates of his greatest
enemies.

And this may be unto us all, matter of Admonition, to prepare for changes, to
esteem creatures as they are, perishing substance. Who ever had an estate
better gotten, better bottomed or better managed then Job? yet all was
overthrown and swept away in a moment. We can never expect too much from God,
nor too little from the creature.

Lastly, We may learn from the foregoing story of these afflictions,
considering that Satan was the contriver and engeneere, who set all a work.

That Satan is mighty both in power and policy for the effecting of his
designs, if God give him liberty and leave. You see he does not fail or miss
in the least, he brings every affliction upon Job in the perfection of it, and
he does not bungle at it, or do his work by halves; but he is quick and
speedy, both in laying the plot and executing it. There is nothing in this
inferior world able to stand before him, no creature, no man, if God let him
alone. The good Angels can match, yea and master devils, there is no doubt of
that: but if God stop his Angels and withdraw his hand, the devil would
quickly over-runne all the world. Ephesians. 6.
We wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers. Evil
spirits are called powers in the abstract, they have not only a power, they
are not only powerful, (hence called principalities, such as have great
authority and sovereignty (as it were) over others,) but they are called
Powers. It is not an empty title or a naked name that is given them, but they
are filled and clothed with strength proportionable. Satan is a mighty Prince
commanding in the spirits of wicked men (there is his Throne) he can kindle their
lusts and ^^flame their spirits, set them on fire from hell, and then cause
them to go on with a rage (in doing mischief) as high as Heaven. 2 Timothy 2.2^.
He can lead men captive at his will, though not against their own will: Yet
to show the efficacy of his actings, he is said to lead them captive at his
will, to do his will and execute his devillships designs. It is admirable
what Satan can do upon wicked men, who are his willing vassals and
bondslaves; if he speak the word they go, if he suggest they submit; if he
move they obey. And likewise we see what a mighty Prince he is in the air, all
the elements and the meteors stoop to his direction. He cannot only command
men who have reason, but he can command the fire, the water, the winds, the
thunders, therefore he is called the Prince of the power of the air; those
powers that are in the air he can command. Ephesians. 2.2.
For though it be a truth that Satan of himself cannot make one spark of
fire, or so much as one breath of wind, yet if he be let loose and unchain'd,
he can go to Gods Storehouse of wind and fire, he can go to Gods Magazin
of thunder, storms and tempests, he can fetch out such store of all these, and
so enrage them, that no man is able to withstand their violence.

Ephesians. 2.12.
The Apostle taxes all natural men, that they live without God in the world,
that is, they live without a sensible apprehension of the Majesty, of the
power, and holiness of God, they are not affected with God in the world. I may
say in a sense unto many godly men (and it may be a reproof unto them) that
they live without the devil in the world, that is, they have not such
apprehensions of the power and policy and sleights of Satan, as they ought to
have. We do not know, or apprehend as we ought, and as we might, who the
devil is, or what his power is. I do not speak this, as if I would have any
meditate and pore upon the power of Satan, so as to be afraid of him, that is no
part of my intent: but it is for this end, that our hearts might be raised up
to bless God, who does bind up such an enemy, and bound such a power, who if
he were let alone would do us mischief an hundred times in a day. Nay he
would unquiet and unsettle the whole world. This is the reason why we should
consider the power and policy of Satan, to bless God, who stops the mouth of
this Lion, so that he cannot stir to do that mischief, unto which his
nature does at once incline and enable him.

Verse 20. Then Job arose and rent his mantle and shaved his head and fell
down upon the ground and worshipped.

Verse 21. And said, Naked came I out of my mothers womb; and naked shall I
return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the
name of the Lord.

Verse 22. In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly.

These three verses contain the third Division of the Chapter, as we showed in
the Analysis of it. We have seen in the first, the character of Job in his
prosperous estate, and the description of his prosperity. We have seen his
afflictions in the causes, in the time, in the instruments, in the matter, and
in the manner of inflicting them. In this third part we have the carriage of
Job, how Job took it, how he behaved himself in this sad condition. And
likewise how God took it that Job did so behave himself. So then,

We may note two things in the general out of these 3 verses.

1. We have the carriage of Job, his behavior.

2. We have the testimony of God concerning his carriage and behavior.

The carriage and behavior of Job is laid down, verse 20, 21. And concerning
his carriage, the Text gives us to consider, 1. What Job did. 2. What Job said.


1. What he did, and that is in the 20th verse, and there we find mentioned
five distinct actions of Job upon the receiving of the relation of his
affliction.

1. He arose. 2. He rent his mantle. 3. He shaved his head. 4. He fell down
upon the ground. 5. He worshipped.
2. What he said, and that is in the 21. verse, And he said, Naked came I out
of my mothers womb, and naked, etc.

His sayings contain two strong and undeniable argumentall Propositions, and
one clear Conclusion, flowing naturally from them both, or from either of
them; by which he does acquit the Lord in his afflicting of him, and also
support and strengthen his own soul under those afflictions.

The testimony of God concerning Jobs carriage is in the 22. ver. The Lord
comes in, as it were like an umpire to determine who got the day, which is
resolved when he says, In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly.
These words expressly set the Laurel of victory upon the head of Job. Satan
undertook that Job (if touched) would curse God; now says God, look upon him
touched, see what he has done, examine all his actions that are past; observe
what he has spoken, weigh every word that has come out of his mouth in the
balance of truth and reason, and when thou have done both, tell me whether he
has yet cursed me. I pronounce, that in all he has done, in all he has said,
Job has not charged God foolishly. That in the general for the sum of the
Context, and for the parts of it.

To begin first with what Job did, his actions.

Then Job arose and rent his mantle, etc. Then.] Job stood out the three former
assaults unmoveably, but when he had received the fourth, then his bowels were
moved, And then, etc.

Job arose.] This was his first action; to arise is properly an act of one that
sits; he is said to arise that before did sit or lie. But yet in Scripture
to arise is not always taken so strictly, neither is it in this place. To
arise in the Scripture language notes two things. First the speediness of
doing a thing: when a man does a thing instantly or presently, he is said to
arise to do it, to arise and do it, though he were standing or walking
before. This is an Hebraisme, He arose and rent his mantle, that is, He
presently rent his mantle upon the hearing of these messages, especially the
last. And so you have the word in diverse places, as Judge. 20.18. The children
of Israel arose and went to the house of the Lord, that is, they went presently
up to the house of the Lord, 2 Samuel 14.31. Then Joab arose and went to Absalom,
the meaning is only this, that upon the receiving of that message, he went with
speed, he made no delays: And Nehem. 2.18. when Nehemiah exhorted them to the
great work of building the house of the Lord, the people showing their
willingness and readiness expressed it thus, Let us rise up and build, that is,
let us build (as we say) out of hand, speedily.

Secondly, To arise implies the courage, constancy and strength of those who
undertake or go about a business, they arise and do it, that is, they do it
with spirit: So here it may import as much concerning Job in his sufferings, He
arose and rent his mantle, that is, though he heard all these sad relations,
yet his spirit was not overwhelmed, he was not drowned in those sorrows, he
did not sink down under them, but he arose and rent his mantle, etc. as if he
had raised himself up to wrestle with the temptation and the tempter, to
wrestle with Satan himself. In this sense the Lord is said to arise, Isa.
33.8, 9. where there is that sad description of the Land, The Earth mourns
and languisheth, Lebanon is ashamed, etc. Now will I rise says the Lord, now
will I be exalted, that is, now will I come and show my self with a mighty
power for the deliverance of my people. I will be exalted and they shall
rejoice. That prayer of the old Church, Arise O Lord, and let thine enemies be
scattered, has the same intendment, desiring the Lord to go forth armed with
strength for the help of his people and the subduing of their enemies. Thus
Job arose, bound with a fourfold cord of affliction: he raised himself up
like Sampson, though in humility, yet with strength and courage. And so it is
opposed to the sinking of the spirit under troubles, as you know the spirit of
Eli did, 1 Samuel 4.18. There was sad tidings brought to Eli concerning the death
of his sons and the taking of the Arc, the Text says, As soon as he heard
these things, he fell down backward, he had no spirit, no strength left in
him, he did not arise and rend his garment, but he sunk down and brake his
neck. When Nabal heard of the danger that his churlish and inhospitable answer
had almost drawn upon him, 1 Samuel 25.37. His heart dyed within him, and he
became as a stone. When all that Job had was dead and gone, his heart lived,
yea he was (erecto animo) of a raised spirit, not only when he arose, but when
he fell upon the ground: for then he worshipped, and worship is the lifting up
of the soul to God: In the worship of God while the body is upon the knee, the
mind is or ought to be upon the wing.

And rent his mantle. That is the second act. Renting or garments is very often
spoken of in Scripture, and we find it especially in these two cases. In case
of extreme sorrow, and in case of extreme indignation.

In case of extreme sorrow, and that of two kinds, either in the sorrows of
afflictions or in the sorrows repentance; in both these we find renting of the
garments.

For the sorrows of outward affliction; so we read frequently of renting
garments: When Jacob heard of the death of Joseph, when his sons brought him
home the bloody Coat, saying (but falsely) that surely their brother was torn
with wild beasts; he presently rent his garment. Genesis 37.34.
And when the relation of the death of Saul was brought to David's ear, 2 Samuel
1.11.
to express his sorrow, He took hold on his clothes and rent them* and
likewise all the men that were with him; and so again afterward at the
funeral of Abner, 2 Samuel 3.31.
David rent his clothes and gave order to all the people that were with him to
do the like. In great funeral or fatal mournings, it was usual among the
Hebrews to rent their garments. This also was a frequent custom among the
Heathen, -- It scissa vest Latinus. Conjugis attonitus fatis ur bisque ruina.
Vir, Aen 12. Herodotus l. 1. records the like gestures among the Lacedaemonians.
And Livy among the Sabines. l. 1. 2 Chronicles, 34.20.
as the Poet describes a mourner in his mixed lamentations for private and
public losses; he went with his garments torn, being astonished at the death
of his wife and the ruin of the City. Many such instances there are amongst
their ancient Historians.

Secondly, It was used in token of Repentance, when sorrows for sin brake
forth and multiplied, Josh. 7.6. When Joshua humbled himself upon the defeat,
flight and slaughter of the Israelites before Ai, it is said, he rent his
clothes and fell to the Earth: This renting was of their garments in respect
of the outward affliction, but withal in token of repentance, for Joshua and
the people humbled themselves with fasting. So when the book of the Law was
read to Josiah, and he saw how far they had departed from the rule and word
of God, it is said, He rent his clothes, and he was afraid, he humbled himself
and his heart was tender before God.

But it may be objected that in the 2. Joel 13. when we are exhorted to rent
the heart, we are stopped from renting the garment, Rent your hearts and not
your garments, in the case of Repentance.

For answer to that I say, the Not there is not an absolute prohibition of
renting the garment, it is not so much a negation, as a direction, Rent your
hearts and not your garments, that is, Rent your hearts rather then your
garments, or Rent your hearts more then your garments, or be sure that you rent
your hearts whatsoever ver you do with your garments, Negations do not
always quite deny a thing, in the 2 Cor. 3.6. take an instance for it, where
the Apostle treating of the pre-eminence of the Gospel in the new dispensation
says, Who has made us able Ministers, not of the letter, but of the Spirit.
Not, there does not deny, as if the Ministers of Christ did not speak and
publish the letter of the word: for the letter of the word is the vessel
wherein the Spirit is contained, and unless we speak the letter to the ear,
the Spirit cannot in an ordinary way come into the heart; therefore understand
the Apostles meaning thus, he has made us able Ministers, not of the letter
but of the Spirit, that is, he has made us Ministers rather of the spirit then
of the letter, or more of the spirit then of the letter, because of the promise
of the plentiful effusion of the Spirit, after the ascension of Christ.

A further instance we have in that speech of God, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice. That is, rather mercy then sacrifice. Sacrifice is not rejected, but
mercy is preferred. So Rent your hearts and not your garments, that is, rather
rent your hearts then your garments; For otherwise you find that not only it
was lawful (as in the former places) in times of repentance and sorrow to rend
the garments, but they are taxed because they did not repent and rend their
garments. The not renting the garment is charged as a conviction of an un-rent
heart. Jerem. 36.24.
When the roull of curses that Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah was read
before Jehojakim and his Courtiers, the King cut the roll with a penknife and
cast it into the fire, their impenitence is thus described, yet they were not
afraid, nor rent their garments, neither the King nor any of his servants that
heard all those words; As if it had been said, this was a time that called
them aloud to rend their garments, to humble themselves and repent before the
Lord, when they heard such words as these, (clothed with their own sin and
Gods wrath) read unto them, but they did it not; yet they were not afraid,
neither did they rend their garments. So then, renting of the garment was used
as a ceremony of repentance, as a shadow of godly sorrow; It had nothing in it
self to move God, only it testified the greatness of their grief, that their
hearts did rend as their garments were rent.

Further, Renting of the garment was used in case of extreme indignation.
Indignation is anger and sorrow boiled up to the height. It is as it were the
extract and spirit of them both. And it is stirred especially when the ear of a
man is filled with a voice of blasphemy, or his eye with a spectacle of bold
transcendent wickedness against the Lord. Word being brought to Hezekiah of
the blasphemy that Rabshakeh had belched our against God, when he heard how he
had reproached the living God, in saying, who is the God of Jerusalem that he
should deliver it out of my hand? 1 King. 19.1. Isa. 37.1.
the text says, that Hezekiah rent his clothes with indignation; that report
filled him with a mixture of grief and anger; he was grieved that the holy
name of God was blasphemed, he was angry with the blasphemer: these caused holy
indignation, and this the renting of his garments. Acts 14.13.
Thus also when Paul and Barnabas had restored the Creeple at Lystra, the
superstitious Lystrians would have done sacrifice to them as gods; which when
the Apostles Paul and Barnabas heard of, and saw the preparations (Oxen and
Garlands brought to the gates) for that abominable Idolatry, they rent their
clothes, and ran in among the people saying, Sirs, why do you these things?
we also are men of like passions with you. They rent their clothes with
indignation, being grieved and vexed to see men so besotted, and God so
dishonored.

This act of Job in the Text, renting his garments, may refer to either of
these, it may refer to all these. If it be demanded why did Job rend his
garments? I answer, first, He rent his garments for the greatness of that
sorrow that was upon him in regard of his outward affliction. Secondly, He rent
his garments, to testify his deep humiliation under the hand of God, with
repentance for all his sins. Thirdly, He rent his garments, being filled with
indignation at those blasphemies which Satan suggested to him; This latter I
clear thus; you know it was the maine design, the very plot of Satan to
provoke Job to blaspheme God, do this says he, Touch all that he has, and he
will curse thee to thy face. He did promise this to himself and did undertake
with God to bring Job to that height of impatience. If so, then there is no
question, but as these messengers of sorrow came to him, so Satan came with
them and pointed every message with this or the like poisonous suggestion. Now
see what a master you serve, now blaspheme God, why should thou make scruple
of thinking, or of speaking evil of him, who has powered out all these evils
upon thee. Never stand so much upon his honor, who stands so little upon thy
comfort. It is no question but Satan provoked Job in some such manner. He was
not wise to promote his own ends, unless he did plie him with temptations to
blsphemy. Now Job being most sensible of these temptations, it being to him (as
afterward to holy David, Psalm. 42 10.) as a Sword in his bowels, while the
enemy said unto him, where is now thy God, he arises with indignation and
soule-abhorrence of these injections, rending his garments, etc. That for the
second act. The third follows.

And shaved his head.] Shaving of the head was used sometimes to express
sorrow, sometimes to express bondage, and I find it used in Scripture in
opposition to both these, sc. in times of joy and liberty.

First, Shaving of the head was used as a note of sorrow, Isa. 15.2. the Lord
speaking by his Prophet of the great affliction that should come upon the Jews
says, On all their heads shall be baldness, and every beard cut off; that is,
they shall mourn, that is the meaning of it. And Isa. 22.12. In that day did
the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness; that
is, to shaving of themselves or cutting off their hair; the meaning of it in
joining baldness and mourning was only this, to show that there should be
extreme sorrow and mourning in the land, The Lord calls to mourning and
baldness, that is, to an exceeding great mourning, such as those mournings
used to be when they shaved their heads; And the Prophet puts in this as an
aggravation of their sin, that when the Lord called for such a mourning as
was joined with baldness and shaving the head, that then there should be joy
and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating flesh, and drinking
wine. See this more clear, Ier. 7.29. when the Prophet fore-shewes the great
affliction of Jerusalem, he thus bespeaks them, Cut off thine hair O
Jerusalem and cast it away, and take up a lamentation. To add one instance
more, Mica. 1.16. In case of their sore affliction the Prophet says, Make thee
bald and pole thee for thy delicate children, enlarge thy baldness as the
Eagle; The meaning of all is, mourn bitterly, or mourn greatly for thy
delicate children, thy delicate and sweet children they are destroyed, mourn
greatly for them, enlarge thy baldness as the Eagle; As the Eagle, because the
Eagle (as naturalists observe) casts her feathers, and her head is many times
quite bald, therefore it is said here, enlarge thy baldness as the Eagle, that
is, be exceeding bald, cut off all thy hair in that great mourning. We may
illustrate this by a contrary rule given by this Prophet Jeremie, and likewise
by Ezekiel, when mourning was forbidden, Jer. 16.6. where he speaks of some
that should die and have none to mourn for them, he says, they shall not
lament for them, nor make themselves bald for them, Ezekiel. 24.17. Make no
mourning for the dead, what follows? Bind the tire of thine head upon thee,
when they should keep on their hair, their tire, that was an argument that
there was no mourning.

Further we find, that the cutting off the hair, the shaving of the head, was
a sign of bondage and reproach; when David sent messengers to Hanun, 2 Samuel
10.4.
Samuel records, that Hanun took the messengers and shaved off the one half
of their beards, and cut off their garments in the middle, and the men were
exceedingly ashamed; now the shame was not only because their beards were half
cut off, for if that had been all, they might quickly have cut off the other
half and have delivered themselves from the shame; for they were at liberty:
but it is therefore said that the men were greatly ashamed, because amongst
them it was a mark of shame and slavery to be shaven. Hereupon David gives
order that they should tarry at Jericho, till their beards were grown; it was
a dishonor to be shaved; And it is noted in Plutarch concerning Demosthenes,
that when he had a mind to sit close at his study and would not go abroad, or
be interrupted by visits of friends at home, that he would shave himself, that
so he might be ashamed to go forth or see any body, but be constrained to
keep to his book for two or three months together till his hair were
grown again: Ezekiel. 29.18.
The bondage and reproach that Nebuchadnezzar brought upon Tyrus is thus
described, Every head was made bald. Crinis est libertatis argumentum. Arist.
1. Rhetor.
And Aristotle observes, that the hair was a token of liberty. Thus the
shaving of the head in Job might be a sign both of his sorrovv and great
reproach that was come upon him, being one now that was ready to be mocked
and made the scorn and by-vvord of the world, as we see afterward he was,
during this affliction.

Yet it is considerable from Scripture example, that the cutting off the hair,
and shaving of the head had not alvvayes either of these significations
hitherto discussed, but did vary according to the diversity of places and of
times. In the Book of Genesis, we read that cutting and shaving of the hair,
was a token of joy and liberty both together. When Joseph was delivered out
of prison, Genesis 41.14.
it is said, that he shaved himself and came to Pharaoh. And it is noted
concerning Mephibosheth, as a matter of his sorrow for David's absence, that he
let his hair grow. He trimmed not his beard, 2 Samuel 19.24.
being much troubled at the Kings absence. I confess neither of these
instances come home enough to the point: both of these neglecting the care and
culture of their bodies in their troubles, now being delivered, prepare
themselves by shaving and trimming the hair for the presence of those Kings.
But it is in some Nations, shaving has been a mark of Honor, Aul Gel l. 3.
c. 4. Servus es and comam babes.
All the Roman Emperors were shaved, till Nero. And it was an ancient
Proverb, Thou art a slave for thou wearest locks or long hair.

There is an Objection that may be made concerning this act of Job, (because
afterward it is said, that in all this Job sinned not) whether or not Job might
shave his head without sin? for you have an express rule to the contrary,
Levit. 19.27. cap. 21.5. You shall not round the corners of your heads, neither
shall thou mar the corners of thy beard, and so you have it again in Deuteronomy.
14.1. that they should not cut their hair or make any baldness upon their
heads for the dead, namely by shaving or cutting off the hair. How is it
therefore here that Job shaved himself for the death of his children, and in
regard of those great troubles that were upon him?

I answer briefly for that, first, Job lived (as we have cleared when we spoke
of the book in general) before that Law was given, which did prohibit the
cutting of the hair in that manner.

Secondly, It appears in those places, where those Laws are set down, that
the Lord did forbid only conformity to the Heathen; they must not shave or cut
themselves, as the Heathen did: Vovebant cincinnos in honorem daemonum. Hesych.
who cut their heads round like a half globe (as it is observed concerning
them) and were wont to dedicate their locks to their Idoll-gods. That vain
fashion and gross superstition were the things forbidden in that Law of Moses.

Thirdly, Though the Jews were forbidden to shave their heads, as mourning for
the death of their friends; Et si calvitium induci pro mortuo interdictum est
in lege, tamen certum est in sanct a resipiscentia calvitium probari atque
imperari Iun. in Isa. 22.12.
yet (in the judgment of learned Junius) the shaving of their heads was not
only permitted, but commanded in case of mourning for sin, or in times of
solemn repentance and humiliation. He instanceth in two places before
mentioned. First, the Prophet Isaiah reproving the unseasonable mirth and
desperate security of the Jews in a time of public trouble and treading
down, tells them, In that day did the Lord God of Hoasts call to weeping and
to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth, Isa. 22.12.
Secondly, There is council given answerable to that reproof by the Prophet
Micah cap. 1.16. Make thee bald, and pole thee for thy delicate children,
enlarge thy baldness as the Eagle, for they are gone into captivity from thee.

We will observe something from these two actions, the renting of his garments
and the shaving of his head. These refer to the expression of his sorrow for
those losses in estate and the death of his children: As the other two actions,
his falling upon the ground and worshipping refer to the expression of that
homage and honor that he tendered up to God in the midst of these sorrows.
From those two acts of sorrow learn we,

First, That when the hand of God is upon us, it becomes us to be sensible of
it, and to be humbled under it. Job hearing these sad relations does not stand
out stoutly, as if nothing had touched him: but to show that sorrow did even
rent his heart, he rent his garments, to show that his affliction touched his
spirit, he shaved his head. There are two extremes that we are carefully to
avoid in times of affliction: and the Apostle does caution all the sons of
God against them both in one verse, Heb. 12.5. My son despise not thou the
chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him. Those are the
two extremes, despising and fainting when God does correct. He would not have
us despise his chastning, to say, I do not regard this, let God take all if he
will: If my estate must go, let it go; if my children die, let them die, this
is a despising of the chastening of the Lord, and God cannot bear it, that we
should bear it thus lightly. There is another extreme, that is, fainting; If
when goods are taken away, the heart be taken away, and when children die, then
the spirit of the Parent dies too, this is fainting. Take heed of these two
extremes. Job walks in the middle, in the golden mean between them both. He
does not carelessly despise, neither does he unbeleevingly faint: he rises up
and he rents his garments. He would have it known that he fainted not under
the stroke, and he would have it known, that he felt the stroke, he was not
like a stock or a stone; he would not carry it with a stoicall apathy, but
with Christian fortitude and magnanimity. Senseless ones are taxed, Jerem.
5.3. Thou have stricken them, and they have not grieved. Such are compared by
Solomon to him that lies down in the midst of the Sea, or as he that lies
upon the top of a mast, secure and careless in the greatest dangers. They have
stricken me shall thou say, and I was not sick, they have beaten me and I felt
it not, Prove. 23.34, 35. The Prophet Hosea reproves the like. Strangers (says
he) have devoured his strength and he knows it not, yea gray hairs are here
and there upon him and he knows it not, ca. 7.9. That is, he is in an
afflicted, in a declining condition, and yet he lays it not to heart. A man
may out of the greatness of his spirit (but not out of the carelessness of his
spirit) say as Luther once did, when things went very ill, If the world will
go thus, let it go thus. Otherwise it is a most unbecomming temper to be
stricken of God, and not to tremble, at least to take it to heart. When God
afflicts us, then we should afflict our selves and be humbled: when Gods hand
is upon us, our hands (in this sense) should be upon our selves: We must bear
our cross upon our backs, we must not make a fire of it to warm our hands.
Indeed the Apostle exhorts to rejoice in tribulation, and it is an excellent
thing to rejoice in tribulation, but we must not slight, much less make a
sport of tribulation. Rejoicing arises from a holy satisfaction that the soul
has in the dealings of God with us. But sleighting arises from an unholy
contempt, or at the best from a stupid insensiblenesse of Gods dealings with
us. The former has in it the height of wickedness, and the latter has not
the least degree of goodness, It is no virtue to bear what we do not feel.

Secondly, observe

That in times of affliction we may express our sorrows by outward gestures,
by sorrowful gestures. Job was not only sorrowful, but he acts sorrow, he
puts himself into mourning postures, he rents his garments, he shav's his
head, down he falls upon the ground. It is no hypocrisy to appear what we
are: it is hypocrisy to appear what we are not. We use to say, he mourns
truly that mourns without a garment, but if a man mourn in truth, a mourning
garment is comely. To mourn in our clothes and laugh in our sleeves, is both
sinful and base. Now Job mourned indeed, the shaving his head and renting his
garment, was but to keep an outward correspondence with what he was within.
Therefore take heed of censuring those who in great sorrows use sorrowful
gestures, striking upon their breasts, tearing their hair or the like. Only
let all take heed of excessive and immoderate mourning; mourn not like
Rachell, who would receive no comfort, mourn not like the Heathen who had no
hope. To be above passions will be our happiness in Heaven, to rectify
passions is much of our happiness on earth* To be without natural affections,
is to fall below a man: to steer and manage them is one of the heights of a
Christian.

Thirdly, We showed that this renting of his garments might have reference to
his Repentance: whence note,

That when God afflicts us with sufferings, we ought to afflict our selves to
humble our souls for sin. Smarting times are good repenting times, and
worldly sorrow should get the company of godly sorrow. It is not safe to be
alone with worldly sorrow, that works death; but if we mingle a few tears for
sin, and our unkindnesse to Christ, with those tears; then they will refresh
us. We get by losses in our outward estate, when they lead us to look to the
losses and repair the breaches of our spiritual estates; no question but Job
at this time fell a searching of his heart and a trying of his ways, renewing
his repentance and assuring of his peace with God. When afflictions cause us to
return thus into our own breasts, they have then a sweet influence, a blessed
operation upon us.

Lastly, Observe,

That thoughts of blasphemy against God should be cast off and rejected with
the highest indignation. Job rent his garments, when Satan solicites Job to
rent the name of God with reproach and cursings. Thoughts dishonouring God must
needs be vexing to every good heart. Nothing touches a godly man, like that
which touches God. When the glory of his God is engaged and concerned, he
cannot contain. So much for those two acts, he rent his garments and he shaved
his head.

The two other acts are, 1. He falls upon the ground.

2. He worshippeth. The Original words do both signify a bowing to the
ground; He fell upon the ground and bowed, so some translate it, you shall see
the reason by and by. He fell upon the ground and worshipped, that is, He fell
upon the ground to worship. To fall upon the ground is a gesture of worship,
and not only is it a posture of worship, when the worshipper mournes, but it is
likewise a posture of worship, when the worshipper rejoices. Great joy as well
as great sorrow transports a man in his next actions. It is said, Mat. 2.10,
11. that the wise men when they found Christ, rejoiced with exceeding great
joy, and presently, they fell down and worshipped him. Neither is this posture
peculiar to worship in times or upon occasions of extraordinary joy and sorrow
(unless in the degree of it) for the ordinary invitation was, O come let us
worship and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our maker, Psa. 95.6. I
said in the degree, for to fall down is more then to bow down. Falling down in
worship proceeds not only from sorrow, but from joy, when the heart is filled
with joy, then we fall down and worship. And it is probably Bolduc in loc.
observed that the ancient Prophets and holy men, the servants of God were
called Nephalim (from Naphal, which is the Original word of the Text) Cadentes
or Prostrantes, that is, prostrates or fallers, because in their worship they
usually fell down upon the earth to humble themselves before God. And because
adoration was so commonly made by falling to the ground, by bowing the head, by
bowing the knee, by bowing the whole body, therefore the same Original word
which the Hebrews use for worshipping does properly signify to bow down the
body. And that phrase to bow the body, as it is often joined with worshipping;
so sometime to bow the body, put alone, does signify to worship, 2 King. 5.18.
(...) a radice (...)
When I bow my self in the house of Rimmon, scil. When I worship, etc. So
likewise the Greek word to worship has the same sense in it, (...). Quod est
more catellorum ad pedes alicujus, tanquam Domini totum sese prosternere
subjectionis gratia. Zanch.
for that word signifies (as a learned Writer observes upon it) to bow after
the manner of dogs that crouch at the feet of their Masters for favor, or for
fear. So in worship the people of God crouch down and abase themselves at
Gods feet, as not worthy in themselves to eat the crumbes under his Table.

Yet we are not to look upon this, as if it were the only true and acceptable
worship-gesture; for we shall find in Scripture that there were other
worship-gestures with which God was well pleased. Some have worshipped God
standing, some sitting, some walking, all these are worship-postures. For
standing we find it, 1 King. 8.22. at the Dedication of the Temple, Solomon
stood before the Altar of the Lord, and made that prayer. For sitting we have 2 Samuel 2.18. When Nathan brought that message unto David concerning the building
of the house of God, that it should be deferred till his sons time, the Text
says, That David went in and sat before the Lord and said, who am I O Lord?
And in the end he says, Therefore have I found in my heart to pray this prayer
unto thee. We also find walking in prayer, Genesis 24.63. Isaac went out into the
field to pray. He walked and prayed, we translate it to meditate, but in the
margin of your books, (...)
you find it to pray, as being nearer the Hebrew. So that walking and sitting
and standing are likewise praying gestures or postures of holy worship: But
chiefly that posture of bowing down the body or bending the knee is the
worship posture; so it follows in the Text.

He fell upon the ground and worshipped. And worshipped.] To worship is to
give to any one the honor due unto him: So the rendering unto God that love,
that fear, that service, that honor which is due unto him is the worshipping
of God, that is the Scripture definition, Psalm. 29.2. Give unto the Lord the
honor due unto his name; then follows by way of exposition, Worship the Lord
in the beauty of holiness, that is, in his holy Temple, in his beautiful
Sanctuary, or in the comely honor of his Sanctuary. So that worship is the
tendering of honor to the Lord, in a way honorable to him, namely according
to his own will and Laws of worship: which is intimated by coming to
worship him in his beautiful Sanctuary, where all things about the service of
God were exactly prescribed by God. And then there was beauty or comely honor
in the Sanctuary, when all things were ordered there by the rule of his
prescription; varying and departing from which would have filled that holy
place with darkness and deformity, notwithstanding all the outward luster and
beauty had bin preserved.

The worship of God is twofold, there is internal worship and there is
external worship. Internal worship is to love God, to fear God, and to trust
upon him, these are acts of inward worship, these are the sum of our duty and
Gods honor contained in the first Commandment: And so you may understand
worship in the Text. Job fell down and worshipped, that is, presently upon
those reports he put forth an act of love and holy fear, acts of dependence
and holy trust upon God, in his Spirit, saying to this effect within himself.
Lord though all this be come upon me, yet I will not depart from thee, or deal
falsely in thy Covenant. I know thou art still the same Jehovah, true, holy,
gracious, faithful, All-sufficient; and therefore behold me prostrate before
thee, and resolving, still to love thee, still to fear thee, still to trust
thee, thou art my God still and my portion for ever. Though I had nothing left
in the world that I could call mine, yet thou Lord alone art enough, yet thou
alone art All. Such doubtless was the language of Jobs heart, and these were
mighty actings of inward worship.

Then likewise there is external worship, which is the sum of the second
Commandment, and it is nothing else but the serving of the Lord according to
his own Ordinances and institution, in those several ways wherein God will
be honored and served, this is outward worship, and as we apply our selves
unto them, so we are reckoned to worship God. Job worshipped God outwardly by
falling to the ground, by pouring out supplications, and by speaking good words
of God (as we read afterward) words tending to his own abasement and the
honor of God, clearly and fully acquitting and justifying the Lord in all
those works of his providence and dispensations toward him.

This is worship both internal and external. Internal worship is the chief,
but God requires both: and there is a necessity of joining both together, that
God may have honor in the world. Internal worship is complete in it self,
and pleasing unto God without the external: The external may be complete in
it self, but is never pleasing to God without the internal. Internal worship
pleases God most, but external honors God most: for by this God is known,
and his glory held forth in the world. External worship is Gods name. Hence
the Temple was called the place where God put his Name, sc. his worship, by
which God is known, as a man by his name, They that worship God must worship
him in Sprit and in Truth: In Spirit, that is with inward love and fear,
reverence and sincerity. In Truth, that is, according to the true rule
prescribed in his word. Spirit respects the inward power, Truth the outward
form. The former strikes at hypocrisy, the latter strikes at Idolatry. The
one opposes the inventions of our heads, the other the looseness of our hearts
in worship.

Observe further, that it is only said, Job fell down and worshipped, nothing
is said of the object to whom he did direct his worship, or whom he did
worship. The object is not expressed but understood, or presupposed; And indeed
worship is a thing so proper and peculiar to God, that when we name worship, we
must needs understand God. For nothing but God, or that which we make a god is
or can be worshipped. Either he is God whom we worship, or (as much as in us
lies) we make him one. What creature so ever shares in this honor, this honor
(ipso facto) sets it up above, and makes it more then a creature.

The very Heathens thought every thing below a God, below worship: therefore
there needed not an expression of the object; when the Text says, Job
worshipped, that implies his worship was directed unto God, yet there is a kind
of worship which is due to creatures.

There is a civil worship mentioned in Scripture, as well as divine worship.
Civil worship may be given to men. And there is a twofold civil worship
(spoken of in Scripture) There is a civil worship of duty, and there is a
civil worship of courtesy. That of duty is from inferiors to their
superiors, from children to their Parents, from servants to their Masters,
from Subjects to Kings and Magistrates. These gods must have civil worship. As
Genesis 48.11. when Joseph came into the presence of Jacob his father, he bowed
down to the ground; this was a civil worship, and a worship of duty from
an inferior to a superior. And it is said of the brethren of Judah, Genesis
49.8. when Jacob on his deathbed blessed the 12. Tribes, Thy brethren shall
worship thee or bow down to thee. It is the same word used here in this Text.
Judahs honor was to vvield the Scepter, the government was laid upon his
shoulders; now he being the chief Magistrate, all the rest of the Tribes, all
his brethren must worship him or give civil honor unto him.

Secondly, There is likewise a worship of courtesy, which is from equals,
when one equal will bow to another, or when a superior (as sometimes in
courtesy he will) bows down or worships his inferior: As it is noted
concerning Abraham, that when he came before the men of the Country of Heth,
he bowed himself; Genesis 23.12.
Now Abraham was the Superior, he was a Prince and a Great-man, yet coming
before the men of the Country, he bowed himself, and it is the same word.

So then this civil worship may lawfully be given unto men. But as for divine
worship that is proper and peculiar unto God, that glory he will not give to
graven Images, man or Angel, and therefore we must not. Hence we find that
when Cornelius and John did act their civil worship a little too far, they
were presently taken often for they should entrench upon the divine worship.
Civil worship when it is excessive and goes too far is sinful; As in
Act. 10.25. Luke relates that as soon as Peter came in, Cornelius met him and
fell at his feet and worshipped him; the worship was to Peter, for we are
not to think that Cornelius was so grossly ignorant as to take Peter for a
god, and to give him divine worship; but the meaning of it is, that he fell
down at his feet and gave him an honor and respect beyond what he ought to
have done, he was excessive in it: therefore Peter takes him off, Stand up
(says he) I my self also am a man, I am a man as thou art, though an Apostle
give me such respect as becomes a Minister of Christ, take heed that you give
me no more than belongs to a man. So the Angel, Revel. 22.8. When John
falls down at his feet and worshippeth, he takes him up, See thou do it
not, says he, for I am thy fellow servant: This is too much for man, worship
God, as it is in the end of the verse; such worship belongs properly and
peculiarly unto God.

So much for the opening of these two latter actions of Job in reference unto
God. We shall now give you some Observations. Impendit liberis and servis
luctum, Deo prostrationem and adorationem. Pined. in loc.
He fell down upon the ground and worshipped. You see how Job divides himself
and his affections in this time of his affliction, part he bestowed upon his
children and servants, and losses, they shall have his sorrow and tears, He
rent his mantle and shaved his head, but they shall not have all: God shall
have the better part, his love, his fear, his trust, his body to bow to him,
and his soul to worship him.

Learn from hence, That a godly man will not let nature work alone, he mixes
and tempers acts of grace with acts of nature.

We must not sorrow as those that are without hope (says the Apostle) qualify
sorrow with hope, these mixed do well. A man must not sorrow for outward things,
as though we had nothing else to do, but to sorrow, he must remember he has a
God to worship and honor. Job bestows somewhat upon his children, but more
upon his God; while his body fell to the earth, his heart was raised up to
Heaven, He fell down and worshipped.

Secondly observe,

That afflictions send the people of God home unto God; afflictions draw a
godly man nearer unto God; Then Job fell down and worshipped. Afflictions are
a great advantage to the servants of God; for when the world frowns most, then
they beg most for the smiles of God, when the world is strange to them, and
will not look on them, then they get more familiarity and closer communion
with God, they seek his face. Wicked men in their afflictions, in their
sorrows, are either quite drowned in and overwhelmed with them, so that there
is nothing but sorrow, as we say all a mort; or else they go out to help and
relieve themselves with worldly refreshments; trouble drives them to sin, it
may be as low as Hell to seek relief. The more poor they are, the more
wicked they are; such are not poor as Job, though they are as poor as Job.
Jobs poverty sent him to God, rich in mercy. He fell down and worshipped.

Thirdly learn,

That the people of God turn all their afflictions into prayers or into
praises. When God is striking then Job is praying, when God is afflicting, then
Job falls to worshipping. Grace makes every condition work glory to God, as God
makes every condition work good to them who have grace.

Fourthly, Job falls down and worshippeth, observe here,

That it becomes us to worship God in an humble manner. Though God (as we
showed before) may be worshipped in another posture, yet we should rather
choose that posture which is most humble, and may lay our bodies as low as our
souls, if it may be. There were some lately amongst us, who cried aloud, as
great Patrons for humble postures in worship: and all were censured for a
stiff neck and an Elephants knee, who refused to bow with them, or to bow
their way. I may well add their way, for Gods way of bowing was neither
questioned nor refused; all their humility in bowing went but one way, they
must bow toward the East, and toward the Altar at least, if not to it. Some
of their stomachs I believe would have digested that before this time,
especially being a little helped with a distinction.

Lastly, We may here observe,

That divine worship it is Gods peculiar. Papists have worship for creatures,
and they have a distinction for it, but no Scripture for it. They tell us of
Latria, which is they say worship proper only to God, and their Dulia, which is
for Saints, and then their Huper-dulia, which is for the Virgin Mary, and for
the sign of the Cross. Thus they make vain distinctions which God and the
Scripture make not. Vain distinctions are good enough to maintain vain
superstitions. They that invent a worship, must invent a doctrine to maintain
it by. Some perhaps may stumble at that Text, Rev. 3.9. where this promise is
made to the Church of Philadelphia, Behold I will make them of the Synagogue of
Satan, which say they are Jews and are not, but do lie, behold I will make
them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.
May not worship then be given to a creature?

Ans. This worship may be taken for civil worship, namely for that submission
which the enemies of the Church, shall be forced by the power of Christ to make
unto her, as was promised by the Prophet, Isa. 60.14. The sons also of them
that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee, and all they that despised
thee shall bow themselves down at the s^tes of thy feet.

Ans. 2. If this be divine worship, then worshipping at the feet of the Church,
notes worshipping in the Church, not worshipping of the Church. The worship is
not terminated in the Church, but in Christ; who dwells and rules in the Church,
who is both Head and husband of the Church. These enemies being convinced of
the presence of Christ in his Church shall worship him. This, David prophecies
of Christ, speaking in his own person, Psalm. 18.43, 44. Thou have made me the
head of the Heathen, a people whom I have not known shall serve me. As soon
as they hear of me they shall obey me: the strangers shall submit themselves
unto me. That of the Apostle will more illustrate this sense, who speaking of
the great benefit of prophesying in a known tongue, concludes his Discourse
thus, If all prophecy and there come in one that believes not, or one
unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all. And thus are the
secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on his face, he will
WORSHIP God, and report that God is in you of a truth. The worship then is not
given to the Church, but to God, who in such ordinances, or other acts of his
power and goodness is evidently revealed as present in the Church.

So much for the actions or gestures of Job, what he did? He rent his mantle
and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground and worshipped.

Now we come to his words, to that which Job spoke in the two last verses.

Verse 21. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return
thither.

Verse 22. The Lord gives and the Lord takes, blessed be the name of the Lord.

Words are or ought to be the Interpreters of the heart, and the Comment of our
actions. This speech of Job does indeed interpret his heart and expound the
meaning of his former actions. This speech (I say) of Job is the true Comment
of his own actions; for some seeing Job renting his garments and shaving his
head, and casting himself down upon the ground, they might not know the
meaning of all this, they could not read his heart in these strange
behaviors, they might not understand what his intentions were, probably they
might judge that he was enraged and mad, that he was distracted or drunk
with sorrow: that he was either desperate or impatient, at the report of those
losses. Therefore now to confute all such surmizes, he speaks forth, the words
of truth and sobernes. And by that which he says, sets so fair and true a gloss
upon his actions, as might then render them, not only rational and ingenuous,
but holy and gracious in the eyes of all men, as they were before in the eyes
of God, who knew his heart. Satan was now, like the servants of Benhadad before
Ahab, 1 King. 20.23.
watching for words, he had done his business and now he was trying how it
would work, what the event and issue would be; he harken'd when some
irreverent speech should come from the mouth of Job, he looked presently that
he should blaspheme God: he could not but smile surely, when he saw him renting
his garments and shaving his head and falling down on the ground, O now it
works, I shall hear him blaspheme and curse God presently. He that is thus
distempered in the carriage of the other members of his body, will not surely
be able long to rule (that unruly peace) his tongue. One undutifull or
dishonorable word cast upon God, would have been music to Satan's ear and
joy to his heart. He would have caught it up as nimbly as the men before
spoken of, did, brother Benhadad from the mouth of Ahab. But how blanke looked
Satan, how was he clothed with shame at the fall of those words from Job,
Naked came I out of, etc.

What David spoke concerning the words of his enemies ( Psalm. 55.21. Their
words were smoother then butter, but war was in their heart, they were
sweeter then honey and softer then oil, yet were they drawn swords) we may
speak of these words of Job considered in reference to Satan, and in reference
unto God. These words of Job in reference unto God were as sweet as honey, as
smooth as butter. For this breath had nothing in it, but meeknes and patience,
humility and holiness, in all which God delights: but in reference unto Satan
they were as drawn Swords, as poisoned arrows, Satan was hardly ever so
smitten before, as he was by these words of Job. There is no word in this
sentence, but gave Satan the lie, and refuted all his slander. And in the close
Job gives him the deepest stabbe of all, It was a dagger at the very heart of
the devil, when he heard him say, Blessed be the name of the Lord. No words
could be uttered upon the longest study, more cross to Satan's expectation, or
more answerable to the former testimony of God; and therefore the Lord crowns
all, both his actions and his speeches with a new testimony, In all this Job
sinned not nor charged God foolishly.

So much of Jobs words in general, I shall now examine them distinctly in the
parts.

Some conceive that Job at that time spoke out his mind more largely, Beza. in
loc.
but that the Holy Ghost in the penning of this Story did gather and sum up
the strength of all his speech into these two conclusions.

Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither.

The Lord gives and the Lord takes, blessed be the Name of the Lord.

We will consider the words a little first in the Grammatical sense of them,
and then we will consider the reason of them: For here they are used logically
as a strong and mighty argument, both for the supporting of his own spirit
under those afflictions, and for the justifying and acquitting God in so
afflicting him.

Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, etc. Naked.] There is a twofold
nakedness, there is an internal nakedness, and there is an external
nakedness: There is a nakedness of the soul as well as of the body. The
nakedness of the soul is, when it is divested of all it is gracious ornaments
and endowments. When Job says, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked
shall I return thither, it refers especially to the nakedness of the body;
for though it be a truth that Job came naked into the world in regard of his
soul, yet he knew he should not go naked out of the world, in regard of his
soul. Seeing then he refers nakedness to his going out of the world as
well as to his coming in, therefore it cannot be here meant of an inward
nakedness, his soul came naked in, but he knew his soul should go out
clothed. Neither can it be meant of a then present spiritual nakedness; for
Job was never so richly and gorgeously attired in his soul, never appeared in
such glorious ornaments of grace, as when he was stripped of all worldly
comforts. Therefore the nakedness here is bodily nakedness, that which Moses
speaks of Genesis 2.25. describing our first Parents, They were both naked, says
he, the man and his wife, and they were not ashamed. Yet that nakedness and
this which Job speaks of (though they were both bodily and external) were
very different and unlike: for that nakedness of Creation needed no covering,
nakedness was then an ornament. Man was richly attired when he had no
garments. The nakedness of creation was the absence of clothing, or a not
using of clothes, it was not the want of clothing. But the nakedness Job
speaks of, is the nakedness after the fall properly, where nakedness imports
not only a not having of clothes, but want of clothing; and so nakedness is a
part of that curse and punishment which followed sin. Naked came I out of my
mothers womb, that is, I came into the world in a sad and miserable condition,
weak and poor: And so nakedness is put not strictly as opposed only to
clothing, but we may take it more largely for the want of all outward comforts
whatsoever, I came a poor destitute creature into the world, I had not only
no clothing upon my back, but I had no comfort for my body, I brought neither
Sheep nor Oxen, nor children nor servants into the world with me, I had none
of these things, nothing to help me of my own, when I first set footing into
the world. Natura noverca unum hominem animantium cunctorum, alienis velat
opibus. Caeteris vary tegumenta tribuit testas, cortices, coria, spinas,
villos, setas, pilos, plumam* pennas, squammas, vellera; truncos etiam arboris
cortice interdum gemino a frigoribus and calore tutata est, hominem tantum
nudum, and in nuda humo natali die abjecit. Plin. Not. Hist l 7. in the
Preface. (...)


Some Naturalists considering this kind of nakedness, have fallen out into
great complaints against nature, or indeed rather against the God of nature, as
Pliny in the Preface to his 7th book of his natural History, does as it were
chide with nature for turning man into the world in such a helpelesse forlorn
condition, as if man were dealt with more hardly then any other creature, then
any beasts of the field or fowls of the air. Other creatures says he come
into the world with hair, or fleeces or bristles, or scales or feathers, or
wings, or shells, etc. to defend and cover them, but nature casts man naked upon
the naked ground. This he spoke, not considering that nakedness was once no
trouble, but rather an honor and an ornament, and this he spoke not knowing
whence or how that kind of troublesome nak^^nesse came into the world: And this
he spoke, not observing as he might, how many ways God has provided for the
help and supply of that nakedness; giving man understanding and reason in
stead of weapons and clothes, which also are a means for the procuring of all
things necessary for the supporting of that naked and weak perishing condition.

Naked shall I return thither. The difficulty that is in this lies only in
that word Thither; the doubt is, what place he means or whither? What into my
mothers womb? There is no such return, as Nicodemus said, Ioh. 3.
Shall a man that is old go into his mothers womb and be borne again? Some
answer it thus, The Adverbe [ thither] does not necessarily refer to the
literal antecedent; but in Scripture sometimes Relatives refer to somewhat
in the mind or in the thought of the speaker, and not to that which was before
spoken by him; as that of Mary shows, Joh. 20.15. when she comes into the
garden and finds that Christ was risen, she meets Christ and supposing him
to be the Gardener, says unto him, Sir if you have borne him hence, Him, what
him? There was no antecedent mentioned to which Him should relate, only Mary's
mind was so full of Christ, that she thought every one would understand, what
him, or whom she spoke of: as if none could speak of or think any thing but
of Christ only. Therefore she made the relation to that which was in her own
spirit, and not to what was formerly expressed. So some Interpreters make the [
thither] to be God or the grave, I shall return unto God, or I shall return to
the grave, to the house of the grave, as the Chaldee paraphrase has it. For
they suppose Job had his mind full of those thoughts, therefore he may make a
relation to that.

Another consideration for the clearing of it is this, that such Adverbes of
place as this is, do not only signify place, Quod dicitur nudus revertar
illuc, intelligitur in illum statum quem habuit in utero matris. Aquin. in loc.
but a state or a condition, wherein any one is, or to which any thing or
person is brought; as it is ordinary in our speech to say, hitherto I have
brought the matter, that is, to this state or to this condition; So when Job
says, Naked shall I return thither, that is, I shall return to such a
condition or to such an estate, as I was naked before, so I shall return to a
state of nakedness again.

But thirdly, that which may more clearly carry it, Neque novum est ut nomen
proprium cum figurato eodem filo atque eadem oratione conju^gatur. Sanct. Magna
parens terra est. Ovid.
the thither which Job here speaks of may be understood of the earth or the
grave, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither,
to the womb of the earth which is the grave: and so there may be in the latter
a reference unto the former, taking the one properly and the other improperly,
taking the earth for his mothers womb in an improper sense, sc. the earth
which is the common parent from whence we all came, and to which we all
return; the earth shall receive and take in all mankind again, when man dies
the earth opens her bowels and receives him in, and which makes her once more
a mother, the earth at last being, as it were, with-child, or rather bigg with
children, shall travel in pain, and groaning to be delivered, shall by the
mighty power of God bring forth mankind again. There shall be a mighty birth
from the womb of the earth at the last day. In Scripture the resurrection is
called a birth, in the day of the resurrection mankind is a new begotten by
God, and mankind is a newborn, that cleares it, Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my Son
this day have I begotten thee, which words are applied by Paul, Act. 13.33. to
the resurrection of Christ. God has fulfilled the promise made unto the
Fathers, unto us their children, in that he has raised up Jesus again, as it
is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my Son this day have I
begotten thee. And as Christ so all men, but especially all Christians shall be
again begotten by the power of God, and borne from the womb of the earth in
the day of their resurrection.

So much for the understanding of these words, Naked came I out of my mothers
womb and naked shall I return thither.

I shall collect some Observations from them two ways. First as they contain
a general truth. 2. As they are an argument or a reason for the support of a
man in such a sad condition as Job was then reduced unto. In the former way
observe,

First, That every man is borne a poor, helpelesse, naked creature. The soul
is naked of all that is good, there is not a rag of grace upon it, when we come
into the world. Our bodies are naked too, so that we are borne with nothing
upon us, but only an ugly dress of sin, such as may justly make God loath
us, and us a terror to our selves. Naked came I into the world; this one
thought well taken in and fully digested, will lay pride in the dust; this
thought that we were borne thus naked, will strip us of all high and proud
thoughts of our selves.

Secondly, Naked shall I return. Note,

When death comes it shakes us out of all our worldly comforts and
possessions. Death is called an uncloathing, 2 Cor. 5.4. We that are in this
Tabernacle do groan, being burdened, not for that we would be uncloathed,
that is, not that we would die. Death is called an uncloathing, because it
pulls all outward things off from a man, it pulls off all his raiment, his
riches, his lands, his honors, yea death uncloathes the very bones, our flesh
wears off quickly in the grave. We have a usual phrase among us, and it is
a very proper one: when a rich man dies (we say) he left a great estate, he
leaves it indeed, for he cannot carry it with him, he must go out naked, how
well clothed so ever he was while he was here. The Apostle does more then
intimate, that some rich men do scarce believe this for sound doctrine; he
speaks as if he would beat them off from some thought of carrying the world
with them out of the world; while they live they are buried in their riches,
and when they die, they hope their riches will be buried with them, yea and
rise with them again. Such a conceit (I say) the Apostle seems to meet with,
for in the 1 Timothy 6.7. having said, We brought nothing with us into this world,
he adds in the next words, and it is certain we can carry nothing out; he
does not say, we brought nothing into the world, and we can carry nothing out,
as Job here speaks, but as if Jobs assertion had come into question in Paul's
time, he says, we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain, never
doubt of the truth of it, we can carry nothing out, we shall go out as we
came-in. Many, as the Prophet Habbakkuk speaks, Chap. 2.6. lade themselves
with thick clay. But as the question there follows. How long? This lading must
be laid down again. If riches end not before thee, as thine, they must end
with thee. Yet if any would carry riches and clothing out of the world, it
will be their wisdom to labor for spiritual riches, for spiritual
clothing, when such die, as they shall not be found naked, so they shall not
go out naked: All your other clothing and riches must be left on this side
the grave, but get spiritual clothing and riches, and you shall go out of
the world adorned and enriched for ever, the clothing of grace, the robe of
righteousness, a vesture of spiritual ornaments will endure to all eternity.

Thirdly note here further, how the Holy Ghost describes the life of man, Naked
came I into the world, and naked shall I return.

The life of man it is nothing else but a coming and a returning; Here is
nothing said of staying or abiding; We have here no continuing City, while we
are here, we can hardly be said to continue here, and after a few days we
shall not be here at all. It is but a coming and a going, it is but a flood
and an ebb, and then we are carried into the Ocean of eternity.

We may yet consider the words as they are an argument (and so I shall note two
things from them.) So Job uses them as an argument both to support himself and
to acquit God. Then observe.

First, That a godly man in his straights studieth arguments to acquit and
justify God in all his dealings with him. Job could not have found out upon
longest study a better or a stronger argument for the acquitting of God then
this is, I have as much as I brought, then what wrong is done me in all this.
As wicked men when they fall into straits or troubles, especially when they
fall into sin, study arguments how to shift themselves out and lay all the
blame upon God; as Adam and Eve our first Parents in Paradise (there it began)
when they had sinned and were naked, they began to devise shifts how to put it
from themselves and to fasten the fault upon God. David on the other side
labors as much to clear God, if ever he should be stripped naked, Psa. 51.4. I
will confess my sin, that thou may be justified when thou speak and
clear when thou judge. Weigh the reason why David confesses his sin in
that Psalm, I do it says he, that I may by this means acquit God,
whatsoever God shall do with me hereafter, whatsoever affliction God shall
bring upon me; men it may be will begin to judge G^d for it, and to say that he
has dealt hardly with me, notice having been taken, what an eminent servant of
God I have been, Behold, says he, I confess my sin before thee that thou
may be clear when thou judge, or as the Apostle Paul quotes the place,
according to the Septuagint, Romans 3.4. That thou might overcome when thou
art judged. David knew men would be apt to judge God, if they saw him
afflicted, and therefore to stop their mouths, or to give God the day against
them, he confesses his sin, thereby showing cause why God might chastise him,
either for correction of sin past, or prevention of sin to come.

Secondly, As the argument refers unto Job himself, we may observe this,

That the consideration of what we once were, and of what at last we must be,
may releeve our spirits in the greatest outward afflictions of this life. Art
thou for the present in a naked condition? Consider thou wast naked once, and
ere long shall be naked again: Consider the two extremes, the beginning and
the ending, and that will bear thee up in the middle condition. There is many
a man that complains and says, I have nothing but the clothes upon my back
left me, and they are but rags, but mean ones neither: Why! With nothing but
the clothes upon thy back? Know O man thou wast borne with nothing but thy
skin upon thy back. Consider this, and leave complaining; this was one thought
which helped Job to bear this burden, the want of all. And the Apostle Paul
uses this argument to the very same purpose, 1 Timothy 6.6. having said, That
godliness with contentment is great gain, he subjoynes presently this
argument of Job, for says he, we brought nothing into this world, and it is
certain we shall carry nothing out; To consider what (not long ago) we were,
and what very shortly we must be, will mightily work the soul to contentation
in what estate soever we are. It follows.

The Lord gave and the Lord has taken away. This is the second argument which
Job uses to both the former purposes; and it is a more spiritual and sublime
argument than the former. A man who has nothing in him but nature, may say as
much as Job did before, though he could never say it with Jobs spirit; for
though godly persons use natural arguments and common reasons, yet being
concocted in their spirits, they become heavenly and spiritual. Natural men
(I say) or Heathens have taken up such an argument as that, Scio me mortatem
genuisse.
as when word was brought to a Heathen Philosopher, that his son was dead, I
knew (says he) that I begot a son mortal, and subject to death; he did but
look back to the common condition of man and supported himself. But now I say
this second argument is higher, it is not an argument bottomed upon the frailty
of nature, but upon the sovereignty of God; This argument is grounded upon the
equity of divine providence and dispensations: The Lord (says he) has given
and the Lord has taken away.

The Lord has given. Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above,
Jam. 1.17. What gifts does Job here mean? He means good and perfect gifts in
their kind; but not the best and most perfect kind of gifts. The Lord once gave
me those Oxen, those Sheep, all these outward things that now I am stripped
of, The Lord has given; A gift is any good freely bestowed; when we receive a
thing, which another was not engaged to bestow, that is a gift. Now God does
not only give us those transcendents, grace and glory, faith in Christ here
and full fruition of Christ hereafter: not only are these gifts, I say, sent
in from God and undeserved by us; but outward things, riches and honor,
children and servants, houses and lands, these are the gifts of God likewise;
we have not the least creature-comfort of our own we have, nothing of our own
but sin. What have thou, that thou have not received? is a truth concerning
every thing, we have even to a hoof or a shoe-latchet. We are indebted unto
God for our spiritualls, for our temporals, for all. We must say of all, little
or much, great or small, The Lord has given.

How did the Lord give Job all his riches and estate?

The Lord does give either immediately or mediately. When Job says, the Lord
has given, we are not to understand it, as if the Lord had brought such a
present to him and said, here take this estate, take these cattle, these
servants; but God gave them mediately by blessing the labors of Job. So when
the Lord prospers us in our honest endeavors and labors and callings, then
the Lord gives us outward things.

The Lord has given. Job does not say, by my strength and diligence, by my
policy and pradence, I have got this estate; as the Assyrian said, Isa. 10.13.
by the strength of my hand have I done this, and by my wisdom, for I am
prudent. Job takes no notice of himself, he was not idle, yet he speaks as if
he had done nothing, the Lord has given.

This should teach us in the first place to acknowledge the Lord as the
fountain and donor of all our outward comforts. When you get wealth, do not
say, this I have gotten (such language is barbarous in divinity) but say, this
the Lord has given. We find an express caution to this purpose, given by
Moses from God, not only against the former language of the tongue, but of the
heart, When the Jews should come to Canaan and should grow rich and great
there. When thou have eaten and art full, then thou shall bless the Lord.
Deuteronomy. 8.10, 11.17.18.
Beware thou forget not the Lord thy God for the good land which he has given
thee, and say in thy heart, my power and the might of my hand has gotten me
this wealth, but thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that
gives thee power to get wealth: It is he that gives thee power. Many who are
persuaded that God gives them grace, that God gives Heaven and Salvation, are
hardly persuaded, or at least do not so well consider it, that God gives
riches, etc. their their hearts are yet ready to say, that they have gotten
this wealth, they have gotten this honor. It is a sweet thing, when a man
looks upward for these lower things, and can say on good grounds that his
earth has dropped down to him from Heaven. The Lord has given.

Further, when Job says, the Lord has given, it is an argument of his own
justice and equity in getting; Job did not enrich himself by wrong, by
grinding the faces of the poor. If he had done so, he could not have said, the
Lord has given. So much as we get honestly, we may look upon as a fruit of
Gods bounty. Look into your estates and whatsoever you have got by wrong
dealing, take heed of saying, this is of Gods giving, for so you make God
himself a partner in your sins. God sometime gives when we use no means,
but he never gives, when we use unlawful means. What God said concerning the
setting-up of those Kings, Hos. 8.4. They have set-up Kings, but not by me, he
says of all, who enrich themselves by wrong, they have gotten riches but not
by me. When men leave the rule of justice, God leaves them. And though
unlawful acts are under the influence of his blessing. Wicked men thrive
often, but they are never blessed; their prosperity is their curse.

Thirdly, it is observable, that when Job would support himself in the loss
of his estate, he calls to mind how he came by his estate; and finding it all
given in by the blessing of God upon his honest labors and endeavors, he is
satisfied. Note,

That what we get honestly, that we can part with contentedly. He that has got
his estate by injustice, can never leave it with patience. Honesty in getting
causes quietness of spirit in loosing outward things. Keep a good conscience
in getting the world, and you shall have peace when you cannot keep the world.
Whereas a wrong-doer and a wrong-dealer, is in such a day under a double
affliction, he is afflicted with his present loss, and he ought to be
afflicted for his former gain.

Fourthly, These words, the Lord has given, being rightly handled, will be as
a Sword to cut off four monsters or monstrous lusts, which annoy all the
world, or as a medicine to cure four diseases about worldly things. Two of
these lusts are strongest in the rich: and the other pair assault the poor.
The poor pine either with discontent, because they have so little; or with
envy, because others have so much. The rich swell with pride, because they have
abundance, or they are filled with contempt of those that are in want. Let the
rich seriously weigh this speech, it will cure them of pride. Charge them that
are rich (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.17.) that they be not high-minded. You
see how subject rich men are to this inflammation of pride. But with what does
he prick this bladder? It is with this thought that God gives all riches, Let
them trust in the living God, who gives us all things richly to enjoy. That
argument of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. If thou have received it, why do thou
boast? is as strong and as true in regard of temporals, as of spirituals.
Consider seriously that your estates are the gift of God, and down falls pride.
If you come honestly by them, they are the gift of God: If you come dishonestly
by them, they are the gifts of Satan, and you ought to be ashamed of them and
restore them, not to boast or be proud of them.

Then secondly, it will cure the rich of all contempt of others; what the
Apostle James observed and censured in the rich of those times, is found by too
much experience among the rich at this day, Ye have despised the poor, Chap.
2.6. Consider it is the Lord, who gave, and he gave as a Lord freely, he might
have given thine estate to that poor man, and have left thee in that
condition, thou so much despisest in thy brother. God gave him as much as his
wisdom thought fit; and it seems he has given thee more then thou art fit
for. (...) despi^ing him, thou do asperse the dispensation of God, and
whilst thou woundest him in his poverty, thou woundest God in his providence.
Consider it is the Lord that gives, and then be unconvinc'd, if you can, that
while you contemn man in his wants, you question God in his wisdom, busy thy
self hereafter in praising him who gives All, and leave despising him, who
has received less.

Then likewise let the poor look upon this Text, and it will cure them of two
diseases, into which they often fall, and by which they are much endangered,
even in the vitals of grace, discontent and envy. It is the Lord that gives,
that shapes and cuts out your condition, why then should you not be contented
with his allowance, and be thankful in your lot? If your estates be
proportioned from above, you ought to be content with your portion. Ignorance
or in advertency from whom we receive, causes murmuring at what we have. Do
not think thou have love from God, because thou have a less allowance from
God. The power of God is as much acted in making a Fly, as in making an
Elephant; and his love may be as much, and is often more acted in giving a
penny, then in giving a talent. Know this, thou who art a child of God, if thy
portion be but a penny, it has upon it the Image and Superscription, a Fathers
love, which is better then life.

This also will cure the poor of envy; many times the poor have an evil eye
of envy at the rich, they cannot bear it, that others have so much and they so
little: Consider it is the Lord that gives. This argument Christ uses, Mat.
15.20. to him that was angry that they who came at the latter end of the day
had as much as he, May not I do with mine own what I will? Is thine eye
evil, because mine is good? The envious eye is an evil eye, envy is the
disease of the eyes. This Text is one of the best medicines that ever was
prescribed. Will thou be sick, because another is in health, and make thy
brothers happiness the ground of thy misery? Do not think that all is lost,
which is not cast into thy lapp; or that thy estate is less or worse, because
thou see one having a greater or a better. Must God ask thee leave, or ask
thy council, how and in what measure to distribute his favors. Were all but
well catechized in this one principle, that God gives all, it would soon
dispell this malignant vapor, and all would rest satisfied, not because they
or others have received thus or thus; but because God has thus disposed to all.

Observe one thing more,

If the Lord gives us all, then we should be willing to give back somewhat unto
the Lord again. And this consideration that God gives us will make us willing
to give unto God. What is the reason that many are so unwilling to give
somewhat unto God? It is because they will not understand that they are
beholding to God for all. If they were persuaded of their receipts from him, a
little Oratory might persuade a gift from them, in the cause of God, especially
when God intreates them, who may of right command them; when he is content even
to take it as a courtesy, who may send for it by authority, and expect it as a
duty. God himself, who fills and enjoyes all things, has sometimes (in a
sense) need of your estates. Christ who is Lord of Heaven and Earth is
sometimes in want of a penny. Christ tells you of his wants and poverty, Math.
25. and shows how and when he is releeved. And as Christ wants in a member,
some particular believer; So he often wants in his whole body, which is the
Church or whole company of believers. If you have any spiritual wisdom to
discern times and seasons, you may know, that now Christ wants money (as I have
explained.) Now God (in his cause) has need. He goes about (in those who
solicit his cause) and asks a relief at every one of your doors. Now then
do but consider, when any thing is asked for the Lords sake, that the Lord
gave all, this will be a key to unlocke your chests; this will at once untie
your hearts and your purses. Will you let Christ want, shall the cause of God
want, while you have it, whereas what you have, God gave? It is express
concerning Nabal, that this was the reason why he would not part with a loaf
of bread to relieve David and his Army, 1 Samuel 25.11. Shall I take my bread and
my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and send them to a
fellow I know not who? You see the man was all in his possessives, my bread,
and my water, and my flesh, he never thought that God had any share or interest
in his estate, that God gave it, therefore he would not give to a servant of
God. You shall see on the other hand, how David's munificence and that of the
Nobles with him, 2 Chr. 29. sprung from this root, the acknowledgement that
nothing was their own, it came in all from God; when they had offered so
willingly and bountifully toward the building of the Temple, David shows the
mine which yielded so much treasure, even this we have dug in all this
while, All things come of thee, and of thine own we have given thee, verse. 15.
They confessed that all came of God, they were but Stewards, he was the Owner,
and his own they could not withold from him. God gives us the use of the
creature, but he keeps the right to them in his own hand, when we have the
possession of them he has the property. Wherefore let the consideration that
God gives all make us ready and open handed to give unto God, when he calls
and requires it at our hands.

And the Lord has taken away. When God gives it is an act of bounty, and when
he takes it is an act of justice, for he is Lord, sovereign Lord in both. But
why does Job here charge this upon God, The Lord has taken? Was it not told
him by the messengers, that the Chaldeans and Sabeans came and took away his
cattle, plundered and pillaged his estate? They told him that the fire
consumed his Sheep, and the wind blew down the house upon his children: Why
does Job say, The Lord has taken? What? will Job charge all those robberies
upon God himself? Does not this look like the blasphemy that the devil hoped
would come out of Jobs mouth?

I answer, when Job says, the Lord has taken, it does but set forth the
supreme power and sovereignty of God in ordering all things; and (as we opened
before) that God gave the Commission to Satan, or leave to spoil him, or else
Satan could not have touched one of the dogs of his Flock. Job knew that God
had all men and devils, fire and wind, all creatures in his hand. He says, the
Lord has taken, because none could take but by the will of God, and he was
satisfied, that God willed that in righteousness and in judgment, which they
acted with so much cruelty and injustice. Is there any evil in the City, and
the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6. Every evil of affliction or of trouble is
said to be the Lords doing, because it cannot be done without the Lord. Wicked
men in all their plots, and in all their successes, are either the rod of God,
to chasten his people for their sins, or else they are as Gods furnace to try
his peoples graces, and purge them from their sins. Thus the hand of the Lord
is in all our sorrows, The Lord, says Job, has taken away.

We should from hence learn,

In all our afflictions to look beyond the creature. In all the evils we
either feel or fear, let our hearts be carried up unto God. As then we
rightly enjoy outward blessings, when those blessings carry us up unto God,
when upon creatures our hearts are raised up to Heaven: So then we make a right
use of afflictions, of crosses and troubles, when we are led by crosses (in our
meditations) unto God. Job does not say, the Lord has given and the Caldeans
have taken away, the Lord has enriched me, and Satan has robbed me, but as if
he had never heard any mention of Satan or Chaldeans, of fire or wind, he
says, the Lord has given and the Lord has taken. He does not fall out with
man or complain of the devil, he is not angry with chance or fortune, with
stars or constellations; many in the troublesome evils which they suffer are
apt to fly out upon all creatures and upon all causes, rather then to cast an
eye upon God: whereas indeed we should not take either good or evil out of the
hand of any creature. There were some of old, Marcion and his followers, who
could not relish this Doctrine, nor endure that we should carry our evils, and
lay them before Gods door, and say, the Lord has done this; Therefore they
found out two beginnings, that is two Gods rather then they would make the same
God the author of such extremes (as they thought) of good and evil: They
said, There was one God that was a good God, and another an evil God; the one
a giving God, the other a taking God; the one a loving God, a merciful God,
the other an angry God, a severe God. Many of the Heathen taught better
divinity then those Heretics. For they feyned that their Jupiter, had two
great vessels, placed at the entrance of his Palace, whereof the one was
filled with Good, and the other with Evil. These he dispensed according to the
dictate of his own will among the sons of men. And they painted Fortune in two
forms, with two faces of contrary colors, the foremost white, the hindermost
black, to signify that good and evil, which they shadowed under white and
black, came both from goddess Fortune: which comes near that language in the
Prophet Isa. 45.7. I form the light and create darkness, I make peace and
create evil. And we are taught to look upon the same God, as the spring and
fountain of all good, and of all this sort of evil. Though it be a truth (as
the Apostle speaks) that the same fountain cannot send forth bitter water and
sweet, take it in a natural or moral sense, yet the same fountain may send
forth bitter and sweet, take it in a civil sense,; that is, the same may be
the author of outward corrections and of outward favors. God is not the
fountain of good and of evil in a moral sense, so nothing but good flows
from him: but take it in a civil sense, and so both good and evil, bitter and
sweet come from the same fountain.

Consider the words as they are an argument, and then see their strength to the
purposes, for which Job does especially here apply them; First, the acquitting
or justifying of God. 2. The supporting and comforting of himself: and so we
may note from them.

First, That the absolute sovereignty of the Lord over us is enough to acquit
him from doing us any wrong, whatsoever he does with us. Job says only this,
The Lord has given and the Lord has fallen; He is the sovereign Lord,
therefore I have no reason to complain; he does it, upon whom I have laid no
engagement, upon whom I have no tie at all, to do this or that for me; he does
it who may resolve the reason of all his actions into his own will, he is the
Lord. God cannot injure his creature; therefore the Apostle has recourse to
that only in the 9th Romans for the answer of all cavils and objections against
Gods dealing with man, Has not the Potter power over the clay? The sovereignty
and supremacy of the Lord is enough to bear him out whatsoever he does with,
or to his creatures. O man, who art thou that reply against God.

Then again, it is as strong for the second end, for the support of the soul
in bearing evil, consider that it is the Lord that gives and the Lord that
takes. The thought of Gods sovereignty over us and over ours, may quiet our
spirits in all that he does unto us or ours. As it does justify God, so it
should quiet us: hear David Psalm. 39 9. I was dumb, says he, and opened not
my mouth, because thou did it: he does not say, I was contented because
thou dealest thus and thus with me, but I was dumb, I opened not my mouth,
because thou did it, that it was the act of God, the sovereign Lord
satisfied him, he had not a word to say, because God did it. So Job here, The
Lord has taken away, is as if he had said, I could not have borne this at the
hands of any creature, but at the hands of my sovereign Lord that may dispose
of me and mine, and do what he pleases, at his hands I not only bear it, but
take it well.

Joseph had not a word of discontent to vent against his brethren, being thus
resolved, It was not you that sent me hither but God, Genesis 45. And David lays
aside all revenge against railing Shimei on this ground, So let him curse,
because the Lord has said unto him, curse David, 2 Samuel 16.10. A godly man
cannot be angry at the doing or speaking of that, which pleases God, that it
should be done or spoken. And it takes away all complaining, that the Lord has
taken away.

Blessed be the Name of the Lord. The Septuagint, and so the Vulgar from them
insert here another sentence between these two; the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the Name of the Lord, reading it thus, The Lord has given and the
Lord has taken away (...). Sept.
, as it pleases the Lord, so comes things to pass, blessed be the name of
the Lord; but we have no more in the Hebrew, then our own translation gives us.

Blessed be the Name of the Lord. This is the triumphant conclusion which
flows from the former Propositions, this is the issue and result of them
both. A conclusion as opposite to Satan's design as the two Poles of the
Heavens are one against the other. Satan waited to hear Job conclude with
blaspheming the Name of the Lord, and now he hears Job conclude with blessing
the Name of the Lord. How did this vex and sting Satan? This one word of Job
did wound Satan more, then all the afflictions which Satan procured, wounded
Job. Though I return naked, though all be taken from me, yet blessed be the
name of the Lord.

Blessed be the Name of the Lord.] The Name of God in Scripture is taken; first
for God himself. The name of a thing it is put for the thing named, Psalm.
44.5. Through thee will we push down our enemies, thorough thy Name we will
tread them down that rise up against us. Thorough thy Name, that is, thorough
thee: Thorough thee and thorough thy Name are the same. So Psalm. 48 10.
According to thy Name so is thy praise, that is, thou art praised like thy
self, as thou art in thy self, so thou art or ought to be praised by thy
people, the name is put for the person. You have it clearly, Act. 1.15. The
number of names together were about an hundred and twenty, that is the number
of persons, so many persons, because numbered by their names.

Secondly, the Name of God is often in Scripture put for the attributes of ^od.

Thirdly, the Name of God is put for his Ordinances or worship, Go ye now to
my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, Jerem. 7.12.
that is, where I first set up my public worship; because as a man is known by
his proper Name, so is God by his proper worship. And therefore false worship
is the setting up of a strange god. When we mistake the name, we mistake the
person.

Fourthly, the Name of God is that reverence, esteem and honor, which Angels
and men give unto God. As we know amongst us, the report and reputation that a
man has among men, is a man's name; what men speak of him that is his name,
such an one has a good name, we say; such an one has an ill name, that is,
men speak or think well or ill of such persons: So Genesis 6.4. When Moses
describes the Giants, he says, they were men of renown, the Hebrew is, They
were men of name, (...)
because the name of a man is the opinion he has amongst men; as a man is
esteemed, so his name is carried, and himself is accepted in the world. So the
name of God is that high esteem, those honorable apprehensions, which Angels
and men have of God, such as the thoughts and speeches of men are for the
celebration of Gods glory and praise, such is his name in the world, Blessed be
the name of the Lord.

By blessing God we are to understand, either, first what we express in word
concerning God. God is blessed by his creatures, when his goodness, and
greatness, and mercy, and bounty, and faithfulness and justice are published
with thanksgiving and praise. Or God is blessed likewise, when we have high
and great and glorious thoughts of God: when we inwardly fear and reverence,
and love, and honor God then we bless God. The one is to bless with the
tongue; the other to bless with the heart. The tongue blessing without the
heart is but a tinckling cimball. The heart blessing without the tongue makes
sweet, but still music, both in consort make that Harmony which fills and
delights Heaven and Earth. When Job says here, Blessed be the Name of the
Lord, we are to understand it both ways, that Job speaks out the blessing of
God with his mouth, and likewise he had high and reverent thoughts of God. His
heart and tongue met at this work and word.

Blessed be the Name of the Lord. We may note from hence.

That God is worthy of all praise and honor, not only when he does enrich
and strengthen us, when he fills and protects us; but also when he does
impoverish and weaken us, when he empties and and smites us, when he gives us
up to the will of our enemies, to the will of devils and wicked men, even then
God is to be blessed. It is a good thing, and it is our duty to bless God when
we are rich and when we are full, as Deuteronomy. 8.10. When thou have eaten and art
full then thou shall bless the Lord: But it is a far better thing (yet but
our duty) to bless the Lord, when we are poor and weak; when we are empty
and have nothing to eat, then to bless the Lord is the breathing of an
excellent spirit indeed. 1 These. 5.18. In every thing give thanks; Let God do
what he will with his children, they have cause to thank him. As he is God in
himself, blessed for evermore. When God thunders in judgments so loud, that
he breaks the Cedars and shakes the Wilderness; then to give unto the Lord
the glory due unto his Name, and in his Temple to speak of his glory, argues a
spirit highly ennobl'd and glorious in grace, Psalm. 29. Therefore his children
should not rest in this, that they bear afflictions, but they should labor to
bring their hearts, to bless and glorify God in, and for the afflictions that
they bear. And a soul that thus honors God shall assuredly receive honor
from God. That which the Apostle speaks of the Saints suffering persecution,
is true of them in any kind of holy suffering, The Spirit of glory and of God
does rest upon them, 1 Pet. 4.14. The Spirit of God is spoken of, as if it were
unsettled and unquiet, and knew not where to fix it self, till it had found
such a soul: like Noah's Dove, that went hovering about and knew not where to
rest the sole of her foot, till it came to the Arc; so the Spirit of God is
expressed, as hovering about from person to person, from place to place, as if it
could not rest any where till it find a soul triumphing and blessing God in
affliction, at least lying quietly under affliction till God takes it off, and
there the Spirit rests and settles it self.

Observe further, that Job here blesses God in his afflictions, and that makes
the difference; his afflictions now are good unto him.

If we bless God in our afflictions, then our afflictions are blessings unto
us. We have so much blessing in our affliction, as we can bless God for our
affliction. There is a mighty power in this speech, I bless God, it changes
evil into good; here is an heavenly Alchimy (as we may so speak) whatsoever
affliction you touch with blessing God, you turn that affliction to a
blessing; if you have an Iron-yoake of affliction upon you, do but touch it
with blessing God, it turns it into gold. When you have a heavy cross upon
you, ready to weigh you down, do but touch the cross with this word from the
heart, and it makes it as a crown of glory upon your heads. Thus (I say) you
may turn every evil into good, every affliction into a comfort and a
blessing, if you can but touch it, with blessing the Name of God.

We will come to the Conclusion.

In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. This testimony the Lord
gives concerning Job, both in reference to what he did, and to what he spoke.
In all this, In renting his mantle, in shaving his head, in falling to the
ground, in worshipping, in saying, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and
naked shall I return thither. The Lord has given, the Lord has taken away;
blessed be the name of the Lord. In all this Job sinned not, neither charged
God foolishly. God himself puts all the actions and all the speeches of Job
into the balance, and finds not any lightness in them, he brings all that he
had done, and all that he had said to the Touchstone, and finds them pure
metal. The Holy Ghost, the great and infallible moderatour of this cause, and
question between Job and Satan determines, That in all this Job sinned not,
neither did he charge God foolishly.

But it will be objected, Is there any man that sins not? Or is there any
man that sins not in every thing? How then are we to understand what the
Holy Ghost pronounces, In all this Job sinned not. Is any man so holy or can
his heart be kept in so holy a frame, as to do and speak so much, without any
touch of sin, without any spot of defilement? Jobs question Cap. 9. affirms,
that no man can do any one act purely pure, Who can bring a clean thing out
of that which is unclean? Now Job himself in his nature was unclean, he had
uncleanness in him, how then was a clean thing brought out from Job? Whence
had he such a privilege above his brethren, as not to sin in doing and
suffering so many things?

There are some Popish Commentators, who would build the Tower of perfection
upon this and other the like Scriptures, scil: That a man may in this life be
freed from all sin. For the refuting this sense and clearing of the text, I
will give you the resolution in a distinction or two.

First, if we consider sinful actions, they are of two sorts. There are
actions sinful in the matter, when the very thing done is a sin, as to steal,
to lie, to be drunk, to commit adultery and the like; the very thing done is a
sin materially. There are other actions that are sinful in the formality or
manner of doing; so a good work in the matter may be sinful in the manner of
doing. We do not assert that all the works of regenerate persons are sins,
as if they were sinful actions, or that all that they do is sinful in the
matter, for that were a reproach to the Spirit of Christ, that were to reproach
the grace of Christ, by which they being regenerated act, and do these things.
But we positively affirm that to the works of regenerate persons, to their
best works some defilement cleaves, so that though the action be not sinful,
yet there is some sin in the action. There is a great deal of difference
between a sinful action and sin in an action: We have that difference
expressly, Exodus 28.38. Where the High Priest is said, to bear the iniquity
of the holy things; holy things, yet iniquity in them; holy things in the
matter of them, yet iniquity in the manner of performing them.

Now when it is said here, In all this Job sinned not, we are to understand it
first thus. Here were no acts sinful in the matter of them, such as Satan did
promise unto himself, and did undertake with God, that Job would speak and
break out into: Satan was confident that Job would blaspheme and curse God to
his face; this was an act of an high nature, sinful in the very matter of it,
an act abominable, In all this Job sinned not such a sin, he was not
transported by passion or impatiency to reproach and curse the living God.

Secondly, in Scripture language we are said not to sin, when we do not
commit such and such sins; as is clear in that instance about David, of whom
this transcendent testimony is given, 1 King. 15.5. That he turned not aside
from any thing the Lord commanded him all the days of his life, save only in
the matter of Uriah the Hittite; a high expression of his holiness. What then?
Shall we think that David never sinned at all, but in that matter? No, the
meaning of it is, that David never fell grossly or foully, but that time; In
comparison of that act, all the rest of the life of David went for so holy, as
if he had lived without any sin at all. In this sense the Apostle John gives
the command not to sin, 1 John 2.1. I write unto you little children, 1 Ioh.
3.9.
that you sin not (it is a possible precept in an evangelicall sense) that
is, that you sin not as wicked men do, who can do nothing else but sin.
In this sense Job sinned not, he carried himself like a holy person, like an
obedient child of God, like one born of God (as the Apostle speaks) whose
character and privilege it is, that he cannot sin. Such have the blessing of
impotency in the unregenerate part, so that they cannot sin strongly; though as
yet they have not that blessed ability, in their regenerate part, not to sin
at all.

The Septuagint adds to this clause, He sinned not before the Lord, or against
the Lord. The Vulgar adds, those words with his lips. Neither of them mend the
sense of the Hebrew Text, and the latter makes it worse. For it is a higher and
clearer testimony to say, In all this Job sinned not, then to say, In all this
Job sinned not with his lips, for he might sin in thought, etc. though it be
most true which the Apostle James speaks, Chap. 3.7. If any man offend not in
word, the same is a perfect man.

Or charged God foolishly. The translations are somewhat different, the
Septuagint thus, (...). Sept. Non dedit in sulsum Deo. Ar. Mon. (...) Olym.
He did not cast any folly upon God; others, He did not offer any thing
unsavourly of God; Another, He did not accuse or complain of God: The word in
the Original is, He did not give, we translate, he did not charge.

The word which we translate adverbially [ foolishly] is a Noune in the
Original, yet it is fully enough to the sense, He charged not God foolishly,
or he charged not God with folly, so it is rather in the Original. (...)
Proprie insulsitas.
That word which is here translated folly, signifies in the general any thing
that is indebite dispositum, any thing that is unduely disposed, any thing in
disorder. And we find it in Scripture referred diverse ways.

First, It is put for unsavory meat without salt or sauce, as Job 6.6. Can
that which is unsavory be eaten without salt? The word [ unsavoury] there is
the same with this here rendered folly or foolishly.

Secondly, It is used for mortar that has not a due temper or mixture in it,
as Ezekiel. 13.14. I will break down the wall that ye have dawbed with
untempered mortar; mortar that is not well tempered, is unfit for use.

Thirdly, It is put for any rude, undigested or indiscreet speech, as La. 2.14.
Thy Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee; They have seen foolish
and unsavory things for thee. Hence the word is used to expres madness, because
madness is the height of folly being without any seasoning, without any temper,
a thing that has no taste of wisdom or goodness in it, Jer. 23.13. I have seen
folly in the Prophets of Samaria, that is, they are unsavory, their speeches
are untempered mortar, they are foolish and vain. So then he did not charge
God with folly or charge God foolishly, has this sense, Job did not speak any
thing rashly or unbecomming the Majesty of God, or charge him in the least to
have dealt unwisely or unjustly with him. As if the Lord had said, Satan thou
did expect that Job should now at this time have charged me home, and have
laid load upon me with complainings, for dealing thus with him: thou expectest
that he should have broken out into the dialect of hell it self, such words as
these, Why what have I done against God, that he should deal thus with me? Is
this the wages that I shall receive for the work and service I have done him?
Will he discourage and dishearten others, from coming on to his service by my
sad example? Is it justice in God that I who have lived so innocently should be
thus extremely afflicted? Could the Lord find out no swearers, no drunkards,
no adulterers in the world to let Satan loose upon, but he must needs turn him
loose upon me? Had he no other Butt in the world to shoot the arrows of his
indignation at, but at an innocent breast? Is this a just God who uses his
servants thus? Or if he be omniscient and omnipotent, why then did he not
protect me from Satan's rage? Why did he not defend me from the violence of
those evil men? Such kind of speeches, or to this effect, Satan expected, Job
would have uttered rashly against the Lord: but he is deceived, Job has no
such thought, much less did he speak such words, either against the justice,
or wisdom, or power of God; he charges no folly upon God, the only wise God,
but gives him glory, saying; Blessed be his Name whatsoever he does with me or
mine.

Learn from hence first, what blasphemy is, or what it is to curse God; To
curse God is to charge God with folly, or with doing things foolishly and
rashly. For these expressions expound one another. Satan said Job would curse
God; the Holy Ghost says, Job has not charged God foolishly, therefore that
is a definition of Gods own making, plainly declaring what it is to curse God:
Yet every speech or act unbecomming the Majesty, wisdom and power of God does
not presently denominate a man a blasphemer: There may be blasphemy in what is
spoken, and yet the person speaking not a blasphemer. Job himself spoke many
things afterward unadvisedly in the heat of dispute, but he blasphemed not.
Blasphemy or cursing of God properly taken, is ever joined with an intent to
cast reproach upon God: As every one is not a liar that tells what is not
true, but he that tells an untruth, knowing it to be an untruth, with an
intent to deceive and wrong others. So he that thinks or speaks a thing
unbecomming God, with an intent to reproach or slander God and his ways, this
is blaspheming indeed.

Secondly observe,

Impatience under, and murmuring at the cross, which God lays upon us, is a
charging of God with folly. Murmuring against God, questions the wisdom of
God. Complaints have a charge in them. We tax what is done while we submit not
to what is done. When we lie under Gods hand quietly and silently, then we
speak the praise of God, then our carriage ascribes all wisdom, honor and
glory unto him.

Thirdly, In that it is here said by way of excellency concerning Job, that in
all this Job sinned not, referring it to his behavior under these afflictions,
as if the Holy Ghost had said, it is matter of admiration that in this, in all
this Job should not sin. Note from hence,

That it is an high act, one of the highest acts of grace, to be composed in
thought and word under great afflictions. In all this Job sinned not, as if he
had said, it had not been much for Job not to sin in other things; but in this
affliction, in this distress, being so put to it, being thus tried, in all
this not to sin, is Grace, almost to a miracle.

Lastly, Note this,

What is well done by us, shall be sure to receive a fair testimony from God.
When Job had carried himself discreetly, and spoken discreetly, the Lord hides
not this in darkness, he shuts it not up in silence: but proclaims the
innocence and uprightness of his carriage in this present passage of his life,
as he had done before, concerning the whole course of his life and
conversation, that he was perfect and upright. The Apostle publishes, Glory
and honor and peace to every man that works good, Romans 2.10 They that carry
themselves well either in suffering or in working for God, shall have glory and
honor and peace from God. No man needs, blow a trumpet in his own praise,
when he has done well, as the Pharisees did, Math. 6. What we do well, the
Lord himself will report to all the world, In all this Job sinned not, nor
charged God foolishly.

And so we have done with this third part of the Chapter, and with this whole
Chapter, which contains (as you have heard) those three generals, the
description of Jobs prosperous estate; The description of his trials and
afflictions, and the description of his carriage under those afflictions. Now
when he is come off from this assault without wound, without any touch of
sin. Satan perceiving himself defeated and frustrated in this attempt, will
not yet give it over, he is restless, he will attempt him once more. We shall
find him in the next Chapter at the Assembly again, renewing his motion for a
second assault, that he may have leave to lay his siedge nearer and closer to
Job, presuming that though he had not prevailed at the first, yet he shall at
the second charge; let me charge him but once more, and then see his fall, He
will curse thee to thy face.

JOB 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Verse 1. Again there was a day when the sons of God
came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them to
present himself before the Lord.

2. And the Lord said unto Satan, from whence come thou? And Satan answered
the Lord and said, from going too and fro in the earth, and from walking up and
down in it.

3. And the Lord said unto Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job, that
there is none like him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that
fears God, and escheweth evil? and still he holds fast his integrity,
although thou movedst me against him to destroy him without cause.

4. And Satan answered the Lord, and said, skin for skin, yea, all that a man
has, will he give for his life.

5. But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will
curse thee to thy face.

6. And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold he is in thine hand, but save his life.


AS the Prophet Ezekiel, when in vision he had been showed one abomination,
Ezekiel. 8.
was led forward to a second and a third and a fourth, with, Come see a greater
abomination than this or these. Or as the Angel proclaims in the Revelation,
One woe is past and another woe is at hand. The same may we say concerning this
History of Jobs sorrows. Having showed you his first affliction in the former
Chapter, I must now lead on your attentions, with, Come behold a second, a
greater then that; and having showed you one woeful day, I must now show you a
second, Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves.

This whole Chapter presents us in the general with Jobs second trial. About
which we may observe these particulars.

1. The occasion of it. 2. The causes of it. 3. The manner of it. 4. The
consequents of it.
1. The occasion of it was Satan's appearing at that heavenly Session, and being
there questioned about that former affliction of Job, he answers with slander,
and desires that Job may be brought about to a second trial.

2. The causes of this affliction (as of the first) are two.

1. God. And 2. Satan.
1. God permitting and limiting it.

2. Satan provoking and then inflicting it. Both are laid down in the words of
the context now read, to the end of the sixth verse.

3. The manner of this affliction, was the striking and smiting of Jobs body
with a sore and noisome disease, which you have contained in ver. 7, 8.

4. The Consequents of this affliction, or what followed upon it, and those are
three.

1. His wives sinful council, ver. 9. As soon as she saw him thus smitten,
What (says she) do thou still retain thine integrity? Curse God and die.
There Is her counsel. 2. His wise and holy reply, ver. 10. 3. His friends
loving visit, verse. 11, 12, 13. They hearing of the affliction of Job, came
from a far country, to see him and to comfort him.
These are the distinct parts of the whole Chapter.

These six verses descipher the occasion and the causes of Jobs affliction,
Satan inciting and provoking the Lord; and the Lord permitting and limitting
Satan.

The three first contain the same matter which we have opened and explained in
the former Chapter, and they are almost word for word the same; therefore I
shall not need to stay long upon them: Only I shall enquire a little further
about two things.

First about the day of this great appearance. And secondly, about the persons
appearing, who are said to be the sons of God.

To the former of these the Jewish Doctors contend much. That this was the
first day in the recourse or return of the year: intimating, if not
contending, that the first day of every year was as Gods day of general
Audit, in which he conveen'd or called together his Angels, to give him an
account of all the passages and dispatches of the year past, and to give them
instructions what to do, the year coming; Nimis crassum est. Merc.
Conveniens videtur fuisse festum Sabbathis quod tunc and commune erat omnium
fidelium, idemque celeberrimum. Bolduc.
which opinion I leave under the censure of a learned Interpreter, as gross
and groundless.

Others fix it upon the last day of the week, affirming that this was the
Sabbath day. And that this was a convention or Assembly of the Church on Earth
for the solemn worship of God upon that day, which is here called, A
presenting themselves before the Lord; in concurrence with which opinion, the
sons of God must needs be interpreted holy men. I find some affirming, that
men are not called the sons of God in all the old Testament, but the Angels
only. And so they take that Text, Gen 6.2, The sons of God saw the daughters of
men, etc. for the Angels either good or bad, who being taken with the beauty of
those daughters, assuming bodies came into them, of whom came the Giants. A
conceit as monstrous as those Giants, and fitter for a fabulist then a Divine.
On the other extreme, In his Homily on Genesis 6.2.
Chrysostom denies that the Angels are at all called the sons of God.

We may walk safely in a middle way between these two. For both Angels and
men are called the sons of God: Why Angels are called the sons of God has
been showed, Chap. 1. v. 6. Men are called the sons of God for two reasons;
either for their power or greatness, so they Genesis 6.2. might be called the
sons of God, because great and powerful on the earth. Or rather secondly,
for their piety and holiness by which they resemble God, and in which they
serve God as a son does the Father. Indeed the Apostle affirms that the
privilege of sonship was brought-in by the Incarnation of Christ, who is said,
In the fulness of time to be made of a woman, etc. That we might receive the
adoption of sons, Gal. 4.5. But in Scripture a thing is spoken of as newly
done, when it is more fully done, Joh. 7.39. The Holy Ghost is said not to be
given at that time, because he had not been so plentifully given. And the
Apostle to the Hebrews speaks, as if the way into Heaven had been but then
opened, because it was then more clearly opened, Heb. 9.8. So we are said to
receive the adoption of sons, when Christ came in the flesh, because then our
sonship was more apparent, though before it was as real.

So then according to this Interpretation the sense of the words is. That upon
the Sabbath day, when the servants of God, the faithful of that age and place
were met together to celebrate the public worship of God, Satan (the evil
spirit) who is ever ready to oppose and resist us, to interrupt and hinder us,
when we appear before the Lord in holy duties) came also among them to present
himself before the Lord.

I propose this as an opinion to which my own inclination is not strong. These
words with the context (as was noted in the former Chapter) seeming to me,
rather a representation of Gods providence toward man, then a description of
man's worship tendered unto God.

Again there was a day. It may be yet further enquired how much time passed
between the first and this second day of appearance. Some affirm it was the
immediate day after; others the immediate Sabbath after. A third opinion
deferrs it to the year after; Satan cunningly delaying the business all that
while, to the intent he might more fully see how the former affliction wrought,
what effects it had or would have upon Job, before he attempts a second.

The text resolves us in neither of these, but leaves it indifferent and
undetermined, saying only, Again there was a day. It is most probable that
there was such a distance of time between these two afflictions, as was
competent to a full discovery of Jobs spirit, under the first. As when Christ
was tempted and had foiled Satan in that temptation, it is said, the Devil
departed from him for a season, Luk 4.13.
he left him, probably, to see what effects might follow upon the former
temptation: So Satan having tempted Job, and tempted him by a temptation,
though one in the general, yet with a fourfold assault, four several
messengers, making (as it were) four charges upon him, he leaves him for a
season, and again when there was a day, he returns to renew the assault and
battery.

I shall passe-over the two verses following in all that they contain, opened
in the former Chapter. But in the latter end of the third verse, there is
somewhat added very material, where the Lord bespeaks Satan concerning Job,
Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the Earth,
a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God and escheweth evil? (This
was the Character which God gave of him before in the former Chapter, but now
he goes on) And still he holds fast his integrity, although thou movedst me
against him to destroy him without cause. This is superadded to his testimony,
his commendation is enlarged. Job (you see) has gained in this conflict: he
was described before as an holy man, now he is described as a tried man, as an
approved soldier. Job has obtained this honor in the former combat with
Satan, a glorious addition to his character: As the patience and other graces
of Job did increase, so did the testimony of God increase concerning him. Note
from this addition only in the general thus much.

That such as honor God, God will honor. If we do any new or further service
for God, God will add some further honor and respect unto us. If we do, or
say, or suffer any thing extraordinary for God, God will say, or do somewhat
more than ordinary concerning us. The old character did not serve, when Job had
done this new service. God will never conceal any of our graces, no nor the
improvement of any of our graces. If we speak but a word for God, we shall
hear of it again; God takes it and pens it down, as it is said, Malac. 3.16.
They that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened
and heard, and a book of remembrance was written; God sets it down presently:
So he recorded what Job had spoken, and gives it him in at the next meeting
with Satan. We can never loose either by doing or suffering for God. All shall
be recompensed to the utmost farthing. As it is usual with Kings and great-men
of the world, for great services done them (especially in wars and battles)
to make additions to the titles of honor, to give some new motto's, or put
some new devices in the Coate-armour of those who serve them. Thus does God
here. Job having played the man (as we say) or rather the Saint in that former
combat, he has a new title of honor put into his style: Now it is not only
Job, a man that fears God and escheweth evil; but, Job a man that holds
fast his integrity.

Consider the words themselves.

And still he holds fast his integrity. The words [ And still] or to this
present time, may have a double reference. First, barely to the time past: Job
was not only a perfect and a sound man in former times, but he is so still, so
at present. Or rather secondly, it referres to the affliction and losses he
had suffered; as he was in former times, so he is at this time; as he was in
prosperous times, so he is in troublesome times: When the day was light and
clear to him, Job was a perfect man, and now the day has nothing but
darkness and gloominesse in it. Job is a perfect man still, though wounded in
his estate and broken in his outward comforts, yet he is as sound and whole in
his spirit, as ever he was. Though cattle, servants, children be dead and
gone, be spoiled and lost: yet grace is safe, and faith tryumphs, he still
holds fast his integrity.

(...)
Holds fast. This which we translate by two words, is but one word in the
Hebrew. Our language is not comprehensive enough to express the fulness of
that word, in a word. Job does not only hold his integrity, but he holds it
fast: the word implies a strength in holding, to hold a thing firmly. And
more, the word has a further Emphasis in it; it signifies not only to hold a
thing by that degree of strength, wherewith formerly we did hold it; but it
does import thus much, to wax stronger in the holding of it, to prevail or
increase in strength. As when David sent Ioab to number the people, 2 Samuel 24.4.
Ioab was unwilling, and said to the King, Now the Lord thy God add unto the
people an hundredfold, but why does my Lord the King delight in this thing?
Then it follows, Notwithstanding the Kings word prevailed against Joab. That
which is there translated, And his word prevailed, is the same with this we
translate here, Holds fast; the Kings word did take a prevailing hold upon
Ioab, or held him fast to the doing of the Kings command, though he would have
got often from the business: So we may understand it here, still he prevails
or waxes stronger in his integrity.

The same word is used by the Prophet Malachi, cap. 3.13, 14. where God
convinces those proud spirits that puffed at his service, Your words (says
he) have been stout against me. That which we translate, have been stout, is
the same with this in the text of Job; your words have been stout, that is,
they have grown stronger and stronger against me and my ways, you are
confirmed in wickedness; whereas your hearts should have been brought down
and humbled, you are increast and hardened in your obstinacy and rebellion. Such
is the strength and meaning of the word in this place. Job by this opposition
grows more strong and stout in his integrity, he is so far from being
daunted, that he is encouraged; he is as he was, nay more than he was, he is
increased, still he holds fast his integrity.

His integrity. It is a word of the same root with that used, Chap. 1. ver. 1.
There was a man in the Land of Uz, and this man was perfect, and these words
illustrate and expound one another; to be a perfect man, is to be a man of
integrity; there, he was a perfect man; now, he is a man holding fast that
perfection, namely, his integrity.

From this first branch observe,

First, That Satan in all his temptations plants his chiefest battery against
sincerity. Hence it is here expressed, that Job still held fast his integrity, as
if the Holy Ghost would intimate this unto us, that Satan pulled more at that,
than at his estate. Satan did not care at all to pull Jobs Oxen from him, or
his Sheep from him, or his children from him, but to pull his grace from him;
therefore it is said, Job held that fast: Without question Satan assaulted that
most, which Job held most; the thing that Satan aimed at, was not to make Job a
poor man, but to make him a sinful man; and he would never have troubled
himself to rob him of his riches, but only in subordination to the robbing
him of his graces. That was the booty Satan looked for. Satan looked at his
cattle, only as pay for his Army of Sabeans and Caldeans: but he looked upon
his grace (if he could have got it from him) as pay for principalities and
powers. As grace gotten or improved is the joy of Angels: So if grace could be
stolen away or destroyed, it would be the joy of Devils. This was Satan's hope.

Secondly, Note this, Job holds fast his integrity.

That whatsoever a godly man loses, he will be sure to lay hold of his
graces, he will hold spirituals, what ever becomes of temporals. He will be
sure to take fast hold of these, when all is going, when riches are going, when
children are going, when friends are going, when liberty is going, yea when
life is going too, then he lays fast hold upon his integrity. And says (as
Jacob) to the Angel, I will not let thee go, and he says it without
exception: for he knows he cannot be blessed if that go. Integrity is his
Benjamin, all the children he has shall go, but this son of his right hand
must not; For indeed his life is bound-up in the life of grace. And if he part
with that, he must lie down with sorrow in his grave. Wherefore he is resolved
not to part with that, whatsoever he parts with. As it is with a man at Sea in
a Shipwreck, when all is cast overboard, the corn that feeds him, and the
clothes that cover him, yet he swims to the shore if he can with his life in
his hand. Or as it is with a valiant Standard Bearer, that carries the banner
in war, if he sees all lost, he will wrappe the Banner about his body, and
choose rather to die in that as his winding sheet, then let any man take it from
him or spoil him of it, he will hold that fast, though he loose his life for
it. So does Job here, so does every one that is of Jobs heavenly temper and
spiritual resolution: in the greatest storm, in the hottest assault, he will
wrap himself round about with his integrity, wind that about him, and will
not let it go. Kill him if you will, destroy him if you will, he will never
part with his integrity, though he part with life. Indeed there is nothing else
can stand a man in stead to any purpose, if that be lost, all is lost. A man
that is in danger of drowning will lay hold upon any thing, upon a straw, upon
a rush, though it have no strength to support him: Men in danger will lay hold
upon somewhat; they that are wise will lay hold upon the rock, upon that which
will do them good, in an evil day; They will lay hold upon Christ, they will
lay hold upon promises (in laying hold upon our integrity, all that is done)
then they are sure to live: for Wisdom (that is Christ) is a tree of life to
all that lay hold upon her, Pro. 3.18.

Thirdly, it is considerable, that this word is used for the laying hold upon
our weapons, either to defend our selves or to offend and assault our enemies,
Psalm. 35.2. David prays, that God would take hold of shield and buckler, and
stand up for his help. We may note from hence,

That integrity is our arms. Integrity is a Christians weapon, Job lays hold
upon his integrity as a sword to wound his enemy, and as a shield and buckler
to save and defend himself.

Fourthly, from that exposition of the word, that it signifies not only to be
strong, but to prevail, it signifies an overcomming power; he does hold fast,
that is, he prevails with his integrity. We may note,

That grace does not only oppose but conquer Satan and all his temptations. He
does prevail in his integrity (so the Hebrew may be rendered in the letter.)
Sometimes (you know) there is a war and opposition, when there is no
conquest; a war may be carried on diverse years in a nation, or between
nations, when there is no absolute victory on either side; as we see by woeful
and lamentable experience in Germany, where there has been opposition, one
side against another above these 20. years, and yet no side has prevailed.
But as grace makes war, so grace gets the better, grace gets the day, and
will shortly make a final conquest; yea, there is not only a conquest (says
the Apostle, Roman. 8.) but thorough Christ we are more than conquerours.

In the 5th place, I told you that the word signifies, to increase in strength,
he holds fast his integrity, or he increases in strength in his integrity.
Note hence. That

True grace gains by opposition. True grace is increased the more it is
assaulted. Satan comes a purpose to destroy Jobs graces. Job waxes stronger in
his graces. True grace will do so in whomsoever it is. Hypocrites (who have
but a show of grace, painted grace) fall off in times of trial, in times of
temptation; that which only seems to be somewhat, comes to nothing, but
that which is somewhat, comes to more.

Lastly, Consider the Emphasis of the words. God speaks of this in a kind of
admiration; he puts a greater Emphasis upon this than upon the other part
of Jobs character.

Verse 3. Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in
the Earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God and escheweth
evil? and still he holds fast his integrity.

God speaks of it, as a matter of wonder, a rare thing. From this observe,

That to hold our integrity in evil times, is not only good but admirable. It
is that which does even (as we may so speak) provoke God himself to an
admiration. It is a truth whether it be in regard of personal troubles or
national troubles, to hold fast and keep close to God in such distresses is
admirable. To continue good, while we suffer evil, is the height and crown of
goodness. As it is that which puts one of the greatest aggravations upon
the sinfulness of men, that they will hold fast their sins in the midst of
judgments. The Prophet Amos with much elegancy of speech and vehemence of
spirit urges this against the Jews, Cap. 4. I have given you cleanness of
teeth, yet have ye not returned unto me: I have withheld the rain, yet
have ye not returned unto me: I have smitten you with blasting, yet have ye
not returned unto me: I have sent among you the pestilence and the sword, yet
have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.

The Prophet Jeremy takes up the same argument, having before spoken of
judgments sent upon them, Yet (says he) they hold fast deceit and refuse to
return (Cap. 8.5.) they held fast deceit, though they were afflicted, that
aggravated their sinfulness. Now (I say) as it makes sin out of measure
sinful, to hold it fast when God afflicts; so it makes grace out of measure
gracious, puts a wonderful splendor and glory upon it, if we hold fast our
grace, when troubles and afflictions meet us in the holding of it forth; and
God will put an Emphasis upon such a one for grace, as he did upon Ahaz for his
sin, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. In the time of his distress did he trespass yet more
against the Lord, This is that King Ahaz, that brand is put upon him. So there
is an honor stamped on Job in this testimony, that in the time of his
distress, he did yet more good, This is that Job: to serve, believe and love
God more in distress, this is integrity to a wonder, this draws the heart of
God toward such, and makes them truly glorious in the eyes of godly men.

That which follows in the text, does yet more advance the honor of Job in
this victory, still he holds fast, etc.

Though thou movedst me against him to destroy him without cause. (...)
Though thou movedst me] The word here used to move, signifies more than a
bare motion, it carries in it a persuasion, and more then a bare persuasion, it
carries in it a vehement instigation: As when a man does persuade a thing by
arguments and strong reasons; that is the force of the word; as in that place,
1 King. 21.25. There was none like Ahab which did sell himself to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, whom Jezabel his wife stirred up: stirred
up is the word in the text, thou movedst me; Jezabel moved Ahab, incited him,
never gave him over, by arguments and reasons, by this consideration and that
consideration to do wickedly in Israel: So here, Satan did as it were plie God
with arguments and reasons to instigate him against Job, Thou did move me
against him. Satan is a cunning Orator and knows how to handle a matter, that
it may take with greatest advantage.

Some may question, how can this be? Will God be moved by Satan? Is not the
Lord unchangeable? Have Satan's words and arguments such power with God to moove
him to do a thing?

I answer it two ways; We may clear it first thus. As the Saints and people
of God in prayer are said to move God, and to prevail with God, they are said
to carry a business with God. Now you know what they do in prayer, they do
not only spread a petition barely before God, but they strengthen it with all
the arguments they can, argument upon argument, pleading upon pleading; yet the
Lord himself is not stirred, he is not changed at all by the prayer of his
people, it is not to be thought that the Lord upon the prayers of his people,
takes up any new thoughts, or puts on any new resolutions to do this or that;
for a mercy that is but a day old in regard of our prayer obtaining it, is an
eternity old in regard of God purposing it, therefore God is not changed at
all; but he is said to be moved to give or do, as or when we pray, because he
gives and does what he himself had purposed to give, when we should pray: for
as God from all eternity did purpose to give to his people such and such
mercies, Quanquam Deus a nullo potest moveri, ad aliquid volendum de novo, cum
sit immutabili^: tamen sicut voluntate aeterna producit aliquid in tempore, ita
ab aeterno voluit modum producendi.
so he did purpose and decree, to give them when they prayed. Now then as it is
in regard of his peoples prayer and seeking for mercy, they move God; but it is
only the bringing forth of that which he had in his heart from all eternity to
do for them: So here in this case, God had a purpose from all eternity to try
Job, and likewise he did purpose the way and the means of it, that it should
be done upon the motion and instigation of Satan. For although God cannot be
moved by any to do a thing, which before he intended not, he is unchangeable:
yet as by his eternal will and counsel, he does produce things in time: So
likewise from eternity he did order and will the manner of their producing, he
purposed to do good for his Church upon the supplications of his servants, and
sometimes to afflict his Church or servants at the instigation of Satan.

Secondly, This place [ thou movedst me against him] is to be understood by a
figure, very frequent in the Scripture. God speaking of himself after the
manner of men; because as men usually when they do a thing are moved by others
to do it; and by persuasions are sometime prevailed with, to do that which
they intended not an hour before. So God is said to do a thing upon motion,
though he intended it from eternity, often descending to express himself by
that which is common to men, though his manner of doing it be transcendent,
infinitely beyond men.

From the force of this word so explained, Thou movedst me against him. Observe,

That Satan is an earnest and importunate solicitour against the people and
Church of God; he without ceasing provokes God against them, he bends his wits
and strains his language to the height, in pleading against them, to get them
delivered up into his hands, or into the hands of his instruments.

And if Satan be thus zealous, so importunate a sollicitour against the Saints.
It may teach us to be as earnest and zealous for the Saints. Satan does not
only move, but he moves by arguments, he incites: It is not enough to pray by
proposing our desires, but we must pray enforcing and pressing our desires;
such a holy unquietness of spirit, as is expressed by the Prophet, Isa. 62.1.
For Zions sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalems sake will I not
rest, etc. Such was that required of the Watchmen set upon the walls of
Jerusalem, which should never hold their peace day nor night: Ye that make
mention of the Lord, or ye that are the Lords remembrancers, keep not
silence, and give him no rest till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a
praise in the Earth, Isa. 62. ver. 6, 7. This duty is now doubled on us by the
great afflictions and greater fears of Sion. When Christ was in his agony, he
prayed more earnestly, Luke 22.44. And when his Church is in an agony, we ought
to pray more earnestly. At such a time we must mingle more fire with our
prayers, we must pray more fervently. At such a time we must mingle more water
with our prayers, we must pray more repentingly: We must with Jacob (Hos. 12.)
weep and make supplication. At such a time we must mingle more faith with our
prayers, we must pray more beleevingly. In a word at such a time, every prayer
must be a pleading, yea a wrestling with God, a wrestling with resolution, not
to let him go until we have got a blessing, till we prevail with God to
destroy his Churches enemies, as Satan in the text moved God to destroy Job,
his servant and his friend. So it follows, Thou movedst me against him to
destroy him.

To destroy him. The word Destroy signifies to swallow up or to devour: (...)
You have it Genesis 41.4. where it is said, that the seven lean ears and seven
lean kine did devour or eat up the seven full ears and the seven fat kine.
And Exodus 7.12. the text says, That Moses his rod did swallow up the rods of
the Magicians. Psalm. 124.3. Unless the Lord had been on our side, they had
swallowed us up quick. In all these places it is the same word we have here,
thou movedst me to destroy him.

In the former Chapter where Satan desired God to touch Job, I showed what kind
of touches Satan desired to lay upon the people of God, you see it now cleared
by God himself, Thou movedst me to destroy him, to swallow him up. Thy words
were moderate and diminitive, do but touch him, but thy intentions were bloody
and destructive, thou movedst me to destroy him, to make an end of him, that
was thy meaning.

Without cause. But will the Lord, the wise God do any thing without cause? A
wise, a prudent man will not do any thing without cause; though Satan may be
so brutish and unreasonable to move God to do a thing for which there is no
cause, would the Lord be so persuaded, by his motion to do it without cause?
The text seems here to speak so, thou movedst me to destroy him without
cause, and God hearkened to his motion before, and gave him up all his estate,
to do with it what he pleased.

Briefly to clear this. Without cause. It is the same original word used in
the former Chapter, Does Job serve God for naught, (...)
or without cause (as was then opened) so here, Thou movedst me against him to
destroy him without cause, or thou movedst me against him for nothing or for
naught.

We may consider this phrase of speech [ without cause] three ways. First, in
reference unto Satan. Secondly, in reference unto God. Thirdly, in reference
unto Job himself: From each of these considerations light will shine into this
point.

First in reference unto Satan. God tells Satan, thou movedst me against him
without cause, that is, Job never gave thee any cause why thou should make
such a motion against him; Job had never wronged thee, or done thee any hurt,
as David says of his enemies, they are mine enemies without cause, I was never
injurious or unjust unto them. So Satan was Jobs enemy without cause, Job never
gave him occasion* Indeed the holiness and goodness of Job was Satan's grief
and Satan's trouble; but for any other trouble or wrong Job never did him,
therefore without cause, it was in reference unto Satan.

2. In reference unto Satan, without cause, that is, Thou did not allege
any sufficient cause or charge him with any particular crime; thou did only
bring in a general suspicion against him; there was not so much as a common
fame (as you know it was a course to accuse men upon common fame.) So says God
here, it was nothing but a suspicion raised out of thine own brain (as indeed
those common fames, that we heard of not long since, upon which many were
accused, yea condemned, were only suspicions borne in the brains of those men.)
So here Job was charged merely upon the suspicion of Satan, there was no crime
directly alleged, nor any evil report in the world against him; cause was
not showed legally, therefore without cause thou movedst me against him.

3. In reference unto Satan, without cause, that is, it now appears upon the
trial that thou did move me against him without cause; that which thou did
pretend to be the cause, was not found in Job, thou pretendest he was an
hypocrite and served me for himself; now thou se^st thy self confuted, it
appears he did serve me for naught sincerely, and not for his own end^. He
is no painted sepulcher, no rotten self-seeker.

If we consider the words in the second place with reference unto God, Thou
did move me against him without cause, then we must take heed of thinking,
that God does any thing without cause; No, the wise God does every thing in
number, weight and measure; he does every thing upon great reason, upon the
highest reason. God will not do the lowest thing, but upon the height of
reason, he does the least thing upon greater reason, than the greatest
Politicians in the world do the greatest. Therefore God had reason, important
reason to give Job up to be afflicted. He did it for the trial of Job, he did
it for the magnifying of his free grace, and the graces of his free Spirit in
his weak creature, he did it that Job might be set up as an example of
patience, he did it to discover the slander of the devil; therefore he did it
for strong reasons, it was not without cause in reference unto God himself.

Lastly, If we consider it in reference unto Job, it was not absolutely without
cause neither; for though there was not that cause in him, which Satan
pretended, namely gross hypocrisy: yet if the Lord should search and sift him
narrowly (as if he should search and sift the holiest of his servants, his pure
eyes and holy nature would find sin enough in them, which might justify him,
or show to his justice sufficient cause (take the sin in it self) not only
to afflict them temporally, but to lay his hand upon them for ever.) Should God
(I say) have tried him thoroughly and looked upon sin in it self, he might
find cause to afflict him in regard of his sin. So then absolutely in
reference unto Job, it was not without cause, God might have found cause in
regard of his sin.

But there were other causes in reference unto Job, it was to try Job, to
exercise Job, it was that Job might have further honor after the trial: There
might have been a reason in sin (if the Lord had marked iniquity) And there
were many reasons in referrence to his good, why the Lord did leave him thus in
the hands of Satan to be afflicted.

To wind it up. If we look upon Satan, then it was without that cause he
pretended, it was without any direct charge, it was a mere suspicion, Job had
never wronged him. But if we respect God, it is not without cause, God does all
things for weighty reasons. And if we respect Job, God (possibly, yea easily)
might have found a sin in him (any sin in it self considered would do it) as
the cause of his affliction; And he had other actual reasons in reference both
to the being and improvement of his graces, why he left him thus in the hands
of Satan.

Hence we may learn. First (in that God says, Thou movedst me against him to
destroy him without cause.)

That pure or rather impure malice, stirs Satan against the people of God.
Though he always pretends somewhat in them, yet the cause is in himself. God
now discovers he does nothing but out of very malice, pure malice against his
servants. Satan has two names in Scripture, noting his two special works,
Temptation and accusation. He sollicits good men to do evil against God;
Hence he has his name, the Tempter. (...).
He sollicites God to conceive evil of good men; and hence he has his name,
the Slanderer or Accuser.

Secondly, we may note,

That God does afflict his people sometimes without respect unto their sins.
Thou did move me against him without cause. It was not in regard of his
hypocrisy or of any thing thou did charge him with, why I did afflict him
and lay my hand upon him. Though all men have always sin enough to be the
meritorious cause, yet oftentimes sin is not the moving cause of their
afflictions. When the Disciples put that question to Christ concerning the
blind man, Joh. 9.2. Master who did sin this man or his parents, that he was
borne blind? Jesus answered, neither has this man sinned nor his parents, (not
as if either of them were without sin, but to show that they had not sinned
as to this purpose, sc. their sin was not the cause of this blindness, and
therefore in the next words, he assigns the cause) But (sc. he was borne
blind) that the works of God should be made manifest. Afflictions are always
from sin, but not always for sin. Neither are they at all for sin (upon
believers) by way of the least satisfaction to the justice of God (that
chastisement Christ has so fully borne, Isa. 53. that no believers finger
shall ever ache in that sense.) But they are often afflicted for sin by way of
purgation or prevention,

Thirdly, we may note this likewise,

That God will at the last give testimony for the clearing of the innocence of
his servants against all Satan's malicious accusations. God himself gives
testimony here a second time concerning Job, Thou did move me against him
without cause, thou did move me to it, but it is clear, and I give my
sentence, there was no such cause as thou did suggest against him, why I
should destroy him.

When the Lord had thus called Satan to account concerning Job, whether he had
considered him both in his radical graces, and in this additionall grace, the
holding fast of his integrity; Then Satan comes forth to answer this also. Have
thou (says God) considered my servant Job that there is none like him in the
earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God and escheweth evil?
And still he holds fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him,
to destroy him without cause? Yes says Satan in the 4th verse, And Satan
answered the Lord and said, Skin for skin, yea all that a man has will he give
for his life. But put forth thine hand now and touch his bone and his flesh,
and he will curse thee to thy face.

Here is Satan's answer with his motion upon it.

By his answer he labors to blot and obscure the glory which Job had gained in
the former battle; and by his motion he labors to bring him about unto a
second trial. As by his answer in the former Chapter (a little to compare him
with himself) Satan slandered Jobs actions, so by his answer here, he slanders
Jobs sufferings. There it was for something that Job served God, and here that
which Job had suffered is nothing.

It is Satan's trade (and he has many children of the same occupation) to
slander and to slight whatsoever the servants of God, either do or suffer.
Before he slandered Jobs active obedience, now he slanders his passive
obedience. What is this (says he) tush, Skin for skin, yea all that a man
has will he give for his life: It is a slight trial that he has past yet;
what great matter is it if he hold fast his integrity; who would not, who could
not hold-fast for any thing that has been done to him yet? Let us try him
again.

For the clearing of this we will examine the words.

Skin for skin, yea all that a man has will he give for his life.

We see here that malice is steeped in wit, Satan answers by a Proverb, Skin
for skin, etc. A proverbiall, quick, sharp speech, the general sense of which
and Satan's intendments are very clear.

The general sense of this proverbiall speech is this. That life is the most
precious treasure, that a man will part with any thing upon these terms. The
saving of his life. That all a man suffers comes not very near him, while that
is out of danger. Such is the general sense, and Satan's intendment in speaking
this, is as clear; namely, that as Job before had served God for his wealth,
so now he does serve him for his breath; that as before Job kept close to God,
that he might enrich him: so now Job keeps close to God, lest he should
destroy him. He seems to hold fast his integrity (so you tell me) but it is
only that he may hold fast his life; He served you before for wealth, and now
he serves you for breath. His fear of loosing that makes him humble himself,
and give many thanks: Search him to the bottom and you will find him still a
mercenary servant, holding his integrity that he may hold in with thee, and
live. This is the general drift of Satan.

But to give the special meaning of his words does somewhat trouble
Interpreters, Skin for skin and all that a man has will he give for his life.

First [ Skin for skin] Some interpret it thus, A man will venture the skin of
one member to save the skin of another: which being cut off or wounded, his
life is more in danger. As for instance, if a blow come at a man's head, he will
hold up his hand or his naked arm, he will venture the skin of his hand to
save his head. And the reason is, because his life is more in danger, if he be
wounded in his head, then in his hand. Here is skin for skin, he gives the skin
of a member, which is further off from the seat of life, to save the skin of
that member which is so near the seat of life.

Secondly by skin in the former place, some understand all the outward estate
that Job had. It was usual in those times to express all riches by the word
Skin, and the reason of it was this, because (as was observed before) their
substance was cattle, and so from the skin of their cattle, Aes alienum
habere dicitur, and qui aureos debet, and qui corium forma publica percussum,
quale apud Lacedaemonios suit. Sen. de Ben. l. 5. c 14. Suppellex a pelle.

Ludi^ de alieno corio (i e.) ex alienoliberalem te praestas.


they did denominate their estates. Or as others, because their money was made
of skins, and so they did express their wealth and riches under the word skin.
Answerable to which custom, the Latin word for household stuff or household
goods, is derived from that word which properly signifies a skin, because
either they were wont to wrap up their goods in skins, or because they did put
a great value upon skins, and so their whole outward personal estate, was
comprehended under that notion. Hence that common Proverb amongst the
Ancients, Thou spendest out of another man's skin. To be liberal out of
another man's estate, was called a being lavish upon another man's skin. And
then skin in the second place does signify the man himself, or the person of
a man: the thing containing or that which covers being put for the whole, by
a Synecdoche; the skin for the whole man. Pelliculam curare jubes. Hor. lib. 2.
Sat. 5. In cute curanda plus aequo operata juventus. Hor. Ep. 2. l. 1.
And it is usual in good Authors to put the skin for the whole man, as, to
look to the skin is to look to the whole body; Take it thus, that skin in the
first place is all outward things, and skin in the second, is taken for the
skin that covers the body, and so the sense runs thus, Skin for skin, etc.
that is, a man will give all his outward estate, to save the flesh upon his
back, that is, to save his life. As if Satan had said, this act of Job, which
is so cried up, and made a matter so considerable, being examined will be found
as ordinary, as the Highway. It being common, to a Proverb, for a man to part
with all, that he may preserve himself.

There is a third exposition much labored by a learned Interpreter, Sanctius.
who by skin in the first place understands not generally all his estate, but
more especially his apparel, his clothing, which at the first were made of
skins; and were used long after for cloathings, by Princes and great men in
diverse Countries, from which the sense of the Proverb is thus given, skin for
skin, etc. A man will part with his clothes, cast them off willingly, easily,
that he may save the skin of his body, save his life: And so he expounds it by
that act of Job in the former Chapter, verse. 20, where it is said, that Job
rent his mantle and cast it off: as if Satan had alluded unto that, and said,
no marvel if Job humbled himself to the dust and renting his garment, cast
that away, when he heard all was taken from him; Job parted with the skin, his
garment, that he might move thee to compassion, and so save his other skin, the
garment which clothes his flesh; which he feared thou would rent by
wounding, and so let out his trembling soul, his beloved life.

A fourth gives this interpretation of the words, Skin for skin, (...)
etc. The Original Preposition, which we translate ( for) is often in
Scripture likewise translated (upon) as in 2 King ^.5. The widow went from
Elisha, and shut the door upon her and upon her son. So in other places,
then the sense is made out thus; Skin upon skin and all that a man has will he
give for his life; that is, if a man had never so many skins, if it could be
supposed he had an hundred skins one upon another, he would let all be taken
often to save his life. That place is expounded as a parallel, Job. 1.16. where
it is said, That of Christ's fulness we receive grace for grace, that is,
grace upon grace, or abundance of grace, all the grace we have; this grace and
that grace, faith, and love, and patience, and humility, every grace, all grace
you receive from Christ. Thus some illustrate these two places one by another.
So Satan says of Job here, Skin for skin, that is, skin upon skin, a man will
give all his skins, suppose he had many, he would part with all: or take skin
for never so much of his outward estate, he will let all go to save his life.

There is yet another interpretation given of this, Skin for skin, ye all that
a man has will he give for his life; (...)
take the words comparatively; we translate it, yea all he has. That
copulative particle in the Hebrew is rendered sometime and, sometime yea,
sometime so, according to which last exception, the sense stands thus, as a
man will give skin for skin, so a man will part with all he has for his life.
We find some Scriptures wherein this particle is taken in the very same sense:
To give you instance, Prove. 25.3. there the Hebrew reads it thus, The heavens
for height, the earth for depth and the heart of Kings is unsearchable: Now
this is clear, that the sense is comparative, and it is thus to be given, as
the Heaven is unsearchable for height and the earth for depth, so the heart of
the King is unsearchable: So verse 25. of the same Chapter, it is thus read out
of the Original, word for word, Cold water to a thirsty soul and good news
from a far country; now we translate it according to the sense and make it a
comparison thus, As cold water to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a
far country. Thus also we may interpret this place, and it carries a good
sense, Skin for skin and all, etc. As a man would give skin for skin, one
outward thing for another (for they take skin in both places for outward
things, for the goods of this life) as a man would give or barter away one
commodity for another. So a man will give all outward things for his life; life
is more valuable to all outward things, than any one particular thing is to
another. It is ordinary to a Proverb among men in danger to say, spare my
life, and take my goods. How willingly does the Mariner in a storm unlade his
Ship, and cast all his rich wares overboard, that he may preserve that
precious jewel, his life. As a godly man will give life upon life, a thousand
lives (if he had them) rather then loose his soul: So a natural man will give
skin upon skin, gold upon gold, treasure upon treasure, that he may save his
life. Let life lie at the stake, and a man will give all things he has in the
world for it, and think he has a good bargain.

Here are 5. expositions you see offered: The two latter to me seem the most
clear, howsoever every one of them has a fair sense in it; and so we are
agreed upon the general, which is only to set forth the excellency and
preciousnesse of life, there cannot be any miscarriage in pitching upon either
of these Interpretations. I shall give you some notes from hence.

First observe what a blessing life is. Skin for skin and all that a man has
will he give for his life.

Life is the most precious treasure, the most excellent thing in nature. And
let me tell you life is the treasure, that is now so much dug for: there are
many abroad that are digging for your precious lives: Consider what lies at
stake, and what will you give for the securing or reducing of it. Have we not
cause to say of some of our bloody brethren, as Jacob did, Genesis 32.12. when his
brother Esau was marching toward him, I fear him (says he) least he will
come and slay me and the mother with the children; Loss of life was the thing
Jacob feared. And Hesters speech in her petition to the King, imports that all
other losses might have been borne, but loss of life, Cap. 7. ver. 3, 4. Let
my life (says she) be given at my Petition, and my people at my request, for
we are sold I and my people to be destroyed, to be slain and to perish: But if
we had been sold for bondmen and for bond-women, I had held my tongue. See how
she wrought for life, for her own life and the life of her people, and thought
liberty not worth the asking for, compared with life. Moses made many demurrs
and excuses, I am not eloquent, etc. when God gave him Commission to go into
Egypt; but we hear of no delays at all, when once God had said, Return into
Egypt, for all the men are dead, which sought thy life, Exodus 4. ver. 19. God
had not spoken thus, if he had not known there was such a scruple in his mind,
which would have galled him worse in his travels to Egypt then any peble in his
shoe.

Secondly, If life be the most precious thing, the richest jewel in the world:
then in the next place, learn to value your lives. You see how Satan values
life here, out of an ill intent, only to extenuate and undervalue all the
sufferings of Job; he sets his life at a very high rate, that he might make all
his losses of no rate, not worth the speaking off. Let our intent be good, and
then it is good for us to value our lives high, and to sell them at as dear a
rate, as we can, if we must sell them. You know what Solomon says in the
person of a natural man, A living dog is better then a dead Lion, Eccles. 9.4.
We read what is said of the woman in the Gospel, that had spent all she had
upon Physicians. What was it for? Only to restore her health, which is a
degree below life. Certainly if she spent all that she had to obtain health,
which is only the comfort of life, shall not we spend a part of that we have
to save our lives. As ships in danger to be wracked in a storm, are often
preserved by casting some of their rich lading into the Sea. So it is possible,
yea probable that the casting away of some of your estates in this great
storm, may be a means to save both your ship and your lives; your estates
kept may sink the vessel, and then you must sink with it, and certainly die
or swim from it, and hardly live. When Esau (Genesis 25.32.) was hungry and could
not obtain a mess of pottage from his brother, but upon very hard terms,
the sale of his birthright, Sell me thy birthright, says Jacob, a precious
jewel indeed, which Esau should have valued more then his life; but he comes
to his price on this ground, Behold I am at the point to die, and what profit
shall this birthright do to me? He was profane Esau for saying so, that is
the Apostles style, Heb. 12.16. It was profaneness to prefer one morsel of
meat before his birthright; because the birthright was a spiritual
privilege as well as a natural: but there is no mere natural blessing, but
we may both in wisdom and conscience part with to keep our lives; when ye
are ready to die, ye may say, what will this estate, these riches do us good?
If that, your estates may be the price of your lives, ye have reason and it is
your duty to part with them willingly; give some, give all, for what will these
riches do you good, when you are ready to die, or already dead.

Further be ready to give more than your estates, for your lives. Give some of
your blood for your lives, that is more, Skin for skin and all that a man has
will he give for his life: and which is yet more, give a limb for your lives.
The whole is better then a part: And which is highest of all, venture your
lives to save your lives. That which I intend is only this, do not barter away
your lives upon mean rates, upon low terms. If it comes to it (as we have
great cause to fear it will, we see many have been put to it already) sell
your lives as dear as you can. Indeed there are none in so great danger to
loose their lives, as they that will not venture their lives. That of Christ is
true in this sense also, he that will save his life shall loose it; such saving
tends to undoing, yea it tends to death. And whosoever will (venture to) loose
his life, shall (most probably) find it, Math. 16.25. Let it not be said that
you died to save charges, let it not be said that you died to save your skins,
or to save your blood, yea let it not be said that you died to save your lives,
I mean that you feared to hazard your lives for the securing of your lives.
Give all that you have for your lives, venture life and all; your safety
depends upon this hazard, by such a noble liberality, you are in the fairest
way, not only to save all you have, but to gain more then you have.

Thirdly, If your lives be so much worth, what are your souls worth? What is
this life, which is valued thus above all that a man has? The Apostle James
makes the question, and gives the answer, It is even a vapor that appears
for a little time, and then vanishes away, Jam. 4.14. a man's breath it is but
in his nostrils, it is gone presently, yet you see in a true value all the
world is below that. If you are to esteem your lives so, at what price will
you set your souls? To save your lives and save your souls are two things. A
man may save his life and yet loose his soul; yea many labor to save their
lives in doing that, which will be the loss of their souls, poor creatures!
Therefore look to that, set a high rate indeed upon your immortal souls; when
estates and liberties and lives are called for, count them all as trash, that
you may save your souls, hazard not your souls: If life be more worth then
all the world, the soul is more worth then a thousand lives, What will it
advantage a man to gain the world and loose his soul? Or what shall a man
give in exchange for his soul? Mat. 16.26.
The truth is a man should not gain much to get the whole world and loose his
life, that loss is a loss irreparable, irrecompensible from the creature.
Nature teaches us to prize our lives above the world, and grace teaches us to
value our souls above our lives. Therefore how unnatural are they that
prefer a little profit before their lives; but O how ungracious are they, who
prefer a little profit before their souls! Some will sin (as we say) for
sixpence, selling their own souls (as those false Prophets did the souls of
their people) for hand-fulls of barley, and for pieces of bread, Ezekiel. 13.19.
And whereas a man should give all for his life, they will give their souls for
a thing of naught. Know therefore the worth of your souls. Jesus Christ
thought souls worth his life, and therefore dyed to save souls. How much then
do our souls transcend our own lives? And if Christ laid down his life to
ransom souls, do you rather lay down a thousand lives (if you had them)
then endanger your souls, either by acting sin or by submitting unto error.
In that case let estate go, let liberty go, let life, let all go, for life
has not so much pre-eminence over all, as the soul has over life.

Fourthly, If your lives are worth so much, then what is the Gospel worth? If
a man would give all for his life, what should he give for his Religion, to
maintain and uphold that in the purity and power of it? Life is a precious
thing, a thing of great value, but when the Gospel comes in competition, then
life is a poor commodity; and our breath but a perishing vapor. Such was the
judgment of that great Apostle, Act. 20.24. when the Holy Ghost had witnessed
in every City, that bonds and afflictions did abide him, in preaching the
Gospel, he thus resolves, But none of these things move me, neither count I my
life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the
ministry which I have received to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.
His life came to a low rate in his esteem, how cheap was life when the
Gospel was spoken of, I count not my life dear, says Paul, as all other
outward things are mean and low compared with life; so life it self is a
mean, a low thing in comparison of the Gospel. This life is but the life of
the body, but the Gospel is the life of the soul. Many men live, but no soul
lives on this side or without the Gospel. Now if you will offer much to save
your lives, will not you offer much more to save the Gospel? In and about this
we may make the best improvement of Satan's argument, Skin for skin and all that
a man has, should he give for the Gospel, for Gospel ordinances, for Gospel
privileges, for Gospel light. Where, or for what will you venture and bid
high, if not for the precious Gospel?

Lastly, If life be worth all; then hereby we may take measure of the love and
bounty of Christ to poor sinners, who not only spent himself in all to his
life, but spent life and all, that they might not perish; the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ was exceeding great toward us, That though he was rich, yet for
our sakes he became poor, 2 Cor. 8.9. That though he was in the form of God,
and thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet he made himself of no
reputation, Phil. 2.6, 7. But how superabundant was his grace toward us, that
though he was the Prince of life, Act. 3.15. Yet became obedient unto death,
even the death of the cross, Phil. 2.8. that we might live. If a man loves his
life, so that he will give skin for skin, and all that he has, to redeem it,
then O how did Christ love his Church, who gave not only his riches, and his
reputation, but his life also for it is redemption!

JOB 2.5, 6, 7, 8. But put forth thine hand now and touch his bone and his
flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face.

And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand, but save his life.

So went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with sore
boyles, from the sole of his foot unto his crown.

And he took him a pot-sheard to scrape himself withal, and he sat down
among the ashes.


IN this fifth verse Satan goes on, and makes a motion unto God (as we
observed his method in the former Chapter,) but put forth thine hand now, and
touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. This is
Satan's motion. In the sixth verse we have a grant of this motion, bound up yet
with a limitation, as it was in the former Chapter.

For the motion, But put forth thine hand now and touch, etc. What it imports
to put forth the hand, that was opened in the former Chapter, verse. 11. where
we have the same expression, therefore we shall not stay upon it here. Consider
now only that which is differing, a new object upon which the hand must be put
forth, and which Satan desires might now be touched. It is the laying of his
hand, not upon his Cattle, or upon his estate, or upon his children, but upon
his flesh and his bone, Touch his bone and his flesh; that is, afflict his
body; The bone and the flesh are the two chief parts, the material parts of
the body; of them the whole Fabrique does consist: the bone it is as the timber
in this house, and the flesh it is as the lime and mortar filling of it up.
Touch this says Satan. And in that he says, touch his bone and his flesh, he
intends and requires a deep and a sore affliction upon his body; for if he had
said only thus, Touch his flesh, that had been an affliction upon his body;
For we know often in Scripture, the flesh is put for the whole body; and
sometimes for the whole man; therefore Satan is not satisfied with an
expression general, but he puts it in direct and express terms, Touch his
flesh and his bone, that is, touch him so as that the pain and the distemper
may sink into his very bones, into his very Marrow, touch him thus and then
you shall see what he will do.

The Bone it self is a part without feeling; yet to touch the bone, imports
the greatest pain that can be felt. Touch his bone and his flesh, and then
says he, He will curse thee to thy face.

What it is to curse to the face has bin opened already in the former Chapter,
at the eleventh verse, and I must refer you thither for the sense of this
phrase; only in a word take it thus, He will curse thee to thy face, is as if
Satan had said thus; Though Job did bless thee when he had a full estate, and
though he did bless thee when thou did empty him of his estate, and took
all his goods from him; yet if thou do but touch his body, and afflict his
bones, he will break forth into cursed language, both concerning thy person,
and concerning thy service.

I will only mind you further of that which is here secretly couched in this
expression, Touch his bone and his flesh and he will curse thee to thy face;
here is a secret imprecation involved, he tacitly subjects himself to the
curse of God, if Job curse not God. As if Satan should have said; If he do not
curse thee to thy face, then do so and so to me, or think thus and thus of
me: If you would have the meaning of Satan from the language of his children,
you may take the plain English of it thus, Touch but his bone and his flesh,
and damn me, if he do not curse thee, send me to Hell presently. Satan indeed
kept this cursed imprecation close wrapped up in that form of speaking; But now
his children speak it out; If you will have Satan's heart from the mouths of
the sons of Belial, a cursed and cursing generation among us, the plain
English of it is this. God damn me, send me to Hell presently, if he curse
thee not. Satan we see was more modest then these sons of impudence and
perdition; who openly imprecate upon, and devote themselves unto the wrath of
God almost every word; these do not only imitate, but exceed the copy which
Satan sets them here, by bold blasphemy and horrid execrations.

And he will curse thee to thy face. We may from hence observe.

First, Satan had tried in vain to make Job curse God; Now he attempts a
second time; Note, That

When Satan cannot prevail against us by one means, he does not despair of
prevailing by another; He gives not his cause over for lost, because he cannot
carry it at first, he will try, and try again. As it was with Balak, Numb. 23.
when he sent for Balaam to curse the people, and saw the business did not
prosper, or succeed according to his malice, Balaam could not curse them, he
brought him to another place; Come (says he) I pray thee, Numb. 23.27*
I will bring thee to another place, peradventure it will please God that thou
may curse me them from thence, though you could not do it in one place, you
may in another. So Satan, if he cannot work his will one way, he will try a
second or a third.

Satan's unweariednesse in a bad cause when it succeeded not, reproves those who
are so soon weary of a good one, if it succeed not; Many are ready to give up
if one means will not do it, they cast off hope and say, the cause is
desperate. If one, or two, or three, or many means we use, fail, we ought to
try still, never despair of the end while the work is good and the means are
fair; In the morning sow thy seed (says the Preacher) and in the evening
withold not thy hand: Eccles. 11.6.
for thou know not whether shall prosper this or that. I may add, withold
not thy hand in the evening, though thou see the morning seed does not
prosper; this may have a blessing, though that had not.

Secondly observe, Satan tries another way, and he tries a way more probable
and efficacious for his ends then the former; when a weaker will not do it, he
provides stronger means. As God in punishing or chastening sinners, when a
lesser judgment will not humble them, he sends a greater; God comes not only
with another, but with sorer judgments; Lev 26.
If he will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish you seven
times more for your sins: So Satan, when by one temptation he cannot
overcome, prepares not only another, but a stronger; he assaults them more and
more; he not only musters new Forces, but more complete, to foil the soul.
This should teach us when we cannot subdue a corruption in our own hearts by
one means, then to seek a better: And when by one prayer we cannot obtain a
blessing, then to pray again, and to pray better, to pray with more life, with
more faith, with more humility: then mix more fire with prayer, more zeal and
fervency of spirit: mix more water with prayer, As Jacob, Hose 12. wept and
made supplication; above all mix more of Christ in prayer, go out in his Name
and strength. When Balacks first messengers could not obtain Balaam to come
with them; Balack was not discouraged or put off, but (says the Text) Balack
sent yet again Princes more and more Honorable, Numb. 22.15. Let not us be
discouraged if our first prayers (which are our messengers to God) are not
answered; But let us send more and more honorable, more strong cries, more
spiritual desires, which may take upon the heart of God. Why should Satan do
more against us, then we will do for our selves?

Thirdly, Note for our own caution; That we must not only expect continued or
renewed afflictions and assaults from Satan, but we must expect greater and
greater afflictions and assaults from Satan. He has some assaults that are but
as Foote-men, he will bring out his Horsemen at the next bout; And if having
run with Foote-men, they have wearied thee, how will thou contend with
Horses, Jer. 12.5. Be ready then not only to run with the Foot, but to contend
with Horses; prepare your selves for other, for more violent charges then you
ever felt. Satan will if he can lay a closer siege to thy soul then ever he
has done: As that one evil spirit returned into the person out of whom he was
gone, Luke 11.24. with seven Devils worse then himself, so he often returns
with seven temptations, worser, stronger then before.

Fourthly, observe what Satan picks out to be the matter of this second and
stronger temptation, it is, to pinch Job in his flesh, to pinch his body. Note
from hence, That the pain of the body is very powerful to disquiet and
trouble the mind. Satan is very confident to trouble and vex the mind of Job,
by casting darts and diseases into his body. Physicians have a rule, That the
manners of the mind follow the temper of the body, and it is a more certain
rule, That the mind is much carried according to the distemper of the body,
when the body is distempered, the mind is seldom at rest: the body and soul
are such near neighbors, that they cannot but sympathize in each others
sufferings. Some interpret that place of the Apostle, Gal. 4.13, 14. concerning
the weakness and sickness of his body, You know (says he) how through
infirmity of the flesh I preached the Gospel: We may safely join it with
those other troubles, afflictions and reproaches which he endured, and were so
great a disadvantage to his acceptance in the world. So the meaning is, that
though his body was infirm, though he had many weaknesses upon him, yet he
preached the Gospel. And then it follows in the next verse, My temptation
which was in my flesh you despised not, observe, he calls his bodily
infirmity a temptation; The afflictions of the body are great temptations to
the soul. It is very considerable to this purpose what the Apostle James says
when he speaks of the several conditions of the Saints and their duties in
them, Chap. 5. v. 13, 14. Is any man afflicted? let him pray, (he speaks that
in general) Is any man merry? let him sing Psalms. Is any man sick? Is he
pained by sickness in his body? What shall he do then? He does not say, Is
any man sick, let him pray? but, Is any man sick? let him call for the Elders
of the Church, and let them pray over him: As if he should say, A sick man is
very unfit to pray himself, though for himself, he has need to call others
to pray with him and for him, he has enough to do, to wrestle with his pain
and conflict with that affliction: In other afflictions let him pray, but if he
be sick, let him send for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him.
A diseased body unfits the mind for holy duties. The prayer of sick Hezekiah is
called chattering: like a Crane or Swallow, so did I chatter, Isa. 38. it was
rather chattering then praying, such a disquietnesse and uncomposednesse was
upon his spirit thorough, or by the infirmity of his flesh. Pain is a piercing
shaft in Satan's quiver of temptations; Though the spirit of a man will sustain
his infirmity, yet oftentimes, a wound in the body wounds the soul, Prove.
18.14.
and the diseases of the flesh make the spirit sick: A wounded spirit no man
can bear, and a wound in the body, is a burden too heavy for many men.

And if it be so, Then the pain and the weakness of the body is no advantage
to repentance and returning unto God. How pitifully are they mistaken, who put
off repentance till their bodies be in pain, till they are sick and weak;
they do it upon this ground, because when they are in pain, they think they
shall repent with more ease. Observe, if Satan thinks to have such an advantage
upon a holy man, as to make him blaspheme when he is in pain, do thou
think pain will be an advantage to thy repentance? It is said, that at the
pouring out of the fourth Vial, Rev. 16.9. when God did smite the inhabitants
of the earth, and scorched them with great heat, that they blasphemed the Name
of God, (they did that which Satan presumed Job would do) and they repented
not to give him glory. It is a woeful thing to put off repentance to a pained
body: pain in its own nature fits us rather to blaspheme and turn from God,
then to return to him. Never think to have help for the cure of your souls,
by the diseases of your bodies: usually we find, that either sick persons
repent not, or theirs is but a sickly repentance. At the most, pain can but
restrain your lusts, it can never heal them, The actings of some sins are
quickened by diseases; At the most, a disease can but abate the acts of sin, it
can never destroy the life of it. Death it self cannot kill sin: The sins of
wicked men live when they are dead: the grave cannot consume them, no nor the
fire of Hell wast their strength: the sins of unbeleevers shall remain not
only in their guilt, but in their power to all eternity. So much of Satan's
motion. But put forth thy hand now and touch his bone and his flesh, and he
will curse thee to thy face.

Verse 6. And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thy hand, but save his
life.

Here we have the Lords grant unto that motion of Satan, He is in thy hand, but
save his life: Thou may do with his bone and his flesh what thou will, He
is in thine hand. We have opened what it is to have a thing put into the hand,
in the former Chapter, where the same expression is used, therefore I shall
pass those words here. Note only this, that the Lord says here, He is in thy
hand, to prevent Satan's cavil: as if he had said, Thou movest me to touch his
bone and his flesh; well, lest thou should say that I have dealt too gently
with him, and have smitten him with favor, I will put the rod or staff into
thine hand, do thou with (...) bone and his flesh what thou can, spare him
not. We know the Lord is able to strike stronger strokes, and give deeper
wounds infinitely then Satan can, if he pleases; yet, the love of God to his
children, stops his hand and breaks the blow: He corrects in judgment, and
debates in measure, Isa. 27.8. when he strikes his children, he strikes them as
children, gently; Thus (2 Samuel 7.14.) speaking of David's family; If he commit
iniquity (says God) I will chasten him with the rod of men, the word there
used is Enosh, which signifies a weak man, I will chasten him with the rod of
a weak man, of one that has but a weak arm or hand, the hand of a sickly
frail man; A weak, a sickly man cannot strike very hard. Thus says God, I
will chasten thy children if they commit iniquity: they shall rather see my
care, then feel my power in their corrections. Now (I say) lest Satan should
pretend partiality, God puts Job into Satan's hand, and gives him liberty to lay
on as hard, as his hand acted with utmost malice could smite him, thou have
liberty to smite him into the very valley of the shadow of death, to bring him
so near death, that he may look into the graves mouth, but no further.

Save his life. Here is Satan's chain, the limitation or restraint of his
power. When God puts any of his servants into Satan's hand, he keeps Satan in
his own hand. And as all the Elect are in Gods hand, to keep them from taking
hurt, so the Devil is in Gods hand, to keep him from doing hurt to his Elect.
Save his life.

The word Nephesh here used, signifies properly the soul; and the soul is in
Scripture often put for the life: because the soul is the spring, the
fountain of life; life is derived or diffused into the body from or by the
soul: and as soon as the soul is parted from the body, life departs. Hence
both this Hebrew word, (...)
and the Greek word (...), have their names from breathing or respiring: For
life goes out when breath goes out, when we cease breathing, we cease living.
Our life is but a blast, a breath; the Lord formed man out of the dust of the
earth, and breathed into his nostrills the breath of life, and he became a
living soul, Genesis 2.7. This is that vital spirit by which all quick things
move; therefore Beasts, Birds, Fish and creeping things are called living
souls, Genesis 1.20, 24. And this life is called the blood, because (...)
contained or carried in the blood, Genesis 9.4. Further, it is (...) observable,
that the Hebrews call the Body separated from (...) soul, or a dead corpse,
Nephesh, Numb. 5.2. c. 9.10. c. 19.11. Hag. 2.14. Though the life be quite gone
out, departed from the carcass or body of a dead man, yet that dead body is
called life or soul; to note that it shall live again, and that the soul
shall return unto it: The mystery of the Resurrection from death was implied
in the name of the dead. We find also that the Heathens called a dead body, a
soul; possibly from some glimpse of the resurection. We lay up a soul in the
grave, says the Poet. Animamque sepulchro condimus. Virg Aen. 3.


But how is this work put into Satan's hand, The saving of his life. What, is
Satan become a savior? what salvation can we expect from him, whose name is
Apollyon, and Abaddon, Rev. 9.11. both which signify a destroyer. Shall we
send to the Wolf to save the Sheep? or to the Vulture to save the Dove?
Destruction is the delight of Satan, and it is his way, as he has no hope to
be saved himself eternally, so no will to save others temporally.

Observe then, That here to save life, notes only a sparing from death, not a
delivering from destruction, but a forbearing to destroy. Satan saved his life
negatively, Servat animam quia eam non perdit. Drus.
that is, he did not take it away: he can not save positively, or restore that
which was ready to perish; he does not save as a deliverer, but as a murderer,
who would kill his brother, but cannot. He saves, not for want of will, but for
want of power: when he is forced to spare, his nature is to devour. This
devouring Lion hunts for the precious life, even when God says, Save his life.

It may be questioned here, Why Satan (for that is employed) desired so to
destroy the life of Job? God would never have limited and chained him up, but
that Satan had a mind to suck his blood, or afflict him unto death.

These two reasons may be given, why Satan would have his life.

The one might be this, Because it was a thing doubtful with him (though he
bragged much of it) whether he should attain his end or no, to make Job curse
God; when therefore he saw he could not overcome his spiritual life, it would
have bin some revenge to him to destroy his natural life. As some wicked ones
his agents, when by all their threats or flatteries they cannot make a (...)
sin, which is to destroy his spiritual life, their revenge breaks (...)
against his natural life, to destroy that; This is the method of persecution,
first to attempt the death of the soul, by drawing or terrifying unto sin; and
if they fail of that, then death is inflicted on the body.

Or again in the second place, he being doubtful in himself (though he made
no doubt in words) whether his plot would be successful, to make Job curse
God; he (I say) doubting this design might not draw him to sin, resolved to
take away his life, that so Job might never have told tales of his victory, or
have reported his conquest to the world. At least by his death he might obscure
the business, and bury it with some slander: saying that Job died with
discontent and grief, that he blasphemed God when he died, that he wished for
death, and could not hold out any longer. Much like that device of some
Jesuits, who have blown it abroad, that our most zealous opposers of Romish
errors, whom they could never move, either by writing or disputing, while they
lived, have yet recanted all when they dyed. Wherefore least Satan should have
drawn a curtain over the glory of Jobs victory, by aspersing him after his
death, the Lord says, Save his life, Job shall survive his troubles, that
matters may come to light, and a true report be made and left upon record both
of thy implacable malice, and enmity, and of his invincible patience and
sincerity.

And this may lead us yet further to consider, why God was so careful of that
precious part, his life.

For some may say,

Had it not been glory to God and honor to Job, (like that of Martyrdom,) if
he had died under the hand of Satan, holding fast his own integrity, blessing
God even unto death?

I grant this, but yet God knew that the saving of his life would be more
advantageous both to himself and his Job, for those ends: wherefore he says,
Save his life, destroy him not.

First thus, God intended to make Job a Monument of mercy as well as a Monument
of suffering, he intended to set him up to all the world as one, in whom they
might behold the goodness of God in raising up, mixed with his wisdom in
casting down; that men might learn hope from Job, as well as patience from Job.
Therefore says God, Save his life, I have somewhat else to do with him; I will
raise him up again, and in him an everlasting Monument both of his patience in
suffering, and of my own power in restoring. Indeed if he had died in the
conflict and left his bones in the field, he had been a wonderful example of
constancy: but he had not been such an example of mercy, if his life had not
been saved.

There may be this in it too, Save his life, says God, I will have him
preserved in this combat, his courage and carriage in it is my delight. God
loves to see his people holding out, tugging and continuing in such assaults
and temptations. Spectant dij magnos viros cum calamitate aliqua colluctantes,
Ecce spectaculum, ad quod respiciat operi suo intentus Deus. Senec. de Cat. c
2. de P^ov.
If any thing in the world gives delight to God, this is the thing that
delights him. The Heathen thought this the sport of their gods; Seneca in his
Book of Providence, speaking of Cato, and other gallant Roman spirits, says,
the gods delighted to look upon them in their conflicts with fortune. To see
them wrestle with some great calamity, with some great danger, was such a
spectacle as would draw off Jupiter from his greatest business. It is a most
certain truth, that the most true God does love and delight to see his children
wrestling with some great calamity: to see a poor man, man who is but flesh
and blood wrestling with principalities and powers, with the devil and powers
of darkness; this is a sight that God himself (as we may so speak) rejoices
in. Genesis 22.14.
When Abraham had finished that great combat about sacrificing his son, he
calls the place Jehovah-jireh, the Lord will see, or the Lord does see, the
Lord does behold; as if that had been a sight which God himself came down to
look upon. As when some great man or strange show passes by, we go out to see
it; so God comes down upon mount Moriah to see a sight: And what was it? To
see Abraham in that great temptation assaulted and overcomming. Here was a
spectacle for the great Jehovah, and therefore he calls the place Jehovah-jireh,
the Lord has seen. I doubt not but this place also of Jobs trial, might have
born the same name. As the Lord will be seen in the mount of our afflictions to
provide for us, so he will see us in the mount of our afflictions, to please
himself. The Psalmist describes God looking down from heaven upon the children
of men, to see if there were any that did understand, that did seek God, Psalm.
53.2. Surely then if any do seek God, much more if they suffer from him, or for
him in a holy manner, he will look down from Heaven to see them.

Thirdly, I will note that as another ground why God would have his life
spared, because he had much use of him, when he was in that condition, full of
sores and scabs. A godly man is never in such an estate but God has some use
of his life. Therefore says God, Save his life, though he be full of sores, or
rather from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot one continued sore:
though he be a most lamentable creature, and cannot wag hand or foot in any
service of man, yet spare his life, for he may thus stand me in great stead,
and do me more service then many thousands, who (as we speak) are sound wind
and limb, and have not one blemish upon the whole body. A godly person is ever
useful to God, though he cannot stir a limb, yet his life may be useful to
God: whereas a wicked man, though strong and healthy, though furnished with
outward comforts and accommodations, is altogether unserviceable; he will not
do God a stroke of work, though he have received great pay and wages
aforehand. A godly man will serve God in and by his poverty, in and by his
sickness, when diseased, when distressed, when nothing is to be seen upon him
but scabs and boiles. Grace will work through all the defects and decays of
nature. And when the life of nature can scarce move one member of the outward
man upon the earth, the life of grace moves all the members of the inward man
toward Heaven. Though the outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day
by day, 2 Cor. 4.16.

Lastly, God saved his life, as a punishment and vexation upon Satan. The
Talmudists are vouched to affirm, that it was not so grievous to Job, to be
afflicted in his body, as it was to Satan when God restrained him from
destroying his life. As if a man should be permitted to crack the glass, but
he must not spill the wine. That his life must be kept whole in him, was Satan's
wound. It is a torture to malice not to do the utmost mischief. So much for
the clearing of these words, Behold, he is in thine hand, but save his life.

From the Lords grant observe first, That God does oftentimes give up the
bodies of his faithful servants to be abused and tormented by Satan and his
instruments. He is in thine hand, thou may do with him what thou will, on
this side death. Touch his flesh and his bone, or touch his flesh to the bone,
strike as hard, wound as deep as thou can. It is said, Revel. 2.10. that
Satan should cast some of them, that is, of the servants of God, into prison.
God gave up their bodies to irons, and fetters, to the stocks and shackles: He
permits those bodies which are Temples of the holy Ghost, to be thrust into
dungeons and the chambers of death.

Therefore do not think it strange to see the bodies of the children of God
put into cruel and bloody hands, though they are vessels of honor and Temples
of the holy Ghost, yet God may give up those bodies to be defiled and polluted
with the outrages of the most abominable wretches; consider what the Apostle
speaks of the Jewish Martyrs, Heb. 11. How were their bodies abused and
mangled? They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they were slain with the
sword: they wandered about in sheep skins and goat skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented: of whom the world was not worthy: Their bodies had not a
house to dwell in, nor garments to put on, in whose souls God himself dwelt,
and had put upon them the garment of Salvation. Who is able to express, yea,
to conceive what strange inventions of cruelty have been brought into the
world to vex and torment the bodies of the Saints; The stories of the Primitive
times are full: but the fathers of the Romish inquisition have exceeded them
all. Satan here invents a strange disease as an engine to torture Jobs body, in
that he mixed the rack, and the wheel, the sword and the saw, the fiery gridiron
and the boiling oil: The pain of a thousand deaths was heightn'd in that
malignant distemper.

Secondly, he is in thine hand, but save his life, says God. The matter
wherein Satan is limited is life, then note

That life and death are in the hand of God. It is truth, that all we have is
in the hand of God; but God keeps our life in his hand last of all, and he has
that in his hand in a special manner. So David expresses it, Psalm. 66.9.
Thou hold my soul in life; though the soul continue, life may not continue,
there is the soul, when there is not life, life is that which is the union of
soul and body, Thou hold my soul in life, that is, thou hold soul and
body together. So Daniel describes God to Belshazzar, Dan. 5.23. The God in
whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways have thou not glorified.
The breath of Princes is in the hand of God; and the same hand holds the breath
of the meanest subject. This may be matter of comfort to us in such times as
these are, times of danger, and times of death; when the hand of man is lifted
up to take thy life, remember thy life is held in the hand of God. And as God
said here to Satan, Afflict the body of Job, but save his life; so God says
still to bloody wretches, who are as the limbs of Satan, The bodies of such and
such are in your hands, the estates of such and such are in your hands, but
save their lives. The life of a man is never at the mercy of a creature, though
it be a common speech of men, when they have a man under them, Now I have you
at my mercy; though some brag as Laban did to Jacob, It is in the power of my
hand to do you hurt: yet God often checks them (as he did Laban) from so much
as speaking hurt, Genesis 31.29. but the God of your father spoke unto me
yester-night, saying, Take thou heed, that thou speak not to Jacob either good
or bad. Creatures though full of love cannot speak good, and though full of
malice they cannot speak bad, if God forbid: then much less can they do us
hurt, and least of all hurt our lives, if God withold. David triumphs in his
interest in such a God, Psalm. 68.20. Our God is the God of salvation (that is
of deliverance, of outward deliverance (for that is especially there meant) and
unto God the Lord belong the issues from death, or the goings out from death,
that is, God has all ways that lead out from death in his own keeping, he
keeps the key of the door, that lets us out from death; when a man is in the
valley of the shadow of death, where shall he issue out? where shall he have a
passage? No where, says man, he shall not escape; but God keeps all the
passages, when men think they have shut us up in the jaws of death, he can
open them, and deliver us. To him belong the issues from death; It is an
allusion to one that keeps a passage or a door: And God is a faithful
keeper, and a friendly keeper, who will open the door for the escape of his
people, when they cry unto him. It is expressed so in Psalm. 141.7. Our bones are
scattered at the graves mouth: as when one cutteth or cleaves wood upon the
earth; that is, we are even ready to die, to be put into the grave. What then?
But mine eyes are upon thee, O God the Lord: in thee is my trust, leave not my
soul destitute. Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me. Let the
wicked fall into their own nets: whilst I withal escape, that is, make me a
way to escape; As if he should say, Thou have the key of the gate by which we
may issue out from death: Lord, I look that thou should now open it for me.

Let it comfort us that God has our lives, and the issues from death in his
own hand. When Satan thought he had Job fast enough locked up in the valley of
the shadow of death, God kept him safe, he opened a door and let him out.

Thirdly note, that as God has life in his hand in a special manner, so he
takes special care of the lives of his people. Save his life (says God) I
will look to that: Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death
of his saints; Precious is their death; not that death it self is precious, a
privation has no preciousnesse in it: but their life is precious, therefore he
will have a great price for their death; God puts off the life of a Saint at a
dear rate. Woe unto those who violently and unjustly take away that which is
so precious in the esteem of God, at one time or other he will make them pay
dear for such Jewels.

Fourthly observe, It is mercy to have our lives, though we lose all things
else. You see here God says concerning Job, Save his life. I have given thee
his estate, thou have spoiled that, now I will leave his body in thine hand,
wound that, afflict that, but save his life. Here was mercy. Therefore it was a
special promise and privilege made and granted to some in times of great
public sufferings and common calamities, as to Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, Jer.
39.18. and to Baruch the Scribe, Jer. 45.5. that their lives should be given to
them for a prey; as if God had said, It is no ordinary favor in times of
common danger to have your lives for a prey; you complain for this loss and
that loss, and you have cause too, but think withal that you have your lives.
And why is it said, that they should have their lives for a prey? A prey you
know properly is that which we take out of the hand of an enemy, that which
was in his possession; the lives of these persons were said to be given to them
for a prey, in those perilous times, because God by his care and providence
did (as it were) fetch back their lives from the hand of the enemy: their
lives in natural reason were in their enemies hands, but God undertakes to
fetch them back, and recover them out of their hands, and so they were promised
to have their lives for a prey. Thus God gives to many of his people their
lives for a prey, and they are to bless God in this behalf, whatsoever
afflictions and troubles are upon them, that yet they have their lives.

Lastly, we may hence raise our meditations to consider the wonderful love of
God to us in Christ: when God sent Christ into the world to save sinners, he
put him into the hands of Satan and his instruments; yet he does not say (as
here) to Satan, Save his life; Afflict him as thou will, persecute him in his
cradle, despise him, slander him, revile him, accuse him, crown his head with
thorns, scourge him, buffet him, spit in his face, etc. but save his life; No,
this bound is not set to the malice of Satan or the rage of men, God gives them
leave to take life and all. Concerning his servant Job, God says to Satan,
Spare his life; but when he sends his Son, he gives no order to have him
spared, but gives his cruel enemies full scope. How wonderful is the love of
God, who for our sakes was so expensive of his Sons life; when as he thus
spared the life of a servant. If Satan had been chained up from taking the life
of Christ, he had been at liberty to triumph over our lives, to all eternity.
We had all died, if God had said to Satan concerning Christ, Save his life.

Thus we see the Commission of Satan against Job, and the limitation of it.
Satan was not tied up so short as he was in the former Chapter, and yet still
he is tied. There he might meddle with Jobs estate, but not with his body; here
he may meddle with his body, but not with his life: Though God lengthen Satan's
chain, yet he never lets Satan loose, though he be at more liberty then before,
yet he is in custody, there is a But of restriction upon him still. It is our
comfort that though Satan (as Philosophers speak of liquids, water, and the
like) cannot keep himself in his own bounds, yet he is easily kept in bounds by
the word and power of God.

Verse 7. So went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with
sore boiles, from the sole of the feet unto his crown.

Verse 8. And he took him a potsheard to scrape himself withal, and he sat
down among the ashes.

So Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord.] He is presently upon
execution, as soon as he has his commission. We have explained these words in
the former Chapter.

See then what he does. He smote Job with sore boiles from the sole of his feet
unto his crown.

He smote Job says the Text. In the former afflictions Satan had instruments
to work by: He stirred up the Caldeans and Sabeans; he moved the fire and the
wind into a conspiracy against Job. Here he (that he might be sure it should
be done fully) does it himself.

He smote Job.] When the devil smites, he smites thoroughly, he smites home.
When Angels strike, they strike to purpose. It is said Act. 12. that an Angel
of the Lord smote Herod, and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the Ghost.
Spirits have mighty power.

He smote Job; why, he did not demand to smite Job, he did but desire to have
him Touched: you heard before somewhat of that. Satan moves that his flesh and
his bone might be only touched, now, his motion being granted, it is said he
smote him. There are two things in this smiting:

First, It notes suddenness: He did not afflict him by a disease that grew
upon him by degrees; as you know boiles and sores ordinarily are long a
gathering, breeding in, and breaking out of the flesh; but he was all over full
of these boiles in an instant.

Secondly, smiting intimates the vehemency of it, a killing stroke, a deaths
wound; the Hebrew word signifies to strike to death. So here was a sudden
stroke, and a vehement stroke. (...) De homine occidit, perdidit.
It must needs at once wound both his mind and body, on a sudden, in a moment,
to be filled with sores, and covered with a scab; he saw no cause, he had no
prognostics which might induce a suspicion that his body was in such a
distemper; and so it looked the more like an immediate stroke from an offended
God. Every word has its weight and emphasis to add weight and anguish to this
affliction.

It may here be questioned, how Satan can be said to smite? And the same doubt
arises about this action of good Angels; one of which, as executioner of Gods
wrath smote of the Assyrians in one night an hundred and fourscore and five
thousand, Isai. 37.36. and another smote Herod, Act. 12.

I answer, how angels smite is a secret that we cannot express, nor fully
apprehend. For this and the like expressions of smiting, are sured to the
nature of the patient, not of the Agent; man being a material substance is
susceptive, or capable of smiting, or of a stroke: But an angel being an
immateriall substance, cannot smite properly, and he is therefore only said to
smite a man, because we cannot signify an effect or impression upon a body,
but by such a word. We know that in the plague or other diseases, when they are
immediately inflicted by Angels, man receives a stroke, and therefore is said,
to be smitten. But how the Angel gives that stroke or smites, is not known.
Man may feel himself smitten by an Angel, but how the Angel smites he cannot
understand. This word is fitted to the recipient not to the efficient cause of
the disease, or plague, or death.

(...) Vlcus ortum ex calore, sive igne inflammans corpus. Schind. Vox Hebraea
significat scabi em so dissimam, qualis est Elephantiasis. Vatab. in loc.
He smote him with boiles. The Hebrew word signifies an ulcer, a burning or an
inflaming ulcer, an ulcer that comes from extreme heat, or is extreme hot.
Satan did (as it were) kindle a fire in the bowels of Job, inflamed his blood,
and heated the humors of his body, from whence these boiles, these ulcers,
these sores did arise. The Grammarians express it, sometime more generally, A
filthy scab; sometime more particularly, An ulcer, a boil, sometime a
leprocie, it is indeed any foul disease breaking out upon the body.

The same word is used, Exodus 9.10. where it is said, that God smote the
Egyptians and the Magicians with boiles. It was one of the plagues of Egypt
that was inflicted upon Job; We need say no more of it then that, to show that
it was a grievous plague, a most painful sore: for it is added in that place
of Exodus, that the Magicians could not stand before Moses because of the
boiles.

(...) Vlcere pessimo.
Again, it is not only a smiting, and smiting with a boil; but there is an
Epethite added, he smote him with sore boiles, with an evil boil: among evils
some are worse, these were the worst kind of boiles. There are many sorts of
boiles, some are not so bad as others, though all are bad enough. Now lest any
should think Jobs boyles were not the most painful and malignant, a word is
joined to express it to the height: In the kind they were boyles, and (
intensive or) in the degree, they were the worst and most tormenting boyles.

Further in the fourth place, we know it is painful for a man to have one
boil, especially an angry burning one, a boil of the worst sort; but it is
subjoyned, he was smitten with boyles, from the sole of his feet unto his
crown. To be all over boyles, and to be all overrun with the most painful
kind of boyles, what a vehement pain must this be? From the sole of his feet
unto his crown, there is the extent of this stroke. Intensive, it was the
worst kind of boil, And Extensive, it was all over his body, no part free.

From the sole of his feet unto his crown. It is usual in Scripture thus to
signify the whole body? As Deuteronomy. 28.35. The Lord shall smite thee in the knees
and in the legs, with a sore botch that cannot be healed, from the sole of the
foot to the top of the head, or to the crown. And Isa. 1.6. when the Prophet
would express what a general blow the body politic had received from the
hand of God by his judgments, (so it is there to be understood) he says there
were wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores, from the sole of the foot even
unto the head. That is, the whole body politic, the whole State had at one
time or other, or all at one time received wounds, and blows, and strokes
from the hand of God. The extremes comprehend all the parts. That which
extends from one extreme, or utmost part to another, is extended through all;
from East to West, is all the world over, and from head to foot, is all the
body over. So then Satan smote him from the sole of his foot to his crown,
is, He smote his whole body.

All pains and distempers were gathered into this one malady, and all the
parts of his body were smitten, as if they had bin but one member: only his
tongue was untoucht, as is commonly observed, That it might be free to
blaspheme God, who had thus polluted the beauty and comeliness of his body,
who had thus imbittered the comforts of his soul.

Job being thus smitten, would surely look out for help. Though it be
exceeding sinful (with Asa diseased in his feet) to seek to the Physicians
and not to the Lord, 2 Chro. 16.12.
yet it is our duty to seek to the Lord and the Physician; To trust in means
is to neglect God, to neglect means is to tempt God. Doubtless holy and wise
Job walked in a path between these two; He neither trusted nor neglected
means, but used them; yet alas it was with Job, as it is said in the Prophet
concerning Ephraim and Judah, That when Ephraim saw his sickness, Hos. 5.13.
and Judah saw his wound, Then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King
Jareb: Yet could he not heal you, nor cure you of your wound. Though Job (as
they in their civil sickness) seeing his sickness and his wound, had sent to
this and that Physician. Their answer would have been, we cannot heal you nor
cure you of your wound. His disease was of the nature of those, which are
called, Opprobrium medicorum.
The Physicians Reproach: They could not discover any natural cause of it, and
therefore they could not prescribe any artificial cure of it. Physicians of
greatest value, in Jobs case, were Physicians of no value. And therefore to
show that either all had in vain attempted to cure him, or that none durst
undertake the cure; the Text says, That he took a potsheard to scrape
himself withal, and he sat down among the ashes.

These words are a further aggravation of Jobs affliction. When he is in this
manner smitten, smitten with boyles, smitten with the worst of boyles, smitten
with boyles all over, from the sole of his feet unto his crown: surely a man
in this pickle had need to have some good tendance and looking to; suppose the
Physicians and Chyrurgians could not cure him, yet they might ease him; if they
had plied him with Fomentations and suppling oils, if they had bound up his
soars with fine linen to mittigate and molifie them. If such applications and
attendance had not bin a refreshing to him, yet they would have bin a respect
to him; if they had not bin an allay to his pain, yet they would have bin an
honor to his person. But (as this 8th verse shows us) when the man was thus
nothing but sores, he had then nothing to help him: He might say (as David
afterward in a sad condition, Psalm. 142.4.) I looked on my right hand, and
beheld, but there was no man that would know me, refuge failed, or perished
from me, no man cared for my soul. When thus, Lover and Friend, Physician and
Surgeon, Wife and Servant were far from him, at least in duty and
affection; then he is forced to be both Patient and Physician, sick and Nurse,
he took him a pot-sheard to scrape himself withal. Poor man! He who was
lately in health, and the Greatest man in the East, being now sick, has
nothing left him but a piece of a broken pitcher.

There are four aggravations of his affliction in this.

The first is this, that he could get none to dress him, he was feign to do
it himself, says the Text. Neither Wife, nor Servants, nor Friends would
meddle with him. A hard case!

Then secondly, consider what a tool he had to do it with. He was left to be
his own Surgeon, and his dressing instrument was a pot-sheard. The word
signifies, sometimes a whole earthen pot, sometimes a broken piece of it, a
sheard as we call it. Here is no mention of fine linen and salves to heal, or
of oil to supple these soars, only a hard pot-sheard is the tool, and
scraping is all the surgerie. A hard case!

Thirdly, This intimates either, that his body was so loathsome by reason of
the disease, that he was loath to touch himself with his hands: As we say
proverbially in our Language concerning a deformed or filthy creature; A man
would scarce touch such an one with a pair of Tongs. So, as if Job had so
abhorred himself, that he was loath to touch himself with his bare hands, he
must take somewhat, and for want of a better, a pot-sheard to scrape himself;
He had not the heart (as it were) to touch himself, his disease was so foul,
that (as we say) it turned his stomach. This some give as a reason why he took
a pot-sheard, his body was so filthy that he was loath to touch it with his
hands.

Or as others give the reason, his boiles and soars did so overspread and
envenome his hands to the very nails, that it was a pain for him to touch
himself; his fingers were so sore, that he had scarce any use of them; this
constrained him to make a poor shift, even to take a pot-sheard to scrape
himself withal. What a lamentable case was this!

Fourthly, There follows yet a further aggravation of his affliction. If a man
be sick and full of sores, yet if he can get an easy bed or some soft place
to lie upon, it is a great comfort. You know how men will remove from bed to
bed, from place to place when they are distempered and in pain. But see where
Job lies, he has no Downe-bed nor soft pillowes, neither couch nor chair to
sit in, but

He sat down among the ashes. There are two expositions concerning this; For
his sitting in the Ashes, may be taken as a voluntary act, or as a necessary
act. Some take it as a voluntary act of Job, and that he did it Elective, when
he was in that condition, he went out and chose to sit among the Ashes; And so
his sitting among the Ashes was a note of his humiliation and abasement; As
often in Scripture, to sit down in ashes, is as much as to repent and humble
our selves deeply before God, to lie in the very dust dust; as it is expressed
of Job, (chap. 42.6.) when he had seen God, I abhor my self, says he, and
I repent in dust and ashes; Alluding to that custom of sitting in ashes when
they did repent. So you find in that solemn humiliation of the Ninivites, Jon.
3.6. that when word came to the King of Ninive (namely that Jonah had
prophesied the ruin of the City within forty days) he arose from his throne,
and he laid his robe from him, and covered himself with sackcloth and sat
in ashes. Christ upbraiding Chorazin and Bethsaida, tells them that if the
mighty works which were done in them had been done in Tire and Sidon, they had
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes, (...).
Math. 11.22. In great mournings, the Heathen used to sit in or sprinckle
themselves with ashes. As Homer reports of Ulysses after a Shipwreck, and of
others, whom Drusius has observed on this Text. Isa. 61.3. the promise is,
that God will give beauty for ashes, that is, they that humble themselves and
lie in ashes, shall have a happy and comfortable restoration. So that this act
of Job might be voluntary, and a gesture of repentance; sitting down among the
ashes, to humble and abase himself before God.

The Papists are superstitiously ceremonious in this point at this day:
Annually observing a day which they affect to call Ash Wednesday, on which they
sprinckle themselves with ashes, as a preparatory to their formal Lenton
Repentance. But we have not so learned Christ.

Secondly, We may take it for a necessitated act, that he was forced to this,
to go and sit among the ashes, (or as most from the Septuagint translate it,
to sit down upon a dunghill) and that in two respects.

First, In regard of his poverty and want, as if he were so bereft and
destitute of all outward things, that he had not a house to put his head in,
not any other conveniences to make use of; but was constrained to go out, and
sit upon the dunghill or amongst the ashes.

Secondly, Others rather conceive, that the necessity did arise from the
contagion and loathsomenesse of his disease, so that he was forced to go out
of doors, he filled the house with such a noisome smell.

Or he was forced to go out as a Leper; concerning whom the Law was
afterward, you know that they should be put out of the Camp or City; and it
was a Law grounded upon reason, Levit. 13.44, 4^.
and the common light of nature, though it had a spiritual signification, as
given to the Jews. The Septuagint say expressly, (...). Sept.
he sat upon the dunghill without the City, as Lepers were wont to be
according to the Law of Moses; and as we see executed in that case of Vzziah
the King, being a Leper he dwelt in a house by himself alone, and was cut off
from the house of the Lord, 2 Chro. 26.21.

But that Job sat either without the City, or upon a dunghill, is only a
conjecture, and besides the Text. Which way soever we take it, it is a great
aggravation of Jobs sorrows. Take it for a necessitated sitting in the ashes
abroad, it inferres, that either he was so poor, as that he had not a house to
be in; or that his disease was so contagious, that he could not be endured in
the house. Or take it for a voluntary act, that he did choose to sit in ashes,
it was an aggravation of his affliction; for then it notes that he was in the
lowest, in the saddest condition that can be imagined: sitting in ashes, being
an emblem of extreme sorrow, and never used but in times of greatest
calamity, public or personal.

So that here, every circumstance is an aggravation of Jobs affliction. He was
smitten by Satan, and he smote hard enough: he smote him, and he smote him with
boyles, he smote him with the most malignant kind of boyles; he smote him with
such boyles all over, from the sole of his feet to his crown; and when he was
in this condition, he had no Nurse, no Surgeon, no Physician to help him,
he was forced to take a pot-sheard to scrape himself: he had no soft bed
prepared to lie on, nor (as many have thought) house to be in; but out of the
City, or out of his house he must, and among the ashes, upon the dunghill. Lo
there he sits. Zenophons Cyr. Ad Principis effigiem quam Historiae fidem.
What one said of an exact History of a great Prince; That surely it was
written rather in theory as a pattern or picture of a Prince, then according to
the truth of a history. So we may say of this description of Jobs troubles;
That surely it was written rather as a studied pattern of man's sufferings, then
as an accomplished History of the sufferings of any man: yea who almost can go
so far in imagination, as Job went in real passion. But we will pass from
the description of his sorrow to some Observations upon them.

First, Here we see, That Satan if he be permitted, has a power suddenly to
aflict the body with diseases; And that is a power far transcending all the
power that is in man; Man is able to wound the body of his brother with a
material instrument, but all the Tyrants in the world cannot smite the body
with a disease, or command a man into sickness; Though God should say to them
as here to Satan, I give you leave, yet they must leave that to Satan: whose
help is sometime begged by envious wretches, who would kill their brethren
without a Sword, and vex them unseene. Man must have a weapon to smite, but
Satan can smite and kill without a weapon, if God say the word. Man can spill
the blood, but Satan can poison the blood: He can infect the humors, and taint
the spirits more subtly, more speedily then the most skillful poisoner in
Rome. We showed before how suddenly Satan can raise commotions in the air,
storms and tempests there; he can do the like in our bodies: for such are
diseases in the body as storms and tempests in the air. Storms make (as it
were) a confusion among the Elements, and are the distemper of nature: diseases
make a confusion among the humors, and distemper the constitution and spirits
of the body. It is said of the woman in Luke 13.16. that Satan had bound her 28
years; Observe in that, the power Satan has over the body, if God give him
liberty to exercise it; As cruel men can bind in chains, and cast the body
into prison for many years, so Satan can bind the body with a spirit of
infirmity as with a chain.

Secondly observe this, That health and strength of body are a very great
blessing: You see Satan desires to try Job by taking away this blessing last,
and he thought this would make Job curse God: you may see the value of it by
his desire to destroy it. Health is the Prince of earthly blessings. We say, he
lives miserably that lives by medicines, who to uphold nature is in the
continual use of art. How miserably then does he live, whom art and medicines
cannot restore to health, who is diseased beyond the help of Physic.

I might mind you likewise from this, to remember what frail bodies we live
in, even such, as have in them the seeds of all diseases. Sin indeed is the
seed of sickness and of death. And hence it is, that if the humors of the
body be a little stirred, they quickly turn to a disease: and this house of
clay is ready to dissolve and fall. What is the strength of the body, that we
should trust it? or the beauty of the body that we should be proud of it? We
see in Job, how quickly the strength of it is turned into weakness, and the
beauty of it into blackness. All flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse
thereof is as the flower of the field; The grass withers, and the flower
fades, Isa. 40.6.

And here likewise note this, you that enjoy health of body, whose strength yet
continues, and your selves are free from the bonds of any bodily infirmity:
while you hear of one smitten with a disease from the crown of the head to
the sole of the feet, consider what a mercy you have, who have no pain from
the crown of the head to the sole of the feet; who have not an aching joint,
nor pain so much as in a finger. It is like that many of you can say you have
this blessing, you do not know what pain in any one member means; look upon
a man, that knew nothing but pain, upon a man, that had not one member free;
and prize your blessing.

Such likewise who have pain and infirmities, in one or two, or more parts of
the body, may see in this spectacle cause to bless God, that they have any
part free. To have but one or but a few sores is mercy, sparing mercy, when we
behold another nothing but a sore. Indeed when one member suffers, (whether in
the body natural or mystical) all the members suffer with it. But compassion
is not so heavy a burden, as passion is. And as the sound members sympathize in
sorrow with those that are smitten, so they that are smitten, sympathize in joy
with those that are sound. The ease of one part mitigates the disease of
another, and it is an abatement of our troubles to see those whom we love in
peace. Two are better then one (says Solomon,) for if one fall the other may
help him up, but if both fall, who shall help. And if every member suffer,
there is passion in all, but compassion in none; much less support or help.

Thirdly observe: Job in this condition was left of all. Do not think it
strange if you be brought into such straights, as to be left alone, when you
have most need of assistance. Job was as a man friendlesse, Physitianlesse,
wifelesse, servantlesse, all forsook him. It is the comfort of the people of
God, that they know how to be alone, and yet can never be alone: though they be
left of all visible friends, yet they have an invisible friend who will visit
them, stay with them by day, and watch with them by night, for he has said, I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee. In the Greek there are five negatives
to affirm this, that God will not leave his, Heb. 13.5. And he that has him
alone, has infinitely more then all the world in one. When friends and
Physicians will not come near, when wife and children take their leave or
stand afar off, when servants hold their noses, being not able to bear the
stinch and ill savor that comes from the body, yea, when a man comes to be an
abhorring to himself, yet at that time God delights in him; Christ at that
time imbraceth him, and takes him in his arms, and kisseth him with the kisses
of his lips, which are better then wine, yea better then life. Job was never so
near God, so in the bosom of God, as when no creature in the world would so
much as touch him; Job was never so beautiful in the eye of God, as when he
had nothing but boiles upon him.

Fourthly, I may present you with Job as he was upon his Ashhill in want of all
things; from thence be admonished, That the children of God, his dearest
servants may come to uttermost outward extremities. When a man is among the
ashes, then he is at the lowest: what can a man be less then that? The
Apostles were made as the filth of the world, as the offscouring of all
things, as sweepings and off all which are cast out upon the dunghill; So was
Job in the sense of many interpreters. They who are of most worth may be used
as if they were worth nothing. Job was a pearl though upon a dunghill. They
who were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghils, says Jeremie in his
Lamentation for Jerusalem, chap. 4.5. We may say, They who are brought up and
clothed in better then scarlet, even in the robes of righteousness, and in the
Garments of Salvation, may yet be brought to embrace a dunghill. There is no
judging by Appearance; No man knows love or hatred by all that is before him
(or upon him) Eccles. 9.

Lastly, look upon Job sitting in the ashes, as a voluntary act, and then
observe, (which is of much concernement and use for us now in regard of the
present condition we are in.) That as the afflicting hand of God does increase
upon a people, or upon a person, so ought the humiliation and repentance of
that person or people to increase. When the hand of God was upon Job before, he
rent his Mantle, he shaved his head, these were acts of great humiliation; but
now Job having a nearer and a deeper affliction upon him, humbles himself yet
more. Then he fell upon the ground, but now he sits among the ashes. Greater
afflictions call to greater humiliation. We ought not only to be humbled when
God afflicts, but to be humbled in a proportion to the affliction; As it is
in regard of sin committed, Great sins call for great sorrow; And as it is in
regard of mercies received, Great mercies call for great praises: so, Great
troubles call us to great humiliations; and still the greater troubles are, the
greater our humiliation ought to be. This is one way of accepting the
punishment of our iniquities, and of improving present evils for our
everlasting good. Consider whether this be not the work of this day.

We have had the hand of God upon the Nation in lesser judgments heretofore,
we have had warning-peeces shot of amongst us; but now we hear the report of
murthering-peeces every day. Diverse years God made war upon us with the
sword of the Angel, by which thousands have fallen in our streets: but now God
has put a sword into the hands of men. The former sword was a favor compared
with this, Those wounds, a kiss compared with this. Both David and experience
resolve it thus. 2 Samuel 24.
Many of our dear brethren are slain and fallen by the sword, their blood has
been spilt like water, and their bones have been scattered as when one cleaves
or cutteth wood upon the earth. The spoiled cry to us for bread, the sick and
wounded for help and healing. Many towns have been plundered, many Matrons and
Virgins have been ravished, many families have been scattered, many wives and
children deprived of their husbands and parents, many parishes bereft of
faithful Pastors, some of our dwellings turned to ashes; And is it not time
for us; not only to rent our garments, but to sit in ashes? do not these things
call us to eat ashes like bread, and mingle our drink with weeping. Is it not
time for us not only to write, but to act a Lamentation, and to say, For these
things I weep, mine eye, mine eye runs down with water? There is one thing
yet, which may and ought to be a Lamentation to us, beyond all our own
sufferings, namely this, God is dishonored, his name is blasphemed, his people
are reproched. The enemies strike this sword in their bones, A scornful
inquiry, Where is now your God? Psalm. 42.10. Should not tears be our meat day
and night (as they were David's) while they say continually, Where is now your
God? Psalm. 42.3. our not sitting in the ashes for such things as these will
bring us unto ashes; and if we will not sit upon the dunghill of our sins in
humiliation, our sins will bring us, and our land unto a dunghill of
desolation. In this day, as of old by his faithful Prophet ( Isai. 22.12.)
does the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness,
and to girding with sackcloth; And not only to these, but to Jobs posture of
sorrow, sitting in ashes; the voice of the rod calls to this: the voice of
the trumpet, heard daily in our streets, calls to this. We have cause to cry out
as the Prophet Jeremie in his fourth chapter, ver. 19. My bowels, my bowels, I
am pained at the very heart, my heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my
peace, because thou have heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, and the
alarm of war. And because the sound of the trumpet among us, like that on mount
Sinai, Exodus 19.19. does not only sound long, but also louder and louder; It
becomes us, not only to continue our mourning, and our crying unto God, but to
cry louder and louder. If we increase not our humiliations, God will yet
increase our judgments: if we will not sit in ashes, he will bring us to
ashes, and punish us yet seven times more for our sins.

Wherefore receive the counsel of the Apostle James, in these your
afflictions, Be afflicted, and mourn and weep: let your laughter be turned to
mourning, James 4.9, 10.
and your joy to heaviness. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and
he shall lift you up. God lifts them up who cast themselves down; and if (in
this sense) we be afflicted, we shall not be afflicted. Christ has purchased,
Free Grace bestows deliverance; and we receive it, when we return, repent and
believe.

JOB 2.9, 10. Then said his wife unto him, Do thou still retain thine
integrity? Curse God and die.

But he said unto her, Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks:
what? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?
In all this did not Job sin with his lips.


WE have already considered out of the former parts of the Chapter Jobs second
affliction: First, in the occasion of it; secondly, in the causes of it; and
thirdly, in the manner of it, together with those aggravating circumstances
which made his sorrows out of measure sorrowful. And now we must look upon
that Jewel among the ashes, and consider what befell him there: These things
make the fourth part of the Chapter, namely the consequents of his affliction.

These consequents are three: 1. His wives unseemly and sinful counsel, verse.
9. 2. His wise and holy reply, verse. 10. 3. His friends visit to comfort him,
verses 11, 12, 13.


First, we will discuss his wives unseemly and sinful counsel, Then said his
wife unto him, etc.

There are two Questions raised concerning Jobs wife.

1. Who she was? 2. How it came to pass that she was spared, when all his
outward comforts were removed?
For the first, in a word. It is the opinion of many among the ancient Jews,
that Job lived in the time of Jacob the Patriark. And that he took to wife
Dinah Jacobs daughter, but I leave the Rabbis to prove that, if they can. Why
she was spared in the time of so general a calamity, may bear some further
inquiry. For seeing a wife is the chiefest of creature comforts, and the very
reason why God at the first did institute that relation, was that man might
have a help meet for him: it may seem somewhat strange why Satan, going about
to bring upon Job trouble in its perfection, Genesis 2.20.
should leave him that, which is the perfection of all outward comforts, a
wife. What were Jobs Oxen, and Asses, and Sheep, and Camels to a wife? And what
were his children to a wife? When Adam had not only such a number of cattle,
but all the cattle and riches in the world in his possession, and under his
dominion, God saw him defective till he provided him a wife, a wife was the
complement of all. How then comes it to pass, that when Satan would afflict
Job to the uttermost, he leaves him his wife?

To clear this, before we come to examine the words that she spoke. The Jews
which are the Authors of that aforementioned opinion, that his wife was Dinah,
tell us (to lengthen out the dream) that she was spared for Jacob, her fathers
sake. It is a truth, That children do often fare the better for holy
Forefathers. It is no mean privilege to be born of those that are in Covenant.
As God visits the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate him, so he shows mercy to thousands of
those that love him, etc. Exodus 20.5, 6. but in this place we have no stock to
graft this truth upon, but a mere imagination. I pass on.

Secondly, some conceive that his wife was out of Satan's Commission, that he
had nothing to do to meddle with her, she being comprehended under that clause
of exception in the first Chapter, verse. 12. All that he has is in thy power,
only upon himself put not forth thine hand; his wife (they say) was a part of
himself, according to that Genesis 2.24. And they (viz. the husband and the wife)
shall be one flesh. So that Satan could not smite her, but he must smite Job
too; therefore she was exempted, say they, and set beyond the reach of Satan's
stroke.

Though this may have some show of wit in it, and somewhat of reason too,
referring unto the first part of Jobs affliction; yet there is no show of
either in reference unto the second, where Satan had a Commission to afflict
his body, his flesh and his bone; for then she also (take it in the sense
before) was comprehended under the Commission of Satan, being (though not as
Eve from Adam, bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, yet) according to the
law of marriage given to all, One flesh with him, Genesis 2.24.

Therefore in the third place, that which I conceive and agree with others in
for the true reason why she was spared, is this. That she might be a further
instrument of her husbands affliction. Satan meant to make use of her for his
own purpose, to drive on the main design; and whereas she should have been a
help to her husband, Satan employes her against her husband; this was his aim,
and therefore she was spared. Chrysostom.
Hence one of the Ancients calls her the strongest and fittest weapon, with
which Satan did assault, the choicest Arrow in his Quiver, by which he wounded
the soul and spirit of Job. She that should have had her hands busied in the
washing, suppling, curing, and healing of his wounds, smites him with her
tongue, a piercing and a poisoned instrument. The rib was not smitten, that it
might smite the head. Another compares her to a Ladder, Greg. Moral.
by which Satan hoped to scale this impregnable tower, that death might creep
in at the window of his ears, by hearing and consenting to her sinful
persuasions.

Seeing then Satan spared Jobs wife, that she might be the instrument of this
additionall affliction; which most conclude to be as the sting of all his
afflictions.

First note this, That Satan's mercies have always somewhat of cruelty in
them. Plane nullae. Jun. in loc.
He spares the wife, but it was that she might further vex the husband. His
mercies are like the mercies of wicked men, Their tender mercies are cruel,
that is, they are no mercies at all, Prove. 12.10. There is a punishing mercy,
and there is a sparing cruelty among men. Such are Satan's sparings ever lined
with cruel and bloody intendments.

Secondly observe, That the greatest outward blessings may prove the greatest
outward afflictions. A wife is made a cross, a snare. Our greatest danger may
be from our helper; And that which was given for our good, may be to us an
occasion of falsing.

Satan can make use of our friends to do us hurt by. He tempts not only by
himself, but by creatures: And not only by creatures that are at a distance
from us, but by those who are nearest in relation, and by those, most. He can
make a servant, a child, a wife isntrumental for our ruin. In this sense, we
may apply that caveat of the Prophet ( Jer. 9.4.) Take ye heed every one of his
neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother. That also of Micah, Trust ye not in
a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide: keep the doors of thy mouth from
her that lies in thy bosom. Yea, Quisque, eti^ sibi caveat, ne fiat organum
diaboli.
take heed of thy own bosom, Satan draws a party from our selves, against
our selves.

Thirdly observe, Satan is very subtle to make choice of such instruments as
may do his work most effectually. Of all those that were about Job he could not
have picked out any to have carried on his plot so powerfully and with such
probability of success. First, in regard of her neernesse, she had
opportunity to come unto him, and freedom to improve that importunity. Saul
knew what he did when he married his daughter to David. I will give him her
(said Saul) that she may be a snare to him, 1 Samuel 18.21. Politic marriages
are usually made for temptation, not for comfort: snares are tied fastest, with
a false lovers knot.

Secondly, the motion or persuasions of a wife, whether to good or evil are
very taking upon a husbands heart: We see it in the first wife that ever was,
she by persuasions overcame Adam unto sin, she was the devils agent for the
undoing of her husband, and the world. Ahab was very wicked, but he had a
tempter in his bosom. But there was none like unto Ahab, who did sell himself
to work wickedness, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up. 1 Kin. 21.25.
Unparalleled wickedness is ascribed to the provocations of a wife. When a
Prince has given up his affections, and his conscience, into the hands of a
malicious, wanton woman, he will quickly sell himself to such wickedness as
will be his own trouble, and entitle him (like king Ahab) the troublers of a
kingdom.

Thirdly, Satan knew that a wound is deeper by how much the hand is nearer that
strikes it. Afflictions press us most when they are from our friends. What
thou my son? said Caesar in the Senate. What thou my wife? Is thy hand upon me
in my own house, might Job say? The Prophet brings in one questioning, What are
these wounds? And Christ answering, Those with which I was wounded in the house
of my friends, Zech. 13.6. The height of enmity is thus expressed, A man's enemies
shall be the men of his own house, Micah 7.6. This caused David to complain so
bitterly, Psalm. 55.12. It was not an enemy that had done this, but it was thou
my friend, and my equal, and my companion: The friend wounded more then the
sword. So might Job complain, It was not an enemy, it was not a Sabean, or a
cruel Caldean that spoke this, but it was thou my equal, my friend, my
companion, and which is more then all these, My wife, my second self.

I grant that in one sense, the wounds of a friend are precious: Precious are
the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful. Precious are
the wounds of a friend, when a friend does wound with holy reproof; but when a
friend wounds by sinful counsel, or solicitations unto sin, those are
pernicious wounds. If that which is light in us be turned into darkness (as
Christ speaks) how great is that darkness? Matthew. 6.
So if that which should be our comfort be turned into our sorrow, how great is
our sorrow? Therefore we see why Satan spared the wife, that she might be an
instrument, and a most effectual instrument, either to prevail upon him, or
to vex him in case she did not prevail. Doubtless Job did not feel so much
smart, when Satan smote both flesh and bone, as now, when his flesh and bone
smote him. Thus we see the cruelty of Satan's mercy: He spared Jobs tongue, and
he spared Jobs wife; he spared his tongue that Job might have a member free for
an instrument of sin, in cursing God; and he spared Jobs wife, that himself
might have an instrument to bid him sin, Curse God and die. This was her
counsel.

And his wife said unto him, Do thou still retain thine integrity? Curse
God and die. Her words consist of two parts: 1. A sharp and a scornful
exprobration. 2. A wicked and sinful direction.


Her scornful exprobration in these words: Do thou still retain thine
integrity?

Her sinful direction in those words: Curse God and die.

Do thou still retain thine integrity? Words quick and short. Tantum narrat
scriptura, quae mulieris virus and viri antidotum continent.
It is probable we have here only the compendium, or brief of that discourse
which passed between Job and his wife. We have only the poison and the
Antidote, as a learned Expositor hints it upon this place.

The Septuagint have taken the boldness (if they be not falsified) to set down
his wives speech at large, and join it in with the body of the Text, thus: A
long time being spent his wife said unto him, How long will thou hold out,
saying, Behold, I wait yet a little while expecting the hope of my Salvation?
For consider, thy remembrance is blotted out from the earth, even thy sons and
thy daughters, the pains and travel of my womb, whom I have brought forth in
vain. Thou thy self sit here in the rottenness of worms, abiding all
night in the open air. I poor handmaid wander from place to place, from
house to house, looking when the sun will set, that I may take a little repose
from the pains and sorrows which now oppress me; but utter thou some word
against the Lord, and die. The Greek Authors comment upon these words, as upon
the text it self. But I shall wave them wholly. Neither shall I stay here in
the Explication of the words according to our reading out of the Hebrew,
because we have handled them at the third verse of this Chapter. In the
testimony which God gives concerning Job; where he speaks thus to Satan, Have
thou considered my servant Job, how that he is a perfect man, etc. and that he
still holds fast his integrity? God spoke it to the praise of Job, still he
holds fast his integrity; his wife speaks it to his reproach, and upbraideth
him with it, Do thou still retain thine integrity? The words spoken by both
are the same, but the sense and intent of the speakers is quite different. God
speaks them in honor to Job: his wife speaks them in contempt of Job, and
therefore she forms them into a question, a cutting kind of speech, Do
thou still retain thine integrity? As if she should say, What? art thou so
senseless and so stupid, so mad and sottish, to go on in this course still?
what have thou got by it? where are thy earnings? what is the advantage of
holiness? or what is the profit of integrity, that thou hold and huggest
it so fast? Do thou still retain thine integrity? This I conceive is the
sum of the question, it is an upbraiding, a reproaching question; and from
that we may observe,

First, That those things which commend us most to God, usually render us most
contemptible before the world. Do thou still retain thine integrity? She
slighteth him, and scorneth him for this, whereas God highly commends him,
speaks it to his praise, That which is highly esteemed amongst men is
abomination in the sight of the Lord. Luke 16.15.
And that which the Lord esteems highly, man abominates.

Secondly this, It is the endeavor of Satan and his instruments to persuade,
that the profession of holiness is vain and unprofitable. Satan has taught
wicked ones, and they (like forward Scholars say it without book,) say it
openly, It is a vain thing to serve the Lord; Satan would feign infuse this
cursed principle into the hearts of Gods own people, and make them believe,
their faith is also vain. Do thou still retain thine integrity? Come take a
little counsel at the last, work like a wise man, will thou hold a thing thou
can get nothing by? Take it on my word, thou can not thrive this way, thou
can make nothing of it, what do thou mean to go on madding in such a
course as this? Thou shall never get bread by it to put in thy head: no nor
water to wash thy hands. All thou gettest by it, will be a knock, a rod upon
thy back, a dishonor upon thy name. And will thou still be so strait-lac'd,
and hold fast thy integrity.

Thirdly, observe further from Satan's intendment in putting such words as these
into the mouth of Jobs wife. That his great design is to take advantage from
outward troubles and ill successes, to discourage the hearts, and weaken the
hands of Gods people in holy duties. That was his project, quite to discourage
Job, and from the ill success he had in the service of God, to get him put off
his Livery, and give over his service: It is the course that the world,
instructed by Satan (as here Jobs wife was) still holds with the people of
God. Their language is, Why are you so precise, why so not, etc? Do you not
observe you get nothing by your prayers? nothing by your fasting? nothing by
your holiness? All that you have got, you may put in your eyes, and see never
the worse. Show us some of your gains, what have you got? where are your
deliverances? where are your victories? where is your Salvation? you have
prayed till you are almost undone, you have fasted till all is almost lost,
things are worse then they were, will you still go on in these duties of
fasting and praying? of humbling and seeking? of waiting and believing? This is
the language of Satan, this the divinity of Hell: And I shall answer it in one
word. It is far better to die praying, then to conquer blaspheming. Such
doctrine may stop up a hypocrites mouth, and weaken his heart from duty. But it
will more open the mouths, and enlarge the hearts of those who are sincere.
Will the hypocrite always call upon God, will he delight himself in the
Almighty? says Job. No, he delights in God no longer, then God gives him
worldly delights, nor calls upon God any longer, then sensible blessings are
sent in unto him: If God stays his hand, he stopps in duty; he quickly takes
out Satan's lesson, and will no longer hold his integrity. But Grace shows us
wages in the work: A godly man has his fruit in holiness, and therefore
though he receives no outward fruit, he still holds fast his integrity. But
what would Jobs wife advise him to do; in case he should let go the holiness
of his life: That follows in the next words; having endeavored to take him
off from one course, she directs him to another.

Curse God and dye. Here is the second part of her counsel, cursed counsel
indeed. Curse God and dye. It is the same Original word which we have opened
before, and met with two or three times already. In the proper signification it
notes blessing, and so the word is by many expositors rendered in this place,
Bless God and dye; Mr. Broughton translates it so in one entire sentence,
Do thou still retain thine integrity, blessing God and dying. We must
therefore examine both sides, that we may find out more fully the sense of
these words.

Some take the words in a good sense, and some take them in an ill sense. Some
take the words in a good sense, Bless God and dye, And others who translate,
Bless God and dye, do yet expound it to an ill sense.

First, Some make a good construction out of these words of Jobs wife,
affirming that she gave her husband wholesome advice, and so they render the
words, Bless God and dye to this sense. What? do thou still stand upon
terms with God? will thou not humble thy self? should thou not rather
Bless God? that is, pray unto God, humble thy self and seek his face; so to
bless, signifies to pray, to make supplication. Thou see in what a doleful
condition thou art, therefore bless God, make thy humble prayer before God,
and die, that is, desire him to take thee out of this miserable world, to
release thee of thy pain; beg that he would cut the thread of thy life which
(to appearance) is the only remedy of all thy troubles; death will be thy best
friend: Thou may die with more ease, then live as thou do. Thy life is a
continual death, it were better for thee to die once, then to die daily.

Mr. Beza is very strong in this opinion, excusing, yea acquitting Jobs wife,
in making this motion to her husband. He grants indeed that she being deceived
and over-wrought by Satan, did work strongly for him, yet denies that either
the counsel in it self or in her intendment was evil. He lays the whole
matter thus. That she observing her husbands silence under the hand of God in
these great afflictions, suspected that he stood too much upon his own
integrity, that he was too well opinionated and conceited of his own worth; or
that this proceeded from fearednesse of conscience, and insensiblenesse of Gods
dealing, and his own condition: and therefore she advises him to consider,
that surely God was very angry with him, to consider, that God had brought all
this evil upon him to humble him; and should he now defend his own
innocence? should he either be silent and not acknowledge his sin, or stand
upon terms with God in defense and justification of himself? Do thou
persevere in those high thoughts of thy self? will not all this bring thy
stomach down? what? will not thy uncircumcised heart be humbled? Do thou
still retain thine integrity? do thou still lean upon that broken reed,
thy own integrity? Bless God, that is, confess thy sins and acknowledge thy
transgressions. (Indeed confessing of sin is a blessing of God: it is a giving
of glory to God, and our giving glory to God is our blessing of God; Josh.
7.19. Give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him.) Thus
bless God, that is, confess thy sin, and so prepare thy self to die in a
holy manner, seeing thou art past hope of life, address thy self piously for
death. Thus he; Teipsum ad mortem sancte obeundam comparato Beza.
and all upon these grounds; First, because he could not be persuaded that a
wife, the Governesse of such a holy family as Jobs was, a wife, the companion
of such a holy man as Job was, should be so full of the Devil, so wicked to
speak the Devils words, with the Devils heart. And secondly, because Satan
himself could not be so senseless as to believe or hope, that such desperate
counsel could ever take upon Jobs heart: And therefore he conceives that she
advised him only, as any one would a dying friend, or a malefactor condemned
and ready to be carried to execution, yet persisting in his sin, or unlamenting
the wickedness which procured that sentence. Her error says he, was only
this, that she judged him wicked, because he was thus smitten, and that he
trusted upon his integrity, because he held it fast: whereas indeed Job looked
for no good, but out of the hand of Free Grace, and accounted his very
Integrity but dung, to the righteousness and redemption of the promised
Messiah.

But (with humble respect to so reverend an Author) there are two reasons
strong against this Exposition, in my apprehension, which I shall propose and
submit to the readers judgment.

The first is this, It had been quite against Satan's design, that Jobs wife
should give her husband good counsel: For it had been so far from being an
addition to Jobs affliction, that it had been a great abatement of it to hear
his wife speak so holily, and administering such wholesome counsel in the
substance of it, though mistaken in the application of it to him. And surely a
heart so composed as Jobs, was under all these pressures, would have shaped out
such an answer as this. My dear wife, I thank thee for thy care and counsel,
thou have a holy jealousy over me, that I am not in such a posture of spirit
as becomes a dying man. Though there be an error in thy advise as applied to
me, yet I take it as an error of love, and thy reproof though misplaced, is
very acceptable and precious unto me.

But (which makes my second reason,) He reproves her for it, and tells her
plainly, Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks, Whereas if that
had been the meaning of her words, she spoke as one of the wise women; like a
wise woman indeed. It is an act of wisdom and of love both to suspect ill of
another, when that suspicion leads us only to advise him for his good. It is an
excellent thing when jealousies are improved into faithful counsels. Surely
then Job had never numbered her with the foolish women, if that speech of hers
had imported only an humble preparation for his approaching death.

In the second place, Some who translate the words, Bless God and die, do yet
expound them as very sinful counsel; though the words sound fair, yet the
sense is made very foul. These understand them as an Ironie, as if his wife
scoffing and jeering her husband had said: Do thou still retain thine
integrity? bless God and die, thou shall have enough of thine integrity, take
thy fill of blessing of God; thou art all for blessing God and holding fast thy
integrity, go on if thou will, and bless God still, and see what thou shall
get by it; thou shall have no other reward but a wound, thou shall receive no
wages of this Master but death, bless God and die; repeat that speech now,
which you used under the first affliction; Repeat again that beloved maxim,
with which you seem to be so much delighted, The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord; you shall see, it will not
fright death away, or be any security from the grave^ you thought when you
spoke those words first, that they would have prevented a second trouble, and,
that God who saw you take the former stroke so kindly at his hands, would not
strike you again: But you see, good words are no defense against blows. And
if thou should be so foolish, to fly for refuge to the same submissive
language, experience would quickly teach thee, that as before it could not
protect thee from this soar disease, so now it would be no protection from the
arrest of death. Bless God and die.

Some strengthen this sense, from the form of speaking here used, which is
imperative, Bless God and die: She bids him do it, I, do it and spare not.
Such expressions import a mixture of scorn, as Lam. 4.21. Rejoice and be glad
O daughter of Edom: Here is a grant, if not a command, a seeming direction if
not an injunction, to rejoice and be glad; what is given as the occcasion of
this joy? The Cup also shall pass thorough unto thee; What cup? A cup of
blood, a cup of trembling: And is this to be rejoiced in? Surely in such joy
the heart must be heavy, and the acting of such mirth is sorrow: yet he bids
her rejoice; as if he had said, be as merry as you can, yet the cup shall pass
thorough unto thee, thou shall not escape. Eia quaeso! nunc cum vix respirare
possis repete tuum, Sit nomen Domini benedictu^ and postea morere.
So Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer
thee, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes,
(do so) but know, that for all these things God will bring thee into
judgment. Thus here, Bless God and die, Go on I pray, take thy fill of
blessing God, bless him as much and as long as thou will, yet I see the image
of death in thy face, die thou shall. Mr. Broughton seems to incline to such a
meaning in his translation, do thou still hold thine integrity, blessing God
and dying; As if she had said, will thou be such a fool, to go on blessing
God and dying, blessing God, while he is killing thee: which was indeed Jobs
wisdom, and his resolution a little after, Though he kill me yet will I trust
in him.

So far of those who translate the text, bless God and die, with that
twofold exposition upon it; I shall now consider what sense we are to make out
of these words as we translate them, and as they are indeed most generally
translated. Curse God and die: This reading of the text, seems most answerable
to Satan's design* which being to provoke Job to curse God, it was most proper
to suit his wives spirit with such thoughts, and to put his own words into her
mouth, Curse God and die: This thread is of the same spinning with the former,
and carries Satan's plot home upon his own principles; She speaks this
adversaries mind as fully as he could himself, when she bids her husband,
Curse God and die.

But could Job die when he listed, that she bids him curse God and die? What
means this language?

Some interpret her meaning to be this, die by thy own hand, destroy thy
self; as sons of Belial use to say, go hang thy self, murder thy self,
make an end of thy self: As God by these plagues is thy Judge, so be thou (to
end the matter) thy own executioner. Or as others; Curse God, that so he may
be provoked to take thee out of the world quickly. Ne prius animum exhales,
quam multis probris in Deum congestis dolori tu^ satisfeceris. Pined.
Or curse God and die, ease thy heart somewhat, and give it vent by breaking
out against God in blasphemies, take this revenge upon him, and then let him
do his worst, curse God though thou die for it.

Lastly, curse God, That so the Magistrate taking notice of it, thou may be
cut off by the Sword of Justice. We know blasphemers were sentenced to death
without mercy, by the Law of Moses, and it is not improbable that the light of
nature might carry those Nations, to as high and severe a revenge, against that
highest sin. We know Socrates was adjudged to death by the Athenians (as their
natural divinity taught them) for an injurious or dishonorable speech
concerning their gods. I conceive her counsel, curse God and dye, had some of
these intendements in it; The best of them is bad enough, and so bad, that it
renders this Objection against them all.

It is objected, That surely, any of these carry too high a strain of
wickedness for Jobs wife; surely she could not imagine, much less have the
boldness to offer, such advice to her husband.

I answer first in general, A good man may have a very bad wife. A husband
cannot infuse holiness, or make his wife good: Marriage does not change the
heart; Marriage with Christ does, but not marriage with a Christian, or the
holiest man that ever lived. Therefore that reason is not cogent.

Secondly, this speech, and a holy person are not altogether inconsistent:
possibly Jobs wife was a good woman, though actually she spoke thus wickedly.
Diverse of the Jewish doctors have an opinion, that it was not Jobs wife that
spoke, but the devil in her likeness. I shall leave that among their other
dreams. It is conjectured by others, (though it were not the devil that spoke,
personating his wife, yet) that it was the devil speaking in or by the person
of his wife, as he spoke in or by the serpent, Genesis 3. Or as persons really
possessed of the devil, who speak Satan's words, and do Satan's works, not their
own. Some (I say) carry it thus, that she was for that time not only acted, but
actually possessed by the devil, and so spoke the devils language: One of the
Ancients is express to this purpose, Chrysostom* Dixit ad eum uxor ejus,
uxorem dixit dixisse^ed vere diabolus dixit, Sic namque and olim ait. Dixit
serpens ad muli^rem, serpentem dixit dixisse sed non serpens dixit, sed
diabolus qui per serpentem locutus est, Origin.
These are the devils words, not the woman's words: which another illustrates by
that in the third of Genesis, where it is said, The serpent said unto the
woman, but it was the devil that spoke unto the woman by the serpent; so here
it is said, His wife spoke unto him, but the truth is, it was the devil spoke
unto him, in and by his wife. And if so, put the language into the worst
exposition given, or give a worse (if truth will bear it) and it will be no
wrong to such an Orator. I believe we cannot expound the words to a higher
sense or strain of wickedness, then Satan could speak.

But we need not make Satan himself the speaker, and yet clear the matter
too; though we neither say as the Jewish doctors, that it was the devil
personally, taking the shape of Jobs wife, or as those Christian Fathers, that
the devil did actually possess her; yet we may say (and so salve the
difficulty) that she was mightily over-powred, and acted by the temptation of
Satan, to be an instrument of temptation, in this gross manner against her
husband: Though she were not acted as the Serpent was, in whom Satan spoke to
Eve; yet we may well say, she was acted as Eve by whom Satan spoke to Adam: Eve
spoke the devils mind, being prevailed upon by his temptation, to persuade her
husband to eat against the command of God; and Jobs wife overcome by a like
temptation attempts the persuasion of her husband to curse God.

For as it is possible for one that is good, to fall into the grossest and most
blasphemous temptation himself, so it is possible for one that is good to be
made an instrument of such temptations unto others. We may see an instance
near, if not fully reaching this assertion in the Apostle Peter, who hearing
Christ foretelling his sufferings, takes him aside and began to rebuke him
saying, Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not be unto thee, Mat. 16.22,
23. Peter acted Satan's part, in this, against his Master, though unwittingly,
yet so wittily, so to the life, that he got his name by it, Christ said to
Peter, get thee behind me Satan: It was Peter's tongue, but Satan tuned it.
Isaac said of his son Jacob in Esaus dress; The hands are the hands of Esau,
but the voice is the voice of Jacob. Christ perceived here Satan's counsel in
Peter's words, he saw the wicked spirit through the clothing of Peter's flesh;
and therefore rebukes the Organ, under the title of the chief agent. Get thee
behind me Satan. Now as Peter, though a holy man and full of good intentions to
his Master, yet spoke the Devils mind and language so fully, that the Devil
himself (as to that purpose) could scarce have mended it. So likewise Jobs
wife might be a godly woman in the maine, though abused and misled by Satan,
she thus excited her husband, in the grossest construction those words can
bear, to curse God and die.

There is somewhat in the Text, which may give us a hint of this: that though
she spoke this, yet Job esteemed her a good woman; For, observe Jobs answer to
this advice. What does he say? He does not say, Thou wicked woman, thou
abominable wretch, why do thou give me such counsel? All that he says is
this, Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks. Observe it, he does
not call her foolish or wicked woman, but, thou speak as one of the foolish
women; As if he should say, How now wife? what words are these that I hear
from thee? thou do not speak now like thy self, I use to hear other
language from thee, thou and I have had other kind of conference, and I have
received other kind of counsel from thee then this; Whence is it that thou art
so unlike thy self? where are thy words seasoned with salt, Non eam stultam
vocat, sed in eo sermon stultarum mulierum mores imitatam, quasia seipsa
desecerit and quasi in alienos mores and ingenium abjerit. Sanctius in loc.
which have so often ministered grace unto the hearers? thou art degenerated in
manners and corrupted in thy speech, thou speak now as one of the foolish
women: Intimating, that she used to speak wisely and discreetely, or as
Solomon describes the virtuous woman ( Pro. 31^26.) that heretofore she opened
her mouth with wisdom; and now she spoke only as a foolish or wicked woman;
He does not say she was one: one act is enough to assimilate, but it is not
enough to denominate. Thus much may serve to evince, that though we take the
words in that worst sense, yet it does not necessarily infer, that Jobs wife
was a wicked, an ungodly woman, which is the objection against that Exposition.

From the words translated, Curse God and die, and thus expounded, we may
observe;

First, That Satan is restless and unwearied in this design to bring the
people of God, to think ill and speak ill of God. It is that he labored for,
in the carrying on of this whole business, concerning Job; and every stone is
turned, every way tried to accomplish this proposed end.

Secondly, In that he persuades Job by his wife, when he was in this woeful
condition, to curse God and die, Observe, That Satan would persuade us to ease
our selves of troublesome evils, by falling into sinful evils. Job was
grievously diseased, you see the medicine and the cure that Satan prescribes,
Go sin, says he, curse God and die; whereas one of the least evils of sin,
is worse then all the evils of suffering that can befall us. All sorrows are
more elegible then one sin. It has been rightly taught us from Antiquity,
that the lowest degree of a lie (because sin) is not to be made or admitted (if
that medium could be assured so noble an end) for the saving of a world. What a
father, and teacher of lies then is Satan, who directs many a poor soul to
save it self from, or help it self out of a small affliction, by adventuring
upon some great transgression.

Thirdly, Curse God and die, It is sinful to wish our own deaths, though we
are under pains more painful then death. It is sinful to desire death
absolutely, we may desire it with submission to the will of God; To live is an
act of nature, but to be willing to live because God wills it, is an act of
grace: And as it is our holiness to do the will of God while we live, so it
is our holiness to be content to live, while we suffer according to his will.
On the other hand, to die is an act of nature, but to die because God wills it,
is an act of grace: Christ is said to be obedient unto death, because he died
in contemplation of Gods decree, and in conformity to his good pleasure. To die
thus, is the duty of a Christian, and the crown of all his obedience. Satan
would have us live as we will, and die when we will; he tempts us as much to
die when we list, as to live how we list. Satan puts Job upon it peremptorily,
curse God and die, desire or procure thy own death. To wish d^^th that we may
enjoy Christ, it is a holy wish, but yet we must not wish that neither,
absolutely. The Apostle Paul, Phil. 1.23. desired to be dissolved and to be
with Christ, yet you see how he qualifies and debates it. To wish for death,
that we may be freed from sin, is a holy wish, but yet we must not wish that
absolutely neither, we must refer our selves to the pleasure of God, how long
he will let us conflict with our corruptions and with our lusts, with this body
of death and sin, which we bear about us. But to wish for death, because our
lives are full of trouble, is an unholy wish; God may, yea and has as much use
of our lives, in our troubles as in our comforts: We may do much business for
God in a sickbed: We may do God as much work when we are bound hand and
foot, in a prison, as when we are at liberty; passive obedience brings as much
glory to God as active does: therefore we must not wish for death, especially
not with an absolute wish, because we are under troublesome evils. And if it be
sinful to wish for death, how wicked is it to procure or hasten death, to pull
down our house of clay, with our own hands, because we are under troublesome
evils.

Fourthly, Observe further, Satan would persuade that death is an end, at least
an ease, of outward troubles; Would thou have an end of thy troubles and of
thy sorrows? Curse God and die, here is the remedy. We say indeed of some
remedies, that they are worse then the disease; but I am sure, this is. Death
to ungodly ones, it is so far from being an end or an ease of their troubles,
that it is to them (as Christ speaks in another case) the beginning of
sorrows, the entrance to eternal death, and the very suburbs of Hell. Yet,
how many does Satan persuade (when they are in Jobs case, in great extremities)
that death will be the cure of all their troubles.

Fifthly, Observe, That Satan would make men willing to die, when they are most
unfit to die. You see what preparation Satan directs Job unto, he bids him
curse God and die. Would not Job, think you, have bin in a fit posture, in a
fit frame for death, when he had bin cursing God? Repent and die, pray and die,
humble thy self and die, believe and die, take fast hold of Christ who is our
life, our way to life and die, are the counsels and voice of the holy Ghost,
but Satan's language is curse God and die, sin and die, be impenitent and die,
blaspheme and die. And it is an experienced truth, that oftentimes they seem
most willing to die, who are most unfit, most unready for death; you shall see
some men venturing, yea casting away their lives without fear or wit, the
whole visible business of whose lives, has been nothing else, but a working
out of their own damnation, without fear or trembling. They as it were give
diligence all their days, to make Hell and reprobation sure, and yet go out
of the world as if they were sure of Heaven. This is Satan's preparation, curse
God and dye.

Lastly, Note this, That the holiest person is liable to the most blasphemous
temptation. One would have wondered that Satan should ever have ventured to
suggest such a gross thing as this, to so holy a man as Job. But Satan where
he has been often foiled, grows impudent; and will then suggest such things,
not because he hopes to prevail, but because he resolves to vex such as he
cannot overcome. He troubles as much and as many as he can.

So much of the counsel which Jobs wife gave him, reproving him as foolish and
over-credulous in holding fast (that unprofitable thing) his integrity; and
advising him to be worse then mad or out-ragious, in cursing God and dying.

Let us now consider Jobs holy and wise reply in the tenth Verse.

But he said unto her, Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks;
what? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?
These words contain Jobs reply, wherein two things are considerable. First, A
reproof. Secondly, A refutation.

First, He rejects her counsel with a sharp and wholesome reprehension, and
then he refuteth her counsel by strong and solid reason. The reprehension in
these words, Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks. The reason of
his reprehension in those which follow, What? shall we receive good at the hand
of God and not evil?

To begin with the reprehension, Thou speak as one of the foolish women. In
the Hebrew, Woman is not expressed, it is only a Feminine, (...)
as one of the foolish ones: we translate it, foolish woman; That word comes
from Nabal, which signifies properly a thing fallen off like a dried leaf, or
blasted withered fruit, without life, without strength, without sap and
moisture, exhausted and killed, thorough excess either of cold or heat: and so
by a Metaphor, it notes any one without the sap or juice of wisdom,
goodness and honesty; such a person we call, a saplesse person. Or it
signifies one that is vile, and base and low, one that has a base, withered,
low, fallen spirit, a spirit fallen below all noble or holy resolutions. Nabal,
is such a fool, as has his judgment and understanding faded, and corrupted
in regard of any holy principles, though he may be wise in regard of natural
principles. Such the Prophet describes, they are wise to do evil, but to do
good they have no knowledge, Jer. ^.22. Hence the Latin word (Nebulo) which
signifies a Knave, is by good Etymologists derived from the Hebrew Nabal;
because such are dull-heads in goodness, and witty only in wickedness. Such
was he. 1 Samuel 25.25. Nabal is his name, and folly is with him; That proper
name is the same with the Appellative here, that is the Masculine, this the
Feminine, Thou speak like a Nabalesse: We find the word often used elsewhere
to signify wicked, worthless and vile persons, Psalm. 14.1. The fool has
said, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.6, 21. at the 6th. verse, O foolish people and unwise, do
ye thus requite the Lord? And ver. 21. They have provoked me to anger by those
that are no gods, and I will provoke them to jealousy by them which are not a
people, and move them to anger with a foolish nation; by them which are not a
people, by a foolish nation: A foolish people deserve not the name of a people.
Look upon this word in the abstract, folly is wickedness; and to work folly,
is in the language of the Scripture, as much, as to work wickedness, to work
the greatest wickedness. Hence it is sometimes translated villainy, Ier. 29.22,
23. The Lord make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the King of Babylon
roasted in the fire, because they have committed villainy in Israel. And
throughout the Book of Proverbs, the fool and an ungodly man, a wiseman and
a godly man, are (Synonomaes). words signifying the same thing. Thus Job
reproves his wife, thou speak as one of the foolish women, like one of those
who have no wisdom, no goodness, not any sense or sap of goodness in them.
But who were these foolish women, at whom he aims in this comparison? that is
not clear; some conceive he intends the women of Idumea, Thou speak as one
of these heathen women, these Idumeans, I have heard indeed such language from
them, when things have gone amiss with them, I have heard them cursing their
Idols, cursing their gods, I have heard them rail at fate, fall out, and
wrangle with fortune; Thou speak like one of them. Thou take thy pattern
in this from the custom of the Heathen, who use their gods coursely, when they
think they have but course usage from their gods. If their gods be angry, they
will be angry with and revile their gods. Thou speak after the rate of these
foolish women; Thou did never hear such doctrine in my family, or among
those who fear and love the true and ever-living God.

Job you see is now somewhat warm in his speech. Job had endured much, and all
his sufferings hitherto had not stirred any passion in him but that of sorrow,
as we saw in the latter end of the former Chapter; Not an angry posture, not an
angry expression all along; but now, that God, and the ways of God are
concerned, Job can hold no longer: this speech of his wife, cast dishonor upon
both, and now passion begins to stir, he cannot forbear her though his wife,
Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks. Observe, That

Passion becomes us in the cause of God; Our Lord Christ teaching his
Disciples the true meaning of the Law, tells them, Mat. 5.22. He that is angry
with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment; but he
that is not angry when there is cause, especially when there is such a cause as
this, he likewise is in danger of the Judgment.

Iusta ira matter est disciplinae.
Secondly, Job is not only angry with her, but he reproves her, Thou speak as
one of the foolish women. It is lawful sometimes to express holy anger and
passion by sharp reproves. Christ who was meekness and humility it self,
yet when he has to deal with Pharisees, he can call them a generation of
vipers, painted Sepulchers, blind guides, an adulterous generation, children of
the Devil: Anger can hardly be silent, and that anger is admirable which
speaks and sins not. He that knows not how to be angry, knows not how to
love. And he that knows not how to reprove with love, knows not how to be
angry.

You may discern love in Job, mingling with and moderating his reproof. Job
rebukes his wife, but it is with the spirit of meekness. First, He does not
speak positively or downright, Thou art a fool, but comparatively, Thou
speak as one of the foolish women use to speak: That seems one mitigation
or allay of this reproof; yet I confess such speaking by way of similitude,
has often in it the force and intent of a direct assertion.

Another thing observeable for the meekness of Job, is this. He does not fall
out with the whole Sex, and say, ye women are foolish, and ignorant, and
impatient; But thou speak as one of the foolish women. He does not charge
the whole Sex, he knew there were wise women, as well as foolish, such Solomon
describes, Pro. 31.26. She opens her mouth with wisdom; and we know Abigail
the wife was wise, and her husband was Naball, a fool. Job does not lay it
upon women in general, he falls not out with all, because he knew there were
some foolish ones, and because he saw his wife in that act, imitating those
foolish ones.

There is a third thing mitigating the sharpness of the reproof; Job does not
fall out with, or disgust the ordinance of God, because his wife spoke thus; he
says not, who would marry to be yoak't with such a one as you? It is enough,
to make one forswear marriage, to have or hear of such a wife; better be in
any condition then in a married condition. How often do husbands discover this
folly? if their wives displease them, presently the ordinance of God
displeases them, who would be married? It is very sad, when man's miscarriage,
makes us question, or disrelish the institution of God.

In the fourth place, Job is not only, not angry with the ordinance of God in
general, but he is not angry with the special act of Gods providence, in his
own particular choice. There are many will say, if their wives trouble them, I
wish we had never seen the faces one of another, we may curse the hour we
ever met together. Jobs spirit was far from this; he was indeed angry with
his wife, but he was not angry, because this woman was his wife: He does not
reject her, because she was bad, but labors to make her better. To convince
another of folly, is the readiest way to make him wise. Thus we see, though
there were sharpness in the reproof to search the wound, yet there was none
to exasperate the person: This reproof was an exact compound of love, and
anger, of zeal and knowledge.

From the ground of her counsel, and this reproof compared together, we may
Observe; That it is an argument of a low and of a foolish spirit, to judge of
any man's condition, by Gods outward dealings with him: For, this was it, that
she grounded her counsel upon; seeing his outward condition, she thought him
as a miserable man, and therefore advises him, to curse God and die. Thou
speak (says he) as one of the foolish women. It is an argument of folly and
madness, to judge a man miserable because poor, or unhappy, or unhealthy.

Again observe, That unworthy and low thoughts of God, argue a low and a
foolish spirit. Thou speak as one of the Nabalesses? Thou have such low
thoughts of God, and speak so poorly of God, that at present I cannot but
number thee among the fools; for as there is nothing ought to be so high in
our thoughts, as God and his ways; so we ought to have high and reverent
thoughts of God and his ways, whatsoever he does with us: though we change,
yet he and they change not; God is the same, and his service the same for ever.

Lastly, Observe, That to do or speak wickedly, is to do or speak
foolishly. Sin is the greatest folly in the world, sin is a declining from the
rule of right reason, both from spiritual reason and from natural, Lo they
have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Jer. 8.9.
True wisdom, is to walk by a right rule, to a right end. While we sin, lust
(in some degree or other) is the rule, and self is the end. In both which we
join hands with folly, and are the companions of fools; Thou speak as one
of the foolish women, etc.

From the reproof it self, we come to consider the reasons of the reproof.
Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks, what? shall we receive good
at the hand of God and not evil? Here is the reason upon which he grounds his
reproof, Shall we receive good at the hands of God, etc. The Hebrew runs
thus in the letter, (...) A radice (...) Accepit manibus vel animo.
shall we receive good from God? etc. The emphasis of the words carry it thus,
shall we receive good with hand or heart at the hand of God, and shall we not
in the same manner receive evil? The word Cabal, whence this is derived,
signifies the receiving of a thing with the hand and with the heart; that is,
to receive gladly and thankfully, as it were to kiss the hand and receive a
thing: Or to receive a thing with much reverence and veneration. Caballa
doctrina, per manus accepta and ore tenus ab alijs ad alios transfusa. Merc.
Hence the Jews call the Doctrine which is received and transmitted from hand
to hand, namely their traditionall Doctrine, Caballa: That which the word
Tradition imports among the Papists, the word Caballa imports among the Jews;
Then the meaning of Job is, That good and evil are to be a like received and
entertained as from God; that is, they are to be received with the same
reverence and chearfullnesse. We receive good things chearefully, thankfully,
reverently, we kiss the hand and take them. And shall we not receive evil?
The words do not refer to the act of receiving, but to the manner of
receiving. We shall receive evil whether we will or no, but shall we not
receive it? namely so, and so, as we receive good, cheerfully, thankfully,
reverently, respecting God and his ways of providence toward us. And then the
question may be resolved into this affirmative conclusion; That look in what
manner we receive good from the hand of God, in the same we ought to receive
evil Or thus, Where we have our good, thence we must have our evil. One and
the same hand moderates and dispenses both. Wherefore, shall we receive good
and not evil?

Shall we receive good? Some interpret the good here to be meant, of the good
of the next life; shall we be in expectation of everlasting good? shall we be
in expectation of enjoying Christ, and seeing the face of God for ever in
Heaven? shall we be at least in hope, of a crown of glory, laid up in store
for us? and shall we not be willing to receive evils, and digest troubles, to
bear the cross a few days while we are here? I (says the Apostle Paul, Romans
8.18.) reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared to the glory which shall be revealed. Shall we have glory in the eye
of our faith, and shall we not endure a little trouble in the eye of our sense?

But rather, by good here, we are to understand the good things of this life,
shall we receive good? sc. outward comforts and prosperity, and shall we not
receive evil? from whom? Evil from the hand of God.

What Evil? Sooner shall the Sun send forth a cloud, then God send forth any
evil properly taken; therefore evil here, is only afflictions, as
contradistinct to the good before named: So the sense is, shall we receive
comforts at the hand of God, and shall we not receive afflictions? Afflictions
are evil, not moral evil, Afflictiones malae per se non sunt, sed malae
ta^tum voca^tur, quia tales vulgo aestimantur.
not natural evil: but they are called evil; either first, because they are
usually esteemed so, or secondly, because they are so to sense, or thirdly,
because they are many times abused, and so in the event they prove evil unto
us: lastly, they are often evil negatively, that is, they do us no good, but
they are never evil positively in themselves, or relatively, as they are
received from God.

We may take notice (for the further clearing of this passage) of the form of
the argument. It is proposed by way of question or expostulation, as we render
it. What? shall we receive good? etc. There is a great deal of force in the
manner of proposing; questions are full of quickness and spirit. Job does not
only give his wife a Logical reason, but a Rhetorical reason, words with
life, to convince her by; What? says he, shall we receive good? etc. As if he
had said, this were an absurd thing, once to imagine; a blind man may see this,
it is so plain, and a fool may understand it; the reason lies all in sight;
That if we receive good from the hand of God, we must at least with patience
receive evil.

From this reason in general, Observe, That reproves come then most strongly
upon the heart, when they are backed with reason. Some reprove with rage and
not with reason, with passion and not with wisdom, they reprove with their
wit rather then with their spirit. Job mixes reason with his passion, and gives
her an argument, as well as a rebuke.

More particularly, from the matter of this reason, Observe first, That good
and evil are both from the hand of God. Give me neither poverty nor riches,
says Agur, Prove. 30.8. both are the gift of God. Poverty is Gods gift as well
as riches. If God do not give us poverty, all the (...) will not make us
poor. I form the light and create darkness (...) ^^ke peace, and create
evil: I the Lord do all these things, (...) 45.7. The same Prophet teaches
us, that these two are equally the p^aitve of God, and such a prerogative, as
equally distinguishes (...) from all Idols and false gods. Show the things
that are to com^ ^eafter, that we may know that ye are gods: yea do good or
do e^ that we may be dismayed, and behold it together. No creatu^^ has ever
answered this challenge, or ever shall, Isa. 41.23. Creatures do good and
evil, as ministers of Gods will, not as masters of their own. Good of every
kind, and all kinds of poenall evil come forth from God. Indeed, God usually
conveyes these to us by the hand of man; but it becomes us to receive them as
from the hand of God. Much, both good and evil, comes to us at the second
hand, but we ought to take it as from the first. This truth well wrought upon
our hearts, will make every good we enjoy better, and every evil we feel,
not so bad. This latter branch shall be cast into a second Observation,

Which may be this, To look on evil as coming from the hand of God, will
quiet the heart in bearing of evil. Shall we receive good at the hand of God,
and not evil? And this in two respects: First, because of the sovereignty of
God, he being supreme Lord, may do what he will: and his will being the
supreme rule of Justice, he can do no wrong. This notion of God assures us,
that whatsoever we receive from the hand of God, is just and right; hence the
inference is natural, If God send evil, I must receive it quietly, for he
sends it justly. Secondly, because of the assured faithfulness, and love and
goodness of God to his, even when he sends them (which are all he sends) this
sort of evils. As if Job had said, any thing is welcome that comes from one
that loves me, and has done me good, as God I know does, and has done often,
and will do for ever. Will not a man take a nominall evil kindly at his hand,
from whom he has received much real good: While we look only upon creatures
and what they do, the burden of trouble is intolerable; but as it comes
from God, from a God that loves us, we cannot but receive it in love.
Afflictions coming from the creature, are as the rod of Moses upon the ground,
a biting, a stinging serpent: but considered in the hand of God, they are as
the serpent in the hand of Moses, a rod to correct, and a staff to comfort us.
David we know fled from Saul in fear of his life; envious, bloody Saul had
threatened to kill him. In his flight, David meets with his beloved Jonathan,
and says unto him (1 Samuel 20.8.) Jonathan, if there be any iniquity in me,
slay me thy self, for why should thou bring me to thy father? He would die
rather by the hand of Jonathan, then by the hand of Saul, death from the hand
of Jonathan who loved him, was sweet; whereas from Saul, it had bin a bitter
cup indeed. Take another instance. Elijah flies from Iezabel, 1 King. 19.4.
and why does he fly from her? She seeks my life, says he, to take it away.
Thoughts of this pressed him so hard, that when he came into the wilderness
(the text says) he sat down under a Juniper tree, and requested for
himself that he might die, and said, It is enough now O Lord, take away my
life. But Elijah; if thou be so willing to die, why do thou fly from
Jezabel? she would have given thee thy wish presently, and satisfied at once,
her own malice, and thy longing: I but death from the hand of a Iezabel was his
fear, not his desire: He could welcome it from the hand of God, but not from
the hand of a spightfull woman. But you will say, death is from the hand of
God, though it come by the hand of the creature. True, but as every good we
receive, is so much the more sweet, by how much the more we see of the hand of
God in it, and less of the creature; so every evil is so much the more
bitter, by how much we see less of God, and more of man in it. If God will
take away my life, I am pleased, but I beg deliverance from the hand of
Iezabel: He fled for his life for fear of Iezabel, but he calls upon God to
die. We may exemplify this in Christ, Ioh. 18.11. The cup which my Father has
given me, says he, shall I not drink it? It is poculum charitatis, a grace
cup to poor sinners, a cup though bitter in it self, though mixed with the
wrath of God as a judge, due to sinners, yet tempered and sweetened with a
Fathers love everlastingly assured unto me, I cannot but drink it, it comes
from my Father.

But it may be objected, that I lately assigned it as one reason, why Satan
spared Jobs wife; namely, That she who was his nearest friend, being made an
instrument of his affliction, the affliction might be more afflictive and
vexatious, And David complains most of a friend, that smote him, Psalm. 55.

I answer, when love turns to hatred, and friendship to unfaithfullnesse, when
former kisses (like that present one of Judas) are changed into treachery; this
is very wounding and grievous indeed. But when God strikes his friends, he is
their friend still, when he afflicts, it is in faithfulness, ( Psalm. 119.75.)
He is good to us, when he sends us evil, and he sends us evil, for our good.
To be smitten by a friend whose very smiting is friendship, and who heales us
by wounding cannot be offensive. Hence David's choice, Let us fall now into the
hands of the Lord (for his mercies are great) and not into the hand of man, 1 Samuel 24.14.

Hence a third Observation from the strength of the argument and reason, may be
thus framed. To consider that all the good we have, descends from God, makes it
both reasonable and equitable, that we should bear evil quietly when he is
pleased to send it. Shall we receive good and not evil? says he, It is
Solomon's advice, (Eccles. 7.14.) In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in
the day of adversity consider. What shall we consider? Consider this, and
mark it well, that as the day of prosperity was from God, so the day of
adversity is from God likewise; for it follows, God also has set the one
over against the other. Therefore seeing God has set one over against the
other, thou must take the one well, as well as the other; at least thou must
bear the latter as patiently, as thou did receive the former joyfully. They
who have shared with others in gains, think it but equal to share with them
in losses; they set the one over against the other. And so must we in respect
of Gods dispensations toward us. If we set our present wants, over against our
former fulness, our present sorrows, over against our former comforts, our
present sickness over against our former health, our present war, over
against our former peace; If we thus set the one over against the other, our
accounts will be balanced, yea our former receipts of good, will be far
greater, and out-ballance our present sufferings of evil. Especially if we
remember, that we never deserved the least part of the good we have received,
but we have deserved more then all the evil that we suffer. We may say as
Ezra did, (Chap. 9.13.) Thou our God have punished us less then our
iniquities; and we may say as Jacob (Genesis 32.10.) Lord we are not worthy the
least of all thy mercies.

This argument may be of great use to us of this Nation, in these times of
darkness and fear. What? shall not we receive evil from the hand of God,
who have received so much good? we have received many years of peace from God,
foure-score years of peace; shall we receive so many years of peace, from the
hands of God, and shall we take it ill, if we receive some years of war? We
have received many years of plenty, shall we take it ill if we should have
some years of scarcity? We have had the Gospel many years, every one
sitting under his Vine, and under his Figtree; what, if now, we hold the
Gospel standing upon our guard, or marching in the field? what if we hold it a
while, sitting in Tents, and standing under our displayed banners?

Fourthly, Forasmuch as the same word, is applied here to express the act of
the mind in reference both to good and evil, Observe. That outward evils are
to be received in the same manner, and with the same mind that good things are
received with. Yet a caution is to be given in with this. There are two sorts
of outward evils or sufferings: Sin is the cause of some sufferings, and
grace is the cause of other sufferings, either grace acted or grace to be
tried. Now we are not to receive the evil of suffering, whereof sin is the
cause, with the same mind as we do good; joy and cheerfulness does not
become such evils. But when our sufferings are caused by grace, either of
those ways, then it becomes us to rejoice. The Apostle says more, Romans 5.3.
We glory in tribulation. And again, (2 Cor. 6.10.) as sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing. The sorrow of godly men is like the joy of the wicked: only in
appearance; Paul had only a shadow of sorrow, as sorrowful; but his joy was
substantial and continual, always rejoicing, though his outward estate cast
up, amounted but to this, poor, and having nothing. The reason is, because God
is the same in all variety of our estates: God loves as well when we are poor,
as when we are rich, yea as well, when himself smites, as when he heales. He
is as good to us when we receive evil, as when we receive good: therefore if
God be the same, surely we ought to be the same too, and take it as kindly at
his hands, when we are impoverisht, as when we are inricht, when we are sick,
as when we are in health, when we are in prison, as when we are free. Shall
present evils make us either insensible of, or unthankful for past mercies?
Shall present troubles be as a grave wherein to bury the memory of all our
former comforts? shall (as it was in Pharaohs dream) the lean kine, and the
blasted ears of corn, eat up and devour the fat kine, and the full ears?
The Heathen Philosopher censures him for a fool, Ingratus est, qui injuriam
vocat sinem voluptatis, stulius qui nullum ^ructum esse pucat bonorum, nisi
praesentium, qui non in praet^ritis acquiescit, etc. Sen ad Polyb. c. 29.
Basil. Orat. 11. de patientia.
who thinks there is no benefit in benefits, nor blessing in blessings, except
they be present. And he brands him as unthankful, who accounts the end of a
mercy, an injury; or thinks he is wronged, when free gifts are not continued.
If a Heathen saw so much obligation, in the past benefits of a man; Christians
should see it much more in the past mercies and blessings of their God.
Wherefore, to conclude this point, with the counsel of the Ancient. Remember
the heaps of good things received, weigh the good and the evil together: Thou
shall never find any man's life, at all times alike; It is the privilege of God
alone to be without changes: but if thou grievest at what is present, take
comfort in what is past: Now thou mournest, but heretofore thou did rejoice:
now thou art in want, but thou have had abundance. We have a saying. It is a
miserable thing to have been happy: But a godly man is happy in the midst of
all his misery: he may say with undaunted Luther, Let him be miserable that can
be miserable, I cannot. He that has not a God to loose, nor a soul to loose,
cannot be miserable, whatsoever he looses; while Christ is safe, a believer
has no reason to be unsatisfied. Thus we have discus'd Jobs answer, and have
found it full of wisdom and of holiness; like those words of the Wise, which
the Preacher says ( Eccles. 12.11.) are as goads, and as nails fastened by the
Masters of Assemblies. Jobs words were as goads by the sharpness of reproof,
to awake and quicken lazy drones; they were as nails by the piercing efficacy
and strength of reason, to confirm and fasten wavering minds.

We have the word and warrant of God for this, in that high Elogium, or
commendation given him at the conclusion of all.

In all this did not Job sin with his lips. Job reprooves his wife for
speaking so, and he refutes what she had spoken; in both he hits the right: Now
In all this did not Job sin with his lips.

This is the same testimony for the matter, and almost the same in words, with
that, given of Jobs victory, in the close of the first days battle; and
having explicated them in that place, I shall but briefly touch them here. In
all this did not Job sin with his lips.

We see in general, the holy Ghost gives the victory to Job. Satan is foiled,
his plot fails, the weapons of his war-fare are all broken and successelesse;
all his fiery darts are either quenched or beaten back upon himself: Job
stands like a mighty rock, or like a house built upon the rock, unshaken,
unmoved: He that is held up by everlasting arms, shall stand fast for ever. In
all this Job sinned not.

The words refer to what was past; For Job afterward did fail and sinned
with his lips; through vehemence of pain, and heat of disputation, he spoke
some things rashly, though nothing blasphemously: So he confesses, Chap. 42.13.
I have uttered things that I understood not. But in all this, so far as Job
had gone, he had not sinned with his lips. As Samuel after many victories and
deliverances, sets up a stone or a pillar with this inscription, Eben-Ezer, The
stone of help, saying, Hitherto has the Lord helped us (1 Samuel 7.12.) So here
the holy Ghost does (as it were) erect a pillar, raise a monument of Jobs
complete and glorious victories over Satan, Thus engraven, Hitherto, In all
this Job has not sinned. Yet you may remember, that such speeches concerning
the Saints, are to be understood in a qualified sense, not in an absolute
sense. For, who can bring a clean thing out of that, which is unclean?
Perfection out of imperfection? Not to sin, is here our duty, and should be our
endeavor, it shall be our reward in Heaven. On earth we are said not to sin,
when we desire not to sin; as has bin more at large showed upon those words of
the last verse of the former Chapter, In all this Job sinned not, nor charged
God foolishly. There read the point handled more distinctly. For the opening
of these words, note only this; that when it is said, In all this Job sinned
not: There is more to be understood, then is expressed; for Job did not only not
sin, but he overcame, and triumphed gloriously over Satan: he did excellently,
and he spoke excellently in all this; So then, these words carry the sense not
only of a bare acqittall, but of a high approbation: In all this Job sinned not
with his lips.

With his lips. Some of the Jews infer from hence, that he sinned in his
heart; because it is said, he did not sin in words, they conceit there was some
irregularity in his thoughts. Surely if his heart had been disordered, his
tongue would have been disordered too; for out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks, therefore it is rather an argument that his heart was free
from sin, because his tongue was.

In all this Job sinned not with his lips. That is, he did not murmr, or
repine, or blaspheme; these are the sins of the lips.

Observe first; Not to sin, is the highest and truest, the most honorable
and lasting victory of all. This victory God himself applauds, the holy Ghost
will cry you up for strength and valor, when you come off from a temptation
untouched; you shall be recorded for it among Christ's worthies, In all this Job
sinned not.

And secondly, To govern the tongue under great and sore afflictions, is a
high act of grace: It is spoken as matter of wonder; In all this Job sinned not
with his lips. Moses, you know, was a meek man, yet he was so put to it, that
he spoke unadvisedly with his lips; He opened his lips so unadvisedly, that God
shut him out of the temporal Canaan for it: rash words cost him dear. David
was a very holy man, and very careful over his tongue, Psalm. 39.1. I said I
will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. I will keep my
mouth with a bridle: And knowing (though as the Apostle James teaches us, we
put bits into the Horses mouths that they may obey us, we can turn about
their whole body, Jam. 3.3) that no bridle of his putting could keep his
mouth; he puts this work into the hand of God, praying with all earnestness;
Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth: keep the door of my lips.
Notwithstanding all this, we find him sinning with his lips more then once,
Psalm. 73.13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
innocence. And again, Psalm. 116.11. I said in my have all men are liars. Job
had the pre-eminence in this, he sinned not with his lips, no not when he was
afflicted and smitten with bitter words: He that offends not in words (says
the Apostle James) is a perfect man; he is a perfect man indeed, who can rule
his tongue, and so keep the door of his lips, as that he offends not either
by silence or by speech. The lips do offend both ways, negatively as well as
positively, by speaking, and by not speaking: Sometimes silence is a loud
sin, not speaking is to some, on some occasions, a crying sin; Job sinned not
with his lips, either by being silent when he should speak, or by speaking
wherein and when he should be silent. And so much concerning this second
consequent of Jobs affliction; His wives sinful counsel, with his prudent and
gracious answer; sharply, yet moderately rebuking; strongly, yet lovingly
convincing her folly: In and by both, faithfully endeavoring at once to
discover and cure her error.

The third consequent of his affliction now follows, namely the visit of his
friends, described in the three last verses of this Chapter, which leads us
into the body of the Book, with all the debates, disputes and arguments held
and maintained with much acuteness of wit, and strength of reasoning between
him and these three, his friends and visitants.

JOB 2.11, 12, 13. Now when Jobs three friends heard of all this evil that was
come upon him, they came every one from his own place: Eliphaz the Temanite,
and Bildad the Shuite, and Zophar the Naamathite; for they had made an
appointment together, to come to mourn with him and to comfort him.

And when they lift up their eyes afar off, and knew him not, they lifted up
their voice and wept; and they rent every one his mantle, and sprinkled dust
upon their heads toward Heaven.

So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days, and seven nights, and
none spoke a word unto him: for they saw that his grief was very great.


THese three verses, contain the third general consequent of Jobs second
affliction. In the division of the Chapter, we called it his friends visit. In
which visit we may here observe;

First, The number of the visitants. They were three. Now when Jobs three
friends.

Secondly, We have here the names of these visitants. Eliphas the Temanite, and
Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite.

Thirdly, We have the occasion of their visit: And that was the report of all
the evil that was come upon Job. Now when Jobs three friends heard of all this
evil, that was come upon him, then they came.

Fourthly, We have the ground of this visit. It was a mutual agreement, or a
compact made between them, so says the text, For they had made an appointment
together to come.

Fifthly, We have the end or the intendment of their coming, what they aimed
at, in visiting Job. And the end is expressed in the Text to be twofold.

1. To communicate with him in his sorrows. 2. To communicate unto him their
comforts. First, To mourn with him. And secondly, To comfort him.
The former of these two ends, viz. their mourning with him, we have largely
set down in the two latter verses; they put that end into act presently, as
soon as they came, they fell a mourning with him. And we may observe 5.
distinct acts of Jobs friends, solemnly condoling or mourning with him.

The first act is this, They wept. And to show that it was no ordinary weeping,
the Text says, They lift up their voice and wept.

The second act of their mourning was, their renting of their Mantles, And they
rent every one his Mantle.

The third act was, the sprinckling of dust upon their heads, and the
sprinckling of dust toward Heaven, which was another aggravating circumstance
of their sorrow.

The fourth act was, their sitting down with him upon the ground, seven days,
and seven nights.

The fifth act of their mourning with him, was their silence, And none spoke a
word unto him.

The Cause or the reason of this solemnity in their mourning, the reason of
these 5. Acts, but especially of the last, of their silence, is given us in the
latter words of the verse. For they saw that his grief was very great,
therefore it must have great sorrow: and great silence, to wait the fittest
season, for the administering of counsel and consolation. Thus for the parts
and resolution of the words, contained in these 3. verses. I shall come to the
opening of the particulars.

And when Jobs three friends. The word which we translate (friends) springs
from a root which signifies to feed a man's self, or others, or to eat
together, (...) A rad ce (...) Pavit, tam se quam alios.
as Sheep eat together, and so from the same word, a Pastor or a feeder of
Sheep is derived, Psalm. 21.1. The Lord is my Shepherd and feeder. And by a
Metaphor it is translated, for a friend: because friends do usually feed
together, eat and converse together; So David describes a friend, Psalm. 49.9.
My familiar friend that did eat of my bread. Jobs visitants are thus expressed,
his friends or familiars: The word sometimes, notes only, a friend at large, or
any neighbor; So in the Law, Exodus 20:16. Thou shall not bear false witness
against thy neighbor, or (it is the same word) against thy friend: there it is
taken in a large sense, for a neighbor, that is, for any besides thy self, to
whom offices of love are due, as Christ expounds it, Luke 10.30. But usually,
it is put strictly, for a special friend, as in Deuteronomy. 13.6. when he speaks of
inticers to Idolatry, If thy friend (says he) who is as thine own soul;
there is the same word, and he shows by a circumlocution, whom he means by
such a friend, namely such a one, who is as thine own soul; one that lies in
thy bosom, and is as near and dear to thee, as thy self. I suppose here in
this place, Jobs three friends, were not friends at large, but intimate and
special friends, or (as we use to say) bosom friends. And therefore when it
is said, Jobs three friends, we are not to understand it, as if Job had but
three, as if these were all the friends Job had; but amongst all his friends,
these carried away the name, these were the chief and choice; Jobs three
friends; As it is said concerning David's Worthies, 2 Samuel 23, David had many
Worthies, but there was a first three, a chief three among them all. So here,
Job doubtless had many friends, a large catalogue of friends, but in these you
have the top of his friends, the chief hree, the first three: These three
special friends came to visit Job, to mourn with him, and to comfort him.

The occasion of this visit, presents it self next, When these three friends
heard of all this evil that was come upon Job. When they heard of it. The
troubles of Job were noysed all the Country over, yea into strange Countries.
Two things are swiftly carried about upon the wings of fame, and poasted about
by reports: First, The sins. Secondly, The afflictions of godly men. If they
fall into any sin, it will be heard of all a Country; it may be all a Kingdom
over. It shall be told in Gath, and published in the streets of Askelon.
Again, if they fall into any great affliction, every one descants upon it, and
many will pass deep censures. It becomes matter of wonder, that men eminent
in godliness, great professors, such as have held forth the name, and upheld
the truth of Christ, that they (I say) should fall into great afflictions, is
reported, discoursed, admired all a Country over.

Nihil est magis praedicabile quam boni hominis ruina.
There is nothing that is more talked of, then the trouble that befalls godly
men; When the three friends of Job heard of all this evil that was come upon
him.

When this report about Job came to them, they came to Job. They came (says
the Text) every one from his own place. The word Place, is often used in
Scripture, to signify a Country, a City, or a Region. Now here it is
conceived, that the place from whence they came, was not only the place where
they dwelt, but the place where they governed. It is frequently asserted by the
Jewish Doctors, with whom the Septuagint agree, and most of the Jesuits are in
it to; that these three friends of Job were Kings, either Reges or Reguli, such
as had the government of those Countries where they lived. Quod autem dicunt
Hebrei totidem juisse reges est ex au dacia illis familiari, Beza.
Beza rejects this as a Fable, and tells us that this opinion has no footing
or foundation in Scripture, but is grounded only upon that usual boldness of
the Jewish Doctors. But whether they were Kings or subjects, whether they came
from their private dwellings, or from the places of their dominion, needs not
trouble us. This is clear, that they were great men, eminent persons in their
Country: and the disputes which follow, testify that they were men of very
great wisdom and understanding, according to all the learning of those times.

These three friends of Job are here set forth by name, by a double name. By
the name first of their persons. Secondly, by the name of their Country, or of
their Family. For that is a question, whether the additionall name be derived
from the Country where they dwelt, or from the Family out of which they were
extracted.

Eliphaz the Temanite, he is the first. We read Genesis 36.11. that Esau begat
Eliphaz; that Eliphaz was the eldest son of Esau, and Eliphaz begat Teman.
This Teman, descending from Esau, is supposed to be the Father or the Ancestor
of this Eliphaz, from whom he is called Eliphaz the Temanite, and so Temanite,
is a note of the Family from whence Eliphaz descended. It is usual likewise in
Scripture, to give such additionall names from the Countries or places, and so
Eliphaz the Temanite, may be from Teman, of which we read often in Scripture;
Jer 49.20. Amos 1.12. Obad. 9. Hab. 3.4. Teman regio Principum Edom in terra
Gabalitica a Theman filio Eliphaz filij Esau sortita vocabulum, etc. Sciendum
etia^ quod omnis Australis regio ^braeis Theman dicitur. (paulo post) Theman
juxta Ezekiele^ Civitas Idumeae. Eusebius de locis.
Teman signifies the South, It was a Southern Country.

Further, Teman was a place, wherein it is observed that the Schools of
Learning were seated, Jer. 49.7. Concerning Edom, thus says the Lord, Is
wisdom no more in Teman? Two things may be gathered from that Text. First,
That Teman was in Edom or Idumea. Secondly, That it was a place wherein there
was much profession of wisdom and learning. So then, we may take the word
Temanite, either as referring unto the Stock from which Eliphaz sprung; or unto
the place where Eliphaz lived. The Hebrews refer it unto his Stock or
pedigree; And the Caldee Paraphrase is for the place or Country.

Jobs second friend was Bildad the Shuhite. All that I find for his pedigree,
is, that he came from one of the sons of Abraham by his second wife Keturah,
of whom it is said, Genesis 25.1. That she bare him Zimram and Jockshan with
others, and Shuah; From which Shuah was the family of the Shuhites; And it is
conceived, that Bildad was of that line, and therefore here called Bildad the
Shuhite.

And for the last, Zophar the Naamathite, there is less certainty concerning
him; Some will have him to be Zepho, mentioned Genesis 36.11. who was Grandchild
to Esau by Eliphaz his eldest son. And for his additionall name Naamathite,
the best conjecture which I find, takes it from Naamah, the name of a City,
spoken of Josh. 15.41. in the division of the promised Land to the Children of
Israel.

Now it is said, that these three, upon the report of all the evil that was
come upon Job, came to visit him; for they had made an appointment together to
come, or they all agreed together; they came not by accident, but by
appointment. The word signifies, (...)
to meet by solemn agreement. Hence the place where the children of Israel
used to meet to solemnize the worship of God, (...) Tempus autlocu^ certus ac
constitutus, conventus indictus, tempus quod unus alteri constituit.
before the building of the Temple, was called, the Tabernacle of the
Congreation; because they were to congregate or meet there at set times to
celebrate the name of God according to his own institution. And in the
thirtieth Chapter of this Book, the grave is called Beth-mogned, (v. 23.) the
house of the gathering together of all men, according to that Statute of
Heaven, It is appointed unto men once to dye, Heb. 9.27. It is the fancy of
Origin upon this place, that these three friends came at adventure, that they
came all of them several ways, unknown to, or without the privity of, one
another, from their several Countries, and met as it were by miracle at Jobs
house, the same day and hour. But the Text is clear, that there was a professed
covenant and agreement made, by which they came together.

They came (says the Text) to mourn with him and to comfort him. In these
words we have the end or intendment of their coming.

(...)
First, They came to mourn with him. The word which we translate, to mourn,
signifies to move the body, or to pass from place to place. Cain (after that
sin of his in murdering his Brother, Genesis 4.) has this judgment passed by
God upon him, that he should be a fugitive and a vagabond, he should be Nod, a
mover from place to place; and afterward it is said, he dwelt in the Land of
Nod; which some interpret for a special place, for a Country called Nod: but
it is taken by others thus, he dwelt in the Land of Nod, that is, where ever
he dwelt, he found the Land as it were moving, it was a moving, a shaking, a
trembling Land to him, He dwelt in the Land of Nod: His conscience quaking
continually, by reason of the guilt that was upon him, for murdering his
Brother, the earth also, seemed to quake under him, wheresoever he went or
dwelt. That only by the way. The same word here used in the Text, by a
Metaphor, signifies to mourn or compassionate the afflictions and miseries of
another. So, Nah. 3.6. Nineveh is laid wast, who will be moan her? And Isa.
51.19. These two things are come unto thee, who shall be sorry for thee? And
the reason why this word which signifies properly to move, is translated to
signify, mourning in compassion with others, may be, either first this;
because such persons will run, go or move from place to place, to give and
administer comfort to their friends, whose afflictions affect and grieve them,
as we see here in these friends of Job; they took a long journey, they moved
indeed when they came to mourn. Or rather secondly, (as I conceive) for this
reason, because such compassionate sorrows and mournings when our friends are
under deep and sore afflictions, are usually expressed by moving the body, or at
least moving some member of the body; as many times the hand is lifted up, Qui
condolent aut compatiu^tur, solent subinde movere coput ad testandum dolorem,
Merc.
and we strike our breasts, or we shake the head: It is ordinary in
compassionate sorrows, thus to move the hand or the head, and so the word is
used to signify mourning, from that act which accompanies or testifies
mourning. And the same word is sometimes used to signify that trepidation or
trembling of the heart, those convulsions of the spirit, upon the approaches of
our own troubles; So Isa. 7.2. That fearful motion and disquietnesse both of
Prince and people, when they heard of the invasion of their Country by Rezin
King of Syria, etc. is thus expressed, The heart of the King, and the heart of
his people were moved, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind.

Secondly, It is said they came to comfort him. The word which is there used to
comfort, signifies likewise to mourn: (...)
and especially the mournings of repentance, or to repent for sin with sorrow:
the reason is given, because true comfort does spring from repentance; Joy
often arises out of sorrow, and so the same word is applied to both. Worldly
joy and sorrow are contraries, but godly joy and sorrow are con-causes,
mutually effecting and helping one another.

We have here an excellent pattern held forth unto us of our duty, in
reference unto distressed persons or Nations.

First thus, It is both an act and an argument of true friendship, to mourn
with and comfort those that are in affliction. A man does then set his seal to
it, that he is a friend, when he will partake and share in his friends
afflictions; when he will divide with him in all estates whatsoever it is,
whether sweet or sour, joy or sorrow, he will have his part. Many friends will
come and rejoice with you, they will come to a feast with you, they will meet
at a house of mirth with you; but they fall off and go back; when they must
weep with you, when if they come, they must come to a house of mourning.
Solomon (Prove. 17.17.) gives us the true character of a friend, A friend loves
at all times, and a brother is borne for adversity. It is the note and trial
of our love to God, when we love him at all times, what ever he does with us:
And it is the argument of true love unto our brethren, when we love and own
them at all times, whatsoever they endure from the hand of God, or man: This
Christ approves and commends in his Disciples, Luke 22.28. Ye are they (says
he) who have continued with me in my temptation. It is an easy piece of
friendship or discipleship, to continue with Christ at a feast, or at a full
Table; but in a temptation to continue with him, speaks a Disciple indeed.
Some friends are like the Swallow, they come in the Summer and sing with you,
but when it is Winter, cold and frost, then farewell, they must seek a warmer
climate. These are summer friends, while the summer of comfort, the summer of
riches, the summer of outward contentment lasts, you cannot be rid of them:
but if the winter come, the winter of trouble, and sorrow, and poverty, and
sickness, they are gone; they will not once look on you, they pass on the
other side of the way, as the Levite did when he saw the man lie wounded and
weltring in his blood, Luke 10.32. these are summer friends, not winter
friends, not

Secondly observe this, As it is an act and an argument of friend- they. ship
to do thus, so it is likewise a duty to do thus; It is a duty to mourn with
those that mourn, and to visit those that are in affliction. Many look upon
it only as a complement, to visit their sad friends, we must look upon it as a
duty. Christ puts it ( Mat. 25.36.) as one of those visible acts of duty, upon
which he will pronounce the blessing of that great day, Come ye blessed, why? I
was sick and ye visited me. Christ is not sick in his person, he is in Heaven,
where is no sin, and therefore no sickness shall ever enter: and indeed he
never was sick in his person, when he was here upon the earth; Christ did not
bear our personal infirmities, he bore only our natural infirmities: I know
it is said, he bore our sicknesses (by compassion and by compensation) but he
was not sick; Whereas then Christ says, I was sick, he means sick in his
members; And when he says, ye visited me, he means his sick distressed
servants; he takes it so kindly, when done to his, that he reckons it as done
to himself: It is an act you see and an office of love, upon which Christ has
a special eye. The Apostle James, (chap. 1.27.) does as it were put all
Religion in this: It is such a fruit of Religion as does evidence the truth of
Religion, and therefore has obtained not only the name of Religion, but is
made the defenition of Religion^ Pure Religion (says he) and undefiled before
God the Father, is this. What is it? To visit the fatherless and the widow in
their affliction. This is a definition from the effect: It is not put in
general, that to visit the fatherless and the widow, but to visit them in
their affliction, is pure Religion; that is, this is a fruit, that which
grows up from the root of pure Religion: if pure Religion live in the heart,
this will be a fruit in the life. Wherefore look not upon the visitation of a
disconsolate friend, as a matter of indifferency, but of duty; and do it not
only for love, but for conscience.

Thirdly, The text says, as soon as they heard, or when they heard of all the
evil that was come upon Job, they came to mourn with him. Then Observe:

The very report of an others suffering, should move us to mourn and suffer
with him. Report should bring us, when we do but hear of such a thing: It is
very unwarrantable to judge or censure a friend upon report and hearsay; but
a report is warrant enough to pity and pray for him, to visit and comfort him.
Remember them that are in bonds (says the Apostle,) Heb. 13.3. as bound with
them: Remember them. Remembrance is of things and persons which are absent;
remember them, though you see them not, though absent from you, yet make their
case as present; be as bound with them, be as afflicted with them, yea hasten
into their presence. Bear one another burdens, Gal. 6.2. Rejoice with them
that rejoice, and weep with them that weep, Romans 12.5. Be ye all of one mind,
having compassion one of another, 1 Pet. 3.8. are Apostolical rules for, and
trials of Gospell-love. It was a sad condition that David was in; and it was a
very sinful condition that others about him were in, when he says, Psalm.
69.20. I looked for some to take pity, but there was none, and for comforters,
but I found none. But if it be sinful not to ease (when it is in our power)
the sorrows of others, how sinful is it to add to their sorrow? Such, David
found (typing Christ in his sufferings) who gave him gall for meat, and in his
thirst they gave him vinegar to drink. Thus the Lord complains of those
Heathen by the Prophet Zachary, (Zach. 1.15.) I was but a little displeased
with my people, and they helped forward the affliction.

Again, If it be a duty to mourn over the afflictions of others; how
exceeding sinful is it to rejoice at the afflictions of others? This was Edoms
wickedness, reproved by the Prophet Obadiah, verse, 12. Thou should not have
looked on the day of thy brother, in the day that he became a stranger* neither
should thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah, in the day of their
affliction: neither should thou have spoken proudly, in the day of distress.

We may further press this point, in reference unto the present condition of
our brethren in many places of this Nation, in reference to the whole Nation
of Ireland, yea of the whole Church of God: Are they not all mourners? And if
we are to mourn with private friends, much more then with public, with whole
Kingdoms and Churches. We may bespeake all passengers in the language of the
Prophet Jeremie, lamenting over the desolations of Jerusalem, Is it nothing to
you, all you that pass by England, Ireland? Is it nothing to you that travel,
(though but in meditation) into the Churches of Christ in Germany? etc. We
read of Nehemiah, Cap. 1.4. when he heard the report of Jerusalems desolation,
though himself was far off at Babylon, though himself was rich and full,
and preferred in the Court of that Persian Monarch, yet he mourned many days.
And Daniel, (Cap. 10.2.) mourned three full weeks, that is, one and twenty
days together, over the distressed estate and condition of his people; Jeremie
wishes, Oh that my head were a fountain of tears, that I might weep night
and day for the slain of the daughter of my people! Chap. 9.1. We have had
many slain, choice ones slain; this should be matter of mourning to us. Take
heed of such a spirit, as is reproved in those, (...)
Amos 6. Who sat upon beds of Ivory, and stretched themselves upon their
couches, who eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst
of the stall: Who chaunted to the sound of the viol, and invented to themselves
instruments of music like David, who drank wine in bowls, and anointed
themselves with the chief ointments, but they were not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph. If ever that of Solomon were appliable, it is to such a
time as this, ( Eccles. 2.2.) I said of laughter thou art mad, of all wordly
laughter and outward mirth, what do thou? if ever it were mad, now it is
mad: Now sorrow is sobriety, and tears are in season. No song so musical as
that which is set to the highest strain of lamentation. I remember the Prophet
Elisha's passion, when he foresaw evils that should be acted; he looked upon
Hazael, says the Text, (2 King. 8.11.) and wept; and Hazael said, Why weepeth
my Lord? he replied, Because I know of all the evil that thou will do unto
the children of Israel: their strong holds will thou set on fire, and their
young men will thou slay with the sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip
up their women with-child. This made him weep, he wept, because he saw blood
and fire, murders and burnings in the face of Hazael; what would he have done
then, if he had seen all fulfilled with his hand? Christ himself wept over
Jerusalam, when he prophesied how the enemy should come, and cast a trench
about it, and compass the City round, and keep them in on every side, etc.
Luke 19.43. If Christ wept for the evils that were to come on others, how
should we weep for the evils that are already come upon us? Mine eye
affects my heart, says lamenting Jeremie (Lam. 3.51.) An eye of prophecy
has affected some hearts, and shall not an eye of sense affect ours? Our ears
were smitten long ago, with sad messages out of Germany, out of the
Palatinate and Bohemia, we were smitten nearer home by the reports of those
inhumane butcheries, exercised upon our brethren in Ireland; We are now
smitten at home, both ear and eye, the sword has passed the Seas, and has
spilt rivers, is like to spill a sea of blood out of our own bowels; for our
brethren that have been slain, for our brethren that are in captivity, for
our brethren that have been spoiled, let us mourn and lament with a brotherly
lamentation. It is true, they ought (as those ancient worthies) to suffer
joyfully the spoiling of their goods, Heb. 10.34. but we ought to grieve when
they suffer the spoiling of their goods. It is an excellent spirit in them, to
suffer it with joy, but it is a sinful spirit in us, which rejoices, when
they suffer. Some Trees keep their greenesse and their leaves, winter and
summer, let the time be what it will, hot or cold, they are alike fresh and
green: Some spirits are like those hard-grain'd trees: But the spirit of a
Christian should be like ordinary trees, which when winter comes, cast their
leaves, put off their beauty and bravery. The story says of Nero, that when he
had set the City of Rome on fire, he got him up to an high place, to behold the
fire, and feed upon the flame, for there and then he sung songs of the
destruction of Troy: To sing songs, to rejoice in the midst of Sions
afflictions, argues not a Christian, but a Neronian spirit. To shut up this
point, let us prefer Jerusalem, above our chiefest worldly joy; let us even
resolve to enjoy nothing of the world, till we see Jerusalem a quiet
habitation, and the joy of the whole earth. The wife of Phineas, 1 Samuel 4.
would not enjoy her son, (and that is the chiefest joy) because the Ark of God
was taken: She enquires, where is the glory? as if she had said, you show me a
son, but can you show me the glory? No, The glory is departed from Israel, for
the Ark of God is taken. There is nothing in the world to be rejoiced in, when
God departs from us; and there is but little, if any thing, to be rejoiced in,
when Ordinances (which are the signs of Gods presence, and the means of
communion with God) are taken or departing from us.

Thirdly, These friends of Job came to mourn with him; they were not sent for,
they were not invited by letters or messengers, but they came of their own
accord. Observe,

It becomes us well for the comforting of our friends, to prevent the
invitation of our friends. Some out of a kind of modesty (that is the best we
can say of it) will not come to a troubled friend, unless they be sent for. I
do assure you this, it is good manners to be an unbidden guest at a house of
mourning.

Another thing I would offer to you from hence, is this; It is said, that
before they came, they made an appointment to come, to mourn with him and to
comfort him; you see they agreed upon their end, before they set a foot in the
way. Note this then,

It is an excellent point of holy prudence, to be settled about our end, before
we undertake or enter upon any action. Some go about business, and they know
not why, they visit their friends, and they know not for what. That was justly
called a confused assembly ( Acts 19.32.) when the most part knew not wherefore
they were come together. Though no man can know the end of his action,
respecting the event, yet every wise man does and ought to know the end of all
his actions, in respect of his own intendment: His end is first intended,
though it be last, yea though it be not all attained. Observe further,

Wisdom does not only propose an end, but a suitable end. Jobs three friends
proposed two of the most suitable ends that could be for such a business, To
mourn with him and to comfort him. If a man were to visit or converse with a
wicked man, it were good to say, I will go to counsel him, to convince him of
his sin, to convert him from his sin. If I go to to one who is full of doubts,
it were best to say, I will go see, if I can settle and resolve him: A suitable
end, is the beauty and grace of all our undertakings.

Again, Consider the order and method of these two ends, it is said, they came
to mourn with him, and to comfort him. Comfort is the higher and the nobler
end, the last and ultimate end in regard of man; it is the end into which all
actions are resolved, and all ends emptied at the last; all the acts of
holiness have a tendency unto joy; all godly sorrow leads unto comfort:
Therefore the Apostle writes to his Corinthians, that he was not glad, because
he had made them sorrowful by an Epistle, but that they sorrowed so, as they
might rejoice. How was that? They sorrowed to repentance, their sorrow wrought
repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of. But is there no more in true
repentance, but only this, that it is not to be repented of? Surely yes. For if
there be joy in Heaven (Luke 15.) over a repenting sinner, then doubtless,
there is abundant ground of joy on earth. If Angels rejoice when a sinner
repents, much more may the repenting sinner rejoice. So then repentance, not to
be repented of, is repentance greatly to be rejoiced in. Repentance that brings
not forth joy, is to be repented of: We must mourn for all sorrows which end
in sorrow; for sorrow is not good for its own sake, but for comforts sake: Jobs
friends came not to mourn with him, that he might mourn, but they came to
mourn with him, that he might be comforted: To add sorrow unto sorrow, is to
be swallowed up with sorrow; he sorrows rightly, that would be swallowed up
with joy. You see the ends which these men proposed in coming to Job, to
mourn with him and to comfort him. Excellent ends both, and without all
question, they did propose and purpose them sincerely. They came to mourn with
him, and they mourned; they came with hearts resolved to comfort him, but they
did not comfort him, they did not attain that end, they could not attain it;
Then Observe,

That as the way of a man is not in himself, so much less is the end of a man
in himself. The way of a man is not in himself, says the Prophet Jeremy,
Cap. 10.23. that is, a man's actions are not in his own power, he is not master
of his own will, or of his own way. If a man's way be not in himself, muchlesse
is his end in himself, that is, in his own power, to have what end he pleases
and proposes. Man proposes, but God disposes. These friends came to comfort
Job, but they did nothing less then comfort him: In stead of comforting, they
afflicted him; which forced him to complain, Miserable comforters are ye all:
And yet their errand was to comfort him.

Some indeed are of opinion, that they were false friends, that they came upon
him with prejudiced and embittered spirits: but the preparatory circumstances,
and manner of their coming, cleares the uprightness of their intentions, and
confutes that slander. Doubtless they came really to comfort him, and ease his
sorrows, and yet behold they doubled his sorrows, and proved a greater
affliction to him then all the rest. Job had nothing left him, but the
integrity of his ways, and the uprightness of his heart; His estate was gone,
his children were gone, his health was gone, his body was broken, he was undone
quite, yet he had a heart-full of integrity. And when Satan the enemy could not
strip him of this, he sends his wife: First, to jeere him out of it; but he
shakes her off quickly as a foolish woman: Secondly, he sends these friends,
gravely and learnedly to dispute and beat him out of it, by dint of argument.
O how long did these hang upon him, with many serious and weighty, with many
pious and divine (much misapplied) discourses: He could not get rid of these,
whose words were as drawn swords, often making his wounded soul bleed and
breath out sad complaints; and yet they came to comfort him. A man's heart
(says Solomon, Prove. 16.9.) devises his way, but the Lord directs his
steps. Man devises, but God directs: He orders the actions, and overrules
the ends of every creature. We can neither cut out our way, nor make up our
conclusions, by our own strength or wisdom. And so much for the 10th. verse,
His friends visit, They came unto him.

I told you before, that the two following verses, do but set forth the
particulars of the first end, their mourning. They came to mourn with him:
Their mourning is expressed by many of those particular circumstances, observed
in Jobs sorrow, c. 1. v. 20. therefore I shall not insist much upon them.

And when they lifted up their eyes afar off they knew him not. This is the
preface to the several acts of their mourning.

And when they lifted up their eyes. To lift up the eyes, is a frequent
Scripture phrase, for seeing, Genesis 26.63, 64. There is a reason in nature for
it, man having a special nerve in the fabric of the eye, by the motion of
which, the eye turns upward. I only offer that, because the same word is used
for lifting up the voice.

Afar off. Some hence infer, that Job lay abroad; and they take this for a
further argument; that he was put out of the City or house where he dwelt, as a
Leper. But this afar off, might be within the compass of his own house, or
in his chamber; as if it had been said, as soon as they stepped into the place
where he lay, and espied him in such a forlorn condition, they knew him not;
though it be not improbable that he was sometime abroad for the benefit of the
air, by reason of the filthiness of his disease; and so his friends might
find him abroad. But that he was turned out of his house, is refuted, chap.
7.13. where he speaks of his bed, and of his couch. When I say my bed shall
comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint, etc. That is, when I thought to
find ease by lying down upon my bed, or leaning on my couch; therefore he had
a house furnished with bed and couch.

When they lift up their eyes afar off, they knew him not. We need not take
it absolutely, as if his disease had so disfigured him, that he could not be
known to be the same man: For often in Scripture, that which is put as an
absolute negative, is intended for a weak affirmative. It is said, ( Joh.
1.11.) When Christ came, he came to his own, and his own received him not,
there is an absolute negation, (yet it follows,) But to as many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God. His own received him
not, yet some did receive him; Some of his own kindred and Country did receive
him; So that, his own received him not, is as if it had bin said, few of his
own received him, or he had but cold entertainment among his own. So Hos.
9.6. Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, they shall bear no fruit.
There is the sound of an absolute denial, yet the sense will bear a weak
affirmation; for it follows, yea though they bring forth, yet will I slay the
beloved fruit of their womb. They may bring forth a few or some fruit perhaps,
but I will destroy it. So here, They knew him not, that is, they could scarce
discern him, or distinguish who he was, his disease and sores had so
discolored or blotted out the lines and feature of his face, that they could
not suddenly assure themselves, this was he. They stood as men amazed; What?
Is this Job? What a spectacle is here? How strangely is his visage changed, and
his whole body disfigured? Such kind of doubting language, doubtless past
amongst them. When they saw him afar off, they knew him not. The Prophet
Jeremy observes the like, after the hard siege of Jerusalem, which caused him
thus to lament, ( chap. 4.7, 8.) Her Nazarites were purer then snow, they were
whiter then milk, they were more ruddie in body then Rubies, their polishing
was of Sapphire: But see the change; Their visage is blacker then a coal, they
are not known in the streets. Famine had eaten up, not only their flesh, but
their form, misery had altered their very complexion and visage; they who
shined before like Rubies and Saphires for color and comeliness, were now
dark as a coal, or dusky like ashes, they were not known to be the same men
and women. It is said of Christ in his affliction, Isa. 52.14. That his visage
was so marred, more then any man, and his form more then the sons of men.
Great afflictions change the very form, and utterly blast the beauty of the
body. Sin does so change the soul, and disfigure the mind, it so deformes
the spirit, and defaces the image, at first stamped upon it; that God says, I
know you not, you are not like the men that Imade. But this is the comfort of a
Job, of a godly man, that when his face is most deformed, his soul is most
beautified; and though a disease may disfigure him, so that his nearest friends
know him not, yet God knows him still; No sickness can wear out the marks
by which Christ knows thee. When thy face is blacker then a coal, he sees the
face of thy soul, shining like the face of an Angel. A person or a people are
then in a woeful condition indeed, when God shall say to them, as he did to
those hipocriticall professors, Mat. 7.23. Depart from me, I know ye not. We
may be in such a woeful condition, that our friends and acquaintance coming to
visit us, cannot know us; yet for the maine, well enough, blessed enough at
that time, beautiful in the eye, welcome into the presence of a glorious God.

They knew him not. What then? Then they lifted up their voice and wept.

This is the first act of their mourning. And we may observe five acts of
mourning here specified, whereof one is a natural act, and the other four are
ceremonial. The natural act was this of weeping, They lifted up their voice
and wept. The ceremonial acts were these: First, They rent every one his
mantle. Secondly, They sprinkled dust upon their heads toward Heaven.
Thirdly, They sat down with him on the ground, seven days, and seven nights.
The fourth ceremonial act was, their silence, And none spoke a word unto him,
for they saw that his grief was great.

First, They lifted up their voice and wept. The word is Baca, and from that,
the place Judge. 2.5. is called Bochin, where the people are said to lift up
their voice and weep, when the Angel reproved them. In Psalm. 84.6. We read
of the valley of Baca, which some translate, the valley of weeping, or the
valley of tears; Others from Baca a Mulberry-tree, the valley of
Mulberry-trees, which being a dry place, the travelers to Jerusalem at the
solemn feasts, did so dig for water, that they made all as one well.

Further, It is said, they did not only weep, but they lifted up their voice
and wept. We may note two things in that phrase. First, the vehemence of their
sorrow, as when a man does lift up his voice and speak, he speaks vehemently.
Isa. 58.3. Lift up thy voice like a trumpet, that is, speak with a loud and
strong voice; So here, They lifted up their voice and wept, that is, they wept
vehemently, they wept exceedingly. Secondly, To lift up the voice and weep,
notes the easing of the mind in sorrow; for it is an ease to the mind burdened
and oppressed with sorrow, to lift up the voice and weep; to cry out in
sorrow, lets the strength of the sorrow out. We say, that sorrow which is
included, Strangulat inclusus dolor.
strangles and stifles the spirit, sorrow kept in, is like fire kept in, more
augmented; As David speaks, Psalm. 39. concerning himself, While I kept
silence, even from good, my sorrow was stirred, my heart was hot within me,
while I was musing, the fire burned. His sorrow was increast, when he had not a
vent for it; Silent mournings are the sorest mournings: lifting up the voice,
vents the sorrow. The holy Ghost expresses great sorrow, by that of a woman in
travail, crying out. To cry out, notes (I grant) great pain, and yet crying
out is a lestening or mitigation of pain. It is observed, that the Midwife
seeing a traveling woman hold in, and conceal her pains, will bid her cry
out. Some lift up their voice and weep, when they are not in pain, when they
mourn not at all: There are Crocodiles tears, tears and voices too of
dissimulation. Ismael had tears in his eyes, and revenge in his heart, Jer.
41. Others are in pain and mourn, when they lift not up their voice nor
weep: Like one that has a deadly wound, they bleed inwardly: But when there
is the highest flood of sorrow in the heart, weeping will make an ebb, and you
may let much of those waters (which are ready to drown the spirit) out at
those sluices of the eyes. That is the first act, the natural act, They lifted
up their eyes and saw such a spectacle, as made them lift up their voice and
weep.

There are 4, ceremonial acts.

First, They rent every man his mantle. We have spoken of that, when we opened
the 20th. verse of the former Chapter, together with the grounds of rending
clothes, sorrow, indignation, etc. I shall refer you thither for further
information in this point.

The second ceremonial act of their sorrow was, The sprinckling dust upon
their heads toward Heaven. In the 20th. verse of the former Chapter, Job shaved
his head: Here is another ceremony, They sprinkled dust upon their heads; And
which is yet more considerable, They sprinkled dust toward Heaven; There were
two ways of sprinckling dust. There was first a taking the dust and
sprinckling it upon the head barely; And then there was another way of taking
the dust and throwing it up in the air, and so letting it fall upon the head;
This act was significative, It typed, that all things were full of sorrowful
confusion, the earth and the air were mingled, the Heavens also were cloudy
and darkened, therefore they cast dust toward Heaven; For as by a stormy wind
and tempest, the dust is raised, which thickens the air, and obscures the
Heavens; so by that act of casting or sprinckling dust in the air, stormy,
tempestuous and troublesome times were signified. In the Acts, (chap. 22.23.)
those wretched Jews to whom Paul preached, being vexed and enraged, cried out,
and casting off their clothes, threw dust into the air: Their action had this
voice in it: This man has, or will, if let alone, fill all the world with
trouble, and disturb the peace of Nations. This they express (together with
their own rage) by throwing dust into the air. It was a judgment, which God
threatened his people with, that he would make the rain of their land dust,
Deuteronomy. 28.24. And when men make it rain dust, by sprinckling it toward Heaven,
it showed great trouble or judgment upon themselves, or upon their Land.
Further, the sprinckling of dust upon the head, was a memento of mortality.
They put dust to dust, that man might remember himself to be but dust.

And they sat with him upon the ground, seven days and seven nights. Here is
the third ceremonial act of their sorrow. In the 20th. verse of the former
Chapter, it is said, Job fell upon the ground, these sat upon the ground; As
falling, so sitting upon the ground, is the posture of a mourner, of a mourner
greatly humbling himself under the hand of God, and the sense of his own or
other men's afflictions. When God lays us low, he can lay us lower, and
therefore it is best for us, to lay our selves as low as we can: so does he,
who sits upon the ground, if his heart sit down with him too. It is possible
for the body to lie grovelling upon the earth, when the spirit is nestling among
the stars: not in faith, as the Saints do, but in pride, as Lucifer did,
Isa. 14.13. However, he either is, or appears to be humbled to the lowest, and
emptied to the full, of worldly comforts, who, with Jobs friends, sits down
upon the ground: especially, if he sit long there, as Jobs friends did, seven
days and seven nights. The time seems almost incredible. How could they hold
out to sit so long? or how could Job, a sick and diseased man? For it is said,
They sat down with him, seven days, etc. I answer, We need not interpret it
for seven continued days and nights, without any intermission; it is frequent
in Scripture, to put a part, especially a greater part, for the whole; that
which is often done, is said to be always done, as, Luke 24.53. The Disciples
were continually in the Temple, praising and blessing God; And Luke 2.37. It is
said, That Anna the Prophetess departed not from the Temple, but served God
night and day: Not that she was there without any intermission, but the
greatest part of night and day, or at the usual time both of night and day:
Paul testifies before the Church of Ephesus, that by the space of three years,
he ceased not to warn every one, night and day with his tears, Act. 20.31.
Did he therefore actually preach three years, night and day without
intermission? That had been a long Sermon indeed. Then his meaning is but this,
that in those three years, he watched and made use of all possible
opportunities, both by night and by day to preach the Gospel: So we may
understand it here, they sat down, seven days and seven nights, that is, a
great part of seven days and seven nights, or all the time of those seven
days and seven nights, which were fitting for such a visit.

Origin will have it, seven nights and seven days, without intermission; In
maintenance of which assertion, he says, they were preserved by miracle,
without sleep, and without meat, all that time. But here is plain truth,
without a miracld.

Secondly, Whereas it is said, seven days and seven nights; we may note
further, that the number seven, (as other numbers) may be understood
indefinitely, a certain time being put for an uncertain; as Jer. 15.9. The
Prophet says, She that has borne seven (that is, many children) languisheth:
And Eccles. 2.7. Give a portion to seven, that is, to many. Thus we may
interpret it here, they sat down, seven days and seven nights, that is, many
days and many nights; as it is expre'st of Nehemiah, chap. 1.4. That when he
heard of the calamity of Jerusalem, he mourned many days.

Thirdly, We may take it strictly, for seven precise days and nights, and then
it referres to the ceremony of mourning for the dead; it was a custom to
mourn seven days for the dead; Jobs friends looked upon him as a dead man,
and so they mourned for him according to the manner of mourning for the dead.
Joseph made a mourning for his father Jacob, seven days, Genesis 50.10. We have
the like time of mourning mentioned, 1 Samuel 31.13. The time of mourning varied
both in times and places. The Egyptians mourned for Jacob threescore and ten
days, Genesis 50.3. The Israelites mourned for Moses thirty days, Deuteronomy. 34.8.
which custom of mourning thirty days for the dead, continued long after among
the Jews: Josephus. l. 1. de bello lud. c. 15.
For Josephus reports, that when the Jews thought he had been killed, they
mourned thirty days for him. So that we may take it here, precisely for seven
days and seven nights, and refer it to the custom of mourning for the dead,
or in cases of extreme sorrow among that people. It follows.

And none spoke a word unto him. This is the fourth ceremony of their mourning,
their silence. In great mournings, silence makes up the solemnity. So Lam.
2.10. These are joined together, The Elders of the daughters of Zion sit upon
the ground, there is the former ceremony, and keep silence. Now whereas it is
said, they kept silence; we need not understand it so strictly, as if for seven
days and seven nights, they never spoke a word. It is usual likewise in all
languages, and very frequent in Scripture, that what is but seldom done, or
done but a little, is said not to be done at all, as in Acts 27.33. Paul says
of those that were in the Ship, that for fourteen days they had fasted,
having taken nothing, a thing beyond the strength of man, take it strictly, to
fast fourteen days, taking nothing. But, it is usual to say, that is not
done at all, which is but a little done; They took nothing to eat, that is,
they took very sparingly, they did eat only so much as would, according to
our language, keep life and soul together. In Isa. 20.3. it is said, that
Isaiah walked naked and barefoote for three years: Now it cannot be conceived,
that the Prophet walked, as we say stark naked, for three years together; He
is said to walk naked, because he had not such or so much clothing as
formerly and usually he had worn. So here, they spoke not a word to him, that
is, they did not speak much, they spoke very little to him; Or secondly thus,
Restrictively to the matter, they spoke not a word, by way of dispute or
argument (which was the business they fell upon afterward) either to convince
him or reprove him.

The reason of this fourth ceremonial act of mourning, their silence, is added
in the last words of the Chapter, For they saw that his grief was very great.

The word here used for grief, (...)
though it had bin alone without any epithet to heighten the sense, notes a
very intensive, a deep and great sorrow. And it is put sometimes, for grief
and sorrow arising from the pain of the body, and sometimes, for grief and
sorrow of mind; Now here I conceive it may carry both senses; they saw that the
grief and pain of his body was very great, his body was in a woeful plight;
and they saw, that his spirit was much perplexed too, his mind was troubled. But
if this word alone signifies as it were all degrees, and all kinds of sorrow,
then consider both the variety of kind, and intention of degrees collected in
Jobs sorrows, which a word so comprehensive is not sufficient to express; the
aid of two other words is called in to help out our conception of his
sorrows. They saw his grief, they saw his grief was great, yet you have not
all, They saw his grief was very great, exceeding great; this aggravates his
grief, (...)
and winds up his sorrow to the highest; as if now the affliction were grown
to a full stature: God threatens Babylon, Isa. 47.9. These two things shall
come upon thee, in a moment, in one day; the loss of children and widdow-hood,
these things shall come upon thee in their perfection. Sometimes imperfect
judgments are upon a people or a person; they are as it were infant
judgments, judgments beginning; anon they grow to a greater height, and anon
they come to a perfect stature, to be mighty ones, giantly judgments: at that
time God had even brought Jobs affliction to its perfection, and his grief was
proportionable, very great: For this reason his friends kept silence; this
reason has an influence on all the acts of their sorrow, but especially upon
this, their keeping silence, For they saw his grief was very great.

From these ceremonial acts of sorrow, I have observed diverse things
heretofore: Now take one thing in general,That great sufferings call us to,
and warrant us in solemn mournings. Jobs friends do not only mourn, but they
mourn as it were in state; there is a kind of magnificence in mourning, a pomp
in mourning; I approve not a proud pomp, but an humble pomp; they mourn you
see with all the formalities of mourning: so it becomes us sometimes; as great
mercies call for great rejoycings, so great afflictions call for great
lamentings. There is a decency in it, when our affections keep pace with the
dispensations of God, whether they be mercies or judgments, comforts or
afflictions.

Secondly, Forasmuch as Jobs friends seeing his sorrow to be thus very great,
kept silence; Observe,

That in great, in overwhelming sorrows, the mind is unfit to receive and take
in comfort. When grief is very great, words give little ease, precious words
are wasted and thrown away, comfort it self is a trouble, in the greatness
and height of trouble. I am sure a mind full charged with sorrow, has no room
for comfort, is not at leisure for counsel. It is a profitable rule in
visiting friends that are sick, or in distress; when you see them in extremity
of pain of body, or in extremity of anguish and trouble of spirit, keep
silence, wait a while. Let the waters assuage a little, and the winds fall
before you meddle. Let them come to themselves before you move them. Etiam
taciturnitas ipsa medicina est, Ambros. in Psa. 37.
As sudden anger, so sudden sorrow is a kind of phrensy: No wise Physician
will give a medicine in a fit: The body must settle before it is fit for
physic, and so must the mind too; silence is as good as physic in some
distempers both of mind and body. A talkative comforter, is another disease to
a sick man; Consolator loquax novus morbus aegroto est. Velox in sermo nibus
magis vulnerat.
unseasonable council is a wound instead of a plaster, and instead of
healing, tortures the patient. It is as high a point of prudence to know when,
as to know what to advise a distressed friend. Solomon tells us in general (
Eccles. 3.7.) There is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak; Let me
advise this for one particular time or season, to keep silence, namely the
extremity and height of trouble. The Prophet Amos, c. 5.13. speaks of a time,
wherein the prudent shall be silent, and he shows us why, in that time the
prudent shall keep silence, for it is an evil time. Some interpret this, as
an addition to the common calamity of those times: They should be so evil,
that wisemen would hold their peace. The Apostle prophecies of such times,
wherein men will not endure sound doctrine, (2 Timothy 4, 3.) in Religion: And
such times may be, wherein men will not endure sound doctrine, in policy. Then
the prudent hold their peace, and none speak but fools or flatterers, such
times make the quickest market for their sophisticated wares, no other will go
off: Such are very evil times, and this is a sore judgment upon those times.
There is hope of good when wise men speak: A word from their mouths may cure
and deliver a nation. Yet I conceive that this Text of Amos may be understood
as a description of a wise man's duty, at least of his property, in some high
and great distempers upon a people. He sees them uncapeable of counsel, to
give them good advice, is (at that present) but the casting of pearls before
swine, all is lost and undervalued, if not trampled on: Yea he sees, that the
more he labors to reform, the more he enrages them; therefore till this fit
be over, prudence teaches him to keep silence.

Thus also it is with private persons in regard of the evils they endure, they
cannot endure faithful counsel in such an evil day upon any private person,
let the prudent keep silence, and wait for an opportunity, which may open a
passage to let in their reproves, or directions, or consolations, with a
taking advantage into the hearts of their afflicted friends and brethren. The
Prophet Isaiah seeing the troubles approaching Jerusalem, resolves to take his
fill of mourning, Therefore said I, look away from me, I will weep bitterly,
labor not to comfort me, chap. 22.4. He either thought that the beholders
would faint to see him, and therefore says, look away from me; or that seeing
him, they would say, he fainted, and so would be giving him comfort; that
therefore his sorrow might have full scope: He says, Look away from me, I
will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me. When a man is resolved to
mourn, let him mourn, your advise may anger him, but it will not help him:
Let sorrow have its way a while, and that will make way for comfort.

We have thus far carried on the sad story of Jobs visitation, his grief is
now come to the height, It is very great. We have also seen his friends visit,
with a double intendment, both to mourn with him, and to comfort him. We have
seen them mourning, they fully reached that end. We leave them now silent,
waiting for a time to attempt and accomplish the other end: they miserably
failed in that, it was to comfort him, but they proved miserable comforters:
Which in the progress and process of this Book, will receive a large and
full discovery.

JOB 3.1, 2, 3, etc. Verse 1. After this Job opened his mouth, and cursed his
day.

And Job spoke, and said,

Let the day perish wherein I was borne, and the night, wherein it was said,
There is a man-child conceived, etc.


THE former Chapter concluded with the astonishment and silence of Jobs three
friends: This Chapter begins with an astonishing speech of Job. We may be as
much amazed at what Job spoke, as we were at their silence; And there appears
the same reason of both: namely, the greatness of his grief. They saw his
grief so great, that they forbear to speak; Job feels his grief so great,
that he cannot longer forbear to speak; it must have a vent, After this
(says the Text) Job opened his mouth. Why, Job had opened his mouth before, he
had spoken twice since he was encompassed with those sorrows. True; But Job
never opened his mouth as now; he opened his mouth before, to justify and to
bless his God, now he opens his mouth to accuse, and curse his day, and
therefore the Chapter may well begin with, After this Job opened his mouth, he
never spoke in this manner before: For he no sooner opened his mouth, but he
cursed his day.

The argument and subject of the whole Chapter, is contained in this first
verse, the cursing of his day; and concerning this, the Chapter holds forth
three things most considerable. There are three particulars belonging unto this
Chapter.

First, The Matter and the Manner of this Curse; what it is, and how expre'st:
Job pronounces a curse upon his day, and unfolds the curse; he unfolds it with
much Rhetoric and strains of eloquence: Troubles will make a man Rhetorical.
Job (as it were) calls up all his spirits, whets his wit, and heightens his
invention, to prepare a proper curse for his day. This he does from this first
verse to the end of the nineteenth.

Secondly, In this Chapter Job holds forth to us, the ground or reason of this
curse: He is full of passion, but his passion is rational. He curses, but he
shows you why. This reason (with some occasional intermixtures) is
demonstrated from the ninth to the end of the nineteenth verse. If I am asked a
reason of my anger, why I am so bitter against my day, This is the account I
give, Because it shut not up my mothers womb, etc.

Thirdly, We have an inforcement of this curse upon his day, by a vehement
expostulation, against the lengthning and continuance of his days. He
complained in the beginning of the Chapter, that ever he had a day, and now he
complains as much that he has any more days. He wonders why his life began,
and he is troubled because it does not end. Wherefore is light given to him
that is in misery? etc. This expostulation concludes the Chapter.

The nine former verses contain the first division of the Chapter, Jobs curse
upon his day, both the matter and the manner of the Curse.

We have this Curse, first pronounced upon his day in general, Then Job opened
his mouth, and cursed his day.

Secondly, He fixes a curse upon his day, in the several parts of it. Take a
natural day, for the space of 24 hours, and then it consists of two parts,
of day and night, light and darkness. According to which division the curse
runs, verse 3. Let the day perish wherein I was borne, and the night wherein it
was said, a man child is conceived.

Thirdly, He pronounces a special proper curse upon each part of his day.
Take the day for the light, for that space between Sunrising and Sunset. He
curses that, verse. 4th. and 5th. Let that day be darkness, let not God regard
it from above, neither let the light shine upon it, etc.

Then follows a curse upon the night, in the 6, 7, and 8. verses, As for that
night, let darkness ceise upon it, let it not be joined unto the days of the
year, etc.

So then, Job pronounces this curse, first in general against his day.

Secondly, He divides the curse upon the several parts of the day.

Thirdly, He fastens a special curse upon each part.

You see how accurate, how exact Jobs sorrows have made him.

We will begin with that which is first here, the cursing of his day in
general, contained in the first verse. Then Job opened his mouth, or after
this, Job opened his mouth and cursed his day.

Then, or After this, has a double reference.

First, After the seven days silence, After his friends had sat by him so
long upon the ground, neither moving question, nor administering a word of
consolation, then Job opened his mouth. Or secondly,

After this, That is, After his sorrows were (as it were) boiled up to the
height, and began a little to remit, so as he could breath, recollect himself
and consider, in what condition he was. After this, After there was some allay,
some ebb and fall of his overflowing sorrows, then he breaks forth in these
words. Sorrow does sometimes not only oppress the spirit, but stop the mouth,
I am so troubled that I cannot speak, says David, Ps. 77.4. That, he could
not speak for trouble, Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent. Vehementiam
doloris exprimit, quod dicit se non esse locutum, Musc. in Psalm. 77.4.
speaks the greatness of his trouble. Plenty of sorrow makes a scarcity of
words: Hence sometmies the Saints in great afflictions and grief of mind,
pray, and cry much to God, when they speak little. Hannah continued praying
before the Lord, (2 Samuel 1.12.) Eli the High Priest marked her mouth (says the
Text) Now Hannah, she spoke in her heart; only her lips moved, but her voice
was not heard. Would you know why in so much praying, there was no speaking,
why her heart spoke, and not her tongue. Her self gives the reason at the
15th, verse, I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit. And verse 16. Out of the
abundance of my complaint and grief, have I spoken hitherto. sc. not with my
lips, but with my heart. All which is given us at the 10th. verse, She was in
bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore. Thus it was with
Job, sorrow silenced him, sorrow in the height caused that high silence, Altum
silentium.
but as soon as that assuaged, Then he opened his mouth and spoke.

A man cannot speak till he open his mouth, yet to open the mouth and speak,
is more then to speak.

First, To open the mouth and speak, is to speak with a loud or clear voice;
as he that speaks softly, is said to speak in his throat. Or as they who have
familiar spirits, or wizards, are said to peep and to mutter, Isa. 8.19. A
witch or wizard, is called there and in other places of Scripture ( Levit.
20.27. Deuteronomy. 18.11.) Ob, which signifies a bottle or bladder, because such
being possessed or acted by an evil spirit, spoke with a hollow voice as out
of a bottle, and (as some affirm) with swollen bellies; From which manner of
utterance, the Greeks call them, Belly speakers. (...).
And Junius, upon that 8 of Isa. 19th. apprehends this as a description of
those Hell-prophets, in opposition to the true Prophets, who used to speak
with a clear, loud, distinct voice: Or as Job here; To open their mouths and
speak.

Secondly, To open the mouth and speak, is as much as to say, he spoke with
his mouth; And there is an elegancy in that; as in those like expressions, I
heard it with mine ears, that is, I did certainly hear it, or I did fully
hear it. I saw it with mine eyes, that is, I am sure I saw it. So the
Scripture says, We are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20. A thing cannot be
bought, but with a price, there must be some price or other, either money or
money-worth, somewhat answering the intrinsic value of every thing that is
bought; but to show that we are bought with a full price, that Christ did not
compound our debt with his Father, but paid the uttermost farthing, it is said,
we are bought with a price. So the Prophet Malachie tells the sacrilegious
Jews, Ye are cursed with a curse, c. 3.9. A man cannot be cursed but with a
curse, but to show the greatness of the curse, he says, ye are cursed with a
curse. So here, Job opened his mouth and spoke, or opened his mouth and cursed,
that is, he cursed his day greatly, Cum enim aliquis loquitur ex impetu
passionis, non ipse aperuit os suu^n, sed passione agitur ad loquendum, non
enim per passionem nostri actus domini sum^^ sed pe^ so^^m rationem; Consuetum
enim est apud sapientes ut ex ratione loquantur passionum motus, quos sentiu^^,
Aquin. in loc.
even with a bitter and grievous curse. He cursed it (as we say) to purpose.
Thus to show the excellency of Christ's doctrine, that his was A Sermon of
Sermons, And he the Messenger, the Interpreter, the One of a Thousand, yea the
One of All the Thousands that ever showed to man his uprightness: the Gospel
says, Mat. 5.1. When he saw a great multitude, he opened his mouth and spoke.
Hence

In the third place, To open the mouth and speak, is to speak upon mature
deliberation, to speak considerately, prudently, punctually, to speak
elegantly, to speak orderly, to speak the words of truth and soberness. A
fool is said to speak with an open mouth: but a wise man opens his mouth
and speaks. A wise godly man has his tongue at his command, but a fools
tongue commands him: His tongue runs faster then his wit, as we say. A fools
mouth (as Solomon tells us, Prove. 15.2.) powers out foolishness: Their
mouths are always open; and therefore they cannot be said to open their
mouths: A fool has not a door to his mouth (therefore also he cannot be
said to open his mouth) much less has he a lock and a key, Figurate enim and
site dicta Parabole vocantur, quta authoritatem habent and in sermon
dominantur.
a bolt or a bar to his mouth: but a wise man has a door to his mouth, yea
his mouth is locked with wisdoms key, and that unlocks it. I will open my mouth
(says the Psalmist, Psalm. 78.2.) in a Parable. Parables are the speeches of
wise men, yea they are the extracts and spirits of wisdom. The Hebrew word
signifies to rule or have authority: because such speeches come upon us with
authority, and subdue our reason by the weight of theirs. Now when he is about
to speak Parables, he says, I will open my mouth. When wisdom calls for
audience and obedience, Prove: 8.6. she says, Hear, for I will speak of
excellent things, and the opening of my lips shall be right things. David
invokes God to open his mouth, when he would show forth that excellent thing,
the praise of God, Psalm. 51.15. God opens not the mouth of a fool, neither
does a fool open his mouth and speak, but his speech opens his mouth.

But did Job open his mouth in this sense wisely and discreetly? did he well to
be so angry with his day? spoke he wisely in cursing his day? I answer, Though
there was much passion in this speech, yet Job spoke out of much deliberation,
he considered what to speak before he spoke. A man may speak with much
passion, and yet speak out of much deliberation, and so did Job here; in that
long silence he was learning what to speak. And as there was much heat of
passion, so there was much light of wisdom in what he spoke.

Fourthly, To open the mouth and speak, is to speak boldly and confidently,
to speak with freedom and liberty of speech; (as the Greek word signifies)
to speak all a man's mind, (...). Joh. 7.26. (...) omne and (...) dictio, quum
qui^ omne id dicit quod adiem pertinet, nihil veritus offensionem eorum
quibus^um loquitur.
without feate or favor of any man. Prove. 31.8, 9. Open thy mouth for the
dumb, open thy mouth, judge righteously, etc. that is, be bold for those that
are poor and dare not appear themselves, speak thou aloud for the dumb, and
freely for those that cannot plead their own cause, or make-out their own
innocence. The Apostle begs of the Ephesians, Chap. 6.19. that they would pray,
that utterance might be given him, that he might open his mouth boldly, to make
known the mystery of the Gospel: and neither fear the faces of men, nor
conceal the truth of God.

You see then by the opening of this expression, there was more then bare
speaking meant, when Job opened his mouth and spoke; When a wise and a holy man
opens his mouth, you may look for more then words, even the treasures of
wisdom and of knowledge.

Let us now examine what treasure we can make of those words which Job spoke,
when he opened his mouth.

He opened his mouth, and cursed his day. But is there any treasure in a curse?
except that which the Apostle speaks of, as the fruit of Gods abused patience,
Romans 2.5. A treasure of wrath. Or did Job deliberate for a curse? was he
moulding and fashioning so deformed an issue as this in his thoughts so long?
Yes, faith the Text, he opened his mouth and cursed his day.

The word here used, to Curse, is not the word which we have met with so often
in the two former Chapters: where Satan undertook that Job would curse his
God. That word, in its native sense, signifies to bless. But here when Job
curses his day, (...) Levis aut nullius ponderis suit per metaphoram levis
vilis contemptus suit in Piel (...) maled^xit blasphema ^it. (...) In Ka^
significat grave esse sive ingrav scere and in Piel honorare, quia quos
honoramus non habemus leves aut viles, sed eorum authoritatis pondu^
suscipimus, ^* Rivetus.
a word is used which has neither name nor shadow of a blessing: And it is
derived from a root which signifies, a thing that is light, moveable or
unsettled. And so by a Metaphor, it signifies any thing or person which we
despise, contemn and slight, or the act of despising and cursing; and the
reason of it is, because those things which we despise, contemn or curse, we
look upon as light things, trivial, or vain, or hurtful: On the contrary,
the word in the Hebrew for honor and glory, comes from a root which
signifies heavy or ponderous; because that which we honor and respect, we
look upon it as a thing that has weight and substance in it: And the Apostle
calls that most glorious estate of the Saints in Heaven, a weight of glory, 2
Cor. 4.17. The opposite word which we have in the Text, is frequently
translated, to despise or contemn, and likewise to curse and blaspheme: and
does properly signify such a cursing, as arises from the contempt, or light
esteem, which we have of a thing or person. So we have the word clearly used,
Levit. 20.9, Every one that curses his father or his mother; Now observe,
cursing of the father or mother, it is directly opposed to the 5th.
Commandment, which says, Thou shall honor thy Father and thy mother, thou
shall look upon thy father and thy mother, as upon persons of weight and
honor, whom thou art bound to reverence and esteem; so that to curse the
father or mother, is to account them vile and contemptible. The same word
expresses, that villainous act of Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.15. who came forth, and
cursed David still as he came. That act was alike opposite both to the rule and
word of the 5th. Commandment, which says, honor thy father, etc. taking-in
the civil father as well as the natural: Shimeis cursing David, lightly
esteemed David, he did not look upon him, in or according to the weightinesse
and honor of his Kingly person, or of his Kingly office, a King is a weighty
person, a Crown is a weighty thing, Shimei despised and so cursed both.
Sometime the word is translated directly to despise: I will give you two texts
for that, Genesis 16.4. When Hagar saw she had conceived, her Mistress was
despised in her eyes, (it is the same word with that used here for cursing,)
the meaning is, she did lightly esteem her Mistress; Thus she thought, now
shall I have the honor of raising Abraham's family; now I am at least as good a
woman as my mistress, thus she despised Sarah. Again, 1 Samuel 2.30. where the
Lord says concerning Elies sons, Them that honor me I will honor, and they
that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. I will make little account of them
that make little account of me, and woe be to those (though all the world
honor them) whom God despises: That man looses more then honor, whom God
does not honor: And they who deny God his honor, deny him all good, and offer
him all evil; such a dispising of God, is a cursing of God.

Further, To curse (if we consider it in the nature of the thing, and not
strictly in the literal sense of the word) is to wish evil to a thing or
person; This also is the meaning of the curse in this place; for when Job
explaines this curse in the parts of it, he does (as it were) with wonderful
art and skill, gather together whatsoever may be thought the evil of a day, or
the evil of a night, and calls it up, to seize upon them. A curse, or to
curse, virtually contains in it all evil; As a blessing, or to bless,
contains in it virtually all good. Every mercy we enjoy, is a blessing
specificated; And so any evil that falls upon man, (as Sword, Famine,
Pestilence, etc.) is a curse specificated; Howsoever possibly those things
which are in their nature evil, and in their matter a curse, may be qualified
(in reference unto some persons) into a blessing. But take a curse properly,
and it contains all evil, and only evil in it. Therefore as when God had
given the world an esse, a being, that he might give it, a been esse, a well
being, he adds to the work of Creation, the word of benediction, And God
blessed them, and said unto them, be fruitful, etc. Genesis 1.22, 28. So
afterward when man had sinned, and the Lord intended to leave the world
groaning under part of those evils which sin had brought upon it, he wraps up
all in the word of a curse, Cursed be the ground for thy sake, etc. Genesis 3.17.
So then when Job curses his day, he wishes all the evil to it, that a day is
capable of. And Job opened his mouth and cursed his day.

But, what was this day that Job was so angry with it? and that his passion
does so burn against it?

The Text speaks indefinitely, Job cursed his day.

Some understand it of the day of his present suffering, he cursed the day on
which such troubles befell him: And we find sometimes in Scripture, that a day
put thus alone, is an evil or a troublesome day; As in the 12th. verse of the
Prophecy of Obadiah, the Lord rebukes the children of Edom thus, Thou
should not have looked on the day of thy brother, that is, the day of thy
brother Jacobs sufferings, the day wherein I had him under my rod and afflicted
him. So the day of the Lord, is the day of the Lords anger, when he powers
wrath and trouble upon the earth. Isa. 2.12. The day of the Lord of hosts
shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is
lifted up, and he shall be brought low. The day of the Lord, or the day of a
man undetermined, often signifies an evil day.

But here we may rather understand it for that day which was as the occasion,
or for the occasional day of all Jobs troubles, and that was his birthday; If
his birthday had been prevented, all his troublesome days had been
prevented, therefore he falls out with that, as himself explaines it, verse 3.
Let the day perish (says he there) wherein I was borne, and the night in which
it was said, there is a man-child conceived. It is usual to call a man's
birthday his day, so the Scripture is conceived to speak, Hos. 7.5. In the
day of our King, the Princes have made him sick with bottles of wine; That is,
on his birthday, which among Princes is commonly solemnized with feasting: As
we read of Pharaoh and of Herod. So then, the day is his birthday, the day of
his nativity: which some take precisely, for the day upon which he was borne;
and others more largely, for the annual return of that day; as if he had laid
in a curse for a day, whenever or how often soever it should return in the
years of his life.

A little further to clear the sense of this curse, let us consider the whole
matter as we have considered the words. There are two or three questions, which
being debated and resolved, will give light to this context.

Job you see takes upon him to curse, First, it may be questioned whether a
curse be in the power of man or no? Can a man curse persons or things?

Surely blessings and cursings are both in the hand of God; whether we respect
persons or things. There is a ministerial curse, and a ministerial blessing
in the power of man: but it is not in the power of any man, magisterially to
make any thing or person blessed, or to make any thing or person accursed. It
was a great brag which Balack made of Balaam, (Numb. 22.6) I wot (says he)
that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed. He
thought he had the curse in his command, he could curse whom he pleased, and
what he pleased, and when he pleased, but he was deceived; he reckoned beyond
his strength, and beyond the strength of a creature. What the Apostle speaks
in another case concerning the ministry of the word, Paul may plant, and
Apollos may water, but it is God that gives the increase, is as true in this;
one man may plant a curse, and another man may water it with a hearty wish that
it may grow, but it is God only that gives the increase of evil, Prima semper
irarum tela sunt maledicta, and que non possumus imbecilles, optamus irati.
Votis malis pro armis utimur. Salvian l. 3 de gubern.
and the decrease of good. Curses are not in the power of any creature, if they
were, we should have a miserable world quickly. How many should we see daily
blasted with the breath of malicious execrations? Some men's mouths are full of
cursing, Psalm. 10.7. They love cursing, they cloth themselves with cursing as
with a garment, Psalm. 109.17, 18. Cursing (as one of the Ancients complained in
his time) is now made the common weapon of anger, and wrath wishes that evil,
which (because of weakness) it cannot work. If cursing could have done it, we
had not been a people at this day. How often has Balack (out of fear or envy
at our prosperity) sent to Balaam (I mean the false prophet that dwells on the
seven hills) come curse Israel, come defy England; how often has that Balaam
cursed our Israel? We have heard of his Anniversary Anathemaes, wherein this
Church and state have been struck with the thunder and lightning of his Papal
curse. But the curse causeless (says Solomon) shall not come. And we may say
to England as Moses did to Israel concerning Balaams curse, Deuteronomy. 23.5.
Nevertheless the Lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam: But the Lord thy
God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because the Lord thy God loved
thee. And what David prayed about Shimei's curse, we have seen come to pass:
The Lord has requited us good for his cursing, 2 Samuel 16.12. We have far
greater cause to fear the blessing of Rome, then the curse of Rome: But to
return. The result of all is this; When God pronounces a curse, he makes it
to be a curse; man at the worst, can but wish a curse and pronounce it. Man is
but the minister, God is the Master of the curse, God can inflict it, man can
but think or wish it.

Another thing here questionable is, Whether it be lawful to curse the
creature? Job curses his day; The rule of the Apostle is, Romans 12.4. Bless
and curse not.

In some cases, to curse is Gods command and our duty, and then we are Gods
ministers for wrath against the wicked. Many times man (though forbidden)
curses, then it is his sin, and he is Satan's minister for evil against his
brother.

There are some cases wherein we may curse. When the Patriark Jacob was upon
his death bed, and bed of blessing, he yet pronounced a curse upon the rage and
anger of his two sons Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49.7. Cursed be their anger for
it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel. I will divide them in Jacob,
and scatter them in Israel. We may curse the plots and counsels of wicked men,
enemies of Christ and of his people: we may curse the persons of wicked men, as
implacable enemies of Christ, and of his people; So David more then once in the
Book of Psalms, yet it is to be considered, that some of those Psalms are
Prophecies of a curse, not pronunciations of a curse. And in all lawful
cursings we must observe these two rules. First, To aim the curse at the
destruction of the sin, not of the sinner. Secondly, Where the sinner appears
incorrigible, yet to desire the clearing up of Gods Justice in punishing, not
the punishment it self. To curse any thing or person passionately, is
infirmity: To curse any thing or person maliciously, is gross impiety.

There is a third doubt, the resolving of which will further clear the
Scripture to us, that is, Whether a day, be an object capable of a curse or no?
It is a question moved by the Schoolmen, Aquin. 2^ 2^. q. 76. Art. ^.
whether a blessing and a curse do belong to any but a reasonable creature? or
whether any thing else be a subject capable of a blessing or a curse? And they
resolve it, that nothing is properly the subject of blessing and cursing, but a
reasonable creature. Benedictio vel maledictio proprie ad illam rem pertinet
cui potest aliquid been vel male contingere, sc. rationali creaturae. Creaturis
autem irrationalibus, bonum vel malum dicitur contingere, in ordine ad
creaturam rationalem, propter quam sunt, Aquinus, ubi supra.
Therefore a day which is a part of time, is in it self incapable of a curse;
Those things only are capable of penal evils which are capable of moral
evils; A day is not, cannot be morally evil, though there be many moral evils
acted in the day. The Apostle advises us, to redeem the time, because the
days are evil, Ephesians. 5.15. Times are called evil, in regard both of
troublesome evils and sinful evils; From evil men and evil manners, days
are denominated evil, yet days in themselves are not evil morally, and so
not liable to a curse, which is a penal evil.

Further, Those creatures which have life in them, and have no reason in them,
are on the same ground incapable of a curse, whereas it is said, that God
cursed the ground, and cursed the serpent, Genesis 3.14, 17. neither the ground
nor the serpent were cursed in themselves, or for their own sakes. The serpent
an unreasonable creature, had not the knowledge of God, and the earth a
senseless creature could not feel the power of God; therefore the curse upon
those creatures, was only in order to, and as a punishment of the sin of man;
The Text is express, Genesis 3.17. Cursed be the earth for thy sake; The earth
there comprehends all the creatures living on the face of the earth, besides
man: These are cursed for man's sake, As those creatures at the first received
not a being or a blessing for themselves, but for man's good, so they receive
not any evil or curse but for man's punishment: So we are to understand those
places in Deuteronomy. 28. Cursed be thy basket and thy store, etc. God threatens a
curse on these creatures, the fruits of the earth, etc. in order to man's
disobedience: But it shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken to the voice
of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his Commandments, etc. that all
these curses shall came upon thee, and overtake thee, ver. 15. Observe, That
the curse is threatened to come on them, to overtake them; When the basket was
cursed, when the increase of the kine and the flocks of the sheep were cursed,
man was cursed: For we may say in the letter, as David did in a figure, when
the Angel of the Lord smote his people with the pestilence, (2 Samuel 24.) Alas
what have these sheep done? that they should be smitten with a curse. As in
pulling down the house of a Traitor, the revenge is not taken against the
materials of the house, but against the Master of the house. So then for the
resolution of this point, take it thus, No creature below man, is or can be
accursed by God or man properly, terminately, or ultimately: That is, in it
self or for it self, or from it self, but only improperly and relatively,
namely with respect to what man should do, has done, or suffered. First, in
reference to what man should do; so Christ cursed the fig tree, to teach man
either the duty of fruitfulness to the glory of God, or of faith in the power
of God. Secondly, in reference to what man has done, the sin of man, thus God
cursed the serpent and the ground: The serpent was cursed both for admonition
to man, and for a punishment on man; God to admonish man, how much he hated
sin, punishes an irrational instrument of sin, and by that enmity planted in
the serpent as a curse, punishes man's too much familiarity with the serpent.
And as the enmity of the serpent was man's scourge, so also was the barrenness
of the earth: That barrenness in bringing forth good fruit, that fertility in
bringing forth briars and thorns, were both as rods for the back of man.
Thirdly, the irrational or senseless creatures are cursed in reference to
that, which man suffers. Thus David cursed the mountains of Gilboa, 2 Samuel
1.21. because there Saul and his beloved Jonathan were slain by the sword of
the Philistines, because there the shield of the mighty was vilely cast away,
the sword of Saul, as if he had not been anointed with oil. In this sense, (as
David cursed a place,) so Job curses a time, his day, the day which either gave
occa^ion to his sufferings, or the day in which he actually suffered such a
world of evils. Thus also Jeremie curses his day with a vehement curse, Jer.
20.14. Cursed be the day wherein I was borne, let not the day wherein my mother
bare me be blessed: And not only so, but he curses the man who first reported
his birth, verse 15, 16. Cursed be the man who brought tidings to my father,
saying, a man-child is borne unto thee, making him very glad. And let that man
be as the Cities which the Lord overthrew and repented not: Maledicere rebas
irrationalibus in quantum sunt creaturoe, est peccatum blasphemiae, maledicere
eis in se consideratis est otio^ sum and vanum. Aquinas, ubio, supra.
and let him hear the cry in the morning, and the shooting at noone-tide, etc.
And why so bitter a curse? was it against the day for it self, or against the
man himself, Jeremie shows it was not, verse 18. Wherefore came I out of the
womb to see labor and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame? To
curse any thing under the notion of a creature, or as it is the work of God,
is to blaspheme God; to curse any unreasonable or insensible creature in
themselves, or to take revenge on them, is to be if not senseless, yet (I am
sure in that act) unreasonable. So far of this cursing his day in general.
It follows, Verse 2. And Job spoke and said.



This verse is only a transition into the matter of the next, it is as if the
holy Ghost had said, Job cursed his day: and would you know how he cursed it?
Respondere saepe dicitur qui orditur sermonem, etiamsi nulla interrogatio
praecesserit, Dru^.
He did it after this manner, or in this form of words, Job spoke and said,
thus, etc. Only note, that the word which we translate spoke, is in the
originrall answered; and so often in Scripture, he is said to answer who begins
to speak. Job answered and said.

We showed you before, that his day in general was the object of this curse,
now he curses it in the parts of it, the day and the night. Let the day perish,
etc. At which words the style alters, that which you read forward to the sixth
verse of the 42 Chapter, is sacred Poetry, Job breathes out his passion in
verse, and in verse receives his answer. It is questioned, whether Job at that
time opened his mouth, and vented his sorrows in verse, or whether it were
after contrived so by the penman of this book. As I see no profit in moving
this question, so I think there is no possibility of resolving it: And
therefore I leave it as I found it, a quere still. Only this is observeable;
that writing in verse is most suitable, where the matter written is deeply
steep't in, and chiefly wrought out of our affections. Hence we find, That
those parts of Scripture which set forth strongest affections, are composed in
verse: As those holy flames of spiritual love between Christ and his Spouse
in the Canticles of Solomon: The triumphant joy of Deborah, after deliverance
from Sisera's Army: Of Moses and Miriam, after the destruction of Pharaoh: The
afflicting sorrows of Hezekiah in his sickness: And the Lamentations of
Jeremie, for the captivity of the Jews: The book of Psalms, is as it were a
throng of all affections, Love, joy, sorrow, fear, hope, anger, zeal, every
passion acting a part, and wound up in highest strains by the Spirit of God,
breathing Poetical eloquence into that heavenly Prophet. So this Book of Job,
whose subject is sorrow, has a composure answerable to the matter. Passion
has most scope in verse, and is freest when tied up in numbers. The words
follow; Let the day perish.

What this day was, we showed you before; It was the day of his nativity, the
day (says he) wherein I was borne. How should this day perish?

To perish, signifies first, not to be. A thing is said to perish, when it is
annihilated, when it returns to nothing: As the Psalmist speaks, Man being in
honor and understands not, is compared to the beasts that perish. The
perishing of a beast, is the nonentity of a beast, when a beast dies, it
perishes, it is not; A beast is no more, but vanishes quite, and is gone for
ever. Then, such men's likeness to a beast, is not in perishing, but in the
want of true understanding: He does not say, man perishes like a beast, but he
is like a beast, that perishes. A wicked man how honorable soever, is a
brutish man, ver. 10. For he knows nothing spiritually, and what he knows
naturally, in that like a bruit beast he corrupts himself, as the Apostle Jude
speaks, ver. 10. of his Epistle. But between the perishing of a foolish man
and a beast, there is a vast difference; A beasts perishing is a not-being, A
foolish man's perishing is a miserable being.

For secondly, To perish, signifies often a miserable being, as in Joh. 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten s^n, that whosoever
believes, should not perish, etc. Not perish, the meaning of it is not, that
all unbeleevers shall loose their very beings, become a nothing, and with their
existence part from their essence. Some wicked beastly men would be glad of
this, that they might live here wickedly, and afterward die like beasts, in
that sense eternally: If this were the perishing that is threatened unbeleevers,
many of them would be ready to say out of love and liking to their lusts, as
Esther did out of love and zeal to the cause of God, If we perish we perish,
If this be to perish, let us perish. But that perishing is of another nature;
They that believe not shall perish, that is, they shall live and perish, they
shall be, and be miserable for ever, the wrath of a displeased God, and the
sting of a polluted conscience, shall torment them to all eternity.

Thirdly, To perish, is to be empaired or loose former dignity and respect. So
let the day perish, may be taken in this sense, let not that day be solemnized,
let it not be remembered with wonted joy and gladness. A day which has usually
bin solemnized, may be said to perish, when that solemnity is laid down, and
utterly disused. In ancient times (and the custom in some places remains to
this day) Great men and Princes kept the memory of their birth-dayes with
feasting and triumph. Thus we read, Genesis 40.20. And it came to pass the third
day, which was Pharaohs birthday, that he made a feast unto all his servants,
And Mat. 14.6. we read, that when Herod's birthday was kept, the daughter of
Herodias danced before them. It is generally conceived, that Job did solemnize
his birthday; and so many interpreters take those feasts spoken of in the
first Chapter, to have been, the birthday feasts of Jobs Children. Origin in
his fragments upon Matthew, affirms, that the Scripture gives no testimony of
any one good man celebrating his birthday: The truth is, while we reflect upon
our birth-sin, we have little cause to rejoice in our birthday: The newborn
infant seems to forbid this solemnity, and by his tears weeps and speaks
down this joy. The birthday of nature should be mourned over every day, much
more upon the day of our birth. The birthday of Grace is our joy and our
glory, and is worthy to be rejoiced in, not only in this day of grace, but in
that of glory, and so it shall. Eternity which is the day of glory, is one
continued triumph for our birthday in grace. Notwithstanding this, I see no
cogent reason, why a godly man may not celebrate and rejoice in his natural
birthday; so he rejoice in God, who took him out of his mothers womb, and
has preserved him ever since he was borne. So then, we taking Jobs day for his
birthday, he saying, let that day perish, means, let it be no more
solemnized, let there be no more joy, no feasts upon that day.

Or fourthly, Let that day perish, may be thus understood, let not that be
reckoned upon, let it be lost, let it not be counted in the Calender of the
year. A day whereof no use is made, is called in Scripture, a lost day, a
fallen or perished day. In the sixth of Numbers, the number of days is
prescribed for the separation of the Nazarites, thus and thus it shall be, and
so many days: Now, if the Nazarite had cantinued many days, according to the
Law of his separation, yet if he were polluted with a dead body before the full
number was accomplished, then he must begin again, for (says Moses,) the days
that were before shall be lost, because his separation was defiled, ver. 12. In
the Hebrew it is, all the other days shall fall, he must not reckon upon
those: So here Job says, let the day perish, that is, let it not be numbered or
reckoned, let it be as a day lost or fallen: So then the sum of all is this;
let the joy and solemnity of my birthday be laid aside, let it never be
celebrated more in the return of the year. I could wish that day had never
been, but seeing that is impossible* it having been already, yet let it be as
if it had never been, let it be put out of all accounts, let it be taken off
from all records; and not only not remembered with mirth and feasting, but not
be remembered at all.

And the night wherein it was said, a man child is conceived. So we translate:
The elegancy of the Hebrew speaks thus, The night which said, a man-child is
conceived; as if the night had been the messenger, and had brought word of his
conception. (...)
Some render the Hebrew word [ Hara,] (which we translate conceived) Borne,
applying both parts of the verse to his birth, Let the day perish wherein I was
borne, and the night in which it was said a man-child is brought forth; And the
Original word will bear it, being used (as learned Mercer observes) for
production as well as conception, So 1 Chronicles. 4.17. And she bare Miriam and
Shammai, etc. She bare, is the word in this text of Job: We may take it either
way; the sense is clear according to our translation, that Job sends this
curse beyond his birthday, even to the night wherein he was conceived; Or if
we refer it no further back then to his birth: It is as if he had said,
whether I were borne by night or by day, let the time of my birth be accursed;
if it were upon the day time, let that day perish wherein I was borne; Was I
borne in the night? let that night perish wherein it was said a man-child is
brought forth; This distribution notes a resolvednesse to curse it; and least
he should miss the time of the day, he curses both the divisions of time, in
every day. As Benhadad in his charge for the taking of of those young men, that
came out of Samaria, to show how fully he was resolved to have them taken,
says, Whether they be come out for peace, take them alive, or whether they be
come out for war, take them alive, 1 King. 20.18. as if he had said, I Will
have them taken whatsoever comes on it, or for whatsoever they come, they shall
not escape. Or as Herod, who, that he might be sure to slay Christ in his
infancy, commands all infants to be slain: So Job, that the curse might not
miss the time of his birthday, curses all the time of that day, the day, and
the night. For though a man be borne in the night, yet that is not called his
birth-night, but his birthday: And to be borne, is to come into the light,
though the birth-time be the darkest of the night. Hence the Heathen called
their Juno, whose help they invoked in time of women's travel (Deam lucinam)
the goddess bringing into light.

So much for the opening of this curse, both in the general and in the parts
of it, respecting the object day and night. In the next words he cuts out or
proportions a special curse, as the portion of each part; The day has a
share, and the night has a share, each by it self. Before I open this box of
curses any further, I shall observe somewhat from the discovery thus far made.

And first I must answer a doubt arising upon the whole matter; for it may be
questioned upon this you have already heard, though we carry on his complaint
no further, How Job can be set up with so much admiration for a mirror of
patience, who makes such bitter complainings, and breaks out into such
distempered passion, cursing his day? May he not rather be an example of
impatience? an unimitable pattern of an unquiet and uncomposed spirit? Are
these the words of patience and sobriety? Is this the language of submission
and humility. Cursed be my day? He seems to be so far from patience, that
he wants prudence, so far from grace, that he wants reason it self and good
nature; his speeches report him mad or distracted, breaking the bounds of
modesty and moderation, striking that which had not hurt him, and striking that
which he could not hurt, his birthday. In this Job appears much like that
proud Emperor Zerxes, of whom the Historian reports, Hero^lotus.
that when the raging Hellespont broke down the bridge that he had made over
it, he in a rage caused some hundreds of stripes to be inflicted as a
punishment on those waters, and caused a pair of shackles to be cast upon
those waves, to teach them subjection: was not this madness? what cared the
waters for stripes? or why should Zerxes take revenge upon the waters? And was
not Job as mad? what cared his day for the curse? or why should Job take
revenge upon his day? But as the Prophet says, Hab. 3.8. Was the Lord
displeased against the rivers? was his wrath against the sea? Should the Lord
set his anger against irrational creatures? Doubtless he does not. Therefore
enquire further into the matter, So did Job fall out with his day? was he angry
with his day? This is yet further to be enquired into and answered.

There are some who on the one hand prosecute the impatience of Job with much
impatience, and are over passionate against Jobs passion. Most of the Jewish
writers tax him at the least as bordering upon blasphemy, if not blaspheming.
Nay they censure him as one taking heed to, and much depending upon
Astrologicall observations, as if man's fate or fortune were guided by the
constellations of Heaven, by the sight and aspect of the Planets in the day of
his nativity, as if Job had observed some malignant conjunction of the Stars
upon that day: As if like the superstitious Heathen, he divided days into
lucky and unlucky, good days and bad days: as if he had denied the providence
of God, at least the particular providence of God in guiding individual
persons or passages of our lives here below.

There are others who carry the matter as far on the other hand, altogether
excusing, and which is more, commending, yea applauding Job in this act of
cursing his day: they make this curse an argument of his holiness, and these
expostulations as a part of his patience; contending first, that these did only
express (which he ought) the suffering of his sensitive part, as a man, and so
were opposite to stoicall Apathy, not to christian patience, to a stone, not to
a man.

Secondly, That he spoke all this, not only according to the law of sense, but
with exact judgment, and according to the law of soundest reason; And which is
far more, that he spoke all this, not out of impotent anger against his day,
but out of perfect love unto his God: That he spoke this curse, not in his
own, but in the behalf of God, pleading for the providence of God againct the
surmises of men: For (say some) he feared least his friends seeing him (whom
they ever took for a godly man) thus afflicted should accuse the providence of
God. As if he had said, I would I had never been borne, or it had been better
for me not to have been borne, rather then I should be an occasion for any to
take up hard thoughts against God, or that his Name through my sufferings
should suffer. So that the love of God, not weariness under, or unwillingnesse
to be under the cross, constrained him thus to speak: And if he was besides
himself, (as the Apostles word is) It was to God, 2 Cor. 5.13.

I do not say, but that Job loved God, and loved him exceedingly all this
while, but whether we should so far acquit Job, I much doubt, especially
seeing Job himself says, Chap. 42. I have spoken, and I will speak no more:
If Job had spoken so much, from the love of God, and to the honor of God in
this curse, having spoken once, he ought to have spoken again and again: And
had it been so, surely Job might have spared his repentance, as to this point,
and needed not have said, Now I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes;
If Job had spoken all this according to exact reason and the exactness of
holiness, he had no reason to repent, especially to repent in dust and ashes,
for what he had thus spoken: No man needs abhor himself for that, wherein he
both intentionally and actually honors God.

We must therefore state it in the middle way, that Job is neither rigidly to
be taxed of blasphemy or profaneness, nor totally to be excused, especially
not flatteringly commended for this high complaint. I conceive it must be
granted, that Job discovered much frailty and infirmity, some passion and
distemper in this complaint and curse; yet notwithstanding we must assert him
for a patient man, yea for a mirror of patience; and there are five things
considerable for the clearing and proof of this assertion.

As first, consider the greatness of his suffering, his wound was very deep
and deadly, his burden was very heavy, only not intolerable: The sufferings of
Christ, being exceeding great, caused him to complain, that his soul was
exceeding sorrowful even unto death, Mat. 27.38. Yet in this complaint, there
was not the least imaginable touch of impatience. When he hung upon the cross,
he cried out, My God my God why have thou forsaken me, verse 46. yet in this
cry, no impatience. To cry out for every light touch, argues indeed a vain and
an impatient spirit: But he that sometimes fetches a groan under a weight of
sorrow, is yet untoucht either in his wisdom or in his patience. In such a
case to cry out, is a discovery of humane frailty, but not of sinful frailty:
grace does not take away sense, it heightens nature, but it does not abolish
it. Consider how much Job endured, and then you will find little impatience,
though he complained much.

Secondly, Consider the multiplicity of his troubles: They were great and many;
many little afflictions meeting together, make a great one, how great then is
that which is composed of many great ones? Many pebble stones will make a heavy
burden, how then is he burdened, who has (if such a thing may be supposed)
many mil-stones upon his back? Jobs afflictions came upon him as an Army, and
encompast him round about. He had many particular afflictions, any one of which
might make a very patient man complain, then Job who bare them all, was not
impatient, though he complained.

Thirdly, Consider the long continuance of these great and many troubles, they
continued long upon him, some say they continued diverse years upon him. We use
to say, a light burden is heavy, if the journey be long; a man may bear any
thing for a brunt, or for a spurt, but to have a sad load continued upon the
shoulders all the day, pinches soar. Jobs load lay upon him day and night, day
after day, yea month after month, chap. 7.3. I am made (says he) to possess
months of vanity: yea as some have calculated them, his troubles continued
year after year for seven year. Though a man make some, yea great
complainings, under many great, long lasting afflictions, an easy apology may
acquit him of impatience.

Fourthly, Consider this, that his complainings and acts of impatience were but
a few, but his submissions and acts of meekness under the hand of God, were
very many. Now we know, that one or a few acts, though evil, do not
denominate a person, especially when they are balanced by many acts of good in
the same person, and about the same thing. How often does Job in this Book,
breath forth patience, humility, faith, love, and steadfast trust in God,
whatsoever he should do with him: these balance his complainings, yea indeed
they overbalance them, so much, for the settling of our judgments, about Jobs
patience, that they leave not so much as an opinion of the contrary.

Fifthly, Take this into consideration, that though he did complain, and
complain bitterly, yet he recovered out of these complainings; he was not
overcome by impatience, though some impatient speeches came from him: he
recalls what he had spoken, and repents for what he had done. See how he
submits himself, ( Cap. 42.) how low he lies before God, even in the dust,
and says, I will speak no more. If I have been impatient, I will use no more
impatient speeches; If I have been impatient, I repent of it, I repent of it in
dust and ashes: To repent of impatience, takes away the imputation of
impatience; and to say I will do evil no more, gains (through the mercy of
God in Christ) an acceptance of us, as if we had done no evil; A man is a
conqueror, though in the battle he suffers many foiles, and receives many
wounds, and loses much blood; though for a great while in the day a man be
worsted, yea though a whole Army be worsted, yet if in the evening, in the
close of the day, he and they keep the field and foil the enemy, the day is
won, and victory goes on this side. Job was in a great battle, in a sore
fight of afflictions, though it be granted that he received some wounds, and
had some foyles, and sometimes looks as if he had been beaten, and speaks as
if he had been overcome, yet in the close, in the evening, in the making up of
all, he went away a conqueror: the conclusion was victory and glory, Job had
the victory, and God had the glory: Therefore as the Apostle James, Chap. 5.11.
when he speaks of enduring with joy, referres us to the end of Jobs day of
trouble, to the end which the Lord made, ye have heard (says he) of the
patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord. So look to the end of
Job, to the end (which through the strength of the Lord) Job made, and there
you shall see patience having a perfect work, or the perfect work of
patience. Look not alone upon all the actings of Job, when he was in the
height and heat of the battle; look to the onset, he was so very patient in
the beginning, though vehemently stirred, that Satan had not a word to say;
look to the end, and you cannot say, but Job was a patient man, full of
patience, a mirror of patience, if not a miracle of patience; a man whose face
shined with the glory of that grace above all the children of men.

So much for that Question, I shall now add two or three points of Observation.

The first thing then that we may observe from hence is this, If we compare Job
in the two former Chapters, with Job in the third, we shall find that the case
is altered with him, he scarce speaks like the same man. Hence observe in the
general,

That the holiest person in this life, does not always keep in the same frame
of holiness. There is a great deal of difference between what he spoke in
the former chapters, when he heard of and felt these things first, and what he
speaks now. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name
of the Lord. Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive
evil? This was the language we lately heard, but now cursing: certainly his
spirit had been in a more holy frame, more sedate and quiet then now it was. At
the best in this life we are but imperfect, yet at some time we are more
imperfect then we are at an other: Faith is never very strong, yet at some time
faith is weaker then at an other: Our love to Christ is never very hot, but yet
at some time it is colder then at another, we cannot keep it in the same
degrees of heat. A man at one time can both do and suffer, and a while after
he can neither do nor suffer as he could at that time, he is out of frame, and
bungles in both. Take the life of a Christian all together, it is a progress,
it is a continual growing, yet take his life apart, consider him in every
circumstance and stage of his life, then there are many stops and stands in his
life, yea many declinings: As it is with a child, Take a child, and his life
from his birth to his full age is in a growing condition, yet consider him at
some particular time, and the child may abate, the child may not only not be
stronger, but much weaker then he was a year or a month before. So it is with
us from the first hour of our spiritual life, till we attain full stature of
it in Christ; Only this is our comfort, that in Heaven our souls shall be set
up in such a frame of holiness, as shall never be moved nor abated in the
least degree; Look in what frame the hand of God sets us up in that day, we
shall continue so to all eternity, and that will be the highest and most
exquisite frame both of holiness and of delight. But now we are up and down,
one day patient, and another day impatient, now believing, and another day
distrusting, now the heart melts and is very tender, anon it is very hard and
relentlesse. How meek a man was Moses, not such a man for meekness upon the
face of the whole earth, and yet at one time passionate, and at another so
angry, that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips. How full of faith was Peter at
one time, how resolved to stick close to Christ, yet shortly after, how full of
fear, and for fear denying Christ. We who receive good gifts and perfect
gifts, are subject to turns and variations, Jam. 1.17.
only he from whom every good and perfect gift comes, is without
variableness or shadow of turning.

Secondly observe, That great sufferings may fill the mouths of holiest
persons with great complainings. Job was not only afflicted, but afflicted
greatly; Job did not only complain, but he complained greatly: You see what
complainings David made in his great troubles, Psalm. 77.2. In the day of my
trouble I sought the Lord, my sore ran in the night and ceased not, my soul
refused to be comforted. So Heman, Psalm. 88.3. My soul is full of troubles,
and my life draws nigh unto the grave, and verse 15. I am afflicted and ready
to dye from my youth up, while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted. Hezekiah
under the greatness of his affliction, ( Isa. 38.14.) says, Like a Crane or
Swallow so did I chatter, I did mourn as a Dove, etc. Jeremie, a holy Prophet,
speaks, if not out-speakes Job in his complaint, Chap. 20.14. Cursed be the
day wherein I was borne, let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blessed;
Cursed be the man who brought tidings to my father, saying, a man-child is
borne unto thee; He does not only curse his birthday, but the messenger of his
birth: And he curses both with a word of deeper detestation then Job employed
to ease or empty his troubled spirit by, Jobs word signified but his
disesteeme, and himself regardlesse of his day, but Jeremie imployes that very
word, through which God powered out his wrath and everlasting displeasure upon
the serpent and the Devil, Genesis (...)
3.14, in each of these Jeremie went a strain of impatience beyond Job, and
yet holy Jeremie still. The Lord (says the same Prophet, Chap, 8.14.) has put
us to silence, and given us waters of gall to drink, because we have sinned
against the Lord. When we remember our own sins, we have reason to be silent,
though the Lord feed us with waters of gall, bitter waters. And if we be silent
and open not our mouths, because we have sinned, he bears with our cry, as we
are pained: He knows whereof we are made, and remembers that we are but dust.
A little thing troubles our flesh, therefore it is no wonder, if flesh and
blood cry out in great troubles, though they be subdued by grace unto the
spirit. And if God (in this case) bear with us, we ought also to bear with
one another, and not be scandalized or take offense, when we see good men
mourning and lamenting under the evils which they endure. He that understands
man, will compassionate the sorrows, not question the sincerity of a
complaining, groaning brother.

Thirdly, Job complains bitterly, and he curses; but what does he curse? He
curses his day. Observe from thence. That Satan with his utmost power and
policy, with his strongest temptations and assaults, can never fully attain
his ends upon the children of God. What was it that the Devil undertook for?
was it not to make Job curse his God? and yet when he had done his worst, and
spent his malice upon him, he could but make Job curse his day; This was far
short of what Satan hoped: Doubtless when the Devell heard the word, cursed,
come out of Jobs mouth, he then began to prick up his ears and triumph, surely
now the day is mine, now he will curse his God; but at the fall of that word
cursed be the day, Satan's hope falls, and down goes he. That word day, was
darkness to the Devil, and as the shadow of death; he fails of his end, and
is confounded, he goes away ashamed and has not a word more to say, but leaves
his friends to say the rest. The gates of Hell shall never prevail against
those who are founded on free grace, and the rock Jesus Christ.

Fourthly observe, That God does graciously forget, and pass by the
distempered speeches and bitter complainings of his servants, under great
afflictions. Job spoke this curse, but when God comes to question with Job, we
do not hear a word or title of this curse charged upon him: God takes notice
that he had spoken of him the thing that is right, Chap. 42.7. God commends
him for what he had spoken well, but Job does not hear a word of what he had
spoken ill: When the iniquity of his speeches was sought for, there was none,
and his failings, they could not be found, for God had pardoned them, as the
Prophet speaks of Israel and Judah, Chap. 42.20. Our Lord Christ says, that
of every idle word you shall give an account at the day of judgment, and by
your words you shall be justified, and by your words you shall be condemned,
Math. 12.36, 37. We had need look to our words, God writes what we speak,
and keeps a book of all we say. You will say, How then were Jobs distempered
complainings forgotten, and all taken for well spoken, that he had spoken? I
answer, First, None of Jobs were idle words, though there was error in his
words. Secondly, His right words were more then his erring words. Thirdly, His
heart was upright when his tongue slipped. Fourthly, He repented of those slips
and errors. And lastly, God forgiving, blotted them out of his book for ever.
Further (in a sense) we may say, that God makes allowance to his people for
such failings: not an allowance of connivence and dispensation, God does not
dispense with any to do the least evil, or express the least impatience in
their speeches; but he makes an allowance of favor and compassion, considering
their weakness and the strength of temptation, he abates proportionably, when
in such a condition they speak impatiently; though their actions and speeches
want some grains of that weight which they ought to have, yet weighing them in
the scale of favor with his gracious allowance, they go for current, and pass
in account with God, as good and full pay of that duty he expects from us, and
we owe unto his Majesty.

JOB 3.4, 5, 6, 7, etc. Let that day be darkness, let not God regard it from
above, neither let the light shine upon it.

Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it, let a cloud dwell upon it,
let the blackness of the day terrify it.

As for that night, let darkness seize upon it, let it not be joined unto the
days of the year, let it not come into the number of the months.

Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein.


WE have already given the Analysis and parts of this Chapter: The subject of
it is Jobs curse upon his day. The first section of it in the nine first
verses, contains the matter and the method of that curse.

And he curses his day, First, In general (ver. 1.) After this, Job opened
his mouth, and curses his day. Secondly, He curses it in both the parts of
it, (ver. 3.) Let the day perish in which I was borne, and the night in which
it was said, there is a man-child conceived.

In these six verses which remain, appertaining to the first Section, he
affixes a particular curse to each part of his day; taking a day, for a
natural day, and then dividing it into day and night, he gives a special
curse to each of these parts; A curse upon the day, and a curse upon the night.

The curse powered out upon the day, lies in the fourth and fifth verses of this
Chapter, Let that day be darkness, let not God regard it from above, neither
let the light shine upon it; let darkness and the shadow of death stain it,
let a cloud dwell upon it, let the blackness of the day terrify it.

Here are six distinct branches of shis curse.

First, Let the day be darkness.

Let the day. Here we are to take day, not for a natural day, but for the day
as it is the continent of light, the whole space of time from the rising to the
setting of the Sun. Now says he, Let the day be darkness.

Be darkness. There is a great aggravation of misery in that, as Christ
speaks, Mat. 6.23. If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is
that darkness? While Job wishes that his very day, which is light, should be
darkness, how great a darkness does he wish unto it; And if the day be
darkness, how dark must the night of that day be?

Then again, Let the day be darkness, he does not say, let the day be
mistie, or cloudy, or duskie, or dark, he does not wish it like that day
described, Zech. 14.6. It shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall
not be clear nor dark; but he says, Let it be darkness. Both in Scripture
and common language, Abstracts are emphatically significant, and carry more
then an ordinary sense in them; When David says, Psalm. 27.1. The Lord is my
light, there is more in it then if he had only said, the Lord does enlighten
me: So to set forth the woeful condition of those who are unregenerate or in
the state of nature, the Apostle tells them, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes
darkness, not only in the dark, but darkness: So here to express how
great a curse he wishes upon his day, Job says, Let the day be darkness it
self.

Now darkness may be taken two ways: Either Properly, or Improperly.


Proper darkness is nothing else but a privation of light, it is no positive
creature, it has no cause in nature, but is the consequent of the Suns
absence; When Job wishes, let that day be darkness, we may understand it of
this darkness, as if he had said, whenever that day comes about, in the
recourse and revolution of the year, let it be darkness, or a very dark and
gloomy day. This had bin a great evil upon his day. This kind of darkness
was one of the 10 plagues with which God smote Egypt. And yet there is
darkness, which is a greatet evil then this, I mean darkness improperly
taken: and so frequently in Scripture any sorrowful, troublesome, sad
condition, is expressed by darkness. A condition of darkness is a sad
condition, a dark day is as much, as a sad day; So then, Let that day be
darkness, that is, let it for ever be accounted a sad and sorrowful day.
Thus the Prophet Joel, Chap. 2.2. calls a day of great trouble, a day of
darkness and gloominesse, a day of clouds and of thick darkness. When
Solomon, Eccles. 12.2. would show by way of Antithesis, the sad and evil
condition of old age comparatively to youth, he unfolds it by darkness;
remember now thy creator in the days of thy youth, make haste, serve God
betime; But what needs such haste? I tell thee why, as times change, so thy
estate will change: Evil days will come, I therefore counsel thee to do it,
while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say,
I have no pleasure in them: while the Sun, or the light, or the Moon, or the
Stars be not darkened; A day without pleasure, is a day without the Sun,
take away the joy of a day, and you take away the light of a day. Youngmen have
the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, all kind of light and comfortable
influences upon them; but these will be darkened and ecclipsed when old age
comes, that will put out or at least obscure your light, your day will be
gone, and your night will have neither Moon nor Star in it, therefore work
while you have light, that is, while you have health and strength of body,
while you have freedom and activity of spirits, fit for that great service,
remember, that is, know and serve your Creator.

So in the Text, we may take darkness improperly, as darkness notes an
uncomfortable estate, and it is used in Scripture to note a twofold
uncomfortable estate. First, An estate of sin; Secondly, An estate of misery.
This latter darkness is the daughter of the former. The Prophet Isay, Chap.
9.2. speaks of the people that sat in darkness: which is repeated, Mat.
4.16. that is, in the darkness of ignorance, of sin and guilt; They had
natural light enough, and they had civil light enough, abundance of outward
comforts: they had health, and strength, and riches, and peace, and plenty, but
they had not a Christ to take away their sins, and cleanse their consciences,
and therefore they were a people that sat in darkness. Jobs curse intends
not this darkness of sin, but that other improper darkness, the darkness
of sorrow, the darkness of penal evil; As if he had said, let sorrow and
sadness over-shadow, let mourning and tears overwhelme, let calamity and
trouble for ever possess the day upon which I was borne.

Let not God regard it from above. Here is a second part of the curse, and a
more grievous curse then the former.

Let not God.] We may observe here the Name whereby God is expressed, it is
Eloah.

The learned Hebricians observe ten several Names of God in Scripture, three
of which note his Being. Jehovah, Jah, Ehejeh, Three his Power. El, Eloah,
Elohim. Three his Government. Adonai, Shaddai, Jehovah Tsebaoth. One his
Excellency, or Super-excellency. Gnelion. The Name Eloah here used, is derived
from El, which signifies Mighty, and so by that addition to the word, there is
an addition made to the sense, Eloah is Most Mighty, or Almighty. This word in
the singular number is very rare; the Name Elohim, which is the plural, is
very frequent in holy Scripture: Christ upon the cross cries out to God by
this Name in the singular number, Eloi, Eloi, my God, my God, as calling for
the Almighty power of God, to support and carry him through his sufferings.
David uses it in the 18th. Psalm, ver. 31. Who is a God save the Lord. Who is
Eloah save Jehovah, that is, who is a mighty strong God, save the Lord Jehovah,
so the next words explain it, Who is a rock save our God. So Job being about
to impleade and accuse his day, calls to the mighty God, (as it were) to judge
this day to his everlasting neglect. Let not God regard it from above.

Regard it from above. (...) Summo ju^icio inqu^^ere.
] The word signifies sometimes to inquire and search after, or to take an
account of a thing exactly and judiciously, as they that are called to
reckoning or to judgment, are enquired after, and so it has relation to that
Name of God, (Eloah,) a powerful or mighty Judge. Let not God regard it, is,
let not God take any account of it, or enquire after it, let it pass as not
worth the looking after.

Secondly, The word signifies to have a care of a thing, to have a thing or
person in account as well as to call unto account: to take care and be
watchful over another for good, is our regarding of it. In this sense the word
is used, Deuteronomy. 11.12. where Moses speaking concerning the Land of Canaan,
says, It is a Land which the Lord thy God cares for, (Cares for) is the same
word with this, and this Text may well be expounded by that which follows as
the meaning of it, The eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the
beginning of the year even unto the end of the year. So that to have regard
to a thing, to a day, or to a person, is to make account of these, to take care
for these for their good, as a part of ones charge or duty, or as an act of
grace and bounty. When Job says, Let not God regard it, this may be the sense,
let not God take any care for it, or make any account of it; let not his eyes
be upon it to do it any good, or to do any extraordinary good upon it: let it
not be honored by God with any special work of providence, which might make
it recorded and remembered with honor among men.

(...).
The Apostle, Romans 14.6. speaks of man's regarding of a day, He that regards a
day, regards it unto the Lord; The Apostle treats in that Chapter about the
observation of days: finding that many believers could not be taken off from
solemnizing those feasts, which were of Gods own founding and instituting
among the Jews, he advises that they should not be judged or hardly censured,
for going according to their conscience, for he that out of conscience and
according to his light regards, that is, does solemnize or observe a day, he
regards it to the Lord, that is, to the honor of God, and with a sincere
desire to please him. But the thing I aim at in alleging this Text, is to
give light to the point in hand, what it is to regard a day. The Apostle is
plain, that Man's regarding of a day, is to have a day in special account, as
those days were, which God instituted among the Jews for special ends,
commanding them to observe them, and promising a blessing in their observation.
Proportionably Gods regarding of a day, is the special esteem he has, or
care he takes of it, and the special blessing he powers down upon it. Some
practical truths are hence observeable,

First, Consider these two parts of the curse, as they are placed in succession
one after another, or in conjuction one with another, Let the day be
darkness, and let not God regard it from above. This may teach us, That there
is no day so dark, or condition so troublesome, but if God regard and take
notice of it, man may take comfort and rejoice in it. Though the day be
darkness, Gods eye will make it light; his regarding is a blessing, we never
loose all, till God leaves us. If in the hour and power of darkness, (as
Christ calls the time of his passion) God do but lift up the light of his
countenance upon us, we shall be saved. Jobs wish of darkness, had done his
day no great hurt, unless he had taken the eye of God off from it also. All
the light that is in the world, the light of Sun, Moon and Stars, is but
darkness to us, if God hide his face; but let Sun, Moon and Stars hide
their faces, let all creatures withdraw their comfort, if God regard us we are
well: Therefore Job puts the sting of the curse in Gods not regarding and
withdrawing from his day.

Secondly, When he wishes that God would not regard his day, he desires God to
lay aside or suspend his continual work.

Observe then, That God does observe and take particular notice of every day.
As all persons shall be accountable to him for their actions, so also for their
time: God will inquire after every inch of time, after every moment of our
lives. Many men regard not a day, they value not their precious time, they know
not how to spend or be rid of it, how to wear it out and pass it away: But
God observes and regards every moment. The Apostle calls to redeeming of time,
Ephesians. 5.16. And he subjoynes a motive, Because the days are evil. We may
give in this of Job for a motive: God regards time, therefore let us redeem
time. If a day be within Gods regarding, surely it may command ours.

Thirdly, Let not God regard it. We may observe,

That the blessing and comfort of every day, depends upon the care and respect
of God to it. The eyes of all things look up unto God. Why do all things
look up unto God. It is that God may look down upon them: If God look down
upon the creature, then the creature revives and is refreshed; there are
influences from the eye and sight of God, which are able to quicken the deadest
times, and make glad the saddest hearts: As we pray for and humbly expect every
day our daily bread from God, so every day does (as it were) expect a daily
blessing from God, which is his regarding of our days.

It is the greatest evil that can befall the creature, when God regards it
not; all the blessings of the creature are bound up (like Jacobs life in the
life of Benjamin) in that respect which God bears to them, and in the care
which he has of them. The Apostle Paul* disputing with the Philosophers of
Athens, shows the state of that time, which they accounted such a golden-age,
( Acts 17.30.) The time of that ignorance God winked at, (...).
so we translate it; the word properly signifies, God did over-looke that
time; And there are some translations which express it in the very term of
the Text, The time of that ignorance God regarded not; For we are not to
think, there ever were any times, which God winked at in the matter of his
Justice, so as not to call them to an account: I grant that times of ignorance
are comparatively winked at in respect of Justice, God will not proceed so
severely with them as with knowing times: but God never winketh at any person,
or at any times how ignorant soever, so as to let them go unpunished, and
never call them to an account. Such connivence God hates, as being inconsistent
both with his providence and his justice. The Apostle is direct, They who sin
without law (that is, without the knowledge of the law written) shall perish
without law, namely, the written law, only according to the sentence of that
law, which the finger of nature has written in their hearts, Romans 2.12.
Ignorance shall not be so winked at, as to be altogether excused. How then did
God wink? There is a twofold winking. 1. Of disrespect. 2. Of dispensation.
Gods winking is his direspecting. He winked at those times, that is, he lightly
passed them by, his eye was not upon them for good, he regarded them not, in
such a manner as to provide for them and send amongst them that great blessing,
which now (says Paul) he sends you by my hands, the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

When the blessed Virgin heard by that message of the Angel, that she should
be mother to the Savior of the world, she blesses God in this phrase, Thou
have regarded the low estate of thine handmaid; When God in a way of favor
does but look toward us, our lowest estate is raised up, Thou have regarded
the low estate of thine handmaid; it is but a look of gracious regard from
God, and all is well with man. On the other side, if God take off his eye,
wink and disregard, all is blasted, yea accursed, our high estate falls, our
comforts are sowred and turned into a lump of sorrow. We may say of all
outward excellencies as Haman did, Esth. 5.13. of all his honor, and
greatness and favor at Court, All this I have, but all this avails me
nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings gate; All his
comforts were clouded, all the light of his high estate was ecclipsed, because
there was a new Star, Mordecai, shining still at the Kings gate; Much more
may we sit down, and casting up all that we have and are, make the foot of
our account nothing, without the favor of God; what do riches, what does
credit, what does beauty or parts avail us if God regard not? all is nothing
at all without God. What are times, what are days, what is your condition if
God withdraw himself? this aggravates the curse, this is mournful, when God
regards not. Job goes on to a third branch of the curse.

Let not God regard it, neither let the light shine upon it. That which before
he spoke against his day, by wishing it darkness, he speaks over again and
more in other words, by wishing light might be denied and withheld from it; To
have no light, is not a bare repetition or an explication of what it is to be
in darkness, but it is an addition to, or an aggravation of it: So the
Prophet, Isa. 50.10. by him that walks in darkness and has no light, sets
out the saddest condition of an afflicted soul. No light is not only
darkness, but pure darkness; As when the Apostle John, would advance the
glory of God, he says, God is light, and in him there is no darkness at all,
(1 Ep. c. 1.) God is pure light, so darkness without light is pure darkness.

Let not the light.] As darkness, so light may be taken either properly for
natural light, that which God first created: light was the first perfect
visible creature, light was the first days work, and by the work of the
fourth was gathered into those heavenly vessels, the Sun, Moon and Stars,
and there put, that it might be dispensed and carried about the world,
especially by that chariot of the Sun. Let this light, this natural light be
withheld, let it not shine (says Job) upon that day. The withdrawing of
natural light is a great affliction to the world: Light is the most
incorporeall of all corporal things; the spiritualnesse of it shows the
goodness of it: light is the beauty, and discovers all the beauty of the
world. As a goodly adorned furnished room without a window or a candle, such
is the world without light. Light is not only the light, but the life of the
world, it quickens and comforts the motions of nature; it is the instrument by
which all the influences of Heaven are communicated to the earth, which being
stopped, the course of nature stops: this caused a great Philosopher to cry out
(when at the passion of Christ the light of the Sun was totally ecclipsed)
Either the God of nature suffers, or the whole frame of nature dissolves. Was
it not then a dreadful curse, when Job wishes the light (taking it for
natural light) might not shine upon his day?

But further, take it improperly, then, let not the light shine upon it, has
this voice in it, Let there be no comfort, no joy, no good thing in the
compass of that day. Light in Scripture expresses all good; as darkness all
evil; That great blessing which was promised unto the Church in the great
restoration of it, is shadowed by light, and by an increasing light, in Isa.
30.26. Moreover the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and
the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the
day that the Lord binds up the breach of his people, and heals the stroke
of their wound. We are not to conceive, that there shall be such an increase of
the natural light of the Moon or of the Sun, but there shall be an increase
of the comfort of the people of God, which shall be as if the Moon and the Sun
had in one day the light of seven days, as if the Moon had got the light of
the Sun, and the Sun had got a sevenfold light more then it had before. And he
who is the chief, the choicest and most transcendent blessing of all, the joy
of all our hearts, Jesus Christ, is called light, he came as light into the
world, he is the light of the world, the Son of righteousness. The creator
of all good things, found nothing so good to show his own goodness by, as
light. Christ is light, God is light, and in him there is no darkness at all.
If then we take Jobs speech metaphorically or improperly, Let not the light
shine upon that day, it amounts to a higher loss then the former. Truly (says
Solomon) light is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun; and we
may say truly, all sweetness is light, and every pleasant thing is as the Sun:
Though the Sun shine upon us, yet if comfort be removed from us, we are in
darkness. Such a condition the Prophet speaks of, ( Isa. 50.10.) Who is among
you that fears the Lord, and obeys the voice of his servant, that walks
in darkness and has no light. No light, is no comfort, none for the outward
man, none for the inner man, both being benighted, both deserted. Hence observe,

That it is a greater judgment to have good things removed from us, then to
have evil inflicted on us. He speaks more against the day, when he says, let
not the light shine upon it, then when he says, let it be darkness. The
punishment of loss is greater then the punishment of sense. He that is
deprived of all good, is by that act invested with all evils. The most woeful
condition of ungodly men in this life, is expressed by the punishment of loss,
There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked, Isa. 57.21. That they have
trouble is not so bad, as that they have no peace. And the worst part of that
everlasting woe which ungodly men shall suffer is a punishment of loss: The
heat of the fire shall not trouble them so much, as the want of light: God
has fully resolved that their day shall be darkness, that himself will never
regard it from above, nor let the least beam of the light of his countenance
shine upon it; Hence the condition of the damned is called outer darkness,
(Mat. 22.13.) By outer darkness, Christ means darkness without any ray of
light: Outer darkness is their portion who are without, Rev. 22.15. As the
greatest blessing we receive by Christ is positive, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes on him,
should not perish, (here is the removing of evil) but have everlasting life,
here is the bringing in of good: And this is the better part of the blessing.
So on the other side, to have all good, light and life removed, is the most
bitter part of the curse.

Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it. Darkness and the shadow of
death.] These words are the fourth branch of the curse upon his day, he
repeates the former curse, but with new additions; He had said before, let this
day be darkness, now he says, let darkness and the shadow of death stain it.

The shadow of death.] The word considered in the composition of it, may be
translated image of death. And because the shadow of a body gives us the image
of a body, (as in the shadow of a man, you have the image and proportion of a
man; in the shadow of a Tree, you have the image and representation of a Tree)
because (I say) the shadow gives the image of a body, therefore the Hebrews by
a Metonymie, call an image a shadow: So that the shadow of death, is such
darkness as is like death, the very image of death: He was not contented in
general to say, let darkness stain it, but if any would know what kind or
degree of darkness he intends, these words expound his meaning to be, the
worst darkness that can be: Any darkness is evil, but darkness and the
shadow of death is the utmost of evils. David put the worst of his case, and
the best of his faith, when he said Psalm. 23.4. (...)
Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil,
that is, in the greatest evil, I will fear no evil. The estate of those men
who lived beyond the line of the Gospel, (and that is a very doleful place to
live in) though a paradise for outward pleasure, is thus described by the
Prophet, Isa. 9.2. The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light
(Jesus Christ,) they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them
has the light shined. Again, The shadow of a thing in Scripture, notes the
power of a thing, and to be under the shadow of a thing, is to be under the
power of a thing. The bramble (Judge. 9.15.) said unto the trees, if in truth
ye anoint me King over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow: that
is, trust to that help which I am able to afford you. So likewise, to be under
the shadow of the Almighty, under the shadow of his wings, is, to be under the
power of the Almighty, for safety and protection* Thus we may conceive it here,
to be under the shadow of death, is to be so under the power or reach of death,
that death may take a man and seize upon him when it pleases. Though I walk
in the valley of the shadow of death, that is, though I be so near death, that
it seems to others death may catch me every moment, though I be under so many
apparances and probabilities of exreame danger, that there appears an
impossibility (in sense) to escape death, yet I will not fear.

Thirdly, To be under the shadow of death, is to be under the influences of
death; the influences of death are those fears and doubtings, divisions and
vexations of spirit, those distractions and distempers of mind which fall upon
man, in times of imminent and unavoidable danger. Let the shadow of death
stain it, that is, let it be filled with those fears, and cries, and
confusions, which usually accompany or prepare the way for death.

Fourthly, Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it, that is, such
darkness as dwells with death, such darkness as fills the house of death,
the grave: The grave is a dark house. We use to say of that which we would
have forgotten, let it be buried in darkness. There is no work in the grave,
and therefore there needs no light in the grave, neither indeed can there be.

Lastly thus, Darkness and the shadow of death, that is, deadly darkness,
thick stifling darkness, such as is in deep pits and mines under the earth,
where vapors and noisome dampes do many times strike men with death. We may
here take notice, how Job heaps up words, words very like in sound, and all
alike in sense, or concurring to make up one sense: Such amplifications in
Scripture, are vehement asseverations: As Joh. 1.20. It is said of the Baptist,
He confessed and denied not, but confessed, I am not the Christ; And those
phrases, Thou shall dye and not live, I shall not dye but live; Thou shall be
below and not above. So Job of his day, Let it be darkness, let not the light
shine upon it, let darkness and the shadow of death stain it.

(...)
The word which we render (stain,) signifies properly to redeem a thing,
either by price or by power, to redeem a thing by paying for it, or to redeem
a thing by rescuing of it; Hence among the Jews, he that was to redeem his
deceased brothers land, and marry the widow, was called Goel, from this word,
as we may read in the fourth of Ruth. So the avenger of blood was called Goel,
Numb. 35.12. because he likewise did redeem the blood of his brother, fetch it
back again as it were by a price in the execution of justice. The learned
Junius with some others, translates according that sense of the Original word,
O that darkness and the shadow of death had redeemed that day, or fetched back
that day, (he referres it to the day past upon which he was borne) and so takes
it for an allusion to the first state of things; we know at the first,
darkness had dominion over all, over all that Chaos or rude matter which God
made at first; Darkness (says Moses) was upon the face of the deep, Genesis
1.2. Then God gave a command to light, saying let there be light, ver. 3.
presently light went forth and rescued the creature from under the power of
darkness. Now, says Job here, Oh that darkness and the shadow of death had
redeemed that day, or fetched again that day out of the hands of light! Oh
that darkness had recovered that which in the beginning was under its power!
that so my day being wrapped up in darkness, might be without form and void.

But the word is frequently translated (and well here) to pollute or to stain
a thing, as Mal. 1.7. Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar, and ye say,
wherein have we polluted thee? And that of lamenting Jeremie, They have
polluted themselves with blood, so that men could not touch their garments,
Lam. 4.14. So darkness is said to stain or pollute the day, as filthiness or
blood stains and pollutes, In nocte sunestatur mundi honor: omnis substa^^ia
denigratur, sordent, silent, stupent cuncta, Tertul de resurrect carnis.
discoulours and defiles the beauty of a garment: Darkness obscures and
blindes the beauty of the most glorious creatures: natural darkness does it.
Suppose you should come into a room furnished with the most exquisite and
costly ornaments, hung with the most curious and lively pictures; if there be
no light there, the beauty of all is lost to us, darkness stains it, you may
have as good a sight in a dungeon as there. Again, take it for Metaphorical
or improper darkness, that also stains the beauty of the creature; if you
have never so great a stock and estate of riches, or honor, etc. let but
sorrow and trouble, war and divisions arise, the beauty of all is stained.
What is honor then, but higher unhappiness? And what are riches then, but
golden tho^^^s? What is liberty then, but freer misery? And what is strength
then, but stronger pain, and an ability to bear a heavier burden of
affliction? The glory and beauty of the creature is gone in dark times; when
such a day comes as Joel speaks of, a day of blackness and gloominesse,
where is your bravery, what becomes of your finenesse? But that which stains the
creature most, is mystical darkness, the darkness of ignorance and of sin:
the darkness of guilt and of Gods displeasure: O how is the beauty of the
soul (which is far more glorious then all visible creatures) how is the
beauty of that stained, when it lies under any of these darknesses! Hence
therefore, we see what a blessing light is, and how we are bound to bless God
for light, for natural light, for the outward light of a comfortable
condition, but especially for the light of his countenance, which is better
then life; for the light of knowledge, for the light of grace, how should we
for ever bless the Father of lights?

Let a cloud dwell upon it.] This is the fifth branch of the curse. A cloud (as
naturalists teach) is a thick vapor raised up by the heat of the Sun to the
middle region of the air, and there-by the cold condensed becomes so thick,
that it stopps and intercepteth the light; Clouds and darkness go together,
as in the 97th. Psalm, ver. 2. if there be clouds, there is darkness, Clouds
and darkness are round about him. So that to say, let a cloud dwell upon it,
is but a further exemplifying of the same thing; before it was, let darkness be
upon it, now, let a cloud dwell upon it.

Dwelling, notes the continuance and consistency of darkness, he does not say,
let a cloud pass over it, (for clouds properly are unfixed, clouds move
continually, and are carried on the wings of the wind;) But Job would have his
cloud a fixed cloud, a cloud so black and so strong, as might not be dissolved,
but cause a continued eclipse upon the day.

A cloud, and the dwelling of a cloud, imports sometime the care and protection
of God over his people, Exodus 40.38. We read of a cloud that was continually
over the Tabernacle, a cloud was over it by day, and a pillar of fire by night.
In the fire there was direction, in the cloud protection, and mercy in both. So
Isa, 4.5. God promises to create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and
upon her assemblies a cloud. Which is expounded in the close of the verse: For
upon all his glory (his Church and Saints) there shall be a defense. But here
the cloud, and the dwelling of it, notes continued darkness: As if Job should
have said, If the light do shine upon that day, I wish that a curtain might
be drawn perpetually between the world and the Sun, let a cloud dwell before
the face of the Sun, which may muffle it and intercept those beams which would
enlighten and refresh the earth.

Clouds are refreshings, yet clouds you see may prove afflictions: As a cloud
is a protection at one time, so it may be an affliction at another: As a cloud
shadows us from the heat, it is a blessing; but as a cloud ecclipses the
light, so it is a curse; The same creature may be employed both for a curse,
and for a blessing. Yet further Job would not only have it a dwelling cloud,
but a condensed cloud. Some clouds are so thin, that the Sun appears, and
light shines thorough them; Job desires this may be thick enough, not only to
cause darkness, but to cause blackness: Which is the last branch of his curse
upon his day.

Let the blackness of the day terrify it. Jobs heart was so full of passion,
that his sorrows could not come out at once, he takes time and breath. Now
says he, let the blackness of the day terrify it.

Blackness, is more then darkness, therefore we find blackness an addition
to darkness, in the Epistle of Jude, ver. 13. where giving diverse elegant
characters of wicked men, whom he calls spots in their feasts of charity,
clouds without water, trees without fruit, raging waves of the sea, foaming out
their own shame, wandering Stars: And what is the portion of men thus
qualified, but Hell, wrath and vengeance? So he tells us in the next words, To
whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. Darkness, and the
blackness of darkness, is the portion of those that shall for ever lie under
the wrath of God; blackness of darkness is the beauty of Hell, that fire will
besoote the damned to all eternity: Then the blackness of darkness, is the
darkest darkness that can be imagined; blackness of darkness was Egypts
plague; that was darkness and thick darkness, darkness to be felt, Exo.
10.21. so dark, that no man could see another, neither arose any from his
place for three days, ver. 23. this was blackness of darkness; the picture
of Hell, that chamber of darkness. The word in the Hebrew, signifies heat
and blackness: The reason is given, a (...)
because heat makes things black and sworthy; from the same word those
Idolatrous Priests spoken of, Geminata postre^a calores intensiores and
vehementiores quales esse solent in diebus canicluaribus, significat, Drus.
2 King. 23.5. were called Chemarims, or the black Priests, and they were
called so, either from the black vests or garments which they commonly wore, or
from the heat and fire of their furious zeal, either in the defense or
exercise of their superstitious worship; or from the smoaky incense which they
offered, fit enough to black themselves, but no way pleasing unto God.

Let the blackness of the day terrify it.] Terrify what? Terrify the day.
The day is not capable of fears, or of afrightments; but the meaning is this,
let the blackness of the day make it a terrible day; or let it be a terrible
day by reason of the blackness of it; As we use to say, such a day was a
terrible day, it was a black day.

Changes in the course of nature are full of terror. That which is proper and
natural to the day is light, therefore to see the day covered with blackness,
Vox composita a (...) Amaritudines and particula (...) sic, sicut.
must needs affright us: when we look for light, as they in the Prophet, and
behold darkness, that troubles; but when we look for light, and behold
blackness, that terrifies. The vulgar Latin translation reads it thus, Let
(as it were) the bitternesses of the day terrify it; The bitternesses of the
day, are those sad accidents and troubles which fall out upon that day. To
which sense the Chaldee Paraphrase thus expounds it; let such bitternesses of
the day afflict it, as the Prophet Jeremie was afflicted with, for the
destruction of the Temple, or as Jonas when he was cast into the sea. Hard
bondage made the lives of the Israelites bitter, Exodus 1.14. And when the Lord
threatens to turn their feasts into mourning, and their songs into
lamentation, he concludes thus, and I will make it as the mourning of an only
son, and the end thereof as a bitter day, Amos 8 10. Hence afflictions are
called, gall and wormwood, bitter things. And the Chaldeans whom God made so
great a scourge to his own people, are called a bitter Nation, Hab. 1.6.

We have opened these words which concern the curse upon Jobs day. Now
follows his curse upon the night.

Verse 6. As for the night let darkness seize upon it, let it not be joined to
the days of the year, let it not come into the number of the months.

Verse 7. Lo let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein.

He goes on in his former passionate Rhetoric, to load the night with as
many evils (if not more) as he had done the day. As for that night, let
darkness seize upon it.

We have heard of darkness before, darkness upon the day. What does Job mean
here to call for darkness upon the night? The night is it self full of
darkness, yea darkness is proper to the night. Is it any curse to say, let
wormwood be bitter, or to say, let lead be heavy? the natural property of a
thing cannot be the punishment of a thing. How is it then that Job says, Let
that night be darkness, or Let darkness seize upon it?

Though it be true, that darkness is proper to the night, yet there are
degrees of darkness, and every darkness is not proper to the night. The word
here used for darkness, is observed by Grammarians, to signify an
extraordinary thick darkness, (...) Tenebrosus ^urbo. Vulg.
yea darkness joined with tempest; Let thick tempestuous darkness seize upon,
or take hold of that night; for the word signifies, to graspe or take a thing
in ones hands, let darkness graspe it. Though the night be dark, yet it may
be darker; we call some nights light nights, in comparison of others. Note from
this,

That there is no estate so ill, but it is possible it may be worse. The night
is dark, yet you may super-adde darkness to it: and though the condition of
any person or people be as the night, dark, yet the darkness may increase
more and more to a perfect night. You know what God says concerning the people
of the Jews, when he threatened them with troubles, I will punish you yet seven
times more for your sins. God can make such a night, as that the former night
shall seem a day to it; God can add darkness to the darkness of the night:
God can add bitterness to the bitterness of womewood, and make lead more
heavy then lead: There is no man on earth in so sad a condition, but he may be
in a worse. Art thou poor? God can send thee such poverty, as that thy former
poverty was riches compared with this. Art thou weak and sick? God can add
more sickness, and make thee so weak, that thy former sickness may be
accounted health, and thy weakness strength compared with this. In this sense
darkness seizes upon the night. He wishes a second evil upon that night.

Let it not be joined to the days of the year. Some read it thus, Let it not
be computed in the days of the year. Hieron, Septuag.
Others, Let it not be in the days of the year. This is another evil he
calls down upon the night. The glory of the night consists in its conjunction
to the day; hence light and darkness put together, come both under the
denomination and notion of day; Night is called day, as being a part of the
natural day: Now that which is the chief privilege of the night, this curse
strikes at: Job would have it rent and disjoynted from the day, Let it not be
joined to the days of the year.

Disunion and division is a great curse, when the night is not joined to the
day, it is the curse of the night. The Rabbis have a conceit, why after the
work of the second day was finished, (God beholding what he had done) did not
add any approbation to it; when he made the light, which was the first days
work, he approves it, God saw the light, and said it was good, but to the work
of the second day, God subjoyned no approbation, by saying it was good; The
reason (I say) which many of the Rabbis give of it, was this, because then was
the first disunion, that made the first second, that ever was, all before was
one (sub unissimo Deo) under the one-most God; I shall leave this phancie to
the Rabbis. But there is somewhat in the notion it self, namely, that
division and disunion are the evils of the creature. The night has glory by
union with the day; the weakest things, and the obscurest things, havean honor
by being joined with the stronger and more excellent.

And as these natural disunions are the affliction of natural things; so
civil disunions and civil divisions are much more the affliction of people
and Nations. Christ assures us that the strongest Kingdom divided cannot
stand, Mark. 3.24. Weak things are strong by union, and that not only by union
with the strong, but by union among themselves. Weak things united are
strengthened, join weak with weak and they are strong. And things obscure,
united, are honorable, especially if united with that which is honorable; The
glory of the wife is in the band of union with her husband, she shines with the
rays of her husbands honor: whatsoever natural or civil excellency is in
him, reflects upon her; The woman is the glory of the man, (as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 11.7.) in regard of subjection: It is man's glory, that God has
given him superiority over so excellent a creature. But in another sense, the
man is the glory of the woman, she communicates with him in all his dignity how
great soever. Thus also the day is the glory of the night: The night shines by
her marriage with the day. Job sues out a divorce between them, Let it it not
be joined to the days of the year.

And let it not come into the number of the months. (...) Antiquissima suit in
mensibus Lunaribus noctium and Lunationum observatio, quod and ipsum mensis
nomen testatur, quod apud Graecos a Luna dicitur, nam ((...)) mensis est, and
vero ((...)) Luna, Pined* in loc. Summa h^^ vult, deleatur e Calendario, Dru.
The Original may be translated, in the number of the Moons: The same word
among the Hebrews, signifies the Moon and a month: as likewise among the
Grecians: And the reason is, because their months were counted by their
Moons, and the Moon is renewed every month. Every Lunation made a Month,
and thirteen Lunations made a year, their month consisting of 28 days,
which is a Lunary month; So that when Job says, Let it not come into the
number of the months, he would take away one special benefit of the night;
And it is as if he had said, let that night be useless, and stand for nothing
in the Calender of the year. To every thing there is a season, and a time to
every purpose under the Heaven, says the Preacher, ( Eccles. 3.1.) So every
season has something to do, and there is a purpose for every time under
Heaven. A purpose for summer, and a purpose for the winter, a purpose for the
day, and a purpose for the night. And for any of these to be disappointed of
their purpose, is (so far as they are capeable of affliction) their
affliction. We may observe hence,

That it is a great curse upon any creature, to be made an useless creature,
to stand for nothing. This is to loose the end of its being, and therefore it
must needs loose the happiness of its being. Every thing was (by the Law of
its creation) ordained for some use, and therefore cannot but be unhappy when
it is made useless. And if it be the glory of inanimate creatures when God
will use them, or when men make use of them for God; how unglorious then is the
condition of those men, who are, as (God speaks of that King, Jer. 22.28.)
Like a despised broken Idol, which has no honor, and is of no use, who are as
vessels wherein there is no pleasure, vessels laid by the walls, (as we speak)
laid aside, as unfit or unworthy to be looked after, and employed in any public
service.

Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful sound come therein. This
solitariness of the night may have respect to the former words: He would not
have it joined to the days of the year, he would not have it come in the
number of months. What then? then it must needs be like a solitary widow, all
alone, Let that night be solitary. Or secondly, his meaning may be this, Let
there be no meetings that night. The night is not solitary in it self, but
then the night is called solitary, when the society of friends is stopped and
interrupted. It was the custom of those times, and it is a custom continued
in many places to these times, Egyptij festum celiberrimum babuerunt nocturnum,
tum, etiam noctu celebrebantur nuptiae, Herod. l. 2.
for friends to meet in the night: and such meetings make night as day; good
society is comfortable; A solitary condition is a sorrowful condition. So
then, Job compleates his curse in this verse, and makes up a full sum of
misery upon his night. What can be said more against it, then now he says. He
had before wished it dark in it self, divided from the day, of no number in
the months; And now he would not have friends meet or refresh themselves by
mutual communion and loving converse that night. Much of the comfort of our
lives is brought in by the society of friends. Man is defined a sociable
creature, as well as a reasonable creature, solitariness is opposite both to
the nature and happiness of man. Woe be to him that is alone (says Solomon)
two are better then one, and especially in times of trouble. As our comforts
are multiplied upon them that are near us, so our sorrows are allayed and
eased by them. There is a solitariness which is the sweetest part of our
lives, when we retire a while from the world, from the throng of men and
business, that we may be more intimate with Christ, and take our fill in
communion with him. To go alone, that we may meet with God, is Heaven upon
earth; but to be so left alone and scattered, that we cannot meet with man, is
(if not a hell yet) one of the greatest afflictions upon the earth: Such
solitary times are sad times.

Let no joyful voice come therein.] As if he should say, If men will meet that
night, and converse together, let them meet only to mourn together, and let
their conversation be made up with mutual sorrows; let them only tell each
other the sad stories of their afflictions. Thus let them meet to lament
together, but let none meet to rejoice together, let there be no meeting with
any joyful voice that night. He alludes again to the custom of those times,
which were wont to have as meetings in the night, so to rejoice in those
meetings; They feasted with songs and music, a joyful voice was in their
meetings, Music is sweetest in the night: The stillnesse of the night gives
advantage to the voice. The Roman History tells us, that their greatest
feasts, their most luxurious banquetings and curious music was in the night.
The Apostle alludes to that custom when he says, They that are drunken, are
drunken in the night, (1 These. 5.6.) Works of darkness seek times of
darkness. He that does evil hates the light, Joh. 3.21. principally the
light of knowledge, and withal the light of sense. There are two opinions
about this joyful voice, which I shall but name and pass on. First, The
Chaldee Paraphrast will have this joyful voice to be the voice of the Cock,
Let not the Cock crow that night, the crowing of the Cock is a comfortable
voice in the night; The Cock is a natural clock, and by his crowing tells us
the hours of the night: As if Job had said, Monstravolant, dirae strident in
nocte volucres, Nocturnaeque gemunt striges, and seralia bub^ Damn^ ca^ens^
Statius, l. 3.
instead of the cheerful voice of the Cock, let that night be filled with the
doleful voice of the Owl, or of the Shreech-owle. A second opinion says,
this joyful voice which Job puts from and denies his night, was the voice of
the Stars, spoken of as they would have us conceive, Chap. 38.7. When the
morning Stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy. But
to leave these as fancies, rather then expositions: The interpretation given is
clear and suitable to the method of the curse: Job would have no meeting on
that night, or if any were, he forbids their joy, Let no joyful voice be heard
therein.

It is a great evil upon any time, when the voice of joy is taken away from
it: it is a great evil upon times, when joyful meetings can no more be
observed; when if any do meet, they meet and sigh together, they meet and
lament together, they meet and bemoane each others losses and calamities. The
Prophet Amos speaks of a time when the songs of the Temple shall be howlings,
(Chap. 8. v. 3.) And ver. 10. I will turn your feasts into mourning, and your
songs into lamentation. It is very sad, when the songs of our private houses
are changed into howlings: but much more when the songs of the Temple. Both
these are pronounced against Babylon, as a part of that dreadful curse which
God will power out upon it, when his wrath comes to the utmost, Rev. 18.22. The
voice of harpers and musicians, and of pipers and trumpeters, shall be heard no
more at all in thee, and the sound of the mil-stone shall be heard no more at
all in thee, and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard
no more at all in thee, That is, O Babylon, there shall be no joyful voice any
more at all in thee: Not the voice of music, no not the voice of a mil-stone.
We have great cause to fear that the joyful voice may suddenly be taken
away, not only from our nights, but also from our days; not only from our
houses, but also from our Temples; For the voice of sin has bin heard from
both. Darkness has begun to seize upon our light; the seed of division is not
only sown, but sprung up among us; our troubles increase, yea our joyful
voice is already changed into the sound of the trumpet, and the Alarm of War,
into the neighings of Horses, and the confused noise of bloody battles, Isa.
9.5. And which may afflict our hearts more, we hear the mournful voice of
the Widow crying out, My Husband my Husband, We hear the mournful voice of
the Orphan, crying out my Father, my Father. Husband and Father slain by the
sword, while they went out to help the Lord against the mighty. It is time for
us to sit solitary and alone, to mourn every family apart, and our wives
apart, (Zach. 12.12.) to lift up our voice in prayer night and day, least the
joyful voice be utterly taken away, and for ever silenced amongst us: Least it
be said of us as of Jerusalem, (Lam. 1.1.) How does the City sit solitary that
was full of people? How is she become as a widow? she that was great among the
Nations, and Princes among the Provinces, how is she become tributary? As that
Heathen said of the time past, I had perished, if I had not perished: So we may
say of the time to come; We shall mourn, if we do not mourn, we shall be
solitary, if we sit not alone. Our nights of sinful joy in chambering and
wontonnesse, have bereft us, and will bereave us more of refreshing joys. And
instead of the voice of friend and brother, you may hear only the voice of the
enemy, and avenger: and that is no joyful voice. When Jacob was informed of
the approach of Esau his bloody brother, he put all things in order, and
presently the Text says, Jacob was left alone, Genesis 32.24. What, deserted? did
his company run from him? No, it was an elected solitariness, not a
necessitated solitariness, he desired to be alone; and he staid alone that he
might not be alone; He staid alone that he might get God nearer in communion
with him and his, that his family might not be scattered from him, and his
house left desolate. So, if we would be voluntarily alone, from the world to be
with God, wrestling out nights in prayer as Jacob did, we might (as he did)
prevent solitary nights, and prevail with God by the voice of prayer, in the
mediation of Jesus Christ, and the powerful cry of his blood, to continue unto
us the voice of joy.

JOB 3.8, 9. Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up
their mourning.

Let the Stars of the twilight thereof be dark, let it look for light but
have none, neither let it see the dawning of the day.


IN the former verses, Job himself curses the night, in this he inviteth
others to curse it; that his sorrow might appear not only serious but solemn,
he calls for those who made mourning their profession, and to weep for and
with others, their trade: such as used to rise early, and awaken their
companions to come away and join in prepared and studied lamentation. This I
take to be the sum and sense of these words, which yet in the letter are very
full of difficulty, and have divided interpreters exceedingly. I shall briefly
touch the most of those senses given, and then more fully present you with what
I apprehend as suitable to this Text, and consonant unto truth.

First, Take a brief of the diverse readings of this verse, Let them curse it
that curse the day, who are ready to raise up their mourning: So we in our
Bibles.

The Vulgar and the Septuagint read it thus. Let them curse it that curse the
day, who are ready to raise up Leviathan.

Another renders the latter clause, Who are ready to raise up the Dragon.
Theodot.

Mr. Broughtons translation runs thus, May they curse it who do curse the day,
who will hunt Leviathan.

Junius and Tremelius, have a translation different from all these, I would
they had cursed thee that inlighten the day, who are ready to stir up
Leviathan, or the Whale. That which all other Interpreters I have met with,
call cursing of the day, they call inlightning the day.

You see there is much variety about the rendering of these words out of the
Hebrew. And there is as much diversity of opinion grounded thereupon.

First, Some apprehend that Job in this verse, alludes to the custom of a
certain people in Ethiopia called the Atlantes, frequently mentioned in diverse
histories, Hi solemn transcendentem execrantur, eique praeterea ominia convitia
ingerunt quod torridus ipsos and regionem perdat, Herod. l. 4. ad finem.
Atlantes diris solis ortum excipiunt, Solin. c. 4 Polybist. Atlantes and s^lem
Orientem and Occidentem dira imprecatione con^uentur, Plin. l. 5. c. 8.

Pined in loc.


who living under the torrid Zone, in an extreme hot climate, used to curse
the Sun when it arose, because it scorched them with vehement heat: This
made them in love with the night, and hate the day. And so the sense is made
out thus, Let them curse this night, who use to curse the Sunrising every day,
whose pain hightning and imbittering their spirits, caused them to power out
the most bitter and revengefull execrations.

But I will lay this by, though some set much store by it, as a special
treasure of invention; For I much question, not only whether this custom of
cursing the day amongst that people, was known unto Job, but whether he ever
heard of such a people being so remote and distant from him.

Secondly, I shall a little open the meaning of that Translation given by
Junius, Let them curse it who inlighten the day, who are ready to raise up
Leviathan or the Whale.

By those who inlighten the day, he says the Stars are to be understood, Let
those curse thee who inlighten the day, that is, let the Stars curse thee;
And who are ready to raise up Leviathan, that is, let the winds be against
thee, let the winds curse thee, or be a curse unto thee. The reason he gives,
is because Stars are ( Illustratores Diei) the inlightners of the day; And to
salve it, we must not (says he) take the day strictly for a day artificial,
for then the Stars are of no use, but for that part of the day natural which
is dark, namely the night; the Stars are the inlightners of the day, namely
of the dark part of the day, the night; And so Job calls here to the very
Stars, that they should oppose and trouble that night.

We read in that notable history, Jug. 5.20. That the Stars in their courses
did fight against Sisera, such expressions there are, making as it were the
Heavens angry, and the Stars to oppose the designs of men. The host of
Heaven is under the command of the Lord of Hosts, when he calls them forth to
the help of his people. Thus he conceives Job inviting the Stars to take part
with him in this quarrel against his night; Let the Stars curse the day,
those inlightners of the day.

Then, he understands by them that stir up Leviathan, the winds; those words (
who stir up Leviathan,) are (says he) a pariphrasis or description of the
winds. The reason which he gives is, because when great winds arise and blow
strongly, that mighty fish the Whale or Leviathan lying at the bottom of the
sea, by the motion of the waters is roused and stirred up, and so mounts to the
superficies or top of the water, or appears above it. Thus the winds raise up
Leviathan. His sense from both, is, that Job sets the Stars and the winds
against this night, and bids them combine to make it troublesome and
tempestuous. This opinion for the reverence of the Authors name, deserves to
be looked upon with respect, but I should not, (neither do I) apprehend that
to be the meaning of Job in this place.

Thirdly, The difficulty is resolved by making these words an allusion to
Fishermen, as if Job here did but describe the condition of those, or show
what by accident does befall those whose trade and art it is to catch Leviathan
or the Whale. These take the word Leviathan in the proper sense, for that
mighty fish described in the 41th. of this Book of Job, Can thou draw out
Leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a coard which thou lettesh down?
etc.

Leviathan is derived from Lavah, which signifies joined or coupled together;
whence (to note it by the way) the word Levi, (...) Adjunctus, sociatus unde
Leviathan trissyllabum cum affixo.
the name of the third son which Jacob had by Leah. She called his name Levi,
For now, says she, will my husband be joined unto me, because I have borne him
three sons, Genesis 29.34. The same reason is given, why that dreadful fish is
called Leviathan. His description cleares this, Job 41.15. His scales are his
pride, shut up together as with a close seal, one is so near to another that
no air can come between them, they are joined one to another, they stick
together that they cannot be sundred. He has his name Leviathan, Qui bujusmode
magnos pisces piscantur, de nocte eos invadunt in tenebris, and ideo quando
dies incipit apparere, maledicu^t diei, quia per hoc eorum opus and intentio
impeditur, Aquinus in loc.
from the close joining or compactednesse of the scales, that cover or harness
him like an impenetrable armor of proof. Now taking the word thus properly
for the fish Leviathan, Job is conceived to allude to the custom of those who
hunt for the Whale: who observing the night to be most advantageous for that
work, are troubled at the approach of light, and therefore the Fishermen as
soon as ever they saw day begin to break, cursed the day, as an enemy to
their success in pursuing and killing the Whale. That Fishing is a business
of the night, is evident from that speech of Peter to our Savior Christ, (
Luke 5.5.) Master we have fi^hed all night and have taken nothing. According to
which allusion, the meaning of Job must be: As if he had said, I will not
strive any longer for words to express my passion against this night, let it
be blasted with the curse of those who are most skillfull in the dialect or
language of execrations; even with such a curse as those sea-hunters the
fishermen use to power forth upon the day, when it breaks too soon for their
profit, so that they are hindered in catching of Leviathan or the Whale.

There is a Proverb amongst us, If you swear or curse, you will catch no
fish; And it seems these were wont to swear and curse when they could not
catch. And hence it was a Proverb in other Countries, Piscatore aut nauta
maledidicentior.
when they would set out an enormious swearer, or one given to profane
cursing, they said, He swears, or he curses like a fisherman: A generation
of men whom that age had branded on the tongue, whose mouths were full of
cursings, and their ordinary discourse, as much oaths as words.

But against this exposition experience is objected, that the usual time of
fishing for the Whale, is in the day, not in the night. If it be so, then the
ground of this opinion is quite overthrown. That some kind of fishing is a
night-worke, the words and practice of Peter before mentioned, are proof
enough: Whether Whale-fishing were exercised in the night, I shall not much
contend to prove, seeing I approve but little of that interpretation which is
bottomed and built upon it.

Besides, I find others, who sticking to this translation, (the stirring of
Leviathan) do yet wave and pass by this conceit of night-fishing: And they
say that the curse here, is not to be referred to their rage against the light,
because it brings the day; but to the day, Piscatores diei maledicunt, in quo
ijs non accidit bonus piscatus.
because it brought them no success. So that, day is not opposed to night, but
a good or successful day, to a bad or successelesse day of fishing. And then
the sense is to this effect, that Job calls for such a curse upon his day, as
profane fishermen, who attempt to catch the Whale, usually spend upon that
unhappy day, wherein they loose their labor, and after all their hazard and
cost come home empty.

And when it is objected against this opinion; Why does Job mention Leviathan
or the Whale, if that be his meaning to allude unto the sinful passion of
disappointed fishermen; for vain men in that employment, are as apt to curse
and be passionate when they miss of their intendments in laboring to catch
any kind of fish?

To this answer may be given in two things. First, This business of fishing
for the Whale, is a business of great charge and greater danger, and because
greatest losses raise greatest passions, and the higher our disappointments
are, the higher is our language: therefore Job who intended here the highest
and greatest curse, wishes it parallel with that, which the greatest cursers
belch forth, when (as they pretend) they have greatest occasion, yea (as they
call reason) reason to curse: And who should these be but ignorant or
idolatrous fishermen, and they at such a pinch, when they have lost the hope of
their greatest gain. As if Job had said, let as big a curse fall upon that
night, as ever fell from the mouths of those profane fishers, not only when
they have bin successelesse in fishing for a Herring or a Sprat, but when after
all their pains, and cost they cannot take Leviathan. Micahs mother cursed,
when the eleven hundred shekels of silver were stolen from her, Judge. 17.1, 2.
To loose what we hope for, vexes corrupt nature as much as the loss of what we
have. They who have not treasure in Heaven, and to whom godliness is not more
the earthly gain, cannot but be enraged, when the hope of their gain is gone
upon the earth.

Secondly, We may say, he names the Leviathan by a Senechdoche, one principal
for all, or for any; the chiefest of a kind is put for all of a kind: And then
it is appliable to those sea-hunters, whatsoever game they pursue. I shall
touch one way more of illustrating the opinion of those who take Leviathan in
this Text for the Whale. We may conceive it thus, that Job does not here allude
to fishing for the Whale, and so to that successelesse fishing which provokes
to cursing. But take it in the general; The Whale (we know) is a very
formidable monster to Seamen and Mariners, the whole Ship with the lading of
it, and all their lives being endangered if a Whale strike it. So we may
understand that of Job, speaking of Leviathan, Chap. 41.25. When he raises up
himself, the mighty are afraid. Now the Whale being so formidable and
dangerous to Seamen; they perceiving the Whale near them, or themselves at
unawares ready to stir up or raise the Whale, are exceedingly afraid; And as
great fear in some sets them a praying, and causes strong prayers, so fear
in others sets them a cursing, and causes strong curses. Profane mariners,
seeing themselves in such imminent danger by the approach of the Whale,
presently curse the day that ever they loosed Anchor or set sail from the
Harbor, the day that ever they fell within the reach of this sea monster, now
ready to sink their vessel, and overwhelme them all. Such a curse Job wishes
upon that night, the night of his conception, as men of this rank, conceive
and bring forth in the day of their most pressing fears, when anguish and
sorrow take hold of them, as travail upon a woman with child, and they cannot
escape.

Thus I have given you the sum of those apprehensions which are offered for
the making up of this Exposition; namely, That the word is here to be taken for
that mighty fish Leviathan; And that, either in respect of those who make it
their business and go out purposely to catch Leviathan, or of those who
unawares are ready to be caught by Leviathan: The former disappointed of their
hopes, and the latter surprised with fears, making a curse their refuge, and
easing themselves by execrations.

There is a fourth opinion which gives the sense of these words quite another
way, though it retains the same translation. For passing by the allusion to
fishing or customs of fishermen, they make these words as a character or
description of the extremest and vilest of wicked men; as if Job saying, Let
them curse thee that curse the day, who are ready to stir up Leviathan, had
said, let the worst or most wicked among the children of men curse this night;
And we know, that the worst of men are most for cursing, they curse deepest; as
the best of men are most for prayer, and they pray highest and holiest. So
then, Jobs mind being to lay the sorest curse upon this night, thinks or finds
his own spirit too straight, his own heart not large enough to do it;
therefore he does (as it were) call in aid from those Masters of cursing, Let
the most expert, the most skilled in cursing, such as are verst in oaths and
blasphemies, the very dregs and scum of men, let them power out the dreggs, the
worst, the bitterest of their curses upon that night.

But how shall we make out this notion, that the vilest of men are here
described? That we must consider and open further, to show the substance and
dependence of this opinion.

The worst and wickeddest of men are conceived to be here meant in two
expressions.

First, By them who are said to curse the day, Let them curse it who curse the
day.

Secondly, In those words, Who are ready to raise up Leviathan. Both these are
supposed as descriptive circumlocutions of the most wicked and vilest men.

How so?

First, They that curse the day. That which a man hates, he is forward enough
to curse: Wicked men love darkness, and they hate the light, therefore they
curse the light. Light is of two sorts, either natural, that of the Sun, or
metaphorical, that of knowledge. Take light either way; take light properly,
for the natural light: or take light improperly, for the light or the day of
knowledge, wicked men and especially the worst of wicked men will be found
cursers of the day. First, They are so expressed in this book of Job, respecting
the natural day, chap. 24. where having described many acts of violence
committed by cruel oppressors, who know not God, ver. 1. he concludes, ver.
13. They are of those that rebel against the light, they know not the ways
thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof; And ver. 16. In the dark they dig
thorough houses which they had marked for themselves in the day time, they know
not the light, for the morning is to them even as the shadow of death: If one
know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death. Men to whom the
morning is a terror and light as the shadow of death, cannot but curse the
day, whose approach hinders them in their night-workes, in their black designs
and purposes. Secondly, Other Scriptures discover more deadly hatred in wicked
men against the light of knowledge, they rebel more against the day of grace,
then against the day of nature, or the natural day: The former hinders only
the outward practice of sin, but this opposes the inward principles of sin.
We see what cold entertainment, yea what war this light found in the world,
and why, ( Joh. 3.19, 20.) Light is come into the world, (that is, Christ and
the knowledge of his ways) and men (not men in general, but ungodly men)
loved darkness rather then light; Why? Because their deeds were evil, (evil
deeds, and evil doers seek covert in this darkness) for every one that does
evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, least his deeds should be
reproved. They are ignorant willingly, that they may sin more freely: For
though they are resolved to sin in and against the light of knowledge, yet they
had rather sin in and with the darkness of ignorance; no man can sin with so
much ease and delight in this light, as he can in darkness. A man that has
light in his understanding, can hardly sin without smart upon his conscience:
Hence they who love sin hate knowledge. On this ground it is as clear as the
day, that wicked men are (Lucifugae) such as avoid, shun and hate the day, no
marvel then if they curse the day; And to be angry with or curse the day, is
an evidence (as clear as the day) of a wicked man. He that desires not to know
the truth, has no desire to practice it; And he who hates the knowledge of the
truth, hates the practice of it; yea he therefore hates knowledge, because he
hates practice: This is wickedness at the height. To commit a sin against
light, is not so great an argument of an evil heart, as to be troubled at the
light which rebukes or would prevent the committing of that sin. Thus we see in
what sense, by those who curse the day, we may understand the worst of wicked
men.

But for the second part, [ Who are ready to raise up Leviathan.] How is this a
description of wicked men?

To make out this, we must expound Leviathan, not properly for the Whale, but
improperly and mystically for the Devil, that great Leviathan: Under which
name, he with all spiritual wickednesses, the opposers of Christ and of his
Church are comprehended by the Prophet ( Isa. 27.1.) In that day the Lord with
his sore, great and strong sword shall punish Leviathan, the piercing serpent,
even Leviathan the crooked serpent, and he shall slay the Dragon in the sea.
Now they that raise up this mystical Leviathan the Devil, are surely the
vilest men.

But who do thus? or how can this be done?

They are said to raise up Leviathan, who seek occasions of sinning, such as
do not stay till Satan tempts them, but they (as it were) tempt Satan. They
are so hasty, so forward to do evil, that they think the Devil comes not
fast enough, and therefore they do even go out to meet, provoke and raise up
the Devil, they invite temptation: Illi parati sunt suscitare Leviathan, qui
sludent ad suggestiones diaboli implendas, Aquin. in loc. Qui sibi ipsis
occasiones quaerunt peccandi eleganter dicuntur suscitare diabolum.
There is a truth in this, All sins are not from the temptations of Satan; our
own hearts are not only the soil, and have in them the seed of all sin; but
they are sun and rain, to warm and water those seeds that they may grow.
And as a godly man (from the new principle at first planted in him by the holy
Ghost) does often stir up the holy Ghost to come and help him, he does not
always stay till the holy Ghost sensibly comes, but finding his own weakness
and wants, and deadness to and in duty, he goes and stirs up the Spirit of
God, and prays that the holy Ghost would breath upon him, quicken and enliven
him in prayer and other holy duties; So many ungodly wretches do not stay for
Satan, or wait till he comes to tempt them, but they (such is their desperate
wickedness and delight in sin) wish that he would tempt them oftener. They do
not only keep open house, and open heart for him, ready to entertain and
welcome him when he comes, but they go forth to solicit his company and his
coming. This is to stir up Leviathan.

So that the whole sense according to this exposition may be given to you thus,
as if Job had said, Let this night be cursed with a grievous curse, even with
as black and foul a curse as can be molded and fashioned in the hearts, or
spit out of the mouths of the vilest miscreants, even of such as are so set
upon sin, that they hate the light and curse the day which either the Sun makes
in the air, or which knowledge makes in their hearts, lest that should stop
and hinder them in the acting of sin; yea let such a curse be upon it, is they
use to vomit out, who are so set upon mischief, and engaged to their lusts,
that they pray in aid from the Devil, to assist and quicken them in their
wickedness; that so their natural corruptions being oyled and smoothed with
his temptations, their motions to sin, (and indeed to Hell) may be swifter and
more violent. These are they that give diligence to make their damnation sure:
These are they from whom the kingdom of Hell suffers violence, and these
violent ones (rather then not have it) will take it by force. Surely their
damnation sleeps not, who (least they should not sin enough) awaken the Devil
to show them sinning opportunities. To such as these (according to the
interpretation now suggested) Job commits his night to cursing, Let them curse
it who curse the day, etc.

Now though there be a truth in the things which are asserted in this opinion,
taken abstractedly; though it be a truth that wicked men are such as curse the
day of ayre-light, and the day of knowledge-light; though they are often so
mad to be sinning, that they provoke and tempt the Devil, yet I will not
give this for the sense and meaning of the words, rather you may take it and
make use of it as an Allegory upon, then an Exposition of the Text.

The last opinion with which I shall conclude the opening of the words, is
this: That Job in this verse, does allude to the custom of his own Country,
and of other Eastern Countries, who had certain persons amongst them, both
men and women, whom, upon solemn occasions either of joy or sorrow, they were
wont to hire or call in for reward, to come and help them out either in
rejoicing or in mourning. We find mention of such in Scripture diverse times,
who were thus called and invited or hired to mourn and lament, in times of sad
and sorrowful accidents, whether personal or public. These had ( Lachrimas
venales) tears to sell, or sale-teares, making both a profession and a profit
of mourning. Solent in luctu voce slebili, and lacertos manibus verberantes ad
lachrymas populum provocare. Hic enim mos permanet in Judaea, ut mulieres
sparsis crinibus, nudatisque pectoribus voce modulara omnes ad fletu^
concitent, Hieron. in cap 9. Ierem.
Such the Prophet speaks of, Ier. 9.17, 18. Thus says the Lord, Consider ye,
and call for the mourning women, (he speaks of them as of a society or
sister-hood well known, and as well custom'd) and cunning women, that they may
come, (that is, women cunning in mourning,) And let them make have and take up
a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eye-lidds
gush out with waters, for a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, How are we
spoiled? And ver. 20. Teach your daughters wailing, and every one her neighbor
lamentation; (you see it was an art taught amongst them,) for death is come up
into our windows, etc. In 2 Chronicles. 35.25. We have a record to the same effect,
concerning the lamentation for Josiah. And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and
all the singing-men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations to
this day. So that there were both men and women prepared and usually called
forth to lament such occasions of sorrow. Again, Amos 5.16. Therefore the
Lord, the God of Hosts, the Lord says thus, wailing shall be in all streets,
and they shall say in all the highways, Alas, Alas! And they shall call the
husbandman to mourning, and such as are skillfull of lamentation to wailing.
Observe here different mourners, they shall call the husbandman to mourning and
such as are skillfull of lamentation to wailing. You see he speaks of two
sorts of persons, they shall call the husbandman to mourning; Husbandmen are
such as mourn when they mourn, when they mourn, they mourn indeed, they
mourn downright; but besides these who mourned ( Ex animo) really, there was
another sort who did but personate sorrow, and act a part in grief; So says
the Prophet, Call in some who are skillful of lamentation, men or women who
have studied the point, and know how to move a passion, and to heighten an
affection beyond that which the plain husbandman can do; Let the husbandman
mourn, but besides that, let there be art and solemnity in the mourning, call
in those that are skillful of lamentation. There was a kind of profession,
trade or art of mourning; Which is further evidenced, (2 Samuel 14.2.) Joab sent
to Tekoah to fetch thence a wise woman, (which is interpreted in the words
following, to be a woman skillful in lamentation,) and said unto her, I pray
thee feign thy self to be a mourner; Thou art a cunning woman, thou know
how to act the part and postures of a mourner to the life, Go to David and
feign thy self to be a mourner, and as a woman that had a long time mourned
for the dead. And it is observed to this day in many places, (and as I have
been informed frequently in Ireland) that not only friends and neighbors are
called to lament at the funeral of their friends and neighbors, but many
others no way related, scarce ever known to the person deceased, who come
professedly to strain for tears, and make lamentable outcries over the dead.
To such a custom or profession Job here alluding, says, Let them curse it who
curse the day.

If it be objected, that this Text speaks of such as curse the day, and not of
such as mourn upon or bemoane the day. That is easily removed, because upon
those days of mourning, they were wont to mix execrations with their
lamentations, and curses with their tears: crying out, oh the day! alas for
the day, oh that ever such a day came! In the 30th. of Ezekiel, v. 2. The Lord
says, Son of man, prophecy and say, thus says the Lord God, howl ye, woe
worth the day. These did curse the day: and such were hired in that sense to
curse the day. As Balaam (who loved the wages of unrighteousness) was hired to
curse the people of God, Numb. 22. So then the cursing here meant, was a
doleful wish, that the day had not been, or that such things had not happened
upon that day: And so these words, Let them curse it who curse the day, who are
ready to raise up their mourning, are only a circumlocution describing those
mercinary cursers or mourners: As if Job had in more words said thus. Let this
night be cursed in as high a strain, and mourned over with as enlarged
sorrows, as the art and invention of those, whose trade is cursing, and who
have tears at command, ever did or can put forth, when hired on purpose to
mourn over the saddest spectacles and most calamitous events.

Now this being taken for a groundwork, that in those times and Countries,
men and women were hired to mourn, and that an art of mourning was then
professed; the difficulties that are in the Text opposing this, are further to be
examined: For here still it seems doubtful, how this word Leviathan can fall
in with such an interpretation, or be applied to those hired and professed
mourners. Toward the clearing of which, I shall a little open three words.

The first is (Gnatidim) who are ready: (...)
which signifies a prepared and meditated active readiness; as we find in two
Texts of the Book of Hester, The copy of the writing for a commandment to be
given in every Province, was published unto all people, that they should be
ready against that day, chap. 3.14. and again, chap. 8.13. So that in Job, to
be ready to raise up the mourning, notes more then an immediate going about a
thing; As we say, I am ready to do a thing, that is, I will or must do it
presently: For it notes also a studied readiness or preparedness to do a
thing.

The second word is (Gnour) to raise up, which is properly to raise from
sleep, (...)
as in that place, Psalm. 44.23. Awake why sleep thou O Lord? Arise cast us
not off for ever.

Exposui cum Hebraeis Leviathan simpliciter, pro (...) luctum suum, ut sit Nun
pro Mem sicut alias haec confundi videas. Quo significatu in scriplis doctorum
Hebraeorum occurrit, and ex lingua Syriaca Sumptum est vicinum nomini, (...)
fic and Chaldaeus vertit. Simplicissimum est Leviathan pro luctu exponere cum.
Hebrais, Merc.
The third word is (Leviathan) which has two other significations both
appliable to this interpretation.

First, Diverse of the Rabbis translate it by the Hebrew word (Ebel,) which
signifies mourning or sorrow; and with the pronoune affixed, Their sorrow or
their mourning. And this is asserted by the learned Mercer, for the plainest
meaning of the word, and so found in the writings of the Hebrew Doctors, which
also directly answers our translation, who are ready to raise up their mourning.

Secondly, The word (Leviathan) is derived (according to the opinion of others)
from Lavah, i. e. joined or associated. Hence Leviath, i. e. society or
fellowship: to which the same pronoune being affixed, the word Leviathan is
made up, and according to that extraction and composition, is rendered
(socictatem suam) their society or their company. And the word in this
derivation and construction of it, falls in with the sense of the former
interpretation, who are ready to raise and stir up their company, namely to
go fourth and mourn, or their company of mourners. And the reason is
twofold, why they are or may be said to raise up their company of mourners.

First, Because those solemn mourners were usually a great many, they were a
company, a Chorus or a Quire, making a doleful lamentation; and so when they
were to mourn, they called together or raised up their company of mourners.
And the word [ raised] is proper for a second reason, (...)
because in such mournings, it was custom'd to rise up very early, or early to
raise up one another. As David speaking of musical rejoicing, Psalm. 108.2.
says, Awake psaltery and harp, I my self will awake early; The Hebrew is
very emphaticall in that place, word for word thus, I my self will awaken the
morning; as if he should say, Praeficae dicehantur apud veteres, quae adhiberi
solerunt uneri, mercede conductae, ut and flerent and fortia sacta laudarent.
Nonius Marcel.

Quae praeficeretur aneillis que^, admodum lame^tarentur praefica est dicta,
Varro. l. 6. (...). Joseph. l. 3. de Bell. Iud. c. 15.


the morning shall not awaken me, but I will awaken the morning, the morning
shall not find me sleeping, but I will be up first and call up the morning. So
those mourners used to awake early in the morning, or rather to awaken the
morning; and they had one woman whom they called (Praefica) the leader, the
first or the chief of the quire and company of mourners (plangendi Magistra)
whose office it was to call up and bring on the rest. It appears in the
Gospel of Matthew, that the Jews (in those times) used to call in music to
their mournings: For when Christ came to the Rulers house whose daughter was
dead, the Text says, He saw the minstrels and the people making a noise, (Mat.
9.23.) And Josephus relating the story of his own supposed death, shows how
all the City of Jerusalem continued a mourning for him thirty days. And he
adds, directly to this point, That many musicians were hired, for reward, to
lead those songs, or direct the solemnity of those lamentations.

This exposition (upon the supposition of alluding to that custom in mourning,
and the allowance of those significations of the word Leviathan) has a clear
and a fair sense, respecting the series of the Text: Job having so far
powered out a curse upon and lamented his night, he (as it were) calls for those
to finish and conclude it, who traded in such kind of curses, and who were
skilled in lamentations.

There is an objection against this, taken from the Grammatical regimen or
construction of the Original. The Hebrew word ( (...) Mos est Scripturae ut
saepe cum agitur de actionibus cantandi, lugendi and etiam arde^ter amandi rem
aliquam nominibus masculis verba saemini^^ goneris jungantur, vel assixis
saemineis mascalina nomina afficiantur, ut excellentia illius actionis
indicetur, quia mulieres in hujusmodi actionibus excellunt, Boldu^, in loc.
who are ready) is of the Masculine gender, and the Pronoune relating to it,
(Leviathan) their mourning, is of the Feminine gender, so that here seems to
be a fault in Grammar, if we expound it thus, their mourning, or their company
of mourners.

To this we may give a double answer.

First, That such changes of one Gender for another, are frequently observed in
Scripture by the learned in the Originalls.

Secondly, The relative word is conjectured to be put in the Feminine gender,
because women were most usually called forth to that work of mourning. And it
is further observeable, that where the Scripture speaks of those actions of
mourning or rejoicing, or loving, which are works of affection, it uses to
ascribe them to women rather then to men, because they are quicker in
affection, and fail: of affection then men, and so more ready to act or
express such joys or sorrows then men are.

For the close of this point, I shall add the apprehension of a learned
Expositor, Sanctius.
who taking the words in this last sense, as referring to those solemn
mournings, yet conceive that the word Leviathan must stand here in the letter;
not as if Job had any intendment to speak of the fish Leviathan, or to allude
to fishing for Leviathan: but either because Heathens in those execrations, did
invoke or provoke Leviathan, In execrationibus illa communiter adhibentur, quae
horribilia sunt, qu eque hominibus metum ac terrore^ incutiunt: In aquatilibus
nihil audimus horribilius Leviatha^, Sanct in loc. Carmen illud dicebatur
Leviathan quemadmodum multa ca^mina abijs sumpserunt nomen de quibus institus
sunt. Idem.
that is the Devil. Or because in those solemn songs of lamentation,
Leviathan was a word much used, or Leviathan was the first word of some of
those lamenting songs; For in execrations, strange, uncouth, dreadful words
were purposely used, the more to affect and astonish the hearers: Now there is
no word more dreadful then Leviathan, whether we take it for that sea monster
the Whale, or for that Hell-monster the Devil. And so the meaning is this; Let
them curse it who curse the day, who are ready to raise up Leviathan, that is,
Let those mourners, who sing that most passionate song of mourning, which
begins with or is entitled Leviathan. It is ordinary among us, to call for a
song, or to call a song by the general subject matter of it, or by the first
word of it. And so, many books of Scripture have their names in the Hebrew
from the first word, as the book of Genesis, is called Beresith, or In the
beginning. And Exodus, Veele semoth, (that is,) And these are the names:
because both begin with those words in the Hebrew. So the song which was the
form of those Lamentations, might be called Leviathan, because (says this
Author) it began with that word; and he alleges a proverbiall tradition for
it out of Mariana, which he had received from a Jew, that it was forbidden upon
the Feast Day to raise up Leviathan; That is, they might not take up that
execratory song which begins with Leviathan. I only present this opinion,
because it suites with and illustrates the former notion of solemn mourning.

Thus I have with as much speed and clearness as I could, given you the
meaning of these words. That which favors their sense most, who keep to the
word Leviathan, is, that this book speaks afterward of Leviathan, to show the
power of the creator, in that powerful creature. And I find the very same
phrase of raising or stirring up Leviathan, used in that place, chap. 41. ver.
10. None is so fierce that dare stir (or raise) him up. The Hebrew word which
there we translate, stir, in this third chapter is translated, raise
Leviathan. Yet I rather incline to the latter exposition respecting mourning,
both because it has the authority of our English Bible to countenance it, our
Translators putting mourning in the Text and Leviathan in the margin; As also,
because it carries a clearer correspondence and agreement, both with
Antecedents and consequents, both with the matter and with the frame of Jobs
complaint and curse in this chapter.

Taking the words in this sense, that Job calls to have his night cursed in
such a solemn manner, as those hired mourners used to lament and bewail the
days of humane calamities, we may observe, First,

That hope of profit will turn some spirits into any posture. Lamenting and
mourning is an unpleasant work, but profit and reward sweetens and makes it
pleasant. Some men will be in any action so they may get by it, they will
mourn for hire, and curse for hire; So did Balaam. Balaam was sent for to
curse the people of God, Numb. 22. He made many delays, and seemingly
conscientious scruples, yet at last he go^s about the work, as black and bad
as it was. But what overcame him, and answered all his doubts about the
undertaking of such a work? The Text in Peter resolves us, he loved the wages
of unrighteousness. He that loves wages, will quickly love any work, which
brings in wages. Upon the stage you might have any passion for your money: Joy
and sorrow, love and hatred, all acted and personated (beyond the personal
temper or occasions of the men) merely for reward; And (which is the highest
argument of a mercenary spirit) some act holiness for hire, and are godly for
outward gain.

Secondly, In that Job calls others to mourn over and condole that night.
Observe,

That some troubles exceed our own sorrows; And we may want the eyes and
tongues of others to express them by. My heart (says Job) is not large
enough, and I have not art enough to act, much less to aggravate my own
afflictions; let them do it whose profession and practice it is, to curse the
day. Sometimes the mercies which we receive, and the joy that the soul
conceives, is more then we can express or be thankful enough for: and then we
send to others, both private Christians and whole Congregations, desiring them
to help us, to lend us their hearts and their tongues, their affections and
their voices in that Angelical work, the praises of our God. Let them bless
God who bless the day, (who are versed in days and duties of thanksgiving)
who are ready to raise up their rejoycings. David says, Come and hear all ye
that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my soul, Psalm. 66.16.
He had not told them what God had done for his soul, but to gain the help of
their souls in praising God, for what he had done.

Sometime also a Christian is so engaged in prayer for the obtaining of a
mercy, and finds his heart so much below his suite, that he calls out to all
those, who have any holy skill in praying, pray for me, pray with me, the
business is too big for me alone. How earnestly does Paul beg prayers, Now
I beseech you brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of
the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in prayers to God for me; that I
may be delivered, etc. Romans 15.30.

As it is thus in praying and rejoicing, so it may be in mourning and in
sorrowing; And troubles are very deep when they exceed our own sorrows, as
mercies are very great when they are beyond our own praises: We in this Nation
have cause to fear such troubles, even such, as may cause us to invite the
hearts and spirits, the bowels and compassions of all the Christians in the
world to come and lament over us: we may be forced to send not only for the
Husbandman, those plaine-hearted mourners, but for those also who are skillfull
in lamentations; such as Jeremie, to set a song in the highest strains of
lamentation, for the bewailing of our troubles, And say, let such lament our
day as lamented Jerusalem, let such lament it, as have lately lamented Germany,
such as now lament the ruins and desolations of Ireland.

Verse 9. Let the Stars of the twilight thereof be dark, let it look for
light, but have none, neither let it see the dawning of the day.

This is the last part of the curse which Job passes upon his night: Let the
Stars of the twilight thereof be dark. Some comforts of the night are
natural, others are accidental. Job in the former verses wishes away the
accidental comforts; The meeting of friends, and the voice of music: In this
verse, he removes the natural comforts of the night, which are two. First, The
present light of the Stars. Secondly, The expected light of the Sun.

The first comfort of the night is, that though it be dark by the absence of
the Sun, yet there is some light by the presence and shining of the Stars:
And it is a greater comfort in the night, to remember, that though now I have
no light but from a glimmering Star, yet shortly the light of the glorious
Sun will shine upon me. But in how dark a condition is the night, when the
Sun is gone and the Stars too; when the Stars are clouded from shining,
and the Sun stayed from rising. This Job wishes as the state of that night,
Let the Stars thereof be dark, yea let it have no hope to see the Sun, that
is, let it be an everlasting night.

Let the Stars of the twilight thereof be dark.] By twilight, we are to
understand the beginning of the night, or the evening when the Stars first
appear; (...) Crepusculum est tam verspertinu^ qua^ matutinum.
the word signifies both twi-lights, the twilight of the evening, and the
twilight of the morning. The Stars of the twilight, are those resplendent
Stars (so much observed by Astronomers and observable by the Vulgar) which
shine in the evening and the morning.

When Job would have these Stars of the twilight to be dark, Heat once
takes away a threefold benefit from the night. First, These Stars are a
great ornament to the night; What a glorious spectacle is it, to see the
canopie of Heaven bespangled with the Stars, as a garment set with Studs or
Oes of Gold? Secondly, The Stars are a great delight and comfort in the
night. Thirdly, The Stars are for direction, and as guides in the night.
Hence Seamen and Travelers mourn when they cannot see the Stars. The
Stars are the Mariners guide in the night: While his hand is upon the helm,
his eye is toward Heaven, and in the Heavens his eye is upon the site and
motion of the Stars. The woeful condition of those Seamen in the storm is
thus expressed, Acts 27.20. Now when for many days neither Sun nor Star had
appeared. When Seamen feel a storm in the night, and cannot see a Star in
the night, their case is almost desperate: Though the light of a Star be
little, yet the benefit is very great.

Let it look for light, but have none.] The Hebrew is, Let it look for light,
and none, which is an usual Illeipsis, we supply the word (have;) Let it look
for light and have none.

Let it look for light.] He puts that in to aggravate the sorrow of that
night. I would have this night expect the light, let it wait and look for it
earnestly, but let it have none; let it be full of hopes, but empty of
enjoyments. Let that night know no succession of a day; whereas usually the Sun
goes and returns, it sets and rises, now let it go and not return, let it
set and never rise again.

Neither let it see the dawning of the day. He does not only wish away, full,
clear and perfect light, but the dawning of the day, which is imperfect light,
let not so much as the beginning or first moment of a morning succeed that
night. Eam noctem ne subsequatur d^es, ne aurora quidem.
The words in the Original are, Let it not see the eyelids of the morning: It
is a very elegant expression, noting the first breakings of light, when the Sun
peepes above the Horizon, which Poets call the Rays of light, streams of
light, or the wings of the morning; As our Lord Christ the Sun of
righteousness, is said to rise with healing in his wings, (...) Primus
albicantis aurorae splendour, quem alij poetae radios capillos, pennas aurorae
dicunt.

Sunt palpebrae aurorae radij qui sub aurora^ emicare solent. Mercer.


(Mal. 4.2.) So the eyelids of the morning, alluding to the Sun which is the
eye of Heaven, and when the day dawneth, the eyelids of Heaven open, the Sun
awakens and looks out: Even as when a man awakes first, his eyelids open;
These rays of the Sun are compared to eyelids, because like the eyelids they
twincle or move continually, darting themselves forth into the air and upon
the earth.

In that Job forbids the Starlight, and would take away the hope of Sun-light
from that night; Observe first,

That in sad times small comforts may pass for great mercies. In the day time,
no man looks after the Stars: Starlight is not valued, while Sun-light is
enjoyed: but in the night a Star is a welcome sight. He that is full (says
Solomon) despises the honeycombe, but to the hungry soul every bitter thing
is sweet. When a man is hungry and wants, a little is pleasant to him; as our
proverb has it, Artaxerxes pene siti pereunte, cum aquam ebihisset sordita^,
quaesivit ab eo Eunuabus ecquid non plurimum molestiae hoc potu sensisset?
Respondet rex, nunquam ita suaviter se vel venum bibisse vel aqua^ puniss ^^am.
Pez^l Mellif. Histor p. 1.
Half a loaf is better then none. A great Emperor once drank puddle-water
with more delight (he professed) then ever he had done the most delicious
wines. Sad times and hardship make that pleasant and very acceptable, which in
plenty we slight and pass by. Hence it follows, That the removing of small
comforts in sad times, are great afflictions: If Stars (which have but little
light) be taken from the night, a great affliction is added to the night. Some
can loose more then another man's all, and yet feel it not, yet think they
have lost nothing. We are not troubled at the loss of small things when we
enjoy greater; But when all we have are small, then any thing we loose is
great. As in Nathans Parable, (2 Samuel 12.) when the poor man having lost but
one Lamb had lost all, he complains greatly.

Secondly, Job says, Let it look for light but have none, There is much in
that: He does not say, Let this night have no light, but, let it look for
light and have none. From this we may observe,

That the want of that afflicts us most, which we expect most. If the night
(that is man in the night) did not expect and look for light, it would not be
much troubled with the absence of light. To loose our expectation, is more then
the loss of the thing expected. It is said of Siseras mother ( Judge. 5.28.)
when her son was upon that expedition against the people of God, that she
looked out at a window, and cried through the lattesse, why is his chariot so
long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his chariot? She looked for a
victorious success and rich spoils, for her wise Ladies answered her, yea she
returned answer to her self; Have they not sped, have they not divided the
prey? to every man a damsel or two, to Sisera a prey of diverse colors, etc.
This cut her to the heart, that she looked for great booty, and reckoned upon a
victory, when Sisera was fast nailed through the temples, never to return.

That man is greatly burdened, from whom others expect much, but he who expects
much, is in danger to be more burdened. Therefore David prays, Psalm. 119.116.
Let me not be ashamed of my hope. As shame arises from doing a thing against
known light and common principles, so also from loosing or suffering a thing
against known hope and common expectation. It is noted as an aggravation of
that peoples affliction in the Prophet, We looked for peace and behold no good
came, and for a time of health, and behold trouble, Jer. 8.15. For a people to
be in expectation of some great mercy, doubles the sorrow of their miscarriage:
Now in these times, we being in our night of trouble, and (as it were) looking
when day will break, when our peace will return, when truth will prevail and
be settled, when error and the abettors of it shall be overthrown. How would
it augment our sorrows, if we looking for these mercies should not have them?
As it is a greater affliction to be miserable when we have been happy, so when
we have long hoped to be happy. God expresses himself as much troubled, when
he looses his expectation from us: It provokes the Spirit of God to anger
against us, when he looks for the fruits of his care and love in our obedience
and finds none, (Isa. 5.) God looked that his vineyard should have brought
forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes. He looked for judgment, and
behold oppression, for righteousness and behold a cry: This disapoointment
provoked the Lord to lay his vineyard wast. So in the Gospel, when Christ
comes to the fig tree three years, seeking or looking for fruit and finds
none. What then? Cut it down says Christ, he is very angry thus missing his
expectation. Now, as it provokes the anger of God to come looking upon man, his
creature for duty and finds none; so it does likewise exceedingly grieve the
spirit of man, when he looks to God for mercy and finds none; And how just is
it that God should cross our expectation, when we so often cross his. No
mervaile if we look for light and behold darkness, for peace and behold
trouble, for success and behold disappointments: Whenas God looks among us
for repentance and behold presumption, for faith and behold unbelief, for
patience and behold complaining, for reformation and behold backsliding, for
fruit and behold barrenness or but leaves.

Fourthly, He says, Let it not see the dawning of the day, that is, let it be
quite out of hope ever to receive any light, therefore let it not see so much
as a glimpse of light. It is the strongest denial of the whole, to deny the
least or the first part: As when the Apostle would have us abstain from all
evil, he exhorts to abstain from the appearance of evil, (1 These. 5.) So
here when Job would put his night quite out of hope to see a day, he says, Let
it not see (so much as) the dawning (that is, the least appearance) of the day.
And this as it is the last, so the heaviest sentence upon his night. Observe
then, That

A hopeless condition is the worst condition of all other. Let a night be
never so dark, never so tempestuous, yet the hope of a morning is a mercy and
a light. A man will bear any heaviness, when he can say as David, Heaviness
may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Solomon tells us, that
the hope deferred makes the heart sick, Prove. 13.12. How sick then are they
who are hopeless, or who have quite lost their hope? Everlastingnesse is the
head of the arrow, the sting and poison of all miseries; it is indeed the sting
of Hell: that Hell is such a night as never shall see the dawning of the day,
has more torment and pain in it then all the pains in Hell. As the
punishment of loss in Hell pinches more then the punishment of sense, so in
the loss this pinches most that the loss is irrecoverable: They are deprived
of the glory of God, and shall never see the least ray of it for ever. They are
in darkness, and they have no hope of light at all for ever.

As that which makes Heaven so full of joy, is, that Heaven is above all fear,
so that which makes Hell so full of terror, is, that Hell is below all hope:
Heaven is a day which shall never see any approaches of the night, and Hell is
a night that shall never see any dawnings of the day. So, proportionably in any
affliction of this life to be hopeless of deliverance, to say it shall never
end, I am in such a night as shall have no day, no not the dawning of a day,
this is the utmost evil, the extremity of affliction.

So much concerning the curse it self which Job powered out with so much
passion, both against the day of his birth and the night of his conception. We
shall now here see the reason of this passion in the words which follow.

JOB 3.10, 11, 12, 13. Verse 10. Because it shut not up the doors of my
mothers womb, nor hid sorrow from mine eyes.

Why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost when I came out
of the belly?

Why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts, that I should suck?

For now should I have lien still, and been quiet, I should have slept; then
had I been at rest.


WE are now come to the second general part of this Chapter. You may remember,
the whole was divided into three Sections. The first showed us the curse which
Job powered out upon his day. The second, the cause or ground of that curse. And
the third, a vehement expostulation about the continuance of his life and the
lengthning of his days.

We have heard the curse opened already in the nine former verses: Now
follows the cause of the curse. Job gives an account or reason of his
passion: If any should check him with, why do thou thus breath out
complaints against the day of thy birth? why do thou write such bitter
things against the night of thy conception? He answers as David did his
brethren in another case, 1 Samuel 17. Why, what have I done or spoken, Is there
not a cause? Or as Jonah when God reproves him about his passion for the
withered gourd, Do thou well to be angry? Jonah replies, Yes, I do well to
be angry even unto death, chap. 49. So says Job here to any that should rebuke
him, with, do you well to be thus angry with your day? Yes, I do well to be
angry with my day, and I show you why, because it shut not up the doors of my
mothers womb, etc.

The reason or the argument stands thus. There is cause I should curse that day
and that night, which not hindering my conception or my birth, brought me forth
upon the stage of the world, to act a part in all these sorrows: But the day
and the night did not hinder my conception or my birth, therefore I have cause,
I have reason enough to break out in such complaints and curse them. I do it,
because these shut not up the doors of my mothers womb. This is the argument
or reason by which he defends his passion: and this argument will be found to
have more passion in it then reason, if we examine it to the bottom. For he
complains of that as the cause, which was not the cause of his troubles: what
did the night or the day, that he thus charge them? They had no efficiency in
bringing those evils upon him, circumstances are not causes; Effects are
produced in time, but time does not produce effects. Only this we may say to
help it, he does not curse the day, as if it could have shut the doors of his
mothers womb, but because on that day those doors were not shut.

But leaving the reason of his speech, we will consider the sense of it.

The Hebrew word for word is thus rendered, Because it shut not up the doors of
my belly. Quia non conclusit portas maxillarum mearum, quae sunt ostia ventris.
And that the Chaldee Paraphrast renders thus by way of explanation, Because it
did not shut up the doors of my lips; the mouth (says he) being (as it were)
the door or the inlet to the belly or stomach, every thing goes in by that
door; and so he carries the sense thus, let that night be cursed because it
did not stop my breath, and so make an end of me; The Septuagint has it thus,
(...). Sept.
because it shut not up [the doors of my Mothers belly,] which answers our
translation, the doors of my mothers womb. Mr. Broughton to the same sense,
because it shut not up the door of the belly that did bear me, that is, my
mothers belly.

I shall in silence pass over that secret or mystery in nature, which may be
the ground of this expression. There are two secrets in Divinity, which are the
grounds of it, and of them I shall speak.

The first is this, When God lays that affliction of barrenness upon the
woman, he according to the phrase of Scripture, is said to shut up the womb;
And when he sends the blessing of fruitfulness, he is said to open the
womb. We have both, Genesis 20.18. When Abimelech had taken Sarah Abraham's wife,
the Lord fast closed up all the wombes of the house of Abimelech. The meaning
of it is this, he made all the women barren, or withheld the blessing of
conception; The Jewish Expositors render the meaning in the very words of this
Text, that the Lord had shut up all the doors of the wombes of the house of
Abimelech. And so likewise for fruitfulness, God is said to open the womb, as
Genesis 29.31. And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb, but
Rachel was barren. Then, to shut the doors of the womb, notes the power of
God in denying, and to open those doors, the blessing of God in giving
conception and making fruitful.

Secondly, It may refer to the birth: for, there must be an opening of those
doors and that by an Almighty power, for production as well as for conception;
And therefore David, (Psalm. 22.9.) ascribes it to the Lord, Lord thou art he
who tookest me out of my mothers womb. It was not the Midwife did it, It was
not the women's help that stood about his mother, but Lord thou did it; The
hand of God only is able to open that door and let man into the world; Unless
he (as we may so speak) turn the key, the poor infant must for ever lie in
prison, and make his mothers womb his grave.

In either or both these respects Job here speaks against the night, because
it shut not up the doors of his mothers womb, to stop his conception, or stay
him in the birth: For then, either he had not been, or he had not been brought
forth as the subject of all those calamities. Hence observe, first

That fruitfulness or conception is the especial work and blessing of God:
God carries the key of the womb in his own hand. From him we receive life and
breath, (Acts 17.25.) yea in his book are all our members written, which in
continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them: We are
fearfully and wonderfully made, Our substance is not hid from God, when we are
made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. As the
holy Ghost admirably and most elegantly describes the conception and formation
of man in the womb, Psalm. 139.14, 15, 16.

There are four keys of nature, all kept in the hand of God.

First, The key of the Rain. The clouds cannot open themselves, the
floodgates of Heaven cannot be unlocked, nor those sluices opened to let down
a drop of rain, until God turn the key, Deuteronomy. 28.12. The Lord shall open
unto thee his good treasure, the Heaven to give the rain unto thy land in his
season.

Secondly, The key of Nutrition, or of Food, Psalm. 145.16. Thou openest thine
hand and satisfiest the desire of every living thing. The strength of the
creature is shut up in the hand of God, and until he unlock his hand, the
creatures cannot strengthen or nourish us, though we have our houses and our
hands full of them.

Thirdly, The key of the Grave, Eze. 37.13. I will open your graves and cause
you to come out of your graves. We are so fast locked up in death, that all the
power in the world is not able to release us, till God speak the word and
turn the key of the graves-doore. That place in Ezekiel is meant (I know) of a
civil death: But it is as true of natural death, And the argument is stronger
for it; If when a Nation (as the nation of the Jews then did) lies in the
grave of bondage and captivity, no man can unlock that door without the key of
Gods special providence; much less can any hand or power but his, open the
door and bring us out of the grave of our corporal dissolution.

There is this fourth key belonging to the door spoken of in the Text, the
door of the womb: Which was shadowed in that ceremonial law among the Jews,
of giving their firstborn unto God, as a thankful acknowledgement, that the
beginning of all propagation and increase was from him. Further observe,

That our birth and production is the special work of God. Thou art he that
tookest me out of my mothers womb (says David,) And he apprehended the power
of God so great in his natural birth, that he from thence takes an argument to
strengthen his faith, that God could do any other thing for him, how hard
soever. He knew he could never be in such straights, but the power of God could
deliver him, when he once remembered that it was God who took him out of his
mothers womb: For in the words immediately foregoing, he brings in his
enemies laughing at, yea reproaching him and saying; He trusted in God that he
would deliver him, let him deliver him seeing he delighted in him; They jeere
him with his God, let him deliver him. David answers, What do ye think God
cannot deliver me. Lord (says he) thou art he that tookest me out of my
mothers womb. Can I ever be in such straights as I was then, can I ever be in
a more helpless condition? Can I ever be in more need of an Almighty help,
then when I was struggling to get into the world? There is more of the power of
God put forth in bringing a poor infant into the world, then in bringing him
out of any trouble or straight he can fall into, in his travels through the
world; And hence the great deliverances of a people from danger, and their
reformations from error are called a birth, as King Hezekiah speaks in his
message to Isaiah, 2 King. 19.4. The children are come to the birth and there
is no strength to bring forth. As if he had said, great things are now
attempted, but nothing can be perfected; great troubles are discovered, but we
cannot be delivered by any humane power or policy; Therefore lift up a prayer
for the remnant that is left. Every new deliverance and reformation of a Church
is a new birth of that Church. Who has heard such a thing? who has seen such
things? shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a Nation be
borne at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.
That is, Sions mercies were speedily and suddenly obtained. She uses to have
long travail and many throes, but now the mighty power of God opened the door
of the womb, a door of hope, and Sion was easily delivered of a man-child, A
glorious mercy, Isai, 66.8. You see how the holy Ghost paralels the working of
great things for the Church, to the travail of a woman; whose infant sticks in
the birth, if God suspend his help, but if he open the door by a hand of
gracious providence, she brings forth, Even before she travailes, (as the same
Prophet speaks,) and before she is in pain she is delivered. I have
adventured to lengthen out this notion somewhat further then that hint in the
Text does well bear, only because we being a people now in strong travail,
and wanting strength to bring forth, may be directed to consider whose hand
holds the key which opens the womb of Nations as well as persons, and at the
turning of whose hand, we shall quickly be delivered; and being delivered, we
shall quickly forget all our pains and pangs, for joy that a man-child, such a
masculine blessing is borne into the world. But the Text goes on still in
tears. As follows, Nor hid sorrow from mine eyes.

(...)
The word which we translate sorrow, signifies more properly labor and
weariness, or the weariness that does arise from labor, and so from thence
it is translated to signify any kind of sorrow or trouble.

Because it hid not sorrow from mine eyes.] By the hiding of sorrow from his
eyes, he notes only thus much, that he should have been delivered from the
sense and experience of sorrow. He had mist those evils which he met with,
since his coming into the world, if those doors being shut, had shut him out
of the world. When sorrow is hid from our eyes, then all evil is removed, as
in that speech, ( Isai. 65.16.) Because the former troubles are forgotten,
because they are hidden from mine eyes, that is, as if he had said, we fear no
trouble, no danger, no evil hangs over out heads, now the former evils are
forgotten, they are hidden from mine eyes, As we use to say of great dangers,
that they are imminent dangers, they hang over our heads, or hang before our
eyes, because they lie so near and are in such a readiness to oppress and
fall upon us.

Now when Job subjoyneth sorrow to his birth, as if as soon as ever the doors
were open for him to step into the world, the first object he met with was
trouble, and he was saluted by sorrow as soon as ever he saw the light.
Observe,

That man is borne to sorrow. He sees sorrow the first thing he sees. Sorrow is
his first acquaintance. The connection is very close, Because it shut not up
the doors of the womb, nor hid sorrow from mine eyes. Eliphaz tells us,
(chap. 5.7.) That man is borne unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward. He is
born to it, the expression implies that trouble and sorrow take hold of us, or
we enter upon and take hold of trouble, as soon as ever we enter upon the
world, we are borne to them, trouble and sorrow are a man's inheritance; as an
heir is borne to his land or estate. Man has a right to those troubles, they
are his birthright, and all his birthright by nature; and as soon as ever he
is borne, he takes possession of sorrow, or sorrow possesses him. Many a man is
borne to riches and a great estate, but he stays a great while for the
possession of them; man is borne to trouble, and he enters upon that as soon as
ever he enters the world; sorrow is not his inheritance in reversion, but in
possession; Even as the sparks fly upward, that explaines it to be so, as the
sons of the Coal, (so the Hebrew) that is, sparks as soon as ever they are
borne out of the coal fly upward, and are presently ascending; so is man
tending unto trouble. Few and evil have the days of the years of my life
been, says Jacob, (Genesis 47.9.) How few soever they have been, they have been
evil: if his life had been but one day, that had been an evil day. If his
life had not been lengthened to the least number of days, yet his evils had
multiplied to a number: in few hours we have many sorrows.

Some make the infants tears a presage of these sorrows, as if he wept to
think upon what a shore of trouble he is landed: Or rather into what a Sea of
storms he is lanching, when he comes into the world; such storms as he shall
never be fully quit of, till he is harbored in his grave. Wherefore as the
Angel said unto the woman, Luke 24.5. Why seek ye the living among the dead?
So I may say to you, why seek ye peace in a land of trouble, and joy in a land
of sorrow? These are reserved for us in our country which is above, expect
them not here, for this is not your rest.

Secondly, We may note from this expression, Nor hid sorrow from mine eyes.

That the sight of the eye wounds the heart. He does not say, and hid trouble
from my soul, or trouble from my spirit, but hid sorrow from mine eyes. It is
a proverbiall speech among us, What the eye sees not, the heart grieves not.
And when the Lord would show how he was moved with the sufferings and knew the
sorrows of his people in Egypt, he doubles it upon this sense, I have seen, I
have seen, or I have surely seen the affliction of my people, Exodus 3.7. Your
sorrows are not hid from mine eyes. Mine eye affects my heart, says the
Prophet Jeremie, Lam. 3.51. That is, mine eye afflicts my heart. While Jeremie
went about the City, and saw so many woeful spectacles in the ruin and
captivity of his people, that sight smote him to the heart. It is said, that
when Christ came to Jerusalem and beheld the City, he wept over it, Luke 19.41.
And for the sorrow of repentance, the sight of the eye has a great influence
upon the heart, They shall look on me whom they have pierced, and they shall
mourn, etc. Zach. 12.10. As the eye does affect, or rather infect the heart
with sin, from sin-occasioning objects; a sin that is in the eye will be
presently at the heart, which caused Job to say, (Chap. 31.1.) I made a
covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think upon a maid? He means,
sinfully to lust after her; as if he had said, there is a quick, a speedy
passage from the eye to the heart, though in the fabric of the body there
seems a great distance between them: Therefore I have made a covenant with my
eyes to avoid occasions of sin, least mine eyes should pollute my heart with
motions unto sin. And as it is in pleasure-provoking objects, that which is a
pleasure to the eye, will presently be a pleasure to the heart, a refreshing to
our spirits: And that pleasure which shall last for evermore in Heaven, is from
a vision that shall last for ever. Joy shall for ever be before the eye, and
therefore joy shall for ever fill the heart. The joy of Heaven consists in
vision, in seeing God as he is, (1 John 3.2.) or in seeing face to face, (1
Cor. 13.12.) which is the vision beatificall. So likewise there is an
afflicting vision. The eye affects the heart with sorrow-occasioning objects,
if sorrow be in the eye, it will not stay long from the heart. Hence when
Sarah-Abrahams wife was dead, Abraham thus bespeaks the people among whom he
dwelt, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight, etc. (
Genesis 23.8.) It did afflict the heart of Abraham with sorrow, to see the body of
his deceased wife, or the coffin wherein she lay, whom he had so entirely
loved, therefore bury her out of my sight. It is very observable, that when
Joseph would do somewhat purposely to afflict and touch the heart of his
brethren with more remorse for their former unkindnesse unto him, the history
says, ( Genesis 42.24) that he took from them Simeon, and bound him before
their eyes; He heard them in their private conference, whisper one to another,
We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear, therefore is this distress
come upon us. When Joseph perceived their consciences began thus to work, he
resolves to give them a pill at their eyes, (even a doleful spectacle, yet the
lively picture of their dealing with him) to make their consciences work
faster, with godly sorrow: He took from them Simeon, and bound him before
their eyes. And Judah when he pleads afterward, chap. 44. for the carrying
back of Benjamin, you know what a patheticall oration he makes; O, says he,
do not detain Benjamin, for when I come to thy servant my father, and the lad
be not with us, (seeing that his life is bound up in the lads life) It shall
come to pass, that when he sees that the lad is not with us, he will dye,
ver. 30, 31. That very sight will kill my father: and for me to see my father
dye, will be death to me also; For so he concludes, ver. 34. How shall I go to
my father and the lad be not with me, lest peradventure I see the evil that
shall come upon my father. Oh (says he) let me carry him back, my father will
die if he see not the lad, and so shall I, if I see the evil that shall come
upon my father; he knew that sight would be as a sword to his heart and as a
dagger in his bowels. The Lord threatens his people thus in case of
disobedience, Deuteronomy. 28.31. Thine Ox shall be slain before thine eyes, thine
Ass shall be violently taken away from before thy face. Thy sons and thy
daughters shall be given to another people, etc. So that thou shall be mad for
the sight of thine eyes which thou shall see, ver. 34. and ver. 67. he shows
what convulsions and divisions of spirit, the visions of the eye would bring
upon them. In the morning thou shall say, would God it were Even, and at Even
thou shall say would God it were morning, for the fear of thine heart
wherewith thou shall fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shall
see. The fear of the heart and the sight of the eye are nearly joined. The
sight of the eye caused the fear of the heart, and both were as concauses of
those distracting thoughts and wishes of hastening the morning to the evening,
and again suddenly reducing back the evening to the morning. Unless sorrow be
hid from the eyes, it can hardly be kept from the heart. It is an usual
custom if a man be but let blood, to bid him turn away his head if he be
faint-hearted, for the sight of his blood will make his heart faint; And so
from more ghastly spectacles, men commonly turn away their faces, etc. Which is
to hide sorrow from their eyes. It follows, Why died I not from the womb? why
did not I give up the ghost when I came out of the belly? why did the knees
prevent me, etc.

These two verses contain a further aggravation of the former reason by three
other steps. Before he spoke against his conception and his birth, now, Why
died I not from the womb? As if he had said, though I were conceived, and
secondly though I were borne, yet why did not I make my cradle, my grave, or my
first swaddling clothes, my winding sheet; though I were borne, yet why did not
I die so soon as ever I was borne? why died I not from the womb? why gave I
not up the ghost when I came out of the belly? Having received the discourtesie
of a birth, death would have been a favor: It had been best for me, not to
have been borne, and next best to have died quickly or as soon as I was borne;
that is the meaning in general of the 11, and 12th, verses. But I shall a
little examine and enlighten the particular expressions.

(...) from (...)
Why did not I give up the ghost?] The Hebrew is but one word, which costs us
five in English, I give up the ghost, the word signifies, that last act of
those who are in the agony of death; In the Greek and Latin that act is
expressed by one word, (...), Expiravit. Leniter mortuus est, sine morbo and
dolor diuturniore: qua^do quis sacile moritur, ita ut non diu decumbat.
Luke 23.46. Where it is said, that Christ gave up the ghost. The word is
conceived to note a willing cheerful resignation of our selves in death, a
dying without much reluctance or resistance, a being active in death rather
then passive, we call it well a giving up the ghost. Some apply it only to the
death of the godly, (as Genesis 25.8. of Abraham, etc.) whose lives are not
violently snatched from them, but willingly surrendered. When a godly man dies a
violent death, he does not dye violently: Whereas a wicked man dies violently,
when he dies naturally: and though sometimes (being weary of his life, or
despairing of relief) he drives out his ghost, yet in a strict sense he never
gives up the ghost. It is said to the wicked rich man in the Gospel, (Luke
12.20.) Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee, demanded
indeed, but O how unwillingly does the rich man pay this natural debt, who is
so able to pay all civil debts. Yet it must be confessed that we find the word
often used promiscuously, applied as well to the death of the wicked as of the
godly; To Ismael, (Genesis 25.8.) as well as Abraham, to Annanias and Saphira,
Acts 5.10. Yea it is applied to the death of any or all living things, Genesis
7.21. And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of foul, and of
cattle; and of beasts, and of every creeping thing that creeps upon the
earth, and every man.

Then again, If I had not so much favor to die as soon as ever I came from
the womb, or to die in the very birth; yet, Why did the knees prevent me? or
the breasts that I should suck?

Here are two steps aggravating the cause of his curse against his day. If I
had not been borne dead says Job, or died naturally as soon as I was borne,
yet why was I not left to perish? I should have died quickly, if they had let
me alone, though I were born alive into the world; that is the meaning of those
words, Why did the knees prevent me? why was there any care taken of me? why
did the Midwife and the Assistant women take me upon their knees? why did they
wash me, swathe me and bind me up? If they had not been so kind, it had been a
kindness unto me, if they had spared their labor, they had done me a favor;
If they had omitted their care, how many cares had I escaped?

Why did the knees prevent me? or (which is a further step and the fifth step by
which this speech ascends) why the breasts that I should suck? As if he had
said, If they would needs be so favorable as to take me up upon the knee, to
wash me, to bind me up and cloth me, yet why was the breast presented to me?
why was I laid to the breast? If they had kept me from sucking the breast, I
should have sucked but little breath; I had died quickly.

So that in these words there are five gradations by which Job aggravateth the
cause of this curse against his day. First, Because he was conceived. Secondly,
Because the door was opened for him to be borne. Thirdly, Because being borne,
he did not presently give up the ghost, or die as soon as he came into the
world. Fourthly, Because there was so much care taken for him, as to take him
upon the knee, and bind him up. Fifthly, Because there was a breast provided,
and papps for him to suck: If any of these latter acts had been neglected, Job
had died, and so escaped all these ensuing troubles of his life, sorrow had
been hidden from his eyes.

And it is observed (especially in these latter acts of this gradation) that
Job alludes to the custom of those times, wherein unnatural women left their
children upon the cold earth, naked and helpless, as soon as they were borne:
or casting them out, expose them to misery, or the casual nursery of nature
lent them by beasts, more merciful then those beastly mothers, who would not
afford them knees to prevent, nor breasts to give them suck. As in that place,
Ezekiel. 16.4, 5. the woeful condition of such an infant is expressed, to shadow out
the sinfully polluted and woefuly helpless estate of that people, and of all
people by nature, till the Lord prevents them by the knees of free grace, and
suckles them with the breasts of his consolation. Thy father was an Amorite, and
thy mother an Hittite, (of a barbarous people, and what then?) In the day thou
wast borne, thy navell was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water, thou
wast not salted at all nor swadled at all, none eye pitied thee to do any of
these unto thee, but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the loathing of
thy person in the day that thou wast borne. Parabolae non sumuntur nisi ab his
qu^e crebro and de more fiunt.
Now this is a certain rule, that such parabolicall and allegorical
Scriptures are grounded upon known customs and things in use; It is certain
there were some so unnatural to their infants, that they would bestow no care
upon them when they were borne, neither wash nor cleanse nor bind them up, but
cast them out, (as the Prophet speaks) to the loathing of their persons.
Levana dea pro levandis e terra insantib^s, August. de Civit. Dei. l. 4. c* 11.

Thebanorum lex de non exponendis infantibus, Apud Aelian. de Var. Hist. l. 11.


The Heathen Romans had a special goddess or deity, whose name imported her
care and office, that children when they were borne, should be taken up from
the earth and set upon the knee. And for the preventing of this unnatural
cruelty, (very frequent as it seems amongst them) the Thebanes made an
express law, that infants should not be neglected or cast out when they were
borne, though the parents thought they would be a burden to them by reason of
the charge, or no delight to them by reason of their deformity.

Now says Job, I could wish, I had had such a father or such a mother, or such
friends, who forgetting natural affection, would have cast me out when I came
first into the world; Why did the knees prevent me? From hence also we may
observe, first,

That an infant, as soon as he lives, has in him the seeds of death: So Job
speaks of himself, Why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the
ghost when I came out of my mothers belly? Or why was I not stifled in the
womb? why was ever that door opened to let me into the world? I could have
died as soon as I lived. Not only is man acting sin, but nature infected with
sin, the subject of, and subjected to the power of death: So the Apostle
teaches us, ( Romans 5.14.) Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them
that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression; And who were
those? Even little infants, they had life, yet death reigned over them, they
were under the dominion of death, and subject to that king of terror. Sin is
the seed of death, and the principle of corruption. God does infants no wrong
when they die, their death is of themselves, for they have the seed of death in
them; We may affirm in one sense, that when infants die, they have no loss;
and we are sure (in every sense) when they die, they have no wrong; All death
(except death to sin) is the wages of sin, and therefore can be no injury to
the sinner.

Secondly, We may observe concerning man in his birth, what a helpless
creature man is. If I (says Job) had been left a little, I had bin gone
quickly, there had been an end of me: I could not have helped my self, if the
knees had not prevented me, if the breasts had not given me suck, if I had been
destitute of these succors, then presently I should have been free among the
dead, I should have been quiet and gone into silence.

Thirdly, Observe,

That every step of life stands in need of a step of mercy. When the infant is
conceived, there must be an act of mercy to quicken it, an act of mercy to
nourish it in the womb; an act of mercy for the birth, an act of mercy being
borne to take it upon the knee, an act of mercy to bind it up, an act of mercy
to give it suck. The beginning of our lives, and the progress of our lives,
our generation and our preservation call for acts of mercy, or else (poor
creatures as we are,) we quickly perish and return unto our dust. We owe our
lives to God at first, and we owe them every moment; if he did not renew mercy
every moment, we could not continue life one moment: As it is with our
spiritual life, so it is with our natural, Our lives are hid with Christ in
God, Col. 3.3. Of and from our selves we cannot subsist, either in grace or
nature. It follows, For now should I have lien still, and been quiet, I should
have slept; then had I been at rest.

These words are an enlargement of the former reason, taken from a description
of the state and condition of the dead; For now (says Job) I should have lien
still, If you should ask me a reason of my former reason, why I was so angry
with that day or night wherein I was conceived and borne, wherein I had that
(to me unacceptable) mercy to be preserved and kept alive? This I subjoyne for
the reason of it, If none of those unwelcome favors or natural rights had
been done me, then, I had lien still, I had been quiet, I should have slept, I
had been at rest, Either I should have been as one that never was, or I should
have been at rest and quiet. The argument lies thus; Rest and quiet are
desirable things, but death, in the omission of those succors, would have
given me rest, therefore I desire those succors had been omitted. This
conclusion is in the 11th, and 12th, verses, which we heard before. The
assumption is in this 13th, verse, which he further confirms in the 6 verses
following, by an argument which we may thus form. I will prove, says he, that
in death I should have rest and been quiet, and lien still, for all conditions
and sorts of men are quiet and lie still in death. There (or in that estate)
where all degrees and sorts of persons are at rest, there sure I should have
found rest; but in death all sorts and degrees of persons have found rest,
therefore I should have found rest too.

Now that all sorts of people lie still and are at rest in death, he proves by
an elegant enumeration of the several sorts and conditions of men. He makes an
argument by way of induction of all or most of the ranks of men. First, He
shows it in Kings and Counselors of the earth, these men that make such a
bussell in the world, when once they are dead, they are quiet enough. And then
he shows it in Rich-men and Princes, who load themselves with thick clay, who
toil and moile all their days to heap up and amasse much wealth; when these
come to the grave, there is an end of all their labors, then they must give over
all their pursuit of riches. Fourthly, He shows it in children, either
abortives, borne before natures time, or borne in full perfection of nature.
ver. 16. Lastly, He shows it in oppressors and the oppressed; in prisoners and
those that imprison them; in the small and in the great, in the servants and in
their Masters; Thus making an innumeration of all these, from thence he infers;
That if all these are quiet, when they are in the grave, then surely his
condition had been so too; I should have been quiet and lien still, then I
should have slept and been at rest.

We must here take notice, that Job speaking of the state of death, speaks
only in reference to an outward condition, and our resting from outward
calamities and troubles; he does not handle the point at all concerning man's
eternal estate; For, death is not rest to all sorts of men in that sense:
Kings and Counselors, and rich men, etc. may rest from the troubles of this
world, and go to a world of everlasting troubles. Such a total rest is the
sole privilege of the Saints. Thus only blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord, from henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from their
labors, and their works follow them, Rev. 14.13. When the Saints die, they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them (through free grace) in
glorious rewards. When the wicked die, they rest from their labors, but their
works follow them (through divine Justice) in everlasting punishments. And Job
resting assured of his own eternal rest, Aperte his verbis ostendit, se adeo
de suturae v^a de securum esse, ut tan^um fuerit solicitus de quiet a
praesentibus calamitatibus. (...)
wishes only a rest from those temporal commotions.

Further, We may observe 4 words used by Job to express the same thing. First,
I should have lien still. And been quiet, there is a second. I would have
slept, there is a third, and fourthly, Then I had been at rest.

I should have lien still.] The word signifies to lie down in any kind, and it
signifies to sleep, Genesis 19.4. Before they lay down, that is, before they
went to bed: It is applied likewise to the sleep of death, 2 Samuel 7.12. Isa.
43.17. They shall lie down, they shall not rise, (that is, they shall die, so
the next words expound it) They are extinct, they are quenched as towe.

And been quiet.] The word signifies also to be silent, (...) Securus fuit, in
pace degit, etiam filuit.
we may put both together, then had I lien still and been silent, and you know,
death and the grave are called silence; I had been like those that go down
into silence (says the Psalmist, Ps. 115.17.) that is, like those that go down
into the grave. And Hezekiah in his mourning describes that silence, Isa.
38.18. The grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee.

I should have slept.] Sleep is the image of death, and death is more then the
image of sleep; sleep is a short death, and death is a long sleep. Many of
them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting
life, and some to everlasting contempt, Dan. 12.2. Our friend Lazarus sleeps,
(says Christ to his Disciples, J^h. 11.11.) but I go that I may awake him out
of sleep. In the 14th, verse, Jesus said unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead.

Then had I been at rest.] We usually say when a man goes to sleep, he goes
to rest: Yet rest is more then sleep, for sometimes a man sleeps when he does
not rest, his very sleep being troubled, and he troubled in his sleep: But
when rest is joined with sleep it is perfect sleep. The word here used,
signifies a very quiet, settled and peaceable condition: Hence Noah had his
name, And he called his name Noah, saying, this son shall comfort us, (...)
concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the
Lord has cursed, Genesis 5.29. He was rest and comfort to the old world, by
preaching righteousness, even the righteousness which is by faith, which
alone gives rest unto the soul, and is able to refresh us in the midst of all
those toils and labors which that first curse brought upon the world, both
new and old. Such rest and sweet repose had I found (says Job) from all my
toil in the house of death and bed of the grave.

Having thus, four words concurring in the same sense, we may here not
unprofitably take notice of that elegant multiplication of words in the holy
Scriptures. There, store is no soar, and variety is no superfluity, yea there
Tautologie is no superfluity: It is the usual rhetoric of the Holy Ghost, to
speak the same thing in diverse words, yea sometime in the same words; We find
such a congeries or heaping up of words used for the most part in some heat of
passion, or vehemence of spirit; As first, when God would express a great
deal of anger and wrath against a people, he speaks thus, (Isa. 14.22, 23.) I
will rise up against them, says the Lord of hosts, and cut off from Babylon
the name and remnant, and son and nephew, I will also make it a possession
for the Bittern and pooles of water, and I will sweep it with the besome of
destruction. Here are a multitude of words, and all tending to the same
purpose, setting forth the fierceness of Gods anger, and the resolvednesse of
his judgment for the ruining of Babylon. The towering confused pride of the
King of Babylon, is presented to us in such a heap of words, ( Isa. 14.13,
14.) hear the pure language of pride from that Kings heart; Thou have said in
thine heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my throne above the
Stars of God, I will sit also upon the mount of the Congregation, I will
ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the most High. The
manifold apostacies and backslidings of Judah, are described in many words by
the Prophet Zephanie, chap. 1.6. And them that are turned bank from the Lord,
and those that have not sought the Lord, nor enquired for him; (Chap. 3.2.) She
obeyed not the voice, she received not correction, she trusted not in the Lord,
she drew not near to her God. When our Lord Christ would show the extreme
ignorance and darkness of his Disciples, in those great Articles of his
sufferings, death and resurrection, having taken the twelve unto him, and
discoursed of those points, he concludes, Luke 18.31, 34. And they understood
none of these things, and this saying was hid from them, neither knew they the
things that were spoken. As if Christ had said, their ignorance in these
mysteries was so great, that they had not the least glimpse or glimmerings of
light about them. So here, I should have lien still, and been quiet, I should
have slept, and been at rest, and all to note the interrupted-quiet and
tranquillity of the grave. As if he had said; Had I died then, not only had not
these storms been upon me, nor these waves gone over me, but the least breath
of wind had never blown upon me. Hence we may observe, First,

That in regard of all outward troubles, death is the rest of man. Blessed are
the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors And they who
die out of the Lord, rest from all that labor they have had in this world.
There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither
thou go, Eccles. 9.10. This life is a day of working, and death is a night
of resting. The Sun arises, man goes forth to his labor until the
evening, Psalm. 104.23. When the Sun of our life arises, we go forth to our
labor, until the evening of death. This life is a continued motion, death is
a continued rest. This life is but noise and tumult, death is silence. Our life
is a stormy passage, a tempestuous sea-voyage, death brings us to the harbor.

There is a fourfold rest which we obtain in death. First, A rest from
labor and travail, no working there. Secondly, There is a rest from trouble
and oppression, no wars, no bloody battles there. Thirdly, There is a rest
from passion, no sorrow, no grief shall afflict us there. In the grave there
is a fourth rest better then all these, a rest from sin, a rest from the
drudgerie of Satan, a rest from the winnowings and buffetings of Satan; a rest
from the law of our members, warring against the law of our minds. When Saul
went to the witch of Endor for advise with Samuel, that Samuel, or the Devil
in the appearance of Samuel, speaks as one disturbed being raised from the
grave; Why, (says he,) have thou disquieted me to bring me up, 1 Samuel 28.15. I
was at rest, why did thou call me up to a land of trouble? It is the
observation of an ancient Father, and the resolution of an ancient Council,
concerning Christ's weeping over Lazarus, Joh. 11. Plane Lazarum mortuum flevit
Christus, sed non tuas lachrimas fudit, doluit Lazarum non dormientem sed
potius resurgentem, Hieron. Ep. ad Tyrasiam super mortem filiae.
That not his death, but his rising drew those tears. When Christ came to the
grave where Lazarus lay, the Text says that Jesus wept. Why did Christ weep
says Jerome, in comforting a mother that had lost her daughter? It is clear
that Christ wept over Lazarus that was dead, but he did not weep thy tears;
Christ did not weep because Lazarus was dead, but he wept rather because
Lazarus was to be raised up again; he wept to think that his friend Lazarus
should be brought back into so troublesome a world. And it was the resolution
of the third Toletane Council, that Christ did not weep over Lazarus because
he was dead, Christus non ploravit, Lazarum mortuum, sed ad hujus vitae
aerumnas ploravit resusscitandum, Council Tolet. tert.
but because he was to be raised up again to feel the burdens and afflictions
of this life: that was their apprehension of it. And it is a truth, that
whosoever lives the common life of nature, lives in trouble: But such is not
the life of him who is raised from the dead: The lives of such though here upon
the earth, must needs lie out of the common course: And what their condition
is, is such a secret as we cannot understand but by enjoying it.

Again, from that particular expression, in that he says, I should have
slept, We may observe,

That as death it is the rest of the whole man, so death it is the sleep of
the body. So you find it often in the Scripture; Our friend Lazarus sleeps,
says Christ, when he was dead; Joh. 11. And the Apostle, 1 These. 4.13. I would
not have you ignorant concerning those which sleep, that is, concerning those
who are dead. Lighten mine eyes (says David) l^st I sleep the sleep of
death, or as the Hebrew, Lest I sleep death, Psalm. 13.3. And hence the grave
is called a bed, Isa. 57.2. The righteous are taken away, etc. they shall enter
in to peace, they shall rest in their beds. When a righteous man dies or is
taken away, he is but gone to bed. Therefore we call those places where the
dead are laid up and buried, (...), Dormitorium.
dormitories or sleeping places. Both the Greek and Latin words meet in the
same signification.

Some of the Ancients were of opinion that this sleep took hold of and seaz'd
upon all man, namely upon his soul as well as upon his body; Asserting that
the soul is in a sleep or slumber, that is, that the soul from the time of
its disunion from the body until the resurrection, lies still without any
motion or operation. I giant that many operations of the soul do cease when
it parts from the body. There are some acts of the soul which are
organicall, and there are other acts that are inorganicall or immateriall: The
organicall acts, that is, whatsoever the soul acts by the members of the body,
those acts I say must needs cease; but the soul can act of it self without
the assistance of the body; as we may collect by many experiments while our
bodies and souls are joined together. How often do we find our souls at
work, when our bodies lie still and do nothing; when sleep binds up all our
senses, and shuts up the windows of the body so close, that we can neither
hear nor see: yet then the soul frames to it self and beholds a thousand
various shapes, and hears all sorts of sounds and voices, then the soul sees,
and the soul hears, the soul devises, and the soul discourses, the soul
greeves, and the soul rejoices, the soul hopes, and the soul fears, the
soul electeth, and the soul refuses: All this the soul does in dreams and
visions of the night, when deep sleep falls upon man. So also in ecstasies and
ravishments, the body is as it were laid by, as useless and uninstrumentall to
the soul. I knew a man in Christ about fourteen years ago, (so the Apostle
Paul says,) whether in the body, I cannot tell, or out of the body, I cannot
tell, God knows, 2 Cor. 12.2. As if he had said, I was lost as to my body, I
could not tell what I was, I did not feel my self; yet he had mighty
operations in his soul, his spirit wrought strangely, and then took in such
revelations of God and from God, as his bodily organs could never fashion into
words, or represent by speech: He heard Quae sando explicari a quequam homine
non possunt. Beza.
unspeakeable words, which it is not Quae nulla vine Sanctorum quidem possit
explicari, nempe quia divinu^ est numen Sic explicat Clemens Alex. Strom 5.
Beza.
lawful (or possible) for man to utter. The soul has an ear to hear such
words as the body cannot find a tongue to express. So the Apostle John in his
divine ravishments, I was in the Spirit upon the Lords day. As for his body,
that was, as to that business laid by and suspended as useless in that day;
and his spirit called up to that angelical work, the receiving of visions and
revelations from on high. And among other things which John saw, he saw under
the Altar the souls of them that had been slain, for the word of God and for
the testimony which they held; These souls were not asleep though their
bodies were, for they cried with a loud voice saying, How long, O Lord Holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood, etc. Rev. 6.9, 10. From all
these texts and experiences we may conclude, that the soul wakes while the
body sleeps that sleep of death. And the death of the body is called a sleep.

First, Because as sleep, so death brings the body to rest, as was observed in
the former point.

Secondly, Natural sleep is not perpetual, we sleep and wake again; so
though the body lie in the grave, yet death is but a sleep, the man shall
awake and rise again.

Thirdly, As a body asleep can easily be awaked and called up by the power of
man; so the body when it is dead, can with infinitely more ease be raised by
the power of God; It is but a call from Heaven and we awaken out of the dust.
God can beyound all comparison more easily awaken us from that dead sleep of
death, then we can awaken one another from the lightest slumber.

There are two questions which I shall propound and endeavor to resolve upon
the whole matter of this context.

First, We find Job complaining, because things were not otherwise ordered
about him, he is troubled, because he was borne, or because he was not cast
away in the birth; for then it had been better with him, he had been asleep
and quiet; he was troubled things were with him as they were. Hence it may be
questioned, Whether it be lawful for us to wish or to desire, that had not
come to pass, which we see come to pass? And are we not bound to rest
satisfied with the present and fore-past dispensations of God, and so be
content with the things that are, or with things as they are?

For this, I say in general, such wishes or desires are not sinful. It is not
absolutely sinful, to wish that not to be, which is; Nay some things which
are, ought to be wished they had not bin, and it is a sin not to wish, they had
not been. As those things that are displeasing to God, provocations to the eyes
of his glory; things that are dishonorable to God, we ought to wish that such
things had never been. God himself wishes in that manner, Psalm. 81.13. O that
my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways! They did not
walk in his ways, he wishes they had, he desires they had been better, more
holy and more obedient then they were. To wish that a thing had not been, out
of a tenderness that God should be offended by sin, is not only lawful, but
very commendable. But to wish things otherwise then they are, as murmuring
against and misliking Gods administration, or out of a tenderness, because we
suffer, is not only sinful but abominable; When our wills rise up against the
will of God, when we cannot be contented to be what God will have us to be, and
to suffer what God would have us suffer, when we who should learn to be
content in every estate, are angry with our estates, and on that ground wish, O
that this had never been, O that I had never seen this day, because it has so
much trouble in it; this wish has I know not how much evil in it. So likewise
when man shall (as it were) take upon him to direct the Almighty and only wise
God in governing the world, secretly surmizing, or openly complaining, that
things might be dispensed and managed with more wisdom, justice and
moderation; such boldness is plain blasphemy. Some are ready to say in their
hearts about the Lord Christ's governing the world, as Absalom did concerning
his father David's government of Israel; Things are carried, as if there were
none deputed to hear or redress the wrongs of men. O that I were made Judge
of the world, that every man which has any suite or cause might come to me,
and I would do him justice: 2 Samuel 15.3, 4.
Things should not go thus if I had the ordering of them; such boldness is
highest blasphemy. And yet with caution of due reverence to the Name of God, he
gives us leave to debate the matter with him, both concerning the state of
things in public, and our own personal estates.

First thus, If we, while we are debating, adore his secret Justice and
usearcheable wisdom, in that which we neither see nor are able to understand.
Thus while the Prophet Jeremie took liberty to plead with God about the
administrations of the world, he humbly praemises, Righteous art thou O Lord
when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments, Illud
semper retinere debemu^: (...) esse Deum.
why does the way of the wicked prosper? we may ask God the question, and
plead with him about his judgments, but we must not have the least jealousy
or suspicion of his righteousness or of his judgments.

Secondly, We may sit down and bewail the state of things, or our private
estates; In that sense we may wish things not to be that are, so as to bewail
that such things are, and this is it which Job especially does in this Chapter,
he sits down bewailing his condition; And so may we while we keep within our
bounds, and duly regulate our lamentings. The bounds and rules may be such as
these. First, Deal not too much with the creature, either in complaining of
the creature, or in complaining to the creature. Let second causes pass, or
look upon them but in the second place: power your complaints into the bosom
of God. Secondly, Consider from whence your bewailings move; take heed they
spring not from delicacie of spirit, or an unwillingnesse to lie under the
cross, because it spoils your fair show in the flesh: Gal. 6.12.
While we bewail our own cross or public crosses, we should be working our
hearts to a willing and cheerful sufferance of the cross. Though a man does
not love that which he bears, yet let him love to bear: It is an high strain
of spiritualnes in bearing, Tolerare est patientia necessitatis, amare tolerate
est patientia virtutis*
when a Christian can say, I love not that which I suffer, yet I love to
suffer: I love not that which I bear, yet I love to bear. To bear is the
patience of necessity, to love to bear is the patience of virtue: to love to
bear, has in it the highest affection and the lowest subjection unto Christ.
The Apostles spirit was raised to this heroic pitch, and somewhat above it,
when he said, I rejoice in my sufferings, Col. 1.24. (Joy is a degree beyond
love) when he said, I take pleasure in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake, 2 Cor. 12.10. (Pleasure is a
degree beyond joy.) But especially when he said, I glory in tribulations, Romans
5.3. And God forbid that I should glory (in any thing else) save in the cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6.14. To glory in a thing is more then to take
pleasure in it. Again, Take heed your complaints and bewailings do not arise
out of distrust and unbelief; such complainings are provocations. It was
called the provocation, when the people of Israel made such distrusting
complaints, Psalm. 95.8. Harden not your hearts as in the provocation in the day
of temptation in the wilderness. And that the provocation lay in their
unbeleefe, the Apostle is express, Heb, 3. where quoting this text of the
Psalm, he concludes his whole discourse thus, ver. 19. So we see they could
not enter in because of unbelief. If we mix faith with our tears, and while
we bemoane our condition, yet believe, that God is good and good to us, that
God is alsufficient, and alsufficient to deliver us; we may wish that the
things that are, were not, and that God who changes not, would make a change in
our estate,

For the close of this point, I shall lay down these three Conclusions,

First, A man may desire that, which God wills not, and not sin in that
desire: As the deliverance of a people whom God will destroy.

Secondly, A man may sin in desiring that which God wills: When it is the will
of God that the father shall die; the child sins in desiring it.

Thirdly, A man may without sin desire that not to be, which God wills; or
which is the same, that not to be which is; such desires being qualified
according to the cautions before given.

There is a second question arising upon a part of this complaint: For Job
complains not only of his troubles, but of his life: And seems to have been
angry with his very being; while he wishes he had never been conceived, or that
his mother had been denied the blessing of conception. The question then is,
Whether an evil or a troublesome being be worse then no being? Or whether it
be better not to be then to be miserable.

I answer, There is a twofold miserable being, one Temporal, the other
Eternal. An eternal miserable being is eternally worse then a not being. But
a temporal miserable being, at the worst, is better then a not being. And the
reason is, because our being is far more excellent then the outward comforts
of our being, these being only accidental to our being; and therefore it
necessarily follows, that it is better to be without outward comforts, then to
be without a being. Again, Life is better then all outward things, (Satan
spoke truly in the former chapter, All that a man has will he give for his
life.) That which a man parts with rather then his life, is below his life. If
then life be better then riches, or health, or pleasures, then much more is our
being better then all these. As a man may hold his life when all his estate and
comforts are gone, so he does hold his being when his life is gone; Life is
brittle ware at the best, but man's being is of an everlasting make. I know
there are some who dispute and conclude, that a being, even an eternally
miserable being is better then no being: And I grant it is so in a
metaphysicall or a philosophical notion, but in a theological notion it is
not. A Philosopher (keeping within the sphere of nature) can see no misery so
miserable, or evil so bad, as not to be. Si natus non suisset ille homo-i. e.
si nunquam processisset a non esse ad esse. Melius quippe suisset nunquam
su^sse quam tanta slagitia perpetrare, gratia quoque and gloria in aeternum
privari, sed and appetibilius est homini absolute non esse, quam esse damnatum,
propter aeternam poenatissimamque miseriam, Dionis, Carthus in Mat. 26. v. 24.
But a Divine can, he sees two things worse. First, An everlasting stain and
guilt of sin lying upon the soul. Secondly, The everlasting wrath and
displeasure of God powered out upon the whole man. Hence Christ says of Judas
who betrayed him, Mat. 26.24. It had been good for that man, if he had not
been borne; because that accursed act joined with his impenitence and
unbeleefe, subjected him to everlasting misery, to wrath for evermore; It had
been good he had never been borne, rather then to fall into such a sin, and
from that to fall into Hell. Not to be borne, is in this place, as much as not
to be. And it had been good for him not to have been borne, is as much as to
say, it had been better for him not to have been borne. It had been better for
him not to have been, then to have committed such a sin, to lie under such
wrath, and to loose such happiness for ever. Though a state of damnation
(considered abstractedly) be better then no state at all, that is, then a not
being, yet, in the concrete, it is not better to be damned then not to be: In
it self, eternal misery is better then a nonentity, but a man eternally
miserable, is worse then a non-ens. And without doubt it will be the eternal
desire of the damned (and that desire is both a part and an increase of their
misery) that they never had been, or now might cease to be, rather then
continue to be miserable.

Now to shut up and resolve the question, as to the ground of it, Jobs
complaint in this Text, I say, Job was only in the present feeling of temporal
troubles, and he was beyond the fear of eternal: Therefore number this among
his failings, that he wished he had never been conceived, because he was thus
afflicted.

JOB 3. Ver. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Verse 14. With Kings and Counselors of the
earth, which build desolate places for themselves.

Or with Princes that had gold, who filled their houses with silver.

Or as an hidden untimely birth, I had not been, as infants which never saw
light.

There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest.

There the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the oppressor,
etc.


FRom the 10th. verse of this Chapter to the end of the 19th, we have showed
you, that Job lays down the cause of his former bitterness and complainings
against his day. At the 10th. verse he is angry because it hindered not his
conception and his birth; And at the 13th. he gives a further cause of that
cause, For then (says he) I should have been at rest. Now being about to prove
that in death he should have found rest, he does it by an induction of
particulars, As if he had thus said. Where all sorts of persons, even they who
have been hardest wrought, and most troubled in the world, find rest; there
surely I should have found rest also, But in death, persons that have been
hardest wrought and most troubled in the world find rest; therefore there I
should have found rest too. Now for the proving of this assumption, that in
death all sorts of persons find rest, even those who have been most travailed,
tired and worn out in the world: To prove this (I say) he gives instance in
diverse, almost all ranks, degrees and conditions of men.

First, In those who are great, rich and wise, in Kings and Counselors of the
earth, which build desolate places for themselves. And in Princes who had gold,
who filled their houses with treasure, etc.

With Kings and Counselors of the earth. With Kings.] The word here used,
properly notes such as rule by Law, such as are opposed to Tyrants, (...)
Regnavit Consilio and Legibas.
who rule according to the dictates of their own will. With such Kings
Counselors are usually joined; With Kings and Counselors of the earth.
Great Princes have their Counsels, and it is a happy conjunction when good
Kings and good Counselors meet together. Yea many times bad men are good
Kings, when they are attended with good Counselors: Whereas evil
Counselors often make a good man a bad King, and by their poisonous whispers
and instillations at the ear, corrupt the hearts, and taint the spirits of the
best Princes. In the multitude of Counselors (says Solomon, Prove 15.21.)
there is safety. The safety of Kings, and the safety of Kingdoms, does consist
in following this multitude. Where there are good Counselors, and a multitude
of them, we may expect good, and much good, a multitude of blessings upon a
Nation.

Now when Job had named these eminent persons, Kings and Counselors, he
adds somewhat further by way of their description, he gives as it were a
character of them from their studies and employments, With Kings and
Counselors of the earth, which build desolate places for themselves.

It may seem very doubtful what is here meant by these desolate places, and
the building of them. (...) Proprie destr^ctiones.
The word in the Hebrew is, desolations, or destructions; It comes from Charab,
which signifies to dry up, because dry places are desolate places, as a
desolate wilderness for the dryness of it, being unfit to sustain man or
beast. Hence the name of the Mount Horeb, Exodus 3.1. called so from dryness,
because there was no water, Deuteronomy. 8.15. The same word also signifies, a sword;
because the sword (as we see by woeful experience) makes places desolate. But
what Job should mean by this, That Kings and Counselors of the earth, build
solitary places for themselves, is questionable.

First, Some take it for an expression of vast and mighty buildings, Palaces
and houses of such largeness and content, that when great Princes and Kings
have their full retinue and families in them, they can scarce be seen: But I
see no reason at all for that sense, and therefore I pass it; a little touch
will make that opinion desolate.

Others by these desolate places, conceive that Job means Forests and
Parkes, places of pleasure, which Kings and great men use to build and make up
for delight and recreation.

Or thirdly, That by desolate places, are meant houses built in desolate or
solitary places, in Woods and Forests. Princes and great men will have their
houses far remote from Towns and places of resort, that they may be free
from suitors, and retire when they please from the throng of the multitude; It
is said concerning Solomon, 1 King. 7.2. that after he had built the Temple and
his own house for his Kingly residence, he built a house in the Forest of
Lebanon; But this may be called a building in, rather then a building of
desolate places.

Fourthly, Rather, I conceive that Kings and Counselors of the earth may be
said to build desolate places, when finding places desolate and ruined, Inn^it
loca vasta and destructa desolataque, quae ipsi extruebant ad nomen sibi
comparandum, Drus.
they, with vast expenses raise up and build stately Fabriques upon them, to
get themselves a name. As want and poverty, war and troubles turn a Palace
into a desolate place; so riches and plenty, power and peace meeting together
in Kings and great men, turn desolate places into Palaces. Kings and
Counselors are of such wealth and power, that they can alter the most
desolate and ruinous places, into delicate edifices and stately dwellings.

Or lastly, Which does best suite with the subject of Jobs discourse or curse
in this Chapter; He speaking so much of death, by the desolate places, we may
understand, Tombs and Sepulchers, places of burial: which Kings and
Counselors build to or for themselves: And so taken, the sense may be given
thus, as if Job had said, if I had died, I should have lien in the grave with
as much ease and quiet, as those great Princes and Kings of the earth, who
build themselves stately monuments to lie in; It would have been as well with
me as with any of them, though interred under stately tombs. We know it was an
ordinary thing for Kings and great men (especially in ancient times) to prepare
for themselves costly monuments while they lived, as houses for their bodies
being dead: Which grew to such excessive charge among the Romans, Nostrae
quidem legis interpretes, quo capite jubent sumptus and luxus removere a Deorum
manium ^ure, Intelligunt imprimis sepulchrorum munificentiam esse minuendam,
Cicero.

Major apud Egyptios sepulchrorum quam donorum cura.


that they were forced to make a Law to restrain it. The Egyptians bestowed
more care and cost in building their tombs then their houses. Even Abraham,
(Genesis 23.16.) bought him a burying place before he built himself a house,
though while he lived, he dwelt in a moveable tent, yet he would be as sure as
he could of a certain grave. And good Joseph of Arimathea had made himself a
sepulcher in a rock, Math. 27.60. And it is said of Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.18. That
in his life time he had taken and reared up a pillar, (that is, he had
artificially raised a great pile of goodly stones) in the Kings dale, For he
said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance; And he called the pillar
after his own name. Now as this pillar was to keep his name, so he intended it
likewise to keep his body when he should die; For it being related in the
verse before, how as soon as he was slain, they made no more ado with him,
but cast him into a great pit in the wood, and laid a very great heap of
stones upon him; The holy Ghost to show us the vanity of man in preparing for a
dead body, while he neglects an immortal soul, and how God disappoints the
vain conceits of men in supposing to perpetuate their own name and greatness;
The holy Ghost (I say) to show this, presently subjoynes in the sacred story,
Now Absalom in his life time, etc. As if he had said, Do ye observe how this
ambitious Prince was buried, even tumbled into a pit with a rude heap of
stones cast upon him. This man had prepared himself another kind of monument,
even a sumptuous pillar, etc. Inane monume^tum quod vocatur (...), Jun. in loc.
So that under or by that pillar, he had archt a curious vault for himself to
be buried in, called Absaloms place, namely his burying place.

And the word which we have here for desolate places, is in Scripture clearly
applied to the grave, or a place of burial. We have it in, Ezekiel. 26.20. where
the Prophet foreshewing the destruction of Tire, speaks from the Lord, thus,
When I shall bring thee down with them that descend into the pit, and shall
set thee in the low parts of the earth, in places desolate of old. There are
three words in that verse, and they are all Synonima's, words of the same
signification; First, The pit. Secondly, The low parts of the earth. Thirdly,
The desolate places; and all these are but several expressions for the grave,
or for a place to bury in, It is no more but this, When I shall bring thee
down, even with those that lie buried in the grave. So that the word which we
translate desolate places, being also in other places used for the grave or a
place of burial, we may very well expound it so here, that desolate places are
the graves or sepulchers of Kings, and Princes, and Counselors of the earth;
which we may do especially, because Job treats in this place about death, and
the state of the dead.

Now Tombs and Monuments may be called desolate places in two respects.

First, Because when the body is laid in there, all company and all friends
leave it; you shall have a mighty train following their friend to the grave,
but there they leave him. Kings and Counselors have stately Funerals, but
when their subjects or friends, favorites or flatterers have brought them to
the tomb and opened the door of the grave, they go no further, they will not
go in with them, and dwell with their bodies in the dust of death, as much as
they honored or adored them when they lived: so that, they are in desolate
places.

Secondly, Graves may be called desolate places, because Tombs and Sepulchers
were in desolate places, they were made in some high Mountain or caved Valley,
in some place remote from the company and habitations of the living; for in
former times they did not bury in Cities or in Towns, but in places where few
came, till they were carried, and therefore properly called desolate places.
Eutrop. l. 8. In Vrbe ne sepelito neve ^^ite.
It is observed, that among the Romans, the first Emperor that was buried in
Rome was Traian. And the law of the twelve Tables did prohibit both the burial
and the burning of the dead within the City. So then it is clear, that
anciently Tombs and Monuments were erected in desolate places, and that great
cost was bestowed in building and beautifying of them; both which favor and
illustrate the exposition given. It follows in the Text; Or with Princes that
had gold, who fill their houses with treasure.

(...)
The word Sar, a Prince, in the Hebrew as in most other languages, signifies the
chief, the head, the first; Some Critics conceive that our English word [
Sir] comes from it, it is very near in sound, and so is the French word [
Mounsier] to this Original for a Prince or Chief.

Job describes Princes thus, they are such as had gold, noting both what the
study and endeavors of Princes are, namely, to lay up gold; and likewise what
is requisite for them. Gold is of great use in a high estate; Treasures are
necessary for Princes. Princes that had gold. Therefore Solomon that wise
Prince says of himself, Eccles, 2.8. And he puts it among his Princely
works, I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of Kings:
When the Wisemen came to Christ, the first thing they offered him was gold,
and they did wisely, for he was a Prince: gold being the chief, and as it were
the prince of Metals, is a very proper offering for Princes. And howsoever
wisdom and goodness, justice and clemency are far more necessary
requisites in Princes then gold, yet there is such a necessary conjunction of
these two, that we find him in the Prophet ( Isa. 3.7.) refusing the
government because he was poor. Be thou our Ruler (say they verse. 6.) and let
this ruin be under thine hand, that is, be thou our Prince and take charge of
us; Not I says he, I will not be an healer, for in mine house is neither bread
nor clothing, make me not a Ruler of the people; As if he had said, I am but a
poor man, a man of a weak estate, Princes must have treasure and great
estates to bear up the dignity of their places; As covetousness, so poverty
is very unbecoming in a Prince. The Roman story tells us, that when two great
Consulls stood in competition for a great employment in the affairs of that
Commonwealth, One of the Senators being as'kt upon which of the two he would
bestow his vote, Answered, upon neither: And gives this reason, Valerius:
Maximus* l. 6.5.4.
One has nothing, and the other can never have enough; One was so poor that
he had nothing to support him, and the other was so covetous that nothing would
satisfy him. Therefore, as before Job joined Counselors with Kings, so here
he joyneth gold with Princes; The next expedient for Princes to counsel and
wisdom, are gold and treasures. We find indeed, that God gives it in charge
to the Kings of Israel, concerning their gathering of treasures, that they
should not be excessive, ( Deuteronomy: 17.17.) Neither shall he greatly multiply to
himself silver and gold, He does not say, your Prince or your King shall not
multiply silver or gold, but he shall not greatly multiply silver or gold, that
is, he shall not set his heart upon them, or think he never has enough, he
shall not greatly do it, (...) Argentum quod ab omnibus ap^petitur.
but let him be careful to do it proportionably to his occasions either of
peace or war.

Further, It is added, Who fill their houses with treasure. The word which we
here translate treasure, is ordinarily translated silver, The root from which
it springs, signifies to desire, and the reason is, because treasure, silver
or gold, are such desirable things, or things upon which the desires of most
men are set: therefore the Hebrews give silver a name proper to its own
nature, or rather to the nature of men, whose desires are enflamed after it.
With this desirable thing, Princes fill their houses.

What are these houses?

A house is a place wherein man lives, or inhabiteth while he lives: this is
the ordinary acception of the word; and so it may be taken here, for the
ordinary dwelling houses or Palaces of Princes; And then it is an heightning
of the sense, They had gold, yea, they had so much, as they filled their houses
with it.

Then again, (That we may keep in this clause to the exposition given in the
last, of the desolate places,) we may understand by the houses that these
Princes filled with treasure, the graves, the Tombs wherein they were buried;
And it is the language of Scripture, to call the grave a house, man's house. Two
Texts I will give you for it, one out of this book, Job 30.23. where Job
speaking of the grave, calls it the house appointed for all living; And
Eccles. 12.5. where Solomon calls it our long home, Man dies, (...) Ad domum
saeculi.
and goes to his long home; the word in the Original is, he goes to the
house of his age, or to the house of age. God is called the rock of ages,
because he is an everlasting strength, Isa. 26.4. The grave is called an house
of age, because it is a very lasting house, an abiding house, a house where man
must abide till God sound him up by the voice of a Trumpet to the resurrection;
So then the grave is likewise called an house, the house of all living, because
thither every one that is living is travailing, man travailes to the grave as
to his house; And a long-home, in opposition to our short home, our uncertain
abode in those houses wherein we dwell upon the earth.

Princes (says Job) that had gold, and this is one use they make of it, they
fill their houses, that is, their graves or their tombs with this treasure. In
those times (it seems) they did not only bestow great cost upon their Tombs
and places of burial, but they put great store of treasure into the Tombs
with them. According to this interpretation, the meaning of Job may be thus
represented, If I had died before, and had been buried poorly and obscurely,
yet I should have done as well as Kings and Counselors, who with vast expense
of treasure build stately Tombs for themselves, yea as well as Princes that
put their treasure into their Tombs with them.

That it was a custom to put in much treasure into Tombs, is observed by
Josephus in his 13th. book of Antiquities and 15th. Joseph. l. 13. Antiq. c.
15. and l. 16. c. 11.
chapter, showing how Hircanus opened David's Sepulcher, and took out three
thousand Talents; And in his 16th. book, chap. 11. he notes, that afterward
Herod opened the Sepulcher of David, and thought to have found a great deal of
treasure there, but found only some precious garments, etc. And the story is
famous out of Herodotus concerning Semiramis, Herodotus. l. 1.
That she having built a stately Tomb, makes this inscription upon it,
Whatsoever King shall succeed here and wants money, let him open this Tomb and
he shall have enough to serve his turn; Which Darius in afterages being in
streights for want of treasure attempting to do, in stead of money found only
this reproof written and laid up there. Unless thou had been extremely
covetous and greedy of filthy lucre, thou would not have opened the graves
of the dead to seek for money. The Lord, threatens by the Prophet Jeremie,
that the Chaldeans shall bring out the bones of the King of Judah, and the
bones of his Princes, and the bones of the Priests, and the bones of the
Prophets, etc. out of their graves, chap. 8.1. It is conceived that the reason
why the Chaldeans dug up and raked in the graves of the Jews, was not so
much from cruelty as from covetousness: They having heard that the Jews used
to put rich ornaments upon the dead, or riches into their graves with them. Or
this might be as a just punishment of that grredinesse after gain, so eminent
in the Jews, that the Prophet in the very Chapter where this is threatened,
charge them thus, ver. 10. Every one from the least to the greatest, is given
to covetousness. Thus it is clear, that there was a custom to put riches and
treasure into the grave with the dead, to which Job might allude in this place,

So much for the opening of the words from the sense given. Observe, first,

That neither power, nor wisdom, nor riches, are any privilege at all
against the stroke of death. Here are Kings, men that have great power;
Counselors, men full of wisdom; Princes that have riches, so much gold that
they can stuff their graves with it, yet these cannot defend themselves
against death: Death will not obey the authority of Kings, nor does it fear
their frowns; the subtilty or policy of Counselors is not able to defeat
it, there is no eloquence, no Rhetoric can persuade death to depart; all the
gold and riches in the world cannot bribe death or stay its hand; I (says Job)
should have found Kings and Counselors, and rich men, even all these in the
grave, and we should have rested together. Riches avail not in the day of
wrath, (Prove. 11.4.) but righteousness delivers from death. Righteousness
delivers from death, why, shall not righteous men die? Surely Job might have
said, with righteous men, with holy men should I have rested, with Abraham,
with Isaac and with Jacob, these are in the grave, death seaz'd on them as well
as other Princes, and Kings and Counselors; How then does Solomon say, that
righteousness delivers from death? Death is there either to be understood of
some dangerous judgment, for, says he, riches avail not in a day of wrath;
that is, in a day of public calamity, but righteousness delivers from
death; that is, from those troubles and dangers; God has respect to a
righteous person, and hides him from that death. Or righteousness does
deliver from death, that is, from the evil of death, from the sting of death,
from the bitterness of death; the bitterness and evil of death is past to a
righteous man. But riches they avail not at all, they cannot at all, as not
deliver from death, so not mitigate the pain, or pull out the sting, or
sweeten the bitterness of death; yea rather riches increase all these: That is
a truth, O death how bitter is thy remembrance to a man that is at ease in his
possession. Men may put their riches with them into the grave, but riches
cannot keep them a moment out of the grave. This thought, How bitter!

Secondly, When Job speaks of Kings, and Counselors and Princes, these great
men of the world, he shows us what their study and business for the most
part is in the world, it is about worldly things; They build desolate places,
they have gold, they fill their houses with treasure; These are their
employments, the current of their cares and endeavors runs out this way. Hence
observe,

That the thoughts of the greatest and wisest of the world, are usually but for
and about the world, The poor receive the gospel, and the rich receive the
world. As a godly man is described by his faith, Abraham believed God: By
fear, by uprightness, by justice, as Job in the first chapter of this Book,
by meekness, as Moses, etc. by the heavenlinesse of their spirits and
conversations: Our conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3.20. So worldly men are
described by their proper studies. Kings, Counselors and Princes, build
Palaces, gather riches, heap up gold. They buy, they sell, they build, they
plant, they eat, they drink, as the worldly world is pictured, Luke 17.27,
28. In the 17th. Psalm, great men are called, the men of the world, as if they
were for nothing but the world, or all for the world; as if all their
provisions were laid in for this world, so it follows, who have their portion
in this life, ver. 14. It is a sad thing to have received our portion, It is
said of the rich man, Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy
good things, thou have had thy portion. In Psalm. 49.11. It is said concerning
such men, that their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for
ever, and their dwelling places to all generations, and they call their lands
after their own names. Their inward thoughts are upon these things; It is
somewhat a strange kind of speaking, to say, their inward thoughts, for there
are no thoughts but inward, thoughts are all wrought in the secret shop of the
heart. But there is an elegancy in it, the Hebrew is their inwards, their
internalls; Internum vel interiora.
Their inwards are, how they may get themselves a name and riches, not only are
their thoughts about these things, but the very inmost of their thoughts, the
most retired thoughts and recesses of the soul are about these things, these
lie nearest to their hearts; As the story says of Queen Mary, when she died,
she had them open her and they should find Calice at her heart, It was a
pitiful case, that a rotten Town should lie (where Christ ought) at the heart
of such a Princess; The heart is the place where Christ and the thoughts of
Heaven should lodge: All below Heaven should be below our hearts. But as a
godly man's inward thoughts are for Heaven and the things of Heaven, for grace
and for holiness; he has thoughts upon the world, but (if I may so speak)
they are his outward thoughts, not his inward thoughts: That which lies nearest
his heart, his inward thoughts are for Heaven: So the inward thoughts of
worldly men are for the world; the Apostle might well say, Not many wise, nor
many rich, nor many noble are called, the thoughts of wise Counselors, of
potent Kings and rich Princes, are legible in their actions.

Thirdly, Having expounded these desolate places to be Tombs, and these houses
graves, Observe,

That some take in their life time more care for their Sepulchers, then they
do for their souls. Here are great men, what do they? They build desolate
places, they will be sure to have stately monuments: And they had gold, they
will be sure to fill their graves with treasure, they will be buried richly, or
they will have their riches buried with them; But what care did these take for
their poor souls in the mean time, where they should lie? Had they taken
order what should become of their souls? When all things are disposed of, this
choice piece for the most part is left undisposed of, unprovided for; Some will
carefully provide for their children, they will provide for their families,
they will provide for their dead bodies, for their carcasses, but for their
immortal souls there is no provision made: While their bodies are assured of
a resting place, they may say of and to their departing souls (as that
trembling Emperor bespake his) O our poor fleeting wandering souls, whether
are you going, where is the place of your rest. As it is said of Absalom in the
place before cited, He in his life time had reared up a pillar (a monument, or
a Tomb) for himself in the Kings dale; What a careful Prince was this for
his body! But how careless was this Prince for his soul! He will have a
pillar to preserve his name, and yet runs out in rebellion against his own
father, to the destruction of his soul. The great business of the Saints on
earth, is to get assurance of a place for their souls to lodge in when they
die: It troubles them not much what lodging their bodies have, if they can put
their spirits into the hand of Christ: What though their bodies be cast upon a
dunghill, or trodden upon, Facilis jactu^a sepulchri.
like mire in the streets, by cruel men? A Heathen said, The loss of a
Funeral, or of a Sepulcher may easily be borne; I am sure, a Christian may:
That loss will never undo any man, especially not those who believe. For in
the person of such the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.2. We know that if our
earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an
house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. All that rich worldlings,
and ungodly great ones can say when they die, is, We know when the earthly
house of this Tabernacle shall be dissolved, we have a building of man, a
stately Tomb made with hands, and with all the skill of the cunning artificer:
We have seen it done already, or we have taken order in our wills to have it
done. The believer erects his pillar in Heaven, and his whole life is a
preparation for his house which is above; And often he settles the business
so, that he can say, I know that when this house of my body is taken down, I
have a building, etc. And he can say, I know, with far greater assurance then
any worldly man, who has sealed it in his will, that thus and thus his body
shall be entombed. It is a sad thing to take care for a rotting carcass, and
forget an immortal soul.

Job having thus paraleld or compared himself in death, with Kings,
Counselors and Princes, notwithstanding all their pompous funerals and
curious Tombs, passes as it were in the next verse to the other extreme.

Verse 16. Or as an hidden untimely birth, I had not been, as infants which
never saw light.

As if he had said, if any think that I have strained too high in making my
self equal in death with Kings, etc. yet surely I should have been as those,
that never knew themselves to be in this world, or as those that the world
never knew to be, that is, As an hidden untimely birth, or as infants which
never saw light.

An hidden untimely birth. The word [ Nephel] in the Hebrew for an untimely
birth, comes from [ Naphal] which signifies to fall down, or to fall off,
Quasi decidum aut immaturus fructus qui ante maturitatis te^pus ex arbore
decidit inutilis, Bolduc. in loc.
as untimely fruit falls off from a Tree; which falling off before it is ripe,
is unprofitable and useless: When the mother miscarries, her fruit is like the
fruit of a tree, shaken off and falling down before it be ripe, or in the
blooming. And the same word is used in the Hebrew, to signify a Giant; There
were (Nephilim) Giants in the earth in those days, Genesis 6.4. and the reason
why they are so called, is as some apprehend, because they were Apostates, such
as fell off from God, from true worship and Religion: Or because they did fall
upon men, as that phrase is applied to cruel men, they did fall upon the
poor, So the word is used, chap. 1. ver. 15. of this Book, The Sabeans fell
upon Jobs Oxen, etc, They who fall from God by impiety, will quickly fall upon
men by cruelty. Or because the dread and terror of them made men to fall down
for fear before them: It is very observable, that the same word should
signify, an infant of less then a span long, and a Giant (it may be) of more
then six cubits and a span, (1 Samuel 17.4.) and both upon equal reason, and
with equal significancy.

Further we may take notice, that the Hebrews express any dead body or
carcass by the same word; the dead body of the oldest man is called Mappeleth,
from the same root and reason too in part, from which they denominate, an
untimely birth, that never lived a day. When the old man dies, he falls as well
as the newly conceived embryon; The one falls off as a blossom from the tree,
the other as the fruitfully ripe, which (if you pull it not off) must fall off.
(...), Cadaver a cadendo.
The Greek word for a dead body, and the Latin, have the same reason of their
derivation, namely from falling: So says Job, I had been as one of these
untimely births, that fall to the earth before their time.

The Apostle Paul says concerning himself (1 Cor. 15.8.) I was as one borne
out of due time, I was an untimely birth: Some of the naturalists say, (...),
Apud Aristotelem significat f^etum post septimum and intra quadragessimu^ diem
conc^ptu^; Apud Hippocratem octavo mense natos. Aristot l. 7. de Histor.
Anima^. c. 7.
that word signifies such abortions as are after the seventh, and before or at
the fortieth day after conception. Others, that it signifies those who are
borne the eighth month, which usually as they are untimely, so they die. Now
Paul calls himself an untimely birth, to suite the humble thoughts which he
had of himself, with an humble expression of himself, which reason he seems
to give in the next words, ver. 9. For I am the least of the Apostles, that am
not meet to be called an Apostle, etc. Even as an untimely birth is not fit to
be called a birth; or, because children that are so borne, are very imperfect,
they are lesser, and weaker then those of full growth: So says he, I am as a
poor abortive, as a child borne out of due time, I am the least of the
Apostles, Iustum temporis ordinem servavit dominus in creandis, fovendis and
formandis Apostolis. Paulus vero vix dum been concepto Spiritu vitali ex utero
projectus fuera^, momen^o simul genitus and natus and vir plene aetatis fuit,
Pined.
and I am less then the least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3.8. I am not come to that
stature and growth of a timely birth. Secondly, He calls himself an untimely
birth, or one borne out of due time, probably for this reason, because of the
suddenness or violence of his conversion; For you know every abortion or
untimely birth, comes from some sudden danger into which the mother falls;
some strain or violence causes abortion: Paul in this sense was an untimely
birth, his conversion was a wonderful violent conversion; Christ came upon him
of a sudden, whereas the other Apostles were a great while a forming, a
shaping, a fitting to an Apostleship, but Paul was as it were in a moment
conceived and borne, brought forth and perfected an Apostle, and so from the
suddenness and violence of his new birth, he may call himself an unimely
birth.

But to pass on from that to the words of Job, As an hidden, untimely birth, I
had not been. Here are two things distinct about this birth. First, It is
called an untimely birth. Secondly, a hidden birth.

An untimely birth, is called a hidden birth, because it is hid from the eyes
of others; Abortives are unpleasing and undesireable spectacles, therefore they
are covered and laid by; there is no remembrance of their form or likeness,
therefore Solomon speaking of an untimely birth, Eccles. 6.4. thus describes
it, He comes in with vanity and departs in darkness, and his name shall
be covered with darkness.

As a hidden untimely birth, I had not been. An untimely birth is said not to
have been. A not being is taken two ways. First, Strictly for that which never
had any life at all, and so some interpret this, for there are abortions or
untimely births, before quickening or before there is any life. Secondly, Esse
dicit^r qui vivit and non esse qui mort^us est.
Not to be, is not to subsist, or not to live: When that which has lived dies,
it is said not to be. The Prophet brings in Rachel, weeping for her children,
and would not be comforted, because they were not, Jer. 31.15. that is, because
they were dead. Joseph's brethren pleading before unknown Joseph, tell him,
thy servants are twelve brethren, and behold the youngest is this day with his
father, and one is not, Genesis 42.13. that is, one is dead. So Jacob speaks at
the 30th. verse of the same chapter, Joseph is not, etc. Hence that answer of
the Wiseman to Alexander, who demanding of him, whether the living or the dead
were more in number, said, The living, for the dead are not.

As infants that never saw the light.] This clause may be an exposition of the
former clause, showing what Job means by an untimely birth, even an infant,
that never saw the light. Yet all infants that never see the light are not
untimely births. Infants are often still-borne, when their mothers have gone
out their time to the last hour, before the pains of travail come upon them.
And therefore I rather understand this as distinct from the former. In the one
Job intending such as are borne before time, which births, are commonly called
abortions or miscarriages. And in the other, those who die in the birth, (...)
Significat parvulum ablactatum, per Catachresin usurpatur de infantibus in
utero matris extinctis.
who are commonly called still-borne. The word which is here used for an
infant, signifies properly a weaned infant, but it is likewise transferred to
signify an infant dying in the birth, which is therefore said never to see the
light; So Solomon expresses it too, in that place, Eccles. 6.5. Moreover, he
has not seen the Sun; And in allusion to this, David when he curses the
plots of wicked men, that though they have conceived mischief, and though they
have gone with it a long time, and are ready to bring it forth, yet in Psalm.
58.8. says he, let them be (that is, let their counsels and designs be) like
the untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the Sun, that is, let
them be dashed and blasted, let them never bring forth their poisonous brood to
the hurt and trouble of the world. To these says Job, I am sure I should have
bin like, if not to Kings and Counselors, and had been as well, and all one
to me. In death, untimely births and those that go down to the grave as a
sheafe of corn that comes in ripe, are all one; there is no difference in the
grave between the infant that never saw the Sun, and him that has lived to
see an hundred recourses of the Sun.

The speech of Job proceeds to a third sort, he strengthens his argument of
rest in death. I should certainly have had rest in death, for in death, even
they who have been most vexed, who have had least rest, who have been even
restless in the world, they have found rest in death, this he cleares by a
further induction, in the 17, 18, 19, verses.

There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest.

There the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the oppressor.

The small and great are there, and the servant is free from his master.

When he had spoken of the rest of death, concerning those great and mighty
ones, and the rest of death concerning untimely births and infants, then he
speaks of the rest which poor oppressed ones, or which wicked oppressors
have in death; all these have a rest in regard of outward bodily troubles,
agitations and labors in the grave, therefore certainly there I should have
been at rest.

There (that is in the grave) the wicked cease from troubling: True rest and
wickedness never meet, rest and the wicked meet but seldom. And it is but
half a rest, and it is rest but to half a wicked man, to his bones in the
grave, and it is rest to that half but for a little time, only till the
resurrection.

(...)
The word which is here used for wicked, is considerable: Though every wicked
man be a sinner, yet every sinner is not a wicked man: It is one thing to sin,
and another thing to be wicked; there are diverse words in the Hebrew tongue,
which signify as it were the diverse statures of sinners, and the degrees of
sin; And the Hebrew which usually expresses many things by one word, does
here use many words to signify one thing, only differing in degree.

First, A sinner is called sometime [ Cata] that is the lowest expression,
noting one that does miss a mark or his way, (...) Erravit, a sc^po vel via,
^a potissimum peccata significat quae vel errore vel per ignorantiam vel
infirmitate carnis committuntur, Moller in Psalm. 106. v. 6.

(...) Peccatum ex superbia. Transgressio non simplex and qualiscunque, sed
maliciosa ac temerar^a, unde and aliquando rebellio vocatur, Musc. in Psalm. 5.
v. 10.


he aims at the mark, yet misses it, he would go in the right way, yet
mistakes it or is misled: So every man, the holiest men are sinners, they often
miss the mark, the white which God sets up, though they take their aim, and
level carefully at it.

Secondly, A sinner is called [ Peshang] which signifies a willingness to
sin, and an unwillingnesse to obey, it signifies pride in sinning, or a
sinning from pride, which is plain rebellion.

Thirdly, The word here used, and in diverse other places, signifies
wickedness in the height, and men most active in wickedness: So that when Job
says, There the wicked are at rest, he means those who had been restless in
sin, who could not sleep till they had done mischief, nor scarce sleep for
doing mischief: He means those who had outrun others in the sinful
activity, or rather turbulency and unquietness of their spirits; such as are
without peace themselves, and seek to molest and disturb the peace of others:
The Prophet describes them to be like the troubled sea which cannot rest, (
Isa. 57.20.) The proper signification of the word (wicked) in the Hebrew, is
the word unquiet, vexatious, or without rest; 1 Samuel 14.47. Wheresoever Saul
turned himself he vexed the enemy. So Job. 34.29. And the reason of it is
given, because men of this height and stature in sin, are men of troubled,
unquiet and restless spirits. As it notes a height in holiness and grace, to
have a kind of unquietness upon the spirit till we can do good, and compass
holy designs and purposes, when we are not only pious, but zealous; As David
resolves, Psalm. 132.3, 4. Surely I will not come into the Tabernacle of my
house, nor go up into my bed, I will not give sleep to mine eyes, nor slumber
to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for the Lord, etc. So unquietness
upon the spirit till it can put sin into act, and compass an evil project,
notes a compleatenesse in the sinner. Sin wakes and works in them to purpose,
who cannot sleep till they have wrought out their sin; of these it is properly
that Job speaks here, these troublers of themselves, and troublers of Israel,
these whom the Lord shall trouble this day, or one day: There, sc. in the
grave, these wicked ones cease from troubling; there they have a kind of rest
being dead, who could not rest while they lived; there at least they cease from
raging. This word (Ragaz) notes any vehement motion, either of mind or body,
arising from fear, or grief or anger, or the concurrence of them all: As when
David heard of the death of Absalom, the Text says, 2 Samuel 18.33. The King was
much moved, etc. He was as it were for a time enraged or distracted, much
troubled, I am sure, with passions, or the working of many passions together.
The word, you see, in the Hebrew, has a near affinity in sound and sense with
our English word raging, and we translate it so, Psalm. 2. Why do the heathen
rage? It is the same word; So here, the wicked cease from raging, or from
troubling; that is, from that madness of rage in troubling the poor,
especially such as fear God: Wicked men are not only sinful, but they are mad
in their sin; As Paul speaks of himself before his conversion, I punished
them often in every Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme, and being
exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange Cities, Acts
26.11. In Paul unconverted, see the picture of a wicked man's spirit, he could
not cease from troubling, but in death he shall.

And there the weary are at rest. The weary.] Some by the weary, understand
those whom the wicked have wearied by troubling of them; and that is a truth,
that in the grave, the wearied, those that wicked men have turmoiled and vexed,
Sicut prior pa^s de tyrannis and oppressoribus intelligitur, ita haec secunda
potest de afflictis and oppressis. Sed congruentius si tota haec periodus,
referatur ad viros fam^sos, qui dicuntur fessi robore, mill sese obijcientes
vitae discriminibus, Pined.
are at rest; so the sense is made out thus; that in the grave, they that
trouble others, and the troubled, the poor persecuted, and the proud
persecutors are at rest. But rather, by the wearied, we are to understand only
the wicked themselves, There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the
weary be at rest, that is, there those wicked men, who weary and tire out
themselves with vexing and troubling of others, are at rest; they then cease
from those vexatious undertakings, which have consumed their spirits and worn
out their bodies; And the reason why I rather expound the weary to be the
wicked (though the other be a good sense) is, because Job afterward speaks of
the rest of those that are wearied, who are passive under the cruelties and
plottings of those wicked ones. There the wicked cease from troubling, and
there the weary be at rest. Hence observe, first,

That wicked men are troublers both of themselves and others. There the wicked
cease from troubling, as if the wicked did nothing in the world but trouble the
world. As before Job had given the special character of great ones and
Princes, They get gold, build Palaces and Sepulchers, and fill them with
treasure: So when he speaks of wicked ones, he says, There the wicked cease
from troubling; As intimating, that while they live in the world, they are a
perpetual trouble to the world. The Prophet Isaiah is express, ( chap,
57.20.) The wicked are as the troubled sea, that cannot rest; they can do any
thing better, then be quiet, they have not strength enough to sit still, they
cannot rest. King Ahab had this apprehension of Elijah, (1 King. 18.17.) when
the kingdom of Israel was full of trouble, (for God did vex them with great
adversity.) Art not thou he (says Ahab) that troublest Israel? No says
Elijah, (who could make up a better judgment then Ahab in that point) I am not
he that troubles Israel, but it is thou and thy fathers house. Ahab had sold
himself to work wickedness, and so had stock enough to purchase trouble for
Israel; wicked ones are the troublers of all; they are troublers of their own
families, troublers of the places and Cities where they live, the troublers of
a whole Kingdom, troublers of the Churches of Christ, and the troublers of
their own souls, they are borne to trouble both active and passive, they love
to trouble, and they have what they love: It is the character and the argument
of an extreme wicked man, to be a troubler; Even as it is a great argument of
great grace, when you see one a comforter of others, or busy to help others,
to do good to others; The tree is known by the fruits.

Secondly, Taking the latter words of this verse, (There the weary be at rest,)
for those wicked men who are wearied by troubling others, we may observe,

That wicked men by troubling others, do as much weary and tire out
themselves; And though they find that in troubling others they weary
themselves, yet they will not give it over, they will trouble still. Job says
thus of a wicked man, in the 15th. of this book, ver. 20. The wicked man
travaileth with pain all his days, not only does he put others to pain, but
himself is in pain; and they are frequently expressed in Scripture as
wearying themselves, sometimes as weary of themselves, so Jer. 9.5. They weary
themselves to commit iniquity; And thou art wearied in the multitude of thy
counsels, Isa. 47.13. Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way, Isa.
57.10. and that was but a way of troubling the Church; She wearieth her self
with lies, Ezekiel. 24.12. The sins which wicked men commit only in and against
themselves, weary them, but they are most wearied, when they are persecutors of
others: It is observed of Antiochus Epiphanes, that famous troubler of the
Church, (by him that has written the Itinerary of the Saints) that he did
undertake more troublesome journeyes, and went upon more hazardous designs,
merely to trouble, and vex, and oppose the Church of the Jews, then ever any
of his predecessors did about any other conquest or noble enterprise; that he
travailed more miles to do mischief, then (as the Author does compare their
journeys) any of the Saints did to do good; and therefore he concludes the
story of him, with this general truth concerning persecutors, All such wicked
men go with more trouble to eternal death, then the Saints do to eternal
life; they toil themselves more, and suffer more to work out their own
damnation, then the godly do in working out their salvation: To be wicked in
the height, is the height of trouble. Solomon says, that a good man is
merciful to his beast, but a wicked man is unmercifull to himself, he will
tire himself more then a good man will tire his beast. This is a certain
truth, he that will follow sin and serve his own lusts, (especially the lust
of pride and oppression, whosoever serves those lusts) serves a hard master,
a master that will make him toil, and sweat, and weary himself while he
lives, and at the last pay him with death. The work of sin is bad enough, but
(as to the sinner) the wages of sin is worse.

The last thing I shall note from it is this. There the wicked cease from
troubling. There, where is that? At the grave, when they come to die, they make
an end of their troubling, not before: Observe then,

Wicked men will never cease troubling until they cease to live. In the grave
they cease troubling, there they are at rest; If they should live an eternity
in this world, they would trouble the world to eternity. As a godly man never
gives over doing good; he will do good as long as he lives, though he fetches
many a weary step, so wicked men, never give over doing evil, until they step
into the grave. And the reason of it is, because it is their nature to do
evil, and that which men do naturally, they do always; they never give it
over, nothing but death can suspend and stop nature.

There are indeed two cases wherein wicked men cease troubling, while they
live. One is, when they are desperate in their designs, and see they cannot by
troubling themselves, trouble others sufficiently, when they cannot have their
will nor compass their ends fully; they being in despair of doing the
mischief they would, will do no more: So the Historian notes concerning
Dioclesian, Existimant aliqui Dioclesianu^ etiam dolor motum fuisse, ut
imperium deponeret, cum perficere se no^ posse videret ea, quae contra
Christian^s molitus fuerat. Christ. ^^z. Mellif. Histor. Par. 2.
the most bloody persecutour that ever the Church had, at the last he gave over
the Empire, and declined the government (not because he was weary of
persecuting, but he was weary of being disappointed,) Because he saw he could
not hatch that which he had long brooded, or bring forth those designs he had
contrived for the utter extirpation of the Christians: Being thus out of hope
to do all the mischief he intended, he puts himself out of power to do that
mischief, resignes the Empire. A second case, wherein wicked men cease
troubling, is, when they have fully attained their ends in this life; sometimes
they bring their work to such perfection, to such a period, that they think
they have attained all, all their plots have taken, all is theirs; and when they
have fully done the Devils work, then he gives them a play day, they have some
cessation: But otherwise except in these two cases, they never cease from
troubling; therefore the Apostle Paul, Gal. 5.12. prays, that they which
trouble them, might even be cut off: As if he had said, they are such a kind of
men, Quam mortem cominatus est Deus homini ut a peccando illum deterreat,
eandem ipsam* insert ut a peccando cesset.
there is no curing of them, they will never have done doing mischief, until
they be cut off by death. As God threatens death to deter men from sin, so
sometimes he is (as it were) constrained to send death to keep or take men off
from sin; A godly man says, If God kill me, yet will trust I in him: and some
wicked men say (in effect, if not in the letter) Till God kills us we will
sin against him. The Psalmist asks the question, Psalm. 94.4, 5. How long
shall the wicked? how long shall the wicked triumph? How long shall they utter
and speak hard things? and all the workers of iniquity boast themselves? They
break in pieces thy people O Lord. What answer shall we give, what date shall
we put to this, How long? The answer is given, ver. 23. The Lord shall bring
upon them their own iniquity, and cut them off in their own wickedness: yea,
the Lord our God shall cut them off. As if he had said, except the Lord cut
them off in their wickedness they will never leave off doing wickedly. The
wicked (says Hannah in her song, 1 Samuel 2.9,) shall be silent in darkness,
The wicked will sin while they have any light to sin by, therefore God puts
out their candle, and sends them down into darkness, and there they will be
quiet, The wicked shall be silent in darkness. They will sin against the
light of the word, as long as they enjoy the light of the world, and do the
works of spiritual darkness, till they are shut up in poenall darkness.
It follows.

There the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the oppressor.
Here is another sort, The Prisoners.] The word is, those that are bound: And
these prisoners may be of two sorts. First, Slaves and captives, who are under
hard taskmasters, such as set them to hard labor; Or men that are in debt, and
put into prison by cruel creditors: Prisoners, in either of these respects are
at rest, or they rest together in the grave; when they have paid that debt to
nature, all their other debts are discharged; death is their debt to nature,
and when they have paid that debt, they (says Job) receive an Acquittance, (a
quietus est,) they rest together, when they have done that work, the work of
dying, poor captives and prisoners have done all, and paid all.

(...)
It is added, They hear not the voice of the oppressor.] The word which we
translate an oppressor, signifies by violence to compel one to work or to
pay a debt; So the Taskemasters, Exodus 5. are said to compel the people with
violence to go on about the work. The same word signifies both an Exactor
and an Oppressor; An Exactor of Debt, an Exactor of Tribute, an Exactor of
Labor, in all these ways the word is used; and because those three, (Tribute,
Debt and Labor) are demanded many times against right and equity, often with
much violence and cruelty, therefore the word signifies also an Oppressor;
Exaction is always within a step of oppression, and is often put for the same;
and because oppressors use bitter words, and hard speeches, wounding with
their tongues as much as with their hands, therefore poor prisoners dying are
said to be free from the voice of the oppressor: Poor prisoners hear not the
voice of the oppressor in the grave; there they are beyond the sound and out
of the hearing of those vexing, railing taskemasters, or exacting creditors.
Hence observe, first,

That an estate of bondage is a misereble restless estate. There the prisoners
rest together; Captives and bondmen have little rest until they rest in the
grave: The language of prisoners is a sorrowful language; their speech is
sighs, Psalm. 79.11. Let the sighing of the prisoners come before thee, and
Psalm. 12.5. because of the oppression of the poor, and for the sighing of the
needy. It is a restless condition which yields nothing but sighs and groans:
Indeed we read in the Acts, (chap. 16.25.) of prisoners that spoke another
language, even the language of joy; we read there of the singing of the
prisoners, Paul and Silas did not sigh but sing in the night while they were
bound in prison, but this was extraordinary; They receiving enlargement of
heart, and wonderful consolation from the holy Ghost, pray in prison and sing
praise to God: Christ sent the comforter that night to them, who made them a
feast in the prison, and they sung to it, they made music, heavenly music,
they sung praise to God. It was not from the good cheer, or any comfortable
message which they had from the Jaylour, or from their oppressors, but Christ
came and visited them; any place, or any estate is comfortable, when Christ is
present to the soul: But in it self imprisonment is a sad condition.
Therefore the Apostle bids us, remember those that are in bonds, even as
bound with them, Heb. 13.3. and Christ takes a prison visit as a special point
of service and kindness done unto him, I was in prison and ye visited me, Mat.
25.36. I, in my afflicted members was in prison, and your visit was an ease to
my affliction, and (as it were) a loosening of my chains. Such visits are now
seasonable: now remember the bondage and captivity, the hard usage and
imprisonment of our brethren in many parts of this nation, Let the sighing of
the prisoners come up before you, even the sighing of those Joseph's whose feet
are hurt in the stocks, and the iron enters into their souls, As some
translate that, Psalm. 105.18. When you are at your tables, and have plenty,
then remember the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction which the
poor prisoners your brethren are served with, and must be contented with
every day or starve in prison. When you are in your pleasant warm chambers and
soft beds, think of the cold, loathsome dungeons and hard boards, in which,
and on which many of them lie. And when you hear the voice of love, and such
speaking, to you, who have the law of kindness in their tongues, Prove. 31.26.
then remember those who hear the voice of the oppressor. From which take this
second observation,

That the words of oppressors are wounding words. The voice of an oppressor
is a terrible voice; And therefore Job puts this in, as a special privilege
that the poor prisoners shall have in the grave, They shall not hear the
voice of the oppressor; who can rest where they speak, or hear their words
and not be troubled? therefore not to hear the voice of the oppressor, is a
circumlocution, Non audire vocem exactoris circumlocutio est maximae libertatis.
noting full liberty: The wilde-Asse is so described, Job 39.7. he regards
not the crying or the voice of the driver, the Original word is that in the
Text, he regards not the voice of the oppressor, or of the exacter: This is
the liberty of the wild-Asse, which was never in hand or under burdens; whereas
other Asses that are in hand, and are employed to bear and travail, they must
be at the voice of the driver, they hear the voice of their oppressors: And
some men are very unmercifull to their beasts; It is greevous to the poor
cattle to hear the voice of such drivers; and the groans of those beasts
will rise up in judgment against their drivers: And if so, how then will the
groans of the Saints rise up against theirs drivers. We have lately heard of
oppressors turned drivers, they have driven their poor brethren as beasts or
cattle before them; and more cruel then any such drivers, they have not
suffered them to drink of the pudled water through which they passed; And yet
more, the words of these drivers, as goades and staves beat their ears, and
pricked them to the very hearts in their passage. The voice of these
oppressors, is the voice of scorn, the voice of slander and reproach; and
David shows us from his own experience, how reproaches work, ( Psalm. 42.10.)
as with a sword in my bones mine enemies reproach me; And the Apostle ( Heb.
11.36.) speaks of the believing, persecuted Jews, that they had this trial
of cruel mockings, their oppressors sharpened their tongues as well as their
swords against them; the tongue wounds deeper then the sword, the tongue wounds
the spirit, but the sword cannot reach beyond the flesh: And God will take as
deep, if not a deeper revenge upon oppressors for their tongue-woundings,
then for their sword-woundings: hard words as well as hard blows must be
accounted for. And the Apostle Jude assures us, ver. 15, That the Lord comes
to execute vengeance upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them,
of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. If any shall say,
when did we speak against the Lord? Christ will answer as in the Gospel, (
Matthew. 25.) In as much as you have spoken against any one (and you have spoken
against many) of the least of these my brethren, ye have spoken against me.
To how many of my brethren, have you said, many times, Where is now your God?
To how many have you said, as they ( Psalm. 22.9.) in that prophecy of Christ,
You trusted on the Lord that he would deliver you, let him deliver you. To how
many have you said, Where are your prayers and fastings where is your
Parliament? Where are your hopes? These are hard speeches. This voice of the
oppressor cuts the heart of the poor prisoner, he can with more ease die,
then hear such blasphemies and reproaches. The wicked ( Mal. 3.13.) bluster
and speak big against God himself, your words have been stout against me,
says the Lord: If wicked men will speak stoutly against God, the high God,
how stoutly will they speak against a poor oppressed captive, that lies under
their feet?

Seeing then it is such a wound and a terror, to be under the power of
insulting oppressors, who will not only strike with the sword, but strike with
every word: Let us pity and pray for our brethren that are under the hands,
yea feet, and which is worse, under the tongues of such drivers; pity them, in
regard of the wants which they feel, and of the words they hear every day.
And let us betimes hearken to another voice, that we may not at last come to
hear this voice, O that my people had hearkened unto me (says God, Psalm. 81.)
If we would hearken to the voice of God, we should not hear the voice of such
men. It is the punishment which God lays upon a people, (and it is a suitable
punishment) for not hearing his voice, that he gives them up to hear this
voice; when a Nation will not hear the voice of the Prophets, then they must
hear the voice of oppressors; Let us hasten to hear the voice, the sweet
voice, the pleasant voice of our God in his ministers of the Gospel, lest we
be given up to hear the dreadful, grating, cutting voice of such miscreants,
who yet are the ministers of Gods just displeasure against a disobedient
people. If we, like the deaf adder, stop our ears at the voice of the charmer,
charm he never so wisely, (Psalm. 58.5.) doubtless the Lord will (yea he has
done it in part already) send Serpents and Cockatrices among us, which will not
be charmed, and they shall bite us, (with bitter and sharp words,) Jer: 8.17.
Let us therefore so hear the voice of the word, that we may be delivered from
this rod of the voice (which smarts worse then the voice of the rod,) and from
the scourge of tongues. And let us pray, that God would hasten the performance
either of that gracious promise, (Isa. 14.2.) They shall take them captives
whose captives they were, and they shall rule over their oppressors: or of
that, ( Isa. 60.17.) that he would make those great and notable changes in the
Church, and give us for brass gold, and for iron silver, and for wood brass,
and for stone iron: That he would also make our Officers peace, and our
Exactors righteousness; This will be a time of refreshing indeed, And as the
time of the restitution of all things which God has spoken by the mouth of all
his holy Prophets, since the world began, Acts 3.21. namely when our Officers
shall be peace, and our very Oppressors righteousness: When the very
troublers of a people become their peace, how great is that peace? when they,
who were the oppressors of a people, are turned to be, very righteousness,
how great is that righteousness? And where there is great righteousness and
great peace, how great is the joy of that people? Yet howsoever the wise God
shall order these outward dispensations, yet His prisoners have freedom in,
though not from their captivity: And they shall hear the voice of his Spirit
speaking more comfort to their hearts, then the voice of their oppressors can
speak terror to their ears. And their ears shall not long be smitten with
the hard speeches of ungodly men; death, a blessed death, will shortly lead
them into the house and chambers of silence, where as Job here speaks, they
shall never hear the voice of the oppressor any more.

Verse 19. The small and the great are there, and the servant is free from his
master.

The last instance which Job gives of rest in death, is contained in this 19th.
verse. In the words before he said, There the prisoners rest together, they
hear not the voice of the oppressor, here he adds, The small and the great
are there, and the servant is free from his master.

The small and the great are there. Small and great.] There is a twofold
quantity, in which men may be considered. There is a natural quantity, and
there is a civil quantity, and in both quantities, small and great are there.

First, There is a natural quantity, by which men are distinguished into small
and great, children and men of full growth: in the grave such small and great
are mixed: little children, children of a span long, mingle their dust with men
of highest stature.

Again, There is a civil quantity, and so the small are the poor, the low
and the mean, they are small ones in a civil account: And civil greatness,
is power, riches and honor: the honorable they are the great men, and the
rich are great men, in a civil quantity; so the word is used, Chap. 1. ver. 3.
Job was the greatest of all the men of the East, he was the greatest in civil
quantity, in regard of his power, honor and riches. The Prophet Jeremie
opposes the poor and the great, (chap. 5. ver. 4, 5.) Therefore I said, surely
these are poor, etc. I will get me unto the great men, sc. the rich and
honorable, the Princes and the Magistrates.

The small and the great are there. In Scripture, when we find the two
extremes, (small and great are extremes in quantity) we are to understand all
the middle acts, or things, or persons, that is, all that lies between those
extremes. We read such Scripture language concerning the actions of men,
Psalm. 139.2. Thou know my down-sitting and my uprising. Here are two
extremes, the two terms of a man's actions and of his life, his down-sitting
and his uprising, now when it is said, God knows these two, we are to
understand, that God knows whatsoever a man does, all his actions between his
down-sitting and his uprising. So in that promise of a continual blessing from
God, Psalm. 121.8. The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in. Here
are two extremes, between these, we are to include and suppose all that a man
does while he is abroad. God shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in,
that is, every thing thou take in hand (according to his will) from the time
thou go forth or beginnest thy work in the morning, till thy coming home
from work, or the end of thy work in the evening; thus it is clear about
things or actions: It is likewise clear about persons, Psalm. 49.2. when David
calls high and low, rich and poor to hear, he calls all to hear; Give care
all ye inhabitants of the world, ver. 1. So when it is said in this Text, The
small and the great are there, it is not, as if those only were there, or that
those of a middle quantity, either in regard of natural or civil proportion
were not there; For death seizes upon middle men, as well as small and great;
There are graves of all imaginable sizes and dimensions between small and
great, According to that of the Apostle, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed to men once
to die, to men indefinitely, of what sort, or degree, or size, or quantity, or
quality soever, It is appointed to men; therefore small and great are there,
and many of all sorts are there.

Ex aequo illic sunt tam parvi quam magni, secundum illud. Mors Sceptra
ligonibus aequat. Drus. (...)
There is a further elegancy yet in the Original, we read it, small and great
are there, but the Hebrew strictly read in the letter runs thus, the small and
the great are there the same: Or as Mr. Broughton renders it, little and great
are there all one. The words taken thus, yield these two points to our
meditation. First this,

Death seizes equally upon all sorts and degrees of men. The small and the
great are there, the small cannot escape the hands or slip through the fingers
of death, because they are little; the greatest cannot rescue themselves from
the power, or break out of the hands of death, because they are big.

That the small are there, should be an admonition to young ones, take heed of
putting off repentance until you are great, for the small are in the grave;
That the great are there, should be an admonition to the greatest and
strongest, to prepare for death, for all your strength and greatness, your
honors, your swelling Titles, your vast riches, cannot oppose, much less
prevent or overcome death. The small and the great are there. Secondly, Observe,

That death makes all men equal, or That all are equal in death. As death
equally takes hold of all men, so death makes all men equal; not only are the
small and the great there, but there the small and the great are the same:
Death takes away all distinctions, and the grave knows no difference among the
sons of men. While men live, they are at a great distance one from another.
There is and there ought to be distinctions among men, and men ought to know
their terms of distance, and to acknowledge men in their greatness, power and
places. As there is one glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon, and
another glory of the Stars, for one Star differs from another Star in
glory, 1 Cor. 15.41. So there is one terrestrial glory of Kings, and another
glory of Nobles, and another glory of the Common People, and these have not the
same glory in common, even among them, one man differs from another man in this
worldly glory; but when death comes, there is an end of all degrees, of all
distinctions, There the small and the great are the same. As the Apostle
speaks of our being in Christ, in regard of the privileges of the Gospel,
Col. 3.11. In Christ there is neither Jew nor Gentile, there is neither male
nor female, there is neither bond nor free, that is, all have a like and an
equal share in Christ, and in the privileges of the Gospel: the Gospel
makes no distinction between poor and rich, in regard of spiritual
privileges and benefits; so death takes away all distinctions in regard of
civil privileges, In death there is neither small nor great, neither male nor
female, neither bond nor free; the greatest shall lie, as low as the smallest,
and the highest as low, as the meanest, every one there shall be but as his
neighbor, and as his brother in the flesh. There is but one distinction that
will outlive death, and death cannot take it away; the distinction of holy and
unholy, clean and unclean, believer and an infidel, these distinctions
remain after death, and shall remain for ever; but rich and poor, honorable
and base, high and low, King and subject, these distinctions shall be done
away, and forgotten as if they had never been: no difference, no distinction
(but that which God makes, and that which grace makes) can stand out against
the power and stroke of death, There, the small and great are the same.

And the servant is free from his Master. The servant.] There are two sorts of
servants. There are some who are voluntary servants, and others who are
servants by constraint. There are some who might be free, but they will not,
and there are others, who would be free but they cannot. Of the former sort we
read a Law, Exodus 21.5. where the servant that loved his master and refused
his freedom saying, I will not go out free, must be brought before the Judges
and have his ear bored through with an awle, in token of his willingness to
serve that Master for ever. Others are servants by constraint, as the people of
Israel in Egypt, who were made to serve with rigor, Exodus 1.14. to serve
whether they would or no, which is servitude rather then service.

We may understand the Text of both, The servant, that is, either he that does
voluntarily serve, and willingly puts himself under the command of another, or
he, which is under the command of another whether he will or no: to both these
death gives freedom, whether their Masters will or no, The servant is free
from his Master.

(...)
The word which we translate [ is free] notes that formal manumission or
setting at liberty which is used in places or Corporations, where freedoms are
either purchased by money, or deserved by appointed service.

Tria sunt quorum terminatio pluralis, and sensus singularis, videlicet Adonim
Dominu, Elohim Deus. Bagnalim, Herus.
And the word here translated, Master, is plural, Masters: it is one of the
Names of God, Adonai, which Name the Lord has from government; That very name
is given to Masters of Families, because they ought to govern and order the
affairs and business of the family, with wisdom and justice, Every master
of a family, is a governor of the family, he is (as it were) a King in his own
family. The servant is free from his Master. Hence note, first this,

Sin brought in servility and the subjection of man to man. I ground it thus,
because Job speaks of service as of an estate of affliction, as of an estate
of trouble, under which many groan, and from which they can get no release,
till death break the bands, and sets them free.

In the state of innocence, there was a dominion granted to man over the
beasts, but there was no dominion granted to man over man: Genesis 1.26.
In the state of integrity relations should have continued, but subjection
should not have been found: only that natural subjection of children to
Parents, but as for civil subjection there had been no such thing in the
world. Peccatum ubi intravit libertatem perdidit and corrupit potestatem
naturae datam Chrysostom Hom. 29. in Gen Substantivum seipsum genititivo casure
en^ superlativam locutionem cum singulari energia de^otat. Buxt. rf. Servus
abjectissimus.
Before man forsook the service of God, he needed none to serve him; service
comes in by sin, and the increase of it, by the increase of sin; As we see,
when Canaan was so vile as to forget the duty of a son, he is set below or in
the worst condition of a servant, Genesis 9.5. Cursed be Canaan, a servant of
servants shall he be unto his brethren, that is, the lowest and most abject
servant: As God of Gods, is the greatest God, and Lord of Lords, is the Highest
Lord, so servant of servants, is the lowest, the basest servant: So then, as
civil subjection came at first from sin, so the increase of subjection, which
is to be a servant of servants, came from the increase and progress of sin.
Observe secondly,

A servant is not in his own dispose. Though he be a voluntary servant, yet he
must serve the lawful will of his master. He may, yea he ought, in every
ingenuous service, to serve willingly, but he is not at his own will, to serve
when, or where, or how he will.

Some have thought they have a freedom from service, by the liberty of the
Gospel, or Gospel-priviledge: and that is the reason why the Apostle, 1 Timothy
6.1. gives that rule, Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their
own Masters worthy of all honor, etc. He speaks of believing servants. Some
presumed they had such freedom by Christ, that they might cast off subjection
to men; No, says the Apostle, as many as are under the yoke, that is, while
they continue servants, they must submit to their condition, yea though their
Masters be unbeleevers, as the next verse shows, And they that have believing
Masters, let them not despise them, etc. nothing takes away subjection but
death, for as he that is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lords
freeman, 1 Cor. 7.22. So he that is the Lords freeman, being called to it, is
and ought to be man's servant; The Centurion in the Gospel shows the servants
duty, I say unto one, go, and he goes, and to another, come, and he comes,
and to my servant, do this, and he does it. The servant is at his Masters
beck, not at his own dispose, and nothing can free him but death, so long as he
continues under the yoke, in that relation. Hence observe thirdly,

That death concludes the subjection of man to man. In the grave, or there, the
servant is free from his Master, there is no more service due to man, when once
death, that king of terrors has carried us into his dominions.

JOB 3. Ver. 20, 21, 22. Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and
life unto the bitter in soul?

Which long for death, but it comes not, and dig for it more then for hid
treasures:

Which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the grave, etc.


AT this 20th. verse, the third and last Section of the Chapter begins,
Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life to the bitter in
soul?

In the former part of the Chapter, Job wished that death had surprised him
as soon as ever he set his foot into the world, yea before he came into the
world, that he might have died in the very womb; Here Job begins to
expostulate, why he having made so long a journey, and in his latter time so
troublesome a journey in the world, why (I say) he is not (at his request) cut
off and taken away, by the stroke of death; Why is light given to him that is
in misery, and life to the bitter in soul? We may frame his argument thus, out
of his words, as they are here couched; There is no reason, or if there be,
show me a reason why his life should be prolonged, who lives miserably and
would die willingly; But I am the man who live miserably and I would die
willingly; wherefore then? where is the reason, or show me a reason why my life
is prolonged. That is the force of his argument. The maine Proposition of the
argument, is contained in the 20, 21, 22, 23. verses, namely, that there is no
reason why a man that lives miserably, should be denied to die, wherefore is
light given to a man that is in misery? He endeavors to prove the Assumption
at the 24th. verse, where he shows that he lived in great misery, which he
does amplify in the two last verses of the Chapter. This may serve for the
sum and scope, or intendment of this last Section.

To the words themselves. Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery?

Wherefore. There is a wherefore in Scripture, first of doubting, and secondly
there is a wherefore of mourning, and thirdly a wherefore of complaining. In
this wherefore, in this question, we may include all three. Job doubts, and
Job mourns, and Job complains, Wherefore is light given to him that is in
misery?

Wherefore is light. Light. Some take light here for knowledge, Wherefore has
a miserable man so much knowledge to see himself, and to know himself
miserable? Ad quid pro^est homini in miserijs constituto, quod lucem
cognitionis habeat, cum per eam consideret mala quibus affligitur. Aquin. in
loc.
It is some abatement to the sense of misery, not to know that we are
miserable; Wherefore is light given? If I did not understand the sadness of my
condition it would be less to me. There is a truth in that; and it is the
thing that will so much torment and vex the damned to all eternity; that while
they are in the darkness of hellish misery, they shall have so much light in
Hell, (I mean the light of knowledge concerning their own condition, whreby
they shall fully and clearly discern their unhappiness;) If they were
ignorant and did not know how miserable they were, their estate were far
less miserable. On earth, the light of the knowledge of Gods will increases
the sin of men; in Hell, the light of the knowledge of their own woe, will be
an increase of their punishment. As Christ says to the Jews, Joh. 9.41. If ye
were blind, ye should have no sin, but now ye say we see, therefore your sin
remains. So we may say of those who are separated from Christ for ever; if ye
were blind, ye should have no sorrow, but now because in that estate of utter
darkness, ye shall have both eyes and light to see your misery, therefore your
sorrow shall remain. When a wicked man goes to the generation of his fathers,
where he shall never see light, sc. of comfort, Psalm. 49.19. even then he shall
have light enough, (and more then he would have) to see his sorrow. And in Hell
he shall be as much pained with, and hate the light of his own condition, as
upon earth he hated and was pained with the light of divine revelation, Joh.
3.20, etc. So that the damned shall for ever cry out, Wherefore is light given
to him that is in misery?

Yet I take not this to be the sense here, Wherefore is light? by light here,
understand natural light, and then it is no more but this, Why do mine eyes
yet behold the Sun? Wherefore does the light shine upon me, whenas I am under
the clouds and in the darkness of this condition? Or by light, we may
understand life; and so the sense is, Wherefore is life continued, (which is
expressed in the next clause) to him that is in misery?

To be in misery, is more then to be miserable. As to be in the flesh, notes, a
mere carnal man, and to be in the spirit, (...) Sumitur active pro labor cum
summa defatigatione and taedio, passive pro dolor ipso and miseria and saepe
utroque modo sumitur conjunctim, ut in Ecclesiaste, ubi vitae humanae calamitas
and miseria isto vocabulo explicatur.
notes a very spiritual man; so to be in misery, notes a very miserable man.
The Hebrew word properly signifies, labor; At the tenth verse it was
translated, sorrow: And it notes any toilesome melestation, which either we our
selves endure, ( Psalm. 25.18.) or cause others by guile or mischief done them,
to endure. Hence it is translated guile, Psalm. 55.11. and mischief, (Psalm.
94.20.) because by these, one man troubles and vexes another, to the making of
him miserable.

And life to the bitter in soul. Life is the union of soul and body, when
life departs, soul and body take leave and part; the Philosopher defines
life to be the bond or colligation of soul and body together: Now (says Job)
why is this life, why is this bond continued to a man whose soul is in
bitterness? while my life was pleasant, it was pleasant to live; while my
soul was sweet, it was sweet to have it knit to my body; but now my soul is
in bitterness, or I am bitter in soul, and what sweetness or pleasure can I
find in my body?

(...) Qui prae calamitate animo sunt acerbo and in perpetua maestitia. Merc.
To be bitter in soul, notes deep intrinsicall or inward sorrow; the greatest
sorrow, makes the soul bitter: As in Scripture, when we find Soul added
respecting the evil of an estate, or the good of an estate, evil and good are
meant in the highest degree; As when Christ says, Mat. 26.38. My soul is
exceeding heavy, or exceeding sorrowful even unto death; that is, I am in the
lowest deepes of sorrow: Sorrow unto death, is sorrow within one step or degree
of death. My soul is sorrowful, there can be no sorrow but in the soul, the
body (take it as a distinct from the soul) is not capable of sorrow; sorrow is
a passion or an affection of the soul, an affection of the mind, and therefore
all sorrow is seated in the mind; yet when our Lord Christ says, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, It is far more then to have said, there is sorrow or
exceeding much sorrow in my soul. So here, this phrase, To him that is bitter
in soul, or whose soul is bitter; Notes the most bitter and grievous sorrow.
When the Psalmist would set forth the great sorrow of Joseph in prison, Psalm.
105.18. One translation says, that the iron entered into his soul, and the
Hebrew, word for word is this, his soul came into iron: We know the soul is
so pure and spiritual that iron cannot enter it; We know that only the body
can be bound with chains; The soul could quickly slip from the most watchful
keeper, and break out from the strongest irons, were it not to keep company
with the body. Whereas then it is said, his soul came into irons, it is only
to show, that Joseph was under very sore affliction, even the sorest affliction
of the body. As on the other side, when Mary said, My soul does magnify the
Lord, my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. We know, nothing properly can
magnify the Lord, or rejoice, but the spirit or the soul; yet when she says,
my spirit does rejoice, this notes a deep, pure, internal, spiritual joy,
with which, she was ravished at that time: And as they who rejoice in soul,
would even willingly be rid of their bodies, they are above the body: So they
who are bitter in soul, are desirous to be rid of their bodies; the body is
a burden when the soul is bitter. This bitterness of soul, caused those
bitter complaints before, and now this vehement expostulation, Wherefore is
light given to him that is in misery?

Wherefore? We are apt to think there is no reason for that, for which we can
see no reason. Job was in a dark condition, and could not see the reason, and
therefore almost concludes there was none. When we are posed, we think all the
world is posed too. If we cannot interpret and expound the dealings of God, we
think none can, nay, in such cases, some are ready to think (at least to
speak as if they thought) that God himself can scarce give a good account of
them; This wherefore goes through the earth, and reaches Heaven. Tell me O my
friends, show me O my God, Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery?

Why Job, there may be many reasons, many answers given to this, wherefore a
man should be in light, though he be in misery: and why his life should be
continued, though his soul be in bitterness. What if God should appear and
tell thee, It shall be thus* and the reason of it is, because I will have it
so; Is not that therefore answer enough, to any man's wherefore? The will of God
is reason enough for man, and ought to be the most satisfying reason; If God
say I will have life remain in a man, that is bitter in soul, that man should
say, Lord it is reason I should, because it is thy pleasure, though it be to my
own trouble. Yet it is but seldom that God makes his will his reason, and
answers by his bare pre^^gative: He has often given weighty reasons to this
quaerie. First, The life of nature is continued, that the life of grace may be
increased. Again, Such live in sufferings, That they may learn obedience by
the things which they suffer. God teaches us by his works, as well as by his
word, his dealings speak to us: And, It is as great an act of holiness to
submit our selves to the will of God in his works, as it is to the will of God
in his word: Another reason of this wherefore, may be this, God sets up some as
patterns to posterity, he therefore gives the light of life to some that are
in misery, to show that it is no new, nor strange thing for his Saints to be
darkness: And what if God does it to magnify the strength of his own power
in supporting, and the sweetness of his mercy when he delivers, such bitter
souls. Further observe, first, That

The best things in this world may come to be burdens to us. See here a man,
weary of light and life; light one of the most excellent creatures that God
made, the most excellent next to life, yea life, the best, the most excellent
thing in nature, both these become burdensome; How gladly would Job have bin
rid of light, how gladly rid of his life? Consider then, how burdensome other
things (which at the best are burdens) may be unto you, If you hear a soul
complaining of light and life, and why are these given me, when I am in misery?
Then what comfort think you will honor give you? or what comfort will riches
give you? or what comfort will beauty give you, in such a condition, as makes
you weary of light and life? What comfort will sin give you, what ease will
your lusts give you, in such a condition as makes you weary of light and life?
I never heard of any of the Saints, that were troubled at any time with their
grace, or weary of the favor of God. I never heard any of them say, why is
grace given to one that is in misery? or the light of Gods countenance to the
bitter in soul? I never heard any say, wherefore is faith given to a man that
is in misery, or hope and patience to the bitter in soul? grace was never a
burden to any man, under greatest burdens, or unsavory, to the bitterest
soul; when you are weary of all other things in the world, these will be your
supports. Therefore labor after those things, which you shall never be weary
of; even after those things which will be more pleasant to us, then ever light
was, when light shall be to others more troublesome, then ever darkness was to
any; let us labor after those things which will be more sweet to us, then ever
life was, when life shall be to others, ^ore bitter, then ever death was to
any. Secondly observe,

It is a trouble to possess good things when we cannot enjoy them. Would you
know, how Job spoke here as one weary of light and life? It was not under the
notion of light and life, as if he had been weary of these in themselves, but
it was because he could not enjoy these. Solomon assures us, ( Prove. 25.20.)
that, As he that takes away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar upon
Nitre, so is he that sings songs to an heavy heart; Music to one that is in
sorrow, doubles his sorrow, why? because he cannot enjoy the music; a heavy
heart can worse intend music, then a heavy ear; only those things which we
can enjoy in the use of them, please in the possessing of them: Of all
temporalls, the possession and enjoyment may be separated, but for spiritualls,
the very possession of them is joy, therefore enjoyment; their presence is a
pleasure, and therefore their presence shall ever please. We may distinguish
between their use and their comfort, but we can never separate them.

One thing further, When Job says, Wherefore is light given, and life given?
The meaning of it is, wherefore is light continued, and wherefore is life
continued? for he speaks of himself and others that had light and were alive,
and yet he says, wherefore is light given? etc. From this we may learn, That

Every act of continuance of good things to us, is a new act or deed of gift to
us; Mercy is given, every moment it is enjoyed: not only is a new mercy, and a
renewed mercy a new gift, but continued mercy is a gift and a new gift; life is
a new gift every hour of time we live on the earth; and glory will be a new
gift, every minute of eternity, we shall live in Heaven.

Which long for death and it comes not, and dig for it more then for hid
treasures. This 21. verse does further explicate who are the bitter in soul,
even such as long for death; when a soul (from natural principles) finds a
sweetness in death, that soul is in bitterness; Our affliction and our
misery is indeed worme-wood and gall, as the Church complains, (Lam. 2.19.)
when death is as honey, and longed for as the honey-combe. There is bitterness
in the death of the body, and yet some are so bitter in soul, that they
account the very bitterness of death, sweetness; They say not as Agag, (1 Samuel 15.32.) Surely the bitterness of death is past, but O that the sweetness
of death would come. To be rid of sin makes us long for death spiritually, to
be rid of pain makes us desire death naturally; therefore he says, the bitter
in soul long for death.

The word which we translate [by longing] signifies a very vehement desire, as
you know in our tongue, to long for a thing, (...) from (...) Hiavit, inbiavit,
ore aper^o intuitus fuit, concupivit, expectavit. Notae etiam, vera fide,
patientique expectatione anhelare adrem^ promissam.
is the highest and hottest acting of desire, after a thing. It signifies
properly to gape or to breathe: Hence (by a Trope) it signifies strong desire;
because they who desire a thing much, are said to gape or breath after it: just
as an hungry man gapes after meat, wheresoever he sees it, and his mind runs
upon it, when he cannot see it, that is the force of the word. Hence also the
word is used in Scripture, to note the strong actings of faith, and vehement
expectations of hope in God, when the soul is raised up mightily to believe
the word of promise, then it longs after and opens its mouth wide (as it were)
to receive the thing promised. As in Isa. 8.17. I will wait upon the Lord, who
hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. The Prophet
Hosea applies the word to robbers and thieves, who stand watching and longing
for the traveller, and looking at every turning, chap. 6.9. As troops of
robbers wait for a man. Yet further to clear this, we may take notice, that
in the Hebrew there are two words which come from this root, (...) Palatum,
quod ci^o inh^et.
whereof the one signifies the Palate of the mouth; because the palate is the
part affected with the taste of such meats, as we long for; Hence we say, the
mouth waters after such or such a pleasing dish. The other word signifies a
Fish-hooke, (...) Hamus, quod in eum pisces inhient, vel potius quod pisces
expectet.
and the reason is double, either because those hooks are pleasantly baited,
which when the fish sees, he longs after it, and greedily swallows it down.
Or because when the angler has cast in the hook, he is in great expectation,
waiting and looking earnestly when the fish will be enticed and bite. By all
these uses of the Original word, we may collect the exceeding intensivenes of
that desire which is here expressed by longing for death: They long for death,
even as a hungry man longs for any meat, or as a woman with child longs
for some special meat, as a fish longs for the bait, or as an angler longs
till the fish bites, or as a believer (which as it is the most spiritual, so
the most ardent desire of all) desires, to have any promise fulfilled, upon
which he has pitched his faith, and anchors at by hope.

Which long for death and it comes not, that is, it comes not so soon as they
would have it; for death will come at one time or other, but death does not
come at their time, or their pace. It comes not, in the Hebrew it is only
thus, which long for death and it is not, we supply, it comes not.

And dig for it more then for hid treasures. To illustrate the greatness of
this desire after death, he adds a similitude of those who seek for treasures;
if there be any natural desire more strong, then that of a woman with-child,
or a longing woman, it is the desire of a covetous man, the desire of gain or
treasure; covetousness is the strongest appetite.

Observe but what a gradation there is in this expression, to set forth the
greatness of their desire after death: they do not only long for it, but they
dig for it, digging you know is no ordinary labor, it is an extraordinary
work, a hard labor; As longing is a strong desire, so digging is strong
labor, hard labor. And then, it is no ordinary digging neither, but digging
for a treasure; men will dig hard for treasure; you see men will dig hard for a
stone, for iron, for coals, how then will they dig for a mine of gold or
silver. A man will dig the earth for a little money, but when a man diggeth,
hoping to find money in the earth, that will make him work indeed; now they
dig after such a manner; And beyond that, he says they dig for it as for
hidden treasure, that is a further degree of their endeavor after it.

That which we translate, hidden treasure, (...) from (...) abscondit.
is but one word in the Hebrew: It signifies any hidden thing, especially
treasures, because treasures use to be hid or close laid up. And there is a
twofold hiding of treasures: There is a natural hiding, and there is an
industrious and artificial hiding. There is a natural hiding, so treasures
are hid, that lie in the bowels of the earth, they are naturally hid. Then
treasures are hid by industry and by art; when we are afraid we shall be
spoiled of our treasures, or that they shall be taken away, then there is a
hiding them, and often a digging to hide them in the earth; As now in these
times of spoil and violence, if a rich man hear that those spoilers are nigh,
he presently hides his treasure. Now either as robbers dig and search for
treasures industriously hid, or as miners dig and search for treasures
naturally hid, so (says Job) with such earnestnes do these dig for death.

There is one thing here to be resolved by way of question before we come to
the Observations; Namely, whether it be lawful to wish for, or to desire
death? Job here proposes such as long for death; Is it lawful to desire
death? does he speak here only (de facto,) of a thing which some do; or of
that which may be done?

I answer, first, That death in it self is no way desirable, and it is not an
object of desire. We cannot desire that (for it self) which is an enemy or
destructive unto us. If any should desire death as death, or under the notion
of death, they should desire that which is destructive, that which is their
enemy, so the Apostle calls death; 1 Cor. 15. The last enemy which shall be
destroyed is death. Death is an enemy, therefore (as death) no man can desire
it. Indeed, many have desired death, but still we find somewhat else at the
bottom of that desire. But what bottom or ground makes the desire of death
lawful? I answer,

First, It is a holy desire of death, if we desire death to be free from sin;
when the soul says thus, because I see, only the end of living will be the
end of sinning, therefore I long for death that I may sin no longer.

Secondly, It is lawful to desire death, that we may have more full communion
with Christ the Lord of life. I desire to be dissolved, says Paul, but why?
not that he desired dissolution, but that he might be with Christ. Phil. 1.23.
Christ is life, and Christ is our life. It is better to enjoy life, then to
live; How much better then is it, to enjoy Christ who is life, then to live.

To both these we may refer that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. We that are in
this tabernacle, groan being burdened, they were burdened with sorrows, and
burdened with sins, while they were in the tabernacle of the body, yet (says
he) it is not that we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon; he did not
groan for the grave, but for glory; not that he might be uncloathed, but
clothed with immortality; not barely that he might die, but that mortality
might be swallowed up of life.

Under these notions we may desire death: yet with this caution, that for the
time of it, we refer our selves to the good pleasure of God. For what the
Apostle James speaks of the inordinate desires, and absolute resolves of
worldly men, about gaining in that or the other City, is by allusion appliable to
these spiritual greedy merchants, after Heavenly glory, chap. 4.13. Go to now
ye that say, to day or to morrow we will go into such a City, and continue
there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain, etc. For that ye ought to say,
if the Lord will. So I may say, Go to now, ye that say, to day or to morrow,
we would die, ( for to die, to us is gain, Phil. 1.21.) and go to that
heavenly City, that City having foundations, whose builder and maker is God,
and continue there forever, taking in and enriching our selves with that glory
which Christ has bought: for that ye ought to say, when the Lord will, or now
if the Lord will. On such conditions as these, and with this caution, we may
desire death, yea long for death.

But to long for death, only to be rid of the troubles of this life, to
desire to lie down to sleep in the bed of the grave, only to ease our flesh,
and rest our outward man, is sinful. The Apostle says (Acts 20.24.) I count
not my life dear, so I may finish my course with joy; But we shall account our
lives too cheap, if we fear to finish our course with sorrow; If we think,
that it is not worth the while to live, unless we live in outward comforts; we
exceedingly undervalue our lives, when a cross in our lives makes us weary of
our lives. This was Jonahs infirmity, when he had taken pet about the gourd, (
Chap. 4.) he would needs die, and he concludes the matter, It is better for me
to die then to live, and all was, because he could not have his will, because
he was troubled: This also was Elijahs infirmity, when he was persecuted by,
and fled for his life from Jezabel, 1 King. 19.4. He requested for himself
that he might die, and said, It is enough now, O Lord, take away my life, for I
am not better then my fathers. P^r iniquum est non aliam relinquere Deo
levandae aerumnae rationem quam si vitam a^imal, etc petendumergo potius, ut no
vulius sui ^uce illustret, quam ut tenebris mortis obruat.
This is an infirmity at the best; we ought rather to seek to God that he
would remove the evil from us, then remove us from the evil: for God has a
thousand doors to let us out of trouble, though he does not open the door of
the grave to let us in there and out of the world. He can end our troubles, and
not end our lives.

Yet such a wish is much allayed, yea (in some cases) lawful, if we keep the
former caution, and say, if the Lord will. If we refer our selves to the will
and good pleasure of God, we may desire to be laid to rest by death, that we
may be rid of those pains and evils which we suffer in this life. And yet I
desire rather to raise the spirits of all above these troubles while they live,
then satisfy them how they may desire freedom from them by death. When
Solomon returned, and considered all the oppressions that are done under the
Sun, and beheld the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no
comforter, and on the side of their oppressors there was power, but they had no
comforter: Then he praised the dead, which are already dead, more then the
living which are yet alive, (Eccles. 4.1, 2.) that is, he pronounced the dead
to be in a better condition then the living. Yet know, that Solomon in this
place, speaks the words of mere natural reason, not of divine reason. For he
speaks (though with a divine Spirit) yet in the person of a natural man.
Natural reason says, it is better to die, then live under oppressions; but
divine reason says, there is more honor to be gained by living under
oppressions, then there is ease to be attained by dying from under them. To
bear a burden well, is more desirable then to be delivered from a burden:
Especially, if while we are bearing, we can be doing, doing good (I mean) and
I mean it especially, if we can do public good. A Christian should be
content, yea he should rejoice, in suffering much evil upon himself, while he
can be doing any, especially if he can do much good to others. A graciously
public spirit, will triumph over personal troubles and labors, so long as he
sees himself a blessing or a help to the public: and though he longs to die
for himself, and to be with Christ, which is better, yet he is loath to die,
so long as he can say with blessed Paul, Nevertheless to abide in the flesh,
is more needful for you, (or others,) Phil. 1.24. When a Heathen Emperor,
Caesar, said, he had lived long enough, whether he respected Nature or Honor:
Tully the Orator answered him well, But you have not lived long enough for the
Commonwealth. Much more may we say, when we see able and godly men longing for
death, because they have lived long enough, whether they respect common Nature
or their own Honor, But you have not yet lived long enough for the Church of
God, and for the common good of his people. We should be willing to live so
long, as God, or his people have a stroke of work to be done, which our
abilities and opportunities fit us to do: In this sense, A living Dog is
better then a dead Lion, Eccles. 9.4. That is, it is better to live (though we
are the meanest) working for God, then die, or be dead, though we have bin the
chiefest.

I enlarge this the rather, because of the present troubles, and the infirmity
of our flesh, which sometimes is ready to envy those who die, because we live
in sorrow; and is not satisfied with this, that our souls are here sheltered
from death, and under the covert of Christ, unless our bodies also may be
sheltred in death, and lie under the covert of the grave. So much to that
question.

Let us note something from the words themselves, Which long for death and it
comes not, and dig for it more then for hid treasures. Observe first, That

Many afflictions to our sense are worse then death. They long for death,
because they are in misery. It is said, and it is a truth, O death how bitter
art thou to a man that is at ease in his possessions! And there is a truth also
in this, O death how sweet art thou to a man, that is bitter in his soul! It
often falls out, that to die, is but a short affliction, but affliction many
times is a long and a continued death, a frequent death, as the Apostle speaks
of his afflictions, in deaths often, (2 Cor. 11.23.) That there is a
bitterness in death, the speech of Agag implies, (1 Samuel 15.) Surely the
bitterness of death is past: Yet while a man (as lamenting Jeremie complains,
Lam. 3.19.) Remembers his afflictions, and his misery, the wormwood and the
gall, that is, his afflictions and misery, more bitter then gall and wormwood,
his sense overcomes his judgment, to conclude, that there is a pleasantness
in that bitter thing, which we call death. Secondly observe, That

As death finds many before they look for it, so some look for death and
cannot find it. How many are there, whom death surprises before they are aware,
and seizes upon them, when they think not of it? when as others are
expecting, and longing, and gaping, and gasping after death, and they cannot
meet with it, it comes not. Indeed, it is a great deal better for a man to
expect death, when it comes not; then to have death come upon him, when he
expects it not. Some are calling for death, crying out for death, before they
know how to die, before they know how to live, yea, before they know why they
lived. It were well for such if they might loose their longing, and long for
death long enough before it comes; for upon the matter (poor souls) they
long for Hell, while they long for death, and while they are hastening from that
life and misery, which will quickly have an end, they are plunging into that
death and misery which will never end. Thirdly observe,

As death is a punishment to most, Mors expectara non veniens, miserrimam
efficit vitam.
so not to die is a punishment to some. Job speaks of it as of an affliction
upon such, they long for death and it comes not. Death is an affliction to
all, it is a punishment to all unbeleevers, a punishment with a sting; And as
all wicked men are punished with death, so some of them are punished with this,
that they (for the present) cannot die, ( Rev. 9.6.) In those days men shall
seek death, and shall not find it, and shall desire to die, and death shall
flee from them. It is laid as their punishment that they should live, and as an
affliction beyond all their afflictions, that then, they could not die. They
are in a sad condition, who can have no remedy or cure of their troubles but
death; but how sad is their condition, who cannot obtain that remedy? It is
like the punishment of the damned in Hell, Mors prima animam nolentem pellit a
corpare, Mors secunda animam nolentem. tenet in corpore August.
they shall long for death but it will not come, and they shall ever seek for
death but shall never find it. No wicked man did ever part so unwillingly with
his soul when he died, as he will unwillingly meet with it, when he rises
again; And as the first death does part soul and body unwillingly, so the
second death keeps soul and body together unwillingly. They have a taste of
this misery in this life, whose souls are truly said, to be imprisoned in
their bodies; And O how desirous are they to dig down these mud-walls, and make
an escape, but cannot. Fourthly observe,

It is an affliction to nature, to be debarred of any thing it desires, how
destructive soever it be unto it. It is (in one sense) a natural desire, to
long for death, and yet death is the destruction of nature: A man under
distempers of body, in a disease, a Fever, etc. is often troubled and grieved
because he cannot have those things which will hurt him: He longs for such
meats and drinks as given him, would kill him, and yet a denial angers him:
The hope of death deferred will make the heart sick, and when the desire (death
desired) comes, it is as a tree of life; Grief arises from the unsatisfaction
of our desires, and therefore though the thing had, which we desire, will undo
us, yet the not having it does afflict us.

Which long for death and it comes not, and they dig for it more then for hid
treasures. Take somewhat from this latter branch, and they dig for it more then
for hid treasure. As Soon as ever Job had expressed their longing desire after
death, you see presently, he tells us that they dig for death. From this
observe,

That where desires are true, they presently produce endeavors. He that longs
for a thing will labor for it, they are digging presently, ( Prove. 18.1.)
Through desire a man having separated himself, intermedleth with all wisdom;
If it be death a man desires, he will be endeavoring after it. There are some
velleities, listlesse wishings and wouldings, which produce no endeavors; but
true desires, are ever active, natural desires are seconded with natural
endeavors, and so spiritual desires, with spiritual endeavors. If a man
desire death, he will dig for it, surely then he that desires Christ and longs
for eternal life, will be digging for the enjoyment of them. Observe further,

That proportionably to the strength of our desires, is the strength and
earnestness of our endeavors. As real desire causes real endeavor, so
strong desires cause strong endeavors: It was not a bare desire, but an
earnest longing (as was cleared in opening the words.) And it is not a bare
labor, but hard labor, digging is strong labor. A mere natural man, whose
desires after sin are strong and vehement, acts sin with equal vehemence. The
holy Ghost says, he does evil as he can, that is, to utmost his canning or
ability, He draws iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with
cart-ropes. He does evil (says another Scripture, Mich. 7.3.) with both hands
greedily. To do a thing with both hands, notes the greatest endeavor: As when
the Pharisees are said not to touch the burdens which they laid on others with
their little finger, it notes their refusal of the least endeavor, Math.
23.4. So a spiritual heart, having his desires turned heavenward, he diggs for
heavenly treasure every day, and gives diligence to make his calling and
election sure. They who have strong desires after Christ, labor strongly after
Christ. So they are expressed ( Pro. 2.4.) where Solomon speaks of wisdom,
which is Christ and all that is Christ's. If thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for hid treasures; Such is the search and endeavor that
ought to be after Christ, and such it will be if there be true and great
desires after Christ.

Thirdly, In that he says, they dig for it, as for hid treasure, We may
observe,

That the best things are hardest to come by. If you will have treasures, you
must dig for them; you may have pibble stones, flints, above ground, but
treasures lie deep; And in proportion, the better every thing is, the more
digging it requires; And the best things, ought to be most dug for. They
that will have the great blessing, must wrestle for it, or the Crown, they
must strive for it; We must dig for heavenly hidden treasure, before we have
it; And yet both the treasure and the strength to dig for it, are freely given.
Fourthly observe, That

Those things which we esteem most, we labor to secure most. It is said that
they dug for treasures, and that the treasures were hid. I told you in
opening the words, there is a natural hiding of treasure, and an industrious
hiding. Take it in the last sense, men that have treasures will labor to
preserve them, why? because treasures are much esteemed, and the things we
esteem most, we preserve most. In the Hebrew, the word that signifies
treasure, signifies the hiding of treasure, or hidden treasure. Among all
treasures, spiritual treasures are most hidden; they are so hidden, that they
are called mysteries, or secrets? The knowledge of Christ was a hidden treasure
for some thousands of years; the Apostle in his time calls it, the mystery
which was kept secret since the world began, Romans 16.25. Again he calls it,
the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God ordained
before the world, unto our glory, which none of the Princes of this world knew,
1 Cor. 2.8, 9. And as spiritual knowledge, so our spiritual life, is called a
hidden life, your life is hidden with God in Christ, Col. 3.3. And as our life,
so our spiritual comforts are hidden, therefore called Hidden Manna, Rev.
2.17. All our spiritual estate is treasure, and it is all hidden treasure, so
hidden, that the Saints dig deep to find it, and when they have found it, they
hide it, as Christ shows us (Mat. 13.44.) speaking of the Kingdom of God,
which he compares to a treasure hid in the field, the which when a man has
found, he hides: He hides it, not to obscure it from the light, but to secure
it from danger: Mary hid those precious sayings of Christ her Son and her
Savior in her heart, Luke 2.51. And David having found the Commandments of
God, which he prized above any treasure, above thousands of gold and silver, he
hid them in his heart. Thy word (says he) have I hid in my heart, that I might
not sin against thee, Psalm. 119.11.

Verse 22. Which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the grave.

Having said, that they long for death, and dig for it as for hidden treasure.
Now supposing, that they find death, he shows how it affects them, they
rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the grave. There is little
or no obscurity in these words, only consider the emphasis of this expression;
the word which we translate rejoice, (...) Summo gaudio and incredibili
laetitia etiam signis exterioribus predita gestiunt, vel prae laetitia
exultant, vel laetantur ad exultationem. Drus.
or rejoice exceedingly, notes such a rejoicing as breaks forth in some
outward gesture, as when a man does leap for joy; And Mr. Broughton translates
it thus, which joy till they skip again, noting an extraordinary joy, and
gladness when they can find the grave; that is, when they die. Yet some join
the sense of this verse with the former, to carry on or lengthen out the
similitude thus; Which long for death, and dig for it as for hid treasures:
And finding death, they are affected as they who (seeking for treasures) find a
grave; For if in digging, they did but hit upon a grave, then they thought
themselves sure of treasure and great riches; because treasure and riches was
used to be put into graves, as was showed in opening the fifteenth verse of
this Chapter. The sense is fair, and comes up to the same point, from either
of these expositions. Observe hence, first, That

What at one time we fear most, in that at another time we may exceedingly
rejoice. Death is dreadful, and the grave is a place of darkness, yet here
is joy and rejoicing, yea exceeding joy and rejoicing when they find the grave.

Secondly, They rejoice in it, but why? It was that which they had longed for,
that which they had long sought for? if at another time they had bin showed the
grave, or commanded into the grave, they would have taken little pleasure in
it. The same thing inflicted or threatened by another is dreadful to us, which
desired by our selves is pleasant and delightful: It pleases us to have our
desire satisfied, though the thing desired be never so unpleasant: And to be
eased of present evil, makes a future evil appear in the likeness of a
persent good. For Joy is an affection of the mind, arising from the
apprehension of some present good, even as hope springs from the apprehension
of some good, that is to come.

Further, We may consider the issue of all these acts, after they had longed
for death, and dug for death, and found death; presently upon the finding of
it, they rejoice, and rejoice exceedingly. Hence observe,

That which any one truly desires and endeavors to find, causes him to
rejoice, when he has found it. If you desire death, and seek for the grave,
the finding of these will be to you as life, and as a house of mirth: How much
more then shall we rejoice, having found good things, the best things, after
earnest longing and digging for them. When the wise Merchant had found the
treasure hid in the field, the next words inform us of his joy, Matthew. 13.44.
When the man after long seeking on the mountains, had found his lost Sheep,
and the woman, after lighting her candle, and sweeping her house, and diligent
search, had found the lost groat, they both rejoiced, and called in their
neighbors and friends to rejoice with them, ( Luke 15.) It troubles a man to
be found of that or him, whom he hates or fears, Have thou found me O mine
enemy? says Ahab to Eliah, 1 King. 21.20. And it cannot but delight us, to
find that or him, whom we love and long for. Have I found thee O my friend?
will such an one say. And if a miserable man rejoices exceedingly when desiring
he finds death and a grave, how will the soul leap for joy, when we shall
find him who is the longing and desire of all Nations, Jesus Christ. How
exceeding exceedingly will the soul rejoice, when we shall find what we have
so much longed for, not death, but life, and life not only in Christ, but with
Christ, when we shall find, not the house of the grave, but a house of glory,
and glory in the height, an exceeding excelling superexcellent weight of glory.

And by this effect, we may make proof of grace here. If thou have found
Christ, in ordinances, in duties, in meditation, in prayer, in the promises;
for here, in these things, the longing soul diggs after Christ: joy will at
one time or other fill thy heart, yea thy heart will leap for joy, thou will
rejoice in Spirit, as Christ did in his Father, Luke 10.21. For this joy is a
fruit of the Spirit, ( Gal. 5.22.) and one of the first fruits. And God seldom
misses to give the soul a taste of this joy at the first, or presently after
conversion, though afterward clouds may come over us, or at leas^ our light of
joy not be so clear.

Further, If a man long after any truth, and digs it, how exceeding joyful
will he be when he can find that truth; When a Philosopher had found out the
resolution of a question in the Mathematics, Archimedes.
he was so ravished with it, that he ran about crying, ^ have found it, I have
found it: Surely the finding of one Divine truth (which is the mind of Christ)
should affect us more then the complete knowledge of all that is knowable, or
can be known in the whole course of nature. Every truth is beautiful, but the
truths of God are beauty. Thus we may try our desires in all their pursuits, by
this issue of them, joy in finding the things which w^ pursue.

Lastly observe, That as he does rejoice, so this joy answers to the desire in
the degree of it: Proportionable to our desires and endeavors in seeking, are
our joys and comforts when we have found There is not only a joy, but a
proportionable joy, the desire was very great, and the endeavor was very
great, and now the joy come up to both, that is very great too, not only do
they rejoice, bu^ they rejoice exceedingly; they rejoice, so as they skip for
joy That is (I am sure it ought to be) more apparent in our regula^ desires
after things good for us, then in our irregular desires after things which are
hurtful to us. If that exceeding desire after death will produce exceeding joy
in death; then exceeding desire afte^ life and spiritual good things, will
work exceeding joy when w^ have found them; desire is that which widens the
vessel to tak^ in abundance of joy; large desires after any thing open the
hear^ and enlarge the faculties to take in abundance of joy, when we have found
the thing which we desire.

JOB 3. Ver. 23, 24, 25, 26. Verse 23. Why is light given to a man, whose way
is hid, and whom God has hedged in?

For my sighing comes before I eat, and my roarings are powered out like the
waters.

For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, and that which I was
afraid of, is come unto me.

I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet; yet trouble came.


AT the 20th. verse of this Chapter, Job begins to expostulate concerning the
continuance of his life; and he casts his complaint into an argument, which was
formed to his purpose, thus, There is no reason, or if there be, show me a
reason why his life is continued, that lives miserably, and would die
willingly; But I am the man who live miserably, and would die willingly:
therefore why is light or life continued unto me? The former part of this
argument is contained in the 20, 21, 22, 23. verses. In which Job demonstrates
that there is no reason, or at least if there be a reason, it is such, as he
could not make out, why that man should have his life continued who lives in
misery, and is willing to die. Three of those verses we have already finished,
and there remains the 23. (which is a part of the same reason) to be yet
opened.

In this 23th. verse, he (as it were) repeates his argument; He had said
before, Why is light given to him that is in misery, etc. and so he does
illustrate it in the two verses following: In this 23th. verse he re-inforceth
what he had said in other words, Why is light given to a man whose way is hid,
and whom God has hedged in? He doubleth his call for a reason or proof of
this thing.

Why is light given?] Those words are not here expressly in the Hebrew, but
they are supplied by our Translatours, and by Translatours in other Languages,
from the 20th. verse, to make up the sense. The Original runs thus, To a man
whose way is hid, and whom God has hedged in: But the question is implied as
in the former, and here to be prefixed, Why is light given to a man whose way
is hid, and whom God has hedged in? Mr. Broughton reads it without the
question, (Why is light given?) thus: The Wight, or man whose way is hid, over
whom the puissant casts a covering.

To a man whose way is hid.] Job speaks not here of a way in a proper sense,
the way wherein men travail and pass in their journeyes, from place to place:
but the way, is a way, in a Metaphor; And so in Scripture, the way of a man is
taken; First, for the purpose or intention of a man; Secondly, for the course
and conversation of a man: and that either for the course, wherein we walk
toward others, or for the course wherein others walk toward us: When it is
said here, Why is light given to a man whose way is hid? the way, is either the
course wherein Job walked, respecting God, or the course which God took
respecting Job, Why is light given to a man whose way is hid?

The way of a man, in his walking before God, is twofold.

First, Internal. Secondly, External.
There is an internal, an inward way which the soul treads in converse with
God, a secret path, a path which no eye has seen. And then there is the
outward way of walking. That speech of God to Abraham takes in both, Walk
before me and be perfect, that is, converse and carry thy self uprightly
before me, in thy affections and in thy actions. Now when Job says, his way
was hid, he means neither of these: for though the internal way, whether it
be the way of sin, or the way of obedience, be a path so secret, as that it
is always hid from the eyes of men, yet Job knew well enough that God saw even
that way, and therefore he could not complain that his most secret way was hid
from God. Yea in another place he comforts himself with this, that God knew
the secret ways of his heart: For when his friends accuse him and charge him
with hypocrisy, he supports himself with this, My witness is above, and my
record is in Heaven, there is one there that knows the way, the secret way of
my spirit with him, to be sincerity, though you charge the way of my spirit,
with hypocrisy. The soul has many ways of communion with God, which are
altogether hidden from the eye of man; man cannot see or discern the private
passages between God and the spirit, either when the soul approves it self
to God; or rejoices and exults in God. And as concerning this way, this inward
way, as Job knew that it was not hid from God, so (I conceive) it did not
trouble him, that this way was hid from man; As there are in God certain
(Arcana Consilij,) secret mysteries, and hidden ways of counsel, which he
will not communicate to holy men: so there are in holy men (Arcana pietatis)
some secrets, some mysteries of godliness, which they do not communicate to
the world; and therefore the complaint does not lie in either of these respects.

The Church complained, but she was checked for complaining, that her way was
hid from God, Isa. 40.27. Why say thou, O Jacob, and speak, O Israel, My
way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God?

Yet that place is not to be understood of a hiding from the eye of Gods
inspection, as if the Church had any suspicion that the Lord did not know, or
did not see how matters went with them, or in what condition they were; but it
is to be understood of the eye of Gods compassion; There is a seeing eye, or
contemplating eye, and a compassionating or succouring eye. So the meaning of
that complaint, is only this, Why say thou my way is hidden from the Lord,
that is, why do thou speak as if God did not regard thee in thy troubles,
as if God had no pity nor compassion on thee, no bowels toward thee, why
say thou my way is hid from the Lord? In the third of Exodus, when God comes
to help the people of Israel, he tells Moses, I have seen, I have seen: or
I have surely seen, namely with an eye compassionating their condition, as the
next words show, for I know their sorrows. Now when the Church complained that
her way was hid from God, her meaning was, that God did not take notice, so, as
to pity and deliver her. Excepting in that sense, she could not conceive that
her way was hidden from God; neither is the way of the Church, So, hidden from
God, but as to our sense: for the Lord pities his people when he corrects them,
and therefore Jacob is chidden for saying so, Why say thou O Jacob, my way
is hidden from the Lord? Therefore this Text is not to be understood of Jobs
way in respect of God, but of the hiding of Gods way, or the hidden dealings of
God toward Job. My way is hid says Job, that, I cannot understand, nor
interpret, nor expound the meaning of Gods dealing with me. I am not able to
give an interpretation of it, I know not what this thing means: My way is hid.

The way of Gods dealing with him, was a hidden way, in two respects.

First, In regard of the cause of his affliction; It was hidden from him, why
God had laid so sore and so heavy a burden upon him; and that is it which
Elihu in the 34. of this book, ver. 31, 32. hints at, where he tells Job,
surely (says he) it is meet to be said unto God, that which I see not, teach
thou me, He answers such a complaint as this, I (says Job) cannot see the
reason why God does afflict me; Elihu tells him, It is meet to be said unto
God, that which I see not, teach thou me, and if I have done iniquity, I will
do so no more, Lord if thou will show me that my sin is the cause, and what
sin is the cause, I do here promise I will lay down my sin, and (through thy
help) do so no more.

Sunt qui viam enarrant viam elabendi. D^us.
Or again, It was hidden in regard of the issue or event, My way is hid, that
is, I can see no passage out of this way; I cannot tell when these troubles
will end, I see no help, I have no glimpse of light breaking out to me in this
way, it is a dark, a hidden way unto me: This darkness troubles him, as much
as all his troubles. And it is, as if he had said, I am so encompast with
clouds, that I walk in darkness, and see no light; My life is so entangled
and wrapped up in troubles, that I see no way of deliverance or escape.

And this exposition seems most proper, if we take in the latter part of the
verse, where he says, and whom God has hedged in: This explaines the hiding
of his way, to be the hedging of his way, such an incompassing of him about
with sorrows, that he could not make his way out.

In the first Chapter, you may remember, that Satan was much troubled that God
had made a hedge about Job; And now Job himself is much troubled, that God had
made a hedge about him: I am the man, says he, whom God has hedged in. That
which before was the object of Satan's envy, is now become the object of Jobs
complaint, a hedge: Sure then it was not the same hedge. No, that which Satan
complained of, and envied at, was a hedge of mercy, and a hedge of blessings, a
hedge of favor and of protection: But this which Job complains of, is a
hedge of thorny troubles, and of pricking sorrows: The former was (as we may
speak) a hedge of Roses, and this was a hedge of Briars. That was a hedge so
high and strong, that no evil could come in, to, or break through, to annoy
him; And this was a hedge so high and strong, that no good could come or be
brought unto him.

So then, take the sense thus, Why is light given to a man whose way is hid,
and whom God has hedged in? that is, why does God continue my life, when I am
in such a condition, as that I can neither discover the reason why I came into
it, nor am I able to discover any passage out of it.

And this is it which the Church complains of, ( Lament. 3.7.) He has hedged
me about, that I cannot get out; and verse 9. He has enclosed my ways with
hewn stones, God had built up a wall (as it were) by art, with hewn stones,
he had set them so close together, that there was no passing by, no getting
through. Observe hence, first,

That affliction is usually accompanied with much darkness. Affliction is
often called darkness in Scripture, And as it is darkness without, so it
often causes darkness within. An afflicted person has such darkness upon
his person, that he cannot discern, many times, either why God does afflict
him, or when God will make an end of his afflictions. That in the Prophet (
Isa. 50.10.) is true of outward afflictions, as well as inward, Who is there
among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that
walks in darkness? There Is many an afflicted person walks in a way, hidden
in a threefold darkness. First, The way is hid, in the darkness of the
cause for which he came into it. Secondly, The way is hid in the darkness of
the event, how to get out of it. Thirdly, The way is hid in the darkness of
his present duty, what to do in it: The way of affliction is often wrapped up
and hidden in this threefold-darkenesse.

Further, Seeing Job speaks of this as an addition to all his sorrows, and as
the complement of them all, that he was thus shut up and hedged in, and that
his way was thus dark in regard of the cause of it. Observe, That

It increases an affliction greatly, not to know the reason of an affliction,
or to have the way of Gods dealing hidden, from our eyes. It is a trouble not
to see the reason of things; The mind is exceedingly eased, when the
understanding has light; This made Jeremie enquire, Why does the way of the
wicked prosper? As if he had said, If I could see the reason of it, it would
satisfy me, but while thou keep me in the dark, and I can give no account
to my own soul or those that ask me, of this thy dispensation, to wicked
men, this is the burden of my soul. It is usually said, Faelix qui pot^it
rerum cognoscere causa^.
They are happy who know the causes of things. And in regard of the diseases of
the body, we say, that a disease is half cured, when the cause of it is
discovered: But when a Physician is in the dark, and cannot find out the cause
of a disease, he must needs be in the dark for the remedy of it: So it is also
with a man in regard of any affliction, when he cannot find out the cause, he
knows not what to pitch upon as a remedy. When Rebekah, (Genesis 25.22.) had
twins in her womb, and they strugled together within her, she was much
troubled, and nothing would satisfy her, until she went to God to know the
reason of the thing, Lord (says she,) why am I thus? And when God had told
her, that two Nations were in her womb, and that two manner of people should
be separated from her bowels, she made no more complaints. So when there are
such strivings, such struglings, and contrary motions of trouble in us, or
about us, the soul goes to God, and enquires why is it thus? Lord, I am more
troubled with the ignorance of my troubles, then with the weight or smart of
them.

Thirdly, Take the words as respecting the issue, or deliverance from trouble,
and they afford us this observation, That

It is a great addition to an affliction, not to see or discern a way to
escape or get out of affliction. To be in an affliction, out of which there
appears no passage (unless the soul be mightily supported by the hand and
power of Christ) brings within a step of despair. The Apostle speaks as much
when he says, (1 Cor. 10.13.) There is no temptation has taken hold of you,
but that which is common to man, (and then it follows) but God is faithful,
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with
the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. As
if he should say, If God did not indeed discover, or make out to you some way
of escaping, I must needs say, you were never able to bear it, but (says he)
God will make a way for you to escape, that ye may be able to bear it;
Meaning, that the opening of this way, would revive their spirits, and then
they would be able (through the strength of Christ) to bear it.

If so, then how shall the soul bear an affliction, when God instead of
making a way to escape, does as it were make a hedge to stop all escape?
Therefore when the Lord would support his people in their troubles, he promised
that they should have a door of hope opened to them, I will give her the
valley of Achor for a door of hope, Hos. 2.15. He would give her some
appearance, some glimpses and openings of deliverance, in and from, their
present dangers. It is threatened, ( Deuteronomy. 28.25.) thou shall come out one way
against thine enemies, and fly seven ways before them, they should fly many
ways, but they should escape no way. Thou shall come out one one way, and fly
seven ways, that is, Tentabis semper and diversis vijs effugere, sed frustra,
nusquam tibi patebit effugium.
thou shall try this, and that, and every way to escape, but thou shall find a
hedge at every ways end, to stop and hinder thy escape. We use to say of a man
in a distressed condition, He is in a wood or in a wilderness. And when God
entangles men in their own devises, it is said, He powers contempt upon
Princes, and causes them to wander in the wilderness, where there is no way,
Psalm. 107.40. So Pharaoh said of the children of Israel, they are entangled in
the land, the wilderness has shut them in, Exodus 14.3. And when a people are
as the children of Israel were, having a a Sea before them, an army behind
them, and Mountains on either hand. Then they may say (as Job did) their way
is hid, and God has hedged them in.

For my sighing comes before I eat, and my roarings are powered out like
water. Here Job takes up the former proposition, and applies it particularly to
his own person. Before, he said only in the general, why is light given to him
that is in misery, and why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom
God has hedged in? Now he says in effect, it is thus with me, I am a man in
misery, and I am a man whose way God has hid and hedged in, wherefore then is
my life continued? And he proves that he was in such a condition, by the
effects of it, sighs and roarings. So that this verse holds forth two things
about Jobs sorrow. First, The continuance of it, in those words, My sighing
comes before I eat. Secondly, The extremity of it, in those, My roarings are
powered out, etc. The argument may be thus framed, That man is in extreme and
continual misery, who does not so much breath, as sigh, who, when he would
speak, is forced to roar: But thus it is with me, my sighing comes before I
eat, and my roarings are powered out like water, therefore my misery is
extreme and continual.

My sighing comes before I eat.] In the Hebrew it is word for word, thus,
before the face of my bread, my sighings come. Which Hebraisme, (before the
face of my bread) has a great emphasis in it. It notes the continuance of his
sorrows without any intermission, When a thing is said to be before the face
of another, (...) Aquila.
it notes an equal continuance with that, before the face of which it is said
to be. As in the negative ( Exodus 20.3.) Thou shall have no other gods before
me, so we translate it; the Hebrew is, Thou shall have no other gods before my
face, that is, so long as I continue to be thy God, thou shall have no other
god; but I shall be thy God to all eternity, therefore thou shall have no other
gods but me, for ever. So in the affirmative, Psalm. 72.5. where under the type
of Solomon's Kingdom, the continuance of the Kingdom of Christ is prophesied,
the Holy Ghost says, It shall continue so long, as the Sun and Moon
endures; the Hebrew is, it shall continue before the face of the Sun and of
the Moon, that is, there shall be an equal duration of the Kingdom of
Christ, and of those lights of Heaven, the Sun and the Moon; The Kingdom of
Christ, shall last as long as the world shall last.

So then (according to this sense) before the face of my bread my sighings
come, is, as if he had said, look how long I have my bread before me, look
how much time I spend in eating, so much time I spend in sighing, my sorrowings
are of the same continuance with my refreshings. The phrase imports the
un-intermittednesse (as we may so speak) of his sorrows: that he had no stop,
no breathing time, A Deo perpetua est haec calamitas, ut ne cibi quidem aut
ullius necess^atis causa dolores possim fallere and uno momento a gemitibus
ab^rrare. Vel tam frequentes mibi sunt gemitus ut vix mibi c^mpus supersit ad
capiendum cibum.
which was not a sighing time, no not for a meal time; while he was eating,
with every bit of meat, he had a morsel of sorrows; He might say, as the
Psalmist, ( Psalm. 102.9.) I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink
with weeping, when I drink, my tears flow into my cup; When I take in a few
drops of comfort, I weep out streams of sorrow: Or my sighings come and
return so fast upon me, that I have no time to eat my bread: I am so plied
and followed with these afflictions, that I have no leisure to be comforted.

If at any time a man gets respite from his grief, it is when he eats; how
respitlesse then was Jobs grief, before whom sorrow and sighings sat (as
guests) continually at his table.

My roarings are powered out like water. As the former words showed the
continuance, so this the extremity of Jobs sorrows. It is a great affliction
that makes a man of spirit speak, or complain: It is a greater affliction
that makes a man of spirit weep or mourn. How great an affliction then is it,
which makes a man of spirit cry out and roar? when a man of courage roares, he
is pained to purpose. Job a man of spirit and courage, does not only sigh but
roar; Sighings are more secret sorrows, but roarings must be heard,
especially his roarings, which were powered out like water.

Roaring is the Lions voice, Metaphora a Leonibus ^amelicis. Is. ^14. Psalm 46.3.
and here is an allusion to the hungry Lion, roaring on his prey: Or to the
troubled waves of the sea, which also are said to roar. Excessive sorrow is
often set forth by roaring, Psalm. 22.1. Why art thou so far from the voice of
my roaring, says David, typing the sorrows of Christ? I do not only cry, but
I roar out unto thee, Lord why do thou not hear my strong cries, cries
like the roaring of the Lion, or the noise of troubled waters. So Psalm. 32.3.
David to show his extremity of pain and trouble, while he kept in, and did not
confess his sin, speaks thus, while I kept silence (while I smothered my sin
in secret) I roared for the very disquietnesse of my soul: silence in not
confessing sin, causes roaring under the guilt of sin. Those are great burdens
of sin, and great burdens of sorrow, that cause roaring. My roarings are powered
out like water.

This notes further yet, the abundance and the strength of his sorrows. I am
powered out like water, (I am as it were, all melted into sorrows) is said of
Christ in that Psalm of his passion, ( Psa. 22.14.) I am powered out like
water, my heart in the midst of my bowels is like melted wax. When the
Prophet Ezekiel would show how that people should be affected with the tidings
of their afflictions, he says, Every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be
feeble, and every spirit shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water,
(chap. 21.7.) The Hebrew is, Mades metu. Plaut.
all knees shall go into water. The sorrows of repentance are expressed by the
pouring out of water, to note both the abundance of them, and the intensivenes
of them, in that known place, 1 Samuel 7.6. They gathered together to Mizpeh, and
drew water, and powered it out before the Lord, that is, they mourned
abundantly, and they mourned with all their strength.

How strong and abundant the sorrows of Job were, has been often showed
before, and observations drawn down from them, And therefore I shall need do
no more then clear the words and give the sense. It follows, For the thing
which I greatly feared is come upon me, and that which I was afraid of is come
unto me.

For the thing which I greatly feared.] The causall particle in the beginning,
(...) Particula (quia) interdum non reddit causam sed vel ornatus vel
asseverationis causa adhibetur.
does not always infer a cause; this verse is not a reason of what he spoke
before; but this particle is often used in Scripture, for affirmation or
illustration, and not as causall, or by way of demonstration; As Joh. 4.17.
Christ tells the woman of Samaria, Thou speak well, I have no husband; the
Greek is, for I have no husband. We translate it only by way of assertion: So
Mat. 7.23. Then will I profess unto them, I never knew you; the Greek is,
then I will profess unto them, for I never knew you, we render it only as an
asseveration: So very frequent in the Hebrew, the particle [ Chi] which is here
used, has in it only the force of an affirmation, For the thing I greatly
feared, is come upon me, that is, certainly, or assuredly the thing which I
greatly feared is come upon me; as if Job should make this as the conclusion
and the sum of all his complainings; this is it which now I must conclude,
that the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, and that which I was
afraid of is come unto me.

(...) Metuere me^um ita dicitur ut gaudere gaudium, pugnare pugnam, (...).
Deus.
The thing which I greatly feared.] The Hebrew is, I feared a fear, and it is
come upon me, And so fear is in the Scripture, frequently put for the thing
feared, by a Metanomy of the effect for the cause, the abstract being put for
the concrete, As Prove. 1.26. I will mock when your fear comes, that is, when
the trouble which you feared, shall come upon you; As if Job should have said,
this evil, is that which I have foreseen and forethought, I had such
misgivings in my spirit, long before this, that such a black day might come
upon me, and I might be thus hedged in, now I see my thoughts are come to
pass, and my conjectures prove true, the thing which I feared and greatly
feared, is come upon me. We translate well, I greatly feared, the Hebrew is, I
feared a fear; Such expressions raise the sense; As when we are said to be
bought with a price, it notes that there was a great price paid for our
redemption: To rejoice with joy, shows the greatness of joy. So here, To
fear a fear, shows that he was in a great fear, as we translate, I feared a
fear, I greatly feared.

Here it may be questioned, whether these fears of Job were lawful: does it
become us to have such mis-givings of heart, in respect of our outward
condition? The Apostle bids us, be careful in nothing, (Phil. 4 6.) and was
it a virtue or a grace, was it commendable or so much as approveable in Job, to
be fearful in all things? Christ rebukes his Disciples because they were
afraid in a storm, and was it well in Job that he was fearful in a Sunshine,
when he had the fairest weather, and prospered in all things? Does it become a
godly man, to be always solicitous about his estate, and doubting that
troubles will come? One would think there is trouble enough, in troubles, when
they come, a man should not trouble himself with them, before they come.
Besides, it is said, Prove. 10.24. respecting wicked men, that God will bring
that which they fear upon them, so that it seems, God is angry with those,
who are always fearing, or stand poring upon such and such evils as they
fear, may come upon them: To these God says, ( Isa. 66.3.) I also will choose
their delusions, and I will bring their fear upon them, because you feared
these things, you shall have your fear: As God gives some their prayers in
anger, so he gives many their fears in anger; And it is as great a sin,
inordinately to fear, that God will take away the meat of our necessity or
convenience, as it is to pray that God would give us meat to satisfy our
lusts or wantonness.

To clear this, we must distinguish of fear as to the purpose we have in
hand. There are diverse sorts of fear.

First, There is a fear of wisdom and caution, and there is a fear of
torment and vexation. That which the Apostle John speaks, (1 John 4.18.) fear
has torment, is not meant of all fear: there is a fear that is a tormenting
passion, a fear which distracts or divides the thoughts about troubles which
may come, and there is a fear which only directs us to avoid or prevent the
coming of trouble.

Secondly, There is a fear which is opposed to security, and there is a fear
which is opposed to comfort. It was David's sin, that he wanted the fear
opposed to security, when he said, In my prosperity I shall never be moved:
Lord, by thy favor, thou have made my mountain to stand strong, Psalm. 30.6,
7. The fear of Job in his prosperity was opposed to this security, he did not
say, I shall never be moved, he thought he might be moved: The favor of God
had made his mountain strong, yet he knew it had but the strength of clay, and
therefore might be cast down. This was his fear, he looked upon creatures, as
they are, mutable and moveable. Christ speaks of a faith of miracles, which
will remove mountains; and that fear is not contrary to saving faith, which
causes us to think, that our mountains may be removed. Jobs fear was
grounded on the uncertainty of creature comforts, he knew wealth was britle
ware, and might quickly receive a crack. This fear we ought to carry about us,
in regard of our spiritual estates also, though grace be everlasting ware,
though we are high-built, and full-growne in grace, though through the favor
of God our mountain of holiness, and of comforts be very strong, yet we must
not be secure; though we are high-built, yet we must not be high-minded. Hence
the Apostle Paul warnes the believing Gentiles, that they should fear: I
grant, ye are in a good estate in comparison of the Jews, they are cast off,
ye are graffed in, yet let me give you this caution, be not high-minded but
fear. Romans 11.20.
That fear which is opposed to presumption and security, is a good and
necessary fear, in the best of our estate, whether in grace or nature, whether
in worldly or heavenly riches. And such was the fear of Job.

Thirdly, There is a fear which makes us provide for an evil day, and there
is a fear which hinders us from enjoying the comforts of a good day. The
former was in Job, doubtless his fear in good days, made him diligent to
provide for the evil day; As it is said of Noah, (Heb. 11.7.) That Noah being
warned of God, of things not seen as yet, through faith moved with fear,
prepared an Arc, for the saving of his house; Noah knew the flood would come,
this holy fear set him a work to provide an Arc. It is an argument both of
wisdom and of grace, in a calm, to prepare for a storm, in peace, to
consider what to do in a time of war, in health, to lay up thoughts about
our sickness, and in a day when the light of Gods countenance shines into our
hearts, and we walk in the comforts of the holy Ghost, then to think, a night
of desertion may come: and what shall I do, if I should walk in darkness and
see no light? Such, as this, was the fear which Job feared.

Fourthly, There is a fear which makes us distrust God, that he will afflict
us; And there is a fear which keeps us from doing that, which may provoke
God to afflict us; This was Jobs fear, as was showed, ( chap. 1. ver. 1.) He
feared God, and eschewed evil. He was loath to grieve and offend God, or to
give him any occasion to be angry.

Lastly, There is a fear which is opposed to hardness of heart, and a fear
that is opposed to courage of heart. Jobs fear was opposed to hardness of
heart; of this Solomon speaks, ( Prove. 28.14.) Blessed is the man that fears
always. And to clear what fear he means, he adds in the next words, But he
that hardneth his heart shall fall into mischief. Where we see first, that
there is a fear opposed to hardness of heart: And secondly, that to fear
that fear always, even in our greatest prosperity, is not only our duty but
our happiness: that fear will not interrupt our comforts, but comfort us.
Yea, this fear does not only consist with comfort, but with courage, and
though we may fall into the troubles, which we thus fear, yet we shall not
fall under them: Such as this was Jobs fear.

So then to take up all: Jobs fear was a fear of wisdom and caution, not of
torment and vexation; a fear opposed to security and presumption, not to joy
and consolation; a fear that made him diligent to prepare against an evil
day, not a fear that did eat out all the comforts of a good day; a fear
which kept him from doing that, which might move God to afflict him, not a
fear which made him distrust, that God would afflict him; a fear opposed to
hardness of heart, not a fear opposed to courage and strength of heart. Such
a fear as this, is a holy fear, such a fear as this, is a good companion in
our best estate: this fear and our comforts may well join together, this
fear will not trouble, but regulate our lives, not break, but sweeten our
sleep. Observe hence,

That holy wisdom, sanctified prudence, bids us fear and prepare for
evil, in our good days. I was afraid of these things, says Job: We must not
suspect, but we ought often to think of evils, before they come. A wise
moral man, Sapienti meliora sunt in votis, deteriora vero in expectatione.
Plut. de Tranquil.
much more a wise Christian, while he is earnestly praying for good, is also
carefully providing for evil. Lest the Disciples should forget trouble in
times of peace, Christ says to them, Behold (Mat. 24.25.) I have told you
before; Now you are at pretty good ease, it may be you think, it will be thus
with you always, but take heed of such thoughts, I have told you what will be
hereafter; Behold I have told you before. And again, ( Joh. 16.33.) These
things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace, in the world ye
shall have tribulation: In the peace we have with Christ, we should expect
tribulation from the world. The Spirit of God often hints such things
aforehand, to the spirits of his people, that they may not be surprised: Paul
testifies, ( Acts 20.23.) that the holy Ghost every where witnessed that bonds
and afflictions did abide him; He looked for trouble in all places, this made
him both patient under, and victorious over all his troubles. Ungodly men feel
trouble, before they see it, and are often past all hope, before they have had
any fear; when they have a good day, they think their day will be an
eternity, and last for ever; Those in Amos, (chap. 6.3.) were merry, they were
singing and feasting, eating the fat, and drinking the sweet, and what do
they in these their good, their only good days? The Prophet shows us in the
next words, They put the evil day far from them: they would have no thought
that their estate might change, when they had a mind their estate should
continue; Hence the Prophet Isay, (chap. 28.15.) describes them, making a
covenant with death, and coming to an agreement with Hell: and then they
supposed themselves safe, and under covert, come what would. The Prophets
indeed have been talking of judgments and scourges; but what of that, we have
got a protection, we have covenants in our pockets will be our security, so
they were promised, and so they believed, as their words witness; If the
overflowing scourge shall pass thorough, it shall not come near us. These
are the thoughts of foolish and ungodly men, they make bargains and
agreements, as it were, with all troubles, that they shall not be touched;
others may smart, but they have taken order for their own indemnity: They have
made lies their refuge, and under falsehood have they hid themselves: And so
they call cheerfully for their wine, come fetch wine, and we will fill our
sel^es with strong drink; and then conclude confidently, (as if all the world,
and time, were at their command,) To morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant, Isa. 56.12. When a wise man falls into trouble, he falls
forward, that is, he falls into those troubles, which he did foresee; but
when an ungodly man, a wicked man falls into trouble, he falls backward, he
falls into those evils, which he never thought of, much less feated. Many
of the people of God at this day, do, and may say of the evils which are now
upon us, the things which we feared are come; these storms were seen long ago
in the clouds; yea in the Sunshine, in fair days, these foul rainey days
were foreseen; and they who have foreseen them, and foreseen them with such
an eye of faith and holy fear, as we have described, are in best case to
graple with them, and will be gainers by them. It is well for us, when we can
say, the things we feared are come upon us; They are in a sad condition upon
whom those evils fall, which they never feared; when troubles come, they go
nearest their hearts, who have put them farthest off, before they came. Hence
observe in the second place,

That the more preparing fear we have before troubles come, the less we are
pressed with fears, when trouble comes. If we consider Job, how unmoveably he
stood the charge and assault of these afflictions, how he wrastled with all the
distresses, which at once took hold of him, we are to look (next to the
support he had immediately from Christ) to this wise caution of his, that he
feared such a storm might overtake him, hefore he got to his journeyes end: He
thought these things might come, and therefore laid in provision for them,
against they came. Those blows wound deepest, which we expect not. Dangers
unknown, Gravius est vulnus quod non expectatur, and illa aegrius tolerantur,
quibus homo se non prius asseufacit.
do easily surprise us and oppress us, whereas those which we fear and
think of, may either be prevented in their coming, or we may be provided
against they come. That which the Naturalists say of the Cockatrice, that if
the Cockatrice see a man first, the man dies, but if the man sees the
Cockatrice first, the Cockatrice dies, is an experienced truth, respecting the
point we have in hand, that if troubles see us first, we die; but if we see
them first, they die; that is, their sting and strength (as to us) is much
abated. Dangers are most felt, where they are not foreseen, and sometime
being foreseen, they are not felt at all; For a prepared expectation, does
either weaken them, or strengthen us, make us more able to sustain them, or
them less able to hurt us; whereas indeed every cross which finds us
secure, has an advantage to leave us desperate. When Nabal heard of danger
past, which he never dreamt might come, his heart died in him like a stone, (1 Samuel 25.) How then had he been astonished into stone, if he had seen the evil
falling upon him. Such can ill bear trouble, who look for nothing but
comfort. It was an addition to the affliction of that afflicted people, ( Jer.
8.15.) When they looked for peace, but no good came, and for a time of health,
and behold trouble; if they who are in trouble, are more troubled, when they
cannot have the peace they looked for, then surely they must be more perplexed
with trouble (when it comes) who enjoying peace, never had a thought, that
trouble would come. When a people are so far from looking for evil, that
they look for nothing but good, and build upon it, that they shall never see
sorrow, then to see sorrow is a killing sight. The sorrows of Babylon shall be
mightily increast and augmented, doubled and trebled upon her, because when
they are coming upon her, she shall be saying, I sit as a Queen and shall see
no sorrow: she was fearelesse, and she shall be comfortless; Trouble will lie
heavy enough upon us, when we look and prepare for it, but it will be
intolerable to those, who never looked for, nor laid in one thought of
preparation, against its coming. The fool in the Gospel, said to his soul,
take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years: But it is best for
us, when we have abundance of outward goods, to say to our souls, these may
be lost in a few hours: Therefore say to thy self in the time of thy
fullness, what, if a day of emptying should come? say when you are rich, it may
be before I die, I may be poor, what shall I do then? Now I have a house, it
may be before I die, or within a few days, I shall be turned out of doors, in
what posture do I find my self for such a condition? Now I am at liberty and
enjoy my friends, it may be shortly I may be cast into a prison, and come into
the hand of enemies; now I have my wife and children about me, my vine and my
olive-plants, at, and round about my table, I may shortly be deprived of them,
and O my soul, how can thou bear these changes? It is good to put these
cases to our selves now, surely Job often tutored his spirit with such
questions as these, and catechized his heart in them from day to day, hence he
says, The things I feared are come upon me; To proceed I was not in safety,
neither had I rest, nor was I quiet, yet trouble came.

This is both an addition to, and an exposition of the former verse; These
words explain what he meant by saying, I feared a fear, even this, I was not
in safety, neither had I rest, etc.

I was not in safety.] No? was not Job in safety in the days of his
prosperity? Is it not said, that he had a hedge about him, and such a hedge as
the Devil could not break thorough, to hurt him, (...) Significat in quiet
vel pace agere, vel tranquille and in otio vivere. Nec multum abludit a voce
Hebraea Latinum salus. Moller. in Psa. 122.6.
and was not Job in safety then?

The Hebrew word from the root [ Shalah] does also signify, I was not secure,
I was not in security, or I did not sit safe in my own thoughts, in my own
opinion: I did not live securely or without fear in my most flourishing days.
And from this root, Christ is called Shiloh, Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, till Shiloh come. Christ is Shiloh, that is, he, in whom all
persons may securely trust: you may sit down in safety in Christ, and rest
your souls for ever, he is Shiloh, our preserver; And the Hebrews use that
word, Shiloh non tantum babet significationem passivam, quasi di^as,
tranquitlum foeliceum, cui omnia prospere cedunt; sed attivam etiaem, ut Shiloh
sit sospitator, seu promissae foelicitatis author.
to signify that fleshie mantle in which the infant is wrapped in the mothers
belly, because the infant lies there quietly and securely, it is out of fear,
and has no thought of any danger, but lies securely, out of barms way. So
that when Job says, I was not in safety, he means, I did not think my self
safe, or beyond the reach of danger, I was not taken up in outward
contentments: I did not look upon my possessions as perpetuities, or upon my
house, as that which should endure for ever, or my dwelling place to all
generations. Job was not like the great Monarch of Babylon, (Dan. 4.4.) who
said, I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house, (it is the same word which is
used in the Text) I, says Nebuchadeezzar, counted my self the greatest man in
the world, and I thought none could touch or molest me, I was at rest and safe:
We have such a description made by the Prophet of a whole Nation, as this King
makes of his own person, Jer. 49.31. Arise, get ye up unto the wealthy Nation
that dwells at ease, or (it is the same word) to a Nation without either
fear or care, a secure Nation, as it is explained by the words following,
which have neither gates nor bars, which dwell alone. If you come to a man's
house that has neither lock nor key, nor door, nor bar, you may well
resolve, that he dwells securely, and is in safety. And if you come to a City
that has neither gates nor bars, you will say, either this City has no
enemies, or else it fears none. A City without gates and bars, is the
emblem of security. Jobs temper was directly opposed to this, I was not in
safety, neither had I rest, nor was I quiet.

These two latter expressions are of the same importance with the former, both
these words have been opened at the thirteenth verse of this Chapter; both
being there applied to rest and quietness in the grave. There he said, if he
had died, he had been at rest and quiet: but all his life time, he had no rest,
neither was he quiet. But is this agreeable to the duty or character of a godly
man, to say, he has no rest, he is not quiet? Surely a godly man ought to be
quiet, when all the world is hudl'd together in confusion; when the mountains
skip like lambs, and the little hills like young sheep, then, even then, he
ought to stand like mount Sion, that cannot be moved; And did it become Job, or
is it any part of his commendation, that in the times of his peace, he had no
rest? When the Prophet shows the temper of wicked men, he compares them to the
troubled sea, when it cannot rest, Isa. 57.20. It should seem that Job was
like a troubled sea, for himself says, he could not rest. I answer by
distinguishing, first of a twofold rest, There is a rest of contentation, and
a rest of confidence. Job had not a rest of confidence, he trusted not in his
outward peace; but he had the rest of contentation, even in his outward
troubles. A wicked man's conscience is like a troubled sea, when he enjoyes
outward peace; but Job enjoyed peace of conscience, while his outward estate
was like a troubled sea: He was fully settled in his mind, when he had no rest,
and was satisfied in spirit, when he had not this quietness: So that when he
says, I had no rest, neither was I quiet; his meaning is only this, I never
placed my happiness in these things, I never built my hopes upon creatures, I
never trusted upon them, nor expected much from them. Or if you will more
clearly apprehend the sense of this last verse, you may read it in that
contrary practice of the rich man, Luke 12.19. His house was full, but his
heart was fuller of the creature: and he made the creature both his rock to
build upon, and his pillow, to sleep upon; when his ground brought forth
plentifully, and he had built new barnes to lay up his fruits, then he lays
himself down to sleep, and that he might sleep quickly and quietly, he sings
a requiem to his soul; Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years,
take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry; No face can be more unanswerable to
a face, Heaven and Hell, light and darkness, are not more unlike, then these
words of the rich man are unanswerable in likeness, to those words of Job.
That rich man's words are the affirmatives of all Jobs negatives, and may be
thus rendered in full sense, I was, (and I resolved I should so continue,) in
safety, at rest and quiet. Jobs estate was as full as his, but his heart was
emptied of all creature confidence and complacence, I (said he) never thought
my self the safer for these, and therefore I said to my soul, soul, take not
thy rest, quiet not thy self in these: This is his intent in saying, I was not
in safety, neither had I rest, nor was I quiet. It follows,

Yet, (though it was thus with me) trouble came, though my heart was loose from
the creature, yet I lost all I had in the creature: though I made not the world
my comfort, yet I found sorrow in the world; I never expected much peace in it,
none at all from it, yet trouble came, such trouble came, as might move and
shake me to pieces. Job, you see, when he had abundance of all outward things,
yet says, he was not in safety, and at quiet, he did not rest in or upon
them. Hence observe, A godly man never sets up his rest in creatures. Though
he have never so much riches in possession, yet he does not make riches his
portion. He lives by that caution, ( Psalm. 62.10.) If riches flow in or
increase, yet set not thine heart upon them, In the highest flood, and
springtide of worldly prosperity, we should keep our hearts within the
channel; When riches are increased into a mountain, and (to the eye of
nature) into a mountain of rocks, yet then do not set thy heart upon them, as
upon a foundation, (...)
(so the Hebrew word imports) to settle thy contentments: All the creatures in
Heaven and earth, are not strong enough to bear the weight of a man's heart,
(God only can do that) who is the rock of ages, or an everlasting strength,
Isa. 26.3. all, besides him, is a foundation of sand, and so a godly man takes
them. What nature looks at as a foundation of rocks, that grace sees to be a
foundation of sand, and therefore will not rest upon it, neither indeed can it.
A godly man in his afflictions is, as having nothing, and yet possessing all
things, (2 Cor. 6.10.) and in his abundance, he has all things, but
possesses nothing: for he so possesses things, as if he did not possess them,
as the Apostles counsel is, (1 Cor. 7.31.) He marries as if he married not, he
weeps as if he wept not, he rejoices as if he rejoiced not, he buys as if he
possessed not, because the fashion of this world passes away. It was an
excellent speech of Luther, concerning worldly things, I have protested, that I
will never be satisfied with the creature, (this is to be a Protestant indeed,
as well as in truth.) A godly man is an Epicure in Christ, he would never play
the Epicure, but in Christ and in God: In them, and toward them, he gives his
affections their full swing, and as a wicked man is said to enlarge his desires
(after the earth) as Hell, (Hab. 2.5.) so he enlarges his desires (after
Heaven) as Heaven, and complains his desires are no larger. In the thoughts of
Christ he sits down, and would take his fill, he says, I am safe in him, I am
quiet and at rest; He says to his soul, soul, do thou see That Christ,
and do thou take notice of those promises? Thou have goods laid up in him,
in them for many years, yea for eternity, soul take thine ease, take it
fully, thou have riches, thou have an estate that can never be spent, soul,
eat, drink and be merry; his blood is drink indeed, and his flesh is meat
indeed, joy in Christ is joy indeed, unspeakeable joy here, and fulness of
joy hereafter: In his presence there is fullness of joy, and at his right hand
there are pleasures for evermore. Until the soul pitches thus on Christ, it
is not in safety, much less in rest or quiet. As the needle in the compass is
in continual motion till it points toward the North, where (as it is
conceived) there are rocks of Lodestone with which it sympathiseth: So the
soul is in continual motion, until it points to Christ, who (we are sure) is
that living rock, with whom all believers sympathise, and the true Lodestone
which attracts all believers to him. A believer, like Noah's Dove, finds no rest
(all the world over) for the feet of his soul, until he returns to this
Arc of safety and salvation: And therefore after all his flights and
flutterings among the creatures, he says (with the Psalmist) return unto thy
rest, (thy Christ) O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee,
Psalm. 116.7. Thou have been abroad in the world, and that (like a
narrow-hearted Master) deals niggardly with thee; If thou should stay long,
either in the service of, or dependence upon the world, the world would starve
thee: Therefore return unto thy rest, in the Lord, for the Lord has dealt,
(and will yet deal, more) bountifully with thee, O my soul.

Lastly, In that Job says, I was not in safety, neither had I rest, etc. yet
trouble came. We may observe,

That, the more our hearts are loosened from the creatures, the more assurance
we may have of enjoying the creatures. It is as if Job had said, I was not
fastened to the world, my heart was not engaged to any thing on this side
Christ: and this was the fairest, the most probable way for the continuance of
my outward comforts; yet trouble came. The redditive particle, yet, supposes
somewhat in reason or probability at least, that might have carried it another
way. As when the Prophet Amos, reckoning up the judgments of God upon his
people, speaks to them thus in his Name, ( chap. 4.6, 8 9.) I have sent you
cleanenesse of teeth, yet have you not returned unto me, I have sent you the
pestilence, the sword, yet have you not returned unto me. The yet, shows there
was great reason, God should expect their return, or that he had done that,
which in all probability, might have caused them to return, when he sent those
judgments. So here, when Job says, I was not in safety, etc. yet trouble
came; The yet, implies that there was somewhat even in that unquietness, which
gave him hopes of settlement in his outward comforts: It seems to carry such a
sense in it, as if he had in more words explained himself thus. Had I dwelt
securely, and given my self up, to the contentments of my flesh, or trusted in
an arm of flesh, for safety, I should not have wondered at my calamity, or
thought strange of my trouble; But this is a riddle which I cannot yet expound,
that when my heart was no way set upon my estate, my estate should fall, That
when I rested not in the creature, I should meet with such troubles in the
creature. This is not the manner of God, It is not usual for God to do thus,
in his dispensations toward his people and servants. It is very rare, that he
takes their outward comforts from them, when they are not taken with their
comforts. Hence it is (as I apprehend) that Job puts it in with a yet
trouble came. This way of God with me, is out of the ordinary course of
providence. I confess Mercer, a very learned commentator, does not favor this
exposition, of laying such a weight upon the particle yet, Non place^ quod
quidam putant Jobum velle hoc loco, quod non intimuerit, neque ins^lentior fuit
rebus affluentib^s, and tam^^i^ haec mala inciderit. Mercer.
and therefore renders the Original (Vau) as a bare copulative. I was not in
safety, etc, And trouble came. Yet having the authority of our translation, and
the frequent use of the word to that sense in other places, we may venture upon
it; yea I think it is no venture, but a certain advantage both to the Text
and to our selves. And I am certain the position is true, though the
exposition should not prove so: For the truth is, troubles are never so near,
as when we put them furthest off: Nor is the world ever so unsure to us, as
when we make surest of it. God often pulls their comforts from them, whose
hearts are glued to their comforts; As it is said of those in the 1 These. 5.3.
when they shall say, peace and safety, then sudden destruction shall come upon
them, as pain upon a woman in travail, and they shall not escape; Mark, when
they shall say, that is, conclude all is their own, when out of the abundance
of their hearts their mouths speak of nothing but of peace and safety, all is
well, and all will be well, then sudden destruction comes: When a man says, I
have riches, I have a full estate, I have honor, I am a happy man, I may take
my rest; then poverty, want, disgrace, misery, vexations and troubles, fall
upon him as an armed man. Thus for the most part God wrests the creatures
soonest out of their hands, who hold them fastest. In the 17th. of Luke, Christ
instanceth in the days of Noah, and in the days of Lot, when they were
secure, buying and selling, building and planting, marrying and giving in
marriage, as if the world had been their own, and as if they meant to take the
heart of it out, and leave a poor world for the next age, then the flood came,
and then fire came, and they with theirs were swept away and consumed, as in a
moment. The Master of the servant in the Gospel, shall come in a day: in what
day? First, in a day when he looked not for him. Secondly, in a day when his
heart was let out upon the creature, when he shall be eating and drinking with
the drunken, when he shall be smiting his fellow servants; when he shall think
all sure, and the day his own, in that day shall his Master come, even in the
day that he looks not for him, and in an hour when he is not aware, Luke
12.45, 46 To have the spirit steept and drencht, in worldly pleasures or
profits, endangers us, to some sudden sweeping judgment: And when we value
the enjoyment of the creature more then we ought, we shall not long enjoy it so
much as we might. Earthly things fail us soonest, when we trust in them, or
think our selves safe by them.

From this observe (in passage) a vast difference between God and the world,
between earthly things and spiritual; the way to hold spiritual things fast,
is to take fast hold of them, to cleave to them, with a full purpose of heart,
never to let them go; If you carry loose affections toward Christ, you may
quickly loose the comforts of his presence: The more we rest upon Christ, the
more we trust on God, and make him our safety, the more safe we are, Him does
God establish in peace peace, in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed upon him,
even because he trusts upon him, Isa. 26.3. We have most peace from God, when
we expect most, and may look for more rest and quiet, when we rest quietly in
him, and say, in God I have enough, yea as Jacob, (Genesis 33.11.) I have all. But
if you would have rest in the world, say as the Prophet Micah directs, ( chap.
2.10.) This is not our rest. Keep your hearts at a due distance from the
world, and you shall (most probably) keep the world; What Christ speaks of
this life, is true of the things of this life; He that will loose, (that is, he
who is ready) to loose the things of this life, shall save them: and he that
will save, that is, he who is resolved to save the things of this life, shall
loose them; put them out of your hearts, and you may hold them in your hands:
you stand firmest upon the earth, when you do but touch it, and touch it (as a
round body does a plain) only in a point. You are freest, from danger, when
you say, we are not in safety: freest from motion when you say, we are not in
rest: And when (in Jobs sense) you are not quiet, then (according to the
ordinary dealings of God, with his people) you are furthest from trouble.

So much concerning this Chapter, containing Jobs bitter curse upon the day of
his birth, and his vehement expostulation about the continuance of his life.

His three friends stood silent all this while; much divided between compassion
and indignation: they pitied his sad afflictions, but they were angry (and
they thought, they had reason to be angry, in the behalf of God) with his
impatience and complaint. Their zeal kindled, their hearts wax't hot within
them, while they were thus mute and musing, the fire burned and brake forth, at
last they spoke (every man in his order) with their tongues: A hot dispute
ensues, Eliphaz begins, the rest follow; after a long ventilation and debate,
God himself (appearing as Moderator) states the question between them,
determines and concludes for Job, against those three; Ye have not spoken of
me the thing that is right as my servant Job has, chap. 42.7. To this God, the
most wise, the only wise God, the infallible Moderator of all persons, actions,
things and questions both in Heaven and upon the Earth, be glory and praise for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A TABLE, Directing to some special Points noted in the precedent EXPOSITIONS.
A
ADvice and Counsel, the good or evil which others do by our advice, is
reckoned as done by us, page 56. Affliction is the touchstone of sincerity, p.
135. Afflictions are all bounded and ordered by God, p. 139. Those afflictions
are most grievous, wherein God seems to be against us. p. 164. We ought to be
sensible under the hand of God in afflictions, p. 186. And may express our
sorrows by outward gestures, p. 187. When God humbles us with sorrows, we
should humble our selves for sin, p. 188. Afflictions send the people of God
home to him, p. 193. They turn them into prayers, p. 194. They come from God,
p. 208. Therefore look beyond the creature, p. 209. To bless God in
affliction, is a high act of grace, yet but our duty, p. 213 To bless God in
afflictions, will make our afflictions a blessing, p. 214. God afflicts his,
sometime without reference to sin, p. 236. Great afflictions may cause great
complainings, p. 343. No affliction in this life so great, but it may be
greater, p. 361. Reasons why God continues life to those who are greatly
afflicted, p. 443. Affliction usually accompanied with much darkness, p. 461.
It increases an affliction, not to know the reason of it, ibid. Especially not
to see a way to escape it, p. 462. Angels, called the sons of God, three
reasons of it, p. 80, 223. How Angels present themselves before God, p. 80, 81.
We should imitate Angels in our readiness to do the will of God, p. 83.
Arise, to arise and do a thing, what it imports, p. 178. Atlantes, what people
they were, p. 367, 368.
B
BEing, How a troublesome being may be worse then no being, and how not, p.
409. Best things hardest to come by, p. 453. Best things are hidden in two
respects, page 453. Benefits received or promised, what influence they may or
ought to have upon our obedience unto God, p. 109. Birth-dayes kept solemnly,
p. 336. Spiritual Birthday our greatest joy, ib. Birth, The great power of
God in the birth of man, p. 390. The remembrance that God takes us out of the
womb, a great support to faith in greatest troubles, p. 391. Untimely birth,
what and why so called, p. 423. Bitter day, is a day of trouble, p. 360.
Bitterness of soul, notes the deepest sorrow, p. 442. Blasphemy, what? pa.
218. The Holiest persons subject to the most blasphemous temptations, p. 286.
Blessing, three ways, 1. Man blesses man. 2. Man blesses God. 3. God blesses
man, what? p. 117. All success from the blessing of God, p. 119, 120. God
delights to bless those who are laborious, ib. The blessing of God is
effectual, p. 121. To bless God, what? 213. The best outward blessing may be
turned into a cross, p. 273. Bodies of the Saints abused and tortured here on
earth, p. 255. Book of Job, who supposed the penman, p. 5. The subject
principal, p. 6. Collateral, p. 7.8. The parts and divisions of it, p. 8 9,
etc. The scope and uses of it, p. 10, 11, etc.
C
CAlling, Every man ought to have a calling, p. 120. Cattle the riches of the
Patriarchs, and why? p. 38, etc. Chemarims, Idolatrous Priests, why so called?
p. 360. Chrildren are blessings, p. 34. A greater blessing then riches, ib. The
more children, the more blessing, ib. 35. Best to have most sons, ib. To have
daughters and sons, the complete blessing, ib. Many Children no hindrance
either of piety or equity, p. 36. Love and concord among children, is the
fathers special blessing, p. 48. Lawful delight is to be permitted our
children, p. 54. Children at full age, not out of their parents care, p. 55.
Childrens souls chiefly to be cared for, ib. Parents ought to pray in
special for every child, p. 65. Jobs loss of his children, his greatest
loss, showed in 5. considerations, p. 167, 168. Christ, His presence makes any
place or condition comfortable, p 431. That the heart of a believer is never at
rest, but in Christ, p. 475, 476. Cloud, what it is, and what it signifies in
Scripture, p^ 358. Conception of children, the work and blessing of God, p.
389. Counselors, Their power to hurt or do good among Kings and Princes, p.
411. Creatures, the best creatures left to themselves, will undo themselves,
p. 83. Cursing. What is meant by cursing God in the heart, p. 70, 71, etc.
Cursing has three things in it, p. 131. What, to curse God to his face, p.
133, 218. What it is to curse a thing or person, p. 327. A curse contains all
evil, as blessing all good, p. 328. Man is but the minister of any curse, p.
330. In what sense the irrational creatures are capeable of a curse, p. 331.
D
Darkness, Diverse sorts, p. 347. A dark day is a sad day, p. 348. It stains
the beauty of the creature, p. 357. Day, What it is to regard a day, p. 350.
Death, Sudden death no argument of Gods disfavour, p. 173. Death may surprise
us eating, therefore be holy in eating, p. 173, 174. Death shakes us out of all
our worldly clothing, p. 200. Death, It is sinful, absolutely to wish our own
death, though we are in pains more painful then death, p. 284. Satan
persuades that death is an end of all troubles, p. 285. He would make men
willing to die, when they are most unfit to die, p. 285. Death is the total
rest of the godly only, p. 400. The outward rest of all, p. 403 Death, In death
we have a 4. fold rest, p. 403. Death is the sleep of the body, p. 404. Why so
called? p. 405. Their opinion refuted, who say the soul sleeps when the body
dies, p. 404, 405. No power or policy can prevent death, p. 417, 436. In death
all are equal, ib. In what sense we may desire death, p. 447. Many afflictions
to our feeling are worse then death, p. 450. Death finds some before they look
for it, others look for death and cannot find it, p. 451. Not to die is a
punishment to some in this life, and it will be an everlasting punishment to
all the damned, p. 451. Degrees in grace. God has servants of al sizes, p.
103. We ought not to set up our rest in a low or lower degree of grace, p. 118.
Desire, It is not always a mercy to have our desires granted, p. 137, 138. It
is an affliction to nature, to be debarred of what it desires, though the thing
desired be destructive to nature, p. 452. True desires produce endeavors, ib.
Proportionable to the strength of desire, is the strength of endeavor, ib.
Desires obtained fill with joy, p. 455. And with joy proportionable to those
desires, p. 456. Devils not in fulness of torment yet, p. 89, 90. Diseases.
Satan can smite the body with diseases if God permit him, p. 266. No disease
can wear out the marks by which Christ knows us, p. 314. Division and
disunion, a great curse, p. 362.
E
ENd, We should resolve upon our end, before we undertake any action, p. 310. A
wise man proposes suitable ends, i. e. Man may propose his end, but he cannot
reach it, p. 307. Eschewing evil, more then the not committing of evil, p.
28, 29. A godly man does not only forbear, but eschew sin, all sin, and all
the occasions of sin, p. 33. Evil of sin. Why sin called evil, p. 28. Satan
would persuade us to ease our selves of troublesome evils, by committing
sinful evils, p. 284. Affliction, in what sense called evil, p. 291. Evil
of punishment or affliction, considered as coming from God, may be borne with
more quietness, p. 292. Because we receive all good from God, it is equal
that we should patiently bear evil, p. 294. Exposition of Scripture, very
useful, p. 1, 2. Exposition of Scripture to the heart, the sole privilege of
Christ, p. 2. Exposition of Scripture by our lives, most excellent, p. 2, 3.
Eye, How the sight of the eye wounds the heart, either with sin or sorrow, p.
393. Also that the sight of the eye affects the heart with joy, p. 394.
F
FAce of God, what? p. 142. Favor of God makes our worst outward troubles
comfortable, p. 350. The blessing of the creature depends wholly on the favor
and respect which God shows it, p. 351. Fear of God taken two ways, both
described, p. 27. Moral honesty without the fear of God, commends us not to
God, p. 31. Fear contains every grace, p. 32. Fear keeps the life clean,
p. 32. What it is to fear God for naught, p. 105, etc. Whether it be lawful
in times of comfore to fear troubles, p. 466. Diverse sorts of fear, p. 467,
etc. To fear a fear, what it imports, p. 466. Holy wisdom bids us fear, so
as to prepare for evil in our best days, p. 469. The more we thus fear, the
less we shall feel troubles; p. 471. Feasting is lawful, p. 49. Seven rules
given about feasting, p. 50, etc. Feastings anciently in the night, p. 364 Fire
of God, why so called? p. 160. Fool and wicked the same, p. 287. Low thoughts
of God, and the works of his providence, argue the greatest folly, p. 289. Sin
the greatest folly, p. 290. Friend, unkindnesse from a friend troubles most, p.
273, 274. A friend who? p. 301. It is an act of true friendship, to mourn with
and comfort our afflicted friends, p. 305.
G
GArments, Renting of garments in what cases used, p. 179. Gain will make some
do any thing, p. 381. Ghost, giving up the ghost, what it imports? p. 396.
Giants and infants are expressed by a word coming from the same root in the
Hebrew, p. 421. Gift, what it is? p. 203. Every outward as well as spiritual
good thing, is Gods gift, p. 203, 204. God gives no more then we get honestly,
p. 205. That God gives all, destroys 4, Monsters at once, two in the rich, two
in the poor, p. 205, 206, etc. That the Lord gives, should make us willing to
give to the Lord, p. 207. A godly man, the most considerable object in the
world, page, 93, 94. Such are most aimed at, and assaulted by Satan, p. 95. A
godly man will not let nature work alone, p. 193. He acquits God in all his
dealings with him, p, 202, A godly man can never be in so ill a condition, but
God has use of his life, p. 254. Godliness has the promises of this life
performed to it, p. 45. Time spent in duties of godliness, no hinderance to
our calling, p. 45. Gold and silver how proper and necessary for Princes, p.
414, 415. Good and evil, how alike from the hand of God, p. 292. Grace
preserves it self pure among the impure, p. 24. Grace the best blessing, p.
29, etc. where one grace is every grace is, p. 30. Holy practice makes grace
visible, p. 52. It increases by opposition, p. 229, Grace and the favor of God
are sweet to us when all other things are bitter and burdensome, p. 444.
Graves and Sepulchers called desolate places, p. 412. Care and cost anciently
bestowed in building of them, p. 413. Why called desolate places, p. 414. Grave
called a house, p. 416. Much treasure formerly put in graves, p. 416, 417. Some
take more care for their graves and sepulchers, then they do for their souls,
p. 420.
H
HAnds, work of the hands may be applied to any business, though a work of
the head, p. 117, 118. To put forth the Hand, what it means, p. 124. Hand of
God what it signifies in Scripture, p. 125. Either mediate or immediate, p.
126. To put into the hand, what it notes, p. 137. Health, a great blessing, p.
266. Yet quickly blasted, ibid. Heart must be especially looked to, p. 74. Man
can but guess at the heart of another, p. 75. The heart continually evil, p.
76. Satan can but guess at the heart, p. 135. Hedge, what it imports, when God
makes a hedge about a man, p. 111, 112. Job had a threefold hedge, p. 113.
There is a hedge of affliction, and a hedge of protection, p. 460. Holiness,
Holiest persons do not always keep the same degree of holiness, p, 342.
Honesty, what we get honestly, we can loose patiently, p. 205. Hope, The want
of that afflicts us most, which we hope for most, p. 385. A hopeless condition
is the worst condition, p. 386, 462. Honor, God will honor them who honor
him, p. 225. What it is to honor God or man, p. 327. Humiliation must increase
as afflictions either personal or public do increase, p. 268, etc.
I
IGnorance, How God is said to wink at times of ignorance, p. 352, 351.
Impatience is a charging of God with folly, p. 219. Infants weep as soon as
they are borne, p. 393. They have the seed of death in them as soon as borne,
p. 398. Intentions, It argues a malicious spirit, when a man's actions are
fair, then to accuse his intentions, p. 108. Integrity, to hold integrity in
evil times, is not only good but admirable, p. 229. The world would persuade,
that the holding of integrity and profession of holiness are vain, p 276.
Job, when he lived, p. 18. Joy, Godly joy and sorrow mutually cause one
another, p. 305. What at one time is our fear, at another time may be our joy,
p. 454. Justice in our dealings, honors our profession of godliness, p. 31.
K
KNowledge, wicked men hate it, and why, p. 373. Knowledge of misery which we
cannot be delivered from, makes us more miserable, p. 440. Keys: four keys
specially in the hand of God, p. 390.
L
LEviathan, why so called, p, 369. What it is to raise up Leviathan, ib p. 370,
etc. Two other significations of the word, p. 378. The name of a song. p. 380.
Life, Our life here is but a coming and a going* p: 201. Life is the most
precious treasure in nature, p. 240. Not to be parted with for a trifle, p.
241. The soul far more precious then life, p 243. So also is the Gospel, ib.
etc. The love of Christ in parting with life for us, p. 244. What life is, in
the natural consideration of it, p. 251, 441. Life and death are in the hand
of God, p. 256. Mercy to have life, though we loose all else, p. 257. Likeness
of quality and of equality, p. 100. All the Saints on earth like one another,
and like Christ in quality, but unlike in equality, ib. Light, a great
blessing, the sorts of it, p. 353. Light-haters, who? p. 373. Longing for a
thing, notes the strongest desire, p. 447.
M
MAn, the word man in Scripture, signifies more then a reasonable creature, or
the nobler sex, p. 20, etc. 3 Hebrew words for Man, their difference, ib. Man
taken 1. for any Eminent man. 2. for a Magistrate, p. 20, 21. Mercies, Some
mercies received, exceed our own praises, as some troubles exceed our own
mournings, p. 381. In sad times small comforts pass for great mercies, p. 384.
Every step of our lives needs a step of mercy, p. 399, 445. Morning, to do a
thing in the morning, is to do a thing diligently, p. 59. Morning best
praying-time, p. 60. Mourn, To mourn with those that are in affliction, our
duty, p. 306. The report of others sufferings, should cause us to mourn, p.
307. Great troubles warrant solemn mournings, p. 319. Mourning, a profession,
p. 375, etc. Mouth, to open the mouth, what, p. 325. A fool does not open his
mouth and speak, but his speech opens his mouth, p. 326.
N
Nakedness twofold, p. 197, etc. Every man borne a naked helpless creature,
p. 200. Name, what it imports when God knows a man by name, p. 97, 98. Name
of God taken 4. ways, p. 212. What it is to bless the Name of God, p. 213.
Nature, Changes in the course of nature, are full of terror, p. 360. Negative
words in Scripture, are not always denialls, p. 180.
O
OPpressors of three sorts, p. 430. The words of oppressors are wounding words,
p. 432. They who will not hear the voice of the Preacher, may justly be given
up to hear the voice of the oppressor, p. 433.
P
Pain of the body, very powerful to disquiet the mind, p. 248. Parable, what
it is, p. 326. Parables grounded on known customs, p. 398. Passion, It is
lawful to show passion in the cause of God, when his glory is concerned, p.
288. We may express our passion by reproves, ib. Patience, A man may be
patient, and yet complain under his afflictions, p. 339. Five things in
afflictions to clear this, p. 340. Perfection, or to be perfect, what? p. 24.
The kinds of it, ib. In what sense the Saints are perfect in this life, p. 25,
26. Perish, What it is to perish, p. 335. How a day may be said to perish, ib.
p. 336. Perseverance, that which a man does out of conscience, he will do with
perseverance, p. 76. Possession of good things without the enjoyment of them,
is a great evil and trouble, p. 444. Poverty is Gods gift as well as riches,
p. 292. Power, Neither men nor Devils have any power to hurt till God give
commission, p. 138. Prayer, how it may be said to move God, p. 231. We must
plead with God in prayer p. 232. Prayer, Satan would discourage us one of
prayer and holy duties, p. 276. Praise, They who do well, shall be sure to
have praise from God, p. 219. Preparation, Holy duties call for holy
preparation, p. 57. Prisoners of two sorts, p. 430. Theirs i^ a sad condition,
p. 431. To visit Prisoners, a work very pleasing to Christ, p. 431. Sighing is
the language of Prisoners, p. 431. Punishment of loss, worse then the
punishment of sense, p. 354.
Q
QUantity, Natural and civil, p. 434. Questions, What it imports when God
asks a question, p. 86, 87.
R
REason, We are apt to think there is no reason for that, for which we see no
reason, p. 443. Repentance, Renewed sins must have renewed repentance, p. 76.
Repentance not to be put off to a pained body, p. 249. Reproof lawful, 288.
How to be qualified with meekness, ib. etc. Reproof, prevails most, when
back with reason, p. 292. Resurrection, a birth, p. 200. Rest of confidence,
and rest of contentation, p. 474. Riches, Three reasons why the Holy Ghost is
so exact in describing Jobs riches, p. 41, 42. To be rich and holy, argues much
riches of holiness, p. 42. Riches are the blessing of God, p. 43. Honest
dealing no stop to the getting or keeping of riches, p. 44. Riches and all
outward comforts may be lost in a day, when we least suspect, p. 150. All our
care cannot secure them, p. 151. Roaring under affliction, notes extreme
affliction, p. 464, etc.
S
SAcrifices, four sorts of them under the Law, p. 61. Why the whole
burnt-offering is called an ascension, three reasons of it, p. 61, 62. The
Father of the Family was as Priest before Moses, p. 62. The law of sacrificing
given, though not written from the beginning, p. 63. Wherein the benefit of a
sacrifice did consist, and what made it effectual to man, p. 63, 64.
Sanctification, How one man may be said to sanctify another, p. 53. To
sanctify notes two things, ibid. He that is holy, desires to make others holy,
p. 56. Satan, what the word imports, p. 81, 82. How Satan comes into the
presence of God, p. 82. He that opposes good, is the Devils picture, p. 84.
Satan is in a twofold chain, though he walk all the world over, p. 89. His
going to and fro, what it imports? p. 91, 92. Satan, No place free from his
temptations, p. 92. Very active to do mischief, p. 92, 93. Satan boundless
in malice, p. 140. Satan is speedy in executing, where he has power to hurt,
p. 143. How the will of God and Satan may meet about the same thing, p. 138. He
cannot compel, p. 153. Wicked men do his will, while they are doing their own,
p. 155. He loves to work by instruments, p. 156: Satan labors to work in us
hard thoughts of God, p. 163. Satan very powerful, page 175. Mere malice
moves Satan against the people of God, page 235. When one means will not
prevail, he tries another, p. 247. And more prevalent or strong, ibid. He
makes use of such instruments to te^pt by, as are most effectual, p. 273.
Scriptures, the excellency of them in themselves, p. 3. and above all other
writings, p. 4. Scripture in all parts of equal power and authority, p. 4.
Scripture many ways difference'd, p. 4. Sepulchers, See Graves. Seasons and
opportunities. Satan is very watchful to take the fittest time in doing
mischief, p. 147. We should be as wise to do good, p. 143. Servants of God.
God has servants in the worst places, p. 24. It is an honor to serve God
faithfully among the wicked, ibid. What it is to be Gods servant, Godly men are
his servants three ways, p. 96, 97. Servants of God surrounded with enemies,
therefore surrounded with protections, p. 115. God is the guard of his
servant. (...) And of the meanest thing (...) them, ibid. Servants of two
sorts, p. ^^7. Sin brought in servility, p. 438. No servant at his own
dispose, ibid. Shadow of death, what? p. 355. Shiloh, why Christ was so called?
p. 472. Shaving the head, what it imports? p: 183. Sincerity commends us unto
God, p. 30. Sincere persons are in Gods esteem perfect persons, p. 31. Where
there is sincerity toward God, there will be honesty toward men, p. 31. It is
most opposed by Satan, p 227. A godly man will hold that, whatsoever he looses,
ibid. It is our armor, p. 228. Sinners, in three degrees, p. 425. Sin, Not
safe to let sin lie a moment upon the soul, p. 60, 61. In what sense a man may
be said not to sin, p. 66. Three degrees of sinning, p. 67. We may quickly
sin while we are about lawful things, p 69. Sin spoils us of all, both
honor and comfort, p. 84. In what sense we may be said not to sin in this
life, p. 215, etc. Silence is best in great sorrows, for then a man is unfit
either for counsel or comfort, p. 320. Solitariness is a sad condition, p.
363. What solitariness good? p. 368. Sons of God who? p. 223. In what sense
sonship is said to be brought in when Christ was borne, ibid. Sorrow is good,
only as it tends to joy, p. 310, 311. Great sorrows hinder speech, p. 324. Man
sees sorrow as soon as he is borne, p. 392. Sovereignty of God, should silence
all complaints, p. (...) God can do us no wrong, p ^ Soul, T^^ ^etiousnesse
of it, p. 243. Stars, a three fold benefit to the night, p. 383. Suspicion,
It is no breach of charity, to suspect ill of others, while it leads us to do
them good, p. 68. A suspicion that we or others have sinned, is ground enough
to seek for pardon, ibid, 69. Sword, A terrible judgment, p. 157. How worse
then Famine, p. 158.
T
TEmptation, Four steps of Satan's work in temptation, p. 153. Satan's suits
temptations to man's temper and condition, p. 158. The most violent temptations
are reserved to the last, p. 167. Some tempt the Devil, p. 374. Tongue, To
govern the tongue under great afflictions, is a high act of grace, p. 298.
Touching the estate or person of a man, what it signifies? p. 127, 128. Satan's
touches are utter ruinings, p. 130. Treasure, called hidden, in two respects,
p. 447. Troubles, To consider what we were and shortly must be, may much
strengthen us to bear present troubles, p. 202. Troubler, To be a troubler of
others, is the height of sin, p. 425. Wicked men are troublers both of
themselves and others, p. 427. By troubling others, they trouble themselves,
ibid, etc. They never cease to trouble, till they cease to live, p. 428. Except
in two cases, p. 429. Truth, Satan will speak truth for his own advantage, p.
114.
V
VZ, Land of Uz, why so called, where seated, p. 22. What manner of people dwelt
there, page 23. Verse, Or meeter, those parts of Scripture which are fullest of
affection, are written in verse, p. 334. Visiting of the afflicted, how called
pure Religion, p. 306. Uselessenesse of any creature, is the dishonor of that
creature, p. 363. Uprightness, Upright, what it is to be upright, as upright
is distinct from perfect, p. 26. Two sorts of uprightness, p. 27.
W
WAy of a man, what? p. 458. Way of man toward God twofold, ibid. How our way
is hid from God, p. 459. How Gods way is hidden from us, p. 460. Weeping and
crying out in pain, is an ease of pain, p. 315. Wicked men are employed as
instruments to afflict the godly, p. 166 Wife, why Jobs wife was spared, when
all else was lost, p. 27^. Wives have a threefold advantage in persuading with
their husbands, p. 273. Winds, their nature and power, p. 170. How sent by God,
how raised by Satan, p. 171. Wishes, In what sense we may lawfully wish that
had not been, which is, p. 406. Women, Fullest of affections, p. 379. Worldly
things in their greatest beauty may be blasted in a moment, p. 174. The
thoughts of great and wise worldly men are only for the world, p. 418. The best
things of this world may prove burdens to us, p, 443. Worldly men's hearts,
fuller of the world then their houses, p. 474. They rest fully in wordly
contentments, ibid. A godly man never sets up his rest in worldly things, p.
475. The more our hearts are loosened from the world, the more assurance we
have to hold the world, p. 476^ Worldly things, the more we trust to them the
less we receive from them, p. 478. Their difference in this from spiritual
things, ibid. Worship, What the postures of it, p. 188. Standing, sitting,
walking, kneeling, falling down, all these are worship postures, p. 189. What
worship is, with the kinds of it, p. 190. Divine Worship proper only to God,
p, 191, 194. Civil worship may be given men, that of two sorts, p. 192. God
must be worshipped in an humble manner, p. 194.
A Table of those Scriptures which are occasionally cleared and briefly
illustrated in the foregoing Expositions. The first number directs to the
Chapter, the second to the Verse, the third to the Page of the Book.
GEnesis,
Chap. Verse, Page, 1. 2. 357. 1. 22, 28. 329. 1. 20, 24. 251. 1. 28. 121. 2.
7. 251. 2. 25. 197. 2. 20. 271. 2. 24. 272. 3. 9, 11. 86. 3. 5. 108. 3. 19.
120. 3. 17. 329. 3. 14, 17. 332. 4. 9. 87. 4. 16. 92. 4. 16. 204. 5. 25. 401.
6. 2. 80, 223. 6. 9. 26. 6. 4. 421. 7. 21. 396. 9. 25. 438. 9. 4. 251. 16. 4.
328. 16. 4. 212. 19. 24. 160. 20. 18. 389. 22. 14. 254. 23. 12. 192. 23. 8.
394. 25. 32. 242. 25. 8. 396. 25. 27. 25. 26. 14. 40. 26. 11, 19. 127. 29. 15.
105. 29. 31. 389. 31. 29. 256. 34. 23. 116. 35. 2. 53. 37. 34. 180. 38. 21. 73.
38. 29. 119. 39. 7, 8. 137. 42. 18. 32. 42. 13. 423. 43. 11. 21. 44. 30, 31.
395. 46. 32. 39. 47. 10. 71. 47. 9. 393. 48. 11. 192. 49. 8. 192. 49. 10. 472.
50. 3, 10. 318. Exodus.
Chap. Verse, Page, 1. 14. 360. 1. 12. 118. 3. 7. 393. 4. 19. 241. 4. 21. 137.
9. 10. 260. 10. 13, 19. 171. 14. 13. 121. 14. 15. 88. 15. 11. 99. 18. 11. 70.
19. 20. 53. 20. 3. 464. 20. 12. 327. 20. 16. 301. 21. 11. 106. 28. 38. 216. 28.
30. 216. 32. 6. 70. 33. 12. 98. 33. 19. 60. 33. 23. 142. 40. 38. 358. Leviticus.
Chap. Verse, Page, 10. 2. 160. 19. 27. 185. 20. 9. 327. 20. 27. 324. 21. 5.
185. Numbers.
6. 12. 336. 11. 31. 171. 35. 12. 357. Deutrenomie.
6. 13. 27. 8. 10. 213. 11. 12. 349. 13. 6. 301. 14. 1. 185. 17. 17. 415. 18.
11. 324. 28. 6. 118. 28. 12. 390. 28. 15. 332. 28. 31. 395. 28. 25. 463. 28.
35. 261. 28. 59. 169. 28. 67. 395. 32. 6, 21. 287. 32. 42. 157. 34. 8. 318.
Joshua.
Chap. Verse, Page, 6. 7. 180. 7. 19. 278. Judges.
Chap. Verse, Page, 6. 1, 7. 137. 9. 15. 355. 20. 18. 178. Ruth.
1. 21. 41. 1 Samuel.
Chap. Verse, Page, 1. 12. 324. 1. 13. 88. 2. 9. 430. 2. 30. 328. 4. 18. 179.
4. 20. 94. 7. 6. 465. 9. 20. 95. 16. 5. 54. 16. 14. 139. 20. 8. 293. 21. 4. 58.
25. 11. 208. 25. 16. 112. 25. 25. 94. 25. 25. 287. 28. 15. 403. 2 Samuel.
Chap. Verse, Page, 1. 21. 333. 1. 11. 180. 3. 31. 180. 7. 14. 250. 10. 4. 184.
11. 25. 158. 12. 9. 56. 12. 7, 8. 110. 14. 2. 376. 14. 22. 71. 14. 31. 178. 16.
15. 328. 18. 18. 413. 18. 33. 427. 24. 4. 226. 24. 14. 125, 294. 1 Kings.
Chap. Verse, Page, 5. 4. 81. 11. 14. 81. 15. 5. 216. 18. 17. 427. 18. 46. 125.
19. 4. 293, 449. 21. 5. 230. 21. 13. 73. 21. 25. 101, 273. 22. 19. 79. 2 Kings.
Chap. Verse, Page, 3. 14. 94. 5. 25. 87. 5. 18. 189. 8. 11. 308. 8. 46. 66. 9.
13. 87. 18. 5. 101. 19. 4. 62, 391. 23. 5. 360. 23. 25. 101. 1 Chronicles.
Chap. Verse, Page, 21. 1. 154. 29. 14. 208. 2 Chronicles.
6. 13. 70. 28. 22. 230. 30. 18, 19. 58. 35. 2. 376. Ezra.
4. 6. 82. Nehemiah.
1. 4. 308. 2. 18. 178. 3. 2. 151. 13. 26. 101. Ester.
5. 6. 146. 6. 2. 125. Job.
Chap. Verse, Page, 5. 7. 392. 6. 6. 217. 7. 13. 313. 15. 20. 427. 19. 21. 126.
21. 19. 44. 24. 13, 16. 373. 30. 23. 304, 416. 31. 1. 394. 34. 31. 460. 38. 7.
80, 365. 39. 7. 432. 41. 15. 369. 41. 25. 371. 42. 6. 264. Psalms.
Psalm. Verse, Page, 2. 1. 426. 2. 7. 200. 14. 1. 287. 15. 4. 95. 17. 14. 419,
126. 18. 43, 44. 195. 22. 9. 389, 391. 22. 1, 14. 465. 23. 4. 355. 23. 1. 301.
25. 1. 62. 26. 6. 57. 29. 2. 190. 30. 6. 467. 31. 15. 140. 32. 3. 465. 32. 4.
125. 34. 7. 112. 35. 7. 105. 36. 6. 161. 39. 2. 315. 39. 9. 211. 44. 5. 212.
46. 2. 70. 49. 1, 2. 435, 20. 48. 10. 212. 49. 20. 335 49. 11. 419^ 51. 15.
326^ 51. 4. 202^ 55. 11. 441. 55. 12. 274, 294. 58. 8. 424. 62. 10. 475. 65. 9.
161. 66. 9. 256. 68. 20. 256. 72. 5. 464. 73. 13. 134. 73. 14. 177. 77. 4. 324.
78. 2. 326. 79. 11. 431. 80. 10. 161. 81. 13. 433. 81. 14. 129. 82. 2. 44. 84.
6. 314. 91. 1. 356. 94. 4, 5 429. 94. 20. 441. 95. 6. 188. 95. 8. 408. 104. 3.
161. 103. 2. 117. 105. 8. 59. 105. 15. 128. 105. 18. 442. 105. 32. 161. 107.
40. 463. 108. 2. 378. 115. 17. 401. 116. 7. 476. 116. 15. 257. 119. 75. 294.
119. 116. 385. 121. 8. 435. 123. 3. 143. 124. 3. 233. 126. 1. 148. 139. 2. 435.
139. 7. 143. 139. 14, 15. 390. 141. 2. 6^. 141. 7. 257. 145. 16. 390. 148. 8.
172. Proverbs.
Chap. Ver. Page 1. 27. 152. 2. 4. 453. 4. 15. 33. 6. 13. 2. 7. 14. 61. 7. 15.
60. 8. 6. 326. 10. 4, 22. 120. 10. 24. 467. 11. 4. 418. 12. 10. 272. 13. 12.
386. 15. 2. 325. 17. 17. 305. 18. 1. 452. 18. 14. 249. 25. 20. 147, 444. 25. 3,
25. 240. 27. 19. 100. 28. 14. 468. 29. 27. 27. 30. 4. 171. 30. 8. 43, 292. 31.
8, 9. 326. Ecclesiastes.
2. 2. 308. 3. 1. 145. 3. 7. 320. 4. 1, 2. 449. 6. 4. 423. 7. 14. 294. 8. 6.
149. 9. 4. 241. 9. 10. 403. 9. 12. 149. 10. 19. 39. 11. 2. 317. 11. 9. 280. 12.
2. 348. 12. 5. 416. 12. 11. 296. Canticles.
2. 4. 146. 8. 6. 161. Isaiah.
1. 10. 58. 2. 9. 21. 2. 12. 329. 3. 7. 415. 4. 5. 358. 5. 2. 385. 5. 2, 5.
112. 5. 25. 124. 7. 2. 305. 8. 17. 445. 8. 19. 324, 325. 8. 21. 132. 9. 2. 355,
348 9. 12. 124. 14. 22, 23. 402. 15. 2. 183. 20. 3. 318. 22. 4. 321. 22. 12.
183, 185. 22. 12, 13. 51. 25. 6. 146. 26. 4. 416 26. 3. 478. 27. 1. 374. 27. 1,
7, 8. 141. 27. 8. 250. 28. 15. 470. 29. 14. 27. 30. 26. 353. 31. 8. 157. 33. 8,
9. 179. 37. 1. 181. 37. 36. 260. 38. 14. 249. 40. 27. 459. 41. 23. 292. 45. 7.
1^6. 47. 9. 319. 49. 1. 98. 50. 10. 353, 461. 51. 19. 304. 52. 14. 314. 53. 10.
118. 56. 12. 470. 57. 2. 404. 57. 20. 425. 57. 21. 354. 58. 1. 315. 59. 1. 125.
60. 14. 194. 60. 17. 434. 62. 1, 6, 7. 232. 65. 16. 392. 66. 3. 467. 66. 8.
391. Jeremiah.
4. 22. 287. 7. 12. 212. 7. 29. 183. 8. 1. 417. 8. 5. 230. 8. 9. 290. 8. 15.
385. 9. 17, 18, 20. 376. 10. 23. 311. 12. 1. 166. 15. 7. 317. 16. 6. 183. 20.
14, 15. 333. 22. 28. 73. 23. 13. 217. 25. 27. 157. 29. 22, 23. 28^. 31. 15.
423. 36. 24. 181. 39. 18. 257. 41. 6. 315. 45. 5. 257. 49. 7. 203. 49. 31. 473.
50. 20. 345. Lamentations.
2. 10. 318. 2. 19. 445. 2. 14. 217. 3. 7, 9. 461. 3. 44. 62. 3. 51. 393. 4. 7,
8. 313. 4. 9. 158. 4. 16. 142. 4. 21. 280. Ezekiel.
1. 3. 125. 13. 14. 217. 16. 4, 5. 397. 21. 7. 465. 24. 17. 183. 26. 20. 413.
29. 18. 184. 30. 2. 377. 37. 1. 125. 37. 13. 390. Daniel.
2. 3. 165. 4. 4. 473. 5. 23. 256. 9. 17. 142. 10. 2. 308 12. 2. 401. 12. 4.
91. Hosea.
2. 15. 462. 6. 9. 446. 7. 9. 187. 8. 4. 87. 8. 8. 73. 9. 6. 313. 12. 4. 232.
Joel.
Chap. Ver. Page 2. 2. 347. 2. 13. 180. Amos.
3. 6. 209. 4. 6, 7. 476. 5. 13. 320. 5. 16. 376. 6. 3. 470. Obadiah.
0 12. 307, 329. Jonah.
3. 6. 264. 4. 4. 87. Micah.
1. 16. 183, 185. 7. 3. 453. 7. 18. 99. Nahum.
2. 12. 36. 3. 6. 304. Habakkuk.
1. 6, 2. 166, 360. 2. 2. 201. Zechariah.
1. 10. 191. 2. 5. 112. 4. 10. 91. 11. 4. 71. 12. 10. 168, 393. 14. 21. 174.
Malachi.
Chap. Ver. Page 3. 9. 325. 4. 2. 384. 3. 13, 14. 134, 226. 3. 16. 225. Matthew,
Chap. Ver. Page 3. 17. 86. 4. 9. 107. 4. 16. 348. 5. 1. 325. 6. 33. 46. 7. 23.
314. 8. 27. 171. 8. 29. 90. 9. 13. 181. 9. 23. 379. 10. 30. 116. 11. 22. 264.
12. 36. 345. 13. 44. 454. 16. 25. 242. 16. 26. 243. 16. 22, 23. 283. 18. 10.
80. 20. 15. 207. 22. 13. 355. 23. 4. 453. 25. 36. 306. 26. 24. 409. 26. 38.
442. 27. 38, 46. 340. Luke.
1. 6. 68. 1. 10. 64. 1. 19. 81. 2. 37. 317. 4. 13. 224. 10. 30. 301. 12. 19.
474. 12. 20. 396. 13. 1. 173. 14. 12, 13. 50^ 15. 7. 311. 17. 27. 69. 18. 31.
402. 19. 41. 393. 19. 42. 149. 21. 34. 173. 22. 44^ 232. 23. 24. 108. 24. 53.
317. John.
1. 11. 313. 1 16. 239. 1. 20. 356. 2. 4. 146. 3. 16. 335, 355. 3. 19. 373. 3.
21. 364. 6. 26. 110. 7. 39. 223. 8. 44. 155. 9. 2. 236. 10. 3. 97, 98. 10. 35.
137. 11. 35. 40^. 11. 55. 54. 12. 28. 86. 13. 2. 154. 18. 11. 294. 20. 15. 199.
Acts.
Chap. Ver. Page 1. 15. 212. 4. 28. 125. 4. 30. 124. 5. 3. 154. 5. 10. ^96. 10.
25. 192. 12. 23. 260. 13. 10. 84. 13. 33. 200. 14. 13. 182. 16. 31. 113. 16.
25. 431. 17. 30. 351. 20. 24. 448, 244. 20. 31. 317. 22. 23. 316. 27. 33. 318.
28. 3. 173. Romans.
3. 4. 202. 5. 3. 295 5. 14. 398 7. 9. 2. 11. 20. 468. 12. 14. 331. 14. 6. 350.
15. 30: 382. 16. 18. 96* 1 Corinthians.
6. 20. 325. 7. 5. 58. 7. 30. 150. 10. 13. 141, 462. 10. 16. 117. 11. 7. 362.
13. 12. 394. 14. 24, 25. 195. 15. 8. 422. 2 Corinthians.
3. 6. 180. 5. 1. 420. 5. 4. 448. 4. 16. 255. 4. 17. 327. 6. 10. 295. 7. 10.
311. 7. 13. 97. 12. 2. 405. 12. 10. 408. 14. 13. 2. Galatians.
2. 11, 14. 133. 4. 5. 223. 4. 13.14. 248. 5. 12. 429. 6. 1. 67. 6. 14. 408.
Ephesians.
1. 21. 80. 2. 2. 153, 176. 2. 12. 176. 6. 12, 12. 155, 175. 6. 18. 75. 6. 19.
326. 5. 15. 332. 5. 8. 347. Philippians.
1. 24. 450. 2. 5. 100. 4. 5. 151. Colossians.
1. 24. 408. 3. 11. 437. 1 Thessalonians.
5. 3. 477. 5. 6. 394. 5. 17. 75. 5. 18. 213. 1 Timothy.
6. 1. 439. 6. 6. 203, 6. 7. 201. 6. 17. 206. 2 Timothy.
2. 26. 95, 153.175. Philemon.
0. 12. 176. Hebrews.
1. 5. 80. 3. 12. 71. 1. 14. 81. 1. 7. 161. 3. 19. 408. 9. 8. 223. 10. 14. 25.
10. 31. 126. 11. 7. 468. 11. 36. 432. 12. 5. 186. 12. 16. 242. 13. 3. 307. 13.
5. 267. James.
Chap. Ver. Page 1. 27. 306. 5. 13, 14. 249. 1 Peter.
4. 14. 214. 4. 19. 140. 2 Peter.
1. 4. 100. 5. 8. 93. 1 John.
1. 5. 353. 2. 1. 67. 3. 2. 394. 3. 9. 67. 4. 18. 467. Jude.
0 6. 89. 0 15. 432. Revelation.
2. 10. 155. 3. 9. 194. 3. 2. 31. 6. 10. 140. 6. 9* 10. 405. 9. 6. 451. 14. 13.
400. 16. 9. 249. 18. 8. 174. 18. 22. 365. 22. 8. 193.

FINIS.

