THE EXCELLENCY OF THE Protestant Faith, AS TO IT IS Objects and Supports. IN A
SERMON Preached November 5th, 1689. By T. CRVSO.

PSALM 18.31. For who is God save the Lord? Or who is a Rock save our God?

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for John Salusbury, at the Rising Sun, near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, 1689.

THE PREFACE.
THough the Judaical Observation of Times (such as their Anniversary Feasts of
the Passover, Pentecost, Galat. 4.10.
and Tabernacles were) be forbidden to the Gospel Church, and no Day (excepting
the first of the Week) has now any stated Holiness in it more than another,
yet an occasional Commemoration of Judgments and Mercies upon those Days,
which God himself has signalized; may be an useful means to fasten a durable
Impression of both upon us, as well as to transmit the most Effectual Notice of
God's wonderful Works to following Ages. As it is not fit that we should cease
to humble our selves under the Hand of God, so soon as any Calamity is removed,
so on the other side, we should not leave off to rejoice in his Goodness,
immediately after it has passed before us. That which is done in one
Generation, Psalm. 102.18.
must be written for the Generation to come, and the People which shall be
created, shall praise the Lord.

It is too evident, by the Infidelity which has reigned among us, that we in
this Nation had forgotten the God of our Fathers, and worn out the sense of
former Deliverances; God's rescuing of them heretofore out of a danger which
they saw not, was little thought of for our own Encouragement, in the midst of
Dangers which we did see; the Mercy was almost buried in the Graves of those
who primarily received it; and though we still shared in its happy
Consequences, yet it scarcely infused any more Life into our Faith, than if the
remembrance of it had heen quite extinct. We looked forward so much upon the
Miseries which we had in prospect, that there were few, Psalm. 77.5.
who looked back upon the days of old, or that considered the years of Ancient
times.

Notwithstanding this, and other sad Tokens which were upon us, of our great
Unmindfulness of God, (who had been a Known and a Tried Refuge) he was pleased
very seasonably now again to make bare his Arm in our own time, and to put a
new Song into our Mouths, which contains in it more matter of thankful
Admiration, than the former did; so that we seem to have the Portion of Jacob,
Genesis 49.26.
for our Blessings have prevailed above the Blessings of our Progenitors, and
though our shameful degeneracy forbids us to think, that we are better than our
Fathers (when indeed we are so notoriously worse) yet we must say, that God
has appeared more eminently for us, than he did for them. That which we have
seen, exceeds what we have heard, and even in this case, the Younger
Deliverance will claim a pre-eminence above the Elder. I speak not this, as if
one must therefore supplant, or blot out the memory of the other, for they both
agree, and consist very well together; and the same day having two such
remarkable Seals fixed upon it by Providence, it will surely be very Famous to
all our Posterities, as long as the Protestant Name endures in England, which I
hope will be, as long as the World it self remains. I doubt not, but that they
who sincerely value either of these, will triumph in them both; and therefore
if there be any who secretly repine at this last, it is no uncharitable
imagination to suppose, that they are really displeased with the first also;
for the distance of Fourscore and Three Years between them is not so
considerable as the Affinity of their Nature.

I must add to obviate the Exceptions of Strangers or Enemies, that this
Discourse had never been made more public, than it was first made by
Preaching, if the Authors intentions could have stood against the desires of
the Hearers; and therefore the exposing of it thus to common view, which was
never framed with any such design, must be laid at their door, and not at mine.
If it might but fall into the hands of as favorable Readers, and be attended
with a Blessing from Heaven in the perusal, I should however cheerfully expect,
that its numerous Imperfections would in Charity be overlookt, and the main
Truths entertained with some good success; they that neglect the Treasure which
is in Earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7.
and only look with a censorious Eye to the drossy part, are really most
injurious to themselves, and will lose the benefit of far better and more
valuable Performances, than this, or any of mine can be.

I conclude with a special Request to those, who so earnestly entreated this
from me, that they would follow it with their Prayers to God, that it may go
forth in his Name, and clothed with a Divine Power, so as not to return void
or empty to him that sends it; and that my whole Service in the Ministry
committed to me may be prosperous to those that place themselves under it,
which will he the Glory and Joy of

The least of God's Saints, and Unworthiest of his Messengers, T. C.
November. 9. 1689
THE EXCELLENCY OF THE PROTESTANT FAITH, AS TO IT IS Objects and Supports.
DEUTERON. xxxii. 31. For their Rock is not as our Rock, even our Enemies
themselves being Judges.


THIS Dying Song of Moses (whereof the Words now mentioned are a part) is not
only Historical, but Prophetical, containing some hints both of God's past and
future Dispensations toward the Israelites. His main scope and design in all,
is to show, that God was not to be blamed for his dealing with them, but they
were to be condemned for revolting from him: And therefore whatsoever Blessings
they lost, or Severities they felt, they must look upon their own Sin as the
Cause and Reason of it. To this purpose, Moses starts the Question in the words
going before the Text, Ver. 30.
How should One chase a Thousand, and Two put Ten Thousand to flight, except
their Rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up? This seems to be a
strange and surprising Contradiction to what God had promised by the same Moses
before; Levit. 26.8.
Five of you shall chase an Hundred, and an Hundred of you shall put Ten
Thousand to flight; (which was repeated, as to the substance of it, Josh. 23.10.
by his Successor Joshua, when he called the People together, toward the close
of his Government.) They might therefore now wonder to hear, that One of their
Adversaries should chase a Thousand of Them; though indeed the threatening grew
more familiar to them afterward; for the Prophet tells them, One Thousand
shall flee at the rebuke of One; Isa. 30.17.
at the rebuke of Five shall you stee, till you are left as a Beacon upon the
top of a Mountain, etc. But this Riddle is easily resolved; the Promise before
spoken of, was upon the supposition of their Obedience; and consequently when
they sold themselves by their Iniquities (which is laid to their charge, chap.
50.1.
) it might well be expected that their Rock should sell them in a way of
Judgment, and when they withheld (or imprisoned, Romans 1.18.
like the Heathen) the Truth in Unrighteousness, they might rationally think,
that the Lord would shut them up in a state of Misery and Thraldom.

Now lest they or their Adversaries should overlook the Divine Hand in so
mavelous a change, and more especially lest their Adversaries should (who
were apt to say, as we read in this very Chapter, Our hand is high, Ver. 27.
and the Lord has not done all this) Moses adds in these words, For their Rock
is not, etc. q. d. Tho Multitudes of the Heathens should be defeated by a few
of the Israelites, it would be no strange thing, because their Idol-Gods can do
nothing at all for their protection, and on the other side, if many of the
Israelites be vanquished by a small number of the Heathen, which carries a more
astonishing appearance, it cannot be, because those Idols act for their
assistance, but because our God does withdraw that help from us, which he is
able to afford to us.

We have here in the Text it self two particulars considerable. 1. The
Preference of the true God unto all others. [Their Rock is not as our Rock.]
The Rock is a Title given to God not only in this, and the preceding Verse, but
thrice before in this Chapter; and very often in the Book of Psalms. Ver. 4.15,
18.
Rocks anciently being places of shelter which Men used to fly unto in times of
danger and distress; 1 Samuel 13.6.
and therefore Holy David calls God the Rock of his Refuge. Psalm. 94.22.
2. The Acknowledgment of this by Isreal's Adversaries. [Even our Enemies
themselves being Judges.] They that were so ready to reproach and blaspheme the
Name of God, as well as to boast and magnify themselves, yet could not deny
this. It was owned not only by their Friends and Favorers, Exodus 18.11. Josh.
2.11. Exodus 14.18. 1 Samuel 4.8.
such as Jethro was, and Rahab, but also by their worst and greatest Opposers,
such as the Egyptians, and Philistines too. So that Moses his Appeal to the
Heathens here, is much like that which God made to the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, Isa. 5.3.
and the Men of Judah in their own case, Acts 4.19.
or like that which the Apostles made to the Jewish Rulers, whether it be right
in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye.

Two things are evidently presupposed. 1. That There are no Persons in the
World, but what have some ROCK or other to be the object of their Confidence.
When Israel cast off the God of Abraham, the Fear of Isaac, and the Portion of
Jacob, they chose new Gods; they did not turn perfect Atheists, but they had
their Gods still (though poor counterfeit ones) as the Rock in whom they
trusted. So the other Barbarous Nations had their several Deities whom they
depended on for all necessary succors, as well as paid a respect and
veneration to. This is included in what the Prophet says, Micah 4.5.
All People will walk, every one in the Name of his God. Every Man is naturally
sensible, that he is not a self-sufficient being, and therefore seeks after
something without himself, to believe in. Men choose rather to exercise Faith
upon that which indeed is not God (as Moses speaks in this same Song) because
it has the Name, v. 21.
than to live absolutely without any God at all. 2. The Church and the World do
not repose their trust in the same God. Their Rock, and our Rock are different.
The People of God, and the rest of Mankind, agree no better in their
confidences, than they do in their delights, and many other things; as they do
not love the same Objects, so they do not lean upon the same. Some trust (says
the Psalmist) in Chariots, Psalm. 20.7.
and some in Horses, but we will remember the Name of the Lord our God. Many
that pretend to believe and rest upon our Rock, will be sure first to hew him
after their own fancies; they shape and fashion a God according as may please
themselves; but then it must be considered, that if Men do not take him as the
Scripture represents him, he is not the same, but another God. Many pretend a
Relyance upon him, but they make other things their supports in conjunction
with him, which is really the having of more Gods than one; Psalm. 52.2, 6.
whereas we should say with David, He only is my Rock, and my Salvation.

The principal thing to be Observed from the Words, is, Doct.
That the true Church of God is entitled to the best Rock, in the Judgment of
her very Enemies.

In the prosecuting of this, I shall endeavor to show, I. In what respects God
may be styled the Churches Rock. II. How it appears, that this Rock is better
than that of her Enemies. III. Whence it comes to pass, that it is better even
in their Judgment, who yet reject and oppose it. IV. Conclude with some
Inferences, by way of Application, especially to this day.


First of all, I am to show upon what accounts God may be styled the Churches
Rock, This shoul'd be opened distinctly under these two Heads, why is he called
a Rock in general, and why our Rock in particular.

First, I shall enquire, why God has this general Name and Character of a Rock
given to him here. Not to run into the imprudent extreme of alleging those
resemblances which are forced, or foreign to this matter, I shall only insist
upon three, which the Spirit of God himself does expressly propound to us. The
Infinite God may be very fitly set forth by a Rock, upon the account of Height,
Fixedness, and Strength.

Rock in respect of Height. Rocks are usually of an Elevated Situation above
the other adjacent parts. As this is commonly known, and need not be
laboriously proved, so the Holy Ghost does particularly refer to it in this
case. The promise to him, Isa. 33.16.
that walks Righteously, and speaks uprightly (as distinguished from the
Sinners in Zion) is, that he shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be
the Munition of Rocks. Psalm. 61.2.
Accordingly, David in the midst of his Troubles, when his Heart was
overwhelmed, cries out to God, Lead me to the Rock which is higher than I. And
elsewhere speaking of the Jews in the time of their Affliction, Psalm. 78.35.
he says, that they remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their
Redeemer. God is often described, as the Lofty one, and one that is higher than
the highest. And the Most High God is the Name whereby he is called no less
than four times within the compass of five Verses. Genesis 14.18, 19, 20, 22.
This may not only be understood of the Incomprehensibleness of God's Nature,
(who is far above our sight, and out of the reach of our thoughts) but also,
and as I conceive, principally of his Sovereignty and Dominion; for all
Creatures as they are vastly inferior, so they are perfectly subject to him.
This is a great security to the Church, that their God has every thing at his
foot, and under his absolute Command; his proceedings are unaccountable, and
his purposes uncontrollable; for he is the Supreme, and therefore (as the
Prophet speaks) we may rejoice in his Highness. Isa. 13.3.


Rock, in respect of Fixedness. Rocks are counted some of the most stable parts
of this lower Creation; and therefore when the Holy Ghost would represent a
more than ordinary storm of Divine displeasure, he says, that the Rocks are
thrown down by him; Nah. 1.6.
which implies, that they are not liable to common shakings. Our Savior tells
us of the Wise Man who built his House upon a Rock, Matthew. 7.24, 25.
and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the Winds blew and beat upon
that House, but it fell not, for it was founded upon a Rock. This shadows out
to us the firm unshaken Counsels of the Immutable God, who from Everlasting,
and to Everlasting, is free from the least Alteration either in his Being, or
Will. He does not turn, and waver to and fro, as the best and noblest of his
Creatures (witness the fall of Angels and Men) are prone of themselves to do,
but is always in one State, and of one mind. This is a mighty advantage to us
also; as himself says, Mal. 3.6.
I am the Lord, I change not, therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed. An
unchangeable God is the Author of the Churches stability, or else she had been
long ago toss't by the hand of Violence, and kicked by the foot of Pride out of
the World; Psa. 46.5.
but God is in the midst of her, and (for that reason) she shall not be moved.
His Eye and Heart which at the first were chiefly placed upon his People, can
never be taken off from them; there is no more variableness in his Affection,
than uncertainty in his duration; he may as soon be plucked out of his Throne,
as the graving of Zion be raced out of the Palms of his Hands.

Rock, upon the account of strength. When Balaam looked upon the Kenites, (a
People very well fortifyed) he took up this Parable, Number. 24.21.
Strong is thy dwelling place, and thou put thy rest in a Rock. We know,
that one of the Miracles at our Saviors Passion, was the rending of the Rocks.
Mat. 27.51.
What Instruments have force enough to enter into them? They that split and
break so many other things, still remain whole and entire themselves. This
plainly holds forth to us the Eternal Power of God, Isa. 17.10.
who is called the Rock of our strength. Omnipotence is essential to him, Psalm.
21.13.
and therefore David mentions his being exalted in his own strength, to
difference him from us, and such as we are, because all created strength is
borrowed, and separable from the Creature. How securely therefore can God bid
defiance to the poor feeble attempts of Devils and Men, who receive that
strength from him, which they exert against him! How apparently unavoidable is
it, that whosoever dashes against this Rock, must be broken! As this should put
God's Enemies in fear, (who contend with one that is infinitely mightier than
themselves) so it is a very encouraging Motive of his Peoples Trust; the
Weakness of God may much better be relied on, than Humane Power, when it is at
its utmost pitch. What is an Arm of Flesh to the Arm of the Lord? How
Invincible is he, and they that confide in him? Nothing can make any
opposition, if he think fit to prevent it, nothing can have any success, if he
resolve to blast it. He is able to do all that he desires, and to undo all that
is endeavored by any of his Adversaries.

Secondly, I am to examine, why God is called our Rock; how comes the Church to
have this peculiar propriety in him, as divided from the World. There is a
twofold Right, or foundation for this claim; God's Covenant, and our Choice;
because he has freely given himself to us, and we (if we are born from above)
have unfeignedly received him.

our Rock by Covenant: As he has engaged, and betrothed himself to us, and us
to himself for ever, Hos. 2.19.
in Righteousness, and in Judgment, in Loving kindness, and in Mercies. None
can doubt, (unless they assume more boldness to clip the Divine Prerogative,
than that of Man) but that God may communicate a distinct and separate Interest
in himself to whomsoever he pleases; and every one who knows the Scripture,
must know that God does not please to communicate any such Interest, but to his
Church only, as a Society called out of the World. The rest of Mankind, as they
have a rooted Principle of Atheism in their Hearts, and say that there is no
God, so they have indeed as little relation to him, as if there were none.
There is no General Covenant made since the fall with all the Children of Adam,
but a special Covenant of Grace with all the faithful, which conveys a new
Title to them, instead of the Old one, lost by the first Apostasy. He that was
a God to Abraham, Genesis 17.7.
and to his Natural Seed, excluding all other Nations, under the Old Testament,
is a God to his Spiritual believing Seed, excluding all other Persons
whatsoever, now under the New Testament. God is not the same to common Men, as
he is to his particular People; though he be clothed with the same Attributes,
yet he does not exercise them alike. As for the Men of the Earth, he is not
bound by promise to be their Rock, but on the contrary he is obliged by his
threatenings to be their Revenger; his Truth does not tie him to defond, but to
destroy them.

Our Rock by Choice, and voluntary acceptance. All that are Israelites indeed
have sincerely taken the Lord to be their God, and thankfully rejoice in him as
such. Jerem. 3.22.
Behold we come unto thee, (says the Church) for thou art the Lord our God.
Again, in another place, we find them making the like profession: Hos. 14.3.
We will not say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our Gods. This
Negative here implies an Affirmative; their renouncing and abandoning of false
Gods did include their embracing of the true. Such Texts are so numerous, that
it is needless to cite them. The taking of God to be our Ruler and our Portion,
our Sovereign and our Shield is the very first thing, which truly adds us to
the Church, and manifests our saving Conversion. Till we place our happiness
and our security in him, and are willing to live both under God's Government
and Protection, we are properly of the World, and walk according to its course.
Isa. 33.22.
The Lord is our King, he will save us, is (as it were) the Natural and
Primitive Language of all Returning Sinners, when they are effectually called
to be Saints. God's offering of himself to us in the Unlimited Ministry of the
Word, does not make him Ours (for he is offered to multitudes now, whom he will
not know at last) but our hearty Compliance with it; it is a mutual agreement on
both hands, which must confirm the Interest, and complete the Title. God is not
to be looked upon as our Rock, before the Spirit persuades and prevails with us
to choose him; and if we are not persuaded so to do, we are not really his
people, though we may be called by his Name.

Second thing, is to show, how it does appear, that our Rock, or the Rock which
the Church is entitled to, is better than that of our Enemies. If we compare
them a little together, we shall quickly and easily see a vast Disproportion. I
only premise, that as a long continued Ridge of Hills is sometimes reckoned by
Geographers and others, as One Mountain, so their Rock (who are and have been
the Churches greatest Enemies) though it go under that single denomination, is
indeed a Conjunction of many things, which they make their Refuge, and esteem
their safety. I shall instance in six particulars, which may be comprehended
under this General term.

Humane Head is their Rock. The degenerate Roman Church does expressly and
openly avow this; they declare themselves to be Originally headed by Peter, as
the chief of the Apostles, and their Bishop, and Founder, and now by the Pope,
as his Successor. Let us look a little into both.

Peter, though we should grant him to be Bishop of Rome (which is more than we
need to do, because no satisfying proof can be brought that ever he was there,)
yet that he had the primacy among the rest of his Brethren, the Apostles, and
that the Christian Church was founded upon him, is by no means to be allowed.
The Text which they have urged to countenance this Opinion, has been so
frequently and fully cleared, that I think they can scarcely abuse it to do
them any further service. Matthew. 16.18.
Thou art Peter, and on this Rock will I build my Church. The case in short was
this; v. 16.
Peter a little before had made a good confession, Thou art Christ, the Son of
the Living God; Christ requites him by saying also to him, Thou art Peter; q.
d. Thou art fitly called so, ( Peter signifying a Rock, or Stone: John 1.42.
) And have made good this Character by the stedfastness of thy Faith in me;
then he adds, (not upon thee Peter, but) upon this Rock will I build my Church;
i. e. upon this Truth which thou have confess't, or upon my self, who am the
matter and substance of it. Certainly, if Peter were to have had so great a
pre-eminence beyond his Fellows, our Lord would not have placed them all
equally upon twelve Thrones, Matthew. 19.28.
which utterly shuts out the pretense of exalting Peter's Chair above the rest.
Besides this, it deserves to be remark't, that none of the Apostles (excepting
the Son of Perdition, whose Charge was taken by another) fell so foulely, as
Peter did; none denied and abjured their Master, but only he; as if God had
resolved to discourage the design of advancing him to any such Headship over
the Church, as the Papists would put upon him. He that seemed to be a Pillar,
Galat. 2.9.
was but left a while to himself, and he seemed like a reed shaken with the
wind.

Pope, the present visible Head of the Roman Church, his Succession to Peter in
that Seat can never be clearly made out, and if it could, their case would not
be much the better. We know very well, what abominable Monsters have possessed
both the place and the power, as even their own Historians have reported; as
Rome is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, Revel. 11.8.
so that Chair has been literally filled with unclean Sodomites, and Egyptian
Sorcerers; as their Antichristian Church is often described by the Beast, so
the Heads of it have been more properly Brutes than Men; and while they have
lifted up themselves above all that is called God, they have carried the
notorious mark and Image of the Devil. The greatest Deceivers that ever
appeared in the World, have been their Men of Infullibility, and such as have
departed furthest from the Truth, have been their Unerring Guides. If this Rock
of theirs, be as our Rock, let all that have the least part of an Eye to see,
determine; 1 Cor. 10.4.
our Rock is Christ, (as the Rock of the Jewish Believers was) a Rock which no
Darts of Temptation could pierce, and a Rock which stands fast for ever; the
Holy one of God, and the King Eternal.

Unwritten Traditions are their Rock, and the Word of God is ours. What
comparison is there between these two? How many things have our Enemies
delivered to the World as Oracles, which have been grossly false and fabulous!
And how doubtful and uncertain must the best be, if we consider how liable they
were to be altered and depraved, either through the remisness or treachery of
those into whose hands they came! How hardly can we credit a report in our own
times, after it has been propagated from one to another, unless we trace it to
the Spring! How many times are we deluded and mistaken in things which are but
of Yesterday! How much more when Traditions are pretended of so great
Antiquity! But indeed, it is a great temptation to Men to leave the Word of God,
and seek out other supports, when they find that the Word is against them; if
the Bible could be suborned as a positive Witness in their Cause, they would
not fly to these Unscriptural Sanctuaries; they are forced (as it were) to say
something of this kind, that they may not be speechless. How much safer and
happier are we therefore, who are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets! We are able to say with David, Ephesians. 2.20.
that we hope in the Word; and we believe as the Sacred Canon directs us to
believe, but no otherwise. Our Faith does not lean upon the Words of Men, but
the Inspired Writings of those that came from God; which the Apostle Peter
commends as more sure than a voice from Heaven. 2 Pet. 1.18, 19.


Thirdly, Images, Relics, and the Consecrated Elements are their Rock. (I
join all these together, as having some affinity one to another, and being of
equal signification, i.e. of none at all.) What confidence do the Romanists
place in Images, as if those lifeless representations (like the shadow of Peter
passing by) could perform extraordinary matters! Acts 5.15.
A piece of folly and stupidity, which cannot be better described, than in the
words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 115.8.
They that make them, are like unto them, and so is every one that trusts in
them. What strange expectations have they from the supposed Virtue of their
multiplied Relics, as if every little fragment that once belonged to a Saint,
2 King 13.21.
would (like the dead bones of Elisha) revive others with a Touch! Tho, if we
were to contend with them about these, (as the Archangel did with the Devil
about the Body of Moses) we should find that the far greater part of them must
needs be Counterfeits. What Mighty things will they fancy to be done by the
presence of the Host, which they carry often in Procession, as if they did
intend to match the Idolatrous Israelites exactly, Exodus 32.1.
by having Gods which should go before them! How unworthy are all these things
to be compared with our Rock, with God (I mean) whose similitude none ever saw,
or with Christ, the express and substantial Image of his Fathers Person! How
unfit are they to be laid in the balance with a Living God, and a Glorified
Redeemer!

Indulgences and Pardons are another of their Rocks. Indeed, these are some of
the chief Excrements of the Roman Church, wherein (like Samson's hair) they
think that their great strength lies. For after they have debaucht themselves
never so much, and stained their hands never so deeply (perhaps) in blood, they
fancy that they may (with Pilate) wash them by this means, and appear fair and
unspotted in God's sight; As if there could be no condemnation to those that
have received the Priests Absolution, or as if they might confidently alter
those triumphant words of the Apostle, Romans 8.33.
and say, Who shall lay any thing to our charge? It is the Vicar of Christ that
justifies us. Who knows not, that they trust to the Key of David hanging at the
Pope's Girdle, which shall open Heaven to them, and shut Hell against them,
notwithstanding all the Wickedness of their foregoing Lives? This is the Rock,
which all the profligate Members of that Communion swim to, and which they are
fatally Shipwrackt by; multitudes purchase a standing upon this dangerous and
deceitful bottom, not only with the sacrifice of their Estates, but the loss of
their Souls too. We Protestants on the contrary, though we are far from
imagining that we have no sin, yet we place all our hopes in Divine
Forgiveness; believing that it is to no purpose for Men to remit our sins, so
long as God retains them. Isa. 55.1.
Our free pardon without Money and without Price, is more effectual than that
which they buy so dear.

Intercessions of Angels and Saints are another Rock which they build much
upon. They persuade themselves, that these Heavenly Courtiers have their King's
Ear in every case, and that they are as attentive in listening to us, as
successful in pleading with God; more especially, the Virgin Mary, (their Queen
of Heaven) invested by them with greater Authority than all the rest, so that
she need not to use the humble Style of entreating, but may take upon her to
command her Son. But surely, if we could suppose that the Blessed Virgin in
that perfect and sinless state above, could be guilty of such presumption, Our
Exalted Savior might with more reason say to her there, John 2.4.
as he did at the Marriage in Cana (when she only intimated to him, that they
had no Wine, without so much as making any explicit request for him to provide
it) Woman, what have I to do with thee? Is not she, and all the other Agents
employed by that Church, perfectly discarded by that Text, which mentioning the
relief that we have, if any man sin, 1 John 2.1.
tells us only of an Advocate (which shows, that there is but one) with the
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous? Such an Advocate for our Persons, as that
he is also the Propitiation for our sins, which they that are of Cephas (I
mean, the Roman Faction) cannot say concerning him, or any Creature whatsoever.
Now, who can be so fit to intercede for us, Romans 8.34.
as he that dyed for us? Who so worthy to plead our Cause, as he that paid our
Debt? Who best deserves to be always spoken to by us, John 11.42.
but he, whom we know that God always hears? Who so likely to prevail in
mediating with God, as he that from Eternity rejoyc't before him? What
comparison is there between Jesus Christ, and the highest Angels, or the best
of Saints? Between an Omniscient High Priest, Eccles. 9.5.
and those that know not any thing of our Affairs below?

Merit of good Works is a principal Rock which our Enemies have chosen to
themselves. This (like the rich Man's Wealth) is their strong Tower, and the
high Wall to their own conceit. They look upon God as their Debtor, and go to
him (as he in the parable did to his fellow Servant) crying, Matthew. 18.28.
Pay me what thou owe; scorning to receive that as a Gift, which they think
they may demand as Wages. I need not insist here, (though it is most undeniably
true) that the Works which they are so confident of meriting by, are not really
good, because a sound and lively Faith is not the root of them; I say, I need
not make use of this Argument against them here, for though we do believe with
our hearts, and perform all Acts of Obedience from that principle, Ephesians. 2.8.
yet we are saved by Grace, and that is the surest foundation to raise our hopes
upon. Mercy will be found the best and strongest plea in the day of Judgment;
and those wretched drowning Sinners, that catch hold of any other twigs, shall
sink and perish Everlastingly. Who can say, that his own Righteousness is equal
with the Righteousness of God, which the true Protestant desires (like Paul) to
be found in? Philip. 3.9.
Who can compare his own filthy Rags (which are no better than Tinder, Revel.
7.14.
if the Fire of God's Wrath should fall upon them) to Robes washed white in the
Blood of the Lamb? And therefore, as Balaam, after he had spent a great deal of
time and pains, with hopes of cursing Israel, was constrained at last to bless
them; so Bellarmine (a great Cardinal, and celebrated Author in the Church of
Rome) when he had used abundance of subtilty in defending the Doctrine of
Merit, he does in a manner, revoke all, by concluding, [ Propter incertitudinem
propriae Justitiae, and periculum Inanis gloriae, tutissimum est fiduciam totam
in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate reponere.] Because of the uncertainty
of a personal Righteousness, and the danger of vain glory, it is the securest
course to put our whole trust in the Mercy and goodness of God alone. This
leads me to

Third thing, which is to show, whence it comes to pass, that even our Enemies
judge our Rock to be better than our own. Briefly, there may be these three
grounds and reasons of it.

mighty Evidence in some Truths, which cannot be resisted by Men of the most
corrupt minds. The Light of Nature is not so far put out in the vilest Persons,
but that they do see some of the Differences between good and evil. Indeed the
deep Mysteries of the Gospel are such as cannot be known by Natural Men, 1 Cor.
2.14.
but there are other Truths so manifest and notorious, that they cannot easily
be ignorant of them; it is almost impossible to hide them from their
understandings, and Conviction breaks in against their Wills. It may be in
their power to deny many things, which it is not in their power to disbelieve;
their Tongues perhaps may speak in opposition to that, which their Judgments do
necessarily assent to; as the Devil may be the Author of Atheistical
Suggestions to others, though he cannot doubt of the being of God himself. I
question not, but that our Enemies would judge their Rock to be better than
ours, if they could bring their thoughts, as well as their Words, so much under
their own Command; therefore we must conclude, that they think thus, because
they are not able to avoid it by thinking otherwise

Signal Rebukes of Providence do many times make this Truth more plain to our
Enemies, of the Incomparable Excellency of our Rock. Then it becomes as legible
to them, as the Handwriting upon the Wall to Belshazzar; and they discern it as
clearly, Exodus 8.19.
as Pharaohs Magicians did the finger of God, when they could no longer imitate
the miraculous Works of Moses by their Enchantments. If Dagon cannot stand
before the Ark of the Lord, 1 Samuel 5.2.
even in the house of Dagon, but like a poor helpless God be driven of from his
own dunghill, it must needs in some measure open the eyes of those that are most
in love with darkness. When God frustrates the most probable tokens of the
Liars, and turns the wisest counsels into foolishness: When he brings his
wheel on a sudden over their necks, that are trampling upon others, and makes
Men's own contrivances and preparations most pernicious and fatal to
themselves: When Enemies that were wont to be attended with the strangest
successes, fall afterward under as surprising disappointments, and the stream
of prosperity which has carried all before them, runs as strong against them:
This will certainly make them reflect (though Satan bend all his cunning to
stiste such Reflections) upon the weakness of the Rock which they trust in.
There are some appearances of God in all his works: he does nothing, but what
declares the glory of the Agent: nevertheless there are particular
dispensations also toward the Enemies of the Church, Psalm. 9.16.
wherein the Lord is eminently known by the Judgments which he executes.

Terrors of God are a Demonstration of this truth sometimes to Adversaries,
even in the midst of their prosperity. I do not think that Babylon, even while
she sits as a Queen, can fortify her Children against inward Convulsions, or
that they who seem above the fears of any visible disturbance, are therefore
always perfectly at ease; the Worm of Conscience may be biting, while their
Gourd is flourishing; the Spirits of Isreal's troublers may be troubled, and
when their voice to others is as the roaring of a Lion. God may speak more
dreadfully in his Wrath to them. Psalm. 2.5.
He who can touch the Mountains, so as to make them smoke, can make the Pillars
of the Antichristian Kingdom tremble, and their Hearts astonished at his
reproof. This way of God's dealing with the minds of Men, is worse than the
heaviest strokes of Providence falling upon their outward concerns; it is many
times indeed industriously covered and dissembled by those that feel it (who
know how to laugh, when they have more cause to howl) but it cannot be totally
escaped, nor quietly endured. It will unsettle Men from their lees, and beget a
sense of God's excellent greatness, and (it may be) will extort such an
acknowledgment also, as it did from lofty Nebuchadnezar at the beginning of his
Reign, Dan. 2.47.
that our God is the God of Gods. If God do work upon the Souls of Enemies, as
he is able to do, (without letting loose his visible hand against them) he can
bring every knee to bow, and every tongue to confess.

If any should now ask, Q.
Why Our Enemies cleave to their Rock still, seeing they must be secretly
convinced, that our Rock is better, the Answer is easy.

First, A. 1.
Common Convictions (such as they at any time lie under) are very weak and
ineffectual, as to the altering of Men's state and customary practice. The mere
speculative knowledge of Divine Truths has but small influence in producing a
Reformation, when they are not deeply imprinted by the Spirit of God, and backed
with an Holy experience. No man (says our Savior) having drunk old Wine, Luke
5.39.
desires new; but the new may still satisfy those that never had any more
than a Notion of the goodness of the Old. 1 Pet. 2.2.3.
Those Spiritual tastes and relishes which Believers have, incline them to a
love of the Word, and keep them from following after Fables.

Pride of their Hearts will not suffer them to destroy, what they have been
building up for so many hundreds of Years. They must pull down the whole frame
of their Church, if they entertain any thoughts of a new foundation. They must
abandon all that they have been fiercely contending for so long, if they
espouse our Rock, and quit their own. It will not be enough to give up a few
less material points, but their main principles must be renounced also. And
this is too hard a saying for those who have puff't up themselves with a vain
Opinion, that they cannot err.

Worldly Interest will hinder such a change. For, they must then strip
themselves of all that pomp and grandeur, and lay aside all those cunning
Artifices of robbing the People to increase their Churches Treasure, which
recommends that Religion so much to the Lusts of Men. They know not how to
sacrifice the pleasure of Domination, or to leave that profitable Trade of the
Merchandise of Souls, which they must do, if they make choice of our God, and
be reconciled to our Religion. Great Possessions and Honors do very often,
even in lesser cases, prejudice Men against the Doctrine of the Gospel.

Consciences are Judicially seared; as the Apostle Paul foretold of these Grand
Apostates in the latter times. 1 Timothy 4.2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
They are under strong delusions (as the same Person speaks of them elsewhere)
by the Righteous Judgment of God, who, because they have left the truth, has
left them to themselves. Perhaps God may have a Remnant of People, that are yet
in Babylon, whom he will call out from thence before the time of her final
destruction; but as to the Generality, and main body of that Church (and more
especially, the Learned Men in it) they seem to be delivered over to a
reprobate mind; and the hardness of their hearts is become both their sin and
their punishment too. So hopeless an Attempt is that of Healing those whom God
has determined to cut off.

last place, I am to Apply all this, with some relation to the Day. Several
things may be Inferred from the foregoing Discourse, which are very proper to
be considered by us now.

Enemies themselves cannot but judge, that their Rock is not as our Rock, then
we have a Witness for us in their own bosoms, that our Separation from them was
just and necessary. They cannot blame or censure the Reformed Churches that
have forsaken their Communion, without some inward check upon their Spirits.
When they call us Heretics, and give us all the other opprobrious Names they
can invent, it is scarcely possible that they should forbear to think, (as Saul
said to David) that we are more righteous than they; and therefore their
contradicting and blaspheming (like those malicious Jews) is the greater sin.
Acts 13.45.
As Pilate, even when he condemned Christ, did declare him innocent and
faultless, so while our Adversaries revile us, and thunder out their
Excommunications against us, there is still something within them, which gives
sentence for us. How little then is the evil which they speak, to be regarded,
when their own Hearts tell them, that they lie in speaking it!

pray in Faith for their Confusion: (The Scripture encouraging us to expect
this, much more than their Conversion.) Their Rock is but a Quick-sand which
will swallow them up, or as a Millstone to drown them, Instead of a foundation
to bear them. What therefore should make us afraid of using the Psalmist's
words, Psalm. 97.7.
with the same hope that was in him of their accomplishment! Confounded be all
they that serve graven Images, that boast themselves of Idols. What should make
us doubt, but that the doom denounc't by the Prophet will be executed on their
Gods! Jerem. 51.18.
They are vanity, the work of Errors; in the time of their visitation they
shall perish. During the time of God's forbearance, and of the patience of
Jesus Christ, we should be praying, that this time of visitation may be
hastened, as Men who are assured, that their fall shall be great, and that
after it they shall never rise more. Romans 11.2.
Let all that make Intercession against Babylon (as Elias did against Israel)
believe this firmly, that the Golden Cup which is now in her hand full of
abominable filthiness, shall run over at last with Divine fury.

foolishly and unjustly the successes of God's Enemies are at any time
attributed to their own Rock. This has been their practice often; as the
Philistines offered a great Sacrifice to Dagon their God, Judge. 16.23, 24.
when they had gotten Sampson in their hands. So the Adherents of Antichrist
have praised their Gods of Gold and Silver, of Wood and Stone, and made their
acknowledgment to their several Imaginary Saints, when they have prosper'd in
any of their Designs. But how much are they mistaken and deluded in all this!
How do they offend (like the Caldaeans of old) in imputing this power to their
God, which they receive from ours! Habac. 1.11.
We read of the Holy City being given to the (Popish), Revel. 11.2.
Gentiles to tread under foot for a limited time; now who can give it to them,
besides the Lord of all, who does it, when he pleases, in order to wise and
holy ends? An Idol, which is nothing in the World, 1 Corinthians. 8.4.
( i.e. has no efficacy or virtue) is worthy only to inhabit the praises of
such as the horse and mule, which have no understanding.

so much better than theirs, how carefully should we walk before him, that he
may continue to be Ours! That we may not be dispossessed of our Interest in him,
nor broken off from our Relation to him. The same God who has turned our
Captivity from us, is able to bring it back again; and he that has set our
feet in a large place, can yet shut us up into the hands of our Enemies. It Is
easy with God to undo all that he has done, if we abuse his Mercy by
groundless presumption, and wilful impenitency. The greatest Judgments do
sometimes times come after the greatest deliverances. Jude 5.
The Lord having saved the People out of the Land of Egypt, afterward destroyed
them that believed not. It Is very possible, Josh. 23.15.
that God may bring all evil things upon the same Persons, upon whom all good
things have come. Our Mountain does not stand so strong, but that our sins may
breed an Earthquake to unsettle and remove it. No humane Policy or Power can
protect us, if our God should depart from us. We read, that the Army of the
Syrians came with a small Company of Men against the Israelites, 2 Chro. 24.24.
and the Lord delivered a very great Host into their band, because they had
forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers. And if these Nations should so lose
their God after such amazing Instances of his Presence with them, how dismal
would their condition be! If God should be provoked to turn away his wrath from
our Adversaries, Prove. 24.18.
and pour it out afresh upon us, to whom should we flee for help? If our Rock
should sell us, who of our Confederate Neighbors is able to Redeem us?

the Glory due unto his Name for the TWO Great Salvations which This Day brings
to our remembrance; I mean, That which was wrought for our Forefathers so many
years ago, and That which was wrought for us but One year since. God has
honored this Day with a Double Mercy, let us honor God by yielding to him a
Double Sacrifice of Praise; binding it, as with a twisted Cord to the Horns of
the Altar. Psalm. 118.27.
Let us raise a Pillar of thankfulness with such a lasting Inscription, as
neither Time, nor any other Hands may ever be able to deface. Both our Fore
fathers and we were delivered from the same Enemies, though not strictly from the
very same methods of Conspiracy; formerly they aimed at the destruction of the
Lawgivers by one blow, but lately at the subversion of the Laws themselves by
more gradual measures; in the Powder Treason they had contrived to blow up the
Persons of our Governors, and for some years past they have been laying the
Train to blow up our Constitution. Blessed be that God, who so seasonably
prevented both the one, and the other. This Day might have been a Day of
trouble and rebuke and blasphemy. 2 Kings 19.3.
(as Hezekiah once complained); and so it would have been indeed, if when the
Children were come to the birth, there had not been strength to bring forth; I
mean if God had frowned upon the Glorious Undertaking of our Present Sovereign,
which this day begun to take effect. Let not Darkness therefore, nor the Shadow
of Oblivion ever stain this day; let no cloud dwell upon it; let no mournful
voice be heard therein. Who is there, that bears Good will to our Sion, that
will not reckon it the best in our English Calendar, and most worthy, above all
others, to be joined to the Days of the Year? In short, Let Our Mouths be
filled with God's Praise, and with his Honor all this Day long, and let our
Conversations practically express it all our Life long; That our Holy Gratitude
for the Mercies which we have, may fit us for those which we want; that our Sun
may neither go backward, nor stand still, but make have (in God's due time) to
finish its remaining course.

THE END.
BOOKS Sold by John Salusbury, at the Rising Sun, near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhil.
THE Mighty Wonders of a Merciful Providence, in a Sermon Preached on the
Thanksgiving-day, Jan. 31. 1689.

The Duty and Support of Believers in Life and Death.

The Period of Humane Life determined by the Divine Will.

The Usefulness of Spiritual Wisdom, with a Temporal Inheritance.

The Churches Plea for the Divine Presence to prosper Humane Force; in a Sermon
preached on the Fast Day, Jan. 5. 1689. All 5 by the same Author.

A Rational Defense of Nonconformity: Wherein the Practice of Nonconformists is
vindicated from promoting Popery, and Ruining the Church, imputed to them by
Dr. Stilling fleet in his Unreasonableness of Separation. Also his Arguments
from the Principles and Way of the Reformers. and first Dissenters are
Answered. And the Case of the present Separation truly stated; and the blame of
it laid where it ought to be. And the way to Union among Protestants is pointed
at, by Gilbert Rule, Minister of the Gospel.

The Conformists Charity to Dissenters, and Concurrence with the Favor granted
them in the Act for Toleration, proved from the Works of the most Eminent
Divines of the Church of England.

Certain Sermons or Homilies appointed to be read in Churches in the time of
Queen Elizabeth, in Two Parts, in Twelves, price 3 s.

Chirurgorum Comes, or the whole Practice of Surgery, begun by the Learned
Dr. Read, Continued and Completed by a Member of the College of Physicians in
London.


