Catastrophe Magnatum: OR, THE FALL OF MONARCHY. A Caveat to MAGISTRATES,
Deduced from the Eclipse of the SUN, March 29. 1652. With a Probable
Conjecture of the Determination of the Effects.

By Nich: Culpeper Gent. Stud. in Astrol. and Phys:

DAN. 2. 21, 22. He changes the times and the seasons, he removes Kings, and
sets up Kings: he gives wisdom to the Wise, and knowledge to them that
know understanding: he reveals the deep and secret things, he knows what is
in the darkness, and the light dwells With him.

LONDON Printed for T. Vere and Nath: Brook, in the Old Baily, and at the
Angel in Cornhil. 1652.

To the right Worshipful, Sir William Culpeper Knight and Baronet, Nicholas
Culpeper wishes Health, Wealth, and Peace, in this World, and a Crown of Glory
in that to come.
Worthy Sir,
BEfore I proceed farther, let me crave pardon of your Worship, for these my
bold attempts in presuming to Dedicate these my weak Labors to your Worship,
to whom distance of place has now almost made a stranger; but considering that
Ingenuity of Spirit that was once in your Father, and flourishes in you who
are the Branch of so Noble a Root, together with the ancient Familiarity that
was between your Father and mine, imboldned me after I had converted a few idle
hours into Study, and having brought forth to birth what then I conceived, I
present it at your Worships feet: I hope there is nothing in it unbeseeming the
name of Culpeper; if there be failings in it they are no more then what we are
all subject to. The Ingenuity of your Worship, I know to be such, that you will
not only pass by my boldness in dedicating it to you, for that Objection our
Alliance in blood may take off, Sigenus amborum scindit se sanguine ab uno.
Besides, as your ingenuity is Operative, which the Bowels of all your poor
Neighbors daily bless God for, which you are commended for, even where you
are not known, and is is no small joy to mine (your poor Kinsmans) heart, so
shall you be eternally rewarded for it another day, blessed is he that
remembers the poor, your Worship knows well enough what follows. I hope your
Worship will expect no Flattery in the Epistle, there being none in the book:
if you accept the Book, I shall think my self happy, and I am confident those
of our blood will hardly degenerate; it was a notable expression of Plato, O
Knowledge, how would men love thee, if they did but know thee! for as Health is
the conservation of the Body, so is knowledge the conservation of the Soul.
Though it has been near upon fifteen years since I saw your Worship: yet have
I often heard of you, both by Master Thomas Culpeper and Master Whitfield, who
are both of our kindred, as by many others more, and I hear your virtues
increase daily more and more, the Lord increase them till the time of your
change come: and though we live in such an Age which calls Good Evil, and
Evil Good, which takes Vice for Virtue and Virtue for Vice, which think they
strike at the Devil and hit God, yet your Worship knows as well as I can tell
you, and better too, being no stranger to the writings of Philosophers, what
Plato said of Virtue and Vice: quoth he, If Virtue could take a bodily shape,
she would be so beautiful a creature, all men would be in love with her, (of
which your Worship is one) also if Vice could take a bodily shape, she would
be such an Ugly beast, all men would hate her: for if Drunkards have so many
Apish and beastly postures, what would Drunkenness it self have if it were
Visible? and yet that is but an Attribute of Vice neither.

I know very well, and my Genius prompts me to it, what an excellent love your
Worship bears to Learning, and truly I might make another reason of that for
Dedicating these my weak labors to your Worship, as knowing the brightness of
your brain will dissipate the clouds of my Ignorance: the truth is, there arose
a Question within my self whether I should dedicate it to your Worship or not,
but that contest held not long, for I doubted not of your favorable
acceptance, for I knew well enough what failed on my part in the performance of
the work, or what other imperfections you could find in the book, should be
most Nobly censured, and like your self: then presently I proceeded, and
stamped your Worships name upon it, that it may be said, in despite of the
proudest carper in the world, it is the Godchild of a peerlesse Godfather. Sir,
one thing more I must entreat you, for I doubt I have been so bold, your
Worship will think I flatter, and that I know your Worship hates, as well as
my self; if there happen any thing in the book, which your Worship cannot
understand, I know you will say as noble-minded Chion did, Let my betters judge
of these matters. I must confess the thing is a work of worth if well
understood, else your Worship had not had it presented to you, your worship
knows very well, and far better then I can tell you, that knowledge requires
the whole circuit of a man's life, even from the terminus a quo to the terminus
ad quem; and the longer a man lives the more he may learn. I am brief, for
it is brevity your Worship delights in, therefore to use many words I account it
needless: your Worships friendly acceptance of it shall be such a favor to
me as I shall never forget (indeed I have so much the blood of Culpeper in me
that I cannot) what such as are altogether unlearned or proudly learned, speak
against, I shall take to be a badge of a weak, or stubborn brain, rather than
any blemish at all to the work. I know your worship will judge like your
self, to whom I make bold to present this as a memorial of those former
favors not unknown to your worship which passed between your Father and mine;
Lastly, before I conclude let me entreat one favor of your worship, if I have
mistaken in, or robbed you of any of your titles of honor, I beseech you pardon

Your most humble Servant and Kinsman, Nich: Culpeper.
From my Study at London. Spittle-Fields, next door to the Red-Lion.
Now published.
Theatrum Chemicum Britanicum, containing several Poetical Pieces of our
famous English Philosophers, who have written the Hermetique Mysteries in their
own Ancient Language, with Annotations, and several Hieroglificall Pieces cut
in Brass. By Elias Ashmole Esquire.

A most excellent Book of Chiromancy, or the art of Divining by the lines and
signatures of the Hand, a most acurate piece, lately published by George
Wharton Esquire.

Both sold by Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill.

A Discourse of the terrible Eclipse of the Sun, March 29, 1652.
CHAP. I.
What an Eclipse is.

AN Eclipse is properly the deficiency of light in a Star, if it be defined in
a critical sense: and although any Star upon the Ecliptic may suffer an
Eclipse, when they are diametrically opposed to the Sun; and although a part of
the body of the Sun may be Eclipsed by Venus or Mercury, in an inferior
conjunction, when they have no latitude (and for ought I know, it carries
signification too, though little heeded) yet if we reason of an Eclipse in a
vulgar sense, take the Philosophical description of it thus.

An Eclipse, is the prohibition of the light either of the Sun or Moon from our
eye.

And as it is necessary, before we reason of an Eclipse, to tell you what an
Eclipse is; so it is as necessary, to tell you what the Luminaries Eclipsed
are; and to what intent the eternal, and only wise God, placed them in the
heavens: and that this may be done methodically, I will tell you 1. What the
Sun is. 2. What an Eclipse of the Sun is. 3. What the Moon is. 4. What an
Eclipse of the Moon is.


First, know this, that the Sun is the light and governor of the world; a
creature which gives life, light, and motion to the creation: by moving about
his own body upon his Axis, he moves the whole creation: by him is time
limited; by him the Planets become Oriental, and Occidental: he hides them, and
he gives them their luster: whatsoever in the creation has motion (and there
are but few things without it, if any) they have it all from the Sun: in a
word, he is the primum mobile of the creation; it is he that makes the Trees to
spring, and the Birds to sing, and brings forth the fruits of the earth in due
season; he quickens and enlivens all things; and every sign is exalted above
its fellows, when he is in it: he adds life, and light, and strength, and heat
and virtue, to the earth; and therefore his Eclipse is the more dismal to it:
he is indeed the life of the creation, perhaps anima mundi: when the Sun leaves
a sign, that sign remains like a dead body without a spirit and motion; and
other signs avoid that sign, as a living body avoyds a dead body: it is the
Sun that causes the motions of wind, inundation of water; the circulation in
the creation, is caused by the Sun: it is he that draws the waters out of the
sea, and returns them upon the earth, that so it may bring forth fruit in due
season, the truth is he is a great and famous Planet, of mighty power,
nobility, magnanimity, and command; and yet not like the Commanders of our
times; for he loves not money. His corporal Conjunction, infortunates more then
the conjunction of any Planet; but his Trine, and Sextile Aspects, fortunate
more then the Trines and Sextiles of any Planet: And if you will know the
reason why his Conjunction is so unfortunate, he gives to all the Planets their
light and motion; and when they are with his body, he takes it away again.
Life and death, principalities and powers, vanquishing and victory, are known
by the Sun: beware his Eclipse upon his exaltation. As he is in the heavens, so
are Magistrates in a Commonwealth: if the one be afflicted, why may not the
other? the motion of the Sun is natural; the motion of terrestrial creatures,
artificial: when Nature suffers, beware Art. In the body of man, he represents
the head, because he is exalted in Aries: mock not, if you find him represent
the same in a Nation. All Kings, quatenus Kings, are represented by the Sun; do
not admire if they be Eclipsed: the truth of it is, he is Lord Paramount in the
creation; and to prove this, I will send you to school, whither Job sent his
companions, Job 12. 7, 8. Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and
the fowls of the air; and they shall tell thee: or speak to the earth, and it
shall teach thee; and the fishes of the sea shall declare to thee. To which I
might add, The trees themselves will do it; the birds in the spring declare it
to the whole Nation, (I wish I could call it a Commonwealth.) The mines in the
earth, yea the flint-stones, will tell you what the power of the Sun is; and
yet he is Eclipsed: we will not deny the influences of the other Planets
together with that Sun; for as the stomach first concocts the meat, and sends,
or should send, the chyle well concocted to the Liver; and the Liver having
concocted it again, nourishes the body by the Veins, and every Vein
receives a part of the blood from the Liver, according to its own capacity,
even so the Sun administers of his own power, to the rest of the Planets, and
to the earth it self: every one receives its part according to its capacity: an
Apple Tree bears an Apple; a Crab-tree but a Crab, because it is capable of no
more: a good Plum-tree bears a Plum; and a Sloe-tree, but a Sloe, because it is
capable of no better; So that the nature of the Sun, operates in all natures,
according to their capacity. The house of the Sun, is the best and most noble
house in all the heavens: his exaltation is the best and most noble exaltation
in all the heavens: his triplicity is the best and most regal triplicity in all
the heavens. As a wise Ruler should be in the midst of the Gommonwealth, so
has ^he eternal and only wise God placed the Sun in the midst of the
creation, and all the rest of the Planets, like Serving-men, attend him. He
has made Saturn his counselor, by whose sober advice the violent motions of
the other Planets are retarded. He has made Jupiter his Judge, by whose equal
temperature, honesty, and serenity, things should be ordered, I cannot say they
are; yet I am of Julius Cesars opinion.

Tarpeio, quondam, cons^dit culmine, cornix,
Est been, non potuit dicere, dixit, erit.
On the Tarpeian Steeples top, the Crow
Cried out, All is not well; but 'twill, I trow.
And so hope I.
He has made Mars his Commander; he is the General of his Army, and he
retains that office in this Eclipse; and I have some hopes he will use it
well. Venus buys and sels his commodities; and that is her office in the
habitable world. Mercury is his Accomptant, and takes notice what is done, and
tells him of it once in two months. The Moon is his Ambassador, and tells frail
flesh what he intends to do, and when he will do it: Oh that they would be so
wise to hear her!

And having now told you what the office was, which the great First-being of
all things placed the Sun in the firmament for, (Sensibus haec imis, res non
est parva repone.
Afford these lines a place amidst your senses,
And be not gulled by flattering pretenses.)
I come now to show you, what an Eclipse of the Sun is: but before we come to
that, take an Aphorism or two.

1. An Eclipse is either total, or partial.

2. A total Eclipse is, when the whole Star is darkened; a partial Eclipse is,
when but part of the Star is darkened.

3. No Eclipse can happen but at or near one of the Nodes, the Head or tail of
the Dragon: if I had been minded to have frighted the multitude with uncouth
words, I would have said, Anabibazon, and Catabibazon.

4. The Sun, seeing he is the Author of light, (...) the light of the world
proceeds from him, it is imposs(...) should be darkened really; but only his
beams are hindered by the body of the Moon, from some particular place of the
earth: nay, it is impossible the Sun should be darkened every where in the same
Hemisphear: it is not universaliter, but secundum quid: for the Moon being made
of the same metal the earth is (namely, a lump of dirt rolled up together, and
by an All-powerful God hung in the Air, the foundations of it fixed upon
nothing) the opacous body of the Moon, takes away the light of the Sun from
some particular people; whereas, by reason of the different Paralax of the
Moon, other Nations in the same Hemisphear can behold the body of the Sun, not
in the least darkened. From these things thus joined together, take this
definition of an Eclipse of the Sun.

An Eclipse of the Sun, is a taking away both light and virtue of the Sun from
a particular people, by the interposition of the body of the Moon.

And if so, who, but Doctor SELF, and Doctor CONCEIT knowing, as I told you
before, wherefore God Created the Sun can deny but that dismal effects must
follow the interposition between a Nation and such a real, such an all-friend.
A word is enough to a wise man.

In the third place, I come to tell you wherefore the Moon was created; and
though she be but a lump of dirt, she was not created for nothing; had she been
so, man had been created for less. She is called in the Scripture, a great
light, who, as Jehovah Elohim says, was made to RULE, as well the Sun: and
because she was to rule the night, she cannot be Eclipsed but in the night.

I wonder in my heart, what the Priests would say, if a man should ask them the
question, What rule the Moon has in the night? Or whether a prohibition of
light, be not a prohibition of rule? Or whether a prohibition of rule bring not
confusion? Or whether the corruption of one thing, be not the generation of
another? Happily my argument may appear to be truth ere long and they may feel it
to their cost: when God sets them to rule, and they deprive one another of
their power, caveant mortales.

Well, but what effects was the Moon created for? that is the question, and to
that now turn I. She is the lesser Luminary; she is the Governess of the world:
she changes all bodies, and causes vicissitude of times: pray God the effects
of this Eclipse turn them to the best.

Yet this I will say by the rules of natural Philosophy, All things between the
terminus a quo, and the terminus ad quem, require order and good method; and
according as the method is in the medium, so shall the end prove.

If the new River-water had been brought from Ware to London in lead, it had
come clear; but being brought in earth, it is muddy. I will leave this Nation
to pick English out of it.

The Moon, about which our discourse is, is most appropriated to man; and not
only to man, but also to beasts, and birds, and fishes: she carries the virtue
of the Sun to the creation, and causes man to change from childe-hood to youth;
from youth, to Manhood, from Manhood, to Age; from Age, to decrepidness: she
helps man to live, she helps man to dye: her one light (if you note it) does
the like. A body may gather the whole world is maintained by light: and as
various as the light of the Moon is, so various is the life of man. She
receives her light from the Sun: she increases, she comes to the full, she
wanes, and at last returns to the place from whence she came; and so must man.

The Eclipse of the Moon is no way to be despised, neither is the Eclipse of
the Sun by the Moon: for this one judgment I will give you now (although it be
out of course) when the Moon is Lady of the Ascendant, and Eclipseth the Sun in
the Tenth; Such, as the Magnates for want of better breeding, or more knowledge
of God, or humble-wort growing in their gardens) call vile, Plebeian, and evil
men; such as they could crush to pieces (if they knew but how) will rise up,
both against Magistrates, and against their Rulers, and handle them without
Mittens, as they have handled them before; Kingdoms will be changed, and
Beggars will get on horseback; let them have a care how they ride. I hope I
have not transgressed.

The Moon is to the Sun, as an Ambassador is to a Prince: the Sun gives her
power and governs her, and supplies her both with light and strength, from the
time of the Conjunction to the Opposition: in her Opposition, she is so proud,
she thwarts him; then he diminishes her light, and takes away from her, what
she borrowed of him before; just as when a King sends out an Ambassador to some
people or Nation, the Ambassador grows proud, and looks upon himself as an
absolute King; The King quickly knows how to make him know himself: even so the
Sun withdraws his light again, brings her to nothing at all, and bids her look
to the rock from whence she was hewn.

But I pray you now, when the Moon is in her full power, and then Eclipsed,
must this Eclipse signify nothing? We will take her signification to be a
Queen, the governess of the night, and a governess both over sea and land.

There remains but one thing more, which is to show you what what an Eclipse
of the Moon is; for which, take this definition.

An Eclipse of the Moon, is a diametrical interposition of the body of the
earth, between the Sun and Moon, whereby the light of the Sun, is hindered from
the body of the Moon.

I have done with this Chapter, if you will be pleased but to take notice, that
the Moon may be totally obscured in the same Hemisphear, because the magnitude
of the body of the earth, is greater then the magnitude of the Moon; only take
notice, that the farther Eastward people in the same Hemisphear live, the
sooner to them will the Eclipse appear.

CHAP. II.
Of the Attendants of the Eclipse.

AS great men have many and great attendants, so has this great Eclipse of the
Sun: And as some of the attendants of great men run before them, others follow
after; so do the attendants also of this Eclipse: and all must be heeded, in
this our present Judgment.

Before this Eclipse, was the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in Pisces,
Feb. 15. 1642/3. which Master Lilly so learnedly treated of in his Prophetical
Merlin: and to see how the circumferental lines of Gods providence fix all in
the same center: Saturn and Jupiter make three Oppositions, within the time of
the operation of this present Eclipse: a most strange thing, and not to be
contemned. Besides, there is an Eclipse of the Moon March 14. 1651/2 together
with the position of the heavens at the Suns ingress into Aries. The
Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in September, 1651. is not to be despised: nor
yet the Square of Jupiter and Mars in February, 1651/2.

As followers of this Eclipse, we have another Eclipse of the Moon in
September, 1652. a Conjunction of the Sun and Mars in May, 1652. of the Sun and
Saturn in July, 1652. of Saturn and Mars in August, 1652. an Eclipse of the
Moon in March, 1653. a Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, 1654. And the real truth
is, all the Planets by all aspects, conduce together to further the operation
of this Eclipse: therefore the Eclipse must needs be great, not only because
so great a part of the Sun is darkened, and that upon the very degree of his
exaltation; but also, because of the multitude and formidableness of its
attendants; which having now showed you what they are, I shall proceed to show
you what they signify, in this Chapter in the general, and afterward in
particular.

In the general, consider, that Saturn is an old worn-out Planet, weary, and of
little estimation in this world: he causes long and tedious sicknesses,
abundance of sadness, and a Cartload of doubts and fears: his nature is cold,
and dry, and melancholy. And take special notice of this, that when Saturn is
Lord of an Eclipse (as he is one of the Lords of this) he governs all the rest
of the Planets, but none can govern him: Melancholy is made of all the humors
in the body of man, but no humor of melancholy. He is envious, and keeps his
anger long, and speaks but few words; but when he speaks, he speaks to purpose.
A man of deeep cogitations; he will plot mischief when men are asleep: he has
an admirable memory, and remembers to this day how William the Bastard abused
him: he cannot endure to be a slave: he is poor with the poor, fearful with the
fearful: he plots mischief against the Superiors, with them that plot mischief
against them: have a care of him, KINGS and MAGISTRATES of Europe; he will show
you what he can do, in the effects of this Eclipse: he is old, and therefore
has large experience, and will give perilous counsel: he moves but slowly, and
therefore he does the more mischief: all the Planets contribute their natures
and strength to him; and when he sets on doing mischief, he will do it to
purpose: he does not regard the company of the rest of the Planets, neither do
any of the rest of the Planets regard his: he is a barren Planet, and therefore
delights not in women: he brings the Pestilence: he is destructive to the
fruits of the earth: he receives his light from the Sun, and yet he hates the
Sun that gives it him: he partakes with Mercury to do mischief but nothing
else: he will be obedient to no Planet; neither will he be servant to any: once
more, Look to it Magistrates: he abhors Jupiter, by reason of his benevolence.
And pray take notice then, Saturn being Lord of the Eclipse, what the effects
of the three Oppositions of Saturn and Jupiter may produce.

Post nubula Soles. Having considered the nature of Saturn, let us a little
consider the nature of Jupiter, that so we may make a firm foundation, to build
our following Discourse upon. Oh that men would be so wise us to consider that
they would but in this their day, consider the things that belong to their
peace, before it be hid from their eyes.

The effects of this Eclipse will spare none it lights upon, neither will it
play or dally with them, but, Torrent-like, sweep them away with a mighty
ruin. I hope those that preach so fiercely against Astrology, when they feel
the effects of this Eclipse, will probably learn wit, when they are beaten to
it. And though I quote here the good nature of Jupiter, I do not think the
effects of the Eclipse will be good, as the nature of Jupiter shows, because
Jupiter has little or no signification in the Eclipse: but I hope such times
may come after, and so people may live in hopes of what benefit they or their
children may live to enjoy. I have a reason for this my hope too: for, to
believe a thing without a reason, is (in my opinion) foolery, and not faith.

It was the opinion of M. Lilly, in that MASTERPIECE of his, his PROPHETICAL
MERLIN, that in the late Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, Saturn was the
strongest Planet: I can scarce believe it; neither was it ever my fancy to
prefer accidental dignities, before essential. But I shall talk more of this
hereafter: only thus much of the Conjunction, which, according to the vulgar
course of providence, should have happened in a Kingly Sign; by the Almighty
providence of God at this time, and but at this time, since the Creation of the
world, happened in a Plebeian Sign, nay in the weakest Sign of the Zodiac:
but the Scripture must be verified; the Lord will pull down the mighty, and
exalt the humble and meek. Enough of this: I come now to the nature of Jupiter.

Jupiter delights in equality, and so do I: he delights in community and
goodness: and the reason why he does so, is, because he is a Planet temperate,
in respect of heat, dryness, coldness, and moisture. He is a just,
upright-dealing creature: he will not give All to some, and None at all to the
rest. He signifies much good to the people, correction of Laws,
single-heartedness, chastity. He will correct men, but he will not undo them,
neither destroy them. He abhors the nature of Saturn, and keeps him from doing
that mischief which the poor old soul would willingly do. He is very mild, and
shows goodness in his forehead, and not coveteousness: if he had a thousand a
year, he would bestow it all upon the poor: he always speaks truth in his
words, and carries himself truly in his actions; and then to be sure he is
neither Priest nor Lawyer: You will be confident of it as well as I, if you do
but consider he hates coveteousness: the truth is, he minds public, and not
private good: he is fortunate in all his deeds, by the equality of his temper:
the heat of the Summer, and cold of Winter, is temperated by him: the truth of
it is, by the salubrious beams of Jupiter, an equality is made in the creation.
And now there comes in my head an odd passage of Doctor Gell, in his last
Sermon preached before the learned Society of Astrologers; God (said he) set
the bounds of the people according to the number of the Angels of God:
therefore there ought to be no community. But, by Doctor Gell's leave, who
desires a Community? we desire but our own birthrights, and the heavy yoke
William the Bastard laid upon us, taken off; and should be glad if we could
obtain that: only this I desire of Doctor Gell (whom I honor both for his
learning and piety) when God did divide Nations according to the number of the
Angels, whether he gave All to some, and None at all to the rest? whether he
left any poor in the land unprovided for? whether he made them not All
Freeholders? and leave him to be answered by his own conscience.

Thus much for Jupiter: I come now to Mars, and I shall be the more large in
him, because he is the chief significator of the effects of this Eclipse.

This world, as it stands in statu quo, makes a difference between rich and
poor men; and when a man has picked up a great deal of well-concocted earth, I
am a better man then thou, quoth he; though perhaps the birth and breeding of
the other, be ten times better then this: but as the Grave equals all men, so
do Celestial influences: nay I will tell you more then this, Magistrates are
grown to such a terrible hight of Pride, that this Eclipse will teach them,
that the Lord knows the proud afar off. Miserable and sad are the effects of
the Eclipse like to be, when the two infortunes are Lords of it; and so they
are in this: but what their operation will be, I am now to speak of only in the
general; and I will prefix this Scripture in the front of it, Psalm. 28. 5. If
they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operations of his hand, he will
pull them down, and not build them up. Mars is the chief Lord of the Eclipse;
and you shall see what a kind of creature he is: he is a hot and dry, fiery
burning Planet; an angry conquering creature, destructive to nature: he is so
angry, that he will hear no reason: the Priest with his Rhetoric in the
Pulpit, cannot move him; neither does he regard the Lawyer that pleads at the
bar: all the Sophistry in Oxford and Cambridge will not be able to qualify his
anger in the effects of this Eclipse, but are all like to feel his fury: he
lays out all his strength in what he does, or in what he delights to do: his
natural disposition is to set people together by the ears: I may say of him, as
Virgil said of Alecto, Tu potes unanime is armare in praelia fratres,
Atque odiis versare domos: tu verberatect is,
Funereasque infer faces, tibi nomina mill,
Mill nocendi arts, faecundum concute pect us
Disjice compositam pacem: sere crimina belli:
Arma velit, poscatque simul, rapiatque juventus.
The dearest knots of friendship he unties,
And utterly subverts whole families
With dismal funerals, and bitter wrath:
A thousand names, a thousand arts he has
To break sweet peace: by his impetuous charms,
The Youth desire, and crave, and handle arms.


Look you here now, what a master the eternal God of heaven and earth has
appointed you over this Eclipse; one that delights in nothing in the world but
killing and murdering, setting people together by the ears, quarrelling, folly,
and impatience, vehement anger: one that neither fear nor entreaty is able to
hold or retard from sowing the seed of sedition and war, when he sets upon it.

Saturn, I told you before, was another Lord of the Eclipse; and Mars is
exalted in the house of Saturn, as though both the malevolents were conjoined
to execute the will of God in the destroying effects of this Eclipse. Mars is
of that nature, that he will run on, right or wrong, and never regard what the
end will be. He causes infirmities and sicknesses, diminution of substance,
madness, and revenge, thunder and lightening; and what else can terrific the
minds of the giddy-headed multitude.

But in this Eclipse, because Venus is near him, she will somewhat qualify his
malice: I shall show you hereafter how and in what manner; only in this place,
what the general disposition of Venus is, that so I may hold to what I
promised, only generals.

Venus is a Planet cold and moist, fortunate, merry, and jocund: I would we of
the Commonalty of England had cause so to be: we shall have, we must have; they
had as good let us have it at first as at last; the heavens promise it us, and
it is in vain for man to domineer.

Heu, nihil invitis fas quemquam credere divis.
The effects of this Eclipse shall clearly prove
It Is vain to strive against the powers above.
Besides this, by her coldness and moisture, she somewhat tempers the hot and
dry disposition of Mars: and if we bring it home to this Eclipse, she orders
him, having gotten him in her house, she loves singing, and banqueting, and
drinking, and venerial vices, diseases that come therefrom; and therefore in
this Eclipse, she has got a sit companion in her house, cut out for the
purpose. Mars and she usually cause whoredom, and sometimes a knock with a
French colt-staffe: she gives very good words, and is very meek of nature: she
will give good words to the poor, because they are cheap, and cost nothing: she
is an enemy to Saturn, though she give him an exaltation in her house. I will
leave Venus, and come to Mercury.

Mercury loves all Arts, and has gotten a special command over all Clerks and
Accomptants: and he is of a convertible nature, just like a Priest, I should
have said a Weathercock: he is masculine with the masculine, and feminine with
the feminine: he is a fortune with the fortunes; an infortune with the
infortunes: he is a bold spoken fellow, full of tongue; his father was either a
Priest or a Lawyer, I know not which: he is a cheerful creature, quick in his
actions: he is a divellish liar, a betrayer; as full of deceit as an egg is
full of meat: he will promise more by a farthing candle, then he will perform
in seven years: he signifies winds; and in this Eclipse, such winds as will
rend the stoutest Rocks in Europe in pieces.

These be the Planets, which (as I shall tell you hereafter) have one way or
another signification in this Eclipse; and there can be no more, nor more
variety of these significations which I have here delivered.

I have showed you here their natures in general; I come now to show you their
natures in particular: only before this, let me premise this one thing, the
Moon has a very great signification in the effects of this Eclipse; the
general signification of which, I gave you in the first Chapter, the particular
signification, both of her, and other Planets, you shall have hereafter, when I
come to the particular dimension of time, in which the effects of this Eclipse
are to Operate.

CHAP. III.
Of the Prodromi, or forerunners of the Eclipse.

THE Prodromi or Forerunners of this Eclipse, because they are very many, and
something contrary the one to the other, I will not put them together, for fear
they should fall out; but speak of each of them in a part by it self.

Of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter. PART I.
Had it not been unavoidable to my present discourse, I would not so much as
have mentioned this great and rare Conjunction: rare, because the world never
saw the like; great, because rare: and the reason why I would not have
mentioned it, is, because Master Lilly has so learnedly Treated of it in his
Prophetical Merlin, in which you shall find this speech, not to be despised.

The first restitution of the Fiery Trigon in the Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter, happened in Enochs time. The second, at the universal Deluge. The
third, in the delivery from the Egyptian Bondage. The fourth, in the Persian
Monarchy. The fifth, in the time of Christ, and the Roman Empire. The sixth, in
Charles the great. And now the seventh has a secret mystery of Sabbatisme in
it, and promises some thing of more singular moment to the world then the
other. Thus Master Lilly very learnedly, and as truly wrote.

To this give me leave to add one speech of the Jewish Rabbis, That as God
made the world in six days, and rested the seventh, so the world should enjoy
six thousand years of trouble, and one thousand or Sabbaticall time of rest; as
God rested the seventh day, so shall the world have a thousand years of rest,
after six thousand of trouble; in which time the kingdoms of the world should
become the Kingdoms of our God and of his Christ.

Neither is this much disconsonant from that of the Apostle, Romans 8. 19, 21,
etc. For the earnest expectation of the creature waits for the manifestation
of the sons of God. Because the creature it self also shall be dilivered from
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God, etc. I
do not desire to be accounted a Prophet, nor do I plead revelations for what I
write; yet a little time may prove me to be no liar.

I shall only quote you what a few Authors say of this Conjunction. Campanella
says, That the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, under the fourth
triplicity, which is inimicall to the first triplicity, the prerogative of
Monarchy will be so shaken, that it will never be able to stand upright more
(nor perhaps ever did in conditions) dreadful heresies (anglice excellent
truths) will begin to appear and be protected by force of arms: faith is
enlarged more by the sword then by miracles: new Religions arise, and set a
period to the austerity of the former (as much as if he had said, Knowledge
begins to break through the clouds of ignorance) yet will all this be to a good
intent, because the Stars only incline, but it is in the use of man's liberty,
to use this inclination either to good or bad. Blame me not for being a little
copious upon this Conjunction: for without the due consideration of this, it is
impossible I should judge rightly of the Eclipse of the Sun: and I must be a
little critical against all Authors; I hope Master Lilly will pardon, me if I
dissent a little from him: if he may freely write his own judgment, why may
not I by the same rule? The Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter (calculated by
the Rudolphine Tables) it seems happened in the second house; I shall not be
very critical against either the truth of the Rudolphine Tables, nor yet at the
ability of Master Matthew Fisk that calculated them; whose noble spirit is
returned to God that gave it; neither will I exclaim upon other Authors, as
Noel Durret, Argol, and others, all which differ in time (yet not so much in
that, as Master Fiske and Sir Christopher Heydon differed in the calculation of
that in 1603.) By Argols computation, it should be in the ninth house: Argol
might be a little mistaken; and the effects shall prove, before they are half
over, that it happened in the tenth, and the figure not much different from
that of this Eclipse: I cannot at this time stand to give you my reasons, let
experience be judge, Time will tell truth, when I may not. Besides, since the
time of this Conjunction, never more never greater Phaenomena's have been seen
in the air: never more Parelii or mock-Suns, or Paraselenes, or mock-Moons,
have been seen in England, since John of Gaunt, or William the bastard, then
have been seen in one year: not a year has past our heads, but more then one
of them has appeared; besides other supernatural sights; and rest confident,
more yet to come: and if ever God showed any thing in vain, this is the first
time that ever he did it.

To proceed, when the two superiors returned to the watery triplicity, dreadful
Wars are stirred up for Religion, or by the Clergy; as many Religions appear in
a Nation, as there are hairs upon a man's head; strange Engines are invented
for war: the sword, famine, and pestilence afflict the earth.

If the Conjunction happen in Pisces, as this last did, and not far distant
from Aries neither, the Clergy are reformed (pray God they do not reform them
all away) new opinions vex the Church, Heresies arise (as the Ranters did now.)
The Sign is double bodied, and people do all with a double heart; or, as the
Hebrew has it, with a heart and a heart; so that we may truly say by the
effects of this Conjunction, as David, Psalm. 12. 1. Help, Lord, for the godly
man cease, and the faithful fail from among the children of men: they speak
vanity every one with his neighbor, with flattering lips, and with a heart and
a heart. But the Lord will cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that
speaks proud things. The first we know to be true, the second I expect.
However, this is certain; Pisces being the house of a superior Planet, and near
at hand to Aries, common people will carry themselves in more then an ordinary
Majestical way. If their Taskmasters set them to make brick, and give them no
straw, they will rebel: And just in the nick of time when they are in such a
humor, comes this Eclipse of the Sun; which, what it will produce, more anon:
as also, three Oppositions of Saturn and Jupiter, which will kindle such a fire
in Europe, between the Magistrates, Ministers, and common People, which all the
water in the Sea is not able to quench. Besides Albumazar says, that if the
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter happen in Scorpio or Pisces, the effects
thereof will work but slowly. And that happily may be the reason the effects of
this Eclipse appeared in their colors no sooner. But if all the powers of
heaven can blow the coals to make them burn, this Eclipse of the Sun will do
it: and the bellows will blow the better, because Mars in this Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter, was in Quartile to the Sun, and now Lord of this Eclipse.

From these Principles thus considered, let us build a little rational
Judgment upon this Conjunction, that so we may have a sure foundation, to
erect our Judgment of this Eclipse upon. Men are undone, by rapine and
violence of sonldiers. The whole Nation of Europe is in a mutiny; and they have
as much patience as a nest of Wasps. Thieving, rapine, and injustice, are Lords
Paramounts of Seas and Land. The Merchants trading is bad; he scarce knows into
what Country to trade; and when he does, he loses his ships by Sea. The world
is mad, and servants turn masters: and what will the end be?

Kings and great men are undone: the Priest and Lawyer leaves prating, and
fall to fretting. It is the opinion of Guido Bonatus, upon a Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter in Pisces, that all the evil that is done (and that is not a
little) will be done under pretense of Religion: which how true it has proved
already in England, every one that has but wit enough to eat an egg, knows.
Besides, Leovitius quotes a great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter to have
happened in Pisces, 1524. In the first year of the effects of it, happened
great inundations of water; France was absolutely overrun: let them beware
now; it is as likely to fall to their share now, as a Pomwater is like an apple.
Next year after, the Emperor and the French fall together by the ears; in
which unfortunate Battle, the poor French King was taken: it was well he escaped
so too. The Duke of Saxony pays his debts to Nature, and sleeps both day
and night to the Resurrection. The Boors in Germany are up in arms; and such a
mortal fury possesses their brains, that within four months space above an
hundred thousand men were slain, and the matter examined after, whether guilty
or not guilty. The King of Hungary goes to war with the Turk; but he never
returned home alive to tell how he sped. France, England, Venice, and almost
all Europe, was together by the ears. Rome was surprised, sacked, and pillaged,
by the Duke of Bourbon; and the Duke himself was slain in the assault. His
Holiness Pope Clement the seventh of that name, when neither wit nor holiness
would serve his turn, yields himself a prisoner. Holland was quite routed and
depopulated: a fair warning to make them a little quieter now; and they would
take warning, if God had not an intent to scourge them. A huge Comet, with a
terrible tail appeared, such a one as operated in the effects of this great
Conjunction.

Certainly these providential ways of God were made for Priests to learn by,
and not to rail at. The Pestilence and the Famine wandered all over Europe. The
Bishops of Germany were all together by the ears with the Duke of Saxony. The
Helvetians were at Civil war; and what was it about, think you? truly, about
that MONSTER called RELIGION. The Turk. falls into Austria, and besieged
Vienna, but did not take it. The Sea devoureth a great part of Holland,
Zealand, and Flanders.

A body would think here were enough to bid the Nations of Europe beware the
effects of this Conjunction: and they would do it, did not God hide wisdom from
their eyes, that so he may destroy them.

I shall only quote one Aphorism of Rigel, concerning this Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter, yet in force, but not in his height, till this present
Eclipse: and with it I will conclude this first Part.

Dreadful streamings are seen in the air; whether in the forms of Comets, or
other forms, it matters not. And I pray (to leave my Author a little) when have
there been more seen then since the time of this Conjunction? When more
Mock-Suns, and more Mock-Moons? Not a year has past without diverse of them, as
I told you before; and had not mentioned them twice, had the significations not
been prevalent. And if you have not enough, you shall have enough, before this
year of 1652 pass over your heads, even such that shall make your hearts ache
for fear. And truly, whatever you think, I am of opinion, God shows nothing in
vain.

To proceed: Hot infirmities, acute diseases, wars and dissentions between
Kings and their people, and between one King and another. And when Kings are
together by the ears with one another, let them remember what AEsop said of the
Mouse and the Frog; who whilst they were busy in fight, came a Kyte and
carried them both away. Look to it, Princes of Europe: there will appear upon
the wing, within these four years, a Kyte that will serve you in the same sauce.

To proceed: An universal evil will overspread Europe, though probably it may
be greater in one part then in another. Many signs will be seen in the
heavens, beyond the course of nature, either round, or like crosses or pillars;
whose effects you may know, if you consider the hour they appear in.

And thus much for the first Part of this Chapter, namely, the Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter.

PART II.
Considering the Conjunction of Mars and Venus lately past, and that Mars is
not only Lord, but also chief disposer of the Eclipse, neither are the effects
of that Conjunction overpassed; we shall therefore, in all reason, speak a word
or two of that Conjunction.

In the first place, it signifies hot, dry, and blasting winds, destructive
both to corn and fruit trees: the air is terrible, by, reason of thunder and
lightening: pains of the eyes: the eastern nations are together by the ears;
it is past my wit to part them. Many infirmities will men be incident to: some
women play the whores, others die. And if you consider him as he is in this
Eclipse, in the eleventh House, Kings and their subjects cannot agree: the
subjects have got a sword by the hilt, and care not a halfpeny for a
Proclamation. It Is not words, but swords, that must end the difference. Friends
fall out; and that is an ill time. Many fornications are threa^ned; luxurious
living, Sodomy, and all the loose Venereal abuses that can be; and are as
frequent as atoms in the sun.

PART III.
The Eclipse of the Moon comes next in course to be handled, March 14. 1651/2.
it happens in the first Face of Libra: according to the opinion of Proclus, it
causes hail, and terrible tempest, many hot winds, and those venomous and
pestilential that shall happen in the summer.

Secondly, consider the Luminary eclipsed is in the eighth House, which,
considering it as in an airy Sign, threatens many infirmimities, and death;
wars, and rumors of wars; diseases, and heat of blood; a terrible change both
in Religion and Law; death of ancient people. The Sign being humane, the
effects of it fall most heavily upon men.

Thirdly, Ptolomy says, that an Eclipse happening in Equinoctial Signs, their
accidents happen upon such men as profess holiness, though they have little or
none in them: upon such as pervert the Law, and set Injustice in the place of
Justice; and know not equity from bribery. Also he says, that if it happen in
the eighth House, it signifies a change of the Law; men will be deceived of
their Legacies, and the seeds of the earth will be destroyed. Also, if Jupiter
be Lord of the Eclipse, and in Capricorn, Guiffus says the effects thereof
will work most potently in winter. I suppose his meaning is, When the Sun comes
to the place where Jupiter was, (and it is a good reason) they will appear in
Sea-fishes, and Ships at sea, and Birds which live at sea: the Laws of Cities
will be changed, and so they will in Nations; I hope, for the best.

Fourthly, Albumazar says, it causes the death of Noblemen.

Fifthly, Guiffus says, that if the Eclipse of the Moon be in Libra, it
threatens death to mortals, putrefaction to herbs and seeds; famine,
pestilence, and other sharp sicknesses, proceeding of wind, and heat of blood:
schisms amongst the Ecclesiastical persons; terrible tearing winds,
destructive to mankind.

Sixthly, the Cities and Nations subject to the effects of this Eclipse, are
such as we shall note you hereafter in the Eclipse of the Sun.

PART IV.
As concerning its congruity with the Vernal Ingress of Sol into Aries, or
(which is more proper) the Earth into Libra, let this suffice briefly, that it
happens in the twelfth House of that Figure, and upon the very Cusp; showing a
year full of injuries and straights: servants will slip their necks out of the
collar, and turn masters: subjects will rebel; and Kings are in a miserable
case, and yet will they be as tyrannical as ever: subjects rise in arms against
their Kings: fearful wars, terrible seditions, and dangerous mutinies, appear
in the world. Let such as are wise, look to themselves: for it is no question
but the fools will run on, although they be punished.

PART. V.
The Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in Sagittarius comes next to be
considered; touching which, I would have written more, had not the press staid
for me: the truth of it is, the position is but wretched; it happened Sept. 13.
1651. they may set the position that have less to do then I: the first degree
of Virgo ascends; the time is 15 ho. 8 min. p.m. what they do in the
Conjunction, they must do alone, for there is not one Planet strong enough to
lend the least assistance. Saturn and Luna are in their detriments, and in
Opposition too, and that is worse, and fills the heads of the vulgar with
madness and sadness: Venus and Sol are in their falls, and Mercury is with the
Dragons Tail, a most pitiful position as ever your eyes saw; nay there is
another thing in the wind, one or two; the Sun is near the place where the Moon
is eclipsed in March: but that which shall bear the bell away is, the Eclipse
of the Sun happens upon the very cuspe of the ninth house of the Conjunction,
and the Conjunction with a hot violent furious malevolent and martial fixed
Star, cor Scorpii.

This premised, we come a little to judgment. The Conjunction of Jupiter and
Mars, sets the swordmen and gown-men together by the ears: this I am confident
is so rational, that none but a Clergy man, will have the face to deny it. I
forbear my judgment here, which shall get the better of it; a very little time
will manifest which is sharpest, the Priests wit, or the soldiers sword: only
take notice, and then I have done, that the Conjunction happening in the fourth
house in a fiery sign, and with a fiery fixed Star, not only consumes the
fruits of the earth by heat and dryness, but also consumes whole Cities and
Towns by fire and sword: also this happening in a humane sign, (for the first
of Sagittarius is humane)

There will be much effusion of blood amongst men: the Nations subject to
Sagittarius, are never in their elements, but when they are together by the
ears: look to it Spain and Hungary, it will touch thee; and let the Turk have
a care he loose not Buda either by fire or sword, and say I told him of it. I
shall conclude this, after I have quoted the judgment of Haly upon such a
Conjunction. When Mars is joined to Jupiter men are in a quarrelling humor, and
altogether about Religion, and when they have snarled a while, then they fight:
the sword rages in the earth, sickness and mortality follows it, so that those
which escape the sword, may die by the pestilence: beasts of great valor, and
various in color, will appear in the air: the beginning of the year will be
very fruitful, but heat and dryness consume the fruits of the earth, before the
harvest.

The King of the Country subject to the influence of the Conjunction, dies:
look to it, Spain and Hungary; and let the Bassa of Buda beware of a
bow-string, or something else as bad. As for the Quartile of Jupiter and Mars,
which happens in Febr. 1651/2. I shall speak nothing, but only refer you to
those most excellent, pithy, and most true verses of George Wharton Esquire,
upon that month; and they are these: Mars lays his knap-sack by, and stoutly
draws,
His trusty bilbow to prescribe us Laws.
Jove claims his privilege, and Mars his power;
Both wrangle hard, and each on other lower,
At length, Jove yields, and Mars assumes the chair;
Votes his own person noble, doings fair.


And thus you see what way is made by other Planets, for the effects of this
Eclipse, at what posture the inclinations of the heavens stand; and the
disposition of sublunary bodies, is from them like to be found at the time of
their operating.

CHAP. IV.
A. Calculation of the Eclipse of the Sun, March 29. 1652.

SO various have the opinions of Authors been, about this Eclipse, and such
difference in Tables, such halucination in the parallax of the Moon, that it
would set a man's brains in such an ecstasy, that like Hercules, it would bring
him to ne plus ultra. The time of the day is not agreed upon, nor yet what part
of the body of the Sun will remain enlightened, whether the North, or the
South part: nay, Authors vary that have calculated by one and the same
Hypothesis.

And if others may make bold to please themselves, why may not I have the same
liberty? Therefore I got my special and loving friend (whom I esteem an able
Artist) M. Samuel War, to calculate this Eclipse for me, by the Tables of
Bullialdus; together with the position of the heavens at that time, and the
Type of the Eclipsed Luminaries.

An Epilogism of the Eclipse of the SUN, happening on the 28 of March, Anno
(...), 1652. being applied to the Meridian of London;
ho. min. Whose Longitude according to Bullialdus, is, 24. 45. Latitude 51. 32.

ho. min. sec. MEan Conjunction at Vranisburg, the 29. 1. 39. 45 Difference of
Meridian substract 48. 00 Rests time of the mean Conjunction, Land. 29. 51. 25
Interval between the mean and true Conjunct. substr. 2. 52. 9 Rests mean time
of the true Conjunct. at London, 28. 21. 59. 36 p.m. Equation of days add 2. 0
Apparent time of the true Conjunction, 28. 22. 1. 36 Equated anomal. of the
Sun, 9 11. 51. 14 Moon, 7 15. 4. 4 The true place of the Luminaries 19. 14. 49
The true motion of the Moons Latitude 8. 48. 29 True Latitude Septentrional A.
45. 39 Reduction substract. 2. 7 The Moons place in the Ecliptic 19. 12. 42
Hourly motion of the Sun 2. 27 Moon 36. 39 The Moon from the Sun 34. 12 Time of
Reduction add 3. 43 Exact time of the true Conjunct. is, March 28. 22. 5. 19
Horizontal Parallax of the Sun 2. 21 Moon 1. 0. 4 The Moon from the Sun 57. 43
To which given time the Suns R. A. is 17. 44. 50 Distance from M. C. 1 ho. 54
min. 41. sec. 28. 45. 15 R. A. of M. C. 349. 4. 35 Obl. A. of the Ascend. 79.
4. 35 In the Ascend. 18. 28. 8 On the Nonagesime 18. 28. 8 Altitudo Nonagesimi
in latitudine Londini 40. 4. 4 Distance of 90 from the Node in consequentia 8.
1. 48 Add Septentrional latitude 41. 37 Altitudo Nonagesimi in orbita Luna 40.
45. 41 Her Horizontal parallax of longitude 37. 7 Distance of the Sun from the
90 46. 41 The Moons parallax in longitude 31 To an hour preceding the Suns R.
A. 17. 42. 33 Did. from M. C. 2 ho. 54 min. 41 sec. 17. 42. 33 R. A. of M. C.
334. 2. 18 Obl. of the Orient 64. 2. 18 There is in the Ascendant 6. 23. 4
Nonagesime 6. 23. 4 Altitude of the 90 34. 12. 53 Distance from the Node 4. 3.
6 Meridional latitude substract 21. 3 Altitude of the 90 in the Moons Orbit 33.
51. 50 Horizontal Parallax longitude 32. 10 Distance of the Sun from the 90.
12. 49. 18 Parallax of the longitude 7. 11 Difference of the Parallaxes found
6. 40 Substract from the hourly motion of the Moon from the Sun, leaves hourly
motion seen 27. 32 By which dividing the former Parallax, gives the interval
between the true and visible Conjunction to be subtracted 18 To this interval,
the Moons true motion is 39 The visible conjunction, March 28 22. 4. 11 Place
of the Sun 19. 14. 47 The Moon 19. 14. 8 R. A. of the Sun 17. 44. 47 1 ho. 55
min. 49 sec. distant from M. C. 28. 57. 15 R. A. of M. C. 348. 47. 32 Obl. A.
As^end. 78. 47. 32 On the Ascendant 18. 15. 1 90 18. 15. 1 Altitude 90 39. 57.
30 Distant 90 from the Node in anteced. 7. 48. 41 Bor. lat. add 40. 31
Altitude of the 90 in the Moons Orbit 40. 38. 1 Horizontal Parallax of
longitude 37. 35 Distance of the Sun from the 90 59. 46 Parallax longitude 39
Therefore the visible conjunction is truly had. Distance of the 90 from the
vertex 50. 42. 30 Parallax latitude 44. 15 True motion of the Moons latitude 8.
47. 48 Lat. S. A. 45. 35 From which substract Parallax-latitude 8. 47. 48 Rests
latitude seen S. A. 1. 30 S d. of the Sun 16. 22 S d. of the Moon 16. 46
Aggregate of their SS dd. 33. ^8 Parts deficient 31. 38 Digits eclipsed 11. 35.
48 To an hour preceding the visible conjunction, R. A. M. C. 333. 45. 16 Obl.
of the Orient 63. 45. 16 On the Ascendent 6. 8. 21 90 6. 8. 21 Altitude of the
90 34. 6. 17 Distance from the Node in anteced. 4. 17. 59 Meridional latitude
substract 32. 20 Altitude of the 90 in the Moons Orbit 33. 33. 57 Horizontal
parallax of longitude 31. 54 Distance of the Sun from the 90 13. 3. 59 Parallax
longitude 7. 13 The difference of this parallax, and that at the visible
conjunction, subtracted from the Moons hourly motion, leaves hourly motion
seen 27. 38 Did. Nonagesimi a vertice 56. 26. 3 Parallax-latitude 48. 5. To an
hour following visible conjunction 93. 49. 50 R. A. M. C. 3. 49. 50 Oblique A.
of Ascend. On the Orient 29. 26. 37 90 29, 26. 37 Altitude of the 90 45. 26. 24
Distance of the 90 from the Node in conseq. 19. 00. 17 Lat. Boreal. add 1. 37.
6 Altitudine Nonagesimi in orbita Lunae 47. 3. 30 Horizontal parallax 42. 15
Distance of the Sun from 90 10. 9. 23 Parallax-longitude. 7. 27 Difference
hereof to the Parallax at the visible conjunction, substract from the Moons
hourly motion, leaves her hourly motion seen 27. 27 Did. Nonagesimi a vertice
42. 56. 30 Parallax-latitude 39. 20 Line of incidence 33. 6 Time of incidence
1. 11. 52 Time of emersion 1. 12. 29 Total duration 2. 24. 21 Interval between
visible conjunction and greatest obscurity subtracted 15 Latitude of the Moon
seen, beginning, M. 6. 13 end, S. 9. 25 The altitude at the beginning, of 31.
33. 31 31. 44. 53 Altitude at the middle, of 39. 54. 44 40. 42. 49 Altitude at
the end, of 45. 4. 24 46. 5. 12 Beginning, March 29. a. m. 8. 52. 4 Greatest
obscuration 10. 3. 56 Visible conjunction 10. 4. 11 End 11. 16. 25

A copy of the constitution of Vrania's countenance taken, to the Ecliptical
Synod of the Luminaries, happening (the 29 of March, at 10 ho. 4. mi. a.m.) in
the year of humane redemption, 1652. above the Horizon of London, the distance
of whose Vertex from the Equator, is 51. 32.



Gentle Reader,

Please to take notice, that the Cutter (through neglect) has not placed the
center of the Moon at the beginning on the line of Incidence, as he should have
done. Humanity can but err; therefore, let thy pardon argue the greatness of
thy humanity, since the disease is Epidemical.



I shall here give you some General Aporisms, how to judge of Eclipses.
1. Consider what Province or City is signified by the sign the Eclipse
happens in; and be sure that suffers.

2. Consider what Kingdoms or Cities are under the Sign the Lords of the
Eclipse are in; and be sure their diet is served them with the same sauce.

3. Note the nature of the Sign the Eclipse happens in: if it be violent, as
this is, the effects of the Eclipse will be the like: if it be moveable, they
begin betimes: if fiery, they signify War, and diseases of heat: if fixed, the
effects, though they work slowly, yet they work surely: if both fiery and fixed,
as that will be 1654. they threaten a Hectic War.

4. Take notice of the nature of the Sign: if humane, men suffer; if bestial,
beasts also: and if beasts, then of necessity man, because he takes his
nourishment from beasts. And now if I were minded to be critical, what a
gallant occasion have I! Suppose the Sign be watery? then, quoth my learned
Authors, the water is afflicted: and if the water be afflicted, the earth must
needs be, because it is nourished by the water: if the earth be afflicted, then
beasts, because they are nourished by the earth: beasts, earth, and water,
nourish man; and why must not he be afflicted too? Either the Sign the Eclipse
is in, or the Sign the Lords of the Eclipse are in, being hot and dry, cause
corruption by heat and dryness: if cold and moist, by coldness and moisture. In
this present Eclipse, the Sign is hot and dry; Saturn in Cancer, cold and
moist: What miracle is it, if it drown a Sea-town, and consume a Land-town by
fire?

5. It is probably apparent, that one and the same Eclipse may cause dryness in
one place, and moistness in another, thunder and lightning in a third,
earthquakes in a fourth, barrenness in a fifth, and burnings in a sixth; and as
many more as God pleases.

6. Whatsoever evil falls upon Princes and Magistrates, must needs touch the
Commonally.

7. An Eclipse of the Sun falling upon the angle of the Ascendant of any
Nativity, kills the native: if it fall within three degrees, it brings such a
disease as cannot be clawed off again with speed; especially if the malevolent
beheld the eclipsed Luminary at the Genesis, and more probably, if the eclipsed
Luminaries be with the Dragons tail, then if he be with the Dragons head.

8. The Dragons head regards Princes most; the Dragons tail, the Plebeians.

9. If between the time of the Eclipse, and the effects of the Eclipse, a good
direction operate in the Nativity of a private person, he need fear no evil,
though the Eclipse threaten him never so sore. The cursed Cow has but short
horns.

CHAP. V.
A general Judgment of the Effects of this Eclips.

AND in handling this, I shall give you first the Judgment of Authors upon the
Eclips. Secondly, former examples of Eclipses of like nature. Thirdly, my own
judgment upon it.

To the first of these, namely, the judgment of Authors, and in the judgment
of Authors we have many things to consider: As first of all the house of
Heaven, in which the Eclipse happens, which is the tenth house, the house of
Kings, Princes, and other potentates, and the house of all such as lord it over
their brethren; the Luminaries Eclipsed in the tenth house foreshowes death or
deposition to Kings, Princes, Magistrates, and such as call and account
themselves Ecclesiastical persons; thus Giuffus, and this he confesses depends
upon the will of God, and so it does; and yet it were wisdom for so many of
them as lie under the lash of this Eclips, (which who they be more anon) they
have timely admonition, and a woeful experience given them in Isa. 5. 12, 13,
14, 15. and 16 verses, and a joyful promise to them that fear God in the 17.
verse. They regard not the works of the Lord, nor consider the operation of his
hands; therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no
knowledge, and their honorable men are famished, and their multitudes are dried
up with thirst: Therefore the grave has enlarged her self, and opened her
mouth without measure; and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp,
and he that rejoices shall descend into it: And the mean man shall be brought
down, and the mighty man shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be
humbled: But the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is
holy, shall be sanctified in righteousness. Father of mercy look down upon all
those Magistrates that fear thy name; thou know what man is, thou know he
is but dust; and what can I say to the Magistracy of this Nation, any more then
what Daniel said to Nebuchad nezzar; (pray do not mistake me, I do not liken
you to Nebuchad nezzar, nor my self to Daniel: yet this I say, these things
were writ for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the world are come) if you
will keep your places, you must know that THE HEAVENS DO RULE, Daniel 4. 27:
Wherefore, Oh KINGS and MAGISTRATES, let my counsel be acceptable to you; break
off your sins by righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the
poor, it may be a lengthning of your tranquillity. I am sure it might have been,
had that course been taken in time, had your PRIESTS discreetly handled
according to the genuine meaning of the holy Ghost, these two Scriptures, this
and that I quoted to you in Isaiah, when they thundered out with a terrible
voice, Curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof, etc. How
happy might it have been for this poor Nation; how happy had all the Princes in
Europe been, if their lazy Clergy had done the like. But the greatest part of
that generation now living in Europe, follow the example of Priests of Bell in
the Apochripha; eat and drink of the best, live idly, and deceive their
Princes.

You may remember I left you before at Isaiah 5. the 16. verse, the 17. verse
gives comfort to them that fear God, and uprightly serve him; for when the Lord
shall have brought to pass what he threatened in the former verses: Then (says
he) shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the wast places of the fat ones
shall strangers eat. Indeed, the truth is, a general peace may be expected
throughout the Earth, and now blush for shame all you that rail and scould at
Astrology, when you see the times of the book of the Scripture and the book of
the Creatures, end in a Center: And thus much for the house afflicted.

In the second place we come to the Planet afflicted, and the sign he is
afflicted in.

The Planet afflicted is the, what his signification was, I told you in the
beginning of the Treatise, but seeing we are long in learning, and very subject
to forget such things as threaten evil to us; I will give you a brief Epitomy
of what persons are signified by the, He signifies all Magistrates in general
from the Emperor to the petty Constable; the sign afflicted, is, the exaltation
of the, and the chiefest sign in the Zodiak; we shall tell you by and by what
has ensued upon the Eclipses of the, in in former ages: is a sign, Masculine,
Diurnal, Moveable, Cardinal, Equinoctial, Fiery, Choleric, Bestial,
Domestical, Luxurious, Intemperate, Violent, Oriental.

The opinion of Giuffus of an Eclips of in is this, ( I pray God it do not
prove too true) It threatens destruction to the fruits of the Earth, kills the
fruit in the bud, kills sheep and other cattle; great KINGS, PRINCES, and
MAGISTRATES, are either banished or imprisoned or put to death. Princes and
their Subjects agree like Cats and Dogs, first they snarl, and then together by
the ears; huge Armies, terrible wars, slaughters of men, burning of Towns,
Theft, Rapines, Depopulations, Fire, and the sword reign lords paramount in the
Nations threatened by this Eclips: Neither shall the women want their share;
for, for, such of them as are with child shall be too too subject to miscarry;
( let them make use of my DIRECTORY for MIDWIVES to prevent it) both men and
women are subject to acute Fevers, or other Epidemical diseases; the air is
hot, blasting, and burning; barrenness of the Earth and dearth of Corn is
threatened to those Nations under, CHANGE of GOVERNMENT, death of KINGS,
Magistrates, and rich men, the execution of which my Author confesses is in
the hands of God; the less reason have the Priests to rail at him.

We leave now Giuffus and come to Proclus; but before I quote the words of
Proclus, here is something else to be considered; namely, in what face of this
Eclips is to be found, we vulgarly hold that it is in the latter end of the
second face; and we know as well that since the Creation the fixed Stars are
almost moved out of the signs they were Created in: now the query lies thus,
whether we should take the faces, according to the signs, or the fixed Stars in
the signs?

We will not much contend about the business, ye may take which you please,
there is never a barrel better Herring, and in both Proclus shall be my Author:
if we take the Eclips to happen according to the vulgar account in the second
face of, It makes Kings and Magistrates Goal-birds, and if it do not lay them
in prison, it most terribly afflicts them, nothing in the world thrives with
them, what ever the matter is; some of them whom God pleases lose their heads,
and then they feel the lighte^, others are hanged, and they cannot feel at all,
it is as wretched a time for Kings as ever the Sun saw.

But if you will measure the time by the fixed Stars, it happens in the last
face of, and that shows Sedition, Cruelty, Fierceness, and Inhumanity of
Soldiers, Soldiers will be in Arms against their Governors right or wrong, a
sword and a gun are two prevailing arguments: there is none like them to be
found in Keckermans Logic, nor Ramus Dialects, all the Sophistry in all the
Universities in the world will not be able to appease them, Caesar is dead, and
cannot appease his soldiers dangerous mutiny; Galesus in Virgil, and Emathion
in Ovid were both slain in doing the like Office: when the business comes to
pass you will know what I mean; mean season, let old father Time be witness
either of the truth or falsehood of my predictions; and thus much for the
Planet Eclipsed, and the sign and place he is Eclipsed in.

We come now in the third place, to the Lords of the Eclips, of which will
challenge the pre-eminence, and will be angry if we should not give it him, and
now I cannot but remember two verses in Lucau, I Will make use but of one verse
and a piece of another. Quid tantum Gradive paras? Nam mitis inalto,
Jupiter occasu premitnr --
What, What! Stout, and must thou needs rule all,
Poor Jove is set in the West, and in his fall.
Take notice rules the soldiery, even from the Generalissimo to the Snapsack
boy; let none of them take exception at this, it belongs to them all as they
are a Military body: signifies all civil Magistrates, Priests and Lawyers: a
Boy of 14. years old deserves to be whipped, that cannot pick English out of this.

We shall show you what the actions of in the effects of this Eclips will be.

First, Generally.

Secondly, Specially.

First, Generally according to Origanus, he consumes the fruits of the Earth,
casually by fire, accidentally by heat and dryness; the air will be hot and
dry, and goods of rich men, which they love as dearly as they love their lives,
which they have tired their UNLUCKY and COMMONWEALTH DESTROYING brains to
get, shall be extorted by violence, and consumed by soldiery, all the miseries
the sword can bring upon a people, and they are not a few; war, bloodshed,
rapine, extortion; when a covetous man sowes his corn he knows not who shall
reap it, (yet this I Will tell you by and by, the Lord by a special providence
may look after them that fear him) the air is hot and dry, pestilential and
mortal; all Europe is together by the ears, not only one with another, but also
with themselves; Asmodeus the lecherous Devil enters into men and women, and
draws them to their ruin; Kings and Magistrates are mad, and Subjects are as
stubborn.

Pallida Tisiphone ( i e. ultio cordis) media inter millia saevit.
-- No fear their wrath asswageth,
Revenge of heart midst many thousand rages.
The bodies of men are troubled with choler; Towns and Cities are consumed by
fire, and ruined by soldiery, murder, and theevery are as familiar, as
butterflies in April: thus for Origanus, and if I have a little commented upon
him, blame me not if I have spoke the truth.

We'll come now to Giuffus: lord of an Eclipse sets the Nations signified by
the Eclipse together by the ears, by reason of the TYRANNY of PRINCES,
seditions, tumults of the People; Princes and Magistrates are angry, the people
are like mad dogs, they run at every thing they are set at; a thousand
reproaches, disdaines, and ill words begin the effects; imprisonment is the
middle; death and repentance amongst great ones the latter end; the law shall
be changed, and the soldiers sword shall be sharper then the Scholars wit.

Secondly, Particularly.

In the next place, we'll consider the sign is in: Giuffus, if be lord of the
Ecclips, and in: four footed beasts must go to wrack, especially such as are
useful to men, imagine oxen and horses: the fruits of the Earth shall be
consumed by caterpilars, violent heat destroys the corn, either upon the ground
or putrifies it in the barns.

Also Albumazar says, if have North Latitude, he causes many infirmities, the
Smallpox, Measels, etc. if South Latitude, death of women and cattle; but in
this Eclips having no Latitude, for ought I know he may perform them both.

Messaholah says, that having dominion in an Eclips of the causes corruption
by his heat, diseases of choler, and heat of blood, violence, injury,
dissension, tumults, and uproars amongst the people, (look to it France, if
thou find not this too true, say I am a lier, and I Will be content to bear the
name with patience) also thunder, lightning, tempest scorching dryness,
sedition, and privy conspiracy, plague, pestilence, and famine, battle,
murder, and sudden death, though the Dull headed College of SORBON pray never
so earnestly, Good Lord deliver us. Proclus, an Eclipse of the in the fiery
triplicity, signifies war, great drought, cruel seditions, bitter
controversies, mortal sicknesses, dryness and barrenness of the Earth.

A^steed, if the Eclips of the be in a fiery sign, and ruler both of it and the
year, signifies great burnings.

We pass now to the second significator of this Eclipse, which is the, because
she is lady of the succeeding Angle ^ which Angle possesses the middle face of
it, and the Ascendants of the Eclipse: If the Moon be lady of the Eclips quoth
Albumazar, and also lady of the Ascendant, as here she is, the common people,
flutter like a Be in a Tar-Box, and by wranglings and contentions are like to
vex the Magistrates to some tune.

Ptolomie says, if the Eclipse happen in Equinoctial signs, either in or or
which this is one of them, the effects of it will fall foul upon the Clergy,
such of them as make a trade of prateing nonsense instead of Gospel.

By the rules of the Ancients, cannot be brought in as a Lord of this Eclipse;
for though he be anguler yet is he not stationary; yet shall I have
something to say to him by and by. Thus you have the first thing I promised
you, namly, what Authors said of the effects of this Eclipse, pass we now to
the second:

Which is, What experience Authors that were dead before we were born, have
left upon record of Eclipses of this nature. I shall give you some few from
Leovitius, and but few, by reason the Press stays for me.

Anno 1418. the Sun was eclipsed in Aries 26 degr. in Prague, in Pohemia the
Clergy (as forsooth they call themselves) and the Laity (as they please to call
others) fell together by the ears, the King of Bohemia died of a Palsy, such
a fanaticall fury possessed the Clergy in Paris, that their saucy actions caused
two thousand of them to be knocked on the head in the streets, in one day. Oh
that they would once learn to be a little wiser.

Anno 1419. happened a dismal Eclipse of the Sun in Aries 15. Mars Lord of it in
Taurus, as he is in this; Now follows a new Tumult in Bohemia: John Zizka a
noble Soul of an ingenious brain, and an excellent Soldier, gathers a great
Army, he first enjoyes Bohemia, routs the Clergy in every Battle, unthrones
Sigismund the Emperor, and at last dies in his Bed a Conqueror, after the Lord
had made him a sufficient scourge to correct the proud insolency of the Clergy.

The Duke of Brunswick and his Clergy went together by the ears, which war
continued Three years: But who gave the Clergy authority to leave their Bible,
and take a Sword; no one breathing knows: sure 'twas Mars or the Devil, for
Jesus Christ, whom they pretend they preach, is the PRINCE of PEACE.

Anno 1486. happened a dreadful Eclipse of the Sun in Aries 6. which set
almost all Europe together by the ears, and who were the authors of such a
dissension think you, truly the buffle-headed Clergy; for it is almost a miracle
to find an evil in a Nation, and they not the Authors of it: the Emperor was
that year taken Prisoner by the French, it is a strange thing an Eclipse of the
Sun seldom happens in Aries, but it plagues the Roman Emperor. Caesar's are but
men, neither shall Three years pass over your head, counting the time from the
29. of March, 1652. but they shall find, and your selves shall see they are no
more. Anno 1530. There happened a great Eclipse of the Sun in 18. Lord of it near
the Bulls eye, being a fixed Star of a hot and violent nature, and the effects
of this lasted until the spring time 1632. it seems Leovitius followed not
Ptolomies method concerning the time, when the effects of an Eclipse began to
operate: In the beginning of the effects of this Eclips, the Bishops persuaded
the Emperor to besiege Florence, which famous City, after a long, tedious and
starving siege was taken and brought into bondage. Portugale was perplexed
eight days together with Earthquakes about the middle of the effects of it:
after which terrifying Earthquakes succeeded as terrible a Pestilence. I am
almost of an opinion this Eclipse 1652. will shake down that new upstart
Monarchy, which revived but in the declining age of the world, like a lightning
before death, or the violent strugles of a dying man. About the end of the
effects of this Eclipse appeared a Comet, which run through the Grab, the
Virgin, and the Bullance, and did a world of mischief; the Helvetians were got
together by the ears about Religion; the King of Denmark who had been ten years
banished, prepares a Fleet, and makes a faint assay to recover his Kingdom, but
the poor man was taken at Sea and committed to safe custody; the Emperors son
dies, and the Duke of Saxony marches to his grave; the King of Hungary and
Bohemia is proclaimed Emperor, and to war must he go against the Turks before
he had learned to handle a sword: but the world shall never say of him now he
is dead and rotten that he did nothing, for he beseiged a town which lay upon
the confines of Germany, and when he saw the town would not yield and he was
afraid to storm it, he turned Retrograde. I will not shame him so much, to say
he run a way but the man seeing he could not beat his enemies, went to see what
he could do against his friends, with fire and sword he wasted the greatest
part both of Germany and Austria: at last, when he heard that the Christians
had raised a potent army against him, he being something a kin to prince
Rupert, loving plundering better then fighting, he and his Army shift every man
for themselves, leaving a name of ignomy branded rather then engraven upon his
sepulcher, if ever he were thought worthy of any.

Anno 1540, happened a great eclips of the Sunn in Aries 28. a most parching hot
and and dry summer followed, insomuch that very deep rivers were fordable, and
rivers of a mean bigness were utterly dried up: the very heat of the sun set
fire to woods, the Kings house in Bohemia was fired none knows how, frequent
fires were all over Germany, the King of Hungary who is a branch of the house
of Austria died, the Duke of Saxony takes his leave of this world, and turns
private man in another, Ferdinand beseiges Buda in Hungary, but instead of
taking the town, he lost his army first, and his life afterward by the Turk,
the Emperor must needs be in arms forsooth, and whither must he go but to
Algier, but there comes a tempest and stops the man's course, a hundred and
thirty ships he lost, himself entered battle both with the danger of the sea
and hunger both at a time; at length when no other good was to be don, he
gathers up the relics of his forlorn creatures and returns home like a fool
as he came forth, and thus much for my second part, namely, what authors of
credit have left to posterity concerning the effects of Eclipses of the Sun in
Aries, upon which in civility you cannot deny me that small courtesy, as to
give my own animadversions.

First, you see here that the Priests have been the creatures that have made
all the scuffle in the world, in the effects of these Eclipses; it is their
turbulent spirits, and sophistical language that caused so many mournful
widows, and woeful fatherless children, so much murder and bloodshed in those
parts, where the effects of the Eclipses operated, he that has but half an eye
may see what they have acted in this Nation in these late unhappy wars; its in
vain for them to prate to me, that they never fight, as some of them have said:
there is a pretty fable in Esop, to this purpose; After the winning of a
battle, the conquering party took a Trumpeter prisoner, and when they would
have executed him, he prayed them for Gods sake they would not hang him, for he
never fought in all his life; but said they, thou cowardly rascal, with thy
Trumpet thou incitest others to fight. I leave the Clergy of this Nation that
are guilty of the business, to make the moral themselves; it is easily done,
Pilate had never condemned Christ, had it not been for the Scribes, Pharisees,
and Priests, but was almost forced by them to do it; Pilate knew as well as I
that he was guiltless; but being a faint hearted base spirited fellow, and
least he should be thought not to be Caesar's friend, crucified the Lord of
Glory: I pray God in these our days, in which the end of the world is coming,
fellows of that jackcoat be not near of kin to the frogs men ioned in the
Revelations 16. 13, 14. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of
the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the
mouth of the false Prophet, for they are the spirits of devils working
miraecles, which go forth unto the Kings of the Earth, and of the Whole world,
to gather them together to the battle of that great day of God Almighty: look
to it Priests, look to it people, the time is a coming, and if you look not to
it these lines of mine shall one day leave you without excuse, build not your
faith upon tradition; in the latter times it will be a hard matter to discover
who is a Saint and who is not, even such times in which if it were possible
they would deceiv the elect, if they could be deceived; the times will be
sharp, they will be short, and for ought I know we are upon the beginings of
them, I would fain know of all our Priests, who (unless the Devil) chained
Divinity to an University, I hate such creatures, I cannot call them men, that
when they have learned a great deal of Sophistry, and know well how to quible
handsomely upon a point, and have read Augustine and Cyprian, and Nazianzene,
and Bazil, and a great many other old Fathers, then they say they have gotten
the body of Divinity; truly, I have read many of them my self, but could never
see Christ with such a pair of spectacles, the Theory of the Gospel I know, it is
only Jesus Christ and him crucified, and the indwelling of the spirit of God
in man, but what the practical part is I am as yet ignorant; my opinion at
present is, that it is something more plain and simple then the world takes it to
be; the main way to judge between a saint and a sinner, is not who performs
most duties; for our reformation so much boasted of, consists rather in pulling
down, then setting up, and this Eclipse was so placed by the Eternal God to do
it, and it will execute the will of God in despite of all the Sophisms of all
the Universities in the world: I honor learning while it is in its Sphere: the
fire is good while it is in the Chimny corner, but put in the thatch, and it
spoils all; and so does learning in such men as pretend their natural gifts to
come by divine inspiration, learning will make one a man of a beast, but not a
saint of a man; and yet the most part of men think that the Gospel rests only
in the heads of the learned, and humane learning is deified and made a little
godalmighty of, as though the Gospel were so chained to human leaning, that it
could not be separated: I am none of those that count humane learning evil, but
know, and by experience find, it is an excellent ornament to a man, it makes a
man the more a man; and therefore a saint that has humane learning, is better
able to express Christ, then he which is a saint and has none, because he is
more a man, but he is never the fitter nor abler to receive Christ.

In the second place we find in all these examples, that the Emperors and
whole house of Austria has bin much afflicted, let them look to it: now
Bohemia will probably be afflicted with intestine wars: the Emperor at his wits
end, his house totters, and it is in vain for him to prop it up by Armies, or any
thing else, men's lives are but like so many ships sailing to their long homes,
which should be toward heaven: it is in vain to prop up a ship when it totters,
with posts without side, it is the ballast within must keep it steedy: and let me
give this sober advise to the foreign Princes of that ancient Family, it is a
principle of goodness within you, and not the strength of Armies without you
must do you good in these times which so nearly concern you.

Lastly, let Christian Princes beware of warring with the Turk during the
effects of this Eclipse: you have read already how fatal it has been to you in
former ages: the time of his fall is not yet come, although fall he must:
neither has the Eternal ordained any of you to pull down that proud Monarchy.

I should now come to deliver my own judgment upon the effects of this Eclipse:
but here is an Objection seems worth the answering, namely, Why did not the
Eclipse of the Sun in Aries 19. 1633. work so great effects as you
Prognosticate in this. To this I Answer,

First, the Eclipse was not so great, therefore not so formidable: The
greatness of the effects of an Eclipse of the Sun, are drawn from the greatness
of the parts of the body of the Sun darkened.

Secondly, the house of the heavens afflicted by that Eclipse was obscure,
therefore so must the effects be, and yet what sad effects it produced is well
known throughout all Europe, it being not past our memory.

Thirdly, and were both in the ninth house, and therefore moderated the matter
by wisdom, and good Counsel.

Fourthly, the last, though not the least of all my arguments is, matters were
not then fit nor ripe for action; so then there is as much difference between
that eclips and this, as there is between fire set among corn when it is green,
and when it is dry.

I com to my last thing propounded, which is my own judgment rationally
delivered from the Scheam: and in doing of this I shall be as accurate as I can.

The fixed Stars with which this eclipse happens, are of a Saturnine and
Mercuriall condition (I mean those that are within the Zodiac, for I have
nothing to say to the rest now) the second paper will show you what their
condition is, to that I refer you, as not daring to write in words of length,
and not of figures, what I think; when Iuvenall was in the same fear he wrote
his Satyrs against such as were dead; and considering my self this Nation is
full of Critics, I will give my self the latitude of all Europe in my
Prognostications: the Mid-heaven signifies Kings, Magistrates, etc. the
Ascendant the common people; the place of the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter
last past, was in the mid-heaven of this Eclips, perhaps so was the conjunction
in the mid-heaven of the figure: the Moon is Lady of the ascendant, and darkens
the Sun in the 10th. upon the very degree of his exaltation: and if this
signify not a Democracy, or to write English, That the Government shall come
into the hands of the People, and that throughout Europe, or the most part
thereof, before the effects of this Eclipse are over past, I dare be bound to
forfeit my Life: and yet this great thing shall not be done easily: Although I
speak more of this hereafter, yet a few words spoken here in due season will
not be amiss: Saturn perplexes the Ascendant, and if the Ascendant signify the
common people, it perplexes them also.

Its no great miracle if Magistrates be perplexed: that the Vulgar should
suffer: when the Lion roars, the beasts tremble. Two years shall not pass
before both come to pass. Saturn in the ascendant according to Bally, and there
unfortunate, and the old soul is as misfortunate as can be; signifies
detriment and impediment to the Body of man, infirmities and sickness of his
own nature: the truth on it is, he looks as sour as Verjuice on the common
People; and to tell them the plain truth of the business, he is Lord of the
seventh, eighth and ninth Houses. Have a care of your selves gentle Clergy, and
be ruled by me, join together and petition the State against his effects, and
tell them ITS DAMNABLE, ITS DAMNABLE. See if you and the States are able to
withstand his evil influence. I will promise you, the States have patience
enough to stay two years to try which is in the truth, you or I. It were a most
gallant thing, my Friends of the Clergy, if your outcryes and most humble
petitions, could withstand the influence of the Stars, which the eternal God,
the first Being of all things created them for.

A word or two to my Brethren of the Commonalty, my self being a Commoner: Good
people, I cannot flatter, neither can I persuade my self you will act honestly
during the effects of this eclipse. I speak not to those in England, but
generally to all those in Europe, horrid Tumults, Murders and Mutinies are
threatened, cruel massacres; the Commoners are subject to be impudent and
insolent against their Magistrates: remember, remember Jerusalem was ruined by
its own seditions within it, or else Vespasian had as good have thrown his cap
at it. Let us reason a little together in a fair way; I pray tell me, and tell
me truly, suppose your Magistrates do not please you, is Mutinies the way to
help your selves? would you take such a courswel at the hands of your servants?
would you be glad to be served so? read all Histories and see if you can ever
find any good end ensue such preposterous beginnings; you will undo your selves
and beggar your children and families if you take such courses, God will have
his work don in his own time, by his own way, of which I am sure Mutiny is
none. And yet the more is the pity, they are too too frequent throughout
Europe; I pray God England be not too too sensible of them during the effects
of this Eclipse, I say no more. I am sure France is peppered with them, and
Holland has its share.

The square of Saturn to the Luminaries, signifies wrangling and falling out
between great and rich men: Kings and Magistrates cannot agree with one
another; so it seems the common people shall not have all the fish to fry,
Negligence and Tyranny having taken possession of Princes; Envy, hatred and
accusations by the people, and something wors sues and pursues them, and like so
many evil Spirits haunts their Ghosts, and at last unthrones them, and lays
their honor in the dust: And where can come a better place for that counsel of
the Holy Ghost, then this: Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye
Rulers of the Earth; serve the Lord with fear and rejoice with trembling: kiss
the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way: Blessed are all they that
trust in him.

Besides, Saturn being Lord of the Eight, and in the Ascendant, threatens the
Earth with diseases of his own nature, which you may read in my Semeiotica,
and I doubt feel before the effects of this Eclipse be half over. The truth is,
a general pestilence is threatened to Europe, of which England is like sadly to
participate, neither shall Holland want its share.

Lastly, consider that the places subject to the effects of this Eclipse, are
England. France. Germany. Swedeland. Poland. Denmark. Silesia. Syria. The holy
Land. Palestina. Russia. Ireland. Lorrain. Franconia. Parthia. Persia.
Scotland. Granado. Burgundia. Holland. Zealand. Prussia. Numidia. a great part
of Afric. Austria and its whole House. Saxony. Hassia, etc.

Of Towns and Cities.
Naples. Anconia. Capna. Ferraria. Padua. Florence. Brunswick. Lipzick. Nantz.
Cyprus. and most of the SeaTowns in Asia the less. Mantua. Sena. Tarentum
Constantinople. Tunis. Algier. Venice. Genoa. Millan York. Saint Andrews.
Lubeck. Magdeburg Wittemburg. Gorlitz. Franckfort upon the main. Hull. Vienna
in Austria. Antwerp. Oxford. Gaunt. Brandenburg. Auspurg. together with many
others too tedious here to name, and indeed the Effects will be generally felt
over all Europe in one measure or other; so that I may say of Europe concerning
the effects of this Eclips, as my friend and Countryman Thomas May Esquire,
once did of Mauritania, a little before the batel at Thapsus, only a little
altering the first verses.

All Monarchy it quite will overthrow,
More wrack alas its sad effects will do,
Then after ages can repair with speed;
And beasts possess the seats of Nations dead,
Where feared Monarks once gave laws to Men
Shall Lions reign, and Tigers make their Den.
The slimy Serpent all alone shall crawll,
And wanting men, shall be no plague at all.
And thus much for this Chapter.
CHAP. VI.
Of other great conjunctions and oppositions, Whose influences concur to the
complement of our Judgment upon this Eclipse.

IN handling this, you must not conceive that I intend to handle them all, for
if you do, you make a false conception; the Press stays for me, and you will say
it were time (if you knew as much as I) to make have; I shall therefore handle
the greatest and most prevalent of them, and let each stand in a part by it
self.

PART 1.
The first that presents it self is a of and in 17. and this happens, upon the
27. of May, 15. h. 33 '. p.m. They that please may set the Figure, and they
that please not may let it alone, it is all a case to me. They mediate the
heavens the day before, with the goat a horned beast, and it is in the Citizens
sign, let them beware of a child got in Capricorn; the star is of the first
magnitude of the nature of and.

The of and in Gemini; according to Guido signifies impediment that shall fall
upon men, by reason of Thunder and Lightning: but my own opinion is the
chiefest danger is in the Lightning, and this danger is most like to fall about
the Western parts of the World; the Earth has got a hot and dry disease, being
exceedingly distempered for want of water; and that water which does fall from
the skies, it comes in such violent storms that it does but little good; wars
and contentions, theevery ( and something worse) which I will not name vexes
the North parts of the World; and diseases coming of heat of blood, imagine the
Smal-pox, Pestilence, etc.

If I should leave Guido, and come to Haly, he will tell us but little better
news; for he says it signifies strife and contention, fighting and killing.

Give me leave a little to add my own: London, beware of fire; beware of
quarrelling, thou have got but little by playing such pranks before, thou art
likely to get less by such another action: the Pestilence is likely to begin
this year, God in mercy does it to show what he will do the following year:
beware Flanders, a curse is coming upon thee; what if God knows it is good for
thee to suspect the worst, either it will come, or it may come: let Brabant,
Corduba in Spain, Nurenburge in Germany, that famous Imperial City, Bruges in
Flanders, etc. remember what I tell to London.

Questionless the effects of this will bring a change of Government in London,
I pray God it be for the best, I have some hopes it will: Oh, that thy Citizens
would every morning when first they rise read my monthly observations on May
1652.

PART 2.
The second in course is the of and in 2. with a nebulous fixed star, which
bids Saturnine people beware their eyes, and among them my self, it happens
July 14. 1652. 19. h. 13 '. p.m. the being at that time in to them both from.

Now begin the effects of the Eclipse to work, and he is a fool in grain that
prefers Tradition before Reason, I shall tell you hereafter when Authors say
the effects shall begin. Now the Princes of Europe beat their heads to find
out which is the readiest way to undo themselves, Ambassadors are rife; but
whether Princes consult together to outwit one another, or to secure one
another, or the like, there is some question of them both, and is never a
barrel better Herring, If presently after this conjunction, you find not a
Pestilence and also many uproars in Rome; also Bohemia troubled much with war,
the Florentines all in an uproar, and here in England many people troubled with
sore eyes, and other diseases of heat of blood; especially a Cephallick
disease, called an addle Brain, say I am no Artist; Men shall wonderfully be
given to lying and deceiving, they know not what they would have, their
thoughts are in a Chaos, and hang together like ropes of sand, their thoughts
dance up and down from one thing to another without any order: so that if they
would look upon them with the eye of Reason, they begin without order and end
without issue: we may say of men's dispositions about this time, as Seneca said
of men's lives, They are tossed much, but sail nothing; and truly, this is a
very shrewd Disease, the only true cure that I at present know for it, is to
observe the vanity of your own dispositions. What a vain thing is it, That a
man whose Birth and breeding has made him but a a Bramble, never to rule over
the Trees, should offer to turn Statesman, or except against the government he
cannot mend; Thomaso Masianello the Fisherman did so at Naples, to his own
destruction, and the City also: Truly, I had not given you so many cautions,
had I not been confident, That about this time your Wits be too subject to runn
a wooll-gathering to their own destruction.

Besides Guido says, That the conjunction of Sol and Saturn in Leo, makes
children disobedient, and act things clean contrary to their Parents will:
They say that Gemini is the Ascendant of London; and yet this we find by
experience, That Saturn never came into Leo but he punishes this City; let her
Magistrates and Common-councel-men avoid pernicious Counsels and Debates about
this time: I am very jealous, if God do not immediately contradict the
influence of the Heavens about this time, such a thing, or such a like thing
may be; and perhaps something worse, if some be not wiser then some, there be
those now living that will have occasion to temember August or September 1652.
so long as they have a day to live.

PART. 3.
The next that comes in order is the of and in 5. August 9. 1652. the effects
of which I tremble to think of, and willingly would have past them by if I
durst; the punishment will be great, and I pray God the desert be not as great;
and that I may be methodical in the handling of it, I will bring to your memory,

First, what has formerly succeeded such a, and yet within our age.

Secondly, what Authors say of such a conjunction.

Thirdly, my own judgment on it.

To the first of these I shall quote but only one Example, which ushered the
late King Charles to the Crown: 1622. in July happened a conjunction of and in,
which though it be a little out of my road, makes not a little to my purpose:
during the effects of this conjunction, London was afflicted with an Epidemical
disease in the belly; the very same disease, which lately puzzled all our
pitiful College to find out what it was, and caused by the very same aspect,
namely, a of and in. I cannot conceive it can appear a wonder to any real
Physician, that knows upon what foundation the ground of his Art is built;
but that so great affliction of Saturn in a moist sign, should mar the
attentive faculty in man; but though they had not wit enough to find out the
cause of the disease; yet they had wit enough to invent a hideous name for it.
viz. the plague in the guts; I had not mentioned this, had it not been to have
done a little good to my Countrymen; if ever it be their hard hap to be
troubled with such a College puzling disease, it is but only strengthening the
retentive faculty, and the cure is done, that so you need not puzle nature to
encounter with a virulent disease and preposterous physic at the same time,
but enough of this. To proceed,

Under the effects of this conjunction of and Anno 1623. the Sea broak in at
Amsterdam, as I have been credibly informed by those that lived there at that
time, and now in the very same place it brake in the last time: I would not say
this is a strong confirmation of the truth in Astrology, for fear the Priests
should rail at it; yet this I say, what is here written is truth, and if that
truth which is most demonstrative is most excellent; take this into that
number; and now wherefore do you think I have quoted all this, truly to make
way for what follows.

If the effects of the of and in. 1622. jumpe so exactly with the effects of
the of and in. 1650. as they did as near as the men of Benjamin could sling a
stone; Why should not the effects of the of and in 1652: answer as exactly to
the of and in 1624. The summer 1624, was exceeding dry, and was it not so 1651.
the summer 1625. was exceeding pestilential, and if the Eternal God do not
prevent, the influence of the heavens threatens no less in 1653. let such as
question the truth of Astrology consider of this, and indeed for their sakes I
quoted it, I am confident many moderate souls are possessed with a PRIEST RIDDEN
HUMOR, that they suppose whatever a Priest prates in a Pulpit must needs be
true, and for truth they entertain it without any examination, it is a hundred
pitties the men of BEREA are dead, and none of their generation living in
England, whom the Holy Ghost commends for searching the Scriptures to see
whether what the Apostle Paul taught were true or not, but our Ministers Ipse
dixit serves the turns of most of their hearers, though their spirits comes as
far short of Paul's, as the spirit of a Hare does from the spirit of a Lion:
and thus you have the first thing propounded. viz What has succeeded such a in
our age, and also the reasons, why I did it.

Proceed we now to the second: What the opinions of Authors is of such a
malevolent as this is, and I care not greatly if I begin with Haly; the of and
causes impediment to Kings, diseases amongst men, and it happening in a fiery
sign, they must needs proceed from heat of blood; men first of all deceive one
another, and afterward fall out and fight (and so let such creatures do, till
I part them) men are subject to hot Rhumes in their eyes, according to Guido;
especially their right eyes; fire and sword, and sudden death, and another
inconvenience from their Geniu's, their heads are not set fast enough upon
their shoulders: besides, the happening in, a fixed sign, the mischief is like
to be durable, ah, and violent too, both the stars being violent, and the sign
no less, the malice must needs be much increased, unless Jupiter help, and the
poor soul is so weak he cannot. The have of the Printer, or something else,
hinders me from quoting more Authors.

Come we now to the third thing proposed, and that is my own judgment; and
herein I might well say as the Priest did in the Pulpit, I know not where to
begin, nor where to end, but I must begin somewhere, or else I shall shame my
self, and confound my Auditors; if this do not argue simplicity in me to recite
in a book, I am sure it did in the Priest to recite it in a Pulpit; well then,
I will let it stand for a jest: and thus I Will begin.

First, Never yet happened a in Saturn and Mars in, but it punished London
with a Pestilence the next year following, and now they make two in, one in
1652. another in 1654. what harm is it, if I bid London beware of a Pestilence,
in 1653. and 1655. though it should never come to pass, is the City ever the
worse? Or the Citizens ever the poorer; I am confident it has held true, as
may appear by Chronicle, these five hundred years: The merciful God whose
tender mercy is over all his works, grant in mercy to his poor and almost
undone Nation, that it may take away our Oppressors only, and spare such as
mind and intend really the good of the Commonalty: And if I might make an
Allegory of one place of Scripture, which though it were really in the letter
once verified, it follows not in the least, but it may in a mistical sense be
performed once again, it follows not, because God said, Genesis 3.15. I will
put enmity between thee and the serpent, and between thy seed and her seed,
etc. That all the Enmity between them, should be only between men and
serpents, greater enmity then which is not between two creatures, for men
though they keep beasts for their profit, and birds for their pleasure, and
dormice for their ease, as to make themselves sleep, or the like: yet a man
when he meets with an Adder, gives him no quarter, but is sure to die for it;
and where it is said in the foregoing Scripture: I will put enmity between thee
and the woman: and it is quoted in Plinies Natural History; and I am much
mistaken if the same thing be not in Gesners History of Beasts, that if a
serpent be put into a room where there is forty men, and but one woman, the
serpent will single out that woman amongst all them men, to do her a mischief:
I say does it follow because this Scripture holds so true in a litteral sense,
may it not hold as true in a mistical sense, and produce a real war.

First, in the Microcosm, or body of man, between the spirit of man and his own
corruptions, look into your selves you shall find it as I tell you.

Secondly, in the habitable world between the saints and the men whose portions
is in this world; which Cain and Abel first began: but the contest shall never
be ended till the dissolution.

Thirdly, in the intelligible world between good and bad Angels; for Michael
and his Angels shall fight against the Dragon, and the Dragon shall fight and
his Angels: but here is our comfort, and the comfort of all saints, our Christ
is a Conquering Christ, and is preparing to ride out Conquering and to Conquer,
and if this be so, as is apparently true, why may not another Scripture? 1
Kings 19. 15, 16, 17. And the Lord said unto him go, and return on thy way to
the Wilderness of Damascus, and when thou come there, anoint Hazael to be
King over Syria, and Jehu the son of Nimshy, shall thou anoint to be King over
Israel, and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah shall thou anoint to be
Prophet in thy room; and it shall come to pass, that him that escapes the
sword of Hazael, shall Jehu slay, and him that escapes the swood of Jehu shall
Elisha slay, and I care not greatly if I ad the next verse; yet have I left me
seven thousand in Israel, that have not bowed the knee to Baal; I will not
stand much in the interpretation of this Scripture, but leave every one to be
his own interpreter: yet this I say, that Tyranical brain who has escaped the
sword in this Nation, may dye by the pestilence; and he who escapes the
pestilence, may dye by the hand of that Angel who is noted to come, Revelations
14. 6, 7. And I saw an Angel fly in the midst of Heaven having the EVERLASTING
GOSPEL to preach to them that dwell on the Earth, and to every Nation, and
tongue, and people; saying with a loud voice, fear God and give glory to him,
for the hour of his judgment is come, and worship him that made the Heaven and
Earth, and the Sea; which Angel I assure you is coming, and will be heard, not
in your ears, but in your hearts; I mean the hearts of such as have not bowed
THEIR KNEE TO BAAL: And this gives me some hope the Lord will preserve you in
this terrible pestilential time 1653. in the mean season make use of Paul's
advice which he preached at Lystra: Turn from vanity, and worship the living
God which made the Earth and the Sea and all that therein is.

Secondly, Kings and Magistrates cannot agree with one another, but only in one
thing, and that is oppressing the people, and that they are old dogs at, and
the poor groan under it, Arise O God and help them!

Thirdly, the Soldiery cannot agree with one another, let them score their valor
on the heads of their enemies in Gods name, and not fall out with one another
for that is pity.

Fourthly, many Clergymen and Lawyers are displaced and imprisoned, and some
made shorter by the head.

Fifthly, a new sect of Heretics arise, and yet I should admire how wors can
be invented then are already, did I not know the Devils invention is very quick
in what is naught.

Sixthly, a woeful mortality is threatened both to man and beast, pestilence
amongst men, diseases of the heart and stomach, murrain among cattle, violent
hot and blasting East winds.

Seventhly, I could almost be afraid of some treacherous action, either
hatching or acting by those that are in authority in Scotland: I hope our State
will have a vigilant eye over them, they have warning of it long enough before
hand.

Eighthly, Cholar perplexes the bodies of men, to which if I add a little
discontent, as I may do very well, both distilled through the Limbick of an
idle Brain, may bring forth such an untoward chymicall preparation, as may
produce contempt of Authority, to the great prejudice both of superiors in the
Nation, and also in the Nation it self.

Ninthly, private Murders and poisonings are like to be very rife, I desire
all men in authority to have a care of themselves, lest some of them be sent to
take a supper apud inferos, before they are aware of it; it is a scurvy
fashion, I do not like it, and yet to tell you the truth I fear it.

Tenthly, the Land is not like to bear all the evil influence of this
conjunction, the Sea must have his share also; there is like to be old knocking
there, our Frigots I hope are like to get good prizes, let the Hollander beware
how he meddles with us, until such time as he longs to be beaten, I am of
opinion that most of the Merchants of Europe will com off losers in the effects
of this conjunction.

11. Religion is much controverted and that by such as know neither what it is,
nor what they would have: God grant they make not a Deformation instead of a
Reformation, and the common People love the Law and the Hangman much alike;
neither can they forbear quarelling even with Magna Charta it self.

12. France is as full of tumults as an egg is full of meat, od conceited
tumults without either sense or reason: Cardinal Mazarine his brains are like
to be knocked out in an uproar or else poisoned: and if the King himself escape,
it is more then I look for: Many parts in Italy are like to speed no better: you
may know what the evil effects of such disordered Tumults are, by the late
sufferings of Naples.

13. English brains are very discontented; neither are they all troubled with
one discontent: happy is that man, that finds another man of his own
judgment. The Soldier stands stoutly to his principles; it is pity there is
not a School to teach men Patience, such a pannick fear possesses the hearts of
the Vulgar, and such multitudes of Ghostly thoughts they conjure up, that at
last they run away pursued by nothing but by their own fears: The Winter
following, men and women will be mighty subject to quartane Agues. And thus
much for this Conjunction, and also for this part.

Part 4.
COme we now to another Eclipse of the which happens Sept. 7th. 6h. 2'2. p.m.
you may find the Scheame set ready to your hand in my Ephemeris for 1652. near
scheat a star of the nature of and the Eclipsed in threatens destruction to
Vegetables; as also to Fishes, and other Creatures that live in the water:
Corruption of Fountains and Rivers: death of the common people; continual War
and Sedition, and Sedition especially in such places as are near the Sea: Look
to thy self Holland; if thou will not, I cannot help it; much detriment by
water is threatened to thee: the Sea will go near to encroach upon such people
as have formerly encroached upon it.

Proclus says, That the Eclipsed in the last degrees of threatens murders and
rapines, fighting and quarrelling, both by Sea and Land.

Also Giussus says, That when the ascendant of an Eclips is Kings will prove
Tyrants, and when I pray were they otherwise? the Commonalty will be up in
Arms against their Princes: many murders and battails and combustions will
be in the world; death, or deposition of Princes, and it is well if they escape
so too: men will be troubled with sore eyes, etc.

Also if the ascendant be in the first face of as it is here, there will ensue
much thunder and lightning, and lofty winds.

If the luminary Eclisped be near the Equator, as this is, Look to your selves
Priests; I Will promise your honesty will be called in question.

Pass we now to the Lords of the Eclips, which are and, is placed in the
mid-heaven in, where he threatens a change of Government, a change of the Laws
and customs of Cities: the Winter will be cold, and much snow: Thus Ptolomy.

Albumazar says, It signifies the death of noble men. The next Lord of the
Eclips is posited in the sixth house: What the general signification of Lord
of an Eclips is, you have in my judgment upon the Eclips of the Sun; only we
shall have something to say to him here, as considered in the sixth house, and
in the Lion. Lord of the Eclips in signifies death of four-footed Beasts;
causes great diseases of heat amongst Men; stirs up heat of air, and makes
men as quarrelsome as himself is; he overthrows houses and whole Towns by Fire
and Sword: there is but little Water: some fountains are dried up, and the
water of others are putrified.

Also Albumazar says it signifies Dearth of flesh and bread, especially in the
east parts a sickly and mortal year: men dye by the Sword, and children by
extreme pain in their bellies.

A change in Religion is a coming, if many Planets in a house increase the
signification of a house, as is as true as what is truest, then may much
sickness be expected during the effects of this Eclips, so many Planets being
in the sixth house: And so much for this part.

Part 5.
Of the oppositions of and.

You may remember we told you before, that and made three oppositions during
the effects of this Eclipse, and all three of them from and; the first happens
in the year 1652/3. Febr. 27. 0h. 3'0. p.m. in 6d. of and.

The second happens the 10th. of July 1653. 3h. 3'0. p.m. in 3d. 1'4. of and.

And the last happens in January 1653/4. the 17th. day about 8. in the morning,
in 24d. of and, being with cor, and with fomahand, I shall here speak of them
all together, and in so doing, first I Will show you what Authors have left to
posterity upon the like oppositions. Secondly, the judgment of Authors upon
the effects of them. Thirdly, my own judgment upon them.

To begin with the first of these, namely, What Authors have left upon Record,
to have succeeded such oppositions, Anno 1433. in Sept. there was an of and
from and 13. joins with in November, and opposes. Anno 1434 and make another
in the latter end of and, about which time appeared a terryfying Comet; and so
there may do now too for ought I know, or else other sights in the air as bad.

Also Anno 1633. there happened a terrible Eclyps of the in the crab, which
showed his influence to some purpose the year following; and now judge whether
it be not to some purpose to quote this example, there being such an admirable
congruity between those and these oppositions; only the Eclyps of the was in
the crab then, and in the ram now, and that an of and, being in, might never
be said to come without having one touch at Rome, and to tell you the truth,
It was never yet known by man, nor mentioned by Chronicle, that ever the
tumbling and tossing of the body of through the Lion happened, but it was a
sufficient scourg to London. The Veneitans and Florentines, together with other
Italian Princ^ made War against his holiness the Pope, Anno 1434. who seeing
himself not able to resist, his Gutts and he ran away, and he was glad at
heart he could escape so: A general. Council was held at Bazile, at which his
holiness the Bishop of Rome permitted the Bohemians to receive the Sacrament, in
both kinds, whereas both before and since, the Priests drink up all the Wine
themselves, and leave the poor people ready to choke themselves with the
breaden-god.

When those Princes we told you of before, had routed the Pope out of his
holy-Chayre, like a company of Asses, they go together by the ears with one
another; the Emperor dies, and Albert, Archduke of Austria is made Emperor,
but he held it but a small time, Death summoning him to make his appearance in
another world.

Anno 1493. was another opposition of Saturn and Jupiter in and an Eclyps of
the in then operating. The Roman Empire is together by the Ears, whole Herds
of Cattle dye of the Murraine; The King of Portingall falls off of his Horse
and breaks his neck; now the Emperor dies, and that veneriall disease (though
called the French Pox) began first in Naples; the King of France is full of
trouble, his Army quits the Field; the King of Poland is beaten by the Turk;
presently after this, as there does now, happened an Eclypse of the in, which
though it were but small, yet were the effects great, by reason the luminary
was infested with the squares both of and: Good Lord have mercy upon us! what
will the effects of this next Eclips in be, when the Eclips it self is great,
and the luminaries besieged by the bodies of and? The Death of the King of
France, and also of many GermanePrinces succeeded in the effects of this. Anno
1552. there happened another of and in and, an Eclyps of the in then stoutly
operating, Caesare is at wars, the Bishops of Germany are together by the
Ears, so was the Duke of Saxony and the King of France; I had not mentioned
this had not Edward, the last of that name, King of England, a most hopeful
young man changed this life for a better; he had the Virgin in the Horoscope
of his Genesis, and the Eclipsed near the degree ascending, and in the place
of: Wars followed his death; and Religion mended just as sour Ale does in
Summer. The Marquess of Brandenburg must needs go fight with the Duke of
Brunswick: one battle he gave him, and was handsomely beaten for his pains:
As soon as ever he could get another Army he must have the other bout with
him, and was served the same sauce: the year after this great England was as
full of troubles as the Sea is full of water.

Wyat Rebelled about the coming in of Phillip King of Spain, and many more
were clapped up in the Goal, right or wrong, it matters not: Guilford Dudly and
his wife Ioane, the Duke of Suffolk and his Daughter lost their heads: The Lady
Elizabeth was clapped up in Prison; and Mary Rules the Nation more like a Beast
then a woman: I must transgres no longer in quoting what is past, but come to
what Authors say of the, which is the second thing promised.

Haly faith, The of and signifies many brawlings and contentions, both between
man and man, and between Nation and Nation; sets the Commonalty together by the
ears against their Magistrates and Kings. Besides, according to Guido, It
signifies that Kings and Magistrates shall be deposed, especially such whose
Kingdoms are under and; Cities thereunder shall be consumed by Fire and
Sword. Also, besides all this, Albumazar says, That rich men shall be made
equal with the poor.

De Male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius Haeres.
Goods ill got soon scattered be,
The third Heir never does them see.
I come now to the third, which is my own judgment upon the Oppositions, in
which I shall be very brief.

First, They signify consumption of estate; let no thriving time (I mean, no
time to grow exceeding rich) be expected by English men yet these four or five
years; God has provided other Fish for them to fry, his determination upon the
world is otherwise: Ier. 45. 4, 5. Jehovah says thus: Behold, that which I
have built will I break down; and that which I have planted I will pluck up;
even this whole land: And seek thou great things for thy self? seek them
not: for behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, says the Lord; but thy
life will I give unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou go. I hope
such as fear God, and aim at the liberty of the Subject, shall have Baruchs
promise made good to them; and let them thank God if they escape so too: and if
they please to hear me, well and good; if not, I have my reward: God is a
bringing to pass a great work in the world, which when you see it come to
pass, it will make your hearts ache; and I am persuaded I can give you some
reasons why he does so, for the God of reason does nothing without reason, and
if we cannot see a reason of Gods actions, it is to be imputed to our
blindness; let the Priests prate what they will The Saints are united to the
Godhead, by the person of our Lord Jesus Christ: Some of the Reasons may
probably be these, or if you will not take them for reasons, take them for
probable conjectures, it is no matter under what notion you take them, so you
make good use of them.

First, one Reason may be to prepare the Saints for such Miseries as he will
shortly reveal to them; Whilst the Bridegroom stayed the wise Virgins, as
well as the foolish, slumbred and slept; and in all probabilities these
dreadful times are but to awake them out of that sleep; consider how unfit
the best of Saints are to receive those wonderful things which God will
shortly reveal to them; if they please I Will draw them up a looking-glass to
behold a copy of their Countenances in, as they stand in statu quo, as their
Disposition is at present.

First, they mind riches much, and send their Hearts to meet them before they
come; they draw Maps of their own desires, and cut out such a kind of life in
their thoughts as pleases them, and by their own thoughts put themselves into
another condition then God has ordained for them; as children, to exercise
their houswifery, make clay-pies; and to express their desires make Babies of
clouts; neither is there any better way for a man to know his own heart then
this, for though a man's condition be not as he would have it, and let the
impossibilities or improbabilities be never so great of being what they
desire, yet their fancies will discover to them what their inclinations are,
they will create a fools Paradise in their own Brains; First what they would
be. And secondly, what they would do if they were so; and when they have
created such a Paradise, then they walk up and down in it with delight;
First, how much money they would have. Secondly, what they would do with it;
what preferment they would have, and then how they would carry themselves in
it, and though they want the things themselves they desire, yet will they
please themselves with the Pictures of them drawn in their thoughts.

Secondly, I make no question but the Saints are guilty of sins as well as
other men, and delight to busy their time in thinking of those things that
nothing at all concerns them; they long after curiosities, like Women with
child, that many times long for such things as cannot be had: our thoughts
are the buds of an immortal nature whithin us, and ought to be spent about
such things as are discovered in the works and word of God, and not to be spent
about the idle Idea's of our own brains: What a madness were it for a Lady,
instead of Pearls and Diamonds, to dress her self up with Peacocks feathers;
and yet our thoughts, as familiarly as the Sun rises and sets, instead of
feeding upon wholesome food, contained in the Book of the Scriptures and the
Book of the Creatures, like Camelions, they feed on the air.

Thirdly, Their thoughts are spent in meditating of what is upon Earth, and not
of what is in Heaven; and taking a survey of worldly happiness, which they
enjoy, as Haman was taking an inventory of his glory the night before he was
hanged, and Nebuchadnezer when he was walking alone and talking to himself
like a fool, Is not this great Babel that I have built? even at the very time
when he was taken with a Lycanthropia; for as men which desire always to be
telling their money, it is a sign they are covetous; and women that always
delight to be looking their faces in a looking Glass, it is a sign they are
proud: so men that are always minding their earthly happiness, and forget to
be thankful to God, shows infinite pride and self flattery in them; therefore
they shall have trouble in the flesh that God may call them off from it.

Fourthly, Take a man that is ambitious, and so it is to be feared are some of
the best of men, though they cannot yet obtain what they desire, yet will they,
feigning themselves to be some great persons, and having erected a throne in
their own brains, sit down very quietly in it.

Fifthly, A man that loves his guts well, and wants money to purchase such food
as he desires, will please himself with the delights of what he would have,
he will set down within his own brain a bill of fare and what ingredients he
will have in it, and please himself with the conceit of it, although he have
none of it.

Sixthly, A man that is revengefull, and wants a sting, he will please himself
with his own revengfull thoughts, and take delight to conceit he is plagueing
his enemy, though he be twenty miles from him.

I am confident, if you look into your own conditions, you shall find I have
hit the nail on the head in some of these; and then you cannot but see a
reason of the troublesomenesse of the times, before the coming of the Lord
Jesus Christ in power. This is my first reason.

Secondly, The Devil begins to grow a little troublesome, because he has but
a short time to continue, as the Bishops in England were in the height of their
pride before they fell, as Monarchy was most tyrannical a little before its
Catastrophe: So will the Devil also, if you believe the Scripture, Rev. 12.
12. Woe be to the Inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea, for the Devil is
come down to you, having great wrath, because he knows he has but a short time.

3. God may do it to leave the wicked without excuse: They have read, all these
things shall come before the great and notable day of the Lord appear, before
he pour out his spirit upon all flesh; and if they will neither believe what
they read, hear, see, nor feel, I do not know what to say to them; As sure as a
club, their consciences cannot plead one inch of excuse.

4. God may do it, to make the Saints attend more to prayer: When men are most
in danger, then they pray heartilyest, and walk closest with God; when they
have a little rest, God is quickly out of their minds. And now I think of it, I
care not if I incite here a couple of Verses which I heard from a Commander now
at present in the Army; Our God and Soldiers we alike adore,
Even in the brink of danger, not before.
After deliverance they are alike requited,
Our God's forgotten, and our Soldiers slighted.


And to tell you the truth, Experience will tell us, that in that persecution
under the late Bishops, the Saints walked more closely with God then now they
do; they now walk as carelessly, as if the Devil were dead. I shall bring all
home to the purpose I quoted it for, and conclude this reason with one place of
Scripture; which, when you have read and seriously considered, tell me if
prayer may not be a notable help to you in these times of trouble which are so
manifestly threatened, and so near at hand, and so nearly concern you; it is
Acts 2. 19, 20, 21. And I will show wonders in heaven above, and signs in the
earth beneath: blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke: The Sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before that great and not able day of
the Lord come. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall CALL upon the
NAME of the LORD shall be saved.

5. It may be to call off the hearts of the Saints from the world, that so they
may look up to God whether they will or no: when nothing but trouble is to be
seen under the Moon, such may the love of God to the Saints be, that he may
move them to come to him by arguments of necessity. This is my first Axiom.

2 Magistrates walk in the clouds, neither will what the common people intend,
quickly be known. Religion in one place, and execution of justice in another,
will be made a couple of dainty cloaks to hide men's knaveries; ( i.e. cover
ambitious thoughts from the vulgar view;) frigidus latet anguis in herba: have
a care you be not deceived that way; nay, have a double care, such as pretend
your freedom and liberty, bring you not into a worse bondage. A seasonable
warning is given you of it, not only by the book of the Creatures, but also by
the book of the Scriptures, Micah 7. 5, 6, 7. Trust ye not in a friend, put ye
not confidence in a guide: keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in
thy bosom: for the son dishonors the father, the daughter rises up against
her mother, the daughter in law against the mother in law; a man's enemies are
the men of his own house: Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for
the God of my salvation: My God will hear me. Here is your disease, here is
your cure; the Scripture has spoke enough, I need speak no more.

3. We told you before, That a murrein amongst beasts was threatened: and as
amongst men in a pestilentiall time, all that are infected die not, neither is
it probable will all the beasts; therefore men eating such corrupted food,
taking their nourishment from it, must needs be defiled by its impurity. And if
you will give me leave to digress a little, I will not transgress.

First, Hereby ye see, what a great part of the curse of God for sin was:
Happy, yea thrice happy is he to whom God reveals a redress.

Secondly, By this you may see, if you be not stark blind, which takes a more
laudable course to cure a disease, Gailen, who gives the medicine with its
impurity; or Paracelsus, who substracts only the medicinal part, and leaves
the impurity, as terra damnata.

4. Violent storms, and unusual, if not unheard of hail will be a great
prejudice unto the earth, especially toward the later end of the Summer 1652,
1653, and its well if 1654 escape.

5. When the air is thus troubled, the spirits of the air must needs be
troubled also; men conceive strange, ridiculous thoughts of the Devil, namely,
that he is an ugly, unquoth creature, with horns on his head, and cloven feet,
with great eyes like sacers: others that have a little more wit, know well enough
that he is a spirit; but they think he is tied up fast enough, either in hell,
or in some other hole, neither I nor they know where; when the truth is, his
residence is in the air; and therefore the Scripture calls him, The Prince of
the power of the air. Therefore I say, the air being disturbed, the spirits of
the air must needs be disturbed also; and such unusual sights may appear, as
may terrify both your eyes and hearts, if not at the time of the Eclipse, yet
within a short time after: Neither shall you see the midst of August 1652
over-past, but the world shall see what I have written is truth.

6. The Jew begins to take a spleen at Rome, and all the Nations in Europe
begin to snarl at her; her final Catastrophe approaches, but not yet.
However, till that time come, continual sicknesses, fires, and tumults; either
one of these, or all of these, or something else as bad, will molest her: And
if her learned Jesuits cannot tell her the meaning of God from it, what are
they good for?

7. One word or two I will speak concerning the 2d opposition of and, which
happens in July 1653; for then, and not quite till then, will the effects of
the of and, which we wrote of before, appear in their colors, that all the
world may see what they are: For as Herostratus set the Temple of Diana at
Ephesus on fire, that so he might get himself a name, that he might be talked
of after he was dead, so the Jesuits, when no other good can be done, will set
all the Princes in Europe that are priest-ridden, together by the ears, that so
they may get themselves a name, though of infamy.

I had thought to have written concerning an Eclipse of the Moon 1653. on March
3. but for some reasons best known to my self, I shall pass it by here, and
speak of it in my Ephemeris for that year.

CHAP. Ult.
What the effects of this Eclipse are probably like to produce to every
particular nation in Europe.

1. IT being taken for granted, that the effects begin to operate July 1652.
the reasons of which I gave you before, and are in full force, power, and
vigor throughout the years 1653, and 1654. and decline in the year 1655, you
may by this know the time of the sufferings of Europe, an Epidemicall desease
called madness, possesses the brains of the Princes thereof, the FIFTH
MONARCHY of the world is coming, and the effects of this Eclipse make way for
him: but he is no Scotch man, no nor English; it is he before whose coming, The
Heathen shall rage, and the people imagine a vain thing; the kings of the earth
shall set themselves together against him, etc. Read the second Psalm
throughout, and you shall see both what shall antecede his Coronation, and what
shall follow it. I cannot but admire at the folly and sottishness of those
that prate and scribble of any other Monarchy to succeed amongst the sons of
men, when the Scripture speaks exactly, Dan. 2. 44, 45. And in the days of
these kings, shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be
destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall
break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever:
Forasmuch as thou saw that the stone was cut out of the mountain without
hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver
and the gold, etc. this is the stone which the builders refused, but God will
make the corner stone,: As also that Dan. 7. 26, 27. But the judgment shall
sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume, and to destroy it unto
the end, and the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the king dome
under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the Most
High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominion shall serve
and obey him; This, this is the MOMARCHY that I expect, if the Lord please to
grant me life to see it; yet I expect it not in the effects of this Eclipse,
for this Eclipse shall only make way for it. I am of opinion Grebner in his
Prophecy of his Vtopian Monarch, having by art caballistick obtained the two
first letters of his name, mistook Charles for CHRIST, well then this is the
first, namely a preparative to the fifth Monarchy, and when you see all Europe
together by the ears, when you see Kings mad, and their subjects stubborn; In a
word, when you see all Europe in an uproar, then think of these things, and
know that he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

2. The Germans are as bad together by the ears as they were in the days of
that conquering King of Sweden. Bohemia suffers extremely; the truth of it is,
I doubt the poor Emperor will be totally routed, and made no Emperor at all.

3. As for England, I cannot sing a quietus est to them as yet, within a few
years I shall; Thou have but one storm to endure, bear that with patience, I
hope thy wars are almost at an end, I would thou could keep thy own brains
from fanaticall furies, and learn to know what belongs to thy peace before it
be hid from thine eyes. Thou will in the year 1653 be molested with a consuming
pestilence, and troubles, with a change of Government at one and the same time,
make thy choice wisely, God will have his own Government established in thee,
whether thou will or no; and tell me one thing, and tell me truly, whether is
it fit he should have his will, or thee thine? should he be master, or thee? In
making thy choice of thy next Representative, take counsel of God, see what he
speaks to thee (or as it should be translated, in thee;) so will he speak
peace to thy soul, that thou may not return AGAIN to folly: For assure thy
self of this, thou shall find my words true, as when the Sun is upon the
Meridian, thou shall never be free from plagues, either of war, (or as I rather
think) pestilence, or famine, till thou do submit to such a Government as
God intends for thee; the cries of the poor, whom thou do tyrannically
defraud of their bitthrights, are heard in the ears of the Lord God Almighty.
Be pleased to read every morning the. 26 chapter of Leviticus.

4. The Jesuits set all Europe together by the ears, let Padua in Italy beware
of August 1653, lest either the sword, earthquake or pestilence, destroy it. Ah
poor University! I mourn for thee, so much goodhast thou done to the world in
general. Lombardy is quite and clean destroyed, and beasts possess the seats
of dead people: The Pope has got the impudence to outface heaven, to see if
his Bulls can outroar the thunder.

5. The Turks fall into a part of Italy, which makes his Holiness tremble,
but he knows how to leave Saint Peter's keys, and take Saint Paul's sword in
hand; the truth is, his fear is more then his harm, its not the Turk shall pull
down the Pope, and yet he must fall.

6. The effects of this Eclipse shall show themselves first of all in their
colors in France. Strange massacres, desperate tumults, fire and sword, and
whatsoever else is bad, molest that kingdom: and it is his own fault, he
carries himself as like a tyrant over his subjects as a Pome-water is like an
Apple, if about the later end of this year 1652, that poor King is not either
knocked on the head, or forced to leave his kingdom, say I am so ignorant,
that I know not a Star from a Hop-pole; let him beware of his Bishops and
Jesuits, especially the College of Sorbon, for fear they have learned a
Scotch trick, to sell him to his adversaries for money.

7. Let not that Noble and Valiant soul the Prince of Conde, aspire to the
kingdom: God has a determination to blast aspiring brains. If ever that
Valiant and Wise Prince come to reign, it shall be, aut nequicquam, aut
nequaquam, either not at all, or in vain; ours was the first Monarchy that was
brought to an end, and France shall be the next; the heavens have decreed it,
and its vain for man to kick against the pricks. Two years shall not pass over
thy head, O France, but thy Monarchy shall come to its fatal and final,
catastrophe, and leave thy ruined nation in such a pickle, that thy pleasant
and fruitful land shall be reduced to such a barrenness, for the wickedness
of those that dwell therein, that this present age shall not live to see it
recruted.

8. Thou Famous City of Venice, (and famous might thou have continued, had
thou not harbored so many Rogues and Whores) look to thy self, I fear before
the year 1653 be elapfed, the Turk will have possession of thee; it would
grieve a man's heart to see the streets run down with blood; I wish I may be
found a false Prophet in this, yet whether I be or not, it would do thee no
harm to make thy peace with God.

9. Its almost a wonder I have forgot the Hollander all this while, who shall
neither be the last nor the least sufferer in this Eclipse, a body would have
thought that nation had been wise, had they not committed themselves to the
protection of the King of France; but when France shall be together by the
ears, and more blood spilt there then wine pressed, then may the poor Dutch man
say, as the Emperor once did, when he trusted to the Pope for some great
courtesy, which he thought would make him and his heirs for ever, the Pope
plays the man, and dies (not because he was weary of this wicked world, and
made haste to be in another, for he always loved this world with all his
heart, else he had never built a tabernacle in it) the Emperor hearing of the
Popes death, now says he, My cake is dough, I never thought of the Popes dying
before: And just in such a pickle will Holland be, when her protecting king is
fled for his life: her necessities will be very great, none will succor, nor
many pity her.

Tenthly, The Monasteries of Germany are like to be made no Monasteries during
the effects of this Eclipse. Truly, by that time the year 1654 be elapsed,
Popery will breathe its last in Germany. God in heaven grant they set up the
truth in its stead; that, like other Nations, they do not (with Esop's fish)
leap out of the frying pan, into the fire.

Eleventhly, During the effects of this Eclipse in England, but how soon it
will be I know not, either at, or before the beginning of the year 1655, (the
wiser my brethren of the Communalty carry themselves, for ought I know or
believe, the sooner it may be effected) the Government will come into the hands
of the People, and everlasting peace shall we enjoy, and never more War shall
afflict us. And (if we may trust to a piece of Art Caballistick) in August
1655, Rome falls, and JESUS CHRIST the Prince of Peace may reign amongst us.
I Will say no more to them now. I may have occasion to speak to them hereafter.

Twelfthly, London, beware of a Pestilence 1653; get able Physicians: And
though many men tell thee of thy final Catastrophe, and fright thee with
Mother Skiptons prophecy, which, if it come to pass upon thee at all, it will
be in the year, One thousand six hundred sixty eight. Labor thou to be one of
the Elect of God, and hold up but thy head till the later end of the year One
thousand six hundred fifty five, and I am confident, both thy danger and
destruction is past.

I could tell the sad things shall afflict thee in the year One thousand six
hundred fifty three. But when Phaeton foretold of a great fire that should burn
up the greatest part of Italy, they got the honest soul, and accused him for
setting the world on fire, and drowned him in the River Po. And happily, should I
tell London the truth, I might be inhumanely dealt withal my self; for this is
an age in which Obsequium amicus, veritas odium parit.
It Is flattery that gets men friends:
Tell but the truth, all friendship ends.


I give London leave to make the moral of it; however she deals with me, I
shall not forsake her in her extremities.

13. The rest of the Princes of Europe must fall as sure as a club: and next to
France, Poland is like to go to pot, if it be not contemporary with it: Denmark
and Sweden happily next; (it is sufficient for us to prognosticate exactly
their downfall, though we cannot exactly find out the time:) and happily Sweden
may come to ruin before Denmark, especially if the Queen light of such a
HUSBAND as probably she may; let the Child of that valiant Father beware of an
unfortunate Match about the beginning of 1653: if not, the ruin of that Kingdom
may happen about the beginning of 1654. In the mean season, let Sweden be ruled
by me, to have a care of their Witches, of which, I am very jealous, it
contains many thousands, who though they cannot probably bring a destruction
upon that Monarchy by their witchcrafts, yet they may the more provoke the
vengeance of God against it, who has said, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to
live.

14. The Florentines are as full of Tumults as a Wood is full of Trees: The
Cossaks fall into Christendom with fire and sword, and I doubt upon the
Territories of Italy.

15. The King of Spain is quite and clean routed out of the West Indies, or
else I am mistaken; as he has formerly there made Slaves of other people,
(nay, he would have served the Baboons so too, could they but have spoken,) so
in 1654, the Natives of the place shall be rid of this, and find another
Master, and yet scarce a better. I remember a notable story in the Egyptian
Chronicle, when the Turkish Emperor besieged Grand-Cairo, the Inhabitants of
that great and populous City refused to give any assistance to the Mamalukes
against the Turk; it is confessed the Mamalukes stood to their tackling like
Soldiers, and lost the City by inches, and the Inhabitants got a worse Master,
the Turks being more imperious over them then ever the Mamalukes were. I am
afear'd of the like change to the Inhabitants of the West Indies, and
especially Guiana. But who it shall be, I leave for time to determine.

16. The Nations of Europe flutter to save their Kings, which never did them
good, nor never will; even like a Bird brought up in a Cage, that regards not
liberty, because it never knew what it was. I remember a pretty story in AEsops
Fables, which I care not greatly if I recite; The Frogs desired a King of
Jupiter, neither would they be pleased unless they had one: Jupiter (to
satisfy them) threw down a great beam into the water, which after it had
astonished them awhile, they began to grow bold with it, and leapt upon it, yea
and despised it too, because it was patient: They fall a croaking to Jupiter
again, and they must have a stout King that could fight, I marry must they:
Jupiter, to satisfy their importunity, sends them the Stork, who stalking
about the Pool, as the Frogs came to do obeisance to him, he eat them up. I
leave every rational man to make the Moral of it, it is plain enough.

17. An Earthquake is like much to annoy Italy, the Peoples Madness and the
Jesuits Knavery much more. Italy! Italy! that ancient Nation where the Poets
say Saturn once ruled when he turned Leveller and brought up the Golden-Age, I
am sorry for thy sufferings, but cannot help them; I would thou would do thy
self so much good, as learn a little more Wit.

18. A Fire threatens Constantinople, so does Dissension, and something worse
then either; the great Turk is either slain, or runs away for his life, if a
bow-string stops not his journey: you would laugh to see the Tartarian invade
Turkey much about the year 1654: I will promise him if he do about that time,
he will go near to carry it. I would to God he would learn to be so wise as the
noble Tamerlane, who is never to be mentioned without an Epethite of Honor.

19. In the year 1654, England begins to grow quiet, and I am glad of that: she
enjoys her desired Liberty, which she has spent so much blood for: the time is
coming, it is but two years to it, or but a little more, not quite three: and
presently after Holland begins to be pretty secure, after once she has learned
to look to the Rock from whence she was howen.

And thus I had best leave off, whilst matters go well.

Apologus pro Epilogo.
IF I may make bold to write a short Apology in stead of a Conclusion, I
desire you to take notice, that in the years 1641, and 1642, the notions
included in this book took up a great part of my study, for indeed in those
years I was totally studious; but finding some weakness in them, and the times
changing as swift as the wind, and swifter too, being not in the posture at
that time to receive such influences as now they are, I took the pain lately a
little to amend them; I confess the greatest part of my judgments I drew purely
from Astrology, yet will I not deny, but I made use of a Caball for the
perfecting most of them.

If any affirm it was boldly done of me to adventure upon such a manner of
judgment in this Age; I answer, Boldness may be taken in a paradoxical sense,
not so much according to the deed done, as according to that conception of the
Caviller: For King James held he was a bold man that first adventured to eat a
raw Oyster, though we now know there is no boldness in it. A few years will
show whether what I have written be true or false; and he that carps at me
before he knows that, shows rather his own folly, then my weakness.

Imagine what I write be every word false, what harm will it do Princes to
prepare for the loss of a kingdom, though it never come? Is it not the way to
teach them humility? I am sure they are proud enough. Were it not acceptable
both before God and man, that they would leave off their TYRANNY? Imagine such
sicknesses never come to the Vulgar as I say this Eclipse threatens; will it do
them any harm to make their peace with God, though they do not die? But most
people send preparation for death before hand, and intend to overtake it on
their deathbeds.

I am not conscious to my self of any grand failings in these predictions, and
I am the more confident of the truth of them, because they jump so exactly with
the Prophesies in Scripture. I know it is the opinion of many in Art, that the
coming of Christ to reign (whether in Person, or in Spirit, I will not dispute
the story here) cannot be yet these many years, neither probably should it be
by rules of Art drawn from judicial Astrology: neither am I ignorant that the
Cabal holds it out to come sooner: happily the days may be shortened for the
Elects sake; yet can I give you diverse Characters, or if you will exemplary
signs, even from the Scripture it self, of its approaching, Matthew. 24 6, 7.
You shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars, Nation shall rise against Nation,
and Kingdom against Kingdom, and there shall be famine and pestilence, and
earthquakes in diverse places. ver. 10. They shall betray one another, and hate
one another. ver. 11. Many false Prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many.
ver. 12. Iniquity shall abound, and the love of many shall wax cold. ver. 24.
There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets. ver. 32. Learn a Parable
of the Fig Tree, when his branch is yet tender, and puts forth leaves, you
know the Summer is nigh, even at the door. I shall quote but one Scripture
more. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. This know also, that in the last days perilous
times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy;
without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce,
despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God, HAVING A FORM OF GODLINESS, BUT DENYING IT IN
THE POWER THEREOF. If these be not testimonies enough the truth of my
Predictions approaching, I shall remit my self to the judgment of such as are
more judicious; and for a conclusion, I will make no other then what Solomon
did in his recantation, Eccl. 12. 13, 14. Let us hear the conclusion of the
whole matter, fear God, and keep his commandments, for this is the whole duty
of man. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil. And to such as do fear God and keep
his Commandments, I shall remain a friend till death,

Nich: Culpeper.

