CVLPEPER'S School of Physic.

OR THE Experimental Practice of the whole Art.

Wherein are contained all inward Diseases from the Head to the Foot, with
their proper and effectual Cures, such Diet set down as ought to be observed
in Sickness or in Health.

With other safe ways for preserving of Life, in excellent Aphorisms, and
approved Medicines, so plainly and easily treated of, that the Freeborn
Student rightly understanding this Method, may judge of the Practice of
Physic, so far as it concerns himself, or the Cure of others, etc.

A Work never before Published, very necessary for all that desire to be rightly
informed in Physic, Chyrurgery, Chemistry, etc.

Nosce teipsum.

By Nich. Culpeper, late Student in Physic and Astrology.

The Narrative of the Authors Life is prefixed with his Nativity Calculated,
together with the Testimony of his late Wife, Mrs. Alice Culpeper, and (...).

The general Contents of this Work are in the next (...). With two perfect
Tables very useful to the (...)

London, Printed for N. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill 1659.

The general Contents of the several Treatises.
1. THe School of Physic, or the English Apothecary; a Treatise of the
transcendent sufficiency of our English Herbs, as they may be rightly used in
Medicine; being a brief account of the whole concernment of the Herbary Art; as
also the excellency of our English home Physic. p. 1. 2. The Sovereign Virtues
of Carduus Benedictus, in English, The Blessed Thistle, which for the operation
and great efficacy that God has given to it, may be rightly so named; as also
of the rare Virtues of Angelica. p. 71. 3. Fragmenta Aurea. Four Golden
Centuries of Chemical, Physical, Judicial Aphorisms, and Admirable Secrets. p.
87. 4. The Garden Plat: or, a very brief account of such Herbs, etc. that
excel, and are some of them most useful in Physical and Chyrurgical Cures on
emergent and sudden occasions. p. 156. 5. The Celestial Governors: or, a
Discourse, in which is p^^iny declared what Members of the Body are governed by
the twelve Signs, and of the Diseases to them appropriate. p. 182. 6. How the
Members of the Body are governed by the seven Planets, and of the Diseases to
them appropriate. p. ^8^ 7. Cardiaca Simplicia, a brief Account of (...) Choice
Simples, as are chiefly appropriate to the Hear^: A Treatise left unfinisht by
the Author. p. 186. 8. The Chyrurgeons Guide: or, the E^^^^^ of some Unskillful
Practicioners in Chyr^ corrected. p ^^5 9. Phlebotomy displayed: or, perfect
Ru^ (...) the letting of Blood. p. 214. 10. Vrinal Conjectures, brief
Observations, with some probable Predictions on the sick Patients Stale or
Water. p. 222. 11. The Treasury of Life: or, Salves for every Sore; experienced
and tried Receipts for the Cure of the most usual Diseases that our frail
Bodies are most subject to, whilst we remain in this Life. p. 229. 12. The
Expert Lapidary: or, a Physical Treatise of the secret Virtues of Stones. p.
263. 13. Doctor Diets Directory: or, the Physicians Vade Mecum; short, but safe
Rules to preserve Health in a Methodical way, passing by the impertinences and
niceties of former Physicians, treating only of familiar, and the most useful
things in Diet, which chiefly nourish and maintain Life. 279. 14 Doctor Reason,
and Doctor Experience consulted with: or, the mystery of the Skill of Physic
made easy, short, clear, and certain Rules how to perceive, judge, and
determine what any usual Disease is from the parts of the body affected, the
Causes, Signs, or Symptoms, collected from the most approved Authors, and
constantly practiced by Mr. Nicholas Culpeper. p. 345. 15. Chemical
Institutions, discovering Natures choice Secrets in experienced Chemical
Practice, showing the several degrees of Progression in the Physical Cabinet of
that Art. p. 405
Mrs. Alice Culpepers Testimony, and Approbation of this Book.
Ingenious Reader,
HAving an Orphan, or Posthumus in my protection, and being solicited by
diverse for the propagation of the public good in its Publication; for its
better entertainment, I appear to tell the World it is a Legitimate Child of
Mr. Nicholas Culpeper, my deceased Husband. And as I promise you it is the
Genuine and Ingenious Offspring of his Brain, so I question not, it will (with
the rest of his laborious Pieces) help to blow louder the Trumpet of his never
dying Fame. I need not much endeavoar to attest that this Tractate is his; for
it will evidently appear at first sight, that it is the Child of such a
Father; which will be commendation enough both for the one and the other: and
that is the reason I refused to seek a Patron for it, since I know his bare
Name will sufficiently serve for a Patronage. I follow the new Mode of the
Times, by disallowing of Godfathers; yet the Bookseller thought it
inconvenient, that this Treatise should wander up and down the World without a
Name, and therefore it is Christened, The School of Physic. If it shall please
any one to cast their affections on this Fatherless Child, him shall I esteem
as my Gossip. Expect from me to say no more at present, because I would
willingly cross an old Saying, Women are never silent till dead. I am in in all
virtuous Endeavors for the Public Good,

Yours, ALICE CULPEPER.
November. 15. 1658. From my House in Spittle-fields, next Door to the Red Lion.
The Preface. To all Students in Physic, Chyrurgery, and Chymestry.
THough that those which look for an eternal life set but light by a
temporary, as they are truly sensible here below, to meet with a mass and
accumulation of sins and sorrows; nevertheless since we find long life to be
one of those blessings so often promised in the old Law, as also that the
beloved Disciple of our blessed Savior survived the other Disciples, and many
of the Fathers of the Church were long lived; we Mortals, as we are too prone
on Earth to esteem it our chiefest good, cannot at least but enroll it amongst
others of the choice and great favors we receive from Heaven. The old saying
is, Vita brevis, Ars longa; Life is short, and Art is long: therefore in all
ages it has been the ambitious task of Learned men, if it were possible, to
perfect Art, so as to prolong life, even to the length of days: indeed the
best of them found there inquiries too difficult, some of them having carefully
scrutinized and searched the matter of the reparation, but none yet living ever
attained to the manner; it being an agreed of Truth, that in the declining of
age, there is an unequal reparation, some parts are repaired easily, some with
difficulty and loss: the Spirits, Blood, Flesh, and Fat, are even after the
declining of years easily repaired, but the drier and more poreous parts, the
Membranes, all the Tunicles, Sinnews, Arteries, Veins, Bones, Cartilages, most
of the Bowels, in a word, all the organical parts are hardly repairable, and to
their loss. Now these hardly repairable parts, to use the same words of one of
the Moderns, a most eminent Writer of this nation, that when the Physician
comes to the office of repairing of them, the other which are easily repaired,
finding themselves deprived of their wonted ability and strength, cease longer
to perform their proper function; by which means it comes to pass, that in
process of time, the whole body tends to ruin. Though these considerations are
thus premised, that in spite of Art, Death and a Dissolution at last will
come; nevertheless it ought to be the care of every wise and honest Physician,
that since nature may in part be repaired, that life may be nourisht, that the
length of it is one of the greatest blessings on earth, so for him to show his
Christian Charity, most religiously to observe and endeavor, to the extent of
his skill, what may be by him performed, as to this prolongation: it being the
duty of one that knows the ways of nature, as how to turn her about, so also
whilst life can be preserved, to maintain her in her most healthful dimensions.
Nor do I esteem of a Physician for his only knowing how to act, as to a
nourishing renovation, restoring, and continuance of health, but it will be
further enjoined on his conscience, to mitigate the far distance of a Doctor,
with such wholesome instructions been able to discern, if not to have
determined, of the parts affected, the causes, the signs, and symptoms of a
Disease; how to have applied right Medicines either for the quantity or
quality, for the curing of themselves or others; such as in cases of necessity
they needed not to have sent some miles for, but might have found in the
Fields, or in their neighboring Gardens; whereas for want of the assistance of
a true Method of Physic, this knowledge having been denied them, thousands
have perished, as at the great day of account some will find to be too true. I
appeal to all men in their Wits, whether there are such unnatural Monopolizers
in the World? What Nation is there, that their Physicians have not for the most
part at the first writ in their Mother tongue? I have been informed that the
late Famous Mr. Noy of Lincolns Inn, that he would have had the Gentlemen to
have joined with him, and moved to have the Law turned into English, which they
being averse to, though otherwise he promised to remember the Society in his
Will; instead of a Library, which he intended when he died, he left them
nothing but the Comedy of Ignoramus, which hangs up; and as I am certified, is
there still to be seen. I have read that the German Physicians once a year in
their Mother Tongue regestred their Cures in the temple of Aesculapius, whereby
the common sort of people knew how to difference diseases; could distinguish of
the easy from the more difficult cures, and learnt according to the light then
derived to them, to preserve themselves and others; whereas we have reason to
thank our grave, wise, and learned Physicians over the left shoulder, who would
have us know nothing, or as little as may be. Mr. Culpeper, now in Heaven,
spent himself early and late for the good of his Contrymen; he discovered
their Subtilties, and was one of the first that broke down the partition wall
of our ignorance and slavery; they are his own words. I have already made a
progress, and whilst I am in the Land of t^^ Living, I will persist, in spite
of all opposers, to inform my Contrymen. It was his greatest ambition to do
all the good he could on earth, the Lord having answered his desires, though
himself did not live to see it, in the publishing of this Volume, which may
truly be called a School of Physic, even a Grammar to learn all the Rudiments
of the complete Practice of this Art; so that if the peruser of this Work be
but one of good natural parts, though he be ignorant of the Tongues, he shall
on sufficient grounds be able to give a reasonable answer, so as to resolve the
most useful and considerable questions in Physic, that can be propounded to
him; he shall be so informed to give an account of what of himself he shall
undertake to practice. It will be needless to enlarge my self further, this
Book has worth enough in it to declare its Author; it requires no commendation
to fore-run it; Diet, Reason, and Experience, the three Doctors Mr. Culpeper
consulted with, built upon good principles, so that the Student shall find
both the Theorick and the Practick sweetly to agree in the discovery of the
most concealed truths. This method of practice being experienced by himself,
written in the intervals of his lingering sickness; as he had a long time before
his death bid adieu to all worldly respects, he having, as has been said, no
higher aim, then the healths and prosperity of his Contrymen; he left, as I
may presume from my own knowledge to affirm, in the hands of his best friends,
to this very purpose, all his tried Receipts in writing to be printed; as
besides those names thou read affixed to this work, there are many others,
if there were occasion, are ready to testify. I am confident no private man in
any age could show such a volume, compiled of such experimental probations; the
Author never showing himself so clearly and powerfully in any of his printed
Treatises as in this last, having been heard to say, that in publishing some of
his former translations, he was troubled with the epidemical disease, as it is
usual with persons of such worth; he then entertained, as he acknowledged, an
ambition to be known to the world; but in these his Treatises, as he protested,
he had opened his breast, dealt so ingeniously for the good of the public, as
to discover the mystery of his profession, not reserving a secret he knew, that
might keep men alive, or when they were in danger, that might recover them,
this being the storehouse of his whole Practice.

Loving Contrymen, whatsoever benefit you shall reap by the labors of our
deceased friend, let your Christian charity employ it for the good of your
neighbors; thanks be to God, there are still noble persons left, that upon
such blessed occasions of being aiding to others, are ready to expose their
persons and purses, not being ashamed, as some are, but accounting it their
honor to be helpful to the poor; to such Worthies this volume will be most
acceptable, not only as it will increase, but also confirm their knowledge. It
will be also extremely necessary for those of lower Forms in the School of
Physic; young Practitioners, who may in this lively mirror see their mistakes,
and the deformities of their Practice, how they have caused the Medicines they
formerly applied, not only to be ineffectual, but rather destructive to the
healths of their Patients; as they are to ask God forgiveness for their
ignorance, in placing the Cart before the Horse, the Practick before the
Theorick, their ventring hand over head on the Medicine, before they rightly
knew the disease, like the mad Empericks of these times, confident in
undertaking cures, though they err both in the method and rules, that ought
step by step to be trod in and pursued. In this School of Physic, such too
forward dangerous Practitioners, whatsoever arrogantly they have hitherto
assumed to themselves, they are to meet with other discipline, sure to be put
back and taught a new lesson; first, rightly to know the dolors and torments of
diseases; for him, like the good Samaritan, to pour in the Oil of his
compassion, as much as in him lies, to abate the present miseries of the
Patient, that he may for the present find some comfort, till God in his mercy
vouchsafes to show better Symptoms of his recovery: and when he has so given
him over, that all hopes of life are past, still to remain constant to his
undertakings, like honest Mr. Culpeper, who would not leave or forsake his
patient when he perceived death, till he had procured and opened a fair and
easy passage for him to go out of this life. As for those stately Doctors that
scruple at attendance after they have received their large Fees, pretending
other dispatches, they will not stay with their languishing Christian brother;
what can this neglect of theirs be imputed so much to, as the cruelty of their
excessive pride, for otherwise, if they were not wanting to their profession,
and to humanity it self, they might in the time of their staying give such
advice as to facilitate the pains of death, comfort the spirits of the
afflicted person, so far as to enlighten his mind for the making of his peace
with Heaven, and his more orderly taking of his leave of his affairs on earth.
The Physician also might better his skill, so far as to observe the conflicts
of the several distempers in the issues of death, so as to distinguish of the
vigors and workings of all manner of Diseases in their last and saddest
triumphs. Physicians in other parts of the world do not come so easily by their
money, they have set, stinted, small fees appointed them, so ordened of
purpose, that they might be made more diligent; that if their Christian Charity
did not, their necessities might compel them to come the oftener to make up
their Sum; so that the poor for a small pittance are better attended, then
our rich persons are here for their handfuls of Gold. The truth is, throughout
the whole World there are not such slaves to the Doctors, as the poor English
are; most of them profess themselves Protestants, but their practices have been
like those of the Papists, to hide the grounds of Physic from the vulgar, who
for want of a right knowledge of the true course and rules of this Art, having
no estates to pour into their bottomless Purses: Si nihil attuleris, ibis
Homere for as, No Money, no Doctor. The poor souls in their disserted and
extreme necessities having been forced (as they were always kept in a
desperate ignorance) to take such unnatural and monstrous Physic, as to be
their own murderers; whereas if they had not been hoodwinkt, and muffled in
such darkness, sacrificed to the ambitions and covetousness of such
uncharitable persons, the poor wretches might by the conscientious aids of
worthy Writers in their mother tongue, (I do not mean such English mad
hodge-podge dangerous Books, as we have already too many of in Print) but of
learned, advised, methodical, and useful Authors in our Language, from which
they might have been so taught and directed, as to know how to distinguish of
the most usual Diseases of themselves, in case of the disease before they go
about the cure; and then to compound the Medicine so, as to relate to the
nature of the Patients body; otherwise that which may cure one might kill
another. They being thus once put into the right way to discern and determine
of the most usual Diseases, throughout this book, with Gods blessing, they
shall meet with perfect directions for the cures; the truth is, amongst a few
good, there are abundance of Authors of other Climates, whose works, with
whatsoever hard words they amaze their Readers, do the less concern us, as
their Medicines do more properly agree with the constitutions of the bodies of
their own Countries. The volumes of these foreign Doctors in the practical
part of Physic, do so swell to no purpose, with such infinite variety of
medicaments, that the practitioners are confounded, as not knowing amongst so
many which of them to choose. Mr. Culpeper being truly sensible of this their
error, made it his business not to puzzle his young Students with the
multiplicity of Medicines, but only to select and set down such as are most
proper, choice, and effectual against the disease, such as are generally
esteemed, and frequently used, the most magisterial Receipts. To be brief, this
work may be compared to the Rainbows diversity of colors, in respect of the
variety of the Treatises it consists of, which cannot but render it the more
acceptable to the people of the three Nations, as in so small a volume they
have the whole body of Physic, which before in respect of the largeness of the
size, was of such a price that the meaner sort of people were not able to
purchase it; this work in the Abstract and Epitome comprehending whatsoever of
any concernment has formerly been printed; it being so entire and beholding
only to it self, as to be free from whatsoever tautologies, impertinences,
vain and frivolous repetitions, those larger Authors, to no purpose, have
puzzled their Readers with; this work being of purpose contrived to save the
charges of larger volumes; to use the Authors own words, It contains Homers
Illiads in a Nut-shel; his honest intention being for the future to prevent
those already mentioned inconveniences, which the poor have so long suffered
under; that with the use of this book, and on occasion, their further recourse
to the Doctors Dispensatory, if they are at too great a distance from a
charitable and deserving Physicians, upon sudden emergencies of necessity,
they might be so readily furnished, as to help themselves, or be assistant to
others. To conclude, Courteous Student, I shall in the fear of God request thee
to make an honest use of these endeavors, to be careful, dilgent, and
understanding in what thou undertakest; and in all thy undertakings to crave a
blessing from heaven, never failing to return hearty thanks to the Lord for
what good soever thou receivest. For my own part, I desire not to be known, I
am sufficiently concerned in the applause of my own conscience; I look not on
any worldly repute to my self, but to the good of thousands of generations that
shall follow: It is enough for me, that in the publishing of this Work, I have
with sincerity and truth discharged the trust imposed in me, by our deceased
friend. Farewell, read, and enjoy.

Thine in all honest endeavors. R. W.
December. 15. 1658.
The Nativity of Nicholas Culpeper, Student in Physic and Astrology,
Calculated By JOHN GADBURY (...).
TO wave the unnecessary Complement of a Preface, the estimate Time of the
Birth of this Eminent Artist, Mr. NICHOLAS CULPEPER, was Anno 1616. October 18.
paulo post merediem, or, a little Afternoon. Which little, by my correction, I
find to be 11. minutes only; and the place of the Sun at that time is 5 23 32
of, as is evident by the Calculation thereof from the Tables in my Doctrines of
Nativities lately published.

Time given S. D. M. S. S. D. M. S. 1601 9 19 58 8 3 5 35 26 15 11 29 22 23 14
13 October 9 0 4 2 43 D. 18 17 44 30 3 M. 11 0 27 M. Lon. 7 7 9 30 3 5 50 25
Apog. S 3 5 50 25 Anomal. 7 1 19 5 Equat. S. 1 45 58 Ver. Loc. 7 5 23 32 5 23
32

The Places of the other Planets are taken from the Ephimerides of David
Origanus, and are thus in Longitude and Latitude.

Long. Planetarum. Lat. Planetarum. 6 52 R. 3 0 South A. 26 28 0 30 North D. 16
47 0 57 North A. 13 14 0 26 North D. 22 35 1 30 South D. 21 8 5 0 North D.

The Figure is thus obtained

Asc. Recta Solis 213 5 45 Asc. Recta Temporis 2 45 0 Ergo, Asc. R. Med. Coeli
est 215 50 45 Add. 90. Asc. Obliqua Ascendeniis est, 305 50 45

The Ascensions of the principal Angles being thus obtained, I next seek for
the Degrees and Minutes of the Ecliptique agreeing thereto.

For the Mid-heaven, whose A.R. is 215 50 45

Proxime Major 216 36 9 A. R. 215 50 45 Minor 215 37 8 L. A. 215 37 0 59 1 0 13
45

If 59 gives 60, what will 13 45?

Logarith. 13 45 936015 59 0 999271. Substr. Answer 14 15 936744.

Which leaves the Cuspe of the Mid-heaven 8 14 25

For the Ascendent, whose Ob. As. is 305 50 45 And the Elevation of the Pole 51
32 Proxime Major 306 26 3 A. O. 305 50 45 Minor 305 23 2 L. A. 305 23 1 3 1 0
27 45

If 1 3 gives 60 what 27 45?

Logarith. 0 27 45 966511 1 3 0 1002120 Substr. Answer 0 26 25 964391

Therefore the Degrees, Minutes, and Seconds of the Ascendent, are 2 26 25 The
The Cuspes of the Succedent and Cadent Houses are obtained true enough by the
Domifying Table.

The Figure follows.



Saturn Strong by 3 Testimonies. Jupiter Strong 9 Mars Strong 8 Sol Strong 6
Venus Weak 1 Mercury Strong 16 Luna Weak 1

A General Judgment on this Figure.
THe Sign Ascending the Horoscope is a Sign of Brevity, His Stature, Form, and
Shape.
and Lord of the Ascendent is in a sign of Brevity also, and the Moon in the
sixth house decreasing in light, all which are arguments of a middle stature,
and somewhat a spare lean body, complexion darkish, or swarthy, hair dark
brown, visage more long then round, eyes quick and piercing, etc. And the
person of this Native was exactly such: And he was also full of agility, very
active and nimble, which I presume was occasioned by the Moons position in the
house of in to and in the house of having South-latitude.

His Temperature, Temp^ture.
according to Astrologers, should be Melancholy, Chollerique, as is plain by
an earthy sign ascending, and position in an earthy sign also, and being among
martial fixed Stars, and Stars of the same nature in the Ascendent, are very
strong testimonies of Choler prevailing over this Native: but the greatest
argument of Choler predominating, I take to be the Suns reception with Mars,
from violent signs, which seems to signify that Choler should overpower the
humor of Melancholy, notwithstanding an earthy Sign Ascending, etc.

He was indeed of such a temperature, I remembered to have heard him confess,
that Melancholy was an extraordinary enemy unto him; so great at sometimes,
that wanting company he would seem like a dead man; and at other times would
his Choler macerate him very strangely, yea, more often then the distemper of
Melancholy.

His Understanding.
Mercury the Patron of ingenuity, etc. is the most potent Planet in the Figure,
and he being in the house of and so near the Benign Beams of, argued the
Native to be of an excellent wit, sharp fancy, admirable conception, and of an
active understanding.

For proof of this, let his many worthy Works now extant be summoned to give in
evidence, viz (1.) His translation of the Dispensatory, so exquisitely done.
(2.) His English Physician; a work of such rarety, that never any Herbarist
before him durst adventure to do. (3.) His Astrological judgment of Diseases
from Avenezra and Durret, in which he has so ingeniously followed the text of
his Authors, that if any copies may be presumed or thought to improve, or excel
their originalls, this very book of his does so. And besides these, he has
published diverse others, as his last Legacy, of admirable worth, truly his own.

He was very eloquent, a good Orator, spoke both freely and fluently. And if I
shall speak the truth in all parts, he was very conceited and full of jeasts,
as the of and aptly denotes; but the knack of jeasting was so inseparable to
him, that in his writing things of most serious concernment, he would mingle
matters of Levity, and extremely please himself in so doing, as is evident in
all his writings; but the Poets excuse is sufficient.

Quaedam cum prima recensentur crimina barba,
Indulge veniam Pueris. --
Some faults with our first beards are shaved away,
And youth (if any) pardon merit may.
The fixed Sign is on the Cuspe of the second house, His Estate.
and the and casting their friendly rays thither, and the in the house of,
viz. intercepted; there are testimonies of a competent fortune, naturally
according to Haly, Bonatus, etc.

-- Sed quae praeclara prospera tami^,
Vt rebus laetis par sit mensurd malorum?
But what can all the hopes of wealth him skill,
That Is balanced by as many threats of ill?
The Lord of the second is Retrograde upon the Cuspe of the fourth in to the
second house, and his dispositrix combust in of, and in to the second also,
which plainly portends a consumption of Riches, and a destruction of what
patrimony should descend unto him from his Parents. And afflicting pars
fortunae, in an obscure house of the Heavens, and Lord thereof in of, caused
him to squander away his estate both carelessly and negligently, and sometimes
by reason of restraint or imprisonment.

It is most true, that he was always subject to a Consumption of the Purse,
notwithstanding the many ways he had to assist him. His Patrimony was also
chiefly consumed at the University. Indeed he had a spirit so far above the
vulgar, that he contemned and scorned riches, any other way, then to make them
serviceable to him; he was as free of his Purse as his Pen; valued not how
little he left himself of either, so he obtained his end of doing good to
others. I could parallel this his Generosity with Arguments of the same stamp,
from some Genitures very eminent, but I am confined. I shall close my discourse
of his estate with this -- Had not he had Caput Draconis in the second, he
would have been perpetually poor: for the arguments of Poverty in his Radix are
such, that had he been born to Craesus estate, it would have pleased him better
to have exchanged it for that of Diogenes.

The third House has signification of Kindred in general, and short Journeys;
Kindred, and short journeys.
and Lord thereof in in the eighth House, the most unfortunate place of the
whole Heavens: as says Ludovicus de Regiis, -- Nulla divisio Circuli tunc
pessima, tamque crudelis in omnibus, quam octava est. And he being there in of
four Planets, viz. and, is an argument of great infortunacy to the Native from
his Kindred, and indeed no great happiness to him in his Inland Journeys.
Besides being on the third, and in a sterril Sign, portends very few, or no
Brethren or Sisters to the Native; and in this case the fewer the better.

It would be too tedious to make repetition of the many misfortunes this Native
has suffered by his Kindred, and the perils and dangers he has escaped in
traveling or going short Journeys. It is confirming enough of the Art, that he
never gained good by either. Nor had he ever any Brethren, etc.

Saturn the general significator of Fathers, Parents, etc.
and Venus the particular in this Nativity, are in opposition, and the Lord of
the tenth in to both, and that from fixed signs, together with Venus her being
combust, all which clearly denote, that the Parents of this Native shall die
before him: but had they lived, I cannot see in Art how he should have been
bettered by them, their significators are so squaring and opposing his. He has
often averred, that his Father, according to report, dyed before he was born,
and his Mother lived till the twenty third year of his age; and he acknowledged
also that they did leave him well, but he was cheated thereof, or at least
spent the greatest part of it.

Luna Lady of the seventh in a double bodied Sign, might seem to denote two
Wives, Wife a^ Children.
but a general significatrix of Wives, being combust, and in evil Aspects of
the Infortunes, seems to contradict it; and that so strongly, that did she not
cast a friendly beam to the Ascendent, and another to the Seventh, he would
hardly have ever married; but that is an argument that once he should.

Venus being Governess of the fifth House, and in a fruitful Sign, irradiating
both the Ascendant and Seventh, friendly signifies that the Native may have
many Children; but Caput Medusae being upon the Cusp of the fifth, and Combust,
and in to that enemy to Nature, and all natural existencies, and in of a Planet
posited in the House of Death, presages that very few of them (if any) shall be
long lived.

This Native had but one Wife, ( viz. Mrs. Alice Culpeper now living) and by
her he had seven Children, (although himself died young) but they are all dead
but one, which is a Daughter. The world may judge how chargeable the management
of such transactions of his life were, he being a person so given up to his
Studies, as never to take care for the future; his Wife, her industry being the
best provider for his necessary affairs, which care of hers he requited in the
admirable Secrets he left her.

His Enemies both public and private, Enemies public and private.
are signified by and, but principally, because he has great dignities both in
the twelfth and seventh Houses, also will have a share in signification of his
enemies, because he is in of, and of, and beholds the Lord of the Ascendent
with a. Now if the question be demanded what kind of persons these Planets
signify, will signify Physicians, Apothecaries, etc. and Divines. And those
two kinds of men and professions should be his most potent adversaries, both
public and private, the most public.

It is notoriously known, that his most public enemies were Physicians, and
his most private ones Divines. The first hated him, and made their hatred
public, for his discovering the use of Medicine in his mother tongue. The
second did disgust him for his studying Astrology, but neither of them durst to
enter the lists of dispute with him, albeit, I remember he has made public
challenges to some in Print, who pretended to fault his doings. Whereby it
appears, that the Doctors questioned not, or cavilled at the matter, but the
manner of his writings. They were not simply sorry that such things were done,
but that he that did them was not one of the College, a Brother of their
Order. And the same may be said of his other sort of Enemies: but well said
Juvenal, Refert ergo quis haec eadem parit, in Rutilo nam
Luxuria est, in Ventidio landabile nomen;
Sumit, and a censu famam trahit. --
Much ods in men, doing the self same thing,
Feasting in Rutilus is rioting:
But in Ventidius bravo Munificence,
And gains him honor by his great expense.


The Saying needs no application; from his Enemies I will therefore descend to
his Friends, Friends.


And those should not be many, for Lord of the elventh in to four Planets,
denotes the Natives Friends, or at least such as pretend friendship unto him,
to be hypocritical and deceitful; and of such covetous reserves, that he shall
seldom be bettered by them. His own acknowledgement was, that he had diverse
pretended friends, but he was rather prejudiced then bettered by them; and when
he most stood in need of their friendship and assistance, then they most of all
deceived him. But this was not to him alone, it is generally morbus mundi, the
distemper of the whole world, like that of the Poet.

Rari quippe bo^^i, numero vix sunt totidem, quot
Thebarum portae, aut divitis ostia Nyli.
So rare true friends, and such in number few,
That scarce so many can be found below,
As Gates of Thebes, or Ports of wealthy Nyle.
Origanus, Fol. 699 tells us, that the in the tenth house (as in this Nativity)
is a certain Argument of honor and preferment, Honor and Preferment.
and a general significatrix of honor, being in the tenth, also portends the
same, in of and in reception with him, he being Lord of the tenth, are certain
Arguments of Honor, Fame, and renown; and indeed had not who is dominus
Ascendentis been in to the general significator of honor, etc. and in of the
particular designed thereof in this Radix, the Native would have obtained a far
higher degree of honor and preferment then he did; but he was an enemy to his
own preferment; yet nevertheless he did in his latter part of his life increase
very much in his Reputation, and his Honor and Fame, were generally taken
notice of. If you would know by what means he should attain Fame and Credit,
etc. being in of Lord of the tenth, and Lady of the ninth, locally in the
tenth, thence casting a aspect to the Ascendent, and Lord of the sixth, there
also, being the strongest Planet in the Figure. all which Arguments laid
together, presage his Fame, and Honor, to come by studying Arts and Sciences;
and that he should rise in the opinion of the world, chiefly thereby: but this
not without some difficulty as his to aptly signifies. It is very well known
that he gained his Honor by Arts and Sciences; but chiefly by Physic, in the
knowledge of which he was most excellently skilled: and it was purely by that
alone Study of Practice, that he has left a name behind him, which will
remain until time shall be no longer.

The fiery Planet Mars in the eighth House in to Lord of the ascendent, What
death he might dye.
and three Planets more, seems to portend a violent death; but the being upon
the Cuspe of the Midheaven, near the body of, and in reception with and in the
sixth, in to him also, takes off the edge of that suspicion, and abates much of
the fury of, and seems rather to portend the Native to die of a Consumption, or
by a decay of natural strength at the heart, ( is in.)

I have heard it credibly reported by some that were with him at the time of
his death, and constantly in his sickness, that he dyed of a Consumption which
had been long upon him; and much means, (and that of the better sort) was used
to enervate it, but it still prevailed upon him, wasting and, consuming him by
degrees, until it reduced him to a very Sceleton, or Anatomy; and afterward,
viz. on Monday the tenth of January 1653/4 released him, and gave him his
pasport to a better world. The then being in to the Radical place of and in to
his own, and to the place of in his Nativity, and being then in a direct
opposition.

Nor was it truly reported, that some Physicians designed his death, by setting
their engines at work to poison, him. I do believe they were enemies great
enough unto him; yet I am confident, by this report, they are egregiously
scandalized, it being customary for ill will to speak the worst.

The Accidents by which this Nativity was verefied, are these.
1634.
Aged eighten years he went to the University, to the body of and the Ascendent
near the of the same Promitter, by direction caused that. He being bred up a
Scholar, and fitted for the University in his younger years, upon the M. C. ad
and ad.

1640.
Aged twenty four years, began to study Physic, the being then directed to the
of her dispositer in the Radix.

1643.
Aged twenty seven years, he then went for a Soldier, and was wounded by a
small shot over the forepart of the body, which he never recovered of till his
dying day; and then the Ascendent to the of, and presently after the of by
Direction. Directions of so evil Tendency and Import, that, might very well
have ruined a King.

1653/4.
Aged thirty eight years, he dyed. The Ascendent coming to an of with Latitude.
The revolution it self being the same with that of the Radix, passing by the
Radical place of and upon the Ascendent, and in and upon the opposite place of,
and in to place also; which ill revolution agreeing with an ill Direction,
necessarily portended Death.

Tempus edax rerum, nos terit omnia tempus,
Nos terimus tempus, jam sumus ergo pares.
Thus time devours all, and does all waste,
And we waste time, and so we are even at last.
The LIFE of the admired PHYSICIAN and ASTROLOGER of our Times, Mr. Nicholas
Culpeper.
IN the County of Kent, a place eminently famous for Loyalty to Superiors,
Nicholas Culpeper was born the eighteenth of October, 1616. he was the Son of
Nicholas Culpeper, a Reverend Divine, son to Sir Thomas Culpeper Knight and
Baronet; his Mother was the Daughter of Mr. William Attersol Minister of
Isfield in the County of Sussex; this worthy Divine did write that learned
Comentary on the Book of Numbers, with other excellent Works. Ncholas Culpeper
the younger was educated at a Free School in Sussex, at the cost and charges of
his Mother, (for his Father died a month before he was born) he was a most
eminently pious Minister, and much reverenced for his virtuous Qualities by all
that rightly knew him, who were truly afflicted that his worthy Father did not
live to bring him up, since he left no other Children behind him. After her
Husbands decease, Mrs. Culpeper his mother, took such care for his education,
that she spent four hundred pounds on her said Son, for his Diet, Schooling,
and his being at the University of Cambridge, where he continued some years,
profited in all manner of Learning, and gained the applause of the University
whilst he remained there. One of the first Diversions that he had amongst some
other smaller transactions and changes, none of his Life proving more
unfortunate, was, that he had engaged himself in the Love of a Beautiful Lady;
I shall not name her for some reasons; her Father was reported to be one of the
noblest and wealthiest in Sussex. This fair Lady after many generous
treatments, as Mr. Culpeper might clearly perceive, entertained the Tenders of
his service, so far as to requite him with her entire and sincere Affections;
and though the strictness of Parents have often too severe eyes over their
Children, yet where hearts are once united, Lovers use to break through all
difficulties. The riches of the Lady, (which might have enchanted inferior
spirits) in respect of the virtuous inclinations of her Mind and Person, had
no power over him, so that like a true Lover, the Language of his Eyes and his
Heart were the same, insomuch that the languishing sincerities of these
suffering Inamorato's, put them to the extremity of the determination, some way
to set a period to their Martyrdomes. Mr. Culpeper having then supplied himself
with two hundred pounds from his Mother, during his abode at Cambridge, his
Fair Mistress and he by Letters and otherwise, plotted secretly with the
assistance of a Gentlewoman that waited on her, to pack up such Rich Jewels,
and other necessaries as might best appertain to a Journey, and so secretly to
make their escape near to Lewis in Sussex, where they intended to Marry; and
afterward for a season to live privately till the incensed Parents were
pacified; but this happiness was denied them by the Malevolence of Mars, and
some other envious Planets, as you shall find in his Nativity. Not to vex the
expectation of the Reader any longer, but rather to epitomize so sad a story,
Mr. Culpeper hastes from Cambridge, his Mistress with those that she durst
trust, were gone part of their way to meet him at the appointed place; but it
pleased the great disposer of terrene affairs to order it otherwise; the Lady
and her servants being suddenly surprised with a dreadful storm, with fearful
claps of Thunder, surrounded with flames of Fire and flashes of Lightning, with
some of which Mr. Culpepers fair Mistress was so stricken; that she immediately
fell down dead, exchanging of this life for a better; her Marriage on earth for
one in heaven. When the Lady was stripped, all the marks that could be found on
her fair body, was only a blue spot on her right side about the breadth of
ones hand. The news of this sad accident met Mr. Culpeper as he journed toward
his dead to him, but otherwise a (...) living Saint. At the instant when this
direful (...) chance befell him, Sir Nicholas Astey his intimate acquaintance
passing by, chanced to be an eyewitness of this sad disaster, who used the
best Rhetoric he had to comfort him in this his affliction; he took him up in
his Coach, and conveyed him to his Mother, who not expecting then to have seen
him, received him with a great deal of joy, till being so truly sensible of his
sorrows; she for that cause left that County, and afterward fell into a fit of
sickness which she was never rid of till her dying day.

It is impossible to express the sorrow of so true a lover as Mr. Culpeper was,
the strangeness of this misfortune being enough to shake the strongest
resolutions of the most established person of the world; I shall only acquaint
the Reader with what I have heard of his best friends, that when that he was
serious even to entertain the deepest Melancholy that his frailty could suffer
on earth, that then he would discourse at large the sad fate of his unfortunate
Mistress. This Lady on whom this unhappy accident fell, had two thousand pounds
in personal estate, and five hundred pounds a year; the loss of this Jewel
which Mr. Culpeper valued above all worldly considerations, cast him into so
deep a Melancholy, that he left the University of Cambridge; so that it was
high time for his Grandfather Mr. William Attersol whose care he was, to think
of some seasonable way to divert this his extraordinary distemper; and the
rather, for that he perceived contrary to his intention, that Mr. Culpeper bent
his inclinations from the time that he was but ten Years of Age, to those as he
conceived unprofitable (if not unlawful studies) of Astrology and occult
Philosophy, which how they are resented still by some Divines and other Zealous
persons, the world is too well acquainted. Mr. Attersol had formerly used his
best Arguments, though to no purpose to persuade him to embrace the Ministerial
function, with an intention as it was supposed after his Decease to have settled
his estate on him; which since he would not hearken too, he divided four
hundred pounds a year amongst the rest of his Grandchildren, and left him but a
Legacy of forty shillings, which was paid him by the two Executors at Nathaniel
Brook his shop at the Angel in Cornhill. This small sum he received with a
smile, and said, He had courted two Mistresses that had cost him very dear, but
it was not the wealth of Kingdoms should buy them from him. The truth is, there
are some Zealots that without any color call Astrology it self the Black Art,
count all Circles above th^^ Sphere to be conjuring, as Mr. Culpeper used to
say, If such kind of people cannot fly up to Heaven to render Astrology a
miracle, they will fetch it from Hell to make it Magic, though it may be well
enough performed by natural causes. To proceed, Mr. Attersol with the advice of
his friends, consulted how to dispose of Mr. Culpeper, which was to send him to
London, where they placed him with Mr. White an Apothecary near Temple Bar, to
whom they gave with him fifty pounds; he having not been with him above a year
and a half, Mr. White failed, his necessities compelling him to go into Ireland
with the loss of Mr. Culpepers money, which caused his friends afterward to
bestow him with Mr. Drake an Apothecary in Thredneedle-street, where being
himself excellent in the Latin, he taught Mr. Drake that Tongue in less then a
year and a half. Not long after this, his other friend dyed; he still remained
with Mr. Samuel Leadbeaters, who formerly lived with him; and afterward took
his Masters shop within Bishops-gate, where for some space of time he studied
Physic. In which application of his, he showed a great deal of wisdom to choose
a Profession, according to his own disposition, and inclination, the strongest
Indenture to bind a man to the happiness of a noble and successful enterprise.
Before I shall further discourse his story, it will not be impertinent to
acquaint the World with some observations, that those that were most familiar
with him intimated to me, (with some others that I gleaned from him) concerning
his Physical Practice; in his addresses to his Patients, he was not as some
are, so arrogant to warrant their recovery: his usual advice was to bid them
trust in God, and seek to him for a Blessing. He was none of those that used to
put confidence in the single testimony of the Water, which as he used to say,
Drawn from the Urine, is as brittle as the Vrinal; the Water running sometimes
in such post haste through the sick man's body, that there is no account to be
given of it, though the most judicious person examine it; for the sick man may
be in the state of death, though life appear in the Urinal. To the poor he
prescribed cheap, but wholesome Medicines; not removing, as many in our times
do, the Consumption out of their bodies into their purses; not sending them to
the East Indies for Drugs, when they may fetch better out of their own Gardens.
Those that knew him rightly affirm that he was so Charitable to his poor
Contrymen, that the money that he received from rich persons, he spread upon
the waters, laid it forth for the good of those that were in want, though
through his Charity he was sometimes necessitated: he would not participate of
any thing from the meaner sort of people, he only desired their prayers. I
have heard those that rightly knew him say, that when he might have had a large
sum to have gone to a rich person, he rather chose to go to one of his poor
neighbors that has been sick, where he has given away his Physic; which
some of his friends wondering at, he has said, His conscience would not suffer
him to do otherwise* the Rich could not want help for their (...), but the Poor
must perish if his Charity did (...) relieve them.

As he was an Apothecary formerly himself, so he discerned the errors of
Apothecaries, and was therefore an Apothecary to himself, and others. He used
not to hansel his experiments, letting loose as some do their mad Receipts into
sick men's bodies, to try how well Nature can ^^ght against them, as one writes,
whilst they stand by and see the Battle, except it were in desperate cases,
when death must be expelled; and when he could keep life no longer, he made an
easy passage for it to go out, (as his Book of the Astrological judgment of
Diseases) where he unites Astrology to Physic, as they concern the
decumbiture of the sick, does sufficiently discover to the World; not like an
Emprick, who being guilty neither of Greek, nor Latin, of writing well, or
spelling true English, being asked why it was called a Hectique Fever,
answered because of a Hecking Cough that attended the disease; yet this
imposture is an imagined Aesculapius, so as to tyranize over the purses and
bodies of thousands, having as many fools to wait his leisure, as the late
learned Senertus was reported to have had sometimes two hundred Patients in a
morning. But removing this block out of the way, it is also to be observed of
him, that he was never too Rigi^ (...) prescribing of his Diet for the sick,
and y^^ (...) man in his time did stranger cures, so far a (...) only to cure
men, but to cure the Art of ^^ring of men; to reform Physic it self, as many
of learned of the College of Physicians ha^^ freely expressed; one of them
being disposed to speak truth of him, said, That he was not only for Gallen
and Hypocrates, but he knew how (...) correct and moderate the tyrannies of
Paracellus. The best Chemists that could fix Quicksilver, search into the
depths of that Art, claimed him, which experiments in this Volumne do admirably
manifest. As some of the learned were pleased to spend their verdicts either
well or ill on him, so he has not been much behind hand with them. I have
heard him say, that the Doctors were Learned, well furnished with general
notions in Physic, but there were some tried Receipts in the hands of private
persons they could never arrive to; which if they had, they were now honored
sufficiently, then they would have been worshipped like Gods. And sometimes in
jest, as his custom was, he used to say, That there were a certain sort of
Physicians that were like the Bishops; they had the Keys of Binding and
Loosing, and nothing else.

To wave what might further be said of Mr. Culpeper's Practice, I shall end
with this, that by his ingenuity and industry he got the love and applause of
all people; in so high an esteem he was, that he had gained the general repute
of the three Kingdoms; insomuch, that though he was courted by his friends to
alter the condition of his single life, he would admit of no such proffers,
till like a skilful Astrologer he had fixed his eyes upon the Firmament, where
Venus the Star of his own Affections governed, surrendering all the powers and
faculties of his soul to the virtues and beauty of Mrs. Alice Field, the
daughter of Mr. John Field and Alice his Wife, kinswoman of Mr. Simon
Barckstead, an eminent Gentleman, owing two and twenty Lordships, free estate;
whom it was his happiness afterward to espouse at fifteen years of age: a
Gentlewoman, who as she was of a good extraction, so also, besides her richer
qualities, her admirable discretion, and excellent breeding, she brought him a
considerable fortune: By her he had seven Children, whereof Mrs. Mary was his
fourth, now living with her Mother in Spitttle-fields, the true picture of her
Father. Mrs. Culpeper while she continued in that blessed state of Matrimony
fourteen years with him, she so wisely demeaned her self, as never to entrench
on his prerogative, not in the least to disturb his studies; she only sought
to maintain her own propriety in domestic Feminine Affairs; so that she was
all his time a Wife at her own disposing, enfranchised, freeborn from her
Wedding Day. Neither while Mr. Culpeper was in health, did he go about to keep
her in the wholesome ignorance of such unnecessary Secrets, (as some suppose
them) but that by her discreet observation of his practice, she has got the
start of most of her Sex now living, insomuch, as since his death, to be in no
less esteem for her practice, then some of the other gender that boast of their
lesser knowledge. It was Mr. Culpepers usual expression in the time of his
health, that though he could not do for her as she deserved, that he should
nevertheless leave her a competent estate, (meaning that he should enrich her
with some Secrets of his Practice) which she has since in the Aurum Potabile,
and other rare Secrets, found happily verified to her own expectation. When Mr.
Culpeper began first to decline in his health, he endeavored to sequester
himself from the throng of the people; he strove for a season to obscure his
own name, which he found to be a most impossible task; for being so long time
laborious in his studies, and having particular tried Receipts, by which he had
formerly done most admirable cures, he was past all concealment. He being then
so unexpectedly taken notice of, as to be put upon the Translation of the
Doctors Dispensatory; to his great assistance, and more happy accommodation, he
had for some time together a most ingenious Mannuensis, one Mr. William Ryves.
After the Dispensatory he writ several experienced Treatises amongst others
inestimable Aphorisms, some of them not much inferior to those of
Hippocrates. It is not to be omitted, that amongst other eminent Authors of our
times, he had the fate to suffer under some works which he is likely to own to
posterity; some whereof are honorable injuries, at which if he were now alive,
he would be the less incensed, if the more particular ingratitude of the person
whom he deserved so much from, had not been only showed to him in his
lifetime, but so, as after his death to asperse a genuine Work of his,
entitled, His Legacies. It will be needless to mention other particulars, what
disguises and false pretenses, for his self-interest, this person has been
forced to make use of. To proceed.

I shall pass by Mr. Culpeper's fighting of a Duel, for which he was forced to
fly into France, remaining there a quarter of a year till the cure was
perfected at his own expenses; as also his taking up of Arms, and some other
cross transactions of his life; I refer those that are Artists to the
consideration of the before-named Scheme of his Nativity Calculated by that
learned and admirable proficient in Astrology. Mr. John Gadbury, wherein they
may find in the Epitome, what I have hitherto more largely insisted on.

For thy more pleasant diversion. Courteous Reader, I shall but only touch
lightly upon the nobleness of his disposition; if it had been in case of a
Patients necessity, nothing should obstruct, he would go all weathers; but if
it had been only for an Astrological question in resolving, of which he was
excellent, except it were to pleasure a special friend. He chose rather to walk
abroad for therecreation of his tired spirits, then to tarry at home, and to
get what he pleased to demand; he has had forty that waited on him in a
morning, whom he sent all away with the same answer: insomuch that one of the
most eminent of the three Nations, in Astrological and Physical knowledge, now
living in the Country, then altogether unknown to Mr. Culpeper hearing of his
humor, came to town of purpose to try him; he had no sooner after he had knocked
entered the Parlor, but Mr. Culpeper was got half way on the stairs, and asked
him bluntly, as his manner was, what he would have. The Doctor told him that he
had come some miles to be resolved of an Astrological question, and that he
would be very grateful to him; before he could almost speak these words, Mr.
Culpeper turning himself round to go up stairs, told him that he would have
nothing to do with his question. Yes, but you would, replied the Doctor, and
laughed, if you knew what it were. What it were, says Mr. Culpeper! Why, what
is it? Says the Doctor, Whether you will go to the Tavern and drink a glass of
Sack. I Will resolve you that question presently, says Mr Culpeper, takes his
Cloak, and immediately goes with him; in such an humor his friend might demand
of him what he pleased, and never fail of an ingenuous and civil satisfaction.
When Mr. Culpeper's sickness stole upon him, as he was naturally consumptive
for some years together; he was so truly sensible of his declination, as that
he was often heard to say, that Tobaco was the greatest enemy he had to his
health, but he was too much accustomed to it, to leave it. What Sir Theodore
Mayern affirmed of the bad French-Wine, which he drank but a moderate quantity
of at the Guilded-Lyon in the Strand, that it had killed him, as within few
days afterward was found too true, might be as certainly said of the
destructive Tobaco Mr. Culpeper too excessively took; which by degrees: first
deprived him of his Stomach, and after other evil effects, in process of time,
was one of the chiefest hastners of his death.

Mr. Culpeper, as has been declared, for a long time perceiving his Sickness
to increase more strongly upon him, though he had held out the Siege with his
most studious endeavors to assist Nature with his best Art; yet still finding
as he made good one place to repair it, there was still a Breach reinforced in
another, Battery upon Battery. Seeing no remedy but that he must yield to the
tyranny of the common Enemy, the Outworks being already taken in; though he
knew with what inexpressible sorrow his Wife must be afflicted to hear that
doleful news, that till then he had concealed from her: but finding the
approaches and infallible pangs of Death to have already seized on him, taking
her by the hand, as she stood by the Bedside in a most disconsolate condition,
he breathed forth these his last Words to her: Dearest, be not troubled, my
peace I have already made with my God; I am now going out of this miserable
Life, to receive a Crown of Immortality, after our so long continuance
together, as Heaven has thought fit, we must for the present part. At these
words, Mrs. Culpeper being in a great agony, at last recollecting of her self,
said, Sweetheart, how can thou be so cheerful when grim Death looks thee in
the face? He endeavoring to raise himself a little higher, said, My dearest
Girl, (an expression he generally used) Live as I have done, and then thou will Dye as I do: for now I speak it, when it is no time to dissemble, In the
presence of God and his Angels, I did by all persons, as I would they should do
by me: I was always just in my Practice: I never gave a Patient two Medicines
when one would serve the turn. Farewell my Dearest, I am spent. And so he
exchanged this Life for a better. Not to take notice of such Reports as attend
persons that are usually envied for their eminent worth, the excess of my grief
not suffering me to enlarge my self; I shall only write, to the great loss and
affliction of all young Practitioners, as also of the most learned Students in
the Arts and Sciences, he exchanged this life for a more blessed. He dyed in
his own house in Spittle-Fields the tenth day of January in 1653/4 in the
thirty eighth year of his Age. He was buried in the New Churchyard of
Bethelem, where he desired to lie. Thus in the strength and flower of his Age
he departed this Life; who if he had lived but a few years longer, Christendom
had been filled with his Fame: he being for his general worth to be numbered
amongst the best Philosophers of his time. His learned friend Dr. Lawford in
remembrance of him, caused this Elegaick Acrostick to attend the Solemnity of
his Funeral Scutcheons.

NO prosperous Star does beam its influence here
IN our Horizon, lo a prodigious Sphere
COvered with blackness; for our rising Sun
HEld not the Circuit till it was high Noon,
O Recast with sables, Cynthia now thy face
LOoks pale with sorrow, he has run his race:
APollo's Sun's eclipst, till JAH that gave
SAlvation, calls him from the darkened Grave.
CAn Eyes but weep, when Marbles sweat forth
UNto his Funeral, and in black appears.
LO now the Heavens do mourn in Clouds, and be tears
PVrled with Cristal at his obsequy.
EVen now the Astral Science seems to weep,
Physic lies panting at his humbled feet;
EArth reels about most slowly, for her Son
REturns unto his Mother before Moon.
As Mr. CULPEPER deserved a Monument to have perpetuated his memory to
posterity; so this Epitaph, which one writ on him, might have been fitly
engraven on it.

The Epitaph.
Here lies the Doctors great envy and wonder,
To The Empericks an aweful clap of Thunder.
Whom he stripped and whipped, for wise men hereafter,
To make them the scorn and scene of their laughter.
To their joy sleeps here our three Kingdoms sorrow,
Till the Resurrection bids him, Good morrow.
The Character.
MR. Culpeper was in his Deportment gentle, pleasing, and courteous. His
Complexion darkish and swarthy. His Visage rather long then round. Of a
Presence not so beautiful as amiable. His Hair black and somewhat curling. His
Eyes piercing. His Body a little above a medium, tending to tallness. Of a
spare lean Constitution. In his Apparel not exceeding the moderation of one of
his degree. Somewhat careless. He was of a clear and established Judgment. Of
an eloquent and good Utterance. Of a quick Spirit, full of swift Thoughts and
mounting. Of a sparkling ready Wit, a Gift which does not always speak men
Fortunate. He was sometimes too much overtaken with deep Speculations, though
Melancholy was somewhat contrary to his nature; whatsoever he said otherwise
of himself: so that it may rather be imputed to the Crosses of his Life, then
to his own disposition. His Health was often disturbed with a dust Choler. Of
Religion he had a greater share then most Physicians use to have; he had so
much Zeal as to hate Superstition, and was no friend to Episcopal Innovations.
In his Counsels he was judicious; of a nimble Apprehension, with little
difficulty in his Dispatches. He was a person of so ready a mind, that he
could more learnedly and suddenly dictate his Papers for the Press, then some
that do take of the Lamp and the Oil more studiously to contrive them. When he
traveled in Discourse concerning a Patients Disease, his understanding cleared
all doubts; neither was it so dark or cloudy as some Practitioners are, who
still create new scruples, for he had the luck (for ^he most part) to look
directly on Truth. He was too free-hearted, (if not inclining to Prodigality)
they are the words in the Calculation of ^is Nativity, Saturn Lord of the Cusp
of the se^ond House Retrograde, near the fourth, made him ^uickly dispatch a
great part of his Estate as soon almost as he received it: verifying his own
usual Expression, That the World was made for him to read on, he would not
stoop to fill his pockets with (...). His Nature was both noble and honest. He
^as an excellent Companion, and for the most ^art of a merry temper. His mirth,
as he was ^sed to say when he was far spent in his sickness, ^as the best
Cordial he had left against the Consumption of his Spirits. He was a despiser
of the World. A man confident, not jealous of his Fortunes, which the better
enabled him to bear his misfortunes. Not to instance his return home wounded in
the Year 1643. his wrongful Imprisonment, all which he endured with as much
patience, as if he had continually met with good Successes: He had not only
thus practiced Seneca, but out-stript the Philosopher. As he was so far from
Covetousness that he cared not who was his Purse-bearer, so long as that he
wanted not for necessary expenses, he durst trust Gods Providence with the
rest: his Mind was surprised with higher mysteries then to stoop to such
worldly trifles. He was a person that by his Art had such a foresight of the
changes of the Times, that few Events seemed new to him; as he was long before
(by his Astrological skill) acquainted with them. He was another Tych^ Brache
for his knowledge of the future Affairs of State. So that though he was an
Astrologer, a Physician, a great searcher into the Secrets o^ Nature, and a
true lover of the Arts; yet such was his modesty, that though he knew so much,
and seldom failed to convince the most obstinate Opinionist, yet he never
would, except on some extraordinary occasion, put himself forward; insomuch,
that he made good that saying, He whose own Worth does speak him, needs not
speak* his own Worth testifies enough of him. He had no^ many Books, but those
that he had were wel^ selected. He was none of those that persuaded the World
he was Learned, by the getting together of a great Library; his Memory was his
Vatican. One could not say of him, Salvete libri sine Doctore. To be brief,
though he was always acceptable to such Friends as rightly knew him, yet they
could not but be a more then ordinary disturbance to him. Certainly he spent
his younger years in most laborious Studies, otherwise the crowds of his
acquaintance could not but impede, if not obscure the serene Idea's of his
Mind. To conclude, he was a better Physician to others then to himself. What
one of our Modern Poets alludes to, in another sense, was verified on him.

When God cuts short the thread of Life,
One's dearest Friends shall bring the Knife.
On the Famous and most Renowned Physician and Astrologer, Mr. Nicholas
Culpeper, lately deceased.
TO illustrate or blazon forth the deceased Authors immortal Name, or to render
him his due Praises, transcends the reach of inferior capacities; his
universal and experimented Knowledge in Natures deepest Arcana being such, that
it may be discreetly affirmed, That Nature was wholly unvailed to him. For
unquestionably, if he had not received the Benediction of Celestial
Illumination, it must have been altogether contrary to humane Reason, that he
could have arrived in so few years, to so superlative a Judgment; his so well
known Parts being such as not only to cause our three Kingdoms, but also
Foreign Countries, to admire both him and his Works. This his last Volume,
which when I remained in his House, the greatest part of I had the happiness
from his corrected Papers to transcribe. Mr. Culpeper finding himself ready to
leave the World, entrusted it in the several Manuscripts, in the hands of his
assured Friends, who preserved them, and looked to the faithful Publishing of
them from the Press, by Mr. Nathaniel Brook, whom the Author designed as truly
worthy of them; they are now perfectly Printed, as to answer the so long and
earnest expectation of them. As touching this Work, there needs no more to be
said of it, but that the Judicious will clearly perceive, that Mr. Culpeper
has throughout the whole entire body of it, not only corrected, but fully
supplied the Defects and Failings of most of the Doctors of these times. What
his Abilities were to perform such high undertakings, not only this, but his
other Works in Astrology, Chyrurgery, Physic, and other Arts and Sciences,
have already so far testified, as to be above the censures of the exactest
Critics now living. Let it suffice, that his well-affected and earnest desire
of the Public Benefit was such, that had God given him a longer term of
years, after Ages would have acknowledged him their Great Informer. Either to
praise his Translation of the Doctors Dispensatory; his Judgment of Diseases;
or his contexture of them all in this School of Physic, is to as little
purpose, as (according to the old saying) to light a candle to the Sun. It is
enough, and above all other commendations, that this Work, by such a cloud of
Witnesses, is so truly and really attested his own. As for my self, I am so
obliged, as that I can do no otherwise, then gratefully confess, that in the
time of my relation to him, I received more Knowledge and Light from him, then
from all the Conversation I have since had either of Books or Men.

His quondam Servant, W. Ryves.
Queens-street, November. 15. 1658.
To Mr. Nicholas Culpeper on his School of Physic.
WE need not now seek sudden Remedies,
From a quick Poison, or a Precipice;
Art's so improved, and that made easy now,
Which for man's Life required a holy Vow:
Nothing's impossible, this Doctor can
Heal not the Body only, but the Man.
This Book's both Charm and Medicine, I can bear
My Antidote about me every where.
Is there a new Disease, we soon may know
What for to name't; this to thy School we owe,
Not to our Empericks, who out of shame,
Think slightly of it, if an easy Name.
Here Is Catalogues of Cures though manifold,
As Grammar Dialect wrought without Gold,
Into a sudden Health so cheated, we
Acknowledge a new Life to spring from thee.
Our Physic Errors by thy English Press,
As we more understand, so are made less.
Apollo's mortal once again, and he
Reading thy Book, dares Death's worst injury.
J. Blagrave.

To Mr. NICHOLAS CULPEPER, on his Admirable Cures.
SAfe Lord of Arts, I Will not dare to profane
The nerves and marrow of thy weight and strain,
Who sound'st the depth of Authors, and could tell,
Where such a one did write, or not write well?
Where they did err, or not, in the sad cure:
How we should ease or martyrdomes endure.
So many Drams of Reason made thy Skill,
That thou knew'st how they saved, how they did kill.
Thus thou were just to others, for whom we
Retribute back what Ttruth must fame of thee:
That thou to us victorious Cures of Art,
With such small tyranny did so impart;
That we our humane Frailties have forsook,
Thou curedst us then without, now with thy Book.
E. Cook.

Wholesome Advice to unskilful presumptuous Practitioners, diligently to peruse
this Book.
YOu who in your Profession think it no sin
To out-go Galens sober discipline;
Would bind the liberal Arts, force them to come
Within the compass of your fatal doom.
In your Emperick Dos confident grown
To cure; God bless us from the Potion.
As trees embrace by a strange sympathy,
By chance not Art, you cannot tell us why;
Still so confirmed in your most direful trade,
That where you cannot murder, you will invade.
Hence, hence Impostors, dare not to apply
Your ignorant stamps to this rare faculty;
But as your own Defamers courted be
By your reforming Garters to your fee:
Or else be rackt and tortured till you do
Send for the Physician, and adore him too;
Or be arraigned at the Sessions, and there look
For naught but death, till that you read this Book
Crossing the Proverb, Learn so in this School,
To rise up Doctors, no more Knave or Fool.
T. Sadler.

To Mr. NICHOLAS CULPEPER, on his descension to the understandings of his
honest plain Contrymen, in this Treatise of his, entitled, The School of
Physic.
NOthing here sowrs our looks, no such strange phrase,
That might perplex us worse then a Disease;
There Is no sad Pill disguised, for to woe
Our Pallats to, what Art ought not to owe;
Nor no new terms of Notion, here the style
Is not prescribed, tastes not oth' Shop or File:
These Grains and Scruples grate no tender ear,
No Opiats nor Gargarismes here;
No such harsh strained Medicines, that we
Can never find out with all our industry.
Thy brighter Genius, Culpeper, was such,
Thou thoughtst we could not understand too much.
So clear thy Elegancies are, we might
Doubt, if thou were Physician, did so write.
W. Brugis.

To Mr. NICHOLAS CULPEPER, on his Cheap and Charitable Cures.
AMongst some, Charity is slander, sure
They Are neither cheap nor speedy in their Cure.
Health is the gift of Heaven, and so to us,
They will have God alone propitious.
Thus some Physicians the Ague turn
Into a Fever, as they please we burn;
Then freeze by fits, alas we cannot tell
Without the Doctors Gold how to be well:
They turn Disease into Disease, till we
Worship the Urinals, visit for the Fee.
Whereas throughout the danger of thy Skill
Thou did retain God and Religion still.
Our healths are owed unto thy Charity:
Thou spent'st thy self for to do good; and we
Have so our humane frailties now forsook,
To live to honor thee, and praise this BOOK.
E. B.

CULPEPER'S School of Physic, OR THE English Apothecary.

A Treatise of the transcendent Sufficiency of our English HERBS, as they may
be rightly used in Medicine.

Being a brief exact Account of the chiefest Concernments of the whole HERBARY
ART; as also of the Excellency of our English Home Physic.

BY Nicholas Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill, 1659.

CULPEPERS School of Physic; OR The English Apothecary.
A Treatise of the transcendent Sufficiency of our English Herbs, as they may
be rightly used in Medicine.

Being a brief exact Account of the chiefest Concernments of the whole Herbary
Art; as also of the Excellency of our English Home Physic.

Courteous Student,
WHat can be more pleasant to thee, then the enjoying of Medicines for cure of
thine Infirmities, out of thy Native Soil, and Country, thy Field, thy
Orchard, thy Garden? And what more profitable unto thee, then thereby to avoid
the infinite Charges rising upon the use of strange and foreign Medicines,
whereby not only thy sub^ance is wasted, but thy health oft-times greatly
^paired? This is then that Truth which I com^end unto thee. As England
abounds plenti^lly with all things necessary for thy mainte^ance of life, and
preservation of health, so needs it not, partly through Natures instinct,
partly by the industry of men, sufficiency of Medicine to cure the sicknesses
and infirmities, whereunto our Nation is subject: which my opinion and
judgment, considering the use and custom has long been to place greatest
value in strange Medicines, and the practice of the most does ratify the same,
I know must needs seem strange unto thee, but read, consider, and then judge,
and at the least let me enterchange my pains with thy attentive weighing of
that which thou shall read, prejudice set aside: and that a way may be made for
the plainer handling of this matter, I briefly define a Remedy, a Medicine, a
Disease after this sort, as follows. First beginning with a remedy which I
call the work of the Physician, whereby health may be repaired. Physic is an
art which takes charge of the health of man, preserving and maintaining it
present by the right use o^ meat, drink, and exercise, with other such helps o^
nature: and restoring the same decayed, by di^t medicine, help of hand, or
surgery, instrument severally used, or by joint force applied. Which three are
Physic instruments, whereby the actio^ of curing is performed, which action I
call a remedy. And the second of these instruments, namel^ a Medicine, I define
an adversary force of some natural thing, equally matching the proper o^ next
cause of the disease. Of which Medicine herbs, trees, stones, minerals, and
metals, earth waters, and all fruits, are matter only, and n^^ the very
Medicines themselves: for as Physic self is an art, and the action artificial,
and not nature, so are the instruments of the same action artificial and not
natural. And as nature affords not to us of our own work, either garments, or
houses, or any kind of instrument, but only the matter whereof such
instruments may be made, leaving with us an industry rightly to frame them, and
wisdom to use them: so, no more ^is Lettis, Poppy, Rhewbarb, or Scammony a
medicine, then an Oak, a Table or Ship; or a Quarry of Stones, an House.
Moreover, all medicines standing in a kind of relation to the disease, which by
means of the Patients age, sex, time of the year, custom, and such like
occasions, greatly vary; no Nature which always keeps constant in her own
kind, can therefore either be a Medicine, or properly bear the name thereof:
which I wish to be noted, lest it be thought that Simples and such other
natural things were Medicines, because commonly they carry the names of them.
And thus much shall be sufficient to have said of the nature of a Medicine. Now
a Disease (which remains last to be defined) is such a state of the body as
thereby it is unabled to perform aptly the actions thereto belonging, or those
actions which the Soul does accomplish by the instrument of the Body. Thus much
briefly concern^ng the explication of the terms, wherein this truth is
propounded. Now the reasons, whereby both I am moved to be of this judgment,
and ^m so hardy as to propound it to others to be received, whereof the first
rises from the Christian Doctrine of Gods Providence, which as it serves
greatly to establish the chief points of Physophy, so being drawn, and more
particularly applied to the maintenance of man's life, carries with it as a
sufficient provision for maintenance and preservation of health, a like
furniture, and as answerable to the necessity of the Patient, health being
decayed. I will not stand to entreat of Providence, being well known to
Christians, and being a truth in Divinity, and Christianity, cannot be false in
Philosophy. Although the best of the Ancient Philosophers and Poets have
always kept it as a sure ground, who as they serve little to establish us,
having a surer foundation, yet may they justly condemn the Atheist of this
Age, who so far has quenched those remnants of the light of the first
Creation, that all things seem to him Fortune and Chance. There is no Nation
under Heaven so poor and destitute, but it has of the own Country soil
sufficient to content Nature with, of Food and Apparel; which as they be two
pillars of life, so from them are taken the means of preservation of Health,
which as to Beasts are applied by natural instinct, so are they used of man by
reason, the temperer of appetite and affection. This provision of sustenance is
most agreeable with the goodness of the Creator, who as he is Author of being
to the Creature, so fails he not to maintain and preserve the same Creature
the whole term of the being thereof: and because the necessity of the Creature
is perpetual, his wisdom has also foreseen, and provided a perpetual supply of
such sustenance, as is fit for that Nature which stands in need thereof: and
because the need is not once for all, but parted into times, varying, according
to the diverse disposition and nature of that for which this provision is made,
he has also so bestowed his goodness in this point, that at all times to all
things, necessary sustenance should not be to seek; and this extended not to
men only, but even to bruit beasts, and all things which require nourishment.
The end of this Provision is the preservation of the Creature, which Nature
most carefully studieth (if it might be perpetual and eternal) thereto to bring
it, the goodness of the Creator, will have nothing wanting, his wisdom will
have it wait upon the necessity of the Creature: wherefore as the Earth is
called the Mother of all things, not because it brings them forth only, but
yields them perpetual nourishment, so is the Country of all people to them
named, the Parent of all parents. Then by Natures law, all things being
abundantly ministered unto us for the preservation of Health at home in our own
Fields, Pastures, Rivers, etc. how can the Wisdom of God, and his Goodness,
stand with the absence of Medicines and Remedies necessary for the recovery of
Health, the need being as urgent of the one, as of the other: and so as great
an occasion of practice of the same Goodness and Wisdom in the one as in the
other? which being most plain and evident, it follows necessarily, that the
Medicine should be as ready for the sick, as meat and drink for the hungry and
thirsty: which except it be appplied by the native Country, cannot be else
performed. It is known to such as have skill in nature, what wonderful care she
has of the smallest creatures, not only giving to every part of them a
careful discharge of sundry duties, as of attraction, retention, concoction,
expulsion of excrements, distribution, and such like, but also to the whole
creature, a knowledge of Medicine to help themselves, if happily diseases annoy
them; neither out of India, nor Arabia, but from their very haunt: which being
not denied to them, much more is granted to us, in so much as (the work of
Nature being most excellent in man) she is more vigilant over mankind, then
over other creatures, as by the shape thereof most plainly appears. The
Swallow cures her dim eyes with Celendine: the Weasel knows well the virtue
of Herbgrace: the Dove the Vervine: the Dog discharges his maw with a kind of
Grass: the Spider is triacle to the Monkey: the Hippopotamus discharges the
abundance of his blood by opening a Vein: and Ibes is said to have showed the
use of the Glyster: and too long it were to reckon up all the Medicines which
the Beasts are known to use by Natures direction only, and those not so far
fetched as our Drugs, but familiar with them, and taken from the place of their
Food: it being very probable, she has bestowed this gift even upon all, one
having interest in Natures care as well as another. By this then may we gather,
if Nature fail not the very beasts in this behalf, neither sends them to
borrow afar off, much more is that performed unto us the Lords of all the
Creatures, and for whose use all things were created: except we be thought less
subject to diseases then they, wherein we be so little privileged, that no
creature in that respect is so frail as we, and those most subject to
infirmities, which are governed and dieted by us. So that we of all creatures,
have greatest need of Natures liberal hand in this behalf. For be it for the
most part, we are more healthful then sickly, and so have greater use of the
means of keeping Health, then of restoring, yet hardly can a man say which of
them is more necessary to be ready and pressed at hand, the danger of Diseases
being always imminent, although Diseases themselves be not always present.
Now, if to any the reason seem weak from that which should be to infer a
being thereof; we are to understand in the Works of God, whatsoever should be,
is: he being a Workman of an absolute power and cunning. But says one, The
East and West Indies, Arabia, Barbary, the Red Sea, are the Mines, as it were,
and the Fountains of Medicines; and Spain, Portugal, and Venice, the Vents of
such things; and Navigation the means to obtain them. It cannot be denied, but
those Countries yield many strange things, whereof we take use with great
delight, and Navigation serves greatly for communicating of Commodities, and
enterchange of Merchandise: but how far, and of what Commodities? Verily of
such, as if our delicacy would give us leave, we might very well spare, being
things rather of superfluous pleasure, then necessary reliefs, and serving
rather for a certain pomp, then for maintenance of life: and which without
great working of the wits, might be proved to bring more harm to our Country
men, then commodity; both in respect of the diversity of complexion of our
bodies from those of strange Nations to whom they properly belong, the
corruption of their outlandish Wares, the selling of one thing for another, and
the withholding from us the best of choice. But of this hereafter. Moreover,
Navigation being of a later invention then the necessity of Medicine, neither
practiced of many Nations at this day, cannot supply this want; or if men began
then first to be diseased, when they began to find ways in the Sea to those
far Countries, does it not greatly detract from that Providence whereby all
things are guided, to lay the recovery of man's health upon the adventures of
Merchants? and the Disease being in the one part of the world, to have the
Medicine in the other: yea, as far distant as the East is from the West, and
the Life and Death of a man to stand upon a halfpenny weight of Scammony, or a
dram or twain of Rhewbard. Nay, which is yet more absurd, that the health of so
many Christian Nations should hang upon the courtesy of those Heathen and
barbarous Nations, to whom nothing is more odious, then the very name of
Christianity; and who of malice do withhold from us such Medicines as they know
most for our use. Whereupon the Turk denies unto the Christians at this day,
the Terra Lemnia, a Medicine to be preferred before the chief of those we
persuade our selves to enjoy. The corruption of their Drugs, is it not so
great, that in the light of all knowledge, scarce one is able to discern the
right Bolus Armena, from the Ocre of Apulia; or to discover the adulterating of
Ambergreece, and Musk, with a number of other corruptions, which have gotten
strength by custom of error? Thamarinds are counterfeited with Prunes,
Scammony with the milk of Spurge, Manna with Sugar and the leaves of Seen,
Aspalathum with the inward part of the root of an Olive Tree, Frankincense with
Rosin, Bdellium and Sarcocalla with gums: for Bolus Armena is sold a Red earth
out of Apulia, for Malabathrum a leaf of a Lemon or Orange, for Turpeth some
other root dipped at both ends in gum; which be as like in virtue to the
Simples whereof they bear the visard and mask, as Chalk to Cheese, according to
the Proverb. And greatly thou art deceived, to think our Navigations store us
with ancient Medicines, wherewith Physic in old time has been furnished: for
at this day neither is Balm known unto us, neither is Xylobalsamum, nor
Cardomomum, nor Amomum, neither Costus, neither Calamus odoratus, Aspalathus,
Agallocum, Narcapthum, with the most of the noble ancient Medicines: so that
Navigation has not at any time supplied this want unto us, and how it should
hereafter I know not, except Galen take pains again to sail into Cyprus, into
Palestine, and Lemnos, to gather and make choice with his own hands. For what
hope is there to be had of the Provision made by Merchants? who buy to sell
only, and thereof to reap gain; and by reason they be unlearned, if they would
be faithful, yet must they fail greatly in this point, and then must we use
such Medicines as we can come by, and the Patient recover such health as he
may. For the most part, these Drugs come out of Spain or Portugal, either
fetched of us, or brought of them; yet neither of them ever has born name of
yield of the best Simples, so that if they be of those Countries, then they are
not such as they should be: if Spain and Portugal fetch them elsewhere, then
lies the assurance upon their credit. Or let me know how they discern the
Coriander of Ethiopia, the black Helleborus of Cyrene, the Amomum of Scythia,
the Myrrha Troglodytica, the Opium of Apulia, (which are counted the best) from
the same growing in other places, which never carried name of commendation for
such Simples. The Coloquintida growing alone upon the plant is much suspected
of good Physicians, the Squilla that has no fellows, is thought to savor of a
venomous nature, likewise the Thymelea. Now when these are gathered to the
Merchants hand, who shall tell him how they grow, or who shall enquire but the
Philosopher, that knows what may come thereby to these Simples? Neither is
the danger less in the manner of laying them up, and keeping them over long:
besides, the just time of gathering being either over-passed, or prevented,
greatly diminishes the virtue of the Medicines. As the use of Euphorbium is
perilous before it be a year old, and after three years, it is nothing worth.
So Agarick gathered before it be ripe, or kept past two years, becomes
unwholesom. And as the Peony root is to be gathered in the wane of the Moon,
and the Cray-fish to be taken after the rising of the Dogstar, the Sun entering
into Leo, so are there many other, which if they miss their due time of
gathering, fail greatly in their virtues. To these corruptions moreover may be
added the washing of the Sea, the long journeys they are brought, whereby it
should seem, nature had denied unto us the use of them, as to whom they were
not of her yielded, with such difficulty, and as it were, by constraint, they
come to us. Then if the best of ancient Simples be partly unknown and wanting,
partly adulterated, partly by age and other means spent before they come to our
use, what shall we say to our Compounds and Mixtures, which rise of these
Simples? Can the temper mend them? or a quid pro quo, as they call them, serve
the turn? No verily, not our turns, to whom the substitute Medicines, as I may
call them, were not appointed, being in great part as hard to come by, as the
Medicines whose substitutes they are, and as much unknown unto us. As for
Agallicum, Calamus odoratus, for Amomum, Acorus, for Castorum, Bilphum, for
Crocamagmo, Agallocus, with a number of the same sort, which these few leaves
of Paper will not admit. Neither is it to be thought these Lieutenant Medicines
serve at all turns in the place of the right Medicines, for so should Ginger
serve the turn of Folefoot to purge by Vomit, which it cannot, no more then
curds of Cow milk can soften and supple like butter, or the dung of the
Stock-dove, purge like Euphorbium; or the Dock-root draw phlegm from the Head
like Pellitory; which Galen notwithstanding makes substitutes of these
Medicines which have such operation. I conclude therefore, seeing Navigation
cannot afford us either the Simples, which we seem to need, and those which it
does, both corrupt and counterfeit in the greatest part; we have neither to
crave thereof in this point aid, much less to trust thereunto. Now the Simples
being but (for the most part) bastard Ware, how can the Compounds that amount
of the same be other then counterfeit? Whereupon as Cardanus says in his
Method of Curing; The wise Magistrates of Venice have oftentimes forbidden the
making of Triacle and Mithridatum, because the Simples could not be had,
whereby they should be compounded. Which if Venice, the greatest Mart in this
part of the World of such Wares, cannot a vouch, what can we hope for from
other places? That a man would marvel to see the great store of them in all
shops of Apothecaries under the names of Triacle and Mithridatum of
Andromachus; and it being required in Triacle before it be used, it should have
a time, as it were of mellowing, which of Galen in his Book of Triacle to Piso,
is extended to twelve years: and of Paulus Aegineta in his seventh Book, by
seven years, for those that are bitten or stung of venomous beasts, or have
drunk poison, or are infected with the pestilence, and in other diseases, from
^en years till it be twenty of age. I marvel what assurance we have of the age
of this Triacle, which is ordinary in use; or if we have none, how we dare use
it at adventure, knowing by age the virtue thereof has no small alteration. I
would these inconveniences were the smallest, which I have but briefly, and as
it were, for a taste run over, yet were even they sufficient to stay our
overhasty use of such strange Merchandise, and to move us to betake us to those
we know, both in the Blade, and in the Seed, in the Root, and in the Fruit; and
know the Air, the Hill, the Valley, the Meadow where they grow. But this trust
upon, Outlandish Medicines have much more nearly touched us then so. If a man
would say by his overhasty embracing, whatsoever strange Nations do as it were,
purge over unto us, we drink diverse times rank Poison instead of wholesome
Medicine, I think it would justly move us to be advised, and not to pass over
the enquiry of a reason, why such a one should think so, being one whose
vocation tends to the charge of the health of men's bodies. The right
Hermodactiles are commended for excellent Medicines against all Pains in the
Joints; as the Gout, the Schyatica, and such like, from which they purge gross
Phlegm. Doronicum Romanum, has great commendation for comforting the Heart,
expelling Poison, against the Cough, for avoiding of Humors which overcharge
the Chest; which are great virtues doubtless in them both. Now if they (...)
the shops, as they bear the name of these Medicines, so carried not with them
instead of these virtues dangerous poison, then should I have less cause to
exhort our Nation to be take the^ to their Gardens and Fields, and to leave the
Banks of Nilus, and the Fens of India. The common Hermodactils being a kind of
poison* called Ephemerum, so named, because with such swiftness it charge and
overchargeth our vita^ spirits, that it kills him that has taken it i^ one
day. The other commonly called Doroticum Romanum, and used for an especial
Cordial, so that it has place in the electuary of precious Stones, in the
electuary of Amber, in the cordial Powder; this Doronicum, I say, calle^ of
Mathiolus, Demoniacum, that is to say, Divelish, noting thereby the virtues
thereof, is no baser poison, then a very kind of Aconitum, by Mathiolus
experience, which he confesses himself (before having been abused by the
common error) first to have learned of Jacobus Antonius Cortusus, a man very
skilful in the nature of Simples, which Jacobus taught him the experience, by
giving it to dogs, which it kills. Now if by reason no such danger happens
to us, by the use of them, they seeming not so dangerous; we are to understand
they be given in small quantity, and mixed with diverse remedies against poison,
the good Providence of God providing so, that otherwise they should not be
ministered, as in the purging Electuary of Diacnicis, Hermodactils are bridled
with Cinnamon, and the powder of Diatragatanthum frigidum, where indeed ^t has
somewhat too large scope, being better ^empered in Benedicta, with Cloves,
Parsley^eed, Galanga, and Mace, and in the Pills of Her^odactils with Aloe,
Mirobalans, Bdellium, the ^eed of Herbgrace, which have force against poi^on,
the which small quantity of them being ^ndled and dulled with other Medicines,
especi^lly such a resist the force of poisons, is not deadly unto us although
great hurt thereof must needs ^nsue. I have stood the longer upon this point ^f
strange Medicines, in answering the suppy by Navigation, the rather, because it
seems most ^o make against us in the maintenance of our ^ome Medicines, and
breeds as it were a loath^omness of those blessings of God, which we daily
^ay at commandment enjoy: But hitherto has ^nely been showed the corruptions
and counter^eting of foreign Medicines which belongs to ^ertain only, and
not to all; (although those ^ertain be the chief, and of greatest price) and
that being foreseen, the provision out of strange and far distant Nations, may
seem well to stand ^ith that Providence we speak of: and except ^hey be in
respect of their strangeness hurtful ^r unprofitable unto us, the skill of
Sailing be^^g a means to present them at our need, Na^ures care should seem no
whit to be blemished. ^he reasons which I have before alleged, I ^ave to the
indifferent Reader, to consider of, and because I am so far urged, I easily
stick ^ot to hold, that we receive no small hurt ^om all all the kinds of
strange Medicines, whereof I yield these few reasons which follow.

Our English Bodies, through the nature of the Region, our kind of diet and
nourishment, our custom of life, are greatly diverse from those of strange
Nations, whereby arises great variety of humors and excrements in our bodies,
from theirs; and so the causes of Diseases rising upon breach of diet, (the
diet being of another sort) must needs be unlike, whereupon although their
humors be in kind, and in a generality agreeable to ours, as Blood, Choler,
Phlegm, Melancholy, and such like, yet rising upon other matter then the same
in us, and otherwise framed by a far other state of body, by reason of a
diverse kind of life, the Medicines which help them must needs hurt us, not
finding the like cause to drive with: and this no doubt is the cause, why we
are not able to bear such dose o^ quantity of their Medicines, as those Nations
are, to whom they be native. Besides they work^ in our Bodies after a far more
unkind manne^ then they report them to do in theirs; nay, they destroy us, and
help them, which is an argument to me, that every Medicine has a relation to
the Diseases of the inhabitant, which if it b^ profitable to strangers, yet
does it by a constraint and not half so kindly. The Greeks, a^ it may appear by
Dioscorides in his fourth Book and Chapter one hundred fifty and two, treating
of Scammony, are able to bear a greater quantity, yea double then we, of
Scammony, which is an ordinary purger with us. Who says, thirt^ grains thereof
may be given with twenty of black Heleborus, and sixty of Aloe to make a just
purgation, and of Scammony alone sixty grains. Now common experience teaches
us the great odds betwixt Scammony raw, as they call it, and the same
corrected, which we name Dacrydium, both in vehemence of purging, and
tormenting the body: yet hardly dare we pass above twenty grains of the same,
and this mixed with Cordials and stomach Medicines. Moreover, their slender
correcting of it, does argue it to be far less noisome to them then to us, who
correct it only, or at the least, are contented with the correction thereof by
a little Salt and and Pepper, or a little Ginger: who for the plenty of
excellent Simples, which we both want and know not, and for their skill in the
nature of those we correct with, might as well have qualified it as we; who
first wash it in Rose Water, wherein Cytrea Myrobalanus, Spike, and Cinnamon
have been boiled: in which also we let it steep four and twenty hours, then dry
it, then mix it again with oil of sweet Almonds, and some Goom for Tragacantha,
and last of all bake it in a Quince, covered round with paste. Who has not
horror of the torments which both the Hellebores brings to the body? yet says
Paulus Aegineta in his seventh Book, and fourth Chapter, The black Helleborus
purges yellow Choler from the whole body, without pain: which canndt be
verified of our bodies, howsoever it be in theirs; and therefore we fear to
minister the Powder thereof in any sort, but the steeping only of the barks of
the roots, from twenty grains to sixty, they being bold to take a whole dram
thereof in substance, which is more then treble the quantity, for one dose.
These strange workings of these foreign Drugs in our Bodies, and a more gentle
and kind working in theirs, does it not manifestly declare unto us, that they
were not created for us? do they not force us oftentimes with peril of our
lives to give them over? that the Patient knows not diverse times, whether he
should stand rather to the courtesy of his Disease, then of his Potion? There
is a Simple which has not many years been in use, brought out of India, and
highly commended, called Mechoaca, it purges gently, say they, without vexing
or grieving the body, without anoying the stomach greatly, and cease purging
at your pleasure, with a little supping. These be great virtues doubtless, and
I wish we could find them in Mechoaca: for Experience the touchstone has
bewrayed it in our bodies, to be of a far other operation; it tormenteth the
body, it annoyeth the stomach much, neither does a supping stay the vehemence
of purging, and this have I partly by mine own experience found in Mechoaca,
and partly by the experience of my friends, who upon the use thereof have much
complained of these accidents. That juice, or rather milk of Poppy, which is
brought out of Asia, named Opium, it is not unknown to all the World, what a
mavelous force it has in benumming the sense of Feeling, and utterly
extinguishing the natural Heat of the body, so that we fear to give thereof
into the body above the weight of two grains, and those corrected with Saffron,
Castorium, and such like, lest it cast the Patient into such a deep sleep, as
he needs the trump of the Archangel to awake him. Now, the same Opium being
taken of the Turks, Moors, and Persians, brings to their wearied and
over-travelled bodies, a mavelous recreation, in such sort, as they
ordinarily use it therefore as a present remedy, not in the quantity of two
grains or twenty, but even an whole ounce or twain at once: And Hollerius in
his Scholia upon his Chapter of Phrensey, says, That Rondelet a learned
Physician, and the French Kings Professor at Montpellier, reported unto him,
that he had seen a Spaniard take thereof into his body half an ounce at one
time, without hurt. Wherefore if the difference of our bodies from those of
strange Nations be so great, that the thing which helps them, destroys us;
that ^ureth them without annoyance, does vehement^y torment us; I would wish us
to be better advised, then to be so ready to embrace them, as ^o contemn in
comparison of them, the Medi^ines which receive, as it were, a taming, and ^re
broken unto us by our own soil: neither art ^hou here to look, the Wisdom of
the Physician should consider the variety and diverse dispositions of the Bodies
by Age, Complexion, Region, Sex, etc. and thereafter to temper these Medicines,
and so to avoid the dangers; for ^he question is not of the manner of using
these things, for then should such consideration have place, but even of the
very nature, which no manner of use can alter. Yet are these Simples most
excellent creatures of God, made for the use of men, but not for all men; and
although we may receive help from them, by a certain general community that
our bodies have with those of Arabia, Barbary, and the rest; yet no doubt, as I
have showed in a few, so we receive by the use of them so much the less good by
them, as we most differ from them, and that which wants of the performance of
good to us, must needs turn us to much harm, the unhelping part, (as I may call
it) always working, and so ever harming. Neither do I see why the Medicines of
India or Egypt should be laid upon us, more then the Indian or Egyptian diet;
which is to eat Lyzards, Dragons, and Crocodiles: for if the proper Medicine
does always regard his proper adversary, which causes the disease (as no
doubt it should do) then there being a great difference betwixt our humors and
theirs, as much in a manner as is betwixt the flesh of a Crocodile and of a
tender Capon; our medicines which are to fit us, must needs be of another kind
then theirs, which in our bodies not finding such humors and excrements, as
that strange diet does engender, must needs seize upon the very substance of
our bodies, to have somewhat to work on: which painful working especially of
the purgers, causes the common saying amongst the people, to the great
discredit of our Art: There is not a purgation, but it has a smack of poison.
Truth it is, no purgation can work without natures annoyance, being in part a
prick of nature to avoid her excrements: but when she is so provoked that she
sweateth cold sweats, that she gives over, that the patient sounds not by
the excess of purging only, but for the most part through the evil quality of
the medicine, it is surely an argument, it wanted his proper subject to work
in. If needs we will take unto us the practice of such strange Medicines, (I
call them Medicines according to the common phrase, else properly be they
matter only it were to be desired (which in part is performed) that such
Medicines as be so perilous, might be planted in our natural country, that
through the familiarity of our soil, they might first grow into acquaintance
with us, before we entertain them, not into our bosoms, but into our hearts,
and chamber them with our vital spirits. And as it is said of the tree Persea,
which in Persia being poison, translated into Egypt, becomes wholesome,
bearing fruit to be eaten, and good for the stomach: so those natures receiving
such mitigation of our soil, might in time better fit us then they do, which as
it cannot alter their nature, being impossible to be done by change of place,
so doubtless might it purge away that evil quality which annoyeth us, and
seems rather to be an evil complexion, and as it were a cacochimy and disease
of the thing, then any necessary propriety belonging to the nature. This which
has been said of Persia, is also to be seen in other Simples, which in other
places are poison, and kill with the very shadow, yet brought into England, and
planted with us, clean change that venomous quality. Ugh called Taxus, of
Dioscorides is said to be so dangerous, and of such venomous nature, that in
Navar the very shadow thereof poisoneth him that sleeps under it: and
Aegenita says, being taken inward, it strangleth, and swiftly kills. This
Taxus notwithstanding, being so perilous in other places, our English soil
has so reformed, that boldly our children do eat of the fruit thereof without
danger: the like may be verified of our Hemlock, which although it be to be
numbered among the poisoning Herbs, yet it is far behind that which grows in
Candy, or Megara, or Cilicia, scarce to be accounted poison, in comparison of
that in those Countries. Now if thou shall think (gentle Reader) as the change
of a Region alters some qualities, so all, and thereby empaireth the virtue
of the Medicine; thou may easily be deceived. For as they depend not one
upon another, so may the one be well without the other, though by one common
form they seem to be linked together to make one nature. Rhewbarb is known to
have two qualities, one contrary to another, of purging the body, and stopping:
yet by steeping may the one be separated from the other, the purging virtue
being drawn out by steeping, and the stopping still remaining in the substance
steeped: so likewise may the noisome quality of the Medicine be eschewed, the
wholesome and medicinable virtue notwithstanding, being in full force, yea
greater retained, I say greater, insomuch as the hurtful quality would hinder
the operation of the healthful, which being freed and unyoked from the other,
does far better accomplish his work. Of all kinds of Honey that of Greece, and
namely of Attica and Hible are most commended, the next price is given to the
Honey of Spain and Navar: yet it is certainly known by experience, that the
English Honey is most agreeable to our English Bodies, and greater quantity
thereof may be taken, with less annoyance, yea, none at all to those which are
not of too hot a temper: the other kinds being more fiery, more apt to
engender Choler, and to inflame the blood, and more unfit to loose the body.
Whereby we may evidently see, that Nature uses not one shoe for every foot,
but either ministers a diverse commodity in kind, or else by the Country,
Air, and Soil, does so temper it, that greater use may be thereof to the
inhabitant of the same Country. By this then which hitherto has been said, it
is manifest we receive great hurt by the use of strange Medicines, and not upon
reason only, but from plain experience, even with hurt to our own bodies,
which as it is the greatest price of knowledge, so therefore ought we the more
to set thereby, and more carefully to seek to avoid the danger. Again, it is
evident, that the planting of strange Simples frames them more to our use.
Wherefore as there be many excellent Gardens in England, especially in London,
replenished with store of strange and outlandish Simples, it were to be wished
such endeavors were of others followed, that so we might acquaint us better
with these strangers, and by Vsu capio make them our own. But what soils will
brook all things? it is true, yet no doubt of those that it will brook, which I
dare say are four or five hundred; this frugality of nature toward us as it is
thought, might bear a greater show, and more safely use them, especially the
purgers, which carry with them greatest anoyance. Now if it be objected, the
force of outlandish Simples are thereby more feeble, as we find the Organ of
Candy surpassing ours in strength, I mean the same kind with that of Candy
planted in the Gardens, which may be said also of other strange Herbs planted
by us. It cannot be denied but they are so, neither can the strange Simples in
all points be equal with his kind, keeping his Native soil; yet is the
difference scarce half a degree under, or if it were a degree full out, what
reason were it to fetch that one degree with much peril, and charge, as far as
Candy, Spain, or Venice, or from another world: whereas a little increase of
the quantity of the thing, would easily supply that want, though I mention not
the gain of freshness of the same, which makes no small recompense of wanting
in the force: neither is the nature or virtue of a Medicine to be esteemed by
taste or smell, neither by the force it has against the disease, the nature of
a medicine lying in an equal matching of the cause of the disease, which if it
overmatch, so far off it is from the praise of an wholesome medicine, that it
becomes (...) cause of a contrary disease; wherefore the ^ommendation of a
medicine lies not in force, ^^t in such force. And therefore the counsel of
^he best Physicians is, if the disease will bear any delay, as the most do,
rather to apply a medicine of weaker force, then at once with a vehement ^one,
to shake the frame of Nature. And the weaker medicine being weak, either in
respect of the nature of the Simple, or the small quantity, they counsel rather
to use that kind of curing, which is by the feebler medicine in kind, then by
reason of the under quantity. For what skilful Physician would cure a small
distemper of heat, and as it were in the first degree, with a small quantity of
Opium, or Mandrake, or Henbane, being cold in the fourth degree, rather then
with the just quantity of Endive, or Succory, or diminish a small excess of
humors, with an under quantity of Coloquintida or Scammony, rather then with
the just quantity of a feebler medicine? Wherefore upon good reason they
conclude it to be far safer for the Patient, to cure with contraries of feebler
force, either often repeated, or in a greater quantity applied, then with a
main force of a medicine of equal strength at once to expel the disease, Nature
abhorring all vehement and sudden either emptying or ^^lling, heating or
cooling, or any other kind of sudden alteration, which being grounded upon
good reason, the delaying of the force of strange medicines by our soil,
serves greatly for the commendation both of planting them with us, and of the
Medicines themselves planted. The Simple still keeping within the compass of
the matter of a Medicine, neither being so diminished, but that by increase of
the quantity, it may match with the disease, which no man with reason can deny.
Now, if the greatness of the quantity happily procure loathsomness to the
Patient by extraction, that inconvenience may easily be avoided: by which means
a pound may be brought to an ounce, an ounce to a dram, and a dram to a few
grains, to please the Patient with. Such of strange Medicines as will not brook
our Climate, thereby declare the evil disposition they have to cure the
infirmity of our bodies. Every Medicine is as it were a mean betwixt
nourishments and poisons, excepting those Medicines which are applied
outwardly, which may both be of nourishments and poisons. In this mean betwixt
these extremes, there is such a scope and breadth, that some Me^^^ines incline
to the one, and some to the other. Now the best are such as rather incline to
nourishments then poisons, which as they do fight against the Disease, so have
they a certain token and pledge of greement betwixt our bodies and theirs:
whereby they acknowledge us for friends, and not common enemies with the
disease: the other Medicines which have no such token and earnest, being apt,
as well to destroy us, as to take away the Disease, and so join fellowship with
rank poisons. Then our native Soil being by the Ordinance of GOD the fittest to
yield us nourishment, from which ^ur Cattle and Fruits have a nutritive or
nou^ishing juice, which render the same again to ^s, what can we think of those
Medicines, to whom our soil has not a drop of juice to yield ^^to, and gives
no entertainment. Verily ^e are both to learn thereby, that nature does ^urnish
us other ways, and also greatly to sus^ect them to be of an extreme kind of
Medi^ines, the Spices only excepted, and such as are said to be sympathetical
to certain parts of our ^odies, which notwithstanding, less serve that ^seth
more strange and foreign they be. What should I speak of the unmeasurable
charge and ^ost these strange Medicines put us unto? In my opinion if it were
but that, we might be stirred up to this, or such like consideration: Has God
so dispensed his blessings, that a Medicine to cure the Jaundies, or the Green
Sickness, or the Rheum, or such like, should cost ^ore oftentimes then one
quarter of the substance that the Patient is worth? And the provision of a
whole year, whereof Wife and Children, and the whole Family should with things
necessary be maintained in health, be wasted upon the curing of a Palsy, or a
Chol^ick, or a swimming of the brain, or any other disease whatsoever? Is
Physic only made for ^ich men, and not as well for the poorer sort? does it
only wait upon Princes Palaces, and never stoop to the Cottage of the poor?
does it only receive gifts of the King, and never thanks and prayers from him
that has but thanks and prayers to bestow? or does the Lords goodness pass
over them of low degree? Has he respect of persons? Yea, has God given to the
Beast a remedy out of his own food and pasture (as it is most certainly known)
with a skill to use it, and has he set a Journey as far as from the Sunrising
to the going down, as it were a wall of Brass, and the fiery sword of a
Cherubim to keep us from the attaining of Salves for our Sores? Justly may we
thus complain, especially those of the poorer sort. And if Physic (as it is
indeed) be an Art common to all kind of men, all sorts of nations, all estates
and conditions of men; I would know why the means also of performing the
actions belonging to the same Art, should not be as common? And if it be
ordinary to all Nations to fetch their Medicines far, let me know why, as we
cease not to travel for to store us with outlandish Drugs, we carry not thither
also our Country Medicines for change; or they of those Nations give not the
like Adventure for ours? but they are contented with their own store, and so
ought we with ours. If it be not ordinary, why should it be more extraordinary
to one then to another. The most of our Apothecary Ware is bought from the most
vile and barbarous Nations of the world, and almost all from the professed
enemies of the Son of God: shall we say, the Lord has not care, or sets
more store by them then by his own people? that he so furnishes them, and
leaves us destitute? or shall we rather condemn the vanity of our own minds,
who unsatiably desire strange things, little regarding, or rather loathing that
which is always at commandment? But God (says one) has not bestowed all
things upon all Nations, but has left something to be supplied by the
Commodities wherewith one Nation abounds, and another wants; that thereupon
mutual duties arising, the society of men might be upholden. Which objection,
if it carried with it what things they were, and of what kind, that one Nation
supplieth to another, and what sort of Commodities they be that one Nation
needs the help of another in, a more direct answer might be made then
otherwise I may hit upon: but I guess it is neither of Water, nor Fire, nor yet
of Air, nor of any thing necessary for maintenance of life, otherwise should
the Native Country of each one be rather a stepdame to us then a natural
mother; but it is of those things only which with healthful and lusty Bodies
we might be without, if custom had not too much prevailed with us. And to go
no further then to the use of Wine in England, in many respects it greatly
hurts us, yet our ordinary use thereof, has given us such a longing
thereafter, that we think if we should want it, many of our days were thereby
abridged; whereby notwithstanding Rhewms are mightily increased, the Sinews
feebled, the natural Moisture and Heat of the body overhastily wasted, and
swift old Age brought upon us, with an infinite number of discommodites
besides. Which the Nations finding where we have it; do so delay it, that
rather they seem to drink wined Water, then watered Wine, except the aged, or
such as are feeble stomached. And diverse Nations which may have of the best,
because they would be sure to banish the use of it, count it sacrilege to
taste it: as the Turks at this day, who use instead thereof a distilled water
of Rice steeped in Milk, thereby supplying the use of Wine. Neither do we find
this discommodity of Wine by the abuse of drunkenness or surfeting only, but
even keeping within the three cups that Eubolus powers out to wise men:
whereof the first is of health and nourishment: the second of mirth, and joy of
heart: and the third of sleep, so that a draught or twain does marvellously
distemper our bodies: which inconvenience we find not by our ordinary drink;
yea, though it be stronger then wine. If I should compare our Mede with the
best Wine, and the Metheglin of the Welchmen with Malmsie, I could take great
arguments from the nature of Honey to prove it. Especially being tempered with
certain wholesome Herbs, which have virtue to strengthen the parts of the body.
And by experience it is known, that Honey mixed with water, turns in time to
a wholesome liquor, in taste much like to Wine. Whereupon Pena in his Chapter
of Honey, folio 22. doubts not to affirm, that the Mede of the Polonians and
Muscovites, and the Metheglin of the Welchmen, are more wholesome and pleasant,
then many of the best kinds of Wines, he himself being a French man, and
therefore in his judgment less partial. Wherefore to conclude this argument,
seeing, Wine (which is the glory of strange Merchandise) is but an hurtful
superfluity, the rest must needs be far other then necessaries. But Medicines
being such, as without which our health and life runs into infinite perils,
by causes inward and outward, through breach of Diet, unwholesomness of Meat,
Wounds, Bitings of venomous Beasts, Infections of the Air, and such like, it
follows necessarily, that they be not such as God would have one Nation
gratify another with; which if they were, greater reason were it to charge the
neighbor Nations therewith, that thereby their minds, might with performance
of such mutual duties, so necessary, be in streighter amity and peace linked,
who cease not, for the enlarging of limits, to vex one another, rather then the
Nations so far distant, who have neither fellowship of love, nor quarrel of
hatred equal with the Borderers. Neither would I be so taken, as though I knew
not at sometimes, that one Na^ion has need of another, even in things
necessary; as the supply made by Joseph to his ^ather Jacob, and other Nations
out of the store of Egypt; but the controversy is of an ordina^y course, which
the Lord uses in bestowing his ^lessings, wherewith he does fully satisfy ^he
need of all Nations with things necessary, ^aving when he punishes with Famine
or ^^ant of Victuals, which is extraordinary in re^pect of his accustomed
course of preserving his ^^eatures. Now, if the strange Medicines (for he most
part hot) should seem rather in the whole kind, then by reason of abundance
superfluous to them, and so more fit for us, being of a colder temper: we are
to consider, the use of them is manifold to the inhabitants, and not only to
warn them, as the Ethyopians called Troglodites, although they be parched with
vehement heat of the Sun, are said to live with Pepper, not to correct the
distemper of the^ Bodies, which would rather increase it then diminish, but to
correct their evil Waters, and waterish Fruits, wherewith they in part do live
Again, we are to understand, that the disease which is most agreeable with Age,
Sex, Region, Custom, Complexion, is always most dangerous, as engendered by an
exceeding vehemen^ of the cause, whereto Nature has yielded, an^ so requires
a like vehement Medicine: wherefore if the Arabian, the Indian, the Spaniard
fall into cold diseases, or such as follow cold no marvel though Nature has
ministered unto them plenty of strong Wines and Spices, whi^^ the Northren
Nations need not. Who as the be more apt to fall into such diseases then the^
their temper thereto agreeing, the Air and R^gion furthering the same, so are
they not ther^of so dangerously sick, as they of the So^ Countries, and
therefore require not so for^able a Medicine. But I mind not to stand (...)
show the use which foreign Nations have of the Commodities, let them see to it.
Hitherto h^ been showed, both that they be hurtful unto (...) and that it is
not absurd for hot Regions to (...) bound with hot Simples, the use of them be^
diverse, both in respect of curing their Bodies, and other uses without the
compass of Physic. These be the reasons which move me to suspect the use of
strange Drugs, and drive me to think, that Nature has better provided for us;
and as the Indian, Arabian, Spaniard, have their Indish, Arabian, and Spanish
Medicines, so also the Germane has his, the French man his, and the English
man his own proper, belonging to each of them. I know, gentle Reader, nothing
does more hinder the accepting of truth diverse times, (especially with such as
see with other men's eyes) then the person of him who first propounds the
matter, being taken rather to be an opinion of one, then an undoubted truth to
be cherished of all, as who have interest therein. Wherefore that such might be
satisfied, I will add to my former reasons, taken from the Nature of the
thing, the authority of more Doctors then one, who agreeing with this which I
hold, may be a means, to draw the gentle Reader the more seriously to consider
of this matter, and truth may take some strength thereby, and win the more
credit. Pliny in his four and twenty Book of his History, and first Chapter,
has this Sentence, thus much in English: Nature would that such only should
be Medicines, that is to say, which easily might be come by of the common
people; easy to be found out, without charge, taken from the things whereby we
live; but in process of time, the craft of men, and sleights of their wits,
found out these shops of strange drugs, in which a sale of men's lives is
offered, whereupon confectious, and infinite mixtures began to be extolled.
India and Arabia a man would think he were in them, and for a little gall or
small ulcer, a medicine must be fetched from the Red Sea: whereas every day the
poorest do sup with true medicines. And in his two and twenty Book, and four
and twenty Chapter, We do not meddle (says he) with the medicines taken from
the merchandise of India and Arabia, or of the New World, they are not fit for
medicines and remedies: they grow too far off, they are not for us, no, not for
the Nations where they grow, else would they not sell them away. If we shall
needs use them (says he) let them be bought for sweet perfumes, and sweet
oils, and dainties, or to serve superstition, because when we pray, we burn
Frankencense and Costus. And thus much out of Pliny, whose judgment, as it is
ancient, of a thousand years, so is it of him, who most diligently sought out
the mysteries of nature, and published them for the use of posterity. Now if
happily it be objected, that Pliny might well verify that of Italy, which
England cannot perform, we must understand, that Pliny reasons from nature,
which serves for all nations of the world as well as for Italy, and directs
his Pen, not only against the medicines strange to Italy, but even against all
that are far fetched and dearly bought, as appears plainly by his words. To
this sentence of Pliny, I will add the judgment of two Physicians of late
time, lest Pliny being no Physician, should be thought an unsufficient
testimony. Fuchsius in his first Book of compounding of Medicines, and seventy
six Chapter, thus agrees with Pliny. If we were not so carried away with the
admiration of strange things, and were not fools (says he) who had rather use
medicines fetched from strange and far countries, (contemning our native
medicines) then such as grow in our gardens: we might make honey serve in stead
of Manna. But with the exceeding cost and charge which those medicines put us
unto, we are worthily punished for our folly. Lo, here two witnesses, the one
a great Philosopher, and the other both a Philosopher and a Physician,
comparable with the best of late days.

The third witness with Pliny and Fuchsius, is, Martino Rulandus, to whom the
students of Physic owe much for his Medicina practica, and other works. This
Rulandus in his Preface to Medicina practica, has these words; thus in
English: We have simple medicines (easily had, homely, of our own country of
Germany, to be bought with little money or none at all) ready (says he) and
entreated of in writing, by which only all kinds of diseases are certainly
and undoubtedly cured, oftentimes better and much more easily (believe reason
and experience, says he) (and that with no hurt or danger) then with the long
compounds of the Apothecaries, which are costly, evil gathered, without
knowledge of the Physician, oftentimes unperfectly mixed, and unskilfully
confused, and as unskilfully boiled; oftentimes putrified, and by age of force
wasted, slovenly and with great negligence confected. In which words Rulandus
briefly has comprehended, in a manner, all the discommodities of strange
Medicines. These testimonies I rather have alleged, gentle Reader, that thou
may know this my opinion, is not mine only, and new sprung up from the
leisure of a Student, who might easily be overtaken with a speculation, which
never could be shown in use and practice, but has with it the voice of
authority, and suffrages of excellent Philosophers and Physicians, although
they have not of purpose, and in a set Treatise handled this Argument, as thou
sees: which, notwithstanding, contains indeed the matter of a great Volume.
Hitherto has been showed the great inconveniences and dangers which rise of
the use of strange Medicines, by reason, by experience, by authority of
Phisolophers and Physicians. If my reason be evil gathered, the experience
false, the authority not authentical, what have I lost thereby? A few hours
meditation, and a few lines writing, or my credit impaired, will some say. If
my credit could either buy such virtues to strange Medicines, as they carry the
name, or purge the shops of counterfeit stuff, or redeem the harms they have
done, I would verily esteem as much of the change, as he which made exchange of
Brass for Gold. Although I ween it be a propriety to man's weakness unavoidable
of any to err, and therefore if obstinacy be not therewith coupled, always
found pardon. But if my Arguments rise from the causes and effects of these
foreigners, and causes and effects of our bodies, which are of all Arguments
the most forceable to establish, or overthrow any thing to be decided by
reason, and the authorities such, as justly exception cannot be taken against:
blame me not (gentle Reader) though I be carried into this persuasion my self,
and of a love and zeal to benefit thee, have published that which I have
conceived of this Argument. If I be deceived in my judgment of strange Drugs,
(which I wish with all my heart I were) these reasons, the woeful experience,
the authority of such men have induced me. Which if all may be answered, that
which seemed more then doubtful before, shall by this Controversy shine most
clear; and truth as it were wrought with the fire of reason, receive greater
strength and perfection.

Thus much touching the unableness of strange merchandise to perform unto us
sufficiency, yea any measure of medicines as belonging unto us properly, and
the discommodities of them. Now if strange medicines serve not our turns, and
all medicines be either strange or home-born, it must needs follow, that the
home medicines are most natural and kind to us, except a man would say, all
medicines bring harm unto us which is not of the nature of a medicine, being an
instrument of performing remedies unto us, or if it were so, yet have we this
by experience, that strange medicines do more annoy us then strangers, yea
destroy us, and restore them: wherefore home medicines, and of our Country
yield, of equity must necessarily perform the same to us, which their medicines
do to them. Else I would know, why we should be inferior unto them, or one
Nation more privileged that way then another, the need being common, and the
providence of God all one; yea, such as rather then remedy should need the
chariot of the Sun to fetch it from one end of the world to the other, or be so
far to seek as our common Druggs are, he has linked the remedy in many things,
so straightly to the cause of our hurt, that even the self same which harmed us,
carries with it amends. As the Scorpion rubbed upon his stinging, cures the
same. Likewise the Rany divided, and applied hot to the wound, cures her
venomous biting, and so the Pastinaca marina, as it brings most dangerous
hurt, it refuses not (being thereto applied) to minister remedy. Which
practice of nature might verily move us to think, her meaning is not to send us
either into Arabia or India for aid for our griefs, but thereby to commend her
care unto us, and give occasion of praising Gods providence, and stirring us up
to make diligent search into our own provision, and to make better trial, then
we are wont of the same. Wherein the great liberality of GOD appears in such
large measure, that rather superfluity, then sparing may be noted herein: in
that both one simple nature carries with it the virtue of many medicines, and
many simples, remedies against such diseases as we might be thought like never
to be subject unto, and such things as in respect of their nature might seem
vile unto us, afford us (being skilfully applied) most sovereign medicine:
whereof for a taste I give two or three examples; Milk is either to be
considered in all the parts together, or them severed. All kind of Milk
boiled, especially burned with stones taken from the seashore, helps all
inward ulcers, chiefly of the jaws, the lungs, the guts, the bladder, and the
kidneys; it is good against the itch and wheals, and it helps bloody flixes.
New Milk is good against frettings made with poisons received inward: as of
Cantharides and such like: it is profitably gargled against swellings and
frettings in the jaws. The whay of Milk is good to purge the body, especially
of such as be melancholic, and disposed to the falling sickness, leprosy, and
breaking out with scabs. The cheesie part of it, as curds, fresh without salt,
softneth the belly; which pressed and broiled stays the laxe. Cheese laid on,
helps the inflammation of the eyes. The butter of Milk drunk, softneth the
belly, and serves against poison for want of oil, rubbed upon their gums with
honey helps the toothing of children, and cures the itching of their gums
and sores of their mouths. It helps such as are bitten of the serpent called
Aspis. The soot of butter is very effectual against watering eyes, and swiftly
skinneth sores. Thus thou see, Reader, what treasure is hid in Milk, (even
an excrement) being used both whole and in parts. That which I have said of
Milk, belongs also to most of creatures, which both all serve for medicine
and each of them for sundry purposes: whereby natures endeavor to furnish us
with all help of medicine may evidently appear; yea, most of all, when she
seems to be so jealous over our health, that she provideth against Drysinus,
against the Scorpion, the Viper, and Cerastes, and the most of venomous bitings
of Serpents, wherewith notwithstanding we are not as other nations encumbred,
and those not common medicines only, but even proper unto them. As the venom
of Drysinus is abated and utterly extinguished with the Trifolie, and with all
kind of mast, be it of the Beech or Oak, or of any kind of tree that bears
Acorns. Penerial cures the Scorpions sting. Against the biting of a Viper,
Garlike, Onions, and Leeks new gathered, are principal triacles wherewith also
the venom of Cerastes is overmatched. Ergo, if Nature fail us not against the
venom of strange ^erpents, from which we be freed, by reason of the temper of
our Region, repugnant to their nature, (all things being done in the actions of
nature, in exquisite wisdom, and by a precise rule of Gods providence) much
more are we furnished against the Diseases bred in our bowels. That which has
been said of venomous Beasts, may also be showed in the cure of strange
Diseases, wherein Nature seems to be as careful as in the other. The French
pocks is an Indian Disease, and not known to this part of the world within this
hundred years, before that voyage of Charles the Emperor, which he took against
Naples, where being brought over with ^he Spaniards which returned with
Christopherus ^olumbus, who first discovered the West Indies, (...) has since
infected the whole world. Now, his strange and Indian disease has nature
pro^ided remedy against, not only out of India, ^s the Gnaicum, and Salsa
Parilla, but even out Europe as effectual: as the Smillax aspera, ^herewith
Fallopius says, at Pisa he cured di^ers of the French Pocks. And La Reviere in
^is French Apology, affirms the same to be ^^one with the essence of the
Primrose and Cow^ip. The anointings with Mercury is known by ^aily practices,
what force they have against this most grievous Disease, which although some do
mislike, because indiscreetly used, it is somewhat ^angerous: yet Antonius
Chalmetous, a skillful Chyrurgeon, in the fifth Book of his Enchiridion and
fifth Chapter, affirms, That therewith he ^ath perfectly cured diverse without
danger, and ^f it has otherwise fallen out with some, that it has rather
proceeded of unskilful using, then ^y the nature of Mercury. Now, gentle
Reader, thou art to understand, the Pocks in India, being the same Disease with
that we call the French Pocks, is there a gentle disease not much differing
from the Scab, void of such grievous ^ymptoms, as it brings to these
quarters, corrupting, not only the fleshy parts of our bodies, but even the
very bones also. This testifies Fallopius in his Book of the French Pocks. Yet
needs not our Medicines crave the help of India for the cure thereof, no, not
although it ^age far more fiercely (as it does) against us then against them:
which being evident, let us consider how justly nature may be blamed to fail in
the provision of medicines. Scarce would a man look for any great virtue of
medicine in the Worms of the earth, being a creature so abject; yet join they
and glue together wounded sinnews; they cure Tertians, they help the pains of
the ears, the Toothache, and the powder of them drunken, provokes urine. The
little vermin called Sowes, which being touched run together round like a
peese; who would think they cured the difficulty of making water, the Jaundies,
the Quinsey? For which purposes they be of great force, and for to discharge
stuffed Lungs, with tough and gross humors, nothing may be compared. Likewise
the Corns of Horse legs called Lichenes, although they be base and vile
excrements, yet help they such are taken with the Falling Sickness. The
decoction of Frogs with Salt and Butter, is a treacle against the bitings,
stingings, and poisons of all Serpents; and the ashes of them burnt, stays
the Flux of blood being thereto applied. These base creatures the rather I
propound, that being known, the treasures which nature has hid and laid up in
them, with such variety of virtues, we might the better esteeming of her
benefits, and the blessings of our own country, both acknowledge them, accept
them, and be more thankful unto God for them. The which base creatures, the
viler they seem to be, the more commend they the goodness of the Creator, who
would not the abjectest thing that is, should altogether be without, wherewith
to serve, and do homage to his Lord and Master: which if these things afford
us, what may we justly promise to our selves, and require of the rest, more
excellent creatures? Let not the reason seem strange and weak to the Reader,
who art a Christian, which is taken from the Providence and Wisdom of GOD, to
prove the sufficiency of his execution and performance of the same. For if
Galen thought it reasonable, (as it is most reasonable,) to gather the Wisdom
and Providence of the Creator by his work in the Creature, and maintenance
thereof, which he, in the end of his Books of the use of Parts, calls a point
of Divinity, far to be preferred above the whole Art of Physic: much more
reasonable is it for me, and the reason sounder which is drawn from that Divine
Providence, to the practice thereof. And if Galen had that religion in him,
being a Gentile, and groping only in the mist of natural knowledge of God,
could not satisfy himself with a Psalm or Hymn (as he himself calls it) of
seventeen staves, every staff containing an whole Book (for thus he himself
calls his Books of the use of Parts) of the wisdom of the most wise God,
esteeming that duty more acceptable unto him, then sacrifices of an hundredth
Oxen, or the most costly perfumes and incense: Let it not be harsh in thine
ears, gentle Reader, to hear now and then the goodness of our God, his Wisdom
and Providence, to be both entreated of, and advanced of a Christian Physician,
and to Christians, to whom the Son of righteousness has shined, and scattered
those mists of natural darkness, and has given the earnest of immortality. And
be assured there is no truth in Philosophy, but may stand with, ye rather may
rest, and be upholden of Christianity. But let us proceed. Julius Bassus,
Nicerates, and Petronius Niger, as says Dioscorides, thought their country
Medicines, and those which the native soil yielded, most worthy to be exactly
entreated of them; belike, either thinking them sufficient for the inhabitants,
or more agreeable with them. Which homely practice of the Nations where he
traveled, Dioscorides confesses to have been the matter whereof he compounded
his golden Book of Medicines, which at this day remains a rich storehouse to
all Physicians. Now then I would know why we should more be provided of
Medicine against one disease, then another, of our country yield? Is it
because such diseases which require strange Medicines are more dangerous, or
less? If more dangerous, then should the remedy for them be more at hand, then
for other: if less, why are then the strange Medicines esteemed as most
forcible? And if we be less subject to such diseases as are cured with them,
and so the absence of them may seem tolerable, why then are Tertian Agues
chiefly cured with Thamarines and Rhewbarb? Whereof the one comes out of
India, and the other, for the most part, out of Barbary. Whatsoever nature is
yielded to any Nation, it serves either for nourishment or Medicines, or being
neither nourishment or Medicine, is plain poison. Now a subduction being made
of each of these, one from the other, what part shall we think will
nourishments leave to Medicines? A far greater doubtless then they themselves
be, and as they exceed nourishments, so greatly do they and beyond all
comparison exceed the poisons. Wherefore if the most of creatures in every
Nation, be a fit matter of Medicine, greatly no doubt are all Nations stored
with them: which store declares, that as diseases partly rise of breach of
Diet, and partly through poisons; so Nature would furnish us with Medicines in
number answerable to the causes of both, which being not sufficient, argues
that Nature misseth of her purpose, having sufficiently declared her endeavor:
but Nature always brings her works to perfection, except in case of
Monsters, which are not ordinary. Wherefore her will, (she being an instinct of
Gods) ever going with the execution thereof, must needs perform that to us,
which he pretends in the variety. But that thou may (gentle Reader) have
better hold and greater assurance of the sufficiency of thy Country Medicines,
I will set down briefly, according to the variety and sorts of all diseases
cured with medicine, Medicines taken from our native soil answerable unto them,
and effectual to cure them. And because Medicines have relation to diseases, I
will first touch the diseases, and thereto join the Medicines. All diseases are
either in the complexion, or frame of the body: such as are in the complexion
are all cured by Medicine, which I named in the beginning of this Treatise, one
of the instruments of Physic. Of disease^ in the frame, these only are cured
with Medicines. Quantity superfluously increased, or diminished: obstructions,
over streightness, or over largeness of passages in the body. These are only
the diseases properly to be cured with medicine: other diseases which rise of
these, either of their own accord, vanishing by the cure of these, or else to
be cured by surgery, as evil figure and shape through want of proportional
quantity, that being restored, the figure forthwith returns, or if not,
rather is to be cured with help of hand. And luxation of joints, and evil
coupling of parts, if they rise of distemper only, that being taken away with
medicines, returns oftentimes with it, good situation of parts. Likewise, the
situation perverteth through distemper, the complexion being restored, the
other consequently do follow. Now, having declared in general the diseases
which only require medicine, that every disease may have his proper one, I
will subdivide them more particularly, joining to every disease that medicine
which thereto belongs. The diseases in the complexion, are either in all the
parts of the temper thereof, or in one or twain. In the whole complexion are
such as are engendered of venomous causes: and those either engendered in the
body, or happening thereto outwardly; they which are engendered with age in the
body, are Cankers, Leprosies, Falling Sickness, Suffocation, of the matrix
through Nature corrupted, Swounding, through corruption of Worms, engendered in
the body, and these be the diseases of venomous causes bred in the body. Such
as happen thereto by outward occasions, are either by poison taken into the
body, or by outward ^ouching procured, taken into the body; as the poison of
Toads, Henbane, Nightshade, Hem^ock, Ratsbane, Quicksilver, and such Minerals;
and last of all, infected Airs, causing Pestilence, and Carbuncles. Such as are
outwardly procu^ed, are either without wounds or with wounds; without wounds,
infection passing from one to another, as the French Poxs. With wounds,
^enemous bitings, and stingings of beasts, as of ^erpents and mad Dogs. And
these are all the ^iseases said to be in the whole temper of the ^ody; which
having first showed to be suffici^ntly cured by home Medicines, in like manner
^ill I prosecute the rest. And herein (gentle ^eader) thou art not to look I
should set down ^ll Medicines, which our native soil is known to ^estow upon us
for cure of these diseases, which ^ould grow to an infinite Volume, I herein
^eferring thee to the works of those, who of pur^ose have written of the nature
of Simples, and ^re Authors of Practice; but it shall I hope, suf^^e for this
purpose, to pick out amongst a great ^any, those of choice for these diseases.
And ^st to begin with Cankers, which being not ex^cerated, but remaining
humors, are cured (if ^ith any medicine) by the juice of Nightshade, ^ll the
sorts of Endive and Succory, with Agrimony, with Saint John's wort, wild Clary,
called Oculus Cstristi, the flesh of Snails boiled, Crayfishes, green Frogs;
and to conclude, with all kind of Metals and Minerals, and among them Lead,
howsoever it be used, is most sovereign. If it be exulcerated, then herein have
the Minerals and Metals the chief place. To the exulcerate Canker belongs the
Wolf (which is naught else, but a Canker exulcerated.) The Gangrene and
Speacelus, are cured by the r^medies of the Canker and Wolf, the one being a
degree of an Ulcer, in which the parts begin t^ be mortified; the other, when
they have no^ lost life altogether. The Leprosy is an univers^ Canker, and for
outward medicines requires n^ other. Among the inward, Plantine, Wha^
Hedgehogs dried and drunk, help greatly. An^ thus much for Cankers and
Leprosies, which (...) they be diseases hard to be cured by any med^cine, so
receive they as great help by these o^ home medicines, as by any of strange
(...) The Falling Sickness, if it be in such as are age and have been long
diseased therewith, is a d^ease hardly, or not at all to be cured. But wh^^ it
is curable, these medicines be compar^^ with the best: The root of the Missleto
of (...) Oak, the runnet of an Hare, the Peony-ro^ Enula Campana, the scalp of
a Man, and A^hoof, Hyssop, the milt of an Horse, the Sto^ which are found in
the Mawes of the first (...) of Swallows, five leaved Grass, the juice of t^
Cowslip, the juice of Horehound with Ho^ All suffocations of the Matrix are
cured (...) Plantine, Pennirial, Herbgrace, and by an infinite number of home
medicines. Worms, and that infection is taken away by Coriander-seed, Colewort
seed, Garlike, Wormwood, and in a manner with all bitter herbs, with the juice
of Purslane, with the filings of Stags-horn, little inferior in virtue to
that, which is commonly taken for the Unicorns horn, Peach leaves, Hyssop,
Mints, Purslane seed. Thus much touching medicines against diseases, engendered
of venomous causes within the body. Now touching such as happen by outward
occasions: and first of those that by mouth are taken into the body. Against
which generally, it helps great^y to drink store of butter instead of oil,
with warm water, or the decoction of Flax seed, Fe^igreek, or Mallows, and
thereupon a vomit, which done, Sothernwood, the root of Seahulver, the seed of
Nep, the juice of Horehound, the seed of wild Rue, Walnuts, Turnips,
Herbgrace, five leaved Grass, with an infinite number of native medicines,
expel the poison, and restore the Patient. More properly to the poison of
Cantharides, belong Penerial; to Buprestis all kind of Pears, and Women's Milk:
to the Salamander, Chamepitis, (...) holy roots: to the worms of the Pine Tree,
su^^ (...) ^he poison of Cantharides: against the poison of the Toad, the roots
of Reeds and Cyperus: against the Camelion, Radish roots, and Wormwood: against
Ephemerum, Asses milk, or Cows milk hot: against Dorycnium, Goat^ milk, Asses
milk, Cockles, and Crayfishes; against the poison of Aconitum, Organ,
Herbgrace, Horehound, the decoction of Wormwood. Against Chriander, Wormwood,
salt broth made with a Goose or Hen, which expe^ also the poison of Flewort:
the Poison o^ Hemlock is cured with Mints, Herbgrace, Nettle-seed, Bay Leaves,
which also cure the poison of Ugh, and Carpasus. The poison of that kind of
Crow-foot called Sardonia, is cured with drinking store of Mede, and Milk,
Henbane with Nettle-seed, wild Endive, Mustard Seed, and Rocket, Cerus, with
Mede, hot Milk Peach-stones, with the decoction of Barley with the decoction of
Mallows, Quicksilver, with store of Milk drunk: Mercury sublimed with Crystal:
Lime, Orpiment, Ratsbane, and such like, with the decoction of Flax-seed, and
Milk with Mede. And to conclude the point, there is no kind of poison, but it
finds cure by our Country Medicines, without borrowing. Thus much for the
cure of poison taken into the body by eating or drinking o^ them. Pestilences
are cured (if with any medicine) with Angelica, Carduus Benedictus, Ar^nike
worn about the body, the root of Pimp^nel, of Tormentil, Herbgrace Setwal,
Walnuts the powder of St. John's Wort, Juniper Berries Verven. and the chief of
all, the noble simpl^ Water Germander, and the Duarfgentian. For pestilent
sores, and Carbunkles, Scabious, Osb^^ Lousestrife, and the Marigold: to the
pestilent may be referred the small Pocks, and such like which agree in
medicine also with the pestilence And thus much for the cure of poisons.
Against bitings and stingings of venomous beasts, and poisoned weapons, there
are also both general and particular remedies. The general are these: the ashes
of the cuttings of the Vine, and of the Fig Tree, with Lee, Leeks, Onions,
Garlike, the Seawater, Mustard Seed, Endive, Heath, the root of the
Sea-Hulver, Bay Berries, Herbgrace, Dill, Sowse-bread, Fennel, Penerial, the
runnet of an Hare, the Weasel; and these general. Particular are such as
follow. Against the bitings of Phalangium, the seed of Sothernwood, Aniseed,
the seed of Trifoly, the fruit of Tamarisk. Against the Scolopendra: wild Rue,
Thime, Calamint: against the Scorpion, Basil-seed: against the biting of a
Viper, Adder, etc. Sothernwood, Bays, green Organ, the Bramble, the brains of
an Hen, Coleseed. Against the bitings of a mad Dog: Crowgarlike, the river
Crab, Balm, an actual cautery, the liver of the mad dog broiled, the blood of a
^og drunk. And thus much for the bitings and stingings of venomous beasts,
which also serve against poisoned wounds, else to be cured with the medicine,
which respects properly the poison, wherewith the weapon has been infected.
The ^nfection without wound, is the French Pocks, whereof (sufficient having
been said before) I will here say nothing. This then shall suffice to have
written of the cure of all diseases rising of ^enemous causes: (wherein if
nature of her own ^ccord, as it were, and in this great neglect of ^ur Country
and native medicines) has shew^d her self so liberal, how large would she be,
if with set purpose, and careful endeavor greater trial of things were had,
and proof made by learned, and discreet men. Now follow the diseases which are
by the excess, or defect of one or two parts of the temper, which are hot,
cold, moist, and dry, simple or compounded, which if they be not procured by
evil humors, then require they altering only by contrary qualities. If by
them: as Phegm, Choler, Melancholy, then are these humors first to be avoided,
and diminished.

Such as require altering, are cured by natures of contrary quality, not only
generally, but even answerable to all degrees of excess. And first to begin
with hot diseases of the first degree, they are cured with such contraries as
follow: Barley, sower Grapes, Roses, Violets, the Oak, Quinces, Damsins,
Pellitory of the wall, Docks, Pears, Apples, Hartshorn, the flowers, and whole
herb of Mallows: of the second degree, the water Lilly, Ducks meat, Knotgrasse,
Vine leaves, the Bramble, Plantane, Cherries, Lead, Cerus, Barberies,
Cowcumbers, Mellons, Gourds, Citrals, whites of Eggs, Medlers, and Services. Of
the third, Purslane, Housleek, Mandrake, Henbane. Of the fourth, Hemlock,
Poppy. Thus much for hot diseases.

Medicines for cold diseases are these, ho^ which follow. Of the first degree:
Bugloss, Borage, Fumitory, Sage, Horse-hoof, Lycorice Maidenhair, Butter,
Lillies, Flax-seed, Marrow and Fat, Cammomile, Fenigreek, etc. O^ the second:
Dill dry, Mugwort Parsley, Saffron, Honey, Balm, Salt, etc. The third: Annise,
Folefoot, Calamint, Commine, Fennel Hyssop, Mints, etc. The fourth: Garlic,
Cresses, Mustard, Celandine the great.

For moist diseases these medicines are good: Of the first degree dry: Cabbage,
Beats, Cammomile, Fennel, Beans, Fenigreek, etc. Of the second: Dill, Mugwort,
Shepheards-pouch, Dodder, Lintils, Honey, Rosemary. Of the third: Wormwood,
Germarder, Hyssop, Juniper, five-leaved Grass, Organ, Horehound, etc. Of the
fourth, Garlic, Cresses, Mustard Seed, wild Rue.

Dry diseases have these medicines: Bugloss, Mallows, Turnips, Endive, for the
first degree. The second: Violets, water Lilly, Lettice, Purslane, etc. The
third and fourth degrees, as these are evil supplied by strange simples, so are
they recompensed by increase of quantities of moist in the two first degrees.
And thus much touching medicines belonging to the cure of diseases in one part
of the temper, which being in two parts, and without humor, require either
temperings the simple qualities aforesaid, in diverse simples, or natures
wherein such two do exceed, which because they be as plentiful as those I have
before mentioned, and that hereof none makes doubt, I will not touch: If this
double distemper rise of humor, as for the most part it does, then is that
humor to be diminished, or altogether to be voided out of the body, and then
the distemper remaining to be altered. The humors are properly to be voided by
purgation, otherwise there be diverse: as exercise, fastings, sweating, urine,
and such like. But properly the vacuation of Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy, which
are the causes of this double distemper, belonging to purging medicines, which
purgations, as the greatest doubt is of natures provision in them, so they
being supplied by our own Country Soil, the greatest part of this controversy
may seem to be decided.

Purgations are either by vomit, or by stool: by vomit our native soil
ministers great choice, as very gently: The Radish roots with the seed, the
Pepon root, and Nettle-seed, with more vehemence: Folefoot, leaf and root, the
middle bark of the Walnut-tree, and the long blossoms thereof: and yet most
vehemently, the seeds of Broom, and the flowers thereof: and these for vomit.
By the stool, and first to purge choler: the flowers and leaves of the
Peach-tree, Violet flowers and seeds, comparable with Rhewbarb, the great
garden Dock, called the Munks, Rhewbarb, Damask-roses, wild Saffron, the
powder of Fetherfew, all the kind of spurges, the root of the wild Cowcomber,
the root of Briony, and Coloquintida. Melancholy is purged with Coloquintida,
the Oak Fern, the juice of Mandrake, the flowers of Broom, Barefoot, and
Antimony. Phlegm and water are purged with Coloquintida, the juice of
Rhineberries, the gross bark of the Elm, the juice of the root of Walwort, of
Elder, the garden Flowerdeluce root juiced. The dry leaves of Laurel, the
Seawithwinde, scurby weed.

These are a show of our English store of Purgers, which if they be too strong,
then are they to be ministered in smaller quantity, mixed with those of feebler
working: if too weak, then are they to be sharpened with quicker. If they offend
any part, they are to be corrected, partly with cordials, and partly with
medicines respecting such parts as they annoy. Which wants are not only to be
charged upon our Country medicines, seeing even the best of foreign purgers
are to be touched with the same. As Scammony is corrected with Quinces,
otherwise it troubles the stomach with a griping and gnawing, it purges over
vehemently, it hurts the liver, and is an enemy to the heart, and does
exulcerate where it passes, and procures dysenteries, that is to say, ulcers
in the guts. Turpeth is corrected with Ginger, and long Pepper. Mastick with
oil of sweet Almonds, and Sugar, else overthrows it the stomach, troubles,
and overdrieth the body. Coloquintida with oil of sweet Almonds, Gum,
Tragacanth, or Mastick, else troubles it vehemently the whole body, procures
the bloody Flix, and miserably tormenteth the guts. So Agarick requires to be
steeped in wine with Ginger and Cloves, yet scarce abstaineth it from
overthrowing the stomach. Cassia marreth the stomach, and requires to be mixed
there with stomach medicines. The excessive dryness and binding of Rhewbarb, is
corrected with some moistning syrup. Aloe requires Mastick and Gum,
Tragacanth, to mitigate the fretting thereof. Seen marreth the stomach, and
either through windiness, or through vehemence of scouring tormenteth the body,
and therefore needs Ginger, Cinnamon, or Spike, sweet Prunes, fat Broth, and
Raisins. Hermodactiles offend the stomach, and cause wind, and require Ginger,
Cumine, or Spike: and to be short, there is no purger of strange drugs, which
requires not correction of great faults; which correction is taken from such
medicines as respect those parts chiefly, which the purgation, does annoy,
whereof such is our store, that in all parts we be sufficiently armed
therewith: but of these shall hereafter be spoken.

Now if any man think for want of Cassia, Manna, Seen, Rhewbarb, these humors
cannot be voided, or not so well; let me then know how the Grecians wanted
them, and yet found no lack, using only Scammony, Helleborus, and Colocynthis,
Aloes, and Agarick, for their chief purgations. The other being brought in of
late in comparison, by the Arabians, who both in knowledge of Physic, and in
the works thereof were far inferior to the Grecians, to whom I say (I mean the
ancient of them in Galens time, and before) neither Manna, nor Cassia, nor
Seen, nor Rhewbarb, nor Hermodactyles were known, either at all, or at the
uttermost for purgers: and as for Manna Fuchsius says, that certain having
been about the mount Libanus, made report that the inhabitants of that mountain
having eaten their fill thereof, neither feel themselves any whit troubled
therewith, nor their bodies loosed, but use it for an ordinary sustenance:
whereby again appears a great diversity of working of strange medicines,
according to the variety of Countries. But what should we say of the nature of
Purgers, it is doubtless one of the hardest points at this day in all natural
Philosophy; neither mind I at this present to deal therein: but this may I
say, as by preparation, one nature may according to the variety thereof receive
diverse, yea, contrary virtues, so seems it to me, that this virtue of purging
may be procured to natures of themselves destitute thereof, by preparation.
Diverse, and in a manner all the metals and minerals being burnt and washed,
give over their fretting nature: And Quicksilver (which of it self is not
sublimed, or precipitated) becomes a vehement scouring medicine: so likewise
Antimony, before it be turned into glass or oil, is not known to purge the
body, which being done, is greatly commended against the Dropsy, the French
Pox, Melancholy, and diverse other diseases, which it cures by purging: so
that it seems art of preparation, as it makes no nature, (that being a work
of the universal nature) so may it not only be a preparer, but even a maker of
medicines, which medicines are not natures, as has been before declared, but
qualities in natures, even as health, and sickness are not of the nature of
man's body, but even accidents thereto. Which being certain, let us then
consider what an infinite variety of medicines would arise of things, the same
being used not only entire, but diversely prepared, and even corrupted: wherein
the industry of Alchmistes, is verily greatly to be commended, and far more
excellent then the common Pharmacopolia, rather so to be called then
Pharmacopoiya, by the skill whereof diverse Natures in one thing are so exactly
severed, every one having a diverse operation. Now oft-times because the Humor
to be purged is gross and tough, and so hardly yields to the Medicine, or
has some other evil quality, wherewith it might greatly hurt the parts,
whereby it passes; Nature not forgetting this point, has as abundantly
supplied such helps in this behalf, as need requires: as for the preparing of
Choler; Plantine, Roses, the Verjuice of the Grape, Endive, Succory, Sorrel,
Sperage, etc. For Melancholy; Violets, Borage, Bugloss, Baulm, Fumitory,
Doddar, Ceterach, or Fingerfearn, etc. For Phlegm; Fenel, Parsley, Betony,
Nep, Penerial, Thime, Savory, Germander, etc. Of these I less stand upon,
because the preparers of humors are least in controversy, although from hence
may an argument be drawn, not lightly to be passed over, to prove the store of
purgers, seeing nature has ministered sufficiency of preparers, and as it were
Harbingers to the purgers of Country yield. But I will draw to an end, and
thus much shall suffice for this present purpose to have bin said of Medicines,
belonging to the cure of all Diseases in the Complexion. The other kind of
Diseases are in the frame of the Body, and of those, if quantity be
superfluously increased, and that in the whole body, medicines which do
vehemently waste, as those of the third degree hot, diminish the same. If in
the part only, medicines which we call eaters and fretters, dispatch the same:
as Copperas, the ashes of Spurge, burnt Allom, Mercury sublimed and
precipitate, Verdigreece, burnt Salt, etc. If measure be diminished, and that
without loss of substance, the glewing medicines bring cure: whereof our native
soil is so stored, that for Wounds, the Surgeons need neither send into
Barbary, nor India: as Plantine, Hounds-tongue, the flowers and leafs of
Willows, Yarrow, Carduus Benedictus, Betony, Scabious, Verven, Elm-leaves,
Adders-tongue, Moon-wort, Herb-turpence, Selfheal; and these if the wounds be
in the fleshy parts. If it be breaking of Bones, such are joined with fine
flower, the brain of a Dog, with Wool, and the white of an Egg, the
Holilock-root, the moss of the Oak, Glue, Roses, Wormwood, etc. If there be
loss of substance in the fleshy parts, either by wound, or ulcer, Incarnatives
fail us not: as Barley meal, Fenigreek-flower, Figbene-meal; and to be short,
all such as be of the first degree hot and dry, without eagerness or fellness.
Now the diseases in the straitness of Passages, or Obstructions, if they arise
of the humors aforesaid, and in those places whereto the medicine may
conveniently come, then are they to be set free by purging. If upon other
causes, or in such places whereto the force of the medicines which purges
cannot come, or hardly enters, or of such causes as be no humors, but
through some other strange matter, or by straitness of the vessels wherethrough
the passage is, then are other remedies to be used, whereof we have great
plenty, as softners, loosers, and such as enlarge the pores of the body; of
which sort are such as be not above the first degree hot, as Camomile, Lilies,
new Butter, Swines-grease, Lin-seed, Fenigreek, Briony-root, all Marrows. Also
Medicines which make the matter thin, or cut it, and divide it into sundry
parts; of which sort are they of the second degree hot, to the third degree: as
Dill, Pennerial, Savery, Organ, Thime, Marjoran, Saint-Johns wort, Wormwood,
etc. Now if the humor prepared be to be voided by place medicine, then Salt,
Salt Water, Lie, Ashes, Allom, and Lime, take place; and if more vehemence be
needful, Calamint, wild Cresses, Treacle, Mustard, Garden Cresses,
Mustard Seed, Nettles, Dragons, all the Spurges are to be numbered among the
best: and if these serve not, the root of Crowfoot will make the supply. If the
humor cannot be voided conveniently, except it be altered into another matter,
of which sort is pent blood out of the veins, then are ripening medicines first
to be applied: as Butter, Wheat Flour, Sorel, Horse-hoof, Lilies,
Marshmallows, Onions roasted; which are all singular ripeners. If the matter
be tough and clammy, the scourers avoid that inconvenience: Endive, Succory,
red Roses, Plantine, Housleek, Agrimony, Betony, Honey, Horehound, Wormwood,
Baulm, Pimpernel, Watergermander, etc. Now if the matter which stops be the
stone, as in the Kidneys, or Bladder, then are these Medicines most convenient
for that use: Grummel-seed, Goats-blood, the juice of Mugwort, Seahulver-root,
the stones found in the great Snails heads, Radish-roots, Saxifrage, etc. If
any hard matter be in other parts, the softners, and wasters, and dissolvers
are to be applied. Thus much touching the cure of Obstructions and strait
Passages, which according to the variety of place where they light, cause
sundry Diseases, or rather take to them sundry names: As in the Brain, the
Apoplexy; in the bladder of Gall, the yellow Jaundies; in the Spleen, the
black; in the Sinnews of motion, the Palsy or trembling; in the Lungs, Asthma,
etc. Now if these Passages be too large, they are to be stopped and straightened
with cooling and drying medicines; of which sort, in a manner, are all of sharp
and sour taste: as Vine leaves, the Bryer and Bramble, Barberries, Medlers,
and Services, Quinces, and such as are of themselves, or by mixture with liquor
clammy; as Wheat Flour, Bean-flower, the white of an Egg, Plaster, washed
Lime, Litharge, and Ceruse. Now moreover, because in all good cure, not only
the cause of the Diseases is to be oppugned, but the part also to be
strengthened, which must needs, partly by the cause of the disease, and partly
even by the conflict of the same cause with the medicine be feebled, that
nothing be wanting unto us for the restoring of health, nature has provided
even special munition for every part of the body, that the whole furniture
against all diseases might be complete: As for the Head, Anniseeds, Folefoot,
Betony, Calamint, Eyebright, Lavander, Bays, Marjoran, Piony, Sage, Rue, or
Herbgrace, Lettice, the Leaves and Flowers of Water-lilies, Roses, Garden
Nightshade. For the Lungs, Calamint, Dragons, Licorice, Enula campana, Hyssope,
Linseed, Horehound, the Lungs of a Fox, Scabious, Water Germander, Barley,
garden Poppy, Violets, Horsehoof. For the Heart, Bugloss, Borage, Saffron,
Baulm, Basil, Rosemary, Violets, the bone of a Stags heart, Roses. For the
Stomach, Wormwood, Mints, Betony, Baulm, Mint, Quinces, Medlers, Sorrel,
Purslane. For the Liver, Dartspine, or Chamepitys, Germander, Agrimony, Fenel,
Endive, Succory, Liverwort, Barbaries. For the Spleen: Maidenhair, Sperage,
Fingerfearn, Do^der, D^^der of Thime, Hops, the bark of the Ash-tree. For the
Kidneys, Seahulver, Grumel, Parsley, Kneholme, Saxifrage, Mallows, Plantine,
Pellitory of the Wall. For the Womb, Mugwort, Penerial, Fetherfew, Savin,
Walwort, Juniper. For the Joints, Camomile, Saint-Johns wort, Organ, Rue,
Mullen, Primrose, and Cowslips, the less Centaury, and Chamepitys.

Thus have I (gentle Reader) briefly run over the Diseases cured by Medicine,
having passed by those which either rise of these, as evil figure by immoderate
excess, or defect of quantity, unequally increasing or wanting, or number, evil
situation for want of good couplance through distemper, and such like, as also
the compound of those which require (only composition excepted) the same
medicines. Whereby evidently may thou see the goodness of God toward thee,
in so plentifully furnishing thine own soil with such variety of medicines,
which if it yield thee such plenty in this neglect, and loathing of our
country remedies, what fruit were thou to look for, if diligence and pains
were used? Verily, right well might we both avoid the dangers before declared,
ease our selves of immoderate charge, and have better assurance of our
medicines then we have: yea, very well satisfy our daintiness, even with
strange simples, or find out such as should not only in virtues match with
the spices of India, (which is a plain case) as Rosemary matcheth Cinnamon;
Basil, Cloves; Sage, the Nutmegs; Saffron, Ginger; Thime, Musk; Savery, the
leaf called Malabathrum, but even in pleasantness of taste express the same.
And as Avens does most lively represent the taste of Cloves unto us, so likely
is it, if search were made, and this enterprise of examining and trying our
native simples taken in hand by men of wisdom and understanding, we should no
more be destitute of spices, then India or Arabia, although neither Indish, nor
Arabic: and as the small jags of the roots of Avens fail little from Cloves in
taste, so might we as likely find that which were little inferior to
Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmegs, and Mace; not only in likeness of working, but even
in similitude of nature: but I will refer this to that time, when either men
shall be more careful for public benefit then private gain, or sufcient
allowance bestowed of such men as should spend their days only in searching
out the virtues of natures, which at this time is greatly wanting, even as for
all other professions of arts. Our English soil is greatly commended, as it
justly deserves, for temper of the air, and of such as have experience
thereof, of strangers, and great masters of simples, for variety of excellent
medicines carries great praise, who report they find such simples in the
valleys and woods of our North parts, as they find in the tops of mountains in
the South Countries. So that certain Gardens in England, especially in London,
are able to afford great variety of medicines, even of forreigh simples to all
diseases. And if the Dittany of Candy, the Cyprus-tree, the Nicotian out of
India, Coloquintida, the Almond-tree, the Pomegranate-tree, will brook our
soil, and flourish therein, as they do, we need not doubt, but certain and
sufficient provision of all medicines, I mean all kinds, but not all of every
kind, which were unnecessary, neither can any Country challenge the same)
might be made partly of a voluntary yield of the same, partly by planting, and
sowing with just temper of the mould, and situation of the Plant, out of our
own Country, both with less charge, and less danger, for all diseases. Now if
it be demanded, why then both the practice is, and has been hitherto
otherwise? I will only say thus much for answer, although much more might be
said. The whole Art of Physic has been taken, partly from the Greeks, and
partly from the Arabians, and as the precepts of the Art, so likewise the
means and instruments, wherewith for the most part the precepts of the same
Art are executed, which has bred this error in times past; now by a tradition
received, that all duty of the Physician touching restoring health, is to be
performed by the same remedies not in kind only, but even specially, with
those which the Grecian and Arabian Masters used, who wrote not for us, but for
their Greeks and Arabikes, tempering their medicines to their states, although
their rules be as common as reason to all nations. Galen says in his first
Book of preserving health, he gives the rules thereof no more to Germans,
then to Boars and Bears, but to the Grecians, which declares they respected
their own Nation, both in rule and medicine, Who also the Arabians in the same
point followed. Now we receiving the same medicines with the rule, must needs
fall into the absurdities aforesaid, much like to the evil Musician, which
plays only upon the instrument, whereon his Master taught him, which if he
assay upon another, commits diverse discords among other evil graces in
Music. But the wife and learned Physician, being furnished with other Arts
more general then his own, whereto natural Philosophy most highly approaches,
being a knowledge of all natural things, not of Arabia, or India, or Greece,
but universally finds in all countries medicines for diseases, nature
yielding sufficiency of contraries to all sorts of them, whereto the
inhabitants are subject; at the least in all quarters, which rise not of a
blind tradition, but from a certain knowledge of nature. This then I take to
be the chief cause of this custom in using strange medicines, which ignorance
of nature does feed and nourish daily. I blame none, neither tax I any man, and
I dare say, there is not a learned Physician in this Land, who is not able to
perform this point with English medicines, if they would take the matter in
hand; whereto rather I exhort them, then instruct them, being a thing
sufficiently known unto them. For it is not the Nutmeg, or the Mace that
strengthens the brain, and cures cold diseases, and moist diseases thereof,
but a drying and warming virtue, with a secret agreement which they have with
the brain to preserve the same, which being found as sufficient in Sage, in
Rosemary, in Betony, and such like, the Nutmeg, and the Mace, with such other
spices for that turn may be discharged. The same may be said of all strange
natures, which although we want, yet have we such as are suffient to serve
instead: for as every nation has a peculiar condition of the same disease, so
must the medicine also needs be of another sort; and as the medicine varieth,
so why the matter of the same medicine should not also vary, I know not. The
medicine varieth in respect of the complexion of the Patient, being other in
one country, then in another, which medicines is, as it were, seated in
nature, which has many qualities besides that medicinable; which quality, if
the medicine be good, must agree with the Patients complexion: if not, then
hurts it greatly. If it agrees with the complexion of a Moor, an Indian, or
Spaniard, then must it needs disagree with ours; which disagreement and want,
if it be patched up unto us by correctours, yet declares the patching, that
the medicine is rather by force constrained, then naturally yields it self to
the remedy, and so of it self unmeet. Wherefore as well the matter thereof is
to be changed, as the medicine it self. And if those corrections need also
correction, what then? I will not say that all simples need their correctours,
although it be avouched of some, and such as carry great authority for their
skill in Physic. Thus have I (gentle Reader) for thy benefit I hope made a way
to the greater use of our home medicines, wherein if I have said freely my
mind against strange drugs, thou may understand that otherwise the way were
stopped to our English medicines; and blame me not, if I say as much for ours,
as the strangers say for theirs. And if as yet by custom ^t seem hard to alter
the common course, let each practicer look to that, I set no laws to any; only
^ crave liberty in this point, both pleasant and profitable to English men.
Wherein I have examples of excellent Philosophers and learned Physicians,
neither broach I any idle conceits of my own. Of this mind is Plinius,
Secundus, Fuchsius, Rulandus, Symphorianus, Campegius, Octavianus, Horatianus
Physician to Valentinian the Emperor, that all Countries have sufficient
medicines for all diseases. I know much more might be said of this point, but
this I thought sufficient.

The End.
The Sovereign Virtues of Carduus Benedictus. In English, The Blessed Thistle:
which for the Operation and great Efficacy that God has given unto it, may be
rightly so named. As also of the rare Virtues of ANGELICA.
It is excellent for the Head, and the parts thereof.
THis Herb eaten, or the Powder or Juice of it drunk, keeps a man from the
Headache, and Megrum; it also drives it away. Being taken in meat or drink,
it is good against Dizziness, and the swiming giddiness of the Head. It
comfort Brain, sharpneth the Wit, strengthens the Memory; it is a singular
remedy against Deafness: for it amendeth the thickness of the Hearing, and
provokes Sleep. The juice of it laid to the Eyes, quickneth the Sight: Also the
water in the which the Powder, or Herb dried, is steeped, has the same effect,
if the eyes be washed therewith. The Herb eaten, is good for the the same
purpose. The Water or Juice dropped into the eyes, cures the redness,
bloud-shotten, and itching of them.

Some write, that it does strengthen the Teeth, they being washed and rubbed
with a cloth dipped in the water or juice thereof. The powder stauncheth blood,
that flows out of the Nose, being applied to the place.

It Comfort the Stomach.
The Broth of the Herb, otherwise called the decoction, drunk in wine, is good
for an evil stomach; it helps a weak stomach, and causes an appetite to
meat. Also the wine wherein it has been boiled, does cleanse and mundifie the
infected stomach. The powder thereof eaten with Honey, or drunk in Wine, does
ripe and digest cold Phlegm, purges and brings up that which is in the
breast, scouring the same of gross humors, and causes to breathe more easily.
The Herb chewed in the mouth, heals the stench of the breath.

It helps the Heart.
The powder being taken before a man is infected, preserves him from the
Pestilence. And a dram of it, or a walnut-shell full, taken immediately after a
man feels himself infected, expels the venom of the Pestilent infection
from the heart: so that if man sweat afterward, he may be preserved. The same
effect has the herb boiled in wine, or in the urine of a healthful man-child,
drunk: I mean the decoction or liquor, from the which the herb is strained,
after that it has been boiled therein.

The leaves, powder, juice, or water of the herb drunk, the patient well
covered with clothes, sweating three hours, expels poison taken in at the
mouth, and other corruption or infection that may hurt and annoy the Heart.

It helps the Liver, Lungs, and other parts of the body.
This herb boiled in wine, and drunk hot about a quarter of an hour before the
fit, and the patient afterward well covered in the bed, drives away the Ague.
The powder and water of this herb drunk with wine, has the same effect. The
juice drunk with wine, is good against shortness of Breath, and the diseases of
the Lungs. It strengthens the members, and is good against the ache of the
body. This herb boiled in the urine of a healthful manchilde, and drunk, does
help the Dropsy, breaks all Aposthumes, mastereth the Falling Sickness. The
powder eaten or drunk, helps against the stitches in the side. It is also
good for them that begin to have the Consumption, called the Ptysick. The herb
eaten, does strengthen the trembling and Palsy members. The powder ministered
in a Glyster, helps the Cholick, and other diseases of the guts. The water
drunk, has the same effect* The juice drunk with wine, or the herb boiled in
wine, and drunk hot, breaks the stone, and drives out gravel: being sodden
in water, and the patient sitting over it, so that the hot vapor may come unto
the diseased place, it helps against the same infirmity. After the same
manner being used, it is good against the Green sickness. Also it heals the
griping pains of the belly: it opens the stopping of the members, pierces
and causes urine. The leaves boiled in wine, and drunk as is aforesaid,
provoke sweats, consumes the evil blood, and ingenders good Also the wine or
water, in the which this herb is boiled, being drunk, consumes the evil
humors, and preserves the good. It is excellent for one that is bruised with
a fall or otherwise. The leaves, juice, broth, powder, and water of the herb,
is very good to heal the canker, and old rotten, festered sores. The leaves
bruised or pounded, and laid to, are good against burnings, hot swellings
carbuncles, and sores that are hard to be cured, especially, for them of the
Pestilence: and also they are good to heal the bitings of venomous worms, and
serpents, or creeping beasts. Finally the down coming of the flowers thereof,
when the seed is ripe, does heal cuts and new wounds, without pain.

Thus much of Carduus Benedictus gathered out of the Herbals of diverse learned
men, which although it may be sufficient, yet I have thought good here to set
down that, which two painful and skilful Physicians, Matthiolus and Fuchsius,
have written hereof in Latin: whose words, as (perhaps) they may bring some
credit to that which is already written: so in them something more may be
learned, or at the least, something ^s uttered for the better understanding of
that ^foresaid. Their words in English are as fol^oweth.

Carduus Benedictus is a Plant of great virtue, especially against the
Pestilence, and also against deadly poisons: as well taken inwardly, or laid
outwardly to the stingings and bitings of venomous Beasts. They are healed with
this Herb, that are sick of a Quarten, or other Agues, that come with a cold,
and that by the drinking of the decoction, or stilled water, or a dram of the
powder. In like manner being drunk, it helps infants that are troubled with
the falling sickness. The decoction taken in wine, does mitigate the pain of
the guts, and reins, and other griefs of the belly; it provokes sweat; it
kills the worms, and is good against other diseases of the womb. The Herb it
self as well green as dried, both drunk, and laid outwardly to the grief, does
heal ulcers. On such exraordinary occasions it is mingled with the drink made
of Guacum, wine, and water, for the French Pox. Thus much Mathiolus.

Learned Writers affirm, that it takes away the stoppings of the inward
bowels; it provokes urine, breaks the stone, and helps them that are stung
of venomous beasts. They say also, that they are not to be infected that take
it in their meat or drink, before they come into the evil air, that it helps
them much that are already infected. Moreover, most agree, that it i^ a remedy
against the bitings of Serpents. Finally, to conclude, late writers say, That
it cures the pains of the head, takes away giddiness, recovereth the memory,
being taken in meat or drink. Also it helps festering sores, especially of
the Paps and Teats, if the powder thereof be laid upon it. Thus much Fuchsius.

By this we may in part understand, with how great virtue, God has endued, and
(as I may say) blessed this herb. To sum up all, it helps the body inwardly
and outwardly; it strengthens almost all the principal members of the body; as
the brain, the heart, the stomach, the liver, lungs, and kidneys. I may say it
is a preservative against all diseases; for it provokes sweat, by which the
body is purged of much corruption which breeds disease. It expels the
venom of infection: it consumes ill blood, and all naughty humors, whereof
diseases are engendered. Therefore giving God thanks for his goodness, which
has given us this Herb, and all other things for the benefit of our health; it
will in the next place be convenient to consider how to make use of it in the
application.

How Carduus Benedictus may be taken.
It is to be observed, that we may use this herb, and enjoy the virtues thereof
four ways. First, in the green leaf. Secondly, in the powder. Thirdly, in the
juice. And fourthly, in the distillation. The green leaf may be taken with
bread and butter, as we use to take Sage and Parsley in a morning to breakfast.
And if it be too bitter, it may be taken with honey instead of butter. It may
be taken in pottage boiled among other herbs: and being shred small, it may be
drunk with Ale, Beer, or Wine. It is sometims given in Beer with aqua
composita, and that without harm, when the stomach of the patient is weak, and
he not troubled with any hot disease. The juice of it is either outwardly
applied; the leaf, powder, and water of it, is received in the mouth.

It may be taken in Pottage also in the green leaf, or with Wine; which if it
be burned and drunk hot, it is the better. If you please, you may boil it with
Wine, and honey or sugar to make it sweet, and then drink it very warm.

The powder may be taken with honey upon a knives point, or with bread and
honey if you please; or else it may be drunk with Ale, Beer, or Wine. The
distilled water may be drunk by it self alone, or else with white Wine before
meat, or with Sack after meat, especially if the stomach be weak and cold.

The liquor or broth in the which this herb is boiled, may be made thus. Take a
quart of running water, seethe it and scum it, then put into it a good handful
of the herb, and let it boil until the better part of the liquor be consumed:
then drink it with wine, or if you think fit with honey or sugar, to make it
more pleasant in the taste. Or else make a Potion thus: Take a good handful of
the leaves, with a handful of Raisins of the Sun, washed and stoned, and some
Sugarcandy, and Licorice sliced small, boil them all together in a quart of
Water, Ale, or Wine: If it be too bitter, it may be made sweet, as is aforesaid,

It is also to be observed, that the Powder and Water of the Herb is most to be
regarded, and specially the water: For they may be long preserved, so that one
may have them always in a readiness to use, as need shall require, when a^ the
juice cannot be had, nor the green leaf. And the Water (which only is void of
bitterness) may be drunk by it self alone: for the stomach and taste will bear
it, and like of it as well as of Rose Water. Notwithstandig, if the seed be
sown as soon as it is ripe, one may have the Herb both winter and summer, from
the time that it begins to grow, until the seed wax ripe again. Therefore I
council all them that have Gardens, to nourish it, that they may have it
always for their own use, and the use of their Neighbors that stand in need
of it.

Of the time and quantity to be observed in taking of Carduus Benedictus.
Here (perhaps) some will ask a question of the time, and quantity, which
things are to be considered in taking of medicines. As touching the time, if it
be taken for a preservative, it is good to take it in the morning, or in the
evening, before one goes to bed, because that is a convenient time to sweat,
for one that feels not himself greatly diseased. But if a man take it to
expel any ill humors, it is good to take it whenever any grief is felt in
the body, immediately to go to bed, and sweat.

As touching the quantity, one needs not be so careful in taking this Herb, as
in taking those medicines, that do purge vehemently by ^gestion, (as some term
it) or by vomit. For ^n taking them, if great discretion be not used, ^n
considering the time, the quantity, and the state of a man's body, they may
cause present death: or otherwise they may much weaken the Patient.

This I counsel all that use it, that when they, or any of theirs, are
diseased, they defer not the time, but take it presently, as soon as it may be
had: and that they do not think it sufficient to take it once; but that they
take it three or four times at the least.

Of the Sovereign Virtues of ANGELICA.
NOw I have written what is sufficient of Carduus Benedictus, I will add unto
it another (...) much like it in the virtue, called Angelica, that if the one
be wanting, the other may be taken. As ^^uching the name, the latest writers in
my judgment, most to be credited in this matter* find no other name for it,
neither in English nor in Latin. Howsoever, I know that some much to be
commended for their learning, an^ also for the publishing of the same, to the
benefit of their country, have given it other name^ but I think erroneously.
If we English it is as the Latin word sounds, we may call it Herb A^gel, or,
The Angelical or Angel-like Herb. (...) what occasion this excellent name was
first gi^^ unto it, I know not; unless it were for the ^^cellent Virtues
thereof, or for that God made (...) known to man, by the ministry of an Angel.
I suppose the former cause rather to be true: howsoever, as I am not able to
prove the other, so I think no man can give any good reason to the contrary.
For this we know, that God has made his Angels ministering Spirits, to serve
us, for the safeguard of our souls, and also of our bodies. But upon what
occasion soever the name was given, it is excellent, and so are the properties.

Angelica is hot, and dry, at least in the third degree. All the later Writers
agree upon this and experience proves the same, that it is goo^ against
Poison, pestilent Airs, and the Pestilence it self. The Practicioners of
Germany writ^ thus of it: If any man be suddenly taken either with the
Pestilence, or with any Pestilent Ague, with too much sweating, let him drink
of the powder of the root half a dram, mingled with a dram of T^eacle, in three
or four spoonfuls of the water of Angelica, distilled from the roots and after
his going to bed, covering himself well, ^t him fast (at the least) three hours
after: which if he do, he will begin to sweat, and by ^he help of God, he shall
be cured of his dis^ase. For lack of Treacle one may take a whole ^ram of the
Root of Angelica in powder, with (...) much of the distilled Water as
aforesaid, (...) ^ill have the same effect.

The Root of Angelica well steeped in Vine^^r, and smelt to in time of the
Pestilence; (...) the same Vinegar being sometime drunk ^^ing, preserves from
infection. But in my ^^dgement, it is better to take an Orange or ^emon, cut
off the top, pick out the meat, prick full of small holes, put into it a piece
of sponge, (...) fine linen cloth, dipped in the foresaid Vine^^r, and smell
unto it.

The water distilled out of the roots of An^^lica, or the powder of the same,
is good against ^^awing and pains of the belly occasioned with ^^ld, if the
body be not bound withal. It is ^od against all inward diseases; as the
Pleurisy, (...) the beginning, before the heat of the inflama^^^n be come into
the body: for that it dissolveth (...) scatters abroad such humors as use to
cause ^^e Pleurisy. Moreover, it is good for the dis^ases (...) the Lungs, if
they come of a cold cause: and (...) the Strangurian, if from a cold cause, or
of a ^^pping. It is good for a woman that is in tra^^. It expels wind that
is in the body, and ^eth the pain that comes from the fame. The (...) ^t may
be sod in wine or water, as the nature ^he sick requires. The juice of the
root put into an hollow tooth, takes away the ache; the same effect has the
distilled water, being put in at the ear.

The juice and water of Angelica, quickens the eye sight, and breaks the little
films that cover the eyes, causing darkness of the sight. Of the roots of
Angelica and Pitch, may be made a good Emplaister against the bitings of mad
beasts. The water, the juice, or the powder of this root, sprinkled upon the
diseased place, (...) a very good remedy against old, and deep fore^^ For they
do scour and cleanse them, and cover the bones with flesh. The water of the
same, in a cold cause, is good to be laid on places diseased with the Gout and
Sciatica. For it stancheth the pain, and melts away the tough humors that are
gathered together. The seed is of like virtue with the root. The wild
Angelica, that grows here in the low woods, and by the waterside, is not of
such virtue as the other is; howbeit the Chyrurgeons use to seethe the root of
it in Wine, to heal green wounds. These properties I have gathered out of
German^ Writers. I have not as yet proved them all m^ self, but diverse of them
I have proved, and have found them to be true. I have set down the pill of an
Orange, or Lemmon; the me^^ whereof is also commended by Physicians, to b^ both
a preservative good against poison, an^ the infection of the Pestilence

Late Writers affirm, that the roots of Angelica are opposite to all poison,
and infectio^ If any be infected with the plague, or poisone^ they give him
immediately to drink a dram of the powder of this root with Wine in the winter;
and in summer with distilled water of Carduus benedictus; then get him to bed,
and cover him, until he have sweat foundly. The same root being taken fasting
in the morning, or but held in the mouth, does keep, and preserve the body from
the evil of the air. The leaves of Angelica pounded with the leaves of Rue and
Honey, are very good to be laid to the bitings of mad dogs, presently taken
after the hurt, the Wine being drunk, wherein the root, or leaves of Angelica
has been boiled.

To conclude, I have thought good to write of these Herbs Carduus Benedictus,
and Angelica, either because they are not known to many; or else that Artists
would have their secret virtues concealed. But I do not think it fit, that any
thing should be secret, which may be profitable for my Country. For God has
not made any thing for the use of a few, but for the commodity of all men. And
we that are the children of God ought to frame our selves so, that we may be
like affectioned unto our Father, who is beneficial to all men; who has made
his sun to shine, and his rain to rain upon the wicked as well as upon the
good; that is to say, who feeds all both good and bad; by heat and moisture,
which proceed from the Sun, and the rain, all things grow upon the earth,
whereby our lives are maintained. I conclude, that forasmuch as Almighty God is
good unto all men, we ought to be like minded, and not to keep secret, nor to
hide any thing that may profit one another. I wish all men rightly to use the
good creatures of God, and to give him hearty thanks for all his benefits.

Fragmenta Aurea.

The first Golden CENTURY OF Chymicall and Physical Judicial APHORISMS, AND
Admirable Secrets.

BY Nich. Culpeper, Gent. late Student in Physic and Astrology.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill, 1659.

Fragmenta aurea. The first Golden Century of Chemical and Physical Judicial
Aphorisms, and admirable Secrets.
1.
THe Hoofs of the forefeet of a Cow dried and taken any way, Mizaldus.
increase milk in Nurses: the smoke of them being burnt drives away Mice.

2.
If you fry Earthworms in Goose-grease, and drop a drop or two of the Grease
warm (being strained) in your ear, helps the pains thereof. I suppose you had
best first slit them, and wash them in white wine.

3.
The water wherein Smiths quench their iron Ben^^i^^^^
being drunk, helps the Spleen. So does eating Capers.

4.
Unslaked Lime beaten into powder, and mixed with black Soap, takes away a Win
being anointed with it.

5.
Mizaldus.
If any Wood or Iron be gotten into the flesh, and you cannot get it out, dip a
tent in the juice of Valerian, and put it into the wound, if the wound be big
enough; also stamp some of the herb, and bind it to the wound with a cloth, it
will not only draw out the thorn or iron, but also speedily heal the wound.

6.
To rub the Teeth and Gums every morning, and after meat too, if you please,
with Salt, is the best way under the sun to preserve the teeth sound and clean,
from rotting and aching.

7.
Minus.
An excellent cure for the Gout, is to take a young Puppy, all of one color, if
you can get such a one, and cut him in two pieces through the back alive, and
lay one side hot to the grieved place, the inner side I mean.

8.
Strong Ale sod till it be thick, is an excellent salve for old aches, and also
for sores.

9.
If any suspect he has gotten the P^^rifie, let him hold his breath as long as
he can, and if he can let it go without coughing, he has not the Pleurisy,
otherwise he has.

10.
The Coals of a Birch-tree beaten into powder, and put into any wound or sore,
heals it not only perfectly, but also speedily.

11.
A fleaed Mouse dried, and beaten into powder, and given at a time, helps such
as cannot hold their water, or that have a Diabetes, if you do the like three
days together.

12.
Betony, Penerial, or sweet Bazil, Mizaldus.
in powder given to a Woman in travel, hasteneth her delivery. I suppose it
would be very requisite, the time of gathering of them were observed.

13.
If a piece of fine Gold, viz. Angel-gold, Golumell^ Mizaldus*
(or for want of it Leaf-gold, but then you need not take it out again) be put
into juice of Lemmons, and after twenty four hours taken out again: a little
Angelica root in powder put into the juice, and drunk up by such as have the
Plague, cures to admiration.

I suppose if the time of gathering the Angelica were observed (for it is an
herb of Sol) it would be far more effectual, as also the time of ^^^tting in
the Gold.

14.
A little Bay Salt dried, and beaten to powder and mixed with the yolk of an
Egg, and applied to a Felon, (called in Sussex an Andicom) does not only
speedily cure it, but also draws away the pain and swelling from the parts
adjacent, which is usual to such infirmities.

15.
Bay Salt finely powdered, and mixed with Fasting-spittle, and applied
Plaister-wise to any place where superfluous hair grows, does take it away: The
like effect has Pigeons dung applied in like manner.

16.
Bleeding at the nose will be speedily stopped, Mizaldus.
if you write in the Patients forehead with his own blood, these words,
Consummatum est.

17.
The powder of the tooth of a Bore, mixed with new oil of Linseed, Mizaldus.
for that which is stale stinketh) does presently cure the Squinancy, if the
grieved place be but touched with it with a feather.

18.
The coals of a burnt Vine, in powder mixed with Honey, does make the teeth
which are rubbed with it, as white as Ivory.

19.
Strong Aqua vitae mixed so full of Sugar* as that you may eat it with a knives
point* taken last at night, cures hoarseness in a short ti^^* an ounce of Aqua
vitae will serve at one time.

20.
The dross which is left in pressing out Linseed oil, being laid to steep in
running water, Mizaldus.
and the hands washed with it, makes them of a delicate color; and if you will
take the pains to bathe your body now and then with it, it will beautify your
skin.

21.
The blood of a white Hen smeered all over a face that is full of freckles,
Mizaldus.
and let alone till it be dry, and then wiped off, clean takes away the
freckles and spots.

22.
Cantharides wrapped in a Spiders web, and hanged over one that has a quartane
Ague, Mizal^
perfectly cures them.

23.
Also for any Ague, just when the fit comes upon you, take half a pint of Sack,
and boil it to a quarter of a pint, with a little Garlic sliced thin in it,
and drink it as w^^m as you can, it will suddenly cure you to admiration.

24.
The decoction of Hollihock mixed with a little honey and butter, does (being
drunk warm) wonderfully ease the Chollick.

25.
A Plaster made of young Swallows, being ^^rnt, nest and all, does (being
applied to the throat) ease the Squinancy, and swelling of the throat; you may
make it into a Plaster with oil and wax.

26.
If you use (when you go to bed) to rub your finger between your toes, and then
smell to them, you shall find it an excellent prevention, both of Gramps and
Palsies.

27.
The little bone of the knee-joynt of a Hares hinder leg, does presently help
the Cramp, if you do but touch the grieved place with it.

28.
A little piece of the tongue of a Fox (moistened, and made soft in vinegar, if
it be too dry) applied to the place, draws out a thorn, or any thing else that
is gotten deep into the flesh.

29.
Mizaldus.
The three-corner'd stone which is to be found in the hinder part of the head of
a Carp near the neck, being beaten to powder, and a little of it snuffed up
into the nose does instantly stay the bleeding of it.

30.
Mizaldus.
The head of a Cat that is all black burned in a new pot or crucible, and made
into fine ashes, and a little of it blown (with a quill into an eye that has a
web or pearl growing before it, three times a day, is a most sovereign remedy.

If in the cure the Patient feel any burning in (...) ^e, then take three or
four Oaken-leaves, (...) ^ste^ ^em in water, and lay them to the eye, and when
they have layen awhile turn them.

Mizaldus affirms this has cured such as have been blind a whole year.

31.
Snails either with shells or without, Hollerius.
being beat with runnet, and applied Plaister-wise, will draw out any thorn, or
any thing else that is gotten never so deep in the flesh.

Also applied to the Navel of one that has the Dropsy, it draws out all the
waters; but it must not be removed till it either drop off of it self, or have
drawn out all the water.

32.
The roots of Henbane ^eing stamped, Mizaldus. Alberius magnus.
warmed, and applied to the place, cures the Gout, both in the feet and knees;
the reason is, because it is an Herb of J^^^^^^, who Signs Sagitarius and
Pisces rules the Knees and Feet.

33.
Take nine red Snails, and put them between two tile-stones so as they slide
not away, then dry them in an oven, and give one (beaten into powder) of them
every morning fasting in white wine, to one that is bursten, and let him fast
an hour after: and if that cure h^^ not, give him nine more.

34.
Knotgrass is an herb of the (...), Mizaldus.
and cures diseases of the heart and back, stone-cholick, burstness, and
resists the pestilence.

35.
The paring of an Apple cut s^mewhat thick, and the inside laid to eyes
troubled with a hot Rheum, and bound on at night when they go to bed, gives
speedy help, contrary to expectation.

36.
They say Piece-grease, (such as is fried out of Shoe-makers Leather) is an
excellent remedy for the Gout.

37.
Shell-snails dried in an oven, and a dram of the powder of them taken at a
time, does in nine or ten days cure the black Jaundies.

It must be taken in Ale in the morning fasting.

38.
Butter, Aqua vitae, and Beasts Gall, of each a like quantity mixed together,
cures any Ache or Stitch, being anointed with it every morning and evening.

39.
Galen. Gesner.
The powder of man's bones cure the Falling Sickness, according to Galen; but
Gesner avoucheth he has done it often with the Cranium humanum.
Scull of a man not buried, which is the most probable, although the other may
be true,

40.
The powder of Stone-pitch given in small Beer two or three mornings together,
is a notable remedy for such as are bruised, and cheap enough too.

41.
The root of Vervine hanged about the neck of one that has the King's Evil,
gives a strange and unhoped for cure.

The reason of it is, because Vervine is the herb of Venus, and Taurus is her
house. For the time of gathering this, and other Herbs, I refer you to other
Treatises, where the matter is particularly handled.

42.
The tender horns of Bucks, Cribonius largus.
whilst they be covered with a thin hairy skin, being sliced, and put into a
new pot well covered, and so dried in an oven, that they may be beaten into
powder, and some of it given in wine, with pepper and mirrhe, gives speedy ease
for the Chollick.

43.
Pains of the Bladder and Cods, as also the Chollick, will be cured if you
apply to it once or twice Pellitory of the wall bruised.

44.
A Hedge-sparrow is of a notable virtue, Aetius, Egeneta, Mizaldus, and
Experience.
for the guts detracted, and the feathers taken off, and so either kept in
Salt, or converted into Mummy and eaten, (the Birds I mean, not the guts nor
feathers) it will break the stone, either in the Reins or Bladder, and bring it
forth.

45.
The Roots of white Lillies boiled in water, and the Face washed with the
water, takes away ^he redness thereof.

46.
Mizaldus. Galen.
A green jasper hung about the neck of one that has a weak stomach, so that it
touch the skin near the region of the mouth of the stomach, does wonderfully
strengthen it.

47.
If you stamp Hariff a little, and lay it in soak in spring water four and
twenty hours, and then wash any scald or scabby place with it, quickly heals it.

48.
If you boil Parsley and Time well in white wine, and in a draught of it put a
spoonful of white Soap (I suppose Castle soap) scraped small, and this being
drunk up, causes one speedily to make water; and is a precious medicine for
the Stone.

49.
Arnoldus.
Carduus Benedictus stamped and boiled with Barrows-grease, Wine and
Wheat-flour, to an Ointment; this is so sovereign that it cures all Ulcers,
Fistula's, and Sores, yea, though the very Bones be bare.

50.
Mizaldus.
A handful of Mugwort stamped and boiled in sweet Sallet-oyl, till the juice be
consumed, makes an oil which gives speedy ease to the Gout.

51.
If your nose bleed on the right side, crush the little finger of the right
hand; Mizaldus.
if on the le^^ side, of the left hand, and it will cease.

52.
If you give ten grains of red Corrall in ^owder to a Child in Breast-Milk for
the ^rst sustenance it takes, Arnoldus de villa nova
and it will never ^e troubled with the Falling Sickness. It ^ems by this, it
mightily strengthens the ^rain.

53.
There is an Herb called Speregrass, Cupton.
stamp (...), and fill a Walnut-shell full of it, and ^pply it to the place
pained with the Gout, ^nde it on, and within six or eight hours it ^ill draw a
Blister, which cut, and let out the ^ater, and keep a Colewort-leaf to it, till
the ^alady be remedied; this has been known to ^re such as have been troubled
with this disease ^enty years.

54.
Boil the Lees of Oil till half be consumed, G. V^rr^. Ca^o.
^th which anoint the bottom-corners and feet (...) a Chest or Press you put
clothes in, and (...) Moths will trouble them; but you had ^t let it be dry
before you put your clothes

55.
Take a handful of green Rue, gathered in hour of Sol, he being strong, ten
Figs, as any Walnuts, an ounce of Juniper Berries; ^t all these well together
with a little Bay^, and take the quantity of a Hazel-nut ^ry morning; it
defends the body from ^ilence, Poison, or any Sickness, even ^xtream old age.
Mithridates Mithre^ates.
was the Author of it, and therefore let him have the credit of it: besides
with this only, and the blessing of God upon it, have I cured such of the
Ptysick, or Consumption of the Lungs, that have been so weak, they could not
walk about a chamber without leading.

56.
Some men are so gross and fat, that they can hardly walk or do any business;
let such eat three or four cloves of Garlic every morning with Bread and
Butter, and fast two hours after it, and let their drink be water wherein
Fennel has been boiled, it will in a very small time ease them.

57.
That which is shorn from Scarlet, being well died, and dried in an oven, or
otherwise, that it may be beaten into powder, and half a spoonful of the powder
given at a time in red wine, will quickly cure the Bloody Flux.

58.
If you anoint your temples where the Arteries pass, Simeon Sethi.
once a month with the gall of a Partridge, it mightily strengthens the memory.

59.
Rhazis. Albertus.
A Sapphire tied about the neck, so as it touc^ the Region of the heart,
preserves the bear from poison, and the plague, and abateth the heat in
Fevers and Agues.

60.
Petrus Hispanus.
The soles of the Feet rubbed with goo^ Mustard, helps forgetfulness, and
quickens t^ motion.

A man might draw from hence, that forgetful persons are usually dull.

61.
Seethe Ivy-berries in Vinegar, and supyour mouth full of it as hot as you can;
and when it is cold spit it out again, and take another sup, and do likewise; a
few such sups will cure the pain of the Teeth.

62.
Also if you put a little Spirit of Vitriol into the pained tooth. Which you
may get done by a little Lint tied to the top of a Bodkin, or Wire, it works
the same effect; but be sure you take not the Oil of Vitriol inste^^ of Spirit:
For if you do, you will make (...) work.

63.
Aqua Composita mixed with a like quantity of Oil of Roses, helps lame joints;
but let them be well rubbed before with warm clothes, and then anointed with it.

64.
The like effect has Hartshorn boiled to a jelly in Sack.

65.
Take of Cinnamon three drams, Mastick and Pomegranate-rines, of each one dram,
Galangal, half a dram; make all these being in fine powder, into an Electury
with clarified honey, and taking the quantity of a Hazel-nut of it every
morning fasting, does not only cause a good stomach, but also good digestion,
and resists the breeding of ill humors, thereby preserving the body in
health, and the mind in vigor.

66.
Cinkfoil is an Herb of Jupiter, it strengthens the Liver, and cures being
given in powder, all Agues.

I do not intend to treat here of the time of gathering Herbs, but reserve that
to a Treatise by it self. Together with the nature, called the Complete
Herbarist.

67.
Mizaldus.
Whosoever anoints any part of his body with the grease of a Wolf, shall not be
hurt by cold (...) that part.

68.
Tortula Gilbertus.
Vervine stamped, and strained in Wine, gives speedy deliverance to a woman in
travel, if she drinks it.

69.
The like effects has sweet Bazil in powder, and also Cinnamon.

70.
Take nine Hog-lice, commonly called Wood-lice, stamp them with a little juice
of Betony, strain it, and drink it warm in the morning, the doing so three
mornings together, cures the web in the eye.

71.
Jews-ears, (a thing, that grows upon Elder-trees) being either steeped or
boiled in Ale, helps sore throats, if you drink the Ale.

72.
The middle rind of a Cherry-tree stamped and strained, and the juice mixed
with a little white Wine, and warmed, and drunk, breaks the Stone, and avoids
the gravel.

73.
The like effect has the Gum of a Cherry-tree mixed in like manner, as also
the juice of Cammomile.

74.
Cut a Frog through the midst of the back with a knife, and take out the Liver,
Petrus Hispalus.
which wrap in a Colewort-leaf, and burn it in a new Crucible well stopped; The
ashes given to one that has the Falling Sickness, cures them: If once do not
do the deed, use it oftener.

75.
Let one that bleeds at the Nose, Petrus Hispanus.
chew the root of a Nettle in his mouth, but swallow it not down, and the blood
will stop.

76.
Caraway Confects once dipped in Sugar, being eaten half a spoonful after meat,
and a spoonful in the morning fasting, do not only help those that are
troubled with wind, but also causes good digestion; the better you chew them,
the better it is.

77.
The Juice of Arsesmart mingled with half the quantity of Aqua vitae takes away
Aches, being anointed with it.

78.
Seethe a handful of Holly-berries in a pint of Ale, till half the Ale be
consumed, then strain it, and put a piece of butter to it, stake five or six
spoonfuls of it at a time, it is an excellent remedy for the Stone.

79.
Mizaldus.
Wallwort is an excellent remedy for the Gout, either applied outwardly in Oils
and Ointments, or inwardly in Syrrups or Electuaries.

80.
Sallet-oyl, Aqua vitae, Oil of Exceter, and a Bullocks gall, of each a like
quantity, mixed together, make an excellent Ointment for lame limbs.

81.
Primrose leaves stamped, and laid to any part that bleedeth, stays the blood.

82.
Take black Soap, and mix it with almost (...) much beaten ginger, this by
anointing with it, kills any Tetter, or Ring-worm, be it never so desperate.

83.
Dr. Owen.
It is wonderful beneficial to lame members, to bathe them in the decoction of
Rue and Rosemary, and then wrap them in a Lambs skin, the woolly side inmost.

84.
Take Oil of Bays, Aqua vitae, juice of Sage, Vinegar, Mustard, and Beasts
Gall, of each a like quantity, put them into a bladder that is far too big to
hold them; tie them up close, and then chafe them up and down with your hands
an hour and half together; and then have you as good an Ointment for the Gout,
as the world can afford.

85.
The Juyces of Henbane, Lettice, Plantane, Poppy, Mandrake-leaves, Ivy, and
Mulberry-leaves, Hemlock, Opium, Ivy-berries in powder, of each a like
quantity, mix them well together; then put a Sponge into them, and let it drink
them all up, dry the Sponge in the Sun, and when you would have any body sleep,
lay the Sponge at his Nose, and he will quickly sleep; and when you would have
him wake, dip another Sponge in Vinegar, and hold to his Nose, and he will as
soon wake.

86.
Seethe Mallows, and red Nettles together, and let him that cannot go to stool,
sit over it, when it is hot.

87.
The roots of red Nettles being drunk in powder, a spoonful at a time, breaks
the Stone.

88.
A Comb made of the right Horn of a Ram, cures the Headache, if it lie on the
right side of the head, being combed with it; of the left horn for the left
side.

89.
Dip a silk-thread in the blood of a Mouse, and let the party swallow it down
that is troubled with the Squinancy, pain, or swelling in the throat, and it
will cure him.

90.
For a Pleurisy, or any other pain indeed in any other part of the body, Emp.
Ben. Victorii.
this do; Take of Dialthea two ounces, Oil of sweet Almonds half an ounce, mix
them together, and warm them, then anoint the grieved place with it; then take
Cummin-seed finely powdered, and strew upon the anointed place, then heat a
Colewort-leaf very hot upon coals, and wrap the place so used as before,
binding it fast, and you shall soon see the most wonderful effects appear.

91.
Ant. Musa.
Scabious in powder drunk (a dram at a time) in small Ale every morning, cures
Imposthumes.

92.
Peony is an Herb of the Sun, the root of it cures the Falling Sickness.

93.
The juice of Ground Ivy, snuffed up into the Nose, purges the head mightily,
and takes away the pains thereof, though of never so long continuance.

94.
The Gall of an Ox, and so much flower of Lupines as will thicken it into a
Plaster, kills the Worms.

95.
emnius.
If red hot Gold be quenched in Wine, and the wine drunk, it chears the vitals,
cures the plague; outwardly used it takes away spots and Leprosy. A costly
Medicine.

96.
Mizaldus.
The water that drops out of a Vine, being drunk with white wine, breaks and
expells the stone in the Reins.

97.
Pigeons dung stamped with vinegar, Macer.
and applied plaister-wise to the Navel, stops presently all Fluxes of the
belly.

98.
Carduus Benedictus seeds stamped and taken, eases pains, aches, and stitches
in the side; as also gripings of the belly and guts.

99.
If any be troubled with Stomach Worms, let him hold a piece of an honeycomb
in his mouth, and the Worms will come out to the honey.

100.
Syrup of Borage and Buggloss resist Melancholy, and cause light Hearts,
taking away grief and passions thereof.

Fragmenta aurea. The second Golden Century of Chemical and Physical Judicial
Aphorisms, and admirable Secrets.
1.
Mizaldus.
THe Roots of Sorrel hung about their necks that have the Swine Pocks, does
wonderfully help them.

2.
Briony Roots boiled in water, and the water drunk, helps the Dropsy.

3.
Eyebright is an herb of the Sun, and is a wonderful strengthner of the eyes
used any way, either outwardly or inwardly, both the leaves, stalks, and
flowers; for it is an herb appropriated to them.

4.
You may easily know whether a Dropsy be hot or cold, thus: If it begin below
and swell upwards it is hot, because the nature of heat is to ascend: but if it
swell downwards, it is cold, because the nature of cold is to descend.

5.
Dry a bullocks, sheeps, or goats Bladder, Galen.
and beat it into powder, and give a dram of it in water, vinegar, or any
convenient liquor, to such as cannot hold their water, or use to piss in bed,
and it will help them: give it at night or morning, according as you see cause.

6.
Rub a green Marigold leaf between your fingers, and put it up into your nose,
and it will draw away abundance of humors, and help Rheum anoying the head.

7.
The Roots of Elder-trees sod in water, and the decoction drunk for common
drink cures the Dropsy.

8.
Garlike and Housleek, of each a like quantity, stamped and applied
plaister-wise to the place, will help the Gout be it hot or cold.

9.
White wine, Benenius
wherein the ends of a pair of tongs have been quenched (being before red hot)
six or seven times, being drunk, diverse times, does help such as have grieved,
swelled, or diseased Spleens.

10.
Mizaldus.
It is a sign of health in a sickness when the Gods begin to itch; but take
heed then of Venerious acts, lest you pay for your pleasure.

11.
The decoction of Walwort, either in wine or water, does admirably (by being
drunk) cure the Dropsy.

12.
Arnoldus de villa nova.
Coriander-seed being beaten into powder, and mixed with Honey, and applied
Plaister-wise either to Carbuncles or Sores, helps them.

13.
Mizaldus.
The Berries of winter Cherries stamped and the Juice pressed out and dried,
helps both the Stone and Dropsy.

14.
Elder-leaves made hot between two Tile-stones, and applied to the Forehead and
Temples, ease the pains of the Head.

15.
Take the buds, leaves, or inner-rind of an Elder-tree, beat it, and drop a
drop or two of the juice thereof into the Ear; it cures not only Imposthumes
there, but also Deafness.

16.
Mizaldus.
The Brain of a Weazel dried, and drunk in Vinegar, cures the Falling Sickness.

17.
Many men are troubled with watery Stomachs, much thin fresh water coming out
of their mouths toward morning; it usually comes with a proneness to vomit;
(the vulgar call it, water-springs) for such, or any other Rheum whatsoever
that molesteth your body, take this most excellent, though cheap Medicine.

Take a little stick and tie some old Oken-leaves about the end of it, and cut
them pretty round, then put them into your mouth as far as you can well suffer
them, and hold the stick fast between your teeth, and abundance of Rheum will
come out of your mouth, hold your mouth over a porringer, and you may see how
much. Then wash the leaves in water and put them in your mouth again: do so as
often as you think fit. If you do so before meat it will help your digestion.

18.
Earthworms slit, and washed well in white wine, and dried and beaten into
powder, and a spoonful taken of them in any liquor in the morning fasting, in a
little time cures the black Jaundies.

19.
Olibanum mixed with as much Barows-grease (beat the Olibanum first into
powder) and boiled together, make an Ointment which will kill the Lice in
Childrens heads; and such as are subject to breed them, will never breed them
after. A medicine cheap, safe, and sure, which breeds no anoyance to the brain.

20.
Tormentil boiled in wine, Petrus Hisp.
and the wine drunk for ordinary drink, and the Herb it self that was boiled,
being applied Plaister-wise to the eyes at night, helps such as are so blind
they cannot see at all,

21.
Andr. Mathiolus.
Briony roots boiled in white Wine, and a draught of the Wine drunk every night
going to bed, helps such as have the fits of the Mother.

22.
The juice of Coleworts snuffed up the nose, purges the head marvellously, and
takes away the pains thereof, though of never so long continuance.

23.
Mizaldus.
The Gums of young children, being often rubbed with the brains of a Hare or
Cunney, their teeth will cut easily,

24.
Pet. Hisp.
Fine Aloes boiled well with the juice of Coleworts, and made into pills, a
scruple being taken at a time at night going to bed, does gallantly purge the
head, and ease the pains thereof,

25.
Take a good handful of Arsemart, wrap it up in a Bur-leaf, and take it up
being so wrapped, first in cold ashes, then cover those cold ashes with hot
embers, those hot embers with hot coals, and let it roast, and apply it being
well roasted to the place grieved with the Gout, change it morning and evening,
and in three days you shall see the most wonderful effects of it.

26.
If you beat a plate of Gold very thin when ^ol is in Leo, Hermes. Arnoldus de
villa nova.
Jupiter and Luna in good Aspect and Fortunate, it will do wonders; for being
^id to the seam of the Head, it strengthens the ^rain, and helps the
infirmities thereof: being ^anged against the region of the Heart, it helps ^he
diseases thereof, faintings, sownings, etc. and causes gladness: being hanged
to the Back, it cools, and strengthens them, and helps pains in the back,

27.
Take all the Urine the party makes at one time that has the Quartain Ague,
Mizaldus.
and knead flour, and make a cake with it, and when it is baked, give it to a
Dog of the house; do so twice or thrice, and in so doing the party will be well
and the Dog sick. Choose a Dog for a Man, but a Bitch for a Woman.

28.
To swallow down three grains of Mastich every night when one goes to bed, Emp.
Ben. Vict.
delivers from the pains of the stomach.

29.
Mark where a Swine rubs himself, then cut off a piece of the wood, and rub any
swollen place with it, and it will help it; with this proviso, that where the Hog
rubs his head, it helps the swellings of the head, and where the neck, those of
the neck, etc. If you cannot apply a part of the thing the Hog rubbed against
to the grieved place, you must apply the grieved place to that.

30.
The rind of an Ash-tree boiled in wine, an^ a draught of the wine drunk six
or seven mornings together, eases the Spleen.

31.
Pains of the Spleen trouble a man most after meat.

32.
Egg-shells dried and beaten into powder, and given in white wine, break the
stone.

33.
Mizaldus.
Mice-dung, with the ashes of burnt Wasps, and burnt Hazel-nuts, made into an
Ointment with vinegar of Roses, do trimly deck a bald-^ead with hairs, being
anointed with it.

34.
Six cloves of Garlike stamped and strained into a draught of Rhenish wine, and
drunk up, is a present r^medy for the stone, strangury, and chollick.

35.
Gather Elder-flowers on a Midsummer-day, dry them, and beat them into powder,
and take a spoonful of it in Borage-water every morning and evening, it
restores Youth and conserves it.

36.
Burn horsleaches into powder, and mix them with vinegar, and therewithal rub
the place where you would have Hair grow no more, and you shall have your
desire.

37.
Drinking much Butter-milk makes one lax^^ive.

38.
The stone of a Swallow beaten into powder, Petrus Hispanus.
and given in drink to such as have the Falling Sickness, cures them.

39.
Mingle two spoonfuls of water with one spoonful of clarified Honey, and give
it to a woman when she goes to sleep; if she feel gripings and pains in her
belly, she is conceived with child, else not.

40.
Green Nettles steeped in the urine of one that is sick twenty four hours;
Mizaldus.
if they remain green and fresh the sick will live, else not.

41.
The berries of white Thorns taken in white Wine, are of great force to break
and expel the Stone.

42.
Plantane is given with good success to such as have the Plague.

43.
Wormwood stamped with the white of an egg, and applied to the eyes, by way of
a Plaster, is a notable way to take away the redness and bloodiness of them.

44.
A Garland made of Ivy-leaves, Mizaldus.
laid to the breasts of women that hang flagging, gathers them up together
decently, and makes them round; the like will Ivy-leaves do, if they be beaten,
and applied to them.

45.
Mizaldus.
If you wash wounds with Wine, wherein Agrimony has been sodden, it cleanses
them of their filth and putrefaction.

46.
Also stamp Agrimony, and apply it to wounds that are ill knit or joined, and
it will open them again

47.
Mizaldus.
The juice of Rue mixed with clarified Honey, and a drop dropped into the eye at
a time, takes away dimness of sight.

48
A head of Garlic (the skins being pulled off) bruised, and applied in equal
parts to the foles of the feet, where they are hollow, helps them with speed
that are pained with the Toothache, especially if it come of a cold cause, and
lie in the nether jaw.

49.
Mizaldus.
If you rub Warts with the leaves of a Fig Tree, and bury the leaves in the
earth, the warts will insensibly consume away.

50.
Briony-berries dried and beaten into powder, and drunk in the decoction of
Watercresses, does wonderful help the Strangury.

51.
Benedictus Victorius Faventinus Emp.
Take of venice Treacle one scruple, of liquorice and Cinnamon in powder, of
each three grains, of White Wine an ounce and an half, mix all these together,
and make of them a Potion.

If a Woman take such a drink as this is, every other morning, about a
fortnight, or three weaks, before her delivery, it will make her labor very
easy. My Author says, she will bring forth her child without any pain at
all.

52.
Take of Yarrow and Plantane, of each a like quantity, beat them, and strain
the juice of them into red Wine, a good draught of which being drunk morning
and evening, will stop a bloody Flux.

53.
If a Woman desire to know whether she be with child, or not, Mizaldus.
let her make water in a clean copper or brazen vessel at night when she goes
to bed, and put a Nettle in it, if the Nettle have red spots in it next
morning, she is with child, else not.

54.
Oxen, Kine, Bullocks, or Horses, Absertus.
will not be troubled with any disease, if you hang a Hartshorn upon them.

55.
Put two or three of the seeds of Oculus Christi into your eye, and within a
while after you shall not feel them, whereby you will think they are not there,
at last they will drop (...) of themselves compassed about with slimy (...)
which does hinder the sight. If you (...) this now and then, it will clear your
eyes wonderfully.

56.
Warts rubbed with a piece of raw Beef, and the beef buried in the ground, the
warts will consume away, as the beaf rots in the ground.

57.
Take the inner rind of an Oak-tree, and boil it well in fair water, then
bathe any sore with it, whether new or old, three or four times morning and
evening, and then anoint it with fresh butter and flour of brimstone well
mixed, and you shall see a speedy cure.

58.
Take a Bur-root, the bigger the better, and scrape it clean, then put it in a
Pot of new Ale, and the Ale will boil; let it stand twenty four hours close
stopped, and then let one that has the yellow Jaundies drink a good draught of
it, and in doing so two or three mornings he will be cured.

59.
Let him that has the Strangury drink a draught of small Ale, wherein the
inner Rind of the young branches of a Hazel-tree has been boiled, first in the
morning, and last at night, and it help him in few days.

60.
Lay a thin piece of raw beaf to the forehead of them that have lost their
voices, and remove it not all night, and in two or three nights it will help
them.

61.
Take the bones of Horses, and wash them clean, then dry them in the sun, then
break them, and boil them in a Caldron of water a long time, and save the fat
which comes from them, which is an excellent Ointment either for Gout or
Palsy.

62.
The ashes of burnt Snails put into the eye, take away the spots thereof.

63.
A piece of raw Beef of an indifferent thickness put in steep all day in good
Aqua vitae, and laid at night to the temples, and let lie there all night,
stops the waterings of the eyes, and all rheums that flow down from the head.

64.
Draw a coard through the tail of a Water-snake, and hang her up, Hollerius.
a vessel of water being under her, into which she may gape, and after a little
time will she vomit up a stone which will drink up all the water, this stone
being tied to the navil (in a piece of fine linen) of one that has the
Dropsy, quickly draws out all the water.

65.
An Egg that is laid on a Thursday, the white being emptied out, and the empty
place filled with salt, and gently roasted by the fire without burning, till it
may be beaten into powder, and cankered teeth being rubbed with it, kills both
canker and worms that eat the teeth.

66.
White Copperis the quantity of h^^f an ounce dissolved in a pint of water,
kills all Tetters and ringworms that are washed with it.

67.
A little piece of the Navil-string of a child^ that is newly born, being
enclosed in a Ring, and so born that it touch the skin, is a sure and perfect
remedy against the Chollick,

68.
The decoction of the leaves of Plantane is a most sure remedy for the diseases
of the Bladder, being drunk morning and evening.

69.
Wicker.
If any one be bewitched, put some Quicksilver, in a quill, stop it close, and
lay it under the threshold of the door.

70.
Saint-Johns-wort born about one, keeps one from being hurt, either by Witches
or Devils,

71.
Number the days from the twenty six day of June, to the day when a party
first began to fall sick, and divide the number by three; if one remain, he
will be long sick; if two, he will die; if none, he will quickly recover.

72.
Joh. Ardern.
The juice of the roots of Daffadil mixed with a little Saffron and water, gives
speedy help to those that are suddenly swollen.

73.
Hemlock boiled, and the Yard bathed with the decoction, helps the Priapismus,
or continual standing of the Yard.

74.
Garlic beat to powder, and the powder taken inwardly, breaks the Stone.

75.
Beat Bay Salt into powder by it self, and as much Cummin-seed by it self, and
as much common Fennel-seed by it self, then mix them together with a little
Red-rose Vinegar over a Chafing Dish of coals, and apply it hot upon a cloth to
the nape of the neck near the head, the next night change it.

This is a most precious secret, for it cures the most inveterate headache,
though of never so long continuance, or never so violent; besides it clears the
eyesight, and draws away the superfluous humors of the head.

76.
Sage either sod and taken inwardly, Petrus Hispanus.
or beaten and applied Plaister-wise to the Matrix, draws forth both terms, and
after-burthen.

77.
Shave the crown of the head of one that is sick, and lay upon the shaved place
Rue stamped with oil of Roses, binding it on; and if the party sneeze within
six hours after, he will live, else not.

I suppose this may be true in diseases of the head, and it may be cure them,
if curable; and I verily believe it is a notable remedy for mad folks.

78.
A spoonful of the powder of Nettle-seed mingled with good wine, and drunk at a
time, aswageth the pains of the Matrix, the windiness of the same, as also the
fits of the Mother.

79.
If a Hog-louse or Wood-louse be pricked with a needle, and any aching tooth
presently touched with that needle, the pain will instantly cease.

80.
Africanus
The seeds of Docks tied to the left arm of a woman, helps barronness.

81.
Goats-dung mingled with vinegar and bran, and applied plaisterwise to swelled
breasts, gives speedy cure.

82.
Betony stamped, and applied to any wound in the head, draws out the broken
bones, if there be any, and heals the wound.

83.
Mizaldus.
The seeds that are found in the knobs of the lesser burs, being beaten into
fine powder, and given in white Wine, purge stones and sand very effectually
from the reins.

84.
If you seethe Mugwort in water, and apply it hot plaster-wise to the Navil and
Thighs of a woman in travel, it brings away both birth; and afterbirth; but
then you must speedily take it away, lest you draw down Matrix and all.

85.
There is a pretty secret to cure a scald or burn without a scar. Take Sheeps
Suet, and Sheeps Dung, and the inner rind of Elder; boil these to an Ointment,
and that will do it.

86.
To draw a Tooth without pain, fill an earthen Crucible full of Emmets, Ants,
or Pismires, call them by which name you will) Eggs and all, and when you have
burned them, keep the ashes, with which if you touch a Tooth, it will drop out.

87.
Anoint a freckled face either with the blood of a Bull, or of a Hare, it will
put away the Freckles, and make the Skin clear.

88.
Mugwort steeped in Rose Water, and the hand^ washed with it, helps the
trembling of them.

89.
Take a great overgrown Toad, and tie her up in a leathern bag pricked full of
holes, and put her bag and all in an Emmet-hill, and the Emmets will eat away
all her flesh, and then you may find the Stone, which is of mavelous virtue.
If a man be poisoned, it will draw all the poison to it presently; if he be
stung by a Be, Wasp, Hornet, or bitten by an Adder, by touching it with this
Stone, both pain and swelling will presently cease.

90.
If you chance to buy this Stone, and would know whether it be a true one or
not, hold it near to the head of a Toad, and if it be a true one, she will come
to catch it from you.

91.
If you anoint warts with the juice of Elder-berries, it will take them away.

92.
The outward rind of Raddish-roots, the herb Mercury, Ben. Vict. Favent. Emp.
of each an ounce, Saffron three grains, Cassia lignea in powder a dram,
juice of Savin two drachms; beat them all together, and wrap them in a fine
linen cloth, and hold them to the Matrix of a woman in travel, when the birth
is near, and the child will come out with but little pain; and not only the
birth, but also the afterbirth.

93.
Mizaldus.
The juice of Knotgrass drunk with the powder of seven Pepper corns, a little
before the fit comes, cures the quartane Ague: but they say, it must be
gathered on a Thursday, and the juice pressed out of it then also.

94.
A bathe wherein Emmets and their Eggs have been sod, will quickly cure an old
and almost incurable joint disease.

95.
Oil wherein Frogs have been sodden so long, till all the flesh is sod off from
their bones, does mightily help all benumbedness and lameness of the nerves and
joints.

96.
The juice of Betony dropped warm into the ear, puts away deafness.

97.
Take a handful of Arsemart, wet in clean water, and lay it gently in a wound
or sore; Paracelsus.
then take it away, and bury it in some moist place: and the wound will heal as
the same herb rots.

98.
The water of Marigolds helps diseases in the eyes, and takes away pains in the
head.

99.
The smoke of Marigold-flowers received up a woman's privitives by a funnel,
brings away easily the afterbirth, although the Midwife has let go her hold.

100.
The head of a Kite before she has feathers as Gallen writes, burnt, and a
scruple of her ashes taken once a day, cures the Gout.

Fragmenta Aurea The third Golden Century of Chemical and Physical Judicial
Aphorisms, and admirable Secrets.
1. For the Jaundies.
FOr the Jaundies take Milk and White Wine, of each equal quantities, distill
them in an Alimbeck, temper it pretty equally, I mean the water with the
spirit, and let the sick drink two ounces in the morning, two hours before
meat, and going to bed.

2. For the Black Jaundies.
For the black Jaundies take Enule Campane-roots, bruise them, and boil them
well in a quart of Milk, strain the Milk through a woollen strainer, and let
the sick drink thereof; this has helped those that have been sixteen years
sick of this Disease, and could not be cured.

3. For the Jaundies.
For the Jaundies boil good store of Hemp Seed bruised well in good strong Ale
or Beer, and let the sick drink no other drink.

4. For Children that have the Jaundies.
If they be young Children that have the Jaundies, or people of riper-years, at
the first beginning of them, this Remedy will be sufficient; Take an Apple, and
cut off the top, then pick out the coar with a knife, and put into the hollow
place a penniworth of whole Saffron, and a dram of Turmerick in powder, put
on the top again, and roast it, then mash it all to pieces, and eat it up at
night going to bed; this doing a few nights together will help them; you may
add a little Butter to it, if you please.

5. For the Black Jaundies.
The Black Jaundies has been known to have been cured oftentimes with this
medicine; Take the inner bark of a Walnut-tree, and boil it very well in Ale or
Beer, and when you have done so, quench red hot steal in it at least forty
times, drink a quarter of a pint, of this hot morning and evening.

6. For the Yellow Jaundies.
The inner bark of a Barberry-tree boiled in White Wine, and the decoction
drunk, is an excellent remedy for the Yellow Jaundies; so also are the roots of
Celandine.

7. The Pleurisy.
As in all Inflammations, so also in Pleurisies blood-letting is not to be
neglected in the beginning.

8. For the Pleurisy.
Such as have the Pleurisy must forbear eating flesh, and drinking wine and
strong beer, but must be content with cold broaths, and to drink Barley-water,
or Almond-Milk, if they be rich.

9. For the Pleurisy.
Take three ounces of Carduus-water, a spoonful of white Wine, and six whites
of Eggs well beaten; mix all these together, and dip a cloth in them, the
which lay as hot as it can be suffered to the pained side of one that has the
Pleurisy, and it will give him speedy ease.

10. For the Pleurisy.
Also another most admirable remedy for one that has the Pleurisy, is to take
an Apple, and make it hollow, (as I told you before in the yelow Jaundies) then
put into it a dram, or a dram and a half of Olibanum, roast it, (as before)
put some Butter to it, and eat it up last at night.

11. For a Cough.
A good remedy for an inveterate cough is this; take a handful of Figs, and
boil them in Beer, till they be very tender, then take them out, and bruise
them, and put them into a linen bag, and apply them warm to your stomach, and
when they are cold, take them off, and warm them in the same liquor again.

12. To strengthen the Lungs.
A Syrup made, or a Spirit drawn from those whitish Thistles, which are
commonly called our Ladies Thistles, is a great strengthner of the Lungs; the
like may be said of Hysop.

13. For an Imposthume in the Lungs.
For an Imposthume in the Lungs, drink the decoction of Cammomile twice a day,
and but two ounces at a time gives help to admiration.

14. For heat and dryness of the Lungs.
Heat and dryness of the Lungs is quickly, cheaply, and safely cured, by
drinking no other drink but Plantane water.

15. For the Chollick.
Take Winter-savory, and boil it well in white Wine, and the decoction drunk
very hot, rids the belly of the Winde-chollick, as though it were swept out
with a broom. My Author says, he has known diverse have been helped with this
remedy, that have had it so extremely, that they have swooned several times in
a day; yet I confess some of the following remedies please me better.

16. For the Chollick.
Apply cupping-glasses to the navel; this remedy pleases me very well, both
for bastard and true Chollick; for the Navil vessels, though they be of little
use after the infant is born, yet they still remain hollow, and pass to all the
chief vessels of the Abdomen.

17. Chollick.
Take Rosemary, Sage, and Bay Salt, and roast them well between two hot
Tile-sherds, and (...) ^y ^em hot to the Navel, it is a present remedy to the
Chollick, especially to the Bastard-Chollick.

18. Chollick.
You may easily know a Bastard-Choll^^^ (...) a true Chollick thus (...)
Bastard-Chollic^ (...) belly is so sore, (...) cannot endur^ (...) have it
touched; (...) not (...) in a true Cho^lick.

1^ (...) ^hollick.
Take Emmets Eggs (...) them (...) ^ven, and beat them to pow^ (...) the ^^wder
at a time in any (...); it is as admirable a remedy for a (...) Chollick as any
is, and will make a man fart, as though he had got a Patent for it.

20. Strangury.
Take a good big Onion, cut off the top, and pick a pretty big hole in it with
(...) Knife, the which hole fill with Betony and Centaury in powder, of each
equal quantities, putting a little Butter amongst the^ then put on the top
again, and roast it amongst the embers, bruise it being roast (...) and apply
it being bruised as hot as you (...) endure it to your Navel, and you shall
(...) it an excellent remedy for the strangury.

21. Chollick.
Take H^^p-seed, and dry it, and beat it into (...) say this being drunk in
Wine, is a (...) ^^^ll^^k; the like they say (...) manner: it is very (...) ^e
the^ (...) ^d in a real Chol^^^k; but --

(...) For the (...) ^^^llick.
It is (...) take (...) inwardly for (...) basta^^ (...) ^st ^se not so e^
cat^ous (...) ^s: therefore let suc^ as h^ (...) ^ick, ^pply a Plaster (...)
Cumm^ (...) ^r ^^^ly.

23. For the Chollick.
Take a Lapwing, and burn her in a Crucible, feathers and all very well, till
the ashes be white; a scruple of these ashes being given in a little warmed
Wine to drink at one time, is an excellent remedy for the Chollick.

24. Worms.
Garlic either eaten or boiled, and the decoction drunk, kills the Worms.

25. For the Worms.
Take Worm-seed, and beat it into very fine powder, and make it up into Troches
with juice of Lavender, Cotton, and Gum Tragacanth, dry them, and so have you
an excellent remedy for the Worms always by you.

26. For the Worms.
Zedoary beaten into powder, and half a dram of the powder drunk in the morning
fasting in a little Muskedel, not only kills the Worms, but also strengthens
the Heart.

27. For the Worms.
Take Garlic, Wormwood, Featherfew, and Mints stamped very small, and heat
very well with the gall of an Ox, and a little vinegar, and applied to the
belly plaister-wise, and it will kill the Worms, and bring them forth.

28. For the Worms.
Another remedy for the Worms, and less tedious too, is to take the gall of a
Bull, and warm it, then dip a little wool in it, and bind the wool to the
Navel.

29. For the Worms for Children.
Take Orange-pills, and dry them well, and beat them into powder, and give a
little of the powder inwardly with Muskadel; this is a gallant remedy for
Children that will not endure any ill-tasted Medicine.

30. For a looseness and Diabetes.
The Pizzle of an Hare dried, and beaten into powder, and the powder drunk in
Wine at night going to bed (you may give a dram at a time to a man, half a dram
is enough for a child) you shall find it an excellent remedy not only for a
Looseness, but also for the Diabetes.

31. For the Diabetes.
The best remedy for a Diabetes that I know, is this, Take the Bladder of a
Goat, which I suppose to be best, because it is a Beast of Saturn. If you
cannot get a Goats Bladder, get a Bullocks or Sheeps Bladder dry it very well,
and beat it into powder, and take a dram of the powder first in the morning,
and last at night.

32. Caution to the former Receipt.
In my opinion it were very fitting in the foregoing Medicine, that the
Sphinater Muscle of the Bladder were by all means carefully dried, and
administered as before.

33. Flux.
The Maw of a young Hare dried, and beaten into powder, and made up into
Troches with juice of Plantane, and a little Gum Tragacanth is an excellent
remedy to keep by you for the Flux, and it also strengthens the Stomach
exceedingly.

34. To stop a Flux.
Take Plantane-seed, and beat it to powder, and give a dram of the powder in
red Wine to a child that is troubled with the Flux, and it will stop it.

35. For a Flux.
Take the dung of a Stone-horse that is kept in a Stable, and fry it in
Muskadel, and apply it being so fried to the Navel, and it will stop any Flux
of the belly whatsoever.

36. For one that cannot go to stool.
Take Salt and Soap, and mix them well together, and apply them plaisterwise to
the belly of one that cannot go to stool, and it will move him to stool in a
short time.

37. Bloody Flux.
Take the Jaw-bones of a Pike, or Jack, beat them to powder, and take half a
dram of the powder in red Wine morning and evening; this has been known to
have helped the Bloody Flux, when nothing else could do it.

38. For the Bloody Flux.
Take red Beans, and boil them in red Wine, till it be thick, and let the
Patient eat of this morning and evening, and in a short time it will help the
Bloody Flux, be it never so violent.

39. For the Flux.
Take an old Apple, cut off the top, and pick out the coar, then put into the
hole a ball of Virgins-wax, put on the top again, and roast it in the embers,
mash it all together, and take it inwardly, as a Medicine for the Flux.

40. To break the Stone.
The Urine of a Boar taken, and drunk inwardly, is an admirable remedy to break
the Stone.

41. Another to break the Stone.
Take the blood of a Fox, and anoint the Region of the Bladder near to that
place where the Stone lies, and it will break the Stone.

42. Another to break the Stone.
Also it is an excellent remedy to break the Stone, to drink the blood of a Fox
either alone by it self, or mixed with white Wine. And to make the truth of
this appear clearly, Caution.
take a Pebble-stone, and put it into the blood of a Fox, and it will dissolve
it; yet in my opinion, and my opinion is grounded upon reason, if the Stone lie
in the Reins, it is best to drink the blood of a Fox; but for the Stone in the
Bladder, it is best to inject it with a Siringe.

43. To break the Stone.
Bees dried stings and all, and beaten into powder, and a dram of the powder
given in white Wine, is an excellent remedy for to break the Stone.

44. To break the greatest Stone that is.
Take the green Weed that comes from the Sea amongst the Oyster, washed clean,
then dry it, and beat it into powder; drink two drachms of this with Muskadel
in the morning, fasting an hour after it, it will break the greatest Stone that
is.

45. For the Stone.
Take Oil of Crystal drawn by the art of the Alchymist, let him that is
troubled with the Stone take a dram of it at a time in a good draught, either
of White or Rhennish Wine, and it will break the Stone. For proof of this, take
a stone, and lay it in the urine of him that has drunk this Medicine, and in
twelve hours it will be dissolved.

46. Green Wounds.
The same Oil of Crystal is an excellent cure for any green wound.

47. Stone.
Take a Goat, and keep him three days fasting, (but you must be sure not to
give him meat nor water in the night) then put him into a great tub full of
holes at the bottom, and feed him with nothing but Cammomile, Parsley, Gromwel,
Celandine, Saxifrage, Hawthorn-berries or flowers, give him Salt to lick, and
nothing but white Wine to drink; save his water that runs through the holes of
the tub, into which water put Holly-berries, Ivy-berries, Hawthorn-berries,
Juniper Berries, Parsley-seed, Fennel-seed, Gromwel-seed, Smallage-seed, the
roots of Radishes, and Nettles, Knee-holly, and Sparragas, leaves of
Watercresses, infuse all these warm in the Urine in a limbeck close stopped,
then distill it off; this Water is held to be the most effectual for the Stone
that is; for three ounces of it taken at a time, breaks the Stone, and brings
it away without pain.

48. Sciatica.
For the Sciatica, take a gallon of urine, I suppose it were best of the party
that is diseased, boil it, and scum it well till it be clear, then put to it a
quart of black Snails, su^^ as you shall find in the Meddows without she^^^
boil them together till it be thick like a Poltiss (...) then spread it upon a
cloth, and apply it to the grieved place.

49. Piles.
Take a quart of Linseed-Oyl, and put as many live Crawfish into it, as it will
hold, boil them in it a quarter of an hour, then strain them out, and bruise
them well shells and all, boil them well again in the Oil, then strain them
out, and keep the Oil for an admirable remedy for the Piles; you may use it by
moistening a little cotton in it, and binding it closs to the place with a
truss.

50. For the Piles.
Take Scabious, and boil it well in water, and let the party sit over the steem
of the water that is troubled with the Piles, and it will help him.

51. For the Piles.
The Herb Pilewort either applied to the place in an Ointment, or taken
inwardly, is an approved remedy for the Piles.

52.
Many other remedies are used by Authors, as namely to boil Elder-tops in
white Wine, and wash the place wit^ the decoction.

53.
Also to drink the juice of Dandelion, and Dazies in a cup of Ale every morning.

54. An excellent remedy for the Piles.
Another remedy, the conceit of which pleases me very well, is this; Take a
gray Cat, and cut her throat, then flea her and roast her, and save her grease,
boil the blood and the grease together, and anoint the Piles with it as hot as
you can endure it; this seems to me pretty rational, because a Cat is a Beast
of Saturn.

55. Swelling of the Wrists.
For aching and swelling of the Wrists take Plantane-leaves, and stamp them well
with a little Salt, and apply them to the place. I know no reason, but why this
may cure any other swelling in the joints.

56. Ache.
For any Ache take Venice Treacle, and spread it upon a cloth, and lay it to
the place like a Plaster.

57. Gout.
Take Bur-roots, bruise them, and boil them very well in piss, and when you
have made a very strong decoction, strain it out, and add to the piss that is
left as much Sallet Oil, boil it together to an Oil, and if you use it, you
shall see it do wonders in curing the Gout.

58. For the Gout.
Take the Yolk of Eggs, and make them into a Poltiss with a little woman's Milk,
and a little Saffron, and apply it to the place grieved with the Gout.

59. For the Gout.
Take Nettles, and stamp them with salt, and apply it to the place grieved with
the Gout, and it will dry up the humors in a short time.

60. For the Gout.
Take of black Soap the quantity of a Walnut, juice of Rue, and of Celandine,
of each as much as the Soap comes to, mix them altogether spread them upon a
piece of Sheeps-leather, and apply them plaisterwise to the place grieved with
the Gout, and in three days it will give help.

61. For the Gout.
Take a pint and a half of good Ale, half a pound of black Soap, a handful of
Bay Salt beaten very small, boil them till half be consumed, then mix with it
four spoonfuls of Aqua vitae, stir them well together, then dip a cloth in it,
and apply it to the place grieved with the Gout as hot as you can endure it.

62. An excellent remedy for the Gout.
Take a Badger, the fattest you can get, kill him, and scald him like a Pig,
then make a hole in on^ (...) his sides, take out his guts, garbage and all ^^d
put into his belly Nettles two handfuls, two ounces of Brimstone, four yolks of
Eggs, and four ounces of Turpentine incorporated well together, then sow up his
belly close, and roast him, and save the dripping for an excellent remedy for
the Gout.

63. Cramp.
The foregoing remedy is not available only against the Gout, but also
against the Cramp, and all infirmities of the Sinnews and Joints.

64. Cramp.
If you cannot get a Badger, take a fat young Puppy-dog, and use him in like
manner.

65. A special remedy for the Gout.
Take a young Whelp in March, kill him, and flea him, and pull out his guts,
and fill up his belly with Water-frogs, sow up his belly close again, then
roast him, and save the dripping for a special remedy for the Gout.

66. For a Burn or Scald.
Take unslaked Lime, and slake it in common Oil, then take it out again as dry
as you can, and make it into an Ointment with Oil of Roses; this Oil will cure
any burn or scald without a scar, and that in eight or ten days time.

67.
For one that is burned with a Match, take the same Match wherewith he was
burned, and burn it to ashes, and strew the ashes upon the place, and it will
heal it in a very short time to admiration. It is a very pretty sympathetical
remedy, and I quoted it not only to cure burning by a Match, which happens
scarce once to a man's knowledge in his life time, but for burning with any
other thing whatsoever. For example. If a man be burnt with Iron, apply Crocus
Martis to the place.

68. For a burn with Gunpowder.
Take Sheeps-dung, and Sheeps-suet, and fry them both together till they be
thick like an Ointment, then anoint the place that is burned with Gunpowder
twice a day, neither change the Medicine, nor yet wash the sore; for that part
of the Medicine which sticks on, will readily fail off so soon as it is well.

69. To stop a bleeding wound.
Take Bur-leaves, and bruise them, and apply them to the bleeding of a wound,
and it instantly stops it. I fancy the Medicine much, because Burs is an herb
of Venus, and the wound is caused by Mars.

70. For the same.
Another remedy of the same nature is this, Put the powder of dried Vervine to
the wound.

71. To cleanse a Wound,
If you would cleanse a wound neatly that is filled with congealed blood, stamp
red Nettles, and apply them to the place.

72. For bleeding at the Nose.
If a man bleed at the Nose, take a leathern point or lace, and tie it hard
about his Testicles or Yard, and that will make the blood leave Mars, and run
to look after Venus.

73. Morphew.
If you anoint the face all over with Mustard, it is an excellent remedy for
the Morphew.

74. Palsy.
Sage eaten, or used any way, is an excellent remedy for the Palsy in the
Limbs.

75.
The Shaking Palsy is caused no way sooner, nor more ordinarily, then by
leading a tippling life.

76. A Preservative against the Palsy.
A gallant Preservative I have been told against the Palsy (whether it be to
be found in any of my other writings, I know not well) is this, every night
when you go to bed, rub your fingers between your toes, and smell to them.

77. A Felon.
Take Groundsel, and stamp it very well, and mix it with a little Oil of Roses,
and apply it to a Malady in the fingers, which they usually call a Felon, and
it will speedily cure it.

78. For the same.
Take the yolk of an Egg, mix it with a little Bay Salt in powder, spread it
upon a cloth, and apply it to the place, and it will speedily cu^e a Felon.

79. Imposthume, or hard swelling in the Belly.
Take young Walnuts before they have shells, stamp them; and bind them to the
Navel, it will presently break any Imposthume, or hard swelling in the belly,
and not only break it, but also draw it out.

80. For hard swellings of the Belly.
Because you cannot get such green Walnuts all the year, you may take the pains
to pickle them up in vinegar when you can have them; yet because I am of
opinion, that there are other people negligent as well as my self, and
therefore may neglect the getting of them at that time; Take the Kernels of
Walnuts, and stamp them with Rue, and apply them plaisterwise to the Navel:
this is an admirable remedy also for all hard swellings of the belly.

81. Imposthume.
Take two handfuls of Clot-bur-roots wash them clean, and bruise them very
well, then boil them in a pottle of good Ale till half be consumed, strain it,
and let him that has an Imposthume in his body drink of it morning and
evening, and in three days so doing, it will cure him.

82. For the same.
To drink the juice of Marigold-leaves, is as gallant a remedy for an
Imposthume as any is.

83. Murren in Hogs.
Water Betony given as a drench, is a present cure for the Murren in Hogs.

84. For Diseases coming of Repletion.
Fasting three days, and three nights without meat or drink, is a most
admirable remedy for all diseases coming of Repletion.

85. The Chin-cough.
The Chin-cough is easily cured, if the party troubled with it, spit three or
four times into a Frogs mouth, but it must be into the mouth of the same Frog,
you may easily keep her alive in a little water.

86. For a swelled Leg.
For a swelled Leg that is broken, and almost mortified, bathe it with the
decoction of Nettles made with water, and it will give ease and cure to
admiration.

87. Defluxion of Humors.
If there be a great defluxion of humors to any part of the body, be it in
wounds, or else where, it matters not, neither whether with pain, or without,
Opiats will be found to be the best cure when all is done.

88. To help Digestion.
The inner skin of the Gizzard of a Hare dried, and beaten to powder, and taken
inwardly, is the greatest strengthner of a weak stomach, and helper of
digestion that is.

89. To make Children speak quickly.
The way to make a child speak quickly, is to rub its tongue often with Salgem
and Honey.

90. Stuttering.
The same Medicine for ought I know will help one of riper years that stutters.

91. To quench thirst.
Washing the mouth with Vinegar, and spitting it out again presently, quenches
the thirst of one that is a dry; the reason is, because the Pallat of the
mouth, which is the seat of thirst, being moistened and cooled is satisfied;
and that ^s the reason why men when they are hot, get hurt by drinking, because
the stomach is over-^loyed before the Pallat be cooled.

92. A Suppository.
A little piece of Salgem cut in a fitting form, and put up the Fundament, is
one of the best Suppositors in the world, and will last a man almost his life
time.

93. For a Wound.
If you would cure a Wound without a scar* anoint it with Venus her spittle.

94. For the Pearl.
There is a certain Trefoyl that has a white spot in it like a Pearl; this
herb is an excellent cure for the pearl in the eye.

95.
If a Cow has a sore Udder, boil her ow^ dung in her own Milk, and apply to it.

96. Shingles.
Take the juice of Archangel, and dip a cloth in it, and apply it to that
inflammation in the Neck, commonly called the Shingles, and it will help it.

97.
Another approved remedy for the same disease, is to anoint the place with the
blood of (...) Cat.

98. An Ache.
For an Ache coming of cold, or an o^ bruise, take a quart of Muskadel, a good
han^ful of Onions pilled and bruised, an ounce (...) Pepper finely beaten, and
boil all these together till they be thick, then spread it upon a cloth, and
apply it to the grieved place.

99. For an Ache in the Legs.
For an Ache in the Legs take the Gall of an Ox, and boil it well over the
fire with Neats-foot-Oyl, and dip a cloth in it, and apply it to the grieved
Leg.

100. Witchcraft
The best remedy for Witchcraft that I know in the world is this; take a stalk
of Amara dulcis, leaves and all, and let the party bewitched wear it about
their middles next their skin.

Fragmenta Aurea The fourth Golden Century of Chemical, Physical, and Judicial
Aphorisms, and admirable Secrets.
1. Bruise.
TAke a good big handful of Rue, Yolks and Whites of five Eggs, a handful of
wheat-flour, bruise the Rue very well, then temper them all together, heat them
hot by the fire, spread them upon a piece of cloth like a Poltiss, and apply
them to any bruised place, changing it once in 24. hours, and it will speedily
heal it.

2. A Caution concerning Bruises.
Concerning all Bruises, let me give you this caution, Be sure you cure them
well, and soundly at the first, else you may feel those bruises at fourscore
years of age, which you got at fifteen.

3. Swelling.
An excellent remedy to assuage a Swelling, is this: Take two handfuls of
Penerial, and boil it in the strongest Ale you can get till it be tender, then
strain it, dip a cloth in the Ale, and apply it warm to the swelling, and in
two or three days it will help you, new dipping the cloth twice a day.

4. An Excellent Salve to cleanse and heal a Sore.
Take the juice of Betony, Plantane and Smallage, of each equal quantities, let
there be a pound of them all together, four ounces of Wax, two ounces of
Frankincense, two ounces of Pitch, and two ounces of Rosin, melt the things
that are to be melted over a gentle fire by themselves, then pour in the
Juyces, and boil it till they be consumed, keeping it always stiring, then
strain it through a clean cloth, and keep it for use; so have you an excellent
Salve, both to cleanse and heal a sore.

5.
I like this Medicine the better, because it has no oily quality in it,
experience teaching that all unctious Medicines to raw flesh are inimical.

6. An admirable remedy to cleanse and cure Wounds.
Oil of Mirrh is one of the best remedies that I know to cleanse and cure
wounds, for it will do it so speedily, as is to be admired.

7. For an inflamed Wound.
If there be any inflammation in a Wound, take Camphire, and mix it with
Hog's Grease, and anoint the place with it, and it will very speedily remedy it.

8. To increase or diminish the Flesh of Wound.
In Wounds sometimes the flesh rises too fast, and sometimes too slowly, a
remedy for both these, is this: Take the Lungs of a Sheep, and heat them very
hot, and apply them to the place as hot as you can endure it; do this twice a
day.

9. The Itch.
The Itch is a disease which infesteth the skin only, therefore beware you
strike it not in, lest you infest the body also.

10. For the same.
A strong decoction of Scabious, or Devils-bit, which you can get, you shall
find it an admirable drink for such as are troubled with the Itch, you may
also anoint the body with Ointment of Tobacco.

11. Falling Sickness
Take Wormwood and Rue, of each equal quantities in powder, and blow some of it
into the nose of him that falls of the Falling Sickness, and it will
instantly recover him.

12. For the same.
One experience of my own let me quote; I have cured one lately of the
Falling Sickness, that Lad had it above seven years every new and full Moon, by
giving of him Mustard Seed in powder made up into Pills with Mithridate.

13. Convulsions.
Misletoe gathered in the hour of Sun, when the Sun is in Aries, and the Moon
in trine to him from Leo; this being bruised, and infused warm in white Wine,
and distilled off in an Alimbeck, eight or nine drops of the strongest spirit
given in any convenient liquor, is an admirable remedy for the Convulsions.
With this I cured a child lately, that was not above a month old, it had but
one fit after the first taking of it, then it sneezed much, and recovered.

14. A Caution.
And here give me leave to be a little critical against another vulgar custom,
and that is, no Misleto must be used but what grows upon an Oak, forsooth; and
I have proved by experience, that it is all of a like virtue, as being
generated by the beams of the Sun upon what Tree soever. Is an Apple ever the
worse for being grafted upon a sower Crab-tree?

15. Caution.
Yet this Caution let me give you; have a care it touch not the ground, for
that good Philosophers hold takes away its virtue: whether the reason be
because it is appropriated to the head of a Man, or because the Earth is
Saturnline, and therefore hinders the virtues of Sol, I will not here dispute.

16. For the bite of a mad Dog.
Let him that is bitten with a mad Dog, drink either the juice or decoction of
Vervine every morning, till the next new and full Moon be past.

17. An Observation.
Observe this for a general rule; all Creatures that are bitten with a mad Dog
near the new Moon, fall mad at the full; and those that are bitten at full
Moon, fall mad at the new.

18. To cure the biting of a mad Dog.
Take Vervine, Agrimony, and Plantane, of each equal quantities; bruise them
and boil them in good white wine, and let him that is bitten of a mad Dog drink
a draught of the decoction every morning; then take the Herbs and bruise them
with Bay Salt, and apply them to the wound.

19. Ring-worm.
Take Featherfew and bruise it, and rub any Tetter or Ring-worm with the juice
of it, and it will kill it.

20. Wen.
An excellent way to cure a Wen is this: take forty Snails and boil them in a
pint of running water, till half be consumed, then let them stand and cool,
then take some Wool and dip it in the fattiness of the water, and apply it to
the Wen, this will consume it insensibly in a short time, especially if you
take inwardly the following medicine.

21.
Take fine Jeat and beat it to powder, and take half a dram inwardly in a
little Ale or Pottage, once in three or four mornings.

22. Biting of an Adder.
The best way that I know for the biting of an Adder is this; Catch the same
Adder that bit you, as she is easily caught, cut her open, and take out her
heart, and swallow it down whole.

23. For the same.
Also cut off the head of the Adder, and bruise it, and apply it to the Wound,
both these together would give a cure to admiration.

24. To expel an Adder being crept into the body.
If an Adder be crept into a man's body, which is a thing though it happens but
seldom, yet it may happen, therefore the cure is not amiss; this do, Take a
handful of Rue, and bruise it, and boil it in the urine of the party, and let
him drink the decoction, and it will make the Beast make more haste out, then
it did in.

25. For the same.
If such a one be crept into the body of a Beast, boil Rue in the urine of the
Beast, and force him to drink it.

26. Wind in the Stomach.
Take Cummin-seeds two drams, Galanga one dram, make it up into Troches with
Musfilage of Gum Tragacanth; so have you an excellent remedy for Wind in the
Stomach: when you have occasion to use them, take half a dram in powder in
white wine in the morning, fasting an hour after it.

27. For the Plague.
Take of green Walnuts before they have shells, of Rue, and the inner rinds of
Ash-tree, of each equal quantities; bruise them and infuse them well in white
wine, distill off the spirit in an alembick, so have you a most sovereign remedy
for the Plague.

28. To draw the Venom out of a Plague Sore.
Take a Cock chicken, pull off the feathers till the Rump be bare, then hold
the bare Fundament of the Chicken to a Plague Sore, and it will attract the
Venom to it from all parts of the body and dye: when he is dead, take another
and use likewise; you may perceive when all the Venom is drawn out, for you
shall see the Chicken no longer pant nor gape for breath; the party sick will
instantly recover.

29. How to apply the foresaid Remedy to any part of the body.
I know no reason, but why this may be very well used in the disease, though
there appear no rising at all; it is an easy matter by the Symptoms to judge
which of the principal parts is most afflicted; then consider the purging
places of the Liver are the Groins, the purging places of the Heart are the
Armpits, the purging places of the Brain are behind his Ears.

30.
Then take a live Pigeon, if you cannot get a live Pigeon, take a Chicken, cut
him asunder in the middle, and clap the pieces hot to the purging places of the
principal part afflicted.

31. For a Rupture.
An excellent remedy for a Rupture is, to take Oil of Nep, and dip well in it,
and bind it on to the place.

32. To recover a newborn child that has any life in it.
When a child is still-born, if you perceive any life be in it when you cut
the Navel string, sque^ze out six or seven drops of blood into a spoon; and
give it to it inwardly, and it will instantly fetch life in it again.

34.
I suppose the Arterial bood to be far better then the Venal blood in this
case; you may easily know the Artery in the Navel-string from the Vein, because
it looks whiter.

35. Against the stopping of the Terms in Women newly delivered.
Many times the Terms stop in women so soon as they be delivered, which
costeth many women their lives; in such cases, take a dozen Peony-seeds and
beat them into powder, and let her drink them up in a draught of Carduus
posset drink, and sweat after it: if this do not the deed the first time, give
her as much more about three hours after.

36. For the same.
The decoction of Vervine and stinking Arrash, work the like effect.

37. For a Felon.
Take a Snail out of his shell and chop it very small, and bind it on to a
Felon, and it will instantly cure it.

38. For ^he Sciatica.
An odd remedy for the Sciatica is this: Take a handful of Nettles and sting
all the place so far as the pain goes till it be all blistered to the purpose,
and so let him go to bed and sleep if he can, and the next day he will be well:
there have been those known to have been cured with this only medicine, that
have been so bad they have not been able to stir out of their beds in five or
six weeks.

39. For the Convulsion.
A decoction of Clary drunk, or the Spirit of it distilled, is a most admirable
remedy for the Convulsion.

40. For the Ptysick.
Ale boiled to a hight that it may be spread upon a cloth, and applied to the
Breast like a Plaster, is a most admirable remedy for the Ptysick.

41. For the running of the Reins, and Strangury.
The hard Roe of a Red-herring dried and beaten to powder, and the powder taken
inwardly, is an excellent remedy both for the running of the Reins and
Strangury: and so also is the Roots of Osmund royal.

42. For Rhum^ (...) Eyes.
Spread a little stone-pitch upon leather as broad as your hand, and when ye
have done so, prick it full of holes, either with an Aul, or point of a Knife,
and lay it to the nape of your neck; it is as gallant a remedy for Rhume in the
eyes, as those you shall pay more money for: some it cures in two or three
days, if it cure you not in that time, let it stick on as long as it will; if
that will do no good, apply another.

43. For Dimness of the Sight.
Some people that are beginning to lose their sight, suppose they see little
moaths or flies ^etween them and the light, in such cases ^et an issue be made
in the Nape of the Neck.

44. To procure sneezing.
Take Sneezing-powder the weight of six pence, Castorium the weight of two
pence, mix them together with a little Oil of Amber, and put it ^p the nose of
one that is troubled with the fits ^f the Mother, and it will cause her to
sneeze, ^d quickly ease her of the fit.

45. Against fits of the Mother.
Let the party that is troubled with the fits of the Mother take a scruple of
Assa foetida in Pills once or twice in a week

46. Against Wind.
The foregoing remedy is inferior to none, for such whose bodies are troubled
with wind.

47. For Costiveness in a Woman that lies in.
There is nothing better, nor safer for a Woman when she lies in, and is
Costive, then two ounces of Oil of Sweet Almonds new drawn.

48. For bleeding at the Nose.
Take Nettles and stamp them and press out the juice, and let him that bleedeth
at Nose take a spoonful of the juice, and hold it in his mouth as long as he
can, and spit that out an^ take another fresh spoonful, and hold that i^ the
mouth likewise; also if you will you man moisten the Nettles after you have
pressed the juice out of them with a little Vinegar, an^ bind it on to the
forehead.

49. To prevent, or cure the Pestilence.
Take a pound of green Walnuts before the have shells, half an ounce of Saffron
in po^der, half an ounce of London Treacle, and h^ a pound of Sugar, mix them
well together in Mortar, then set the moisture over the fire till it come to an
Electuary; keep it by you, it is an excellent remedy to prevent the Pestilence
before it comes, or to cure it being come, by taking the quantity of a Walnut
at a time.

50. An excellent Cordial for such as have the small Pox, or Meazles.
Take the flowers of Marigolds, infuse them in strong spirit of Wine, and when
the tincture is quite taken out, strain it out, and infuse more flowers in the
same spirit, repeat the infusion till you have made the tincture very deep,
then strain it out, and keep it close stopped; it is as excellent a Cordial for
such as have the small Pox or Meazles as most is.

51. For those that have bruised themselves.
Make a Syrup with the juice of Cabbage-leaves and Sugar, and let them that
have bruised themselves, take now and then a spoonful of it.

52. For a Stitch.
Take a Cabbage-leaf, and heat it very hot betwixt two dishes, having first
moistened it with a little Sack, then lay it hot to the side of one that has
the Stich, renewing it morning and evening.

53. For the Itch.
A decoction made with Fox-gloves and water, and drunk, is a most excellent
remedy for such as are troubled with Scabs or Itch, especially for such as have
scabbed heads.

54. For a scald head.
Also an Ointment made of the leaves or flowers of Fox-gloves, and Hog's Grease,
is an excellent remedy to anoint scabbed heads; this is an excellent remedy, I
have proved it my self, and never knew it fail.

55. Against Hoarseness.
Take a Turnip, and cut a hole in the top of it, and fill it up with brown
Sugar Candy, then roast it in the Embers, mix it being roasted with a little
butter, and eat it up for your supper, you shall find it an admirable remedy
for the Hoarseness.

56. For the Headache coming of a hot distemper, and also heat of the Reins.
Take red Poppy-flowers such as grow in the corn, and fill a glass full of
them, then pour some Sallet Oil to them, let it stand warm either in the Sun,
or by the fire, for a fortnight, then strain out them, and put in fresh, using
them likewise, strain them out, and keep the Oil for your use, and it is an
excellent cool Oil to anoint the Temples with in Headaches coming of heat, or
the Reins of the back when they are too hot.

57. For a Cough.
It is an excellent remedy for the Cough, to wet the soles of the feet with
spirit of Wine at night going to bed.

58. To prevent Miscarriage.
Take Venice Turpentine, and spread it upon brown paper, let the Plaster be
about the length and breadth of a man's hand, and applied to the Reins of the
back, it is an excellent remedy to prevent Miscarriage: You had better in my
opinion spread it upon leather, it will make beastly work else.

59. For the same.
Another remedy for the same is this; make a Caudle of Muskadel, (but how to do
it I cannot teach you) and put into it the husks of three and twenty sweet
Almonds, (that which you pull off from them, when you blanch them) being dried
and beaten into powder, and let her eat it for her supper at night.

60. For a Kibe.
Take strong Ale, and boil it to an extract, and apply it plaisterwise, it is
an excellent remedy for a Kibe.

61.
The very same is excellent good to break a Boil, and draw it out.

62. For a Pleurisy.
Boil Horse-dung in white Wine till half the white Wine be consumed, then
strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar, (the Wine I mean, not the Horse-dung) and
let him that has the Pleurisy drink a draught of it, and go to bed, and cover
himself warm.

63. An excellent remedy for any old Ache.
Take a Bullocks Gall, and boil it in white Wine Vinegar, and Aqua vitae, of
each equal quantities, boil it till it grow clammy, and keep it for your use;
it is an excellent remedy for any old ache, by spreading it upon a cloth, and
applying it plaister-wise.

64. For a Cough or Consumption of the Lungs.
Take a Cock, and when you have killed him, pull off the feathers while he is
hot, then presently cut him through the back with a sharp knife, pull out all
the bowels, and wipe him clean with a cloth, break all the bones, and put him
into an Alimbeck, and distill him with a pottle of Sack, and as much red Cows
Milk, so will you have an excellent spirit for a Cough or Consumption of the
Lungs, if you take three or four spoonfuls of it in the morning fasting.

65. For heat in the Reins.
Let such as are troubled with heat in the Reins lay to the place a fine cloth
dipped in Rose Water, juice of Plantane, and the Milk of a Woman which brought
forth a Girl.

66. An excellent remedy for those that are subject to vomiting.
Take Wormwood, Spearmints, and red Rose-leaves, of each a handful, chop them
small, and boil them to a Poltiss with red Rose Water, and Vinegar, of each
equal quantities, thicken it with Rie-bread grated, spread it upon a cloth, and
apply it to the Stomach of him that is subject to vomiting as hot as he can
endure it.

67. For an Ague of the Breast.
Let such Women as are troubled with that inflammation, commonly called the Ague
in the Breast, apply to the place a fomentation made with Rosemary-tops boiled
in their urine, apply it hot for three or four hours, and it will help it.

68. For the running in the Reins.
The Marrow of an Oxes back being dried and beaten into powder, and a dram of
it taken in the morning in a little red Wine, is an excellent remedy for the
running of the Reins.

69. To take away Freckles from the Hands or Face.
Such as are troubled with Freckles, either upon their hands or face, or
Sun-burning, may easily help themselves, if they wash the place with a little
juice of Lemmons, wherein Bay Salt has been dissolved, wash the place often,
and let it dry in of it self.

70. Against any Swelling.
Take Cammomile-flowers, and Rose-leaves, of each a like quantity, boil them in
white Wine to a Poltiss, and apply it as hot as can be suffered to a swelling,
and it will presently ease the pain, and assuage the swelling.

71. Against Deafness.
Stop the ears of one that is deaf with good dried Sewet; it many times gives
help when nothing else will.

72. To stop bleeding.
Take powder of Earthworms, and put upon a Wound that bleeds, and it will
instantly stop the bleeding.

73. For the same.
Take the ear of a Hare, dry it, and beat it to powder, and put that powder
upon a Wound, and it will do the like.

74. For him that spits Blood.
Take the juice of Betony, and temper two spoonfuls of it with four spoonfuls
of good Milk, and let him that spits blood, drink the same quantity four
mornings together, and by that time he will be whole.

75. For a Flux.
Let him that is troubled with the Flux take the seeds of Trefoyl, bruise them
well, and drink half a dram of them in the morning fasting in white Wine; if he
be curable, it will cure him in three days; if he be not curable, he knows the
worst of it, it is but dying.

76. To stop the bleeding of a Vein being cut.
If a Vein be cut, and you cannot stop the bleeding, take Rue, and boil it in
water, then stamp it, and apply it to the place, and bind some wool over that
which was never washed.

77. For Veins that are sprung.
For Veins that are sprung, take Beans and husk them, then boil them in
vinegar, and bruise them, and apply them Plaister-wise to the place.

78. For those that piss Blood.
Take Garlike, bruise it and boil it in water till the third part be consumed;
a little of this water being drunk presently, helps them that piss Blood.

79. To cause easy Delivery.
Let a woman that is with child and near her time, drink a decoction of Betony
every morning and she shall be delivered without much pain.

80. For the same, and to expel the afterbirth.
A decoction of Hyssop made with water and drunk very hot, gives speedy
delivery to women in travel; yea, though the Child be dead in her womb, so
soon as she is delivered of a dead child, if you suppose any of the
Afterbirth be left behind, let her keep drinking the same decoction till her
body be cleansed.

81. For the same.
Savory used in like manner has the same effects.

82. For the same.
Also another good remedy to give speedy delivery to women in travel is this:
Take wild Tansie or Silver-weed, and bruise it, and apply it to her nostrils.

83. For the same.
Also another remedy is to take the Roots of Polypodium and stamp them, and
apply them to the soles of the feet Plaister-wise, the child will quickly come
away be it alive or dead.

84. For a Surfeit.
Take the bottom of a wheaten-loaf, tossed it very well till it be dry and hard,
then dip it in good Spirit of Wine, and wrap it up in a single linen cloth, and
apply it to the Breast of one that has surfeited and cannot digest his meat;
apply it warm, and let it lie to the place all night, and it will speedily help
him, and cause him either to vomit up or purge out the evil humors which the
Surfeit has contracted in his body.

85. To cure hot Rhume in the Eyes.
Take twelve or sixteen woodlice, some call them sows or slugs, wash them
clean, then stamp them, and put three or four spoonfuls of Ale to them, and mix
them well together in a mortar, then strain it, and let him that is troubled
with a hot Rhume in his eyes, drink it in the morning fasting, and as much at
night going to bed, and in a few times using, it will cure him.

86. An admirable Poltiss for any swelling.
Take Violet-leaves, Groundsel, Mallows, and Chickweed, of each a handful, chop
these small, and boil them well in water to a Poltiss, thicken it with
Barley-meal, adding a little rough sheeps suet to it to make it moist, so have
you an admirable Poltiss for any swelling, or inflammation in a wound or ulcer.

87. For scabby Heads of Children.
Take white Wine and Butter, of each a like weight, boil them together, till
they come to a salve, and you shall find it an excellent Ointment for
Childrens scabby heads.

88. For the Falling Sickness, or Convulsion.
Take the dung of a Peacock, dry it, and beat it into very fine powder, and
give the party troubled either with the Falling Sickness, or Convulsion, so
much of it at a time in Succory-water as will well lie upon a shilling, if it
be a child, half so much will serve the turn, or less, if the child be very
young.

89. To cure Tetters, or Ring-worms.
An excellent way to cure Tetters and Ring-worms, is to wash the place often
with Tanners Woofs.

90. Against the bloody Flux.
Take the bone of a Gammon of bacon, set it an end in the middle of a Charcole
fire, and let it burn till it be as white as choke, both in the outside and
inside, then take it and beat it to powder, and let the sick of the bloody Flux
take a dram of it at a time in Milk thickened with flour.

91. Against Heat in the Reins,
An approved remedy for the heat in the Reins, which is a thing causes hard
labor, and many times abortion to women, is to take a fine linen cloth, and
dip it in Housleek, warm it, and apply it to the Reins.

92. To ease a woman of her After-pains.
Take Tar and Barrows-grease, of each equal quantities, boil them together, and
in boiling add a little Pigeons-dung to it, spread some of it upon a linen
cloth, and apply it to the back of a woman newly delivered, that is troubled
with After-pains, and it will give her ease.

93. For the same.
Give a Woman that is troubled with After-pains pains half a dram of
Bay Berries beaten in powder, and given her to drink in a little Muskadel.

94. To cure the swelling of the Cods.
Stamp Rue, and apply it to the Cods that be swelled, and it will presently
assuage it.

95.
Take the juice of Valerian, and wet a tent in it, and put it into the Wound
where any piece of Iron is broken in, and stamp the said herb, and lay at top
of it, and it will speedily not only draw out the iron, but also speedily cure
the Wound.

96. To cure the biting of a mad Dog.
So soon as a man feels himself bit with a mad Dog, or any other venomous
Beasts, or at least so soon as he can possible get it, let him take green
Fig Leaves, and press out the juice of them three or four times into the wound,
if it be at such a time of the year when Fig Trees have no leaves, take the
rind of the Fig Tree, and bruise it, and ^pply it to the Wound.

97. For the same.
They say Mustard made with good Vinegar, and applied to the wound, works the
same effect.

98. For a Wound.
So soon as a man is wounded, let him wash the blood clean out of the Wound,
either with White Wind, or with his own Piss, and presently put the juice of
Thapsus Barbatus into it.

99. A medicine to drive out the small Pox.
Take of distilled Taragon water eight spoonfuls, and put thereto six grains of
Bezar or Unicorns horn, or for want of those two, put so much Saffron, but the
other is the better: let it be warm, double the portion as you see cause,
taking nothing an hour before, nor an hour after it.

100. To avoid Phlegm.
Take clarified Posset Drink, and put thereto sweet Butter, the yolk of an Egg,
and a little small Ginger, Hysop, red Mints and Sugar, se^ these seethe all
together, and drink thereof first and last, as warm as you can suffer it.

The Garden Plat: OR, A very brief account of such Herbs etc, that excel, and
are some of^ them most useful in Physical and Chyrurgical Cures on emergent and
sudden occasions.
HOundstongue stamped and bruised, heals several wounds.

The Powder of Butter-bur, alias Pestilent-wort, the leaves in Summer and Roots
in Winter, expels the Plague by sweat, drunk in Ale, Beer, or Wine.

Fumitory stamped, and drink the juice in Ale, Beer, or Wine, purges Choler,
and does cleanse the Blood.

Germander stamped and drunk, does purge women's flowers, and helps the
Green Sickness.

Celandine, or Fig-wort, or Tetter-wort, or Pile-wort, or Swallow-wort, or
Marsh-marigold; these does help Tetters, Ring-worms Piles and Eyesight.

Eyebright, the water helps the eyes washed therewith: and the Powder eaten
with ^h^ yolk of an Egg, and Mace, restores (...) sight.

The roots of Psillependula beaten and drunk, cures the Stone.

Water-bittary, alias Brown-wort stamped, and laid to, helps old and new sores.

Pellitory of the Wall steeped and drunk, cures the Stone.

Egremony stamped and drunk, helps Lunatic persons.

Saint-Johns-wort, St. Peters-wort, and Tutson-leaves stamped, helps old sores.

Mercury the Herb stamped, and drunk, purges women, and weak folks.

Shepherds-purse, or Sinkfield stamped, and drunk, helps the Flux; and so does
Plantane and Knotgrass.

Scabious stamped, and drunken, helps inward Imposthumes.

Divels-bit stamped, and drunken, helps the Ague.

Spown-wort, alias Scurvey-grass stamped and drunken, helps Dropsies and
Scurvey.

Sanicle stamped, and drunk inwardly, helps Wounds, and laid to outwardly.

Comfrey helps the Ruptures stamped and drunken, and laid to outwardly, it
helps wounds, and joins them together.

Hyssop boiled, bruised, and drunken, helps the Lungs.

Mints bruised and drunken, comfort the Heart* so does Sage.

White Horehound, or Balm distilled, or otherwise, helps inward grief.

Rue expels the Plague.

Fennel, Dill, and Anniseed, and Cummin, breaks wind, and helps the Stone.

Saxifrage stamped, and drunken, and seeds of Gromwel, helps Wind and Stone
above all others.

Betony helps the head and stomach.

Lovage restores the Lungs.

Pellitory of Spain expels the Plague.

Three Leaves of Arsarabacca stamped and drunken, purges upward and downward.

English green Tobacco stamped, and mixed with fresh Butter, will heal a wound, a
sore, or a scabbed or scald head.

Dragon-wort stamped and drunken, expels the Plague, or distilled; and so
does Arone or Priests-Pintle, Cuckow-pintle.

Centaury purges Choler by siege; and so does Rheubarb.

Elina Campany purges melancholy.

The seeds of Piony helps the falling evil.

Valerian, or Setwal, expels the Plague stamped and drunken,

English Galangal comfort the heart.

Helleborus called neezing powder, purges the head.

Aloe, alias Seagreen, purges Choler.

Laurel-leaves laid in Vinegar twenty four hours, and dried, the powder drunk
purges Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy.

The root of Elder or Danewort stamped and drunken, helps Dropsies, or swollen
Legs or Limbs.

All Elder-leaves, Plantane leaves, Elm-leaves, or all Oak, or green leaves
stamped and laid to, will heal a green wound.

Ground Ivy boiled in water, and laid to a sore will heal it.

Wild Bugloss, alias Carpenter-work bruised, and laid to, heals the green
wound.

Maidenhair boiled and drunken, heals the Lungs, and inward parts.

Oil of white Poppy, anointed upon the forehead, will cause one to sleep.

The seed of Henbane mixed in a Wax-candle, and the mouth holden over when it
burns, will draw the Worms out of ones Teeth.

Sea-holm-roots candied with Sugar, called Iringo-roots, will restore nature:
And the powder of them will break Wind and Stone being drunken.

Yellow Dock-roots boiled and drunken, purges by Urine and siege.

Watercresses stamped or boiled, and drunken, is good for the Stone, Dropsy,
and Scurvey.

Tamarisk the small, or the rind of the great Tamarisk boiled and drunken,
helps the Spleen.

Barberies in conserve or sirup, does stop the Flux, and cool the body.

Licorice helps the Stone, Stomach, and Wind,

Oranges and Lemons helps a hot Stomach in the burning Ague.

Distilled Water of Oak-leaves stops the Flux:

Misletoe of the Oak stamped and drunk, helps the falling evil.

Ash-tree ^^^ll suffer no Spider, or venomous thing to co^ under the shadow,
the leaves steeped in Wine, and drunk, will make one lean.

An Elder-leaf laid unto a man's feet that is chaffed in going between the Toes,
or other places, will heal it.

Costemary, alias Balsum-mint stamped and bruised, will heal a Wound as fast as
Balsome, or Sanicle laid unto it.

Ditony of Candy, or Ditony, or Herb of Deliverance stamped and drunk, is good
to deliver a Woman in Travel with Child, and for want thereof Wood-betony will
do the same.

To heal a scalding or burning quickly; Take Sallet Oil Olive, and clear water
beaten together, and therewith anoint the grieved place till it be whole.

To heal a Tetter, or Ring-worm, or Chop, or crush in ones Palm of the Hand;
Take Bay Salt finely beaten to powder, and mix it with sweet Sallet Oil Olive
together, that the Oil be very salt; and with that Oil and Salt fret and rub
away scurf, and so use it till he be whole, and purge him with the root
Mechoakam.

To heal a bruised Thumb, Finger, or cut in the Leg; Take the leaves of an Elm,
and stamp them together, it will both bind and heal quickly, and knit the
bones together that is dispersed.

To stanch blood in a Wound, take Sage, and beat it together with Wheat-flour,
and lay it to, it will stanch presently, and heal the Wound; so will
Shepherds-purse, Plantane, Knot-grass.

Vnguentum album with Lint laid in a wound, or old sore, and a Plaster of
Gratia Dei thereon, will heal it very quickly.

Pestilent-wort boiled in Milk, and made in a Posset with Sack, will cause one
to sweat extremely, and drive out the Plague, and heal them, and heal also the
Ague. Lay the Herb, and curd unto the sore.

Sanicle, Sanamonda, alias Hedge Avince, that bears a yellow flower (but not
the red, Scurvey-grass, Fumitory, and Sorrel, stamped and strained into Ale or
Beer, and drunk inwardly, does cure the foresaid Diseases of Tetter,
Ring-worms, Scurfs, Scabs proceeing of the heat of the Liver, which does most
commonly come, or break out at the Spring, or fall of the Leaf.

Beat Bay Salt to powder, and put it into Beer or Ale, that it be as salt as
Brine, and drink it three times, in three mornings it will put away any Ague,
the strongest Ague that is.

The water of Oaken-leaves distilled and drunken, will stop the bloody Flux.

Elder leaves stamped, and laid to any sore or wound, will draw very fast at
first, then mix therewith the fresh Fat of a Hog unsalted, and it will heal it
very quickly.

The Celestial Governors: OR, A Discourse, in which is plainly declared what
Members of the Body are governed by the twelve Signs, and of the Diseases to
them appropriate.
ARies Aries.
is of the East Masculine, fiery and chollerick, and governs the Head, Face,
Eyes and Ears, etc. And of Sicknesses, The Apoplexy, Mamnia, Wounds and Spots
in the Face, Abortisements, and other impitious diseases, Ring-worms, and
Morphews.

Taurus Taurus.
is of the South Feminine, earthly and melancholy, and governs the Neck,
Throat, and Voice. And of Sicknesses, Squinancies, Scrophulus, Cattares, and
Hoarseness.

Gemini Gemini.
is of the West Masculine, airy and sanguine, and rules the Shoulders, Arms
and Hands. And of Sicknesses, Phlegmonies, Ferruncula, and other proceeding of
blood in the said places.

Cancer Cancer.
is of the North Feminine, watery, and phlegmatic, and rules the Breast, Ribs,
Paps of Women, Lungs, Liver, Spleen. And of Sickness, Alopesia watery Eyes,
Cotogses, and Rheums, Scabs, and Leprosy.

Leo Leo.
is of the East Masculine, fiery and chollerick, and rules the Heart, Stomach,
Back, Sides, and the Midrift with Virgo. And of Sickness, Cardiaca, trembling
of the Heart, and sounding.

Virgo Virgo.
is of the South Feminine, earthy, and melancholy, and rules the Belly, Guts,
and Midriff with Leo. Of Sicknesses, Illiaca, and cotica passio, opilations of
the Spleen, and black Jaundies.

Libra Libra.
is of the West Masculine, airy, and sanguine, and rules the Loins, Navel,
Reins, Buttocks, and Bladder with Scorpio. And of Sicknesses, all filthy scabs
and spots in the Face, loss of sight, Canker, and Hemeroides, Leprosy,
Alopesia, and Chollick.

Scorpius Scorpius.
is of the North Feminine, watery, Phlegmatic, and rules the secret Members,
the Fundament and Bladder, with Libra. And of Sicknesses, all filthy scabs and
spots in the Face, loss of sight, Canker, and Hemerods, Leprosy, Alopesia, and
the French Pox.

Sagitarius Sagitarius.
is of the East Masculine, fiery, and chollerick, and rules the Thighs and
Hips. And of Sicknesses, hot Fevers, Optsaluva, and blear Eyes, and falls from
high places, and from Horses.

Capricornus Capricornus.
is of the South Feminine, earthy, and melancholy, and rules the Knees. And
of Sicknesses, Aches in the Knees, Deafness, loss of speech and sight, Itch,
Scabs, and foulness of the skin.

Aquarius Aquarius
is of the West Masculine, airy and sanguine, and rules the Legs. And of
Sicknesses. Fever Quartanes, black Jaundies, Swelling of the Legs, and Varices.

Pisces Pisces.
is of the North Feminine, watery, and phlegmatic, and rules the Feet. And of
Sicknesses, Gowt, Scabs, Leprosy, and Palsy.

How the Members of the Body are governed by the seven Planets, and of the
Diseases to them appropriate.
SAturn Saturn.
governs the Bones, Teeth, the right Ear, and Spleen, and the Bladder with
the Moon. And of Sicknesses, Leprosy, Canker, Fever Quartane, Palsy,
Consumption, black Jaundies, Illiaca passionis, Dropsy, Cattare, Gowt in the
Feet, Scrophulus.

Jupiter Jupiter.
rules the Lungs, the Grizzles, the Liver, and Spearm with Venus, the Arteries
and Pulse. And of Sicknesses, Peripneumonia, Apoplexy, Pleurisy, Cramp, the
Cardaca with the Sun, Squinancy, numness of the sinnews, and stinking of the
mouth.

Mars Mars.
rules the left Ear, the Gall, Veins, Yard and Stones, and the Reins with
Venus. And of Sicknesses, the Pestilence, hot Fevers, yellow Jaundies,
Shingles, Carbuncles, Fistula's, Chollerick, Fluxes, Fever, Tertians, and
Quotidians, all Wounds, specially on the Face, and the Falling Sickness with
the Moon and Mercury

Sol Sol.
rules the Heart, the right Eye, the sight, the sinnews, and the Brain with
the Moon and Mercury. Of sicknesses, swooning, Cramp, Opthalima, Rheuming Eyes,
and the Cardiaca, with Jupiter.

Venus Venus.
rules the Genitores, Dugs, Throat, Loins, the Liver and Spearm with Jupiter,
and the Reins with Mars. Of sicknesses, all Diseases of the Matrix, Gomorhea
passio, Flux of urine, Priapismus, weakness of the stomach and Liver, French
Pox, Flux of the Bowels, and the menstrual sickness with the Moon.

Mercury Mercury.
rules the Spirits, Imagination, Memory, the Tongue, Hands, and Fingers, and
the Brain with the Sun and Moon. Of sickness, Madness, loss of the common
senses, foolish doting, lisping and stammering, Cough and Horseness, the
Falling Sickness with the Moon and Mars.

The Moon rules the left Eye of a Man, Luna.
and the right Eye of a Woman, the Belly and Guts, the Brain with the Sun and
Mercury, and the Bladder with Saturn. And of sicknesses, Collica passio,
Phlegmatic Aposthumes, all manner of Opilations, the Falling Sickness with
Mars and Mercury, the Palsy with Saturn, and the Menstrual sickness with Venus.

Cardiaca Simplicia. OR A brief Account of some choice Simples, as are chiefly
appropriated to the Heart.
Left unfinished by Nich. Culpeper.
WHat this Treatise concerns, the Title shows, the Margin shall also show you
what Planet, and Sign of the Zodiac every Herb is under, all the several parts
of the Body handled in this manner, open to you my own Moddel of Physic, and
draw the Curtain which has so long blinded the Eyes of the Understanding, both
of ancient and moddern Physicians; here is revealed those hidden qualities, A
Commonwealth is well hope up with such Physicians.
which they harping at, and only groaping for, could never give a reason of,
like mad men rather then Naturalists. But I desire here to be helpful, not
critical; therefore I shall about the Business promised in the Title, by him
who loves, and delights in the Works of the Lord.

Nich. Culpeper.
Spittle Fields. Sol 6. Libra 1649.
BAum is of a cherishing nature, Sol. Leo.
and wonderfully resists passions of the Heart, faintings, and swoonings, it
makes the man lightsome and ^lithe, merry and cheerful, it comforts and chears
^he spirits, and takes away fears, cares and destracted thoughts arising from
Melancholy, or ^ddust Choler. It is hot and dry in the second degree,
strengthens the inward parts exceeding^y, helps digestion, and opens
obstructions of the Brain, it naturally preserves the vital Spirits, Heart, and
Arteries from melancholy vapors, and is profitable in the bloody Flux, and a
notable meat for such as have the Gout; a sovereign Antidote for such as are
poisoned by eating Mushromes: I suppose it took its name [Balm] from its
sovereignty in curing Wounds.

Scordium, Jupiter. Leo.
or Water-Germander is of a heating, drying, and binding quality, and provokes
both Urine, and the Terms in Women, it is a great Antidote against poison, and
helps the gnawing pains of the Stomach or Sides, coming either through cold,
or obstructions; it stops the bloody Flux, eases the Lungs of old Coughs, and
rotten Phlegm; it keeps bodies from putrefaction, resists Pestilence, Small
Pox, Meazles, faint spots, Purples; and some are of opinion, it withstands any
Epidemical Disease whatsoever. It comforts, and strengthens the Heart
exceedingly, and nothing better to kill Worms, whether in the Stomach or Belly,
boiled in Vinegar, and the place bathed with it, helps the Gout.

Vipers Bugloss is a deadly enemy to poison, Venus. Le^.
and poisonous Creatures, there grows enough of it about the Castle Walls at
Lewis in Sussex, whosoever eats of it, shall not be hurt by venomous Beasts
that day. Crollius in his Basilica Chymica will furnish you with enough such
notions; it chears, and comforts the Heart, expels sadness, and causeless
Melancholy, it allayes the heat of the Blood, and the fury of Agues, by
cooling the spirits; it procures abundance of Milk in Nurses, especially the
seed of it, it mightily eases pains in the Back and Reins.

Jupiter. Sol.
Burnet, is hot and dry in the second degree, and is a great friend not only to
the Heart and Liver, but also to the whole body of man, a little of it put in
Wine, is not only delightful to the taste, but also, wholesome for the body. It
refreshes the heart, quickens the Spirits exceedingly, driving away
melancholy, and indeed the opposition of the house of Saturn to Leo shows that
the heart and vital Spirits are impeached by nothing so much as by Melancholy;
it defends the body from all noysom vapors, from ill Air and Pestilence; and
indeed whatever defends from ill Air must needs defend from all Epidemical
diseases, for it is the Planets corrupting the air, nor the A piece of College
nonsense in this time of Fluxes.
Brewers corrupting their drink, that causes Epidemical diseases. It is
admirable good in fluxes, whether they be of blood or humors, whether they be
internal or external, it stops the whites in women, belching and vomiting, and
is a very good wound Herb for all moist sores.

Venus. Taurus.
Sorrel is cooling and binding, drying in the second degree, it opposes the
sting and venom of Scorpions so exceedingly, that a man can feel no hurt by
them; It succors the heart, and blood, as also the Vital Spirits over-pressed
with heat; whether you take the Root, Herb, or Seed, if any planet from
Scorpious cause the malady, this is the cure. It resists putrefaction
exceedingly in the blood, and restores weak decayed stomachs, it stops fluxes
and helps the immoderate flowing of the terms, it strengthens the Reins and
Kidneyes and hinders the breeding of the Stone; neither is there a better
remedy in the world for Scrophula, or the disease called the Kings evil, or any
other disease in the neck or throat.

Violets, Venus.
I can give but little reason if I were asked why I set Violets amongst the
Cordials, unless I should plead tradition. All Physicians have reckoned Violets
among the Cordial flowers; for my part I believe nothing less, they cool
inflammations, be they internal or external, they are especially appropriated to
inflammations in the neck and throat, fundaments and matrix falled down and
inflamed; they cool the heat of the Reins, thereby resisting the Stone, and
stopping miscarriages. Difficult labors in women thence arising, they are
excellent in Fevers and Plurisies, and hot Rhumes and horseness of the throat.

Strawberries, Venus.
I know no reason why I may not put in Strawberries here as well as either
Violets or Sorrel, for neither of them are proper in this place, for the heart
being the original of heat in the Microcosme, no cold thing is properly, or per
se, appropriated to it. Strawberries are cold in the first degree, the fruit
cold and moist temperate, the root dry and binding; in general they refresh the
Spirits ready to faint for heat, they cool the liver and blood, abate the fury
of Chollerick diseases, help Palpitation of the heart the yellow Jaundies,
Inflammations, whether internal or external; they are excellent in sore mouths,
sore throats. Ulcers in the privitives, fasten loose teeth, Scabs, Itch,
Tetters, and other Martial infirmities of the skin.

Jupiter. Leo.
Borage and Bugloss, their natures being the same, I put them both together,
they are hot and moist, and naturally appropriated to keep the vapors of
melancholy from the heart, and bridle the unruly passions of the vital Spirit,
which my Theory of Chyrurgery will manifest to you, they make the heart joyful
and glad, cheerful and merry; it clarifies the blood exceedingly, opens
obstructions of the Liver, and helps the yellow Jaundies, and by clarifying the
blood, and removing the addust and sharp humors, there must needs be a gallant
internal remedy for Scabs, Itch, Pimples, and other infirmities thence arising.
They help swoonings and passions of the heart, and restores such as are pined
away either by Consumptions or any other lingering sickness.

Ros-Solis, Sundew, It is always moist in hot weather, Sol. Cancer.
yea the hotter the sun shines upon it, the moister are the leaves, thence it
took its name. It is excellent good for hot salt Rhumes that distill down upon
the Lungs, Ulcers in the Lungs, coughs, shortness of breath, it comforts and
strengthens the heart and stays the fainting of the Spirits.

Angelica, Sol. Leo.
heats and cherishes the Heart and Spirits against poison, and pestilence, ill
Air and Vapors, Epidemical diseases; it strengthens old and cold stomachs, it
eases all pains coming of cold and wind, provided the body be not bound,
Plurisies, diseases of the Lungs, Coughs Ptysicks, Chollick, Stone, Strangury,
difficulty of Urine; it provokes the terms, expels the Afterbirth, it
discuseth all inward tumors and windiness, obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen, it takes away all crudities and indigestion of the stomach, and is a
present remedy for Surfeits; the juice cleanses Ulcers well, the root is held
to be stronger in operation then the leaves; the wild Angelica is that which we
in Sussex call Kexweed, and is good in all the former premises, but not so
effectual as the garden.

Rue is a mighty antidote against Poison, Sol. Leo.
by it Mithridates that renowned King of Pontus so fortified his body against
Poison, that he made it invincible; though some unworthy wretches in our age
are not ashamed to say, he fortified his body against poison by accustoming it
to Poison; and when being vanquished by Pompey the great, and betrayed by his
own Son, he would have Poisoned himself, but could not: a likely tale, as
though if he had accustomed his body to hot Poisons, cold would not quickly
have dispatched him, and the contrary: But to leave the grand liars of the
wor^^ the most of which, (the more is the pity) ar^ scholars, and to come to
our business. Rue is a counter-poyson against dangerous medicines, ill Air, it
preserves the whole body ^n health being but in a very small quantity, taken
every morning, it takes away lust, and is a^ enemy to Venus; it is admirable in
pains of the s^d^s, coughs, difficulty of breathing. Ptysicks, ^sthma's,
Inflammations of the Lungs, sharpness of urine; it kills Worms and helps the
Drop^^e, and Warts in any part of the body, and is admirable against the
bitings of venomous beasts.

THE Chyrurgeons GUIDE: OR THE ERRORS OF Some unskilful Practitioners in
CHYRURGERY,

Corrected by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. late Student in Physic and Chyrurgery.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill, 1659.

THE The Chyrurgeons Guide. OR, The Errors of some unskilful Practitioners in
Chyrurgery.
The first Error which they use, is touching the Disease called in Latin, Lues
Venerea, and in English, the French Pox.
THe Errors which are used at this present (touching the Venerian Disease) are
very great, but chiefly at the beginning; for when it first breaks forth, it
appears in the Yard with inflammation, ulcers, and excoriation of the conduct
of the Urine, which comes from the neck of the Bladder: and after that
commonly follows Aposthumes of the Groins, with Pushes, and such other like
discolored Pimples, according to the infected humor; for the cure of the
which, unskilful persons begin with vehement or strong Medicines; as
Colocinthis, Confection of Hamech, or such like. And the next day they open a
Vein in the right or left arm, (respecting not that there may follow a lask of
their vehement Purgation) and then minister their unctions, and suffumigations,
which is certainly a manifest Error.

By the which means they draw the infectious blood and humors to the noble
parts, and feeling the inward anoyance of the same, sends it to diverse
outward parts of the body. The which does engender hard tumors, as knots and
kernels not easily curable, and most sharp and fretting (rebellions against
curation) botches, with such other like.

And so by the maliciousness of the humor, it corrupts and eats the bone
with such pains and torments, that the poor Patients are so afflicted, that
they know not where to rest; and especially more in the night, then in the day.
Therefore at this present I have thought good, according to my little skill, to
teach a Method for to bring these errors into a perfect order.

At the beginning of this contagious Disease, you shall first begin this
curation by evacuating of the body with gentle Lenitives, which do both cool
the boiling rage of the blood; and also make it thinner in mundifying the
blood: this must be used according to the temperature of the Body.

The which shall be done after that the body is prepared, to the end that the
solutives may the better work upon the aforesaid humors. For in this case,
nature must rule the Chyrurgeon, and not the Chyrurgeon nature. Then after
that, it is necessary and profitable to open the Anckle vein, in the right or
left foot, according as the Apostume does appear; and if there be no Apostume,
according to the discretion of the learned Chyrurgeon: this done, you divert or
pull back the aforesaid infectious humors from the principal parts. And upon
the Apostume, you shall apply continually mollifying and drawing Medicines, in
doing what may be to bring him to suppuration. This Indications being
accomplished, you shall use of the potion made with Ebenum and Guaiacum,
prepared according to the temperature of the humors, which shall be used the
space of a month or thereabouts.

And although that some learned men have an opinion, that the decoction of
Guaiacum ought to be used without any other Medicines, yet nevertheless it has
been found by experience, that the use of other simples with it, (being fit and
agreeing to the diseases) has a great deal more profited, and been found of
better effect then if it had been ministered alone; for in a compound disease a
simple remedy is not requisite.

Although that Alphonsus Ferrus has written to the contrary; the which
Alphonsus uses this decoction of the Wood in a manner to all diseases; (whose
opinion is not to be followed) which decoction is used in Phtisi. etiam si dies
placuerit in senio Philippi.

Moreover they have greatly erred, which have set forth the Radix Chini, being
a root very dear, unprofitable, and altogether without taste, and the greatest
error of all is committed among them, which have brought in use, the diet of
the decoction of Box-tree, which is an Astringant wood stinking, and an enemy
to all the principal parts. And if you will have a wood which is most agreeable
to the Guaiacum; you shall use of Fraximus, the which opens obstructions of
the Liver, of the Milt and of the Reins; for I have known many which by the use
thereof have recovered their health.

The second error touching the said disease when it comes to suppuration.
WHen this disease has been once taken in hand and evil handled, either by
Ignorance of the Surgeon or the negligence of the Patient. The common
Chyrurgeons use commonly new errors; that is, with giving solutives without
preparing of the evil humors. By the which means, they take away the best and
leave the worst behind, whereof ingendreth Nodes, old and Cankerd sores, and
such like. Then they (as evil or rather worse) apply their Unctions or
Suffumigations before that the Ulcers be made clean or the Nodes taken away,
and sometimes leave the Bone foul. By the which means, they purchase to
themselves both shame and infamy; for within four or five months the Ulcers
open with great corruption of the Bone.

Moreover they commit an error touching the Unction, for they anoint the Head,
the Region of the Heart, and other noble parts, against all reason: and also
all the whole body over, which is the occasion of many a man's death.

Therefore to amend these errors (when you see that this disease is confirmed,
and that there are hard Ulcers, hard Swelling, or Nodes) it is the most surest
way to mundifie the said Ulcers, and to open the Nodes with acaustick; then you
shall make incision in the Node unto the corruption of the Bone, and then apply
Praecipitatum, or else Pledgets with Basilicon and Praecipitatum mingled
together: this done, you shall take away the corruption of the bone.

And then after that you may safely use your Unctions made with Axungia Gummes,
Minerals, Oils and Mercury; also if you add thereto of fine Treacle or
Mithridatum, it will be the better.

You shall anoint the Shoulders, the Muscles of the Back, the Loins, the Hips,
the Thighs, the Knees, and all the outward members, as Legs, and Arms.

But you must take very good heed that you touch not the Head, the Region of
the Heart, the Somach, nor the ridge of the Back. Also you must have a good
respect to cease your anointing in such order, that you bring not too many
accidents to the mouth, whereby the Patient may utterly lose the use both of
his Tongue and Teeth.

Because that so many ignorant Chyrurgeons, have taken upon them this cure
(without either discretion in applying the Unction, or ordering of the Patient)
I have thought good to write two or three words touching the ordering of the
Patient.

When the body is prepared with apt and meet Medicines, as well Syrrups,
Decoctions, Purgings, and opening of the Vein according to the disposition of
the body, the Patient shall be placed in a place naturally hot or else
otherwise made warm, which must be free from all cold; having the doors,
windows, and other open places closely stopped; for the cold Air is very hurtful
both for the Sinewie parts, and also for the working of Medicines; for it will
diminish and hinder the actions thereof. And in this case there are many which
commit great errors, which are worthy of reprehension; for as well in the
Winter as in the Summer, they anoint the Patients in great and large Chambers
where very much Air enters.

Wherefore at the beginning of this cure (if the place be not very close and
warm) you shall make a Pavilion with Coverings, and such other like, round
about a fire; by the which means you shall keep the cold Air from the Patient.
But if it be possible, it is better to have a little Chamber close and warm,
and also continually a pan with Coals in the midst of it.

If it be so that the Patients be so weak that they cannot abide the heat of
the fire, or would be loath to be seen naked, (as Women or Maids) you shall
anoint them lying in their Beds, First the Patient shall put out one Arm, and
then the other; and so the rest of the parts shall be anointed one after
another. And you shall use the Patients from time to time, to such a course as
is required against the disease.

The third Error, is concerning Wounds piercing into the Breast.
IT fortuneth oftentimes, that the Wounds pierce the hollowness of the Breast,
so that great quantity of blood does fall down into the bottom of the same, and
there does stay upon the Diaphragma, also the heaviness of the said blood
oppresses the Diaphragma, Diaphragma is two Muscles which go overthwart the
Breast and separateth the Heart from the Liver.
and putrefieth and ingendreth an evil Qualtity. The which putrefaction sending
Vapors to the heart, causes a continual Fever, and commonly death within ten
days. Of the which the common Chyrurgeons have no consideration, or else by
their ignorance they know not the cause; and so the Patient is destitute of all
help.

Wherefore when you see that the Wound pierces into the Thorax, or Breast, you
shall take good advisement, in searching out diligently, whether the Blood be
descended into the lower part of the Diaphragma; the which may be known by the
stinking of the Breath, and by the relation of the Patient, which does feel the
Blood quivering or shaking inwardly: And also commonly his face will be of a
reddish or high color, by reason of the Vapors which ascend up.

And note that at the which side the blood does most remain in lying upon the
same side, the Patient shall feel less pain then upon the other, because that
the said blood oppresses the Lungs and the Diaphragma; the Chyrurgeon ought to
have a good respect to the sign^ above written, and whilst that the strength
of the Patient is yet remaining, it shall be needful to make way for the said
blood to be evacuated between the fourth and fifth rib, a hand breadth, or a
little more from the ridge of the back, and your Incision-knife being very
sharp; also you shall do it by little and little, very gently in cutting
Mesopleuria, or the Muscles between the ribs; it ought to be done toward the
lower part of the said Muscles; for the Vein which nourishes them, and the
Ligaments which gives them their moving and feeling, are placed more above
then below.

After that the Incision is made, you shall let out the corrupted blood by
little and little, according to your discretion, and it shall sufficc to
evacuate every dressing five or six ounces; this done, it shall be very
profitable to use the wonted Potions, which you shall find in the writings of
learned Practitioners, which have largely written of the said potions; and by
this means above written, I healed four in one year. The which cures without
the aforesaid remedies, could never have been done; for the which I give unto
God most hearty thanks.

The foruth Error, touching the applications of the Traepans, Terebelles for
fractures of the Head.
IN the fractures of the Scull, there are committed great errors touching the
application of the Traepan, principally when the bone is broken in many parts;
for they have no consideration of the shivering of the Scull, but apply the
Traepan, by the which means they press down the shivers of the bone upon the
Dura Matter, and rent or tear it in such order, that it produces grievous
accidents, whereby commonly death ensues. Wherefore in this case, you shall
have a good consideration before that you apply the Traepan; for it is better
(if it be possible) in this case to use other Instruments, as Eleviatories,
Cisers, Lenticuli, or such other like, to make way for the bruised matter which
depresseth the Dura Matter, it shall be the better, and less danger for the
Patient. By this means I have many times forborne the applying of the Traepan,
to the profit of my Patients, and my good Name and Estimation.

Moreover there be many ignorant Chyrurgeons, which without consideration apply
the Traepan upon all parts of the Head, as well upon the comistures, or seams,
as other places; which is the cause of the death of many Patients.

Wherefore they ought to have a great consideration, and to be very diligent in
this respect, and for to use their Art according to this true Method prescribed
them.

The fifth Error, touching the Punctures of Nerves.
WHen it chances that any is hurt by the Punctures of Nerves, if he be not
speedily helped by some cunning and expert Chyrurgeon, he is in great danger to
fall into Convulsions, which is the occasion of many a man's death, which
commonly happens to them that are dressed by the ignorant and common Chyrurgeons:
For when they begin the cure, they make Fomentation with hot water, wherein
has been boiled Mallows, Violets, and such like; then after the Fomentation,
they apply an Appeaser of pain made with the crumbs of white Bread, being
mingled with the yolk of an Egg, Oil of Cammomile, and Oil of Roses; the which
things are altogether contrary to the Punctures of Nerves.

Forasmuch as their application does moisten too much the nervous places, and
retains or keeps in the matter which is already come to the place; and if
there be any Aposthume, it does augment and increase it, and causes the matter
to ascend up to the Brain, whereby ensusueth Convulsions or Death.

Wherefore to avoid this danger, and to follow the cure methodically, you shall
have first a regard to the evacuation of the body; and if the strength of the
Patient be good, to use Flebetonice Revolsive, or according to the cause of the
grief. Then to take away that which is ready conjunct, you shall enlarge the
Orofice, ^o the end, that the Medicine may the better penetrate to the bottom,
and take away the sharpness of the humor. In this case I have found very
profitable the Oil of Hippiricon prepared in this form; that is to say, with
Venice Turpentine, and for one ounce of the said Oil, you shall take half a
scruple of Euphorbium, which shall be applied very hot with Pledgets; and upon
that a Plaster made with Propolis, Gum Ammoniack, and Wax as much as shall
suffice. By this means the matter (which is drunk into the Nerves or Tendons)
shall be drawn out to the outward parts.

Also for this intent I have found profitable Lin-seed Oil, and Euphorbium, of
each alike, with the twentieth part of Sulpher, being very finely poudred, with
Perosin and Wax, as much as shall suffice to make an Unguent.

This Unguent does heat moderately, attract and dissicate, and is of a subtle
faculty, with the which (by the help of God) the Chyrurgeons shall get both
honor and profit.

The sixth Error, is touching the abuse of the Runners about, called Cutters
for the Stone and Ruptures.
AMong the common Runners about, (which use to cut the Stone and Ruptures)
there is a great error of theirs to be lamented of any Christian heart; for
under this cure of cutting the Hernies, they do miserably take away the Stone,
as well in the Hernia aquosa, or ventosa, as in all the rest, the which is
inhumanely and against the will of God; and they do not only use it in men,
but most of all in little Children; therefore it should be very good for the
Parents which have their Children troubled with any kind of Hernies, that
before they commit their Children to lose their stones, and sometimes their
lives, by any of these Runnagates, (for so may I well term them) that they show
them to some learned Chyrurgeon, to the end, that he may see what kind of
Hernies they have, and so to discern the Aquosa or Ventosa, from Intestinale,
or Omentales.

For certainly I have seen Hernies in Children, which came by the relaxation or
division of the Peretoneum, have been perfectly healed by the apt applying of
glutinative Medicines, and such other like, without cutting or taking away of
the Testicle. But such is the covetous desire of these Persons, which make the
Parents believe that it cannot be helped without their butcherly cutting; and
for to get money, which they are as greedy after it, as Vultures after their
prey, not having the fear of God before their eyes; but like covetous Gripers
catch what they may for the time, and care not what become of them afterward,
whether they live or die; we know by woeful experience what harm they have done
both by the murdering cruelly, and also lameness, and continual pain. These
Fellows rush into England, and have such a great name at the first coming; but
after when their works are tried, and then the proof of them seen, the peoble
for the most part are quickly weary of them; and many a fatherless Child and
Widow, which they have made, may curse the time that ever they knew them. I
dare affirm they never did any cure in England, but that there are English Men
which have done the like, and greater.

Such is the foolish fantasies of our English Nation, that if he be a stranger,
he shall have more favorers then an English man, though the English man's
knowledge does far pass the others, as experience therein has showed: and this
I will stand to the proof of, that there are English men that shall in all
things do as much both by learning and experience as any of them all. That they
may not deceive the common people with their fair promises, I resolve by Gods
permission to write of all the kinds of Ruptures, or Burstings, and how to know
every one of them; to the end, that if any Chyrurgeon which has not the right
knowledge, may straight at the first sight know what to do. I will begin to
treat of the kinds of Ruptures and first of the division of them in general and
then particularly.

Of the eight kinds of Hernies.
THere are eight kinds of Hernies, or Ruptures; whereof some have their proper
names, and the others by similitude: the proper Hernies do most commonly come
by the Relaxation, or Rupture, of the Proteneum, insomuch that the Intestines,
and Epiplocon, or Zerbus, does lose their natural place; and of these are seven
kinds; that is, Enterocele, otherwise called Herni intestinale; Epiplocele, or
Herni Zirbale; Bubonocele, or Herni Inguinale. The Hernies by similitude are
when there is some tumor against nature in the Cods or in some part of the
Groin, without the coming forth of the Intestines or Zirbus, and of these there
are five kinds; the first is called Herni Aqueuse; and of the Greeks Hidrocele;
the second Herni Carneuse, or Sarcocele; the third Variquese; the fourth
Venteuse, which is called of the Greeks Pneumatocele; the fifth Humorale, which
shall be spoken of particularly in order: and first we will begin with the
proper kinds.

Of the Hernie Intestinale.
FOr because that the Hernie Intestinale is the most convenientest, I will
speak first of it. This kind is no other then a certain descending down of the
Intestines in Scrotum; the cause of the which is when the Peretoneum is broken
or relaxed in the place where the Spermatick vessels do pass; which comes
commonly by some vehement strain, as by vehement running, leaping, lifting, or
vehement crying, and such other like; the signs to know when the Intestines is
descended into Scrotum, is when he lies, they will easily be put up again
without any manner of trouble, or may be reduced, the Patient standing with
ones hands; and in the reducing you shall hear a gurguling or noise, and by
this you may know it from Zirbus, because that when the Zirbus is put up it
makes no noise, and also it is not so painful: the other signs shall be
declared when we come to speak of the Herni Zirbale.

When this kind is not very far gone, and that it be not complete: the best
way is to cure it by Medicines, as well to be taken inwards, as to be applied
without; that is to say, with emplaisters, and so by convenient trussing and
boulstering steept in the Juice of Herbs convenient (...) Ruptures which are of
astringent and glutinative ^aculty. I have seen many by these aforesaid
Medicines have been perfectly cured, yet nevertheless if for the oldness of it,
that it be not to be cured by these means; then you must come to the last
remedy, which is by cutting; for the executing of the which, I wish all men to
choose an expert Chyrurgeon, and not to trust too much to these Runners about;
and as for this kind, it may be cut without taking away of the Testicle.

Of Herni Zirbale.
HErni Zirbale, which the Greeks do call Epiplocele, is another thing then the
falling of Zirbus (which is a grease that covers the Guts) into Scrotum, the
which most commonly falls within Didimes, but yet sometimes by the breaking of
the Didimes it falls out; the causes as well inward as outward are the same
which cause Herni Intestinale; for look how the Peretoneum is broken or relaxed
in the other, even so does it in this; the signs are much like also, saving
that it is much more softer, for in the touching it handles like Wool, and is
also less painful; and it is more difficult to put up then the Herni
Intestinale, and in the reducing makes no noise; this kind is less dangerous
then the others, by reason that the pain is less, and also because that the
excrement is not in it, as it is in the Herni Intestinale.

Now here is a special thing to be noted in this kind, which the common cutters
do use; that is, they do use to cut away the Zirbus which is descended within
Didime, without either tying or cautrising, and so there follows a flux of
Blood, which having no issue, but is retained in the belly, there does corrupt,
which causes most perilous accidents, and most commonly death.

Of the relaxation of the Peretonium, called Herni Inguinale.
HErni Inguinale is a descending of the Intestines, or Zirbus, into the Groins,
which the Latins call, Inguina, the which sort does never go further then the
Groin; for when the Intestines, or Zirbus, does pass through the Peretoneum,
then it is either Intestinale or Zirbale; for this kind is nothing but a
relaxation of the Peretoneum. The causes are as of the others aforesaid, and it
is easily to be known by the roundness; and it will be more easily reduced then
any of the others; you may know when the Intestines is descended by noise that
it will make, though not commonly, yet most oftennest, as has been said of
Enterocele; but if it be the Zirbus, it makes no noise, and is much more softer
and not so painful.

Of the kinds of Hernies which be by similitudes or improperly called.
WE have spoken of those three kinds of Herni which are properly called; now it
remains ^o speak of the five kinds which are by similitudes; and first we will
begin with the Aquose, which is no other thing, then a certain watrish tumor of
Croton increased by little and little, and for the most part lies between
Heritroides and the Spermatick vessels; howbeit sometimes it may be contained
between Dartos and Heritroides, and between Dartos and the Scrotum, as many
learned men have written: the signs are that the Scrotum does wax big by
little and little, and for the most part without pain, and the tumor is heavy,
and glistering, and hard, principally when the Scrotum is filled: it waxes in
length and does not return as does the Intestinale and Zirbale but remains at
one stay.

This kind if that the water have long lien there, and so corrupted the
Testicle, it must be taken away.

Of Herni Charneuse.
HErni Charneuse, which the Greeks do call Sarcocele, is a tumor against nature
in the Scrotum, which there does grow to a certain scireuse flesh, and does
much resemble the Verequeses, or Swelled Veins; the causes of the which are by
the gathering together of abundance of gross humors which nature cannot rule
because of the weakness; the signs are unequable hardness, and inflammation,
which does always remain in the part; that is to say, the Didime; and does
always increase with pain, being unequal and not even: wherefore Guido says,
that this kind and Vanqueuse are very dangerous.

Hernie Verequese.
HErnie Verequese is an appearance of Veins not accustomed about the Testicles,
and other parts contained within Scrotum. The causes are gross humors gathered
together, as melanchollick blood, and such like, which nature cannot disperse,
because of weakness. The signs are, repletion of the Veins about, like to the
twigs of Vines, with softness of the Testicle or Dideme.

This kind, if it be not very great and far gone, it may be healed by solutive
Medicines.

The Hernie Ventose.
HErnie Ventose is a tumor of the Cods increased by wind; and from the
imbecility or weakness of the part affected, it is known by the swelling of
the Cods and Yard, which glistereth like unto a slikt paper; it comes suddenly,
and is round and light, if that there be not another humor joined with it.

It is to be cured with Carnificatives, as Oleum Nucum, Oleum Anethinum,
Costinum, etc. And there may be added too of Seeds and Herbs, as Semen Anisi,
Carvi, Faeniculi, Agni casti, Ruta, Calaminta, Origani, etc.

Hernie Humorale.
HErnie Humorale is an Aposthume contained likewise in the Cods, which is
engendered of humors hot and cold, not much declining from the natural habit,
which may lie between Scrotum and Dartos, or between Heretroydes and Dartos, or
only within Heritroydes; as for the causes, the signs, and curation are like
to other Aposthumes.

Now that I have declared the definition, causes, and signs of Hernies, it
shall not be amiss to expound in few words those parts which must be opened
when any of these kinds are cured by handy operation: and this is to be noted
first, that the Testicles are covered with three Tunicles; the first of them
takes his original of the skin, and is called Scrotum, or Purss; the second
which takes his original of the Peretoneum and is called Dartos; the third
which is proper to the said Testicle, and is called Heritroides; these two last
do not only cover the Testicles, but also the Spermatick vessels, as well they
which bring the substance wherewith the Sperm is made, which are named
Preparans, as them which bring the Sperm to the neck of the Bladder, which is
called Ejaculatores, or expelling, the which goes up to Ossa pubis.

Phlebotomy displayed: OR, Perfect Rules for the letting of Blood.
GAllen, Ipocras, and Avicenna, and other Masters of Physic accord and say,
That lettting blood of the Vein, and that is called Phleobatomatum; or it is
ventosing, carving, or cutting: and letting blood of any of these wise, is good
for man's health of body; for Blood immingled with other humors, that is too
much, or else corrupted by the cause of much sickness; it is therefore good to
know which Veins in a man should be let blood, and for what Sickness.

The Vein in the Forehead, is good for the Frenzy, and aching of the Head, and
for the Megrum, and for the Morphew, and Scab in the Face, for the Posthumes in
the Eyes, both hot and cold.

The Vein in the Heart, is good for a man's mind, and for the Rhume that is
within the Forehead, and for the watering Eyes.

The Veins in the Temple, is good for the Megrum, and for the Headache of the
Eyes, and that has long lasted, for the sickness of the Eyes, for ache in the
Eyes, and for the great heat in the Temples.

The Veins behind the Ears, is good for the Blains, and Pimples of the Head,
for the Megrum, and Ache of the Head, it helps man's mind, it is good for
Toothache, and for the Gums, and for all vices in the Mouth, and it purges
the Rhume of the Head.

The Veins in the corner of the Eyes next the Nose, is good for the Megrum, for
all the sickness of the Eyes, and for the Sight, Cephica tum prius apta.

The Vein in the top of the Nose, it purges the Brain, it is good for Ache and
Flux of the Eyes, and for the Ache of the Nose.

The Vein in the Cheeks is good for the Megrum, and for Spots or Scabs in the
Head.

The vein in the Mold is best for to bleed, and for to wash thy Head with the
same blood.

The Veins of the over Lip, and the nether, be good for hot Blains in the
Mouth, and for Aposthumes, and for hot evils in the Mouth, or Gums.

The Vein under the Tongue is good for Posthumes, and Rhumes of the Head and
Gums, and all manner of vice of the Eyes, Mouth, Tongue, Tooth-aching, and
Blains of the Nose, Mouth, Gums, and for the Aposthumes, and swellings under
the Throat.

The Veins under the Chin is good for the King's Evil, and for Sauce-flean, for
Spots and Blains in the Face, and other Aches of the Eyes, the Gums, and for
Ache in the Nose.

The Veins of the Neck before, is good for the Squinancy, and for all manner of
Aposthumes and Swellings that come from the Head to the Ears, or to the Gums,
that causes the Toothache, when the breath begins to be short.

The Vein of Liver that is called Bosilica, it is good for the Jaundies, and
for chafing of the Liver, and for all manner of Dropsies, and it is good for
all evils in the Breast, and aching of the Back, Shoulders, Sides, and Stomach,
and for the Posthume that is called Pleusis.

The Head Vein that is called Cephanica, it is good for the Megrum, and for
Headache, and for madness of the mind, for ache, and all other vices in the
Eyes, Teeth, Tongue, the Squinancy, and other evils that come to the Throat.

The Heart Vein that is called, Cardiaca ut medium, it is gentle Purgacions,
for it draws blood and humors of all the body; but namely it is good for the
Sickness and Purgations of the Heart, Breast, Stomach, Liver, and Lungs.

The Vein above the Thumb is good against all Fevers, and most, Fever
quartane, and for evils of the Gall, and for streightness of the Breast.

The Vein between the Thumb and the Forefinger, let blood for the hot
Headache, for Frenzy, and madness of Wit, and for Sickness of the Head,
Cephanica, let the blood of the Vein in the Forehead, if it be needful.

The same vein of the left hand, is good for Lithargy, and afterward bleed in
the Forehead.

The Vein which is between the little finger and the next thereto, is called
Salva cella; you must let blood in the right hand for Aposthumes, and Sickness
in the Stomach, and for all evil humors about the Liver.

The same Vein on the left hand, is for to let blood for Imposthumes, and
gathering of evil humors about the Milt and Spleen; it is good for the black
Jaundies.

The over Vein in the Yard is good for the Cramp, and for Sctatica passio, for
swelling of the Womb, for the Dropsy, and for the Stone.

The nether Vein of the Yard is good for the sides, for the Reins, Bladder, for
swelling of the Stones, and for the Emerodes.

The Vein beneath the knee helps the knees, and it is good for aching of the
thighs, and the joints, that is called Sciatica passio.

The Veins beneath the knees, both within and without, is good for the Liver,
Sides, and Thighs, and for the matter that is above, and to draw downward.

The Vein in the Hams is best for holding of Women's Purgations; for it is the
next matter, as says Aviceri, and also it cleanses man's body.

The Vein that is under the Knuckle, which is called Sophena, It is good for
Aposthumes, Swellings, and akings, and other evils that comes to man's body from
the Head to the Foot; it asswageth them, it is good for the Stone, and letting
of urine, it helps the Matrice, and women's purgations, it is good for the Seab
that is called Malum mortum de Bassilica.

The Vein that is under the Knuckle without, that is, called Sianca; it is good
for aching that is in the Thighs, and goes down to the Legs, and to the Feet,
and for the Podagar, and for the Seab; it helps most the aching of the Thighs
and Joints that is called Sciatica passio.

The Vein that comes to the great Toe on either Foot, it is good for the Gout
in the Eyes, for Blans and Spots in the Face; and for Postumes and Evils of the
Stones; for the Blood, for Cankers, Festers, and Sores in the Thighs, and Legs;
and for withholding of Women's Purgations.

As for the time of letting Blood; to wit, that neither in hot weather, nor yet
in great cold, nor in rainy weather, nor in misty weather, nor in the weather
of great tempests, nor in the old Moon, nor in the new; that is to say, four
days before the change, neither four days after; but the three first quarters
be good, see that the Moon be in a good sign; and from St. Bartholomew's tide,
to St. Peter's tide, till February, let the Blood on the left Arm, and in
January on the right; that is to say, Spring or Summer; from the twenty fifth
day of July to the fifth of September, let no Blood, for then the Canicular
days be, after the teaching of Gallen and Avicenna.

Rules concerning Blood letting to be observed.
ALso be ye always well advised and wary that ye let not Blood, nor open no
Vein, except the Moon be either in Aries, Cancer, the first half of Libra, the
last half of Scorpio, or in Sagitarius Aquarius, or Pisces.

Remembering also that you ought not to do it in the day of the changing, nor in
the day next before, nor next after the same or when the sign is in the place
where the inscision should be made; neither in the heat of Summer, as from the
middle of July unto the middle of September; nor in the cold time of Winter,
when there is much Frost and Snow; except urgent necessity forces you
thereunto. Also if you choose out these signs following, appointed unto each
complexion; doubtless you shall do the better, so that time and occasion will
suffer it. As thus.

Open a vein in the Phegmatick person, when the Moon is in Aries, saving in the
Head.

In a Melanchollick Man, the Moon being in the first half or fifteen degrees of
Libra, except in the Hips; or when the Moon is in Aquarius, saving in the Legs.

In a Chollerick body it is best to be let Blood what time the Moon is in
Cancer, saving in the Breast; the last half of Scorpio, saving in the Privy
members; or in Pisces, saving in the Feet.

The Sanguine man may bleed in any of the aforesaid Signs, so that he do it not
what tim^ the Sign is in the Members, or the Season inconvenient. Therefore
beware also ye Chyrurgeons, that ye make no notable inscision, as to cu^
Ruptures, take out the Stone in the Bladder, devoid from the body any natural
Excrescences, Wens, or Nodes to depart, deplorate or rotten Members, to root
out the Canker in the Breast, let out the water collected in the Belly through
the Disease Ascites. To be short, to make an inscision or cautherization in any
member, or to remove the Catricle from the Eye, or to attempt any other thing
by natural working upon the body of man, when the Sign governing the Sun is in
the Members, in which such attempts are to be made, for the Remedy of these
Diseases abovesaid; or when the Lord of the Ascendant, or first House, is the
same Sign that governs part of the Body at that time; or when there is any
Oppositions, Conjunctions, or Quartile Aspects of Saturn and Mars; or when any
Planets is evil aspected unto another; or when the Moon is in the Sign of Leo;
or in the day of the change or full, except great necessity require it.

Moreover I would wish no inscision to be made about the full of the Moon,
whereafter any great Flux of Blood may be feared to ensue; though the Sign be
never so meet, but rather let it be done in the Wane of the Moon.

As touching the Stone, Ruptures, Dropsies, to be helped by way of inscision, I
have rather mentioned them in this place, because that the rude and ignorant
Chyrurgeon may be brought to the true Practice and Knowledge hereof. I doubt
not but to make many partakers of the benefit thereof; whose good intent I
would wish either to follow in those attempts, and so to use it in utter
refuge, when other means will take no place in that case, it being a most
assured Remedy for the time and due observations of letting Blood, right well
allowed, and practiced at all times.

Vrinal Conjectures. Brief Observations, with some Probable Predictions on the
Sick Patients Stool or Water.
I Must acknowledge that in my Judgment, I do in general, as concerning the
uncertainty of Urine concur with learned Dr. Read; but not so, as in some
particularly, evident, and remarkable distempers wholly to slight the Urinals
Prophecy: I shall therefore only set down some useful Observations, and refer
them to the Censure of sober and serious Practitioners. Urine is the clearer
and lighter part of Blood proceeding from the Reins, which if endeavored to be
suppressed, causes the Chollick or Stone. At the first evacuation most Urines
appear thin so long as they retain any heat, which whilst it prevails, suffers
not the Urine to grow thick, or congeals. Sometimes the Patients Urine comes
thicker from him, afterward clearer. Some remain still as they were made:
those that have Urine clear, will soon collect that which is thick into the
bottom of the Urinal: Others remain troubled, the grosness notwithstanding
gath^red in the bottom, insomuch that these diversities of thin and subtle
humors ought to be perceived of things conceived in the Urine. Some descend to
the bottom, called in the Greek, Hypostasis, in English the Grounds, which if
white rising up from the bottom like a pear, signify health; if of another
color, some distemper: if like things are seen in the middle of the Urinal,
they are called sublutions: if they approach to the highest Region of the
Urine, they are in Latin called Nubilae, in English Clouds; the grounds and
residences imperfect, like little red Vetches, in Latin called Orobea: some
like to Bran of ground Wheat severed from the Meal, in Latin called Furfurea.
Other Urines resemble Plates, having breadth without thickness, in Latin
called Laminea: some are more like to Meal, Wheat, or Barley, in the Latin
called Similacea.

There are sometimes discerned in the Urine things that resemble white heats,
some longer, some shorter; some like to Rugs almost red: there is also
sometimes seen in the uppermost part of the Urine a foam or a froath in bells
or bubbles: sometimes there swims in the Urine the resemblance of a Cobweb; at
other times there is about the Circle, as it were the renting of Cloth, or the
resemblances of the Motes of the Sun, things like the corruption of a Sore, or
the masculine seed; sometimes gravel or sand: in these there may be diverse
colors, some white, some red, some yellow, some gray, some black. These
Colors must be strictly observed, whosoever will undertake from them a
confident determination of the Sickness. I refer all these to the judgment of
wise persons, what subtilty and cures in such niceties ought to be used.

There is for this purpose to be considered, that judgment may not be wanting;
first whether the Ordure be thin, or very thick, what other matter issues out
with it, what color it is of, what the savor is, how little, or how strong,
how easy, or how painful. Secondly, the sweat, what color it is of, of what
smell, whether the taste be salt, bitter, sower, or unsavory. Thirdly, the
evacuation of it be of one color, or of many; if it does smell very strong,
what humor it did most abound with, whether fasting, or after-meals, painful or
easy. Fourthly, whether the Spittle is thick or thin, mixed with blood, corrupt
like the humor issuing out at the Nose; and if that be blood, whether it be
red, watery, or black. Lastly, it is to be observed what the diet of the Patient
has been before, as also in his sickness, his age, the strength of his body,
exercise, and the air he lives in, where he continued longest in his youthful
years, whether in high or low, watery or dry, hot or cold Countries; these
generals might suffice. I shall conclude for the Students better satisfaction
with some other, from time to time, retained tradition, which in my judgment
some of them are worthy of serious consideration, White Urine signifies rawness
and indigestion of the Stomach; red, heat; thick like Puddle, excessive labor
or sickness; white or red gravel appearing in the bottom of the Urinal,
threatens the Stone in the Reins; black or green colored Urine, is ominous,
commonly signifying death.

Of Vomits.
IS the expulsion of bad humors contained in the Stomach; upward it is
accounted, if wisely administered, as to the mitigation of the violence rightly
considered of, to be the wholesomest kind of Physic, for those which are
gross, or full of humors: For that which a Purgation leaves behind, a Vomit
roots up; if the party vomit too much, rub his feet with hot and sweet water;
and if it cease not, apply a gourd to the mouth of the Stomach. Sometimes
without any Physic at all, one may fall to a customary vomiting, then it
proceeds from the hot complexion of the Stomach; if from a cold, you may help
it by a bag of Wormwood, dry Mints, or Marjoram, of each alike; one handful of
Nutmegs, Cloves, and Galingal, half a dram of each one: let all of them be
dried and powdered, and put betwixt two linen clothes with Cotton interposed,
and basted, and then let them be applied upon the Stomach; or else you may
apply the said Herbs alone, dried upon a ^ot Tile-stone, put betwixt two linen
cloths upon the Stomach; let the stomach be fortified with ^he syrup of Mints,
or Wormwood, or Lozenges. ^f the Vomiting proceeds from a hot complexion, you
may help it by a Plaster applied to the ^tomach, of Oil of Roses, Mints, or
Barley-flour, with the white of an Egg; the water of Purslain may be taken in
drink to quench the thirst.

Of the Excrements.
EXcrements, some are necessary, and some superfluous, as they proceed from too
much blood; yet nevertheless nourish, when other nourishment fails, the seed,
spearm, milk, or fat, which are superfluous, and do not proceed from blood, nor
can nourish; but rather being separated from the blood, are either moist,
earthy, black, melancholy: sweat, urine, proceeds from the nose, spittle, etc.
Earthy or dry Excrements, as Warts, Nails, Corns, and such like. Aristotle
reckons the Marrow of the body amongst the Excrements, but as the bones are
nourisht by it, even as the body is nutrified by the blood, it cannot be
acknowledged for any other, then a nourishment. Blood is the very essence of
life, which diminished, the spirits must consequently be dissolved; in
consideration whereof, I counsel them that use any moderate exercise, not in
any case to be let blood, lest that corrupt matter succeed in the place of pure
blood; but if there be abundance of blood, or if it be putrefied, or burnt, if
other medicines avail not, this ordination of mine must needs be infringed with
better judgment, as it may be safer to use Horsleeches, especially at the
Fundamental Veins, which are called the sink of the body: By this way, the
Scurvey, Gout, Dropsy, and Melancholy may be prevented, being applied in the
Spring, or Fall, or oftener. If the Blood which is let out appear red, and white
water overflow with it, the body is sound; if bubbling blood, the stomach is
diseased; if green, the heart is afflicted.

THE TREASURY OF LIFE: OR, Salves for every Sore.

Experienced and tried RECEIPTS, the Cure of the Most usual Diseases that our
frail BODIES are most subject to, whilst we remain in this Life.

Practiced by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. late Student in Physic and Astrology.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill, 1659.

THE Treasury of Life: OR, Salves for every Sore. Experimental and tried
Receipts for the Cure of most usual Diseases that our frail Bodies are most
subject to, whilst we remain in this Life.
CHAP. I. For the falling out of the Fundament.
THe cause of falling out of the Fundament, is weakness, or relaxation of the
Sphineter Muscle; and therefore the cure must be by such Medicines as dry and
bind.

2. A Poltiss made with Pear-tree-leaves, and applied to the place, is very
good.

3. But first you must put the Fundament up into its right place again with a
warm cloth, which may be done without much trouble, if it have not been long
out.

4. If it have been long out, many times there follows inflammations and
swellings; and then it is very difficult to put it up in its right place again;
yea, impossible before the swelling be taken away.

5. In such a case you must bathe the place with Oil of Roses warm, or with Oil
of Cammomile, or with the decoction of Cammomile, if the inflammation be not
great.

6. If the inflammation be great, you may make a Poltiss of Chickweed, and
Mallows, and Endive, and Succory, with some Malt-flour to make it thick, and
Sheeps-suet to make it moist, and that will allay the inflammation in four and
twenty hours time; then you may put it up again into its proper place.

7. Having put it up again into its place, strew upon the place the Powder of
burnt Hartshorn.

8. A Poltiss made of the leaves of Rosemary, and applied to the place, is
exceeding good.

9. To burn Greek Pitch in a close stool whilst the diseased party sits over
the smoke of it, is an approved cure.

10. All such things as are dry and binding, are naturally medicinal for the
disease, amongst which Sinckfoil, Bistort, and Tormentil are very good.

CHAP. 2. Of the Liver.
FOr stoppages of the Liver, the Decoction of the Roots of Parsley, Fennel,
Endive and Succory are very good being drunk; and also an Ointment or Plaster
made of them, applied to the right side is very good.

2 Sage constantly eaten is a mighty great strengthner of the Liver, inferior
to no Herb growing.

3 Take of Agrimony and Liverwort, of each two handfuls, Hearts tongue, Bettony,
and Ribwort, of each one handful; make a strong Decoction of them, and boil the
Decoction into Syrup with Sugar, so have you an excellent remedy for the Liver
always by you.

CHAP. 3. Of the Dropsy.
IN the beginning, the Dropsy may easily be cured, by drinking but the
Decoction of Endive, and eating the boiled Herb for a Sallet.

2 Ribwort boiled and the Decoction drunk, helps those that have the Dropsy,

3 Also a Plaster made of Plantane and Ribwort, or a Poltis made of the same,
with a little Barley-meal and Vinegar; if withal you exercise your body much,
and apply this to the Region of the Liver, you shall find it an excellent cure.

4 Fill a Pot almost full with the Juice of Plantane, and bind a Linen cloth
over the Pot, and upon the Linen cloth put wood-ashes; in that manner set it
over the fire, and let it boil till half be consumed, strain out what remains
unconsumed; and give three or four spoonfulls of it every morning to them that
are afflicted with the Dropsy, and you shall see the wonderful effects of it.

5 Goats blood dried on the fire, and a dram of it given at a time in the
morning, in any convenient Liquor, will soon help the Dropsy.

6 Take the Juice of white Briony Roots, and mix it with its double weight of
Honey; it is an excellent Purge for such as have the Dropsy, but give not too
much at a time.

7 The Bark of the Root of an Elder-tree is a very good remedy for the Dropsy;
being boiled in Water, and the Decoction drunk: and yet in all probability the
Bark of the Root of Dwarf Elder is better then it: if you cannot with
convenience get the Bark of the Root, take the Bark of the Branches; there
cannot be much difference, if there be any at all.

8 Mustard Seed dried and beaten into powder, a dram of it taken every
morning in good Wine helps the Dropsy; it is a gentle remedy and usually
sure: yet this is certain, one remedy will not cure one disease in all Bodies;
if it would, there need be but one remedy for one Disease.

9 Hyssop boiled in Wine, and the Decoction drunk, not only cures the
Hidropical humors, but also hinders them that they cannot engender again.

10 If those that have the Dropsy be anointed with common dirt, such as is
found in cart ways, or upon cart wheels; in a very short time it cures them.

11. The speedy and quaint way to cure the Dropsy, is to let the Patient drink
every morning a spoonful of the Piss of a Black Goat; if you cannot with
convenience get a Black Goat, get a Black Sheep and let him drink a spoonful of
his piss in the Decoction of Spikenard.

12 A man's own Urine, being drunk, is very good in this Disease.

13 The fat of a Dolphin melted and drunk with Wine, helps such as are sick
of the Dropsy.

14 The powder of a Lodestone drunk with Milk, cures the Disease.

CHAP. 4. Of the Spleen.
THe Spleen is a small member in the body of Man, lying in the left
Hippocondria; but it is an exceeding troublesome part, and often subject to
Diseases, and when it is iseased it disturbs the whole body.

2 The decoction of the inner Rind of an Ash-tree, being made in White Wine,
and a good draught of it drunk in the morning, whilst the stomach is empty, is
a certain remedy for such as are troubled with the Spleen.

3 A Poltis made with Goats dung, and strong Vinegar, and moistened with a
little Sheeps suet, and applied to the left side, and often renewed makes the
Patient whole.

4 Make a Decoction with Hart's-tongue, Cetrarh and White Wine, and let the
Patient drink of it thirty mornings together, and it will help them of the
Spleen.

5 The leaves of a Willow-tree, or if the season of the year afford ye not the
leaves, take the Bark, stamp it with Salt, and apply it Plaisterwise, to the
left side; it appeaseth the ache and grief of the Spleen.

6 Ivy-leaves used in like manner work the same effect.

7 Hart's-tongue, Agrimony, the leaves of Willows and Ivy, being boiled in Water
and Honey, and the decoction drunk, eases the hardness and other ill qualities
of the Spleen.

8 The powder of a Fox dried upon hot coals, if it be given to drink, does
utterly waste the Spleen.

9 The Twigs of Willows boiled, and the Decoction drunk for common drink, does
the like.

10 Penniroyal boiled with Salt, and applied to the grief, takes away the ill
humors of the Spleen.

11 That plaster which is called Amoniacum cum Cicuta, being spread upon
Leather, and applied to the Region of the Spleen, is an excellent good remedy.

12 Bind the Spleen of a Dog to the Region of the Spleen of the Patient, and it
will help him in one night.

CHAP. 5. For the Yellow Jaundies.
TAke an Apple, and cut off the top, and pick out the Core; then put into the
Apple a dram of Turmerick powder, and ten or twelve grains of Saffron whole;
put on the top again, roste it by a gentle fire, then take it off, and adding a
little butter to it, mash it all together and eat it last at night going to
bed; this doing in few nights will cure you.

2 A Medicine for the Yellow Jaundies which seldom fails, is this: to swallow
down Lice alive; you may swallow them down in what you please.

3 The Urine of the Patient drunk with Juice of Horehound, helps the Jaundies.

4 Ivory in powder is a very good help for the Jaundies.

5 Yet in my opinion, Spodium which is nothing else but burnt Ivory, is far
better; because it strengthens the Liver exceedingly: and it is impossible
the body should be afflicted with the Yellow Jaundies, and not both Liver and
Spleen exceedingly weakened.

6 The proper cause of the Yellow Jaundies is a stoppage in the Biliar pores.

7 The Juice of Cammomile given to drink to the Patient diseased with the
Yellow Jaundies, is a presenr remedy,

CHAP. 6. Of the Stone.
THe cause of the Stone either in the Kidneys or Bladder, is the heat of either
part; which hardneth the gross slimy substance into a Stone.

2 Goats Blood dried, and beaten into powder, being taken inwardly is a very
good remedy.

3 The powder of Burnt Grasshoppers is also very Good.

4 If the Region of the Bladder be anointed often with the Blood of a Fox, the
Stone will break incontinently, as appears; for if you put a Stone into the
Blood of a Fox, it will break in three days time.

5 And here take notice by the way, that many times people in avoiding gravel
have some great Stone stick by the way in the passage of the Yard, which is
many times forced to be taken out by cutting: in such a case, if the party did
but hold his Yard in the warm Blood of a Fox, it would in a short time be made
small enough to come out of it self, without any such troublesome or painful
remedy.

6 And although it is very probable, the Blood of a Fox is not always at
present to be had; yet it may be dried and kept for use, whereby it may be
always had at present; and may be dissolved in any convenient Liquor when
there is need of its use; and of all Liquors, I suppose Vinegar to be the best,
because of its piercing quality

7 Take nine Ivy berries and beat them into powder, and give them to drink in
warm White Wine; they wonderfully cleanse the Kidneys and bladder of Gravel,
and provoke Urine exceedingly.

8 Take all the blood and the whole skin of a Hare, put them into a new pot
that has a cover; lute it up close, and burn it in the fire to ashes; the
Hares skin, and blood I mean, and not the pot: Give the Patient a small
spoonful of these ashes in White Wine; it mightily breaks and drives out the
Stone.

9 The Stone that has been taken out of a man, or the Gravel which men void,
being taken back again inwardly, a dram at a time, does wonderfully break and
bring away the Stone, and is indeed the most exquisite remedy that I know.

10 A Tode-stone being beaten into powder, and a little of the powder given to
the Patient; causes the Stone incontinently to break and come away.

11 Take Snails, dry them to powder, slime, and shells and all; you shall find
it a most exquisite remedy, being taken inwardly, to break the stone.

12 Egg-shells dried and beaten into powder, is a good remedy; and so is the
Juice of Mugwort, if you drink the quantity of a quarter of a pint in the
morning fasting.

13 The Gum of Cherry-trees, and also of all Plum-trees, being dissolved in
White Wine and drunk, breaks the Stone, and cleanses the Kidneys and Bladder
of Gravel.

14 Take of Goats Blood, the Liver, Lungs, Reins, Yard, and Stones of the Goat;
make puddings thereof in the great Gut of the said Goat; order them well and
boil them as you do Hogs puddings; and let him that is troubled with the Stone
eat them as meat, not as Medicine; their wonderful effects in breaking the
Stone will be admirable in your eyes.

15 Sometimes it is a difficult matter to know whether the Stone be in the
Reins or in the Bladder; in such a case, thus do: take a handful of Chickweed,
and boil it well in water, then strain it out, and apply it to the neck of the
Bladder; if the grief increase, the Stone is in the Bladder, else not.

16 Goats piss drunk, breaks and expels the Stone.

17 Take two or three young Liverets, drown them in Vinegar, that they may dye
there; then put them into a new pot, lute them up close, and burn them in the
fire to ashes; these ashes taken inwardly is an excellent remedy for the Stone.

18 If a man that is subject to the Stone would use himself to eat no other
food, but the flesh of Foxes; and anoint the Region of his Bladder with the
grease of the same beast, it would in a short time cure him.

19 A Hedge Sparrow, the feathers pulled off, and the guts pulled out, and the
body converted into Mummy, or else salted and eaten raw, is an excellent remedy
for the Stone.

20 It is an excellent good way to break the Stone, often to anoint the Region
of the Bladder with a strong Spirit of Camomile, drawn in Allembick.

21 Lignum Aphrituum cut in small pieces and infused in strong spirit of Wine,
(the longer you infuse it, the better) make an excellent good drink for such as
have the stone; provided you drink it but moderately.

22 But Lapis Nephriticus is far better, being either born about one, and
beaten into powder, and given inwardly; whereby it appears, that there is far
more virtue in the Mineral kingdom, then there is in the Vegitable: the Stone
is very scarce to be had in London, if it be to be had at all; because it is
never used by the neglect of our College of Physicians.

CHAP. 7. Of the Strangury.
IN the Strangury, the Urine comes away by drops with much pain; with a great
desire to piss.

2 Ox dung mixed with honey, and applied warm to the neck of the Bladder, is
very good,

3 The Decoction of English Galanga provokes Urine much.

4 The neck of the Bladder anointed with the grease of a Hedgehog, is
exceeding good to open the stoppage of Urine.

5 And here by the way, give me leave to quote one experience of my own, though
it be something out of course; not a year before the writing of this, I had a
Patient who had layen a long time sick of the Stone; I gave him the water of a
Hedgehog, distilled in an Alembick, so much of it as I had, which was about a
pint; of which he took a quarter of a pint every morning: during the time he
took it, the violence of his pain ceased, and he avoided such an incredible
deal of Gravel, which was wonderful to behold: but that being gone, no more to
be had, nor and to be procured by reason of the season of the year, his pains
returned: and not long after followed his dissolution; being opened, there was
two great stones found in his body, in each Kidney one.

6 Apply Galbanum, being spread upon a Plaster, upon the Belly, under the
Navel. My Author says, it causes the Patient to make Urine presently; any
that please may try it, I can give no reason for it.

7 Raddish-roots scraped clean, and sliced thin, and infused all night in White
Wine, and stopped close, and a quarter of a pint taken the next morning, is a
mighty great provoker of Urine, but it has no very pleasing taste.

8 Herbs that are held Medicinal for this disease are Fennel, Parsley, Gromwel,
and Saxifrage, both Seeds, Leaves, and Roots; the Leaves and Bark of Hazel, and
the Leaves of Plantane.

9 Warm Eggs applied to the neck of the Bladder, wonderfully provoke Urine.

10 The Roots of Filupendula, being dried and beaten to powder, and taken
inwardly are excellent good for the Strangury: It is called Drop-wort, whether
it be because it cures them that piss by drops, or because the roots hang like
drops by small strings, it matters not; the one is their virtue, the other
shows that it is so.

11. The best remedy in the world against the Strangury, is this; to save all
the water the diseased party makes, and let the diseased party drink it down
back again, and that in very few days will cure him.

CHAP. 8. Of Ulcers in the Yard.
THe causes are clearly sharp and gnawing humors.

2. Make a decoction of Sage in white Wine, and inject it often into the Yard.

3. If the Yard be swelled, anoint it with warm Oil of Roses.

4. The juice of Plantane injected into the Yard, helps the Ulcers thereof.

5. If you boil the Milk of a Goat, or of an Ass, with its equal quantity of
juice of Plantane, till you have clarified it well, and now and then drink a
spoonful of it; it helps not only Ulcers in the Yard, but also in the Kidneys
and Bladder.

6. If much sharp humors resort to the place, ^s usually there does in such
cases; take of those Cakes called Trochisi albi Rhazis with Opium ^ne dram,
Plantane-water four ounces, beat the ^roches into powder, and mix them with the
^lantane-water, and inject it into the Yard with ^ syringe, a little at a time
not all at once.

CHAP. 9. Of the Diabetes.
WHether the cause of this disease be the immoderate attraction of the Reins,
or the weakness of the Sphinater Muscle of the Bladder, or both of them, we
will not dispute the point out here; howsoever this is certain, there follows
as well great thirst, as pissing against ones will.

2. Against this disease give the Patient the Bladder of a Goat, or of a black
Sheep, or else of a Bull beaten into powder; let him drink half a dram of it in
any convenient liquor at night going to bed.

3. I suppose the Sphinater Muscle of the Bladder were sufficient, if it were
converted into Mummy, and beaten into powder; for it will be found to be a very
difficult thing to beat the whole Bladder into powder; besides it is the
Sphinater Muscle which is in fault in our Bladder; therefore if that only of
the Sheeps or Goats Bladder be used, the Remedy is agreeable to the Disease.

4. I remember once I cured a great Lubber, that could not lie all night
without pissing a bed, nor remain a quarter of an hour in the day time without
pissing, by only advising him to drink no other drink, then what had been tied
up twelve hours in a sheeps bladder; and as ^ have been since informed, he is
perfectly cured by it.

5. Give him for three days in the Wane o^ the Moon, the Bladder of a
fresh water fish.

6. The Brain of a Hare converted to Mummy, and given in Wine to drink, causes
the Patient to hold his water.

7. Galangal taken inwardly, is a good remedy to stop the involuntary flowing
of the water, if it come of a cold cause, as I am of opinion it always does.

8. The Lungs of a Kid bound warm under the Navel, withholdeth the distillation
of urine, says my Author; yet my opinion is, that if they be medicinable for
the disease, the best way is to apply them to the Neck of the Bladder.

9. My own Child was troubled with this disease when very young, whom I cured
with these remedies; First I got Alehoof, and chopped it very small, but washed
it not, and having sprinkled it with strong white Wine Vinegar, applied to her
Wrests.

Then I took three Holly-leaves, the fullest of prickles I could get, and
boiled them in her drink: These medicines I learned of an Italian, which indeed
cured her.

CHAP. 10. Of swelling of the Cods.
THis disease comes sometimes of humors falling down into the Scrotum, and
sometimes only wind gathering there.

2. Take Bean-flour, make it into the thickness of a Poltiss with juice of
Dwarf-Elder, and common Oil, and apply it warm to the Cods, it will presently
allay the Swelling.

3. A Poltiss made of the bark or leaves of Elder, or dwarf-Elder will do the
like.

4. Goats-dung dissolved in Wine, and the Cods bathed therewith, takes away the
swelling.

5. The decoction of Marjoram also does the like, if it be used in like manner.

6. But before all these, I prefer the decoction of Vervine and Plantane to
bathe the place with.

CHAP. 11. Of the Priapismus.
THe Priapismus, or continual standing of the Yard, is a disease exceeding
painful and dangerous, proceeding usually from a superabundance of hot and
moist windy vapors possessing the seminal vessels.

2. Let such as are subject to this disease, use cool and moist diet,
especially let them eat much Purslane and Lettice.

3. Hemlock bound to the Privities, presently asswageth the disease.

4. Let such as are subject to this disease, avoid all Venerial thoughts; for
nothing in the world stirs the body to action more then thoughts do.

CHAP. 12. To provoke the Terms.
A Plaster made of Galbanum, and applied to the Navel, does mightily provoke
them.

2. Herbs medicinal to provoke them, are Calamint, Penerial, Betony, Sage,
Marjoram, Savory, Mugwort, etc.

3. The powder of Calamint works very violently upon the Feminine parts, and
therefore a dram of it taken in white Wine every morning, is a very probable
remedy to provoke them; only have a special care you give it not to women with
child, because it destroys the fruit of her Womb.

4. One caution let me give you before I go any further, whatsoever you give to
provoke the Terms, give it the Moon increasing, and the nearer the full the
better; for you will find it an Herculian task, to bring them down in the Wane
of the Moon, especially in such as never yet had them.

5. The root of a white Lilly roasted soft in the embers, and stamped with Oil,
and appl^ed to the Matrix, it mightily opens the passages thereof, and brings
down not only the Terms, but also the dead child.

6. A Pessary made of Wool dipped in the juice of Sage, is a very good remedy
to provoke the Terms; and indeed so is Sage taken any way; and it is very
probable, that the use of drinking Sage-Ale took its rise from hence

7. It is good to make a bathe of all such things as provoke the Terms, and
having put it in a Close-stool, let the diseased party sit over it.

8. Cinnamon, and Cassia Lignea provoke the Terms exceedingly, and would be
more used, were they not so common.

9. Bitter Almonds stamped, (being first blanched) and used as a Pessary, not
only to provoke the Terms, but also cleanse the Womb of ill humors.

10. Half a dram of the powder of Steel given in the morning in white Wine,
will bring them down.

11. I knew once a young Virgin in Service in London, who was broken out all
about her body, her face, and all in rough bunches, not much unlike those of
the French Disease; and she lay under that scandal, that she had that disease;
I was sent for to see her, and examining the matter, found that she never had
the Terms, I presently conceived that to be the cause, and by administering
only such Medicines as provoke them, cured her in a short time.

12. Once I had a Patient aged about thirty, a Widow, in whom they were
stopped, by reason of grief; and when I could provoke them no other way, about
the full of the Moon I advised her to drink a gallon of Posset drink made with
white Wine; in two hours time before she went to bed, I think she drank a
pottle at least within the time, and the next day they came down; the reason is
clear.

CHAP. 13. To stop the Terms.
BEfore I come to Medicines, I thought good to give notice of this, that those
things which strengthen the Womb, both provoke the Terms when they are
stopped, and also stop them when they flow immoderately; such be stinking
Arrach, Cinnamon, Cassia Lignea, etc.

2. Therefore the extract of Arrach made into Pills with the powder of the same
Herb, is excellent good both to provoke them, and also to stop them.

3. If the cause of their immoderate flowing be some vein broken, as sometimes
it is, then to take the syrup of Clounswound-wort inwardly, is an excellent
remedy.

4. Neither do I think the syrup of Comfrey, or of Solomons-seal to come much
behind it.

5. Make a Pessary or Goats-dung, and the juice of Shepherds purse, or
Ribwort, or Plantane, and Yarrow, and Pomgranate-flowers, it helps mightily in
this case.

6. Make a bathe of Plantane, Ribwort, Teazle, Shepheards-purse, Pomegranate
flowers, the rind of an Oak, put it in a Close-stool, and let the diseased
Woman sit over it.

7 As many Grains as a Woman does drink of Corriander-seed, so many days shall
the terms be stopped, says my author: I set it down rather for the oddness of
the conceit, rather then to persuade any one of the truth of it.

8. Red Corral being drunk, stops the terms

9. The ashes of burnt A corns cast up the (...) trix, stops the terms, and
rids the Womb of all filthy noysom humors.

10. The Decoction of Ribwort drunk, is a most excellent remedy to stop the
terms.

11. The water that is found in a hollow Oak, is very good being drunk to stop
the terms.

12. Dried Acorns beaten into powder, and Acorn Cups, and Comfry Roots, and the
Roots of Solomons-seal, of Bistort, Tormentil, and Cinkfoyl, are very good to
take inwardly.

13. The herb St. John's Wort, being beaten into powder and drunk, does stop
both White and Red Flux.

14. Also Dragons blood is much commended for it.

15. The Flowers of Red Archangel, or dead Nettles, stop the Red Flux; the
Flowers of White, the Whites.

16. Many times this Flux comes upon women in Labor, especially such as fall
in Labor before their time; and then it is exceeding dangerous: in such a
case, the speediest cure (for there must be no dallying) is to force away the
conception.

17. If you can save them and dry them and give them her down back again, it
may do wonders.

CHAP. 14. For the fits of the Mother.
THe cause is clearly windy vapors ascending from the Womb upwards.

2. Stamp nettles and apply them to the matrix is very good.

3. Apply a plaster of Galbanum to the Navel, it is a most admirable remedy to
restrain those noysom vapors, I never yet kn^w it fail.

4. It is a strange thing, that many that lie sick of this infirmity, though
their speech be even taken away, yet their pulse gives no indication of any
sickness at all,

5. Therefore if you find any Woman in that case, especially if they fetch
their breath short; do not say they counterfeit, but judge the disease to be
the fits of the Mother.

6. Let her receive stinking Vapors at her Nose, and sweet vapors at her
Privities; for the Womb draws to all sweet things, and flies from all stinking.

7. Nettle-feed beaten into powder, and drunk in Wine; does assuage all pains
of the Womb, and takes away the windiness thereof.

8. Take of extract of Arrach half an ounce, Assa-foetida two drachms, make
them up into Pills with powder of Arrach; and let the diseased Woman take a
scruple morning and evening.

9. The Leaves of Burs, draw the Womb which way you please; therefore in this
disease apply them to the soles of the feet: but in falling out of the Womb,
apply them to the crown of the head.

10. Bur-seeds do the like.

CHAP. 15. Of swellings of the Breasts and Nipples.
THe cause may be either cold taken at the Breasts, which causes inflammations
there, such as women call the Ague in the breast.

2. Or else the curdling of the Milk there, when it is turned into a substance
like Cheese.

3. Sometimes the nipples are so swelled through superfluity of Milk, that the
child cannot draw them.

4. In such a case take Bean flowers, and mix it with the white of an Egg, and
apply unto them.

5. Nettles boiled in Vinegar, and applied to them, instantly helps them.

6. Crumbs of Bread mixed with the juice of Smallage, and applied unto the
Breasts, helps them when the Milk is curdled in them.

7. If there be any hollow Ulcer in the Breast, Goats-dung mixed with Honey,
soon, easily, and gently cleanses out all the filth, and heals it.

8. A Poltiss made of Mallows, Chickweed, Malt-flour, and Sheeps-suet, takes
away the Ague in the Breast without breaking.

9. Goats-dung mixed with Vinegar, and applied plaister-wise, dissolves the
curdled Milk.

10. The ashes made of a Dogs Head, helps cankrous Ulcers of the Breast.

11. Pigeons-dung mixed with Honey, is of great efficacy in knotted Breasts.

12. Knot-grass being carried about the person, takes away the swelling of the
Nipples incontinently.

13. The Breasts anointed with the grease of a Hedgehog, helps the curdling of
Milk, and opens the Pores exceedingly; also if the Nipples be swelled, anoint
them with it, it instantly helps them.

14. The shells of Partridges Eggs stamped, and mingled with Tar, helps the
Nipples when they are so chapped, that they are ready to fall off.

Crab-claws taken inwardly, are very good in all diseases of the Breast; yet my
opinion at present is, that the whole Crab converted into Mummy, and taken a
dram at a time, is better.

CHAP. 16. Of Childe-birth.
DAte stones beaten into powder, and given in Wine does give most wonderful
ease to women in labor.

2. Dip a linen cloth in the juice of Parsley, and put it up the Privities, it
causes the deliverance of the dead child.

3. The same being drunk, brings away the Afterbirth.

4. It is also it very good thing, being taken inwardly, to cleanse the Womb of
ill humors; and therefore a syrup of it ought to be kept always in the House,
it furthers conception much.

5. Polipodium stamped well, and applied to the feet of a woman in travel,
brings away the child, whether it be alive or dead.

6. Castorium, or the spirit of it taken inwardly, is held to be very good.

7. The ashes of an Asses-hoof mixed with Oil, and the Privitives anointed with
it, is a very good and easy remedy.

8. Also give unto a Woman in this case another Woman's Milk to drink; it
causes speedy delivery.

9. The decoction, or rather the juice of Vervine, given to drink to a woman in
travel, causes speedy deliverance also.

10. A dram of Myrrh given in powder to drink in any convenient liquor,
brings the child away, whether it be alive or dead.

11. Boil Mugwort in water till it be a Poltis, and apply it hot to the Thighs
of a woman laboring with child, it causes both birth to come away; and if
you let it tarry long there, it will bring the Womb away also.

12. Dittony in powder given a dram at a time to a woman laboring with a dead
child, brings it away.

13. Take Peony-seed in powder, mix it with so much Oil, that you may make it
into a Plaster, and apply to the small of the back of a woman in labor,
according to the opinion of my Author, it causes delivery without pain.

14. A suffumigation made of the Horns and Hooss of a Goat, being put in a
Close-stool, the woman sitting over it, wonderfully moves the Womb to
deliverance.

15. Betony is held to be a precious herb to be taken inwardly in this case.

16. It is reported, but whether it be true or no, I know not, that if there be
any Pears in the room where a woman is in labor, they wonderfully hinder
delivery.

17. Juniper Berries eaten, or rather the distilled spirit of them drunk,
causes delivery both of the child and after-burthen.

18. Dissolve a Swallows-nest in water, strain it, and let the woman laboring
with child drink the water, a good draught of it at a time, it causes the
birth of the child to be very easy.

CHAP. 17. Of the Gout.
TOwn cresses stamped, and made in a Poltiss, adding a little Sheeps-suet to it
to keep it moist, and applied to the place, is a very good remedy.

2. The place being anointed continually with Rape-seed-oyl, will in time help
the disease without any other remedy.

3. The root of a Hollyhock, or else of a Marsh-mallow being stamped and mixed
with the grease of an old Dog, and applied to the place, will help the Gout in
three days time.

4. The seed of Plantane being beaten into powder, and mixed with Hog's Grease,
and applied to the place, is a great help against the Gout.

Take Mustard seed, Figs, and Honey, a little Bread, and a little Vinegar, beat
them all together, and bind them to the grief.

Take the flesh of a fat Cat, the grease of a Goose, of a Badger, and of a Fox,
Ivy-berries, Sage, Rue, Virgins-wax, Frankincense, the Yolks of roasted Eggs,
and snails; put all these in an earthen pot that has a hole made in the bottom
for the purpose: lute the top of it close with paste, that no Air may go out
nor in, and put the bottom of this pot into the mouth of another whole pot,
that is fit to receive it, and lute them close together; then dig a hole in the
earth fit to receive the undermost pot, and cover it up close with earth; then
make a fire about the uppermost, and there will distill out of it a most
excellent Ointment to cure the Gout.

7. Take six Bats or Flittermice, boil them in rainwater with a few sprigs of
Willow; it makes an excellent Bath to cure the Gout.

8. The Gouty place being anointed with Oil of Henbane, takes away the pain.

9. Take Snails and bruise them, and apply them to the place; is a most
admirable remedy.

10. Kill a puppy dog that is not thirty days old, and anoint the grieved
place with its blood.

11. Take a whelp of the age aforesaid, and roste him, and when he is half
roasted, cut him through the midst; and apply him hot to the grieved place.

12. Henbane heat hot between two Tilesherds, and applied to the place, helps
the disease.

13. Make a plaster with Opium, Saffron, and the Yolks of Eggs, and apply to
the place.

14. Make an Ointment with Emmets and their Eggs, and Hog's Grease, adding a
little Baysalt to it, and anoint the grieved place with it.

15. The distilled Spirit of Misletoe, the grieved place being bathed with it,
is as excellent a remedy for the Gout as most is.

16. The ashes of burnt Time mingled with the White of an Egg, and plaistered
upon the place, helps the Gout.

17. A Bath made with Water, wherein Emmets and their Eggs being first bruised,
have been boiled; does quickly help the oldest Gout that is.

18. A most admirable remedy for the Gout, but that is very difficult to be
gotten in these parts, is to anoint the place with the grease of a Lion.

19. Gallen says that the ashes of Coleworts being mixed with Hog's Grease,
will help the Gout in three days time; if it be anointed with it.

20. The dung of a Stork mixed with Hog's Grease, helps the Gout; though of
long continuance.

21. An Ointment made of Rosa Solis, and Hog's Grease, is an excellent remedy.

22. Hermodactils beaten into powder, and made with an Ointment in to
Hog's Grease, is very good.

23. Pigeons-dung boiled in Wine, till the Wine be consumed, and used as a
plaster, helps the Gout.

24. Take a pound of wax, five pound of good Oil, a pound of good Wine; boil
them together till the Wine be consumed: afterward mingle therewith two
drachms of Euphorbium in powder make an Ointment thereof; the effects thereof
has been proved in Gouts of all sorts.

25. A dram of the Juice of the rind of a Popplar-tree being drunk every
morning, is an excellent remedy; if you cannot get a dram of the Juice,
bruise the Bark, and make a strong Decoction of it; and of that you may drink a
quarter of a pint.

CHAP. 18. For the Fistula and other hollow Ulcers.
MIngle the Milk of Spurge with Hog's Grease, and boil them together till they
be well incorporated, then put a little powder of Myrrh to them; anoint the
tent with this Ointment, and put it into the hole of the Fistula; and it will
cleanse it of all manner of filth.

2. Take of Plantane, Ribwort, Primrose-Leaves, and Dazies; dry them and beat
them into powder, and let him that has a Fistula, take three drachms of this
powder in a day inward in any convenient Liquor, viz. one in the morning,
another at noon, and the third at night: it is a sovereign cure for all sorts
of Fistula's and hollow Ulcers; if they be cureable; if not, my Author says
the Patient will vomit up the Medicine again.

3. The ashes made of a Dogs-head, being burnt in a new pot, helps any
Fistula or Canker, and cleanses the hollow U^cer of all his filthiness.

4. If the Fistula have many holes, or if there be but one, and that one be so
straight that it will not admit of a Tent, as many times it happens by reason
of hardness of the lips; in such a case there is no better remedy then this:
take Goats-dung and boil it well with Honey; then strain it when it is hot, and
drop a little of it warm into the hole; it takes away the Swelling, and
draws out the Filth and Corruption, purges away the rotteness, and heals
up the Fistula.

5. If the Fistula be outward, put thereto the Juice of Doves-foot, and it
will heal it; if it be inward drink it inwardly, and it will do the like.

6. Let such as are troubled with Fistula's take a dram of Myrobalans in
powder every morning; if the cause come of Melancholy, let him take the powder
of Indian Myrobalans, but if it proceed of Choler, use Citron Myroba^ans.

7. If it be a woman that have the Fistula, drop into it the Juice of a Cows
turd; but if it be a man that has it, let it be Juice of a Bulls ^urd.

8. The Juice of Plantane put into the hol^owness of the Fistula, will help it.

9. The Juice of Ribwort, and the Juice of Pimpernel will do the like.

10. If the Fistula be clean, a Tent made of Lead being put into it will cure
it; you may pull (...) out now and then if you please, and put it in ^gain.

11. Let such as are troubled with Ulcers or Fistula's use Avens in their
ordinary drink.

12. The distilled water of Nightshade, is excellent good to wash hollow
Ulcers; but in my opinion, the Spirit of the Herb is ten times better.

CHAP. 19. Of the Leprosy.
TAke an adder, cut off the Head and Tail, and cleanse him of his Skin and
Entrails; then boil him in Wine, and make him into Troches with a few crumbs of
bread; of which let the Patient take a dram every morning in a quarter of a
pint of the Wine wherein he was boiled: if this begin to make his body swell,
take him to a Hot-house and let him sweat, and after sweating let his whole
body be anointed with the liquor wherein the Adder was boiled; and you shall
find the whole flesh and skin will be renewed, and the Patient perfectly cured.

2. Viper Wine, if it be well made, must needs also be very good in this case.

3. Make a strong Decoction of Adders in water, then let Corn lie in steep in
the water certain days, and feed Hens with the same Corn; let them eat no
other meat nor drink, no other drink but the water it was steeped in; and in
few days you shall see their Feathers will fall off: when all their feathers
are off; then kill them and boil them, and let the Leoprous person eat them,
and drink the water wherein they were sodden, and bathe his body in it, or at
least wise so much of it as is troubled with the Leprosy.

4 Take a Snake and roste her with salt, afterward burn her in a pot well
closed, while she may be all brought into powder; of which we may give a dram
at a time in any convenient Liquor to him that has the Leprosy.

CHAP. 20. Of Warts.
THough Warts themselves be no terrible disease, yet are they but an ill
savoured Ornament to the hands, and a worse to the face.

2. Put the feet of Hens in hot Embers, till the scales thereof be separated
and shrunk from her Legs; and with the same scales while they be warm rub your
warts, and in three or four days so doing it will drive them away.

3. The rind of a Willow-tree burnt, and the ashes tempered with Vinegar, and
applied plaister-wise to the warts, takes them away.

4 Agrimony stamped with Vinegar, and applied to them, does the like.

5. Purslane rubbed upon Warts, has this property, that it will pluck them up
by the roots.

6. Take a red Snail and cut her overthwart the back, and save the liquor that
comes from her; the which blend with a little Baysalt being first dried and
beaten into powder, and apply it to the Warts, and it will instantly kill them.

7. The Milk of a Fig Tree if a little of it be put upon Warts, it takes them
away by the Roots without any pain at all.

CHAP. 21. To draw any Thorn or Splinter out of the Body.
SOuthernwood made into an Ointment with Hog's Grease, of its own property
draws out any Splinter, or thorn, or Iron, out of the body of man.

2. Goose-dung mingled with the Juice of Betony, does the like.

3. The ashes of burnt Swallows mixed with Vinegar, and applied, has the like
operation.

4. Polipodium stamped with Hog's Grease, and applied to the grief; is very good
also.

5. The root of Gladen being stamped, and applied to the place, is good in the
same operation; for it draws out, not only Thorns and Splinters, but also
pieces of broken Bones,

6. Also if it he drunk inwardly, it is exceeding good in all manner of bruises.

7. Betony being made into an Ointment with Hog's Grease, is excellent good to
draw out pieces of broken bones; especially in the head.

8. Stamp the Root of Elecampany with the grease of a Hedgehog and a little
Honey; and apply it to the place, it draws out Thorns, or any thing else that
is fastened in the body of man.

9. Snails bruised and applied to the place, is a remedy inferior to none

The Expert LAPIDARY.

OR A Physical Treatise OF THE SECRET VIRTUES OF STONES.

BY Nich. Culpeper, Gent. late Student in Physic and Astrology.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill, 1659.

THE Expert Lapidary: OR A Physical Treatise of the secret Virtues of Stones.
1. Jacinth.
OF these there are two kinds, red, which is the best; the other like a
Carbuncle, which is presently changed by the fire, and of a small bigness.

This Stone being carried about a man, preserves a man from hurt by lightning,
and preserves him from the plague; if it be brought near to any that has the
plague, it loses its luster, splendour, and brightness; so it does being
brought near to any poison; being beaten into powder, and so taken inwardly, or
born whole about a man, it provokes sleep, and increases honor and wisdom.

Authors for this, Cardanus and Wicker.

2. Sapphire.
THis being born about one, helps all diseases of the skin, as Morphew, Itch,
Scabs, Ring-worms, etc. keeps back sweating, makes men chaste, causes
strength, and a good color, takes away vain fears, helps Necromancy, and
troubles by Necromantick Apparitions, by divine gift; it makes the mind quiet,
godly, and safe; being drunk inwardly, it helps such as are bit by venomous
Beasts and Scorpions, inward Ulcers, Poison and Pestilence, flesh growing in
the Eyes, strengthens and makes glad the heart, being mixed with other
Medicines for the same purpose; it asswageth Carbuncles by being touched with
it; being worn, it defends from the Pestilence; inwardly taken, it helps Ulcers
in the inner parts, and burstness.

Authors for this,

Albertus magnus, Garcias, Cardanus, Dioscorides, and Gallen.

3. Emerald.
OF Emeralds there are three sorts, the best comes from Scilicia, and is the
softest; the next from Peru, which is harder, and not so deep a color, but
more perspicuous and glistering; the third (which is the worst) comes from the
West Indies, and is of a dull color, scarce to be seen through; scarce any
that come from Peru are without spots.

They rejoice most in their own light, and are of more force by night, then by
day; no Stone more safe to carry about one, then this, the Sapphire, and Jacinth.

This Stone stays lust, and according to Cardanus, and Albertus magnus, they
will break, if they be about a man when he deflours a Virgin.

Being born about one, it stays the Vertigo, or dizziness in the head,
strengthens the memory, stays inordinate passions and affections, helps the
sight, causes love of Study, increases riches; being held under the tongue,
it is good to divine with, it causes eloquence.

Being taken inwardly, it cures the Falling Sickness, bloody Flux; it
resists Poison, and helps vain fears, as of Fairies, Night-Hags, Devils, etc.
it helps folly and anger, and brings a good condition.

Cardanus, Albertus Magnus, Garcias, and Aristotle.

4. Ruby.
RUby is a red Stone shining like fire, it restrains lust being born about
one; but most of all, being taken inwardly, it resists the Pestilence,
preserves the body sound, strengthens the vital spirits, thereby taking away
evil thoughts, and making the man nimble-witted, cheerful, and therefore
fortunate.

Cardanus, and Wicker.

5. Granate.
OF this Stone there are two sorts, East and West, and the West are supposed to
be best; they are of the quality of the Earth and Fire; being worn outwardly,
or taken inwardly, they resist sadness, but take away sleep; they strengthen
the heart, but hurt the brain as much; they stir the blood, and make men angry.
The Easternly work the same effects, but not so violently.

Cardanus, and Wicker.

6. Sardine.
OF Sardine there are three sorts in the Indies, to wit, red, fat, and that
with silver creases, but the best of all come from Babylon; being born about
one, they keep away evil dreams, quicken the wit, bridle in the blood and
choler, and make men conquerours in strifes and suits of Law, and increase
riches.

Cardanus, Pliny.

7. Diamond.
A Diamond is the hardest of all Stones, and most effectual in whatsoever
virtue it has; it wonderfully prevails against night-fears, therefore must of
necessity prevail against melancholy and choler adust; or it may do it by
strengthening the heart, for fear comes through weakness of the vital spirits,
and is known by the beating or motion of the heart. It is reported to make
those unfortunate that wear them: for it is so to the Heart, as the Sun is to
the Eye, though it be light it self, yet it dazles the eyes, and makes them
blind, if you look upon him; the best way then to wear them, is at a distance
from the body; they make men undaunted, therefore they are best for Cowards to
wear: they are ill to wear for dishonest people, for they make them bold to do
mischief.

Cardanus, and Garcias.

8. Amethist.
OF these there are two sorts, the one white like Crystal, and hardly known
from it; the other of a Violet color: the best are brought out of India, they
make men staid, and watchful; being bound to ones Navel, they keep him from
drunkeness, they are profitable in fights and huntings; they quicken the wit,
take away sleep, and vapors that flow into the head; being laid in Wine all
night, and the Wine drunk in the morning, they make women fruitful, and resist
poison. Cardanus.

9. Bezoar.
THere are two sorts, East and West Bezoar; the East is best, it has no
obnoxious quality with it, if you take never so much of it; being taken
inwardly, it is profitable against the bitings of venomous beasts, and all
melancholy diseases, as Leprosy, Itch, Scabs, Quartane Agues, Ring-worms,
etc. It has been known to cure men past hope, and left off by Physicians, and
has restored them to their former health; it resists poison; a little of it
in powder being put upon a Wound made by a venomous Beast, sucks out the
poison: or being made into Lozenges with Rose Water, it is a Preservative
against all manner of poison.

Garcias.

10. Topaze.
TOpaze is a Stone of a green color, being rubbed upon a Physical Whetstone,
to wit, a Whetstone of Cypress, it produces an Oil which will cure diseases in
the Eyes; also it is helpful for Dropsies and Consumptions. If you put it into
a vessel of boiling water, it cools the water so, that you may presently thrust
in your hand, and take it out, without any hurt to your hand.

Epiphanius, Albertus magnus.

11. Snakes Stone.
CAtch a Water-snake, and draw a string through his tail, and hang him up with
his head downwards, a vessel of water being under, into which he may gape, and
after certain hours or days he will vomit a Stone, which falling into the
water, will drink it all up: this Stone being bound to the Belly of one that
has the Dropsy, draws out, and drinks up all the water.

Hollerius.

12. Toad Stone.
A Todes Stone by gentle touching, or stroaking, takes away the pain,
inflammation, and swelling from any Wound, made by any venomous Creature, and
instantly draws out the poison; therefore if a Rat, Be, Wasp, Spider, Hornet,
or any other venomous Creature, have hurt any part about thee, touch the place
gently with this Stone, and the pain and swelling will cease.

Take a Toad, and tie her up in a purse full of holes, and lay it in an
Emmet-hill, and when the flesh is all eaten away, you may find the Stone, if
there be any; for all Toads have it not.

If you accidentally get such a one, and desire to know whether it be right or
no, hold it near to a live Toad, and if it be good and true, she will proffer
to take it away.

Wicker, Lemnius.

13. Alectorius.
THis is a Stone found in the ventricle of an old Cock; it is of the bigness of
a Bean, it makes him that bears it, beloved, constant, and bold; makes them
beloved of Women, and strong in the sports of Venus, being held under the
tongue it quenches thirst.

Lemnius, Albertus Magnus.

14. Jasper.
Jasper being borne about one, stops Bleeding, helps Travel in Women, stays
Lust, cures Agues and Dropsies, and chears the heart.

Garcias, Albert. Mag. Mathiolus.

15. Nephriticus.
THis is a stone which being borne about one, stays the pains in the Reins,
and Stomach, expels Stone, and Gravel.

A certain man being troubled with the Stone, wearing this Stone about him,
voided so much Gravel, that he feared the quantity would do him harm being
cast out, it was so exceeding great; therefore he laid off the Stone, and
presently he voided no more Gravel; but being pained again, he wore the Stone,
and presently the pain ceased, and abundance of Gravel; and small Stones came
from him; for it is of that admirable faculty, being borne about one, next the
skin, that it preserves from the pain of the Stone, and cools the Reins.

Another of ten years of age was pained with the Stone, and wearing a Bracelet
of these Stones, never was troubled with it afterward.

Nich. Monardis, Wicker.

16. Tiburones.
IN the Indian sea are caught fish, called Tiburones, being great, strong,
fighting fish, and of a terrible aspect, which daily fights with the Sea Wolves
in their heads is found three or four Stones, and sometimes more, very white,
great and heavy; so that sometimes one of them weighs two pound: the powder of
them cures the Stone in the Reins and Bladder, and difficulty of Urine; and is
of no taste at all.

Nich. Monardis.

17. Boodstone.
THis is a kind of Jasper, being worn next the skin, it stops bleeding either
at the nose or mouth, or by wound; it stops the Hemorrhoydes or Piles, and
stays the Courses in Women: this it does (as experience teaches) either by
dipping the Stone in cold water, and holding it it in the hand, or by binding
it to the place, so it touch the skin.

N. Monardis.

18. Haematites.
LApis Haematites is binding and a little heating, and extenuating; it cures
Scars and Scurf in the eyes, being mingled with Honey; and eyes that be
Bloodshed, being mingled with Woman's milk: it is given in Wine against
difficulty of Urine, and overflowing of the Courses in Women; and in Juice of
Pomegranates, to such as Vomit blood.

Wicker.

19. Sea Sand.
IF a man that has the Dropsy, stand up to the neck in Sea-sand, by the
Seaside, in a hot day, it will drink up all the water and cure the Disease.

Wicker.

20. Whetstone of Cypress.
A Whetstone of Cypress, that which comes off from it by whetting, stays the
falling off of Hair, and causes it to grow in bald places, it keeps the
breasts of Virgins from growing; being drunk with Vinegar, it consumes the
Milt, and cures the Falling sickness.

Wicker.

21. Aetites,
THere are four sorts of these, but the best comes from Afric, and are found
in an Eagles nest, which is very little and soft having another little one
within it; and is thought to be the female. The Male come from Arabia, and is
hard like a Gaul, having another hard Stone within it, and is of a reddish
color,

The third comes from Cypress, and is like that which comes from Afric, but
is bigger, and has sand and little stones within it.

The fourth is called Taphiusius, from the place whence it comes, and is found
in Rivers; it is white and round in form: this is the worst of all.

These all jointly are called Lapis pregnans, or a Stone with Child, because
it carries another Stone within it.

If this Stone be given to a thief in bread, he cannot swallow it down, or if
you boil it in any thing, and give the Decoction to any that has stolen any
thing from you, he cannor drink it though the Stone be out.

Being bound to the Neck or Arm of a Woman, it strengthens conception, and
stays miscarriage; in the time of her Labor, if it be bound to the inner part
of her Thigh, near the place of conception, it causes her to have an easy
labor, almost without any pain: but be sure you take it away so soon as she is
delivered, for fear of further mischief.

Pliny, Disocorides, Lemnius.

22. Chelidonius.
IF you take young Swallows out of their nest before the full Moon, you shall
find two little Stones in their Ventricles: the one reddish, the other black:
these ought never to touch the earth, but be kept close wrapped up in Bullocks
or Stags leather; the former being bound under the Armeholes, helps the
Falling Sickness, the other Fevers.

Thus Albertus Magnus.

Some say if you prick out their eyes, the Old one will bring a Stone which
will recover their sight; and some say she does it by Celandine; the Stone will
remain in their Ventricle: I have tried this, I pricked out the eyes of some in
a nest, and not of others; and I found the Reddish-stone in the Ventricle of
one, whose eyes I pricked out, and she could see again; but in those whose eyes
were not pricked out, there was none; but I never observed the Lunation.

Also they say if you break their Legs, she will bring a Stone which will
instantly cure them; which Stone will be found in the nest.

23. Lincyrius.
LApis Lincyrius, being cast among burning coals quenches them; and if you
wrap it up in a Linen cloth, not only that, but the cloth also, will remain
unburned even in the midst of the hottest fire.

It wonderfully helps forward the Travail of Women.

Epiphanius.

24. Jet. 25. Amber.
IEt being beaten into a very fine powder, and given to a Woman fasting, in
White Wine, will presently make manifest whether she be a Virgin or no; for if
she presenlty make Water, her Virginity is lost; if not, the contrary.

The same effect also has Amber; both of them, or either of them being hung
about ones Neck, are profitable against distillation of Phlegm into the Throat
and Lungs.

Baptista Porta. Mathiolus

26. Lapis Lazuli.
IT is a Stone of a Sky color; the best of them have spots in them like stars
of gold, and are found in Gold Mines: being given inwardly, they purge
Melancholy notably. So they do meanly: being carried about one, they make the
bearer of them merry, fortunate, and rich.

Dioscorides, Cardanus, Med. Florentini.

27. Blatta Bizantia
BEing beaten into powder, and snuffed up into the Nose, helps the fits of the
Mother, and such as have the Falling sickness; being taken inwardly, it
looseneth the Belly.

Dioscorides, Medici Coloniensis.

28. Pearls.
PEarls help trembling in Old men, Convulsions and Frenzies, preserve the body
sound, and restore lost health; both amend and increase milk in Nurses, correct
the seed and failings in the parts of generation, helps eating Ulcers, Cankers,
and the Hemorrhoydes.

Dardanus Wicker.

29. Corral.
OF Corral there are three sorts, Black, White, Red; the first is most rare,
the second most common, the third most excellent.

Let a Child newly born take ten grains of Red Corral in powder, in a little
Breast Milk, before it taste any other food, and it will never have the
Falling Sickness.

Generally it takes away all inward griefs, restores weak and sick bodies, by
strengthening the heart, resists all Diseases growing in children, by
strengthening nature; cures all Fluxes in Men, Women, and Children; it stops
blood flowing from any part, it stops the Terms in Women if they be
immoderate, else not; and brings their bodies to good temperature.

Arnoldus, Mathiolus, Wicker.

30. Turkey Stone.
THis Stone being worn in a Ring, as sickness comes, or death draws nigh, so it
loses its luster; it looks perfectly blew, in sickness pale; a little before
death perfect white: and so it looks if brought near to any Poison.

This Treatise was revised, and for want of time, left to posterity without
addition.

Nich. Culpeper.
Sol. 18. Aquar. 1652.
Doctor Diets DIRECTORY; OR THE Physicians Vade Mecum.

OR Short, but safe Rules to preserve Health in a Methodical way, passing by
the Impertinencies and Niceties of former Physicians, treating only of
familiar and the most useful things in Diet, such as chiefly nourish and
continue Life.

BY Nich. Culpeper, Gent. late Student in Physic and Astrology.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill, 1659.

Doctor DIETS Directory; OR The Physicians Vade mecum. OR Short, but safe Rules
to preserve Health in a Methodical way, passing by the Impertinencies and
Niceties of former Physicians; treating only of familiar and the most useful
things in Diet, such as chiefly nourish and continue Life.
Courteous Reader,
HAving to my no small grief observed what a stir and a pudder most Writers
have made about Diet, and there Commonplace Practice, I thought fit to reduce
their tedious deviations into this Epitome; that the diligent Student having
recourse to these three Doctors, Diet, Reason, and Experience, might with the
other assistance of the Doctors Dispensatory, be so clearly informed, as to
rest ingeniously satisfied.

Nicholas. Culpeper.


Of Diet.
BY Diet is to be understood the ministering of Meat and Drink, according to the
accustomed natural ordering of it for the substance and temperature; an exact
order of it in labor, Meat, Drink, Sleep, and Venery.

There is none, but if they rightly understand themselves, but may in some
respects be their own Physicians, if they will but rightly consider of those
things that may do them good, and restrain their Appetites from those which are
hurtful. For the latter, as touching those things that are to be avoided, I
shall amongst others briefly advise them to beware of Care, Grief, Pensiveness,
Anger, of Surfeits, and of Venery; to keep good hours, not to break the usual
custom of their sleeps in the night; not to perplex themselves with with too
much worldly business, which brings on age and death. For refreshments, to wash
their hands, and comb often, and every morning to plunge their eyes in cold
water; keep the feet dry, and sometimes wash them, that they may not be too hot
or cold, but in a good temper; keep the head and the neck in the same
indifferent moderation; but more especially to be sure to abstain from too much
Venery, which shortens life. Other particular directions for diet follow in
their order; I shall only instance some few heads, and refer the diligent
Student to the other two Doctors, of Reason and Experience, where this Theme
throughout forty three Diseases is briefly, but sufficiently discoursed of.

Diet for Sanguine Persons.
SAnguine Persons are hot and moist of complexion, wherefore they must be
circumspect in eating of their meat, considering that the purer the complexion
is, the sooner it may be corrupted, and the blood may be the sooner infected.
Wherefore they must abstain to eat inordinately of Fruits, Herbs, and Roots, as
Garlic, Onions, and Leeks; they must refrain from eating of old flesh, of the
brains of beasts, the Udders of Kine. They must use moderate sleep and diet, or
else they will be too fat and gross. Fish of muddy water are not good for them;
and if blood do abound, cleanse it with Stuffs, or by Phlebotomy.

Diet for Phlegmatic Persons.
Phlegmatic Persons are cold and moist, therefore they must abstain from Meats
which are cold. From eating Viscus Meats, specially from all meats which do
engender phlegmatic humors; as fish, fruits, and white meat. Also the eating
of crude Herbs, especially to abstain from meat which is hard, and slow of
digestion, as it appears in the properties of meats above rehearsed. Dwell
not near watrish and mourish Grounds; take Onions, Garlic, Pepper, Ginger, and
all meats, the which be hot and dry; and sawces, the which are sour. These
things following does purge Phlegm; Polipody. Nettle, Elder, Agarick, Ireos,
Maidenhair, and Sticados.

Diet for Chollerick Persons.
Choler is hot and dry, therefore Chollerick Persons must abstain from eating
hot Spices, from drinking of Wine, and eating of Chollerick meat; howbeit the
Chollerick Persons may eat grosser meats then any other of the Complexions,
except their education has been otherwise. They should not long fast: these
things following purge Choler: Fumitory, Centaury, Wormwood, wild Hops,
Violets, Mercury, Manna, Rheubarb, Eupatory, Tamarides, and the Whay of Butter.

Diet for Melancholy Persons.
Melancholy is cold and dry, therefore melancholy men must refrain from fried
meats, and meats which are over salt, that are sour and hard of digestion,
from all meats which are burnt and dry: they must abstain from immoderate
thirst, and from drinking of hot Wines, and gross red Wine; and use these
things, Cows Milk, Almond Milk, Yolks of rear Eggs. Boiled meat is better for
melancholy men then roasted; all meats, the which will be soon digested, and
all meats, the which do engender good blood; and meats, the which are
temperately hot, are good for melancholy men, and so are all herbs which be
hot and moist. These things following do purge melancholy; Quick-beme, Scene,
Sticados, Hart's-tongue, Maidenhair, Pulial-mountain, Borage, Organum, Sugar,
and white Wine.

Of Exercise.
FRom Exercise proceeds two great conveniences, the evacuation of Excrements,
and keeping the body in a good habit; Exercise being a vehement motion, hardens
the members, augments the heat, causes digestion, a quick alteration, and
better nourishment, opens the Pores of the body, and cleanses them; it is so
necessary for health, that where Exercise is wanting, Sickness will ensue.
Learned Writers affirm, that nothing more dulls the body, then sluggishness;
nothing more strengthens it, then labor: notwithstanding for the management of
Exercise, some considerations are to be entertained; the time of Exercise, that
it is not when the body is replenished with Diet not sufficiently digested.
Gallen says, that the best time for Exercise, is when the first and second
digestions are completed, as well in the Stomach, as in the Veins, otherwise
the body is subject to crude humors, and yellow choler: the knowledge of this
time may be perceived by the color of the Urine; for that Urine which
resembles clear water, signifies that the juice which comes from the Stomach is
crude in the Veins; that which is well colored, neither too high nor too low,
signifies that the second digestion is perfected; when the color is very high
or red, it betokens that the concoction is more then suffices; wherefore when
the Urine appears in a temperate color, neither red nor pale, but as it were
gilt, then should Exercise have its beginning.

Of Sleep.
THe commodity of moderate Sleep appears; that the natural heat, which is
occupied about the natural heat whereof nourishment proceeds, is comforted in
the places of digestion; and so digestion is helped and bettered by Sleep, the
mind rendered more quiet and clear, and the humors more temperate: the
moderation of Sleep must be measured by health or sickness, by age or time, by
emptiness or fullness, or by the natural complexion. Phlegmatic persons are
naturally inclined to Sleep, because they engender many humors. Weak stomachs
that digest slowly, are disquieted of their rest. Sleep immediately after meat,
is not wholesome; immoderate Sleep exposes the body to many diseases, heaviness
in the body and eyes; and a savor of the meat before eaten, signifies that the
Sleep was not sufficient. It is most wholesome to sleep on the right side, that
the meat may approach to the Liver, which is to the Stomach, as fire is to the
pot, by it digested; it is good for those that have weak stomachs to sleep on
their bellies: Lying on the back is very unwholesome: unquestionably moderate
Sleep strengthens all the spirits, comforts the body, quiets the humors and
pulses, qualifies the heat of the Liver, is good against melancholy. On the
contrary, immoderate Sleep makes the brain giddy, ingenders Rhume, Aposthumes,
causes the Palsy, Oblivion, and troubles the spirits. Seven hours sleep is
sufficient for Chollerick and Sanguine men; nine hours for Phlegmatic and
Melancholy: those that sleep longer, deserve to be sick of the Lethargy,: In
cases of necessity to procure sleep, take a little Camphire mingled with some
woman's Milk, and anoint the Temples. Otherwise, Take an ounce of the Oil of
Roses, and three drams of Vinegar, and stir them both together, and use them:
Or else take Gallens Medicine, who had got such a habit of watchfulness by his
over much study in his youth, that he was forced to eat boiled Lettice with a
little Butter, when he was old, after Supper.

Of Venery.
THis kind of Excrement is common to all living Creatures, as well Beasts as
Men; for which cause Nature, as a wise Mother, has provided that every
concoction has its excrement, or superfluity; the Stomach sends out dung; the
Liver Urine, the Veins Sweat; so after the third and last concoction, which is
done in every part of the body that is nourished, there is left some profitable
blood reserved by Nature for Procreation, which blood we call the Generative
Seed; the timely evacuation whereof avails much for the bodies health: for by
it the body is made light and disburthened of Phlegm, and other superfluous
humors, which otherwise would wax rank, as may be observed in ancient Maids,
and some chaste Scholars; for besides their secret flames, and imbridled
affections which dispose their minds to extravigant imaginations, we see them
also ill complexioned, by reason of such vaporous fumes which ascend up toward
their cloudy brains. To pass over other inconveniences they are subject to, as
the Green Sickness, the Nightmare, the Spleen, the palpitation and trembling
of the heart, and their polluted dreams; the best advice I can give such
persons, is to marry in the fear of God, and chiefly those are required who are
Sanguine or lean; for such persons abound with blood. Physicians hold the
Winter to be the best time for Carnal Copulation, and in the Springtime, when
Nature is desirous, without the help of Arts and Drugs; and at night when the
stomach is full, and the body somewhat warm, that sleep immediately after it
may lenifie the Lassitude caused through the action thereof. In the Summer, in
May and July, when the Spittle thickens on the ground, it cannot be so
wholesome, nor in frosty w^ather. Immoderate Venery weakeneth the strength,
hurts the brain, extinguisheth radical moisture, and hasteneth on old age and
death; the Sp^rm or Seed of generation being one of the greatest comforters of
life, which being wilfully shed or lost, hurts more then if he should bleed
forty times as much. That Batchelors and Maids may drive away their unclean
dreams at nights, let them refrain from Wine, and Venerious Imaginations, not
use to lie in soft Beds; let them read the Bible, and moral Philosophers, use
exercises; let them eat Agnus Castus, in English Park, and they shall find a
strange effect to follow.

Of Bathing.
BAthing in cold Water, so that the same be clear, clear from Rain, or a silver
colored Brook, in the summer time, before meats, does wonderfully delight
nature, provoke the appetite, and is very good against Rhumes, the Dropsy and
Gout, and causes digestion; you shall find it wonderful expedient sometimes to
bathe the head with hot Lee made of ashes; after which, you must cause one
presently to pour three or four quarts of cold water, then let the head be
dried with cold Towels; the sudden pouring down of the water stirs up the
natural heat of the body, quickneth the memory, keeps from baldness. In the
summer, washing of the hands often, does much avail the eyesight. In the
Winter time, when the Water is cold and Frozen, this kind of artificial Bath
is very expedient and wholesome: take two pounds of Turpentine, four ounces of
the Juice of Wormwood and Wild Mallows, one ounce of fresh ^^cor, one dram of
Saffron, mingle them and seethe them a pretty while, and being hot, wet four
Linen clothes therein, and therewith bathe your self; or else make a Bath
after this manner: take Fumitory Enula Compana Leaves, Sage, Fetherfue,
Rosemary and Wormwood, of each a handful or two; seethe them in a sufficient
quantity of water till they be soft, and put as much as a Walnut of Allom, and
a little Brimstone powder, and therewith bathe the affected places of the body:
he that uses these bathes in convenient time may live healthfully, for by them
superfluous excrements are extracted in sweat. But with this caution I commend
Baths, that no person that is distempered through Venery, Gluttony, Fasting,
Watching or violent Exercise, do enter into them.

Diet for a Fever and Ague.
I Do advertise every one that has a Fever or an Ague, to eat no meat six
hours before his fit does take him; and in no wise as long as the Ague does
endure to put off his shirt or dublet, nor to rise out of the bed but when need
shall require, and in any wise not to go nor take the open Air; for such
provision may be had, that at the uttermost at the third fit, he may be
delivered of the Fever. Let the Patient beware of casting his hands and arms
at any time, or to spraul with his Legs out of the bed; it is good for the
space of three fits to wear continually Gloves, and not to wash the hands. He
is to eat little, and those temperate meats; to refrain from Wine, Beer and
Cider, and all other things whatsoever that are not of a very light digestion.

Diet for the Chollick and the Stone.
THe Iliack and Chollick are engendered of ventosity, the which is intrused or
enclosed in two Guts, the one is called Ilia, and the other is called Colon;
for these two infirmities, one must beware of cold: and it is not good to be
long fasting, and necessary to be laxative, but in no wise to be constupate.
These things following are not good for those which have these aforesaid
infirmities; new bread, stale bread, new ale; they must abstain also from
drinking of Beer, of Cider, of Red Wine, and Cinnamon: also refrain from all
meats that Honey is in, from eating of cold Herbs, Beans, Pease Pottage; beware
of fruits, and of all things the which do engender wind. For the Stone,
abstain from eating of Red herring, Martilmas-beef, and Bacon, salt fish, salt
meats. Beware of going cold about the middle, especially about the Reins of the
back, and make no restriction of wine and water, nor seege, that water would
expel.

Diet for several kinds of the Gout.
They which are troubled with the Gout, or any kind of it, I do advertise them
not to sit too long, forgetting to exonerate the bladder and the belly, when
need shall require; and also to beware the Legs hang not without some stay; nor
that the Boots or Shoes be not over strait: Whosoever has the Gout must
refrain from drinking of new Ale, of Beer, and Red Wine: Also he must not eat
new Bread, Eggs, fresh Salmon, Eels, Fresh Herring, Pilcherds, Oysters, all
shell fish; he must avoid the eating of fresh Beef, of Goose, of Duck, and of
Pigeons: he must beware of taking of cold in his Legs, or riding or going
wetshod. Beware of Venerous acts after refection, or after, or upon a full
stomach, from all things that engender evil humors and are inflative.

Diet for the Lepors.
HE that is infected with any of the four kinds of Leprosy, must refrain from
all manner of Wines, and from new drinks, and strong Ale; let him beware of
riot and surfeiting; let him abstain from eating of Spices, Dates, from Tripes,
Puddings, and all inwards of Beasts; Fish, Eggs, and Milk is not good for him:
he must abstain from eating of fresh Beef, and from eating of Goose, Duck,
water Fowl, and Pigeons; and in no wise to eat Venison, not Hare-flesh and such
like.

Diet for those that are troubled with the Falling Sickness.
WHosoever has any of the kinds of Falling Sickness, he must abstain from
eating of white meats, especially of milk; he must refrain from drinking of
Wine, new Ale, and strong Ale; to eat the fatness of fish, nor the heads of
fish, the which ingenders Rhume; shell fish, Eels, Salmon, Herring, and Viscus
fishes are not good for Epilentick persons: also such must refrain from eating
of Garlic, Onions, Leeks, Chibols, and all Vaporous meats, the which do hurt
the head: Venison, Hare-flesh, Beef, Beans, and Pease are not good; and if they
know that they are infected with this great sickness, they should not resort
where there is great store of company; as in the Church, Sessions, or Market
places; if they do, the sickness will infect them more there, then in any other
place, or at any other time; they must beware they do not sit too nigh the
fire, for the fire will overcome them and will induce the disease: they must
beware of lying too hot in bed, or to labor extremely; for such things cause
the grief to come the ofter.

Diet for the Head Ache,
MAny sicknesses, or infirmities, and impediments may be in a man's head;
wherefore whosoever has any distemper in the head, must not keep the head too
hot nor too cold, but in an equal temper; to beware of ingendring of Rhume,
which is the cause of many infirmities: there is nothing that does engender
Rhume so much, as does the fatness of fish, and the heads of fish, and
surfeits, and taking cold in the feet, and taking cold in the nape of the neck
or head; also they which have an infirmity in the head, must refrain from
immoderate sleep, specially after meat; also they must abstain from drinking of
wine, and use not to drink Ale and Beer, the which is over strong;
vociferation, hallowing, crying, and high singing, is not good for the head:
all things the which are vaporours, or do fume, are not good for the head; all
things the which are of evil savor, as carrion, sinks, wide draughts,
piss-bowls, snuff of candles, dunghills, stinking channels, and stinking
standing waters, and stinking marshes, with such contagious Airs, does hurt the
head, the brain, and memory; all odoriferous savours are good for the head, the
brain, and the memory.

Diet in a Consumption.
HE that is in a consumption must abstain from all sour and tart things; as
Vinegar and Alegar, and such like: and also he must abstain from eating of
gross meats; the which are hard and slow of digestion, and use cordials and
restoratives and nutrative meats: all meats and drinks the which are sweet, and
that sugar is in, are nutrative: wherefore sweet wines are good for them, the
which are in consumptions moderately taken: and sour Wine, sour Ale, and
sour Beer are naught, for they fret away nature; and let them beware that be
in a Consumption of fried and burnt meat which is over roasted: and in any wise
let them shun anger and pensiveness. These things following are good for a
Consumption; a Pig or a Cock stewed, and made in a Jelly, Cockrels stewed,
Goats Milk and Sugar, Almond Milk, in the which Rice is sodden, and Rabbets
stewed, etc.

Diet for those that are short winded.
SHortness of wind comes diverse times of Impediments in the Lungs, and
streightness in the Breast, opilated through viscus Phlegm, when the head is
stuffed with Rhume, called the Pus, stops the breath of his natural course;
wherefore he that has shortness of breach, must abstain from eating of Nuts,
especially if they be old; Cheese and Milk is not good for such, no more is
Fish, and Fruit raw, nor crude Herbs. Also all manner of meat which is hard of
digestion: they must refrain from eating of Fish, especially from eating Fish
which will cleave to the fingers, and is viscus and Phlegmy, and in any wise to
beware of the skins of Fish, and of all manner of meat, the which does engender
Phlegm. Also they must beware of cold, and when any house is a sweeping, to go
out of the house for a space into a clean air. The dust also that rises in the
Streets through the vehemence of the wind, or otherwise, is bad for them; smoke
is evil for them, and so is all things that are stopping. Wherefore it is
expedient for them to be kept laxative.

Diet for the Palsy.
THey which have the Palsy, universal, or particular, must beware of anger,
testiness, and of too much passion, whether of fear, or otherwise; for through
anger or fear, diverse times the Palsy does come: also they must beware of
Drunkenness, and eating of Nuts, coldness, contagious, and stinking, and filthy
airs; of lying upon the ground; the savor of Castory, and the savor of a Fox
is good against the Palsy.

Diet for Mad Folks.
THere is none which has any of the kinds of Madness, but they ought to be
kept up for diverse inconveniences that may otherwise happen; to be confined in
some close house or chamber where there is no light, and that he have a Keeper,
the which the mad man does fear. See that he has no knife, nor shears, nor
other edge-tool, nor that he have no girdle, except it be a weak list of cloth,
for hurting himself. Also the chamber or house that the mad man is in, let
there be no painted clothes, nor painted walls, nor pictures of man or woman,
or fowl, or beast; for such things makes them full of fantasies: let the mad
persons head be shaven once a month; let them drink no Wine, nor strong Ale,
nor strong Beer, but moderate drink: and let them have three times in a day
warm Broth, and a little warm Meat: use few words to them, except it be for
reprehension, or gentle reformation, if they have any wit, or perceiverance to
understand, otherwise they must be kept under with sharper correction.

Diet for the Dropsy.
THe learned agree, that the more one drinks that has the Dropsy, the more he
is a thirst; for although the sickness does come by superabundance of water,
yet the Liver is dry, whether it be Alchites, Iposarca, Lencofflegmancia, or
the Timpany. They that have any of these four kinds of Dropsies must refrain
from all things which be constupate and costive, and use all things which are
laxative. Nuts, and dry Almonds, and hard Cheese are poison to them.

Of ordering of Surfeits.
GAlen declaring on Ipocrates Aphorism, of eating too much meat, says, More
meat then agrees with nature, is called Repletion, or a Surfeit. A Surfeit is
taken as well by gurgitations, too much drinking, as by epulation, of eating of
crude meat, or of more meat then suffices, or can be truly digested. Or else
Repletion, or a Surfeit is, when the stomach is forced, or stuffed, or
repleated with too much drink and meat, that the Liver, which is the fire under
the pot, is suppressed, that he cannot naturally nor truly decoct, or digest
the superabundance of meat and drink, the which is in the pot or stomach:
wherefore diverse times these Impediments do follow.

The tongue is deprived of his office to speak, the wits or senses be dull, and
obnubulated from reason, sloth and sluggishness consequently follows. The
appetite is withdrawn, the head is light, and aches, full of fantasies, and
diverse times some be so sopited, that the Maltworm plays the devil so fast in
the head, that all the world runs round about on wheels; then does the
principal members, and the official members fail of their strength, yet the
pulses be full of agility. Such Repletions, especially such Gurgitations do
engender diverse infirmities, through which, brevity and shortness of life
follows. For the wise man says, That Surfeits do kill many men, and Temperance
does prolong the life. And also it is written, Ecclus. 37. That there does die
many more by Surfeit, then there does by the Sword. For as surfeiting
ingendreth many Infirmities, as the Dropsies, the Gouts, Phlegm, Pimples in the
face, vehement Impressions, undigest Humors, Opilations, Fevers, Putrefaction.
It perturbates the head, the eyes, the tongue, and the stomach, with many other
infirmities. Gallen says, overmuch repletion, or surfeiting, causes
strangulation and sudden death; for as I said, the stomach is so enforced, and
the Liver is so sore oppressed, that natural heat, and the powers are extinct;
wherefore abstinence, for this matter, is the best and the perfectest Medicine;
the Patient being in no wise to eat meat until the stomach be evacuated of all
evil humors by vomit, or other convenient ways; for else crude and raw
undigested humors will increase in the body. Two Meals a day is sufficient for
a resident person. A labourer may eat three times a day. I advertise that the
first refection, or meal, be digested, ere he do eat the second; for there is
nothing more hurtful for man's body, then to lay meat upon meat undigested; for
the last refection or meal, will hinder the digestion of the first refection or
meal. Also sundry meats, of diverse operations, eaten at one refection, or meal,
is unwholesome; nor is it good to sit long at dinner and supper: An hour is
sufficient to sit at dinner, not so long at supper. We English have an evil use
in sitting long at dinner and at supper; at the beginning of dinner and supper
we feed on gross meats, and the best which are wholesome, nutritive, and light
of digestion, are kept for servants; for when the good meat comes to the table,
through feeding upon gross meat, the appetite is extinct. I am unwilling to be
too large on this Subject, and therefore I shall refer thee, Courteous Reader,
to the other two Doctors, of Reason and Experience.

Of several sorts of Drinks.
WAter is one of the four Elements, of the which, diverse Liquors or Drinks for
man's sustenance, are made, taking their original and substance of it; as Ale,
Beer, Mead, and Methegline. Water is unwholesome alone by it self for an
English man, considering the contrary usage, which is not concurrant with
nature: Water is cold, slow, and slack of digestion. The best Water is Rain
Water, if so be that it is clean, and purely taken: Next to it is running
water, the which does swiftly run from the East into the West upon stones or
pibbles: the third Water to be praised, is River or Brook Water, which is clear
running on pibbles and gravel.

Standing Waters, which are refreshed with a fresh Spring, are good; but
standing Waters, and Well Waters, on which the sun has no reflection, although
they be lighter then other running Waters are, yet they are not commendable.
And let every one beware of all Waters which are standing, and putrefied with
froath, docknet, and mud; for if they bake, or brew, or dress meat with it, it
will engender many infirmities. The Water which every man ought to dress his
meat withal, or shall use baking or brewing, let it be running, and put it in
vessels, that it may stand there two or three hours, strain the upper part
through a thick linen cloth, and cast the inferial part away. If any do use to
drink water with wine, let it be purely strained, and then seethe it, and after
it is cold put it into his wine; but it is better to drink with wine stilled
waters, especially the water of Strawberries, of Bugloss, of Borage, of Endive,
of Succory, or the water of Sow-thistle, and Dandelion; and if any one is
troubled with the Stone, or does burn in the pudibunde places, let him use to
drink with white Wine, the water of Haws, and the water of Milk.

Of Wine.
WInes are of Grapes, except Respis, which is made of a berry. Choose your Wine
after this sort, it must be fine, fair, and clear to the eye, fragrant and
redolent, having a good odor and flavor in the nose; it must sparkle in the
glass when it is drawn, or put out of the pot into the glass; it should be cold
and pleasant in the mouth, strong and subtle of substance: moderately drunk,
it does accuate and quicken the wits, comfort the heart, scour the Liver,
especially if it be white Wine, it does rejoice all the powers, and nourish
them; it ingenders good blood, it does comfort and cherish the brain, and it
dissolveth Phleghm; it ingendreth heat, is good against heaviness and
penvesiness, and is full of agility; it is medicinable, especially white Wine;
for it does mundifie and cleanse wounds and sores. The better the Wine is, the
better humors it does engender. Wine ought not to be too new nor to old; high
Wines, as Malmesey may be kept long, because Wine is full of fumosity, it is
good sometimes to allay it with water.

French Wines, and specially Renish Wine, that is fined, is good at meat,
especially Claret Wine It is not good to drink Wine nor Beer before one does
eat, though there be old-fantastical sayings to the contrary. Also these hot
Wines, as Malmesey, Corse Greek Romanisk, Romney, Sack, Alygant, Bastard, Tire,
Osay, Muscadel, Caprick, Tent, Roberdavy, with other hot Wines, are not good to
drink with meat, but after meat with Oysters, with Salads, with Fruit, a
draught or two may be allowed; Old men may drink high Wines at their pleasure:
all sweet and gross Wines cause fatness.

Of Ale.
ALe is made of Malt and Water, and they which do put any other thing into Ale,
except Yest or Barme, do sophistick their Ale. Ale for an English man is a
natural drink. Ale must have these properties, it must be fresh and clear, not
ropy; it must have no Weft nor Tail. Ale should not be drunk under five days
old; new Ale is unwholesome, sour Ale, and dead, and Ale which do stand atilt
is most unwholesome. Barley Malt makes better Ale then Oaten Malt, or any
other corn; it ingenders gross humors, but it causes strength.

Of Beer.
BEer is made of Malt, of Hops, and Water; It is a natural drink for a
Dutchman, and of late it is much used in England to the detriment of many
English men; especially it kills them which are troubled with the Colic,
and the Stone, and the Strangullion; for the drink is a cold drink, and does
inflate the Belly, as it does appear by the Dutch-mens Faces and Bellies; if
the Beer be well served, and be fined, and not new; it does qualify the heat
of the Liver.

Of Cider.
CIder is made of the Juice of Pears, or the Juice of Apples, sometimes of
both; but the Best Cider is made of clean Pears which are Dulcet: it is not
praised in Physic, for Cider is cold of operation, and full of ventosity; it
ingenders evil humors, and does assuage too much the natural heat, hinders
digestion, and hurts the Stomach, except it be to those which are constantly
used to it; it is most in request in Harvest time.

Of Mead.
MEad is made of Honey and Water boiled together, if it be fined and pure, it
preserves health; but it is not good for them which have the Chollick.

Of Metheglin.
MEtheglin is made of Honey, Water, and Herbs boiled and sod together; if it be
fined and stale, it is better then Mead.

Of Whey.
WHey if it be well ordered, especially that Whey the which does come of
Butter, is a temperate drink, and moist; and it does nourish and cleanse the
breast; purges red color of the face: clarified as it ought to be, it purges
moderately and cannot be sufficiently commended.

Posset Ale.
POsset Ale is made with hot Milk and cold Ale, it is a temperate drink, and is
good for a hot Liver, and for hot Fevers, especially if cold Herbs are sod in
it,

Of Coit.
COit is a drink made of water, in the which is laid a sour and a salt Leaven
three or four hours, then it is fit to drink; it is usually drunk in Picardy,
in Flanders in Holland, and in Brabant.

Of Honey.
HOney, as well in meat as in drink, is of admirable efficacy; for it not only
cleanses and nourishes, but it also for a long time preserves that
incorrupted which is put into it; this excellent matter is most wonderfully
wrought and gathered by the little Be. Mead which is made on part of Honey,
and four times so much of pure water boiled till no skin does remain, Galen
highly commends as an excellent drink to preserve health. There are many rare
qualities in Honey which I intend hereafter particularly to write of.

Of Bread.
A Vicen says, that bread made of Wheat causes fat, especially when the bread
is of new Wheat. Bread made of fine flour without Leaven, is slow of digestion,
but it does nourish, if it be truly ordered and well baked: when it is Leavened
it is soon digested, as some old Authors affirm. But bread having too much
brand in it is not laudible. In Rome and other high countries, their Loaves of
bread are little bigger then a Walnut, and many little Loaves joined together,
which do serve for great men, and are saffroned; I praise it not. I do love
Manchet bread, and great Loaves which are well molded and through baked, the
brand abstracted.

Bread made of Mestling, or of Rye.
MEstling-bread is made half of Wheat and half of Rye; and there is also
Mestling made half of Rye and half of Barley. Some strange people will put
Wheat and Barley together. Bread made of these aforesaid grain or corns, thus
potched together may satisfy the belly, but will never do good to man no more
then horse-bread, or bread made of Beans and Pease. Howsoever this matter does
go much by the education or the bringing up of the people which have been used
to such bread. Barley does engender cold humors; Pease and Beans, and the
substance coming from them are windy (...) but if one have an appetite to eat
and drink of (...) grain besides Malt or Barley, let him drink of what may be
made of Oats, for Haver-cakes in Scotland are many a good Lierd and Lierds
Dish; and if it will make good Haver-cakes, consequently it will make good
drink. Good bread does comfort, confirm, and stablish a man's heart. Hot Bread
is unwholesome for any one, for it does lie in the stomach like a sponge,
exhausting undecocted humors; yet the smell of new Bread is comfortable to the
Head, and to the Heart.

Simnels, and Cracknels, and Bread baked on a stone, or on iron, and Bread that
Saffron is in, is not so wholesome.

Burnt Bread, hard Crusts, and pasty Crusts do engender Choler adust, and
Melancholy humors. Wherefore chip the upper Crusts of your Bread, and whosoever
does use to eat the second Crust after meat, it makes him lean; and so does
Wheaten Bread, the which is full of Bran.

Bread which is nutritive, and praised in Physic, should have these
properties. First, it must not be new, but a day and a night old; it is not
good when it is past four or five days old, except the Loaves be great; it
must not be moldy nor musty, well molded, it must be through baked; it must not
be heavy, temperately salted. Old Bread or stale, does dry up the blood, or
natural moisture of man, and it does engender evil humors, and hinders
digestion: wherefore there is no Surfeit worse, then the eating of bad bread
occasions.

Of Broaths in general.
ALl manner of liquid things, as Pottage, and other Broaths, do repleat one
that eats them with ventosity. Pottage is not so much used in all Christendom,
as in England. Pottage is made of the liquor in the which flesh is sod, with
putting to chopped Herbs, and Oatmeal, and Salt. The Herbs, with the which
Pottage is made withal, if they be pure, good, and clean, not worm-eaten, nor
infected with the corrupt air desending on them, they comfort notwithstanding
their ventosity. But for as much as diverse times many parts of England are
infected with the Pestilence through the corruption of the air, which does
infect the Herbs; in such times it is not good to make Pottage, nor to eat them.

Of Furmity.
FUrmity is made of Wheat, and Milk; for it is hard of digestion. But when it
is digested, it does nourish and strengthen.

Of Pease Pottage and Bean Pottage.
PEase Pottage, and Bear Pottage does repleat with ventosity. Pease Pottage is
better then Bean Pottage, for it is sooner digested, less windy; they are both
abs^^^ine, and do cleanse the body. Bean Pottage increase gross humors.

Of Almond Milk, and Rice Pottage
ALmond Milk, and Rice Pottage. Almonds are hot and moist, it does comfort the
Breast, and it does mollify the Belly, and provokes Urine. Rice Pottage made
with Almond Milk, does restore and comfort Nature.

Alebrues, Caudles, and Cullesses.
ALebrues, Caudles, and Cullesses, are for weak men, which cannot eat sollid
meat. Caudles made with Hemp Seed, and Cullesses made of Shrimps, do warm the
blood and comfort Nature.

Honey Sops, and other Broaths.
HOney Sops, and other Broaths, of what kind or substance soever they are made
of, do engender ventosity. Wherefore they are not wholesome for the Chollick,
nor other inflative impediments, or sicknesses, especially if Honey be in them.

Of Eggs.
IN England Hen Eggs are most eaten. I will first write of them; the Yolks of
them are Cordials, for they are temperately hot. The White of an Egg is viscus
and cold, and slow of digestion, and does not engender good blood: wherefore
whosoever will eat an Hen Egg, let the Egg be new, and roast it rear, and eat
it, or else poach it; poached Eggs are best at night, and new rear roasted Eggs
in the morning, if they are a little salted, they are nutritive. In Turkey, and
other places, they use to seethe two or three bushels of Eggs together hard,
and pull off the shells, souse them, and keep them to eat at all times. Hard
Eggs are slow of digestion, roasted Eggs are better then sodden, fried are
naught. Duck Eggs, and Geese Eggs I do not praise.

But Pheasant Eggs, and Patridges Eggs are excellent.

Of Butter.
BUtter is made of Cream, and is of a moist operation, good to eat in the
morning before other meats. French men will eat it after meat; but eaten with
other meats, it does not only nourish, but it is good for the Breast and
Lungs, also it does relax and mollify the Belly. Dutchmen do eat it all times
in the day, the which I do not approve, considering that Butter is uncrious,
and every thing that is uncrious, is noisome to the stomach, forasmuch as it
makes lubrifaction: every thing that is uncrious, that is, Butter, Oil,
Grease, or Fat, do swim above in the brinks of the stomach, as the fat does
swim above in a boiling pot; the excess of such nautation or superflice, will
ascend to the orifice of the stomach, and cause eructuations. Wherefore the
eating of much Butter at one refection, is not commendable; it is not good for
them which are in an Ague or Fever, for the unctuosity of it does augment the
heat of the Liver. A little portion is good in the morning, if it be new made.

Of Cheese.
CHeese made of Milk there are four sorts; green, soft, hard, or spermice.
Green Cheese is not called green, by the reason of the color, but for the
newness of it, for the Whay is not half pressed out of it, and in operation it
is cold and moist. Soft Cheese, not too new nor too old, is best; for in
operation it is hot and moist. Hard Cheese is hot and dry, and ill to digest.
Spermice is a Cheese, the which is made with Curds, and with the juice of
Herbs; to tell the nature of it is doubtful, considering that every Milk-wife
may put many juyces of Herbs of sundry operation and virtue, one not agreeing
with another. Besides these four natures of Cheese, there is a Cheese called a
Irweve Cheese, the which if it be well ordered, is the wholesomest of them all.

But take the best Cheese of all these rehearsed, if a little do good and
pleasure, the least excess does engender gross humors, for it is hard of
digestion; it makes one costive, and is not good for the Stone. Cheese that is
good ought not to be too hard, nor too soft, but betwixt both; it should not be
tough nor brittle, sweet nor sour, nor tart, too salt, nor too fresh; it must
be of good savor and tallage, not not full of eyes, mites, or maggots. Yet in
high Almain, the Cheese which is full of Maggots, is called there the best
Cheese; and they will eat the great Maggots as fast as we do eat Comfits.

Of Milk.
MIlk of a Woman and of a Goat are restorative.

These Milks are good for them that are in a Consumption.

Cows and Ewes Milk, if the Beasts be young, and do go in good Pasture, their
Milk is nutritive, and does humect and moisten the members, mundifie and
cleanse the entrails, alleviate and mitigate the the pain of the Lungs, and the
Breast; it is not good for them which have gurgulations in the Belly, nor for
sanguine persons; but it is very good for the melancholy, for old men and
children, especially if it be sod with a little Sugar for those that are sick.
There are few diseases, in which Milk is not offensive, if taken inwardly,
except it be in some Consumptions of the flesh, or other Consumption of the
Lungs, or breathing parts.

Of Asses Milk.
THe Consumption of the Lungs and breathing parts, called Phthisis, wherein the
flesh accidentally decays through the exulceration of the Lungs, and of the
breathing parts, is especially to be cured by Asses Milk, Cammels Milk, though
in other Consumptions excellent, is not so good in this cure, because it is too
thin, and moist as the Woman's Milk; also because it wholly nourishes, and does
not cleanse, whereas the Asses Milk is both meat and medicine, cleansing and
nourishing alike.

Of Cream.
CReam, the which does not stand long on the Milk, sod with a little Sugar is
nourishing. Clouted Cream, and raw Cream put together, are eaten more for the
sensual appetite, then for any good nourishment. Raw Cream undecocted, eaten
with Strawberries or Hurtles in a rural Banquet; I have known such Banquets
endanger men's lives.

Of Almond Butter.
ALmond Butter is made with fine Sugar and Rose Water, eaten with the flowers
of Violets, it is a commendable Dish, most in season in Lent, when the Violets
are fragrant; it rejoices the heart, comforts the brain, and qualifies the
heat of the liver.

Of Bean Butter.
BEan Butter in other Countries is most in Lent; it ingenders gross humors, and
is windy.

Of Fish.
OF all Nations and Countries, England is best stored with Fish, not only with
all manner of Sea, but also of fresh water Fish, and with all sorts of salt
fishes.

Of Sea fish in General.
FIsh of the Sea, the which have scales or sins, are more wholesomer then the
fresh water fish, the which are in standing waters; the younger the fish is,
the bettter it is to digest; but this is to be understood, that if the fish be
never so solidate, it must have some age, but not overgrown, except it be a
young Porposs, which fish is neither praised in the Old Testament, nor commended
in Physic.

Of fresh water fish in General.
FIsh which are in Rivers and Brooks, are more wholesome then those which are in
Pools, Ponds, or Moats, or any other standing waters, for they do labor and do
scour themselves. Fish which feed on the mudde or else do feed in the fen or
moorish ground, do savor of the mudde, which is not so good as the fish that
feed and scour themselves on the stones, gravel, or sand.

Of salt fish in general.
SAlt fishes the which are powdered and salted with salt, are not so wholesome,
especially if one do make a meal of them; the quality does not hurt, but the
quantity; especially such salt fish as cleaves to the fingers when one does eat
it: the skins of fishes are utterly to be abhorred, for they do engender viscus
Phlegm and Choler adust. All manner of fish are cold of nature, and do
engender Phlegm, and nourishes very little; it is not wholesome to eat fish and
flesh at one meal.

Of fish more particularly.
First of Anchoves.
ANchoves are the Sea Minoes of Province and Sardinia, which powdered with salt,
wine Vinegar, and Origanum, and so put into little barrels, are transported and
highly esteemed of; they are fittest for a stomach that is oppressed with Phlegm,
for they cut, ripen, and digest it, warming the appetite; they afford but
little nourishment.

Of Cod-fish.
COd-fish is a great Sea Whiting, but not so dry and firm as the whiting is;
more pleasant in the eating then of a good nourishment.

Of Cockles.
COckles are of themselves so hot of nature, that they leap and fly in the
summer nights above the water to be cooled by the Air; the Celsey Cockles are
esteemed the best; they are most in season in May, they increase the flesh and
provoke lust.

Of Conger.
COnger is no other then the Sea Eel, of a sweet and fat flesh; they feed as
Eels do, it is good nourishment in the Summer for hot stomachs.

Of Crabs.
SEa Crabs, some are smooth, some rough tasted; the great ones are called
Paguci, some of them weigh ten pounds, they nourish very much, and are highly
commended for the Consumption of the Lungs, especially if Asses Milk be drunk
with them.

Of Herrings.
HErrings the eating of them fresh, have occasioned many to fall into Fevers;
neither the Red, Bloat, nor Pickled have any nourishment with them; the same
may be said of them broiled.

Of Lobsters.
LObsters, they have a strong and hard flesh, and are hard of digestion; they
come in season with the Buck, and go out of season when the Do comes in; they
are best toward the full, little worth in the Wane of the Moon; when their
Spawn lies greatest in their head, they are in their prime: they are hot,
windy, and venerous.

Of Mackarels.
MAckarels are of a thick, clammy, and suffocating substance, pleasant to the
taste, but offensive to the brain, head and breast; they cause Apoplexies,
Palsies, Lethargies and drowsiness in the best stomachs; they are a dangerrous
meat for Phlegmatic persons.

Of Maids.
MAids are little and tender Skates; they and Thorn backs bring forth their
young ones without Eggs, after the propagation of beasts: they are nourishing
fit for weak stomachs, for such whose lasciviousness has borrowed too much
from nature.

Of Mussels.
MUssels the fish of the poorer sort of people; sharp filthy and cruel diseases
follow the eating of them.

Of Oysters.
OYsters are wholesome, the best are thick, little round shelled, of a short,
firm, and thick flesh rising up round like a woman's breast, being in a manner,
all belly having in their taste salt, short fins of a green color listed about
with purple hair, fair eye-lidded Oysters; such are our Wall fleet and
Colchester: they are esteemed best eaten raw, they settle the appetite, and
confirm a weak stomach and nourish; they are most dangerous when they are full
of Milk, which is betwixt May and August.

Of Plaise.
PLaise are of a good, wholesome, and fine nourishment; the best Plaise have
blackish spots, as the best Flounders are reddish; add to these Soles, they
are all three wholesome diet.

Of Shads.
SHads have a tender and pleasant flesh, they are enforcers to sleep; in May,
June, and July they are best; for then they are freest from bones, and fullest
of flesh.

Of Shrimps.
SHrimps are of two sorts, the one crookt, the other streight-backt, they have
the best Juice of any fish, most nimble and skipping; they are excellent good
to recover sick and consumed persons; they are a principal dish in Venus her
feast, they are high commended of Physicians to be as restorativs as the best
Crabs or Crefishes.

Of Skate.
SKate so resembles the Thornback, that they often couple and engender
together; they are more tender, and of a pleasanter taste, and more stirring to
Venery.

Of Soles.
SOles are counted the most delicatest dish of the Sea, they have a pleasant
taste being neither of too hard nor too soft a flesh; they engender good blood,
and are easy of Concoction.

Of Sturgeon.
YOung Sturgeon is highly preferred, Gallen affirms it to be of a sweet and
good nourishment; other writers compare it with Veal; the Male is better then
the Female: the great and grown Sturgeons is better then the lesser: we have
the best from Danzick and Hamborough: Physicians forbid Agueish persons to eat
of this fish.

Of Thornback.
THornback is of a pleasant taste, but of a stronger smell then Skate; very
moist for to nourish much, yet a favourer of Lust.

Of Turbut.
TUrbut, some writers call this fish the Sea-pheasant; the truth is whilst they
are young their flesh is moist and pleasant, they are not of an easy digestion.

Of Whitings.
THe best whitings are taken at Tweed called Merlings; they are light,
wholesome, and good meat.

Of Barbels.
BArbles are esteemed for bearded Mullets, it is a gelied, cold, and moist
fish, hurting the sinews, abating lust, troublesome both to the head and belly
if much eaten of; eaten fasting they are dangerous for bloody Fluxes.

Of Carps.
CArps are of a sweet taste, good nourishment, provoking to Venus; if they
stink of mudde, or fenny filth, they are not wholesome.

Of Eels.
EEls and Lampreys have such sweet flesh that they highly praise gluttons, but
in respect of their muddy residences, Hyprocrates will not allow them to be
wholesome; for though they give much nourishment, it is very corrupt; they
loosen the belly, but bring Fluxes; open the Winpdipes, but stop the Liver;
they infect the Lungs, though they breed much, it is but bad seed, and cause
sundry other diseases: they are worst in Summer, but never wholesome.

Of Flounders.
FLounders if they be thick and well grown are a most wholesome and light meat.

Of Gudgeons.
GUdgeons are exceeding wholesome, their flesh is short and pleasant in taste,
they are soon concocted, nourish much, and increase good blood.

Of Lampreys and Lamprons.
LAmpreys and Lamprons differ in bigness and goodness, they are both sweet and
nourishing meats, much increasing lust; they are dangerous for Surfeits; they
are best if ever good, in March and April, they being then so fat, that they
have scarce any back-bones at all.

Of Mullets.
MUllets of the River are of like goodness with the Sea Mullets, though not
fully of so fair and pure a substance; except it be large and fat, it may make
a show on the table, but it affords but little nourishment.

Of the Perch.
THe Perch is a most wholesome Fish, firm, tender, white; they are ever in
season save in March and April; eaten with wine vinegar they cool a distempered
feverish stomach, and nourish the weak body.

Of Pikes.
PIkes in respect of their muddy employments feeding on Frogs and filth, cannot
be so wholesome, in my judgment, as some Writers would have them to be. The
best Pike is taken in the clear River, but I never saw any of those fat, and
therefore I suspect their goodness: certain it is, old Pikes are hard and tough
to digest, young ones, called Jacks, are too waterish and moist; one of the
middle growth is the most likely to nourish.

Of Roaches.
ROches, according to the old Proverb, a sound as a Roach, are accounted
incapable of any disease; hence we account them wholesome, they are full of
bones, which make them the less regarded.

Of Salmon.
SAlmon is a fat, tender, short, and sweet flesh it soon glutteth, and fills
the stomach, they are most commended which go furthest up i^ fresh Rivers,
those worst which are taken nearest the Sea: salt Salmon loses a double
goodness, one of a good taste, the other of a good nourishment.

Of Smelts.
SMelts so called, because they smell so sweet; their flesh is of the finest,
lightest, softest, and best juice of any fish; their excellency is in the
Winter, when they are full of spawns. The Western are most esteemed.

Of Trouts.
TRouts in Northumberland are very large, others smaller they are very
pleasant, and good meat for sound persons.

Of wild, tame Fowl, and small Birds.
That a Partridge of all Fowls is soonest digested, it is a restorative meat,
comforts the brain and the stomach, augments carnal lust. The woodcock is a
meat of good temperature; quails, Plovers, and Lapwings nourish but little, for
they engender melancholy humors: young turtle Doves and Pheasants engender good
blood. A Crane is hard of digestion, and does engender evil blood. A young
Hernsew is lighter of digestion then a Crane. A Buzzard well killed, and
ordered, is very nutritive. The Bittour is not so hard of digestion as is the
Hernsew. A Shoveler is lighter of digestion then a Bittour. All these are
noisome, except they be well ordered and dressed. A Pheasant-hen, a Moor-cock,
and a Moor-hen, except they do sit, are very nutritive. All manner of wild
Fowl which live by the water, are hard of digestion.

Of tame domestical Fowl.
OF all tame Fowl, a Capon is best, is most nourishing, and is soonest
digested. A Hen in Winter is good and nutritive, and so are Chickens in Summer,
especially Cockrels and Pullets, the which are untrod; the flesh of a Cock is
hard of digestion, the broth or gelly of (...) Cock is restorative. Pigeons are
good for chol^erick and melanchollick persons. Geese and Ducks, except the
green Geese, are not of easy digestion. Young Pea-chickens half a year old,
breed good nourishment.

Of small Birds.
All manner of small Birds are good and light of digestion, except Sparrows.
Titmouses, Colmouses, and Wrens, the which eat Spiders and Poison, are not
commendable. Of all small Birds the Lark is best, the Blackbird, the Thrush.
Rasis and Isaac praise young Stares, but I do conclude, because they are bitter
in eating, that they engender Choler.

Of Beef.
BEef is an excellent meat, if the Beast be young, and is not Cow-flesh; for old
Beef, and Cow-flesh do engender melancholy and gross humors. If it be
moderately powdered, that the gross blood by salt is exhausted, it does make an
English man strong. Martinmas-beef, which is called hanged Beef in the smoke,
is not wholesome; it may fill the belly, and cause one to drink, but it is
naught for the Stone, and ev^^ of digestion, and makes no good juice.

Of Mutton and Lamb.
MUtton with Rasis and Averroyes is good meat, but Gallen does not commend it*
and surely they hint at some reason, considering that this Beast is so soon
infected; nor dot^ there happen so great a Murren and Sickness to any
four-footed Beast, as does to the Sheep. Notwithstanding, if the Sheep be fed
in a good Pasture, and fat, and do not flavor of the Wool, it is good for sick
persons, for it does engender excellent blood. Lamb is moist and phlegmatic,
it is not good for old persons, except of a melancholy complexion; nor for
phlegmatic men to feed, except very moderately.

Of Veal.
VEal is a nourishing meat, for it is soon digested. Whereupon many Authors
hold the opinion, that it is the best flesh, and the most nutritive meat that
can be for man's sustenance.

Of Pork and Bacon.
WHereas Gallen with other ancient and approved Doctors praise Pork, in holy
Scripture it is not allowed; for a Swine is an unclean Beast, and does lie upon
stinking and filthy soils, and with stercorous matter.

Pork, if it be of an old Hog not clean kept, it ingenders gross blood, humects
too much the stomach; if the Pork be young, it is nutritive. Bacon is good for
Carters and Plough-men which labor; but if they have the Stone, and use to eat
it, they will endure great misery.

Of Brawn.
BRawn is an usual meat in Winter amongst Englishmen, it is hard of digestion.
The Brawn of a wild Boar is much better then the Brawn of a tame one.

Of Pigs.
PIgs, especially Sow-pigs, are nutritive, and made in a gelly, is a
restorative; if the Pig be fleaed, the skin taken off, and then stewed with
restoratives, as a Cock is stewed to make a gelly. A young fat Pig is
wholesome, if it be well ordered in the roasting, the skin not eaten.

Of Kid.
YOung Kids flesh is praised above all other flesh, as Avicen, Rasis, and
Averroys affirm, it is temperate and nutritive, although it be somewhat dry

Of wild Beasts.
THe opinion of all ancient Physicians was, and is, that Venison is not good to
eat, principally for two causes. The first is, that this Beast does live in
fear, and his timerosity causes melancholy humors.

The second cause is, as it does engender chollerick humors, it is a Lords
dish, good for an Englishman; for it does animate him to be as he is, which is
strong and hardy.

Of the Hare.
A Hare makes a Gentleman good pastime, and better for the Hounds or Dogs to
eat the Hare after they have killed it, then man, for it is not praised. The
Scripture says, The Hare is an unclean Beast. In Physic, Hares flesh is dry,
and does engender melancholy humors.

Of Rabbits.
COneys flesh is good, but Rabbits flesh is best of all wild Beasts, for it is
temperate, and does nourish, and singularly praised in Physic: for all things
the which does suck, is nutritive.

Of the Head, Brains, Fat, Skins, Fins, Marrow, Blood, Tongues, Stones, and
Inwards of Flesh or Fish.
THe Heads of Fish, and the Fat, especially of Salmon and Conger, is not good
for them which are disposed to Rheum; the heads of Lampries and Lamprons, and
the string which is within them, is not good to eat; refrain from eating of the
skins of flesh and fish, and burned and brown meat, it ingenders viscus humors,
and Choler, and Melancholy, and makes opilations. The Brains of any beast are
not wholesome, except the brains of a Kid, for they are evil of digestion, and
hurt the appetite and stomach; they are cold, moist, and viscus. A hot stomach
may eat them, but they engender gross humors. The brains of a Woodcock, and of
a Snipe, and such like, are commestible; the forepart of all manner of beasts
and fowls, are more hotter and lighter of digestion, then the hinder parts are.
The marrow of all beasts are hot and moist, are nutritive, if well digested;
they mollify the stomach, and take away the appetite: wherefore one should eat
Pepper with it. The blood of all beasts and fowls are not wholesome, but hard
of digestion. All the inwards of beasts, and of fowls, as the heart, the liver,
the lungs, tripes, trilibubs, with all the entrails, is hard of digestion, and
does increase gross humors. The fat of flesh is not so much nutritive, as the
lean; it is best when lean and fat is mixed one with another. The tongues of
beasts are hard of digestion, and of little nourishment. The stones of a
Cockrel, and stones of other beasts are very nourishing.

Of roasted, boiled, baked, fried meats.
BEyond Sea at the Universities, boiled meat is used at dinner, and roast to
supper, as boiled meat is lighter of digestion.

Broiled meats are hard of digestion, and naught for the Stone: fried meat is
harder of digestion then broiled, it ingenders Choler and Melancholy: Baked
meat buried in paste, is not praised in Physic. All manner of flesh which is
inclined to humidity, should be roasted; and all flesh which is dry, should be
boiled. Fish may be sod, roasted, broiled, and baken, every one after their
kind and use, and fashion of the Country, as the Cook and the Physician may
agree and devise: For a good Cook is half a Physician.

Of the Roots of Borage and Bugloss.
THe Roots of Borage and Bugloss sod tender, and made in a succade, do engender
good blood, and a wholesome temperance.

Of Elisaunder, and Elina Campane.
THe Root of Alisaunder sod tender, and made in a succade, is good for to
destroy the Stone in the Reins of the Back and Bladder. the Roots of Elina
Campane sod tender in a succade, is good for the breast, for the lungs, and for
all the interial members of man.

Of Parsley and Fennel.
THe Roots of Parsley sod tender, and made in succade, are good for the Stone,
and to make a man piss. Fennel sod, is good for the lungs, and the sight.

Of Turnips and Parsnips.
TUrnips boiled, and eaten with flesh, augments the seed; if they be eaten raw,
and moderately, they provoke a good appetite. Parsnips sod, does increase
nature, and are nutritive, and expels urine.

Of Raddish and Carrets.
RAddish roots does break wind and do provoke urine; but they be not good for
those which have the Gout. Carrets sod, augment and increase nature, and cause
urine

Of the Roots of Rapes.
RApe roots, if they be well boiled, nourish, if they be moderately eaten;
immoderately, they engender ventosity, and offend the stomach.

Of Onions.
ONions provoke to Venery and Sleep; and if a man drink sundry drinks, they
rectify and reform the variety of the operation of them, they cause a good
appetite.

Of Leeks.
LEeks open the breast, and provoke urine, cause and increase bad blood.

Of Garlic.
Garlic of all roots is much used in France, and some other Countries; it
opens the breast, and it does kill worms in the belly, which the Lumbrici,
Ascarides, and Cutuibicini, which are small little long worms that tickle in
the fundament; it also heats the body, and desolves gross winds.

Of Cabbage.
CAto in his book De re rustica, writes too highly in praise of Cabbages, as he
judges them to be a sufficient medicine against all diseases; some are of
opinion if they are eat raw before meat with Vinegar that they preserve the
stomach from Surfeits, and the brain from drunkenness: this I am certain of,
that if they are constantly eat, they injure the sight, except the eyes are
very moist, they cause and break wind; the opinion of most writers is, that
they are not so wholesome as Lettice, being hot in the first, and dry in the
second degree.

Of Asparagrass.
NO kind of Herbs nourish more being freed from their bitterness and eaten
hot; they are temperately moist, and exceed not in heat the first degree; they
increase Venery, strengthen the Liver, and help conception.

Of Musk Melons.
MUsk Melons are not so moist or cold as the ordinary sort of Melons are; they
engender better blood, and descend more speedily into the belly; fruits of this
kind are dangerous, not to be eaten presently out of the ground, but rather
let them lie a week, though that they are ripe, that there watrish moisture may
be abated. Garden Pompeons and Melons, may lie in a warm Kitching till
Christmas.

Of Potata Roots.
POtata roots nourish mightily, either Sod, Baked, or roasted; the newest and
heaviest are the best, they engender much flesh, blood, and seed,

Of Raddishes.
RAddishes cause rank belchings, are hardly digested, they burn the blood,
engender Lice, cause Leanness, spoil the eyesight, and corrupt the whole mass
of nourishment.

Of Skirret Roots.
SKirret Roots have a long string within them, which taken away before they are
sod makes them eat exceeding sweet, they are of a mild and temperate nature
agreeing with complexions; did we know all the virtues of them, they would be
more nourished then they are in our Gardens.

Of Borage and Bugloss.
BOrage does comfort the heart, engender good blood, and causes mirth; so does
Bugloss, which is taken of more vigor, strength, and efficacy.

Of Artechokes and Rokat.
THere is nothing usually to be eaten of Artechokes but the heads of them, when
they are almost ripe, sodden tender in the broth of Beef, or with Beef; eat
them at dinner, they increase nature, and provoke Venery. Rokat does increase
the seed, stumulate the flesh, and does help digestion.

Of Succory and Endive.
SUccory does help the Stomach, and keep the head in temper, and qualify
Choler. Endive is good for them which have hot and dry hot Stomachs.

Of white Beets and Purslane.
WHite Beets are good for the Liver and for the Spleen, are abstercine.
Purslane does abate the ardor of lasciviousness, and mittigates heat in the
inward parts of the head and eyes: if preserved in brine, it heats and purges
the stomach; it is cold in the third degree, and moist in the second.

Of Time and Parsley
TIme breaks the Stone, desolves wind, and causes Urine; Parsley breaks the
Stone, causes Urine, is good for the Stomach, and causes a sweet breath,

Of Lettice and Sorrel.
LEttice extincts Venery, causes milk in women's Breasts; it is good for a hot
Stomach, provokes sleep, increases blood, temperates it. Sorrel is good for a
hot Liver, and also for the Stomach; being sod, it loses the belly: in the
time of the Plague, taken fasting, sucking, or chewing some of the Leaves, it
preserues against infection; the seeds thereof brewed and drunk with Wine and
water are good against the Chollick, and the stopping of Fluxes, excellent
against overcharged Stomachs: Sorrel possets are sovereign in sundry
distempers. This Herb is cold in the third, and dry in the second degree.

Of Marigolds.
MArigolds, the Herb and Flowers are of great use with us amongst other
Pot Herbs, the flowers either green or dried are often used in Possets, Broths,
and Drinks, as a comforter for the Spirits, and to expel any malignant or
pestilential quality gathered near thereunto; the Syrup and Conserve made of
the fresh flowers are used for some purposes to the same effect.

Of Pennyroyal and Hyssop.
PEnnyroyal purges melancholy, and comforts the Stomach and Spirits. Hyssop
cleanses viscus Phlegm, is good for the Breast and Lungs.

Of Rosemary and Roses.
ROsemary is good for Palsies, for the Falling Sickness, and for a Cough, good
against cold. Roses are a Cordial, they comfort the heart and brain.

Of Fennel and Annis.
THese Herbs are seldom used, but their seeds; Fennel-seed is used to break
Urine, good against Poison; Annis-seed cleanses the Bladder and the Reins of
the back, provokes Urine, and causes a sweet Breath.

Of Sage.
SAge is good to help a woman to conceive, it provokes Urine and sleep; it is
good in an Ague or Fever: and against the Falling Sickness, this Herb is of
excellent Virtue.

Of Violets.
VIolets comforts the brain, preserve against drunkenness; the syrup of them
cools the Reins, and is very good against the Falling Sickness.

Of Watercresses.
WAtercresses are very wholesome in the Springtime, they comfort the Sinnews,
and are hot and dry.

Of Tansie.
TAnsie purges the Ague, dries the Sinnews, and is good against the Worms.

Of Rue.
THere are two kinds of Rue, the one of the Garden, another of the Field; it
is good against Infection, abates Lust, is excellent for the Sight: that of the
Field is hot and dry in the fourth degree; that of the Garden is hot and dry in
the second degree.

Of Wormwood.
THere are several sorts of Wormwoods; those of the Sea are not of that
goodness in quality, as the common and aromatical bitter sorts are:
n^vertheless because they are not so bitter as the common sorts, which renders
them more acceptable to many persons that desire to please their pallates,
rather then to be cured of their diseases by bitter medicines; our Physicians
and Apothecaries feeding their humor for their own profit, and to please their
Patients. There are many other Herbs used in Pottage, Broths, Possets, Sallets,
Sauces, Tansies, etc. from most of which small nourishment is received. Of the
virtues of those which are of the highest concernment, having already
discoursed of in the first part of this Volume, I shall here omit them.

Of Figs.
A Vicen writes, that Figs nourish more then any other fruit, when they are
eaten with blanched Almonds: they are good roasted and stewed, they cleanse the
Breast, and the Lungs, open the opilations of the Liver and the Spleen; they
provoke to Venerious acts, as they augment and increase the seed of generation;
they cause sweating, wherefore they engender Lice.

Of great Raisins.
GReat Raisins are nutritive, especially if the stones are out; they make the
stomach firm, and cause a good appetite, if a few of them be eaten before meat.

Of small Raisins of Curr^^^.
SMall Raisins of Currants are good for the Reins of the back, they do provoke
urine; howbeit they are not good for the Spleen, they cause opilation.

Of Grapes.
GRapes sweet and new are nutritive, and stumulate the flesh, they comfort the
Stomach and the Liver, avoid opilations; but they do repleat the stomach with
wind.

Of Peaches, of Medlers, and Cervices.
PEaches mollify the belly, and are cold. Medlers taken superfluously engender
melancholy. Cervices are of the same operation.

Of Strawberries and Cherries.
STrawberries are praised above all Berries, they qualify the heat of the
Liver, engender good blood eaten with Sugar. Cherries mollify the belly, and
are cold.

Of Nuts great and small.
THe Walnut and Banock are of one operation, they are slow of digestion; yet
they comfort the brain, if the pith or skin be pulled off, they are nutritive.
Filberts are better then Hazzle-nuts, if they are new taken from the ^ree, and
the skin or the pith pulled off, they are ^utritive, and increase fatness; if
they are old, they should be eaten with great Raisins. New Nuts are better then
old, for old Nuts are chol^erick, and naught for the head, and evil for old
persons, as they engender the Palsy in the Tongue: immoderately taken or
eaten, engender corruptions; as biles, blains, and such putrefaction.

Of Pease and Beans.
PEase which are young, are nutritive. Beans are not so good as Pease, they are
more windy, although the skins or husks be ablated; yet they are a strong meat,
and does provoke Venery.

Of Pears and Apples.
PEars which are mellow and not stony, does increase fat, and engender waterish
blood, they are full of ventosity. Wardons roasted, ^tewed, or baked, are
nutritive, comfort the stomach, especially if they are eaten with Comfits.
Apples are good after a frost has taken them, ^or when they are old,
especially red Apples, and those of good odor and mellow: they should ^e eaten
with Sugar or Comfits, or with Fennel-seed, or Anniseed, because of their
ventosity; they comfort the stomach, and cause good digestion, especially if
they are roasted and baked.

Of Pomegranates and Quinces.
POmegranates are nutritive, and good for the stomach. Quinces baked, the coar
pulled out, mollify the belly, help digestion, and preserve a man from
drunkenness.

Of Dates and Milons.
DAtes moderately eaten are nutritive, but they cause opilations of the Liver,
and of the Spleen. Milons engender bad humors.

Of Gourds, of Cowcumbers, and Pepones.
GOurds are of bad nourishment; Cowcumbers restrain Venery, as they are cold
and moist, corrupt the stomach, and if they are not well ordered, and
moderately eaten, engender thick and gross humors, and are within few degrees
of poison to persons of a weak digestion.

Of Apricocks.
APricocks quickly corrupt, and ingender^ chollerick and whayish excrements,
cause pestilent Agues, stop the Liver and Spleen, and breed ill juice.

Of Barberries.
BArberries preserved, refresh hot stomachs; kept in pickle they serve for
Sallets, and the garnishing of Meat.

Of Citrons and Lemons.
CItrons, the juice of them are good against poison, and qualify humors
putrefied in the body, cause a sweet breath, and cure burning Agues. Lemons
approach their nature, is cold and dry in the third degree, their seed
temperate, the juice eat alone causes gripings of the guts; but the peel with
the pulp, as nature has united them together, the heat of the one corrects the
rawness of the other, and both of them comfort the heart,

Of Mulberries.
MUlberries are hot in the first degree, cold in the second, best before meat,
they please the stomach cause a looseness of the body, and provoke urine.

Of Raspis.
RAspis are like the Black-berry, or Dew-berry, but not so astringent; cold
stomachs cannot convert them into good juice.

Of Goose-berries.
GOose-berries ripe are as nourishing as they are sweet, they should be eaten
first, not last, because they are so light a fruit. The red Goose-berries are
more cold, dry, and astringent by one degree, because those in our country are
not sweet.

Of Prunes and Damsins.
PRunes are used in medicine, for they are cold and moist. Damsins are of the
same nature. Six or seven Damsins eaten before dinner, are good to provoke the
appetite, they mollify the belly, and are abstersive, the skin and stones
ablated.

Of Olives and Capers.
OLives eaten at the beginning of a refection, coroborate the stomach, and
provoke the appetite. Capers do purge Phlegm, and cause an appetite.

Of Spices. Ginger.
GInger heats the Stomach and helps digestion. Green Ginger eaten in the
morning fasting, does acuate and quicken the memory.

Of Pepper.
THere are three sundry kinds of Pepper, white, black, and long Pepper. All
kinds of them heat the body, dissolves Phlegm and Wind, helps digestion, and
causes to make water.

Of Cloves and Mace.
CLoves comforts the sinews, dissolve and consume superfluous humors, restore
nature. Mace is a Cordial, helps the Chollick, and is good against the bloody
Flux.

Of Saffron.
SAffron comforts the heart and stomach, but is too hot for the Liver.

Of Nutmegs and Cinnamon.
NUtmegs are good for them which have cold in their head, and comfort the
sight, and the brain, and the mouth of the stomach, and is good for the Spleen.
Cinnamon is a Cordial, wherefore some Writers admire why one dies that may eat
Cinnamon; yet it does stop, and is good to restrain Fluxes, and the looseness of
the body.

Of Liquorice.
LIquorice is good to cleanse and open the Lungs and the Breast, and to loose
Phlegm; in cakes with Honey it purges moderately.

Of Salt.
SAlt moderately used is very wholesome, taken excessive, it ingenders Choler,
dries up the natural moisture, and inflames the blood, stops the Veins, hardens
the Stone, and gathers together viscus humors, causing sharpness of Urine,
consuming the flesh and fat of the body; they which are cold, watery, and
Phlegmatic, may feed more plentifully of Salt and of Salt meats, but
Chollerick and Melancholic persons must eat it moderately; and Sanguine
persons must take no more of it, then lightly to relish their meat. By the
general consent of Writers, it is not nourishing; I must in particular dissent
from them, and affirm that it does not only accidentally, but essentially
nourish; accidentally, in making the meat more gracious to the stomach,
hindering putrefaction, and drying up superfluous humors: essentially in it
self, as it takes its just and due proportion, for our body has, and should
have humors of all tastes, the finest humor of the body being nothing but salt
it self, so termed by the best, but newest Philosophers; which if so, will
hardly be preserved without eating of salt.

Of Sugar.
SUgar is temperate and nourishing, good against the Choler of the Stomach,
admirably useful in preserves, conserves, sauces, etc. The ancients term it the
Indian salt, the kinds hereof are made of the tears of Sugarcanes so
replenished with Juice, as that they crack again; there are other ways of
making of Sugar, to no purpose; to particularize, the best sugar is solid,
hard, light, exceeding white, sweet, glistering like snow, melting as salt does
speedily in any liquor; the Refiners, if I am not mistaken in my art, feel an
unspeakable sweetness in theirs; it is their mystery, I am unwilling to call it
couzenage. Sugar is not so hurtful as Honey to Chollerick complexions. Gallen
writes, that it may be given in Agues; it delights the Stomach, pleases the
Blood and Liver cleanses the Breast, and restores the Lungs, and i^ good for
children against the Worms.

Doctor REASON And Doctor EXPERIENCE Consulted with.

OR The Mystery of the Skill of PHYSIC made easy.

Short, clear, and certain Rules how to discern, judge, and determine what any
usual Disease is, from the parts of the Body affected; the Causes, Signs, or
Symptoms, collected and observed from the most approved Authors, and constantly
practiced

BY Nich. Culpeper, Gent. late Student in Physic and Astrology.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill, 1659.

Doctor Reason, and Doctor Experience consulted with, etc.
Of the Apoplexy.
IT is a disease that deprives of sense and motion in the whole body, as also
of the principal animal functions; this disease does amaze both body and mind,
and is so dangerous, that few recover of it, the Brain which is the rock of the
Sinews is affected. In a weak Apoplexy, there is a sudden fall on the earth
with outcryes, with such a difficulty of breathing that one cannot discern any
life in the Patient. An Apoplexy is often caused by slimy, gross, and cold
Phlegm, as also by crudities and drunkenness; so that such as are much addicted
to surfeitings, especially old men, are subject to any Apoplexy. This disease,
if it be great, is hard to be cured; if the Patient do escape death, he either
falls into a Palsy of some part, or of the whole body. The Air the sick person
lives in must be somewhat hot, his Diet must be temperate; instead of Exercise,
strong Fractions and Ligatures of the extreme parts may be used;
Cupping-glasses must be fastened to the shoulders: he should be carried up and
down in a hanging bed, and after two or three weeks it will be good to bathe.

Of the Mother.
THe stopping and choking of the Womb or Mother, is a running back of the
Womb, or of malign vapors bred in the Womb, unto the higher parts, whereby the
bowels, midriff, and stomach are sometimes crushed, that they cannot be widened
by breathing, the Womb in this disease being lifted so high, that it drives the
other members above it to the higher parts. This disease has some affinity
with the Falling Sickness, Swounding, and Apoplexy. The Womb is chiefly
affected through menstruous blood, or some other humor, for the most part
queaziness of stomach, and loathng of meat, and thick breathing follow this
disease. This disease is sometimes caused from an Impostume in the Womb, or by
some seed sent into the Womb, and therein detained and corrupted. The danger of
this disease is not so great, if the Spirits are not hurt. The Air the Patient
lives in should be temperate; such meats are to be abstained from, as increase
blood and seed: the diet must be sparing, wine is not to be drunk, except
al^ayed with water, except in case of swounding; their Exerc ses are to be
moderate, their sleeps short, and to shun Melancholy.

Of Melancholy.
THat which is Hypocondraical is windy, oft-times caused by the over-boiling of
dreggish blood settled near to the stomach, or gristles of the short ribs, by a
distemper of the liver, stomach, or miseraical veins: the part affected is the
brain, the signs of this disease are the excessive heat of humors, the parts
about the heart being inflamed. This distemper is caused by the default of the
spleen, when it does not draw away the Melancholic blood made by the distemper
of the Liver. At the first, this disease is easily cured, but if it grows old,
it is hardly to be remedied. The Patients diet must be moist, little broth will
suffice, because of fluctuations in the stomach: he may drink cream of hulled
barley, with a little cynamon and seed of Annis, white wine mixed with water;
music is good in this disease, and such means must be used as may cause sleep.

Of Melancholy of black Choler.
THis disease is a kind of doting, without a fever arising from such malign
and melancholic humors which distrub the seat of the Mind. The signs of
melancholy are fear and sadness, evil thoughts without any cause, proceeding
from such vapors of black Choler, as darken the mind, and over-cloud the
brain. Melancholy which seizes on the essence of the brain, and continues there
long, is altogether incureable. The Air where the Patient resides must be of a
wholesome smell, moist, and temperate; his diet moist, but of good juice, easy
of digestion. Let him drink white wine, and exercise himself moderately; his
sleep should be somewhat longer then ordinary: he is to be cherisht with mirth
and good hopes, perturbations of mind being wholly avoided.

Of the overflowing of the monthly Terms.
THe superfluous flux of months, is when it does tend to be the hurt rather
then the good of the woman, by reason that they are purged more then they
should; but in such women as are of a moist constitution, that have good diet,
and much ease, the months may be suffered to flow more then ordinarily they
use. The womb is the part chiefly affected, sometimes the whole body
sympathizeth: this affection is an accident which appertains to the immoderate
excretion; it is not altogether against nature, as it is in the bleeding of the
nose, and other bleedings; for here only too great a quantity of the monthly
flux is unnatural. This distemper takes away the appetite, hinders digestion,
breeds crudities, weakens the whole body; the color of the face is changed,
feverish heats arise in the body; sometimes the feet are swelled, and a
dropsy follows: one cause is by reason of the heat, thinness, or abundance of
blood more then is requisite; or else because of the continual motion, for when
these concur, Nature is defeated. Immoderate fluxes caused by the birth of a
large Infant, are less dangerous, because they will stay of themselves. This
disease is to be feared if the body be weakened, or the color of the face
changed, the woman being reduced to such coldness, faintness of heart,
swoundings, and sometimes death. The Air that this Patient lives in should be
temperate, the meat binding and thickning; exercise is forbidden, her rest and
sleep must be moderate, her mind pleased.

Of the suppression of the Months.
AS the overflowing is dangerous, so the retention on the contrary is as
dangerous and unnatural, if they be of age, unless they have conceived: the
womb is chiefly affected in regard of the fatness thereof, whereby the veins
are crushed together, and so the flux is hindered. In this disease the forepart
of the head is pained, spreads it self to the neck, shoulders, and loins: her
appetite is taken away, her mind unquiet, her stomach queasie, she loathes
meat, her face discolored, she is troubled with phlegm, and taken with a
trembling; her urine is thick, red, and muddy, sometimes blackish, with a red
watery substance in the bottom: the chief cause is gross and phlegmy matter
mixed with blood, which stops the veins leading to the womb, whereby the
straitness of the veins does happen, or else from the inflammation of the womb:
if the Terms are stopped, other diseases must of necessity follow. The Air she
is to breathe must incline to heat; her meat must be heating, she must not
sleep too long, her mind must not be disquieted.

Of the Obstruction of the Liver.
THe Obstruction of the Liver is a binding or straitning of the Veins, or Liver
passages. The Liver is the Storehouse of blood, from which all parts of the
body draw nourishment; and together with purer blood, gross and slimy humors
are generated in the Liver, seeing that the branches of the hollow Veins are
knit unto the Vena Porta in such sort, that the knitting and combination does
not come within the compass of our sight, as also that all the nutriments of
the body must be conveyed through the port Veins, and the hollow Veins ends,
which are very small, where they end in the Liver substance: so that it is no
wonder, that by reason of the passages and straitness, Obstructions are oftener
caused in the Liver, then in any other Bowel. This Disease does breed in the
extreme parts of the vessels of the hollow part and Veins, and they are
terminated in the Livers substance, with thin ends knit one into another with
little bones, the universal nourishment of the whole body being to be made
through these. This Disease is to be discerned by a heaviness and stretching
pain in the right side; then most to be perceived, when the Patient is
exercised presently after meat. The narrowness of the Liver, and Veins
passages, is the cause of this Disease. The air for the Patient must be hot and
clear; his diet such as may heat, not stopping; he must shun bathing and
exercise after meat, his diet moderate; he may sleep in the day time, but not
too long at night, not at the most above seven hours; his belly must be kept
loose, and his mind delighted.

The Hicket.
THe Hicket called Singultus, is a violent or vehement motion of the Stomach,
whereby it does endeavor to expel such things as rest in the Tunicles, and in
the Body, and also such as do stick fast thereto. The Hicket, though it much
resemble vomiting, yet this Disease is rather stirred up, then vomit, when the
humors are strongest: the part affected is the mouth of the Stomach, sometimes
the inflammation of the Liver. This Disease comes often for the most part by
fits, as the Cough does with a swooning; the cause of the swooning in this
disease, is the straitness of the passage of the air, which is contained in the
stomach, it being often caused by fullness and superfluous moisture, by which
the Patient is either loaded ^or in a manner shrunk together. If this disease
be caused by fullness, if a sneezing come, the Patient will soon be rid of it;
if it be accompanied with wringing in the guts, commonly called Illiaca passia,
it is a bad Omen; but if it follow doting, swooning, or convulsion, it is
mortal. A temperate air is best for the Patient; his meat must be such as does
heat and dry; a small quantity of Wine may be permitted.

Of the Stone.
THe Stone of the Kidneys is a hard substance bred like a Sand-stone in the
Reins, from whence by the force of the Urine, it is often conveyed through
the straight pipes into the Bladder, if it be not too great, which does so
stretch the passages of the Urine, that great pain does follow: the settled
pain is in the Veins, and sometimes the right side, or the left, is affected,
or both at one time, even as the right or left Kidney is affected; for the
gravel is bred in the mouth of the Kidney, or substance of them. This Disease
is accompanied with a loathing of meat, frequent belchings, and extreme pains
in the Reins. The cause of this Stone is a gravelly and sandy constitution, and
immoderate heat of the Kidneys, for the most part of a gross and slimy humor.
Those that are troubled with this Disease, are loose bodied, and do often
vomit; this Disease in old men is hardly cured. The air where the Patient
lives, must be clear and bright, his diet moderate; he may drink small Wine, he
must avoid exercise; his belly must be kept loose, he may sleep more then
ordinary, his mind being free from perturbations.

Of thickness of Hearing.
SUch men as cannot understand a loud voice, such men we say are deaf;
sometimes the cause of this effect is in it self, sometimes by accident, when
as the Brain, or Nerve, through which this faculty is conveyed, is hurt. This
Disease is known by the Patients complaints and answers; this Disease is
sometimes caused by the distemper of the Brain, by gross or cold humors thrust
into the ears, and there fastened: this Disease, if it slowly increase, in
process of time brings with it an incureable deafness. The air for the Patient
to live in, must be hot and dry; he is to abstain as much as may be from meat,
especially from those that breed gross vapors; his drink must be small Wine,
his exercise moderate, his belly kept loose by art or nature.

Of Madness.
MAdness or Fury is an inflammation of melancholy to the great fierceness and
alienation of the mind: Such as have this Disease, rage like beasts. Madness
differs from a Phrenzie, as a Fever is the companion of a Phrenzie, from which
madness is free; the part affected is the Brain, which does appear by the hurt
of the principal functions of the mind: The signs of this disease are various,
sometimes laughing, singing, then sad, fearful, rash, doting, crying out,
threatening, skipping, leaping, then serious, etc. This Disease does chiefly
arise from the distemper of the Brain, from hot or melancholy humors, so much
sometimes dried up, as to turn to black Choler; sometimes by yellow Choler
over-burnt, or the boiling of the blood. Young persons are most subject to it;
it is an ill sign if the Patient have no stomach; a good, if Ulcers arise in
the face. The air the person lives in must be temperate, his diet liquid broths
and moistners of the body, his drink Barley-water, by no means Wine, except his
disease came by fear, moderate exercise, more then usual sleep, strangers must
not see him.

Of Shortness of Breathing
CAlled the Asthma, it is a thick and a fast breathing without a Fever, such
as is usual to them which run: this disease often pestreth the Patient, so that
he cannot breath except he hold his neck straight up; and if he lies down it
almost choaks him: in this distemper the Wind-pipes branches scattered into the
Lungs distance are affected. The Patient in this distemper, finds a heaviness
at his breast, and feels a straitness and shrinkings, coughs often, and voids
nothing; in old men this disease is never cured, hardly in young men. The air
the Patient breaths must be hot and dry, he must forbear such meat as breed
gross and slimy matter; his exercises must be little, his sleeps in the day
time, those in the night very moderate, his mind not perturbed.

Of the Worms.
THis disease is for the most part caused by the stopping of the passages of
the vessels through which the Gall is conveyed from the Liver and Spleen into
the Bowels, by reason of gross humors which do heat the Liver and generate
plenty of Gall therein: these Worms which do breed in the Bowels, are called
Lumbrici, or Belly Worms; there are others which are called Ascarides like to
Mites, which breed in rotten Cheese. It is evident that Worms are of several
kinds, as they breed in many parts of the body, in rotten Ulcers, in Teeth, in
Ears and Kidneys; but the Guts are for the most affected. Those that are
troubled with the Ascarides have an extreme itch in their fundament and narrow
Guts, have a desire to go often to the stool, after they have voided somewhat,
they are not so much troubled. The cause of worms commonly is rottenness, or
gross, Phlegmy, and slimy matter, apt to corrupt, with a putrefying heat, which
accompanies all these which does prepare this matter, and then it is wrought by
the perfusion of natural heat which gives life to the Worms; many persons of
age and stature have slighted the Worms, till their Guts have been fretted and
brought into danger of death. For the remedy, the air must be temperate, the
meat such as breed good Juice: Let the Patient eat largely, or else the Worms
will gnaw their Gutts for wants of sustenance, the excrements of the Belly must
be kept loose.

Of the Plague.
THe Plague is caused by unusual and pernicious putrefaction; sometimes the
constitution of the body is so different from the natural temperature, that it
is altogether changed into a pernicious and poisonous quality. This disease is
sometimes caused by corrupt and poisonous exhalations, by Carrion, by the evil
influence of the Stars, which is then the immediate hand of God, and properly
called the pestilence; when it proceeds from outward causes it is called a
pestilent Fever or the Plague: the air infected first gets into the heart; the
air being subtle, thin, and apt to get into the pores; it first infects the
Genital Spirits, then the Radical Moisture, at last the whole substance of the
body. This disease first begins to discover it self by the Patients
unquietness, loss of his appetite, the members dull and heavy, the head aching,
the stomach pained, the spirits decayed, strength failing, especially the
Vital, with many other Symptoms, except the disease be supernatural, and then
the signs are so gentle that they can scarcely be perceived; the infected air
which is a great cause, does not only weaken the humors and spirits of the
body, but also the sollid substance of the heart. The Plague of all other
diseases is most dangerous, for although the signs are good, yet suddenly the
Patient dies, the danger is the greater if no Pushes or Carbuncles break forth;
it is also as dangerous if they break and run in again: this disease is
consummated and brought to its full ripeness in four and twenty hours; if a
cold sweat arise on the body, the face and eyes look black, the spirits are
cast down extraordinarily, and the Patients excrements that are voided,
diversely colored, it is a sign of death. The air must be rectified by sweet
perfumes, every day they must not be spared. At the beginning of the disease,
the diet must be cooling, the sleep short; for by long sleeping the corrupt
matter turns again to the heart: Venery must be eschewed, the belly kept loose,
and the mind freed from all careful perturbations.

Catarracta, or Suffusion
IS when the sight is by little and little dulled by a slimy humor frozen from
Ice, and droping over the eyes of the Patient; sometimes it sticks so fast over
the ball of the eye, or betwixt the Crystal Humors and the Tunickle Rhagois,
so as to tender the sight: in the beginning of this disease certain fumes and
Spirits do present themselves to the sight; this disease is caused from cold
and moist humors that fall on the Optic Nerve. If this disease be of long
continuance it cannot be cured, but if that which is congealed, by rubbing, be
rent asunder, and does not remain so long, but grows together again, and is of
a sad white color, there is still left some hopes of the cure.

Of the French Pox.
THe French Pox it is a fowl and contagious disease, which often proceeds from
the immoderate use of Venery; the beginnings of this disease are small, but in
time it vitiates the humors, spirits, membranes, tendons, flesh, and bones, and
perverts the temperature and substance of the whole body; the Liver is chiefly
affected, as appears from the bad Concoction of the Stomach, the not propension
to Venery, laziness, falling off of the hair: it begins in the groins and privy
members with little pushes in the Urine, which in time do send forth clammy and
corrupt blood, heat of Urine, effusion of seed, several colored spots
appearing in the upper part of the body, a pain in the sinews, heaviness in the
head, hard swellings appear in the forehead and other parts, which at last
become great Ulcers, so as to corrupt the bones. The cause of this disease is a
filthy quality communicated by touching, but for the most part by the act of
Venery, as the privy members have a thin and rare substance: taken in time this
disease admits of cure, but otherwise is incureable. For the cure of this
disease, the air must be moderately hot, for cold hinders the operation of the
medicines; the Patients diet must be sparing, his bread twice baked, he must
feed on the best fowl; when he purges, sod meats are best for him, such as are
windy breed gross humors; those which inflame the blood are bad for him; he
must exercise himself till he sweats; to expel the moist matter, he must purge
twice a week, his sleep moderate, he must abstain from Venery, and shun all
perturbations of mind.

Of the weakness of the Stomach.
THe weakness of the Stomach, in Latin called Debilitas Ventriculi, is a
disposition of the alterative faculty wherein either the nourishment is not
altered, or not well concocted; the faculty of the Stomach failing, the crudity
of the Stomach does follow by some external cause. The sign of a difficult
concoction is when the Stomach does not boil after the accustomed manner, or is
surcharged with fumes and vapors; sometimes weakness after a disease is the
cause. The indigestion of the Stomach thus weakened, raw humors must needs be
gathered together, either hot or cold, disturbing the Stomach by some outward
quality, which is followed with a loathing of meat, and a loading of the
Stomach, belchings, vomitings caused by Phlegmy and putrified humors; the
relish then communicated to the palate being sweet and watrish, and much
spettle voided without coughing or heming; that crudity is worst which is
caused by ill nourishment, and very bad in those which do abound with Choler.
The air the Patient breaths should incline to heat, as he ought to be kept
warm, his diet must be easy of digestion and moderate, neither must he receive
any other meat, till the former be digested; he may drink good Wine, his head
laid high, and his sleep not to be disturbed, he ought to be moderately merry,
and to avoid all perturbations of mind.

Of the Squinancy.
THis Disease is an inflammation of the Throat, or of the highest part of the
Gullet, hindering the breath and swallowing; when the fault is neither in the
breathing nor swallowing. This Disease by reason the upper part of the Gullet
is choakt up, does threaten present danger by strangling. If the inner parts of
the Throat are affected, then the Patient is in great danger: this pain is
sharp, and the Patient breaths with difficulty; he swallows with difficulty,
and that which he drinks does often run out at his Nose. This Disease is caused
by blood which is carried thither by the Ingular Veins; for in these Veins
there is plenty of blood. If the inflammation be in the inward Muscles, that
Squinancy is very dangerous, within three or four days it is very likely to
kill the party; and although that the Patient may think himself well, yet he is
taken away with a sudden suffocation. The air where the Patient resides must be
temperate, free from wind, his diet liquid and soft; he must shun those things
that may heat his blood; he must abstain from Wine and Exercise, speak little,
his sleep shorter then ordinary it used to be; if it be too long, those that
watch with him must awake him out of it; his belly must be loosened, and his
mind kept merry.

Of involuntary Pissing.
INvoluntary pissing called Diarberes, is a default of the Kidneys, a swift
passage, the drink being nothing altered, through the body, an inmeasurable
thirst following. In this Disease the Kidneys are affected; it is known by the
heat felt in the Reins, and the insatiable thirst. If the Patient strives to
hold his urine, his Stones, Hips, and Loins swell, such heat felt in those
inward parts, as if the Bowels were burnt. This distemper is sometimes caused
by sharp humors in the Kidneys, by brinish Phlegm, or a pernicious quality fixed
to the blood, or humors fastened to the Reins. This distemper causes a great
dryness, and consumption of the body. If the person have a burning Fever, he
cannot be cured, because his radical moisture is wasted. The air in which this
Patient lives, must incline to cold and moist; his diet such as will breed good
but thick juice; such as will qualify the sharpness of the humors; salt and
sharp meats, as also such as provoke urine, are not good: the belly must be
kept loose by art or nature. Rest is best for this Patient, because it stays
the motion of the humors.

Of the Inflammation of the Eyes.
THe Inflammation of the Eyes, called Opthalmia, is an inflammation of the
Tunicle or Membrane growing close to the eye, spread over all the Membrane from
the corners of the eyes. This evil takes its beginning from the Pericranium,
from whence Veins are conveyed to the eyes through the forehead and temples.
The part affected is chiefly the eye, where redness appears, and it is
oftentimes swelled, so that the Tunicles and parts near adjoining are sore
stretched; this is either caused by the fullness of blood, by which the Membrane
growing next to the eye is filled, or stretched; or else by phlegmatic blood,
and then it is not so stretched; or else by thin sharp Choler, running from the
temple and corner veins secretly into the eye-veins, then such tears gush out
of the eyes, that the next parts seem burnt, the Pupilla is in danger of being
exulcerated, if the tears that flow from the eyes are salt and hot. The
Patients air must be dry, cold, and obscure, his meat somewhat cooling, and
little nourishing; he must eat little in the first days of his cure, his sleep
must be long, his belly evacuated, and his mind kept pleasant.

Of the Nightmare.
THe Nightmare called Incubus, is a Disease in which one does think that a
great weight lies on him in his sleep; it differs from the Falling Sickness, as
the cause of it is venomous, so is not the Hag or Nightmare, there being no
Convulsion, as in the Falling Sickness. The part affected is the Heart-walls,
or part of the Midriff; the sense of the Patient in his sleep is stupefied; he
supposes himself to be stifled, insomuch that he cannot speak a word; he
groans, and his fancy is so disturbed, that he thinks a Spirit is there, whence
the anguish of his mind is caused, so that he desires to cry out, but cannot:
from hence is caused the heating, or rather boiling of his blood, so that his
spirits being attenuated, and his pores opened, the Patient suddenly starteth
up. This Disease is caused from gross cold Phlegm, as also from melanchollick
blood settled about the Heart and Veins of the Breast, from whence cold vapors
are belched out. He that uses a slender diet, is seldom troubled with the
Nightmare, but does frequent those that have many crudities. They that lie on
their sides are very seldom troubled with it. If this Disease be of any long
continuance, it does threaten the Falling Sickness, or the Apoplexy, Madness,
or Hypocondraick Melancholy, and other Diseases. The air where the Patient
lives should be temperate, hot, and bright; his meat easy of digestion, of
good juice, not windy; he must eat sparingly, especially at supper; he must not
sleep in the day time, his belly must be kept loose, and his mind quiet.

Of a Convulsion.
A Convulsion, called Spasmus, is a Convulsion or shrinking of the Sinnews, an
effect of which does force them and the Muscles unwillingly to that disposition
of body which they did enjoy by the benefit of the animal faculty when they
were in perfect health, this being an involuntary motion in the part which did
usually move of its own accord. The Brain is first affected, and chiefly, and
then the face with the whole body is taken with a Convulsion, which does happen
to those that have the Falling Sickness; in which accident, the roots of the
Sinnews are hurt, the brain being shrunk, does join all its force together for
the expelling of that which is hurtful. The brain is sometimes first affected,
and then the face with the whole body is shrunk up together; but for the most
part a Convulsion does happen to the Muscles in determinate parts, whereby the
part affected does plainly show that the Muscles are grieved. The signs of this
Disease are the stretching of the Sinnews, which if long with the Patient, do
exceedingly waste the strength, while all parts under the head are annulled.
The efficient cause is either fullness or emptiness, fullness is caused by blood,
and then a Convulsion happens suddenly; it is also caused by a phlegmy humor,
which does wind it self, as the blood does into the Sinnews and Muscles: this
causes a Palsy. The emptiness of a Sinnew takes more deliberation in growing
upon a Patient; this is occasioned by the Ague, Hunger, Melancholy, violent
Sweating, Vomiting, excessive Venery, or Inflammations in the sinnewy parts. A
Convulsion which is caused by a Wound, and of Heleborus, is mortal. This
Dis^ase is also incureable, if it be caused by emptiness. Let the air of the
Patient be hot and dry, his diet rather roast then sod; instead of Wine, when
the Disease first seizes, he may be permitted to drink honied water, wherein
Sage and Cinnamon are boiled; exercise must be avoided, the neck and back-bones
of the sick person must be rubbed, his sleep moderate, his excrements
answerable to his belly, his mind quiet.

Of Choler.
Choler is an immoderate perturbation of the Stomach and Bowels, whence malign
humors break forth upwards and downwards. This Disease is often so violent,
that it deprives one of Life within the space of a day or two without a Fever,
the substance of the body being consumed by vomits and stools; for excrements
come often out with such force, that the spirits are expelled with the humors:
the upper and lower part of the stomach is primarily affected, the bowels being
distempered by the stomachs disburthening of it self through them. The signs
that make known that these parts are affected, are vomits and evacuation; a
chollerick, sour, and stinking matter is vomited upwards and downwards for
many hours, as if the Patient had drunk great store of such stuff. This Disease
is gathered together in all the body, or in the Gall, Bladder, Misentery, or
Bowels. This Disease is sharp, but the strength of it is dissolved in a short
time. The air the Patient lives in must be cold and bright; if he be strong, a
little quantity of meat will suffice him; he should forbear eating for two
days; he may drink then strong Wine: in this Wine thin plates of Gold should
be quenched; he must sleep very gently, and shun the passions of the mind.

Of the Head Ache.
THis disease is sometimes caused from the location of the Head, sharp Vapors,
and Swelling humors ascending from the lower parts assaulting the Head, because
as the brain is of a cold and moist temperature, superfluity of excrements are
therein generated, which if they increase, and are not avoided by the expulsive
faculty, in time disturb the Head with Aches; the Headache occasioned by an
ague, quaffing, or some other external cause, is by the Latins called
Cephallalgia: the Films of the brain is much troubled with this disease, which
by reason of their tenderness, the least pains are sharp and tender to them,
but the substance of the brain is more grosser, so that the pain that seizes
thereon, is duller and more loading; this disease is sometimes caused from cold
and Phlegmy matter; this matter by the grossness, and sliminess does stop the
narrow passages of the Head: the pain that comes by a hot, is more vehement
then that which comes by a cold distemper; an old pain caused by cold matter is
hardly to be cured, especially in old men: a Headache continually vexing, is
the forerunner of madness, especially if the Vomit appear somewhat rusty; it
also presages other diseases. The Air where the Patient lives should be hot and
dry, roast meat is better then boiled, exercise and sleep must be moderate; let
him lie with his head raised up, and somewhat covered, he must avoid Vomiting
and discontents of mind.

Of the Cough
CAlled Tussis, is a violent breathing, causing much breath or spirit speedily
to break forth, as it endeavors by its force to discharge sharp excrements
which do molest the Lungs, and hinder the passages, or which do any other way
offend the body; this motion is caused by nature which does force the
instruments of breathing by some violent course, from whence the Cough is
caused. The beginning of a Cough is for the most part from the Lungs, whereby
the Muscles of the Breast are stirred up, and the chest is vehemently pressed,
by which means all things that are in the way are expelled; when as the breath
breaks forth so strongly, the Lungs have this passion following it, even as
freezing follows cold, in the brain; and to bring this motion into act; first
the Lungs become wider, then again they are shrunk; the Midriff also being a
help to this motion, the Lungs are the affected part, sometimes the Midriff,
Stomach and Liver, for neither the Breast in the Plurisie, nor the Liver can
any ways beget a Cough, unless also the Lungs are hurt: sometimes a Cough
follows the stopping of the passage, through which the breath is moved The
signs of this disease are manifest, for the Cough is so strong, that let one do
what he ca^ he cannot forbear coughing; there being often a kind of tickling
in the inward parts of the mouth: this disease is often caused by an humor from
the head into the Winde-pipe an^ Lungs, which if it run abundantly and wit^
great force, the Patient breaths with great difficulty. If the Cough hinders
sleeping it is (...) bad sign, also a continual and vehement Cough with a
distillation, is accounted very dangerous because by this there is some danger
of a Consumption; a continual Cough is caused by a^ old obstruction or
corruption of the Lungs, no^ by Rhumes; for when those stay, the Coug^ also
stays. The Air where the Patient lives must be temperate, and inclining to
dryness, hi^ meat must be easy of digestion, very moderate, he must avoid such
things are sharp and bitter; his exercise must be moderate, day sleeps are
hurtful, his belly either by art or nature must be kept loose, and all
perturbations of mind to be avoided.

Of the Flux of the Belly.
A Disentery, so properly called, is a Flux of the belly with exulceration and
excoriation, whereunto great pains with gripings are joined; chiefly fat
corpulent bodies are galled by sharp humors, and sometimes the Filmes of the
inward tunickles of the Bowels are voided by stool; the inward parts are
affected as those things which are voided do testify, for the excrements are
thick, and some fat or bloody drops are mixed therewith; and sometimes foamy,
which is voided with wind; this blood for the most part swims upon the
excrements, if the Ulcer be fastened on the inward Bowels, but if the pain rest
about the Navel, or somewhat higher, or that a quantity of blood is mixed and
drowned with the stool; in the beginning of this disease, for the most part
slimy biting Chollerick excrements of diverse colors are voided, wherewith at
the last some quantity of blood is mixed; also there is a griping of pain of
the Bowels; the excrements are little, and expelled by little and little; and
after this a small quantity of flesh is voided, and sometimes parcels of the
Bowels, ^^ward Tunicles do appear in the Excrements: This Flux is caused by
sharp humors, such as are putrefied and very much biting. Signs of this disease
are the weakness of the Stomach, increase of thirst, continual Flux of the
Belly; also if the Urine be not answerable to that which is drunk, and black
Excrements are voided, the body being lean. The air wherein the Patient is to
remain ought to be temperate, his diet easy of digestion, and such as will
breed good Blood, because the Concoctive and retentive faculties are feeble;
exercise and motion are not to be ^sed, watchings and all perturbations of
mind ^^e hurtful.

Of the Hemorhoids or Piles.
HEmorhoids are veins of the Fundamen^ stretching beyond measure, or swollen most
excessively; sometimes they appear about the Fundament, and then they are
called outward Hemorhoides; sometimes they swell inward, and then their
swelling is not so great and therefore the Veins do not appear outwardly, these
are called the inward Hemorhoides when they run too much, then they void
Melancholy and thick blood, but after it good an^ red blood is perceived to
issue; after the blood i^ of a Citron or pale color, the strength of the body
failing, the weakness of the Legs, and (...) heavy pain of the Hips concuring,
the Blood i^ oftentimes this way evacuated, because abundance of dreggy blood
which is this way generated by evil digestion, would else rot and putrifi^ in
the body; wherefore nature has provide^ that the Liver, Spleen, and other
parts adjoining, through the former branches should sen^ all their corrupt
blood through the Fundament Hemrhoids coming on such as are mad or molested
with black Choler, or the effects of the Kidneys, are good; yet if they bleed
too much there is great danger, for they threaten a Dropsy; if they flow
naturally, neither an inflammation of the Lungs, Sides, or else eating Ulcer o^
Leprosy, Melancholy or a Quartane Ague wi^ soon follow. The air the Patient
lives in must b^ dry, his meat such as breeds very few Excrements, his drink
Wine, some what binding,

Of Swoondings.
SWoonding called Sincope, is a sudden failing of the strength, and so it is
in a degree in a manner deadly, because it is the beginning of natures
dissolution; the heart in this disease is affected, as may appear by the
sudden failing of the strength of the body, smallness and weakness of the
pulse, and coldness of the extreme parts. In this distemper the Patients face
looks as if he were dead, because the blood flies inward, the extreme part of
the body, by reason of faintness and looseness of the body, wax cold, their
sweat being ill savoured by reason of the dissolution of the parts: this
disease is often caused by great watching, anger, sadness, vexation and grief
of mind, by Fevers, emptiness of the belly, sweating, laboring, vomiting at
the stool, or by a sudden evacuation of water in a Dropsy; for hereby
moderate evacuations and resolutions of the Spirits are caused, by which means
the heart cannot but be greatly overthrown; if when this sick person is in a
swound, the head fall on the Shoulders or Breast, and he neither breaths nor
his Pulse beats, his face appearing green and of a leaden hue, if a sneezing
Medicine will not prevail, present death is at hand. The air this Patient is to
remain in ought to be temperate, for hot or cold offend; his Chamber should be
lightsome, his meat easy of digestion, his sleep not long, except in
extraordinary cases, and a Physician by to observe the Patient in his sleeping
and waking: for if while the Patient is awake, his pulse, color of his face,
and breathing be better, or settled, his sleep may be broken; but those
accidents being better whilst he sleeps, he may continue sleeping.

Of the Spleen.
THe tumor of the Spleen is sometimes soon hardened, and swells even as the
Liver does, though it has a thinner substance then the Liver, because his
nutriment is thick; and besides the Spleen must receive the dregs of blood, and
his more earthy and impure parts. This Disease so stops the Midriff, that it
cannot be raised up or thrust down, when it should serve for breathing, whereby
great sighings are caused in the sleep, as also great difficulty of breathing.
The part affected is the Spleen, which may be perceived by the loading pain in
the Spleens region. This Disease is plainly discerned by the loading pain in
the Spleens region, and by reason of the plenty of matter. This Disease is for
the most part caused by melancholy humors, which are the dregs of the blood,
and are caught into the Spleen by the dregs of the body, and there remain for a
long time; or else are caused, because the Veins of the body do flow with such
melanchollick blood at the first, whilst the tumor is increasing, the cure may
be performed; but if it be once ripened, it is incurable. The air the patient
lives in must be clear and bright; his meat must be such as has an opening
force, that is soon concocted, and breeds good blood; his diet must be sparing,
his exercise before meat, his sleep moderate, and his mind pleased.

Of the Lethargy.
THe Lethargy called Lethargia, is such a necessity of sleeping, as cannot by
any means be avoided; or it is an oblivious Disease caused by a cold imposthume
of the brain, the substance thereof being affected chiefly, the hinder part,
but not the ventricles, as may appear by the offended functions of the brain:
It is such a Disease, whereby Reason, Memory, and the Imaginations of the other
Senses are annoyed; in this Disease, as has been said, an urgent necessity of
oblivion with sleeping does possess the Patient, together with a lingering and
continual Fever. The causes of this Disease proceed from a cold and a moist
distemper of the brain, and abundance of phlegmy humors so putrefied, that they
bring a Fever with them. This Disease speedily kills the Patient, if it be not
met withal in time; for the space of seven days he is in danger of death, if
he escape them, there are hopes of recovery. The air he lives in must be hot
and dry, if otherwise, it may be rectified with Juniper-wood, Rosemary, and
Bay Leaves; his diet must be such as may extenuate; his sleep must be hindered
as much as may be, with pricking, and pulling of his ^air, or with smoke of
Brimstone, Beaver-stone, Galbanum, Sagapenum placed under his Nose, that he may
be forced to draw it up his Nostrils, to which pupose his Nose must be rubbed
and chafed with Vinegar; the excrements of his body must be brought down with a
Glister or Suppository; instead of exercise frictions and ligatures of the
exterior parts, viz. the hands and feet must be used.

Of the Yellow Jaundies.
THe Yellow Jaundies called Icteritia, is an effusion sometimes of yellow
Choler, sometimes black, sometimes both, over the whole body, and this is
incident to Maids: also this chollerick blood is spread over the whole body
with the blood, because the excrements are not daily, or not at all voided. In
this disease the same place or part is not always affected; for sometimes the
Liver is in fault when it is too hot, or else imposthumed, and then both the
Urine and the Stool are stained with a yellow color. Sometimes the Fever does
concur with a certain pain in some obscure place of the Liver, whereby the
color of the face is changed: sometimes the bladder of the gall is affected,
and then heaviness is felt in the right side of the Heart-walls. This Disease
is manifested to the eyes by the color; the Patients appetite is diminished, a
bitterness increases in his mouth because of heat; and yet for the most part it
is without a Fever, but looseness and Headache of the body ensue; the Urine
is like to Saffron, also muddy and thick, and sometimes it is stopped, the
excrements are white; if the bladder of the galls passage is stopped, little is
voided, and that little by little and little. This Disease comes sometimes by
increase of Choler through the Livers too hot distemper, for hereby such store
of Choler is generated, that the Gall cannot contain it: sometimes this
Disease is caused by the Inflammation of the whole Liver, in which case the
whole body is stained with gally excrements, by reason of the great heat of the
blood. If this Disease continue long, it threatens the danger of a Dropsy. The
air the Patient lives in must be temperate; his diet such as may cool, moisten,
and extenuate the humors, and easy of digestion; such as bind and multiply
Choler are to be avoided; Baths and Frictions in the Winter time are good; his
exercise is to be small, his sleep moderate, his excrements voided in due
season, his mind is to be furnished with pleasing objects.

Of Giddiness, or the Vertigo.
GIddines is a Disease whereby the head and all other parts of the body seem to
be turned circularly about, so disturbing the brains and senses, that the
Patient often tumbles down, unless he be held up by some stay near at hand. This
Disease is of near kin to the Falling Sickness, only herein they differ, that
the giddy party is not deprived of his senses, neither is he burried this way
and that way, as Convulsions afflict their Patients. The chief part affected is
the Brain, which does appear by the functions which are hurt, for the animal
faculty is grieved, but the brain is affected; the Headache the forerunner, a
heaviness and dullness thereof, with an annoyance of smell and taste, and a
ringing in the ears. A sign of this Disease is, that the Patient cannot endure
those that turn about in their sight, being so depraved, that all things seem
to turn round. This Disease is caused by the abundance of spirits and boiling
blood, if it be not voided at the Nose, when it is ready to run out: this
Disease is also caused by crude, raw, venomous humors often generated in the
head, or in some of the inferior parts, especially in the stomach. If this
Giddiness lasts long, it is next to an Apoplexy and Falling Sickness. The air
the Patient remains in should be temperate, bright and clear; his diet such as
breeds good juice pleasing to the stomach, and not windy, his exercise and
sleep moderate for the head; the voiding of his excrements, if they come not
from him naturally, must be furthered by art, his mind in no case to be
disturbed.

Of the Palsy.
THe Palsy called Paralysis, is depriving of senses and motion, not in the
whole body, as in an Apoplexy, but when one side, or all parts of the body
under the head, or any other limb is deprived of sense or motion, as the Jaw,
Hand, Lip, Feet, Arm. It also falls out that some part is deprived of the
sensitive faculty, the motive faculty not being hurt. Contrariwise, the motive
dies, when as the sensitive is found sound: sometimes it happens that sense or
motion is not quite taken away, but only was dull, and is benumbed. Physicians
call this an imperfect Palsy, the Harbenger of a Palsy; why the sense does
sometimes perish, and motion abides, this happens because some parts do
participate of a twofold kind of Sinnews: this Disease has great affinity
with the Apoplexy, and sometimes is caused by a weak Apoplexy, and then it is
called Paraplexia: herein they differ, the Apoplexy seizes upon all the parts
of the body, depriving them both of sense and motion. The Palsy seldom or
never leaves the head without motion or sense, but the other parts of the body
lose both motion and sense, and that in a different manner; for if the
beginning of the marrow of the Backbone be affected, all parts under the face
do sympathize with it; if but one half of the back be affected, all parts that
have relation also suffer: but if the beforementioned parts are not hurt, but
some particular Sinnew of some part of the body is loosed, that part whereof
this nerve is joined, shall also lose sense and motion. In this disease, as
has already been said, the marrow of the Backbone is affected, which is the
original of all other Sinnews; wherefore the Practitioner ought to take pains
in Anatomy, to know where this mischief keeps its first residence. One evident
sign in this Disease is, that if the palsied part be lifted up, it falls back
again, it is soon cool, and in time withers; the Patients urine is for the most
part white, and sometimes inclining to redness; when this mischief is at the
full height, the Pulse is faint, slow, little, and soft; it is caused by a cold
and moist distemper, sometimes by an Imposthume, or some other tumor crushing
the sinnews by a wound, a fall, a fracture, too strait a ligature, laxation of
bones in the back by a stroke; but for the most part it is caused by thin and
waterish humors derived from the brain, which do insinuate into the pores and
substance of the Sinnews, and so the Sinnews being made too soft, are loosened
and slackned, and do suck in so much moisture, that they stop the head of the
Sinnews, whereby the passage of the animal faculty is hindered, which has its
original from the brain. A Palsy which is caused by the cutting of a Sinnew
overthwart, is incurable. A Palsy caused in the Winter, and in old men, is
seldom or never cured, because natural heat is deficient in them. The air
wherein the Patient lives should be hot and dry, procured by a fire, if the
season of the year require it; or by a perfume of Cloves and Rosemary; his meat
must be such as heat and dries, his diet must be slender till the fourteenth
day, for it is very good for the Patient to be abstenuous; his drink must be
small; he must avoid sleep in the day time, and trouble of mind.

Of the weakness of the Liver.
THe weakness of the Liver comes by distemper without any manifest evil in that
Bowel; the proper and principal faculty of the Liver is the blood which does
come to it by the property of its own substance, and cannot be weakened of a
sudden by any distemper, for the distemper must needs take deep root before it
hurt the substance of the Liver, or dissolve the strength thereof, but by what
distemper soever this is caused, the Liver does not perform its proper duty
except it be by halfs. In this disease, as has been said, the Liver is chiefly
affected, as will appear by its own functions hindered; the blood is not well
digested, and then the blood which is voided by stool is watrish, which shows
that the nutrement was well concocted in the Stomach, and began to be concocted
in the Liver, but not perfected because of the Livers weakness. This disease
scatters the Spirits native heat, dissolves the strength and actions of the
Liver; it is most probable that a cold distemper is the cause of the Livers
weakness, if the distemper be but light, the color of the face is white, the
Excrements stink a little, few are voided, the Patients Urine is thin: there
are many other conjectured causes, if the weakness of the Liver has been of a
long continuance, it is scarce to be cured, and in time is changed to be an
evil habit of the body, from whence a general weakness is caused; or else it
turns to the Dropsy. A temperate air is good for the Patient, meats that are
easy of digestion and do moderately heat, his drink may be thin and
Odoriferous Wine, his sleep must be moderate, his mind cleared from
discontents.

Of the Chollick.
THe Chollick is a continual passion of the Bowel, which is called Colon, there
follows it a difficulty of voiding of the Excrements and wind, at the lower
parts a grievous pain and sore pricking comes by fits, because this bowel is
thick and sinewy, whereupon if any hurtful thing creep into its Tunicles, it is
not presently driven out; this disease has affinity with the Iliaca passio,
but in the Iliaca passio the pain is more vehement; the looser Gut called Colon
is chiefly affected: the pain of this disease is vehement, as if the person
were bored through with an auger, it is stirred up in the inside of the Bowel;
this pain is inconstant, for sometimes it does pinch one side and then another,
though it does chiefly molest the right side, and from thence is carried to the
left. The Chollick is eased by Lenitive glisters, and fomentations; there are
many causes of this disease, a several matter running to the Guts, because of
their wideness, or else it is caused from an inflammation of the same part, or
by a sharp biting humor, or by slimy, and gross humors, or by a thin Phlegm
that is in the Film of the Colon; and because that Bowel is the receptacle of
wind, the Chollick is often caused by them when great plenty of them is
gathered together in those places, or else it is caused by slimy and gross
Phlegm sticking in the common passages, or from a tumor remaining in the
Bowels, whereby the Guts are strongly pressed, that the wind can hardly get
forth; the Chollick does often turn into a resolution or looseness of the
Sinews, into a Joynt-Gout, into Iliaca passio, or a Dropsy; of all Chollicks
that is the worst which is caused by an inflammation. The air the Patient lives
in must be temperately hot inclining to dryness, yet the native heat of the
outward and former parts of the belly, must be kept hot with warm clothes, his
meat must be easy of digestion, such as does generate few superfluities, it
must be moist not windy, nor slimy his drink may be strong Wine; exercise is
good before meat, and rest afterward, they may sleep in the day time.

Of the Pleurisy.
THe Pleurisy is an inflammation of the thin and small skin which clothes the
Ribs on the inner side, called in Latin Pleura, from whence this disease takes
its name; there are many pains of the side, but in this place I shall only
treat of that pain that does follow asharp disease by the inflammation of the
inner skin; for if the inflammation be in the outward Muscles, or if the pain be
great because of windiness, this is but a basterd Pleurisy, and the Patient is
without a Fever. The signs of this disease besides the difficulty of
breathing, and a vehement Cough, is a pricking pain which plainly does
demonstrate that the membranes and some other tender parts are affected; this
pricking pain sometimes spreads it self over the sides and breast, sometimes to
the short Ribs, to the Channel-bone of the Throat, so that the Patient is
forced to breath short and thick; also there is a continual Fever, because the
inflammation does border on the heart, the Pulse is thick, not too great, hard
and unequal, and by that means tough and like to a saw; a cough also comes
withal the first day, and then nothing comes at length: spettle is voided and
comes up colored according to the nature of the excrements, and it is also
moister: there are many other signs, the cause for the most part is blood
running from the hollow Veins into the Ribs thin Veins; sometimes it is caused
by Phlegmy blood, and then the disease is longer of continuance, and the
spettle frothy and white; sometimes the blood is Chollerick, and then a sharper
disease is caused. The suppression of the Hemrhoides, or monthly terms, will
cause a Pleurisy; this disease is dangerous to old men, to Women with child,
and such as have been sick twice or thrice of it; it vexes the Patient more in
the night then day time: whosoever is sick of a Pleurisy, and is not cleansed
in fourteen days, they turn to supurati^^* This disease kills by choking, or
too much pain, or by the translation of the matter into the Lungs, whereby the
Consumption of them is caused, and also Ulcers. The air the Patient lives in
must be temperate, somewhat inclining to heat, his meat easy of digestion, he
is not to drink Wine till the disease be abated, he may be permitted longer
then ordinary sleep, his belly must be kept loose.

Of the Bleeding at the Nose
THe Bleeding at the nose called Hemorrhagia, does signify a Bleeding at the
Nose, whether it does come immediately from the Nostrills, carried thither by
the Veins of the palate, through which for the most part nature does expel the
superfluous blood of many, or else whether it comes from the Veins of the Head
further off; but in general it does signify any bleeding, whether it be of
Nose, Womb, or any other part of the body, when blood comes forth moderately in
the beginning of a Pleurisy, Impostume, Squinancy, Burning Fever, Small Poxs,
it is always for the best; yet this Bleeding in some other diseases is
Critical: foreshewing death the Nostrills are chiefly affected, but not
always; the essence of the Nostrils, but they are affected by the consent of
some other part; the Veins by which this blood is cast out at the Nose, run
from the palate and Mouth into the Nostrills, and sometimes from the head; when
too much blood is voided, the color of the face waxes pale, the body is of a
leaden color, the outward parts are cold, and a swooning follows, and many
times after death. Oftentimes bleeding at the Nose is caused by nature, which
does by this means expel the excrements, and which is troublesome to the body:
Sometimes it is caused by the evil affection of the Veins, wherein the blood is
contained, and the blood runs out of the Veins, the Veins being opened by the
plenty of blood which they could not contain. There are sundry other causes: If
bleeding have continued long, swooning, weakness, and too much cooling of the
Liver, Lachexia, or the Dropsy is to be feared. Bleeding at the Nose without
coldness of the outward parts, is mortal. The air the Patient should live in
must be somewhat cold, his meat must be such as does nourish well, and easy of
digestion; he must avoid exercise, and speak little; he must avoid all passions
of the mind, especially anger.

Of the Falling Sickness.
THe Falling Sickness is a Convulsion of all the parts of the body, not
continual, but that which comes by distances of time, the mind and senses
being thereby hurt. This disease does either happen when the brain has the
cause of the disease in it self, which is usual, or by the evil effect of the
mouth of the stomach, or from some other part underneath, by which the venomous
effect creeps into the brain through secret passages: the Patient feels the
cause of this Disease like a vapor of cold wind to be carried to the brain by
the continuity of the other parts, from the part of the body wherein the
Disease is chiefly seated; the cause of this Disease being for the most part a
venomous vapor carried up from some lower part of the body into the brain, and
then the Patient does suddenly fall with a Convulsion. The brain is the part
affected, either by it self, or by the consent of the stomach, or by some other
parts. The fit comes oftentimes suddenly with much foam, which because it is
slimy, may be drawn out at length, yet in a gentler Falling Sickness this does
not appear; when the Patient is deprived of his senses, he falls to the ground
with a violent shaking of his body, his face is wrested, his eyes turned
upwards, his chin somewhat driven to his shoulder, and oftentimes he voids seed
and ordure against his will, his Muscles are loosened; all these are signs of a
strong f^t. Sometimes their teeth are so fast closed together, that they are in
danger of stifling, paleness of the face, inordinate motion of the tongue, pain
and heaviness of the head, forgetfulness, sadness, troublesome dreams are
ushers to this Disease; the Patient being taken with a giddiness, sometimes
darkness, and diverse dim glisterings appear before his eyes. This Disease is
for the most part caused by abundance of melanchol^ck and phlegmatic humors,
from whence cor^upt, venomous, and stinking vapors break out, whereby
obstructions are caused in the passages ^f the brain, and the passages of the
spirits are ^^ereby hindered; by this means the brain, and the roots of the
Sinnews shrink, and as it were tremble, in the expelling of that which is
obnoxious, whether it be vapor or humor. This disease frequents children,
because they are of a moister brain then young men; next to these, men o^ a full
growth, and old men least of all. This Disease is more incident to men then
women* and usually it does stick close to the Patient, unless it be taken away
by medicines in the minority: If the Disease be vehement, and come often on the
Patient, it is incurable; but if a quartane Ague, or any longer Fever surprise
him, i^ portends health. The air wherein the Patien^ lives must be hot and dry,
his meat mixed with such things as do dissolve and extenuate the humors;
exercise of the body, and frication of the head are prevalent, the moderate use
of Venery is healthful; his excrements must be voided i^ due time; and if
Nature be deficient herein, Ar^ must be used; his sleep must be moderate, and
his mind pleased.

Of Rheum.
RHeum, in Latin called Catarrhus, is a distillation commonly taking a deflux
of humors and excrements from the head or brain into the other parts of the
body; and because the brain is of a cold and a moist nature, and dot^ want
plenty of nourishment, by reason of the largeness thereof; so likewise it does
breed many excrements: and the slight distemper being cold and moist, will
further it, for vapors sen^ from the lower parts get up thither; and these
being thickened by reason of the brains thinness, are entertained; and even as
these superfluous humors are sent back again to some one or other part of the
body: oftentimes in the first Ventricle, if they do not offend much in
quantity, and then they are soonest purged; by the Pallat sometimes they spread
through diverse places when they flow too much, and then they are voided at the
Nose, Pallat, Ears or Eyes; and they do often fall into the Stomach and Lungs,
from whence several diseases are occasioned. The Brain is most affected, as may
appear by those things which are voided at the Mouth, Nose, and Pallat, and
then it is a more continual disease; neither is any hurt of any other part
perceived; whereby it may be cherisht; but while it is caused by other parts of
the body, it will the better be known by its proper signs. This is an affection
which is caused by moderate excretion, if the excrements of the head fall on
the Lungs, it does cause for the most part hardness of breathing, and a great
Cough, and Hoarseness, bringing pain and soreness to the aforenamed places; the
hot distemper of the brain is sometimes the cause, the great weakness thereof
being oftentimes the cause; sometimes it is occasioned from the brains cold and
moist distemper; for then the nutriments conveyed to the brain are not well
digested, whereby many superfluities are gathered, and store of excrements
lodged in the brain. Surfeits and too much fullness increases this Disease, or
by too much sleep; also by the weakness of the digestive and expulsive faculty
of the brain. If the humor fall from the head to the nose, it is but a small
grief; if to the throat, worse; if to the lungs, worst of all; for the lungs
are in danger of being exulcerated, from whence comes a Consumption: the Winter
season is very obnoxious to this disease, because of the uncertainty of the
weather. The air the Patient lives in should be moderately hot, and rainy
weather, as also Northern and Southern blasts must be avoided; his meat must be
very easy of digestion, and such as breeds good blood; his sleep must be
moderate, and sometimes in the day time, his head must be so covered, that
neither too much cold, nor too much heat offend it; his body must daily, either
by art or nature, be emptied of excrements; he must use moderate exercise, and
shun the passions of mind.

Of the Pain of the Stomach.
THe pain of the Stomach called Cardialgia, is a painful sense of the mouth of
the stomach, caused by a biting matter. This distemper has an affinity with
the Disease called Cardaica passio, which is in like manner a Disease o^ the
mouth of the stomach, caused by corrupt humors, and such as are biting and
violent, which either came from some other place, or else were there generated
and gathered together. The Cardaica passio differs from this Disease, because
this is caused by biting humors, but that is caused by virulent humors,
venomous, and so malign, that a very hot and sharp Fever accompanies it. The
mouth of the Stomach is primarily affected, the heart being hereby hurt,
because of the nearness, a pinching pain with biting and fretting being felt
under the Breasts grissels. In this Disease there is a gnawing, biting, and
pricking of the stomach; there is an oppressing pain there, whereby the Patient
breaths with difficulty; sometimes the belly does cast out the chollerick
stuff, and sometimes he does vomit choler; a Fever seldom comes with this. In
this Disease the appetite is abated, the Patient is in more pain before then
after meat; this Disease is often caused by sadness, for by those causes
Choler comes into the stomach, whereby bitings and gnawings are caused;
sometimes by inflammation, or by sharp or phlegmy humors: if this Disease comes
without a Fever, it is less dangerous. Let the air the Patient lives in be
cold, either by art or nature; his meat easy of digestion, and such as is
least subject to corruption; rest asswages the pain, his sleep must be
moderate, ^is belly must be rendered answerable to nature, ^erturbations of his
mind are to be shunned, especially choler.

Of the Gout.
THe Joynt-Gout is a feebleness of the Joints, and pain coming upon them at
several di^^ances of time; for the most part it is caused by (...) Flux, which
windeth it self betwixt the Ligaments, Films and Tendons of the Joints; for in
this disease the Joints do first receive the Humor, which at length does
insinuate into the Films adjoining: sometimes there is a Gout in the fingers,
sometimes in the knee, sometimes in the hips, from whence it spreads it self to
the Thighs, Calves of the Legs, and to the end of the Feet; yet this Gout
sticks not in the Hip, but is fastened above the Hip at the to^ of the Buttock;
if the Gout stick in the feet 'ti^ called Podagra, or the Feet-Gout, whether it
b^ in the ankles, soles of the feet, or great toe^ joint: sometimes it seizes
on the shoulder-joynts, and turning-joynts of the Backbone o^ Chine: sometimes
not any knitting of the bones is free from this pain. The parts affecte^ are
the joints, tendons, ligaments, films of the parts of the body, which either
knit or inviron the bones are here affected, and sometimes the Membranes are
filled and stretched; the Patient i^ tormented for a long space, when this
Diseas^ does first surprise him, yet the pain is but little by the use of evil
diet almost all the joints o^ his body suffering alike, sometimes not one part
of the body being free from this Disease. In the Feet or Hip-Gout for the most
part no swellin^ does appear, but in the Hand and Knee-Gout, swelling, redness,
and heat, by extreme pains a^ easily to be perceived; sometimes an inflamat^on
is caused, and then the appetite is lost, an^ the Patient is troubled with
watchings, and Fever. The cause of every Joynt-Gout is for the most part great
store of phlegmatic humors, or some other humors overflowing in the greater
Veins, the Liver and Head, so that the parts are therewith surcharged; and that
these parts may likewise be free of this burden, they do cast these excrements
upon the joints, ligaments, and tendons, and films, whereby they are filled,
stretched, and weakened. There are four causes of these superfluities of humors,
the immoderate use of strong Wine, Venery, crudities and feebleness of the
parts, to which may be added the relinquishing of accustomed exercises, and
suppression of evacuation. This disease is an an hereditary Disease. The pains
of the Feet-gout trouble the Patient at the Spring time and Autumn: if this
Disease be not cured before the Patient comes to his perfect growth, it will
not be pefectly cured. The air the Patient lives in must be temperate,
inclining to heat and dryness; such meats as do moderately nourish are good,
and such they must eat but sparingly; when their Disease has left them, they
may use exercises, otherwise not; their sleep must be moderate, for too long
sleep cherishes this Disease; his belly must always be kept loose, the use of
Venery is hurtful, all perturbations of the mind are to be avoided.

Of Congelation.
COngelation, called Catalepsis, is a sudden detaining both of soul and body,
with the which whosoever is taken, the same figure of body does nevertheless
remain; he abides sitting or lying, if he did either sit or lie when the fit
took him. By some this disease is styled an awaking amazement, because the
disease takes away sense and motion in all parts of the body; this disease
agrees in some things, but differs very much in others from an Apoplexy. In
this disease the brains hinder-part is chiefly affected, the animal part being
hurt, as well imaginative as sensitive and motive. In this disease the Patient
is dumb, his body is bereft of sense and motion; and though he retain the form
of one being awake, yet his mind and senses are asleep, and that on such a
sudden, that the lookers on are amazed. This disease in so vehemently seizing
on the Patient, that he rather thinks he is transported to heaven then dead;
the mind is assaulted so violently, that the person in this distemper remains
in the same figure, wherein he was when he was stricken; he can neither void
excrements, make water, by reason of the senses dullness, his pulse beating
little and faintly, but in the mean time equal. This affect is caused by a cold
and weak distemper of the brain, whereby the brain and animal spirits are
congealed and dried up, not only cooled. A cold and dry matter causes this
disease, as melancholy, the air cold and dry, the mixture of Phlegm and
Choler when both overflow; they are in great hazard of life that are taken
with this disease, if this disease be strong, it is hardly to be cured. The air
the Patient lives in must be hot and moist, his meat Ptisan, Cream, his drink
small white Wine, and somewhat a stringent.

Of the Frenzy.
A Right Frenzy is an inflammation of the brain and the films thereof, bringing
with it a sharp Fever, doting, and alienation of mind; it is a kind of a
madness, both dreadful and dangerous, because this disease is generated in
part, which is the chief sense of the faculties of the Soul: and because a true
Frenzy has its beginning from a false, it will be convenient first to treat
of a false Frenzy. It is an alienation of the mind with disquietness, without
an impostume of the brain, and it does follow a Fever caused by Blood or
Choler: doatings do not fret and grieve so much as they do, that are possessed
with a true Frenzy; and as the Fever does increase or decrease, so the fate
of the Frenzy is increased or decreased, especially in the hour of the Crisis,
or conflict betwixt Nature and the Disease. In these Fevers dry Vapors get up
into the Brain, whereby the animal parts are disquieted, sometimes Impostumes
are the cause of this disease. The parts affected are the Pia matter, or dura
matter. In this distemper there is a continual and dry Fever; and as the
Patient sleeps very disquietly, so his watchings are more troublesome, he
breaths by fits, he will if he be not looked to, start out of his bed suddenly,
he will weep, sing, and cry out; the Patients tongue is withered black, he is
very thirsty, his Urine is thin and fiery, sometimes white and thin, then he is
in great danger. This distemper is caused with too much blood, and such a one
is mad with Laughter, yet he dotes less, and is not so Feverish: but when it
is caused by burnt Choler, then is the Patient stark mad, and must needs be
bound, as he is in this distemper very strong. A Fever is the inseparable
companion of this disease: this is a most sharp and dangerous distemper, and
speedily kills, if present remedy are not given; for all kinds of Frenzies are
mortal, being bred in the place where the souls principal part is resident. The
air the Patient remains in must be temperate and bright, no variety of Pictures
must remain in his sight, his diet must be such as may moisten and cool the
body, he must avoid too much motion, frictions on the lower parts are to be
used, especially when the disease is milder; sleep must be procured by Local
Medicines, and such as are received in at the mouth, the Excrements of the
Belly must be evacuated, for if they are kept in, they do increase the disease;
perturbations of his mind are to be avoided.

Of the Dropsy.
THe Dropsy is such a passion that it is not without plenty of watery humors,
because the blood-making-faculty is vitiated; it is a long disease, for the
most part caused by the coldness of the Liver. There are three kinds of
Dropsies, Anasarca, which is a dispersing of Phlegmy humors over the whole
body. In this Disease the body increases most unnaturally, for it is all over
swelled, and an humor mixed with Phlegmy Blood is spread over all the body
between the skin and the flesh, and the body does suck it up, even as a sponge
sucks up water, and by reason of this an ill color passes over the whole body.
The second sort of Dropsy called Ascites, is that when great store of winds,
but greater of water, are gathered together in one place, which does lie
between the Guts and the Stomach. In this Disease, first the belly and Abdomen,
by little and little, then the Thighs are swelled, and all the other parts of
the body by little and little wax lean; but when there is a greater store of
wind then water, whereby the Abdomen is stretched beyond measure, called
Timpanites; then rather a noise of wind then water is perceived, if the belly
be struck, for there is the sound of a Tabor, from whence this Disease has its
name. The natural color of the face in this Disease is not altered the Liver
is the part affected, for hereby the blood is generated, and from this the
Dropsy is caused by the primary affect of the Liver, and then the Cough comes
withal, because the hugeness of the Liver causes the obstructions of the
Lungs, also the Excrements are not very liquid. Sometimes this Disease is
caused by the consent of the Misentery, Spleen, Stomach, Meseraick Veins, and
Jejunium intestinum, whereof a weakness of such Veins does follow, as did
convey food to the Liver, and then Excrements are heaped together in the lower
parts, until they are corrupted, and so surcharge the body, and afflict the
Patient with a Lax. The Patient in this disease, is for the most part troubled
with a Fever, and does thirst very much, especially if he be troubled with
Ascites, and because of Salt and putrefied humors, he loathes meat. The color
of the face is whitish, hardness of breathing, and heaviness of the body,
concurs also Swellings of the Feet, because of the far distance of the heart.
In Anasarca the whole body is weakened, and does Faint, and Swell equally, yet
for the most part the Swelling is in the Shins and the Feet; so that if the
Fingers are thrust into the flesh, the prints of them will remain a long time.
The great coolings of the Veins and Liver is the cause of this long and sore
disease; this happens to the Liver by it self, or else by the coldness of the
Spleen, Guts, Misentery, Midriff, which sometimes because of their obstruction,
sometimes because of their weakness, draw not unto them too much blood; also it
is caused by the Bleeding at the Nose, by immoderate running, or by staying of
the monthly Courses, or Hemrhoids, for so the natural heat is choked by the
loss of Spirits in the blood: sometimes it is caused by the Flux of the belly,
or stomach if they do last long, for the natural spirits, and native heat are
scattered. There are many other causes, if ulcers arise in the body by water,
that is between the flesh, because of the great plenty of humor it is hardly
cured. He who is supurated, or have a Dropsy, when he is cut or burnt, if that
water or matter does run out he dies presently; also if a Cough does seize on
him he is in great danger. Of all these Dropsies the Timpanites is the worst.
He that is in a consumption, many times fall into a Dropsy, because the evil
is communicated to the Liver, for matter and venomous filth having found a way
into the Liver, gets in and sticks fast therein, and so does corrupt the
substance of it. The air where the Patient lives should be clear and somewhat
inclining to heat and dryness; moist and windy air do increase this Disease. In
this distemper a supper of roast meat is better then sod; his meat must be
easy of concoction: flesh broth must not be given except the Patient takes
Purges; he may drink thin Wine, but not sweet, because this will not quench his
thirst; as it is good in this Disease to endure hunger, so to thirst long is
dangerous: moderate exercise, frictions, and the Baths are good; he may sleep
in the night time but not much, the Excrements must be answerable to nature, he
must abstain from Venery; and even as fear and sadness do hurt very much,
because they hinder digestion, so anger and some of the other passions will be
very good for him.

Of spitting of Blood.
SPitting of Blood is any avoiding of Blood at the mouth. Blood is also voided
from many other places of the body; here care ought to be had in observing
whether the Patient was wont to Bleed at the Nose or no, for from thence it
does fall into the Stomach and Throat, and from thence into the Lungs, but for
the most part it does turn and harden into a cold; if then one spit blood and
yet did not Bleed at the Nose formerly, then it comes from some peculiar part;
blood is often voided from the Gums and Mouth it self, and then the Spittle is
of a bloody color, and very little is voided out, and that without a Cough; if
it do come from the Throat or Weezel-pipe, then it is voided by Hemmings not by
Cough, and the continuated parts of these places do appear loosened, if the
Tongue be thrust out; but if it did come from the Head, a pain of the Head and
heaviness went before, a noise in the Ears, the Forehead Veins rise, they have
a kind of a heat and blood in the Mouth, and a tickling is felt in the Palate,
if it does run into the Throat, from whence by often Hemming it is cast out;
oftentimes the Patient has a desire to Cough but cannot; but if the blood does
come from the Lungs, then is the blood foamy, and then it is voided by frequent
Coughing and without pain, and at sundry times, and as often as blood is voided,
because some great Vein is burst, then plenty of blood is cast up; no cause
except that known, it being as it were cast up by Vomit; but if blood be cast
up because some Vein in the Lungs is gnawn, which is often caused by a sharp
humor falling down, then it is voided by degrees, a little now, and a little
then, unless some great Vein be fretted asunder, for then it runs out in great
abundance; for this is very dangerous, for then follows a Cough or a Fever;
sometimes some part of the Lungs being rotted, is voided by a Cough, and this
is the surest sign of the Lungs exulceration: much more might be written of the
peculiar parts affected, and of the signs. This distemper is often caused by
fullness, and by a great quantity of blood, which does offend the body, and some
peculiar parts of the body more particularly, so that hereby the vessels mouths
are opened. Of this is a good habit of body, immoderate use of hot nutriments
and Wine, suppression of terms; and then there is no pain but rather a
lightsomness of the body, which before was dull; and then also there is not too
great a quantity thereof, and it is not very foamy or red. Women without any
danger of Consumption have been eased by this shedding of blood in the
suppression of their terms. To omit other causes that might be rendered of this
distemper, it will be very necessary to take notice, that if the Lungs are
ulcerated, there is danger, for then there is danger of a Supuration and
Consumption when a Vein in the Lungs is opened and burst; yet there is some
hope, if the substance of the Lungs be sound; yet a Consumption signifies
danger, if the blood which comes out of the rupture of a vein falling upon the
Lungs be there detained, by which means the Lungs are inflamed and putrefied;
for at length the substance of the Lungs will be corrupted and putrefied; there
is also danger when a great V^^^ is opened or broke, for that the heart may be
suffocated from the plenty of blood voided from thence. Spitting of blood, if
it be caused by a corrosion of the Lungs, is incu^able; if from the Breast,
there is less danger. Spitting of matter it is a sign the Lungs are
exulcerated: this disease, if it continue long, will turn into a Consumption.
The air the Patient lives in should be somewhat inclining to cold and dry, the
Patient must avoid sunshine, and a bright fire, his meat must be such as does
cool, dry, and bind, it ought to be of a slimy substance; he must eat
sparingly, he may drink wine and water mixed together; he must shun all
exercise, he must breath very gently, for violent breathing is offensive; he
must not sleep in the day time, his sleep at night must be moderate; his belly
must be kept loose by art or nature, perturbations of his mind must be
avoided, especially anger.

The Postscript.
COurteous Student, observing my indisposition of Health to increase, and still
seize more powerfully on me, I have so ordered, through the trust I have
imposed in some of my best Friends, that these Papers preserserved for the
public good should outlive me; in which as the old Saying is, I have
enclosed Homer^ Iliads in a Nut-shel; in these few Pages epitomized the Mystery
of the Skill of Physic; in this small Looking-glass, representing to thy clear
view, above forty of the most dangerous and desperate Diseases that chiefly in
this Life afflict ou^ frail Bodies. It cannot be expected, that having confined
my self to such narrow limits, that I should have annexed there more particular
Cures, they having been so seriously, and I hope through Gods Blessing
successfully treated of in my foregoing Treatises. I acknowledge in these my
last Endeavors, that I have in part made use of an excellent Manuscript amongst
others, some years since that came happily to my perusual; whether it were
(...) Original, a Copy, a Translation, or the Authors Name, I know not; but
whosoever he were, I so approved of his admirable Reason, that I thought it fit
to join the best Experience of my own continued Practice to it; Vis unita
fortior. It is ^^t out of any arrogance or prerogative of my own fancy, that I
have styled these three, Diet, Reason, and Experience, Doctors: those that know
(...) rightly, can determine that I was never so inmoured with that Title, but
only to inform my ^istaken Contrymen, that it is not the Cowl ^^at makes
the Munk, the shaking of the Vrinal, ^e stroaking of the Beard, hard Words, the
Plush ^loak, a large House with a Monster in the first ^^om to amaze the
Patient, but deep grounded Rea^^^n, and tried Experience, that commences a
Physi^an with Diet, Reason, and Experience. The three ^^re-mentioned Authentic
Doctors I have con^lted; I commend their Advice to the well affect^^ and
judicious, for others I care not.

Nicholas Culpeper.

Chemical INSTITUTIONS, DESCRIBING Natures Choicest Secrets in Experienced
Chemical Practice; showing the several Degrees of Progression in the Physical
Cabinet of that Art.

BY Nich. Culpeper, Gent. late Student in Physic and Astrology.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill, 1659.

Chemical Institutions, Describing Natures Choicest Secrets in Experienced
Chemical Practice, showing the several degrees of Progression in the Physical
Cabinet of that Art.
Chap. 1. Vinegar of Squills
TAke of Squills (the outward skins and hard root at the bottom being cast
away) one pound, slice them with an Ivory or Bone Knife, for Iron spoils them,
then put them into three quarts of strong Vinegar, stop them close, and in one
month they will be ready for use; and then if you please with Honey you may
make them into a Syrup.

According to the quality of the Patient, strength of nature, and of the
disease, so let the Dose be 3 and therefore no certain Dose can generally be
determined.
The Dose is one spoonful in the morning ^sting, and walking an hour after it.

It preserves the body in health, even till ex^eam old age, as Samius,
recorded by Gallen, ^oved, whom he affirmed to live one hundred ^^d seventeen
Years in health, using no other ^edicine but only this.

It causes good digestion, long wind, clear ^^ce, acute sight, good hearing;
it expels wind, and makes a good color; it suffers no offensive thing to
remain in the body; Wind, Choler, Phlegm, Dung, nor Urine, but brings them
forth, brings out filth, though it lies in the bones; it has been known to
cure such as have been given over by all Doctors; it cures hardness of the
Liver and Spleen, takes away Gouts, and all swelling of the Limbs. In a word, I
commend it for a wholesome Medicine, for soundness of body, conservation of
health, and vigor of mind.

The College of Physicians of London laid all their heads together to hammer
out the time when this Squill must be gathered, or taken out of the earth; and
the result of all their consultations was this, That it must be gathered at the
rising of the Dog Star, and so they very learnedly quoted it in that stately
piece of Wit, their Pharmacopeia; but which of the two Dog-stars they mean,
whether Cyrius or Procyon, or wha^ rising, whether Comiscal, Acronychal, or
Heliacal, I know not, I nor I think themselves neither so that a child in
Astrology cannot choose bu^ admire at their learned ignorance.

Chap. 2. Elixir Vitae.
TAke of Cloves, Nutmegs, Zedoary, Gi^ger, Galangal, Pepper white and blac^
Juniper Berries, Citron pills, Orange pills, Sag^ Basil, Rosemary, Mints,
Marjoram, Bay-berrie^ Penniroyal, Gentian, Calamint, Elder leave Roses white
and red, Spicknard, Cubebs, Aloe Hapatique, the seeds of Mugwort and Marjoram,
of each two drams; Figs, Raisins, Dates, Almonds, Pine-nuts, of each six
ounces, white Honey a pound, Musk one dram, fine Sugar four pound, bruise the
things that may be bruised, and infuse them all together in fifteen pints of
Aqua vitae for ten days, or thereabouts, afterward still it in a bathe till
the feces be dry.

Take this water, and stop it close in a glass, let it stand in Horse-dung two
Months, then have you the first water good.

Then take out the feces, and distill them in sand with a strong fire, and there
will come out a water red like blood, and thick, which will stink admirably,
place this in Horse-dung as the former; this is the second water of the nature
of fire.

The first water, if a child take a dram of it every third day in the morning,
it keeps its body sound from diseases, it cures wounds at three times washing
with it, or four at the most; it helps all infirmities in the eyes, a drop
being put into them; the face and breast being washed with it, it preserves
Youth; being taken in^ardly, it provokes Lust, and makes barren women fruitful,

The latter water, a spoonful will recover and revive a man that is half dead;
it helps pains in the Matrix, and cures Pleurisies; being used by ^nction it
cures pains of the Chollick, helps ^ardness of the Spleen, pains in the
teeth, stink^ng breath, Fevers of all sorts, being taken inwardly; and
powerfully prevails against humors of all sorts; if any one be so sick that he
cannot speak, give him a dram of this with a dram of the former water, and
so soon as it is in his mouth he will speak. This Dr. Floravantus says he has
proved an hundred times; yet if it lack not above half the number it is no
matter.

Chap. 3. Aqua Mirabilis.
TAke of Turpentine one ounce, Olibanum two ounces, Aloes, Hepatique, Mastick,
Cloves, Galangal, Cinnamon, Saffron, Nutmegs, Cubebs one ounce, Gum of Ivy five
ounces; beat what can be beaten into very fine powder, and still them in an
Alembick with a gentle fire.

The first water will be clear and white; when it begins to change color, take
away the first water, and receive the second.

The second water will be of the color of Saffron, and thick, when the color
changes again, take away the second water, and receive the third.

The third water will be like Honey, then distill the feces dry.

The first water cures Fistula's, and noise in the ears, a drop or two being
put into them.

Mark the quality of the disease, and give the hottest water in the coldest
disease, or at least qualify them one with another.
The second cures infirmities in the eyes, they being washed with it.

The third water cures ulcers and scabs in any part of the body, and swellings
of the eyes; it presently eases pains of the teeth, it resists cold poisons,
as Toads, Spiders, Serpents, Scorpions, etc. Neither can any sting hurt one, a
drop of this Oil being warmed and applied to the place: it cures all ulcers
lie they never so deep in the flesh, nerves or bones, and that without any tent
in nine days, be they never so foul, fistulated, or cankered; it cures wounds
with a stone, or fall, or shot, a linen rag being wet in it, and laid upon it;
it strengthens the nerves and sinnews, helps swellings of the Legs, Joints,
or any place coming of a cold cause, or corrupt blood.

It is so hot in operation, that nothing can be found hotter; and of such a
piercing quality, that warm a drop thereof and lay it on your hand, it will
presently soak in, and you shall not feel it.

If you would try the virtue of it, take a Capon, or any other Fowl, the
feathers being plucked off, and the guts being taken out; then heat him so hot
as you can well hold him in your hand, then anoint him with this Oil, and lay
him in the Sun two hours to dry; then anoint him again, and dry him as before,
then lay him where you will, he will never putrify.

Chap. 4. A Precious Water.
TAke of Aqua vitae many times distilled over a gallon, Sperma caeti,
Ambergrease, Rheubarb two drams, Musk one dram; put the Aqua vitae in a glass,
then tie up all the aforesaid species in a linen cloth, and hang the Nodulus
in the water by a string, it being close stopped (lest the spirit evaporate)
with Wax and Parchment, (putting a little Cinnamon into the Nodulus) so shall
you have an excellent water of the color of Gold.

This is indeed a precious water, and I am of opinion, that if an Astrological
time were observed for the beginning of the business, it would be ten times
better.

It expels Poison; a drop of it being taken in any convenient substance,
resists both pestilence and putrefaction; if any be infected with the
pestilence or any other Fever coming of putrefaction or inflammation of blood,
or humors, (as most Fevers (if not all) do) six or seven drops given in any
cordial, cures them.

Chap. 5. An Apprehension worth experience.
TAke of the Juice of Chelondine, which was gathered when the Sun was in Leo,
which is called his own house, let him be free from Malevolent Beams, and if he
apply to the aspect of Benevolents it is the better; let the Moon be strong,
applying to the Sun, and increasing in light; let the Angles of the Heavens be
clear from the bodies of Saturn, Mars, or the Dragons tail; from this Juice
draw the Elements apart, and rectify them all severally, the triplicity the
Patient was born under, and his Disease being known, and discretion in the
administration accordingly used; why may not it alone cure all Diseases, though
not in all people?

Chap. 6. A Balsam.
TAke of Turpentine one pound, Oil of Bays four ounces, Galbanum three ounces,
Gum-arabick four ounces, Frankincense, Mirrhe, Gum of Ivy, Wood of Aloes, of
each three ounces, Galanglal, Cloves, Comfrey-roots, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Ginger,
Zedoary, Diptany of Creet, one ounce; Musk, Ambergris one dram, the things
being in powder which may be beaten; put them into a Retort, and put to them
Aqua vitae six pints; then wet a rag in Aqua vitae, and set fire to them, let
it burn, stopping it close; and after nine days still it in sand, first with a
gentle fire.

At the first will come out a clear water with Oil amongst it, let the fire be
gentle till you see it begin to look black.

When it changes color, then change your receiver, and separate the Oil from
the first water; then increase the fire, and perfect the distillation.

Keep the last water also apart, which being suffered to stand and settle, will
have a liquor which may be separated from that which is called the Balsam it
self.

The first is called water of Balsam.

The Oil is called Oil of Balsam.

The last water, mother of Balsam.

And the residence in the bottom of the last water, is the Balsam it self, and
is the most precious of all.

The first water cleanses the eyes, causes a clear sight; the face being
washed with it, makes it fair; it preserves Youth, breaks the Stone in the
Reins, brings forth Urine stopped by carnosity or fleshiness; it marvellously
cures all sort of wounds being washed with it, and a Lint dipped in it, and
put into them; it also helps Hecktique Fevers and Coughs.

The Mother of Balsam helps Scabs, Itches, Tetters, Ring-worms and Leprosy.

The Oil of Balsam helps many Diseases, as Wounds in the Head, though the Skull
be broken; a dram of it at a time, being drunk in water, helps Pleurisies
wonderful speedily.

The Balsam it self is the wonder of the world, two drachms of it being taken,
eases any pain; it helps Coughs, Hoarseness, infirmities either hot or cold;
being used in unction, it pierces to the utmost extreme parts, curing thereby
old Aches and bruises; it cures Quartane Agues, all the body being anointed
with it once a day.

Chap. 7. A Balsam for the Stone.
TAke of Turpentine a pound, old Oil six ounces, Oil of Bays four ounces,
Cinnamon, Spikenard, of each two ounces, Bricks well burnt, eight ounces; still
them altogether in an Alembick.

It provokes Urine, breaks the Stone, kills Worms, helps noise in the Ears, the
Palsy, Gouts of all sorts, all pains in the Joints, either by drinking of it,
or anointing with it, but you must use but very little of it at a time
inwardly, mixed with apt things for the disease you take it for.

Chap. 8. A Balsam for the Palsy.
TAke of Galbanum a pound, Gum of Ivy three ounces, bruise them, and still them
in Balneo, mix the liquor with Oil of Bays, one ounce, Turpentine a pound,
still them again, then separate the Oil from the water, and keep the Oil for
your use.

For the dead Palsy, Convulsion, Apoplexy, Shaking-palsie, or any disease of
the Brain, Chollick, Wind in the Bowels, etc. lay the Patient upon his Back,
and pour a little of this Oil (being warmed) upon his Navel, and you shall
presently see the wonderful operation appear more divine then natural.

Chap. 9. Of the Quintessence of every Simple Matter.
WE are in the first place to learn what is the Quintessence of every thing, or
simple matter; which being known, the other secrets of this Art will more
easily manifest themselves unto us: for every thing which has its institution
from another thing, ought to have its definition declared, that the original
may be understood. Know therefore that Quintessence is the fifth part of every
thing, having form and substance, and a most subtle spirit drawn from its
body, as from a more gross and crasse matter, and superfluity of four Elements,
by a most subtle and extreme distillation, as we shall hereafter teach.

But let it not seem wonderful to any one that this Art has for the most part
lien absconded, and shut up from the common knowledge and vulgar capacities of
men; for many of the Ancient Philosophers have so labored in this art, that
thereby they have nourished and preserved the life of man to an extreme old
age; and have spun out the thread of life to the end of nature, and ultimate
time ordained and appointed by God, Qui statuit omnibus semel mori,

But as by a corruptible Medicine, life cannot always be preserved
incorrupted; so a Medicine having near affinity to incorruption, may preserve
the power of nature to an extreme old age.

And the best Antidote conducing hereunto is the Quintessence, which is no
elementary thing, but a certain secret soul drawn from its body; so that
whatsoever it is admixed withal, seems in a manner incorruptible; for it
comforts and restores all the powers and spirits of man's body, by the
excrements of the Elements evacuated and wasted: and it is a spirit of life,
for it digesteth all indigestible things, and cutteth away and digesteth all
superfluous qualities.

For it preserves flesh from corruption, it comforts the Elements, restores
decayed Youth, vivifies the spirit, soft things it hardens, hard it mollifies,
thick and gross things it rarifies, thin substances it conduces and makes
thick, the lean it makes fat, fatness it extenuates; it cools the hot, and
heateth the cold; dries up moisture, and moistneth dryness; and repelleth
every complexion adverse to the body.

Further it extinguishes all the noxious matter of superfluous humors, and
restores natural heat; so that the greatest Philosophers never found out any
thing more conducing to the sustentation of life.

Now although the Quintessence may sometimes have the complexion of some other
thing adjoined unto it, (for unto what complexionated thing soever it be
joined, it draws the complexion thereof unto it self) yet solely by it self,
it has none of the four qualities in it; to wit, Airy, Watery Fiery, nor
Earthly, which could be discerned or discovered by the judicious inquisition of
the most skillful Philosophers. Lastly know that the Quintessence has not in
it any thing of the earthly Element, Cold or Dry, because it cures melancholy
diseases which are cold and dry.

Therefore for a conclusion, observe that it is neither hot, nor cold, nor
moist, nor dry; but is a thing of a temperate nature, exceeding all the
Elements which are under Heaven: For when it is administered unto any one, it
makes that body temperate; neither does it recede from its temporancy, by
assuming any Qualities or Complexions.

Neither does it follow, that it is a Medicine for cold infirmities, because it
is hot; nor that it cures hot diseases, because it is cold: for two contraries
cannot exist in one body, because one contrary is expelled by the other.

Therefore we see it ought not to be called hot or cold, nor dry or moist,
because it cures such as are Physical, which are hot and dry; and the
Hidropical, which are moist and cold; but all the four qualities are in it
corrupted, and altogether sublated.

And although it is not an Element, nevertheless it is a temperate Matter,
purified by the Elements themselves, and extracted from the Feces of the four
Elements, which are the most powerful causes of the corruption.

These Feces therefore are segregated as a most gross body from its matter, as
it were from a most subtle soul, by the Science and Art of distillations.

And because the Quintessence is the Commune vocabulum of all things which have
a form and species to extract it from; and although chiefly it is to be
understood of Wine, yet nevertheless there are very many other things from
which it may be drawn and educed; as from all metals, from all fruits, from
flesh, eggs, roots, and many other things as we shall shortly declare; and it
excels all other things, because of its great subtilty: and therefore by
very many Philosophers it has been called Coelum Philosophorum.

For the Heaven is of it self distinct toward the four Elements, so the Coelum
Philosophorum, viz. The Quintessence has it self against the ^our qualities of
humane bodies, which are composed of those Elements,

It is called also by some Aqua ardens, a burn^ng water; because (until it be
brought to its perfection and utmost distillation) it burns in the fire,
leaving no superfluous humidity in the vessel. By some it is also called the
soul of Wine; for as the soul is more noble then the body, so is the
Quintessence which is extracted by true distillation, more noble then the body
of Wine from whence it is educed.

It is named also by other Aqua vitae, or the Water of life, because it does
conserve humane life from corruption, as we see when it is administered to those
that have the Syncope passion; and because it is diverse ways, and from diverse
things extracted, we shall begin with the first in order.

Chap. 10. How the Quintessence of Wine is to be extracted by a distallatory.
HAving delivered what the Quintessence is, and to what it conduces, we are now
to perpend and consider, by how many ways it may be extracted, and from what
things; and because it is drawn from things moist, dry, hot and cold, we shall
in the first declare how it may be drawn from moist things, as from Wine, after
this manner.

Take of the best red Wine, a little inclining to sweetness; and which is
perfect, natural without mixture or sophistication, not too ne^^ nor too old,
but of a temperate age; or if yo^ cannot get red Wine, take white Wine the bes^
what quantity you please, and place it in a C^^curbite, so that two parts may
be full, and the third remain empty; then put it upon a Li^^beck with a head
and receiver, and let the^ be all well luted with lute made of paper ma^^
defied, or meal and whites of Eggs mixed t^ the thickness of Honey. It may also
be mad^ according to Raymund Lully, with Olibanu^ or Mastick mollisted, or with
powder of Calviva, incorporated with the white of an Egg.

And when the vessels are thus Luted, the the animal and vegitable virtue
cannot exha^^ from the matter to be distilled; then set a tr^vet over the
furnace with a vessel or Caldro^^ like Balneum Mariae; which vessel, fill half^
two parts thereof with water, and underneat make a gentle fire, increasing it
by little and little; and when the Cucurbite waxes hot, i^crease not the fire
any more, but always im^tate nature as much as is possible to do. For Nature
as says Gallenus and Lully, cannot suffe^ any violence without corruption of
the prim^ vum, or first matter.

Now (according to Avicenna) there ar^ four degrees of heat, according to the
four co^plexions; the first whereof is warm as war^ water, so far calefied,
that it cannot hurt an^ member immited into it. The second degree (...) so hot
as it may be suffered by an humane member without lesion.

The third degree is so hot, that if any member be immitted into it, it is
offended with its calidity; and this degree is next to ebulition.

The fourth degree of heat is so vehement, that it cannot be endured, because
it exceeds in heat; and this degree is ebulition, or boiling.

Some also call the fire of a Bathe the first degree of fire and the heat of
Ashes the second degree, and burning fire the third degree, but the fourth
degree they deny.

And according to other Artists, the fire of a Bathe is the first degree, the
fire of Ashes the second degree, and Sand the third; and sometimes proceed to a
fourth: but he who desires to be a perfect Master in the Art of Distillation,
ought to observe, that in all Distillations whatsoever, the fire never ought to
be increased to the fourth degree, because the fire will be more violent then
the nature of the matter to be distilled can bear. And by consequence, Nature
her self will be violated through the violence of too much heat; and therefore
of all Artists the fourth degree is to be rejected.

For Nature her self was so ordained by God, that she cannot suffer any
violence or vehement thing, without the corruption of her self, as by the
judgment of many Philosophers may be proved: Therefore I counsel all Lovers of
this Art, that they do not undertake to intermeddle with this excellent work
given unto us by Divine Providence for the preservation of our humane lives,
unless they have the perfect knowledge of these four degrees of heat, and know
how to temperate them and the fire in al^ things as they ought.

It is therefore to be understood, that the degrees of heat are always to be
diminished afte^ the first distillation, because in the first distillation the
matter is most gross, so that it will no^ easily yield to the distillation,
because of its impurity and crude substance, which is not in the subsequent
distillations.

Therefore in the first distillation the fire is t^ be exalted from the first
degree to the last part of the third degree, so that the bathe be ver^ hot, yet
it ought not to boil. In the second d^stillation we may work with a more gentle
fire because by the first the grosseness of the matte^ is somewhat attenuated,
so that there needs no^ so great a fire; and so always by descending (...)
little in every degree, you shall extenuate the fire, because, as we have often
said, if you d^^ force, or too much compel the matter which ought to be
distilled, Nature her self will b^ corrupted.

Chap. 11. How a rude matter ought to be putrified and mad^ fit for
Distillation.
WE must diligently weigh, and accurately consider what substance the matter
(...) of that is to be digested; whether it be hard o^ soft, gross or subtle,
how, and by what Art i^ may be putrified and digested, that it may b^ the
better brought to yield to the distillation and that the pure may be sequestered
from the impure, and the gross may be the better separated from the subtle: In
the progress whereof observe these degrees of putrefaction.

Whatsoever it is out of which you would extract a Quintessence by
distillation, first of all let it be putrified and digested two months in
Horse-dung, and between the first and second distillation one month; between
the second and third, three weeks: between the third and fourth, fifteen days;
between the fourth and fifth, eight days; between the fifth and sixth, four
days; and between the sixth and seventh, two days.

And further observe, that the dung ought always to be of the same equal heat;
for if the heat be deficient, the circulation of the water is corrupted. And by
conseqence, the matter it self which should be reduced into the Quintessence,
will be separated in the heat of Heaven, as you may see in a Diameter Line,
which divides the Quintessence, which is the superior part, from the feces,
which is the inferior part. And here note that these degrees of digestion and
putrefaction of the matter is so to be attributed, as it is before declared
concerning the degrees of heat.

Therefore there is required a longer time of putrefaction before distillation
then afterward; and when the first distillation is made, the matter contains
not in it self so much grossness as before; and is become more apt to receive
the Quintessence then before it was.

And therefore after the first distillation, the putrefaction is made in a
shorter time then at the first, because the matter is become more subtle.

And therefore it is worthily to be perpended, that there ought to be made
seven digestion, or putrifactions, as also seven distillations.

The manner also of digesting, after the opinions of the Philosophers, is
delivered after this manner.

Every one that will endeavor to perform such a work, let him cause to be
made a pit o^ hole of five foot deep, and two foot wide, or a little more.

Let the pit be made in some moist place, as in a Celler, which being done, let
the bottom b^ covered with quick lime about the thickness o^ half a foot. Let
there be another laying o^ horse-dung, which is not much putrified, nor very
new, upon which, place the vessel wherein yo^ put the matter to be fermented,
and then fill the pit with dung round about the vessel; which being done, let
the dung be madefied with hot water according the magnitude and quantity of the
pit, until you can feel the heat about the vessel or cucurbite; and this is
usually done in the space of half an hour; but if in that time it b^ not done,
then proceed pouring on more ho^ water: and do this three or four times in a
wee^ and when the Calx and Dung waxes old, let i^ be removed and new put in the
room.

This is the method which is to be observed i^ all things that you would
distill; and therefore it is made digestion, because gently, and without any
vehement motion of nature, action, or mutation, a gross matter is made subtle
and obedient to distillation.

Digestives are also ordained diversely according to the four degrees of heat;
so that in the first there must be a greater work then in the second, third,
fourth, and the rest.

Therefore in the second digestion we must deal more gently and temperately;
and the bed of Calx is to be thinner then at first, and the bed of Dung to be
the deeper; and so you are to proceed in all the degrees of digestion unto the
last, in which you are to put no Calx at all, but only Dung.

Digestion may also be made by setting the matter to be digested in a Cucurbite
in the Sun, for some space of time in the Dog days.

Or also digestion may be made in the winter time by setting the matter in a
Vial, or Cucurbite, over a Furnace; or also the Cucurbite may be placed in a
Vessel full of sand, and calefied with hot water; and let the Cucurbite be
covered in sand two third parts, and set in the Sun in the Dog days.

I must here take the pains to explain what time of the year I mean by Dog
days. By the Dog days I mean the hottest time of Summer, which generally is
July and August; about which time the Summer Dog Star rises: and those days
called the Dog days, are generally ^nown to all Country men. The other
distinctions that some makes, are observed by none but Scholars; and their
names are Cyrius and Procyon; and their rising various, viz. Comiscal,
Acronychal, or Heliacal.

You may likewise make digestion by putting your Vessel in hot water, in the
manner of Balneum Mariae.

There is also another way, that is, that the Vessel wherein you would digest
your matter should he placed in the Summertime in an Emmets nest, so that the
bottom of the Circulatory may be almost buried, and that the Su^ may
reverberate upon the extremity: and in this operation you shall see a wonderful
digestion.

Lastly the matter may be digested and putrefied in the month of October, or
thereabouts, (when the Vintage is ripe in Vinacea, or in the mother of Wine,
which has no heat by accident, neither has the Horse-dung.

And this is to be done when the Juice is pressed out of the Grapes, by burying
the Circulatory Vessel in the Relicts; in the effects whereof you shall
perceive a miraculous operation.

By Vinacea you may understand, either the substance of the Grapes left after
the Juice is pressed out, and that is best for this work; or the mother of the
Wine that arises when it ferments: you may do your work in either, but i^
England in neither. But you have other waye^ enough already prescribed,
therefore this shall suffice for putrefaction and digestion.

Chap. 12. How to know whether Wine digested in a Circulatory be fit for
distillation.
WHen you have digested Wine seven times over as before is directed, you may
then thus prove, whether it be fit to be distilled.

Take a Linen cloth and wet it in the digested Wine, then kindle it with a
candle, and if the Wine burn without lesion and combustion of the Linen, it is
not perfectly rectified; but it is a true sign that there remains some watery
substance therein, and therefore the work is to be repeated; and it is to be
digested so often and so long until there remain no watery substance, which may
be known by this probation, as before is directed.

There are some who say it is to be proved by putting Sugar into the Wine; and
if it be well rectified the Sugar will burn plainly with the Wine.

Now take notice that this digested Wine is not the Quintessence, but the
subject of the Quintessence: but when the Linen cloth burns with it, and
that it has perfectly lost its acute, sulphurous, and unsavory taste, and
becomes pleasant and sweet to the taste, and that no fumosity remains in the
adustion thereof; then you may call it a Quintessence. But in insensible things
which have no sapor, we must have respect unto the fume; as in Gold, and
Silver, and other Metals, and precious Stones; from which sometimes is also
extracted a Quintessence, which is converted into Aurum potabile.

The Circulatory Vessels for distillation are of several forms according to
the various opinions of Authors; there is a Circulatory called by some a
Pelican, and of others, the Vessel of Hormes; this is the most noble and
commodious for the work: others distill in a Cucurbite with an Alembick, with a
blind head; but of these every one may accomodate himself as he pleases.

Chap. 13. How to distill by way of Circulation.
WHen you perceive the matter by frequent putrefaction to be sufficiently
digested, and that you have made experience thereof by the proof before
directed, then have in readiness your Vessels fit for Circulation; include your
matter in your Circulatory Vessel, and put it in Horse-dung, or set it in the
Sun in the Dog-dayes, or in Balneo Mariae, calefied unto the first degree of
heat, or a little more, according as you see the matter temperated and made
subtle by digestion; and there let it remain so long time until it be
converted into your desired Quintessence, which is to be known by the sapor, as
aforesaid.

And observe diligently that if there appear in the bottom of the Vessel any
Hypostesis, that is a certain little troubled Cloud, that ought first to be
separated from its matter by distillation, which being done, Circulate it again
as at first.

When therefore the diligent inquisitor into this Art has brought forth the
Quintessence, in the putrification, and subtilty of the matter of Wine or
fruits, let him confidently believe he may attain unto the same in all other
things of the like nature. And therefore we must submit unto the opinion of
Aristotle, that when a matter is thus by distillation nobilitated and made
immaterial, it cannot be any more reduced to any form, being without any
elementary substance, exceeding formality and corruption: and therefore it is
as it were a Celestial body.

For as the Heaven disposes it self to all inferiors, so also does the
Quintessence to all complexions and qualities. And as all the Stars have their
course from the noble influence of the primum moblit, so also all Medicines,
wherewith the Quintessence is mixed, do attract the virtue thereof as the
Adament does the Iron.

Chap. 14. How to extract the Quintessence without labor or cost.
NOn omnia possumus omnes; and as Hesiod says, Non uni dat cuncta Deus; God
gives not the knowledge of all things to one particular person; neither is
every one capable of understanding all Arts: but that every one may reap some
benefit hereby; here follows an easy way of extracting the Quintessence of
Wine without any great labor or cost.

Take of the best Wine you can get, whether white or red, that which is a
little sweet, distill it in a Limbeck four times over, or oftener, till there
remains no watery substance therein, which you may thus prove: put a little of
it into a Silver or Brass Vessel, and kindle it with fire; if it burn up and
leave no humidity in the Vessel, it is distilled enough.

When this matter is thus digested and rectified, put it in a Pelican, or a
Vessel called the Vessel of Hermes, luted and cemented with strong lute, so
that the strength of the matter cannot evaporate; but by the frequent ascension
and descention of the matter in the Vessel it is converted into a pure
Quintessence, and becomes from a corruptible matter, in a manner incorruptible.

And when it has many times been sublimed after that manner in the said
distillatory, then open the mouth of the Pelican, and there will ascend out a
most precious and fragrant Odor, by which you may know whether there be any of
the four Elements remaining in the matter which ought to be converted into the
Quintessence. For if it be brought to a perfect Quintessence, there will arise
out of the Circulatory a most fragrant and precious Odor, even of a celestial
fragrancy and sweetness. And if this fume enter into any secret place of the
house it will fill the whole house with an admirable and most incredible
savor, being of such heavenly sweetness and fragrancy: and if it be set on the
top of any tower, Omnes Aves ad se attrahet quae circa sunt in Viciniis.

But if when it is opened, it give not such a scent, then close again the mouth
of the Pelican, and lute it well, and set it again to distill as before, until
by that effect a perfect Quintessence appears; or (as Raimund Lully, Lib. 1.
Cap. 2.) a vegetable Mercury, which you may always know by its odor.

And it has not only an excellent odor and taste, but is also incorruptible
as to other Medicines, and does not burn in the mouth as Aqua vitae; neither
has it any humidity or earthly substance, for all the terrestrial and
elementary matter remains in the bottom: And as the Heaven it self is composed
of matter and form, so also is the Quintessence.

Nevertheless it is not altogether free from corruption: for if it were
perfectly incorruptible, it would make our bodies perpetual and eternal, which
the Creator has not permitted to the Creatures, since he has measured out the
term of our life, as says the Psalmographer: therefore when any matter is
converted into a Quintessence, it is not become divine, but natural;
nevertheless it is made by the divine help and assistance of God, without whom
nothing is made.

Chap. 15. An easy way to extract a Quintessence without Fire.
WHen in this excellent Work you would avoid expense, and save that which is
more precious, the loss of time, and would extract the Quintessence after this
double way, you may do it without fire or coals.

The first way is this; Take Horse-dung, and impose it in some large deep
vessel, or in a pit, as before is directed, made for this purpose; and in the
middle of the dung place the distillatory impleted with the matter that is to
be distilled, two thirds, and let the third part remain empty without the dung,
because nature requires it, that the matter may have its ascent and descent,
and may by consequence be converted into a most clear water. And this is done
without any labor or fire; but you ought once in a weak at least to renew the
dung.

It may be also done in the Sun in the Canicular, or Dog days, so that divine
Providence has provided that both rich and poor may have the operation of this
Art.

Chap. 16. To extract the Quintessence of Celandine.
CHelidonia, or Celandine, according to Raymund Lully, etc. is called, Quasi
Coelidonum, as a gift of Heaven; but if we will derive its Etymology from the
Greeks, Pliny and Aristotle say, that Chelidonia takes it name from the greek
word Celidon, which signifies a Swallow: for with this herb the Swallows help
their young ones to their sight in their nests. And this herb flourishes at the
coming of Swallows, and dies at their departure.

This herb has innumerable virtues, and therefore I thought not fit to omit it
in this work. The juice of it being pressed and strained out, and gently boiled
with Honey in a vessel upon hot embers, is a singular remedy against all scales
of the eyes. But to make the Quintessence thereof, take of Celandine in the
Summer time, when it is at its maturity and green, the whole substance, flower,
herb, and root, what quantity you please, cut it small, and beat it in a stone
Mortar, then put it in an earthen Cucurbite well glazed, fill the Cucurbite
quite full, luting it well, then set it in new Horse-dung to ferment and digest
by the space of three weaks, then put it on an Alembick, and distill it in
Balneo Mariae; let th^^ to be somewhat moderate, and the Phlegm will come off,
and the other Elements will remain in the bottom of the distillatory: then take
out the Feces, and work them upon a Marble till you have made them as fine and
subtle as possible: then put them again into the vessel, and pour upon them the
Phlegm which you first distilled off from them, and put them in a blind
Alembick, let them be very well luted, and set in Balneo Mariae seven or eight
days to putrify and digest: Or if you think that way too chargeable, ferment
it in Horse-dung: this being done, let the matter stand and cool a while, then
distill it in ashes in an Alimbeck with a receiver, and there will arise a pure
water of the color of Oil, which contains in it self two Elements, to wit, the
Air and Water: the other two, viz. the Fire and Earth residing in the bottom.

And if you would separate the Phlegm from the Air, put the Oil in a new
distillatory, and distill it in Balneo Mariae with a gentle fire, and you shall
see the Phlegm ascend, and the Oil will reside in the distillatory; and thus
you have these two Elements, the Air and Water separarated one from another:
For the Oil will not ascend in Balneo, because the fire is not powerful enough.

And when you would separate the other two Elements, take the Feces out of
which you have distilled the oil, and bruise them upon a marble as at first;
afterward take four parts of Phlegm and one part of Feces, and incorporate
them together, then set them in a furnace in Balneo 7. days, and afterward
distill them in sand with a strong fire, and there will arise a red water:
continue your distillation till it is converted into that water, and you have
in that water two Elements, viz. Fire and Water, and the Earth remains in the
bottom of the Cucurbite, as a black matter; then put that red water in another
Cucurbite, and distill it in Balneo Mariae, and the Phlegm will be separated
from it, and in the bottom of the Vessel will remain a red Oil, which is the
Element of fire; and thus you have (...) four Elements severally extracted and
sepa^ated one from another.

Then let the earth be calcined with Aqua ^^tis the space of ten days that it
may be well ^^citated; afterward grind it again upon a ^arble and imbibe it
with the same Phlegm, ^^d distill it in an Alimbeck till in the matter ^ou shall
perceive white little stones like salt; ^issolve this salt again with the water
you have ^istilled, and when it is dissolved distill it again, ^epeating it so
often until the earth lose all its (...) pure and terrene color, and become
white (...) Virgins wax; and then it is truly rectified.

There is also another more subtle way to re^^ce and bring every Element into
his chief sub^^ance and Quintessence; it being presupposed ^^at every Element
is first rectified, then let it ^e taken and put in a Circulatory Vessel, and
(...) in Horse-dung or in Balneo Mariae thirty ^^yes, and afterward distill it
again; then its ^ody being as it were a gross matter, will be ^^nged into a
spirit, or most substil substance.

There are some who operate after a more ^^sie manner, by taking four parts of
Earth and ^^e part of one of the four Elements which you ^^ll, and digest them
in form aforesaid, and cir^^late them thirty days by a frequent ascension ^^d
descension of the matter, which is done in ^^e Circulatory in that space of
time, so as every ^^e of the Elements is converted into a Quin^^^sence; and
when you perceive the Quintes^^^ce to swim above the other matter, then it is
circulated enough; and thus you have the way to extract the Quintessence of
Chelidonia it follows now to declare the virtues thereof.

The Element therefore of Water, or the Phlegm, conduces to expel all diseases
of the body whether hot or cold; for it temperates the veins about the heart,
and expells all poiso^ therefrom; it cures all accidental diseases of the
Lungs, purifies the blood, and preserves the natural virtue of man from all
corruption, an^ abateth the malignity of any infirmity.

The Element of fire is like Oil, and has the^ virtues; it confirms and
preserves youth in i^ strength and beauty, because it suffers not an^ blood to
putrify; it expells all salt Phleg^ and Melancholy, and wonderfully takes
awa^ all Adust Choler.

The Element of fire, the quantity of o^ Grain thereof being taken and
incorporat^ with good Wine, and applied to the Neck (...) one that is sick,
(nay a dying) has this efficacy it recovers and restores again all the lost
pow^ and strength of the body; it penetrates un^ the heart, and calefies it,
and expells all poiso^ and superfluous moisture from the heart: if yo^ give a
man a grain of this Oil, that is an Ag^ny of death, it will immediately revive
him, (...) a miraculous manner (says Lullyus.)

There are also others who do likewise extract a Quint essence from Chelidonia
after another manner; by taking the Herb, Roo^ and Flower of Celandine, and
weigh it, rese^ving the weight for its time, then cut it sma^^ and infuse it in
Fountain Water, then boil it till it is reduced to its former weight; this
being done, beat it in a stone Mortar, and strain out the juice, take away the
Feces, and boil the rest unto the thickness of Honey, and then the matter will
be prepared to separate the four Elements one from another; which to do put it
in a ^ucurbite, filling him half full, and lute an Alimbeck upon it the best
way you can and distill it in Balneo Mariae with a gentle fire, so that the
water may be separated from the matter.

Then place the Distillatory in ashes, and another water will be separated from
it, which is like oil; and when you see the oil swim on the top the third time,
remove the receiver, and apply another to receive that Oil which is the fire:
And thus you have the three Elements separated, viz. Water, Air, and Fire, and
the Earthly substance remains in the bottom of the vessel, as it were a combust
matter; now reserve every one of these Elements in a vessel by its self and
when you would rectify any one of them to make it medicinal, distill the water
seven times in an Alembick, and in every distillation wash the Cucurbite from
its remaining Feces, and admix them with the earthly Element, and distill them
in Balneo Mariae, and let the vessel wherein that water is reserved be well
luted.

After this manner you may also rectify the Air by a seplenary reiteration in
ashes, always mixing the Feces with the Earth; so likewise may you temperate
and rectify the fiery Element: and this is the third Oil, which must also be
kept in a vessel close shut, and so mus^ all the rest.

The work being thus done and perfected, w^ proceed to demonstrate and show the
nature and virtues thereof. The virtue and quality of the watery substance, is
to expel all venomous hea^ from the Breast, and to mundifie the Blood, to open
all oppilations of the Lungs and Liver, to evacuate Phlegm, and superfluous
humors.

The Oil of the Air conserves youth, strength, and beauty, suffers not the
blood to putrify, no^ Melancholy to rule, nor Choler to burn, no^ Phlegm to
abound in man's body; but increases the blood, and disperses it through all the
members of the body; it is very penetrating.

It is good also if any one be in danger of losing the sight of an Eye; drop a
drop o^ two thereof into the Eye every day, and in thirty days you shall see a
wonderful effect.

But the quality of the fiery Oil is of much more efficacy and virtue then the
two other; it wonderfully preserves old men, and keeps back old age, calefies
the blood, recreates the heart, preserves a man from death, and restores youth*
And if it be taken with Aqua Siliginis, it is said to be the Elixer of life,

The earthly matter being rectified three times by dissolutions, coagulations,
and calcinations, is a subtle salt of earth, with which all Metals may be
transm^^ted into Stone, and wherewith all Spirits are fixed, having radical
moisture. The manner of taking this Medicine is this; Take Ignis Chelidoniae
gutta 3. Aqua Rosarum coclearia 3. sumantur stomacho jejuno. If the infirmity
be cold, give it in Wine; if the party exceed twenty four years of age, give it
in Aqua vitae; but in burning Fevers in no wise administer to the Patient.

Chap. 17. To extract a Quintessence from Man's Blood, Eggs, Flesh, or the like.
TO extract a Quintessence of humane blood, take the blood of a man of a
sanguine Complexion, or Chollerick, that is sound and healthy, of Middle-age,
and one that drinks good Wine, when he is newly phlebotomized; and when the
blood resides in the bottom of the vessel, separate the water from the blood,
and labor it in a convenient vessel with its tenth part of common Salt, and
labor them well together, and enclose it in a Pelican.

Afterward set it in a bed of Horse-dung, and Calx viva about five foot deep,
and two foot broad, having one laying of the Calx and another of Dung, as
before we have directed concerning digestion; and let it be fermented there one
Moon, or thereabouts, according as the season is; and when you see the matter
to be resolved into water, and the gross substance residing in the bottom of
the Pelican to be separated quite from the water; then take it out of the
dung, and put it in Balneo Mariae with an Alimbeck, and distill it with a gentle
fire, as before is spoken of the Quintessence of Wine.

And when you have performed the first distillation, mix it again with the
Feces which remain in the Distillatory, and let it putrify again in the dung,
until you see the pure to be separated from the impure, and the pure and subtle
matter to swim above the Feces, And if the season be fair and clear, let it
putrify a longer time then if it were cloudy or rainy weather. This being
done, distill it again the second time, then mix it again with the Feces to
digest, and then distill it, repeating this course four times over at least.

After the fourth distillation, circulate it a long time in the same manner as
you do the Quintessence of Wine, till it come to the perfection and purity of a
Quintessence of humane blood, which has a noble virtue to sustain humane
nature in all infirmities, and free the body from all Diseases.

Let this therefore suffice to have spoken concerning humane blood. If you
would also extract a Quintessence from Flesh or Eggs, let the Flesh be finely
and subtly minced, and then bray it in a Mortar with a tenth part of common
Salt. In like manner let the Eggs be beat in a Mortar with alt till they be
reduced into water; afterward put them in a Cucurbite, and place thereupon a
blind Alimbeck, and wor^ in all things in digestion, fermentation, and
distillation, as is directed touching human^ blood.

Chap. 18. To draw a Quintessence from Apples, Pears, and other fruits.
IF you would draw a Quintessence from Apples, Prunes, Cherries, Chestnuts, or
such kind of Fruits, first cut them small with a knife, then beat them in an
earthen Mortar, and incorporate them well with the tenth part of common Salt,
afterward put them in a Cucurbite, and place thereupon a blind Alimbeck well
luted, and set it in Horse-dung to putrify, as before is spoken concerning
humane blood, and then the virtue and excellency of the Fruit comes forth out
of its essence, which lies occult in the matter; and when it is separated from
its Feces, and gross matter, it is reduced to a certain immaterial and
incorrupt matter deservedly, by Philosophers called the Quintessence of Fruits,
and has an hundred times greater virtue then it had before, when it was an
Elementary Body.

Chap. 19. To extract a Quintessence from Flowers, Herbs, and Roots.
IF you would separate a Quintessence from the four qualities of Flowers,
Herbs, and Roots, take them when they are at their full maturity, with their
whole substance in a clear and serene season, the Moon increasing near the
full; for then the Herbs are more free from corruption; and after you have cut
them small, beat them in a Marble Mortar with the tenth part of salt, and
impose in a circulatory.

Let it ferment in Horse-dung a month, renewing the dung once a week, then at
the months end take it out of the dung, place upon it a blind Alimbeck, and
distill it in Balneo Mariae, augmenting the fire to the third degree; then
reserving the distilled water, take the feces, and pulverize them finely,
afterward power the distilled water upon the feces, and again set on a blind
Alembick, luting all well, distill them as at first in Balneo Mariae, abating
the fire half a degree; Afterward pulverize the feces again, and power on them
the distilled water, let it digest again, and distill it the third time, and
putrify it always abating the fire half a degree; decrease also the
putrefaction half a degree always; see that in the second digestion it
putrify one and twenty days, in the third fourteen days, and in the fourth
eight, so that it is to be fermented four times.

After the fourth distillation is performed, put it in a Circulatory, and bury
it in Horse-dung, or in Balneo, making the fire in the first degree, or it may
also be set in the Sun in Summer, and circulated there one month, or a little
more, while the superfluous humidity of the four qualities is quite digested,
consumed, and resolved in the Circulatory by frequent ascension and descension:
and thus you have a Quintessence, wherein consists the greatest virtue of
Herbs, Flowers and Roots.

You may do it likewise after the same manner as Chelidonia, and it will be the
stronger.

Chap. 20. How to distill Vinegar and man's Urine wherein all calcined Metals
may be resolved.
WE have already declared that Sol may be dissolved in distilled Vinegar; we
come now to describe the manner of distilling the Vinegar, for there is a great
difference between the distillation of Aqua vitae and Vinegar; for in Aqua
vitae the better substance is first distilled, but in Vinegar it is last: take
therefore the best Vinegar you can get, put it in a Cucurbite and set thereon
an Alimbeck, and distill it in ashes, or in sand, or in Balneo Mariae with a
gentle fire until no more water will come forth; taste the water often upon
your Tongue, if it be very sharp with a kind of ucerdacity or biting, then it
is time to remove the receiver and put another in his place, which is to be
well luted, and augment the fire a little; and when you see little white lines
as it were little Clouds in the Alimbeck continue distilling until the spirits
do arise; the Vapors whereof you shall see arise unto the top of the Cucurbite
and pass out of the Alimbeck into the receiver; but when you see as it were
drops of blood in the Limbeck, then apply another receiver, and let it distill
until all that sanguine matter be come into the receiver; and this matter is
very fetid, smelling of Combustion, and therefore is not fit to resolve
Calcined Sol to make Aurum potabile, but good to tinge metals, because the
fetor of the Combustion will adhere to the substance of the Sun, whereby the
Aurum potabile will be corrupted.

But if you would distill man's Urine, wherein leaves of Gold or Calcined Gold
may be dissolved, from which, the Urine being so distilled, may be extracted a
color to make the Aurum potabile so much spoken of, which has an excellen^
virtue against the Gout, the feet being twice or thrice in a day bathed
therewith and let dry of themselves; it is good also for such as are Ptysical,
and for many other diseases which for brevities sake I omit.

Take therefore the Urine of a man of a sanguine complexion, or a sound
Choler; one that drinks good Wine, and is not above thirty five years of age,
distill it four times by an Alimbeck in Balneo Mariae; afterward circulate it
in a pelican forty days, and reserve it for your use: others distill it
oftener, and it is the better.

Chap. 21. To make an Aqua vitae Composita for men of a cold Complexion or
Region.
HAving already discoursed at large of Aqua vitae Simplex, we now proceed to
give you the way of preparing several compound waters, and first of such as
ought to be administered unto men of a cold complexion, or unto such as labor
under any disease proceeding from a cold cause; which is this.

Take Zuiziberis albi, Cinamomi, Cubeb. Recent. Gari^ph. Nucis Muscati, Macis
electi, Cardamomi, Zedoari, Galangae, Piperis longi, of each equal parts;
bruise them grossly and to one part of these Species add six parts of simple
Aqua vitae; put them in a long Cucurbite placing thereon a blind Alimbeck, and
let it stand to digest fourteen days, afterward distill in Balneo Mariae with
a gentle fire; then put the feces again upon the distilled matter, and let it
digest eight days more.

It may also be distilled without an Alimbeck, but that way is not so good. And
when it has been distilled three times, the first water is called Aqua
benedicta, the second Aqua vitae composita, and the third Aqua balsami.

Some also add to the composition hereof Fol. salviae, Rutae, Castorei
recentis, Corticis Citri, Baccarum lauri, Florum Lavendulae, Florum Rorismarini
ana, two drams: these are all to be distilled with the aforesaid species,
always adding to one part of species six parts of simple Aqua vitae.

This water is good for all diseases of the head proceeding from phlegmatic
humors, to be taken in the morning the quantity of two drams in one ounce of
the best Wine.

Some use to dip a crust of bread in this water, and others to anoint the head
with this water, adding to half an ounce hereof, Betony water one ounce.

But beware that you do not give this water in any disease or grief of the head
proceeding from a hot cause, unless some cold Medicine be mixed therewith,
which may temperate the heat of this water.

This water does strengthen the memory being drunk fasting, the quantity of
half an ounce mixed with Rosemary water, and the hinder part of the head being
anointed or washed therewith, and let dry of it self: it is good also against
madness, if you cut off the hair of the head, and apply to the head clothes wet
in this water mixed with water of Marjoram and Rosemary, you shall perceive a
wonderful operation.

It is also good for the Palsy being mixed with Sage-water, and the members
often bathed therewith, and it being drunk upon an empty stomach with water of
Lavander-flowers.

It is good to take away all spots of the face, and all infirmities of the eyes.

It has a mavelous operation to take away all pains in the Teeth.

A Comb being dipped herein, and the head combed therewith, it adorns the hair,
and preserves them from becoming hairy; it cures all scabs in the head,
recovers lost hearing, Bombast being dipped therein and applied to the Ear.

Wounds being washed therewith it heals them wonderfully, and suffers no
putrified flesh in a Wound.

Being taken fasting, it is powerful against all Poison, against all Cankers,
Fistula's, and the Dropsy, and the Stone in the Bladder; it helps Conception
in a Woman being taken fasting, if the obstruction thereof proceed from a cold
cause.

Being drunk with Galangal, and Gentiana, and Bombaste wet therein, and applied
to the Matrix, provokes the Terms.

If this Water be put upon Fish, Flesh, or any other Meats, they will not
corrupt nor putrify, neither will flies blow thereon.

If the body be fomented therewith, it is good against the Jaundies, and all
trembling of the Members, and against all filthiness of the mouth and nose.

A Cloth being dipped herein, and applied to the Stomach, wonderfully helps
digestion.

A Cloth wet therein, and applied to the Stomach, helps Convulsion fits. Let
those who labor under the Iliack passion drink often thereof; it is good also
against the Falling Sickness and the Hemerhodes.

It is much praised by Albertus Magnus, for its wonderful operations in the
Palsy.

Chap. 22. An excellent Compound Water used by the Emperor Frederick the Third.
TAke Aq. Vita simp. rectificat. four pound, vini opt. four pound, Cinamomi
three ounces, Garioph. nucis moscatae ana. one ounce, Zuizib. albi one ounce
and half, Macis half an ounce, Zedoariae half an ounce, Galangae 2. drams,
Cubeb. His. an. half an ounce, Radicis benedictae 1. ounce, Salviae florum
Lavendulae, an. half an ounce, Melissae iris Balsamithae an. one ounce, Rosarum
albarum one ounce and half.

Bruise all these, and put them in a great Cucurbite, which will hold fifteen
or sixteen pound, adding Zachari albi three ounces, Passular ficuum pinguium,
an. six ounces, Camphorae half an ounce, Aquar. Rosarum, Endiviae, florum
Sambuci, an. two pound, put them altogether into the Cucurbite luting it well,
and set it in the ^un twenty days, viz. ten days before Midsummer day, and
ten days after.

Then strain out the water, and distill it by an Alembick, and keep it in a dry
place; it is a sovereign Cordial for a cold stomach, and wonderfully preserves
the whose body in health. The Dose is the quantity of half a spoonful; but let
it not be given to a Woman when she has her Menstrue.

Chap. 23. An excellent Compound Water against all Ulcers and Poison, etc.
TAke Salviae twelve ounces, Nucis Muscat. Gariop. Zuizib. albi, Gran.
Paradisi, Cinamomi an. four drams, Ol. Laurini one ounce, Castorei recentis one
dram, Spinae Indicae, Rorismarini, an. half a dram, florum Rorismar. one dram,
Folior Rutae one ounce, Fol. Majoranae one dram, Corticis Citri two drams.

Let all these be new if you can get them, but if you have them not new, then
take the old dried flowers, and pulverize them, and put to them the best white
Wine you can get, then set them in a digestive to putrify a month. This
digestion may be made in Balneo Mariae in the first degree of heat, afterward
distill it by an Alimbeck in Balneo Mariae, then add the water again to the
Feces, and distill it in Balneo again twice over; afterward distill it in ashes,
and reserve the water carefully in a glass close stopped.

The Virtues of this Water.
ANy Meat wet in this Water retains an excellent sapour and odor.

It is good against pestilentious airs, and expels the venom thereof out of the
body; it cures all infirmities of the Eyes, and defects of the Sight.

It marvellously cures Wounds, they being washed therewith, it dries up all
hidropical humors.

It is good against all diseases of the Lungs, Spleen and Milt, of the
intestines, and of the head; it takes away all spots out of the face, filth of
the Mouth and Nose, mitigates the pain of the Teeth, procures good digestion,
purifies the blood, and consumes corrupt blood, and wonderfully comforts and
strengthens the memory.

This water also preserves youth, makes a (...) mix them together and make
therewith a past^ of the Bole, let it dry, and powder it again, an^ make paste
thereof again with the same waters, repeating this over three times; and thu^
you have the Bole-Armonick prepared.

Chap. 25. A precious water used by the Count Palatine.
TAke Salviae recentis, one ounce and hal^ Nucis moscatae, Macis, of each one
ounc^ Zinzib. albi, one ounce and half, Gran. Par^disi six drams, Cinamomi one
ounce and an hal^ Zedoariae Galangae, an. half an ounce. Camphor^ two drams,
Rorismarini, sem. Feniculi of eac^ one ounce and an half, Lavendulae, Marjora^
Rute, of each one ounce, Florum Camomilae o^ ounce, Matricariae two drams,
Rosarum ru^m. 1. Betonicae one ounce, Abrotani four dram^ Castorei recentis one
dram, Spicae Indicae tw^ drams Macro-piperis one ounce, Olei Laur^ two drams,
Aqua vitae one pound and an hal^ Menthae and Menchastri, of each two drams.

Powder what is to be powdered, cut tha^ which is to be cut, and bruise those
things which are to be bruised, and put them all in Cucurbite with a long neck;
then pour there upon eight pounds of the best Wine, close u^ the vessel, and
bury it in the Earth thirty daye^ then take it up and put it in another
Cucurbit^ placing thereon a Limbeck; and distill it in Ba^neo Mariae three times
over, always puttin^ the distilled water again upon the feces. A^ (...) you
come to distill it the fourth time, add a good quantity of Sage-leaves fresh
gathered. And when it is so distilled reserve it for your use, the older it is
the better it is; you may use it when you please; it has innumerable virtues
against all distempers and infirmities of the body.

Chap. 26. A precious Compound Water of Life which may be used instead of a
natural Balsom.
TAke Trupentine purified and washed in the best white Wine twelve ounces.
Honey also clarified with white Wine three pound, mix them altogether; then
add of Aqua vitae well rectified four pound, put them in a Cucurbite,
afterward take the Herbs hereafter named, cut them small, and add them to the
rest in the Cucurbite, let them stand so eight days; the vessel being well
luted that it evaporate not, afterward distill it in ashes with great
diligence. The Herbs are these.

Take Buglossae, Boraginis, Melissae, Salviae, Lavendulae, an. m. 1. Hissopi,
Florum Camomilae, Card. Benedicti of each half a handful, Rorismarini, two
handfuls, Artemisiae half a handful.

When these things are distilled then add these things following well powdered,
and set them to digest in horse-dung eight days, or in Balneo three days.

The things which are to be added are these.

Take Ligni Aloes, Xylobalsami, Santalorum trium, Calami Aromatici, Stichados
Arabici, seminis Citri, sileris montani, Cimini of each one dram, Macis, Nucis
muscatae, Cinamomi electi, Garioph. Galangae, Cubeb. Zinzib. albi,
Macro-piperis, Croci orientalis, Gran. Paradisi, Cardamomi minoris, an. three
drams, Coriandri praeparati, gran. Juniperi, Bacc. Lauri, an. half an ounce,
Bistortae six drams, sem. Feniculi, Liqueritiae, Visci quercini, sem. Anisi,
an. one ounce, Amigdal. mundalarum passularum recent. an. one pound.

Take the glass or distillatory in which the matter is, and set it in ashes
well luting of it, and make thereunto a gentle fire the space of four hours.
And when you see a clear water pass forth into the receiver, take away that
receiver and put thereto another, luting it well as before; and increase the
fire until there distill forth a Cytrine Oil into the receiver, which reserve by
it self.

Thirdly, when you perceive a black Oil begin to appear, take away that
receiver, and add another; in which receive the black oil till it be all
distilled; which Oil keep by it self. The first water ought to be thus
prepared, by putting into it Musk and Amber of each one dram, leaves of Gold
one scruple.

To comfort all the members of the body; Take of Malmsey Wine one ounce, add
thereto a spoonful of the first water, mix them together till it turn white
like Milk, drink it fasting, and fast two hours after it; it wonderfully
comforts and fortifies the whole body.

For pain in the head, take one spoonful of the said water in water of Betony;
it comforts and strengthens the Lungs, being taken in Wintertime with
Mulbery-water, or sage water; but in Summertime, take of Endive-water one
ounce, and of this water one spoonful.

For infirmities of the Breast, and a cold Cough proceeding from a Catarre;
take of Hyssop-water, Borrage, or Fennel-water, mix them with the aforesaid
water.

For the heart. Take Bugloss or Borrage water half an ounce, as much of the
aforesaid water, and as much Balme-water; mix them and drink them fasting.

For the Stomach. Give of this water in Mint or Wormwood-water.

For the Spleen. Use the aforesaid water in water of Bugloss or Tamarisk.

For the Vertigo and Palsy. Give the said water with Piony-water, or water of
the Herb and Root of Saint John's Wort.

For the Stone in the Bladder. Take Rhadish water one ounce, and too spoonfulls
of this water.

For the Strangury. Take water of Cresces, Parsley, or Saxifrage one ounce, and
one spoonful of this water.

For overflowing of the terms. Take water of Plantane, and drink it morning
and evening with one spoonful of this water.

To provoke the terms. Take Mugwort-water, or Mugwort-seed, with one spoonful
of this water; drink it about that time when the terms are expected.

For Women who have received hurt by unskilful Midwives, or such as cannot
conceive, by reason of the coldness of the matrix, let them take one spoonful
of this water in the morning fasting, with water of Valerian, Betony, or Wild
Roses.

For the eyes. Take water of Fennel, and Eyebright, of each half an ounce, and
of this water one dram, drink it as aforesaid.

For Spots or Freckles of the face. Take water of Bean-Flowers, or
Pimpernel-water one ounce, and of this first water half an ounce, mix them
together, and wash the face therewith morning and evening, and drink of this
water in Endive-water, twice or thrice a week.

The second water which is Citrine, and the third which is like black Oil, is
excellent good against Fistula's, Cancers, and other Wounds and Sores, and may
be used instead of a Balsom.

Chap. 27. An Aqua vitae Composita, Against the Vertigo of the Head, and the
Palsy.
TAke Salviae nine ounces, Florum Lavendulae four ounces, Hissopi, Menthae. an.
m. 2. Garioph. Nucis Muscatae, Cinamomi, Zinzib. albi, Granorum Paradisi,
Zedoariae, Galangae. an. half an ounce, Calami Aromataci one ounce, Cran.
Juniperi one ounce, Granorun Peoniae, half an ounce, Vini albi eight pound*
Digest them in horse-dung eight days or four days in Balneo Mariae,
afterward distill them in an Alembick, and reserve it for use in a glass close
stopped; it has a wonderful operation against the Palsy and Vertigo of the
Head.

Chap. 28. A Precious Water for the Head, Brain, and Memory, etc.
THis following Water was found out by a learned German; it is an excellent and
noble Water of Life, having many egregious operations to comfort and preserve
the whole body from Diseases, especially the Head, Brain, and all the inward
parts of the Head; to expel and dissolve all infirmities proceeding from
coldness and moisture; to exhilerate the Instruments of the Soul, and quicken
the five Senses; for it marvellously comforts the four pincipal Members, with
the Reins and Intestines.

It procures also the best digestion in the Stomach, gives great comfort to the
outward Members by its only odor, by taking one part of this Water, and two
parts of the Water of of Sage, Lavander, and Rosemary, mixed together, and wet
a sponge therein, and foment the Members therewith morning and evening, and let
it dry in of it self.

Or if you drink three or four drops thereof in a glass of Wine, a little
before dinner or supper, it comforts the Stomach.

It is good also to comfort the Head; take of this Water one dram with half an
ounce of Betony-Water, and drink it morning and evening, or dip a Crust of
Bread in that Water, and eat it every morning fasting.

For the Brain and Memory, take of this Water one dram, Waters of Rosemary and
Marjoram, of each half an ounce, and use it in like manner as he last

For the Breast, take of this Water one dram, Water of Hysop and Maidenhair,
each two drams, use it in like manner.

For the Heart, take of this Water one dram, of Borage and Bugloss Water, each
two drams, take it as the former.

For the Stomach, take of this Water one dram, of Mint and Wormwood-water, each
two drams, use it in manner aforesaid.

For the Lungs, take of this Water one dram, add to it Cycory-Water one ounce,
and use it as the former.

For the Spleen, take of this Water one dram, Waters of Tamarisk and
Scolopendrie, of each one ounce; use it in like manner.

To comfort all the Members of the Body, use one part of this Water in four
parts of Wine.

The way to make this Water is thus; Take pull. Diamargarit. frigid, Diarrhodon
Abbatis, species Diambrae, Dianthos, laetificans Galleni, an. two drams,
Cassiae fistulae noviter extract. Zacchari candidi, an. half an ounce, Syrup.
de Liqueritia one ounce, Syrup. Stechados half an ounce, florum R rismarini one
dram, Moschi Alexandrini one scruple.

Upon these Species pour two pound of simple Aqua vitae well rectified by a
treble distillation in Balneg Mariae; distill them in Balneo Mariae with a
gentle fire, so that you may tell six or seven between every drop: the Musk
ought to be tied in a piece of Silk, and put into the vial with the distilled
water, and is not to be distilled with the rest.

Some putrify with the aforesaid Species, Bugloss-water one pound, Balm-water
half a pound, Rosemary-water two ounces, and afterward distill it in Balneo
Mariae.

Chap. 29. To make a Celestial Precious Water, called the Secret of Secrets.
WE come now to declare unto you the Secret of Secrets, a most precious Water,
called Celestial by the Philosophers, because of its heavenly operation: the
way to make it is thus.

Take Salviae cum floribus suis, Rorismarini, Darseni, Zinzib albi, Garioph.
Nucis Muscatae, gran. Paradisi, Galangae, Calami Aromatici, Macro-pip. Zedoar.
an. half an ounce, Macis, Cardamoni. Cubeb. fol. Rutae, fol. Majoranae, flor.
Lavendulae, Ros. Rub. an. two drams, Theriac. Andromachi, Mithridat. an. a dram
and a half, Ol. Laurini, cort. Citri, florum Buglossae, Borraginis,
Rorismarini, Angelicae, Rapentici, gran. Juniperi, Mentastri, Menthae,
Matricariae, an. a dram and a half, Castorei verbeciae cum flor. suis,
Betonicae, Ligni Aloes, Spicae Indicae, gran. Peoniae, seminis Feniculi, Ceori,
an. half a dram, Ambrae, Moschi, an. half a scruple.

Let all these things following be put to digest with Aqua vitae in Balneo
Maria four days and as many nights, viz. Sage, Rosemary, Rue, Marjoram,
Lavander, Roses, Mithridate, Treacle, Oil of Bays, Bugloss, Borrage, Angelica,
Rapontick, Juniper Berries, Mint, Calamint, Mother-wort, Vervain, Betony,
Castoreum.

And when they are putrified distill them in a Limbeck in ashes with a gentle
fire, so that you may number one, two, three, between every drop: when these
are distilled take the other things, viz. Cinnamon, Mace, Nutmegs, Grains of
paradise, Galangal, Calamus, Aromat, Pepper, Zedory, Cubebs, Cardamomi, Lignum
Aloes, Citron Pills, Spikenard, Piony-roots and seeds, Coriander prepared;
pulverize all these grossly and put them into the distilled water, and let them
digest together fourten days, then distill them again by an Alimbeck in Balneo
Mariae, afterward add the Camphire, Rhubarb, Saffron, Amber, and Musk.

If you would have the water yet better and more costly, add Pull. Diamargarit,
Nicholai, Diapliris cum moscho, Nicholai Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diamoschi Mesnae,
Spec. Diambrae, Letificans Galeni, pull. Dialigni Aloes, an. half a dram, add
twenty leaves of Gold, white Sugar half a pound, let them stand three days in
Balneo Mariae, keeping the water of the Bath warm, afterward distill it by
filter in glass Retorts; let one glass stand somewhat higher then the other,
cut small forms of a filter, and hang therein, and by them the matter will be
distilled; let the glass be well luted that no Air may evap^rate: and this is
the most excellent way of distillation of all others.

There are some Physicians who to comfort the Stomach have invented a green
water, which they use with the Aqua viae above prescribed, or with the Claret
following.

The green water is made on this manner.

Take Aqua vitae four times distilled by an Alimbeck in Balneo Mariae, four
pound, Balm dried three ounces, Balsamint two ounces, infuse the Herbs in the
Aqua vitae eight days, and then use thereof.

Note that the Herbs are not to be dried in the Sun, for then the water will be
obscure, but in the shade; and the water will be of a fair green color, and
pleasant to the drinker.

The Claret is made in this manner. Take of the best white Wine four pound,
fine hard Sugar four ounces, Cinnamon one ounce, Coryander prepared three drams,
Cloves two drams, Grains of Paradise and white Ginger, of each one dram and a
half, black Pepper two scruples, Zedory half a dram.

Make them all into powder, and afterward use it as you make Hypocras. This
some use to take with the Water before prescribed.

The Virtues of this Water are these.
IT is good for the memory, taking every day half an ounce mixed with
Rosemary-water half an ounce, water of Marjoram and Balm, of each two drams.

For madness or grief in the brain proceeding from cold, take of this water
half an ounce, Betony-water two drams, dip a Linen cloth therein, and apply it
to the head.

For the Vertigo of the head take hereof half an ounce, water of Lavender and
Sage, an. three drams, and take every morning fasting Diapliris cum moscho
Nicholai.

For deafness, drop of this water every morning and evening into the ear, and
rest upon that ear that it may go out again. For Worms in the ears, take of
this water half an ounce, Juice of Rue two drams; or if you cannot, get the
Juice, take the distilled water thereof, adding a little Aloes Epatick subtly
powdered. And of this distill a little into the ear morning and evening, lying
upon the other side, and after a little time turn and lie upon that side where
the Worms are, and they will come forth and dye.

For the eyes, take of the aforesaid water half an ounce, Fennel-water and
water of Valerian, of each one dram, drop thereof into the eyes.

For filth of the mouth or nose, give every day half an ounce thereof with
white Wine, in which Mints and Roses have been boiled.

For the Epilepsie, drink thereof every day half an ounce with Peony-water one
ounce; or thus. Take the Root and seeds of Peony, Viscus Quercinus, of each
equal parts, boil them in white Wine, and give them to the Patient with the
said water.

For the Palsy, foment all the members with this water, and drink thereof
every morning one ounce.

For lost speech, take of the said water half an ounce, waters of Lavander,
Peony, Sage, of each two drams, drink it, and take of Mithridate one dram with
Wine wherein Castoreum has been boiled.

Against Melancholy, take of the aforesaid water half an ounce, with the
waters of Bugloss and Balm, each two drams, waters of Hart's-tongue and Borrage,
each one dram; mix them together, and drink it three hours before dinner.

Against the Dropsy, take of the said water one part, water of Elder-flowers
two parts, Fennel water three parts, mix them together, and take for a Dose
half an ounce.

For the Stone, take of this water one part, Saxifrage-water,
Wintercherry-water, Aqua Millii solis, Rhadish-water, of each two parts.

Against Sterrility, take of this water two drams; of white Wine, water of
Rosemary, and Mother-wort, each two drams; drink it morning and evening, and
twice or thrice in a week take Diamargarit sem. Avicenna.

Many other excellent virtues has this celestial water, which I omit here for
brevities sake, leaving them to manifest themselves by experience.

FINIS.
The Table to the several Treatises of the whole Book.
The English Apothecary: The transcendent sufficiency of English Herbs, being
fundamental Reasons.
PRoving our Medicines to be most congruent with our bodies, and the great
prejudice we daily receive by the use of foreign Drugs, as also by their
sophistication: to which Fuchsius, Martino Rulandus, etc. agree. page 35 The
correcting of Scamony of its malignity. page 19 Of Mechoaca and Opium, and the
prejudice we receive thereby, unless well corrected page 21 Of Rhubarb and its
properties. page 24 The inconveniency of drinking Wine, and that of Honey may
be made a better and more wholesome drink. page 31 Of Milk and its virtues page
41 The cure of Poisons by venomous beasts with Peniroyal, Treyfoil, etc. page
42 The cure of the Prench-Pox, not only with Sarsaparilla, but with the
essence of Primroses and Cowslips. page 43 The rare virtue of Cink-foyl, Worms,
Wood-lice, or Sowes, Lichenes, etc. For the cure of Tertian-Agues,
Falling Sickness, Toothache, etc. page 44 To cure the bitings of venomous
beasts by the decoction of Frogs. page 44, 53 To cure Cankers by the juice of
Nightshade. page 49 To cure the Leprosy with Plantane, and its virtues page 50
To cure the Falling Sickness with Misleto, Peony-root: a man's skull, etc. page
50 The cure of Poisons in particular. page 51, 52 The cure of the Pestilence.
page 52 The cure of hot diseases by contrariety. page 54 The cure of cold
diseases by contrariety ib. The cure of moist diseases. page 55 The cure of dry
diseases ib. Rules to be observed in cures. page 55, 56 Of purgations, and
their manner, both by vomit and stool. page 56 Preparatives for the Humors
before evacuation, etc. page 60 The cure of Wounds and the broken Bones by
Herbs, etc. page 61 Of Anodines, Causticks, Emmolients, etc. page 62, 63 The
occult properties of sundry Herbs being appropriated to the Head, Heart, Liver,
Spleen Stomach, Lungs, etc. ib. That the Brain is comforted by Herbs as well as
by Spices. page 68 The sovereign virtues of Carduus Benedictus, with its use or
manner of taking it. page 71 Of the sovereign virtues of Angelica, with its
temperature and use. page 79 A discourse showing what members of the body are
governed by the twelve Signs page 82 Of the members of the body and how they
are governed by the seven Planets page 184 A brief account of some simples
appropriated to the Heart page 186 The Chyrurgeons guide, or the errors of
unskilful Chyrurgeons page 195 The first error of their curing the Lues
venerea, or French Pox page 195 The second error, when the disease comes to
suppuration page 198 The third error is concerning Wounds in the Breast page
201 4. Of their applications of Trepans, Terribelles for fractures of the head
page 203 5. Touching the punctures of Nerves page 204 6. Of the abuse by
Runners or Cutters of the Stone and Ruptures page 205 Of the eight kinds of
Hernies, or Ruptures page 207 Of the Hernie Intestinale page 208 Of the Hernie
Zirbale page 209 Of the relaxation of the Peretoneum, called Herni Inquinale
page 210 Of the kinds of Hernies, which be by similitudes, or improperly called
page 211 Of Hernie Verequose page 212 Of the Herni Ventose ib. Of the Hernie
Humorale page 213 Phlebotomy Displayed, or, perfect Rules for letting of Blood
page 214 With Physical cautions for Blood-letting page 219 Vrinal conjectures,
or, brief observations upon the sick Patients stay, or water page 222 Of
Vomits page 225 Of the Excrements page 226 The Treasury of health, or Salves
for every sore, with their cures page 227 For the falling out of the Fundament
page 229 For the Liver page 231 For the Dropsy page 231 For the Spleen page
333 For the Yellow-Jaundies page 235 For the Stone page 236 For the Strangury
page 239 For the Ulcers in the Yard page 241 For the Diabetes page 242 For the
Swelling of the Gods page 243 For the Pleurisy page 244 For to provoke the
Terms page 244 For to stop the Terms page 247 For the Fits of the Mother page
248 For the Swelling of the Breasts page 249 For Childbirth page 251 For the
Gout page 453 Foa the Fistula or Ulcer page 256 For the Leprosy page 258 For
the Warts page 259 For Thorns, Splinters, etc. page 260 The expert Lapidary, or
a Physical Treatise of the virtues of Stones page 265 Of Jacinth and its
virtues 265. The Saphir 264 Emrald ibid. The Ruby 265 Granat 266. Sardine ibid.
Diamond 266 Amethist 267. Bezoar ibid. Topaz 268. Snakes-Stone, ibid.
Toads-stone, 269 Alectorius ibid. Jasper, 270 Nephriticus, ibid Tiburones, 271
Boodstone, ibid Haematites, ibid. Seasand, 272 Whetstone, ibid Aetites, ibid.
Chelidonius, 274 Lincyrius, ibid. Amber, ibid. Lapis Lazuli, 275 Blatta
Byzantia, 275 Pearls, ibid. Corral 276 Turkey-stone ibid. Doctor Diets
Directory, or the Physicians Vade Mecum; being choice and safe Rules for health
page 279 Of Diet page 280 The Diet to be used For sanguine persons page 281 For
Phlegmatic persons ibid. For Chollerick persons page 282 For Melancholy
persons ibid. Of exercises, 283 Of sleep 284 Of Venery 285 Of bathing page 287
A Diet for a Fever and an Ague page 288 A ^^et to be used for the Chollick and
Stone (...). For all sorts of Gouts 289 For the Leprosy (...) For the
Falling Sickness 290 For the Headache 291 For a Consumption. 292 For short
breath. 293 For the Palsy, 294 For Madness. ib. For the Dropsy. 295 For
Surfeits. page 295 Of several sorts of drink. 297 Of Wine. 299 Of Ale 300 Of
Beer. ib. Of Sider 301 Of Meed 301 Of Metheglin ib. Of Whey ib. Of Posset-Ale.
302 Of Coit. 302 Of Honey. 302 Of Bread. page 303 Bread made of Misling and Rye
page 303 Of Broaths in General page 305 Of Firmity. ib. Of Pease and
Bean-pottage. page 306 Of Almond-milk, and Rice-pottage. ib. Alebrews, Caudles.
306 Honey-sops and other Broaths. 306 Of Eggs. 306 Of Butter. 307 Of Cheese.
308 Of Milk. 309 Of Asses-Milk. ib, Of Cream. 310 Of Almond-Butter. ib. Of
Fish. 311 Of Seafish. ib. Of Salt-Fish. 312 Of Anchoves, ib. Of Cod-Fish. ib.
Of Cockles. 313 Of Conger. ib. Crabs. ib. Of Herrings. ib. Of Lobsters. 314
Ma^carels. ib. Maids. ib. Mussels. ib. Of Oysters. 315 Plaise. ib. Of Shads.
ib. Of Shrimps. ib. Of Scate. 316 Of Soales. ibid. Of Sturgeon. ib. Of the
Thornback. ib. Turbat. 317 Of Whitings. 217 Of Barbles. ib. Crabs. ib. Of Eels.
318 Of Flounders; Gudgeons, Lampreys ib. Muslets. 319 Of the Perch. ib. Of the
Pike. ib. Roaches. 320 Of Salmond. 320. Smelts. ib. Of Trouts. page 321 Of
Wild or Tame Fowl, and small Birds. 321 Of Tame Domestic Fowl. 321 Of Small
Birds. ib. Of Beef. 322 Of Mutton. Of Lamb. ibid. Of Veal. 323 Of Pork. 223 Of
Bacon. ib. Of Brawn. ib. Of Pigs. 324 Of Kids. ib. Of Wild beasts. 324 Of the
Hare. 325 Of Rabbets. ib. Of the Head, Brain, Skin, Fins, Fat, Marrow, Tongues,
Stones of Flesh or Fowl. page 325 Of Roasted, Boiled, or Fried meats. page 326
Of Roots, Plants, and Spices. The roots of Borrage and Bugloss. 327 Of
Elizaunder and Enula-Campana. 327 Of Parsley and Fennel ib. Of Turnips and
Parsnips. ib. Of Radishes and Carrots. 328 Of the Roots of Rapes, Onions,
Leeks, Garlic. ib. Cabbage. 329 Of Asparagas. 329 Of Musk-Mellons. 329. Of
Potata-roots, ib. Radishes ibid. Of Skirret Roots. 330 Of Borrage and Bugloss.
331 Of Artechokes and Roket. ib. Of Endive and Succory. ib. of White Beets and
Purslain. ib. Time and Parsley. ib. Of Lettice and Sorrel. 332 Of Marigolds.
ib. Of Pennyroyal and Hyssop. 333 Of Rosemary and Roses. ib. Of Fennel and
Annis. ib. Of Sage ib. Violets. 334 Watercresses. ib. Of Tansey. Of Rue. ib.
Of Wormwood. ib. Of Figs. 335 Of great Raisons. ib. Small R^sons. 336 Of
Currants. ib. Of Grapes. Of Peaches. Of Medlers. Of Services. 337 Straw-berries,
Cherries. ib. Nuts great and small. ib. Of Pease and Beans. ib. Of Pear^ and
Apples. ib. Of Pomegranates and Quinces 338 Of Dates and Mellons. ib. Of Gourd^
Cowcumbers, etc. ib. Of Apricocks. Of Barberries. ib. Of Citrons and Lemons.
339. Of Mulberries and Raspis. ib. Of Goose-berrie ib. Of Prunes and Damsins.
340 Of Olives and Capers. ib. Of Spices. Ginger. Of Peper. Of Cloves. Of Mace.
341 Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Liquoris. ib. Of Salt. Of Sugar. 342 Doctor Reason and
Doctor Experience consulted with, or the mystery of the skill of Physic made
easy. 343 Of the Apoplexy. ib. Of the Mother. 346. Of Melancholy. ib. Of
Black Choler. 347. Of the overflowing of the monthly Terms. 348 Of the
suppression of the Terms. 349 Of the obstruction of the Liver. 350 Of the
Hicket. 351 Of the Stone 352 Of the Hearing. ib. Of Madness. 353 Of the
shortness of Breath. 354 Of the Plague. 355. Of Catarracta, or Suffusion. 357
Of the French Pox. ib. Of the weakness of the Stomach. 359 Of the Squinancy.
360 Of involuntary pissing. 361 Of the inflammation of the Eyes. ib. Of the
Nightmare, 363 Of Convulsions. ib. Of Choler. 265 Of Headache. 366 Of the
Cough. 367 Of the Flux of the Belly and its cure. 368 Chemical Institutions,
Describing Natures choycest Secrets in experienced Chemical Practices, showing
the several degrees of progression in the Physical Cabinet of that Art. page
405 Of Vinegar of Squills page 405 Of Elixer vitae page 406 Aqua Mirabilis page
408 A precious water page 409 An apprehension worth experience page 410 A
wonderful Balsam page 411 A Balsam for the Stone page 412 A Balsam for the
Palsy page 413 Of the Quintessence of every simple matter page 413 Of the
Quintessence of Wine to be extracted by a distillatory page 417 How a Rude
matter ought to be putrified and made fit for distillation page 420 How to know
whether Wine digested in a Circulatory be fit for Distillation page 425 How to
distill by way of Circulation page 426 How to extract the Quintessence without
labor or cost page 427 An easy way to extract a Quintessence without fire
page 430 To extract the Quintessence of Celandine page 430 To extract a
Quintessence from Man's Blood, Eggs, Flesh, or the like page 437 To draw a
Quintessence from Apples, Pears, and other Fruits page 4^9 To extract a
Quintessence from Flowers, Herbs, and Roots page 439 How to distill Vinegar and
Man's Urine, wherein all Calcined Metals may be resolved page 441 To make an
Aqua vitae Composita for men of a cold complexion or Region page 442 An
excellent Compound water used by the Emperor Frederick the Third page 445 An
excellent Compound water against all Ulcers, Poisons, etc. page 446 The virtues
of the same water page 449 An excellent Compound water for the Plague page 448
A precious water used by the Count Palatine page 450 A precious compound water
of Life, which may be used instead of a natural Balsam page 451 Aqua vitae
Composita against the Vertigo of the Head and the Palsy page 454 A precious
water for the Head, Brain, and Memory page 455 To make a celestial precious
water, called the Secret of Secrets page 457 The virtues of the same water page
459
A Table of Diseases contained in this Book, with their several Cures.
A
APoplexy 346 Agues 73, 75, 78, 80, 98, 100, 177, 179, 181, 188 Aposthumes 73,
144 Aches 88 101, 105, 139, 148, 149, 166 Afterbirth 120, 122, 123, 170, 171
Agues Quartane 75, 91, 111, 122
B
BRain comfort 71, 97, 111, 187 Bleeding stops 72, 90, 92, 96, 101, 102,
142, 143, 162, 168, 169, 180, 383, Breathing helps 72, 73, 192, 354 Breath
stinking 72 Belly pained 74, 75, 81 Bruises 74, 94, 150, 163, 180 Burning 74
120, 141, 180 Biting of venomous Beasts 82, 156, 188, 189, 192 Bitings of Mad
Dogs 83, 154, 155, 174 Burns in the Eyes 92 Bloody Flux 98, 104, 115, 133, 134,
269, 173, 179, 181, 187, 189, ^ness 100 Back pained 111, 188 Bladder 118
Bewitched 118, 149 Barreness 120 Bones broken ib. Birth and Afterbirth 120,
122, 123, 170, 171 Blood spitting 169, 30^, Blood pissing 170 Blood cools 180
Blood clarifieth 190 ^east swelled 240
C
COngelation 391 Consumption 73, 166 Chollick 73, 91, 93, 95, 112, 118, 128,
129, 130, 191, ^8^ Carbuncles 74, 107 Cuts and Wounds (heal without pain) 74,
75 Cramps ^2, 141 Cold 100, 191 Cough 127, 165, 166, ^^7 Chin-cough ^46
Children to speak quickly 147 Convulsions 150, 163, 172, 363 Childbirth 25^
Cods swelled 174, 24^ Choler 176, 177, 178, 187, 347, 3^^ Cools 17^
D
DEafness 71, 1^^, 168 Dropsy 73, 93, 106, 107, 10^, 10^, 117, 177, 178, 179,
192, 231, 39^. Diabetes 89 107, 132, 242, 161 Digestion helps 99, 146
E
EYes 171, 176, 361
F
Falling Sickness 73, 75, 94. 97, 10^ 108, 113, 153, 172, 178, 179, 384
French Pox 75, 357 Fellons 90, 144, 159 Freckles 91, 95, 121, 168 Phlegm 176
Fl^^^ 177, 179, 188, 189, 168 Fistula 96, 256 F^^ness 98 Fe^^ors 98 Frenzy 393
G
Green Sickness 73, 176 Gout 82, 88, 93, 94, 96, 97, 102, 103, 107, 110, 116,
123, 139, 140, 141, 187, 188, 253, 389 Gr^^ 105, 171 G^^^^der burning 142
Go^^^^ 167 Gall^^^ 180
H
Headache 71, 76, 87, 103, 104, 108, 110, 119, 123, 164, 178, 36^, Heart
comfort 73, 177, 178, 187, 188 Hard labor 81, 89, 100, 101, 114, 122, 170,
180, 189 Hair takes away 90, 112 Hoarseness 90, 164, 189 ^^ad purges 109, 110
^air to grow 112 Humors 146, 188, 190 Head Scabby 17^ Hicket 35^ Hearing 35^
I
INfectious air 8^, 8^ Increase Milk in Nurses 87, 18^ Itch 152, 153, 1^^
Jaundies black 94, 109, 124, 1^^ Joints lame 99, 102, 122, 17^ Imposthumes 108,
144, 145, 176 Jaundies yellow 116, 124, 125, 126 190, ^35, 37^
K
King's Evil 95, 10^, ^8^ Kanker 74 Kibes 1^5, 166
L
LEthargy 373 Liver strengthens 73, 190, 231, 379 Lungs and their obstructions
73, 127, 128, 177, 178, 179, 187, 197, 192 Lice 109 Looseneth 103, 112, 133,
137 Looseness 1^^ Lunatic 177, 3^^ Liver 188 Leanness 180 Lust 191 Leprosy
258
M
MOthe 97 Megrum 71 Memory strengthens 76, 98, 99 Mother fits 110, 161, 248
Measles 163 Miscarrage 165 Melancholy 178, 188, 190, 346 Madness 119 Morphew
143 Murrain 145 Madness 353, 393 Mirth 190, 191
N
Nightmare 363
O
OBstructions opens 35, 190, 191, 351
P
PLague 72, 74, 75, 78, 80, 89, 97, 104, 157, 162, 176, 177, 178, 179, 18^,
187, 188, 35^ Poison 75, 78, 82, 97, 187, 191, 192 Palsy 73, 92, 121, 143,
144, 376, 314 Pleurisy 88, 126, 127, 166, 191, 244, ^8^ Purges 17^ Pains in
the Bladder 9^ Pains 103, 105, 113, 13^, 191 Passions 105, 18^ Priapismus ^18
Piles 137, 138, 350 Pimples 19^
R
RVptures 9^ Rhume 94, 107, 108, 117, ^^^ 171, 189, 190, ^86 Redness of the
Face 91 Ringworms and Tetters 102, 117, 155, 172, 176, 180, 181, 190 Reins 120,
167, 173, 188, 189
S
SIght 71, 100, 106, 113, 114, 115, 161 Stomach strengthens 72, 96, 99, 187,
189, 359, 388 Stitch in the sides 73, 94, 163, 190 Stone 74, 75, 93, 96, 101,
102, 103, 104, 112, 113, 118, 120, 121, 134, 135, 136, 177, 178, 179, 189, 191,
236, 352, 412 Sweat (...) 74 Sores 74, 76, 96, 108, 116, 151, 157, 177, 179,
181 (...) 74, 111, 139, 145, 146, 151, 168, 172 (...) 114, 116, 129, 160, 191,
239 (...) 88, 112, 191, 233, 372 Sauin^^^^ 90, 103, 360 ^welli^g of the Throat
91, 103 S^linters draws forth 92, 93, 260 S^a^^^ring 147 S^nses lost 161 Small
po^e 163, 175, 187 Surfeit^ 171 (...) 177, 179 (...) ^rovokes 181 (...) 100
(...) 96, 109 (...) 102, 178 (...) 106 (...) 109, 111, 157 Swelling 121 Sick
live or dye 113, 118, 119 Scalding 124, 142, 164, 178, 1^^ Sciatica 137, 1^^
Swooning 371
T
TYsick 73, 160, 192 Teeth 72, 82, 88, 99, 117, 12^ 121, 179, 19^ Teeth white
90 Terms provoke 119, 159, 244 Thirst quenches 147 Terms stop 2^^ ^^8
V
VErtigo 71, 7^, 37^ Urine provokes 74, 7^ Vomiting 10^ Voice lost (...)
Ulcers 75, 241, 2^^
W
WIt quickens (...) Wind 81, 101, 162, 1^^ 179, (...) Worms kills 75, 104,
130, 131, 1^^ 179, 187, 192, 35^ Wen 88, 155 Wounds 88, 89, 114, 123, 136, 143,
148, 152, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 187, 188 Web in the Eye 92, 117, 148 Women's
Breasts 113, 120, 167 Warts 114, 115, 122, 192, 259 Womb 119, 173, 187
FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following, with many others, are Printed for
Nath. Brook, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Angel in Cornhill.
Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic, Chyrurgery, etc.
CVlpeper's Semiatioa Vranica, his Astrological Judgment of Diseases from the
decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged: the manner of finding out the cause,
change, and end of the Disease; also whether the sick be likely to live or dye,
and when the Recovery or Death is to be expected, according to the judgment of
Hippocrates and Hermes Trismegistus: to which is added M. Culpepers Censure of
Urines.

The expert Doctors Dispensatory: the whole Art of Physic restored to
practice: the Apothecaries Shop, and Chyrurgeons Closet opened; with a Survey,
as also a Correction of most Dispensatories now extant; with a Judicious
Censure of their Defects, and a Supply of what they are deficient in: together
with a learned account of the virtues and quantities, and uses of Simples and
Compounds; with the Symptoms of Diseases; as also prescriptions for their
several Cures: by that renowned P. Morellus, Physician to the King of France; a
Work for the order, usefulness and plainness of the Method, not to be
paralleled by any Dispensatory, in what language soever.

Natures secrets, or the admirable and wonderful History of the generation of
Meteors; describing the temperatures of the Elements, the heights, magnitudes,
and influences of Stars, the causes of Comets, Earthquakes. Deluges, Epidemical
Diseases, and Prodiges of Precedent times; with Presages of the weather: and
descriptions of the weather-glass: by T. Wilsford.

The Mysteries of Love and Eloquence: or the Arts of Wooing and Complementing;
as they are managed in the Spring Garden, Hide-Parke, and New Exchange, and
other eminent places. A work, in which are drawn to the life the Deportments of
the most accomplished persons; the Mode of their Courtly Entertainments,
Treatment of their Ladies at Balls, their accustomed Sports, Drolls, and
Fancies; the Witchcrafts of their persuasive Langue, in their Approaches, or
other more Secret Dispatches etc. by E. P.

Helmont disguised; or the vulgar error of emperical and unskilful Practicers
of Physic^ confuted; more especially as they concern the Cures of Fevers, the
Stone, the Plague, and some other Diseases by way of Dialogue, (...) which the
chief Rareties of Physic are admirably discoursed of, by J. T.

Books very lately printed, and in the Press now printing.
THe Scales of Commerce and Trade: by T. Wilsford.

2. Geometry demonstrated by Lines and Numbers; from thence Astronomy,
Cosmography, and Navigation proved and delineated by the Doctrine of Plain and
Sphericall Triangles: by T. Wilsford.

3. The English Annals, from the invasion made by Julius Caesar to these times:
by T. Wilsford.

4. The Fool transformed: a Comedy.

5. The History of Lewis the eleventh, King of France: a Trage-Comedy.

6. The Chaste Woman against her will: A Comedy.

7. The Tooth-drawer; A Comedy.

8. Honor in the end: A Comedy.

9. Tell Tall; A Comedy.

10. The History of Donquixiot, or the Knight of the ill-favored face; A
Comedy.

11. The fair Spanish Captive; A Trage-Comedy.

12. Sir Kenelm Digby, and other persons of Honor, their rare and incomparable
secrets of Physic, Chyrurgery, Cookery, Preserving, Conserving, Canding,
Distilling of Waters, extraction of Oils, compounding of the costliest
Perfumes, with other admirable Inventions, and select Experiments, as they
offered themselves to their Observations, whether here, or in Foreign
Countries.

13. The Saints Tombstone, or the Remains of the Blessed. A narrative of some
remarkable Passages, in the holy Life, and happy Death of Mrs. Dorothy Shaw,
Wife of John Shaw, Preacher of the Gospel at Kingston upon Hull: collected by
her dearest friends, especially for her sorrowful Husband and six Daughters
consolation and invitation.

14. The Accomplished Cook, the Mystery of the whole Art of Cookery, revealed in
a more easy and perfect Method, then has been published in any Language:
expert and ready ways for the dressing of Flesh, Fowl, and Fish, the raising
of Pastes, and directions for all manner of Kickshaws, and the most poinant
Sauces, with the terms of Carving and Sewing: the Bills of Fare, an exact
account of all Dishes for the Season, with other A la mode Curiosities;
together with the lively Illustrations of such necessary Figures, as are
referred to practice: approved by many years experience, and careful industry
of (...) May, in the time of his attendance of so (...) ^ersons of Honor.

1^. The exquisite Letters of Mr. Robert Love-day, the late admired Translator
of the Volumes of the famed Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuating his Memory,
published by his dear Brother, Mr. A. L.

16. The so long expected Work, the New World of English Words; or a General
Dictionary, containing the Terms, Etymologies, Definitions, and perfect
Interpretations of the proper Significations of hard English Words, throughout
the Arts and Sciences, Liberal, or Mechanic; as also other subjects that are
useful, or appertain to the Language of our Nation; to which is added the
signification of Proper Names, Mythology, and Poetical Fictions, Historical
Relations, Geographical Descriptions of the Countries and Cities of the World;
especially of these three Nations, wherein their chiefest Antiquities, Battles,
and other most memorable Passages are mentioned. A Work very necessary for
Strangers, as well as our own Contrymen, for (...) persons that would
rightly understand what they discourse, write, or read. Collected and published
by E. P. for the greater honor of those learned Gentlemen and Artists that
have been assistant in the most Practical Sciences, their Names are prefixed
before the Book.

17. The so much desired, and deeply learned Comentary, on Psalm the fifteenth,
by that Reverend and Eminent Divine, Mr. Christopher Cartwright, Minister of
the Gospel in York, to which is prefixed a brief account to the Authors life,
and of his work, by R. Bolton.

18. The way to Bliss, in three Books, being a learned Treatise of the
Philosophers Stone, made public by Elias Ashmole Esquire;

19. Wit restored in several Select Poems, not formerly published; by Sir John
Mennis, Mr. Smith, and others.

20. The Judges Charge, delivered in a Sermon before Mr. Justice Hall, and Mr.
Sergeant Cook, Judges of the Assize, at St. Mary Overies in Southwark, by R.
Purre, M. A. Pastor of Camerwel, in the Country of Surrey; a Sermon worthy of
the perusual of all such persons, as endeavor to be honest and just
Practitioners in the Law.

21. The Modern Assurancer, the Clerks Directory, containing the Practick part
of the Law, in the exact Forms and Draughts of all manner of Presidents for
Bargains, and Seals, Grants, Feoffements, Bonds, Bills. Conditions, Covenants,
Jointures, Indentures; to lead the use of Fines, and Recoveries, with good
Proviso's, and Covenants to stand seized, Charter parties for Ships, Leases,
Releases, Surrenders, etc. And all other Instruments and Assurances now in use,
intended for all young Students and Practicers of the Law, by John Hern.

22. Moor's Arithmatick, the second Edition much refined and diligently cleared
from the former mistakes of the Press. A work containing the whole Art of
Arithmatick, as well in Numbers, as Species. Together with many Additions by
the Author, to come forth at Michaelmas Term.

Likewise,

23. Exercitatio Elleiptica Nova, or a new Mathematical Contemplation on the
Oval Figure, called an Elleipsis; together with the two first Books of
Mydorgius his Conicks Analiz'd and made so plain, that the Doctrine of the
Conical Sections may be easily understood: a Work much desired, and never
before published in the English Tongue; by Jonas Moor, Surveyor General of the
great Level of the Fenns.

24. The Joys of Heaven, the Saints support in Gods promises on Earth, Christ's
Sermons on the Beatitudes. An Exposition of the fifth Chapter of St. Matthew,
delivered in several Sermons by Mr. Jeremiah Borroughs, the last Sermons he
preached a little before his Death, at St. Giles Cripple-gate, London.

25. Naps upon Parnassus. A sleepy Muse nipt and pincht, though not awakened.
Such voluntary and Jovial Coppies of Verses as were lately received from some
of the WITS of the Universities, in a Frolic; dedicated to Gondibert's
Mistress, by Captain Jones and others. Whereunto is added for Demonstration of
the Authors prosaick Excellencies, his Epistle to one of the Universities, with
the Answer; together with two Satirical Characters of his own, of a Temporizer,
and an Antiquary, with Marginal Notes by a friend to the Reader.

26. The complete Midwife's Practice, in high and weighty Concernments of
Mankind: the second Edition corrected, with a full Supply of such most useful
and admirable Secrets which Mr. Nicholas Culpeper in his brief Treatise, and
other English Writers in the Art of Midwifry, have hitherto wilfully passed by,
kept close to themselves, or wholly omitted: by T. Chamberlain, M. P.

27. A Manuel, or Miscelany, of Meditations Apot^^^^ (...) Sentences, Precepts,
Observations, Characters and Essays, by R. R.

28. America Painted to the Life, the History of the Conquest, and first
Original undertakings of the advancement of the Plantations in those Parts,
with an exquisite Map, by F. Gorges, Esquire.

29. The School of Physic, or the General Experimental Practice of the whole
Art; so reduced, either into Aphorisms, or choice and tried Receipts, that the
freeborn Students of the three Kingdoms, may in this Method, find perfect
ways for the operation of such Medicines, so Astrologically and Physically
prescribed, as that they may themselves be competent judges of the cures of
their Patients, by Nicholas Culpeper. To this exquisite Work, the Narrative of
the Authors life is prefixed; together with his Nativity, Calculated by
himself: Published with the acknowledgement and approbabation of his Late Wife,
Mistress Alice Culpeper.

30. Blagrave's admirable Ephemeris for the Year 1659.

31. The Ascents of Mose in Parallels with his late Serene Highness, Oliver
Lord Protector, now in the Press.

32. J Cleaveland Revived: Poems, Orations, Epistles, and other of his Genuine
Incompara^^^ (...) never before Published. With some (...) ^uisite Remains of
the most eminent (...) both the Universities, that were his (...) ^poraries.

FINIS.

