THE PARABLE OF THE Great Supper OPENED.

Wherein is set forth the fullness of Gospel-provision. The frank and free
invitation of Jews and Gentiles to this Supper: the poor excuses of the
Recusant Guests that were invited. The faithful Returns which the Messengers
make unto the Lord of their refusal. God's displeasure against those who slight
his Favors: his bringing in of despicable Creatures to fill his House: with
the Condemnation of those that were bidden.

Methodically and succinctly handled by that Judicious Divine, Mr. John Crump,
late of Maidstone in Kent.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Golden Bible on London Bridge, 1669.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir JOHN BANKS of Ailesford in the County of Kent
Baronet, and to the Virtuous Lady his Wife; and to LAMBARD GODFREY, Esquire;
IF we may judge of the Excellency of things by their usefulness, we must
confess, that Parables are very excellent, since they are of such use. Although
the things mentioned in the Parables that were delivered by our Savior and
others in Scripture, were never acted according to the Letter, yet something
like those very things was acted by those very persons to whom the Parables
were spoken, which had it been spoken in plain downright language, would not
have instructed them half so well: for Parables are such clear Glasses, as
(being held up to men) do represent both them and their actions in a most
lively manner, and that so fully, as that they a^e forced to pass sentence upon
themselves by their own judgment and conscience, which otherwise could never be
so convincingly done. I say, to pass judgment against themselves, even as David
did upon Nathan's Parable against him; and the Jews did upon our Savior's
Parable against them, Mat. 21.41.

It is lawful to use Parables, when a man is able so to fr^me them, Per terresh
is intelligit Christus doctrinam lactis; sive similitudines illus rustieas and
terrest^es quibus uti solebat. Marlorat.
that the true scope may both appear and instruct; and the words be so chosen
and placed, as an understanding ear may discern them to be a Parable, not a
story.

A Parable (says Peter Martyr) is nothing else but a simili^ude, or example to
illustrate the matter in hand. Parables do familiarly explain divine truths,
representing heavenly matters under earthly resemblances. If I have told you
earthly things says our Savior, John 3.12. that is earthly resemblances, or
similitudes, representing those heavenly truths, which all believers ought to
know and practice while they are upon the earth. Parables in Scripture do hold
forth the same truth under diverse similitudes. In one Chapter, viz. Matthew. 13.
We see how many Parables Christ makes use of to set out the kingdom of heaven
by. It is said ver. 3. he spoke many things to them in Parables, saying, A
sower went forth to sow. And ver. 24. Another Parable put he forth unto them,
saying, the kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in
his field. And ver. 33. Another Parable spoke he unto them, saying, The kingdom
of heaven is like unto a grain of Mustard Seed, which a man took, and sowed in
his field: diverse other Parables: of like nature ye have in the same Chapter.
So that as some speak of the Jews Manna, it was turned into all manner of
savoury tests, according to the several palats of them that eat it, so there is
that in heavenly Doctrine, which suiteth with all true desires of happiness.

Moreover in Parables, similitudes are fetched from the several and usual
employments of all sorts, to illustrate that Doctrine of the Gospel, which
belongs to all sorts. This every one should heedfully mind; how Christ speaks
to them in the language of their own Trades and Callings: here each person in
his own Trade and Occupation may learn something for his Salvation. Here the
plough-man may meditate on the Parable of the sower, when he is ploughing up
his ground, and turning up the furrows of the earth, which may put him in mind
of plowing up the f^llow-ground of his heart: and when he is breaking up the
clods of the earth, he may remember, that Gods calls for a broken and contrite
heart: and when he put his hand to the plough, this show him the constancy of
an holy profession. No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back,
is fit for the kingdom of God, Luke 9.61. hereby a man may learn what pains to
take with his own heart, so preparing it for the true seed, the word of life:
and when he casts in the seed in the season, he may understand his own
season: and as that which a man sows, is not quickened, unless it die, so he
may learn that the body of man after it dies, and rotteth in the earth, shall
rise again: and he that sees not so much in the sowing and reaping his grain,
is a fool in the Apostles sense, 1 Cor. 15.36. his plowing up the ground may
also show him the grievousness of afflictions, how the wicked plow upon the
backs of the Righteous, and make long their furrows. He that thus meditates at
the plough, shall always have a Sermon before him, every furrow being a line
or sentence; and every grain of Corn that he sows, a Lesson whence he may
learn something of God.

Here the Gardener may receive the Gospel as brought to him in his own
language, and may consider the Parable of a certain man that bad a fig tree
planted in his Vineyard, etc. Luke 13.7, 8. That is, God, who for our capacity
is compared to a man, signifying, that he used them not as beasts and slaves,
but lovingly and kindly as men do, or should do one to another, drawing them
with the cords of a man, and the bands of love, Hos. 11.4. Had a fig tree
planted in his Vineyard,] that is, had a people whom he had chosen to himself,
and both planted, pruned, and watered, by his word and Sacraments: by the
Vineyard he may understand the Church of the Jews, or the Land of Jury, and by
the fig tree the Inhabitants thereof. Of God's particular planting this Vine,
we read, Psalm. 80.8, 9. God brought a Vine out of Egypt, cast out the Heathen,
and planted it, prepared room for it, and caused it to take deep root, so that
it filled the Land, the hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the
boughs thereof were like the goodly Cedaers. And whenever the Gardener (like
Adam) walks am^ng the trees of the Garden, and beholds the Vine, he may
think of that Mystical Union between Christ and his Church; that he is the
Vine, his people the branches, that whosoever abides in him, and he in him,
the same brings forth much fruit. That the Church of God also is a Vineyard
of red wine, that the Lord does keep it, and water it every moment, and lest
any hurt is, he will keep it night and day, Isa. 27.2, 3. That men also are
compared to Trees, as in Jotham's Parable, who compares A^imilech to the
Bramble, a base Plant, usurping Authority, when the more noble Trees, the
Olive, the Fig Tree, and the Vine refuse it. In a word! that the good man is
compared to the green-tree, and the wicked unto the dry.

The Scripture is very copious in borrowed expressions, and partly for our
weakness condescending to us, to make us to understand the deep Mysteries of
God by earthly things. It sets forth Christ (as one notes.) 1. From inanimate
things, from the Sun, the St^r, a Rock. 2. By vegetative, the Root, the Branch,
3. From sensitives, the Lion called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. 4. From
Rationals: the Son of man, to show, that Christ is all in all.

Parables are either. 1. (...), when the nature of the thing does make the
comparison, as in that of the seed; the variety of increase by the word
preached is expressed by the greater or lesser increase of the grain, according
to the ground whereon it falls. Or 2. (...), when the disposition or
affection makes it, as when Christ compares himself to Children piping and
dancing, to express the mild means he used for the saving men's souls. Or 3.
(...), when a passion, or perturbation makes it, as when Christ's coming is
resembled to a Thieves Burghlary, or to a woman's travel for the suddenness and
affrightment. Or 4. (...), when the action is only brought for comparison, as
in the Parable of the unjust Steward, Luke 16.6. that as he made friends of his
Masters money against an hard time, so should we of the goods lent us by the
Lord, by giving alms to the poor, whose prayers may help us in the day of trial.

Our Savior was frequent in the use of Parables in his discourse and doctrine,
and therein he acommodated his speech to his Auditors. The Jewish Nation was
much used to Parables, as appears by the doctrine of the Prophets of old. So
the corruption of the Church is set forth by the similitude of a degenerate
Vine, Isa. 5. and of a most unclean harlot; Ezekiel. 16.30, 31. etc. we read Ezekiel.
21.2. -- 6. Of a Parable of a Wood to be burnt with fire: then the Prophet is
commanded to turn his speech to the men of Jerusalem, and to denounce
destruction to them from ver. 7. ad. 10. at length he is commanded to sigh, and
groan, and lament bitterly, even to the pain of his loins: And if they enquire
into the cause of these things, to answer, because evils are coming, at which
every heart shall melt away. Now by this kind of language Christ took a course
to inflame their minds after Gospel mysteries. And albeit divine mysteries were
veiled in the Parables, as barely propounded to the reprobate world, making
them the more inexcusable, through the just judgment of God; yet these
mysteries were revealed by Parables as clearly expounded to the elect, through
the goodness of God in Jesus Christ.

But although Parables do familiarly explain and illustrate divine truths, yet
they darken divine truths to some, to whom it is not given to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven: and our Savior says, that therefore he
spoke in Parables to them, because they seeing saw not, and hearing heard not,
nor did they understand. A singular judgment of God on them for their contumacy
and contempt of the Gospel. It is an observation of Oleaster, that the holy
Prophets (especially to great men) spoke most in Parables, that since the
people were so shy of naked truth, it might be presented in some Guise.

Doubtless, the design of our Savior in laying things under parabolical
expressions, and as it were out of sight, was, that his hearers might seek out
the things hereby intended with more diligence, and find them with more
pleasure; for this way of Illustration makes things very delightful and
pleasant, and it is not only a way, whereby the ignorant may be made to
understand, but the scope of them being once found, it will then appear, that
no falsehoods, but real truths are contained in them; because truths, not
falsehoods, were not only intended, but signified by them, and so Parables are
not only lawful, but commendable, and very grateful to the ingenious Reader or
Hearer.

How then should every one desire to know the meaning of Scripture-parables? as
Christ's Disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the Parable of the
Tares of the field, Matthew. 13.36. that so they may come to the clear and sound
knowledge of divine truth. Parables are pleasant, like a Picture drawn with
lively colors. And profitable also. Galeacius Caracciolus, that noble Marquess
of Vico, was converted by a similitude used by Peter Martyr in a Sermon,
seconded with private discourse.

Much honored in the Lord!

Here you have in this ensuing Treatise (which I humbly Dedicate to you) a
judicious Explanation, and faithful Application of one of our Saviors
Parables: The Parable of the Great Supper, to which many Guests were invited.
The Author was better known to you than to my self, yet not altogether a
stranger to me. He was not only a word-man, but a workman; a workman that
needed not to be ashamed: a pattern of wholesome words in sound teaching, a
pattern of good works in well doing, so that a man might read his Sermons
written as it were in the lines of his life. He was a light of direction in
teaching, and a pattern of perfection (as it were) in his life. His Preaching
and his Practice; his Words and his Works agreed together. The Law of God is a
Lanthorn, good example bears it; it is safe following him that carrys the
light. That Minister only know how to speak well, that has learned to do well.
Then does the seed of the word bring forth fruit, when the godliness of the
Preacher does water it in the breast of the Hearer. Thus eraving pardon for
this my boldness, that the Lord may add to those gifts and blessings he has
bestowed upon you, is the prayer of

Your most humble and affectionate Servant in the Gospel, W. GEARING.

Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Golden Bible on London Bridge.
THe Protestants Triumph, being an exact answer to all the sophistical
Arguments of Papists. By Chapter Drelincourt.

A Defense against the fear of Death. By Z. Crofton.

Gods Sovereignty displayed. By William Geering.

The Godly Man's Ark: or City of refuge in the day of his distress, in five
Sermons; with Mr^s. Moors Evidences for Heaven. By Ed. Calamy.

The Almost Christian Discovered: or the false Professor tried and cast. By Mr.
Mead.

Spiritual Wisdom improved against temptation, by Mr. Mead.

The Doctrine of Repentance.

Heaven taken by Storm.

The Mystery of the Lords Supper.

A Divine Cordial.

A word of comfort for the Church of God.

A Plea for Alms, in a Sermon at the Spittle.

The Godly Man's Picture, drawn with a Scripture-pensil. These seven last were
written by Tho: Watson.

The True bounds of Christian freedom; or a Discourse showing the extents and
restraints of Christian liberty is settled, many errors confuted; out of John 8.
ver. 36.

A Treatise of the Sacrament; both by Sam. Bolton, D. D.

The Lords Day enlivened, or a Treatise of the Sabbath, by Philip Goodwin.

The sinfulness of Sin, and the Fullness of Christ, two Sermons; by W. Bridge.

A serious Exhortation to a Holy Life, by Tho. Wadsworth.

Ovid's Metamorphosis Translated Grammatically, by J. Brinsley.

Comfortable Crumbs of refreshment, by Prayers, Meditations, Consolations, and
Ejaculations; with a Confession of Faith, and sum of the Bible.

The difference between the spots of the Godly and Wicked, in four Sermons, by
Jer. Buroughs.

Four Centuries of Select Hymns, collected out of Scripture, by Will. Barton.

Sins Sinfulness, by R. Venning.

Memento to Young and Old, by J. Maynard.

The Christians Daily Monitor, by Jo. Church.

Closet Prayer, a Christians Duty, by O. Heywood.

A Little Book for Little Children, by Tho. White.

FINIS.
THE PARABLE OF THE GREAT SVPPER OPENED.
LUKE 14.16. Then said he unto him, A certain man made a Great Supper, and bad
many.
SERMON. I.
CHAP. I.
THese words are a Parable delivered by our Savior, whose usual manner it was
to propound Divine Truths under such Figurative representations. Wherefore in
the handling of a Parable let us observe how the genuine sense of the same may
be found out: for the mis-apprehension of Parables has sometimes caused
strange constructions of the holy Scriptures. Tota difficultas parabolae ex
tribus capitibus pendere videtur, ex Radice, Cortice, and fructu. Salmero de
parab.
Now in a Parable there are three considerable particulars to be observed. 1.
The root, or scope of a parable. 2. The rind, or sensible similitude. 3. The
fruit, or spiritual meaning. And this all along we must hold as a Canon in the
interpretation of a parable, that there is nothing false, absurd, and
impossible in the Parables of our Savior.

Now farther, that we may rightly understand the meaning of a Parable according
to its true scope, we must either look before upon the occasion of it, Ex
profabulatione, vel affabulatione, vel ipsa fabula: Sic Graeci loquantur. (...).
as ver. 7. or else hehind upon the conclusion of it, Matthew. 25.13. or else
into it upon the connection of it. This course the Grecians took in the
understanding of their Apologues or Fables.

In this parable we are first to look upon the occasion of it, which is 1. More
remote; occasioned from the invitation of one that made a Feast, ver. 12.2.
More immediate, occasioned from the communication of one who was at the feast,
ver. 15. Then said he, etc.] first it answers to that, when he was bidden to
the Feast. He spiritualizeth that meeting with discourse proper to the occasion.

CHAP. II.
Observe. HEnce I observe, that it is true Christian practice to spiritualize
earthly things, John 3.12. This may thus appear.

1. Such practice is the imitation of Christ, which may be shown in some
particulars of his practice. 1. In his calling fishers to be preachers, he
spiritualized their work by making them fishers of men, Matthew. 4.18, 19. Then
they lest their other Calling, being called unto this, and sufficiently gifted
for it: let this be observed against the practice of some, who would be
accounted preachers, and yet are not gifted, nor called, nor persuaded to leave
off their other Callings. This of fishing is an apt Metaphor. The world is the
sea, unsettled, tumultuous: the Church is the Boat, continually tossed with
waves. The fishes are men, which devour one another in the sea. The word of God
is the net which takes hold of all sorts of men. Ministers are fishers, whose
work is toylsome, yet various and delightsome: Sometimes preparing, sometimes
casting the net, sometimes drawing it. Some count preaching no labor, or toil,
and so rashly venture upon it, but these are like some idle companions, that
ever and anon go a fishing in fair weather for an hour or two: Will ye call
such fishermen? No: Fishers are such as make it their work night and day, wet
and dry.

2. When our Savior saw one sick of the Palsy, Morbus est corruption totius
entis.
he spiritualized his sickness, by considering sin under the notion of
sickness, Matthew. 9.2. Sin is the sickness of the soul, and pardon the health of
it. The fall of our first-parents did wound us, and that wound is putrified:
from thence is the r^^ of all manner of distempers within us: and every
sickness may put us in mind of this.

3. When he was at Jacob's well, he spiritualized that water by discoursing of
the water of life, John 4.10. The grace of God being of a cleansing, cooling,
and quenching nature like water, which runs through several channels, till it
be swallowed up in the Ocean.

4. When his Disciples prayed him to eat, he spiritualized those words by
making his father's work his meat, John 4.31, 34. He took as much delight in
obeying the will of God, as any do in eating their meat when they are hungry.

5. When there was talking of harvest, he spiritualized it by discoursing of
the harvest for conversion of souls, John 4.35. The harvest of the seed sown by
the Prophets, appearing as ripe fruit in the conversion of souls by the
Apostles.

6. When he and his Disciples viewed the Temple, he spiritualized that sight by
discoursing of the Temple's and the world's destruction, Matthew. 24.2. The
Temple was set on fire by Titus his souldides, but the industry of man could
not quench it. Titus would have preserved the Temple, as one of the worlds
wonders. Thus all the world will be in a flame, and irresistibly burnt one day.

CHAP. III.
Quest. HOw may we spiritualize earthly things?

Resp. 1. In our Meditation: and that in a representative manner, by way of
resemblance. Behold the Husbandman, etc. Jam. 5.7. that is, with the eyes of
your understanding: Consider how he waits for the harvest. Is the harvest
precious to husbandmen, and should not the coming of Christ be much more
precious to Christians? does he toil for the Corn at harvest, and should we
think much to be at any cost and pains till we come to the reward in Heaven?

2. In our Affection: even in an exulting manner, rejoicing in God above, by
the things we receive from him here below. The mercies which we daily receive,
should more endear our souls to the God of mercies, 1 Samuel 2.1. Psalm. 116.1.
remembering and prizing the giver for the gifts-sake.

3. In our Communication: and that in an argumentative manner, discoursing of
the providence of God, from what we see here below. Thus Job reasons out the
case with his wife, to clear God's uprightness in his saddest dispensations,
Job 2.10. afterward he reasons with his friends to clear his own integrity
under those divine dispensations.

4. In our Conversation: and that in an exemplary manner, leading stricter and
holier lives from the consideration of those temporal mercies, whereby our
lives are maintained, Ezr. 9.13, 14. if God renew our lives, should not we
renew our obedience?

The reasons why we should thus spiritualize earthly things are these.

Reas. 1. God has appointed all things here below to raise us up unto him who
is above, Job 12.7. creatures are glasses to represent the Creator. Seculum
Speculum.
They have a teaching voice, they read us Divinity-Lectures of God's
providence. The world below is as a glass, wherein we may see the world above:
they who cannot read other books, may read the Volume of the creatures: here
they may run and read. This is the plow-mans Alphabet, the Sheepherds Calendar,
the Travelers Perspective. The least creature has some lively resemblance of
the great God.

2. This is the way to have always an heaven upon the earth, which we should
aspire after, Psalm. 73.25. It Is said of two worthy Divines, the one reconciled
heaven and earth, Mr. Ball, Mr. Dod.
because worldly occasions did not distract him in heavens way. The other
turned earth into heaven by a spiritual improvement of all earthly affairs.

CHAP. IV.
Use 1. HErein ye may see a main difference between the children of this world
and the children of God. The children of this world are like little children,
who finding a picture in a book, do graze upon, and make sport with it, but
consider not who it is: but God's children are like those men who examine the
story the picture represents: they will pick some farther matter out, than
that which is represented to the eye.

Here we may also see, how far they are from spiritualizing earthly enjoyments,
who abuse them unto wickedness, not acknowledging from whence they come, but
using them contrary to the honor of the true owner of them, Hos. 2.5. This is
fighting against God with his own weapons, heaping sins against him, while he
heaps kindnesses upon them. Great ing^a^i^ude!

Use 2. Take this by way of caution: our spiritualizing earthly things is not
the same with God's spiritualizing us. When he spiritualizeth us, he changes
our natures, turning our sinful qualities into spiritual, pulling down one
frame, and setting up another, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. But when we spiritualize the
creature, we do not change the nature of it, we only make use of it unto such
spiritual ends.

Moreover, though true Christians do spiritualize earthly things, yet there be
those who are called Christians, that carnalize spiritual things, who conceive
of heavenly things with g^oss and carnal thoughts, because they are represented
under earthly terms and figures. Solomon's song has been abused by many this
way. Some are so drowned in natura naturata, that they do not think of natura
naturans.

Use 3. Let us all be exhorted to the practice of this truth.

1. Let us spiritualize earthly possessions: Make use of the goods ye possess
unto those high and noble ends, as everlastingly to be advantaged by them, Luke
16.9. Testify your faith by your works, Rebus n^n me trado, sed commodo. Sen.
and your works by the distribution of your goods: look upon your houses ye
dwell in, but as houses of clay, and think of the eternal mansions, John 14.2.
Our hearts should not be upon our Estates: an heart surcharged with the cares
of this life, is like a foul stomach, which unless it be emptied by a Vomit, it
fills the body with noisome diseases.

2. Let us spiritualize earthly callings: God made none to be idle. Whiles ye
are diligent in any particular calling, spiritualize that in giving all
diligence about the calling of Christianity, 2 Pet. 1.10. Trade and traffic
for heaven, Phil. 3.20. Let says be your factor into that far Country, (...).
and that is the way to gain the Pearl of great price.

3. Let us spiritualize earthly relations, being weaned from those we do enjoy,
1 Cor. 7.29. And being raised by the same to think of that relation between
Christ and the soul, Uxori nubere nolo meae.
or Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5.30.

4. Let us spiritualize earthly affections, 1 Cor. 7.30. When the affections of
joy or sorrow are running, see that they run in the right channel; your joy for
Christ, your sorrow for sin.

5. Let us spiritualize earthly afflictions, looking upon them as trials, 1
Pet. 1.6, 7. They are trials both of corruption and grace, for the consuming of
the one, for the refining of the other. Let afflictions make you more serious
to look into your ways, more conscientious to look after your ways.

6. Let us spiritualize earthly delights: When ye see your Field or Garden
bravely decked, remember they are gone in an instant, Jam. 1.11. Set your
hearts on comforts of a lasting nature. Heaven is set forth by all those
expressions of delight which we are taken with upon the earth, as a City, a
Country, a Kingdom, an Inheritance, Rest, our Fathers house, Abraham's bosom.
Some delight in the City, others in the Country, some delight in Honor, others
in Pleasure and Prosit.

7. Let us spiritualize earthly deliverances: Is it such a mercy to be freed
from trouble, from sickness, from war, then what a mercy is it to be freed from
hell? How much are we bound to bless God for Christ, who is Jesus that
delivers us from wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10?

8. Let us spiritualize earthly dominions: Is it an honor to be Head Governor
of a Town, or Ruler of a Nation? what will it then be to be Judges of the
world? and such honor shall all the Saints have, 1 Cor. 6.2. As Christians
should not disdain those below them, so they need not envy those above them.

To direct you therein use these means.
1. Look that ye have a spiritual mind: As the eye is the light of the whole
body, so is the mind of the whole man, Matthew. 6.22. An impure mind is like mud
water, but a pure mind is like clear water, whereby other things look clear.

2. Maintain spiritual converse and society, where ye may hear spiritual
discourse, Heb. 10.25. Holy Conferences, wherein Christian experiences are
related, are great advantages unto this.

To move you hereunto Consider.
Mot. 1. If you do but enjoy the bare use of earthly things, you live not only
beneath Christians, but beneath men. The very beasts have creatures as the
objects of their senses, and that in an exquisite manner.

2. Those that now turn earth into heaven in the spiritualizing of earthly
things, they shall one day be translated from earth to heaven, to the enjoyment
of eternal things, 2 Cor. 4.18. 2 Cor. 5.1. This spiritualizing earth, does
likewise make way for the familiarizing of death.

CHAP. V. Then said be unto him, etc.
THis [Then] relates to that [When] in the former verse, where we have the
immediate occasion of this Parable. One of the guests being somewhat affected
with our Savior's Table-discourse, speaks thus by way of admiration, Blessed
is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God. This eating of bread may be
taken in the same sense, in which drinking of wine is taken, Matthew. 26.29. The
phrases do import the enjoyment of eternal goods both for necessity and delight
in heaven, which goods are figured or shadowed out by corporal eating and
drinking. But our Savior in his answer here, takes that man off, and us in
him, from a general admiration of their happiness in heaven, to a particular
application of the means conducing to that happiness, even the receiv^ng the
grace of the Gospel, which seems to be the drift and design of this Parable.
They that would eat bread, or enjoy fellow-ship with God in heaven, must first
eat bread, or partake of the Gospel-provision here on earth. Hence I observe:

Sect. 1.
Observe. That the way to enjoy the eternal good things in the kingdom of glory,
is to close with the spiritual good things in the kingdom of grace, 2 Pet. 1.3.

Quest. What? are those eternal good things in heaven represented under eating
and drinking?

Resp. 1. Most intimate and immediate union with God: Eating and drinking
implys the inmost uniting of the body and meat together. The pious soul does
fully possess God in heaven. Here we are (as it were) absent from the Lord, but
there we are present with him, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. Not but that now Saints do truly
enjoy God, but then more intimately and fully: We are now under his influence,
dominion, and blessing, but then we shall always be before his face. Now Saints
are (as it were) in the Suburbs of heaven, then they shall be in the City: now
in the Gallery, then in the Presence Chamber. There is great difference between
abiding in the Presence Chamber of a Prince, and abiding within his dominion,
though under his protection, and related to him as a servant.

2. It denotes the abundant supply of all wants: Eating and drinking implys
the supply of necessity, the maintaining of life. Here we are at continual
reparations: in heaven we shall not want any thing, there is a full table: our
present imperfections in our graces will then be made up, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10. And
all our inabilities in our duties will be happily supplied. Now we have all the
parts of the new man, but then we shall have the perfect stature of the new
man, Ephesians. 4.13. There is a great difference between the rough draught, and
perfect draught of a Picture: Now we have the lineaments and feature, but then
we shall have the most exquisite complexion and favor of the new creature.

3. The full and familiar enjoyment of good company: Eating and drinking
together implys good fellowship. There is excellent good company in heaven, and
enough of it, Heb. 12.22, 23. Then Saints will not be strange one to another,
nor shy of each other, as here full often they are.

4. Complete satisfaction in the fruition of all contents and delights: Eating
and drinking is for delight and merriment, as well as for necessity. There is
feasting in eating: heaven will be a continual feast, and yet the stomach not
cloyed, Psalm. 16.11. Our hungring and thirsting will be turned into
satisfaction, when our seeking God will be turned into our seeing of God.

Sect. 2.
Quest. 2. What are those spiritual good things which we are to close with in
the kingdom of grace, represented under eating and drinking?

Resp. 1. Spiritual privileges, which are provided for us in the grace of the
Gospel, Isa. 55.1. Zech. 13.1. As reconciliation, Adoption, Remission,
Sanct^fication, Vocation, Salvation. Tabula post naufragium.
This Gospel-provision is the plank after the shipwreck, or the Ark in the
midst of the deluge. There is no escaping destruction, or obtaining salvation
but this way.

2. Spiritual ordinances for the conveying of spiritual privileges, and
ensuring them: As preaching of the Gospel, administration of the Seals of the
Covenant to them that embrace the Covenant. In the Sacraments Christian
Religion is taught (as it were) by Emblems and Hieroglyphics. This latter
ordinance is God's ensuring office to confirm his people in the faith. These
ordinances are the Wells of salvation, Isa. 12.3. And Gospel Grace is the
fountain of salvation.

3. Spiritual graces for the improvement of spiritual ordinances: These are the
more immediate work of the spirit, and so called the fruit of the spirit, G^l.
5.22. These be the clusters of Grapes to make us in love with the Holy Land,
notwithstanding all the opposition we meet with in heaven's way: this fruit
grows no where but in Christ's Garden, Cant. 4.12. And the Vine which bears
those Grapes is himself, John 15.1. Interest makes for influence, and so it
comes to pass, that Saints bear this (...).

4. Spiritual duties for the expressing spiritual graces: As praying, hearing,
exhorting one another, Jude v. 20. And as Christ is given for glory and
happiness, so he is given for grace, and likewise for duty, Phil. 4.^3. And
hereby he is shown to be Mediator of Redemption and Intercession too.

Sect. 3.
Quest. 3. How are we to close with these spiritual good things?

Resp. 1. We are to receive them by faith, embracing the grace of the Gospel,
John 1.^2. This is (as it were) the touching of the ^em of Christ's Garment.
Believing is that particular application of Christ, which is represented by
eating, John 6.53. This cau^eth a sweet savor and relish in the heart.

2. We are to walk as we have received Christ, Col. 2. viz. by leading an holy
life, by virtue drawn from him through our union with him: giving the world a
proof in our holy life of the virtue in Christ's death, for the rectifying our
crooked nature. So much as we have received of the knowledge of Christ, so much
we are to testify of obedience unto Christ.

The reason why we must close with spiritual good things, if we would enjoy
eternal, is

Because the one is part of the other: Saints in heaven, and Saints upon earth
make up but one family, Ephesians. 3.15. It Is but one building, one house: and it is
so contrived, that we must go through one room into the other. Grace is the
beginning of glory; some compare it to the golden chain in Homer, whose top was
fastened to the Chair of Jupiter, grace will reach glory, and it must precede
glory.

CHAP. VI.
Use 1. THis informs us. 1. That it is good for man now to draw near to God,
Psalm. 73.28. It tends to his everlasting happiness. It Is good to have our faces
Sion-ward, and to walk that way, that we may see the face of God with
perfection in Sion. Upon this consideration we should be always renewing our
accesses to God, and to maintain such communion is the work of a Christian
conversation; the Lord is nigh unto all such as thus draw nigh unto him, Psalm.
145.18. 2. See their vanity who draw back from God, Peccata elongant nos
voluntate, non loco.
or bid God depart from them when he comes near them in the means of grace
vouchsafed to them, Psalm. 73.27. Job 21.14. Sin divides between God and the
soul, Isa. 59.2. Sin makes men afraid of God's presence. Guilt cannot endure
the thoughts of a Judge; when our Savior would resemble our apostatized nature
in a Parable, he does it by a prodigal's going into a far Country, Luke 15.14.
Thus men naturally and voluntarily oppose the kingdom of grace, and what is
this but to exclude themselves from the kingdom of glory? for they who now bid
God depart from them as obstinate creatures, God will one day bid them depart
from him as cursed creatures.

Use 2. Yet this does not make, but many may partake of Gospel-mercies in the
kingdom of grace, and yet never come to glory. Nay, the higher their
privileges have been, the greater their damnation may be, Ingentia beneficia^,
flagilia, supplicia.
if they abuse those privileges, Mat. 11.22. Men are therefore the worse,
because they had the advantage to be better. If Turks and Indians shall be
damned, surely prop^ane and hypocritical Englishmen shall be double damned.
Infidelity is a worse sin than Sodomy, because it refuses the remedy provided
for all sin.

CHAP. VII.
Use 3. WOuld you come into the kingdom of glory, then be exhorted.

1. To come into the kingdom of grace, subject your selves to that kingdom of
heaven which God has erected here upon earth in the dispensation of the
Gospel: we may try our selves herein by those several resemblances, whereby our
Savior sets forth the nature of this kingdom.

1. It Is compared to good seed, In pretio, in promisso, in p^imitiis.
Matthew. 13.24. Which is operative, and brings forth fruit like it self. It is
called the kingdom of heaven in the price, promise, and first fruits. That
spiritual principle which is called the seed of God, makes us like to God, and
tends to the full fruition of God in the other world.

2. It Is like unto a grain of Mustard seed, Nusquam magis tota natura quam in
minimis.
which though a small grain, produces a great Tree, ver. 31. Thus the word of
this kingdom, though little at first in appearance, it produces great effects.

3. It is like unto Leaven, ver. 33. Which soon d^ffuseth it self into the
whole lump. All the faculties of the soul partake of the power of grace, where
it is implanted in truth.

4. It Is like unto a Treasure, ver. 44. (...).
Which is an heap of precious things laid up for future use. The word of this
kingdom is hid within the heart, both the word of precept, of promise and
threats: all which kinds, and all the particulars under them, are of special
use for the well ordering of our conversation.

5. It Is like unto one Pearl of great price, ver. 46. Christ alone as held
forth in the Gospel, and bearing sway within the heart, is more to be prized
than all things else.

6. It is like unto a Net, ver. 47. St. Basil comparing the Gospel to a Net,
make's hope to be the Cork, which keeps it always above water, and fear to be
the lead which sinketh it.

2. Live as under the Laws of this kingdom of grace.

1. Perform allegiance unto God; yield your selves unto him, Romans 6.13. Princes
do claim tribute and homage, and the persons of the subjects (as occasion
serves) are to be at their service: may not God do the like?

2. Expect protection from God, draw nigh to him, Jam. 4.8. Put your selves
under his wings, to live under divine influence. Spirits may have converse with
one another, though at a distance: Thus our souls may have communion with our
father which is in heaven. Here put forth an act of faith, to cast your selves
upon God; and an act of fear to keep you in aw of God, that ye may be sincere
in his presence. Loose an^ regardless persons are far from God, walk before me
and be upright, Genesis 17.1. Those that would sit down with Abraham in the
kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 8.11. Must now walk with Abraham as before the Lord.

3. Pray that the Territories of this kingdom of grace may be enlarged more and
more upon the face of the earth, Matthew. 6.10. That saving health may be made
known among all Nations.

4. Prepare for the translation of the kingdom of grace into the kingdom of
glory, when this mediatory kingdom shall cease, and God shall be all in all, 1
Cor. 15.24, 28. When Christ shall reign without Adversaries, and without
outward means and ordinances: so live, that ye may be able to say in truth of
heart, come Lord Jesus, Rev, 22.20.

SERMON. II.
Luke 14.16. Then said he unto him, A certain man, etc.
CHAP. I.
YOu have heard of the occasion of these words both remote and immediate: (...)
collatio, comparatio, qua res diversae ostenduntur in aliquo esse similes.
we are now to enquire concerning the form of them, and that is parabolical:
this form of speech is frequent in Scripture, whence I observe:

Observe. It was our Savior's usual manner when he was upon the earth to speak
in Parables, Matthew. 13.18, 24, 31, 33.

A Parable is an artificial framing of some thing in manner of an History,
Parab^la est r^rum, sive veraru^, sive verisimilium, ad a^iud significan dum
apposita and artisiciosa narratio.
by way of comparison, to illustrate something else. The substance o^ these
words is set down by several Authors, cited by Salmeron, Hierom, ^lemens
A^exandrinu^, and others. Yet the word [Parable] in Scripture-sense is d^versly
taken; As

1. For a Type, Heb. 9.9. (...), etc. The exemplar of something which in due
time was really to exist. The ceremonial service, which figured and shadowed
out Christ coming in the flesh, and entering into glory, is there called a
Parable.

2. For a similitude: Thus Isaac's deliverance from death after God's
probational precept, and Abraham's intenti^nal act to put him to death, was a
Parable, Heb. 11.19. A Figure, Similitude, or Representation of the
Resurrection, (...).

3. For a Proverb; a common speech taken up in any Country, whereby a plain
truth is spoken in figurative terms, Luk^ 4.23. A^ages are witty and summary
sentences, (...).

4. For ^n excellent and mysteri^us saying, Psalm. 49.4. Yet the former
description is the proper meaning of a Parable, according to the tenor of this
Parable we have in hand, and others. Those Divine truths which are most
necessary to be known, Christ spoke in Parables: As

1. The Apostasy of man by nature. This is shown in the Parable of the Prodigal
son, going into a far Country, Luke 15.13. And wasting his whole substance with
riotous living, not caring to save any p^r^: we are utterly undone, we have
nothing lest that good is.

2. The recovery of man by the provision of the Gospel: This is shown in our
present Parable, ver. 23. God is willing that the many mansions in heaven
should be filled up with the many fallen creatures upon the earth, closing with
that grace which he ten^ers to them.

3. God has his several times to call men, and the outward and inward call ^o
not always go together. This is shown in that Parable of the H^u^holder going
out to hire laborers into his Vineyard, Matthew. 20. Thus many are outwardly
called, few are inwardly called, or truly chosen, ver. 16. Chrysostom in one of
his Sermons tells the people of Antioch, that though there were many thousands
in that City, yet he could scarce think one hundred of them could be saved in
that condition wherein they were, such villainy was in their youth, such sloth
in the old men, and so he goes on.

4. As among hearers there are few good, so among those that are good, some are
more fruitful than others. This is shown in the Parable of the seed, Matthew.
13.23. Every man cannot excel: we should not be discouraged if we come short of
others. These are truths necessary to be known, there are likewise truths
necessary to be done, contained in Parables: As

1. The necessity of joining says unto the outward participat on of any
spiritual ordinance. This is shown in the Parable of the Wedding feast. What a
sad case was that man in, (...).
who had not a Wedding Garment, Mat. 22.12, 13. He was as it were muzzeled and
hampered, and haltered up: He had as it were a gag in his mouth, and an halter
about his neck, for not having a Wedding Garment upon his back.

2. The necessity of showing mercy, and extending charity to all sorts of
people, even to our enemies. This is shown in the Parable of the Samaritan
relieving the Jew, though his enemy, Luke 10.30, 37. Any one in want is our
neighbor for relief.

3. The necessity of improving all those gifts which God entrusteth us with.
This is shown in the Parable of the talents, Matthew. 25.14. And though we cannot
do so much as some others, yet let us do what we can in our places, and God
will accept us.

4. The necessity of continual watching against Christ's coming. This is shown
in the Parable of the ten Virgins, Matthew. 25.13. For as we know not when he
will come to appear in glory, so neither do we know, when he will come to
summon us by death to appear before him.

CHAP. II.
THe Reasons why Christ spoke thus in Parables are these.

Reas. 1. He did it in a way of judgment unto wicked and obstinate men.

1. For their obduration: Parables being Riddles to them, he veiled the
amiableness of those truths from the eyes of their understandings which they
profanely neglected and derided, Matthew. 13.13, 14, 15. Their wilful blindness
and stubbornness, deserves this judiciary blindness and hardness.

2. For their conviction, and self-condemnation: So this makes for the clearing
of God's justice in those judgments which he inflicteth upon the contemners of
grace. This is observable in the Jews, in that Parable of the Vineyard, where
they condemn themselves in the third person, saying, He will miserably destroy
those wicked men, and let the Vineyard out to others, Matthew. 21.41. Though when
they perceived the Parable touched themselves, they thought this judgment hard,
and cried, God forbid, Luke 20.16.

Object. But how can one and the same way darken, and clear truth?

Resp. Integra parabola rem tegit and clandit, fracta autem and explicatae rem
aperit. Salmer.
I answer, the bare propounding of a Parable may darken the truth, but the
opening of a Parable clears it. And this advantage Christ's Disciples had,
Mark 4.11. A Parable not interpreted and explained, is like to a Picture with a
Curtain before it, but the Curtam is drawn away in the Interpretation.

CHAP. III.
Use 1. THis informs us of the excellent manner of Christ's delivering
spiritual truths. Parables and Proverbs are mysterious, Prove. 1.3, 4, 5. There
is much in a little; the Scriptures are both hidden and plain, deep and
shallow. The Elephant may swim, and the Lamb wade. A Learned man observes,
that the Scriptures are so written, that the weakest capacities, (if willing
and desirous) may know them, and the most reaching heads (when captious) may
stumble and break their necks.

This informs us like wise of Christ's goodness to mankind in his manner of
propounding of divine truth: For

1. Instruction by Parables is that way, wherewith both Jews and Gentiles were
acquainted. Thus our Savior brought heavenly truths to Jews and Gentiles in
their own language, in that way they had been most used to. The Jews were
acquainted with Parables, as appears Psalm. 78.2. And all sorts of the
Gentiles were instructed this way. The Grecians, as appears by Xenophon,
Plato, Pythagoras, Demosthenes, who abounded in Paraples: Likewise the
Egyptians, as is evident in their Hieroglyphical Learning, brought in by
Mercurius Tresmegistus. They described a year by a snake turning it is tail into
it is mouth. Annus vertitur in se. Familiare est Syris, and maxim Palaestinis
ad omnem Sermonem parabolas jungere. Hieronym.
They described God by an eye joined with a staff, signifying he was
all-seeing, and Almighty. They described a King by a Be, having honey and a
sting, thereby signifying clemency and justice, two Princely properties: Mercy
and Judgment should meet together upon the Throne.

2. Instruction by Parables is a way very advantageous for man: For

1. Parables are presented to the senses, and so the ready and plain way to
convey a truth to the understanding. By that which we are acquainted with, we
easily receive somewhat of the nature of a spiritual truth. Similitudes teach
clearly and plainly, Jam. 3.3, 4, It Is a familiar way whereby knowledge
insinuates it self into us. Similitudes work sooner upon weak capacities, than
sylogisms do.

2. Parables help the Memory. Being taken from things obvious to the senses,
they make the greater impression upon the Memory. This appears by the help
which we have in a local memory. Species intelligibiles sensibilibus speciebus
affixae, tenacius harent memoriae.
Several Pearls or Jewels are kept more safely when they are hung upon a
string. A Parable is as such a string containing many precious truths.

3. Parables quicken the affections and spirits of men. They kindle a desire
after, and delight in knowledge, Matthew. 13.36. Demosthenes quickened and rouzed
up the Athenians by a Parable: when Philip, King of Macedon used this stratagem
to betray them, desiring them, that if they would not grant his request in
other things, yet that they would grant him this, to give up some certain chief
ones among them, that did so declaim against him. That Orator used this
Apologue. There was an irreconcilable hatred between the Wolves and the Sheep:
the Wolves at length sent to the sheepherds, that they were willing to be at
peace, upon this condition that they would deliver up into their hands all
their Dogs. Upon this Parable the Athenians were kept from Philips
circumvention; they apprehended the danger of the motion, and so would not
entertain it.

4. Parables convince the judgment: David gave a just verdict against himself,
when the case was propounded in a Parable, 2 Samuel 12.5. Parables are heard
without prejudice, when downright expressions sometimes exasperate.

CHAP. IV.
Use 2. THough Christ did speak Parables often (that is feigned, or invented)
yet he never spoke a lie, or a false thing. St. Augustine tells us, that every
thing that is feigned is not a lie, Non omne quod fingimus est m^nda^ium, sed
quando id fingimus, quod nihil significat. August.
but that which is feigned without significancy: As for Parables they are
invented for their significancy, and moral, and with no intent to deceive.

Use 3. Take heed of abusing Christ's Parables by straining them too much: This
is as wringing the nose till blood comes out, Prove. 30.31. Instances may be
given out of Popish comments, as in that of the Traveller betwixt Jerusalem and
Jericho. They understand it of Adam surprised by the Devil, and make use of his
being half dead, to prove that Adam was not utterly spoiled of all his first
excellencies. Then as by the two pence given to the Host, they understand the
two Books of the Old and New Testaments, committed to the Church for the
restoring of decayed man, so by the phrase [Whatsoever may be laid out more.]
They will have to be meant unwritten verities, and Ecclesiastical Traditions.
No parabolical Text must be interpreted against a plain Text: There is a plain
Text against this Interpretation, Ephesians. 2.1.

Here advice and Counsel is necessary:
1. Consider the nature of a Parable, how it differs from other forms of
speech: As

1. It differs from an history, for that is a narration of a thing done;
Historia est narratio rei gestae.
as the story of our Savior and his Apostles, Luke 1.1. Acts 1.1. But a
Parable is of a thing invented.

2. It differs from an example; Exemplum est pars historiae.
for examples are real instances to illustrate and confirm truth, Job 5.10, 11.
But Parables are but imaginary instances.

3. It differs from a metaphor, Metaphora est translatio vocabuli.
which consists only in the borrowed signification of a word: as mourning
borrowed from men, and applied unto ways. The ways of Sion do mourn, Lam. 1.4.
Treasure borrowed from money, and applied to wrath, Romans 2.5. But a Parable is
a story borrowed.

4. It differs from an Alleg^ry, Allegoria est continuata metaphora.
which has it is foundation in a true story, and from thence taken to signify
something else, G^^. 4.24. But a Parable is founded upon supposition.

2. Make a right use of Christ's Parables: They are mysteries and depths which
the world is unacquainted with. Therefore

1. Be humble in admiring them because of their excellency. On the fullness that
is in Scripture! Oh the riches that are contained in these golden Mines!

2. Be diligent in searching them because of their difficulty: Christ's
Disciples were careful to ask him the meaning of Parables.

3. Be faithful in applying them because of their utility. And here observe
what our Savior does often add unto his Parables, as Matthew. 25.13, 31. Which
give light to the Parable; stick not at the Letter of a Parable, but mind the
scope of it: Let Parables as much affect you, as if they were real Histories.

CHAP. V. A certain man made a Great Supper, etc.
Sect. 1.
HAving heard the occasion and form, we are now to consider the matter of these
words: and that which in order falls under our consideration in the first
place, is the Master of the Feast, who is here called A certain man.] But who
this certain man is, Deus benign and humaniter invitans. Marlor. Verbum
incarnatum Christus Deus and Homo. Gloss. Ordinar.
I find several Authors rather to have several expressions than several
opinions. Some say thus, God rich in mercy, so our English Annotations.
Marlorat says, God courteously inviting after the manner of men. Salmeron
says, the merciful father, who as he is just, he is called a Lion, but as he
is kind and bountiful, so he is called a Man: and he adds a reason for the
additional word [Certain] because he was not as yet so clearly known unto the
world. The ordinary gloss says, Christ God-man: and this sense agrees too
with the last words of the Parable, ver. 24. And it does not contradict the
former. I will take in the substance of all these expressions in one Doctrinal
observation, as the fullest meaning of the words.

Obser. Christ God-man, or God in Christ is a bountiful Benefactor unto man, 2
Cor. 5.19. God in Christ is here called a Man.

1. By way of resemblance. Those properties of any worths appearing in man, or
spoken of man, being more eminently in God: As

1. (...). Homer. A^ma, virumque cano. Virgil. Triumviri Decemviri.
Sovereignty: [Man] in Scripture is put for a man in Authority, one fit to
Rule, or chief in Government, Genesis 43.13. Carry a Present to the man, that is,
to the Governor of the Country. In this sense the Graecians used the word
[Man] Likewise the Magistrates among the Romans were called by the name of Men;
whether more or fewer in Authority together, as if they were the only men. And
this sense suits well with our Text, as appears by that Parable, Mat. 22: the
same in substance with this, where the Master of the Feast is called a certain
King, v. 2. Which word denotes Sovereignty. God is elsewhere in Parables
called a certain noble man, and a certain rich man, Luke 16.1. Luke 19.12.
Matthew. 25.14. It speaks that way of Authority and Dignity wherein man is saved.

2. Pity: the word [Man] is used in opposition to the word [Lion] Tiger, or
Wolf. And it denotes the more pity, when the Relative word [Father] is added
to man. Thus God pities us, and spares us as a man, Mal. 3.17. And bestows
good things upon us with tender affection. Thus he draws us with cords of a
man, and with bands of love, Hos. 11.4. A phrase taken from Cattle bred up to
draw or carry, which by a wise Master are used gently, and brought to their
labor without any violence.

3. Rationality: The word [Man] is put for one who is rational and
understanding, Ezekiel. 1.5, 10. The invitation of God to sinners in the Gospel is
full of reason: he deals like a man with us; not only propounding truth, but
adding several arguments to persuade us, convincing us of the equality and
rationality of his ways, Isa. 1.8.

Sect. 2.
II. By way of Reality.

1. In respect of Christ, by whom this Gospel-provision is, wherein God shows
himself such a Benefactor. Thus Christ who is God, is really a man. There is in
him 1. The blood of a man.] Shedding of blood there must be, for without it
there is no remission, Heb. 9.22. The blood of bruit creatures could not wash
away the blots of reasonable creatures: wherefore Christ took our nature, that
he might have our blood to shed for our sin, Heb. 10.4, 5, 10. There is an
Emphasis put upon Christ as man, in the great business of man's salvation, 1 Timothy 2.5. The remedy carrying in it a sutableness to the malady: the sufferings
of a man to expiate the sin of man. 2. The bowels of a man, Phil. 1.8.] Which
bowels he fally expressed when he was upon the earth, Matthew. 12.18, 19, 20. As
he discovered much understanding, so likewise much affection in the work of
grace toward the children of men: coming in judgment to convince men, and
without violence or boisterousness, setting his steps with such heedfulness, as
not to tread on a broken reed, and avoiding that rushing motion, Manet
compassio cum impassibilitate.
as might easily quench smoking Flax. Moreover he retains these bowels now
he is in heaven, and has a fellow-feeling of his peoples miseries, Act. 9.4.
Though now he be freed from that state of frailty, exposed to passibility and
mortality, yet still he retains his wonted pity. 3. The familiarity of man.]
Man is a sociable and familiar creature. Christ became man, that he might be a
merciful High Priest, Heb. 2.17. Not that his becoming man made him more
merciful, as though the mercies of a man were more than the mercies of God, but
because by this means mercy is conveyed more sutably and samiliarly to man.

Sect. 3.
2. In respect of man for whom this Gospel-provision is, wherein God shows
himself such a Benefactor. The grace of the Gospel is called the kindness and
love of God our Savior toward man, Tit. 3.4. And that 1. By way of
distinction from other creatures in general; which works of creation partake of
common preservation, but man partakes of special salvation, Psalm. 8.4. There is
a way for man to be far better hereafter than here. 2. By way of opposition
unto fallen Angels in particular. They are reserved in everlasting chains.
God's goodness is more manifest to men than to Angels. The Angels, though
golden vessels, yet having contracted rust, were broken in pieces: but man,
though an earthen vessel (when soiled) was cleansed again.

3. In respect of the Ministers of the Gospel, through whose hands this
Gospel-provision is distributed. Every such Scribe is like unto a man that is
an Householder, which brings forth of his treasure things both new and old,
(...), extendit, copiose and alacriter, extends plentifully and cheerfully,
Matthew. 13.52.

Quest. Why is God in Christ here called a Certain man?

Resp. 1. This word is of an indefinite term: and so it may denote the extent
of the Gospel; the grace of God offered in the Gospel, belonging to one man as
well as to another, Isa. 55.1.

2. This word is an obscure word, and so it may denote the mysteriousness of
the Gospel: The manifestation of which in a saving manner is only to the
Saints, Col. 1.26. The other only hear of one Jesus.

CHAP. VI.
Use 1. THis informs us of the condescension of God; that he should be pleased
to take our name to himself, and in his Son to take our nature to himself, Luke
20.9. Heb. 2.16. He assumed it, apprehended, caught, laid hold on it, as Christ
did on Peter, (...).
as the Angel did on Let; as men use to do on a thing they are glad they have
gotten, and are loath to let go again. That God thus comes down to us in our
nature, and in our language, a great help it is to our faith.

It informs us also of the advancement of man: That Christ, God-man, should be
such a Benefactor to ^^an. (...)
Here we may say, what is man, that thou should magnify him! Job 17.7? Man
magnifies God by declaring his greatness, Luke 10.46. God magnifies man by
making him great, (...)
by giving him some real addidition of worth and respect.

Man is magnified in the work of creation, Magnus quantitate, vel qualitate,
annis honor, existimatione, authoritate.
Psalm. 8.4. God created man in his own image, to be Lord of the rest of the
creatures. Man is magnified in the work of Redemption. Man by his fall had laid
himself low; but how is he magnified when God himself became man to recover
man? Heb. 2.16, 17. Man is also magnifyed in the work of Regeneration, being
made partaker of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Endued with all those gracious
qualities, which are true resemblances of God's most glorious essence.
Moreover, man is magnified in the work of glorification, advanced into the
highest heavens; made great with that accumulative happiness, which will admit
of no addition, by reason of its complete perfection. Christ sits at the right
hand of God, and Saints go when they die where he is, Heb. 12.2. 1 John 3.2.

Use 2. Let me give an use of Caution. Though here the word [Man] i^ used in a
magnifying sense, Homo homini lupus demon.
yet sometimes it is used in another sense, Hos. 11.9. Where God says, I will
not execute the fierceness of mine anger, for I am God, and not man. I am a
merciful and faithful God, not cruel, variable, nor changeable, like unto man.

Moreover, though God at sometimes appear like a man, yet at other times he
does appear like a Lion, Totum dilaniat, and usque ad cor in varia scindit
frusta. Zanch.
like a Leopard, like a Bear bereaved of her whelps, Hos. 13.7, 8. The Leopard
lurks privily to ensnare the Traveller, and the Bear comes greedily with open
mouth, renting the caul from the heart. This speaks the fierceness of anger,
and total destruction accrewing to men. Thus we see, as God is a bountiful
benefactor to penitent sinners, so he is a consuming fire to obstinate sinners.
It is dangerous to provoke him.

Finally, though God compare himself to man, and so encourage us to come to
(...) must we take heed of thinking him like (...) selves, and so take
encouragement to sin against him: as though God were altogether such a one as
any of us, a favourer, or abettor of sin, Psalm. 50.21. To imagine him a man who
cannot see the heart; this is like a child, a or fool, who shats his eyes, and
because he sees no body, he thinks no body sees him. Or to imagine God to be
such a one, as may be corrupted in the work of justice, or overpowered like
man: This were to turn the grace of God, and language of the Scripture into
wantonness and foolishness.

CHAP. VII.
Use 3. LOok upon God only figuratively as man, but look upon Christ really as
a man, made of the substance of a Woman, Gal. 4.4. This Mediator, the man
Christ Jesus, took upon him those three Noble and necessary Offices belonging
to the children of men, King, Priest, and Prophet. These things were shadowed
of old. Judicious Writers look upon that one man spoken of by Ezekiel, to be
this man, Ezekiel. 9.2. And there employed, 1. His Kingly Office in those words,
Among them] or in the midst of them, as a King and Commander. 2. His Priestly
Office, employed in his Linen clothing, used in holy vestures, 1 Samuel 2.18.
Pliny tells us, that the clothing of the Egyptian Priests was of Linen: and
it is thought they took the custom from the Jewish Priests, who were appointed
of God to wear such Garments, Exodus 28.42, 43. 3. His Prophetical Office,
shadowed out by the Ink-horn he had by his side. Prophets were to declare the
mind of God by speaking and writing.

Be further exhorted to hearken to this, O ye children of men. God as a certain
man calls unto you O men, and to you O sons of men, Prove. 8.4. To the higher
and meaner sort of people. The poor are Gospellized, says our Savior. Smyrna
was the poorest, but the best of the seven Churches. Well! Let all sorts of men
obey this call: Especially when we consider those relative words in Scripture
added to this word [man.] As 1. A King, Matthew. 22.1. Obey him as your lawful
Sovereign. 2. A Master, Ephesians. 6.9. That Master of whom the whole family in
heaven and earth is named. 3. A Father, The father of glory, Ephesians. 1.17. A
father that has a kingdom to bestow upon every one of his children. 4. An
Husband, 2 Cor. 11.2. Thus the Church of God is called the Lamb's wife, Rev.
19.7. Some Husbands are fierce like Lions, but Christ is gentle like a Lamb.
Let such loving terms whereby God is pleased to familiarize his mercy to you,
persuade you to close with it.

SERMON. III.
LUKE 14.16. A certain man made a Great Supper, etc.
CHAP. I.
HAving spoken of the Maker of the Feast: we are next to consider the feast
which is made, called here a Great Supper.] Some say, the Gospel with the
effects of it, is meant by this Great Supper. Others say, the grace of God in
Christ. The bread of life, say others. Eternal blessedness, say others. All
these terms amount to the same sense, including all spirituals and eternals for
the making up of man's welfare.

Quest. But why is this called by the name of a Supper?

Resp. Some answer thus, because it is the last refreshment manifest now in the
latter days toward the end of the world. And in respect of this supper they
will have the law of nature to be as a breakfast, and the law of Moses as a
dinner. But I suppose the meaning of the word may be best gathered from the
manners of people about their daily food. (...), q. (...), quod non tam sac^le
ut prandium ^are^ur: nam veter^m prandium parcius and f^ug^liu^ erat. Coen^
vero exquisitio^, and lautior, quum sinitis dici laboribus, genio hilarious and
before ind^lgevatur. Caen^, q. Kow^, quia antiquitu^ scorsim solebant prandere
Romani, coenare cum amicis. (...) and (...) permutantu^.


The two usual times of eating both to the Graecians, and Romans, and Jews, are
those we call dinner and supper: And their manner was to dine more sparingly,
and sup more liberally. And of old the Romans were wont to dine by themselves,
and to sup with their friends.

Hither likewise the Etymologies of the Greek and Latin words refer: yet must
we not stand too exactly to difference words that are akin: for dinner and
supper are put sometimes for one another. That which St. Luke here calls a
supper, St. Matthew calls a dinner, Matthew. 22.4. So that the meaning is, A
feast at any time of the day. The Epithet [Great] may well be adjoined, because
the provision is so plentiful for the recovery of lost man.

CHAP. II.
HEnce I shall observe this point of Doctrine.

Observe. That Gospel-provision for the good of souls is plentiful. It is
compared here and else where to a Great Supper. Herodotus tells us, the
Egyptians had their greatest Feasts, their Marriage feasts at supper. It is
also compared to a feast of fat things, delightfully refreshing the body with
Wines on the Lees well refined, Isa. 25.6.

Quest 1. What is this Gospel-provision for the good of souls?

Resp. It is the only way of man's salvation since the fall, begun in grace,
and swallowed up, or perfected in glory, revealed in the holy Scriptures by the
Prophets and Apostles, 1 Pet. 1.9, 10, 11, 12.

Quest. 2. How does the provision appear to be so plentiful? how does the feast
or supper appear to be so great?

Resp. 1. Look at the maker of this feast, it is the great God who is rich in
mercy, and great in love, Ephesians. 2.4, 5. Whose manifold wisdom has appeared in
the contrivance of this provision, Ephesians. 3.10. It Is as the feast of a King, and
that for the Marriage of a son, Matthew. 22.2. And no cost is spared at such
seasons. (...) and (...).
The ancients had not only feasts at their marriages, but feasts before and
after: they abounded in feasting about the time of marriage.

2. Look at the materials of this feast: That which is the food of the soul in
the first place is Christ himself, it is his body and blood which is the bread
of life, the food of our souls, John 60.51, 52. The Great God, and our Savior,
the eternal son of God. Moreover the sincere milk of the word is the food of
the soul, 1 Pet. 2.2. The word as it is God's institution, without the mixture
of man's traditions, nourishes the soul. More particularly the promises, which
are exceedingly great and precious, 2 Pet. 1.4. More especially, the work of
grace in the soul, whereby it delights it self in fatness, Isa. 5.5.2. And
that by a direct act, receiving the grace which God offers, justifying,
sanctifying, adopting, saving grace; then by a reflex act reviewing the grace
which is received, which more immediately tends to the comfort of the soul. Sum
up all this, here is solidity, plenty, variety; here is for necessity and
delight: for health and mirth; it is a great supper.

3. Look at the vessels at this feast: it adds to the greatness; of a feast
when it is served in Plate, Dishes, Cups, Flaggons, Candlesticks, and all in
Plate. The vessels of the Sanctury were of pure gold, Exodus 27. The vessels
wherein Gospel-provision is served, are ordinances. And what is said of one
ordinance [the prayers of Saints] may be said of all ordinances of Christ, that
they are golden vials full of odours. Rev. 5.8. Ordinances purely administered
according to their Primitive institution.

4. Look at the guests of this feast, such as sit down and feed on the food
provided: they are persons of great worth, such as obtain like precious faith
with the Apostles and Prophets, 2 Pet. 1.1. Who sit down with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, Matthew. 8.11. They are such as are clothed with the Righteousness of
Christ, Kings and Priests to the great God of heaven and earth.

5. Look at the attendance of this feast, the Ministers of the Gospel, able
Ministers of the new Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6. Who are the Ambassadors of God,
and Paranymphs of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19. These hand out this provision. The
Hebrew word for Ministry is (...) manus: per manum prophetoe.
They are inst^^cted of God to instruct others; endued with heavenly gifts,
Ephesians. 4.8. For the bringing souls in, and carrying souls on in the way of heaven.

6. Look at the place of this feast; that is called the mountain of God, Isa.
25.6. Else where called a great mountain, which excells all the mountains of
the world. This mountain is the Church of God, the pillar and ground of truth:
and it does appear, wheresoever the ordinances of God are in power and purity.

CHAP. III.
Use 1. THis informs us of God's great goodness, Psalm. 31.19. That he should
provide such spiritual store to supply our spiritual wants, and should set out
the nature of spiritual things by those sensible things which are most obvious
to us, wherewith we are most affected. This Gospel-provision is set forth in
Scripture by those things which are the objects of all our five senses: As 1.
It is compared to a pearl of great price, which is the object of seeing, Matthew.
13.46. Pearls and Diamonds seed the eye: Sacred truths are proper and pleasing
objects to the eyes of our understandings. 2. It is compared to a sound, to the
voice of harpers, Rev. 14.2. A melodious tune is the pleasant object of
hearing. Music delights a skilful ear. This Gospel-provision excells all
that the eye has seen, or the ear has heard, 1 Cor. 2.9. 3. It Is compared to
a garden full of fragrant flowers, and sweet spices, which is the object of
smelling, Cant. 5.1. The choicest fruits grow in gardens, but the wild grows on
the wast. Divine graces are only among Christians; moral virtues may grow among
Heathens. 4. It is compared unto a marriage, Rev. 19.7. which is the object of
touching. On how delightful are those spiritual and eternal embraces, which
Saints have and shall have in the arms of God's everlasting mercy! 5. It is
here, and in Matthew. 22. compared to a feast, which is the object of tasting
These sensible similitudes serve to convey holy truths with the more ease and
delight, and to tell us, how satisfactory grace and glory is to them whose
senses are exercised to discern both good and evil, Heb. 5.14.

This sets forth the greatness of man's wickedness in refusing the
Gospel-remedy. Ingentia beneficia, ingentia flagitia, ingentia supplicia.
The great providing it for us, and bringing it to us, shows that God he is
much more quick and peremptory in these days of grace, in rejecting men, says
Dr. Preston. The time is shorter, he will not wait so long as he was wont to do.

Use 2. But though the grace of God in the Gospel be great, Distributive quoad
genera singulorum, non collective quoad singula generum. Prideaux.
yet it is not universal, so as to set all persons equally in a state of
salvation, Romans 9.18. Where it is said, God will have all men to be saved, it
is meant distributively in respect of ranks and kinds of men, not collectively
in respect of the individual persons of men.

Use 3. Is there such plenty of Gospel-provision, then eat O friends, and drink
abundantly, Cant. 5.1. This eating is believing, John 6.53, 63, 64. The phrase
intimates, 1. That close union between the grace of God, and a believing soul,
as between the body and the meat which is eaten. 2. That special good which the
believer does receive by the grace of God, as the body by meat. David shows
what it is to taste that the Lord is good, when he presently adds, Blessed is
the man that trusts in him,] Psalm. 34.8. Give heedful attendance to the means
of grace, and yield conscionable obedience to the grace you hear of. We have
had plentiful means of grace, so that many have been in a strait by their
plenty, like guests at a full feast, Coena magna coena dubia.
that know not at which dish to reach. For this cause a great supper among the
Romans was called a doubtful supper: but take heed of wantonness under means of
grace. And consider, as the day of grace is great, so the day of judgment will
be great, when you shall be called to account for your abuse of Gospel Grace.

CHAP. IV.
Luke 14.16. -- And bad many.]
THese words show, Verbum (...) (unde fortasse Angl. Call) frequenter de
vocatione ad convivium dicitur, unde and apud latinos simpliciter vocare est
invit are ad mensam. Novar.
that the invitation is answerable to the provision forementioned. The Greek
word in the Text signifies to call, but it is most frequently used for such a
calling as is to a feast or banquet: therefore it is fitly translated, bidding
or inviting. The [many] that are here said to be invited, does most properly
belong to the time before Christ's incarnation, and in special to the Jews, as
appears by the immediate subsequent words, which refer to the time at Christ's
incarnation. But the words are delivered in such large terms as exercise the
bounty of the Maker of this Feast, who declared herein his willingness, that so
many should partake of his supper: Not only Jews, but Gentiles, ver. 21.23. Of
which there was some fore-taste in the conversion of several Gentiles called
Proselytes by their coming in at the call before Christ came in the flesh.
Hence I note,

Obser. The invitation to partake of Gospel-provision is very large. Mnay are
bidden, Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22.1, 7. The explication of this truth will appear by
an enumeration of several particular g^ests invited, and many considered under
each of them: As

1. Adam was invited, and with him the whole race of mankind. He was the first
man, and the Head of the following men; and the Gospel was propounded to him,
Genes. 3.15. That he might communicate it to them that came of him. Wherefore
some make those words [ who will have all men saved, 1 Timothy 2.4.] a gloss upon
the words of our Text.

2. Noah was invited, and with him the old world: Noah did partake of the grace
of God in the Gospel, and those of that age had the offer of that grace by him.
Christ was preached unto the old world by the ministry of Noah, 1 Pet. 3.18,
19. who is called not only an heir of righteousness, but also a preacher of
righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. Those disobedient wretches in that loose age were
called upon by Noah from God to believe and repent.

3. Abraham was invited, and with him the whole Nation of the Jews, who came of
his loins, Genesis 12.1. and 17.1. he receiving the seal of this
Gospel-righteousness in his uncircumcision, he became the father of all them
that believe, though they be not circumcised, Romans 4.11. which extends to the
good of believers in any Nation. But for a long time the Gospel was confined
within Abraham's family, and Abraham's posterity according to the flesh.

4. Moses was invited, and with him the Jews had a fresh invitation under that
paedagogy, of his, which was to bring them to Christ, Act. 7.31, 32. Salmeron
on this Parable in Luke, will have the words of our Text with specialty to
refer unto the invitation of the Jews under Moses his paedagogy, which was to
lead unto Christ.

Sect. 2.
This truth likewise may be explained by an enumeration of those several
particular ways wherein this invitation is made. As the guests are many, so the
manner of inviting them in the several ages of the world is manifold, Heb. 1.1.
As

1. In the way of a promise: and it is to be noted, (...). Epipha.
that the first promise for the good of God's Church, is concerning the person
of Christ, who is the substance of Gospel-provision, Genesis 3.15. In this grand
promise all the other promises which are great and precious do concenter.

2. In the way of a type in Noah's time: the Ark which he built, was a figure
or type of Christ. As out of the Ark was no temporal preservation, so out of
Christ is no eternal salvation. Every straok which Noah struck was as a voice
to the old world to look well to the securing of themselves.

3. In the way of a covenant in Abraham's time, Genesis 17.7, 11. Romans 4.11. This
covenant is dispensed in a twofold manner: first singly, as it is propounded
to mankind. If ye will believe and repent, ye shall be saved: then doubly, as
it is propounded to the elect. Thus, not only if you will believe and repent,
ye shall be saved: but I will give you a new heart, so that you shall believe
and repent, and shall be saved, Jer. 31.33. Thus God undertakes for both parts,
and so it becomes an everlasting covenant, containnig the sure mercies of
David.

4. In the way of a law in Moses his time. The institution of the ceremonial
law, what was it but the representation of the Gospel, though indeed but as a
rough draught compared with that polished form thereof, set out by Chri^s
coming in flesh. That the Gospel was in those ceremonies, will appear by
considering these particulars about the Gospel: As

1. The Gospel in the nature of it, as it contains the good news of the pardon
of our sins, and our peace with God: This was held forth in the mercy-seat,
where God gave that people a meeting, Exodus 25.22. Communing with them as a
reconciled father; removing their sins, which set them at such a distance from
him; that they could not draw nigh.

2. The Gospel in the cause of it: the blood of Christ procuring, or purchasing
our peace with God. This was hel^ forth in the several sacrifices, Heb. 9.23.
Christ was slain typically and vertually in those days.

3. The Gospel on the effect of it, as it procures man's salvation. This was
held forth in the holy of holies; Heb. 10.19, 20. into which Jesus Christ is
entered as our forerunner.

4. The Gospel in the ministry of it, as it is preached by those appointed
thereunto of God, making it their work. This was held forth by those who
ministered about holy things, waiting at the Altar, and living thereon, 1 Cor.
9.13. So for the Sacraments administered by a Gospel ministry, they were held
forth in circumcision and the Passover.

5. In the way of prediction in the Prophets time: how plainly does Isaiah
foretell this Gospel-provision, Chap. 53. and 55. So the other Prophets.

6. In the way of promulgation, or proclamation in John Baptist's time, Matthew.
3.1, 2, 3. and since his time by the preachers of the Gospel. In which way
there is an invitation of men unto Gospel-provision. 1. Objectively] the good
things of the Gospel as they are set down in the holy Scriptures, having the
virtue of a call. 2. Formally] as those good things are explained, and we
pressed to receive them viva voce.

CHAP. V.
Use 1, THis informs us of God's willingness unto man's happiness, God does not
only propound a way for man to be happy, but invites man to accept of it: And
he does further declare and protest, that he had rather men should live than
die, he had rather they should be saved than damned, Ezekiel. 33.11. God is no
hard Master, no churlish Nabal, who was unwilling David and his company should
partake of his plentiful provision in their streights: but he is as the
bountiful housekeeper that keeps open house.

Here also take notice of man's inexcusableness, in not making use of
Gospel-provision; how ill may God take it? and how ill will any be able to
answer it, Ut vivat regnetque beatus, cogi posse negat. Horat. Epist. 2.
when they will not vouchsafe to come upon God's invitation? what is this but
to make light of that great provision which God has prepared, Matthew. 22.5. Not
regarding the offers of grace? what ill natures are those upon whom no kindness
can be fastened? like him in the Poet, who would by no means live happily.

Use 2. Of Caution 1. Though men are thus generally invited, yet other fallen
creatures (as the Angels) they have not so much as an invitation: so that there
is somewhat of distinguishing mercy in the very invitation. Christ took not
upon him the nature of Angels, to recover them that were lost of those kind of
creatures, Heb. 2.16. not one of them are invited among the many guests at this
feast.

2. Though men are thus generally invited, yet they are very hardly persuaded
really to close with the invitation. Though many are called, yet few are
chosen, Matthew. 22.14. Outward privileges profit not, where the hidden man of
the heart is not right: a form without the power of godliness is nothing. Many
a ship has been called by the name of Safeguard, Good-speed, and such like
specious names, which yet have been split upon the rocks, or fallen into the
sands.

3. Though men are thus generally invited, Res delicata est spiritus dei, ita
nos tractat, sicut tractatur.
yet they will not be continually invited: God is not always suffering, though
he be long-suffering, his spirit shall not always strive with our flesh, Genesis
6.3. It Is dangerous to tempt, resist, or quench the spirit of God. When you
often invite guests to your table, and they slight your invitation, you will
resolve to invite such no more.

4. Though men are thus generally invited, yet they will be as generally
rejected, if they continue slighting God's invitation. Here many are bidden to
partake of grace in the Gospel: elsewhere many are forbidden to partake of
glory in heaven; and that for their contempt of Gospel Grace, Matthew. 7.22, 23.
Sometimes God lays remarkable judgments here on Cospel-contemners: witness the
Nation of the Jews, Matthew. 22.7. but their posterity shall be re-invited: and
it will prove effectual through the grace of God prevailing with their hearts,
Romans 11.32.

CHAP. VI.
Use 3. BE exhorted to hearken to this call and invitation of God, Mark 4.3.
Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. hearken, or listen, as they do in a Court of Justice to hear
when their own cause is to be handled. Remember, Jam tua res agitur.
that every word which is spoken in a Sermon to every one of you, is as it were
the handling of your particular cause, the resolving or deciding your
particular case.

Answer ye this loving invitation with a ready acceptance, let your hearts
echo back the sound of the Gospel, Psalm. 27.8. with sincere obedience to the
voice of the Gospel. The proof of this effectual call does thus appear.

1. By the service we are employed about different from others. This calling
denotes the setting a man apart unto what he is called; so that he does not
live as he did before, but mind's the business to which he is called. We see it
in worldly callings; men are set apart for the same, and give themselves to the
same. Paul was separated unto the Gospel, or set apart to the particular
calling of an Apostle. Thus Saints are set apart to the general calling of
Christianity, to spend their time in godliness, Psalm. 4.3. distinct from the
practice of the profane, or mere civil men.

2. By the spiritual assistance we have to do that service God calls us unto:
God calls none to an employment, but he qualifies them (more or less) to
discharge it. God calls none to any particular calling in Church or State; but
he gifteth them for it. When God called Saul to be King, he put into him
another spirit, suitable to the condition whereunto he was called. So when God
calls any to his kingdom and glory, he gives them a spirit which aspireth
and endeavors to that prize of this their high calling in Christ Jesus.

3. By our deportment answerable to the nature of the calling which God has
called us to, Ephesians. 4.1, 2. Every man is to look to the (...) or quod Placet, in
his place or calling. Th^se actions are beseeming a child, which do not become
an old man: Men of better breeding have a suitable deportment; so have Saints.

4. By our abiding in that calling unto which God has called us, Luke 9.62.
Those that are come into a state of grace, do go on till they come to glory.
Now to move you to accept of God's gracious invitation: Consider seriously

1. God communes with us in a way of familiarity, Isa. 1.18. What an honor did
Haman account it that Queen Esther should invite him to a banquet with the
King? Est. 5.12. how much more may we look upon this in the Text.

2. God commands us in a way of authority, 1 John 3.23. It is his will and
pleasure that we should embrace this call.

3. God does beseech us in a way of entreaty, 2 Cor. 5.20. He wooes us to be
happy.

4. Upon refusal God threatens us in a way of severity, Quod deus loquitur cum
risu, tu legas cum fletu.
Prove. 1.24, 32. They who will not feed upon these Gospel-dainties, shall eat
of the fruit of their own ways. They that sow the wind of iniquity, shall reap
the whirlwind of misery.

SERMON. IV.
Luke 14.17. And sent his servant at Supper time, to say to them that were
bidden, Come for all things are now ready.
CHAP. I.
HEre is the renewing of the motion made in the former verse. Est in more illud
apud nonnullos habitum, ut qui invitati sunt ad prandium, sive ad coenam sub
ipsum tempus caenae instantis vel imminentis prandii iterum evocentur. Salmer.
in loc.
The language of this verse alludeth to the manner of those who send out a
servant when the Dinner or Supper is ready, to give out a fresh summons to the
guests, whom they did invite, that the provision may not be spoiled, but served
in with much sweetness and delight unto them, for whom it was prepared. The
servant here sent, may be taken diversely, though not contrarily, either for the
last of the old Prophets, not excluding those that went before, or for the
first of the new Prophets, John Baptist, Mal. 4.5. Matthew. 11.10. not excluding
those that followed after: or else for the great Prophet and servant of God,
Christ. The time when this servant was sent, called here, Supper-time.] Does
specially point at the accomplishment of the great work of man's Redemption,
through the incarnation of Christ dying and rising again in that humane nature
which he assumed. Before I descend into the particulars of this verse, I shall
observe one thing as this verse is joined to the former, and contains a
second invitation.

Sect. 1.
Obser. God is very urgent with men to accept of Gospel-provision for the good
of their souls: he speaks once and again, Jer. 7.25. This truth will thus
appear.

I. By the several acts of God put forth in Gospel-provision for man's salvation.

1. He has prepared the provision without any desert or desire of ours, God's
kingdom is not partum, but paratum.
Tit. 3.4, 5. It is all according to his mercy: he has spared no cost in the
recovering of fallen man; he has freely parted with the blood of his only Son
to redeem the souls of slaves and Rebels.

2. The means of grace is vouchsafed to many that do not improve the same,
Matthew. 11.16, 17, 21. Some, whether piped to, or mourned to, are nothing
affected; neither the Preacher, nor the Doctrine regarded: they are not awed
with threatenings, nor allured with promises.

3. God propounds a way, Praevenit voluntati ut inclinet.
and offers help to do us good, before we enquire after it, Isa. 65.1. Every
motion toward God is an influence from God. We are prevented of God, we do not
prevent God's grace, as the Pelagians sondly conceit.

4. God forbears his wrath, when we do not presently close with his mercy: he
stays, though man lingers; he waits to be gracious; he meets with many unworthy
passages from man. His native goodness discovers it self in his patience, when
our native sin discovers it self in our provocations.

5. God reproves where we are defective, and happy are the wounds of such a
friend: He which first reproves, is unwilling to punish. That man is in ill
case when no man dares speak to him; and it is worst of all, when God says to
any, let him alone, Hos. 4.17.

6. God stops our way, when we are running headlong to our own misery: he will
not suffer us to act according to our corrupt desires, he hedge^h up our ways
with thorns, Hos. 2.6. God many times keeps us short, that he may kep us humble.

7. God makes us to consider our ways, and recollect our thoughts, whither our
course tends, Hag. 1.5. Whiles men walk heedlesly, they walk dangerously.
Hence are those frequent phrases, Hear and give ear: as if God should say,
Hearken, do ye know what ye do, or what will be the fruit of these courses you
take?

8. God works irresistible upon us notwithstanding our obst^nacy, by a sweet
and holy violence persuading us, Luke 14.23. He does not only stop our way, but
changes out wills. When God's elect come to heaven, surely (says one) their
first thoughts will be like those of the Israelites, wondering how they past the
sea with safety, and so many Egyptians drowned. The discriminating grace of God
is one of the most unaccountable things of the world.

Sect. 2.
II. By the manner of God's speaking to sinners in the holy Scriptures.

1. By way of interrogation, why will ye die? Ezekiel 18.31. God in a friendly
manner expostulates with men, why will ye be damned? why will ye venture your
selves any longer in a natural estate, in which condition if you should die
presently, you must certainly perish eternally.

2. By way of lamentation: God puts on the bowels of a man, nay God in the
second person of the sacred Trinity, puts on the nature of man, that he might
not only suffer for man, but sympathize with man: and how affectionately does
he exercise that sympathizing property of our nature toward sinners? Luke
19.41, 42. weeping for obstinate sinners?

3. By way of protestation with the strongest asseveration. As I live, says
the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, Ezekiel. 33.11. Oaths are
added to words in Scripture for confirmation, not of God's truth: (the bare
propounding of it is sufficient) but for the confirming of our faith.

4. By way of ingemination. Turn ye, Turn ye from your evil ways, Ezekiel. 33.11.

CHAP. II.
Use 1. THis informs us that the destruction of man is a thing displeasing to
God; Ezekiel. 33.11. He takes pleasure in man's conversion and salvation, as
appears by the means he has provided for man's good, comparing it to things
of the greatest efficacy: calling his word mustard seed, leaven, asword, a
hammer, fire, etc. As likewise by internal means: The motions of his spirit
knocking at the doors of men's hearts, and opening them in some measure by
convictions, when he goes no further. This appears likewise by the hatred God
expresses against man's destroying enemy, Sin: he is not the Author or Abettor
of it, but the great opposer of it.

Object. But if God take no pleasure in the destruction of a sinner, why then
is he said to laugh at it? Prove. 1.26.

Resp. Consider destruction merely as the sinner's misery, so it is displeasing
to God; but consider it as it is an act of justice in punishing the wicked for
his impenitency, so it is well-pleasing to God, for he is just as well as
merciful. A just Judge may grieve to inflict punishment upon a man, and yet
rejoice in the same act as it is the execution of the Law.

Here we may see that man's ruin is not to be charged upon God's unkindness,
but upon his own untowardness. Man since his fall is apt to charge God with the
inequality of his ways, when this charge is justly laid at man's door, Ezekiel.
18.29. This quarrel may be easily decided, if we consider these things.

1. The Case; Et ipse se infinitis miscuit quaestionibus. Vulg.
God is man's maker; he made him straight: man made himself crooked, Eccles.
7.29. Man might have kept his station, but he sought out many inventions,
tricks, and devices, like Poetical stories; of which there is neither proof nor
profit. Men puzzle themselves, then do they complain of others.

2. Consider the interest on both sides: God could make something of man's bad
bargain, but man could make nothing of it: God can glorify his justice by this
means: God need not lose his glory, though men lose their souls.

3. The carriage of both parties: God minds man's recovery more than himself
minds it: he would gather men in a tender manner to himself, and they in a
cruel manner refuse his good will, Matthew. 23.37.

CHAP. III.
Use 2. BUt though God be thus urgent about the salvation of man, yet he is
quick and peremptory in the destruction of many: God's judgments come in a
flying roll, and there be those who bring upon themselves swift destruction, 2
Pet. 2.1. And though God seem to come slowly to punish man, yet his hand will
fall heavily upon those that abuse his patience.

Use 3. Answer Gods urgency with you to accept of Gospel-provision.

1. Be urgent with your own hearts to turn to the Lord by says: and then be as
urgent to bless his name for turning them.

2. Urge your hearts to turn from all sin by true repentance, to cast away from
you all your transgressions, Ezekiel. 18.31. break off your union with sin: loath
that sin which you break off from by repentance, and your selves for it; and
cast it away as unprofitable, useless, hurtful, dangerous.

Mot. 1. Consider, that the means of grace requires you should offer violence
to heaven, Matthew. 11.12. resolve to break through all difficulties as did
David's Worthies: heaven must be taken as it were by storm.

2. Consider how urgent some will be for heaven when it is too late, knocking
at the door, and pressing argument upon argument, but all to no purpose, Luke
13.25, 26, 27. a form of godliness will not secure men from God's wrath at the
great day. There must be stirring as well as seeking; the exercise of grace, as
well as the performance of duty.

CHAP. IV. And sent his servant, etc.]
WE are now to consider the several particulars in the verse, and the first
thing considerable is the Master of the feast sending his servant, (...)
significat mittere cum authoritate Chamier. Cursum navit dirigere. Jansen. Est
plus quam (...) Cornel. a lapide. Hint (...).
alluding to the custom of the higher rank of persons in the world, who have
their household servants at command, to send at their pleasure upon particular
errands And sent] The Greek word signifies to send with authority and
discretion -- His servant.] This word is taken in Scripture in a threefold
sense. 1. For a bondman. 2. More generally for all the faithful. 3. More
specially for the Ministers of the Church, or Messengers of God about sacred
things. In this verse it is taken in the last sense. And it may further be
taken.

1. Collectively for all the Prophets, Marlorat in loc. Annot. Bibl.
especially those toward Christ's coming into his Temple. All the holy Prophets
spoke as by one mouth, Luke 1.70. and that which St. Luke puts in the singular
number, St. Matthew puts in the plural number, Matthew. 22.3.

2. Singly, and that by way of eminency for Christ himself, God's choice
servant: as in that other Parable, last of all he sent unto them his son,
Matthew. 21.37. Though perhaps there may be some specialty in reference to John
Baptist, the immediate forerunner of Christ. I shall take in both senses in the
observation, for they are not contrary to, but consistent one with the other.

CHAP. V.
Observe. CHrist and his messengers are the servants of God sent out for the
good of souls, Matthew. 21.35, 36, 37.

Christ is the servant of God.
I. As mediator. Thus he is that righteous servant of God, who justifies many
by bearing their iniquities, Isa. 53.11. a servant voluntarily subjecting
himself to his father for the good of all the elect, Matthew. 20.28. Yea a
covenanting servant, engaging himself by way of compact to transact such a work
as his father set him about.

A Righteous servant.
1. In reference to the purity in his nature, being without any act or taint of
sin, and so fit to be a sacrifice for the sins of others, Heb. 7.26. perfectly
righteous, his will being exactly framed to the will of his father.

2. In reference to his fidelity in his office; he was faithful to him that
appointed him, as Moses, Heb. 3.2. and that not as an ordinary servant, or no
more than a servant, but as a most eminent servant, and more than a servant: A
son ver. 5.6. though he act according to his father's will, yet he acts all
according to his own will and appointment.

II. As man he took upon him the form of a servant, being made in the likeness
of man, Phil. 2.7. and became obedient to the death, Beza in Phil.
that is to his dying day, says Beza: he went through many a death all his
life long. Moreover, as a servant he did not disdain to do the meanest office,
to wash his Disciples feet. And for his particular calling, he was a Minister,
or Preacher of the Gospel, Luke 4.18.

Christ was sent, that is
1. He was empowered with authority from the father, Matthew. 11.27. Christ is
the father's plenipotentiary, and privy counselor. He is the power of God,
and the wisdom of God. The father has committed salvation and judgment into
his hand: he has made him both Savior and Judge of the world, John 5.26, 27.
Him has God the father sealed, John 6.27. God has commissionated him with
full power to save whom he will.

2. He was endued with gifts from the spirit, not by measure, but in a
supperabounding manner, John 3.34. The spirit of God did in a special manner
appear about Christ's manhood in the framing his body, Luke 1.35. and in the
furnishing of his soul with all requisite qualiries, which did appear with
proportionable increase according to the growth of his body, Luke 1.80.

CHAP. VI.
THe messengers, or ministers of Christ are the servants of God also, which is
thus evident.

1. He sets them about his work; therefore they are called men of God: their
employment being altogether about the word of God, 2 Timothy 3, 16, 17. clearly to
explain, and faithfully to apply it. What they are to deliver unto others, they
are to receive from the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.23. They are not only employed about
sacred things in the general calling of Christianity, but in the particular
calling of the ministry.

2. He pays them their wages; and that with the enjoyment of himself who is
their Master, Matthew. 25.20. Matthew. 24.46.

These servants of God are sent.
1. In respect of their qualification for the work; being filled with gifts
answerable to that weighty employment, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. endued with wisdom,
courage, patience, utterance, etc. that may make them able Ministers of the new
Testament.

2. In respect of their acceptance to the work, Isa. 6.8. a man must be
willing to take it upon him.

3. In respect of their commission to the work, In physicis aer non facit
seipsum ignem sed fit a superiori. Aquin. in loc.
set apart thereunto, Act. 14.23. It Is not every one that has good legs, or
that can run, that is a messenger: he must be likewise sent. It Is not every one
that has good abilities of knowledge, courage, wisdom, elocution, is either a
Commander in war, or an Ambassador of state: he must be likewise
commissionated. It Is a great error to think, that all the Lord's people are
ministerially Prophets.

4. In respect of their continuation in the work, Act. 6.4. Those that have set
their hands to this plough, must not look back. No other impediment than that
which hinders them from the execution of their office, must give way to them to
lay down their office.

CHAP. VII.
Use 1. HEre see the condescension and humility of Christ; he made choice of
the lowest kind of life, even that of a servant, and the lowest kind of death,
that of the Cross, when he was among the children of men, Phil. 2.7, 8. he
emptyed himself, suspended, (...).
and as it were laid aside his glory and majesty. Yea it is said, God sent his
own son in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3. Though his flesh was not
sinful, yet he was just like to sinful flesh. As to imputation in respect of
God, who laid upon him the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6. and as to reputation,
in respect of men, he was reputed a sinner, being reckoned among the
transgressors, ver. 12.

This may also inform us of the exaltation of ministers, they are servants,
but, of the Lord: and this title they may glory in, Jud. 1. Jude might have
called himself a near Kinsman to Christ, or Christ's brother, for he was so
accounted, Matthew. 13.55. Mark 6.3. and he was so as much as James, who is
called the Lord's brother, Gal. 1.19. but surely alliance to Christ in the
service of the Gospel, is better than alliance to him in the flesh. To be a
faithful minister of Christ, or true believer on Christ, is more honor than to
be a natural brother of Christ.

Here also take notice of the condition of servants: Servi sunt imo homines,
imo contubernales, imo humiles amici, imo conservi. Sen. Epist. 47.
though their calling be low in the world, yet it is as lawful as any other
worldly calling, and very useful, else Christ would never have taken upon him
the form of a servant. Therefore servants should be respected for their
usefulness, Col. 4.1. Philem. v. 16. Seneca has a pretty Epistle to persuade
his friend to respect his servants, and not to carry himself severely and
rigidly, but familiarly toward them. Surely, it is your wisdom, so to carry
your selves toward your servants, that they may not only fear you, but love
you. And let servants be contented in the places wherein God sets them: for if
Christ could, then a Christian may do God and men good service in the form of a
servant.

Here also you may see God's indulgence to man, as to send so many servants for
his good, and among the rest his son for one, Luke 20.10, 11, 12, 13. Lord!
what is man, that thou should be thus mindful of him?

Use 2. Four things are to be noted by way of Caution.

1. Though Christ be God's servant, yet he is his Fellow: so God does call him.
The man which is my fellow, Zech. 13.7. not a secondary inferior God, as the
Arrians would have him, denying him to be true God: God calls him so (says
one) to show the unity of the essence, Diodat in loc.
and unity of the will of the father, and of the son, the mediator: Christ did
account it to be no robbing of his fathers honor to be equal with God, Phil.
2.6. The same he is in nature, and in working, and all are bound to honor the
son as they honor the father, John 5.23.

2. Though Christ be the servant of God, yet he is Lord of the Church, Ephesians.
4.4, 5. appointing laws to govern it as he pleases. Yea, he is Lord of all
creatures, both of the dead and of the living, Romans 14.9. he is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords. A name is given him above all names: he is the great God and
our Savior.

3. Though ministers are the servants of God, yet they are not the servants of
men, but only for God's sake, doing service for the good of souls, 2 Cor. 4.5.
They are servants for the people, not of the people. It is observed by the
Judicious, that ministers are called Ministers of God, 2 Cor. 6.4. Ministers of
Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1. ministers of the new Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6. ministers of
the Gospel, 1 These. 3.2. ministers of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.21. but never ministers
of the people.

4. Though ministers are servants of God, yet they are no ordinary servants.
They are as stewards to a Lord, or Ambassadors to a Prince, 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor.
5.20. Yea they are said to be laborers together with God, 1 Cor. 3.9.

CHAP. VIII.
Use 3. BE therefore exhorted to these duties.

1. To answer the labors of these servants of God: yield up your selves to
God, as his servants, Romans 6.16. Come into his household, give up your names to
him.

2. Live as the servants of God. To serve God, is the great duty we are still
pressed to: this is the beaten road that all Saints walk in, and that all men
should walk in. Here look,

1. To the essential requisits of this service: it must be 1. From God; it is
of the very essence of a duty, that it be commanded of God: in all duties there
must be an eye to the will of God, Romans 12.2. 2. It must be through God, that
is, through the spirit enabling us to perform this service, Romans 1.9. and
through the son presenting our service, that it find acceptance with God, Col.
3.17. 3. To God, to set forth his glory, 1 Cor. 10.31.

2. Look to the material properties of this service.

1. Serve God singly, or solely, Matthew. 6.24. not any other in opposition unto
him: here let all Masters of families especially consider, that all under their
roof do serve this one God, Jos. 24.15.

2. Reverently, Psalm. 2.11. Stand in aw of him, honor him with your very heart.

3. Delightfully, Romans 7.22. You like not a servant that goes about his work
grudgingly; no more does God.

4. Diligently; be servent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. and
instantly serving God day and night.

To move you to this service, consider
1. It is pleasant, Prove. 3.17. there is freedom in this service, there is
wages in this work.

2. It Is profitable. The works of Saints follow them, Rev. 14.13. their good
service shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

3. It Is honorable. To serve Christ is to reign. Sumus domini, non tantum in
geaitivo singulari, sed in nom^nativo plurali. Luther.
It Is more honor to serve Christ, than to serve the greatest Emperor, or to
have great Princes to serve us. Theodesius counted it a greater honor, that he
was a member of Christ's Church, than that he was Head of the Empire. Oh how
will God's servants be honored at the great day!

SERMON. V.
LUKE 14.17. And sent his servant at Supper time, etc.
CHAP. I.
WE are now to consider the time when the servant was sent, viz. at Supper
time.] The Greek word, (...), hinc latin hora, and Angl. Hour.
here translated Time, does properly signify an hour. In holy Scriptare it is
used for time, for an age, for a moment, for the opportunity of time, Joh.
16.2. Joh. 12.18. Luke 12.12. Rev. 9.15. it signifies likewise beauty. So the
Adjective of this Substantive is used, Romans 10.15. how beautiful? or how
seasonable? That being beautiful which is timely, opportunely, or seasonably.
So it is with the Gospel dispensed: and this is the sense of the word in our
Text.

This hour of supper is that fullness, Hora coenoe fuit plenitudo temporis, etc.
Salmer.
fitness, or seasonableness of time, wherein God sent his son into the world,
to accomplish that great work of man's Redemption: or the last time, or latter
ages of the world, which were come in the Apostles days, compared with the
foregoing time: after which no more alteration in Gospel Dispensation was to
be expected: This supper time being the last meal. Hence I note,

Observe. That Christ's coming into the world was very seasonable. 'Twas supper
time for Gospel-provision: the fullness of time, the very nick of time for man's
Redemption, Gal. 4 4. This may appear

I. By considering the time when he came into the world. Nos sumus in quos
fines seculorum devenerunt. In hoc fine servus mittitur. Gloss. Ordin.
'Twas under the reign of Augustus Caesar, the second Roman Emperor, who then
had the Jews (among other Nations) under his power, Luke 2. And he was
crucified under the reign of Tiberius Caesar, the third Roman Emperor, Pontius
Pilate being governor of Judea, Luke 3. This was the remarkable jancture of
time, of our Savior's coming in, and going out of the world, about 1600 years
and upwards from our time, according to the ordinary computation of
Chronologers.

II. By comparing several accidents with this time.

1. In respect of the accomplishment of Prophesies: as that prophecy in Genesis
49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, etc. until Shiloh come. The
right of supreme power, and administration of justice in temporal dominion,
should not be quite taken away from Judah, until the Messiah came, who should
be of Judah's posterity, and change it into a spiritual and everlasting
kingdom, destroying a little while after by means (...) Romans, both the people
and form of any Jewish commonwealth. Till Christ came, Judah always had the
right, and kept some relics of the possession in their greatest captivity,
having the body of its commonwealth several, with its divine and humane laws.
And when Christ came, his spiritual kingdom was over all people; was not this
opportune and seasonable? many other Prophesies also might be looked upon.

2. In respect of the truth and substance of these figures and shadows in the
legal ceremonies. When Christ came into the world, he was fitted with such a
body, as was meet to be a real sin-offering, to answer all the typical
sin offerings of old, Heb. 10.5. A body of man's nature, yet without man's
corruption; a body made of a woman without the help of a man: a body joined
with the deity, and to be an expiatory sacrifice for sin. He was fitted with a
name answerable, called the Lamb of God, John 1.29. the true Pasc^al Lamb, yea
he was fitted with a spirit answerable, most desirous to give himself a
sacrifice for sin, Lo I come, lo I come, Heb. 10.7.9. he was straightened with
desire till the baptism of his sufferings was accomplished.

3. In respect of the expectation of God's dear children, who in the days of
Christ's coming were earnestly waiting for the consolation of Israel through
the coming of the Messiah; Witness Simeon, Luke 2.25. and Anna. ver. 36.37.
This was the sugar by which they sweetened all their crosses in those dark
times: when a friend comes, that has been long looked for, how seasonable and
welcome is his coming? especially when we suffer much by his absence, and enjoy
much by his presence.

4. In respect of the conversion of the Gentiles to be added to the believing
Jews, or to come in the room of the obstinate Jews, who would have none of this
Gospel-provision. The fields were white unto harvest, when Christ came, John
4.35. The several nations of the world were ready to receive the Gospel upon
the tender of it to them; Cuncta atque continua tolius generis humani aut pax
fuit, aut pactio. Flor. hist. lib. 4.
they being as it were at leisure, or ready to hear; for it is observable, when
Christ the Prince of peace came to preach the Gospel of peace, there was in
that age generally either a peace, or truce throughout the nations of the
earth: So Florus observes, that writes the History of that time. How
seasonably did Christ come in this time of public quietness to reason with men
in a calm manner about their souls?

5. In respect of Christ's herald, or immediate forerunner, John Baptist
coming in the spirit of Elias, Luke 1.17.

6. In respect of the institution of Gospel Ordinances in the room of the
legal. When the ceremonial service appeared an intolerable yoke, Act. 15.10.
then Christ comes, who instituted baptism instead of circumcision, and the
Lord's Supper instead of the Passover, Matthew. 26.26.

Quest. But here it may be demanded, why a supper?

Resp. It fitly answers to the word [Supper] in the Text, which expresses the
grace of God in the Gospel.

1. The Supper-meal is the sweet meal, in regard of the work of the foregoing
day which is past, and the rest of the succeeding night which is to come. This
may refer to the hard service of the ceremonial law past, and to the sweet
powrings forth of the spirit to come at this supper time.

2. It Is the last meal; the last mess of the Gospel served in, not another
Christ to come. Now God would have us methodical in the use of means, first to
close by faith with Gospel-provision in the word preached, Romans 1.16. and when
the word preached has had its due work, then to partake of the Lord's supper.

CHAP. II.
Use 1. HEre see the manifold wisdom of God in the dispensation of
Gospel-provision, Ephesians. 3.10. how seasonable was the time of the Gospel's
discovery in the clearness or brightness of it? when the day star appears,
the Sun is at hand; so before Christ's nativity a star appeared; whence the
wise men concluded, that the Sun of Righteousness was rising.

Here also observe, that we have one privilege above them who lived before
Christ came in the flesh: they had the dawning of the morning, but we the light
at noonday, Col. 1.26. They had the Parable, we the interpretation of it. The
Gospel was once confined to one Country, the Land of Judea, but now the
Commission is to preach it in every Country, to every creature, Mark 16.15. And
generally believers in the new Testament have a greater measure of grace than
those in the old Testament. There have been more plentiful effusions of the
spirit since Christ came in the flesh, Joh. 7.39.

Use 2. For caution: This does not make but that many before Christ came in the
flesh did partake of this Gospel-provision, and went to heaven in the strength
of this food. Witness those many worthies, Heb. 11. in all ages of the world,
who lived and died in the faith of Jesus. Christ, the true Messiah. So 1 Cor.
10.3. Romans 4.11.

Use 3. Be exhorted to answer the time of Christ's seasonable coming by knowing
the time or season of our salvation, Romans 13.11. The Apostle calls upon us, as
men upon their servants to go about their work, because the Sun is up. Now is
the accepted time, 2 Cor. 6.2. Christ counsels you to improve this time, now
ye may be accepted, John 12.35.36. It Is very sad if you do not, Luke 19.42.

CHAP. III. To say to them that were bidden, etc.]
THese words contain the manner or way, how, or wherein the Gospel-errand is to
be delivered, and that is by word of mouth. The servant sent was Praedicator; to
say, is Praedicare. The servant here sent is not as an ordinary messenger to
carry a Letter, but as an extraordinary officer of state appointed, an
Ambassador commissionated to treat with others; such is the dispensation of
the Gospel in the ministry thereof. Hence I observe

Obser. That the word spoken by the ministry of men appointed thereunto, is the
way which God uses to save men. This is the usual way of propounding
Gospel-invitations, the real acceptance whereof tends to salvation, 1 Pet.
1.23, 25.

Sect. 1.
Quest. 1. What is meant by the word, which is to be spoken or said unto people
for their souls good?

Resp. It Is the revealed will of God, fully made known in the holy Scriptures
for man's eternal good: those writings being inspired of God for matter and
words: the perfect distribution of which is set forth by the Apostle, 2 Timothy
3.16. profitable

1. For doctrine; containing all things needful to be known, or believed, in
reference to our salvation: as the Doctrine of our innocence, of our fall, of
our recovery. There is not a syllable of this in any of the Volums of the
Heathens, Psalm. 147.20. These things are revealed only by the Scripture.

2. For reproof; to confute all those false Doctrines, which oppose the true.
Truth discovers, and consoundeth error, Isa. 8.20.

3. For correction; to reprehend the vices and ill manners of those that walk
contrary to this word.

4. For instruction; to direct us to lead our lives according to this word. And
all this must be (as is added) in righteousness: and it must be so, seeing this
word is the truth, 1 Pet. 1.22. which cannot justily be contradicted.

Sect. 2.
Quest. 2. How must this word be spoken?

Resp. I. If we look at God from whom it is spoken, it must be spoken

1. Exactly, according to his mind: what we deliver to others, must be received
from him, 1 Cor. 11.23. Ministers must learn as well as teach, hear before they
speak, Ezekiel. 3.17. what the Prophets and Apostles had immediately, Ministers now
have mediately.

2. Reverently, as in his sight, 2 Cor. 5.11. before whose dreadful tribunal
born speakers and hearers must one day appear.

3. Authoritatively, as in his stead, 2 Cor. 5.20. as Writs and Warrants run in
the name of the supreme power: so must the word preached in the name of God.

II. If we look at the word which is spoken, it must be spoken

1. Gravely; according to the weight of the matter, and majesty of the style.
There should not be an affected language, but sober expressions subservient to
the matter.

2. Methodically; according to the distinct heads of divinity held forth in the
Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.3.

3. Pertinently; according to the particular portion of Scripture which is fixed
upon, keeping to the matter in hand, as Sr. Paul does in the confirmation of
the Resurrection. A man may speak according to truth, or the word in general,
when he does not speak according to his Text, or the Scripture which he quoteth.

III. If we consider by whom the word is spoken, it must be spoken

1. Understandingly; and that according to the analogy, or proportion of faith.

2. Resolvedly; in an open and free manner, boldly declaring the word of God, 2
Cor. 4.13. Romans 1.16. being ready to defend what we deliver.

3. Affectionately, Phil. 3.18. our Sermons should not only be informing, but
enflaming: affectionate speeches help much to work upon affection, and they
seem to flow from affection.

IV. If we look at those to whom the word is spoken, it must be spoken

1. Audibly; with the voice so lift up, as the standers by may take it, John
7.37. the lungs are of use, as well as the brains in the ministerial employment.

2. Plainly, 2 Cor. 3.12. speaking in a familiar speech; not uttering fine
phrases like painted glasses, which makes a show, but keeps out the light: we
must speak to the capacity of all sorts of hearers. Qui pueriliter,
populariter, trivialiter, and simplicissime docent optimi ad vulgus sunt
concionatores. Luther.
The learned can understand plain words, but the unlearned cannot understand
elegant words. It Is best therefore to use those words which all know.

3. Distinguishingly: separating the precious from the vile, Jer. 15.19. giving
unto each the portion belonging to him: for this end a Minister had need
observe the carriage of his people, that he may accordingly discharge his duty
toward them.

Quest. 3. How does this appear to be the way that God makes use of?

Resp. 1. The Scripture-rule illustrated with instances clears this. The Rule
is, Romans 10.14, 15. The instances are, that of St. Peter sent to Cornelius,
Act. 10. That of Ananias sent to St. Paul, Act. 9.

2. The daily experiences of Saints confirm this. Where is the man or woman
that has received any of the gracious workings of God's spirit, and have not
received it this way?

CHAP. IV.
Use 1. THis may inform us of diverse things.

1. That the gift of utterance is very requisite for a Minister, Ephesians. 6.19. for
Ministers are spokes-men by their office. Isaiah was bid to lift up his voice
like a Trumpet, which yields a loud and a distinct so and. John Baptist's
language was as the voice of a crier, Matthew. 3.1. which is a stretched out
voice, and an authoritative voice: yet should a Minister take heed he be
nothing but voice, an empty sound.

2. The calling of the ministry is very useful; it is to bespeak souls for
heaven, by inviting them to accept of Gospel-provision, Tit. 1.2, 3. none need
think it too mean a calling for their children; the honourableness and
usefulness of preaching may be estimated by the preciousness of souls.

3. See Mr. Hieron. his preachers plea.
How foolish are they who account preaching of a plain Sermon to be a poor way
of profiting an intelligent man, in respect of the reading of a Learned book.
And upon this account many (I fear) absent themselves from hearing, thinking
they have a tolerable exc^se: yea some have been observed to be so irreverent,
as to read a book in Sermon time. But know, it is the word spoken, nor the word
written, is the ordinary way of salv^^ on, the foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor.
1.21. not, but that to real good books is a good exercise, if it be done in its
proper time.

Use 2. Ministers should not only preach with their tongues, Sanctiores sunt
aures plebis q^am corda sacerdotum. Milar
but likewise with their hearts feelingly. The heart is the best Oratory. St.
Paul's spirit was stirred within him to preach against the Idolatry of the
Athenians, Act. 17.16. It Is a sad complaint of Hilary, that the peoples ears
were better than their Teachers hearts.

Ministers should also preach with their lives, Phil. 3.17, 20. Aristotle
says, that a good Orator must be a good man. There be many preachers, says
Calvin, very clamorous in declaiming against the sins of the people, but do no
good, because the people see they are not moved themselves with what they
preach to others. Christ preached often when he opened not his mouth, as
Theophilact observes, Theophilact. in Mat. 5.2.
viz. (...), by his life, and by his miracles.

Consider further, though preaching be the ordinary way of conversion, yet
reading the Scriptures is very useful and necessary. Junius turned from Atheism
to Christianity by reading the first Chapter of John. Christ bids us search the
Scriptures, John 5.39. God can also make Christian conference effectual.
Moreover, it is not the breath of a man, but the inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
which works conversion: and God's spirit does not tie himself to means,
though he tie us, but blows (as the wind) where he lists. And this spirit
may breath into little children, as well as into grown men: they may have the
teachings of God, though they are incapable of the teachings of men.

CHAP. V.
Use 3. LEt us be thankful to God, that the word of faith is so nigh us in the
preaching of the word, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. that Manna falls at our very doors,
it is but stepping out, and taking it up. If Plato could bless the Gods, that he
was not only a man, but a Grecian and Athenian, and that he lived in the days
of Socrates: if Bucholcerus counted himself happy, that his birth fell out in
Melancton's time; how may we bless God for the many helps we have to attain
saving knowledge. Therefore

1. Speak to God in prayer before you come to hear, that he would bless the
word to you when you do hear.

2. Diligently attend to God's word which is spoken, Eccles. 5.1. Be not
praying or reading when you should be hearing. Our King Edward VI. heard
Sermons with great reverence, penned them with his own hand, and diligently
studied them afterward, Constantine the Great in hearing the word would many
times stand up all Sermon-while: and when some of his Courtiers told him, it
tended to his disparagement, he answered, that it was in the service of the
great God, who is no respcter of persons.

3. Be affected with the word you hear. The word preached does as it were
represent truth before the eyes, Gal. 3.1. Thus the Prophets were to show the
people their sins. The eye affects the heart. Think while you are hearing, as
if that were really and visibly before you, by which Christ and sin is
represented in preaching of the word.

4. Labor to be transformed into what you hear, obeying this word of truth
from the heart, Romans 6.17. Consider, that this word of God engraffed within us,
is able to save our souls, Jam. 1.22. and if it be an engraffed word, it will
be a fruitful word, appearing in our conversation.

CHAP. VI. Come, etc.]
THis word [Come] contains what those messengers, who are sent about the
Gospel-errand are to say: that is to speak to the guests to come away, and
partake of that Gospel-provision, to which they were invited. The word is
metaphorical, answerable to the matter spoken of. Here I note.

Obser. That God would have us come at his call in the voice of the ministry,
Matthew. 22.4. What this call in the voice of the ministry is, ye have formerly
heard. Now we are to consider

Sect. 1. Whither God would have us come.
1. He would have us come to our selves; for naturally we are besides our
selves. The prodigal came to himself, Luke 15.17. we begin to come to our
selves, when we begin to act our reason like men; considering how it has been,
how it is, and how it may be with us.

2. He would have us come to his people; for naturally we are aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12. Come therefore we must unto Mount Sion, Heb.
12.22. This coming is the maintaining of affection to, and communion with the
people of God, Paul, after his conversion went to the Disciples of Jesus
Christ, and would not be beat off from them, though they at first were shy of
is company.

3. He would have us come to himself. 1. The father would have us come: Return
to me says the Lord, Jer. 4.1. return to him from whom we have gone astray. 2.
The son would have us come, come to me, Matthew. 11.28. come to him as a
Mediator to make up all your differences: come to him as a Physician to heal
our infirmities; and as a Prophet to remove your ignorances. 3. The spirit
would have us come, Rev. 22.17. He comes to us that we may come to him to get
victory over our sin. Now these three are not contrary Masters to distract our
thoughts about our coming to them, but they are all one.

Sect. 2. By what means should we come.
1. By the use of all means of grace. Oh come, let us worship, and bow down
before the Lord, Psalm. 95.6. To worship God is to serve him in the
participation of his ordinances, to pay tribute, and do homage to the King of
Kings, to seek God in his own way.

2. By the exercise of the truth of grace, and in special, the acting of faith.
He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is good, Heb. 11.6.
The steadfast belief of divine truth, does very much raise the affections: Some
call the affections the feet of the soul: Acceptance, Adherence, affiance,
Assurance, are four steps in the exercise of faith, whereby we rid gro^nd, and
make progress in the way of Christianity.

3. By pressing forward toward the perfection of grace, Phil. 3.12. as men do
their arms in swimming, or their legs in running. These pressing forward
appears in regular desires, and in endeavors proportionable.

Sect. 3. In what manner should we come.
1. Humbly; as the prodigal to his father; I am not worthy to be called thy
son, Luke 15.19. fall down, lie prostrate before the Lord. This gesture suits
our meanness and his greatness.

2. Speedily, as Zacheus to our Savior, who made haste, and came down, Luke
19.6. delays are dangerous in matters of great importance.

3. Joyfully, as we come to a feast, especially to a marriage feast, such as
this Gospel provision is, Mat. 22.

Sect. 4. How it appears God will have us come.
Here let us consider three remarkable junctures of time, wherein Christ, who
is sent of God, has bid men come.

1. When he came unto the world, and appeared with the sole power of saving
souls. All things (says he) are delivered to me of my father, and presently he
adds, Come unto me, Matthew. 11.27, 28. as if he had said, the power my father
has given me is to be employed for this end, to persuade you to come unto me,
or to come unto him by me.

2. The eight or last day of the feast the Jews called Hosannah Rabbah.
When he was to s^m up many days preaching, in the last day of a great feast,
these were his last words, come to me, John 7.37. as if he had said, were I to
preach to all the world, and were then presently to leave the world, these
should be my last words, come to me.

3. When he was ascended, and sent his mind in a Letter in that book of the
Revelations, these words are the close of that Epistle, come, come, Rev. 22.16.
as if he had said, I am still of the same mind I was, when I was upon the
earth: heaven and earth rings of his coming, The Spirit, and the bride say
come. The bride upon earth, the spirit in his Saints, and Christ from heaven.
And in effect Christ tells his elect I have a heart to come to you, but I must
have all you mine elect to come to me first: you would have me come down, but I
must stay here, till all that the father has given me be come unto me.

CHAP. VII.
Use 1. HOw much are they to blame then, that will not come; ye will not come
to me, says Christ, John 5.40. Great men take it ill, when men wilfully refuse
to come upon a solemn invitation. Many that are invited, instead of coming to
God, rebel against him. Amos compares such unto horses running upon a rock,
where first they break their hoofs, then their necks, Amos 6.12. To come to God
in Christ is the best entertainment we can give the Gospel. To come to hear is
something; to receive God's messengers respectfully is something, to be
reclaimed from profaneness, and to take up a form of Religion is something; but
the chief of all is wholly to give up our selves to Jesus Christ. This is the
seal and glory of the Gospel ministry, 2 Cor. 3.1, 2. Phil. 4.1.

Use 2. For Caution: though God would have us come at his call, yet he will not
always call upon us to come, Genesis 6.3. the day of grace proves but a short day
to many.

Consider likewise, though God would have us come at his call, yet no man can
come of himself. No man can come to Christ, except the father draw him, John
6.44. There can be no motion toward God without an influence from God.

Use 3. Be exhorted to come: come and see, John 1.46. Take notice of the
Messiah, and the plentiful provision which God has prepared for mankind
through him; consider the worth that is in him: behold the Lamb of God, John
1.29. God has sent forth his son, that men may look upon him, and be taken
with his perfect beauty.

Come and buy, Isa. 55.1. ye can bring nothing to purchase Gospel-provision,
but ye may make it as truly yours as any thing you have bought is yours, by
your applying it by a true and lively faith.

Come also and eat, Isa. 55.1. Labor to taste the sweetness of this
Gospel-provision in a way of experience: live so, that it may appear you are
nourished by Gospel-food. Finally, come and rejoice together, Psalm. 95.1. give
thanks for all those Gospel-mercies he bestows upon you.

Quest. Here it may be demanded, who should come?

Resp. 1. Come ye distressed souls, that know not where to have ease elsewhere.
Come all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, Matthew. 11.28. steep your souls in
this sweet sentence of our Savior, it is a precious cordial. Mr. Midgeley
sometime Minister at Ratchdale in Yorkshire, A remarkable story.
oppressed with melancholy and sad temptations to self-murder, and going down
to the waterside to drown himself, having the new Testament in his pocket, took
it out, and opening it, happily cast his eye upon this Text, come unto me all
ye that labor, etc. whereupon he was so supported, that he uttered these
words, say thou so? then will I not drown my self. Ah precious word of God!

2. Come ye empty souls, that have no money, Isa. 55.1. that are sensible of
your own wants and worthlesness.

3. Come ye hungry and thirsty souls, that would fain have supply, Rev. 22.17.
here ye may fill your souls to satisfaction.

4. Yea come, who will come, Rev. 22.17. ye that are willing to take Christ
upon Gospel-terms, ye shall not go without him.

Motives to persuade you thus to come.
1. Consider, Christ comes down, who is the true bread of God, John 6.33. he
came among us, that we might come to him.

2. Doctrine comes down, and that like rain, which shall not return without
some effect wrought, Isa. 55.10, 11. God speaks out of his holy Temple: ^h
the sweet distilling voice of God in the Gospel!

3. Grace comes down; the gracious working of God's holy spirit, Jam. 1.17.

Consider what entertainment ye shall have (...) ye come.
1. If ye will (...), ye shall be most heartily welcome. Christ ^a^th, Him that
comes unto me, I will in no wise (...) John 6.37. If you trust your souls in
his hand, they shall not miscarry.

2. If you now come to Christ by his spirit, he will one day come in his own
person to fetch you, John 14.3. like a bridegroom, who having prepared all at
home, comes himself, and fetches his bride, and does not send for her by
others because it is a time of the nearest and milest kind of love.

3. If you will not come at God's call to obey him, God will not come at your
call to relieve you, Prove. 1.28. Nay, in^^e^d of this voice, [come] there will
be that voice [Go,] or depart from me ye carsed, Matthew. 25.41. what amazing
horrors will then possess you.

CHAP. VIII. For all things are now ready.]
THis clause gives us the reason of the foregoing words. All things.] Some of
the Fathers understand these words of both Testaments, all the holy Scriptures.
Others of the mystery of the Gospel in every part of it. We may take the
meaning of these words of Christ, in those other words of his Apostle St.
Peter, (...) passim usurpatur pro (...). Cujus rei causa petenda est ex ombiguo
Ebraei (...) seu (...) quod and parationis and firmationis notitionem babet.
all things appertaining to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. Are n^w ready.] Now
since the time o^ Christ's coming in the flesh, all things are ready. The Greek
word in the Text for ready, is such a kind of readiness, wherein there is
sureness, firmness, compleatness, and that according to divine destination. So
Amam^, and the ancient Helle^^ises do use the word. Hence I observe,

Sect. 1.
Obser. That all things appertaining to man's happiness, do now appear to be in
readiness, Matthew. 22.4. All things may be said to be ready,

I. In metaphorical or borrowed words, answerable to the language of the Text.

1. The house is prepared, wherein this Gospel-provision is made. Wisdom has
builded her house, she has hewn out her seven Pillars, Prove. 9.1. This wisdom
is Christ: The house built is the Church, 1 Timothy 3.15. that is the mountain
wherein the feast of fat things is made: The Hebrew word for wisdom is in the
plural number (...) and this may be honor is causa, or by an Ellypsis, as if it
were wisdom of of wisdoms. Junius renders it summa sapientia.
that is the upper room, wherein this supper of the Lord is eaten. This is that
building of living stones spoken of, 1 Pet. 2.5. that select company, unto
which God adds those whom he intends to save, Acts 2.47. the hewing of seven
pillars is the laying of a firm foundation: such, as the gates of hell cannot
prevail against the Church of God, Matthew. 16.18. and the pillars hewn, may
signify that spiritual beauty, which accompanies the Church's spiritual safety.

2. The beasts are killed, of which this Gospel-provision consists, ver. 2.
the Oxen and fatlings of the King of Kings, Matthew. 22.4. the typical sacrifices
are slain, and so is the real sacrifice, Christ; the Scripture speaks of him
brought as the Lamb to the slaughter: and he is the Lamb slain, acceptable to
God, nourishing us.

3. The wine is mingled which belongs to this Gospel-provision, ver. 2. mingled
either with spices, to make it the more delicious, or with water, whereby Wine
in those hot Countries was cooled, and became the more refreshing: such
mingling kept from enflaming those that drank it. Hereby is intimated the
delicious, or refreshing dainties in the Gospel, Isa. 55.1.

4. The Table is spread, or furnished, by which this Gospel-provision is set
forth before others, ver. 2. The shewbread is set down, which of old
represented Christ's body, both natural and mystical. Christ is evidently set
forth before our eyes in Gospel Ordinances, Gal. 3.1.

5. The attendants are in a waiting posture, by whom this Gospel-provision is
served unto others. Wisdom has sent forth her Maids, ver. 3. that is,
messengers, and dispensers of holy things. Not that Maids, or Matrons, or any
women are allowed to be Ministers, but the allegory is prosecuted with
correspondent terms. Christ being compared to a Queen; the Pastors and Teachers
are resembled to Maids of honor.

Sect. 2.
II. In proper and plain words: All things are ready thus.

1. Litera Scripta Manet.
The mind of God concerning the salvation of all his elect is ready: the
foundation of the Lord stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. their names are already
written in the Book of Life, and what he has written, he has written, it
shall there abide.

2. The work of Christ for the recovery of lost man is ready; that work of our
Redemption which he undertook to do, is done, it is finished, wherefore this
Priest of ours is set down at the right hand of God, Heb. 10.12. as one having
done his work, in opposition to the Priests of old, who stood daily, ver. 11.
The mystery of the Gospel in man's recovery is a curious piece of work, but
it is perfectly wrought: there are many particular excellent stories about it,
but they are all completed, 1 Timothy 3.16. The incarnation, passion,
resurrection, and ascension of Christ, are all over.

3. The remission of sin upon the score and account of Christ is ready. God is
ready to pardon, Neh. 9.17. but it is through Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19. Pardons are
(as it were) written our, and ready to be distributed to those who will accept
of them. Yea, pardoning grace is daily ready to be renewed according to the
fresh acting of faith.

4. The glorious inheritance in heaven is now ready: God has prepared that
City for all believers, Hell. 11.16. heaven is a Kingdom prepared for them.

Quest. How does all now appear to be in readiness?

Resp. Since Christ's coming in the flesh, the veil is taken off from the Law
of Moses; the Curtain is drawn aside, that the light comes in abundantly; those
Riddles are now unfolded. Moreover, since Christ's Incarnation, the new
Testament is added to the old, whereby there is a great advantage for light;
the prophesies are now turned into Histories: the Canon of Scripture is now
completed, no more is now to be added, Rev. 22.18.

CHAP. IX.
Use 1. THis informs us, that man has nothing to do toward his own
happiness, but to receive what God has prepared, and to walk as he has
received it: the receiving is by faith: a weak faith is a joint Possessor,
though no faith is a joint purchaser of this special privilege. The walking as
we have received Christ, is to express the truth of our faith in the holiness
of our life, with all conscientiousness as in God's sight, and exemplariness as
in men's sight, Col. 2.6, 7.

Here see the difference between God and man, in reference to Gospel-provision.
All is ready on God's part, but alas! what an unreadiness is there on our part,
how indisposed are we to any thing that is good? Inasmuch as God speaks thus to
man, will thou not be made clean, when shall it once be? Jer. 13.27. Men linger
in the state of nature, as Lot in Sodom, and did not God pull them out, there
they would abide for ever.

Use 2. For Caution. Though all things be said to be now ready, we must not
think, as if all were but now ready: we must know, that Christ is the Lamb
slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8. so that Christ's blood in
its virtue, and God's acceptance was of force for man's salvation in the days
before he came personally into the world. And as for the foundation of man's
happiness in his election, this was prepared before the foundation of the
world, Romans 9.33. Moreover, though all things are said to be now ready, yet
there is much to be done before all the elect come to heaven; there are many
enemies of Christ which must be pulled down, 1 Cor. 15.25. and though Christ
has done the work of a Priest on earth in offering up himself as a sacrifice,
yet he is still doing the work of the High Priest in heaven, presenting the
worth of his sufferings in the presence of his father, as he did once die for
us; so he does ever live for us, Heb. 7.25.

Use 3. Be exhorted to answer this readiness of God.

1. Be ready to receive this grace of the Gospel: all things are ready,
therefore come, Matthew. 22.4. let thy heart be ready and prepared, remove the
filth that is in thy heart: adorn thy heart with gracious qualities: attend
upon means of grace, there God comes with a blessing. This Gospel feast is
ready, but are you ready for that? Are your clothes ready? have you put on the
Lord Jesus, whose righteousness is the white garments of Saints? are your
stomachs ready, is your appetite up to this feast?

2. Be ready to express this grace of the Gospel: answer this readiness of
God's good will in your readiness to do the will of God; express it in acts of
piety toward him: be read to hear what the Lord has to speak, Eccl. 5.1.
Prepare your hearts unto the Lord, 1 Samuel 7.3. holy duties call for holy
preparation. The Jews had their laver in their services, washings with
sacrifice.

Express it likewise in acts of charity toward ^en. In reference to the soul,
be ready to give an answer to those that ask you a reason of the hope that is
within you, 1 Pet. 3.15. Which tends much, as to the confirming of the truth,
so to the edifying of souls. In reference to the body, be ready to distribute
your worldly goods, to supply the bodily wants of others, 1 Timothy 6.18. Show it
also in your readiness to suffer the will of God. St. Paul was ready, not only
to be bound, but to die for the name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 21.13. but as for
the exercise of this hard part of Religion, the spirit is ready sometimes, but
the flesh is weak, Mark 14.38.

Now to move you unto this readiness to receive and express the grace of the
Gospel, Consider,

The grave is ready to receive you: wherefore work out your salvation with fear
and trembling. The Tribunal of God is ready to receive you. All must give an
account to him who is ready to judge the quick and the dead, 1 Pet. 4.5. heaven
is ready to receive you, if you thus receive and express the grace of the
Gospel: it is a kingdom prepared for you: the gates of this kingdom are open for
you, if your hearts are open to the word of this kingdom. Otherwise hell is
ready to receive you, and everlasting fire is preparing for you. Tophet is
prepared for the highest rank of sinners, Isa. 30.33.

SERMON. VI.
Luke 14.18. And they all with one consent began to make excuse, etc.]
CHAP. I.
OF the invitation to Gospel-provision ye have heard, The Guests prove
Recusants.
now follows the answer of the Guests who were invited, and their answer is
returned by way of denial, which denial, or refusal of theirs is first more
generally described, and then more particular or distinctly; answering to
(though it be an ill requital of) the invitation which was first generally
delivered, and then more distinctly renewed.

This refusal of theirs in general, may be branched out thus for our more
methodical proceeding in the handling of the words.

1. Here is the universality of it. And they all.] 2. The unanimity of it, or
rather the the conspiracy of it, with one consent. 3. The plausibility, or
rather the hypocrisy of it, Began to make excuse. (...) est particula, non
universalis simpliciter, sed indefinita, restring^nda ad materiam subjectam.
Beza.
For the first, the refusal is universal, They all.] All is here and elsewhere
taken for many, or the most of a company; as sometimes many is taken for All,
Romans 5.19. And this All in our Text does in a special manner refer to the Jews,
though it represent all those in any Nation, or Age of the world, who upon any
occasion slight the Gospel. Here I note,

Obser. That Gospel-provision, as it is generally offered, so it is generally
refused, Matthew. 22.5, 6. The Gospel-provision with its general offer we have
already considered, now we are to enquire what this general refusal is. I
answer, it is a refusal by the major part of men. 1. Pauci salvantur respective.
Gloss. Ordin. in loc.

'Twas a Proverb in times of Popery, that Hell was paved with Priests shaven
Crowns, and Great Men's Head-pieces.


By Rulers, John 7.48. worldly Potentates, 1 Cor. 2.8. The crucified Savior, a
man of sorrows held forth in the Gospel is not relished by the great Dons o^
the world. The Roman Princes, as well as the Jewish Rulers would have none of
him. This was long before foretold, Psalm. 2.2. 2. The major part of the Learned
men refuse Christ. At Athens the Philosopers of the Epicureans and Stoics,
opposed the preaching of the Gospel by St. Paul, Act. 17.18. Thus not only the
Senators of Rome, but the Scholars at Athens refused the Gospel. 'Twas an
observation of King James who was a great Scholar, as well as a great Prince,
that the deep Theorems of Philosophy, make men Learned, but seldom better, and
oftimes worse, even mere Atheists. 3. The major part of the common people
refuse Christ. The multitude cried of Christ, crucify him, crucify him: and
all the world wondered after the beast, Rev. 13.3. The multitude are ready to
follow their Ringleaders. If the major part of the two former sorts go amiss,
no wonder if the major part of this latter sort follow them.

CHAP. II.
Quest. 1. WHat is this general refusal?

Resp. It will appear de facto that this refusal is general, and that by an
induction of particulars, when and where this Gospel-provision has been
offered.

1. In Noah's time the refusal was general. The Inhabitants of the old world
generally disobeyed the word of the Gospel held forth by that Preacher of
Righteousness, 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. they slighted that provision that was made for
their safety.

2. In Isaiahs time the refusal was general; he complains, who has believed
our report? Isa. 53.1. that is, none almost. How did Jeremy contend with the
No^les, the Priests, and the people, who refused the word of God!

3. In Christ and his Apostles time the refusal was general. How many had an
hand in opposing Christ even to the death? Matthew. 27.1, 3, 25, 27. and the
History of the Acts of the Apostles tells us, that Christ's Apostles had no
better usage; every age since even to this present time will give in the proof
of this truth.

This refusal is general.
1. In respect of the Doctrine of the Gospel, which men generally look upon as
strange and incredible, and so will not believe it, but rather scoff at it.
Thus it was when St. Paul preached Jesus, and the Resurrection at Athens.
Anastasis, Occumenius.
the Greek word for the Resurrection, they took for some new God says
Occumenius. Some of Christ's hearers, heard him, wondered, and so departed.

2. In respect of Gospel-discipline, which seems hard, so men will not submit
to it. Those that take up Christ's yoke, must deny themselves, how hardly are
men brought to put their necks to his yoke? Many are resolute against Christ's
government, Luke 19.14. his Laws and Ordinances are slighted by many.

3. In respect of Gospel-professours, men generally contemn them as despicable,
and care not for their company, John 7.49. Some will have no converse with
them: others bitterly reproach them, and desperately persecute them; and how
few do heartily close with them!

Q. Why is this refusal so general?

Resp. The three grand enemies of man's salvation do oppose Gospel-provision.

1. The world, or the powers of the earth without us. And though some do
overcome the world, 1 John 5.4. yet experience tells us, how many the world
overcomes with its frowns and favors.

2. The flesh, or the power of corrupted nature within us: our carnality is
contrary to the spirituality of the Gospel, Romans 8.7. the Gospel bids us make
no provision for the flesh, Romans 13.14. that is for sinful lusts, but the flesh
would have all provision for it self.

3. The Devil, or the power of hell beneath us, who blinds the minds of
unbelievers, 2 Cor. 4.4. they cannot see the excellency of the Gospel, thence
it comes to pass, they oppose it so much. Men generally do no better, because
generally they know no better, 1 Cor. 2.8.

CHAP. III.
Use 1. THis informs us, that Christ's flock is a little flock, Luke 12.32. few
there be that find the way that leads to everlasting life. Lucian says, good
men are very few. Sutton lect. on Romans 11.
They will stand in a little room compared with the rest of the world. Dr.
Sutton says, divide the whole world into three parts with Ptolomy, or into
four with some latter writers; or with some Geographers into six; and you shall
find one of six that profess the true God. Those that do, are driven into a
narrow compass of the North-west: and in that company take out Atheists,
Papists, Newtrals, Worldlings, and Hypocrites; the remainder will be very
small; nothing to the others.

Here also see, that multitude is no true note of a Church, as the Papists say.
The Church was once contained in the family of Seth, Genesis 6.2. afterward in
the Land of Canaan. Since Christ's coming, how has it been crowded through the
defection under Antichrist's reign into a small compass. Augustine says, we
must not number, but ponder the men, to find out the true note of a true
Church. Another of the ancients says, that a Church consists not in the
multitude of number, but in the goodness of virtue.

Use 2. Let me give a Caution in diverse things.

1. Though men generally refuse true happiness, yet men generally desire some
kind of happiness, Psalm. 4.6. All desire happiness, though they desire it
ignorantly, confusedly, and preposterously. They make toward happiness as in a
mist, in a wilderness, in and out; sometimes they think of one thing, sometimes
of another to make them happy. The Heathens groped after happiness, but could
not find it. Such natural desires to happiness le^t in fallen man, are called
by some of worth a stock to graft the Plant of grace upon.

2. Though men generally refuse the Gospel, yet there may be more receive it
then we are aware of. Elias thought ^e was left alone, Romans 11.3. but he was
not: Obadiah had hid an hundred of them in a Cave: And God had reserved seven
thousand who had not bowed the knee to Baal.

3. Though men generally refuse the Gospel, yet many do receive it. Christ
brings many sons to glory, Heb. 3.10. there were an 144000 sealed, Rev. 7.4.
They are many considered in themselves, though few compared with others.

4. Though the Jews generally refused the Gospel, yet they shall generally
receive the Gospel: and so All Israel shall be saved, Romans 11.26. Some by [all
Israel] understand the whole people of God consisting both of Jews and
Gentiles: So Calvin, Osiander, Theod^ret, St. Augustine. Some the Jews only, so
Pareus.

CHAP. IV.
Use 3. BE exhorted then not to follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2.
follow them not.

1. In their guids by which they are led. Argumentum turpissimum est Turba.
Seneca.
Which are 1. Humane commands. The multitude in matters of Religion are carried
by the Edicts and Commands of their Governors in all times. The ten Tribes
walked willingly after the commandment of Jeroboam, Hos. 5.11. though it was to
a false worship. Those that take up any form of Religion for men's sake, will as
soon lay it down again for men's sake. Witness those many turnings in this
Nation in a short space in the Reign of King Henry VIII. King Edward VI. Queen
Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. 2. Humane examples, though never so corrupt. The
conversation of men naturally is traditional, according to what they have
received from their forefathers, 1 Pet. 1.18. walking like an herd of Cattle,
treading in the steps of one another without any consideration: follow not such
brutish guids.

2. In the way wherein they walk, follow them not there: it is the broad way
that the [many] of the world walk in, Matthew. 7.13. that way which is easiest,
or most pleasing to flesh and blood they take. Per viam publicam ne ingredere,
says Pythagoras.

Secondly, be persuaded to live contrary to the multitude: act upon higher
principles, lead another kind of life than the most do; swim against the
stream. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, Matthew. 7.13, 14. The way to
heaven is up-hill, it is directly contrary to that way which the most walk in.
What do ye more than others? Matthew. 5.47. The true godly man is set apart from
the multitude, Psalm. 4.4. He acts apart from others. Noah lived contrary to all
the old word, Genesis 6.9.

Consider, that the broad way, that the many go in, leads to destruction,
Matthew. 7.13. the refusers and disobeyers of the Gospel are punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, 2 These. 1.8, 9. No sin
will gripe so in hell (says one) as unbelief, or disobedience against the
Gospel: when a man shall think, I might have been delivered, but I cast away my
self by refusing those rich offers tendered to me in the Gospel. Walk therefore
in the narrow way, that Christ's little flock walks in, for this leads to
everlasting life, Matthew. 7.14.

CHAP. V. With One Consent, etc.]
IN these words we have the second particular, in the refusal by the Guests
invited to the Gospel-provision: the unanimity or conspiracy in their refusal:
Potest commodissime suppleri (...), aut (...) Beza. (...). Camerar.
they refuse with one consent. Though there be a defect of the word for
[consent] in the original, yet it is necessarily supplied in the Translation,
to make the sense in our language. The Greek Tongue speaks thus concisely in
other writings. This [one consent] Theophilact interprets by compact, or
constitution, intimating the close combination of these refusers of
Gospel-provision.

Observe. The refusers of the Gospel do agree together in that, though they may
differ in several respects.

1. Though they differ in nation, yet they agree against the truth. Gebal,
Ammon, Amalek, etc. Psalm. 83.6, 7, 8. here were ten sorts of people confederate
against God and his people: yea, some of them were near allied to Israel, whom
God would not suffer the Israelites to molest, when they came out of Egypt,
Deuteronomy. 2.4, 5, 9. They combine here against Israel, to cast them out of God's
inheritance, so ill did they reward them.

2. Though they differ in Religion, yet they agree to oppose the Gospel. Thus
the Romans and the Jews: the Romans worshipped many Gods, the Jews but one God,
and that the true God, yet both these people combined against Christ, and put
him to death. The Gentiles and people of Israel were gathered together, Act.
4.27. though they agreed not in the profession of Religion, yet they agreed in
the persecution of Religion, and that with extremity of malice.

3. Though they differ in opinion, yet they agree to oppose them, that hold to
the truth of the Gospel. The Council before which St. Paul was brought in
defense of the Gospel, one part was Pharisees, and the other part was
Sadducees, Act. 23.6. The Pharisees held the Resurrection; the Sadducees were
against it: yet both oppose St. Paul's Doctrine.

4. Though they differ in affection, yet they agree in dis-affection to Christ.
Herod and Pilate were made friends in putting Christ to death, Luke 23.12. It Is
ordinary to see some great Persons that envy one another, to be as one in
opposing good men.

5. Though they differ in factions and parties, yet they can agree together
against the godly party; as the Herodians and the Pharisees against Christ,
Mark 12.13. The Herodians were Courtiers, and sought to bring in Tyranny; the
Pharisees were popular, and sought to maintain the peoples liberties.

CHAP. VI. How they agree will appear.
1. IN the design they drive at, which is to oppose the power of godliness;
they set themselves against the holy Child Jesus, Act. 4.26. The seed of the
serpent is against the seed of the woman. That quarrel presently brake sorth in
Cain against Abel.

2. In the principle they act from* natural light, carnal reason, which is not
(...) dimsighted about, but prejudiced against spiritual things, natural men
^^ing careless of the pr^sence of God, as they are void of the sea of God, Romans
3.18.

3. In the (...) all, by, (...) own will, their (...) their law, Ep^. 2.2, 3.
and not the w^ll of God or his law. The will of a natural man is ^ully for sin,
though his conscience may appear against it: Thus wicked men oppose the Gospel
with one consent, their will standing in direct opposition to God's will.

4. In the way which they take to carry on their opposition to the Gospel.

1. They lay their heads together as one in a way of consultation. The Rulers
take counsel together against the Lord, and against his ann^inted, Psalm, 2.2.
They have (as it were) a stock of knowledge in common, and are ready to afford
each other assistance in resisting the truth.

2. They join their hearts together in a way of approbation taking pleasure in
the sins of one another, Romans 1.32. what one acts, the other likes and
approves; though the one and the other be disapproved of God.

3. They strike their hands together as one, in a way of confederation, Psalm.
83.5. they enter into league, make all as sure as they can on their side.

Quest. How comes it to pass, that sinners thus agree together?

Resp. 1. They are endued with one nature; and so are all as it were of one
complexion and disposition. No wonder to see them act alike, who are alike; it
were a wonder, if they should not.

2. They serve one Master. Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils, whose interest it is
not to have his kingdom divided against it self, Matthew. 12.25, 26. The Prince
of the Air has his several Regions and Regiments, and in such order, that all
act one under another unto the same end.

CHAP. VII.
Use 1. THis informs us, Ejusdem doctrinae vinculum, knits together the old
Jewish Church with the Christians. Calvin.
that consent is no true mark of the true Church. Consent may be among the
wicked in the kingdom of Antichrist, Rev. 13.16. Consent therefore simply
(says Mr. Perkins) unless it be joined with true faith, and true doctrine, is
not of force to declare unto us the true Church. The unity of the Church
depends upon the unity of the Doctrine and Covenant, which is therein professed
and believed. Make Doctrines diverse, and you make Churches diverse: There
cannot be one Church, but there must be one faith, and one doctrine believed.

Use 2. Yet notwithstanding take these Cautions.

1. That sinners do dissent among themselves, though they do thus sin with one
consent, both the erroneous and vicious sort of sinners. Error, as it differs
from the truth, so it jarrs with it self. Wicked men do not only oppose the
godly, but one another, and that most violently. Ahab not only persecutes
Elijah the Prophet, but also fights against Be^hadad the Syrian. Two wicked
Kings oppose one another, 1 King. 20.

2. Yet a particular sinner dissenteth with himself: the light of nature, and
the corruption of nature do oppose one another: natural conscience, and natural
corruption do maintain a conflict. As the regenerate part, and the unregenerate
do fight in the godly man, so does an enlightened conscience, and corrupted
nature in the wicked man.

Use 3. Be exhorted not to consent to sinners if they entice thee, Prove. 1.10.
yield not, though they set upon thee with several arguments, as

1. The safety of the attempt, l^^king privily without peril, without any fear
to have their plot discovered, or their persons punished. To this oppose the
intuitive and vindicative eye of God.

2. The facility of their exploits, to prevent the doubts that may arise
against their proceeding, for the difficulty of their attempts, and
doubtfulness of their success, ver. 12. but God can undo all they do.

3. The commodity that they shall get by their attempt, not trifles of no
value, but riches of all sorts, wherein they shall store their houses, as
conquerours do when they sack Cities, ver. 13. but here oppose the loss of the
soul for ever.

4. The equality of the distribution of the commodity, all shall share alike,
ver. 14. To this oppose the place of the damned. There will be one hell to hold
all those sinners which now go on to sin thus with one consent. A good
Gentlewoman afflicted in conscience, uttered these words a little before her
death. O Lord! let me not go to hell where the wicked are, for Lord, thou
know, I did not love their company here.

Secondly, consent unto that which is contrary to sin.

1. Consent to the law of God, that it is good, ^ote for it, and with it, as
the rule of right, even when you see you cannot perfectly fulfill it.

2. Consent to the worship of God, to serve him with one consent, Zeph. 3.9.
Agree to all God's ordinances, slight not any of them.

3. Consent to the people of God, be one with them, that are one with the Lord:
all ye that Profess Religion, see that with one mind and mouth ye glorify God,
Romans 15.6. If sinners have their [Come] to wickedness, should not Saints much
more have their [Come] to holiness? Isa. 2.3, 5. Zech. 8.21.

Oh now beautiful is unity with verity, consent and concord with truth! It is
the Livery of Christ, the badge which he has given for his Disciples to wear,
John 13.35. his seamless Coat, and unbroken body represented it. It is the
glory of heaven; there the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one in essence:
there Saints are one in affection and communion without any division, and here
Christ would have us so one, John 17.21.

SERMON. VII.
LUKE 14.18. They all began to make excuse.
CHAP. I.
THe next thing considerable is, Lyra in Gloss. Ordinar.
how ready, or forward they are to refuse. They began to make excuse.] Lyra
says here, the Kingdom of heaven is shut against none, but such as shut it
against themselves, and that by the profession of their own language. They
began. Man begins the quarrel, though God begins the pacification. They began,
and so continued, Chemnit. in loc.
as that Greek word, (...) denotes, putting off the grace offered, till they
excluded themselves from true happiness. Here note,

Obser. That men exclude themselves from the good things of the Gospel: when
God begins to offer them life and salvation, they begin to refuse it.

1. They exclude themselves from the grace of the Gospel, as
1. From the outward means of grace, Gospel Ordinances, Church Priviledges:
they put the word of God from them, Act. 13.46. they thrust it away in a rude
manner. Walking in Gospel Ordinances is called order, Col. 2.5. Men therefore
who refuse to walk orderly, or regularly, according to the rule of the Gospel,
do deprive themselves of the privileges of the Gospel.

2. From the inward work of grace: here men exclude themselves by resisting the
Holy Ghost, when he comes by his motions to their hearts, Act. 7.51. This is
called sometimes quenching of the spirit, 1 These. 5.19. grieving the spirit,
Ephesians. 4.30. vexing the spirit, Isa. 63.10. This is done by many reiterated acts
of opposition unto spiritual motions. A man is grieved, when one does him a
discourtesie, but when he shall go on to heap up discourtesies, this stirs
up vexation: sometimes it is called Tempting the spirit, Act. 5.7. sometimes
despising, or offering despite to the spirit, Heb. 10.29. this is the highest
injury that any can offer to the spirit of grace.

2. They exclude themselves from the glory of the Gospel.
They shut themselves not only out of the kingdom of grace here, but also out
of the kingdom of glory hereafter, judging themselves unworthy of everlasting
life, Act. 13.46. their own actions passing judgment upon them, that they are
not meet, nor fit to inherit glory.

CHAP. II.
Quest. HOw do men exclude themselves?

Resp 1. By sin in the general, and in special by unbelief. This hindered the
Jews from entering into Canaan, Heb. 3.19. this broke them off from all
spiritual communion with God, Romans 11.20. Sin is truly a man's own, what his
sin does, he himself does. And as for the sin of unbelief, it is an
unwillingness to close with Gospel-provision, John 5.40.

That men exclude themselves from grace and glory will thus appear.

1. God does not exclude man.
1. Consider the perfect state of grace wherein God made man. God made man
upright, Eccles. 7.29. man might then have gone to heaven in his Primitive
natural strength.

2. Consider the plentiful means God has prepared for the recovery of lost
man: bread enough, and to spare, Luke 15.17.

3. Consider the free offer of grace which God makes to men in such indefinite
and general terms, Mark 16.15. None are to be put by from hearing the Gospel
preached, and none are to be put by from other ordinances, that will subject
themselves to the Gospel preached, submitting to the rules thereof. Yea, Christ
is ready to receive all that come to him, John 6.37.

4. Consider the influence of divine grace, which prevails upon many to
everlasting life, through Christ Jesus, Heb. 2.10.

2. The Devil cannot exclude man from happiness, 1 John 4.4.
He may present objects, and ply men hard with his suggestions, but he cannot
force the will of man. Satan does what he can to undo man: he tempts men to sin
against God, and accuses men for sin before God; but his power is limited, God
has him in a chain, and will not suffer his servants to be tempted above
measure. So then, if God does not, and the Devil cannot, it follows, that men
exclude themselves from happiness.

CHAP. III.
Use 1. THis informs us, that man's worst enemy is himself: men naturally are
cruel to their own souls, Hos. 13.9. self-destroyers. Man carrys the fire in
his own bosom which consumes him. Men corrupt themselves, and so destroy
themselves, Jude ver. 10. corrupting themselves spiritually, clouding their
natural reason, and hindering the supernatural actings of the soul; and so
corrupting themselves eternally; drowning themselves first in sin, and then in
perdition: And man's great torment in hell will be by reflecting upon himself.
This is the never dying worm, Mark 9.44. the furious reflecting of a man's own
conscience upon his former wilful folly.

Use 2. Take this Caution. Though men exclude themselves, yet where God is
pleased to put forth sufficient grace, man cannot hinder his own salvation.
Though such is the nature of man's will, that it cannot be forced, yet such is
the power of God's grace, as to overcome the will of man.

Use 3. Be exhorted, not to cast away your selves; no, not upon any pretense
whatsoever. Begin not to make your plea from any outward privilege, (...).
Isidor.
Luke 3.8. look to the power of godliness, and fruits of righteousness, and
rest not in any form of Religion, lest one day you begin to say to the
mountains, fall on us, Luke 23.30. Yield your selves unto God, Romans 6.13. fear
him. This is to begin to be wise, Prove. 1.7. The beginning of the Olympian
combats was the putting off their garments: cast away your filthy rages, your
sins, not your souls: come into the kingdom of grace, and go on till you come
to the kingdom of glory. Examine your selves, whether you are in a state of
grace: prove that, and it will be evident, you do not exclude your selves,
neither shall you be excluded from happiness.

CHAP. IV. To make excuse, etc.]
WE are now to consider the plausibility, or hypocrisy of the refusal. The
Greek word, (...) deprecari, repudiare, recusare. (...) Plutar (...) Aristid.
(...). Porphyr.
which is here translated [excuse] signifies to refuse; so it is used by
several Authors. Though as Marlorat upon this verse takes notice, that it is
elegantly interpreted to excuse, because excusing is a refusal with the
allegation of a reason, such is the re usal in this Text: the Refusers pretend
reason for what they do, some color and pretext for their practice: excuse the
matter they would, though it be but a poor shift they make. Here note,

Observe. Sinners have their excuses, pleas, and shifts for what they do. There
be those, who will have none of Christ, and yet would put it off fairly if they
could, Psalm. 36.2.

Quest. What are the excuses, or pleas which sinners make?

Resp. 1. They plead multiplicity of worldly business, as here in the following
words of my Text: So in Matthew. 22.5. men pretend, that their particular
callings to maintain their families require so much time, that they cannot
afford time for the serious duties of Religion.

2. Men plead the frequency and urgency of outward temptations: they make the
presenting of an object an excuse for the irregularity of their act^^g. Men are
ready to excuse themselves by accusing others. Thus Adam said the fault upon
^he woman, and the woman upon the serpent, Genesis 3.12, 13. how ready are people
to say, such a one temp^ed me, and persuaded me, without reflecting upon the
naughtiness of their own hearts in yielding, 1 Samuel 15.9, 15, 21.

3. They plead the society and fellowship of others in their way, Prove. 1.14.
they shall fare no worse than such and such. Nay perhaps, some may be ready to
flatter themselves by the foul faults of holy men, whiles they read of Noah's
drunkenness, Lot's incest, David's adaltery, etc. never minding the repentance
of those holy men. Thus, as some abuse the vices of Saints to profaneness, so
others abuse the virtues of Saints to superstition.

4. They plead the weakness of their nature, when they are overtaken with
passion, drunkenness, or uncleanness, and they cry out, we are but flesh and
blood, no Saints or Angels, what would ye have of us? are we not all sinners?

5. They plead the smalness of the fact, excusing their sins by extenuating
them: dealing with their debts toward God, as the unjust Steward did by his
Masters debts, setting down fifty for an hundred, Luke 16.6. pounds are made
shillings, shillings pence, pence farthings, and farthings nothing. Great sins
are made little sins, and little sins no sins.

6. They plead their purposes and intentions to do otherwise than they have
done: some are semper victuri, as Seneca speaks, trifling away their time so
long, till they fool away their happiness. They say it is time enough to mind
Religion hereafter; they hope when they are older, they shall be wiser: and
they have heard of some that have been converted, and accepted at the last.

7. They plead the unnecessariness of such strictness in Religion: fair and
soft goes far; what needs there such ado? Acts of charity, the evidence of
piety, seems profuseness to some, Mark, 14.4. and some that are backward
themselves, are angry with others for being more liberally minded.

8. They plead the safety of their persons, and security of their Estates, Joh.
11.48. it is dangerous to men's outward welfare to be too zealous in matters of
Religion. He that follows truth too close at heels, as one says, may have his
brains dashed out. When the Emperor sent to the Athenians to give him divine
honor, take heed says Demades, you be not so busy about heavenly matters, as
to lose your earthly possessions.

9. They plead an impossibility to fulfill the law of God: framing to themselves
this damnable illusion, and soul-deceit, that seeing they cannot with all their
care satisfy the law, they will loosen the reins of concupiscence to all
manner of iniquity: do what good they car, they shall break the law: and do
what evil they will, they can but break the law.

10. They plead the inequality of God's ways. This is the highest step, when
men charge God with their sins. To excuse themselves, they will accuse God
himself, calling his ways ruggid and unequal, Ezekiel. 18.24. as though God were
unequal in electing of persons, Romans 9.18, 19. that he should chase some,
refuse others: that he should make choice of the unlikeliest persons for
natural parts to do him service. And as though he were unequal in the governing
of the world, that his will should be a law: this men think hard, who measure
God by themselves; that some should have so much, and others so little in the
world: that the wicked should prosper, and the Righteous suffer. Finally, as
though he were unequal in the conferring of rewards, that those who have
wrought but one hour, should have as much as those who have born, the heat of
the day, Matthew. 20.12. and as though God were unequal in the inflicting of
punishments, that when all deserved to be damned, some only should be damned,
and others should go free.

Quest. Why do sinners make excuse?

Resp. 1. It is the nature of fallen man so to do, Genesis 3.12, 13. fin and
shifting came into the world together. The flesh wants not excuses, nature
needs not to be taught to tell her own tale.

2. Sin is so ugly, that sinners will not have it appear in its proper colors;
therefore foul sins must have fair names to make them go down the better. As
lust must be called love, Prove. 7.18. should sin appear in its cursed nature,
and wretched effects, it would affright men, that they could take no pleasure
in committing it.

CHAP. V.
Use 1. THis informs us of the madness of wickedness, Eccles. 7.25. that men
should thus dote upon the great enemy to their souls: to excuse sin, and plead
for that, what is it but for a man to reason himself out of heaven? it is in
effect to bespeak their misery, to tell God, they care not to be saved, or they
will damn themselves.

Here also see the difference between sinners and Saints: the one extenuate and
excuse their sin, the other aggravate their sin, Psalm. 51.4, 5. They that have
grace. 1. They acknowledge and confess it, and that with all the circumstances
of it, and with the rise, or root of all sin, viz. Original c^rruption. 2. They
bewail it, Romans 7.24. bemoaning themselves because of it, Jer. 31.18. their
enclinableness to break God's laws is ready to break their hearts. 3. They
revenge it, 2 Cor. 7.11. out of deepest self-abhorrency buffeting the flesh,
and abridging themselves of those lawful comforts which they have abused. Mary
Magdalen wiped Christ's feet with the hair of her head, which she had formerly
abused unto pride and wantonness.

Use 2. Though sinners excuse their sin, yet their sin will accuse them. Now it
is so by fits, as their consciences are awakened, which fly in their faces, and
bring their sins into remembrance, Romans 2.15. and hereafter it will be done to
some purpose; so that their present excusing of sin is but as the hagging of a
serpent in their breast to sting themselves to death. Though men endeavor to
hide their sin, yet they may be assured, their sin will discover them, and find
them out, Numb. 32.23. Moreover all the pleas and excuses of sinners are such
as cannot stand before God's righteous Tribunal. Sinners and ungodly ones with
all their excuses shall not stand in the judgment of God, Psalm. 1.5.

Use 3. Do not deceive your selves by vain excuses, or false reasonings, Jam.
1.22. the Greek word is (...), a term of Art implying a sophistical argument,
or false syllogism: as thus, They that hear the word shall be saved: But we
hear it, Ergo. Oh do not thus cheat your selves! Practice what you hear the
mak^^^ of an erroneous principle the bottom of hope is dangerous and deluding.
Consider, that the hope of the hypocrite will perish: it is compared. 1. To a
rush, Job 8.12, 13. which, as it yields no fruit, so it withers sooner than
other herbs, that are not seated so near the water. 2. To a Spider's web, ver.
14. as soon as houses come to be cleansed, down go cob webs: and when God comes
with the bosom of destruction, hypocrites perish from his presence, Isa. 33.14.
stubble and chaff, and Spiders webs, will never be able to stand before the
fire and the wind, and the besom of his wrath.

CHAP. VI. The first ^^^d unto him, I have ^ought a piece of ground, and I must
needs go and see it, etc.]
THe excuses which these Recusant guests make, Lyra in Gloss. Ordin.
are several, as appears by the particularizing of these ^^ree, by which Lyra
would have meant those (...) Capital Crimes, Pride, Covetousness, Luxury. But
Sa^meron (though a Papist) puts by that interpretation as impertinent,
Advertendum est in omni^^s his ex^usationi^^s nihil ad luci, quod sit per se
malum, se^^^onesta tantum and licita exercitia, etc. Salmer. in loc.
because the three things here mentioned, are no sins in themselves, but honest
and lawful: as our Interpreters do likewise take notice of, which gives us
occasion to note something from all the three excuses put together, before we
take a view of them apart: none of the three ^e^ng to ^e condemned in
themselves, but the immo^erate affection which men bear to them, and the
unlawful use which they (...) of them, that being the rain of men. Hence I
note,

Obser. That the unlawful use of lawful things is the ruin of many: it is the
case of all these three here mentioned, Matthew. 22.5, 7. I shall give some
instances of this nature; and begin with those in this Parable, as

1. Purchasing, buying of a piece of ground. It Is lawful to buy and sell, yea
needful: it upholds propriety, without which men would live most confusedly.
Propriety is the boundary, which keeps off men from devouring one another, it
distinguishes persons, families, and countries, so that what upholds that,
must needs be lawful, and very convenient, and such is purchasing, Jer. 32.7.
yet how is this abused to the ruining of men's souls, through their covetousness
and oppression, in laying house to house, and field to field, Isa. 5.8. how
many do bustle for room in the world, as though they were born for no other end
than to enlarge their territories and dignities.

2. Farming: employing yokes of Oxen to till the ground: This is lawful, though
our sins have made the whole Creation groan; yet it is lawful for us to use the
creatures for our need; and this of Tillage is very needful. The first man was
an Husbandman in his innocence, God put Adam into the Garden to dress it, Genesis
2.15. So that Gardening, plowing, grasing, is lawful, but the abuse of this
r^ines many, while they so dig in the earth, as to neglect looking up to
heaven, unto that. God which teaches men to plow and sow, Isa. 28 26.

3. Marr^ng: which is so lawful, that it is the only way lawfully to people the
world by, to maintain Churches and commonwealths upon the face of the earth. It
was ordained in the state of man's innocence for mutual comfort, Genesis 2.22.
it is continued since the fall, and now is a special remedy against sin, 1. Cor.
7.2. yet the abuse of this undoes many, when they observe not God's bounds in
entering into it, nor God's ends in their using it, but besot themselves with
it, as in the days of Noah.

4. Eating and Drinking, which is so lawful and needful, that it is the
ordinary way to continue the individuals of mankind, to keep alive particular
persons: so bread is the staff of life, yet the abuse of meats and drinks
undoes many; when men do not only feed their bodies, ^^t also pamper their
lusts, which they should not make provision, for Romans 13.13, 14.

5. Recreation: it is lawful to refresh our minds and bodies with honest and
harmless exercises, but the abuse of this in the timing of it, allowing
themselves as much, or more time for play than for work, this ruins many. The
wise man having spoken of honest and lawful pleasures, which a good man may
^ake in this life, Eccles. 2.24. he presently proceeds to the timing of all
things, Chap. 3. which is diligently to be observed.

6. Apparel: this is lawful, and very useful, and in some sort necessary to
safeguard us from the injury of the weather, and from the shame of sin; yet
the abuse of it undoes many, as to the materials of it, when that exceeds the
bounds of men's Estates; and as to the fashion of it, when that exceeds the
bounds of modesty. Though apparel must be put on, yet there is a putting on of
apparel condemned, 1 Pet. 3.3. when it is scarce used as a covering, but as a
bait.

7. The hair of our heads; it is lawful to wear it, yet how does the abuse of it
tend to the ruining of many: the excessive lenght of it, frizzles and bushes of
vanity maintained by many men: though that order which God has set in nature
condemns such excess, 1 Cor. 11.14. as likewise the cutting of it by women.
God has punished this unnatural excess in hair by that loathsome disease in
the hair called plica polonica, as Hercules de Saxonia has observed.

CHAP. VII.
NOw let us see some acts of the unlawful use of lawful things, as

1. When lawful things are used contrary to the owner of them, when men employ
the creatures which he gives against himself, Hos. 2.8. as here God
complains of their giving his wine, and oil, etc. unto Baal. So elsewhere he
complains of their giving his Children to Molech.

2. When lawful things are used contrary to the nature of them: as when men
will place a sign of the love and favor of God in the bare enjoyment of
worldly possessions. God has placed no such thing in them, Eccles. 9.2.

3. When lawful things are used contrary to the manner wherein we ought to
partake of them; as feeding upon the creatures without fear, Jude ver. 12. in
reference to God, without any ^ear of his presence, or displeasure: as to
themselves and others, without any fear of hurt or shame; feeding unmeasurably,
lustfully; making the plenty God has given them, but as fodder, and fuel to
their lusts.

4. When lawful things are used contrary to the end of them; viz. God's glory,
and man's good.

This comes to pass from the corruption of man's nature, which is ready to ^urn
all into poison, and poison is ready to (...): this like that herb in the
portage t^a^ made the sons of the P^^phets cry o^^, Oh ^ho^^^^ of God, there is
death in the p^t, 2 King. 4.39, 40.

CHAP. VIII.
Use 1. IF the abuse of lawful things undoes many, then the use of (...) will,
1 Cor. 6.9, 10. such ^s lying s^ea^ing, swearing, scoffing, wh^^ing, etc. (...)
is called an undefiled inheri^^^ce, 1 Per. 1.^. either God must change his
mind, or men must change their manners, or else there can be no heaven for
polluted sinners.

This also informs us, that there is no condition, but it has its temptation.
That which is very lawful, may be near unto that which is sinful and hurtful,
when we think our selves farthest from sin, we may be soon overtaken with it.
Art thou single, thou may think thy self free from worldly cares? art thou
married, thou may think my self free from carnal lusts etc? but alas! how
does experience evidence our self-deceit herein!

Use 2. Though the unlawful use of lawful things undoes many, and so we ought
to be very wary about the use of many lawful things, yet

1. Let no man call that unlawful and forbidden, which is lawful, Act. 10.15.
though the Gospel does strictly tie us, as to the substantial parts thereof,
yet it gives a great latitude as to externals. It Is indeed hard to deal in the
world, and not to be defiled; yet let that bear the blame that should, the
carnal lusts within us, not the worldly things without us.

2. Let no man censure another for the use of those things which are lawful,
Who art thou that judge another man's servant? Romans 14. ver. 4. we are fellow
servants serving one Master; we should not judge one another, but refer all
judgment to the Master.

3. Let no man bind up himself from the use of lawful things. Though it be good
as occasion may serve, to forbear that which we may lawfully do, yet it is not
good rashly to tie up our selves by vows from ever using such things again.
Amercements, and strict punishments (methinks) is safer for the preserving of a
body politic, or natural, than vows or oaths; this latter proving such a snare
many times.

Use 3. Make a r^ght use o^ Christian liberty about lawful and indifferent
things, Gal. 5.1. for these things most men do offend. Things expressly
forbidden are too gross for a face that is but modest by profession; but in
things indifferent there appearing a character of lawfulness stamped upon them,
men are apt to grow too peremptory in their use. Wherefore as to such things,
look not only at the lawfulness of things, but at the expediency of them, 1
Cor. 10.23. that is thus.

1. In reference to God, look at things as they tend to his glory, the exalting
of his name and worship, and take heed of all that derogate from his glory,
Romans 14.6.

2. In reference to your serves, look at things as they suit with that
profession of Religion which you have taken up; (...).
have a care that ye walk worthy of your vocation, Ephesians. 4.1. seemly, comely, or
answerable to the grace of that Gospel which you profess: it is not comely for
grown men to act as little children; nor for men of fashion and quality to play
the peasants: so neither is it comely for Christians, to do all that has a
show of lawfulness.

3. In reference to others, whether good or bad. The good are either weak
Christians or strong; if weak, do not despise them; if strong, do not judge
them. And be sure to mind the things that make for peace, 1 Cor. 16.14. If men
are bad, yet ^o walk, as ^o g^ve them no occasion of off^^ce, but ^o win upon
th^^ by your pure and peaceble carriage tow^^^s them.

Secondly, so use those worldly things, which are ^a^^ I in themselves as not
to abuse them, 1 Cor 7.31.

1. Do (...) abuse your worldly rel^^ions, ver. 29. as not by the exc^ss of
your behavior, so neither by the desect (...); let no earthly relation hinder
you in the exercise o^ your duty in relation unto God. If you weep in the loss
of wife or child, do not weep over much. If you rejoice in the marriage or a
Wife, or birth of Children, do not rejoice over much, v. 30.

2. Do not abuse your worldly possessions; be as if you possessed them not. It
is g^od to be as D^vid, and St. Paul, as a weaned child from, (...) as a
crucified man to the things here below. Things that are gl^ed together, how
hard are they parted asunder!

SERMON. VIII.
Luke 14.18. The first said unto him, I have bought a piece of ground, etc.]
CHAP. I.
WE are now to consider the excuses apart, and see the weight of each by it
self. Touching the first, we may take notice of 1. The matter of the plea given
in. 2. The manner of giving it in: where there is the urgency in pressing it,
and the hypocrisy in coloring it. For the matter of the plea, or the excuse
it self; it is purchasing a piece of ground. By which (says Salmeron) we are
to understand the preferring of worldly greatness before heavenly glory. Villam
emit, qui regna mundi hujus aeternis gloriae bonis Praetulit. Salmeron. Villam
emere, est cura augendi honores, potentiam, possessiones etc. impediri ab
evangelio excipiendo. Mailorat.
Or according to Marlorat, that care of encreasinghonours, power, possessions,
etc. which hinders many from receiving the Gospel; that while their endeavors
are altogether to enlarge their Territories here, to join house to house, and
to add field to field, that they may become great in this world, they neglect
those spiritual things, which make us truly great in the other world, and so
deprive themselves of those eternal and glorious enjoyments.

Sect. 1.
Obser. There be those who so endeavor to enlarge their outward condition
here, that they cut themselves short of a blessed condition for ever. They seek
so much room and place in this world, that they neglect a place in those
eternal mansions in the world to come, Luke 12.17, 20.

-- That endeavor to enlarge the outward condition appears. 1. In respect of
the mind: this is that secret moving cause, from whence external motions do
proceed. When the thoughts are sollicitous in worldly ploddings and
contrivances: when the desires are boundless and bottomless in worldly matters,
there is that unlawful endeavor to outward enlargement, Luke 12.17, 18. This
is the debasement of the mind, when that noble part of us might be employed
about things of an higher nature: for the mind of man to be poring in the
earth, when it might be meditating on heaven, what is this but to invert that
order which God has set in nature?

2. In respect of the body, as to its seeding, clothing, and housing, when all
is excessive. As for the food, when for the quality of it, it must be so
delicate, that plain dishes will not serve the turn, like the Israelites Manna,
which would not go down without Quails, like Elie's Sons, who were not
concented with that liberal portion God allowed them, nor to eat it in that
manner as God had prescribed it to them, but caught at what came to hand, and
would have it raw, that they might Cook it to please their licourous taste, 1 Samuel 2.13, 14. likewise for the quality, when it must be so much, feasting
unmeasurably without the bounds of Christian moderation, when scarce a meal can
be made without something extraordinary: like the rich man, Luke 16.19. faring
deliciously every day, cramping, themselves so fast, that they scarce know what
danger means.

Again, for the clothing, (...) verbum (...). Sic comedunt and bibunt, quasi
cras morituri, sic aedificant, quasi semper victuri sunt. Hieronym.
when that must be so fine and so various; such suits, and such changes of
suits; the finery must be daily, Luke 16.13. or else they think they are as no
body. -- Again, for the housing of the body, when the building of that must be
so stately, and its furniture so costly, or else they think it below them: so
feeding, as though they were to die presently; so building, as though they were
to live perpetually, says St. Hierome, Psalm. 49.11.

3. In respect of the Estate, as to Farms, Possessions, Plantations, or any
kind of Revenue and income, when men do so greedily grasp these things, as
though they would live alone, Isa. 5.8. as they cared not for a Neighbor, or
at least for one to stand upon even ground with themselves, but to hold what he
has from them. It is ordinary to see men of great Estates to scrape riches
together, when they know not for whom, it may be for a fool, Eccles. 4.8.
it may be for a prodigal, it may be for a stranger, it may be for one every
way contrary unto them.

4. In respect of the Name: as to their esteem among others, and their dominion
over others; they would have their fame and their power spread far and near;
they call their Lands after their own names, Psalm. 49.11. that so the name may
occasion frequent discourse and admiration of the person that owes the Land.
Men are prone to set up Absalom's pillar to raise their estimation; and to set
up Nebuchadnezzar's image to show their dominion. Men have an itching humor
that spreads far, to have their dignity admired, and their dominion feared by
others.

5. In respect of their Pisterity, as to the perpetuating themselves in their
Children, seeing they cannot do it in their own persons; how many do adventure
the ruining their souls for the raising their families; and though their
posterity may approve their doings, yet the course they take, is most egregious
folly, Psalm. 49.13.

Sect. 2. How men cut themselves short of a blessed condition by their greedy
endeavors to enlarge their outward condition, appears thus:
I. By this reans they will not come into the kingdom of grace. The rich man in
the Gospel with his great possessions turned his back upon Christ, Matthew. 19.22.

1. The immoderate (...) the world hinders he (...), Phil. 3.19, 20. they are
contrary.

2. The carking care for the body hinders the necessary care for the soul: the
one is opposed to the other, Matthew. 6.32, 33.

3. The greedy grasping of worldly riches hinders the treasuring up of heavenly
riches, Mat. 6.19, 20. the World choaks the Word.

4. The hunting after a name upon earth, takes men off from honoring God's
name upon earth, and from minding whether their names are written in heaven.

5. Those that are al^ogether for their post^^ity, take no care for the Members
of Christ of apply their necessities.

II. B^ca^se they that th^s sh^t themselves out ^f the kingdom of grace, God
will shut them out of the kingdom of glory, Matthew. 19.23. heaven is a stately
Palace with a narrow portal. Men must strip, stoop, and strain, or else they
cannot enter in at that strait gate.

CHAP. II.
Use 1. THis may inform us, that mere worldly men are great loosers whatsoever
they gain, Matthew. 16.26. If they g^^^ never so much of the world, and lose
^^eir souls, their loss is incomparable, and irrep^rable. Though there be a way
to redem men from hell before they die, yet there is no way to redeem them out
of hell after death.

Here likewise ye may see, what a difficult thing it is to come to heaven. When
Christ said, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of God, his
Disciples said unto him, who then can be saved? Matthew. 19.23, 25. because they
knew that all men either are, or would be rich. And when our Savior told them,
he meant it only of those that relied on their riches, Plato speaks the same in
substance with that of our Savior. (...).
yet they remained as much unsatisfied as before, Mark 10.24. because they knew
how pro^e men are to trust in that they do enjoy. Men of power are apt to
de^fie their own strength: Men of morality to advance their own righ^eousness,
and rely on their own merits: Men of wisdom to set up their own reason, and
men of wealth to put their confidence in the wedge of gold.

On what a folly and vanity is it so to be taken up with worldly enjoyments, as
to neglect spiritual endowments! Luke 12.20, 21. is it not a folly to get that
which cannot be kept, and to neglect that, Ex auro froenum non meliorat equum.
which (if once obtained) can never be lost, Psalm. 49.13. what are all those
outward accommodations, alas! they are but as the trappings to the horse, as
Seneca calls them: and an horse is valued by his strength and mettle, not by
the saddle and bridle.

CHAP. III.
Use 2. YEt there may be an enlarged temporal Estate, and an enlarged spiritual
Estate belonging to one and the same person. Men may be rich and righteous too,
great and good too, holy and honorable too; The Godly Patriarchs and Kings are
instances here. There is a Christian Brother of high degree, as well as o^ low
degree, Jam. 1.10. it is said that wealth and riches shall be in the house of
the righteous, Psalm. 112.2, 3.

Yet there may be those who are careless about the world, and about heaven too:
Many are very poor, and very profane: this is to be miserably poor. Every
Parish gives in full proof of this truth, besides Scripture-evidence. A company
of lewd fellows of the baser sort assaulted the house of Jason, to oppose those
servants of God, Paul and Silas, Act. 17.5.

Use 3. Is your outward condition strait and mean? then

1. Do not seek to increase it by unlawful means. If a man says peremptorily,
he will be rich, 1 Timothy 6.9. God says as peremptorily he shall not be rich,
Job 15.29. it is just with God to stop that man's course, who is resolved to go
on what ever stands in his way.

2. Account that best for you, which God has allotted to you, though it be not
so full an estate. It was a good frame of spirit in Moses when he was but in a
mean condition, fled for his life, and was forced to keep sheep in a strange
Country for his livelihood, it is said, he was content, Ex^d. 2.21.

3. Consider, whether God has not made you amends in spirituals, does he not
afford you plentiful means of grace? have ye not many refreshing incomes by his
gracious spirit? some observe of the Church of Christ in Smyrna, 'twas the
poorest, but the purest of the seven, Rev. 2.8.

Secondly, is your outward condition enlarged? then let not the love of these
things get into your hearts, Psalm. 62.10.
as the things themselves come into your hands. Let your hearts inwardly be
enlarged toward that God, who has enlarged your condition outwardly, 1 Chr.
17.16. and let your hands be enlarged toward others in a way of Charity, in
imitation of that God, who has dealt so bountifully with you. And here
especially remember the godly, Gal. 6.10. Thus do not grasp the world too
greedily, nor hold it too closely.

CHAP. IV.
And I must needs go and see it.]
HEre we have the urgency wherewith the excuse is pressed. I must needs, etc.]
or there is a necessity of it. Thus the nature of man makes that necessary,
which is but accessory. Exire and videre, studii and affectuum verba sunt, quae
testantur cor ad villam appositum. Marlorat.
-- Go and see it.] These are words of care and desire, expressing the bent of
the heart toward the purchase bought. Go] He that loves this world, goes
beyond the knowledge of himself, and love of God, after this world. And see it]
here is the fruit of worldly pomp and wealth, to feed the eye; to look upon it.
A little serves to feed the body, the rest is only to feed the eye. A worldling
must go to the farm he has bought, rather than to the feast of fat things
which God has prepared; he thinks it more of concernment to look after his
Land, than to look after his soul, or Jesus Christ. Hence I note,

Observe. That worldly men look upon earthly things as more necessary than
heavenly, Matthew. 6.32, 33.

There is a twofold necessity.
1. A necessity of immutability, opposed to contingency, denoting that which
cannot be otherwise. Thus it must needs be, that offenses come, Matthew. 18.7.
Thus it was necessary, that the Type and the Antitype, should answer each the
other, Heb. 9.23. but this acception of the word is not the meaning here.

2. There is a necessity of coaction, opposed to liberty; when a man does not
use his liberty, (...) vim cogentem oppositam libertati habet.
but ties and binds up himself, 2 Cor. 9.7. This is the sense here, I must
needs go and see it.] That is, I will not forbear, o^ make use of my liber^y to
restrain me from going and seeing it; I look upon it as of more concernment to
busy and please my self in mine estate, than to look after Christ. Some do add
a third necessity, viz. of custom, Luke 23.17. but this is not pertinent here.

CHAP. V.
Sect. 1. The truth of this Doctrine appears.
1. BY the intentness of worldlings thoughts more upon earthly than heavenly
things. Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever,
etc. Psalm. 49.11. one would think it a Tautology to say, Their inward thoughts]
for there are no thoughts but inward; all thoughts are wrought in the secret
shop of the heart: But there is an elegancy in the phrase. The inward for the
very inmost of their thoughts: Their most retired thoughts, and recesses of the
soul are about these things, which evidenceth, that these things lie nearest
their hearts.

2. By placing their choice upon earthly before heavenly things. They choose
their own ways before God's ways, Isa. 66.3. they had rather cherish their
bodies in the enjoyment of the creature, than solace their souls in the
enjoyment of God.

3. Dives qui fieri vult, and cito vult fieri. Juvenal.
By the fixedness of their resolution upon earthly things before heavenly. The
will of a worldling is fully set upon the world, 1 Timothy 6.9. but how wavering
is he about Religion? If he has any faith it is but temporary: if he make
profession of Religion, it is but while the Sun shines: and he prosecutes some
worldly design when he prosecutes Religion.

4. By the pursuit of their practice after earthly things more than after
heavenly. Their endeavors are more to enlarge themselves outwardly, than to
enrich themselves spiritually, Luke 12.18. Psalm. 127.3.

5. By the delight they take in earthly things before heavenly. They are better
pleased in the bare possessing and keeping these things, than in the using and
spending them: As the phrases of the Text import, of going and seeing the
ground. They are better pleased in fetch^ng a w^lk to, or taking a view of
their Land, than in spending the Revenue of it to their own and others comfort,
for the glory of God. They must needs go to it.] This denotes their giving
themselves to these things, which God gives unto them. Though at that time they
might go to prayer, or to hearing of the word, yet they will be going to their
worldly enjoyments. They must needs see it.] This denotes their glutting
themselves with these things: The lust of the eyes, 1 John 2.16. The most part
of that a worldling has, is but merely to look upon: and yet the eye is not
satified with seeing, Eccles. 1.8.

6. By the grief of their hearts for the loss and want of earthly things more
than of heavenly; sorrowing without hope for the loss of worldly friends, 1
These. 4.13. sorrowing without measure many times for the want of some earthly
trifles. The danger of the soul's loss is not so grievous to be born, as some
petty loss in their outward estate.

Sect. 2. This comes to pass.
I. Through that perverseness that is in man's nature, whence it comes to pass

1. That earthly things best suit with man's sensual appetite, Jam. 3.15. these
low things agree with men's low and base l^sts. Creatures that creep upon the
earth, delight to feed upon the earth.

2. Heavenly things are not discerned by man's natural understanding, 1 Cor.
2.14. there is a maim, not only in the sensual appetite, but in the
intellectuals and higher faculties, so that man cannot see the worth of grace
by the light of nature.

II. Through that deceitfulness which is in the world, which is as a false
Medium, that represents things otherwise than they are. The word is as a
Looking-Glass, Jam. 1.23. which has but one side, and represents all faces as
they are. But the world is as a Perspective-Glass, which has two ends; with
the one it makes things show nearer and bigger than they are; with the other it
makes things show farther and less than they are. The world makes earthly
things show bigger than they are, and heavenly things show less than they are.

III. Through the malice which is in Satan the God of this world, who blinds
the eyes of men, that they cannot see things as they are, 2 Cor. 4.4. No wonder
men do no better, seeing they know no better.

CHAP. VI.
Use 1. THis informs us, that worldly men are most erroneous in their
principles, and most preposterous in their practices, whilst they look upon
earthly things as more necessary than heavenly; when heavenly things are the
only necessary, Luke 10.42. with these we may do well enough without other
things; without these all other things are nothing. Malum est in necessitate
vivere, sed in necessitate vivere necessitas nulla est. Sen. Epist. 12.
It Is not necessary that we be rich, but necessary that be righteous. Know ye
not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9.
It Is not necessary that we be honorable, but it is necessary that we be holy:
for without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.

Here also see the difference between the worldly man and the Godly man. The
Godly man looks upon spiritual things as more necessary than earthly. Job
esteemed the Word of God as more than his necessary food, Job 23.12. our
Savior said, Contemptus est a me and favor and furor.
it was his meat to do the will of him that sent him, John 4.34. David looked
upon the word better than gold, Psalm. 19.10. So did Luther, to whom Vergerius
was sent by the Pope to offer him a Cardinals Cap, if he would relinquish his
opinions. Luther answered, I neither care for the favor, nor fury of Rome.

Use 2. Though worldly men do now account earthly things more necessary than
heavenly, yet one day they will know the contrary by woeful experience; they
will find they were miserably deceived, when they shall see all these things
dissolved, 2 Pet. 3.11. the thought of which should make us more careful about
heavenly things, and less sollicitous about earthly.

Use 3. Live contrary to worldly men in reference to earthly and heavenly
things.

I. Account earthly things no better than they are.

1. Account them but as necess^ry in some respect, not as absolutely necessary.
They are but convenient supplies for your bodies, and that during this life.
The soul has no need of them here, and the body will have no need of them
hereafter, 1 Timothy 6.7.

2. Account them (whiles ye have need of them) not so necessary by far as
heavenly things. The earth is the lowest of creatures, and made to be trampled
under our feet. And the Primitive Christians laid the price of their
possessions at the Apostles feet, Act. 4. ult. Gold and silver are fitter to
set our feet than our hearts upon.

3. Account these earthly things nothing for present use without the word of
God's blessing, Matthew. 4.4. how is it possible that dead things should sustain
our lives without the power of the living God?

4. Account all these things as nothing without Christ, but as a Cipher without
a Figure: therefore look upon the sweetness of these things as they come
flowing from a God in Covenant, Hos. 2.21, 22. the love of the giver is more
than the gift.

II. Account heavenly things as good as they are.

1. Account them real and substantial, though future and invisible, Heb. 11.1.
Christ's flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed, John 8.36.

2. Account them suitable to your present wants and desires, Rev. 3.18. The
Rabbines say of the Israelites Manna, it was according to every ones taste,
this we may say of that Manna that comes down from above, it is according to
every ones relish that savoureth the things of the spirit: it is food, it is
physic, it is water, wine, milk.

3. Account them full and satisfactory, Psalm. 16.11. Think, O Saints, of what
you will, and wish for what you will in an orderly way, here is enough to make
supply. In heaven God will fully manifest himself, and the soul will fully
receive him.

4. Account them as everlasting, not as perishing, look upon them as above the
reach of Thief and moth, Matthew. 6.20. They are neither exposed to violence from
others, nor yet to vanity in themselves. Wherefore live above earthly things,
let not your hearts be glued to the world. It Is against the order of nature for
Heaven and Earth to be joined together: and it is against the order of grace for
a spiritual soul to be glued to earthly things. The mole that lives much
within the earth, was an unclean creature under the Levitical Law: So were
those creatures that did creep upon the earth, Levit. 11.30, 41. Live up to
heavenly things, set your affections on them, Col. 3.1. Spiritualize the
worldlings speech in my Text, by turning it thus. When worldly temptations
come, say, Christ has purchased a possession for me; my heavenly father has
given an inheritance to me; and I must needs go see it. Then mount upwards in
your affections and meditations, and take a view of heaven in the exercise of
faith and hope, and longing desires.

CHAP. VII.
I pray thee have me excused.]
IN these words we have the hypocrisy in coloring the excuse, Seria
hypocrisis est quae rogat. Marlor. Humilitas sonat in voce, superbia in
action. Greg. Magn. (...) ab (...) Quasi plus vereatur Servum quam dominum.
Salmer.
and a very serious piece of hypocrisy it is. Humility sounds in the voice,
but Pride in the action of this Recusant Guest. I pray] the Greek word
signifies lovingly to entreat. That is, I desire thee in all loves, that thou
would excuse my denial as well as possibly thou can. I pray thee] as if he
did more fear the Servant than the Master. Have me excused.] Give in for me as
good a reason as you can. I have told you, how full I am of secular affairs,
and therefore cannot so attend upon your Master as you would have me, and as
others do, who have no such affairs to hinder them. Hence I note,

Observe. That worldlings would fain be exempted from closing with that
Gospel-provision unto which they are invited, Luke 8.33, 57.

This appears.
I. By men's covert-waving of truth, when they do not openly gainsay it. Thus
Felix refused St. Paul's Doctrine, not by denying the truth of what he spoke,
but by procrastinating the convenience of the season, Act. 24.25. others, when
they appear open gainsayers of truth, yet will they do it in civil terms and
carriage. Thus the Gadarens besought Christ to depart out of their Coast, Luke
8.37. they did not persecute, or thrust him out.

II. By their desiring others to excuse them for not accepting
Gospel-invitation, as

1. By what they would have others speak to them, viz. smooth things, Isa.
30.10. that is, flattering words. Sermons of peace and prosperity, which are
pleasing to people, which the false Prophets, or falshearted hearers did
delight in: Or General things, like arrows at rovers, not like arrows at a
mark: they cannot endure to have their consciences touched with any particular,
or close application.

2. By what they would have others speak of them. As they desire that peace may
be spoken to them, so they desire that good may be spoken of them. They would
be accounted, and declared, better than they are. But for any so to speak of
them, what is it but to speak wickedly for God, and to talk deceitfully for
him? Job 13.7, 8.

3. By what they would have others speak from them, and that to the Lord. When
God's hand lies heavy upon them, then they would have others stretch forth
their hands in prayer to God for them, confessing what they are, and promising
to be better, though their practice declares they mean not as they speak, Exodus
9.27, 28.

III. By their living contrary to this Gospel-provision. Though they profess
they know God, yet in works they deny him, Tit. 1.16. as 1. By halting in their
lives, as doubtful what to choose, whether the broad or the narrow way, 1 King.
18.21. the wavering of their judgment appearing in the unevenness of their
practice: the giddiness of their heads appearing in the unsteadiness of their
feet. They that dare not openly to con^ess Christ, they venture secretly to
deny Christ. 2. By loitering in their lives, as if they had no mind to go on in
the way of Religion, contenting themselves with a dull, formal, Laodicean
temper: like an Horse in a M^ll, that joggs on without any me^tle. 3. By
falling off from a strict course of life, Rev. 2.5. leaving off the duties, and
neglecting the ordinances, which once they were in frequent use of, leaving off
the practice of Religion. 4. By wallowing in their lives in that from which
they were reclaimed, 2 Pet. 2, 22. returning to their impure practices, and
turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, living as bad as the worst in all
dissoluteness and profaneness.


CHAP. VIII.
THe reason why it is so, is because the closing with Gospel-provision
requires that practice of Religion, which crosses a worldly interest, and is
unpleasing to flesh and blood.

1. Such practice as is difficult to the mind, as self-examination, 1 Cor.
11.28. a strange work to a worldling, who is always in such a hurry of worldly
business, that he knows not how to be intent upon this close employment. 2.
Such practice as is irksome to the body, as suffering, Heb. 12.11. no
chastening is joyous but grievous. 3. Such practice as is disparaging to the
name, as hating our nearest relations, Luke 14.26. which is accounted barbarous
cruelty and unnaturalness. The hating them, is the not permitting them to
hinder us in the exercise of our love to Christ. 4. Such practice as is
chargeable to the estate, as the maintaining of those in the work of the
Ministry, 1 Cor. 9. the relieving of those in necessity, 2 Cor. 9. 5. Such
practice as is expensive of time, as constant attendance upon means of grace,
Act. 26.7. visiting others, watching over others: the worldling is not at
leisure for such kind of work.
CHAP. IX.
Use 1. TH^s informs us, that the world is a great Cheat, it miserably deludes
men, and deceives men of that which is of greatest concernment.

1. It deceives men of the word. The people said to Jeremiah, we are Lords, we
will come no more to thee, Jer. 2.31. we are grown up to a great height, and we
need none of thy direction: we are Lords, and can make Laws, and will live by
laws of our own making.

2. It deceives men of their hearts, drawing out their affections from God to
the creature, Ezekiel. 33.31. the worldling's heart is as fat as grease, Psalm.
119.70. it is dulled with the world; so not only the affections, but the
judgment is miserably perverted, so that men cannot esteem of themselves, nor
of others as they ought.

3. It deceives men of happiness, drowning men in perdition and destruction, 1 Timothy 6.9. A Boat over-laden, over-turns. A back over-burthened, breaks. A soul
overcome by the world is undone for ever.

Here also ye may see that the worldling is a very fool; so he is called
expressly, Luke 12.20. And does not his practice in our Text prove him one? I
pray thee, says he, have me excused. The worldling is a fool, because he
prefers time before eternity, the body before the soul, and Earth before
Heaven: Or if he will be wise, it is but penny-wise, and pound foolish.

Use 2. Though worldlings while they live would fain be exempted from the duty
of Saints, yet when they come to die, they would fain partake of the happiness
of Saints. Balaam, who was ready to curse God's people, desired that at his
death he might be blessed with them, Numb. 23.10. It is reported of one, who
was a great enemy to that holy man Mr. Perkins, that he spoke these words at
his rial. Well, said he, I could not endure this man while he lived, but now I
wish my soul in his souls stead. There be many, who would venture themselves in
their condition after death, whose conversation they will not imitate before
death.

Use 3. Be exhorted to rectify your judgment by this truth, do not look upon
it as a mercy, always to have what you would have. Think not your case the
better, because things are with you according to your desire. We read of the
murmuring Israelites, that God gave them their own desire, Psalm. 78.29. but
they had it with a vengeance.

Rectify your practice also by this truth. Do worldlings pray to be exempted
from Gospel-provision, do you pray and entreat to be received to it. Earnestly
desire direction from God's ministers, Act. 13.42. as to the ordering of your
conversation, and the obtaining of salvation: and earnestly desire communion
with God's people, and subject your selves to those Rules of God's word, by
which God's people are to walk. And earnestly desire the benediction of God
himself, even that salvation of his whereby he blesses his own people, Psalm.
106.4. and let the truth of your desire herein appear by endeavoring
answerably to please God in every thing, walking so as to expect a blessing.

SERMON. IX.
LUKE 14.19. And another said, I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I go to
prove them, I pray thee have me excused.
CHAP. I.
THis verse conta^ns another plea, put in by one of the Guests, who refused to
accept of Gospel-provision: and it is managed as the former. Here is first the
allegation of the plea, then the urging it with some seeming reason, and
coloring it with a parclel of fair words. The plea alleged, is a bargain
bought of five yoke of Oxen. Salmeron interprets these words of those who
suffered the loss of eternal life, In hoc designantur, qui propter negotia
justa and emolumenta quae ex illis percipiunt, vitae aternae jacturam faciunt.
Salmeron.
by too much minding the things of this life in their worldly business. This
seems to be the true sense of the words, by comparing this Text with other
Texts of Scripture, which express the usefulness of Oxen, as to man's present
life, Psalm. 144.14. Peculium and pecunia a pecore.
Prove. 14.4. The ancients dealt much in Cattle, and Oxen were in great esteem
with them. Their Goods and Money were denominated from Cattle, because their
Riches consisted in Cattle, and their Money was stamped with the image of it.
The Athenians stamped their Money with the figure of an Ox, as Macrobius
testifyeth. So that the buying five yoke of Oxen comprehends all manner of
negotiation in the world. Hence observe,

Observe. That worldly employments are heavenly impediments. These earthly
occupations, are spiritual avocations, Luke 10.40.

CHAP. II.
Sect. 1.
THese worldly employments, or enjoyments, which are such impediments, are 1.
Worldly callings: those particular states or conditions of life, wherein men
busy themselves about the things of this life: that way wherein men trade and
traffic one with another for their present subsistence: the abuse of which the
Apostle rectifies, 1 Cor. 7.20, 21, 24. Men are apt to let their particular
calling encroach upon their general calling of Christianity, not allowing God
that little time which he has reserved from their particular callings for the
exercise of Religious duties. 2. Worldly possessions, Matthew. 19.22. This
hindered the rich Young man from following Christ. I have bought five yoke of
Oxen, says he in my Text, that is, I have the things of this world about me to
busy me. In the former excuse we had the Farm, in this the stock of the Farm.
The use of Oxen is partly for food, 1 King. 19.21. and the stalled Ox is for a
full table, Prove. 15.17. Herod^tus says, that the Persians roasted an Ox whole
upon their Birthday festivals. A full table for the body keeps many from
minding the feast of fat things for the soul. Oxen are also for labor, they
are strong to labor says the Psalmist, made use of in the plough and cart.
What pains do some take in tillage and carriage, where in Oxen are made use of,
insomuch that they usually slubber over Religious exercises? 3. Worldly titles:
I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them. As there is a proving
to try the quality of the beast, so likewise to try the title of the bargain.
One of Christ's company came to him to have an inheritance divided, but he would
not intermeddle with any part of secular Government, but does part of his own
office by preaching against covetousness, Luke 12.13, 14, 15. worldly titles
have several writings, sundry conveyances, many flaws belonging to them: and
though the writings run, To have and to hold, yet there is little hold to be
had of many of them. 4. Worldly discourse: I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and
I must talk of my bargain. They that are of the world, speak of the world, 1
John 4.5. follow a worldling from a Sermon, you shall hardly hear him speak one
savoury word of all those divine truths which he heard; but follow him from a
Fair or Market, ah! how experimentally will he discourse of all worldly
commodities.


Sect. 2.
These worldly things prove heavenly impediments in general thus, not causally,
but occasionally meeting with man's corruption. More particularly thus.

I. They occasion the breaking out of several inordinate affections, as 1.
Inordinate desires. The more worldlings have, the more they crave: they are
like the horsleech, the grave, the barren womb, and the fire, that are never
satisfied, Prove. 30.15, 16. 2. Inordinate anger: what wrath and fury is vented
by men about the things of this world? 3. Inordinate fear lest they and the
things they dote upon, must part from each other. 4. Inordinate sorrow for
worldly losses: the rich man in the Gospel, when Christ bid him sell all and
give to the poor, was exceeding sorrowful, Luke 18.23.


II. They occasion the stopping up the passage to the kingdom of grace; they
deprive men of the communion of Saints upon earth, and they occasion the
shutting up the gate to the kingdom of glory, Matthew. 19.23. Psalm. 15. The
worldling is no inhabitant for heaven.

CHAP. III.
Use 1. SEe here how man's nature within him makes the creature without him such
an h^nderance to him in heavens way. Hence it comes to pass, that 1. Men are
grown more Heathenish by the creatures. The Egyptians worshipped the Ox as a
God, a fine shaped Ox, and the Israelites imitated them, Psalm. 106.19, 20, 21.
Men with us worship the Ox also, that is, when men put their confidence in
their wealth, consisting of Cattle, as Oxen, Sheep, etc. or consisting of Money
and Land, in which respect covetousness is called Idolatry, Colos. 3.5. 2. Men
naturally are more brutish than the creatures. The Ass knows his owner, and the
Ox his Masters crib, but man does not know his Maker and Redeemer, Isa. 1.3.
the Ox by his lowing shows its dependence upon you, but do you by your praying
show your dependence upon God.


It Is no man's wisdom then immoderately to desire worldly employments, or to
overbusie himself with them, for a man brings himself under a curse by lading
himself with thick clay, Hab. 2.6.

Use 2. For Caution: it is not the mere having of worldly enjoyments, or using
of worldly employments, that is any hinderance to a man in heavens way. Job had
7000 sheep, 3000 Camels, and 500 yoke of Oxen; he was the greatest man of the
East, and the holiest man too, Job ^.1, 2, 3. a rare conjunction: great was his
piety, Ex ingentibus Jobi divitiis valde locupletatur ejus sanctitas. Pined. in
loc.
because he continued Godly in the midst of his greatness.

Use 3. Then keep within compass in the pursuit of worldly employments, that
they may be no impediment to you in heavens way. To this purpose 1. Use right
means in getting worldly enjoyments, Prove. 21.5. in buying or selling take heed
of overreaching; get not treasure by a lying tongue. 'Twas a notable speech of
Erasmus, if he spoke in good earnest; that he desired wealth and honor, no
more than a feeble horse does an heavy cloak-bag. 2. In your using worldly
enjoyments, make earth subservient to heaven, Luke 16.9. pursue earthly things
with an holy indifferency, and improve them for an heavenly end. Moreover, be
exhorted to spiritualize this Doctrine by following heavenly employments.


1. Employ your selves about an heavenly calling, Heb. 3.1. in this calling
trade at home by divine meditation, and abroad in an exemplary conversation.

2. Employ your selves about heavenly possessions. And here let Christians look
at that which they have not only in present possession, but also in reversion,
1 Cor. 3.22.

3. Employ your selves about an heavenly title, labor to make your Calling and
Election sure; and to clear your title to, and evidences for heaven, by knowing
that your names are written in heaven.

CHAP. IV. And I go to prove them.]
IN these words the plea was urged, which was before alleged. I go] it is in
the present tense. The worldling thinks there is time enough for heaven, but
for the present he resolves eagerly to pursue the things of this world. The
word (...), signifies to make an exact trial. A metaphor taken from searching,
or trying metals, or from the practice of men, which examine those that stand
for an office. Thus this Farmer in the Text was very exact to prove, or try his
Oxen, to see whether they would bear the yoke, and draw. Here observe,

Observe. That men are very careful and curious to prove what they have of the
things of this world, Eccl. 1.13.

I. This appears by the several things that men do prove.

1. To begin with that in the Text, the Cattle which men use. If a man buy a
yoke of Oxen, he proves them, to see whether they be for his turn: if he buy an
horse, he will prove it to see how it goes, or draws.

2. The Land which men occupy. If men buy a field, they will view it, to see
the quality of the ground, how good it is. If any controversy arise, they will
measure it, to see how much there is of it.

3. The Money that men buy Land or Cattle with, they will try it. Hence we read
of Gold tried, 1 Pet. 1.7. men prove metals by the fire, to separate, and
consume the dross: by the touchstone, to discern good metal from counterfeit:
by the scales, to see whether it be full weight.

4. Men will try their food. Their Wheat is measured, Rev. 6.6. and the bread
that is made of it is weighed. Physic also is tried, a probatum est does well
at the end of a Receipt.

5. The cloth you wear is tried; and your leather is sealed in the Market.

6. The very Highways you travel in, you will have Officers appointed to be
Surveyours of them.

II. This also appears by the course men take to prove what they have.

1. By lavishing away much precious time, rising up early, sitting up late in
following after these things. Time is precious, and looks at eternity, and it is
great pity it should be squandered away about trifles, but how apt are men so
to do?

2. By commencing costly Suits at Law, to try the title of what they have. Men
by their quarrelsome contending thus one with another, show the weakness of
their judgment, and the strength of their passions, 1 Cor. 6.6, 7. methinks it
were men's wisest course to try that first, which usually they come to at last,
viz. a Reference: of those that go to Law, we may say as Charondas once did of
those that go to Sea: though he wondered not at those that went once, yet he did
at those who went again.

3. Wearing their bodies with hard labor: how do men run and ride even to the
surfeiting of their bodies for the increasing of their Estates!

4. Wasting their spirits with carking cares, not with a care of diligence, but
with a distracting care, arising out of distrust of God's providence, Phil.
4.6. the care of the event, which belongs to God, not to us, 1 Pet. 5.7. this
choaks the word, Matthew. 13.22. such cares in the mind, are like thorns in the
flesh, they prick and wound the conscience.

CHAP. V.
THe reasons why men are so careful to prove what they have are these.

1. That they may know what they have: men care not to be at uncertainties
about these worldly vanities; they love to know what is their own: though the
things themselves be but of an uncertain and perishing nature, yet men love to
be at some certainty about them.

2. That they may use what they have. Wherefore is any thing but for some use
or other? therefore money is said to answer all things, Quo mihi divitia, si
non conceditur uti?
because with it men may have wherewithal to supply any of their outward
wants, Eccl. 10.19. money may be turned into any thing.

3. That they may delight in what they have: rejoice and be merry in what they
do enjoy, Eccl. 3.12. it is well, when good Husbandry and good content can
dwell together.

4. That they may hold what they have. Men are apt to gripe hard, and clasp
close the things of this world, and that they may have the faster hold, they
make the surer trial.

5. That they may the better dispose of what they have: when men can hold their
goods no longer in their own hands, yet then they would have it in no other
hands but by their appointment. Their substance they leave to their Relations,
Psalm. 17.14. and their will stands in force when they are gone: and their heirs
are careful to prove the will, to make all therein contained more sure unto
themselves.

CHAP. VI.
Use 1. HEre you may see how worldlings practice will rise up in judgment
against them, who are so careful in proving their worldly estate, but take no
care at all to prove whether they be in a spiritual estate. They are careful to
prove the Oxen they plow with, but are careless in proving the faith they
profess with. They will look that the Gold they take be not too light, but take
no course that themselves be not too light; and so when God comes to weigh them
in the balance of the sanctuary, they are found too light, Dan. 5.27.

Here the Saints practice is justified in spiritual things, from the worldlings
practice in earthly things. If the Farmer in the Text be so diligent to go, and
prove the Oxen which he bought, may not the Bereans be as diligent to prove the
word they have heard, Act. 17.11. shall worldly heirs presently go and prove
the will of those that have left them an Estate? and shall not the heirs of
heaven go and prove the will of the^r heavenly father? surely it concerns God's
children to prove that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, Romans 12.2.

Use 2. For Caution, though some may be too careful, yet others may be too
careless in proving what they have of the things of this world. The field of
the slothful is overgrown with thorns, Prove. 24.30. and so his poverty comes
swiftly and irresistibly. Seneca called sloth the Nurse of beggary, and the
Mother of misery. And Sol^mon calls the sluggard, brother to the prodigal,
Prove. 18.9.

Secondly, though worldlings are so careful to prove what they have, yet they
shall not long hold what they have of the things of this world. Riches make to
themselves wings, Prove. 23.5. they were never true (says one) to those that
trusted them.

Use 3. Spiritualize this point: be careful to prove all things in reference to
the good of your souls, 1 These. 5.21.

1. Prove Doctrines: as Lapidaries do their stones, as Goldsmiths do their
metals. Add to your diligence in hearing, prudence in discerning.

2. Prove Persons: try the spirits, 1 John 4.1.

1. Prove Others, especially those that bring Doctrines contrary to the
Doctrine of Christ. The Scripture tells us, we are not to receive them into our
houses, nor bid them God-speed, 2 Ep. John 10. let us also prove all private
persons, that would have any intimacy of acquaintance and communion with us.

2. Prove Your selves: examine and prove your own selves, 2 Cor. 13.5. -- 1.
Prove your heart, be ^^re that ye be upright in the main, see that you regard
not iniquity in your heart, Psalm. 66.18. -- 2. Prove the graces that are seated
in your heart: try the truth of them. 1. Try the truth of your faith by the
effectualness of it, 1 These. 2.13. That is effectual, which attains its end.
Now the end of saving says is to receive Christ, as he is offered in the
Gospel. That is also effectual faith, which works by love. 2. Prove the truth
of your repentance by the spiritualness of its sorrow, a sorrow according to
God, 2 Cor. 7.10.

3. Prove the truth of your obedience by the universality of it, Psalm. 119.6.
look at commands as they come from God, and not as they suit with your interest.

CHAP. VII. I pray thee have me excused.]
HEre we meet with the same words we had before. Before we considered the words
more generally, now we shall consider them more particularly, as to [Thee] and
[Me] in the words, Si inimici fuissent, non rogassent, ut excusarentur, sed
temere respondissent. Marlor. in loc.
with the manner of the excuse. I pray [Thee] the messenger sent, who is as
well the peoples mouth to God, as well as God's mouth to the people. Have [Me]
excused. Me] that am no wilful opposer of what you say, that do not dissuade
others from receiving what I refuse, and that do give you a reason for my
refusal. Have me excused.] Give in some reason to the Master of the feast, that
I may suffer no damage by my refusal: (...) qui ex part in causa est (...),
qui causam assignat propter quam. So Plutarch uses the word.
or manage the reason well for me that I have alleged. So much the Greek word
for [Excused] imports.

Sect. 1.
Observe. There be those, who are no wilful opposers, nor yet true receivers of
the Gospel-message, that presume they shall fare the better for
Gospel-messengers. And they be such as these, 1. Such as do not condemn the
Doctrine of the Gospel, as Gallio, who was not like those wicked Jews, who
haled St. Paul to the judgment seat, to have his person condemned for that
Doctrine which they had condemned, Act. 18.12, 13. 2. Such as do not abide
insensible under the preaching of the Gospel, but come to convictions, and
semi-perswasions, convinced of the truth of what is spoken, and almost
persuaded to close with it, as Agrippa, Act. 26.27, 28. 3. Such as do not
persecute Gospel-preachers, nor think them fit to be persecuted. As those
hearers of St. Paul, who said, This man does nothing worthy of death or bonds,
Act. 26.31, 32. These were not so furious, as those Elders with their Orator
Tertullus, who called Paul all to naught, Act. 24.5. 4. Such as do not dissuade
others from the profession of the Gospel; they are not so furious and
imperious, as to tyrannize over the consciences of others.


Sect. 2.
Now that those who are not wilful opposers, yet are no fast friends of the
Gospel may thus appear, 1. Though they do not condemn the Doctrine of the
Gospel, yet if they do not obey it, they do not receive it by faith, nor
express it in an holy life. St. Paul's Doctrine came to the conscience of Felix
to awaken and affright him, but he would not let it come to his heart to
rectify and reform him: he could not but receive that Doctrine in the fear of
it, but would not receive it in the love of it. 2. Though they may reform
something, yet they will not reform every thing that is amiss. Herod in hearing
and seeing John, did many things, yet he would not part with his Herodias, Mark
6.20. 3. Though they do not persecute the preachers of the Gospel, yet they do
not prize them, so as to improve the advantage by them, neither are they much
troubled when others do abuse them, like Gallio, caring for none of these
things, Act. 18.17. 4. Though they dissuade not others from the profession of
the Gospel, yet they dishearten others by their careless practice. The example
of some has a special influence into the practice of others.


Now these presume to fare the better for Gospel-messengers by their see^ing
to, or for the Ministers, when they are in distress, as Saul did for S^muel, 1 Samuel 28.15. when men are in danger, or near to death, then they would have a
word o^ petition spoken for them; a word of counsel spoken to them; a word of
approbation spoken of them. Then they cry, oh Sir! pray for me, speak some
words of comfort to me; what think you of me, etc?

The grounds of this their presumption are these.

1. They presume upon their eating and drinking in the presence of Christ and
his Ministers, Luke 13.26. which may be understood, either civilly, or
spiritually. If civilly, then they presume upon their acquaintance with the
messengers of the Gospel: eating and drinking is a sign of familiarity. Thus
many may think, they shall fare the better for their acquaintance with such and
such ministers, whom they have invited to their table, whom they did familiarly
discourse and converse with. If spiritually; then they presume upon their
participation of Gospel Ordinances with them; they think to fare the better for
those ministers, who as God's messengers have distributed meat and drink at the
Lords table. But those that partake of the sign of the body and blood of
Christ, and not of the thing signified, will be miserably deceived. 2. They
presume upon the teaching of God's ministers among them, that is, they rest
upon the enjoyment of a good minister. Some cry out, we have a good Churchman
in our Parish; we have one that tells us the truth, and takes pains with us,
and so by the grace of God we shall do well enough; though they never mind the
walking answerable to their teaching.
CHAP. VIII.
Use 1. THis informs us, that the apprehensions of natural men are very much
darkened for the present: they think to fare the better for the messengers of
the Gospel, though they refuse the message of the Gospel: as though ministers
were mediators, to give God a ransom for their hearers. This shows us also,
that such men's expectations will be very much frustrate for the future: They
will not be advantaged by another, who have no grace for themselves, Matthew.
25.8, 9. The just shall live by His faith, Habak. 2.4. Every one must give an
account for himself in his own person for what he has done in the flesh, 2
Cor. 5.10. men cannot be Advocates one for another at God's Tribunal, to make a
bad cause good by coloring it over with a few fair words.

Use 2. For Caution: Though some do vainly presume to fare the better for
Gospel-messengers, yet others may truly hope to fare the better for them, viz.
such as receive the Gospel-message. For as whatsoever the faithful ministers of
the Gospel do bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: so whatsoever they shall
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven, Matthew. 16.19. that is,
declaratively, pronouncing the sentence of God's word, either for, or against
men according to the ways they walk in: for what any minister does beside the
Rule, is of no force.

Use 3. Then do not think to fare the better for Gospel Ministers, if ye refuse
the message of the Gospel: if you slight the news of the Gospel; then know,
though the most eminent servants of God were residing with you, they could do
you no good. Though N^ah, Daniel, and Job were among you, they should but
deliver their own souls, Ezekiel. 14.14, 16, 20. These were persons eminent in
holiness, high in the favor of God; yet Noah could not keep off the flond from
the old world, nor Daniel the captivity from the Israelites, nor Job the stroke
from his children. Again, though Moses and Samuel stood before me, says the
Lord, yet my mind could not be toward this people. Yea, though the prayers of
the most eminent servants of God were pouring out for you, they could do you no
good. Sodom was destroyed notwithstanding Abraham's prayer for it. Moreover,
though ye have the Books and Writings of the most eminent ministers, read them,
and know them, yet if you do not live according to them, all is nothing.

Receive ye the message of the Gospel truly, that so ye may fare the better for
God's ministers eternally. Receive it as it is indeed the word of God, and not
of man, 1 These. 2.13. receive it with the exactest attention and reverence, and
with the most absolute faith and credence. Many hearers regard the word no more
than as a tale that is told them. Oh receive it in the love of it, which is the
way to be saved by it, 2 These. 2.10. light in the law of God in the inner man.
Truth is the food of the mind, let your hearts be pleased with it, as your
palats are with delicious food. Receive it in the practice of it, show it forth
in your lives, that you may be filled with the fruits of righteousness, Phil.
1.11.

SERMON. X.
Luke 14.20. And another said, I have married a Wife, and therefore I cannot
come.
CHAP. I.
THese words contain a third excuse, which another of the Gospel refusers
makes: in which we have first the allegation of the plea, then the
peremptoriness in urging it. The plea alleged is, I have married a wife.] In
this (as in the former) the fault is in the abuse of what is lawful. The
marrying of a wife is lawful, Innumeri sunt, qui prooter uxores, pericrunt, and
plurimae uxores, quae propter viros in gehennae supplicium detrusae sunt.
Salmer.
and very expedient, but the hindering a man's self by it in the way to heaven is
very bad. There are many that perish because of their wives, and many wives are
thrust into hell because of their husbands, they keeping one another back from
good, or provoking one another unto evil by their words and actions contrary to
the power of godliness. Hence I note,

Sect. 1.
Observe. There be those who are hindered by their marriage from the true
receiving of the Gospel-message: or they hinder themselves in their marriage,
Luke 17.27. It is said of those in the old world, They are, they drank, they
married. An elegant Asyndeton, that is, they followed these things without
intermission, as if they had nothing else to do men are thus hindered, I. By
perverting the ordinance of marriage, their corruption making that an
hinderance, which God's institution made an help. 1. The help is to maintain
society, God thought it not fit that a man should be alone, and therefore made
him a meet companion, Genesis 2.18. the hinderance then is, when conjugal society
justleth out sp^ritual society. I have married a wife, and I must keep her
company, and with this pretense the company of Saints is neglected by some, as
likewise conference with God, and serious meditation, and secret prayer. Though
it be bad for men to withdraw themselves from their wives company, to associate
themselves with strangers, yet it is good for them to retire themselves, that
they may give themselves ^o fasting and prayer, 1 Cor. 7.5. and so
proportionably to any other spiritual exercise, as occasion serves, whether
ordinary, or extraordinary, private or public duty. 2. The help is to increase
delight: one main work of married persons is to study to please one another, 1
Cor. 7.33, 34. to care or cast in their mind every way how to give test
content. The hinderance then is, when men are so over-busy in pleasing their
wives, that they are very negligent about pleasing God. To please a wife in the
neglect of a spiritual duty, which displeases God, will be but cold comfort in
the end. 3. The third help is to raise a family Male and Female God has joined
together, Hic cura rei familiaris impeditur. Marior.
that others like to them may come from them, Genesis 5.2 3. The hinderance then
is, when men are so diligent to build up their own families, that they neglect
the building up of God's family. I have married a wife, and I must provide for
her, and those that come of her: but God has his family, Ephesians. 3.14, 15. and
men ought to take care how they and theirs may be added to, and brought up in
that family. When family-affairs hinder Church Affairs; when generation hinders
regeneration; when the natural issue hinders spiritual issue, then marriage is
abused. 4. The fourth help is to prevent sin: Man is to take a wife that he may
not go to an harlot, nor continue burning in his natural fil^h. Marriage is a
remedy against incontinency, 1 Cor. 7.2. A benefit since the fall. Conjugium
institutum ante lapsum sanis ad ossicium, post lapsum aegrot is ad remedium.
August.
The whole need no Physician, neither needed man this Physic before the fall,
when he was in perfect health: the hinderance is, when instead of preventing
sin, there is provoking unto sin. I have married a wife, and I must enjoy her:
So the man does glut himself with carnal pleasure, that the mind is mudded, and
very much besotted, insomuch that the clear sight of spiritual things is very
much hindered thereby. The matrimonial conjunction how might it be
spiritualized by the consideration of that secret and delightful oneness
between Christ and the Church, but alas! how is it abused by many in the
obscenity of their speech, and unnaturalness of their actions with their own
wives, contrary to that spiritual use of the marriage bed, Ephesians. 5.31.32.
II. By being perverted by them whom they have married: though the marrying a
wife be no hindrance, yet the marrying of some wife is a great hindrance. I
have married a wife, even such a wife as hinders me. This made Isaac and
Rebekah take the more care for the matching of their son Jacob, Genesis 27.46. and
28.1.


Sect. 2.
Quest. But what kind of wives are those that are an hinderance to their
husbands in good?

Resp. 1. The domineering wife: Uxori nubere nolo meae. Mart.
such a one was Jezabel, 1 King. 21.7. and of her husband it is said, there was
none like Ahab for wickedness, whom Jezabel his wife stirred up, ver. 25. she
was very imperious, and furious against the Prophets and people of God, and her
husband a great persecutor by her means.

2. The contentious wife, which the Scripture compares to a continual dropping,
Conjugium conjurgium.
like as a man that has met with hard usage abroad, thinks to mend himself at
home, but is no sooner sat down there, but the rain dropping through the roof
upon his head, drives him out or doors again, Prove. 19.13. This is like a
tempest in the haven, most troublesome, and most dangerous.

3. The flattering wife, like Delilah, Judge. 16.5, 6. who like a snake winds
about a man to ruin him, who insinuates into her husbands affection, the
better to procure his destruction.

4. The scoffing wife. This cross David met with, 2 Samuel 6.16. it is sad when a
godly husband meets with a jeering and scoffing wise: but let such wives know,
God has a barren womb for a scoffing Michel.

5. The coy wife. Job was exercised with this temptation, but was not overcome
with it, yet 'twas bitter to him, when his breath was strange to his wife, Job.
19.17. she was so coy, that she could not bear her husbands sores. Yet history
tells us of a contrary rare example, the Lady Eleanor, wife to King Edward I.
who sucked out the poison out of her husband, who was treacherously wounded, and
so healed him, and hurt not her self.

6. The discontented wife, such a one was Lot's wife, she was not willing to
leave Sodom, but looked back contrary to God's command, and was turned into a
pillar of salt: her sin seems to be compounded of many sins, as curiosity,
foolish pity, covetousness, and lothness to leave such a pleasant country, but
all through discontent with, or at Gods word and works.

7. The whorish wife, Luke 3.19. A dishonest woman contemns shame, this
causes sorrow and bitterness to her husband.

CHAP. II.
Use 1. HEre see the great force of near relations, Relationes sunt minimae
entitatis, sed maximae efficaciae.
they have a special influence into the lives of men, either to their making or
marring. If rightly set, they are very advantageous, if mis-placed, they are
very pernicious. Some match in a family, what a blessing does it bring? Again,
some match, what a curse does it bring? The one God has appointed one woman,
and no more for one man, every one therefore had need to look to that one, Mal.
2.15. This is the first pair, and original of all others.

Here also we may see the great abuse of near relations, either in the entering
into them, or in the exercise of them. When people marry unsu^tably, or live
unwarrantaby with them whom they marry. Some marry only by their eyes, Genesis
6.2. beauty is a dangerous bait, and lust is sharp-sighted: here it is good
with Job to make a covenant with the eyes, and with Nazianzen to n^rture the
eyes, to bind them to their good behavior: not, but that a man's wife may be
like Ezekiels, the delight of his eyes: it is wisdom surely for parties to look
upon one another, as such pleasing objects, that their eyes may be taken off
from all others. Again, some choose merely for money, as though the excrements
of the earth were of the essence of marriage: their affections being manacled
with money, rather than wedded to the person.

Use 2. Yet there be some, who are not hindered, but furthered by their
marriage in receiving the Gospel-message. Manaoh had a good wife, Judge. 13.23.
she spoke experimentally to her husband of God's goodness. Nazianzen says,
that his Mother was not only an help to his Father in matters of piety, but a
Doctress and governess, yet his Father was an able Minister of the Gospel.
Budaeus that Learned Frenchman, had a great help of his wife in points of
Learning. Placilla the Empress was a singular help to her husband Theodosius in
things both temporal and spiri^ua^. And some chur^^sh men who will not (...)
bettered by their wives, yet they are kept (...) of ha^^^^ way by their good
wives, as Nabal by Ab^gati.

Then ^u^ther, marriage is not to be blamed: men may be pious, and freed from
worldly entangements in a married as well as in a single life. It Is said of
Enoch, that he walked with God, after he begat Methusalah, Genesis 5.22.
Matrimonial acts need be no hinderance to spiritual exercise.

CHAP. III.
Use 3. THe third use shall be of exhortation.

I. To the unmarryed.
1. While ye continue in your single life, be contented with it, 1 Cor. 7.27.
consider from this Doctrine, you had better have no wife than some wife. Of
Sylla the Roman it is said, Foelix fuisset, si uxorem non habuisset: pity those
that have their pull-backs.

2. When you intend to alter your single life into a married estate, see that
first ye be married to the Lord, according to the Covenant of grace, Hos. 2.20.
1 Cor. 6.17. then look to her whom you marry, that you marry in the Lord, 1
Cor. 7.39. which that you may do, seek a wife of the Lord, for a good wife is
God's gift, Prove. 19.14. and a special favor, Prove. 18.22. seek her then by
prayer, Genesis 24.12. and by advising with good friends, and let those who have
Parents, take their counsel: and let all concerned in such a business, look
more to goodness than goods.

II. To the married.
I. To the husband.

1. Live as a man of knowledge with thy wife, 1 Pet. 3.7. the husband is the
head, and where should knowledge be but in the head? but how sad is it to see
such headless heads, such ignorant husbands as there be in many families?

2. Live as a man of affection, let every husband love his wife, Ephesians. 5.23. let
him show it in protecting her from injuries, the husband is to be the wives
safeguard, Ephesians. 5.25. let him provide for her conveniences. (...) alam
significat. ^uxtorf. (...) Ephesians. 5.29.
This duty St. Paul expresses by two significant words, nourishing and
cherishing: the former referring to food, the latter to raiment, as Zanchy
notes; both which the man ought to afford his wife according to his degree.
Let him bear with her infirmities as the weaker vessel, 1 Pet. 3.7.

2. To the Wife.
Let her see, that she reverence her husband, Nun quam crit voluntaria
subjectio, nisi praecedat reverentia. Marlor.
Ephesians. 5.33. inwardly, let her have an high esteem of her husband: outwardly,
let her gestures, words, and actions have reverence stamped on them. There is
good reason why the woman should be in subjection, because she was last in the
creation, and first in the transgression.

3. To Husband and Wife.
Are you unequally yoked, yet part not one from the other, but seek to win one
the other to the faith, 1 Cor. 7.12. Are you equally yoked in the Lord, bless
God for it, and draw evenly together in Christ's yoke: live as the heirs of the
grace of life, 1 Pet. 3.7. be weaned from Relations while you do enjoy them, 1
Cor. 7.29. Consider, that Relations must shortly be dissolved by death: the
time is short. The persons related must be parted for ever, if one be a
believer, and the other an unbeliever. Not only two in the field, or
fellow-travellers: two in the mill, or work-fellows; but two in the bed, or
bed-fellows; the one shall be taken, the other left; the one taken to God; the
other left to the Devil. (...).

CHAP. IV. And therefore I cannot come.
Sect. 1.
HEre is the peremptoriness in urging the plea: Inurhanus est voluptati vacans,
ideo caeteris pejus respondit. Salmer.
and therefore I cannot come] viz. because I have married a wife. The reason
indeed is, because he was married or wedded to the world. This answer is very
saucy, and more unmannerly than the former. It is as if he should have said in
plain terms to the ministers of the Gospel, you may even save your labor to
invite, for this is the shortest and the longest as we say, I cannot come.
Hence I note,

Obser. That those that are wedded to the world, are peremptory in refusing the
word. The things of the world unto which men are wedded are these.

1. The honor of the world, unto which the ambitious man is wedded, which the
Apostle calls the pride of life, 1 John 2.16. when the mind aspireth after
Dignities and Titles, merely to advance the name of a man, gaping after
preferment, disquieted without it, domineering with it.

2. The wealth of the world, to which the covetous man is wedded, running
greedily for reward, (...).
Jude ver. 11. the Greek word signifies a pouring forth like water, importing
the impetuousness and violence of the mind after gain: when no bounds or banks
can put a stop to their overflowing desires.

3. The pleasure of the world, to which the voluptuous, or luxurious man is
wedded, wholly taken up with carnal delights, Amos 6.4, 5, 6. merely sensual;
satiating and pampering themselves with the creature, omitting nothing that may
make them complete Epicures, giving themselves to such excess, that instead of
feeding their bodies, they feed their lusts, to the great prejudice of their
souls.

CHAP. V. To be wedded to the world, is
Sect. 1.
1. TO forsake all that is good to enjoy the world. Those that are married, do
forsake all to enjoy one another: Thus the worldling ( Demas-like) leaves all
for the love of the world, 2 Timothy 4.10. As a true Christian forsakes all
temporals, honor, profit, pleasure, for God; so the worldling forsakes all
spirituals for the world: Saints, Churches, Ordinances; let all go from him, or
he will go from all, that he may take faster hold of the world.

2. To give a man's self to the world. Those that are married, do give
themselves one to the other, resigning up the power or use of their bodies each
unto the other, 1 Cor. 7.4. A man that is wedded to the world brings himself
under the power of the world: the world may do with him what it will. The
natural man walks according to the course of this world, Ephesians. 2.2.

3. To cleave close unto the world. The married man is said to cleave to his
wife, Matthew. 19.5. to be as the Greek word signifies, (...)
glued to her: he that is wedded to the world, is glued to the world: and those
things that are glued, are hardly parted. The worldling's heart is set upon
worldly things, oh it is hard coming between to take off the affection from the
object.

4. To make provision for the world, even for these worldly affections within a
man: he that lives like a married man, nourishes and cherishes his wife as
his own flesh, Ephesians. 5.29. Now as there is natural flesh, so there is sinful
flesh. This is the flesh that a man, wedded to the world, nourishes and
cherishes, making provision for it, which St. P^ul forbids, Romans 13.14. As
some neglect the body by too severe abstinence, weakening it as to the exercise
of godliness; so many more do cherish the body by too great indulgence,
strengthening it to the acts of wickedness. The other neglect a friend: These
harbor an enemy.

Sect. 2.
The peremptoriness of these worldlings against the word appears in these
things.

1. They sh^t their eyes against the word, in seeing they see not, Matthew.
13.13. they shut the window, that the light may not come in. They cannot but
see (so clearly does the Gospel shine) yet will they not see; their minds are
so prejudiced against the truth.

2. They stop their ears against the word; Audientes corporis sensu, non
audiunt cordis assensu. Aug.
hearing they hear not; they hear a sound, but no distinct sound. They are like
the deaf Adder, or Asp, that stops her ear at the voice of the charmer, Psalm.
58.4, 5. who when she perceives the charmer, lays one of her ears close upon
the ground, and covers the other with her tall, because she will not hear the
charms.

3. They open their mouths against the word, as those wicked Jews, who spoke
against those things which were spoken by S^. Paul, Act. 13.45. This is
blasphemy, defaming God himself, casting aspersions upon his most reverent name.

4. They trample with their feet upon the word: these swinish Ep^cures do
trample upon that Pearl of price, that is brought to them in the
Gospel-message, Matthew. 7.6. they feed so greedily upon the garbage of carnal
contentments, that they despise spiriritual enjoyments.

Quest. Why are worldlings so peremptory against the word?

Resp. 1. They cannot be for the word and the world too, Luke 16.13. seeing
therefore they will be for the world, they cannot be for the word: he that is
married to one, cannot be married to another, till he be disjoined from the
former, while the heart is set upon the world, it cannot at the same time be
set upon the word.

2. The word is very strict against them, it threatens damnation to them that
mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19. the worldling hates the word, because the
Scripture speaks not one syllable of good to a worldling so abiding.

CHAP. VI.
Use 1. HEre ye may see, that worldly ^emptations are very dangerous: man's
nature is ready to close with them, and the closing with them undoes a man. A
wedge of gold, and an Achan's eye, may cost a man his life: a worldly proffer
meeting with a worldly heart may cost a man his soul.

Here also ye may see, that the world does choke the word, Luke 8.7. it
hinders the growth of it, so that the love of the world is not seated in the
heart, neither does the fruit of it appear in the life: hence it is, that many
who increase in worldly riches, do decrease as to their spiritual profession.

Use 2. Yet there is a delight in worldly enjoyments, which may well stand with
a delight in God's word. It Is lawful, not only to have, and use the things of
this world, but to rejoice in the same, Eccles. 3.12, 13. so that we keep
within the bounds of sober delight, and our mirth degenerate not into that
laughter which is madness. But it is as hard to bear much prosperity, as to
drink much wine, and not be giddy.

Yet there be those who are wedded to the world, that seemingly comply with the
word, drawing near to God with the mouth, whose heart is far from him, Isa.
29.13. whose heart goes after their covetousness, and after their carnal lusts.

Use. 3. Then live as those who are not wedded to the world, that it may appear
ye refuse not the word.

1. Be weaned from the world, Psalm. 131.2. the world is a distempered body, and
its breasts cannot afford wholesome milk. Use earthly things with an holy
indifferency, use all worldly things with much moderation and sobriety, 1 Cor.
7.29, 30. with a kind of non-attendancy, reserving the bent of your wills, and
vigor of your spirits for heavenly objects. Use them likewise with an holy
jealousy, lest they should deceive you of better: be not sensual in your
sensible delights, like those who feed upon the sweetness of the creature
without fear, Jude v. 12. but sanctify your enjoyments by daily prayer, that
ye may be delivered from the snare of them.

2. Be crucified to the world. The world is crucified to me, says St. Paul,
and I unto the world, Gal. 6.14. that is, the world and I are well agreed: the
world cares not for me, and I care as little for the world: labor to have your
affections and lusts so crucified and deaded, that worldly temptations do not
draw them out: he that is dead, is freed from sin. Love not the world, so as to
sin for its sake: be not so fond of the world, as though you could not live
without it: be not drawn from your duty by it.

Live also like those who are ready to receive the word, that it may appear ye
are not wedded to the world.

1. Be wedded to Christ according to the ministry of the word, it serves to
that end and purpose, 2 Cor. 11.2. the Church made up of believers is the
Lamb's wife. 2. Be observant of Christ according to the laws of marriage; study
to please him, be willing to do any thing for him, 2 Cor. 5.14. and he will do
any thing for you, Hos. 2.19, 20. Consider, that all the outward excellencies
of the world are to be had in the enjoyment of Christ in a more eminent manner:
with him there is the honor of a Crown, 1 Timothy 4.8. what greater honor? the
profit of a treasure, Col. 2.3. many treasures, the pleasure of a Paradise,
Luke 23.43. all delights that are desirable. Besides, the beauty of the world
is soon over, but the fruits of the word abide for ever, 1 Pet. 1.24, 25.
SERMON. XI.
LUKE 14.21. So that servant came, and showed his Lord these things, etc]
CHAP. I.
IN these words we have. 1. The return of the messenger. 2. the report that he
makes. So that servant], he who was sent about that Gospel-errand
forementioned: came] The Greek word signifies to be present, Dicuntur (...)
qui adswit ^^cui in judicio ut Advocati. Thus Plato uses the word. (...):
sisti judicio.
or to stand up as in a Court of Justice, like an Advocate, one called, and
coming to a Tribunal, as well to accuse and implead another, as to excuse and
defend another. Thus this servant that was sent forth, came from the Pulpit to
the Bar, from inviting to accusing: he came, and stood before God's Tribunal,
to give him an account of the particular answers given in by the refusers of
the Gospel-message, that so they might receive their doom.

Observe. That the messengers of the Gospel do return from them who refuse the
Gospel, unto him that sent them to preach the Gospel. They return from men's
refusal to God's Tribunal. For the clearing of this, we must take the meaning
of [servant] in this verse, as it was taken in ver. 17.

I. That servant eminently.] The Angel of the Covenant, the great messenger of
the Gospel, Jesus Christ: he returned to his father after he was refused by the
world: Reversus est Christus ad patrem per ascensionem, and nuntiavit patri per
plagas efficaciter loquentes a majoribus Judaeorum per Gentiles inflictas.
Salmer. in loc.
he returnned by his Ascension, and th^s Christ calls a going to his father,
and to his God, John 20.17. And it was Christ's manner, when he was a preacher
upon the earth to withdraw himself from them, who would not draw nigh to him by
closing with means of grace which he brought.

II. That servant collectively] or those particular servants and messengers of
the Gospel sent from God through Christ in any particular age of the world, to
any particular people, as 1. The Patriarchs. Enoch prophesied against ungodly
livers in his time, and then God took him, Jude ver. 14.15. Noah, that preacher
of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. did not always call upon the old world to amend
their lives, but in the end condemned them in the presence of God, after they
had refused the word of God, Heb. 11.7. 2. The Prophets: Thus Isaeah, Jeremiah,
Ezekiel, made their complaint to God for the obstinacy of their hearers. 3. The
Apostles, when instead of being received, they were threatened and persecuted by
men, then they appealed unto God, Act. 4.24, 29. they betook themselves to his
tribunal, they delivered their enemies over into his hand. The ministers of the
Gospel since are to take the same course.


CHAP. II.
NOw the manner of this return of the messengers of the Gospel from the
refusers of the Gospel, is 1. The removal of the persons of those messengers,
either from one place to another here in this world. When Paul preached at
Athens, and some mocked his Doctrine, and others did not readily receive it; it
is said, so Paul departed from among them, Act. 17.32, 33. The obstinacy of
many hearers drives away their Teachers from them -- on from this world to the
world to come: The Prophets do not live for ever, Zech. 1.5, 6. They spend
their breath upon many, who ill requite them, and gain no good by them, and God
stops their breath the sooner. 2. The withdrawing God's presence from the
labors of those Ministers, so that their labors profit not. Though the
ordinances in their dispensation are continued, yet the exciting and assisting
motions of the spirit are withdrawn, so that men become as the withered
branches of a Vine, John 15.5, 6. no sap, not vigor in them, or the faculties
of their souls about spirituals, are like the wheels of a watch when the spring
is broke, or when it is not wound up. And hence it is, that instead of doing
them any good, both the Doctrine and praying of Gods messengers is against them.


1. Now the office of these Gospel messengers requires this.
They are Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20. therefore when their message is not
received, their manner is to return home; especially when besides the refusal
of the message, the messenger is abused. St. Matthew tells us, that these
refusers did not only slight the Supper, but spightfully entreated the servants
who invited them, Mat. 22.5, 6. wherefore open War is proclaimed, the
Ambassadors being abused,

2. The commission of these messengers requires this.
This direction is in their commission, if any receive them not, or hear not
their word, then they are to depart from them, and to shake off the dust of
their feet against them Matthew. 10.14. These two things are due to the Ministers
of the Gospel. Maintenance, and Audience: the one respects their persons, the
other their Doctrine. Now, if those among whom they come, refuse to receive
them, then they must depart from them: if they will not maintain them, house
them, harbor them, then they must seek out for entertainment elsewhere. The
workman is worthy of his meat, ver. 10. of all things necessary for this life,
for him and his family. -- Again, if those among whom they come, refuse to hear
their words, then they are to shake off the dust of their feet against them.
The meaning of that phrase is, 1. To show, that these messengers sought not
theirs, but them, they would not carry away so much as any of their dust. 2. To
show, they would have no more to do with them, they would wait no longer upon
them. The dust of those feet that should have been beautiful, shall be fatal
against them. 3. To show, how God would break them to pieces, and crumble them
(as it were) into dust, Psalm. 2.9. or trample upon them like the dust. They did
as it were ra^^ the dust, and make a steem against the messengers of the Gospel
in token of despite; therefore they shall be as it were trod upon as the dust
under foot in token of contempt. 4. To show, how little they esteemed the
greatest persons that refused the Gospel, even no more than the dust of their
feet.


CHAP. III.
Use 1. THis informs us, that God's spirit shall not always strive with man,
Genesis 6.3. with perverse men, by preaching, disp^ting; convincing in the mouths
of his messengers, nor by inward checks and motions which they have slighted.
And let men know, that they shall hear of their misdemeanors again, who
refused the Gospel under any messenger of God, now dead and gone. The
messengers are gone to God to do their errand. Men are ready to flatter
themselves, by thinking, when the Minister is removed, they shall hear of their
faults no more. Alas! be not deceived. Abels blood cried when he was dead, Genesis
4.10. and as there is a voice in the blood of Martyrs, so there is a voice in
the Doctrine of preachers after they are dead and gone.

Use 2. Yet God does sometimes continue his messengers among those that are
obstinate, Ezekiel. 2.5. though they grow worse by it, yet they shall enjoy it;
surely, it will be to make them the more inexcusable. Here is one of the depths
of God's judgments, that those enjoy the means, who grow worse by the same, and
those want the means, who would grow better by the same: but Christ pronounces
the severer woe against such, Matthew. 11.21. who abuse that means which others
would improve.

On the other hand, though those that refuse the Gospel, cause Ministers to go
from them; yet those that receive the Gospel cannot always keep Ministers with
them. St. Paul was called away from those that wept sore at his departure, Act.
20.37, 38. Christ has the stars in his right hand, and he places, and
displaceth them according to his pleasure. They that are glad at the sight of
their Minister, must arm themselves for this affliction; their minister must be
removed out of their sight.

Use 3. Refuse not the Gospel, when brought to you by the messenger of the
Gospel. Continue not in your unbelief, hearing the Doctrine of faith preached
to you, do not reject the word: receive the message of the Gospel now it is
tendered to you in the ministry of the word. The messengers of the Gospel will
not always continue. Walk in the light, while ye do enjoy the light, John
12.35. believe in Christ, who is the true light, ver. 36. be guided by the
spirit of God according to the word of God: follow the Doctrine and examples of
Gods faithful messengers, who are called the light of the world, Matthew. 5.14.
obey them that have the rule over you, submit to them that watch for your
souls. Associate your selves with the children of light, 1 These. 5.5. maintain
intimate familiarity with them whose words are pure, whose lives are shining.
Be ye perfecting holiness on earth by way of preparation for the perfection of
holiness in heaven: every degree of grace, is a step to glory.

CHAP. IV. And showed his Lord these things.]
HAving heard the return of the messenger, we are now to hear the report that
is made. And showed.] The Greek word, (...), signifies to relate, or to bring
back again an answer to a message that was sent. A word frequently made use of
by humane writers in that language. Poets, Orators, Historians, Moralists: and
by some in this sense to make report as Ambassadors do when they return from
their embassage. So that great Moralist makes use of the word, which sense
suits well with our Text. His Lord] that is, he who made the feast, and sent
him as a messenger to invite. These things,] that is, the very naked truth of
those several excuses, as they were given in by the Recusant Guests, without
any excusing of their excuses.

Obser. That the messengers of the Gospel do relate unto God those answers
which are made by the refusers of the Gospel.

The answers made by the refusers of the Gospel we heard before in the
examination of their several excuses: now let us see how the messengers do
relate, or show these things unto their Lord.

1. By producing the commission they had to speak in God's name: they show unto
their Lord the dispatching of their errand according to his mind. He that had
the five talents, said, Lord, thou deliveredst to me five talents, and behold,
thus and thus I have made use of them. And so he that had the two, Matthew.
25.20, 22. Lord, says the preacher, Thou did put me into such an office.
Thou did endue me with such gifts, and I did execute that office, and employ
those gifts among such a people, I wholly gave up my self to the work.

Here be those I spoke among, let them deny it, if they can.

2. By declaring what, and how they spoke by virtue of that commission. They
show unto their Lord the Scripture they preached, the Texts they handled, the
Argumens they used, the affection they expressed in the discharge of their duty
in the work of the ministry, John 17.14. and 15.22. Lord, says the preacher,
I gave them thy word to whom thou did send me: and though some did receive
it, yet others did refuse it, and hated those who did receive it. Thy word I
taught without mixture and deceit, pressing the Authority of thy sacred majesty.

3. By complaining of the obstinacy of those who hear the word. Lord, who has
believed our report? Isa. 53.1. Lord, how few are there that regard what we
speak? They look upon thy word as our report, as though it had no other Author
than our selves, and so give no heed or credit to what we say. They consider
not that thou speak when we speak, and so they think they are not bound to
believe us.

4. By reporting the ill usage they meet withal from the opposers of the
Gospel. They show their Lord what they suffer for his names sake. The Apostles
returning from their Adversaries to God, said, And now Lord, behold their
threatenings, Act. 4.29. Lord, says the preacher, behold how many speak against
us, because we speak for thee, how many threaten us, because we denounce thy
threatenings against them for their sins. We may be sure that God hearkens to
such grievances.

5. By appealling to God as the supreme power, whose name has the greatest
wrong by the opposers of the Gospel, Act. 4.24, 25. They show unto their Lord,
that the opposition of enemies is not so much against them [poor servants] as
against himself, and Son and heir Christ Jesus. In outward appearance it is
against us, but of a truth it is against thy holy child Jesus.

CHAP. V.
NOw the time when the messengers of the Gospel do make this report, is 1. In
this life, when they address themselves to the throne of grace by prayer, Act.
4.23, 24, 31. As the speak from the Lord, so they have daily occasion to speak
to the Lord: and they must tell him of their hearers manners, as well as tell
them of his mind, yet so as in this life while there is hope, to beg pardon in
their behalf, Luke 23.34. Those many souls brought in at St. Peter's Sermon,
Act. 2. Some attribute as a gracious return to the fore mentioned prayer of our
Savior: and some make St. Paul's conversion as an answer to St. Stephens
prayer, lay not this sin to their charge. 2. In the life to come, when they
appear to give up their account at God's tribunal: then they shall lay all
open, and speak plainly against all that oposed the truth. Like as the the
Prophets sometimes prophetically desired absolutely, that the curse of God
might fall upon such enemies of theirs, Jer. 18.20, 23. which kind of
imprecations, though God's messengers must not now follow, yet surely hereafter
they will. Lord, remember that heretofore I stood before thee to interceed for
this people, that they might be blessed, but now I stand before thee to accuse
them, that they may be cursed.


The reasons why God's messengers must do thus, are these.
1. Because God is their Lord in a peculiar sense, according to the phrase in
our Text, unto whom they stand responsible for all that they have done in the
work of the ministry. 2. Because God made them witnesses, Act. 26.16. and they
must not be false witnesses. Surely as their persons, so their labors and
their lives, and their sufferings, will all come in as witnesses at the great
day. 3. Because God has made them stewards, 1 Cor. 4.1. and so they must give
a true account. I have observed in the Courts of Judicature here below at our
Assizes, when those that are called do make default, the officer is called who
summoned them, an Oath administered to the Baily of such an hundred, and then
this is propounded to him, By virtue of the Oath which you have taken, did you
warn such a man? Yes, says he, then is he liable to the censure of the Court.
Thus, methinks, 'twill be at the Great Assizes, speak you Ministers of such a
City, of such a Town, of such a Village, did you not warn such a people? did
you not leave such a summons with them? did you not preach such a Doctrine
among them? make many a prayer for them? yea Lord! but they refused to bear thy
Sons yoke; they would not reform their lives according to thy Laws. This will
be dreadful against all the refusers of the Gospel.
CHAP. VI.
Use 1. HEre ye may see, Omnis praedicator est vir rixarum and judici^, ac
cogitur ex officio reprehendere quicquid vitiosum est, non habita ratione, vel
personae, vel officii in auditoribus. Luther.
why ministers are so much despised by many, it is because their employment is
to discover the faults of others, and that displeases those that are faulty,
Act. 19.28. not only the profane, but the erroneous too, do fall out with sound
and faithful teachers. When the truth is spoken against errors, it causes
many enemies, Gal. 4.16. The preachers office displeases those that allow
themselves in any sin, and so consequentially it cannot be but their persons
are opposed.

Again, it is but a folly, for any to think to fare the better for their
acquaintance with the messengers of the Gospel, when they refuse the message of
the Gospel, for they must relate things as they are. It Is required in stewards,
that a man be sound faithful, 1 Cor. 4.2. Though the hearer should be Wife,
Brother, or Sister to the preacher, and should live contrary to the Doctrine of
holiness which he preaches, yet none of them shall be advantaged by their
relation to him.

Use 2. Yet it is not the messenger of the Gospel, Malitia tua te ad mortem
adduxit, non nos. Lyran.
but the refusal of the Gospel-message that condemns men: it is men's own sin
that casts them. Witnesses of old were wont to put their hand upon the head
of the offender, and say, it is thine own wickedness that condemns thee, and
not we. The most obstinate man, the Heretic is condemned of himself, Tit.
3.14. holding such an erroneous opinion, he does vertually condemn himself,
declaring that he is fallen from the truth, and is an opposer of the same.

Now though God's messengers make a report to God, yet it is not to inform him,
as though he did not know those things without that report: God is greater than
our reports, yea than our hearts, and knows all things, 1 John 3.20. all things
are naked and open in his sight, Heb. 4.12.

Use 3. Then let this Doctrine be a watchword to you that are our hearers:
Ministers must do your errand. Must Ministers show to the Lord what you do; oh
then take heed what ye do! Venture not upon any known sin upon any pretense,
Prove. 1.10. Think with your self, would you do such a thing, if the passages of
it should be told to the whole Town: oh then why will ye venture upon such
sinful practices, which must be reported unto God before all the world at the
last day? do not continue in any known sin; be not as the men of this world,
who lie in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. Ye that will go on in the ways of your own
heart, know ye, that for all these things God will bring you to judgment, Eccl.
11.9.

If it be thus, then consider, what answer will ye now give to the messenger of
the Gospel to be returned in your behalf.

1. Let it not be a refractory answer, like that of the Jews to Jeremiah, We
will not walk therein, Jer. 6.16. oh let not your hearts rise, and swell
against the holy word of God.

2. Let it not be a delatory answer, like that of Felix to Paul, I will call
for thee, when I have a convenient season, Act. 24.25. A mere put-off to spin
out time.

3. Let it not be a cursory answer, like that of Israel to Joshua, All that
thou command, we will do, Josh. 1.16. suddenly spoken, without the
consideration of what was to be done, or with what strength they would do it,
as appears by their frequent revolting afterward. Some people are ready to
answer as fast as a Minister can ask them, will you forsake the Devil and all
his works, the pomp and vanity of the world? oh yes, we will do any thing; but
alas! they little consider what they say, as appears by their soon turning
aside from the paths of holiness.

4. Let it not be a nugatory answer with those g^ests in our parable, who
preferred the trifles of this world before the eternal good things of the
Gospel. But let it be an humble, holy answer, like that of the Psalmist, Oh
that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes, in answer to that, Thou have
commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently, Psalm. 119.4, 5.

SERMON. XII.
Luke 14.21. -- Then the Master of the house being angry, etc.]
CHAP. I.
THese words begin the fourth general part of the parable, (...) a (...),
noting one that rules over things, as if he had them tied in bands.
the Result upon the former; the resolution of him who made the feast, upon the
Contempt offered by some, to fill up his table with other guests. Then.] When
the report was returned of the excuses made by those who refused the
Gospel-provision. The master of the house,] or the Master of the family: He of
whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named, the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.14, 15. or the Master or that house, which is the Church
of the living God, 1 Timothy 3.15. (...), appetere, sc. vindictam.
Being angry,] the Greek word signifies the inflammation of the mind, with a
purpose of revenge, proper to man, and applied to God by a phrase spoken after
the manner of men. Well might he be angry, considering the carriage of those
forementioned guests, which so affronted him. Hence observe,

Observe. That God is angry with those that refuse the Gospel-provision, M^tth.
22.7.

When God is said to be angry, we are not to think he is angry as a man, with
the affection or passion, much less with the perturbation of anger; but he is
said to be angry, when he acts like a man in his anger, when he puts forth such
effects for such causes of anger. Those effects of anger which God put's forth,
are 1. Threatening revenge. A man that is angry cries out, Deo ira tribuitur, cum
ostendit factis, aliquid sibi displicere, maxim cum poenam insligit. Rivet.
I shall be even with you, I shall pay you in your own Coin: so says God,
Vengeance is mine, I will repar, Romans 12.19. I will meet with such a one, I
will vex them in my sore displeasure. 2. Withdrawing acts of friendship. An
angry man withdraws his foot from his neighbors house, he turns away his eye,
or hides his face from his neighbors misery. The anger of God is called the
hiding of his face, Psalm. 44.24. at which time he forgot their affliction and
oppression, and did not go forth with their armies, ver. 9. he acted as if he
cared not what became of them. 3. Infl cting acts of hostility. An angry man
watches to do another a discourtesie, so does God being angry, Dan. 9.14. he
watches to bring evil upon a people: his providence is intent to bring it in
the fittest time.

CHAP. II.
THe fundamental and essential cause of anger, Despectus tihi sum, nec quis sim
quaeris Alexi, etc. Virg. Aenead. 1.
is contempt, which may be branched out into these subordinate causes, as 1.
The slighting of benefits. A man is angry, when his favors are not regarded.
Thus God's anger was kindled, when the Israelites said, there is nothing beside
this Manna, Numb. 11.6. 2. The disparaging of the name. A man is angry, when
his Credit is struck at: so is God, when his name is polluted, and profaned. 3.
(...)
The frustrating of expectations makes a man angry. So God was angry with his
Vineyard, because, when he looked for Grapes, it brought forth wild grapes,
Isa. 5.


That God is angry with those that refuse Gospel-mercy, appears by his
executing all manner of judgments upon them, as 1. External judgments. God sent
the Romans to destroy the Jews for their contempt of the Gospel, Matthew. 22.7.
first the white horse went out, Christ riding triumphantly in the Chariot of
his ordinances, Rev. 6.2. but for the worlds opposing it, there followed the
red, and black, and pale horses, ver. 4, 5, 8. sword, famine, death. 2.
Internal judgments. For not receiving the love of Gospel Truth, God gives up
men to a strong delusion to believe a lie, 2 These. 2.10, 11. and as inwardly
there is the strength of a deluded mind, so there is the sting of a guilty
conscience, Genesis 4.13. which makes a man a terror to himself. 3. Eternal
judgment. That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, 2 These.
1.12. concerning such, God has sworn, that they shall not enter into his rest,
Heb. 3.18.


The reasons why God is angry with such as refuse Gospel-mercy, are these.

1. Because they look upon the message as a mere trifle, they make light of it,
Mat. 22.5. though it be of the greatest concernment in the world. 2. They look
upon the messengers, as though they were malefactors, rather than Ministers of
God, and Ambassadors of the Gospel, and entreat them spitefully, Matthew. 22.6.
when people come to such barbarous carriage, there is no remedy against
destruction, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Abuse of Ambassadors is a just cause to make war.
3. They look upon the Master of the house, even God himself, as a Liar. He that
believes not makes him a Liar, 1 John 5.10. To give God the lie, and stand to
it, must needs provoke him to give men their portion with the Devil and his
Angels.
CHAP. III.
Use. 1. IF the refusal of the Gospel make God angry, then surely God is
pleased with them who accept of Gospel-mercy. First, he takes delight in his
Son, as mediator between God and man, Matthew. 3.17. then he takes delight in men
as they close with his Son: he has accepted us, (...), or ingratiated us in
the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.

Use 2. Though God here be said to be angry, yet must we not think God to be
like to out selves, as though he were subject to, or capable of passions as we
are. Fury is not in him, Isa. 27.4. God is without parts and passions, he is
not carried by affections. They are neither materially, nor formally in God,
whose essence is unmixt, and immutable: In man anger is a mixed affection, made
up of these two ingredients, Sorrow, and Revenge. Man is disturbed when angry.
Scylla in an excess of fury vomited up blood, and dyed: but God is not
disturbed in his anger. Anger in God is a work contrary to his disposition of
himself, who inclines rather to mercy. If men would lay down their sins, God
would lay down his anger for ever, Jer. 3.12.

Use 3. Take heed of an evil heart of unbelief, for this makes God so angry, as
to swear in his wrath, Heb. 3.11, 12. Will ye provoke the Lord to jealousy?
are ye stronger than he? 1 Cor 10.22. Gods anger is compared in Scripture to a
whirlwind, Prove. 1.27. which comes suddenly, and irresistibly, and with a
terrible noise, renting and tearing where it comes. It is compared to an
overflowing flood, Isa. 28.2. which no banks, nor bounds can keep in. It is
likened to a devouring fire: hence is that phrase of his anger being kindled,
and waxing hot, Isa. 5.24, 25. and sinners are compared to dry wood. If these
things be done to the green tree, what shall be done to the dry? it is also
compared to the raging of a Bear bereaved of her whelps, and to a Lion and
Leopard. All are put together, Hos. 13.7, 8. This anger of God put the fallen
Angels into everlasting chains, Jude ver. 6. It drove man out of Paradise,
turning him out unto the wide world as it were to shift for himself. Spoiling
him of all his ornaments and endowments. It drowned the old world, and turned
Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes. It ruined the Jews both as a Church and a
commonwealth. Let all that have felt the anger of God, speak whether it be not
an intolerable burden. Oh kiss the son, lest he be angry, Psalm. 2.12. both
with a kiss of faith, and of love and affection to him: take his yoke, submit
to his government. If Christ be angry with you, you perish in the way. Those
that refuse Gospel Light, shall be cast into outer-darkness, Matthew. 8.12. But
blessed are they that trust in him. They who thus come to him, shall be
welcome: they shall have the smiles of his face, the kisses of his lips, the
embraces of his arms to all eternity.

CHAP. IV. Said to his servant, etc.]
THis phrase suits well with that in v. 17. where the servant was sent to say
to them that were bidden. There the servant spoke to the Guests, here the Lord
speaks to his servant: intimating to us, that those who came in the name of the
Lord, must speak in the words of the Lord, delivering the Gospel-errand in the
way and manner to others, as God delivers it to them. Hence observe,

Observe. God speaks unto his servants, the messengers of the Gospel, that
which they must speak to others, Luke 1.70. The Revelation of Divine truth in
diverse manners heretofore, was all from God, first speaking to his Prophets,
and then to his people. God spoke of old in diverse manners, Heb. 1.1. as

Sect. 1.
1. By dreams. Thus God revealed to Jacob the mystery of Christ as mediator in
the representation of a Ladder, reaching from earth to heaven, Antiqui
fingebant somnium deum alitem et volatilem.
Genesis 28.12. This was in the night, being retired from worldly business, that
God revealed his mind by dreams. These Divine dreams were sent upon weighty
occasions, and they left a certain persuasion, and inward sense of God's
presence upon the soul, says Musculus. 2. In a most familiar manner: Thus God
spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend, Exodus 33.11. A
special privilege that Moses had above the rest of the Prophets. God speaking
to him, not by the mediation of an Angel, as to others, nor yet by any form or
similitude, nor yet with terror and amazement as to others, but he spoke with
God familiarly. 3. By Urim and Thummim: Josephus says, they shined, if Israel
marched forward: they shined not, if they were to stay.
which words signify light and perfection, Exodus 28.30. They seem to be two
precious stones given by the Lord himself to be set in the breast plate of the
High Priest. The manner how God revealed himself by Urim and Thummim is not set
down in Scripture. It is conceived to be as an holy sign, that the Lord was to
inspire the High Priest with an answer as Sampson's hair was not his strength,
but the sign of it. 4. By Visions. Thus God revealed the knowledge of Christ as
a mighty one, Psalm. 89.19. This was in the day, as dreams in the night. In
these visions there was. 1. The representing of spiritual things by sensible
forms. Hence God is said to multiply visions and to use similitudes by the
ministry of his Prophets, Hos. 12.10. A plain discovery of deep mysteries.
Thus the King of Babylons coming against Jerusalem was represented by a great
Eagle, Ezekiel. 17.3, 12. a fit Emblem, as appears by the collation which the
Prophet makes. As these predictions were called visions, so the Prophets were
called Seers, and they were Hieroglyphical Teachers, giving instructions by
Emblems. 2. There was also the irradiation, or shining light on the minds of
the Prophets, whereby there was the certain knowledge of those divine truths
imparted to them. Ezekiel says, the heavens were opened, and he saw the
visions of God. The opening of the heaven, and the opening of the understanding
do make an undeniable demonstration of the point, Ezekiel. 1.1. There was also. 3.
The impulse of the spirit, whereby they were strongly carried to make known
that to others, which God made known to them. Hence the word of the Lord, and
the Hand of the Lord, are joined together, Ezekiel. 1.3. The word of the Lord came
expressly to him with that evidence and clearness, that he could not withstand
it: and the hand of the Lord was upon him. The spirit of the Lord took hold of
him, and made him carry that word unto the people. 5. By inspiration,
infallibly to set down in writing the mind of God. Thus in old time holy men
spoke, as they were moved, or (...), forcibly moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet.
1.21. carried out of themselves, not speaking their own mind, but the mind of
God. In speaking of which, the Penmen of Scripture often spoke against
themselves; they minded not their own personal credit or discredit as other
writers do.
Sect. 2.
The Revelation of divine truth to us in these last days is spoken from God by
his son, Heb. 1.2. That eminently faithful servant of God, Isa. 53.11. here we
must consider. 1. Christ spoke those words to others, which his father spoke to
him, John 17.8. he communicated of his father's secrets. 2. The Apostles spoke
those words which Christ spoke to them, 1 John 1.3. Paul received all that he
delivered, 1 Cor. 11.23. and he delivered all that he received, Act. 20.27. he
declared the whole counsel of God. Now 3. Ministers since are to speak that
which is spoken in the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and no other
Doctrine upon the pain of a curse, Gal. 1.8.

The reasons why it is thus, are
1. That the word which is spoken, may appear to be the word of God, and not of
men, 2 These. 2.13. though coming by men, yet not coming from men. 2. That those
that speak the word may appear to be men of God, and sufficiently furnished for
that great work they take upon them, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. God is their Teacher;
they are servants of God for the good of men. 3. That those who obey the word
that is spoken, may appear to be men fearing God, trembling at his word, Isa.
50.10. 4. That those who disobey the word which is spoken, may appear to be
contemners of God, how shall men escape, that neglect so great salvation,
concerning the delivery whereof there is such evident demonstration, Heb. 2.2,
3, 4.
CHAP. V.
Use 1. THis shows us, that the preaching of the word is to be delivered as the
Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. not rashly, and waveringly, but reverently, and
resolvedly. The Prophets of old durst not give out any thing to the Church, but
what God first gave out to them, Hab. 2.1. So what is now spoken, must be
fetched from the holy Scriptures. Away then with their practice, who thrust the
decrees of men upon people for the ordinances of God.

Then must not the preachers of the word seek to please men, for if they
should, they should not be the servants of God, Gal. 1.10. every servant must
study to please his own master: Ministers must not study to gratify the
humors of their hearers: nor must they claw the itching ears of humorous ones.
Those that do so, are not God's builders, but the Devil's dirt-daubers.

Use 2. Yet this does not make, but that preachers may consult with humane
Authors. Paul cites the saying of an Heathen Poet, Tit. 1.12. Though humane
Learning be not so requisite for the delivery of the plain truths of the
Gospel, yet it is very material for the confuting the subtle cavils of the
opposers of the Gospel. Yea preachers may receive light from men like
themselves; not only from the Scriptures, but from judicious expositors. Though
no writings may be received in a coordination with the holy Scriptures, yet
they may in a subordination to them. Though the Scripture explain it self, yet
it is but a Normal expositor, and we have need of personal expositors too, Act.
8.31. The Mathematics are not learned without a Teacher, so it is with many
Scriptures which are hard to be understood.

Use 3. Does God speak to his messengers what they speak, then let our
behavior be answerable to the belief of such truth.

1. In reference to the Scriptures where God speaks, let us look upon them as
the inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. Oh what majesty and harmony, what verity
and purity is in them! Read the Scriptures, and meditate therein, as the word of
God, Psalm. 1.3. They are as a Letter sent from Christ to a particular person,
Rev. 2.1. let them much affect thee in the reading these lines. They are as
good news out of a far Country, oh welcome it. They are as a Statute-book
containing those wholesome Laws according to which we are to order our lives: it
concerns us to be well skilled in them. 2. In reference to Christ, that
messenger of the Covenant, by whom God does principally speak unto men: let us
hear him, because God sends to us by him, and has in a special manner
authorized him to speak unto us, Matthew. 17.5. yield faith and obedience to what
he speaks, hear and live, Isa. 55.3. 3. In reference to Ministers: Account of
them as the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor.
4.1. wait on the ministry of the word, as upon God himself, Prove. 8.34. do not
expect that God should teach you without the means, if ye neglect the means he
has set up among you. Frequent the public ministry: be attentive hearers. It
is dangerous to fall asleep with a Candle burning by your side, some have been
so burnt in their beds: but it is more dangerous to sleep, while the Candle of
the word is burning so near you: and do not wander in your thoughts, that is,
to sleep with your eyes open. Be also retentive hearers: food received, if it
stay not with us, does us no good. The honest and good heart having heard the
word, keeps it, Luke 8.15. If you have not strength of memory to keep the words
of a Sermon, see that ye have an honest heart to keep the substance of a
Sermon. I have heard of a woman, having (methinks) such an heart, who coming
from a Sermon, one asked her, what she remembered, she answered, that at present
she could not recall much, but she heard that which should make her to reform
some things as soon as she came home.
CHAP. VI. Go out quickly into the Streets, and Lanes of the City.]
IN these words we have the commission of the Gospel-messenger renewed. The
chief ones among the Jews proved Recusant Guests, as has been shown by their
several excuses given in. Now therefore the invitation is sent to the body of
that people, and afterward to the Gentiles, ver. 23. though some would have
the Gentiles meant in this verse. In the words read there is the manner how,
and the place where this great errand of the Gospel is to be delivered: For the
first, the manner is with expedition, Go out quickly.] For the Greek word
translated [Go out.] (...) proprie significat exire in expeditionem, and ad
pugnam contra hosts. Novar.
Critics observe its use, 1. In a military expedition. There is indeed a
Militia in the ministry, 2 Cor. 10.4. the work of it is to wage war against
men's lusts. 2. For going out by authoritative commission, as Mark 1.38. Act.
1.21. Thus ministers are to go out, De missione ad ossicium usurpatur.
go when they are sent: as we heard on ver. 17. The word we are now to fasten
upon, is that word [Quickly,] it is swift, upon the wing. Here note,

Observe. God would have a quick, or speedy dispatch of the Gospel-message, Mat.
10.7, 10. This appears. 1. In the Promise: God himself did make a quick
discovery of the Gospel-mystery. The promise of the second Adam came into the
world soon after the sin of the first Adam, Genesis 3.15. As man continued not
long in his state of innocence, so neither did he continue long in his state of
Apostasy, without the hope of recovery. As soon as ever man drank in the deadly
poison of sin, God provided the blood of Christ as an Antidote for the same. 2.
In the Type. The children of Isreal's deliverance out of Egyptian bondage, was a
type of our deliverance from wrath to come. And the Passover was a sign of,
that deliverance which they were to eat in haste, Exodus 12.11. because they
were sent out of the Land of Egypt in haste, ver. 33. Solomon in his Royalty
was a type of Christ in the excellency of the Gospel. The Psalmist therefore
speaking of him, says, His tongue was the Pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45.2.
dexterously setting forth Christ in all his glory. 3. In the Prophecy: Isaiah
speaking of Christ's throne, says, there shall be the hasting of
righteousness, Isa. 16.5. dispatching business without needless delays. 4. In
the performance in the days of the Gospel. There was a going forth quickly
within a few days after Christ's Ascension, Act. 2. This is Salmeron's gloss
upon the words of our Text. Thus then, in the Primitive times the Apostles did
go out quickly. St. Sohn sets it out by the Hieroglyphick of a white horse, and
his Rider going forth conquering and to conquer, Rev. 6.2. The Emblem of those
Apostolical preachers might well be a white horse: white for their purity of
Doctrine, Discipline, and Conversation. Horses for their swift preaching of the
Gospel. An horse by the Heathens was dedicated to the Sun because of its
swiftness. Eusebius speaking of the spreading of the Gospel by those Primitive
preachers, (...). Eusebius. Hist. l. 1. c. 22.
says, that it ran through the world like a Sunbeam. And St. Paul exhorts the
Thessalonians to pray, that the word might have such a free course, 2 These. 3.1.


So in the reforming times in Luthers days: How many godly and learned men did
go out quickly, and spread the Gospel far and near? Luther, Calvin, Melancthon,
Zuinglius, Zanchy, Peter Martyr, Bucer, Musculus, Ecclesiae Anglicana
reformationem desperasset aetas praeterita, admiratur praesens, obstupescet
futura. Scultet. annal.
Oecolampadius, Latimer, Cranmer, Ridley, etc. on this side, and on that side
the Seas, there were very many, viz. Those Angels which came flying with the
everlasting Gospel in the midst of heaven, Rev. 14.6. So the Learned interpret
that place. The Gospel had a swift passage by diligent preaching, by Printing
good Books, by Translating the holy Scriptures into vulgar Tongues, by
Catechizing youth, by public Disputations, by recording the Martyrs: such a
thing (says one) as the former age had even despaired of, the present age
admireth, and the future shall stand amazed at. Thus he speaks of the
Reformation in England.

CHAP. VII.
This work is brought to pass.
1. BY the Ascension of Christ, who went up in the Chariot of a cloud, Act.
1.9. which moves swiftly: and upon his Ascension the spirit came down in the
form of fire, Act. 2.3. which is quick of motion. 2. By the operation of the
spirit. 1. Giving utterance to them that spoke: for those Primitive preachers
spoke as the spirit gave them utterance, Act. 2.4. uttering divine Apothegms,
the Oracles of God. 2. Making entrance into them that heard. The word in their
mouths (called the sword of the spirit) was sharp and penetrating. It is said,
the Angels went whither the spirit was to go, Ezekiel. 1.12. so do the Angels of
Churches, the Ministers of the Gospel.
The reasons why it is thus are these,
1. Because things of the greatest worth (and such the Gospel-message is) are
to be speedily dispatched. If a pardon be to be sent to one that is ready to be
executed, he that carrys it must make haste. Letters of great importance have
this writ upon their backside post-haste. 2. Because both those that preach,
and those that hear the Gospel too, are but creatures, Mark 16.15. therefore
preachers are to make as much bast as they can in delivering the Gospel-message
to their hearers, who have but a little while to be hearing.
CHAP. VIII.
Use 1. SEe here how liberal God is, how speedy in showing mercy, which does
very much set it off: he comes apace toward his people, Psalm. 104.3, 4. clouds
and Chariot, wings and wind, spirits and fire, all speaks speed; every word
shows swift motion.

See here also how unbeseeming sloth and laziness is in the Ministers of the
Gospel. A lazy labourer; an idle Minister is as absurd as a blind eye. God
cannot bear with such. Oh thou wicked and slothful servant! Matthew. 25.26. Such
a loyterer is an unfaithful Steward in God's house, who wraps up his talent in
idleness, and burys it in the earth, where perhaps he is playing the worldling
all his time.

Use 2. Though the messengers of the Gospel are to go quickly when they are
sent, yet they are not to run before they are sent. We read of a scribe
instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 13.52. it is not for every one
who can speak an hour to adventure upon the work of reaching.

Again, though Ministers sent are to go quickly, yet they must not in their
speaking be too quick for their hearers: they should make no more have than
good speed. Old Mr. Dod observes it as a general fault among Ministers, to
shoot over their hearers. Ministers should explain divine truths leisurably,
that the weakest capacity may understand the same.

Use 3. Must ministers go quickly to you, then answer this Doctrine with the
quickness of your motion! be swift to hear: Make use of all opportunities where
ye may hear safely for the good of your souls. Be you as quick in closing with
the Gospel, as God would have his messengers quick in disclosing it. Make your
peace with God speedily, Matthew. 5.25. The only way for this is through Christ,
that one mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2.5. If you would not hazard the
loss of all by continuance in sin, make haste to compound through faith in
Christ. Be sure ye do not put off Gospel-advice a day longer, Heb. 3.7. Christ
bid Zacheus, make haste, and come down, and accordingly he did, and received
him joyfully, Luke 19.5, 6. Be restless in your spirits till you find Christ,
who is the rest of your souls. Enquire diligently, whether you are in the way
to heaven, then make haste in that way, go on with speed. The life of
Christianity is as a race, therefore so run that ye may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24.
Sin is like a sore, the longer you let it alone, the more it festers and
ranckles, and the worse it is to heal. The Scripture says, To day, lest any be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13. sin encroacheth upon the
soul by degrees, James 1.14, 15. let young men remember God in their youth: the
sooner any receive the Gospel-message, they are in a capacity to do God the
more service. Do not put off the doing, or receiving good till old age. Yet let
not this discourage old people from minding good: Better late than never. If
you come in (though at the eleventh hour) you shall have your reward, Matthew.
20.9. Abraham was old when God called him. It was late ere the Thief on the
cross was converted, he had a quick passage from the Cross to heaven.

CHAP. IX. Into the streets and lanes of the City.]
THese words do seem in a special manner to refer to the preaching of the
Gospel unto the body of the Jewish people after the refusal of it by the great
ones among them: (...). Latini quoque utuntur vocabulo platea pro vla urbis
latiore. Plaut. and Terent.
according to that commission where the charge is to go to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel, Matthew. 10.6. the accomplishment of which appears in that
sacred H story of the Acts of the Apostles. Into the streets and lanes,] (...),
urbis locus in quem omnes certatim confluunt.
the two Greek words signify places of resort, where there are continually
multitudes of people. This phrase [the streets of the City] may bear the same
sense, Territorium universum urbis ditioni subjectum designans. Med. in Apoc.
11.
as judicious Mr. Mede takes that in Rev. 11.8. who understands it for the
Territories belonging to the Dominion of that City. Here then it must be taken
for the whole Country of Judea among whom God would have the Gospel published.
And then in the high ways and hedges,] among the sinners and outcasts of the
Gentiles. Thus Salmer. glosseth upon our Text, understanding these words of the
Jewish commonalty, who have their houses together in streets and lanes, as the
Nobility have theirs alone. Streets and lanes denote the multitude of persons
to whom, and the publickness of place where the Gospel is preached.

Observe. God would have the Gospel preached openly, where it may be free for
all to hear it, Prove. 8.2, 3. and Chap. 1.20.

1. In streets there are rows of houses together: Hence we have the name
[Parish] from the situation of houses one by another, Parish, (...)
the joining of several houses together. Thus then, the going into Streets and
Lanes, is the preaching of the gospel in Cities, Towns, Villages, Parishes,
where people dwell together. Thus the Apostles went from City to City preaching
the gospel, Act. 14.21. and preaching Elders were ordained in every City, Tit.
1.5. God in mercy providing for the conveniences of people in sending the
Gospel to their very doors; it is but for them to step out, and they may gather
up this heavenly Manna. 2. Streets and lanes are places of concourse, where
there is continual going and coming: they are thorow-fares, passages in which
some are daily and hourly passing by, Prove. 7.8. Thus then, the going into
streets and lanes is the preaching of the Gospel unto men, who are a company of
Travelers upon earth, exhorting them as strangers and pilgrims to abstain from
sin, 1 Pet. 2.11. whiles they are going to and fro God would have them hear
that which may do them good for ever. 3. Streets and lanes are places of
pastime: Boys and Girls are playing in the streets, Zech. 8.5. Thus then the
going into streets and lanes as the preaching of the Gospel unto the children
of men, to take them off from earthly vanities, and to persuade them unto
heavenly excellencies, Act. 14.13, 15. Eccl. 11.9, 10. 4. Streets and lanes are
places of merchandise: your shops and markets are in your streets. Thus then,
the going into streets and lanes, is the preaching the Gospel to supply men's
necessities for the good of their souls, that they may have food and raiment
for their souls. The preaching of the Gospel is the holding forth spiritual
wares, Isa. 55.1. where men by believing may make spiritual mercies as surely
theirs, as any thing is theirs which they have bought. Every Lord's day is a
market day for our souls. 5. Streets and lanes are places for the proclaiming
of Acts and Edicts: Proclamations are read, and posted up in the streets: in
allusion to which, Jeremiah is bid to proclaim the word of the Lord in the
streets of Jerusalem, Jer. 11.6. Thus then the going into streets and sanes is
the preaching the Gospel by an office-ministry, sent of God to proclaim the
glad tidings of the Gospel. Wisdom stands in the tops of the high places, and
cries in the Gates, Prove. 8.2, 3. as the Herald, and Crier stands above the
rest, that he may be heard.
CHAP. X.
The reasons why God will have the Gospel preached openly, are
1. TO show the sovereign use of the Gospel: The leaves of this tree of life
are for the healing of the Nations: Rev. 22.12. it is for redemption out of
every kindred, and Tongue, and people, and nation, Rev. 5.9. 2. To show the
honorable employment of the work of the preaching of the Gospel: it is a work
none need be ashamed of, Romans 1.16. God's messengers appear openly in the
streets; they are not ashamed to hold up their wares against the Sun. Their
preaching in the light, and upon the house tops, Matthew. 10.27. shows, that
preaching is justifiable before all the world. 3. To show the good will of God,
who would have all come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. he is no
respecter of persons, but in every place those that fear him are accepted with
him, Act. 10.34, 25. he sends the gospel-invitation into the streets and lanes
without prefering one house before another. 4. To show the inexcusableness of
men in refusing the gospel-offer. They cannot plead they never heard of it. Not
only the dust of the street, but the stones, and houses of the street will rise
up in judgment against those who refuse the gospel preached.
CHAP. XI.
Use 1. THis informs us, that a public ministry is a great mercy. The ministry
of the gospel by public persons, such as are authorized thereunto; and in
public places, where any have free leave to attend upon means of grace: which
the Prophet mentions as a special favor, when our Teachers are not removed
into corners, but our eyes see our Teachers, Isa. 30.20. teaching in our view,
not driven to hide themselves. This also informs us of several sorts who are
blameworthy in opposing this truth, as 1. Such as pretend themselves to be
gospel-messengers, and decline the public dispensation thereof, who instead of
going into streets and lanes to convert men to, and confirm men in the faith,
creep into houses to subvert the faith of some, leading captive filly women, 2 Timothy 3.6. -- 2. Such as wilfully sit within their doors, when the gospel is
preached in their streets, that come nor forth to hear the voice of wisdom that
cries in their streets, Matthew. 12.42. -- 3. Such as will not suffer the
messengers of the gospel to preach openly, or to teach in their streets,
contradicting or disturbing the public preachers, like those in Act. 13.45. or
suspending and banishing them, when it is in their power.

Use 2. Yet this does not make, but that upon occasion the gospel may be
lawfully preached in private houses. Paul taught publicly, and likewise from
house to house, Act. 20.20. in every place Religious service is accepted, if it
be done in a right manner (not but that the convenience of public houses to
meet in, is a great mercy, as was hinted before) let none then be prejudiced
with the circumstance of place, so as to be hindered of the substance of the
gospel: yet there is a vast difference between this going into houses to build
up one another in our most holy says, and that creeping into houses as it were
by stealth, to subvert the faith of others. The one is like the visit of a
friend; the other like the sly entrance of a Thief.

Use 3. Hear then, and give ear, you that inhabit the streets and lanes, and
villages about this Town, Jer. 11.6. God sent his Seers to take notice what
they did in Jerusalem according to their streets, ver. 13. your Town is divided
into several streets, and lanes. Take therefore the word of God, as though you
had a particular message sent into every street and lane this day from heaven.
God knows Maidstone, as well as he did Jerusalem: ye therefore that inhabit
the streets of this Town, the High Street, the South Side, and the North-side
of it, Week-street, Stone-street, etc. ye that inhabit the several lanes of
this Town, East-lane, Ballock-lane, etc. look into your hearts and ways.

Moreover, ye that are come out of your doors into the streets, meeting the
message of God thus openly, consider wherefore ye are come: as Christ said to
the multitudes that went to hear John Baptist, What went ye out for to see?
Mat. 11.7. the reasons why we hear any preacher should be well examined: as to
hear him because he is an officer in that work, John was a Prophet, and more
than a Prophet. John was not a reed shaken by the wind. Be ye sure to seek
Christ in the streets, in the public ordinances, Cant. 3.2, 3. Ask the
watchmen that go about the City. The Priests lips of old were to preserve
knowledge. Receive those messengers of God into your houses, who preach in your
streets, Mat. 10.12, 13. Give countenance and maintenance to their persons,
give audience to their Doctrine: welcome those that come in the name of Christ,
and give them high esteem for their work-sake. Receive us, says the Apostle, 2
Cor. 7.2. make room for us in your houses and hearts, let their peace come upon
you; if you beat it back, it will return to them, Mat. 10.13.

Consider ye, it is not the presence of ministers in your streets will serve
you in any stead, unless you make good use of them. There be those will make
this their plea before Christ at the great day, Thou have taught in our
streets, Luke 13.26. If ye make no good use of the messengers of the Gospel in
your streets, whom God sends in mercy, you may have other kind of guests in
your streets, whom God sends in judgment. The sword may be in your streets,
Chariots raging in your streets, Nah. 2.4. the wounded in the streets, Lam.
2.12. carkases torn in the streets, Isa. 5.25. pestilence may be in your
streets, Ezekiel. 28.23. famine may be in your streets, Isa. 24.11. As these
judgments have been, and are in the streets of others, God grant, that there
may be no such complaining in our streets, Psalm. 144.14.

SERMON. XIII.
Luk 14.21. -- And bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, the halt, and the
blind.
CHAP. I.
THese words contain the final cause of the former, viz. the end why the Master
of the feast bid his servant go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the
City: it was to bring in hither the poor and maimed, etc. where observe first,
how the guests come unto this gospel-provision; it is by being brought in
hither, whither they are invited. Hence I note,

Observe. God sends the messengers of the gospel out, to bring the
gospel-hearers in, Matthew. 28.19, 20. we have heard how, and whither the
messengers are sent out, now we are to enquire how they are to bring in
hearers. The notation of the Greek word used in the Text, will give us some
light here, while we consider the several acceptions of the word.

1. It signifies to bring in by way of discovery: as an Introduction in a Book,
which serves for the help of the Reader, that he may gain the more exact
knowledge of what is written. An introduction is a writing, Introductio est
scriptia qua prima urtis alicujus elementa tradimus, and ad eam lectores velut
introd^cimu^, i. e. ad ejus cognitionem.
wherein the first Elements of an Art are delivered, by which that Art or
Science is the more easily learned. Thus ministers Sermons should be as
introductions, to show their hearers the way how to attain saving knowledge, I
show unto you, (says St. Paul to the Corinthians) a more excellent way, 1 Cor.
12.31. Thus then, Bring them in, that is, show them the way wherein they should
walk, Isa. 30.20, 21. point out Jesus Christ to them, who is the way, John
1.29. 2. It signifies to bring in by way of authority, as a citation, or
summoning into a Court of Justice: (...). Demost.
so Demosthenes makes use of the word. So should ministers warn and teach men,
that they may present them perfect in Christ Jesus at his Tribunal, Col. 1.28.
that they come to trial, and abide the trial, so should we bring men in, that
they may be found to praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7. 3. It signifies to bring in by way of conjunction: as two
streams or Rivers are brought into one: (...). Homer.
the strength of them brought into one channel, that did run into two or more.
So Homer uses the word. So preachers should labor to bring their hearers into
one way, who go in several ways. Other sheep have I says Christ, and them also
must I bring, and there shall be one fold, John 10.16. This m^st be their work,
who are shepherds under Christ.
CHAP. II.
Now for the manner of this bringing in, it must be
1. BY convincing arguments, with plainness and fidelity, telling them of the
necessity of Regeneration, faith, and repentance unto eternal life: reasoning
out the case with them concerning the worth of a soul, the danger of a natural
estate, the uncertainty of this world; the eternity of that which is to come,
the hatefulness of sin, the loveliness of grace, the incomparableness of
Christ. 2. By affectionate expressions, making use, not of exasperating, but
mollifying language, Phil. 3.18, 19. for grace is not enforced, but distilled
into the mind: exhortations should proceed from compassion. Words should be
fitted to the matter, for the more ready conveyance of it into the hearts of
the hearers. 3. By an exemplary life, answerable to the Doctrine which is
delivered, a sober, grave, holy example. The preacher of good Doctrine, must
likewise be a pattern of good works, Tit. 2.7.
The truth of this point will appear, if you consider
1. The nature of men to whom the Gospel is sent, they are rational creatures,
and so to be wrought upon in a rational way, by bidding them, Consider their
ways, Hag. 1.5. to commune with their own hearts, Psalm. 4.4. this is the way to
illighten the understanding, (...) persuade the will, to stir up the affections.

2. The nature of the Gospel which is sent to men; Fides estratio Christiani
hominis. Luther.
it is a reasonable service, Romans 12.1. In those points of Christianity where
there is no reason for the thing believed, yet there is very good reason for
the belief of the thing, and that because of the Authority of the speaker.

3. The nature of that happiness, which is the fruit of the Gospel: this is
suited to a rational creature; here is truth in it, which is the object of the
understanding, and Good, which is the object of the will, John 17.3.

Quest. Whether are Gospel-messengers to bring in men?

Resp. It is said, Bring them in hither: in general, that is, into the nouse of
God, 1 Timothy 2.13. or into the Garden of Christ. More particularly thus, 1. Into
the unity of the faith, Ephesians. 4.13. to partake of the Doctrine of Christ. 2.
Into the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. to partake of Christian fellowship,
maintaining communion with them, who agree to walk according to the order of
the Gospel.

CHAP. III.
Use 1. THis informs us, that men naturally are without, Ephesians. 2.12. without
Christ: all out of him are without life, 1 John 5.12. Without the commonwealth
of Israel, Those that belong not to Christ as the Head, belong not to his
Church as the body, without the Covenants of promise. They who have not to do
with the Church, have nothing to do with the privileges thereof. Why, the
Covenant (though but one) is put in the plural number, and why the promises
(though many) are put in the singular number, Bezain Ephesians. 2.
Beza gives the reason: because the Covenant was often renewed, and because the
promises are all but one in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 1.20. -- without hope: it is
only the heirs of promise that cast the Anchor of hope into heaven, Heb. 6.17,
18, 19. others may presume, but hope they cannot: he that has no hope of an
happy life hereafter, will not trouble himself about leading an holy life here.
Now though men are naturally without, yet God would not have men abide without;
he is so courteous and gracious, so kind and loving, as to invite men to come
^n. Indeed, he once drove man out, Genesis 3.^4. and ever since men naturally are
born without; but it is as true, that he would have man come in again, that as
they are born in the wide world, so they may be born in Sion, Ps. 87.5. he
drove man out of the earthly Para^ise, but he sends his messengers after men to
^ring them into an heavenly Paradise.

Use 2. Though God send out ministers to bring people in, yet they cannot bring
them in by any power of their own, it is the spirit of God which leads men into
truth, John 16.13. Moral persuasions by men may bring men unto truth, but it
must be God's teaching, which brings men into the truth.

Again, though God send his messengers to bring his elect in, yet he can bring
them in without any such external helps. John Baptist was silled with the Holy
Ghost from his Mothers womb. Infants may be taught of God, though they cannot
be taught of men.

Use 3. Answer Gods end in sending forth his messengers.

1. Come in: let your great care be to be found in Christ, Phil. 3.9. as the
body is within the garment, whereby us shame is covered, Christ's Righteousness
is your Robe; As the soldier is within his armor, defended by it against the
assaults of his Adversaries: as we are in Christ, we overcome all spiritual
enemies: as the branch is within the Vine, whereby it receives sap and vigor
from the root. As the water is within the fountain, John 4.14. There is a fresh
supply continually.

2. Abide within, John 15.4. Walk in him as ye have received him, Col. 2.6.
walk in the spirit of Christ, follow not the impulses of your own spirits: The
spirits motions appear in spiritual actions; they stir up grace, and keep down
sin according to the Rule of the word; walk also in good works, unto which you
are created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.10. and be not weary of well doing. Come
in, or else you will one day be cast out, Matthew. 8.12. and unless you abide
within, it is a sign you were never truly within, 1 John 2.19. if ye leave good
company, and make others your intimate companions, and continue so to do, it is
a sad sign you were never truly good.

CHAP. IV.
The poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind.]
IN these words we have the Description of the guests, upon whom God bestows
the Gospel-provision. The greater sort of men would have none of it, as their
several excuses declare, wherefore the meaner sort of people shall receive it.
(...), the Poor,] this word notes out such as are brought to extreme want. And
the maimed. (...).] This word signifies such as are defective in any part of
the body.] As the other two words, (...), [the halt and the blind] signify
those particular defects which are in those two parts of the body, the foot,
and the eye. This is the proper signification of these words, and the sense of
them seems to be, valde obscuros and contemptibiles, Marlor. in loc.
very obscure and contemptibles. These words are likewise used in a
metaphorical sense, as Poor in spirit, maimed in the soul, or affections, halt
in opinion, blind in understanding. Howsoever! take the words either properly
or metaphorically, they come up to one sense, to express the mean and miserable
condition of those who partake of the Gospel.

Observe. God makes choice of very obscure and contemptible persons, he brings
those into his favor, who are of no credit, nor esteem in the world, 1 Cor.
2.8, 9, 10. passing by others. Those whom God makes choice of, are

1. Such as are but mean in natural parts; the foolish things of the world, in
opposition to the wise, 1 Cor. 1.27. men that have no great insight into
things, and such as the world will scarce vouchsafe to look upon, or such as
have not such forecast as the Politicians of the world have: Babes and
children in comparison of the wise and prudent of the world, Matthew. 11.25.

2. Such as are but weak in power, compared with the Potentates of the earth, 1
Cor. 1.27. believers are a company of poor feeble creatures, called Doves and
Sheep, creatures void of force. The Church is called the Congregation of the
poor, (...) Basil.
Psalm. 74.19. destitute of worldly advantages; such as have little, and can do
little. Our Saviors attendants were of the meaner sort, Joseph the Carpenter,
and Mary his Wise, Peter and Andrew, James and John, fishermen. St. Basil
brings in Christ thus speaking, I seek for fishermen, not for Princes; I
persuade Mariners, not Potentates.

3. Such as are low for birth and breeding. God chooses the base things of the
world, 1 Cor. 1.28. such as are bred of a mean stock, that there are no
Chronicles of their Predecessors, nor any Pedigrees to be found for them upon
record, that cannot boast of the gallantry or Gentility of their Kindred, as
some do.

4. Such as are mere nothing in man's account, (...).
1 Cor. 1.28. men of no name, that are not esteemed in any reckoning: and such
(too) as account themselves of no worth, nothing in their own eyes. The Apostle
goes so low in the description of them, as if he could not find a word mean
enough to denominate them, and therefore calls them, just nothing.

Quest. Unto what does God choose them?

Resp. 1. He chooses them to be possessours of grace; he chooses the poor of
the world to be rich in faith, Jam. 2.5. rich in respect of the Doctrine of
faith, wherein they receive the pearl of great price, Matthew. 13.46. and rich in
respect of the grace of faith, which is very precious.

2. He chooses them to be heirs of glory, heirs of the kingdom: the kingdom by
way of eminency and excellency, none of the kingdoms of the world are like it.
Believers are Princes under age, Heads destinate to the Diadem, as Tertullian
calls them: they are joint heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. Thus God dignifies
those that are contemptible in the world.

Quest. Why does God choose thus?

Resp. 1. To discover the equity of his proceedings with the children of men,
as is intimated in that Parable, Luke 16.25. God turns the scales at the hour
of death, and causes them to go up that went down here.

2. To difference the spiritual service of the Gospel from the carnal
ordinances of the Levitical Law. Since John Baptist's time the kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, Matthew. 11.12. men of all sorts come rushing in upon
it. The Publicans, Sinners, Lepers, such as were legally unclean, lept over the
Levitical ceremonies, thrusting themselves into the number of the
Gospel-converts, the spiritual worshippers. In the time of the Law Lepers were
to stand aloof off: the maimed, the lame, and the blind, were not to be used in
God's service, Deuteronomy. 15.21.

3. To confound the world, viz. the men of the world in their wisdom and
strength, 1 Cor. 1.27. making them blush for shame, to think how poor idiots
learn the way to happiness in the conscientious practice of that little they
know, when they with all their speculative knowledge, discoursing of happiness,
miss of it.

4. To exalt himself: that all that glory, may glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.31.
when mean men are exalted, they cannot boast. Though the Senator, if chosen of
God, might perhaps boast of his dignity: the Orator of his Eloquence, and the
Emperor of his power; yet surely the poor fisherman being chosen, can boast
of nothing but of him who made choice of him, says Augustine. August.


5. To conform the members to the Head; now consider how poor he was, who was
the firstborn of God's chosen: A Carpenter's Wife was his Mother: When he was
born, he was laid in a manger instead of a Cradle: when he was grown up, he had
not wherewith to lay his head.

6. To show the sovereign pleasure of God; it is so, because so it seems good
in his sight, Matthew. 11.25, 26.

CHAP. V.
Use 1. HEre see that no kind of defects need keep off any from closing with
the Gospel, as

1. Not civil defects, as want of worldly wealth. The poorest need not scruple
coming, those that have no money may come and welome, Isa. 55.1. the
Gospel-provision is not an ordinary, where ye pay for what ye have, but as a
Feast, whereto ye are freely invited, and whereat you may fully feed.

2. Not corporal defects, as want of limbs. The maimed, the lame, and the
blind, need not scruple coming. The man sick of the Palsy was healed both in
his body and soul, Luke 5.25.

3. Not mental defects; as want of wit: though you cannot so fully express your
mind before God as others, yet fall down before him.

4. Not moral defects, as want of good manners, not leading a well-ordered
life. The lewdest persons need not scruple coming. Publicans, Sinners,
Extortioners, Harlots, are received by Christ when they come unto him, Matthew.
21.31, 32. it is lawful for the most notorious sinners to believe; and great
sinners have become notable Saints.

Secondly, here ye may see, that God in his choosing is different from Satan,
and from men in their choosing: Satan makes choice of the craftiest Heads, and
subtillest instruments to carry on his designs, Genesis 3.1. he picks out a Goliath
for strength, an Achitophel for policy to do his work. And no wonder! for he
cannot make men fit for his turn, when he does not find them so: he cannot put
new abilities into men, though he does excite those abilities which are in
them. Therefore he chooses men fit for his turn, seeing he cannot make them
fit. So men in their several choices, they avoid defects as near as they can.

Use 2. Yet all that God chooses, are not obscure persons: God chooses some to
grace and glory, that are very eminent in the world. Abraham the father of the
faithful; Isaac the heir of the Promise: Jacob the man powerful with God, were
all very rich. The elect Lady, ^ John 1. honorable women, and men not a few
believed, Act. 17.12. So God chooses some to be eminent in piety, who are
eminent in natural parts, and moral accomplishments. Such a one was St. Paul,
of whom Porphyry, that great enemy to Christianity, said, it was pity such a
man as Paul should be cast away upon the Christian Religion.

Now as God does not make choice of none but mean persons, so neither does he
make choice of all that are mean. Many are deformed in their minds as well as
in their bodies, such as Thyrsues in Homer. Do we not see many poor people live
and die in gross ignorance and wickedness? David says, the abjects gathered
themselves against him, Psalm. 35.15. saucy dust, (as one calls them) who will
be flying in the faces of God's people. And the rage of such many times proves
the more furious for want of an ingenious disposition, and civil education.

Use 3. Does God make choice of mean persons, then hearken unto this, ye that
are mean in the world and not good, this Doctrine tells you of a way, whereby
your outward wants may be supplied with spiritual abundance: You that are
deformed and decrepit, look into the glass of God's word, and dress your souls
by that glass. As you should labor to supply your outward wants with spiritual
excellencies, so you should labor to see your spiritual wants by your outward
wants.

Secondly, ye that are poor and godly; that are decrepit and deformed in your
body, and yet adorned with the graces of God's spirit in your souls, learn to
spiritualize your outward wants: though the world neither know you, nor regard
you, yet you are both known and esteemed of by the Lord: and though you possess
little or nothing of the world, yet possessing God, you possess all things.
Bless God for giving you spirituals, though he has denied you temporals: ye
may rejoice in the God of all mercies, when you have not many outward mercies
to rejoice in, Habak. 3.17, 18. Expect a change for the better, death will
perfect the souls of Saints: after death the spirits of just men are made
perfect, Heb. 12.23. The Resurrection will perfect the bodies of Saints: the
weak body is raised in power, 1 Cor. 15.43. the crooked body will be raised
straight: the maimed body will be raised whole; the Resurrection will cure all
infirmities: the thought of which comforted the Martyrs, when they gave their
bodies to be burnt to ashes. At Stratford-bow in Queen Maryes days were burnt
at one stake, a lame man, and a blind man. The lame man after he was chained,
bid the bl^nd man be of good comfort, for they should both be healed.

Ye that are not mean in the world, do not ye despise whom God makes choice of,
Jam. 2.5, 6. He that despises the poor, despises his Maker, Prove. 17.5. he
contemns the wise dispensation of God, who would have the world consist of
hills and valleys, of high and low people intermingled. And he that despises
the godly. Poor, defaceth the image of God twice, despising the immateriality
and immortality of God upon the man, and despising the holiness and
Righteousness of God stamped upon the new man.

Let both high and low consider, that these outward degrees are only calculated
for this world; the Grave takes away all civil differences, Job 3.19. Bodies
under ground are alike. The dust of the rich and poor intermingleth; one is not
known from the other. Besides, many that are now despicable, will appear
honorable at the great day: Those that are now so obscure, that they are lost
in the count of the world, shall be taken into the arms of Christ, and made
much of before all the world, 1 John 3.1, 2. Luke 12.8.

SERMON. XIV.
LUKE 14.22. And the servant said, Lord, it is done as thou have commanded,
etc.]
CHAP. I.
IN this verse are two things for the further explaining this Parable. 1. The
relation of what is done by virtue of the Gospel. 2. The notification that more
may be done. Concerning the first, the Relation is made by way of Report unto
him, who sends out the messengers of the Gospel. And the servant said, Lord.]
Which phrase, for the substance of it we met with in the former verse. The
matter related, which we are now to enquire after, relates to the latter part
of the former verse: As if the servant should have said, Lord, thou biddest us
go out quickly, and bring in hither the blind, (...) est adverbium
similitudinis et veritatis.
the maimed, etc. Behold Lord, it is done as thou have commanded.] This
particle [As] is a note of similitude and of verity. The sense may be therefore
just like unto the command. This word [command] is an injunction by Authority,
according to which the messengers of the Gospel must act in all they do.

Obser. What God will have done, is done by the ministry of the Gospel, Act.
10.42.

I. What God will have done declaratively in the offer of grace unto souls,
when he says, go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the City, it is
done as he has commanded: and this is done by the Gospel-ministery.

1. By their accepting that office which God calls them to; Lord, it is done, I
am ready to do tay work, which thou give me in charge: here I am, send me.

2. By their calling upon people to receive that Doctrine which is prepared to
them from the Lord. Lord, it is done; what I received from thee, I delivered to
them, 1 Cor. 11.23. Those talents thou entrustedst me with, I have improved for
the advancement of the world's Savior, and for the advantage of sinners in the
world. I have not defrauded any souls of their due, Act. 20.20, 27. the mystery
of the Gospel has been revealed to them.

3. By their beseeching people to walk answerable to that Doctrine which God
sends to them. Lord, it is done, I have been with them, I have gently handled
them, and sovingly entreated them, as thou commandedst me, Romans 12.1.

4. By their waiting on people who are bad, to see if God in his due time will
make them better. Lord, it is done, though thou sendedst me among despicable
creatures, I was willing to wait upon them to attend thy service, 2 Timothy 2.24,
25, 26. I condescended to my inferiors, I d d bear with the weak^^ was patient
toward the obstinate. I was w lling to deny my self any way wherein I (...)
not deny the truth; I was willing to becom^ all things to all men, if by any
means I might win some.

II. What God will have done effectually in the work of grace upon souls: when
he says, bring in hither the poor, Apostoli praedicationis Evangelicae reti
colligerunt omnes bonos viros Judaeos. Irenaeus.
and the maimed, etc. it is done as he has commanded. But this is done by the
Ministers of the Gospel instrumentally, and principally by the Lord, 1 Cor.
3.5. it is done by virtue of God's ordinance with them, and his blessing upon
them.

CHAP. II.

THe work of grace is also done upon the hearers of the Gospel thus.

1. The danger by nature is over, the worst is past; they have escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust: they are got out of prison, the
shackles of their ignorance and disobedience are knocked off, and they set in a
state of liberty.

2. The happiness of heaven is purchased for them, and bequeathed to them, Ephesians.
1.14. John 17.24. Christ has paid for it, and is willing to bestow it upon
them, wherefore those that have him, are said to have life, 1 John 5.12.

3. The desires of their souls are satisfied as to the truth of what they
desire, though still they desire more, as to the perfecting of what they have
fixed upon, John 4.14. They thirst no more after another kind of happiness,
though still they thirst after more degrees of this kind of happiness.

4. The disposal of all things here below is for their good, Romans 8.28. Venenum
aliquando pro remedio fuit, quicquid ad me venerit, bonum fict. Senec.
poison sometimes is an ingredient into a medicine, and it does well, where
there is a skilful hand to mingle correctives with it.

Quest. 1. Why must that be declared by the Ministry of the word, which God
would have declared?

Resp. 1. Because God is Lord and Master unto the messengers of the Gospel;
they are his servants, as in our Text, and therefore must speak nothing but
what he commands.

2. All divine truths are inspired of him; therefore whatsoever any give out in
matters of salvation, must be according to what he has given forth in the
sacred Scripture, either immediately from Texts of Scripture, or mediately by
undeniable deductions from those Texts.

3. How can it be otherwise? for the Lion has roared, who will not fear? the
Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy? Amos 3.8. So Paul, we knowing the
terror of the Lord, persuade men, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. wherefore the Prophets of
old did readily do what God commanded, though the things were of such a nature
as seemed ridiculous, and might expose them to contempt and scorn, Ezekiel. 12.7.

Quest. 2. Why is that effectually done, which God will have effected by the
ministry of the word?

Resp. 1. To show, that the election has obtained it, though the rest are
hardened, Romans 11.7. what God decrees, is brought to pass. The Election is
sure, the Lord makes it known, that he knows who are his.

2. To show the irresistibleness of divine working: God works, and who can
let? Isa. 43.13. No bolts or bars on man's heart can keep him out, when he is
pleased to take possession of the heart.

3. To show the tenor of the Covenant of grace in the work of grace upon the
soul. Lord, it is done as thou command. This is according to the Covenant of
grace, I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, Heb. 8.10. I will have it
so, and it shall be so; it is but a word, and a work with God.

CHAP. III.
Use 1. THis shows us, what an unreasonable thing it is for any to be angry
with the messengers of the Gospel, for declaring what God commands them. Some
are angry, when the word of God by us his messengers comes close to them,
striking at their beloved sins. Alas we cannot help it, we are but servants,
and upon pain of our Masters displeasure must do what he commands us, deliver
his message, be it pleasing or displeasing.

This also informs us, that God sets his seal to the ministry of the Gospel.
The work of conversion is effectually done according to his command: he owneth
the m^nistry, whether men will own it or no, 1 Cor. 9.2.

Use 2. Yet for all this, the Gospel is ^^d to many, 2 Cor. 4 2, 3. as it is
with the (...) in the firmament, it is often hid in a cloud, when it shines in
the air. So it is with the Sunshine of the Gospel, it is veiled to some, when
it shines round about them.

Use 3. Hearken to the will of God revealed to you in scriptural exhortations,
Prove. 4.1. yea so hear, that your souls may live. As Ministers must preach, so
people must hear according to the command of God. It is a Rule in Divinity,
that active verbs are given to those things which do not properly, and by an
immediate influx effect that which the verbs do signify, but do concur to the
same. God said to Moses lift up thy rod, stretch out thine hand over the Sea,
and divide it, Exodus 14.16. Had Moses power to divide the sea? No, but because
there was a certain concurrence of Moses, using the rod according to direction,
therefore that is attributed to Moses, which was the work of God alone. In this
sense of the use of means according to direction, must those places of
Scripture be understood, which bid man believe, repent, etc.

Labor also to feel the will of God effected in you in a real conversion. Make
trial of by this your keeping God's commandment. Zanchy well observes, Zanch.
there is a threefold keeping the commands: The first is perfect and complete,
as Christ upon earth did, and the Saints in heaven do. The second is imperfect,
but yet sincere, as the Saints on earth do. The third is external only and
unsound, as the hypocrites on earth do. In the first sense it is impossible for
us in this life to keep the commandments; yet this impossibility is not by
reason of the Laws rigidness, but by reason of our corruption. In the third
sense, it is sinful keeping the commandments, when we rest in externals. But in
the second sense, it is possible, and honorable to keep the commandments. It
is possible upon this double account, the will being accepted for the deed, and
the failings in all our duties being pardoned through Jesus Christ.

Wherefore answer this Doctrine by your sincere obedience, that ye may be able
to say, Lord, it is done as thou have commanded. Therefore do not only what God
has commanded, but do it as God has commanded it: So do the work of grace,
that the fruits of the same may appear continually to be done by you, see that
your obedience be according to the full latitude of God's Law, whose law is
exceeding broad.

CHAP. IV. And yet there is room.]
THe servant having related what had been done of the preaching and prevalency
of the Gospel, he adds these words by way of notification, that more was yet
to be done. And yet] that is, notwithstanding the conversion of so many Jews,
or the gathering in the wandering and lost sheep of the house of Israel. There
is room] that is, (...). Aug.
for the Gentiles, those of any Nation that shall embrace the Gospel. There is
room, or place: the Greek word properly signifying that which contains,
circumscribeth, and terminateth our bodies, and it does figuratively signify
the feat or heads of Arguments. They are called Topics, or Common-places; the
boundaries of reasonings, containing the grounds and foundation of discourse.
This phrase [yet there is room] signifies the superabounding of divine grace
spoken of before, under the notion of a Feast, or great Supper. And yet] that
implies, that many were already brought in to partake of this great Supper,
this Gospel-provision. There is room] this shows the sufficiency of it, to
feed, and to satisfy many more.

Observe. Notwithstanding the many that have been brought in by the power of the
Gospel, yet there is rome for more, Acts 2.39.

CHAP. V.
THat many have been brought in thus appears.

1. This way of bringing men in began very early in the world. Christ being the
Lamb slain virtually in the first age o^ the world, Rev. 13.8. Abel offered up
acceptable sacrifice to the Lord, Genesis 4.4. witnessing his Righteousness in
this Gospel-sense, Heb. 11.4. God testifying either by fire from heaven, or
some other visible expression of his gracious acceptance, whereby Abel's faith
was confirmed touching life and salvation through Christ. Since that time many
more have been brought in.

2. God brought in many eminent persons in the old Testament, for this very
end, that they might be instrumental to bring in others. God says of Abraham,
I know him, that he will command his children, and his household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19. and he had an eminent Son for
Religion, viz. Isaac, and a choice servant, viz. Eleazar, so Joshua says, I
and my house will serve the Lord: So for the good Prophets, and the good Kings.
The conversion of some choice ones, proves eminenly instrumental for the good
of many.

3. Multitudes have been brought in together at the same time, and the same
place: about three thousand in one day at St. Peter's Sermon, Act. 2.41. and
the Lord added daily to his Church such as should be saved, ver. 47. Sometimes
whole families together. The Jailer believed in God with all his house, Act.
16.34. So Lydia, and her household.

4. The Apostles did according to their commission preach the Gospel in all
Nations, and had very good success: witness the many Churches that were formed
in several Countries, unto whom many of the Epistles in the new Testament are
directed. The door of faith was opened unto the Gentiles, Act. 14.27. at which
door the King of glory comes into the soul of man.

5. In the darkest times both in the old and new Testaments, when very few
appeared, there were thousands that kept close to the true God. Seven thousand
that did not submit to Baal, 1 King. 19.18. There were an hundred forty and
four thousand sealed ones; such as did not submit to Antichrist and his false
worship, Rev. 7.4. if it be thus in the dark times, what is it in the clear
ages for Gospel Light?

Yet notwithstanding so many have been brought in, there is yet room for more
in that house where Gospel-provision is made ready, viz. in Mount Sion, the
Church of God, where there is the Feast of fat things for all people, Isa.
25.6. This house has two stories. The lower rooms, where God communicates
himself in the use of means, the Church militant. The upper rooms, where God
communicats himself immediately, the Church triumphant: and in both these parts
of God's house, there is room for more than are in them.

I. In the Church militant, yet there is room.
1. (...) non habitatis anguste in nobis. So Piscator renders it.
In the hearts of the faithful preachers of the Gospel, they wish well to the
souls of their hearers. O ye Corinthians, ye are not straightened in us, 2 Cor.
6.11, 12. that is, ye have room enough in our hearts. Our serious thoughts run
more of you, than yours do of your selves. 2. There is room in those Ordinances
that are dispensed by the Ministers of the Gospel. Wisdom's gates are wide
enough to receive all that come, Prove. 8.34. The Gospel is preached, that all
Nations may be discipled, and that all who partake of the Covenant of grace,
may partake of the seals of it, Matthew. 28.19. And when particular Churches grow
so numerous, that they cannot conveniently meet together in one place, for the
participation of Ordinances; then like Bees swarming, they are to be gathered,
and seated under several hives, that still we may say, yet there is room. This
is a warrantable propogation of Churches, not a sinful separation from
Churches. 3. There is room in the virtue of Christ's blood, and riches of God's
g ace, which is held forth in Ordinances, Romans 5.20, 21. Christ's blood is as
fresh as ever it was in the day wherein it was shed; it is that new and living
way to heaven, Heb. 10.19, 20. which never waxes stale: and what wonderful
Cures has it wrought? and the grace of God is as free, as full, and
efficacious, as eever it was.
II. In the Church triumphant yet there is room.
There are many mansions, John 14.2. (...) diversorium. There are so many
mansions in heaven, as would suffice infinitis mundis. Rolloc.
The word in the Syriack Testament for mansions, signifies an Inn or public
place. An Inn is a common receptacle for travelers, so is heaven for Saints,
who are pilgrims and strangers upon earth, 1 Pet. 2.11. Christ, when he came
into the world, was laid in a manger; because there was no room for him nor His
in the Inn: but when he went out of the world, he went to such an Inn, or
public place, where there is room enough for him and all his, whether
believers of diverse Countries come, Rev. 5.9. There is room enough. 1.
Objectively: without us, God fully communicating himself to the Saints above, 1
Cor. 15.28. the joys of heaven are as the very spirits of things extracted of
very great worth, and efficacy. 2. Subjectively: within us. The understanding
widened, clearly to know God, 1 Cor. 13.13. the will widened fully to love God.

CHAP. VI.
Use 1. THis informs us, that when any who hear the Gospel do perish, it is not
through any scantiness of the Gospel-provision, out for want of applying that
provision. Consider it seriously, if ye be shut out of heaven, it is not for
want of room in heaven, but for want of faith in your hearts, Heb. 12.19. Esau
found no place for repentance; no wonder they find no room or place in heaven
when they die, who find no place for faith, or repentance, or other graces
whiles they live. The coming short of Christ and holiness, makes men fall short
of heaven and happiness.

This also informs us, that there is more room than company, more provision
than guests at the Gospel-feast. There is bread enough, and to spare, Luke
15.17. it is likened to a fountain, out of which there is more water runs waste
than is made use of.

Though Gospel Grace be full and free, and all men need it, yet many there be
that make no account of it; they are wholly enslaved to their sense, and taken
up with lower things: heavenly things seem to be too far distant, to work upon
their affections; they see the world, but they see not God, nor Christ, nor
their souls, nor everlasting glory.

Use 2. Though yet there is room, yet we know not how long there may be any
room for us: we had need therefore be careful, lest any should seem to come
short of it, Heb. 4.1. Those that knock after the door is made fast, must go
away as they came, Luke 13.25. those that stay so late till the bridge be drawn
up, cannot get over the water. Christ is now as a bridge to heaven: if we make
us of him in time, well and good, but know, this bridge will be drawn up, and
then you must stay on this side happiness. There is a great gulf between
heaven and hell, and no bridge to get over it, as there is here between earth
and heaven, Luke 16.26.

Secondly, though there be room in heaven, and Christ is gone to prepare a
place for us, yet we must not conceive of heaven as an house like ours, 2 Cor.
5.1. consisting of many rooms, and those not yet furnished or finished; but the
mention of many mansions, and great preparations, is for the setting off the
excellency of heaven, and for the raising up our expectations.

Use 3. Then do not perish in the midst of such plenty: (...). Occumen.
turn not the grace of God into wantonness, as some do to their own
destruction, do not transpose or remove it from its ordinary end and use, from
Gospel-ends, so as to cast off obedience to the Law of God. Return unto God,
who is thus provided to entertain those that come unto him. This use the
Prodigal makes of that consideration, Bread and to spare in his father's
house.] I will arise, and go to my father, Luke 15.17, 18. why will ye expose
your selves to storms and tempests, when there is room enough to house you, and
shelter you? why will ye feed upon husks, upon emty trash with the swine
without, when you may live like men, and fare like God's children, feeding upon
the spiritual delicates of the Gospel? Make room now for the Gospel in your
hearts that there may be room made for you in heaven.

1. Make room for the messengers of the Gospel. Receive us, says the Apostle,
2 Cor. 7.2. the word (...), signifies, make room for us. Why? we have wronged,
corrupted, defrauded no man, neither in name, judgment, nor estate. Place us
therefore in your hearts, as you are in ours. Their feet are beautiful, who
bring the glad-tidings of peace, Romans 10.15. give them therefore room, or
entertainment for their worksake: house them, prize them, pray for them.

2. Make room for the message of the Gospel: receive not the grace of God in
vain, 2 Cor. 6.1. let it appear that the grace of the Gospel is operative
within you: and know this, that this grace works most kindly and properly,
when it orders your conversation in holiness, and raises your expectation to
happiness.

3. Make room for the Mediator of the Gospel. Great Princes have their
harbingers go before, crying make room, make room, let open the door of your
hearts, that the King of glory may enter in, Psalm. 24.7. as they of old were to
open their gates, that the Ark, called elsewhere the glory (the Type of Christ)
might enter in Let your understanding, will, memory, affections, conscience, be
all free to entertain Christ: resign up all to him, that he may do what he will
with you.

4. If you would have room in the kingdom of God, let the kingdom of God have
room within you, that kingdom which consists in righteousness, peace, and joy
in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. That righteousness which is implanted by the
spirit of grace, and expressed in the life of grace. That peace, whereby the
members of Christ's mystical body do sweetly agree together. That joy, whereby
we delight in such righteousness and peace.

Use 4. This Doctrine is consolatory.

1. If we look at God's Elect yet not called.
There is room enough to entertain all the Elect of God as they come in, one
after another. God shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell in the Tents of
Shem, Genesis 9.27. and Christ says, other sheep I have, them also I must bring,
and there shall be one ford, John 10.16. a fold big enough to hold them all.

2. If we look at the called ones, who are at present straightened.
Hereafter they shall be so enlarged, as to have room enough, here they are
straightened.

1. Outwardly straightened: so much the Greek word (...) signifies, 2 Cor. 6.4.
translated distresses: as it were in Little Ease, pent up, so that they know
not which way to turn. I have read of a French Martyr, who was pent up in such
a narrow room for seven weeks together in Paris, that he could neither sit nor
lie down. Sometimes they are straightened in their Estates, kept at short
allowance: but hereafter there will be room enough. 2. Inwardly straightened:
straightened in their knowledge, know ng but in part, and that darkly, but
hereafter it will be fully and clearly, 1 Cor. 13.11, 12. straightened also in
their obedience: there is some reluctance in their obedience: while the mind is
for serving the Law of God, the flesh is for serving the Law of sin, Romans 7.25.
The unregenerate part pulls backward, while the regenerate part puts us forward
to any good. So likewise straightened in love, and other graces, the comfort is,
that these graces will act with more scope or room in heaven: Oh welcome that
happy day.
SERMON. XV.
Luke 14.23. And the Lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways, and
hedges, etc.]
CHAP. I.
THe two former invitations, Exierunt Apostoli extra Judaeam ad Gentes.
Salmeron.
ver. 16. and 21. were to the Jews; this latter is to the Gentiles. In which
invitation of the Gentiles, we have 1. The designation of the messenger sent to
invite them; the same that was sent to the Jews. The same servant from the same
Lord. The Lord said to the servant, Go out.] 2. The description of the place of
their residenc, The highways, and hedges.] 3. The illustration of the manner
of bringing them in. Hic Gentium votatio describitur. Marlor. in loc.
And compel them to come in.] 4. The confirmation of the end thereof; That my
house may be filled.] From the first I observe,

Obser. That the Gentiles now have the same Authority and Privilege to embrace
the Gospel, as the Jews once had, Col. 3.11. The distinction of Jews and
Gentiles comes not from Adam, but from Abraham: God called him from his
idolatrous kindred, Genesis 12.1. making his Covenant of grace with him and his
posterity, renewing and confirming it by the seal of the Covenant,
circumcision,] Genesis 17.1, 2, 9, 10. called a seal of the Righteousness of
faith, Romans 4.11. which Covenant, with the seal thereof, was confined to
Abraham and his posterity, and continued among them till Christ came in the
flesh, which posterity of Abraham were called by three names. Heber from
Hebrews, as it is judged, out of whole loins Abraham descended. Israelites from
Israel; Abraham's Grandchild. And Jews from Judah, one of the Sons of Israel.
Which Jews were the Nation by way of eminency. An holy Nation, Exodus 19.6.
inhabiting the Land of Judea, Canaan, the Type of heaven. And all other people
who came not from Abraham's loins, were called Gentes the Nations of the world,
or Gentiles. Others say, from the Epithet given to Abraham, who is called
Abraham the Hebrew, Genesis 14.13. (...) from (...) to pass over, or pass through,
because from Mesopotamia he passed over Euphrates into Canaan, and so passed
through the Land. Abraham the Hebrew, or the passenger, or passer-through. This
denomination seems the more probable, Heber being far from Abraham, Genesis
11.17.

CHAP. II.
NOw concerning the privileges which the Jews once had, the Apostle gives us a
Catalogue of them, an Inventory of very choice goods, Romans 9.4. who are
Israelites, to whom pertains, 1. The Adoption. Israel was God's firstborn,
and so higher than the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. Though God had a
natural son of his own, yet he adopted the Jews out of his abundant grace. 2.
The glory: the Temple and the Ark so called, 1 Samuel 4.22. because tokens of
God's glorious presence, and Types of Christ, the King of glory, whence Judea
is called the glorious Land, Dan. 11.41. all the while God manifested his
presence there: but now sin has made it vile enough. 3. The Covenants: the
moral law in two Tables, or the Covenant of grace often renewed. 4. The giving
of the Law: the judicial Law for the ordering their commonwealth. 5. The
service: the ceremonial Law for the ordering of their worship of God. As God
had adopted them, so he would have them brought up under his Law, as under a
Tutor, Gal. 4.1. 6. The promises: the rich Legacies in the old Testament. 7.
The fathers: they descended of honorable ancestors, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
8. Christ after the flesh; who took on him the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. as
if a King should marry into some poor family of his subjects, and be glad at
the match.


CHAP. III.
THat the Gentiles have as good leave and privilege to believe the Gospel, as
the Jews had, appears thus.

1. Abraham received the seal of the Gospel-righteousness being uncircumcised,
that he might be the father of those who should believe, God being able of such
stones to raise up children to Abraham, Matthew. 3.9. even of the Gentiles, whose
hearts were as hard as stones, and who worshipped stocks and stones.

2. The prophesies of old were, that Christ should be a light to the Genti^es,
Isa. 49.6. that the eyes of their understanding might be opened to see the way
to heaven, and walk in it. And Isaiah and Moses told the Jews so to their face,
though they despi^ed the Gentiles, Romans 10.19, 20. now the Prophecies were all
to be fulfi^^ed in due time.

3. Gentiles are put into the Genealogy of Christ; it is observable, how among
all the men in Christ's Genealogy only four women are put in, beside Mary the
Mother of Jesus. two of which were Gentiles, viz. Rahab of Canaan, Ruth of
Moab. The other two of the Jews, Thamar and Bathsheba, notorious for incest and
adultery. Vid. Spanhem. dub. Evang. dub. 25. part 1.
St. Ambrose and Chrysostom give several reasons for this, as 1. To curb the
insolency of the Jews, to stain their pride, who boasted much of their
progenitors. 2. To show, that no blot in predecessors is an hinderance to
virtue in their posterity. 3. To show, that the greatest sort of sinners are
capable of conversion. Christ came from Gentiles, and sinners, why then may not
Gentiles and sinners come unto him? 4. The wisemen of the East, who were
Gentiles were welcome, when they came to worship Christ the King of the Jews:
by their gifts they acknowledge Christ, the great propitiatory of the world. 5.
Christ, when he preached on earth, had mercy upon a woman of Samaria, John 4.
and upon a woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.22. she grants she was an heathenish dog,
but yet crumbs of mercy she did expect, and she had her desire, with a large
Encomium of her faith. 6. Christ by his death has broken down the
partition wall, Ephesians. 2.13, 14. that the Gentiles might come to the Jews, and
take those privileges, which belonged to them as well as to the Jews. 7.
Christ after his Resurrection did enlarge the commission of preaching the
Gospel. Though before there was a restriction in the commission, Go not in the
way of the Gentiles] Matthew. 10.5. yet afterward he bids them go teach all
Nations, Matthew. 28.19. and preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark 16.15. 8.
The Apostles did turn to the Gentiles upon the refusal of the Gospel by the
Jews, Act. 13.46. The Jews had the offer of the Pearl of great price, of the
purchase of truth, but they made light of it. 9. The Gentiles did embrace the
Gospel, witness the many Churches that were founded among the Gentiles, at
Corinth, Rome, Ephesus, Col^sse, Phillppi, Thessalonica: and those who did
embrace the Gospel, were as complete in Christ alone, as ever the Jews were in
all their height, Col. 2.10, 11.


CHAP. IV.
Use. 1. THis informs us of the unquestionable mystery of the Gospel God
manifest in the flesh, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, 1 Timothy 3.16. A great mystery, that those who were the professed enemies of God,
worshipping dumb idols for so many ages together, should of a sudden become
the special friends of God, turn from so many Gods, to cleave to one God. The
Ephesians, who were much addicted to the black Art, yet the Gospel coming in
the power of it to them, it made them burn their conjuring books, though of a
very great price, Act. 19.18, 19, 20.

Here also ye may see, that God is no respecter of persons. This inference S^.
Peter draws from our Doctrine, Act. 10.34. that is, of their outward estate and
condition, as Country, Sex, Wealth, etc. Outward things neither please nor
displease God: ^ut as for inward qualifications, the impressions of his own
spirit, and works of Righteousness flowing from the same, those he does
respect, add graciously accept, ver. 35. he accepts not one man before another,
but he accepts a Saint before a sinner.

Use 2. Though we say the Gentiles have now leave to believe, yet we must know,
it was allwaies lawful, for them to embrace the true Religion. Those of them
that would, might turn Proselites to the Jews, and some did so in several
nations of the world: and in several ages of the world, before the time of the
Gentiles general vocation came. As Jethro of the Midianites: Job of the
Vzzites: Naaman of the Syrians: Araunah of the Jebusites: ^rijah of the
Hittites: Ruth of the Moabites: Corne^ius of the Romans: the Eunuch of the
Ethiopians.

Secondly, though we say it is as lawful for the Gentiles to believe, as it was
for the Jews, yet the greater and more learned sort of the Gentiles are as
backward to believe, as those of the Jews were. Have any of the Rulers, or
Pharisees believed on him? John 7.48. thus it was among the Jews: and was it
any better among the Gentiles? At Corinth not many wise, nor mighty, nor noble
were called, 1 Cor. 1.26. At Athens among the Scholars no Church founded. The
Philosophers there scoffed at the strangeness of the Gospel, Act. 17.18. Thus
it has been in several ages. Ulpian, the chief Lawyer: G^len, the (...) of
Physician: Porphyry, the chief Ar^s^^^e (...): Plotinus, the chief Platonist:
Lib^n^us (...)cian, the chief Orators in that age wherein they lived, were all
professed enemies to Christ.

Use 3. Let us Gentiles consider of that provision which God has made in the
Gospel for Gentiles. 1. The salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles, Act.
28.28. -- 2. God has opened the door of faith to the Gentiles, Act. 14.27.
has acquainted ^he Gentiles with the way of applying the Gospel. 3. St. Paul,
one of the chief of the Apostles, is called the Apostle of the Gentiles, Romans
11.13. designed of God purposely for the good of the Gentiles; to bear God's
name before the Gentiles, Act. 9.15. to write God's mind unto the Gentiles.

Now let us Gentiles bless God for this good news of the Gospel, Romans 15.9, 10,
11, 12. Let the Isles be glad, and sing for joy. Let us of this Island bless
God for the plentiful preaching of the Gospel. Let us Gentiles make much of the
Gospel, be desirous to hear it, and subject our selves to it, Act. 13.42, 48.
let us fear, while we consider that the Jews were cut off, when the Gentiles
were graffed in, Romans 11.20. know this, God has not tied his promises so to
any man's seed, but that they may be cast off, if they degenerate. And let us
Gentiles wait and pray for the fullness of the Gentiles, and the conversion of
the Jews, Romans 11.25. for the fullness of the Gentiles, let us pray, Lord, Let
thy way be known upon earth, and thy saving health among all Nations, Psalm.
67.2. and for the conversion of the Jews: they shall come in, and so all Israel
shall be saved. That is, the Nation of the Jews shall be brought in by the
power of the Gospel to profess the Christian Religion, and so many of them
shall be actually saved, as belong to the number of God's elect. Though
obstinacy lie never so long upon the Jews, yet none of them within the Covenant
shall be lost. From Sion shall the deliverer come, Non quia ibi natus, sed quia
inde doctrina ejus exivit in universum mundum.] Aquin.
etc. not because he was born there, but because his Doctrine went forth from
thence into all the world, says Aquinas. Which sense agrees with the Prophets
words, Isa. 2.3. The law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem.

Use 4. This Doctrine is comfortable to the converted Gentiles, for they are
now fellow-Citizens with the Saints upon earth, Ephesians. 2.17. They are admitted
into the new Jerusalem, which has twelve gates. That shows, that there is
every way access unto Christ. They shall hereafter be fellow-inhabitants of the
heavenly Canaan, with the ancient Patriarchs of the Jews. They shall sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God, Matthew. 8.12. sit down
with them fellow-like, equal with them. Abraham was a great man upon earth, but
he is greater in heaven; and the poorest Saint shall be where he is. Poor
Lazarus sweetly rests in his bosom.

CHAP. V. Into the highways and hedges.]
HEre we have the place described, where the Gentiles are to be called; God
sends his servant into the highways and hidges.] As the most despicable of the
Jews before; so here the outcasts of the Gentiles are made partakers of the
Gospel-provision. All Interpreters, Gentes variis v^^s errantes. Salmer.
G^utium agrestem populum. Lyra. Pau^eres and mondicos, qui domibus carent.
Ravanel. Loca (...), ubi ambula^^ homines ignoti and Advenae. Marlor. Gentes
perorhis terrarum dispersas. Beza.
both Popish and Protestant, do understand hereby the forlorn condition of the
Gentiles, till God look upon them in mercy: they being like a company of
Vagabonds wandering up and down by the highways side and hedges; not housed and
harbored in a spiritual sense, but scattered about as beggars upon the face of
the earth, till God by the power of the Gospel brought them into the Church, to
enjoy the privileges thereof, wandering in their conversation through the
vanity of their imaginations. To dwell among the hedges is in the Scripture put
for a mean kind of living, 1 Chronicles. 4.23. and according to the general
acception of the phrase, to abide by the highways and hedges is put for a
wandering kind of life, Mark 10.46.

Obser. That God sends the messengers of the Gospel to them, who are as
vagabonds and outcasts upon the face of the earth, Mat. 22.9.

The Gentiles, and all by nature are as vagabonds and outcasts.

I. They are such as lead an unwarrantable life, as may thus appear.

1. They move not from any good principle; there is no true understanding with
them, no fear of God before them, Romans 3.11, 18. Hence the Gentiles were so
sottish, as to account the very stones in the highways as Gods, Ierem. 17.2.
They anointed stones, their bonds and marks of Territories, accounted as sacred
trivial statues. Theophrastus in his sacred superstision, remembers (for a
part) the pouring of oil upon anointed stones, or statues in the highways:
whereupon lapis unguine delilutus, is reckoned by the Apuleius among his sacred
objects. Therefore the sending the Gospel into the highways, may have special
reference to the reclaiming of the Gentiles from their ignorant, profane, and
idolatrous course of life, appearing by their image worship in the highways.

2. They walk not by any good rule; they are all gone out of the way, Romans
3.12. Vagabonds are lawless creatures, they will submit to no order. Men
naturally live contrary to the Law of God: they love to lurk in the highways,
and by the hedges, without the precinct of good discipline.

3. They tend not to a good end. Men by nature are altogether become
unprofitable, Romans 3.12. like vagabonds, neither minding the commonwealth, nor
their own families, for the good of which they ought to live.

II. They are such as lead a miserable life, as may thus appear.

1. They are Aliens, and Strangers to the people of God and their privileges,
Ephesians. 2.11, 12. Men that wander up and down in highways are not privileged
like those who have their settled abode in Towns and Cities. Natural men have no
acquaintance with God, nor admittance into his presence, they live beyond the
line of communication, as to fellowship with the Saints. 2. Vagabonds are
destitute of house and home, void of necessary accommodations for a comfortable
passage through this world. Natural men are in no house as it were, they live
without the pale of the Church, that Church that shall be saved. As they have
no enjoyment of communion with God now, so neither have they any hope to enjoy
communion with him hereafter, Ephesians. 2.12. while they are void of grace, they are
without hope. 3. They are exposed to wind and weather, liable to continual
danger. Those who are in the highways are in the open air, where storms and
tempests do arise. Those that lie in the hedges may soon catch their death by
colds and surfets. Thus natural men are in perpetual danger, cast out into the
wide world, walking according to the Prince of the power of the air, and
according to the course of this world, Ephesians. 2.2. There is lurking in hedges,
and robbing in highways. Those that stand in the sinners way, are never out of
harms way.
CHAP. VI.
THe ends why God sends the Gospel-messengers among these vagabonds and
outcasts are these, 1. To reclaim them from their vain course of life, that
they should no longer live to the lusts of men, to do what they list, 1 Pet.
4.1, 2, 3. God's word gives a check to men's consciences for those unlawful
liberties, wherein they allow themselves; it startleth and affrighteth impudent
sinners, it stops them, and bids them go no further. 2. To recover them from
the great danger, wherein they are by nature, to recover them out of the snare
of the Devil. The Gospel snatcheth them out of the hands of the Devil, Col.
1.13. men naturally are under the power of Satan, now the Gospel turns men from
the power of Satan unto God. Christ came to dissolve the works of the Devil,
(...), to undo what the Devil had done, too loosen them, and set them at
liberty, whom the Devil had bound. This he does by the ministry of his word. 3.
To reduce them to good order, to bring them from the highways and hedges unto
places of good discipline, where they may observe the order of the Gospel, as
thus. 1. In the partaking of the graces of God's spirit in some measure, which
are linkt together hand in hand, 2 Pet. 1.4, 5, 6. as Virgins in a dance, viz.
faith accompanied with virtue: virtue accompanied with knowledge or discretion:
knowledge accompanied with temperance: temperance accompanied with patience:
patience accompanied with godliness: godliness accompanied with botherly
kindness: and brotherly-kindness with charity, or love to all men. 2. In the
Participating of ordinances, Act. 2.42. Those that belong to such, are endued
with graces. 3. In the performing of duties, leading a well-ordered
conversation, Phil. 1.27.


CHAP. VII.
Use 1. Sine domo, non sine Domino: sine vest; non sine fide: sine cibo, non
sine Christo: carabus expositus, sed Angelorum socius. Fulgent. Epist. 2.
THis informs us, that the preaching of the Gospel is not confined to any
particular Country, as once it was to the Land of Judea. The sound is gone
forth into all the earth; Romans 10.18. Here ye may take notice, that those who
are mean and despicable outwardly, may be honorable and happy spiritually. The
highways and hedges may afford converts. A certain beggar named Lazarus, that
lay without doors upon earth is now received into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.20,
22. he was houseless says Fulgentius, not Lordless; without cloths, not
without faith: he wanted food, but wanted not Christ to feed upon: he was
exposed to dogs while he lived, but received into the society of Angels when he
dyed. A vast difference between temporal and spiritual estate. Here see the
difference between God's elect before their calling, and after their calling.
Before their conversion they are in the highways and hedges, where all comers
and goers are, among the rude multitude, but after their conversion they are as
a Garden enclosed, Cant. 4.12. A spot of ground taken from the commons of the
world. Jerusalem is a City compact.

Here also ye may be informed, that man is not in a capacity to merit; he is
but as a beggar upon the highway, covered with filthy rags, yet vain man would
merit what is received in mercy. Vega said, non accipiam coelum gratis, I will
not receive heaven gratis.

Use 2. Though men by nature are as vagabonds and outcasts, yet there are very
few vagabonds and runnagates indeed that receive the Gospel: such creatures are
usually cursers and blasphemers, Isa. 8.21, 22. despisers of all good: the
shameful trade of begging is accompanied with many vices.

Use 3. Let not us who are sinners of the Gentiles, continue in Heathenish
ways, since the grace of the Gospel is brought unto us, Act. 14.15. Let us
remember our former ways, remember that in times past we were Gentiles in the
flesh, Ephesians. 2.11. and let this keep us humble, watchful, and thankful. The
profane sinners of the world may serve as so many remembrances to us. Such were
some of you, says the Apostle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.11. see that ye
walk not as other Gentiles walk, Ephesians. 4.17. look upon the sinful lives of
others, and be ashamed of their ways.

SERMON. XVI.
LUKE 14.23. -- And compel them to come in, etc.
CHAP. I.
THese words contain the third particular considerable in this verse, the
manner how those who are without do come in to partake of Gospel-provision: it
is irresistibly brought about, called here Compulsion: Concerning which, we
must thus distinguish; There is a magisterial and a ministerial compulsion. St.
Augustine uses this for the Magistrate's compelling his subjects to the
worship of God: but this cannot be so meant here, for the commission is to the
messengers or Ministers of the Gospel. Now the ministerial compulsion is either
disciplinary or doctrinal. Spiritualis est coactio. Calvin.
The disciplinary is by such censures inflicted upon those who walk
irregularly, but this course is to be taken with those who are within the pale
of the Church, and therefore not so proper for the meaning of these words,
V^argumentorum and rationum. Salmer.
which are spoken concerning them who are in the highways, and hedges.
Wherefore the doctrinal compulsion must be here meant: viz. by the strength of
argument, and force of persuasion, and effectual application of the same, which
overcomes the soul as powerfully and effectually, as natural compulsion and
external violence overcomes the body. Hence I note,

Observe. That the power put forth in the ministry of the Gospel for man's
conversion is by s^^^itual compulsion, 2 Cor. 10.4. Heb. 4.12. This appears.

I. By considering the metaphorical expressions, whereby this is illustrated in
Scripture.

1. It is called a pulling out of the fire, Jude ver. 23. catching hold of men,
and rescuing souls from everlasting burnings. The Greek word (...), signifies
the Soldiers violent rushing, or seizing upon a Town or Castle for some rich
booty, or for the delivery of some that are there held Captives.

2. It is called a pulling down strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. battering those
Forts and munitions which man's nature maintains against the revealed will of
God: those lofty conceits, whereby man's heart is lifted up against God, but
this word is able to overcome them.

3. It is called a drawing men after God, Verbis and rationibus trahere.
Drusius.
John 6.44. haling them on, who draw back of themselves; drawing them by strong
reasons and arguments, such as convince the soul. God compels by persuasion,
and persuades by compulsion.

4. It is called a constraining men unto holiness, 2 Co^. 5.14. where the love
of Christ prevails upon men, it keeps them within bounds, that they cannot
break out into that looseness as otherwise they would.

II. By considering the proper operations, whereby this is effected, as 1. The
propounding arguments contrary to the interests and enclination of man
naturally, as self-denial, taking up the Cross, losing life, and so to gain
life and happiness, strange allurements! Matthew. 16.24, 25. Christ draws not
his followers by arguments taken from carnal delights, as Mahomet does His: the
way Christ takes, is contrary to flesh and blood. 2. The removing what hinders
the arguments propounded, and so enclining the will to close with the same,
taking away the unpliableness of the heart, and making it pliable, Ezekiel. 11.19.
God in the work of man's conversion does not only put forth his power in the
nature of a moral cause, using arguments of weight, but in the nature of a
physical cause, making those arguments effectual by drawing, enclining, and
moving the heart, and so working a real change. There goes forth a secret,
sweet, and violent power from God to make his exhortations effectual, as when
Christ called St. Matthew to follow him from his custom-gathering, and bid
Lazarus come forth out of the grave. 3. The infusing a new principle of life,
or habit of grace, an inclination of the soul quite contrary to what was
before, 1 John 3.9. it is not some acts, but an habit, by virtue whereof a man
is called godly, which habit of holiness is placed in the will: for no man is
good or evil only, because he understands good or evil things (as Aquinas
well observes) but therefore a man is called good or evil, because he wills
those things that are good or evil. 4. The acting of this new principle,
contrary to natural inclinations, with the mind serving the law of God while
the flesh is for serving the law of sin, Romans 7.25. A man is carried by force,
when he is moved contrary to his enclination, such a divine force works in
the spiritual man.


The reasons why it is thus, are these.
1. To show the infallible conjunction of the effect with the cause, of our
conversion with God's quickening grace, John 6.45. the grace of God is not in
vain.

2. To show the efficacy of a divine ordinance, accompanied with Gods blessing,
it is the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16.

3. To show that the glory of man's conversion is not at all to be attributed
to man's self; but altogether unto God. The work is wholly of God, Romans 9.16.
if man does not share in the work, he should not share in the praise.

Object. Why are no more converted at Sermons?

Resp. The election has obtained it, and the rest are hardened. The Gospel is
hid to them that are lost, the God of this world blinding their minds, 2 Cor.
4.3, 4. old Adam proves too hard for young Melancthon: the ministry of the word
cannot do it, if God withdraw his influence.

CHAP. II.
Use 1. THis, shows us man's backwardness to be saved, and God's forwardness
to save him, The Angel laid hold upon Lot and his family, while they lingered in
Sodom, God being merciful to them: so while men trifle away their time in their
natural estate, God seizes upon them by the ministry of the Gospel, crying to
them, Save your selves from this untoward generatiom, Act. 2.40.

Here also ye may see, that God's power is greater to make man close with good,
than the power of Satan to make man close with evil, 1 John 4.4. Satan has but
a tempting and enticing power, but God has a compelling and enforcing power:
Satan may be overcome, if he be resisted; but God overpowereth and overcomes
man. Dr. Preston says, the Patrons of nature do put God into the same straits,
as Darius was in, when Daniel was in the Den, who would have saved him, but
could not tell how (with which conceit King James was well-pleased) for, (say
they) the will of man is only excited by moral or assisting grace knocking at
the door of it, and admonishing it, not that it is changed by habitual grace
renewing and healing it. But this Text of ours, and many more tell us, that
God, not only by moral persuasions, but by infused grace, turns sinners to
himself after an irresistible manner, Ephesians. 2.1. Phil. 2.13. Romans 9.16.

Use 2. Yet notwithstanding the will is not compelled. This is a known maxim;
the will in natural things, Volunta^ sequitur rationem, ut indicativum, non ut
impulsivum.
though it always follow the dictates of the understanding, yet acts most
freely: the understanding does not force it so to do. In spiritual things the
will is conformed according to it is essential property of liberty, freely to
make choice of the best things. God works upon man as a rational creature,
and so man is made willing. Yet here observe, that though the will cannot be
compelled in its elicit act, or free choice, yet it may be compelled in the
commanding act. As when the persecutors drew the Martyrs against their will
before their Idols, putting incense into their hands to burn. So Christ says
to St. Peter, They shall draw thee whither thou would not, John 21.

Now though conversion be wrought thus necessarily, yet conditions are required
unto salvation, Conditionale potest esse in effectu.
Heb. 12.14. but the conditions are of God's working, not of man's. Here
observe, that which is conditional, may be necessary in the eslect and event.
If any of you go out of the ship, ye shall all perish, Act. 28. but if ye stay
in the ship, ye shall be all saved. It behooves us to abide in faith and
holiness, if we would be saved, and to be free and voluntary in our spirits
therein, not haled and pulled to spiritual duties, compelled thereto only by
external arguments.

Use 3. Deus facit voluntarios, non salvat invitos. Bern.
Yield your selves unto God, who uses a compelling power to enforce or
persuade you unto good, Romans 6.13. yield your selves as his prisoners of hope:
Throw away your weapons, rebel no more, as Chosroes King of Parthia, who being
subdued by the Romans, made a law that none of his successors should ever wage
war with them again. Seize upon the kingdom of heaven by an holy violence: take
it by force, be instant in serving God day and night, Act. 26.7. Think no pains
too great, nor charge too costly, which is employed in God's service: offer
violence to your dull souls, when they are backward, pray that the word of God
in the Ministry thereof may have a free course, 2 These. 3.1. and put forth
your power in your places for the good of others souls.

CHAP. III. That my house may be filled.]
THis clause carries in it the final cause of all the three former particulars
in the verse. If the words immediately before [compel them to come in] be meant
of sanctification, through the powerful persuasion of the word converting the
soul, then these words must be meant of glorification, which is begun here, and
perfected hereafter, which Christ calls, many mansions in his father's house,
John 14.2. Hence I note,

Obs. God would therefore have the Gospel preached, and souls converted, that
heaven may be filled, Colos. 1.27, 28, 29.

It appears that God would have heaven filled.
I. Objectively: by the glory which is there provided; As the object of
happiness to be enjoyed, of which glory heaven is full. Now this is a maxim,
that God and nature make nothing in vain. Heaven therefore being full of glory,
it must therefore be filled with such as are capable to enjoy it. That heaven
is full of glory appears. 1. Typically, in the Tabernacle and Temple, the
Types of this heavenly house: both which are said to be filled with the glory
of the Lord, Exed. 40.34. 1 King. 8.10, 11. -- 2. Metaphorically, heaven is
here called an house, and it is a spacious house, and very durable, eternal in
the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. it is an house, where is no want of room, nor need of
repair, accommodation is there to the full, and there for ever. 3. Properly and
plainly. There God is all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. that is immediately, without
the helps of ordinances, or means of grace.

II. Subjectively: by the Inhabitants which there are, and shall be to possess
that glory which is there provided: here let us consider.

1. The vast company which is there already; an innumerable company of Angels,
and the spirits of just men made perfect, enjoying their happiness with God the
Judge of all, and Jesus, the Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.
Unto which beloved society believers are said now to come, in respect of their
spiritual conjunction with Christ's mystical body. 2. The several sorts of
sanctified ones, which are in the way to heaven, and are daily going thither,
as is intimated in those Beatitudes, in Matthew. 5. viz. the poor in spirit, the
mourners for sin, the meek and lowly, those that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, those that are merciful, those that are pure in heart, and
actively pure, such as are peacemakers, such as are persecuted for
righteousness sake. Thus we must consider these several sorts, which make up
the reckoning in that number which daily fills heaven. 3. The bodies of the
Saints shall be raised to be glorified with their souls, 1 These. 4.17. and
those heavens that contain the body of Christ, must contain the bodies of
Christians. 4. Their souls and bodies shall be filled with glory.
Their Souls thus.
1. With the fullness of grace, as of knowledge, wherewith their understandings
shall be full, 1 Cor. 13.12. reaching the top of divine truth; of love,
wherewith the wills and affections shall be full, embracing most intimately the
chiefest good. 2. With the fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11. All sin, and all sorrow
cease together.
Their Bodies thus.
1. They shall be filled with immortality: raised in incorruption, 1 Cor.
15.42. they shall die no more. 2. With dignity: raised in glory, ver. 43. no
part of the body then shamefully needing a cover as now it does. 3. With
agility: raised in power, able to go through the service of God without
weariness. 4. With spirituality: raised a spiritual body, ver. 44. not
maintained by natural helps of food, Physic, sleep, etc. but kept by the power
of God. Then body and soul making one person; shall serve and obey God without
interruption for ever.
The reasons why it is thus, are
1. The filling of heaven is decreed of God, and therefore must be effected.
Though many Angels left their own habitation, J^de ver. 6. yet their habitation
abides to be possessed by others. There is not (as some observe) the least
atom of grace or glory intended for the creature, lost to the universality,
though forfeited by the individuals; for what was retracted, as to the extent
of it to more, was supplied by the intensiveness of it in the fewer; whereby
the divine justice was fully displayed, and the bounty not at all diminished.
And as the creatures find no abatement of happiness conferred upon them, so
neither shall the Creator find any abatement of homage attributed to him. 2.
The preaching of the Gospel, and converting of souls, is the only way to fill
up heaven; for this is the way to have Christ in us, the hope of glory, Col.
1.27. This is the way to be joined to that Church, which is the body, the
fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
CHAP. IV.
Use 1. HOw may this support us under all our losses and sufferings. What
though we be cast out of house and home, and lose all for the Gospel, yet if we
help fill heaven when we are gone from hence, will not that make amends? Heb.
10.34. what if we should live in a world filled with violence and oppression,
as the old world was, Genesis 6.13. yet God has an Ark for Noah, an heaven for
Saints; what, though we should be filled with scorn and contempt as Israel was,
Psalm. 123.3, 4. yet there is exceeding joy in the presence of God, Jude ver. 24.

Use 2. Though heaven shall be filled with inhabitants, yet it shall be without
any annoyance to those inhabitants. We must not conceive that house above,
where Saints immediately attend God's service, like these houses below, where
we attend upon God in the use of means. Hear, when an house is filled, people
are crowded; they stand and sit in Little Ease; so that the very attendance
upon means for the soul, is not without some annoyance to the body: but it
shall not be so in heaven. That house is not an house made with hands, 2 Cor.
5.1. but eternal in the heavens, it is of an everlasting continuance, and of a
very vast circumference, without the least inconvenience.

Use 3. Let us live as those upon earth, who shall help fill heaven hereafter,
let us be cleansing our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and so
be perfecting holiness upon earth, which is the ready way to perfection of
holiness in heaven, 2 Cor. 7.1. This is like w ping the feet before we enter a
room kept clean and fair. No unclean thing must enter heaven, as full as it
will be. Without are dogs, Rev. 22.15. the fittest place for them! what should
they do within? Men that live like dogs here, must fare like dogs hereafter:
heaven is no kennel for dogs, but a Palace for Kings, for Saints, who are Kings
and Priests unto God. Let us look to be filled with the fruits of
righteousness; to be filled with such fruits here, is to be fitted for glory
hereafter. Grace (like Grapes) grows by clusters. A cluster of these grapes of
Canaan we may view, Gal. 5.22. and we must look to be filled with such fruits
now, if we would have heaven filled with us hereafter; it is called the fruit
of the spirit, such fruit as does not grow in Natures Garden. 1. Love,] the
bond of perfectness. As the Curtains of the Tabernacle were joined by loops, so
are all true Christians by love. 2. Joy,] that in special, whereby we rejoice
in our Neighbors good. 3. Peace,] the peace of concord with our brethren. 4.
Long-suffering,] patience drawn out at length, continuing as long as the
trouble. 5. Gentleness,] amiableness and sweetness in behavior. 6. Goodness,]
usefulness in our places. 7. Faith,] taken here for fidelity. 8. Meekness,] not
easily provoked, a readiness to pass by injuries. 9. Temperance,] whereby a
Christian (as Master in his own house) does so order his affections, that they
do not irregularly move, nor inordinately lash out.

To make us now to mind the way to heaven, consider what lies in our Text: the
goodly company we shall enjoy in heaven. It was the speech of good old
Grynaeus, O faelicem diem quum ad illud animorum concilium proficiscar: and ex
hac turba and colluvione discedam! Grynaeus.
Oh happy day! when I shall depart from the crowd and sink in this world, to go
to that blessed council of souls. There is but one heaven to hold all Saints,
they shall all be in one house. Hold up your heads O Christians, we shall be in
that heaven where all the godly Patriarchs, Kings, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
and Preachers are, and where all our dear friends in the Lord are, who are gone
a little before us. Does it affect you to read the stories of the Patriarchs,
the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, the sufferings of the Martyrs; the
Acts and Monuments of the Kings, the Sermons of godly Preachers? Oh how will it
affect us to see those very persons another day, and to be happy with them.

SERMON. XVII.
Luke 14.24. For I say unto you, that none of those men which were bidden,
shall taste of my Supper.
CHAP. I.
THis verse contains the conclusion of the Parable, the definitive sentence
upon the whole. In which we have. 1. A Preface. 2. A Proposition. The Preface
is a form of speech usually prefixed to raise our attention unto the weighty
matter spoken of. And this very phrase [I say unto you] is used near an hundred
times by our Savior in the four Evangelists: The Prophets prefaced their
Doctrine with, Thus says the Lord.] But our Savior prefaceth his Doctrine
with, I say unto you.] The Prophets were but men, speaking in the name of the
Lord, but Christ is God as well as man, and therefore could speak in his own
name, as well as in his father's name, because his father and he are one. Here
the consideration of him that speaks, is sufficient to make us receive what is
spoken.

Obser. The Authority of the speaker is sufficient ground for the truth, and
our belief of the holy Scripture. The Authority of the speaker in sacred
Scripture is altogether divine, it being the word of God, and so the Authority
of the only Deity.

Quest. How does it appear that those writings (which we call the sacred
Scripture) is the very word of God?

Resp. 1. It is evident so to be, if ye look at the Pen men of Scripture, and
their impartial proceedings in their writings, setting down their own
commendations, and discommendations in express terms, as Moses does his
meekness at one time, and his provoking God at another time. Now, as it is a
base thing for a man to commend himself, so it is a foolish thing for a man to
blaze his own faults. It appears therefore the Penmen of Scripture were not led
by humane policy, but by divine Authority. And hereby it is evident, they were
moved by the Holy Ghost to set down what they did, 2 Pet. 1.21. As for that
objection which some make from the circumstantial different expressions of the
Penmen, writing the same things as the four Evangelists: we may retort the
objection, seeing the difference is not substantial, but circumstantial, and
thence fetch a good argument to prove the divine authority of the Scriptures,
viz. that the Penmen did not lay their Heads together about the framing of
their writings, and did not transcribe one another Copies, they agreeing in
the main, and yet differing in things of a lesser consideration, which is
admirable to consider of.

2. If we look at the matter of these writings, it is evident, it comes from
heaven, because it tends to heaven, directing men thither, and taking them off
from the world. There is not one tittle of it that savours of earthlyness, or
tends to the maintaining of carnal interest; so then as the light of the Sun
shows it self to be the Sun, as the discourse of a learned man proves himself
to be learned; so the language of the Scripture evidenceth it to be sacred, it
breathing forth nothing but godliness, thereby it appears to be the very
breath of God.

3. If we look at the effects of these Scriptures, what a wonderful force they
have upon the insides of men. Tertullian tells the Jews, that those places
among the Britains, which the Romans could never come at, were subdued by
Christ, that is, by his word. Here we may appeal to men's consciences for
evidence. The awakened conscience of a natural man trembles at this word. The
clear conscience of an holy man feels a through change within made by force of
this word. I can speak it by experience, says Erasmus, that there is little
good to be gotten by the Gospel, if a man read it cursorily and carelessly, but
if he exercise himself therein constantly and conscionably, he shall feel such
a force in it, as is not to be found again in any other book whatsoever.

4. If we consider the preservation of these Scriptures. That writings penned
by so many several men, at so many several places, in so many several ages,
should be kept so entire together, is more than humane power to bring it to
pass.

The Reason why the Authority of the Speaker is ground enough for our belief of
Scripture is,
Because as God is so Almighty, and independent, as none can contribute to his
being, so neither to his truth. Let a man but grant a God, and he must needs
grant his authority to be authentic, and that absolute credence is to be
yielded to him. Hence those Heathen Lawgivers, Numa, Lycurgus, etc. would
needs seem to derive their Laws from some Deity. And Mahomet's dictates may not
be disputed upon pain of death, Let God be true, and every man a Liar, Romans
3.4. and Christ Jesus is truth it self, John 14.6. and God in Christ is that
God who cannot lie, Tit. 1.2.

CHAP. II.
Use 1. THis shows us the difference between the holy Scriptures and other
writings. No other writing must be believed barely for the Author's sake, but
for their agreement to right reason, or to the rule of these holy Scriptures.
In other Sciences, we first know, and then believe; but here it is otherwise,
we must believe the truth and integrity of the Scriptures, because they are of
God, and then we shall know whether these things are of God or not. Humane.
Authors are apt to go awry in their writings, being biassed by self-interest,
and therefore must not presently be credited: as Learned Sc^liger observes of
Baronius, that he did not write, but make Annals.

This also shows us the vanity and vileness of th^se, who so magnify reason,
as they vilify faith; who will believe no more than they see reason for; Quid
proderit Papismum ^eliqu^sse^ et in Socin^am (...) incidisse, c^l^um imagi number
det^^^^, et cul tum magin^tionum ample^^i? Prideaux.
who think it beneath a rational creature to ground faith upon the Authority of
the Speaker. Such are the S^cinians. That which is said to be spoken by a
person of Quality of this Nation, of that judgment, is a very profane speech.
Wha^! says he, do you talk to me of faith; Give me reason, every Cobbler may
have faith. But the Scripture says, Faith is the evidence of things not seen,
Heb. 11.1. the demonstrative evidence: it is the nature of faith to believe God
upon his bare word, and that against sense in things invisible, and against
reason in things incredible.

Sense corrects imagination, reason corrects sense, but says corrects both:
faith helps at a dead lift.

Use 2. Yet this does not make, that we should take divine truths upon trust,
when men utter the same, though they quote Scripture for what they speak; let
who will be the preacher, we should examine what we hear, Act. 17.11. there is
a judgment of discretion that belongs to every one to make trial of their own
actions.

Secondly, this does not make Christian Religion irrational: no, Ratio
Christianorum est fides. Luther.
it is a most reasonable service, Romans 12.1. where we cannot see a natural
reason for what we believe, yet it is most reasonable we should believe it,
when we know the Supreme cause has spoken it. The knowledge of the Scriptures,
and the power of God would make those things credible to faith; which seem
impossible to reason, Matthew. 22.29.

Use 3. Let us be ashamed of our slowness to believe what is spoken in the
sacred Scriptures. As it is our misery, that we are so dull to conceive, so it
is our folly that we are so slow to believe divine truths, Luke 24.25. let us
be sure thoroughly to understand those arguments which prove the Authority of
sacred Scripture: let us believe God upon his bare word, believing though we
have not seen, John 20.29. grounding our faith (according to our duty) upon the
Authority of the Speaker. Study the Supremacy of God's Authority. This made the
Centurion believe Christ upon his bare word, Matthew. 8.8, 9. And be acquainted
with those Experiments that assure you that God is as good as his word, Such as
that of God's delivering Israel out of Egypt just at the time appointed, Exodus
12.41. God kept his word to a day.

1. Herein is the high commendation of faith, when we can thus believe God on
his bare word. This made Christ say of the Centurion's faith, he had not found
so great faith, no not in Israel, Matthew. 8.10. he admired it, as incomparable
and matchless. Some required Christ to come to them; others required Christ to
touch them, but the Centurion required no more than this, that Christ should
only speak the word. 2. Do ye not trust many a man upon his bare word, whom you
look upon as a man of credit? and shall we not much more believe God because of
his Authority speaking to us, though we see not a reason of such and such
things? 3. It is a base affront to the Lord, not to believe him upon his word,
herein we carry the matter so, as if his word were not to be taken, as though
God were no better than a Liar, 1 John 5.10. Such as these trust God no
farther, than they can see cause or reason to yield unto him. How shall we know
a Christian from another man, but by adding faith to his reason, and that about
the things here below? Those of China say, that they only see with two eyes;
and the rest of the world but with one: it is most true of real Christians,
they only see with two eyes; the eye of reason, and the eye of faith, and the
rest of the world with reason only. 4. Consider who Christ is, that thus
speaks, I say unto you.] He is the Image of God, Heb. 1.3. The word, John 1.1.
he that came out of the bosom of the father, that came down from heaven. I say
unto you, you must be thus qualifyed, if ye will be saved.
CHAP. III. That none of those men that were bidden shall taste of my Supper.
FRom the Preface, I come to handle the Proposition, in which there is. 1. The
Subject, concerning which something is spoken. None of those men which were
bidden.] The praedicat, which is spoken concerning that subject: shall taste of
my Supper.] For the subject: None of those men that excused themselves, verse
18, 19, 20. The Grandees of the Jews ranked under those three sorts, the
Honorable, the Wealthy, the Voluptuary. And the Greek word in the Text denotes
the prime of men That were bidden,] that is, solemnly and earnestly invited,
verse 16.17. and yet refused to come, verse 18. to partake of that which was
provided for them. And so by consequence, no other of the same behavior, of
what rank soever in the world. And if not the greater rank, then not the meaner
shall escape unpunished, for the contempt of the Gospel.

Observe. God is resolved, that none o^ those who refuse the Gospel, shall
obtain good by the Gospel. Now they that refuse the Gospel, are such, as
absolutely and finally do refuse it, who continue in the contempt of it,
notwithstanding all means used that they might embrace it. Which refusal of the
Gospel may be farther explained.

1. From the example of the Jews, pointed at in this Parable, who had the first
offer (...) the Gospel, when Christ came in the flesh. The chief of that
Nation, and the generality of that Nation continued in the absolute refusal of
the Gospel. 2. In their persecuting Christ unto the death, Act. 4.27, 28. They
denied the holy One, and the just, and preferred a murderer, Act. 3.14. The
implacableness of their rage appeared in that dreadful curse they wished upon
them and theirs, Matthew. 27.25. thirty eight years after this fearful
imprecation, in the same place, and close by the same Tribunal, where they
cried out, His blood be upon us, etc. Historians tell us, multitudes of them
were slain by the sword. 3. In their thrusting the Gospel from them, brought to
them by the Apostles after Christ's Resurrection from the dead, Act. 13.46. 4.
In their not submitting to be saved by the Righteousness of another: Jesus of
Nazareth will not go down with them; Their ignorance and pride cannot bear it.
This appears also from the practice of many living under the Gospel, who
continue in the contempt of it.
1. Such as continue grossly ignorant of the mystery of the Gospel, with
affected ignorance, having no desire after saving knowledge, like them in Job
21.14. affected ignorance is the Mother of mis-rule and mis-chief. 2. Such as
continue wilfully disobedient to the rule of the Gospel, opposing themselves.
The Apostle puts both the ignorant and disobedient together, as the proper fuel
for hell fire, 2 These. 1.8. their ignorance shall not excuse their
disobedience.
CHAP. IV.
GOd's resolution that no such Gospel-refusers shall have any good by it,
appears 1. By the denouncing of his wrath against such in a most dreadful
manner, swearing in his wrath, not rashly, but advisedly, that they shall never
enter into his rest, that will not come under his Government, Heb. 3.11. 2. By
the execution of his wrath against such in a most destructive manner. Severity
on the Jews, who fell so sadly, that they lie under the wrath of God unto this
very day, Romans 11.22. and are not able to recover themselves. Thus much for the
discovery of God's resolution herein.


Now I shall show, that no Gospel-refusers shall receive any good.
1. As for the openly profane: the Roman furious soldiers destroyed the Jewish
Gospel-contemners, Matthew. 22.7. because they resisted the sword of the spirit,
the word of God, that it did not enter into their hearts, therefore the sword
of the enemy entered into their bowels.

2. As for close hypocrites, God's all-seeing eye will discover them, and his
Almighty hand will destroy them, Matthew. 22.11, 12, 13. God puts the hypocrite
to a stand, when he questions him, so that he shall not have a word to speak
for himself. The high ones that refuse the Gospel, shall not be respected for
their greatness; and those that are low, shall not be pityed for their meanness.

God is thus resolved against these men, becuse they do what they can to
frustrate God's design in sending his Son into the world, Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
Christ came to dissolve the works of the Devil.

CHAP. V.
Use 1. THis informs us, that it is not possible for any one to escape
damnation, who neglects salvation, Heb. 2.3. for those who have transgressed
the Law, it is possible for them to escape, by having recourse unto the Gospel:
but as for those, who refuse the Gospel (the only remedy) how can they escape!
A man that will use no means, must needs miscarry. Here also ye may see, that
no outward privilege can exempt a people that is obstinate from divine
vengeance. Jerusalem, the Vine which God's right hand had planted, must be
plucked up, when it proves unfruitful, and degenerateth.

Use 2. Though God's act of justice run thus generally, yet we must Caution it
with a double proviso, in reference to the Jewish Nation against which this was
threatened. 1. Provided this extend not so universally to the subject, as to
exclude, particular Jews, that did comply with the Gospel, Romans 11. Though such
as had pesecuted the Gospel (which was St. Paul's case) yet seeing they
continued not so to do, but returned to God through Christ, it was well with
them. 2. Provided, this does not extend so perpetually unto time, as for ever
to exclude the Jewish Nation from closing with the Gospel; for they shall be
called, Romans 11.26.

Use 3. Let us improve those examples, which set forth unto us God's vengeance
on sinners, and in special on unbelievers. Examples are twofold, either for
imitation or admonition: the latter is here meant, 1 Cor. 10.11. and
unbelievers are twofold, either of pure negation, living without the
profession and means of faith, as Heathens: or of an evil disposition, walking
contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel, as loose Christians. God's judgments on
both these sorts of unbelievers must be improved by us, and especially the
latter.

1. Yield a firm assent not only to the mattter of fact in sad examples, but to
the cause of them set down in sacred Scripture, sin deserving, and procuring
these judgments, 1 Cor. 10.6.

2. Bring home those sad examples by a particular application to your selves,
so Christ would have us, Luke 13.3. making another case our own.

On continue not to refuse the Gospel: for this end, let the wicked forsake his
way, and return unto the Lord; whether should men go but unto God from whom
they fell? let him that is returned, take heed that he back-slide not from the
Lord through unbelief. Look well to the exercise of faith, labor to apprehend
those promises which God has given you in his word, and appropriate them that
are proper for your present condition, Heb. 13.5. The virtue of a plaster
appears in the application of it to the sore.

CHAP. VI. Shall taste of my Supper.]
HEre is the matter predicated, or declared concerning the subject
forementioned. Shall taste of my Supper.] Tasting is taken,

1. Properly: to touch with the lips, Ravanel.
and pass judgment upon the diversity of savoury things. There is a dispute
among Philosophers, what is the proper sensorium, or instrument of tasting.
Some say the mouth, others the Tongue, others the palate, others the throat,
others the nerves which diffuse themselves through those parts. I suppose,
there is a concurrence of all these to a perfect taste. 2. Figuratively: and
that. 1. Intermitatur Deus summum malum. Experimento cognoscent quantum malum
sit jacturam fecisse, etc. Salmer.
Metonymically for eating, Act. 20.11. a metonymie of the effect, because we
therefore taste, that we may eat. 2. Metaphorically: to make trial, or know by
experience: and that, either in a way of sorrow, as to taste death, Matthew.
16.28. for to suffer death, or in a way of delight. Tasting is put for
perceiving in a comfortable manner, Prove. 31.18. this last acception is the
meaning of it in our Text, They shall not taste,] that is, they shall not by
experience know to their comfort, they shall not partake of my Supper. Gospel
provision for the good of their souls; but shall know by sad experience what it
is to contemn such mercy; they shall for ever despair of the enjoyment of any
good. Hence observe,
Observe. That there is not any true experimental, any sanctifying and saving
good belongs to them that refuse the Gospel. Such as these are excluded from
the communion and fruition, both of the grace and glory of God in Christ.

I. They are excluded from the fruition of the grace of God in this life. They
have not a taste of it as is thus evident.

1. They have no sound knowledge, or spiritual discerning of divine truth. They
call evil good, and good evil: put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, Isa.
5.20. no taste and relish of the spiritual nature of things. Truth is the meat
of the mind, the nourishment of the understanding; but divine truth suiteth not
with a carnal mind; the palats of many are out of taste in a spiritual sense:
it is too apparent by the multitude of unsound opinions that go down without
disrelish.

2. They have no firm faith upon God in Christ; They believe not the record
that God gave of his Son, 1 John 5.10. God has put eternal life in his sons
keeping, and men will not come to him that they may have life, John 5.40.
thereby it appears, they are void of faith in God: now faith is the souls
taster, to suck the sweetness of the promises.

3. They have no content or satisfaction in any thing that good is. Tasting is
receiving that which is edible or potable, with some kind of pleasure, or
liking. Thus wicked men do not taste of Gospel-provision; they have no love or
liking of it. The carnal heart is not affected or pleased with spiritual good:
He receives not the things of the spirit into him, so as to receive any
satisfaction to his mind in them, 1 Cor. 2.14. they are foolishness to him,
insipid stuff, albeit the wisdom of God. This shows their mouths to be out of
taste.

4. They have no meditation on God and his word. They chew not the promises,
nor turn them into fatness, they feed not upon such dainties. There is a taste
in words: the Heathens had this notion, they saw some could not taste of words
as others could. Natural men taste not God's word by any delightful meditation
in it.

5. They have no hungring and thirsting after righteousness: carnal hearts look
upon themselves so full as wanting nothing, Rev. 3.17. Such hearts are like
those stomachs that are full of wind, and not of meat, swelled and puffed up.
They do not faint for God, nor are they troubled for the want of the spiritual
food. They have no spiritual desires, nor endeavors after grace.

II. They are excluded from the fruition of the glory of God in the life to
come: That is the second course of this Gospel-feast; and there also they shall
not have so much as a taste. The rich Epicure in the Parable, Luke 16. could
not have one drop to quench his thirst, or cool his heat, ver. 24. no
refreshment among the damned. The day of judgment, which is called the times of
refreshment to all true penitents, Act. 3.19. will be a day of the increase of
torment to all impenitent creatures.

CHAP. VII.
Use 1. THis informs us of the Righteousness of God in the judgment he inflicts
on men. What more righteous than this, that those should have nothing but the
terror and torment of the Law, who would have none of the grace nor duty of
the Gospel?

Here also ye may see the vast difference between the godly and the wicked: the
wicked shall receive no good, but the godly shall want no good, Psalm. 84.11.
They having an interest in God himself, must needs possess all in possessing
him.

Use 2. Yet there be some natural men, that seem to partake of spiritual good
in a large measure, Heb. 6.4, 5 6, 7. a great deal for cast-aways to partake
of. 1. They may be illightened with some divine understanding: divine light may
shine into their heads, though not into their hearts; they may have much of the
gifts, but nothing of the grace of spiritual knowledge. 2. They may taste of
the heavenly gift: the common gifts and influence of the spirit, given to
profit others withal in the way to heaven, with which gifts they may be
instrumental to the bringing of others unto heaven. 3. They may be made
partakers of the Holy Ghost: as the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost in
working of miracles, as those cast-aways make it their plea, Matthew. 7.22. 4.
They may taste the good word of God, by feeling some sudden flashes of joy and
terror under the word, as Herod and Fe^ix did, and yet not nourished by it,
nor satisfied with it. 5. They may taste of the powers of the world to come: be
taken up with the admiration and contemplation of the Saints happiness in
heaven. Thus Balaam desired by all means to die the death of the Righteous.

Use 3. Let not us be like the refusers of the Gospel, who shall not taste of
Gospel-provision: But 1. Let us taste and see that the Lord is good, Psalm.
34.8. Oh taste now, lest God in anger for your contempt should say, ye shall
never taste of my Supper. Meditate on his word, and apply the promises therein
contained: how sweet are thy words to my taste! says David, Psalm. 119.103. We
should fix our thoughts upon Gods word. Meditation is not a transient, but a
permanent act of the soul, abiding where it fastens. Meditation holds reason
and faith to their work, and blows the fire till it thoroughly burn; a man must
continue walking, to get himself warm; a few slight thoughts will not warm our
hearts in God's service; no, that is the work of most intent meditation. -- Let
us also reflect upon our souls in a way of Christian experience. We taste God's
goodness in experimental and actual discoveries of his gracious working. Oh how
delightfully do Saints sit under this shadow, and how sweet is this fruit unto
their taste! Cant. 2.3. 2. Live as those that have tasted that the Lord is
gracious, 1 Pet. 2.3. by frequent tasting you will be more and more in love
with this kind of Liquor. Long for the perfection of grace in the fruition of
glory, and for that heaven upon earth, the clear knowledge of your eternal good
condition. That glimpse you have of heaven, should make you long for the
beatifical Vision, and your foretaste for the full draught. Alexander the Great
sailing in a boisterous sea, discovered before the rest of his company the
happy land of Arabia by the smell of those sweet odours which the wind conveyed
to him! Whereupon he and his company took heart, perceiving they had not far to
go. Consider, grace is as a smell of heaven beforehand: Let your present scent
set you a longing for all the sweet in heaven. Let this fruit of the Tree of
Life make you the more in love with heaven.


FINIS.
Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Golden Bible on London Bridge.
A Commentary on the Hebrews, by J. Owen, D. D. Mr. Sedgwick's Bowels of Mercy.
fol. An Exposition of Temptation, on Matthew. 4. verse 1. to the end of the
eleventh. By Thomas ^aylor. A Learned Commentary or Exposition on the first
Chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians, by Richard Sibbs, D. D. fol.
A practical Exposition on the third Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to
the Corinthians. By Anthony Burgess, fol. The dead Saint, speaking to Saints
and sinners living, in several Treatises. By Samuel Bolton, D. D. fol. The view
of the Holy Scriptures. By Hugh Broughton, fol. Christianographia, or a
Description of the multitude, and sundry sorts of Christians in the world, not
subject to the Pope. By Ephesians. Pagitt, fol.
These six Treatises next following, are written by Mr. George Swinnock.
1. The Christian Man's Calling; or a Treatise of making Religion ones business,
in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his Particular Vocation, his Family
Directions, The first Part. 2. Likewise a second Part; wherein Christians ^e
directed to perform their Duties, as Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants, in the conditions of Prosperity and Adversity. 3. The
third and last part of the Christian Man's Calling. 4. The Door of Salvation
opened, by the Key of Regeneration. 5. Heaven and Hell Epitomized: and the True
Christian Characterized. 6. The Fading of the Flesh, and the flourishing of
Faith: Or, One cast for Eternity, all these by George Swinnock M. A. Large
Octavo's.
An Exposition on the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon, by Will. Greenhil. 4to. The Cospel Covenant, or the Covenant of
Grace opened: Preached in New England, by Peter Bulkeley. 4to. Gods Holy Mind
touching Matters Moral; wh ch himself uttered in ten words, or ten
Commandments; Also an Exposition on the Lords Prayer, by Edward Elton, B. D.
4to. Christ and the Covenant, the work and way of Meditation; Delivered in ten
Sermons, L. Octavo's. By William Bridge. Heart-treasure: or a Treatise tending
to fill and furnish the head and heart of every Christian, with soul-inriching
treasure of truths, graces, experiences and comforts, with an Epistle prefixed,
by John Chester, Large Octavo. A Glimpse of Eternity, by A. Caley. A Practical
Discourse of Prayer, wherein is handled the Nature and Duty of Prayer, by Tho.
Cobbet. Of Quenching the Spirit, the evil of it in respect both of its cause
and effects, discovered. By Theophilus Polwheile. Wells of Salvation opened, or
Words whereby we may be saved: with advice to Young Men: by Tho. Vincent. The
Re-building of London encouraged and improved in several Meditations: by Sam.
Rolls. The sure way to Salvation: or a Treatise of the Saints Mystical Union
with Christ; by R. Steedman, M. A. The greatest Loss, upon Matthew. 16.26. By
James Livesey. Small Octavo's.
FINIS.

