CULMERS CROWN Cracked with his own LOOKING-GLASS; OR, The Cocks-combs
LOOKING-GLASS Broken about his ears. AND A Counter-mirror held forth to all
good People, for their undeceiving in the pretented sufferings of that
Pseudo-Martyr, and grand Impostor of this age, Blew Dick of Thanet.

Reflecting from certain pertinent Observations upon an impertinent, false and
frivolous Apology of his ascribed to his more ingenuous son, but scribled by
his most ignominious self. Wherein especially, All the world may see the ugly
face of that prodigious Monster; and consequently, what a woeful exchange the
good, but unfortunate, men of Mynster have made, of a Doctor for a Dunce, of a
learned Divine for a leaden Dick, of a reverend Pastor for a ravenous
Persecutor: in a word, of a Casaubon for a Culmer; names, for the merit of the
one, and demerit of the other, as diametrically opposite as Fame and Infamy.

Published By a true son of that worthy Doctor, one of his Parishioners, in
vindication of himself, his dear brethren, and their reverend ghostly Father,
from the false aspersions, and malicious defamations of that common Oppressor
of them all: who pretending to write a Martyrologie, tells a tale of a TURD,
and wrapping it up in a Legend of lies, forgeries, and other base trumpery, (to
say nothing here of his SHITTEN STYLE) thinks it a fit Present for an
honorable Colonel; who judging it fitter for a PRIVY then a public use, or
rather of no use but in a case of NECESSITY, has sent it to Goldfinders Hall,
there to serve for an Ani-tergium when NEED requires.

The case is alTVRD then: what Dick designed
To stand and serve in Front, is clapp't behind.
What Dick thought worthy of a Son of Mars,
Scarce worthy most men think to wipe his A --
Whilst all conclude that none but Fools and Asses
Will value such a Woodcocks Looking-glasses.
Culmers Parish-Looking glass, p. 22. No Knave to the pretended Religious Knave.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
MY first entertainment of thee must be with an Apology for not keeping my word
with thee in the precedent Titlepage, where I promised to play the Observator
upon Blew Dicks Lookingglass. Seriously what I so promised, I then really
intended, but upon second thoughts, and by some inducements not much material
to be specified, my mind is somewhat altered. Not but that I still intend to be
an Observator, but rather on his Life, then on his Looking glass: by the help,
and after the method of the latter, observing the most remarkable passages of
the former. So that upon the matter, the clothes are not so much altered, as
the dressing, the matter, as the form. And this premised, I shall stay thee no
longer in the porch, but in hope of thy courteous pardon for this little
receding from the first design, I shall present my self, and what I have to say
unto thee under this ensuing Title.

DICK CULMERS Life DISCOVERED (Chiefly) by his own LOOKING-GLASS.
TO the shame and dishonor of his native soil, His birthplace, and pranks there.
never before tainted either with producing or harboring any venomous or
noisome creature; He was born and bred (at Duns-acre) in the Isle of Thanet:
from whence, after some notable exploits construed by his fond and partial
parents for early Omens of his innate wit, and good prognostics of an
ingenious headpiece, (such as his newfound way for descending the Cliffs to
catch Jackdaws by the help of a rope fastened to his Fathers Cows horns:) he is
transplanted into the Continent: and, that art might improve nature, sent to
Canterbury School, His behavior at School.
where though under the King of Schoolmasters, (page 3.) such a Block-head he
proves, that he quickly disappoints his friends, and discredits his Master. Ex
omni ligno non fit Mercurius, is an old saying, which our Dick at once both
revives and verifies by his non-proficiency. Senior happily (as he pretends) he
was, that is, Senior Dunce of all the School. To give him his full due, we will
grant him famous too, right famous indeed (not to mention here his many
rakehelly pranks usually chastised with a swinging rod provided for the nonce,
and called by his name) for a bloody persecution which the Fox escaped by
burrowing in a bench-hole, retaining to this day the name of Culmers hole See
the Antidote, p. 3.
.

2. He does very well to commend his Master, but it were better (for his own
credit) that his Master, if alive, had less cause to discommend him. Under him
indeed, though not from him, he made a beginning with some proficiency in his
laudable, liberal Arts of Swimming, Thieving, Cuffing, Footbal-playing, etc.
which afterward he prosecuted, At the University.
perfected, and became Master (or, if you will Doctor) of at Cambridge; where
having gotten his bag fuller of stolen Wheat See the Antidote, p. 6.
then his brain of solid wit, after a notable escape from a second bloody
persecution by the hand of the Butler in Magdalen College cellar, for playing
the thief, he is looked upon as a great shame to the place: and least his
continuance there might occasion too great a flux of tears from that mournful
Saints eyes, expelled the College; who, after some vagaries, plants himself at
Goodnestone (p. At Goodnesto.
3.) where falling to the exercise of his precious gifts, he breaks the Laws of
Hospitality, plays the perfidious guest, and turns Traitor to his Host, upon
pretense of love to his Prince, putting fair for the life of his Parishioner
See the Antidote, p. 17. etc
, p. 7.

3. Soon after being cashiered thence, (whither though the name he brought were
bad enough, yet, as at all removes, he left a worse behind him:) he goes a
Bulling See the same, p. 10.
to Herbaldown, and there bellowing it out a while, he finds himself ere long
eclipsed by the more illustrious Cathedralists, his near neighbors. Wherefore
having gotten (what he long wished and watched for) an opportunity for revenge,
His plundoring the Cathedral.
he brussels up to them, and as if now he would scratch out their eyes, who
would once have well scourged his breech; under a pretense of letting in new
lights, he falls (like one fitter indeed to make a Thresher then a Scholar) to
threshing down the old, (p. 5.) their much admired, but since the Reformation,
never until then abused windows. And, to clear the place of all monuments of
superstition, down go Crowned Kings for Canonized Saints: and, to show whose
son he was, he knocks down Christ, and spares the Devil. Nor stays he there,
but (that all might dance after his own pipe) his next care is to break the
Organs: and carrying them in a triumphant bravado up into the high Steeple, he
there proclaims his much higher valor in the conquest, both of them, and those
whose of right they were, by setting them (more like a scoffing Lucian then a
sober Christian) to the tune of a scurrilous and a lousie catch. In fine, he
makes such a foul work all the Church over, (for which nothing more sure then
that his name will stink to all posterity,) that for want of fair water, he is
fain to use foul, turning that beastly Cock in his own stinking Cod-piece, for
water to lay the dust. From what time no marvel if persecutions abide him, the
very Heathens observing a curse due to that wretch that should mingere in
patrios cineres, dare to play the beast, and piss upon the sacred ashes of his
Ancestors.

4. By the way, here I expected some touch at least of a persecution betiding
him in these his Cathedral actings. Mr. P.E.
For a young Gentleman of the City observing from without, his wild and
outragions zeal within, in making such havoc of the goodly windows upon the
account of Idolatry, and coming up toward him, Ironically falls to applauding
of the action, calling to him, and telling him it was a very good work, and
that he would join with him in it and help him. And thereupon catching up a
good thumping stone, takes his aim at the place where the Pike-man was
standing, mounted on his Haman like ladder: and intending it not at the glass
but the glass-breaker, throws it with all the power he could, and had not some
iron bars interposed between his pate and the stone, it had done such execution
as would have quite marred his making of Looking-glasses, and put an end, if
not to the work, yet to the workman, by dashing out those little brains he had;
who therefore me thinks should not have omitted this out of his
Persecution-legend. But will you know the reason? the Gentleman is yet alive,
and no way (as you must believe his other Persecutors are, eo nomine;) become a
signal example of divine vengeance. He is not indeed, but one that possibly
(and not improbably) may live to see the Cathedral Thresher, who was so nimble
to run up the ladder here, as willing to come down another elsewhere, which
(alas) he cannot do without breaking his neck; it being such a scurvy kind of
ladder as will admit of no descent but by a rope with such a hampering noose,
that (if it be not misplaced, as in this action it was) will neither suffer his
advance to heaven, nor his retreat to earth, but take him short of both, as
unworthy of either, and only fit to be hanged up as a PARISH LOOKINGGLASSE FOR
PLUNDERERS OF MINSTERS.

5. But to go on with our story, the late eclipsed Worthy by this time having
gotten together a sufficient stock of merit, and scorning therefore any longer
to serve as a Journey-man, who had now so well deserved to set up for himself,
he leaves his Curate-ship at Herbaldown, and because others will not prefer
him, His intrusion at St. Stephens.
he will prefer himself. Like a covetous Ahab then envying his neighbor Naboth
a better Vineyard then his own, he confidently thrusts his sickle into a much
worthier man's harvest at St. Stephens See (...) Antido^^^
: whence being ready (as once that Martyr, but in a better cause) to be stoned
for his pains, by the enraged Parishioners, sensible of their true Pastors
oppression: and after a repulse (p. 9.) first at Cartham, and afterward at
Ickham, (for the Devil himself is not more unwelcome every where) he makes
toward his own beloved Home-stal, Afterward at Mynster.
and pitching upon Mynster, as a fit, because a fat, morsel for his insatiate
maw, he employes all the arts he was Master of, in supplanting and pulling down
an eminent Doctor for implanting and setting up that excellent Dunce himself,
(p. 10.) And not satisfied with his persecution of the Shepherd, unless he may
also prey upon the Sheep, (whom he finds averse to such a wretched exchange,
and very desirous to cast such a rider as gets up into the saddle on the wrong
side;) he throws off his visard, and plainly shows that he sought not them but
theirs, not the Flock but the Fleece: that by the saving of their souls he
meant the gaining of their Tithes, not caring so much to reform their lives, as
to improve his own livelihood, being one whose godliness consists only in
gain. Indeed, whatsoever swam at the top, such was the foul and faeculent
bottom of that gilded and specious design. His pranks there.
For now, like a very Tyrant or a Tiger, though he have not wherewith to
nourish their souls, yet he will enforce them to cherish his body; like a
barking Cur snarling at the detainers, though but of Mint and Cumin, and
scouring his foul mouth upon them in such a sort of silly quibling nicknames,
as shall sooner render himself then them ridiculous to all that truly know
both: whilst the spiteful wretch may justly laugh at his own folly for thinking
to fright men with such childish scare-crows; and by that old brawling whores
trick, (which using so much thither, he learned at Billings-gate) of calling
Whore first, discovers one other of those arts whereof he is truly Master: the
grand Persecutor. of Kent and Christendom crying out of persecution, and
thinking to make it visible to all the world by a false, flattering and partial
Lookingglass: which notwithstanding is not so impenetrable but that a weak
sight may look quite through it, or but turning to'ther side, plainly see that
Catilina Cethegum, that it is the Wolf complains of worrying by the Sheep, the
Lion by the Lamb, the Vulture by the Dove: But he who has least cause is most
forward to complain, and however enamored of himself, is indeed a fouler,
uglier and much more odious Persecutor (both of Pastor and People) then any
mirror can fully represent.

6 To proceed, Mynster he gapes for, and Mynster he gets: and behold now the
strong man is in possession, and yet without that mutual honeylove between
Minister and People, which of him in that case is observed, (p. 26.) nay, with
so much of (what he well deserved) ill will and odium of all the Parish, (who
were not such arrant Asses as willingly to suffer such a fool to ride them: or
tamely to submit their necks to such a Swine-heards Hogs-yoak, p. 2.) that, for
preventing the Canterbury Bonfires, (as a better argument for keeping him in,
then any from his own worth and merit) he escapes an Ejection by the Assembly
of Divines, (p. 11.) (and is so abetted by another Assembly, as that finding
him so happy and dextrous) at saving of souls at home, he is sent on the same
errand abroad. And because he cannot get his neighboring Ministers good will
to associate with them in their Margate Lecture (where they knew him so ill
beloved, An intrusion at Margate.
as he could neither do them any credit, nor the people any good) he by high
and strong hand obtrudes himself, (p. 13.) but with so much distaste both to
Ministers and people, that to save his pains, and their patience in hearkening
to such an impertinent babbler, the Lecture falls.

7. So that thus repulsed, home again he comes, where following his Barn more
then his Book, his Tith on the weekday closer then his Text on the Lords; he
has not time enough in the day, but borrows a part of a Moonlight night (the
more proper season for a deed of darkness, and wherein, whilst true men sleep,
thieves and robbers play their pranks) to steal up into the Steeple, Set by the
D. on a Pinnacle of the Temple.
(p. 14.) and being by (that Prince of darkness) the Devils help placed on the
Pinnacle of it, he soon rewards him for his pains, by casting down, not the
Parish true eyesore, himself, but that Devilish eyesore (the Church and
Christians ancient badge and banner) the Cross.

8. Now could the Parish have been as soon to rid of their Cross, which but
that you would think I meant himself, I would call a worse, the Bells, to which
we are now making, should not I conceive have been so speechless as it seems
they were, (p. 27.) when but for his Wives great iron pestle, Thumping the
clapperless Bells with his P.
he means (as Fools have good tools) his own great swinging pisle, they had
been as mure and silent there, as the good people endeavored to make him be
below, when they put him to get in like a thief (as he was) by a (shitten)
window, and rewarded some of his very little flock with a foul style without,
and others with a filthy pew within, and yet (what say they?) good enough for
such as could find in their hearts to go a calving, and lend their ears to such
a bleating Bell-weather; such a mercenary Balaam, as he where ere he comes is
held no better; and particularly with his very testimonialists at Canterbury,
(p. 8.) who long ere this finding themselves mistaken in countenancing a
ravenous Wolf under a sheeps skin, are no less ashamed of him, then he is
proud of them, wishing (many of them) they had not so much cause with just
regret to say, Litera scripta manet.

9. Well, but to Canterbury we have brought him, where for a while we shall
leave him, Preaching to the walls.
playing the Pulpiteer, but preaching, as at home, in a manner to those walls
which can hardly hold any auditors but such as are surprised by being not aware
of his turn: the people there generally abhorring such an accursed instrument
of the barbarous spoil, and beastly profanation of that most incomparable
ornament of the place and Nation, their once flourishing, now (thank the Devil
and Dick) fading, Dick a plum-porridge Priest
falling Cathedral and watching an opportunity for a full revenge upon that
impious Herostratus, no marvel if he found it better playing the Plum-porridge
Priest, (p. 30.) and filling his panch as he did with a first and second mess
of good stew'd-broth, and a Nativity-pye in Mr. Philips Parlor on a
Christmas Day (p. 29.) without the least scandal or scruple of conscience upon
the account of superstition, nay with thanks and approbation as (in terminis)
very seasonable fare: then adventuring his person among the enraged
Christmas-men, who perhaps might have thoughts of such suitable wages for his
not forgotten, though unrewarded impious Church-work, not to be expiated by his
many vaunted good-works, (p. 30.) as that kind of advancement he speaks of, but
with a shorter ladder I believe then served his turn there, and a rope not so
misplac't as then.

10. Playing the Otter.
Thus indeed they had saved his pains in swimming and diving, as shortly after,
to get to Sandwich, (p. 31, 32.) from whence acted and affrighted as much, if
not more, by that Nemesis a tergo, his own guilt, then others malice, he trots
to Deal, where we must imagine him taking Sanctuary in his Cosen Culmers
chimney corner, Preaching in a chimney corner.
and there entertaining mine Host and his family with a Winters tale, or a
Tragickcomaedy of his hard, but happy escape; as lately from the Gallows, so
now from the Billows, from hanging at one time, and drowning at another: and in
a woeful manner recounting a deal of other such pitiful stuff and stories of
his heavy persecutions, as set his tenderhearted Host a weeping, until at
length out comes the tale of a Turd, the beshitten style and pew, when
presently the scene alters, the Heraclitus turns Democritus, mine Host now
laughs as heartily as he wept before, and doubtless becomes a suter to his
guest (for the honor of their name and family) by some godly book or ballad,
to give the world an account (as now he has done in his Martyrological
Apology) of all his sad disasters, and wounderful deliverances. The contents of
which rare Masterpiece, especially in the 29 page, as it makes me call to mind
the story of A-JAX, so that part of it considered and compared with the
precedent, full of lamentable and tragical tales, hardly to be read by any but
Stoics or stocks with dry eyes, puts me also in mind of such another Preacher
as the Author, the famous Scogan, Scogans Ape.
who with his forrowful face, set one part of his Auditory on weeping, and with
his open A -- at the same instant set the other on laughing.

11. But to return to our Pilgrim, who (to case the Land a while of her
unprofitable burden) puts to Sea, and safely gets to London, (p. 32.) whither
if we follow him, we may find him, after a sad rehearsal Sermon of his many
sufferings for the cause (wherein he speaks righter then he is aware, having
ever given a very just cause for all his sufferings: Prattling at Berdmondsey.
) and a use of exhortation to the Brethren at Berdmondsey to pity his case,
but especially to resent the foul abuse and beastly offront offered to a
neighbor of theirs, a London Dame (p. 29.) to the spoiling of her satin
peticoat and her devotion to boot, (whereof he gave them such a sweet relation
as would not out of their nostrils a good while after:) he takes his leave of
them to go tell the same story (decies repetita placebit) to the Army, under
whose protection he makes a cowardly retreat by the way of Wy, Railing on the
living, and rashly censuring the dead.
(p. 32.) where (as his manner is throughout the whole Pamphlet, or rather
Pasquil, being stuffed with nothing more then base invectives on the living and
bitter censures on the dead, all whose sufferings, as if of the Cabinet counsel
with God himself, he ascribes to a just judgment from that divine hand upon
them for persecuting such a darling of Heaven, as he by his false Lookingglass
endeavors to appear:) he so insults over a dead Lion, a valiant but
unfortunate Gentleman, that I cannot but wonder at the surviving brother, that
with patience and silence he can put up and pass over so great an indignity
offered to his brothers memory: how he can forbear to cast stones at his pate
that shall thus cast dirt in his brothers face; De mortuis nil nisi bona.
an impiety abhorred even of Heathens, and deserving Scorpious or the lash of
some outrageous fury to chastise it.

12. But hoping on this hint (though some say his mouth is stopped, and his
hand stayed, with a book) he may be rouzed to do his brother, and therein
himself right; I shall leave him, and return to that snarling Cerberus, who at
length once more recovers his kennel. But expect his long resting there we may
not: for like a Knight errant, Dick a Non-Resident.
or a more arrant Non-Resident then any against whom he clamours, (p. 26.) a
mere wandering Levitical Renegado, (p. 37.) he is continually in motion, once a
week at least, measuring the distance between East-Mynster and West-Mynster,
and out of a penurious baseness seldom or never passing between London and
Gravesend but by the common Tilt-boat, amongst his Peers, I confess, tag, rag
and bobtail, a rabble of sordid, nasty, lousie people: and yet sometimes so
invisibly by lodging and laying himself up, or rather down, Persecuted by the
watermen.
under the benches on purpose to avoid the water-mens persecution for his six
penny fare, that he is fain either to be kicked up like a dog, or, as once at
Canterbury-School, drawn out by the heels, to the wonder of his
fellow-passengers, but not of the watermen, which have been accustomed to his
hidingfox tricks.

13. But he is by this time on shore, and being gotten to the Exchequer, Very
sensible of the want of the Ecclesiast. Court.
(p. 33.) is there preferring (what alas he cannot do in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, which, to the great prejudice of such faithful Ministers, were
unluckily abolished, p. 2.) a Lye-bill against some of his Persecutors, that
is, the detainers of those Tithes whereof (as they are a sort of knowing men,
and withal of more conscience then himself) they know him to be a mere Usurper,
and not less out in calling himself their Pastor, then he was erewhile in
saying that Pontius was the Christian name of Pilate, (p. 34.) Indeed admit
this, (that he is of right the parish Minister of Mynster) and then what he
says is somewhat: Not rightful Minister of Mynster.
but if on the contrary de facto only, he thrusts his sickle into another
harvest: or, admitting the Living to be void, if such a one obtrude himself
upon the people, that is so notoriously unworthy as to become the odium and
outcast of all places; not one, but all, both places and persons, where he is
known, rising up and bandying themselves against him, either to keep him out,
and stave him off that he come not in, or if gotten in, being ever restless,
and never at quiet till he be spewed out: if such a one as he, so foully
scandalous for his life, (by many strange piacula a ppearing by this
Counter-mirror Whereof much more in the Antidote, throughout.
) and such an Ignoramus for his learning, (if he will be judged by his own
book) as utterly unable to return them, Quid pro quo, a recompense in teaching
for his maintenance in Tithes; if such a one, I say, shall call and hold
himself to be the Minister of Mynster, as it is no other then petitio
principii, a craving to have that yielded which until it be proved ought not to
be admitted: so if on that account the people shall withhold their Tithes, and
be worried and hurried up and down for it by such a Priest, let equal Judges
say, which of the two, is the Persecutor.

14. But whatever he be, we must remember where we last left him, and that was
at the Exchequer, where it may be doubted he found but cold entertainment, for
we shall have him next not much rejoicing, though warming himself at a Bonfire
(p. 36.) and for his Readers recreation (that has quite tired his eyes with
poaring so long upon a dull and dusty Lookingglass) rewarding his patience, and
pleasing his ear another while with a piece of Thanet Poetry; a Ballad of Jack
Benet. Dick turned Ballad-singer.
But (as there are two of the name) he says not which: I shall therefore, to
prevent a mistake of the wrong for the right, adventure also on a few rimes in
behalf of the true.

A word with thee Jack Benet,
And, c'ause thou liv'st in Tenet,
Pray tell thy neighbor Dick
Of his unhandsome trick,
To bring thee on the stage
In this bespattering age.
For some that knew old Dick,
And how he used his P --
Say all his brats were not
Upon his Wife begot:
But that the lusty blade
Got up and did his Maid,
Who fructify'd, and what?
A wench the Knave begat.
This Wench they say in Tenet
Was married to Jack Benet.
Now was it not basely done
Of old Dick Culmers Son
Thy name, good Jack, to mention
Without the least distinction,
As if thou were the man?
And (shall I tell thee John?)
What say the men of Tenet?
This sure is that Jack Benet
Who knit the nuptial knot
With Culmers bastard brat.
Then Jack for vindication
Of this base imputation
Upon thy virtuous Wife
Of spotless birth and life,
Or get thy name struck out,
Or make that fumbling Lout
Explain himself, and say:
Mistake me not I pray,
This Jack is not the Gull
That took to Wife the Trull,
(Undone if he had mist her)
Repent, my bastard-sister.
Thus shall thy wife, Jack Benet,
Throughout the I Will of Tenet
Be cleared, who else (alas!)
Will for that Whores-bird pass.
But our Ballad-singer (who is very fugitive, and never stays long at a place)
having sung out his song, and turned over a new leaf, (p. 37.) is gotten to
Billings-gate, where (as Ballad-mongers are) being taken for a rogue and a
vagrant, he has much ado to escape (what by good hap a Scribe at hand was
ready to write) a Mittimus from thence to (a fit cage for such birds as
Ballad-makers to sing in) Newgate. But his time is not yet come, Like to be
sent to Newgate.
though in good time it may, notwithstanding his many testimonials from several
places, which are now no better then so many old Almanacks, out of date, and
which indeed, in most men's judgment, are but the products either of fear or
flattery: some of the subscribers out of fear of his displeasure, ne noceat,
(as the Indians worship the Devil:) others out of flattery, and a seeming
compliance with such an active Zealot for the Cause, none out of love holding
forth a hand to him, but many (as once his Best friend, or friend Best) out of
hatred, to cuff his ears and cudgel his coat.

16. But see he is gotten back to Mynster, (p. 39. Turned Looking-glass maker.
) where we shall leave him making of Looking-glasses, and saving the souls of
as many as will pay him, which he has taken a course shall be but few, by
making it a certain note, or a sure sign of a good Minister (p. 37.) to be
opposed by all his Parish. And thus, like a learned Disputant, has he brought
himself into a very fine Dilemma. For either the people must keep their money,
Taken in a Dilemma.
or else the Priest must lose his credit: a very good hint to the whole Parish
to have a care of avoiding that proverb: A Fool and his money are soon parted.

17. And thus much have you of the life of this faithful Minister, The
Conclusion.
which is as much as the Locking-glass affords. If you want more, you must have
patience with me until further enabled by such another Mirror; which, this
going off so well, we have all reason shortly to expect, if we may be so happy
hereafter as heretofore, that neither hanging at land, nor drowning at Sea
deprive us of the Crafts-mans: which whosoever does not deprecate, let him be
condemned to fire and faggot, being made to contribute his share of both to
that common pile, whereof no doubt both at Canterbury and Mynster, there will
be need enough for drying up that Ocean of tears which me thinks I see gushing
from the eyes of a multitude of mourners greedily assembling to condole the
loss of so universal a Darling, and with joined hands throwing themselves in a
round about the flaming pile, and ejaculating this doleful Dirge and Ditty:

O what a loss have we, Sirs,
O what a loss have we, Sirs!
O hone, O hone,
Blew Dick is gone:
Then what a loss have we Sirs!
So true (alas) is that, Sirs,
So true (alas) is that, Sirs,
The choicest flowers,
Live fewest hours,
So true (alas) is that Sirs.
He Looking-glasses made, Sirs,
He Looking-glasses made, Sirs,
Cathedral Lies,
With Hues and Cries,
O 'twas a Clerk-like trade, Sirs.
But now the workman's gone, Sirs,
But now the workman's gone, Sirs,
His wages he
Receives, but we
Are quite and clean undone Sirs.
But bootless it is to grieve, Sirs,
But bootless it is to grieve, Sirs,
What Is past, in vain
We call again:
Then bootless it is to grieve, Sirs.
If you will be ruled by me, Sirs,
If you will be ruled by me, Sirs,
Let sorrows pack,
Drown Cares in Sack,
If you will be ruled by me, Sirs.
Clear up the brow, cheer up, Sirs,
Clear up the brow, cheer up, Sirs,
What ere his hiew,
Bid Dick adieu,
And let us have the other cup, Sirs.
And change the Note, and sing Sirs,
Till Heaven with Eccho's ring Sirs:
Nor sigh, nor groan,
Nor cry O hone,
But Jo Paean sing Sirs.
Summa approbationis.
Having perused the Mirror and Counter mirror, and finding the former a very AR
Sificial piece, by reason of the PURE STYLE affording very sweet and fragrant
flowers, fit to dress up the PRIVY. chamber: and yet fearing some directions
may be wanting for gathering a Posie of them where with this Counter-mirror is
pertinently fraught, I cannot but give it a free License; wishing all beholders
to join with me in a due estimate of both; at least, not to neglect the good
help of the latter, for discovering the NECESSARY use of the former.

Philo-katoptrono-klastes.

Printed at London, 1657.


