Military Instructions for the CAVALLRIE: Or RULES AND DIRECTIONS for the
SERVICE OF HORSE, Collected out of diverse foreign Authors, Ancient and Modern:
And Rectified and supplied, according to the present practice of the
LOVV-COUNTREY Wars.

PROVE. 21.31. The horse is prepared for battle: but victory is from the Lord.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by ROGER DANIEL, Printer to the Universitie. 1644.

MILITARY INSTRUCTIONS for the CAVALLRIE: According to the Modern warr's.
CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Roger Daniel printer to the Universitie. 1644 And are to
be sold by W: Hope at the Unicorn in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange

woodcut frontispiece depicting cavalry scenes

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS, Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Earl Marshall of
ENGLAND, of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Knight: Lord Lieutenant of His
Majesty's forces in Norfolk and Norwich, and one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy-Councell.
Right Honorable;
HAving lately finished this discourse of Cavallry, intending it only for my
private use and information, it had the fortune to light into the hands of two
noble and judicious perusers. The one (during the short discontinuance from his
regiment, while it lay in winter garrison) has been courteously pleased to go
through it, correcting what here and there was amiss, supplying some things
defective, and manifesting his approbation of it with an Imprimatur. The other
(among other things) has chiefly vouchsafed his assistance and directions for
the managing of the horse, and handling of arms; as being a thing principally
necessary, and that wherein authors have hitherto been defective. These
considerations, together with the commanding request (among others) of some of
your Honors Deputy Lieutenants (not any arrogancy or ambition of mine) have
prevailed with me (in hope of public good) to expose these weak essaies to the
public view of the world. Now since the patronizing of a work of Marshall
discipline, seems most properly to belong to the Earl Marshall; and that
charge wherewith I stand entrusted within your Lordships Lieutenancy, obliges
me in duty to consecrate the best of my endeavors to your Honors service: May
it please your Honor (of your innate clemency, and favor to Arts) to
vouchsafe your honorable patronage and protection on these poor labors of
his, who shall ever (in all humility) remain,

Your Honors dutifully devoted servant, J. C.

TO THE READER.
OF making many books there is no end, said the wise King many ages past;
Eccles. 12.12:
yet for some Arts and faculties, I suppose (even in this printing age of ours)
we may complain of scarcity. For among so many Authors ancient and modern,
which have written of the Art Military, is it not strange that hardly any have
fully handled that which concerns the Cavallry? Among the ancients. Aelian
has somewhat touched upon the manner of ordering the horse among the Grecians,
and Vegetius (where he speaks of the Roman Cavallrie) lightly passes it
over, and concludes in Lib. 3. c p. 26.
these words, De equitatu sunt multa praecepta: sed cum haec pars militiae usu
exercitii, armorum genere, and equorum nobilitate profecerit, ex libris nihil
arbitror colligendum, cum praesens doctrina sufficiat. Now the reason why they
(bestowing their chief labor about the Infantery) left so little direction for
the horse, may be, either because that (both with Grecians and Romans) the
Magis re^publicae necessarii pedi^es; qui possant ubique pro^isse. Veg. lib 2.
cap. 1.
foot were of greatest esteem (as that wherein their chief strength consisted,
and whereon they principally relied) and so the less regard was had of the
horse; or else because the service of horse was not Eq^^st is Romanorum malitia
impofecta fuis, unde nostra ju^^ pot^o^ existim^^na^ est. Scipio Amiratus,
Dissert. polit. lib. 19.
grown to that perfection in those times, which it since attained. For what
great effect could be expected of horse using no When they were to charge the
enemy, they used to pull off their bridles. T. Li^. l^b. 4.
bridle, and having neither Lip. ad Polyb. lib. 3. 219, 220.
saddle nor stirrops: bearing only Polyb. lib. 6.
a weak slender pole (which the very motion of the horse would shake in pieces)
and a little round target (as the Romans manner was at first) or else a staff
or kind of Conius.
lance (which they afterward used in imitation of the Grecians) with three or
four darts? and having no surer stay to counterpoise their forced motion, what
certainty or violence could they use, either in charging or casting their
weapons? and whereas they usually had of the light armed foot Cas. Com. lib. 1.
cap. 17. So did the Germans, of whose light armed foot Caesar reports thus,
Tan^a erat h^rum ex reitatione celer^as, ut jubis ^q^o^um subleva^^, cu^sum
adaq^^^ent. Com. 1. 10.
intermingled among them, how could they be so serried together for the shock
as to do any great effect in making impressions upon their enemies? which
surely was the cause they were often commanded So did the Consul Valerius in
the wa^re against the Sabine^ l.^v.l. 3. And S Tempanius against the Vols^^.
Id^m lib. 4 and many others.
to alight, and (forsaking their horses) to fight on foot. But for modern
Authors there is not the like reason: and yet of so many as have written, none
have treated of rules and instructions for the Cavallry, until lately George
Basta, Count of the holy Empire, and Luys Melzo Knight of Malta, wrote their
books of Cavallry. These works of theirs afford good directions: but yet it may
be said of them as Aelian says of those Authors which had written before him,
Omn^^ f^^e ita ^nanimiter sen^s^^, quasi locere hom^nes vell^nt non ign^^os,
s^d sa^is e^^^m rerum p^^os, quas explicare statuerent. Aelian. de instruend.
ac el^ cap. 1.
That they had so written, as if none should read them but such as were already
skillful in the Art Military. This defect one Walhausen takes upon him to
supply; something he has done in the motions but for the first rudiments, for
the handling of arms, etc. he (as all others) is silent. But these and the like
being written in the foreign languages, and among so many of our military
Pamphlets none treating of Cavallry; I have adventured (though altogether unfit
for such a task) to employ some idle hours in the diligent reading, and
conferring of the said Authors together with such other books and informations
as I could obtain out of the Low Countries and other places, for my better
satisfaction herein: Lapides and ligna ab aliis accipio, edificii tamen
ext^u^tio and formae nostra. Nec aramarum sane textus ideo melior, quia ex
sefila gignunt: nec noster vilior, ^uia ex alienis libamus, ut apes. Lips.
Polit.
endeavoring to extract the marrow and quintessence of their prolixer
discourses, and to digest them into such a method, as I conceived might afford
brevity and perspicuity: wherein I have observed to go upon good grounds,
affirming nothing of mine Nihil mihi autoritatis assum^, sed horum quos supr^
retuli, ea quae dispersa sunt, velut in ordinem epitom^ta conscribo. Veg l. 1.
cap. 18.
own authority. It is true, I have sometimes made bold to dissent from others
but adding my reason, and leaving the judicious Reader to his liberty. For the
style, I conceived the N^que curiosam aliquam verborum manitatem conquirentes,
sed verbis (...) communibus planise; ^si, militarem dicendi formam potissimum
securi sumus. Leo Tact. in Epilog.
bluntest and plainest to be most proper for the subject. If my annotations be
displeasing to any, they may use them like Country styles, and step over them.
To others they may serve to show the truth of that assertion, That a Proved at
large by S. Cl. Edmunds in his preface to Cesars Commentaries by him translated.
mere practical knowledge cannot make a perfect soldier: for had we not been
beholding to Apud veteres res militaris in oblivionem saepius venit, sed a
libris repetita est, postea ^u cum autoritate firmata. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 10.
books, the Military Art (in all likelihood) had been utterly obscured from our
knowledge. For what is there in these modern wars, which is not borrowed from
antiquity? wherein we follow them step by step ( mutatis mutandis, the later
inventions of fire-weapons, and the use and dependancy thereof only excepted)
not only in the manner, but even retaining their very words of command, as in
this Treatise is partly showed, and would be more manifestly apparent if the
subject were Infanterie; which no way disparageth the modern practice, but
rather (for the antiquity of it) gives it the more respect and estimation.

Now, lest the Tyro or untutored horseman should be deterred, and should judge
his task to be overgreat; I have set down a table of the Chapters, that so he
may apply himself, only to those things (at first) which are principally
necessary for him to know and practice.

The defects of our trained bands of horse, will argue the work neither
unnecessary nor unseasonable, had it but had the hap to light into the hands of
a better workman. But as I have seen when an excellent Musician could not be
entreated to handle an instrument, some bungler has fallen upon it; which
caused the Musician (out of impatience and indignation) to undertake it; so, if
these Essaies may be a means to incite some one or other, better able, Nam cum
hoc opus, usus poitus ali^rion, quam mea commendationis causa aggressus s^n,
adjuvari me ab his, qui aliquid illi a^truent, non argui credam, Frontin. in
Praef.
to put pen to paper, I shall think my pains abundantly rewarded. In the mean
time I desire they may be received with the right hand, as they are offered;
and conclude in the words of the Poet, -- Hor. epist. 6. l. 1.
Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.


A Table of the Chapters.
PART I.
Of levying men. Chap. 1 OF Officers in general page 1 Chap. 2 Of the General
of horse page 2 Chap. 3 Of the Lieutenant General horse ibid. Chap. 4 Of the
Commissary General page 3 Chap. 5 Of the Quartermaster General ibid. Chap. 6
Of the Captain page 4 Chap. 7 Of the Lieutenant ibid. Chap. 8 Of the Cornet
page 5 Chap. 9 Of the particular Quartermasters ibid. Chap. 10 Of the
Corporalls page 6 Chap. 11 Of the Trumpetters ibid. Chap. 12 Of the Auditor
ibid. Chap. 13 Of the Provost Marshall ibid.
Of Soldiers in general. Chap. 14 Of the corruption of the Cavallry page 7
Chap. 15 How to reform the Cavallry page 8 Chap. 16 Of distributing booty ibid.
Chap. 17 Of the soldiers pay page 9 Chap. 18 Of supplying the Cavallry with
good horses page 10 Chap. 19 Of the proportion of Cavallry with the Infantery
page 11
Of Soldiers in particular. Chap. 20 Of the enrolling of a Soldier, and his
qualities page 11 Chap. 21 Of the arming of the Cavallry, and their kinds page
12 Chap. 22 Of the Lancier his arming ibid. Chap. 23 Of arming the Cuirassier
ibid. Chap. 24 Of arming the Harquebusier and Carabine page 14 Chap. 25 Of
arming the Dragon ibid. Chap. 26 Of exercise in general, and the necessity of
it ibid. Chap. 27 Of managing the horse page 15 Chap. 28 Of exercising the
Lance in their postures page 16 Chap. 29 Of exercising the Cuirassier in their
postures page 18 Chap. 30 Of exercising the Harquebusier and Carabine in their
postures page 20 Chap. 31 Of exercising the Dragon in the postures page 20
Chap. 32 Of exercising the Cavallry in their motions page 21

PART II.
Of Marching. Chap. 1 OF Guides page 26 Chap. 2 Of intelligence ibid Chap. 3 Of
the order of marching page 27 Chap. 4 Of scouts and discoverers ibid. Chap. 5
Of the order of marching by day page 28 Chap. 6 Of the order of marching by
night ibid. Chap. 7 How the baggage is to march page 29

PART III.
Of Encamping. Chap. 1 OF making the quarters page 29 Chap. 2 Of distributing
the quarters page 30 Chap. 3 Of the necessity of securing the quarters ibid.
Chap. 4 Of the manner of securing the quarters ib. Chap. 5 Of the Rendez-vous,
or alarm-place page 32 Chap. 6 Of the guards ibid. Chap. 7 Of the Sentinels
page 33 Chap. 8 Of scouts to discover the highways page 34 Chap. 9 Of
forraging page 35 Chap. 10 Of Garrisons page 36 Chap. 11 Of Spies ibid. Chap.
12 Of dislodging page 37

PART IIII.
Of Embattelling. Chap. 1 HOw to assail a quarter page 38 Chap. 2 Of giving the
charge page 39 Chap. 3 Of embuscadoes page 40 Chap. 4 How to do, meeting the
enemy marching page 42 Chap. 5 How to receive the charge ibid. Chap. 6 Of
ordering the troops for combat by single companies page 43 Chap. 7 How the
Cavallry are to fight against foot page 46 Chap. 8 Of ordering the Cavallry in
battle ibid. Chap. 9 Of certain ceremonies before fight page 50

An Appendix.
Courteous Reader, this second Edition of my book of Cavallrie coming forth
without my knowledge, I was disappointed of my purpose of inserting some
alterations and additions in their due places: notwithstanding (to satisfy the
commanding requests of some Friends) I shall give a touch of some sudden
observations, which you may please to refer to their several Chapters.

Part. 1. Chap. 2. Experience having taught later times that the allowing of
Bidets (or Nagges) to the Horsemen, caused a great expense of forage, and a
needless consumption of victual, and great disorders by reason of their
boys; they are not now allowed any naggs, neither in the Army of the States
of the united Provinces, nor in diverse other places.

And touching the Captains liberty to choose their own Officers, that is also
altered: for the General now gives Commissions to the Lieutenant and Cornet as
well as to the Captain; yet (in way of favor) the General does oftentimes
admit of such Officers as are nominated and presented to him by the Captain.

Chap. 17. We being now fallen into times of Action, and the knowledge of the
pay allowed to every Officer and Soldier being so generally necessary, I have
thought fit to communicate an Establishment, being that which is at present
used: And though I intended only to speak of so much as concerns the Horse;
yet being of great concernment for the Foot and Train of Artillery, I shall
make bold to digress a little, and give you a brief and summarie list of all,
as follows.

Officers general of the Field.
lib. fol. den. Lord General 10. per diem. Sergeant Major General 2 President
of the Council of War 15 Quartermaster General 1 Provost Marshall General 6
8 20. horses allowed him (each 2s 6d) 2 10 Waggonmaster General 10 two horses
allowed him (each 2s 6d) 5

Officers General of the Train.
lib. fol. den. Treasurer 2 Mustermaster General 15 three deputies each 5
Advocate of the Army 1 Two Chaplains (each 8s) 16 One Physician for the L.
Generals person 6 8 One for the Army 6 8 One Apothecarie 10 One Surgeon 4
two mates each 2 6 Captain of the Guard 1 30. men, each 1 6 Commissarie
General for provision of victual for the foot 16 Four men with horses, each
2 6

The pay of a Regiment of Foot.
lib. fol. den. Colonel (as Colonel) 1 10 Lieut. Colonel (as Lieut.
Colonel) 15 Sergeant Major (as Major) 9 Quartermaster 5 Provost Marshall 5
Carriagemaster 3 Preacher 8 Surgeon 4 two Mates ( 2s 6d each) 5 Captain 15
Lieutenant 4 Ensign 3 Three Sergeants, each 1 6 One Drum Major 1 Two Drums,
each 1 Three Corporalls, each 1 Soldiers, each 8

The pay of Horse-officers of the Field.
lib. fol. den. General 5 Lieutenant General 2 Sergeant Major General 1 10
Quartermaster General 10 Two horses Carbines (each 2s 6d) 5 Commissarie of the
provision 16 Four horses and men (each 2s 6d) 10 Provost Marshall 5 Eight
horses, Carbines (each 2s 6d) 1 Mustermaster General 15 two Deputies, each 5
Preacher 8 Surgeon 4 two mates (each 2s 6d) 5

A Regiment of Cuirassiers.
lib. fol. den. Colonel (as Colonel) 1 10 Sergeant Major (as Major) 12
Captain 1 4 six horses (each 3s 6d) 1 1 Captain-Lieutenant (besides 4. horses)
14 Lieutenant 8 four horses (each 3s 6d) 14 Cornet (the Generals 7s,) the
rest 6 three horses (each 3s 6d) 10 6 Quartermaster 4 two horses (each 3s 6d) 7
Three Corporalls, each 3 two horses apiece (each 3s 6d) 1 1 Two trumpeters,
each 3 A Farrier 3 6 A Sadler 3 6 Carriagemaster 3 6 Preacher 8 Surgeon 4
Two mates, each 2 6 Preachers man 2 6 Provost 5 Soldiers Cuirassiers, each 3 6

Harquebusiers.
lib. fol. den. Captain 1 4 6 Horses, each 2 6 Lieutenant 8 4 horses, each 2 6
Cornet 6 3 horses, each 2 6 Quartermaster 4 2 horses, each 2 6 3 Corporalls,
each, 3 2 Trumpeters each 3 A Sadler 2 6 A Farrier 2 6 Soldiers Harquebusiers,
each 2 6

Dragons.
lib. fol. den. Colonel 1 10 Sergeant Major 9 Quartermaster 5 Preacher 4
Provost Marshall 5 Surgeon 4 2 Mates, each 2 6 Captain 15 5 horses, each 1
Lieutenant 4 3 horses, each 1 Cornet 3 2 horses, each 1 2 Sergeants, each 1 6 a
horse, each 1 3 Corporalls, each 1 3 horses (for each, one) each 1 2 Drums,
each 1 their horses, each 1 A Farrier 1 his horse 1 Soldiers Dragoneers, each
1 6

Advance money to the Officers.
To the Provost Marshall for irons 7 pounds Minister for provision and
necessaries 20 pounds Surgeons chest 15 pounds Minister and Surgeon for
their Wagon 40 pounds To the Captain 140 pounds Lieutenant 60 pounds Cornet 50
pounds Quartermaster 30 pounds Three Corporalls, each 10 pounds 2 Trumpeters, 1
Farrier, 1 Sadler, each, 8 pounds Every Wagon at 40 pounds, or 4 shillings 8
pence per diem for every Wagon. The Captains of Foot have 40 pounds (...) for
a Wagon, and 10 shillings a man to raise their Companies.
Officers, Artificers, and Attendants of the Train of Artillery, consisting of
36 Pieces.
General of the Ordnance 4 pounds Lieutenant General 1 po. 10 shil Assistant
6 shill. pen. 2 Clerks, each 2 6 A Surveyer or Controller 10 2 Clerks, each 2 6
Chief Engineer 10 A Clerk 2 6 6 Engineers for ordering trenches, fortifications
and approches, each 6 6 Clerks, each 2 15 Guides or Conductors, each 2 6 A
Paymaster 5 2 Clerks, each 2 2 Commissaries of Ordnance, Matrosses, and
Ammunition, each 5 2 Clerks, each 2 20 Gentlemen of the Ordnance, each 4 A
Commissary to distribute victual 6 2 Clerks attending him, each 2 A Purveyer
general for Munition and all necessaries for the Ordnance 2 Horsemen to assist
him, each 2 6 A Waggon-master for the Artillery 5 2 Assistants, each 2 6 20
Conductors attending him, each 2 A principal Conductor for the Artillery for
draught horses and ammunition 4 A Commissary for the train of Artillery for the
draught horses 4 Quartermaster for the train of Artillery 6 Master of the
Miners 4 25 other Miners, each 1 3 Captains to 600 Pioners, each 5 3
Lieutenants, each 3 3 Overseers of the Pioners work, each 2 2 Petardeers or
fireworkers, each 4 to each of them 4 attendants, each 2 6 One Master Gunner 6
8 3 Master Gunners mates, each 2 6 20 Gunners, each 2 30 Gunners, each 1 6 200
Laborers, each 1 A Provostmarshall of the Artillery 3 3 under Jaylours, each 1
A Battery-master 5 A Bridge-master, with 100 Matrosses to work about rivers 6
An Assistant to him 3 6 Every Matrosse 1 A Chaplain 4 An Ensign 5 A Drum 1 6
A Trumpet 3 A Surgeon 4 2 under barber Surgeons, each 1 6 Master
Carpenter 4 2 Mates, each 2 24 Carpenters, each 1 6 A Master Blacksmith 4 2
Mates, each 2shill. pen. 6 Servants under him, each 1 6 A Master Wheelwright 3
2 Mates, each 2 8 Servants under him, each 1 6 A Master Farrier 3 6 Servants
being workmen, each 1 6 600 Pioners, each 1 3 Tent-keepers, each 1 6 9 Servants
under them, each 1 An Armourer 3 4 Servants under him, each 2 A Basketmaker for
gabions, hurdles, baskets 2 6 4 Servants, each 1 6 A Collar-maker 2 6 4
Servants, each 1 6 A Ladle-maker 2 6 2 Servants, each 1 6 A Gunsmith 3 6 2
Servants, each 2 A Cooper 2 6 4 Servants, each 1 6 A Ropemaker 2 6 2 Servants,
each 1 6

Chap. 19. line 34. for 81. read 18. Chap. 28. line 30. for uneven, read even.

Chap. 29. The horseman (having spanned his pistol) is not to return his
spanner to the side of his Case (where some would have it) for there it is
neither sure nor readily returned: but is to wear it in a string hanging on his
left shoulder, by his right side. And for lading his Pistols (and so for the
Carbine) I would (by no means) have him to use his flask, but the (far
readier) way of Cartouches, which his Holsters must always be furnished with,
besides those which he is to have in store.

Chap. 32. The custom now is to make the horse but three in file for fight, so
consequently diverse of the motions showed in this Chapter will be useless.

PART III. Chap. 2 Concerning Encamping, the Reader may receive more
satisfaction in my book of Castrametation, published Anno 1642.

Chap. 6. and 7. And for the Watches also, in my Order of Military Watches,
then published.

PART IIII. Chap. 6. and 8. The manner of fighting used by the horse (in diverse
Armies) now a days, is not by wheeling off (as formerly) but by charging
through. Every man having his drawn sword in his bridle-hand, fires his Carbine
or Pistol: the Carbine at 12. or 15. foot distance, and the Pistol so near as
has been showed before in Part 1. Chap. 29. the Carbine levelled at the knees
of the enemies horse, because the powder naturally, and also the least motion
of the horse, use to raise the muzzle of the piece. Having fired, he presently
is to betake him to his sword (unless the enemy by wheeling off gives him
leisure and opportunity to use his second Pistol) and so to charge him on the
flank or rear, and to fight at his best advantage. To this end, the Officers
must be very careful to exercise their Troops frequently, especially in a
regimentall way (as the sole means, under God, to make them victorious)
observing to keep their Troops close serried; to leave fit distances between
each Troop, Regiment, and Brigade; to relieve each other orderly; to retreat
(upon occasion) in due order into their appointed intervalls, and to avoid
confusion.

To his much honored Friend, Captain John Cruso.
I Know the Authors works and name,
Great Mars his scholar, is his fame:
Whose valor, honor, industry
Has taught the use of Cavallry,
Accommodating these our times,
Surmounting the limits of all lines,
Examples set for imitation,
Then love to fight by Regulation:
But have not such been ill requited,
Whom profit never yet invited?
But blame not such as steer at the Helm
Whose care is to preserve this Realm,
Settle Religion, Law, and Right,
Suppressed by rebels force, and might.
If ignorance or malice have
The Authors worth laid in a grave,
Wisdoms grace in men of parts
Will raise it up with tongues and hearts.
Let none be troubled if not used,
When Conscience tells they never abused;
God grant's no use of Marshall men,
Till we know how to use; not when
Good service done the age being cold
Prepared are new, casheer'd are old.
Your devoted Friend, EDMUND HARVY, Colonel.

MILITARY INSTRVCTIONS for the CAVALLRIE. The first Part.
THE ARGUMENT.
CAVALLRIE, so called of Derived from the Latin word Caballus, and this from
the Greek word (...).
Cavallo, (which in the Italian and Spanish signifies a horse) is worthily
esteemed a most noble and necessary part of the military profession: which
being the subject of my discourse, it may be reduced to these four heads.

Primum idoneos eligamus, etc. dein and in itinere, and in castris, and in
praeliis ipsis instructum exercitum habeamus; Aelianus de instruendis aciebus,
cap. 3.
1 The levying of men, 2 Their marching, 3 Their encamping, 4 Their
embattelling.
In the levying of men, there be two things considerable; 1. The election of
officers. 2. The election of soldiers. Concerning the officers, they may be
considered, 1. In general, 2. In particular.

CHAP. I. Of officers in general.
AS in politic government, so in this military profession, every man by a
natural impression is ready to conceive himself to be fit to command and
govern others, though he never knew how to obey; whereas in every mechanical
trade or manufacture, an apprenticehood is first passed in the learning of it,
before it be professed and exercised. In this profession of arms ( Le plus
releve le plus hasardeux, and le plus difficille subject du monde. Le mestier
des Nobles, la prattique des courag^u^, and l'exercice des Princes and des
Roys; Monsieur Praissac.
an art obtained with greatest difficulty, and practiced with most danger) men
would be Captains before they be soldiers. And hereof the chief cause is
ignorance, the fruitful mother of all errors. For surely, if their end and
aim were honor, and they knew how frail and mutable the estate of a soldier
is; and that in a moment a man may lose all the reputation obtained by many
years industry; ( In aliis rebus si quid erratum ^st, potest postmodum
corrigi^ Praeliorum delicta emendationem non recipient, cum poena statim
sequatur errorem; Cato apud Vegetium, lib. 1. cap. 13.
the errors in war admitting no amendment, as in other professions; but
carrying their present punishment with them) and had they seen many shamefully
chased from the army, and proclaimed infamous; and others pass through the
hands of the hangman; they would (doubtless) strive with much industry and
diligence to enable themselves, before they came to undertake the exercise of
so dangerous an employment. And they are not a little mistaken, which think
their Non repellatur imperator pauper si cum virtute sit, quanquam clari^ ac
illustribus majoribus ortus non sit; Leo. Tact. cap. 2. 25.
birth a sufficient pretense to places of honor, without any qualification or
merit; there being other things more real and essential In legitimo duce
quinque haec requiro; Scientiam, virtutem, providentiam, autoritatem, fortunam;
Lips. polit. lib. 5. cap. 15.
required in an officer; namely, Knowledge, experience, valor, dexterity, etc.

To be under command for a time, depresseth those vehement passions which
nature exciteth, especially in young men, which would be very dangerous in a
chief or commander. Moreover, it accustometh a man to danger, and Scientia rei
bellicae dimicandi nutrit audaciam; Veg. lib. 1. c. 15.
makes him courageous; so as being suddenly assailed, he can recollect
himself without astonishment; a most necessary thing in a commander. Add to
this, that by using himself to travel and labor, watching, hunger, thirst,
rain, and frost; and by Mars is therefore called Gradiv^^ (as Festus has it)
quia gradatim, and per ordinem militatia officia distribuenda sunt. And that
this was the constant practice of antiquity, is most apparent. Rufus diu
manipularis, dein centurio, mox castris prafectus; Tacit. lib. 2. etc.
an orderly ascent (by degrees) from a Corporal to a Quartermaster, from
thence to a Cornet, and so to a Lieutenant, he prepares himself for a Captains
charge. He learneth the trick of entertaining his soldiers, and to keep them
in good affection and reverence toward him. He knows their several
dispositions and sufficiencies, and accordingly entrusteth them with
employments. Honor must be his chief end; to attain which, he must be very
vigilant not to lose Occasio in bello amplius solet juvire quam virtus; Veg.
lib. 3. cap. 26.
any occasion of any brave exploit: by which means he will be always observing
his enemy, studying how to prevent him or endammage him; always bearing in
mind this maxim, That in war no great or remarkable matter can be effected
without danger and diligence. To this end, let him be sure to take heed that he
Q^id fieri debeat, tractato cum multis: quid vero facturus sit, cum paucissimis
ac fidelissimis, vel potius ipse recum; Veg. lib 3. cap 26.
trust not too much to his own judgment and valor, without acquainting his
officers with his counsels. And let him so know the several inclinations and
sufficiencies of his soldiers, as to take particular notice of such as deserve
well, and to reward them accordingly; and to rid himself of base and debauched
fellows and cowards.

He must always aspire (in way of For this, Caesar records a memorable
example in Pulfio and Verenus, lib. 5. cap. 19.
virtuous emulation) to higher degrees of honor. Sit celso adversus pecuniam
animo; Plutarch. in Philop.
Covetousness he must hate; for nothing will better continue his soldiers
good affections toward him then liberality. Gaming he must detest.
Philopoemenes pubem ad se armandum impulit, deinde delicias and luxum eorum
optime invertit. Omnes inflammavit, ut quotidianis repressis in corpus
sumptibus, gest^ent in militari and bellico ornatu ostentare se splendidos.
Profusio impensa in hujusmodi res, rohorat animum, extollitque; Plutarch, in
Philop.
In stead of costly apparel, let him delight in good arms and horses; wherein
oftentimes both his life and honor consists. He must be continent and sober,
not given to luxury nor The States edict of Marshall law provideth, that such
as in their drunkenness shall commit any offense, shall not therefore be any
way excused, but the more severely punished; Art. 67.
drunkenness, but always be as a good example to his soldiers: for otherwise
he cannot have that requisite liberty to chastise them for those vices Which
his own conscience will accuse himself to be guilty of.

Above all, let him set before his eyes (as the original and foundation of all
perfection) the fear of God; carrying himself (so far as may be) internally
and externally inculpable. For the horror of a guilty conscience, and the
imminent danger and apprehension of death meeting together, take away all
courage and valor. And thus having reformed himself, he shall the more easily
reform his soldiers, and make them fit for every honorable enterprise.

CHAP. II. Of Officers in particular. Of the General of horse.
TOuching the particular officers, the Iphictates resembled an army to a man's
body; calling the heavy armed the body, the light armed the hands, the horse
the feet, and the General the head; Plutarch.
General of the horse, as being one of the principal Chiefs of an army, must
be a soldier of extraordinary experience and valor; having in charge the
nerve of the principal forces, and on whom the good success of many designs
and actions depends, as being most usually executed by the Cavallrie,
especially in battles: where the charging of the enemy in good order usually
gives victory; and contrariwise, the Witness the battle of Gemblo^rs,
described by Meteren. lib. 8. where the Infanterie is overthrown by their own
horse. So did the Burgundians; Les hommes d'armes Bourguignons rompirent leurs
propres Archers; Phil. de Comines. lib. 1. cap. 3.
disorders of the Cavallrie often disturb and disband the whole army. The
General of the horse was wont to supply the place of Lieutenant General of
the army, and in the Lord Generals absence to command the whole army. True it
is, that the Lord Marshall, forasmuch as he gives the orders, used to have
some superiority of command, according to the opinions of some; whence it
comes that the Lord General, absenting himself from the army, used to take
along with him either the General of horse, or the Lord Marshall, to avoid the
occasions of competition. It is his office to take particular notice not only
of the Captains and officers, but also of those private soldiers which are
careful and punctual in their service, Perserutaberis qui se in billo strenue
gesserint, illisque idoneos ^onores habebis, ignavos autem quo par est
supplicio const^mges; Leo. Tact. cap. 16.
rewarding and Monsieur de la Nolle reports that (in his time) in the
regiment of Colonel Pedro de Pas (consisting of 23 companies of Spaniards)
there was more then 1200 crowns a month given for extraordinary services and
signal acts. Whence he draws this observation, Qui est un bon tesmoignage
quil estoit rempli d'hommes valeureux, Discourse Polit. and Milit.
honoring them in public when they perform some signal act, and advancing
them to offices without partiality. On the other side, Omnes culpas l^gibus
vindicet, nulli errantium credatur ignoscere; Veg. lib. 3. cap 10.
he must chastise delinquents, and such as are wanting in their endeavors: by
which means he shall be reverenced and loved of good men, and feared of such as
are bad. It belongs to his care, that the Cavallrie be in good equipage, and
fitted with all necessaries requisite: And that the companies (being to march)
be provided of nags; without which the soldiers can hardly preserve their
horse of service, by reason that with them they must go to forage (for want of
bidets or nags) after their march, and presently enter into guard in the army
or quarter, without any rest to refresh their horses. He is not to suffer the
Captains either to make officers, or to absent themselves from their companies,
without his leave and approbation. He has his officers apart, and in that
which concerns the Cavallrie, neither the Lord Marshall, nor Lord General
himself uses to dispose of any thing without his advice. If he pass among the
quarters of Cavallrie, or Infanterie, his trumpets are to sound; but not where
the Lord General lodges, or where he is in person. When he commands in the
army (in absence of the Lord General) upon occasion of fight, his place is in
the battle, that he may be able to give order to all. He has usually a
company (heretofore of lances) to lodge with him, and to serve him as his
guard; having usually six soldiers or more of his company attending on him.
Of Caesar it is said, Dubium cautior an audentior. Suet. A good Commander should
rather look behind him then before him, said Sertorius. Plutarch, in Sertor.
He should not resolve upon any enterprise, unless he first consider seriously
of all that might happen; that so, propounding to himself greater difficulties
in the action, then in effect they be, he may prepare remedies surpassing all
the said difficulties: it being a benefit not to be expressed, to be able to
Temeritas, praeterquam quod stulta est, etiam infelix; Livius 22.
foresee (with good judgment) those things which might succeed in the
uncertain and variable accidents of war. Especially he must be Intentus sis,
ut neque tuae occasioni desis, neque suam hosti des. Ibid.
ready in execution: for suppose a determination never so well grounded, yet it
may prove vain and hurtful, if it be not executed with requisite promptitude.

CHAP. III. Of the Lieutenant General of horse.
THe charge of the Lieutenant General of the horse has ever been held of very
great importance; and therefore must be supplied by a person of great
experience and valor; one that must be very careful and diligent, because he
usually marches and lodges with the Cavallrie. For which cause he ought to be
well versed in the opportunity of the ways, upon occasion of meeting the
enemy in marching.

Erat Philopoemen praecipua i^ ducendo agmine locisque ^^piendis sole^tiae
atque usus. Nec belli t^ntum temporibus, sed etiam in p^ce ad id maxim animum
exercuerit. Vbi uer quopiam faceret, and ad difficil^m transitu saltum
veniss^t, contemplatus ab omni part loci naturam, cum solus iret, secum ipse
agitabat animo; cum comit^^ haberet, ab iuquaerebat, si hostis eo loco
apparuisset; quid si a front, quid si a latere hoc aut illo, quid si a ^^^go
adoriretur, capiendum consilii foret; T. Livius dec. 4. lib. 5.
He must always have his thoughts busied about the motions of the enemy,
discoursing with himself from what part they might show themselves, with what
number of men, whether with Infanterie or not, in how many hours they might
come upon him from their army or garrison, and whether they might present
themselves in a place of advantage; that so it might be prevented, as need
should require.

He must also advisedly choose commodious places for the quarters or lodgings,
providing good guards, causing the highwayes to be scoured or discovered,
placing men on those passages where the enemy might make head, not neglecting
to send out rounders, and omitting no diligence to secure the quarter in which
the Cavallrie finds it self exposed to greater dangers then can befall it any
other way, especially being lodged without Infanterie.

He must also procure to have spies, not only in the enemies army, but also
upon their frontiers, to penetrate their designs and intentions, omitting no
inventions which may stand him in stead to avoid inconveniences; knowing that
diligence is the mother of good fortune. Cui enim tantae poteila^is insignia
tribu^ntur, cujus fid^^ atque virtuti possessorum fortunae, tutela virium,
salus militum, reipublicae creditur gloria: non tantion pro universo exercitu,
sed etiam pro singulis contubernalibus debet esse solicitus. Veg. l. 3. cap. 10.
His particular care is to see that the Captains wrong not their soldiers,
that they keep their companies in good state and well armed, and that
themselves and their officers do their endeavors, and observe good order and
discipline.

Toward the soldiers he must be no less affable, and ready to hear them
willingly in their just complaints, and to help them in their necessities, then
rigorous in punishing.

He should also (himself being free from covetousness) give order to others to
use no Extortions (of diverse kinds) are punishable with death, by the edict of
Marshall law, published by the States of the united provinces; Artic. 41.
extortion, whereby the country is ruined, and the soldier made odious, to
the prejudice of the Prince his service; it being evident that too great a
liberty of the soldiers produces nothing but very bad effects.

Upon diverse occasions of sending a good part of the Cavallrie to diverse
places, the charge is given to the Lieutenant General; not only of the horse,
but also of the foot which accompany them, according to the occurrences: for
which cause he must also know how to command the Infanterie.

In absence of the General the whole weight rests upon him; and to him are
the orders sent from the Lord General or Lord Marshall, and to him (as Chief)
reports are made of all the occurrences of the Cavallrie.

He may sequester a Captain from his company, upon just cause and demerit; but
cannot restore him without order from the General, who first gives notice
thereof to the Lord General.

He was wont to have a company of lances, which usually were lodged near his
person; whereof four soldiers always attend him. When he passes by the
quarters of Cavallrie the trumpets sound, but not in the Generals quarter, or
where he is. When the General of horse commands the whole army, and
therefore takes his place (in fight) in the battle, the Lieutenant General
places himself in the vanguard of the Cavallry, where otherwise the General
uses to be.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Commissarie General.
THe Commissarie General commands in the absence of the Lieutenant General,
and therefore must be a man of great experience. This charge was first
instituted by Don Ferrand de Gonzagua, afterward continued by the Duke of Alva,
and confirmed by the Duke of Parma, and so remained. He must be vigilant, and
careful to appease dissentions which grow among the soldiers, as he which
deals most with them. He is to send and distribute the orders, and keep The
Romans were very exact in keeping records and lists of their forces, watches,
duties, pays, etc. Quotidianas (etjam in pace) vtgilia^; item excubitum sive
angarias de omnibus centuriis and contube^niis, quae vicissim mil^tes faciunt;
ut ne quis contra justinam praegravetur, aut alicui prastetur immunitas: nomina
eorum qui vices suas facerunt, brevibus inferuntur. Veg. lib. 2 cap. 19.
record of the lists of the guards, convoyes, and other services. He is to go
every evening to receive the orders and the word; and having given it to the
General and Lieutenant General, he is to give it to the Quartermaster
General, that he may distribute it. Sometime he has a company of
harquebusiers given him, in acknowledgement of his merit, not as annexed to his
place. In all actions he is of singular use, entrusted especially with the
execution of the orders. In appointing the lodgings, or places in several
exploits, he must be free from partiality; and such as at this time have cause
of discontent, he must make amends the next; that so they may see it was of
necessity, not of partiality. His place is of very great use and importance,
as will appear throughout this discourse.

CHAP. V. Of the Quartermaster General.
THe Quartermaster General must be a man of great dexterity and diligence,
and well experienced in Cavallrie. This officer among the Romans was called
Prafectus castrorum. Ad quem castrorum positio, valli and fossae destinatio
pertinebat. Tabernacula vel casa militum, cum impedimentis omnibus nutu ipsius
curabantur; Veget. lib. 2. cap. 11.
It is his office to appoint the lodgings or quarterings; wherefore he must
well know the country, the villages and places, where to place the
corps-du-gards, and sentinells, and what ways must be scoured. He is to keep a
list of the guards, convoyes, cavalcadoes (or exploits by horse) etc. He must
visit the guards and sentinells by day and night, and must show the
allarm-place to the particular Quartermasters, when they go to him in the
evening to receive the word. He must (by Itineraria non tantum adnotata, sed
etiam picta habeat: ut non solum consilio menris, verum aspectu oculorum viam
profecturis, locumque castris idoneum, eligat; Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 6.
maps or otherwise) be well informed of the country, knowing the quality and
bigness of every village, and their distance one from another, obtaining from
the Marshall of the field some one of the country to inform him. He must be
true in his reports, and if any order (for haste) be given him by word of
mouth, himself must go and deliver it, and not trust it to others. On the
Spanish side, in the Low Country wars: the Quartermaster General has two
assistants allowed him, to help to discharge the travells of his office; but on
the States side that service is performed by the particular Quartermasters.

CHAP. VI. Of the Captain.
SInce that the So Melzo and Baila testify, and complain of it in their
writings.
Captains places have been disposed of by the Prince (as the Captains in
Flanders are appointed at the Court of Spain) there are grown these two
inconveniences upon it. First, young and unexperienced gentlemen are made
Captains. Secondly, many good soldiers are lost, which seeing their hopes of
advancement by degrees and merit cut off, abandon the service. Whereas the
charge of a Captain of horse is of so great importance and quality in the
army, as it should not be given to any, but to men of singular valor and
experience: for often it falls out, that of themselves, without orders or
counsel of any other (as occasion requires) they must execute services of
great weight and consequence. Dux itaque vigilans, sobrius, prudens, etc. Veg.
lib. 3. cap. 9. Sit agilis, magis ad faciendum quam ad loquendum paratus: qui
suos ad disciplinam retineat, and ad armorum exercitia cogat, ut been verti^^
sint, ut arma omni^m defricentur a^ splendeant; Cum admiratione equum pos^nt
asscendere, equitare fortiss^^e, conto scunter uti, ad omnia cruditi qua
equestr^ pu^^a deposcit; Veg. lib. 2. cap. 14
He must be vigilant, sober, continent, modest in his apparel, curious to have
good horses and arms, thereby to give example to his soldiers, and to see them
punctual in their service, and exactly observant of discipline; for their
excursions and extortions cannot be remedied, unless the Captain keep them in
order: wherein if he be negligent, he loses his reputation with his
superiors. If he be covetous or given to gaming, he is ready to be drawn to
lay hands (oftentimes) on the pay due to the soldiers; whereby he also
overthrows his reputation and credit. A covetous desire of riches should not
enter into a generous heart. He must diligently and punctually observe the
orders which shall be given or sent him from his superiors, and be in the
place at the appointed hour with his company, and others under his charge. On
all occasions he must be first on horseback, and keep his company full and
complete. He must always strive by desert to advance himself to higher places,
always studying how to endammage his enemy; to this end he ought often to
Praecipua res and titilitas ducis, est ut, adhibitis (...) universo exercitu
scuntibus viris, de suis and hollium coptis sapius tractet, etc. Veg. lib. 3.
cap. 9.
consult with his best experienced soldiers. He must endeavor to know every
one of his soldiers by their Sciat etiam (si potest fieri) nominatim, q^is
comes, quis tribunus, quis domesticua^ quis contuberna^is, etc. Ibid. cap. 10.
names, that so he may distinctly name them upon occasion of employment; it
being an encouragement to them to be known by name of their Captain. Whatsoever
should befall, he must Nam necesse est, ad fugam parati sint, qui ducem suum
sentiant desperare; Veg. lib. 3. cap. 22.
take heed of discovering any fear, on whose courage and countenance the
soldiers depend, and must always show a good resolution in the orders which
he shall give, without confounding himself; knowing that there is no place for
counsel in him, who has his discourse of reason seized by fear. He must
Seren^os viros muneribus honorabis, etc. Ita enim fiet, ut majori fortiorique
animo sint qui dimicabunt. Ubi enim honores and pramia habentur bonis,
supplicia and poena afferuntur malis, ibi bonam spem habebit exercinus; Leo,
Tact. cap. 16.
cherish his well deserving soldiers, and cashiere the contrary; and it must
be his care to have one or more of his soldiers well Tuum and hostium
exercitum, locorum situm, naturam regionis nosce; Live. 22.
skilled in the ways of the country, to serve him as guides: (because the
boots are neither always at hand, nor always to be trusted) and to such he is
to give some allowance extraordinary. Out of his company he is to choose his
Lieutenants, Cornets, etc. weighing only every ones merit, without any
passion; whereby he shall give content and encouragement to his soldiers, and
shall be sure not to be crossed by the General in the confirmation of the said
officers.

The charge of the troops used to be given to the Captains of lances, as having
a prerogative above other Captains of horse, or to the eldest Captain: yet the
Chief ought to have regard to their sufficiency for command, and to give the
charge to them that are ablest to perform it.

In absence of the Captains of lances (when they were in use) the Captains of
cuirassiers commanded; and in their absence, the Captains of harquebusiers. The
Lieutenants observed the same rules.

CHAP. VII. Of the Lieutenant.
IT is necessary, that the Lieutenant of a troop of horse be a man of ability
and experience, nourished and educated in Cavallrie. To this office such were
usually raised, which (for their deserts) had been Corporalls and Cornets.

So much his name implies: for the French word Lieutenant signifies one which
supplieth the place of another.
In the Captains absence he commands the company, upon whom usually all
difficulties do rest; because (often times) the companies are given to young
gentlemen which want experience. He must be strict in seeing the soldiers do
their service with all fitting punctualitie, and to have a care of their horses
and arms. The Lieutenant (with antiquity) was called Tergidux, that is,
Rear-commander; and therefore the rear is fitly assigned him as his proper
place.
He always marches in the rear of the company, causing the soldiers to
follow the Captain and Standard (or Cornet) in good order, well closed
together, and to suffer none to depart from the troop. Upon occasion of fight
he is still to be on the rear with his sword drawn, encouraging the soldiers,
and killing any that shall offer to fly or disband: but in case of the
Captains absence, he shall take the Captains place, appointing an officer to be
in the rear. In the ordinary marching of the company, or passing by some place,
or going to the allarm-place, or to the parado, the Lieutenant must not take
the Captains place, but march in the rear, because the lances and cuirassiers
have their Cornets to lead them at the head of the company. Among the
harquebusiers the Lieutenant was wont to take the Captains place, (according to
Melzo and Basta) because then they had no As the Velites among the Romans, qui
nec signa propria habuere, nec duce^; Lips. ad Polyb. lib. 2.
Cornets; but these last wars having given them Cornets, the rule holds for
them as for the lances and cuitassiers.

The Romans required it in their private soldiers, and to cast account also.
In quibusdam notorum peritia, calculandi computandique usus exigitur; Veg. lib.
2. cap. 19.
He must of necessity be able to write and read, because he keeps the list
of the names and sirnames of the soldiers of the company; and by reason of
orders or letters sent to him from his superiors, which he must not show to
others. He must know the sufficiency of every soldier, and upon occasion make
use of them accordingly.

The company going to the guard in any place, and approaching near it, the
Lieutenant goes before to take notice of the Corps-du-guard, and speaking with
the Lieutenant of the company which is to change, informs himself by him of
the place, of the sentinells for day and night, what ways he must scour, and
of all other things requisite. He must himself go and place the sentinells,
visiting them often, and using all diligence, keeping himself always armed,
(at least with the breast and cask) and his horse bridled, when he has the
guard.

The company being lodged in some village, he must cause the billets to be
signed by the Quartermaster of his company, to be distributed to the soldiers
before the Cornets lodging, where the Alto is made to attend the said billets;
that so (in case of an allarm) the soldiers may know where to assemble
together at their Cornet.

If they stay longer then a day in one place, the Lieutenant is to visit the
houses, to see good rule kept by the soldiers; and being to march away, to
command them carefully to put out their fires. Going to be lodged in a town or
fort, there to keep their garrison, the Lieutenant must accommodate their
lodgings according to their degrees and deserts. And wheresoever they lodge
longer then a day, he must write the names of the soldiers on the said
billets, and keep a register of them; that so upon any complaint of their
hosts, it may be easily remedied, by the ready finding and punishing of the
delinquents.

When the company is to march, and the trumpets sound to horse, he The good
example of a Leader has ever been observed to be of mavelous efficacy,
according to that of the Poet, -- Componitur orbis Regis ad exiemplum, etc.
Ipse manu sua pila gerens, praecedit anheli Militis ora pedes: monstrat
tolerare labores, Non jubet; -- Lucan. 9. de Catone.
must be first ready and mounted, having care that all the soldiers
immediately do the same. And if he find any lingering, either of laziness, or
with a purpose to stay behind to pillage the houses, he must chastise them with
all severity, for example to others. He must have knowledge of the country and
ways, being often sent upon exploits where the guides are not always ready.
If the company be charged by the enemy, the Lieutenant, with some of the best
mounted soldiers, is to remain behind.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Cornet.
THe Cornet of horse must be courageous. In absence of the Captain and
Lieutenant he commands the company. His place of march is in the front,
before the first rank, yet behind the Captain. In fight, the Cornet of lances
used to march even with the Captain, upon his left hand; and charging with him,
strove to break the standard upon his enemy; which being so broken and falling
to the ground, This is contrary to the use of Infantery, among which the
preserving of the colors has ever been prized above life: as appeared (among
others) by one Jaques Marteus who finding himself forsaken by most of the
soldiers, fought so long as he could; then wound himself in his colors and
died; Meteren. lib. 4. But if the enemy should get the cornet unbroken, then it
were a great disgrace; Basta lib. 4,
he was not to regard to get it up again (especially not to alight for it.) If
he were to charge a flying enemy (whether horse or foot) he was also to assay
to break his standard.

The Cornet of cuirassiers in march has his place at the head of the company,
and also presents himself in the allarm-place; but in fight he is to be in
the middle of the troop, leaving parts of the soldiers behind him: Optimus
cujusque decuria praponi, and du^tor caterorum omnium esse debet; Aelian. cap.
5. Curandum, ut etiam jugum secundum milita conilet idoneo; Ibid, cap. 13. The
reason is, because the first rank being the edge, it must be made good by the
second and the rest, if occasion be.
those before him must be of the best armed, and most courageous. He must also
keep a list of the company, to send so many to the guard as the Captain or
Lieutenant shall appoint. Once a day, at the Lord Generals first passing by
the troop, he is to do obeisance, by inclining the cornet toward the ground.

CHAP. IX. Of the particular Quartermasters.
THe The particular Quartermasters, the Romans called Metatores, Veg. lib. 2.
cap. 7. Also Mensores, qui in castris ad podismum dimetiuntur loca, in quibus
milires tentoria figant, vel hospitia in civitatibus praestam; Ibid. Metatores
sive mensuratores praemittes, qui castrorum ambitum, in quo castra ponentur,
dimetiantur; and certam quandam mensuram cum proportione justa unicuique turma
tribuant; Leo Tact. cap. 9. 7.
particular Quartermasters should be men so qualified, as reasonably they might
pretend the Cornet, and (in absence of the Cornet) might command the company.
When all the companies are lodged together, they accompany the Quartermaster
General in making the quarters: but being to be lodged in several places (as
often it happens) some accompany the Lieutenant General, others the
Commissary General. Where a Captain commands the quarter, the particular
Quartermaster of that respective company makes the quarter. There is much
fidelity required in them, in consideration of distributing the word, and the
billets. They use also to distribute the soldiers pay, in the King of Spains
wars; but on the States side the clerks of the company only meddle with the
soldiers pay, and account to their Captain; having a cuirassiers pay, and
being exempted from bearing arms, or doing the duties of a soldier.

In going with the Quartermaster General to make the lodgings, the
Quartermaster must be very diligent, taking with him one or two soldiers (such
as the Lieutenant shall appoint him) which shall return to their company, and
conduct them to their quarter.

CHAP. X. Of the Corporalls.
COrporalls are very useful in a troop of horse. They must assist the
Lieutenant in placing the sentinells, when the soldiers of their particular
squadron are to perform that service.

The harquebusiers are usually sent to discover or scour the highways, and
to be forerunners or scouts, under the charge of one of their Corporalls;
Mistakes in such as are sent out to discover, do often bring much trouble upon
the army, and shame upon themselves. A memorable example hereof is recorded by
Phil. de Comines, of the Burgundians, who taking a field of great thistles to
be a gross of their enemies lanciers, reported it so to their Chiefs, and
caused a great hurly-burly in the whole army; Lib. 1. cap. 11.
for which respects he must be a man of experience. Some passage or place of
importance being to be guarded, a Corporal is sent thither with his squadron.
He must be able to write and read, keeping a list of his squadron. The Captain
allows him half a place of forage, and a share of 10. per cent.

CHAP. XI. Of the Trumpeters.
IT is not enough that a Trumpeter know how (exactly) to sound all the several
sounds of the trumpet, but he must also be discreet and judicious; not only to
be fit to deliver embassies and messages as they ought, but (at his return) to
Ne manco si lasci troppo usare la frequentia di venire trombetti and tamburri:
perch in ques essercito tall'hora son huomini molto astuti and pratichi; da
poterti nocere assai; G. Cataneo. di fortif. and' cap. 4.
report what he has observed concerning the enemies works and guards, and what
he has further gathered and spied. To do this, he must be witty and subtle,
knowing how to invent and affirm things which are not, artificially concealing
whatsoever passes among those of his own side. He must sound the That is, set
on the saddle; being the first sound when the horse are to march; the next is a
chevall, that is, mount on horseback: the third and last is a standart, that
is, repair to your Cornet. See chap. 32.
boutezselle precisely at the hour appointed him; and when the Cornet gives
him the list of the guards, he must signify it unto them. One Trumpeter must
always lodge with the Cornet, to whom the Captain is to give means for his
entertainment. He must always have his trumpet about him, to have it ready at
a sudden allarm.

CHAP. XII. Of the Auditor.
ON the Spanish side in the Low Countries, the Cavallrie have an Auditor by
themselves; who must be a man of great integrity, well seen in the laws, and
of great practice. In the absence or the Auditor General, he supplieth his
place. He hears and judges the causes of the Cavallrie, and makes report of
all that passes to the General, or the Lieutenant General in his absence;
without whose order he cannot execute any of his sentences. The Cavallrie lying
in garrison, he condemns not to death, without reporting first to the Lord
General and Auditor General. He is to keep near the person of the General or
Lieutenant General, who are to see him duly respected. He is to take notice
of the prices of victual which are brought to the quarter of horse, that they
be sold at a reasonable rate; and to see that the victuallers suffer no
extortion by the Provost Marshall or his officers.

But in the States army, the horse and foot have but one Auditor or Fiscall
General; who passes no sentence himself, but that is done by the The Council
of War among the Romans, consisted of their Legates, Questor, Tribunes, and
the Centurions: Convocato concilio, etc. omniumque ordinum adhibitis
centurionibus; Caesar Com. lib. 1. cap. 16.
Council of War, wherein every Captain has a voice.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Provost Marshall.
OF all things in the charge of the Provost Marshall, his principal care must
be about the victuals. He must be an honest man, and content with his fees. He
is to look to the weights and measures and to guard the victuallers (or
sutlers) from insolences. Himself or some of his men must always be in the
marketplace, or where the victuals are sold; and he is to inform himself
where and at what price the sutlers buy their victual, that the Commissarie
and Auditor may tax them accordingly. He must cause the orders to be strictly
observed which shall be published in the horse-quarters: and those quarters
must he purge of rogues and thieves. He must always carry his staff or
truncheon in his hand, (the badge of his office) and having the same, See the
States edict, Art. 78.
it is death for any soldier any way to lay hands on him. If he be to take a
prisoner, he must not enter the quarter without leave of the Chief, but the
Chief is to cause the delinquent to be delivered to him. But if the offense be
heinous, so as the delinquent is like to run away for it, he may (of his own
authority) enter any quarter; but not carry the prisoner away without license
of the Chief of that quarter. In marching, he is to clear the by-ways of
straggling soldiers, to prevent them of pillaging.

Some make it part of his charge to provide guides, and to have regard to the
baggage, both for the placing of it in the quarter, as also for the safety of
it; to that end sending one of his men before, with the Quartermaster General,
by whom the baggage may be conducted to the place assigned. But this more
properly belongs to the office and charge of the Waggon-master.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Soldiers in general. Of the corruption of the Cavallrie.
Soldiers take their name from the Dutchword Soldye, which signifies pay or
stipend; profit being one of the ends why men undertake the military
profession, and honor not the only Monsieur de la Noue his soldiers, in
service of the States, so regarded their reputation, as (after some want of
pay) news being brought that it was come, and they being to receive it, they
made answer, It was not then a time to take money, but to attend the exploits
which they had in hand Meter. lib. 9.
(though the chiefest) of their aims. And therefore they which were of opinion,
that the way to reform the Militia of Flanders, was to redouble the labors of
the soldiers and shorten their pay, were much mistaken. And it will rather be
found, that the scanting of the soldiers profits, and increasing their toil,
procured the corruption of their Cavallrie. The honest profit of a soldier may
be twofold. 1. Ordinary, which is set pay. 2. Extraordinary, which are rewards
for special meriting services; and these are joined with honor.

Among the Romans, Anno urbis condita 349. decrevit Senatus ut stipendium
miles de publico acciperet, cum ante id tempus de suo quisque functus eo mun^e
esset. Live. lib. 4.
the Legionary soldiers had allowance of pay, corn, and apparel, by a decree
of the Senate 349. years after the building of the city; having till that time
served without pay, but not without many profits, and having all necessaries
provided them of the public. A horse-mans pay was then a dram or denarius a
day (of our money about 7. pence halfpeny.) In Cesars time it was doubled, (as
Julio, cap. 26.
Suetonius testifies) and Augustus augmented it to three denarii a day. They
had their Imperatoris miles, qui vest and annona publica pascitur. Veget. lib.
2. cap. 19.
apparel allowed them of the public, and corn; namely, wheat for themselves
and attendants, and barley and oats for their horses, Polyb. lib. 6.
being two medimni of wheat, and seven of barley and oats a month (the
medimnus being about a bushel and an half of our measure.) They had also their
shares of booties, which were very large and ample. Besides, for extraordinary
rewards, they had oftentimes Live. lib. 31.
assignments of land, of inheritance, and houses also; sufficient to maintain
them without using any trades. Moreover they had rewards in money. At the
triumph of Appianus Mithrid.
Pompey out of Asia, every private soldier had 1500. drachmas, (of our money
46. pounds 3. shillings 9. pence) and the officers in proportion. And shortly
after, at the triumph of Ibid. de bello civ. lib. 2.
Caesar, every soldier had 5000. drachmas, (which is 156. pounds 5. shillings)
etc. Furthermore, Lipsius de Milit. Romans lib. 5. ex Polyb.
they had many kinds of honorable rewards for signal acts, and those bestowed
in great pomp at public assemblies of all the Commanders, by the Imperatour
(or General) himself, and a record kept of those services. These rewards were
of many kinds; as several sorts of arms, horses, rich trappings, jewels,
golden bracelets, etc. Besides, their several sorts of crowns, as their For
the several kinds of these Crowns (both for matter and form) see them
represented in figure by Stewechius upon Vegetius. For what merits they were
bestowed Lipsius sets down, lib 5. de milit. Romans
Corona civica, obsidionalis, muralis, castrensis, vallaris, navalis, etc.
which crowns were put upon their heads in great state and solemnity by the
General. These they wore upon all public occasions; as at plays, in
triumphs, in judgment, etc. Vrbanum vero magistratum non ante capere
cuiquamfas, quam december stipendiae militiae adimplerit; Polyb.
for their military profession made them the more capable (afterward) of
offices in the administration of the Commonwealth.

If but such profits and encouragements were given to soldiers in these days,
it were easy to keep them in good order and discipline. But what is A
horsemans pay in the king of Spain army.
seven Phillips dallers (35. shillings English) a month for a horseman, to
maintain himself, his boy, and two horses, and that but ill paid? whence shall
he have means to provide himself apparel? and if his horse fail, how shall he
be able to buy another? And whereas a horseman at the time when this pay was
first ordered, could put himself in The Romans (out of the public treasury)
allowed to every horseman dena millis aris (about 25 pounds sterling) to buy
his horse: and bina millia (five pounds) to keep him, Livius lib. 1.
sufficient equipage for 20. or 25. Phillips dallers (which is five pounds, or
six pounds five shillings) now the price of all things is so raised, as he
shall hardly accomplish it with 60, which is 15 pounds starling. As for
extraordinary rewards they are very rare, offices usually being bestowed for
favor, if not for money. So that good spirits and honest men (seeing their way
of Thus MelZo and Basta complained, being both Lieutenant Generals in the king
of Spains wars, in the Low countries.
advancement cut off, and considering that without pillaging and robbing they
cannot live) give over the service. They which remain, infringing all
discipline (many of them) Quibus ob egestatem and flagitia, maxima peccandi
necessitudo est, Tacit. 3. Annal.
fall to extortion and stealing: and if an officer shall punish them for it, he
gives occasion of mutinies.

CHAP. XV. How to reform the Cavallrie.
AS every Commonwealth is supported by reward and punishment, so to reform the
Cavallrie (where there is need of reformation) there must be good laws, and
good pay: for, Disciplinam non potest servare jej^^nus exercitas. Cassiod.
to suffer a soldier to fall into want by not giving him competent
maintenance, makes him forget obedience and discipline. It were therefore
better to diminish their La discipline manquante, plus y a d' hommes, plus y a
de desordre et confusion. De la N^ue disc. milit. and polit. 13.
number then their profits: That done, they may easily be brought to a strict
observation of discipline and obedience. The laws and articles which ought to
be propounded unto them, should comprise all that is to be observed in military
discipline: for brevitie sake (presupposing all good orders about the service
of God, the severe chastising of blasphemers, the strict forbidding of gaming
(as the occasion of waste of money, and begetting quarrels) and such like
moral institutions) it shall here suffice to touch upon some few of the most
necessary for the Cavallrie,

1 The States edict entitled Crychs-recht etc. in the 17. article. All
Capitejinen, etc. punishes every Captain with death that shall receive any
soldier of another company without lawful consent of his former Captain.
That no Captain receive any soldiers of another company, or make any
officers, without approbation of the General; to the end he may take notice of
the quality of the person. And that such soldiers as are disabled to undergo
the labor of the war, through age, be removed to some castle, etc. and be
provided of some competencie, out of dead pays, or otherwise.

2 That, to avoid the The baggage, the Romans called impedimenta; because of
the hinderance which it brings to the army marching.
trouble of much baggage, which much slackeneth the motion of the Cavallrie, no
man carry a Among the military institutions of the Emperor Frederick the
first ( anno 1152) recorded by Guntherus, this is one; Non erit in nostris
nobiscum foemina castris, etc.
woman into the field. That no soldier have above one horse of service for his
baggage, unless some person of quality, with whom the Commissarie General
may dispense. And that no officer of a company have a wagon, but only the
Captain, and he to have only one.

3 That rewards and honorable recompenses be established for soldiers of
special desert, and punishments for sluggards: in particular, about attending
the Cornet and obedience to the sound of the trumpet. And that such as forsake
the standard (or cornet) whilst it is advanced, be punished with death. That
in fight, when the trumpet sounds a retreat, Cyri miles hosti imminens
repressit ensem, simul receptui canere audurat. Plutarch. Lac. Inutilis miles
qui signum receptui datum negligu. Seneca de ira. cap. 9.
whosoever presently retireth not, be punished with severitie. And that the
Captain (as often as the Cornet enters the Corps-du-guard) himself enter with
it, all excuses set aside.

4 So says the said edict, totidem verbis artic. 38. And that on pain of death.
That the soldiers be kept from straggling here and there, and have the
companies ready upon all occasions: the officers are bound not to absent
themselves from their companies without leave of their superiors. To this
agrees the edict; whether it he under pretense of forraging, or any other
color whatsoever. Artic. 22.
And if any soldier depart without license, he is to be punished with death.

5 That good order be observed about distribution of booty; whereof shall be
treated in the chapter following.

6 All Mutiners or accessaries thereunto, all causers of unlawful assemblies,
or such as are present at any such, or that shall utter words tending to
mutiny, etc. the said edict commands to be punished with death. Art. 6, 7,
10, 11. etc.
That mutinies be prevented: and whosoever is found to have a hand in any, is
to be proclaimed infamous, and perpetually banished.

7 To the end that these (and what other orders may be thought fitting) be duly
observed, the authority of the Captain and other officers must be established
and confirmed, Die marcherende, etc syn vaendel often Cornette sal verlaeten, sal
(sonder all genade) metter doot gestrast worden. Ibid. artic. 24.
as also that of the Provost Marshall, according to those rules
beforementioned in the office of the Provost Marshall.

CHAP. XVI. Of distributing booty.
ALl The Romans had excellent laws for distributing of booty. It was all
brought to the Questor, and by him sold. The Tribunes divided it equally among
the soldiers.

At the taking of any town by assault, none left their stations but such as
were appointed to pillage, because they were sure of their just share.

Spe enim lucri inter omnes certa, sive maneant, sive praedas agant, nemo locum
ordinemque deserit. Polyb. lib. 10. The States, in their edict for Martial
law, have established many excellent laws about the taking, registring, selling
and distributing of booty as may be seen Crychs-recht Artic. 41. 59, 60, 61,
62, 63, 64. Also about taking and ransoming of prisoners. ibid.


booty (whether it be given by occasion of defeating the enemy, or going out
upon parties, etc.) is free to them that take it, whether they be prisoners, or
any thing else, the Lord General being in the field. But otherwise, it is to
be shared among them that were employed in the action.

One part is for the Infanterie, and two for the Cavallrie: and it is death to
him that shall let go any prisoner, or horse, or other booty, or shall use any
fraud whatsoever: and they that shall not discover it (knowing of any such
deceit) shall loose their shares. The Captains, being present at the taking of
booty, use to have five shares, and two for two pages. The Lieutenants three,
and the Cornets two, and either of them one for a page. But of later times the
Captains take ten parts, the Lieutenants six, the Cornets four, according to
the places which they have in forage.

The booty being reparted, every company gives 10. per centum to their
Captain of what is gotten, though he were not present: to the chief of the
troop (though but a private soldier) two parts, and so to the guides.

All the booty being brought together, they choose two of the discreetest
soldiers to cause the booty to be sold: these keep account of the money taken
for it, certifying the Chief thereof, who orders to every man his due
proportion. The Trumpets must have leave of the chief Commander of the place to
sell the said booty, and the buyer is to give one of every twenty to the
trumpeter, for his pains in the sale: which money is to be divided among the
trumpeters which were employed in the taking of that booty; they having no
other share.

If one or more horses were hurt or killed in the combat; or any soldiers
chanced to be hurt in the said action, those horses must be made good, and the
soldiers are to be recompensed, before the booty be divided, at the
discretion of the Chief.

If any soldiers horse fall lame, after the troop be marched a good distance
from the quarter, so as he be forced to return back, yet shall that soldier
have his share of the booty, as if he had been present at the taking thereof.

Moreover, concerning the taking of prisoners, because other authors are scant
in this particular, it will not be amiss (for the better satisfaction of such
as are not acquainted with that language) to add something out of the States
edict, as follows.

Every soldier (of what condition soever he be) shall forthwith, and before
evening, Artic. 59.
bring all such of the enemy as are taken prisoners before him, which
commands in the quarter; upon pain of loosing his prisoner, and being
punished with death.

And if any should take some eminent officer, or commander of the enemy
prisoner, 60.
or other person of quality; they shall be bound to present the same (or cause
him to be presented and delivered) immediately to the Lords the States
General, or the Council of State, receiving for them (as also for other
prisoners which the said States shall take to themselves) some reasonable
recompense, according to the quality or ability of the said prisoners; yet
not exceeding the sum of 500. pounds, whereby the said prisoner shall remain
at the disposing of the said States: and they which took him, ought to have no
further pretense to him.

It shall not be lawful for any man to cause a prisoner to be killed, or set
at ransom: 61.
nor (after ransom be paid) to suffer him to depart, without leave of the
General, or of him that commands in the quarter, on pain of being disarmed,
and banished out of the provinces.

And if any prisoner be found to walk about the leaguer or place of garrison,
62.
without leave of the General or Commander in that quarter or garrison; the
party which had taken him shall forfeit his said prisoner, to the profit of
him who first shall apprehend the said prisoner.

All lawful booties are to be certified by the takers thereof, to the
Commander of the quarter within three hours after their arrival; and are to
be registered, and sold in the open market, etc. upon pains of forfeiture, and
of corporal punishment, etc.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Soldiers pay.
THe means to have these and other good orders duly observed, is, (as is
abovesaid) by giving to the soldiers their pay in competent measure and due
time. On the Spanish side they were wont to allow no Cornet to the
Harquebusiers (as is elsewhere showed) and therefore no pay is here set down
for him; but that course is since altered, and his pay is only one twelfth
part inferior to the pay of a Cornet of Cuirassiers.
The proportion which was observed on the King of Spains side, since the end of
the late truce with the States of the united Provinces, is as follows.

The General of horse his pay or entertainment, is 500. crowns a month,
besides 86 for his company.

The Leutenant General 200. and 86 for his company.

The Commissarie General 80. and the pay of a Captain of Harquebusiers, when
he has a company.

The Captains of lances and Cuirassiers 80. and 6 for their page.

The Lieutenant of lances and Cuirassiers 25. and 6 for a page.

The Cornets 15. and 6 for a page.

The soldiers of lances and Cuirassiers have 6 crowns a month.

The Captains of Harquebusiers have 70. crowns a month, and 6. for a page.

The Lieutenant 25. and 6. for a page.

The soldiers have six crowns a month.

Besides these stipends, there is given to every company 10. per centum,
(without the advantages and entertainments) which the Captain distributeth
among the best deserving soldiers.

The Captains or other officers which are reformed (that is, dismissed from
their service, for their age or otherwise) have their wonted pay continued.

The Quartermaster General has 25. crowns a month, and each of his
assistants 15.

The chief Chaplain has 30.

The Auditor 30, and 18. for his three officers.

The Provost Marshall has 25, and for every of his men (which must not exceed
12.) he has 5 crowns.

The chief Surgeon has 25.

In winter when the Cavallrie is in garrison, the soldiers are paid by the
day, for the better keeping of their horses.

To the General 40. places are allowed as General, and 10 as Captain.

To the Lieutenant General 20, and 10 as Captain.

To the Commissarie General 10, and 10 as Captain.

To every Captain 10.

To the Lieutenant 6.

To the Cornet 4.

To the reformed officers 1.

To the Auditor 6.

To the Quartermaster General 4.

To each of his assistants 2.

To the Provost Marshall 2, and 1 to each of his men.

To the chief Chaplain 5.

Every place is worth 13. stuyvers (about 16. pence English) of these 13.
stuyvers, 10 are paid for forage, and 3. for service. Half of the said 13.
stuyvers is paid to the soldiers in money, the other half in 16 pound of hay,
Picotius.
three small measures of oats, and two bundles of straw, which are sufficient
to keep a horse for a day.

At the end of the accounts, every soldier is abated half a real (3 pence)
upon every place.

The several pays given by the States of the united Provinces at this day,
being reduced to English money, are much about this proportion following.

To the General of horse 4l per diem.

To the Lieutenant General 2l.

To the Or Commissarie General.
Sergeant Major 30s.

To the Quartermaster General 6s 8d.

To the Provost 5s.

To the Carriage-master 3s 4d.

To the Preacher 4s.

To the chief Surgeon 4s.

Note, that the Captain of horse mustereth 6 horse, the Lieutenant 4, the
Cornet 3, for which they receive allowance extraordinary.
To the Captains 8s.

To the Lieutenant 5s.

To the Cornets 4s,

To the Corporalls 2s 6d.

To the Trumpets 2s 6d.

To the Quartermasters 2s 6d.

To the Surgeons 2s 6d.

To the soldiers Cuirassiers 2s.

To the Harquebusiers 1s 6d.

CHAP. XVIII. Of supplying the Cavallrie with good horses.
FOr the reforming of the Cavallrie, there is moreover required a singular
care, that the companies be supplied with good horses: wherefore it will be
necessary, that when the Cavallrie is retired from the field, the Captains
make sale of such horses as be unfit for service, and buy better. When the
companies be entered into garrison, the soldiers which are on foot must
presently be remounted; that so, in the time of winter, they may at leisure fit
their horses for service: for being only remounted at the time of their going
into the field, the Equos assiduo labor convenit edomari. Veg. lib. 2. cap. 14.
horses are not fitted for service, and being young and not used to the bridle,
by any little toil they become unprofitable: besides, when a man is put (on the
sudden) to buy such as he finds, they prove not only the worser, but the
dearer. Moreover, those soldiers which want horses are of no service; and
these are they (usually) which straggle disbanded, and do most mischief about
the quarters. And because oftentimes there is not money assigned apart to
remount the soldiers, it were good that among the companies there were a
brotherhood or fellowship erected, (which the Spanish call Platta) which
consists in making a cash, wherein the money which is gathered to that end,
is kept; as follows. First, the soldiers of every company choose four of
their most judicious fellows, with consent of the captain. These, with the
farrier of the company, must view all the horses of their company, prizing
every one according to his value, and concealing it from the soldiers, to
avoid disputes: and of this prizing they must keep a record, that so, if any
horse happen to die, it may be known what is to be allowed; provided always,
that they go no higher then 50. crowns. To raise this cash, the Captain must
give order that a crown be defalked out of every soldiers first pay, four
realls out of a third pay, and eight out of the contributions of a month: or
else this proportion to be for the first beginning, and afterward the moitie;
or more or less as need shall require,

Every horse dying in service, or by mischance, without the soldiers fault,
shall be made good to the soldier that lost him.

suffer their children to eat any meat, but that which they could hit at an
appointed distance, with a stone cast out of a sling: by which means they grew
so expert at it, as that people are said to be the inventers of that weapon,
and therein to have excelled all others. Every mea^ trade requires exercise
for the obtaining of it; how much more the art Military? which is rebus omnibus
potior, per quam libertas retinetur, and dignitas Provinciae propagatur, and
conservatur imperium: that is, by which liberty is continued, the dignity of
the Province is propagated, and the Empire preserved. And this is confirmed by
Josephus (Exid. lib. 3.) to be true, that not fortune, but the good orders of
the Romans in their militia, made them masters of the world: whose forces even
in times of peace, and (as it were) to keep their hands in ure, were 32000
foot, 2400 horse; but upon occasions they could make 70000 or 80000: and at a
view taken of their own forces, and their allies in Italy, there were found
700000 foot, and 70000 horse. Augustus maintained 23 legions, Tyberius 25. In
Galbaes time the State maintained 31 legions: so that ordinarily in those and
later times, there were (of legionarie and auxiliarie soldiers) maintained
372000. foot, and 37200. horse: whose ordinary pay (besides corn and apparel)
at one denarius a day for the foot, and three for the horse (besides the
increase of wages given to the officers) amounts to five millions, five
hundred sixteen thousand sixty two pounds and ten shillings by the year:
which is more (as S. H. Savile observes) then the great Turk at this day
receives in two years toward all charges. Besides these, they maintained a
guard of many thousands for the Prince, with double pay, and others for other
employments; and yet they never mutined for lack of pay. Virtus militatis
prast^t cateris omnibus. Cicero pro Mar. Nobilis res atque inprimis utilis,
militaris est scientia, etc. Leo. Tact. cap. 20.
O viros summa admiratione laudandos (may be said of them, as Vegetius says of
the Lacedaemonians) qui eam praecipue artem ediscere voluerunt, sine qua aliae
arts esse non possunt! that is, O men worthy to be praised with highest
admiration, which would principally learn that art, (speaking of the art
military) without which other arts cannot subsist! But now, if we shall
compare our times with these, must we not be forced to cry out with De militia
Romans lib. 5.
Lipsius, O pudor, O dedecus!

The Low Countries are (without all controversy) worthily styled the Academie
of war, where the art military (if any where) truly flourishes; and yet, in
comparison of the Romans, the said Lipsius is constrained to say (who would
not speak the worst of his own country) Exercitium nobis neglectum, etc. Vbi
campi doctores nostri sunt? ubi quotidianae meditationes armorum, etc. With us
(says he) exercise is neglected. Where are our teachers for the field? where
are our daily practisings of arms? Or whereas otherwise Omnes arts in
meditatione consistunt. Athleta, auriga, venator, propter exiguam merced^m, vel
certe plebis favorem, quotidiana meditatione arts suas aut servare, aut augere
consuescunt. Militem (cujus est manibus servanda respublica) studiosius oportet
scientiam dimicandi, usumque rei bellica jugibus exercitis custodire. Cui
centingit non tantum gloriosa victoria, sed etjam amplior praeda, quemque ad
opes ac dignitates ordo militiae and imperatoris judicium consuevit ^vchere.
Veg. lib. 2. cap. 24.
no man professes any art which he has not learned, shall the military art
be only that which men suppose they can leap into, and be expert in, both at
an instant? Tympanum sonuit etc. The drum beats, they run together, and enter
their names with the Clerk of the band, something they change in their habit,
and their gate; they swagger and drink; ecce jam miles, behold (says he) here
is a soldier already. Another complains after the like manner. Voyla que
c'est de nostre milice et discipline militaire, et principalement de ceste
party, tant noble; Un rustault charge d' arms, et monte a cheval, c'est assez
pour la Caval^rie. Walhausen. Disciplina hodie non dicam languet apud nos, sed
obiit: n^que mala, sed nulla est. Lips. Politic. lib. 5. cap. 13. Hodiernam
militiam ^risti oculo intucor; pudendam lugendamque nobis, hosti ridendam aut
spernendam. Ibid. cap. 8.
See (says he) what our militia and military discipline is come to, and
principally this so noble a part of it. (speaking of the horse) A clown is
laden with arms, and mounted on horseback, that is enough for the Cavallrie.

Now if we should bring our trained bands (especially the horse) to the
touchstone, and try what alloy they be of, I fear we may ask (with Lipsius)
Haec ridenda, an miseranda sunt?

A principal defense and bulwark of the kingdom, consists in having the
trained bands (horse and foot) well chosen, well armed, and well disciplined.
But how this is generally in every part neglected is too shamefully apparent,
Whether for want of good laws, or of good men to see them strictly executed, it
is not for me to determine. Sure I am, there is great need of reformation. But
my zeal transports me beyond my bounds, and I digress from what I intended;
therefore, for this matter, hic terminus esto.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Exercising in particular. Of managing of the horse and arms.
THe Cavallrie being to be exercised, must be instructed how to manage their
horse and their arms.

Concerning the horse (presupposing him to be of sufficient stature and
strength, nimble of joints, and sure of foot, etc.) he must (of necessity) be
made fit for service, so as you may have him ready at command to pace, trot,
gallop, or run in full career; also to advance, stop, retire, and turn readily
to either hand, and all with alacrity and obedience. Now, to bring him to this
ready turning, he is to be ridden the ring, and figure 8, first in a great
compass, and so in a less by degrees, first upon his pace, then on the trot,
and so to the gallop and career. These things he may be taught by using the
hand, leg, and voice. For the hand (observing not to move the arm, but only
the wrist) if you would have him to face to the left, a little motion of the
little finger on that rein, and a touch of the left leg (without using the
spur) does it: if to face (or turn) to the left about, a harder, etc. If you
would have him to trot, you are to move both your legs a little forward; for
the gallop, to move them more forward; and for the career to yerk them most
forward, and to move the body a little forward with it. After every motion
performed, it were good to keep him a while in that motion, as when you bid him
stand, to stand a while, etc. Also it were not amiss, after every thing well
done, to give him some bread or grass as a rewards For the voice, you may use
the words, Advance, hold, turn, or the like; but because the voice cannot
always be heard, it were good to use him chiefly to the motions of the hand
and leg. It will also be very useful to teach him to go sidewayes: this he may
be brought unto by laying his provender somewhat far from him in the manger,
and keeping him from turning his head toward it. He must also be used to the
smell of gunpowder, the sight of fire and armor, and the bearing of shot,
drums and trumpets, etc. but by degrees and with discretion. When he is at
his oats (at a good distance from him) a little powder may be fired, and so
nearer to him by degrees. So may a pistol be fired some distance off, and so
nearer: in like manner a drum or trumpet may be used. The groom may sometime
dress him in armor, and he may be used (now and then) to eat his oats from
the drum head. It will be very useful sometime to cause a musketier to stand
at a convenient distance, and both of you to give fire upon each other, and
thereupon to ride up close to him: also to ride him against a complete armor,
so set upon a stake, that he may overthrow it, and trample it under his feet:
that so (and by such other means) your horse (finding that he receives no
hurt) may become bold to approach any object. He may also be used to mountanous
and uneven ways, and be exercised to leap, swim, and the like. But for further
directions for the art of riding and managing the horse. I refer the reader
to Besides many of our own writers; Pierre de la Nolie in his Cavallerie
Franchoise et Italienne. also Instruction du Roy (de France) en l'exercice de
monter a Cheval, par Antoyne de Pluvinel. lately published, and diverse others.
them which have written of horsemanship ex professo, whose books are every
where obvious.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of managing arms, extending to postures and motions. Of
exercising the lance.
HOwsoever the use of the lance be now left off in the Low Countries, either
for the reasons alleged chap. 23, or by reason of the discommoditie of the
country (for the lance is of no use but in a spacious, hard, and uneven
ground) yet will it not be altogether impertinent to show the manner of
exercising the same, seeing that I. Lips. (...). It^m de Milit. Romans N.
Machiavoll. G. du Bellay. C. B^ngham upon Aelian. Sir Cl. Edmonds on Cas. Com.
Sir Hen. Savile, etc.
many have taken pains to revive unto us the knowledge of those arms which
sometime were in use among the Grecians, Romans, and other nations, which have
been for many ages totally abolished.

The manner of carrying the lance, is either advanced, or couched; that is,
when it is carried so abased, as the enemy can hardly discover it until he
feel the shock.

The charging of the lance is twofold, either by the right, or left.

The right is, when it is presented or charged along by the right side of the
horse.

The left is, when it is born acrosse the neck of the horse, by the left ear.

The first is the manner used by the Turks and Hungarians, and by some prefered
before the other. One reason which they give for it, is, because that in
charging by the left, the Lancier must incline his body to the left, and so
sits the less sure in his saddle.

Basta would have the second way to be best. Howsoever, all agree that a
Lancier must ever strive to gain the left side of his enemy, and charge him on
the left.

Now there be three ways of charging; 1 By carrying the lance sloaped upwards.
2 By charging it level, in a straight line. 3 By charging it sloaping, or
inclining downwards.


The first is, if against Cavallrie, to take the sight of the enemy with the
point of the lance; or, if against foot, the head or neck of either pike or
musketier.

The second is, by charging a horseman about the middle, (to bear him out of
the saddle) or on the breast of the foot.

The third serves to pierce the breast of the enemies horse, or a kneeling
musketier, or pike charging at the foot against horse.

These three several ways must be diligently practiced, and require much
dexterity: to which end a stake is to be set up, having an ar^ (as it were)
stretched out from it, and thereunto a white (either of paper or linen)
fastened, at several heights, which the Lancier must exercise himself to hit in
full career; also to take up a glove (or the like from the ground with the
point of his lance, etc. All which is here shown figure 2. part. 1. chap. 28.
In his charging of the enemy, he begins upon his pace or trot, Monsieur de la
Nosie, blames the French for their error in this point. De 200 pas ils
commencent a galloper, et de 100 a courir a toute bride, qui est fair erreur,
n' estant besoin de prendre tant d'espace. Disc^^rs 18.
then falls into a gallop, but must not begin his career until he be Fig: 2
Par: j. Cap: 28
within some 60. paces of his enemy; presenting his lance (from the advance)
at the half of that distance, and charging it for the shock as occasion
serves. Against an armed Lancier, the best way of charging is judged to be,
not after the two first ways, but by the third, that is, at the breast of the
horse, and that toward the left side of him, where his heart and vitals are;
and for this, the charging by the right is held best.

Having given his charge with the lance, so as it becomes unusefull to him, he
must betake himself to his pistol, in the use whereof he is to be very
skillful. His last refuge is his sword, which he must also be well practiced
in. Of both which weapons shall be spoken in the next chapter.

CHAP. XXIX. Of exercising the Cuirassier.
ALthough it be supposed and expected that no horseman will presume to mount
his horse to repair to his Cornet, before his pistols, harquebuse, or carabine
be spanned, primed, and laden: his cases furnished with cartouches and all
other equipage belonging to himself, his horse, and arms, made fix and in a
readiness: yet in case a Cuirassier upon service should (though unlikely)
spend both his pistols, and the six cartouches wherewith his cases were filled,
so that he must resort to his flask; and my present task being to teach the
untutored Cuirassier his postures; it will not be impertinent here to set them
down in the largest manner.

Now because these things are to be performed on horseback, it will not be
unnecessary (though mounting on horseback be accounted no posture, but a
preparative to exercise or service) first to show how he is to mount (which
with the rest of the postures is done in Figure 3. Part 1. Chap. 29.) and for
this, the word of command is,

1. To Horse.

The horseman being to mount, must be careful that his horse be very well
girt. Such was the admirable industry of the Romans, as that all their
horsemen were continually practiced to mount on wooden horses, and that on
either side: first unarmed, afterward completely armed, also with drawn swords
or lances in their hands, without the help of stirrops (which were not known in
those times.) Hoc enim continua meditatione faciebant, scilicet ut in tumultu
praelii sine mora asscenderent, qui ^am studiose exercebantio in paco. Veg.
lib. 1. cap. 18.
Both reins hanging in a loose position over the horse neck, and upon the pummel
of the saddle, the horseman is, First, to take the ends of the reins above the
button in his right hand, and with the thumb and two first fingers of that
hand, to draw them to an even length. Then putting the little finger of his
left hand betwixt both reins under the button, with the other three fingers of
the same hand on the further rein, and the thumb on the near side of the
button, to grasp both reins, that so (before he endeavor to mount) he may have
his horse head in balance and at command: Then grasping the pummel of the
saddle with his left hand, and standing with his full body close to the
horse-side, and just between the bolster and cantle of the saddle (always on
the near side of the horse) with the help of his right hand he shall put the
left foot into the left stirrup, and with his right hand taking fast hold on
the highest part of the cantle behind, he shall (with the help of both hands)
gently (yet strongly, and in a right-up posture, without inclining his body to
either hand) raise himself until he may stand perpendicular upon his left
foot, and then putting over his right leg, place himself in the saddle.

2. Uncap your pistols.

With the right hand he is to turn down the caps of the pistol-cases.

3. Draw your pistol.

He is to draw the pistol out of the case with the right hand, (and always the
left pistol first) and to mount the muzzel of it, as in posture 15.

4. Order your pistol.

He is to sink the pistol into his bridle-hand, and to remove his right hand
toward the muzzel, and then to rest the but end upon his thigh.

5. Span your pistol.

He is to sink the pistol into his bridle hand, and taking the key (or spanner)
into his right hand, to put it upon the axletree, and to wind about the wheel
till it stick: and then to return the spanner to his place, being usually
fastened to the side of the case.

6. Prime.

Holding the pistol in the bridle-hand (as before) he is to take his priming
box into his right hand, and (pressing the spring with his forefinger to open
the box) to put powder into the pan.

7. Shut your pan.

He is to press in the pan-pin with his right thumb, and so to shut the pan.

8. Cast about your pistol.

With the bridle-hand he is to cast about the pistol, and to hold it on the
left side, with the muzzel upward.

9. Gage your flasque.

He is to take the flasque into the right hand, and with his forefinger to pull
back the spring, and turning the mouth of the flasque downward, to let go the
spring.

10. Lade your pistol.

Having gaged his flasque (as in the former posture) he is to press down the
spring, which opens the flasque, with his forefinger, and so to lade his
pistol.

11. Draw your rammer.

He is to draw his rammer with the right hand turned, and to hold it with the
head downward.

12. Lade with bullet, and ram home.

Holding the rammer-head in his right hand (as before) he is to take the bullet
out of his mouth, or out of the bulletbag at the pistolcase, being in fight,
with the thumb and forefinger, and to put it into the muzzel of the pistol,
and the rammer immediately after it, and so to ram home.

13. Return your rammer.

He is to draw forth his rammer with the right hand turned, and to return it to
its place.

14. Pull down your cock.

With the bridle-hand he is to bring the pistol toward his right side; and
placing the but end upon his thigh, to pull down the cock.

15. Recover your pistol.

He is to take the pistol into his right hand, mounting the muzzel.

16. Present and give fire.

Having the pistol in his right hand (as in posture 15.) with his forefinger
upon the tricker, he is to incline the muzzel (with a fixed eye) toward his
mark; not suddenly, but by degrees, (quicker or slower according to the pace he
rides) and that not directly forward toward the horse head, but toward the
right; turning his right hand so as the lock of the pistol may be upward: and
having gotten his mark, he is to draw the tricker, and give fire.

17. Return your pistol.

He is to return his pistol into the case, and then to draw his other pistol
(as occasion may serve) and to do as before.

Now concerning the snap-haue pistol, those postures wherein it differs from
the fire-lock pistol are these, (as in figure)

18. Bend your cock.

Holding the pistol in the bridle-hand (as before has been showed) with the
right hand he is to bend the cock.

19. Guard your cock.

With the right hand he is to pull down the back-lock, so to secure the cock
from going off.

20. Order your hammer.

With the right hand he is to draw down the hammer upon the pan.

21. Free your cock.

With the right thumb he is to thrust back the back-lock, and so to give the
cock liberty.

But the more compendious way of lading, for the gaining of time (which in the
instant of skirmish is chiefly to be regarded) is by using cartouches. Now, the
cartouch is to be made of white paper, cut out of convenient breadth and
length, and rolled upon a stick, (or the rammer, if it be not too little) fit
(according to the bore of the barrel) to contain a due quantity of powder, and
the bullet. The proportion of powder usually required is half the weight of the
bullet; but that is held too much by such as can judge. Having molded the
paper, the one end of it is to be turned in, (to keep in the powder) and the
due charge of powder to be put into it at the other end; which powder is to be
closed in by tying a little thread about the paper: then the bullet is to be put
in, and that also tied in with a little thread. When the Cuirassier is to use
his cartouch, he must bite off the paper at the head of it, and so put it into
the barrel of his pistol, with the bullet upward, and then ram it home. By
For the more speedy lading of the pistol, and avoiding the trouble of carrying
either flasque or touch-box, there is a late invented fashion of spanner or
key, (which I have represented in figure 1.) which contains six charges of
powder (at the least) and priming powder sufficient for those charges, and for
the cartouches wherewith the pistol cases be furnished: which the Cuirassier
will find to be of very good use, when he is used thereunto.
this means he shall much expedite the lading of his pistol. The Cuirassier
being become ready in his postures, his next and chiefest study is, to be an
exact marks-man. And to this end he must frequently be practiced at some The
Romans exercised their soldiers at several heights at stakes set up in C^^^^
Na^^io: Ad palum quoque vel sudes juniores exerceri percommodum est, cum
latera, vel pedes, aut caput petere punctim cacimque condiscant, Veg. lib. 2,
cap. 23. But their manner of fighting with their swords was not casim, but all
upon the thrust or point; because that manner sooner pierced the malis, and
laid not open the body in fetching of a blow. Ibid, lib. 1. cap. 12.
marks, to be set up at some tree or stake, of several heights. Now because
the Cuirassier is armed pistol-proof, he must not give fire but at a very La
pistolle ne fait quasi null effect, si elle n'est tirec de trois pas, Monsieur
de la Noue, discourse 18.
near distance, being careful to bestow his bullets so, as they may take
effect. The principal place of advantage to aim at, is the lower part of the
belly of the adverse Cuirassier, also his armpits, or his neck. Some would not
have a Cuirassier to give Les Reitres bien instruits ne deschargent point leurs
pistolles qu'en heurtant: qu'ils addressent tousiours aux cuiffes ou aux
visages. Ibid.
fire, until he have placed his pistol under his enemies armor, or on some
unarmed parts. If he fail of an opportunity to hurt the man, he may aim at the
breast of the horse, or his head, as he shall see occasion. He usually gives
his charge upon the trot, and seldom gallopeth, unless it be in pursuit of a
flying enemy, or such like occasion. Having spent both his pistols, and
wanting time to lade again, his next refuge is his sword; whereof the best
manner of using is to place the pummell of it upon his right As is showed in
the posture 22.
thigh, and so with his right hand to direct or raise the point to his mark,
higher or lower as occasion serves; either at the belly of the adverse
horseman (about the pummel of the saddle) or at his armpits, or his throat;
where if it pierce not (as it is very like it will not fail, by slipping under
the casque) yet meeting with a stay in that part of the body where a man is
very weak, and having a sword of a very stiff blade, as aforesaid, it will
doubtless unhorse him. Being past his enemy, he is to make a back-blow at
him, aiming to cut the buckle of his pouldron, whereby he disarmeth one of his
arms, etc. Basta highly commends the aiming at the enemies sight, and so (by
raising the vizures of his casque with the point of the sword) to run him into
the head. But this seems not so likely to take effect as that of aiming at
the throat; and sometimes (as some casques are made) it would be of no use.

In these and the like exercises the Cuirassier is frequently and diligently to
practice himself at some mark; which will render him fit for service when need
shall require.

Some authors (for the disposing of the Cuirassiers for fight) hold that they
ought to be ordered in gross bodies, that so The Cuirassiers among the horse,
are like the gravis armatura of foot among the Romans, quae tanquam murus
ferreus stabat, and si hosts fugasset, non sequebatur; quia ejus jus est,
facile nec fugere, nec sequi. Veg. lib. 2. cap. 17. Or like the Equites
Cataphracti among the Grecians. Aelian. cap. 2.
by their solidity and weight, they may entertain and sustain the shock of the
enemy. They are also fit for troops of reserve, to give courage to the other
Cavallrie, and to give them opportunity to re-assemble themselves behind them,
etc.

CHAP. XXX. Of exercising the Harquebusier and Carabine.
ALthough there be some difference between the Harquebusier and the Carabine,
in regard of their horse, their arming, and their piece, (howsoever most
authors take them for one and the same) yet in regard the harquebuse differs
nothing from the carabine in length, but only in the bore, their manner of
using their several pieces is one and the same; and so one instruction may
serve for both.

See figure 3. posture 23, and 24.
In march, he is either to carry his carabine hanging at his belt by the right
side, (as is showed chap. 24.) or else to order it upon his right thigh, as the
Cuirassier, in posture 4.

In fight he is to strive to gain the left side of his enemy, (contrary to the
Cuirassier) because that in presenting he is to rest his carabine on his
bridle-hand, placing the but end on the right side of his breast, near his
shoulder.

He must be taught to use his carabine with all exactness and dexterity, and
to be an exquisite marks-man. Walhausen would have the Harquebusier to give
fire not only to the front and flanks, but to the rear also, by turning his
body only; the horse running the contrary way in full careere. But how
possible this is to be done, I leave to the judgment of any man that knows
what belongs to Cavallrie.
For the manner of handling of the harquebuse or carabine, the directions for
the pistol, in the foregoing chapter, mutatis mutandis, may serve for
sufficient instruction. Yet in regard the carabines with us are for the most
part snap-hanes, and so something differing from the fire-lock, I will set down
the order of handling it, in the words of command: holding it need less here
to dilate them.

Postures for the snap-hane carabine.
1 Order your carabine. 2 Sink your carabine into your bridle-hand. 3 Bend your
cock. 4 Guard your cock. 5 Prime. 6 Shut your pan. 7 Cast about your carabine.
8 Gage your flasque. 9 Lade your carabine. 10 Draw your rammer. 11 Shorten your
rammer. 12 Lade with bullet, and ram home. 13 Withdraw your rammer. 14
Shorten your rammer. 15 Return your rammer. 16 Recover your carabine. 17 Order
your hammer. 18 Free your cock. 19 Present. 20 Give fire.
For the use of his sword, he is to demean himself as the Cuirassier.

CHAP. XXXI. Of exercising the Dragon.
THe Dragon was invented for special services to assist the Cavallrie as
Infantery, considering there be many exploits which cannot be effected by the
Cavallrie alone.

The musketier must exercise himself to give fire on horseback, as the
Harquebusier. Being come to guard a passage, or to do any other the like
service, they are to alight, and to demean themselves as Infantery. Whereof it
shall be needless hereto enlarge, seeing we have books in such abundance upon
that subject, as they are able rather to By reason of the frivolous
impertinences, and manifest errors which abound in many of them.
distract, then instruct the reader, and in my opinion, had need of an Index
expurgatorius.

Being so alighted to do their service (as abovesaid) every of them is to cast
his bridle over the neck of his side man's horse, in the same order as they
marched: keeping them so together, by the help of such as are thereunto
especially appointed.

CHAP. XXXII. Of exercising the Cavallrie in their motions.
HAving showed how every horseman is to be exercised in the managing of his
horse, as also in the use of his particular arms; it follows now that he be
taught how to demean himself, being joined in a body.

And here, before we enter into the motions, it were fit to explain the terms
of The Grecians and Romans had the same order of exercise, and that in the
same words which we retain to this day. A File, the Romans called Versus, and
Decuria: A Rank, Jugum: A File-leader, Decanus, because their Decuria (or File)
used to consist of ten among the foot, with some 16. A bringer up, Tergiductor:
A Leader (being every odd man in the file) Prastes: A follower (which is every
even number) Substes: A side-man, Astes Their distances were the same with us.
Their two cubits (every cubit being a foot and an half of our measure) agreed
with our three foot. Their four cubits our 6 foot: and so increasing upon
occasion. They ordered their horse-troops at six foot distance between file and
file in march, and three foot in sight.
art therein used. and to show what is meant by a file, a rank, half files, and
half ranks; the front, flanks, and rear, and the like. But (for brevitie sake)
I pass them over, referring the reader to the books of Infanterie.

To exercise the horse, they are to be drawn up into a body, not by ranks, but
by files; and those of five deep, as most affirm; or of six, as others would
have it: and that because the number of five is not divisible by two, and so in
doubling of ranks, or half files, or the like, there is always an odd rank.
Some would have them (especially the harquebusiers) to be eight in file, taking
the troop to consist of 64. Being put in Battalia, that is, ordered into a
square body, and silence strictly commanded; the first thing to be taught them,
is distance. And herein authors disagree. Some make close order to be two
paces; open order, four paces; and so for double, triple, and quadruple
distance proportionable. Others make but two kinds of distances; close order,
which is three foot; and open order, which is six foot. But this must be
understood cum grano salis, (as the Civilians speak:) for here we must observe
a difference between the manner of taking the distance of the Cavallrie, and
that of the Infantery: for in the foot, the distance is taken from the center
of the soldiers body, which here cannot be so understood, but only of the
space of ground between horse and horse.

Monsieur de Praissac is more plain, who would have the distance between rank
and rank (both for the length of the horse, as also for the space between horse
and horse) to be six paces, and one pace between file and file. Yet, if we take
every pace for five foot (as that is the usual dimention) by this rule they
should be at a very large distance.

In my opinion, the Cavallrie being to be exercised in their motions, should be
at their distance of six foot, or open order (taking it as has been showed)
Omnes milites incedendi ordinem servent, Veg. 1. 9. Vt aequali leguimoque
spatio miles distet a milite; nec ultra quam expedit aut conglobent agmen aut
laxent. Ibid. cap. 26.
standing right in their ranks and files.

In all the motions we also retain the same words of command which they used.
Facing, they called declinatio; to the right hand, ad hastam; to the left, ad
scutum. Facing about, immutatio. Doubling, by ranks and files, Duplicandi duo
genera, perjuga and versus. Their countermarches the same which we use,
Evolutio Chorica, Macedonica, Laconica, per decurias and juga. Wheelings the
same with us, Conversio ad hastam vel scutum. Reversio est conversionis
restitutio. Inflexio, wheeling about, etc.
Now the motions are of four kinds; 1. Facings. 2. Doublings. 3.
Countermarches. 4. Wheelings.

The use of facings is to make the company perfect, to be suddenly prepared for
a charge on either flank or the rear.

Doubling of ranks, or doubling by half files, or bringers up, is used upon
occasion of strengthening the front.

Doubling of files, or doubling by half ranks, serves to strengthen the flanks.

Countermarches serve, either to reduce the file-leaders into the place of the
bringers up; and so to have the best men ready to receive the charge of an
enemy in the rear; or to bring one flank into the place of the other: or front,
and rear, or either flank into the middle of the body.

The use of wheelings, is to bring the front (which is always supposed to
consist of the ablest men) to be ready to receive the charge of the enemy on
either flank or rear.

These motions (for the more easy apprehension of the untutored soldier) are
represented in figures, by a company of harquebusiers of 64 men. And therein
the file-leaders and bringers up are distinguished by a differing letter, as
follows.

The form of the first standing.
To face them to the right, is done by commanding

Left flank.

Front.

Right flank.

Rear.

chart for cavalry exercise

To the left hand.
Which is performed by turning toward the left. From hence they are to be
reduced by commanding, As you were. Which they do by turning to the right.

Now, to face them to the rear, though it be proper first to do it by the right
hand, yet for the more ready way, I would say,

chart for cavalry exercise

To the right hand.
Which is done by turning (all at one and the same time) to the right hand.
Thus the front is where the right flank was.

To reduce them to their first form, the word of command is, As you were.

Which they perform by turning to the left hand. From thence, to face them to
the left, you command

chart for cavalry exercise

To the left hand about.
Which is done by turning toward the left hand, until their faces front to
that place which was before the rear.

To reduce them to their first-form (as that must be observed) the word is,

To the right hand about, as you were.

chart for cavalry exercise

set of four figures charting cavalry exercises

Ranks, to the right double.
The use hereof has been showed before. Every other rank, that is, every even
number passes into the odd, upon the right hand of his leader. The second
rank into the first, and so successively.

To reduce them, the word is,

Ranks, as you were,

Which is best done, by causing those ranks which doubled to stand, and those
which stood to advance.

chart for cavalry exercise

Files to the right double.
To do this, the second file passes into the first (every man behind his
sideman) accounting from the right hand: the fourth into the third, and so the
rest: which must be done throughout the company at one instant, all together.
But because the first rank of the company is as the edge, and the files are for
the most part appointed but five deep. there seems no great necessity of
doubling of files.

They are reduced by commanding

Files to the left as you were.

chart for cavalry exercise

Ranks, to the left double.
The difference of this motion from the former, is nothing, but that here they
which double do it to the left hand of their leaders, which before they did to
their right hands, as the figure makes it plain.

This done, they must be reduced by commanding

Ranks, as you were.

chart for cavalry exercise

Files to the left double.
The difference between this and the former motion, is the difference of hands.
And by this means, those files that stood before, now move; and they which
moved, now stand, as appears by the figure.

They are reduced by commanding

Files as you were, or Ranks to the right double.

chart for cavalry exercise

set of four figures charting cavalry exercises

Half files, to the right hand double the front.
Thus the middle-men double the first rank on the right hand. The other three
ranks double the three following ranks, as is manifest in the figure. To reduce
them, the word is

Half files as you were.

Unless it be better (and so I conceive it) to cause them that double, to
stand: and the first division to advance.

chart for cavalry exercise

Bringers up, to the right hand double the front.
In this motion, the last rank passes into the first, and so successively, as
the figure shows it.

It is of good use: yet because it is very troublesome for the horse to
perform, (especially in reducing them) it may be used, or omitted, as shall be
thought fit. They are reduced by saying, Bringers up, as you were.

chart for cavalry exercise

Files, close to the right and left to your close order.
Being about to wheel the company, they must be closed, first the files, and
then the ranks. And being to open them again, the ranks are first to be opened,
and then the files.

All the files close from the right and left, toward the middle of the body.

chart for cavalry exercise

Half files, to the left hand double the front.
This motion only differs from the former in the hand. There be also
doublings of ranks by the half files entire to the right, or left, or both by
division: But because the files (especially of Cuirassiers) are seldom above
five deep, the doubling of ranks, half files, etc. is little used.

The reducing of them has been showed in the former motion.

chart for cavalry exercise

Files, to the left hand countermarch.
Though it were fit to begin with the right hand, yet for the convenient
turning of the horse to the left, I think it not amiss to prefer the left

The figure represents the Chorean manner.

There be also countermarches after the Macedonian and Lacedemonian ways, and
those in ranks as well as files, which are here omitted for brevity sake.

chart for cavalry exercise

Ranks, close forwards, to your close order.
All the ranks move forwards, saving the first, which stands. The second rank
having their distance, stand; so all the rest. Now the horse being to wheel, it
must be considered that it cannot be performed by them in such exact manner,
and so strait a room as the foot: therefore the Commander is to ride a
reasonable compass, that so they may do it with convenience.

chart for cavalry exercise

set of six figures charting cavalry exercises

To the left hand wheel.
Because Melzo and Basta would have the horse in all their wheelings to do it
by the left (which indeed is the readier way unless the ground or other
hindrance will not permit it) I have omitted the wheeling to the right, which
in order should go first.

All the body moves to the left, upon the left file-leader, as the center.
Then to wheel as they were.

chart for cavalry exercise

There is also wheeling to the right, or left about, wheeling wings into the
front, etc. which are here omitted for brevitie.

To reduce them, first the ranks are to be opened, (as abovesaid) then the
files, which brings them to their first form.

In opening the ranks, the best (if not the only) way is to do it by opening
forward.

chart for cavalry exercise

set of two figures charting cavalry exercises

These and the like motions are directed and commanded by the voice of the
Commander: Vox autem perc^pi interdum non potest, aut propter armorum sonitum,
aut propter equorum transitum and hinnitum, and multitudines strepitum, etc.
Aelian. cap. 35
but because the voice sometime cannot be heard (especially in gross bodies)
by reason of the clashing of armor, trampling or neying of horses, or
tumultuous sound, or noise of the multitude, (and that especially in fight) Nam
cum voce sola inter praeliorum tumultus regi multitudo non possit, etc.
antiquus omnium gentium us^s invenit, etc. Tria genera signorum, Vocalia,
semivocalia, muta, etc. Veget. lib. 3 c 5.
Antiquity has invented helps; making three kinds of military signs or
directions: 1. Vocal, which is by the commanders voice, pronounced by the
inferior officers to the ear. 2. Semivocall, by trumpet or other warlike
instrument, to the ear likewise. 3. Mute, by signs to the eye; as the
ensign, etc.


The Cavallrie therefore must be taught Praecipies autem ut perfect cognoscant
buccinae sonum, ut ubi consistere eos jubet, consistant, etc. Leo Tact. cap. 9.
82.
distinctly to know the several sounds of the trumpet; as when to clap on
their saddle, when to mount, when to repair to the Cornet, when to troop away,
when to give a charge, when to retreat, when to attend the watch, and the like.
All which being the louder voice of the Commander, Intenti ad ducis non signum
modo, sed nutum, Curtius 3.
they must punctually observe and obey.

Now, howsoever I have here propounded a company of 64. horse; to be exercised
in the motions, and those of 8. in file (as I see it observed by Walhausen
would have the Harquebusiers to be 8. in file, and the Cuirassiers 10. lib. 2.
cap. 2, and 3. But therein, (as in diverse other things) he is singular, and
dissenteth from others.
some) yet the general opinion is, that they ought not to be deeper then 5. in
file, though the company consist of 100. horse.

Every such company must be furnished with
A Captain. A Lieutenant. A Cornet. A Quartermaster. Three Corporalls. Two
Trumpeters. A Clerk. A Saddler. A Surgeon. A Farrier.


When the company be About the manner of marching of a company of horse,
there is much disagreement among authors. MelZo, Basta, and Walhausen would
have them to march in one entire deduction (not by squadrons) the Captain to
march first, ne^t after him two attendants with spare horses, they beating his
armor: then the Trumpeters, then the Cornet, in the first rank of horse. But
Walhausen places the Lieutenant next after the Trumpeters, before the Cornet:
all others place him (as he ought to be) in the rear. Flamin: de la Crote*
would have them march in four divisions, and every Corporal to lead one; but
this (the Corporalls being leaders of files) disordereth their ranks. I follow
that order which is prescribed to be generally observed by the council of war.
to march, they are to be divided into 3 equal parts (and each of these is
called a squadron) according to the number of the Corporalls; and these are
distinguished by the names of the Captains, Lieutenants, and Cornets squadron.
The first squadron to be led by the Captain, the second by the Cornet, the
third by the eldest Corporal. The Lieutenant and Quartermaster are to come in
the rear. And when they come to be exercised (or to do service) the Captains
squadron stands, and the other squadrons sleeve up on the left hand, and so
they become a Battalia. As for their marching in gross, that comes to be
spoken of in the next part.

The second Part. Of Marching.
THE ARGUMENT.
HAving showed in the first part, how the Cavallrie is to be levied, it
follows now to speak of their manner of marching: a matter of no small Plura
in itineribus, quam in ipsa acie solent contingere pericula. Nam in conflictu
armati sunt omnes, and hostem cominus vident, and ad pugnandum animo veniunt
praeparat^. In itinere minus armatus minusque attentus est miles, and
superveniente impetu velfraude repent turbatur. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 6.
consequence; in the well ordering whereof, oftentimes (especially upon
occasion of sudden charges) the safety of the troops, or of the whole army
consists. For the orderly handling whereof I purpose to direct my discourse
to these 3 heads.

1 the knowledge of the ways, and discovery of the enemies designs, and
residence.

2 The conducting of the troops to their Rendez-vous, and their orders.

3 The particular distribution of the whole train upon the way; And the scouts
or forerunners. And how they are to march in an open or strait country, by
day or night.

CHAP. I. Of Guides.
FOr the knowledge of the ways (a For want of good guides the late Prince of
Orange failed of an Aenslach (or enterprise) upon Bruges, a city in Flanders.
For when he had marched all the night (himself and many other great personages
often riding up to the horses bellies in waters) he found himself within half
an hours march of the place he landed at; The day appearing frustrated the
design, and caused him to dismarch re infecta. Mereren. lib. 17.
matter of great importance, either to prevent the taking of one way for
another in marching, or in pursuing the enemy, he having received the charge,
and flying by unusual ways) the use of maps may somewhat help, but (being too
general) is not sufficient. And therefore the Waggon-master is to provide good
guides, of the inhabitants of those places where the march is to be, which may
be able to give certain and particular information concerning the Dux locorum
intervalla non solum passuum numero, sed etiam viarum qualitates perdiscat:
compendia, diverticula, montes, flumina, ad fidem descripta consideret.
highways and crosse-wayes, how many there be of them; whether they be even,
large, and free: or straight, hilly, or impeached with difficult passages.
Also concerning ditches and rivers, whether there be bridges or not. And if
there be diverse ways, which is the most safe and shortest, or most exposed to
the enemies advenues or approches, or most commodious for the baggage. Whether
there be requisite commodity for the lodgings, as forage, water, etc,
Insomuch as they may be able to know every hedge or ditch, and all other
particulars. And that you may be assured of their fidelity, and the truth of
their informations, it is good to have them to be soldiers in pay; or where
they are not, to take them of the Ad hoc a prudentioribus locorumque gnaris
separatim debet universa perquirere, and veritatem colligere de pluribus.
boores or inhabitants (as aforesaid) from place to place, keeping them
separated from each other. And if they differ, either from the soldiers which
serve for guides, or from each other, they must be confronted; and by the
mutual consent of all, the best way is to be resolved on. These guides usually
(to prevent their running away, which they will often do if they see an
opportunity of escaping) are led bound, Eosque custodia mancipare addita poena
ostentatione, vel praenni, etc. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 6.
or at least committed to the custody of some soldier. Recompense is promised
them if they do their endeavor, and punishment threatened if they direct amiss.

CHAP. II. Of Intelligence.
EVery good commander must have these two grounds for his actions; 1. the
knowledge of his own forces, and wants, (knowing that the enemy may have
notice thereof, and therefore must he be always studying for remedies, if the
enemy should come suddenly upon him) 2. The assurance of the condition and
estate of the enemy, his commodities, and necessities, his counsels and
designs: thereby begetting diverse occasions, which afterward bring forth
victories. M. Cato in Hispania, quia ad hostium consilia alia via pervenire non
poterat, jussit trecentos milites simul impetum facere in stationem hostium,
rapiumque unum ex his in castra perferre incolumem; tortus ille, omnia suorum
arcana confessus est. Frontin. Stratagem. lib. 1. cap. 2.
And because the commodity of spies cannot always be had; some of the enemies
men must be assayed to be taken, from whom there may be drawn a relation of the
estate of the adverse part, and this exploit is called The French call it
prendre langue.
taking of intelligence, a duty of great importance, (whereon the
deliberations which are to be taken do depend) and also of much travel and
danger.

To effect this, an expert officer, with 20 or 25 of the Dux cum agmine
exercitus profe^turus, fidelissimos argutissimosque cum equis probatissimis
mittat, qui loca per quae iter faciendum est, in progressa, and a tergo,
dextra, levaque perlustrent, ne aliquas adversarii moliantur insidias. Ibid.
Veg.
best mounted, stoutest, and hardiest Harquebusiers (or mixed of Cuirassiers and
Harquebusiers, according to Melzo) with two Trumpets are to be employed. These
are to carry with them some refreshment for themselves and their horses; to
that purpose retiring themselves into some wood, or shadie place; placing good
Centinells upon trees. If they find the enemy marching, they shall follow him
on either flank (as opportunity shall direct them) or on the rear, or meet him
on the front, assaying to take some that are disbanded, or some forrager. In
the night they must approach the enemies army, assaying to take some Sentinel,
or some disbanded soldier in some of the houses thereabout. And because it
well may fall out that (after the taking of some prisoner) the troop shall be
charged by the enemy; the Chief (which must be valiant, How abundant
Antiquit^e was in stratagems, all their histories testify. Frontine (a man of
consular dignity among the Romans) has written four books of stratagems,
being collected out of diverse authors Greek and Roman; and yet many by him let
slip, as himself acknowledges in praefatione ad lib. 1. also Polianus. In
stratagems Hannibal is said to have excelled.
and abundant in resolutions and inventions of stratagems to make his retreat
by some woodie place) shall send (or first there leave them) four of his best,
and best mounted soldiers with a Trumpet; with order, that when they see the
troop coming, charged by the enemy, they show themselves, the trumpet
sounding. For, it being an usual thing in military courses to go and observe
who they be which appear, the enemy by this means makes Alto, (or a stand) for
fear of some embuscado which gives leisure to the troop to advance their
retreat: and the said four soldiers may make their retreat, either severally,
or together, safe enough, by reason of their good horses. If the enemy be
likely to come from diverse parts, the like number would be sent to each
suspected place. These should be sent before with the Quartermasters which go
to make the quarters, that so they might have two or three hours refreshment,
before they go to take intelligence. If the army be lodged in a very
suspicious place; after the first troop so sent out, a second shall be sent;
but neither of them knowing of each others sending out. If the army be to
march the next day, the chiefs of the said troops must know toward what place
the march is intended.

CHAP. III. Of the order of Marching.
THe Commissarie General, grounding himself upon good informations, is to give
the orders in writing for the manner of marching, as well of the soldiers as
the baggage. Every Captain is to receive his written directions overnight, that
so, the sign given, he may appear at the Rendez-vous in such rank and place as
shall be commanded him.

Epoi lodata consuetudine il dividar ^li esserciti in the squadroni, cioe
vanguardia, Battoglia, and retroguardia; and che ogni gio^ngto si venga
mutando. Cataneo di fort. cap. 8. Alternis dichus altera legio and alterum
co^nu praecedunt, eademque rursus sequuntur, mutantes semper ordinem, ut
alternatim primi incedant. Polyb.
Every army is divided into three parts; The vanguard, battle, and rear. That
part of the army which is most exposed to the enemy (and that most usually is
the front) should be the best; and therefore all chiefs desire the vanguard.
The manner therefore is (for general satisfaction) that they which this day
had the van, to morrow have the rear; and they which had the rear, the battle.
So changing alternatively; except the Lord Generals guard (consisting of two
troops, as Melzo has it) or the Generals regiment (according to C. Bingham)
which has always the vanguard. And if the enemy should change place, and
from your front become to be upon your rear, whereby the rear (as most
dangerous) becomes most honorable; that Captain which to day has led the
battaillon, to morrow (in stead of the vanguard) may challenge the rear.

The scouts alter their course also, and attend the enemies proceedings on the
rear.

If occasion be (in time of march) to send out one or more troops for some
service, they are to observe the same orders. But the army being come to their
quarter, and occasion being to send out When all or a good part of the horse
are employed in some exploit, without Infanterie, it is called a Cavalcado.
Such was that when the States men surprised the castle of Crapoel in Limburg,
etc. Meteren. lib. 23.
all or part of the Cavallrie upon some exploit; that troop which first
appears at the place of Rendez-vous shall be appointed by the Commissarie
General (who is to be there) to the first place; the second to the second
place. If two troops come together, at the same instant, they shall cast lots.

By this means, every man desiring honor, they will be the readier to appear
in due time. The same course shall be taken when the troops are to be sent upon
some embuscado, convoy, or the like. If the march be but of one day, he which
commands shall appoint the best experienced and ablest to lead; Others hold
it much better to observe the same order in the dismarch which was used in the
march, so that company which went out first, comes in first.
who is to be in the rear, returning back to the quarter. And these may have
private order to be at the place of Rendezvous sooner then the rest, to avoid
jealousies.

The vanguard, battaillon, and rear, must be divided from each other 300 paces.

CHAP. IIII. Of Scouts or Discoverers.
TO be secured from unexpected assaults of the enemy, neither the army nor
the Cavallrie alone, no not a company, must march without These the Romans
called exploratores, or speculatores. See Veg. lib. 3. cap. 22. Ne secreta
noceant, ducis praestat industria, quem ^mnia pr^^s convenit explorare. Idem
lib. 3. c. 6.
discoverers: which must be sent out, not only by the direct way where the
enemy is like to come, or you are to march, but to scour all the by-ways on
either side. And sometime the first discoverers are seconded by a second
company, to secure the march.

They that shall be employed in this service must be choice men, valiant,
vigilant and discreet: such as neither fear nor misconceit can easily distract.
They must see that with their own eyes which they inform, the least error of
theirs misleading the whole body. Those select men appointed for this service,
are to be P. Considi^^, qui rei milia^^ peritissimus habebatur, and in exerciui
L. Sylla, and postea in M. Crassi fuerat, cum exploratoribus prai^t^itur. C^es.
Comment. lib. 1. cap. 5.
led by an able officer; it being a task so difficult, that many have lost that
reputation by it which they had been long in gaining of. This officer shall
send word of what he discovers; and what he sees not himself, he is to
signify it as so reported to him; and having seen it, then to certify it as
for certain.

CHAP. V. Of the order of marching by day.
THe Omni cura, omnique diligentia providere debei dux, ne proficiscens
p^^tiatur meursum, vel si non facile, at sine damno ^^pell^t ill^um. Veg. ibid.
march must be so ordered as the companies may readily (from that order) be
brought into a good form of battle, upon occasion of a sudden charge. The
Cavallrie (supposed to consist of 40 troops, and the country spacious) is to
be divided into two bodies of 20 troops apiece. Melzo would have 3 troops of
Harquebusiers in front of the vanguard, which Basta and Walhausen are against,
because they are (for the most part) but ill armed. These two divisions are to
march in even front, 150 paces divided. Coming to strait passages, the right
wing is to march before the left. The officers must suffer none of the baggage
nor any other to intermingle with their troops.

The Captain of Harquebusiers which has the vanguard (or one of them in that
division, when the Cuirassiers have it) Praemittes etjam ad loca exploran la
equites quesdam, p^asertim si s^^^osa sint, aut collibus aut montibus inclusa,
per quae t^^n^un dum est, etc. Leo cap 9.38.
must send out a Corporal with 15 horse and a good guide, some league before;
whereof two shall be sent out directly before him; two toward the right, and
other two toward the left; Casar exercitum per insidiosa itinera duxit
nunquam, nisi praespe^^ u^ lo little situs, etc. Sueton. Jul.
to discover among the woods and valleys, and to get intelligence at any
dwelling houses or villages, advising the Corporal of what they discover. Who
is from time to time to advise the chief, which is to march at the head of the
first troop.

After these 15 he is to send out 4 others, led by a sufficient soldier, to
bring reports of what those 15 shall discover; the rather because the enemy
might come upon them upon the flanks, after the first 15 were past.

The Captain of the Harquebusiers which has the rear of the left wing, must
leave a Corporal with 15 horse a mile behind him. Of these 15, two are to be
some 12 or 14 score behind the rest, to give notice if the enemy follow them
in the rear.

Illud vitandum, ne al^u festinantibus, al is tardius incedentibus,
interrumpatur acies, aut certe tenuetur. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 6.
The Captain which leads in front must march so as the other troops must keep
foot with him; and passing over a bridge or narrow passage, must make Alto so
soon as he is over, or in the plain, leaving a soldier at the bridge or
strait, which shall give him knowledge so soon as the rear be past over or
through. Quando per angustias aliquas, aut per arduos aviosque montes
prof^cturus^s, pramitte ex tuis qui juga montium and loca ibi editissima
occupent, and qui aduus angustos and minus patentes anticipent, etc. Leo Tact.
cap. 9. 26.
And if in these strait passages there be any advenues by which the enemy
might charge you, those must be prepossessed by Harquebusiers, or Dragons,
alighting, and keeping themselves upon some height, or in some valley, or
behind some hedge or ditch, to secure their flanks.

Every troop is to leave 100 paces distance between each other, and are to
suffer no baggage nor others to trouble them, as abovesaid.

CHAP. VI. The order of marching by night.
UPon occasion of marching with all or part of the Cavallrie by night, the
companies are punctually appointed their places of march by written orders
delivered to their officers. Before the troops, a Corporal with 12 or 15
Harquebusiers is to be sent, by the space of half a league, to discover and
take intelligence at the houses, whether there be any news of the enemy. And
passing by places which are at the enemies devotion, some of them must have the
language, and feign themselves friends, the better to know what passes.

Not long after these, four others are to follow, as in the former chapter.
Besides, a chosen troop of Cuirassiers are to be ready, led by a Captain of
special desert, with order to Capienda rebus in malis praeceps via est. Seneca.
charge resolutely upon any adversary; and these are to march 150 paces before
the rest.

The chief Commander is to march at the head of the first troop which follows
the said chosen troop of 60 Cuirassiers, and with him one of the best soldiers
of every troop, to carry the orders (upon all occasions) to their Captains:
sending before him four of his ablest men, to give him notice if the said
select troop of 60 Cuirassiers charge the enemy: which if it happen, he shall
cast his company out of the way, and charge the enemy on the flank; and so
the rest of the troops, observing that they intermix not their troops.

The troops must not leave such distances between each other as in the day
march, unless they hear news of the enemies approach. Progredientes viam
faciunt silentio and quiet, decenter omnes proprium ordinem asservantes.
Josephus, of the Romans manner of marching, cited by Lipsius de milit. Romans
lib. 5.14^.
They must march with all possible silence. At any byway, the first company
must leave a soldier at the entrance thereof, which shall be relieved or
changed by the next company, and so successively until all be past. Coming
into open and champion places, the officers shall draw up their troops, and
cause them to march in square bodies, well closed, having regard that none
sleep. The spare horses or pages must not march at the heads of the troops. If
the enemy charge the rear, the chief officer in the rear shall cause the last
company to face about; and so the rest, if need be: but those companies which
were in front must not come to the rear, for avoiding of disorder, and lest the
enemy cunningly make an alarm in the rear, when he means to charge the front.
In the rear of all, a Corporal with 15 horse shall march as abovementioned,
with a guide. The day being come, the said 60 Cuirassiers shall return to their
several companies. If the companies refresh themselves in the night, they must
not be suffered to unsaddle their horses, nor disarm themselves. The guides
(diverse of them) must go before the troops, whether on foot or on horseback,
guarded by two soldiers which know the language, and no other to speak to
them. Interdum aut^m imperita ^usticitas plura promittit, and credit se scire
quae nescit. Veg. l. 3. c. 6.
These are diligently to observe them whether they seem doubtful, looking here
and there, as doubting of the way, and thereof shall presently certify the
officer, that he may call others, to be assured.

CHAP. VII. How the baggage is to march.
AS little baggage as possible may be must be conducted with the Cavallrie. It
is the Waggon-masters charge to order it for the march. First, the Generals
baggage is to march, then the Lieutenant Generals, then the Commissary
Generals, and so the other officers in their degrees.

The place of march is uncertain; Auuertendo ancora, che tutti li impedimen^i
and artiglierie sempre camino da quelle part, che non sia volta verso al
nemico Catanco, c. 8. This agrees with Aelians directions, c. 51. Impedimenta,
etc.
but always it must be most remote from danger. If the danger be in the front,
it marches in the rear, etc. The Waggon-master (or with some the Provost) must
see that all march in their appointed place, and disband not. A company of
Harquebusiers is to guard the baggage. The horse-boyes march after the wagons,
and must not be suffered to march among the troops.

The third Part. Of Encamping.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe next part to be handled (according to our former distribution) is
Encamping. In the skillful performance whereof, the military prudence and good
judgment of the Commander of an army chiefly appears. And herein three
things are principally considerable.

1. In what place, and by whom the quarter is to be made, and how distributed.

2. The manner of securing the quarter, by guards, sentinels, discoverers,
spies, etc.

3. Of dislodging, and the way how to perform it.

CHAP. I. Of making the quarters.
IN Castra tuto semper facienda sunt loco: ubi and lignorum and pabuli and
aquae suppetat copia. Et si diutius commorandum est, loci salubritas eligetur,
etc. Veg. lib. 1. cap. 22
the choice of a fitting place for encamping or quartering, regard must be had,
First, to the commodity of the soldiers; Secondly, to the situation; to be
able to resist the enemy: For experience teaches what benefit or loss an
army may receive by a good or bad quartering, and hereof histories yield a
world of examples.

To lodge or encamp the Cavallrie, a special care must be had of the commodity
of water, and where they may be under shelter: for one cold or rainy night
might ruin the Cavallrie, nothing hurting a horse sooner then cold or wet. By
this means the soldier shall find forage at hand, and needs not to go seek
it abroad with his horse of service, all not having nags. When the horse be
lodged in several quarters, two soldiers of every quarter attend the person
of the General, or the chief Commander, to carry any sudden orders to their
several quarters. But of such companies as are quartered near him, Unus ex
omnibus manipulis imperatori in diem excubat. Polyb.
one is sufficient. When all the Cavallry is lodged together, the Lieutenant
General, Commissary General, and Quartermaster General are usually lodged
near the General, for the better distributing of the Generals orders.

The appointing of the quarters belongs to the Commissary General and the
Marshall, by whose directions the Quartermaster General proceeds. It is fit
for them to have some demonstration on paper, of the place beforehand; and to
know the commodities and discommodities, also advenues of the enemy; wherein
the guides can better direct them then the usual maps, which (if not false)
are too general. When the Quartermaster General Cum vero appropinqua ve^int
ubi ca^tra ponenda, prae^unt Tribunus, and Centurionum illi, qui ad hoc munus
semper electi sunt, etc. Polyb.
goes before to make the quarters, not only the particular Quartermasters,
but also two soldiers of every company are to go with him; which then go back
again to conduct their respective companies to their assigned quarters;
especially in the night. The Provost (or rather the Waggon-master) sends one
of his men to take notice of the place for the lodging of the baggage, who
afterward conducteth him thither; where he then assigns the Sutlers (or
victuallers) their quarter, and causes all carts or wagons to be removed out
of the streets, left an alarm be given.

CHAP. II. Of distributing the quarters.
GReat discretion must be used in appointing to every one such quarter as is
Pro gradu legionibus and auxilus, equitibus and peditibus, loca deputantur in
cas^ is. Veg. 3.8.
fitting and conformable to the quality of his person, and convenience of the
place. The best way to avoid suspicion of partiality is, that such as be ill
lodged now, be better accommodated the next time. The marketplace (for the
convenience of all, and for safety) is to be in the middle; but so as no
streets run through it leading to the Rendezvous or place of arms.

When the quarter is to be in some suspected place, it should (if possibly it
could) be made in the day time, before the approach of the night, that so the
fittest place for the alarm place might be made choice of, and also for the
corps-du-guard; also the better to discover and observe the approches of the
enemy, and to appoint the stands of the Sentinells; that so the soldiers
finding all things ready, be not put to find out their lodgings in the dark
with lighted straw, in danger to fire the houses: besides, a Lieutenant with 25
Harquebusiers uses to be sent out before, and to place themselves beyond the
further side of the village where the quarter shall be, placing Sentinells a
good distance before them, to prevent the enemies sudden approach on that part.
The best house must be appointed for the General, as near the Corps-du-guard
as may be; the rest of the officers are to be accommodated in their order.
Every Captain must lodge among his soldiers. The troops, being come near to
the quarter, make Alto; and receiving information by the Quartermaster
General, or one of the particular Quartermasters, that the quarters are ready,
the Chief gives license to the Captains to enter their quarters. They which
have the guard are to be conducted to the place by the Quartermaster General.
But if the army be encamped in the field, the Cavallrie is to be quartered,
according to the The Romans manner of quartering or encamping, is showed in
figure by Lipsius in his book De milit. Romans lib. 5. dial. 4. Also by Sir H.
Savile, in his annotations upon Tacitus. And by Sir Cl. Edmonds in his
observations upon Cesars Commentaries, lib. 2. cap 9. And described by V^get.
lib 3. cap. 8.
manner of quartering of a regiment, For the modern quarterings, see S. Stevin
his castrametation. Also D. de Solemn, and others.
represented in figure 4. part 3. chap. 2. And of the whole army in Figure 5.

CHAP. III. Of the necessity of securing the quarters.
NOthing sooner deceives an unexperienced Captain, then to persuade himself
that he is superior in forces, and in advantage of place, and so far distant
from his enemy as he cannot, or dare not assail him. Upon which supposition
the Militibus ad capiendum cibum occuparis, aut munera facienda dispersis,
faci^e nectuntur insidia. Noctis obscuruas, necessitas somni, pascentium
equorum dispersio, occasionem superven^nu^^ prastat. Veg. lib 3.8.
surprisings of quarters are often grounded, it being no marvel that secure
and disordered men should be assaulted by well ordered men and resolute; among
the Cavallrie especially, where the soldier cannot arm himself without help:
his horse-boy nor himself being scarce themselves, (as but newly rouzed out of
their sleep by the alarm) can hardly tell where to find bridle or saddle, or
light: so as the enemy is upon their jacks before they can mount, or at least
unite themselves together.

These things oftentimes happen, but are justly derided by good soldiers,
Castrorum munitio curanta mihil en^^^equae tam salutare, neque tam n^cessarium
in venitur in bello Idem lib. 1. c. 21.
and therefore all diligence must be used at all times as if the enemy were at
hand, ready to set upon the quarters every moment.

CHAP. IIII. Of the manner of securing the quarters.
ALl the diligences used about securing of the quarters, seem only to serve
for the gaining of time, Subita conterrent hosts, usitata vilescunt.
and that the enemy may not charge you on the sudden, so as the soldiers have
not convenient time to arm themselves, mount their horses, and assemble at the
place of arms. To effect this, there is no better way then to The Romans
manner of fortifications about their camps, for security, are fully described
by Veget. lib. 1. c. 24. If the enemy were near, all the army stood ready for
battle, to guard them which (behind them) wrought about the trenches. And this
was done by every century by turns; every soldier becoming a pioner for the
time. Ibid. cap. 25.
make sure the enemies approches. If the quarter be in a suspected place, the
companies of Harquebusiers are to be quartered in the advenues of the village,
the Lances (if any be) and Cuirassiers in the middle.

At the entrances of all the streets, either trees or For a sudden defense of
the quarter (if being in a champain country, destitute of any other) it has
been usual to enclose the quarter with wagons and carts. So did the
Helvetians (now called Swissers) as Caesar records it, Communt. cap. 10. And
to this purpose, vide Veget. lib. 3. cap. 10. Persae (imitantes Romanos) ductis
fossis castra constituunt; and quia arenosa sunt propt omnia, saccos quos i^^es
pertav^rant, (...) pulverulenta (quae effoditur) terra complent, ^orumque
c^^nulo aggerem faciunt. Ibid.
wagons are to be placed acrosse, giving order to the Harquebusiers to guard
those passages, and that none of them mount on horseback without special
order: that so, the rest may have time to assemble at the place of arms, if the
enemy come figure depicting encampment layout THis Regiment consists of four
troops of horse, viz. two of Cuirassiers, and two of Harquebusiers: which
Regiment contains in breadth (or front) from A. to B. 700. foot, and in depth
(or length) from B. to C. 300. foot: from A. to D. is 205 foot in breadth for
one company of Cuirassiers, which consists of 80 horse, together with 80
nags, which have five files of huts, and five files of horse, which Curassiers
are quartered (or lodged) on the right hand of the Regiment.

From E to Z is 115 foot in breadth for a company of Harquebusiers, which
consists of 100 horse, and it has three files of huts and horses.

From A to G is the space of ground where the Collonell of the Regiment is
lodged, on the right hand of these four companies, and the said enclosure for
the Colonel is 70 foot broad, from A to G.

From G to H is 40 foot in depth (or length) for the said enclosure for the
Collonell; and so are all the other enclosures of the Officers.

From H to I is 20 foot in breadth, for the street between the Collonells
Enclosure, and the Enclosure for the Lieutenant and Cornet of the said
Collonells company (which are both lodged in one Enclosure, marked I K) which
has also 70 foot in breadth, as that of the Colonel; which Enclosure is
divided into two parts: The Lieutenant being lodged on the right hand, and has
40 foot in breadth for his Enclosure: And the Cornet on the left hand (with one
of the Trumpeters) having the other 30 foot in breadth of the said Enclosure;
which makes 70 foot for them both.

From K to L is another street of twenty foot broad, to the enclosure marked L
M. L M is the enclosure where the Quartermaster is lodged, with two other
horsemen which he pleases to admit of, which is 25 foot broad, and 40 foot
long, as the rest. Their hut (within the said Enclosure) being 12 foot square
for them three, and their stable is 25 foot broad for their six horses.

From M to N is 30 foot for the street between the Quartermasters enclosure,
and the first hutts for the horsemen, marked N.

From N to O is 180 foot for the quartering of the files of huts for the
horsemen, viz. for 16 huts, and their 32 horses in a file, agreeable to the
Regiments of Infantery: That so, where the Regiments of Cavallry are to be
lodged in the champaine ground among the Infanterie, they might all make one
and the same line before and behind the Regiments. And through the said two
Troops of Cuirassiers there be two streets marked P. which streets are of 13
foot broad and the huts of the horsemen are ten fort broad, and 8 foot long for
one horseman and his boy. And between two huts there is two foot of space for
the drain of rain water, dropping from the thatch or covers of the huts. These
huts have their chief doors or passages toward the heads of their horses, and
a small one opening into the street, where they lay their hay and straw every
one behind his own hut.

Q are two streets of twelve foot broad, which pass through the troops of
Harquebusiers.

R is a street of five foot broad, between the horsmens huts, and the mangers
for their horses.

S is ten foot for the Stables for their horses, which horses are placed with
their heads toward their huts, and every horse has 4 foot in breadth for his
litter, and 8 foot for the two horses; according to the length of their huts.
And more ground then eight foot they must not take; for otherwise it would
cause a great disorder and confusion, not observing the said precise measures.

T is a street of 20 foot broad between the heels of their horses: in which
street they mount and alight off their horses; which street they are bound to
keep clean, and to carry away the dung every two or three days.

V is 30 foot in breadth for the street called the Victuallers (or Sutlers)
street.

W are the Sutlers huts being ten foot square, and more room they must not
take, unless (when they have many Pensioners) the Quartermaster give them a
foot or two more in breadth, but not in depth, to observe the measure of 300
foot in the depth of the Regiment, as the Infantery.

X is ten foot of ground behind the Sutlers huts, for a place for the Sutlers,
the horsemen and their wives to dress their victuals. And in no other place of
the Quarter must any fire be made. Neither are they to cast any filth, etc.
within the Quarter, but to carry it to the place appointed thereunto, upon pain
of a fine, which the Provost takes.

E F is the enclosure of the Captain of a troop of Harquebusiers, being of the
same breadth and depth as those of the Capt. of Cuirassiers, viz. 70. foot
broad, and 40 foot deep. And the ancientest Captain of Harquebusiers, or
Cuirassiers closes the battalion of the Regiment on the left hand, at the
corner marked B.

F Y is a street of twenty foot broad, to the Lieutenant of the troop of
Harquebusiers his enclosure Y.

Y Z is 25 foot in breadth for the enclosure of the said Lieutenant, where also
are placed his four horses; having in depth 40 foot. And the Cornets of the
troops of Harquebusiers are lodged on the right hand in the two first huts of
the horsemen, and that to place his three horses, and the fourth horse is the
Trumpeters, who always lodges with the Cornet. These companies of
Harquebusiers have also 180 foot depth for the quartering of their three files
of huts marked (in the Cuirassiers) N O. but these have but 15 huts in every
file for 30 horse: having also two streets (as the Cuirassiers) through them
marked Q. being 12 foot broad (as abovesaid) leaving three foot of space
between their huts for the drain (whereas the Cuirassiers have but two foot)
their huts are also often foot broad and 8 foot deep for two Harquebusiers, and
8 foot for the litter of their two horses, and ten foot for their stable. And
five foot for a street between their huts, and the mangers of their horses:
their Sutlers streets, and Sutlers huts, etc. are as the Cuirassiers.



The manner of Quartering the Pr. of Orange his Army both horse and foot.
figure depicting encampment layout

upon them; unto which a new passage must be cut, for the more privacie and
security. If there be Dragons, then they are to guard the said approches: If
Infantery, then it is their task to do it.

If the situation of the place be such as that the enemy may environ it round,
the usual entrances or approches to the village are to be stopped up, and new
ones cut in some secret places, as gardens or the like, distant from the usual
ways, that so the enemy may be afraid to charge home a Centinell or
Corps-du-guard, thereby to enter with them as they retreat. The quarters are to
be well barricadoed about, except the new cut passages leading to the
Rendezvous.

CHAP. V. Of the Rendez-vous or alarm place.
THe alarm place is that place without the village, where the soldiers are to
assemble to withstand an assailing enemy, being a place of great consequence.

In the election of this place, consideration must be had of the situation of
the villages and country, whether it be large or strait; also of the time,
whether it be by day or night: again, whether the Cavallrie be lodged together,
or in several villages. If together in one village, and in the night, (when
the enemy may come upon them the more at unaware, as not being discoverable
very far) then this place must not be in the front of the village, as being
too near the enemies approach, whereby it might be seized on by him, and so your
men cut off one after another as they come thither to assemble themselves: but
it must be on the sides or flanks of the village, though the baggage be
hazarded; which This all ages have verified. The States men (by a stratagem)
had surprised S. Hertogen-Bosh, anno 1585. but by reason of the covetousness
of the soldiers (neglecting their charges to fall to pillaging) were beaten
out again with loss. Meteren. lib. 12.
inviting the enemy to pillaging, often gives him occasion of disorder. But in
the day time it were best to be in front, showing the more courage.

If the Cavallrie be quartered in diverse villages (which often happens,
especially in places little suspected) the quality of the country must be
considered. Some villages may be backed with rivers, and so give but one
entrance to the enemy: then the general place of arms or rendez-vous shall be
in the center. And those villages which are exposed to the first brunt, shall
be as Corps-du-guards to assure the rest. These (upon alarm given) must
assemble in their particular alarm places, from thence they shall advance,
united to receive the charge, though the enemy far exceed them in number: and
must sustain him so long, till they may be assured that the rest are all met at
the general Rendez-vous, whether (being forced by the enemy) they shall
retreat by little and little, the other advancing to relieve them. If the
country be open, so as the enemy may assail which he please, then they must
use those diligences as when the Cavallrie is lodged altogether in one village.
They which are first assaulted must make resistance, until the other be met at
the general Rendez-vous.

Touching the order of their assembling together in the alarm place, the
Commissary General, or Quartermaster General, overnight appoints a certain
place for every troop, where they shall stand, which way faced, etc.

CHAP. VI. Of the Guards.
THe Commissary General is to keep account of the Of the guards, and means of
securing the quarters, used among the Romans, Vegetius handles at large, lib.
3. cap. 8.
Guards, and to give orders requisite to those that are to have the guard:
wherein he may employ one or more companies, according to occasions. The
Corps-du-guard must be in the middle of the village. The guards, being disposed
in their places, must be every night visited by the Commissary General (which
often the Lieutenant General, and sometime the General himself ought to do)
to keep the soldiers in the greater aw. The Generals company is exempt from
the ordinary guards and convoyes, because they must be a guard to the General,
(unless the General go in person) and so is the Lieutenant Generals company.

The companies entering the guard, must be completely armed, and sound their
trumpets; their Lieutenant taking information of all things from the Lieutenant
which goes from the guard, and then certifying his Captain; who is to acquaint
his superior officers with all occurrences, and with the reports of such as
went to discover and scowre the highways, also of the convoyes and other
duties.

If the Cavallrie lodge in several villages (which ever must not be far
distant from each other) in every village a company must have the guard and
Sentinells.

Edict for Martial law, art. 58.
The Captains, officers, and soldiers which have the guard must be armed all
night, and have their horses at hand, ready bridled, observing all possible
silence.

In the day time, if there be any open champain within half a league (or
thereabout) of the quarter, the company which has the guard shall send out a
Corporal with twelve or fifteen horse, which shall hide himself in some covert
place near the entrance of the said champain. There he shall place double
Sentinells in some eminent place, who seeing some Cavallry, one shall go to
descry them, the other shall go and tell the Corporal; who sending word to the
Corps-du-guard, shall advance at large, sending out two horses to take
knowledge of the said Cavallry. If there be some high tree near the place where
the said Corporal stood, he may thereon place a Sentinel, and save the
sending out of the said two Sentinels. These horse shall be changed (or
relieved) twice a day, by those which have the guard. If the enemy charge them,
they are to retreat to the said entrance, and there to entertain the enemy till
they of the guard can be ready (upon the former notice given them) and come to
second them.

If all the Cavallry go to oppose the enemy, the Captain of the guard shall
have the vanguard. If more companies then one be employed for guard, that
company shall have it, near which the alarm was given.

Sometime it so happens as that the troops come to their quarter in the night
and in ill weather, so as the advenues cannot be observed, nor fitting places
for the guards nor Sentinels: Then the Commissary General (or the General
himself) is to go and appoint them as he shall judge most convenient:
appointing to every company ten soldiers of guard, (more or less as need
shall require) and commanding all to be in readiness, giving order to the
Corps-du-guard (as the only remedy) that if the enemy assail the quarter, they
go resolutely and charge him: which (besides the honor and reputation so
gotten) oftentimes proves Audaces fortis na juvas.
fortunate. Some use (to keep their soldiers awake) to sound the boute-selle
at midnight, as if the enemy were at hand; but that might prove more dangerous
then profitable: for after the first time, it makes the soldiers secure and
careless. Better it is that (after two or three hours refreshing) in such
cases, the companies be caused to go out into the champain, every Si sint i^tae
cautelae, nihil nocturni aut diurni superventus hostium nocere possunt Veg.
lib. 3. cap. 10
soldier taking with him some oats and other refreshments; placing the
Corps-du-guards as shall be thought fit, and not giving ear to the murmuring
of the soldiers. But if the weather be rainy and tempestuous, such as that
they must be under shelter, every officer (by certain hours) shall divide the
night, and go from house to house, knocking and calling to the soldiers,
causing them to saddle their horses. A while after him, another is to enter the
houses, and see every soldier armed and ready to mount, punishing those that
are sluggish.

The Quartermasters shall also (by turns) visit the quarters and guards. The
Chief himself is also to visit the soldiers, calling to one and to another
with a loud voice, to make them the more attentive.

CHAP. VII. Of the Sentinels.
SEeing The Romans manner of setting out of Sentinels, and all that belongs
to the watch, Vegetius shows, lib. 3. cap. 8.
that they of the guard cannot be always on horseback, nor discover the enemy
afar off, to prevent a sudden surprise, Sentinels have been invented; which
every Corps-du-guard sets out of those soldiers which have the guard. These
are usually placed N^cessariis locis ac temporibus non modo simplices, verum
etiam duplices vigiliae constituendae sunt, ut si quid alteram lat^at,
ambarlatere non possit. Leo Tact. cap. 14. 31.
double, that while one goes to certify the Chief of the Corps-du-guard what
he has heard or seen, the other stays to observe new accidents which might
happen.

They are placed where most highways join, to possess all the advenues, if
they exceed not three hundred paces distance.

Nearer to the Corpse du-guard there uses to be placed a single Sentinel, to
observe the motions of the other double.

Between these, another single Sentinel sometime is placed (when the double
are somewhat further off to possess some cross way, or when for some other
hinderance they are not in view of him) which may have both them and the
nearest single Sentinel in view. So that every Sentinel must know that he is
only placed there to certify the Corps-du-guard of all occurrences; so as
(though he were provoked by any advantageous occasion) he must not stir a
foot; or else he commits a That soldier which by day or night shall remove
from the place where he was placed Sentinel by his Corporal, before he be by
him called away or relieved, shall be punished with death, without favor.
Edict. art. 28. Poena mortis apud Romanos, illi qui locum deseruisset aut
omnino fugesset exstatione, Polyb. lib. 1.
capital crime. While the one is gone to relate his observation to the
Corps-du-guard, if the second be forced by the enemy, he shall by little and
little retreat to the said Corps-du-guard.

No Sentinel must alight from his horse, unless for natural necessity; and
then but one at once.

In the day time, the Sentinells are to be placed on high places to discover
the further, but not on the highways, lest they be surprised by forragers or
others of the enemy, pretending to be friends: he shall therefore keep a
stones cast out of the highway, suffering none to accost him.

In the night (if it may be) they shall be placed in valleys, because from
thence one sees best what comes from the higher ground. They shall suffer no
person (whosoever he be) to enter or go out of the quarter; but causing him to
stand at 30 or 40 paces distance from them, the one shall go and certify his
officer; who ( Since the Prince of Parma's time, the Sentinells have not been
trusted with the word: by reason of a miscarriage at the siege at Tournay,
which the States men relieved by wresting the word from a Sentinel.
having the watchword) shall go and take notice of him, and know his business
in that place, and at that time.

The Sentinells are to be changed (or relieved) after this manner; The The
Romans divided their night (and so the day) into four watches, every watch
containing three artificial hours, which were unequal and planetary. The
first night watch ever begun at sunsetting; the second continued until
midnight: the rest accordingly. Every Sentinel watched three hours, and then
was relieved. In quatuor parts ad clepsydram sunt divisae vigiliae, ut non
amplius quam tribus horis nosturnis necesse sit vigilare. Atisbion^^ omnes
vigilia commituntur, and finius horis a cornicme revocantur. Veg. lib. 3. cap.
8.
hour being come, the Lieutenant parts from the Corps-du-guard with that
number of horse which are to stand Sentinel, the one half of these he
commits to a Corporal, or old expert soldier, which goes with him (for
the Cornet must not forsake his standard) the other moitie he retains to
himself. This division made, the Lieutenant with his troop goes one way, the
Corporal with his, the other; encompassing the whole quarter, each of them
having a trumpet with them. Thus they (riding one toward another) change the
Sentinells from place to place, conducting the discharged Sentinells with them,
till they meet each other.

The Captain having gone the first round, The sending out of rounders was also
used by the Romans. Idoneos tamen tribuni and probatissimos eligunt, qui
vigilias circumeani, and renuntunt si qua emerserit culpa, quos circuitores
appellabant. Veg. ibid.
the rounders are to be sent out, to see whether these Sentinels be vigilant.
And sometimes four other rounders are sent out, twice as far beyond the
Sentinells, as they are from the quarter, (twice at least in a night) to
discover round about the quarter, and to observe whether the dogs bark more
then usually, etc.

If they observe any thing, one comes back to bring the news, the other three
go on. In the day time, a Sentinel shall be placed on the top of the steeple
of the village, where the quarter is, and a boore with him, as best knowing the
passages and approches. If the Sentinel which always walks before the
Corps-du-guard cannot hear him, another Sentinel shall be placed at the foot
of the steeple, so that these three may understand each other, and (without
loss of time) give notice to the Corps-du-guard. Besides, there ought to be
double Equit^s extra v^llum nocturnas excubias facere debent. Ibid.
Sentinells on hors-back placed on high places without the quarter, to be able
to discover the further.

The General has always a Sentinel at his tent, so has the Lieutenant
General, (taken out of their own guards) and so the Commissarie General. No
Captain may have a Sentinel (not to overburden the soldiers) unless he
command the quarter, or have the Cornet lodging with him: except the Captains
of Harquebusiers which lodge in the advenues, that so they may the sooner have
notice of an alarm.

The Commissarie General must show the Captain that has the guard, where the
Sentinells for the quarter shall be placed. The one Sentinel (when they see
men approaching) shall withdraw himself somewhat from the other, toward the
quarter; that so (if any violence be offered to the other) he may run to the
Corps-du-guard.

They are not only to certify of the approach of the enemy or any other; but
also are to observe the fires which they see, or the barking of dogs which they
hear more then usual, or shooting with canon or small shot afar off, and of
all to inform the Corps-du-guard.

If an alarm be given whilst the Lieutenant and Corporal aforesaid are about
to change the Sentinels, they must presently send word to the quarter, and
instantly hasten toward the place where the alarm is, leaving the Sentinells
to stand somewhat the longer.

Castra munire semper tutum est, etc. si enim aliquid adversum contingat, menus
imperatorium erit dicere aliquando, Non putaram. Leo Tact. c. 20.
To assure the quarter in an open and champain country and much suspected, it
is good to place Sentinells 200 or 300 paces from the quarter, answering one
upon another (as upon all occasions they must be) as in a circle round about
it. And these not to stand near the ways or principal approches, (as the
manner is) but always passing to and fro, one toward another, as if they
would change places: By which continual motions none may pass undiscovered.
As far beyond these, they which went to discover have their courses,
sometimes riding up even to the adverse garrisons (if they be not too far
distant) which shall be showed at large in the next chapter.

CHAP. VIII. Of Scouts to discover the highways.
THe quarters being thus accommodated, the Commissarie General shall depute a
Corporal with 12 or 15 horse, and a trumpet to discover or scour the
highways toward the enemies abode; without which diligence the enemy might
charge the Sentinells so suddenly, and enter with them, as there would be no
time for the Corps-du-guard and others to prepare themselves for defense. These
do consist partly of Cuirassiers, and partly of Harquebusiers, to give the
alarm. They are to advance toward the enemy some three or four hours march,
by the several highwayes, four or five to a way, as occasion shall require.
They must not set foot on ground, but must silently go, listening if they hear
any rumor, which in the Tutius operantur exploratores noctibus quam dicbus;
n^m quodammodo ipse sui proditor invenitur, cujus speculator fuerit ab
adversariis deprehensu^. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 6.
night is easy to be heard. If they hear any thing without being discovered,
the Corporal shall secretly send word to the quarter by a soldier of the
approach of the enemy. And when he judges the first is arrived, he may send a
second to assure the former advice; retreating by little and little, and
observing the enemy and the number of his horse: which he may easilier guess
by their footing, then by view. But if the enemy perceived him, he shall cause
a carabine or two to be discharged, and shall speedily dispatch away a soldier
to certify the quarter. Or if the enemies number be great, he shall set on
fire some house thereabout, they of the quarter knowing beforehand wherefore it
is done. And sending two soldiers with more certain news, they shall give fire
to their carabines when they be so near the quarter as that they may be heard,
thereby to give them the more time to get ready. If the quarter be in a very
suspicious place, more companies of discoverers must be sent out, and they are
to have a countersigne given them (as the name of some town, etc.) to know each
other by in the night.

Alarms (though false) cannot be prevented, it being in the enemies choice to
show himself as often as he please, happily for no other intent but to weary
your soldiers; or by that stratagem to make them secure and careless. To
remedy this, the Captains use to give the alarm secretly (without sound or
noise) by silent advices; that so the enemy vaunt not of putting you to
trouble, but weary himself. And thus the horror of the sounds of trumpets and
noise of warlike cries is avoided, which hinder the hearing of the Commanders
directions. But if the enemy charge the said Discoverers or Sentinells so
hard, as that they have no opportunity to send word, but the enemy puts on to
enter the quarter with them (which is the best way for him to compass his
purpose) then they shall (flying to the quarter) give the alarm with firings of
the Harquebusiers and calling out aloud, entering not at the usual ways, but
at the private ones; to give the enemy occasion of suspense, not knowing
whither they might draw him on. Moreover, when the alarm is thus secretly given
(as before showed) and having some notice of the enemies forces how strong they
are in number, you may cause your soldiers to mount with all possible
secrecy, and order them for fight, on the flank of the enemies advenue,
leaving the Sentinels (with some trumpets) there standing, with command that,
when the enemy approaches them, they shall Such a stratagem was used by Sir
Fran. Vere, Anno 1589. who being to pass through a wood near Loc, the enemy
from that castle came forth, to gall them in their passage. Sir Fran. with 50
horse and 6 trumpets made a stand about the middle of the wood, hasting the
troops and carriages out of the wood into the plain, placing 100 foot with 6
Drums in the rear. The enemy gave 3 shouts (as the Spanish manner is when they
go to charge) but could neither see nor be seen by reason of the winding of the
way in the wood. Upon this he commanded the Drums and Trumpets to stand, and
sound a charge: whereat the enemy made a stand, expecting to be charged; which
gave time for all the troops to get into the plain, by hastening their march.
Manuscript penned by Sir Fran. Vere, of his own exploits, etc.
bravely sound an alarm. Whereupon the enemy (if he be a soldier) will charge
them in full career with one squadron to enter with them, and then second those
with the rest of his troops: whereupon it will be hard (especially in the
night) to keep the soldiers from pillaging. The first (entering without
resistance) will be scattered about the houses; the rest will hasten to get
their shares: and whatsoever the Captains do, they shall not be able to keep
them in such order as they ought. Then shall your troops resolutely charge
them, not doubting of a good issue, they being now surprised which thought to
find you asleep. Or if it be not thought fit to fight, yet may you by this
means make a safe retreat, so as you be not troubled with too much baggage.

If there be no bridges or strait passages between the quarter and the enemy,
by which he must necessarily pass, the further the discoverers ride toward
the enemy, the better; if he lay in garrison (so as the distance be not too
great) they may ride to the very gates. But if there be such strait passages or
bridges by which the enemy must of necessity pass if he will assail the
quarter, there must be guards of Harquebusiers placed, which by their giving
fire, or otherwise, shall give notice if the enemy shall approach. Sometime a
whole company is to be sent out upon this service, being a guard for the whole
army.

CHAP. IX. Of forraging.
FOrraging is an action of great importance and danger. 1. Of importance,
because thereon depends the sustenance of the horses. 2. Of danger, by reason
of Hosts qui long a suis aut pabuli, aut praedae gratia commorantur, subito
occupandi cum delectis. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 10.
the enemies endeavors to set upon the guards and convoyes of forragers, which
must be sent out at least twice a week. Therefore, that these forragers may the
better be secured, there must always be a good gross of Infanterie and
Cavallrie sent with them, under the command of a chief officer, or at least a
well experienced Captain. The Provost or one of his assistants is to go with
them, to punish such as are exorbitant or straggle. If the forage be for the
whole army, the Lieutenant General is to lead the convoy. Pugnatores ab
impedimentis laxamento aliquo dividuntur, ne constipati laedantur in praelio,
ambulante exercitu. Ibid. cap. 6.
The baggage nor horse-boyes must be mingled among the troops.

It is not fit to go twice together to one place to forage, lest the enemy
knowing it, watch an opportunity. At first it is good to forage in the most
remote places, and where the enemy is like to come to encamp: but if the
enemy be settled, it is not good to forage so near him as that he might set
upon the convoy with Infanterie and Cavallrie; but rather in such places, where
he can hardly (without great danger to himself) endammage the forragers. Vt
locorum varitas advenerit, ita defensionis ratio varietur. Ibid.
If there be one or more streets by which the enemy might come, between the
quarter and the place of forage, some convenient number of foot, and ten or
twelve horse must be left at the advenues of each of the said streets. The
horse are to place a Sentinel, and to send out two to discover the ways a
good distance before them. By this means the forragers having finished their
forraging, make their retreat safely; to which purpose also one or two troops
of twenty five horse apiece use to march upon the flanks of the forragers.
When all the forragers are marching back again toward the quarter, all the
convoy marches in the rear; it being unlikely that the enemy will set upon
them with any great forces between their convoy and their quarter.

At the place of Ubi pabulandi tempus fuerit, alii pabulum colligant, alii
apparati instructique sequantur, ut ne si omnes se ad pabulum colligendum
converterint, and subita quadam irruptio aut insidiae fuerint, ipsi imparati
spartique opprimantur. Leo Tact. cap. 17.
forage, the Chief shall cause a troop of Harquebusiers to advance somewhat
before the rest, there to stand and to suffer none to pass beyond: he is also
to send out some soldiers on every side, and to visit woods and valleys, etc.

For the better securing of the said forragers, or the quarter, there use to be
fifty or more of the Infanterie (which may be fitly performed by Dragoneers)
with a competent number of horse, placed in some castle or strong Church within
two or three hours riding of the quarter. But to secure the quarter, there
ought to be two places equidistant so guarded, which might cut off those small
troops which run near the army on either side. And if the troops be of number,
these may (by their discoverers or spies) receive notice thereof, and so
suddenly inform the quarter.

CHAP. X. Of Garrisons.
BY reason of the affinity between a camp and a garrison, it will not be
amiss (though somewhat by way of digression) to say something of them. The
fittest places for the Cavallrie to be laid in garrison are those which are
frontiers toward the enemy: thereby the enemies excursions are hindered, and
their own friends secured. Whereas otherwise (though they be never so strong of
Infanterie,) they are like to have some of the enemies horse always at their
gates. Besides, it gives more Adversus omnia profuit, milites quotidiano
exercitio roborare, etc. and
courage to the Cavallrie to have their garrison thus on the frontiers, against
the time of their going out upon service, then if they had spent all the winter
Severe in desides vindicare. Veg. lib. 1. cap. 1. Exercitus ^^bore profitit,
ou^ conse^escit. Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 26.
lazily in some garrison more within the country. It is good to appoint them
their ordinary settled garrisons, that so they may there leave their baggage,
and go into the field with the less encumbrance; which will also make them the
better skilled in the knowledge of the country and ways. If there be one
troop or more of horse laid in garrison in some walled city where the horse
make no guard, the Captain of each troop must always keep one of his soldiers
in the Corps-du-guard of the governor, to give him notice of all occurrences,
of the enemies approches, alarms, etc.

Besides, it is fit that a troop of horse having a frontier city for their
garrison, should keep fifteen horse upon the guard; if there be more company,
then twenty five at least, to be presently ready upon all occasions, while
the rest can prepare themselves. And always at the Anno 1584. the town of
Zutphon was taken and surprised by certain soldiers, which by night had
conveyed themselves close to the gates at the opening of which (in the morning)
they violently rushed in, and kept it, till more supply came. Meteren. lib. 12.
opening of the gates, every morning, two or more horses are to be sent out to
discover about whether there be any embuscadoes. For the securing of your
discoverers some ordinance is always kept ready, and until they return none
are to be suffered to go out of the gate.

If the country about the garrison be champain, happily the enemy lying near
may have an embuscadoe two or three leagues off. And the better to draw you
into it, he may send out some horse (the day before) within sight of your
garrison; which returning the same way Virtatus, disposito per occulta milite,
paucos misit qui abigerent pecora Segobrigensium, ad quae illi vindicanda, cum
frequentes precurristint, simulantesque fugam pradatores perseq^ereneur,
deducti in insidias, caeisque sunt. Frontin. Strat. lib. 3. cap. 10.
(some driving cattle, others carrying sacks, etc.) may draw out some of your
horse to regain their booty, whereby you might fall into their embuscadoe. In
such cases you must observe such cautelous diligences as shall be showed in the
Part. 4. cap. 3. The like stratagems and embuscadoes have been practiced in the
late wars. Anno 1599, Count Lodowick of Nassau by the like device drew the
Count Busquoy one of his garrison of Sevenaer upon an embuscadoe, where Busquoy
himself was taken prisoner (among others) which cost him 20000 guilders
ransom, and the town it self taken. Me^^ren. lib. 21. 433.
chapter of embuscadoes.

If those which you shall send out to discover meet with no boores, or that
they come not to the garrison as they were wont, it is a sign they are stayed
by the enemies embuscadoe.

If an alarm be given in the night, those soldiers which have the guard must
presently mount; their Chief must instantly send two one way, and two another
way to run about the ramparts of the place, to take notice and to report
wherefore the alarm was given: if the rumor continue, the rest are to run
thither with all expedition. But this diligence of keeping the horse at the
Corps-du-guard is not of necessity in such garrisons which lie within the
country, where there is no fear of surprises, or scaladoes.

CHAP. XI. Of Spies.
THe best and principal means for a Commander to avoid diverse inconveniences,
and to effect many worthy designs, are, First, Nulla consilia me^^^ sunt, quum
illa, qua ignora verit adversarius antequam facias Veg. lib. 3. cap. 26.
Metellus Pius, in Hispania interroga^, Quid postera die facturus esset, Tunicam
meam si^d ^loqia posset (inq^^) combiererem. Pro^em. Stratag. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Veteres Minotauri signum in legionibus habuerunt, ut quemadmodum ille in intimo
and secretissimo labyrin^ho ^^^^us perhibetu^, ^ta (...) consilium semper
occultum esset. Veg. 3. ^.
to be sure to keep his own deliberations and resolutions secret. Exp^^randum
soli lie ut quid hostis moliatur, in praesent, vel in futurum possimus
agnoscere. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 6. Livius gives Annibal this commendation, Omnia
ei hostinem, haud secus quam sua, nota erant. lib. 22. For want of good
intelligence, many inconveniences have befallen diverse commanders. Semp. onnis
(as Livie reports) having ^ought against the Eq^i till night p^^^ed them,
thinking himself beaten, without further inquiry, made toward Rome: the Equs
also deeming themselves overthrown, withdrew their army into their own
country. The same might be paralleled by diverse modern examples, for which I
refer the reader to our modern historians.
Secondly, to penetrate the designs and intentions of the enemy. For which
purpose it behooves him to have good spies, which must be exceeding well
rewarded, that so they may be the readier to expose themselves to all dangers.
The best and most assured spies are ones own soldiers, which (feigning some
discontent for want of pay, or otherwise) enter into the enemies service, and
get themselves into the Cavallry, as having best opportunity (whether in the
field or in garrison) to give information. Of these it is good to have many,
and in several places, the one knowing nothing of the other. You are to agree
with them of the place where they shall convey their letters, as some tree,
gallows, or other place easy to find, where they also shall find yours giving
them order to come in person when their advice is of great importance: as, if
the enemy would fall upon a quarter, surprise some place, or attempt some other
great enterprise. There might also diverse soldiers be daily sent disguised,
under several pretenses, to observe what is done in the enemies leaguer, when
it is near. The boors use also to serve for spies, as well women as men, which,
being not much regarded nor suspected, may have the freer access: but these
are not always to be trusted, neither are they so well able to judge of or to
pierce into business, and the less assurance and information is to be had by
their relations.

There are also spies which are called double, which must be men of great
fidelity. These (to get credit with the enemy) must sometimes give him true
information of what passes on the other side; but of such things, and at such
times, as they may do no hurt. But these kind of spies cannot continue long
without being discovered.

If it be possible, such spies must be had, as are entertained into domestical
service of the chief officers of the enemy, the better to know their intentions
and designs.

On the other side, there must be exceeding great care taken to beware of the
enemies spies, which otherwise may do you as much mischief as you reap benefit
by your own. To remedy this inconvenience,

1. Those which shall be discovered must be punished with extreme rigor, which
will be a means to deter others which are or might be so employed.

2. Rogues, vagabonds, and idle persons must be chased out of the leaguer.

3. No officer is to enterain any unknown person into his service. For
oftentimes at table and otherwise things happen to be spoken, which were more
fit to have been kept secret.

4. No stranger is to be lodged within the quarters by any officer or soldier
without special license. To this purpose a sudden Cum explorator hostium
latenter oberrat in castris, omnes ad tentoria sua per diem redire jabeantur,
and statim deprehenditur explorator. Veg. lib. 3. c, 26.
command uses to be published, for every man to repair to his tent or cabin,
whereby the Provost takes such as are remaining in the streets; which are made
to give account of their business there.

5. A means may be used to deceive the enemy by his own spies, giving it out
that you intend one thing, and do a contrary: also by seeming no way
mistrustfull of the enemies drums and trumpets (which are often sent with
some pretended message, to hear and observe) and letting fall some words
(which carry with them some probability) in their hearing, which they may take
for truth.

6. Si speculatores hosttum ceperis, ne uno eodemque modo illos tractaveris,
etc. Leo Tact. cap. 17.
Sometimes it is wisdom, having discovered a spy, in stead of punishing of
him, to tell him that (out of a good Inclination to him) in stead of severe
punishment, you desire to do him good, etc. by such baits they may become
double spies. And if you suspect any of your own soldiers, it is best to
dissemble it, and to make much of them, the better to discover them.

Edict for Marshall laws, Art. 13.
Lastly, no drum nor trumpet of the enemies is to be admitted into the
leaguer, but first to be stayed by the Sentinells of the Cavallry, until
notice be given to the Lord Marshall, and he give leave for their admission:
then they are to be committed to the provost Marshall, which suffers no man
to speak with them. The Lord Marshall having understood their message,
acquainteth the Lord General therewith, that so a course may be taken for
their dispatch. Other ways and means may be used for discovering and
preventing of spies, wherewith the ready Solertia enim imperatoris, ubi
occasionem rerum gerendarum ceparit, non in iis solum quae invente sunt
consistis, sell etiam mulio plura ac sape meliora excogitat. Leo Tact. cap. 18.
invention of a quick-spirited Commander will abundantly furnish him upon every
occasion.

CHAP. XII. Of dislodging.
FOr the manner of dislodging or removing of the Cavallry out of the quarter,
there are also necessary advertisements to be given.

All the Cavallry lodging together, and order being given for their remove, the
Commissary General is to take notice of the precise hour: and at the
distributing of the word to the Quarter Masters, he is to warn them to give
notice thereof to their Captains; which must be careful to cause the With
antiquity it was usual to remove or dislodge, by sounding the trumpet three
times. Leo c. 11.
boutez-selle to be sounded when they hear the Generals trumpets do it. This
uses to be sounded two hours before the time of departing, and the A chevall
when it is time to march. Upon sudden occasions or for privacy, no other
warning is given but only the Tu^^cen unus inso^uit, mox alii pariter
responderunt. Dio. l. 17.
Generals trumpets sound, and the rest take it from them.

If the Cavallry be quartered in several places, the Quartermasters (coming
for the word Scipio tesseram vesperi per castra dedet, ut ante lucem viri
equique curati and prans^ essent, armatus eques fraenatos terieret equos. T.
Live. lib. 28.
the evening before) carry the orders to the Captains, acquainting them with
the just hour for their assembling at the general Rendez-vous. If the remove
be sudden, word is carried by one of the two soldiers which attend the
General; as is before showed. In suspected places they are to remove with all
possible silence.

The Rendez-vous where the troops must assemble, to be ready to march, must be
out of the village, and free from hedges, etc. (though it be somewhat the
further off) toward the place to which they are to march. The company which
has the vanguard is to be first on their march toward the Rendez-vous; the
soldiers of every company assemble at their Cornets lodging, who is to be
first on horseback; and the John, Duke of Calabria is said upon all occasions
to have been le premier homme arm, and de toutes pieces. Phil. de Comines,
lib. 1. cap. 1^.
Captain by his readiness is to give a good example to his soldiers. The
greater part of the company being met, the Captain is to advance toward the
Rendez-vous.

The company which that day has the guard, must not stir until all be gone,
their Lieutenant going to the contrary side of the village (remotest from the
Rendez-vous) to draw in his Sentinells. All the troops and baggage being
marched away, the said company shall also march. But if the said company be to
march in the van or battaillon (to save the travel of the horses to hasten to
their place of march, and the trouble of passing before the other troops) it is
best to commit that duty to the company of Harquebusiers which is to march in
the rear of all.

Every Lieutenant (when his company marches) is to stay to reprehend or How
severe the ancients were in punishing of abuses, may be seen in that example of
Lucillius the Centurion, who having broken a staff about the bones of one of
his soldiers, called for a second, and a third after that, for which he was
called Cedo alteram, among the factious soldiers. Tacit. 1. Annal. Which
severity of theirs wrought so good effects (as Frontine reports) that the
Roman army being to encamp where a tree laden with fruit grew within the
quarter, it remained so laden and untouched when the army was dislodged. Front.
lib. 4. cap. 3.
severely punish such as stay behind, especially doing it to pillage, or for
the like bad intent. The Provost or his assistants are also to stay to see the
fires put out, and good order kept.

As the troops enter the Rendez-vous, the Quartermaster General, or some of
the particular Quartermasters are to place them one after another in their due
places, according to the written orders; leaving spaces for every company that
is to come, which after two or three days they can observe of themselves.

The companies entering the Rendez-vous must fit themselves as for fight. The
Captains must put on their casques, so must the Cornets, etc. The Harquebusiers
must place their Carabines on their thighs. The Cuirassiers must hold their
pistols in their hands, the trumpets sounding, until all be come to their
places. If they be there to make some stay, they may put off their casques and
a light a while, (with leave) but must not omit to place Sentinells on some
high places.

The fourth Part. Of Embattelling.
THE ARGUMENT.
OF all other military actions, the Acies, si sapienter disponitur, plurimum
juvat: si imperite, quanivis optinis bell^tores sint, mala ordinatione
franguntur. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 14.
chiefest is that of embattelling, or ordering an army for combat; which now
(in the last place) I am to treat of.

The occasions of combat for the Cavallry are many and frequent, (sometime by a
sole company, sometime by more troops, otherwhile by all the horse together) of
diverse kinds, upon differing accidents, and those (for the most part) sudden
and unexpected. Since therefore no Nulla ars minus habet stabilia praecepta
quam militaris ars, adeo subita in bellis ingruunt pericula, and fortunae
varietas dominatur. Scipio Amiratus, Dissert. Politic. lib. 21. discourse. 2.
rules nor directions can be so full and ample as to meet with all sorts of
accidents, my purpose is to aim at the chiefest; and to show,

1. How to assail a quarter; to give the charge in fight; and to order
embuscadoes, by way of offense.

2. How to do, meeting with the enemy in marching; and how to receive the
charge by way of defense.

3. How to order the troops in battle; first, by single companies apart:
secondly, by all the Cavallry united in a gross body.

CHAP. I. How to assail a quarter.
A Captain which is desirous to gain honor by some enterprise upon the enemy,
though much his superior in strength, has In mansione dormentibus opportunum
praelium semper infertur, cum hoilis ^us interimatur quam praparare se possit.
Veg. Ibid. cap. 19.
no better way then to assail him in his quarter. To effect this, he must have
good knowledge of the village and the country thereabout; and if he can (by
taking a little compass) charge him on the rear or on the flanks: if there be
any negligence in the quarter, it is like to be on those parts.

If he cannot (by other means) get knowledge how their guards are kept, and
other duties either observed or neglected; he may conjecture by the Ad rem
pertinet qualis ipse adversarius vel ejus comites sint, nosse: utrum temerarii
an cauti; audaces, an timidi; scuntes artem bellicam, an ex usu temere
pugnantes, etc. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 9.
qualities of their Chief, whether he be a good soldier or not; whether he be
proud and hasty, or that he be advised and deliberate: for ignorance joined
with a natural fury causes a man to despise his enemy, and to think it a
disparagement to him (as an argument of fear) to use such cautelous courses in
assuring his quarter; especially knowing himself the stronger.

In the assailing of his quarter, there are two things to be observed;

1. To make your approches as near the village as possible may be.

2. In campis sparsis, atque securis, opportunum pralium infertur, exceptis
superventibus vel incursionibus repentinis ex occasion, quam nunquam dux
exercitatus amittit. Veg. l. 3. c. 19.
To hinder him from uniting his troops into a body.

Touching the first, the first troop shall advance (without any forerunners) as
secretly as may be: and as soon as they perceive themselves to be discovered
(without losing a moment of time) shall charge the Sentinells, and enter the
quarter with them, and surprise the Corps-du-guard before they be able to mount
on horseback.

For the second, there must be an exquisite observance of the orders given, and
not a man to disband. Suppose the enemy has 1000. horse and you but 500, you
may fitly divide your forces into five troops. The first having surprised the
Corps-du-guard (as before mentioned) shall from thence pass to the
marketplace, with resolution to sustain any resistance which they shall meet
with. The second troop (perceiving the quarter invested) shall follow upon the
gallop closely united, and finding no resistance, shall possess the alarm
place, and send some horse to run through the streets, to keep the soldiers
in; and to hinder them from mounting on horseback.

The third shall come fairly on to the said place, and so the fourth; which
(leaving the third there firm) shall hasten to the place where they hear the
most noise: then shall they alight and enter the houses, putting to the sword
what enemies they find. The running of these horse through the streets,
hindering the soldiers to mount, will surely make them think rather Nec
insequentium ullum periculum est, cum victi (quibus defendi poterant) arma
converterint in fugam. Ibid. cap. 21.
of escaping by flight through the gardens or otherwise, then of resisting:
neither can there (in such a tumult) be good orders given or observed.
Therefore the fifth troop hearing the noise cease, may conjecture there is no
need of their help to take the village; and so shall divide themselves into two
parts, and inviron the quarter on the outside, to hinder the enemies flight on
foot. The horse-boyes may fire a house or two, especially where the enemy shall
endeavor to fortify; then (as the soldiers) to enter the houses to pillage
and take prisoners, etc.

Another way of assailing the quarter, is this: The enemies camp removing, the
Chief or Captain must labor to inform himself of the place where he purposes
to lodge that night; and where the quarter for the Cavallry shall be: which may
easily be learned, because overnight it is usually published: or having good
knowledge of the country, he may conjecture it. He must consider the number of
his enemies horse, and of his own, and though he be inferior by half (as
beforesaid) yet may his enterprise take good effect, if it be well carried. He
must fit the time so Nam vel celerius vel tardius aliquo pervenire quam
constitutum est, propositum persape nostrum intervertit. Leo Tact. c. 15. 42.
justly, as that he may come to the enemies quarter in the evening, before the
guards be disposed, or the orders given. And if the distance were such, as that
he must march when the enemy marches; he shall depart from his quarter with
all secrecy, and A good commander (like a good wrastler) ought to make show of
one thing, and to put another in practice: to the end to deceive the enemy, and
gain the victory. Ibid. cap. 20. Tutissimum n^mque in expeditionibus creditur,
facienda ab hostibus nesciri. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 6.
pretend to march to some other place, taking a way contrary to that which
leads to the place intended. And (when he thinks fit) he shall face about,
and march on the flank of the enemy as covertly as may be. But to do this, two
things must be observed; 1. That your march be through your friends country.
2. That you have more then one spy in the enemies Cavallry, so as they be not
able to stir without your knowledge. It must be also considered, that if you
go to assail your enemies quarter, he may have means to discover your purpose
by his scouts or otherwise, and so be prepared for you: therefore must you have
a care to be provided for it, by taking good order beforehand, and securing
your Nam disciplinae bellicae, and exemplorum periti, nusquam majus periculum
imminere testantur, quam in recessu ab hostibus. Veg. lib. 3. cap 21.
retreat by placing a good number of Infantery or Dragoneers in the midway at
some convenient place. Going about this exploit in the night (as the fittest
and safest way) every soldier must have some token or sign of a This kind of
service is called a Camisado, because the soldiers use to put shirts over
their arms to be distinguished by. So did the Duke of Alva his soldiers ( Anno
1571.) in the night assail the Prince of Orange his quarter, donnant une
Camisade. Petit. lib. 10.
white color on their casks, to distinguish each other by. It often falls
out, that the enemy (having got intelligence of some intention to set upon his
quarter) keeps extraordinary guards, and is very vigilant in the night; but
in the day time they all go to rest and are careless, as fearing no danger: at
which time many have been so found and defeated.

CHAP. II. Of giving the charge.
TO know rightly how to charge the enemy, is a matter of great consequence. If
you meet the enemy marching in the day time, and he retreat, whereupon you
resolve to charge him; you are first to send a troop of Harquebusiers to charge
him on the rear, as follows. The Lieutenant shall first give on with 25 horse
charging the enemy upon a full trot or gallop: him shall the Captain follow
with the rest of that troop. These are to be seconded by a company of
Cuirassiers, as fittest to sustain the enemy, if he resist. But if the way be
narrow, the said Cuirassiers shall follow immediately after the first 25
Harquebusiers, and then the Captain with the rest of them. The other troops
shall second these, keeping always a hundred paces distance between every
company.

If you meet a troop of the enemies horse, your self having also but one troop,
both of equal number, and that it so fall out that the enemy retreat; you are
to send your Lieutenant with twenty horse to charge him in the rear, following
him with fifty to the same effect, closed as firm as may be: the rest must
follow at a good distance under a good Corporal, which shall not engage
himself to fight (though the enemy turn head) unless he see his Captain and
Lieutenant in great danger: and then he shall courageously charge the enemy, to
give time to those of his company to reunite themselves: Milites lectissimos
habeat Dux postaciem in subsidus praparatos: ut sicubi hostis vehemennus
ins^ilis, ne rumpatur acies provolent subito and suppleant loca: additaque
virtute, minticorum audacrant frangant. Hac dispositione nulla melior
invenitur. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 17.
there being nothing more dangerous in combat, then to engage the whole troop
at once; because if they never so little disorder themselves, they cannot
reassemble unless they have fresh men to sustain the enemy. Besides, the mere
sight of a reserve gives a terror to the enemy, which (upon occasion) may
charge him on the flank. And if there be but fifty horse in a troop, yet some
ten or twelve would be left for a reserve. If the troop which retreateth be of
sixty horse, at least fifteen must be sent with the Lieutenant to charge the
enemy, so as he be constrained to entertain them, to give time to the rest that
follow to arrive in gross and united: for by your sending of a smaller number,
they might save themselves without loss, by leaving only some few to make the
retreat.

CHAP. III. Of embuscadoes.
IT is an ordinary thing in war, to study how to endamage an enemy, and to
distract his forces: to which purpose all possible means must be used,
especially when the camps lie near each other. The Cavallry must principally be
employed to travel and molest the enemy, sometime by hindering him from his
victual, sometime by endamaging his forragers, sometime by sending some troops
even up to his camp to take some booty, by that means Boni duces, no
capertomarte (in q^o est comm^ne periculum) sed ex occulto sempe^ auemant; ut
(integris suis) quanto possunt holles interimant cerie v^l terrerat. Veg. lib.
3. cap. 9.
to draw him forth, and to make him fall upon some embuscadoe disposed
beforehand in some fitting place.

To order your embuscadoes (or ambushes) as they ought, you must first know
what number of Cavallry the enemy has; if he have fewer horse then you, you
may employ all yours, attempting to draw out all his, and to rout them. Or else
you may employ some small number, by which you may (at several times) make
some good booty, the enemy not daring to issue out of his quarter. But if the
enemy exceed you in horse, it is not convenient for you to make embuscadoes,
unless it be with some few horse: for being a small number, you may easily
retreat; but being a gross, it might be entertained by part of the enemies
Cavallry presently issuing, and those seconded by more, whereby you should be
hardly able to retreat without disorder and loss.

Count Philip of Nassaw anno 1595. intending to set upon Mondragons forragers,
with 600 horse passed the river Lip, to lay an embuscadoe. But being
discovered by some of the enemies soldiers or betrayed, (as Meteren has it,
lib. 17.) was taken unawares and routed: himself and Conut Sol^us wounded to
death, many others slain, and diverse taken prisoners. The Romans were
enquisite in laying and discovering of ambushes.
The good success of an embuscadoe consists chiefly in their not being
discovered, for which cause they are usually appointed to march in the night:
or being to march a great way, to cause them to pass by those places in the
night, where the enemy might most likely discover them. So proportioning the
time, as that they might arrive at the place appointed for ambush before day,
that so they may give time to lay their embuscadoe under favor of the night.
The said troops arriving long before day, they are to be kept firm on the
plain, and Sentinels are to be placed on every side. In the mean time you Qui
superventus and insidias subsessas passus est, culpam suam non potest excusare:
quia haec evitare potuit, and per speculatores idoneos ante cognoscere. Veg.
lib. 3. cap. 22
must diligently search and discover about the place appointed for your
embuscadoe, lest there should be any ambush of the enemies: then (being assured
for that) you are to lay your embuscadoe before the dawning of the day, and to
place Sentinels in places convenient, where they may be unseen: some on trees,
others couched on the ground, to discover such places as they cannot descry
from the trees. The embuscadoe must not be laid much before break of day,
because (otherwise) they cannot discover the approach of the enemy, but at hand,
and so the embuscadoe should have no time to come forth, and put themselves in
order, and being so taken on the sudden, Deprehensa subsessa, si circumveniatur
ab host plus periculi sustinet quam parabat infer. Ibid. c 6.
they might be defeated in their own ambush. Besides, in that remainder of the
night, many might be overcome with sleep, and not use that vigilance which is
required. The troops must be placed at good distances one from another, that so
they intermix not, nor hinder each other in time of fight. In making the
embuscadoe with a gross of Cavallry, some number of Infantery must be laid in
ambush about the midway, to sustain the Cavallry in their retreat (if need
were) or otherwise to assist them upon occasion. With antiquity embuscadoes.
were very frequent and were to be used by either party. Vtrique parti in
itinere ad subsessas communis occasio est. Nam qui pracedit, opportunis
vallibus, vel sylvosis montibus, quasi post se relinquit insidias, in quas cum
inciderit inimicus, recurrit ipse and adjuvat suos. Qui vero sequitur adversis
semitis, long ante destinat expeditos, ut praecedentem adversarium atceat
transitu, decepisum quo a front and a ^ergo concludat. Ibid. cap. 22.
In marching, some horse must be sent out a good way before, by the right way
and the by-ways, to discover whether there be no ambush of the enemies: And
indeed, to be the better assured of the good success of an ambush, it should
be accompanied with some new and extraordinary invention.

If the Chief of a frontier garrison will attempt to endammage the enemy by an
ambush, being inferior in strength to the enemy, he must gather together so
many of the troops of his neighbor garrisons, until he be superior. And by
making embuscadoes two or three times in this manner, it will terrify the
enemy; in so much as that it may be conjectured, that though afterward he make
embuscadoes with fewer horse, the enemy will not hazard to come forth, and so
he may the safelier take booty. When the army marches, there is usually some
Cavallry left behind in embuscadoe in some eminent place, from whence they may
discover far off, by that means to be secured from the enemies Cavallry,
which usually is sent to charge the rear of the marching army, to take some
prisoners, or to get intelligence. But these must not go to their place of
ambush by the right way, but having passed the place, they must return to it by
some by way, lest the enemy following them, discover them by their footing.

To employ all the Cavallry (supposed to be 4000, in forty troops) in
embuscadoe, three troops must be sent before toward the enemy, under an able
Commander, giving notice only to him and the Captains where the embuscadoe
shall be; and letting none of the soldiers know that any more horse are to
follow them, lest any of them (in the enemies charge) being taken prisoner,
should reveal it to the enemy. Of these three troops, one hundred are to be
sent to the enemies camp, viz. fifty Cuirassiers with their Captain and
Lieutenant, and fifty Harquebusiers with their Lieutenant. Of these
Harquebusiers Pauei equites pramittuntur, valida manus per alia mut^tur loca:
primi ubi ad agmen inimicorum pervenerum equites, teniant levites, atque
discedunt, etc. tunc illa manus superveniens, opprimit ignorantes. ibid.
25 shall advance before with a good Corporal, attempting to take horses,
prisoners, etc. as they shall be able. In view of these Harquebusiers, at the
distance of a canon shot, 25 Cuirassiers must make Alto, under command of their
Lieutenant, to receive those 25 Harquebusiers when they return with booty. The
Captain, with the other 25 Cuirassiers and 25 Harquebusiers shall keep behind
some half league off, divided into two troops; the Harquebubusiers being placed
nearest the enemy in convenient manner, partly to succor the said fifty horse
(which likely will be charged by the horse of the enemies guards) and also to
make their retreat, wherein the Cuirassiers are of principal use. These four
troops must still retreat in fitting distance one from another, one of them
still turning face to the enemy; unless the enemy so charge them as they must
be forced to fly in disorder. The other 200 horse (being 150 Cuirassiers, and
50 Harquebusiers) shall enter the embuscadoe, with their Chief, about half an
hours riding off from the other fifty horse; which when they see returning and
charged, they shall issue out: the fifty Harquebusiers first giving a charge
rank after rank, then the Cuirassiers, leaving twenty horse in the rear to make
the retreat.

The gross (which had taken another way, lest the enemy should perceive by
the footing that there was a greater number, and so should stay or turn back)
must be in ambush about an hours march behind the said 200 horse. And seeing
them return charged (as surely they will, the enemy thinking himself the
stronger) shall suffer them to pass, and the enemy also, that so they may
charge them on the rear when they see their time. For better assurance, it were
good to lead out with them (as before was intimated) some C. Cassius in Syria
adversu^ Parthos ducens aciem, equitem ostendit a front, cum a tergo peditem
in confragoso loco occultasset: cein cedenie equitatie, and per notae se
recipiente, in praeparatat insidias perduxit exercitum Parthorum, and cecedit.
Frontin. Stratagem. 2. lib. cap. 5.
500 musketeers, and 300 pikes, which must be in ambush about a league behind
the gross of Cavallrie, on the way by which the said 300 horse should return
charged. These foot must take heed they be not discovered until the enemy be
come up to them, and then shall give them a full vollie to disorder them. Upon
this, the gross of Cavallrie (now issued out) shall charge them on the rear
and flanks: and then the said 300 horse are to face about, and sustain the
charge; by all which means it is not like that the enemy can escape without
much loss.

According to this proportion, a greater or smaller number may be ordered, so
as, if you would make an embuscadoe with 100 horse only, 50 of them must be
sent before toward the enemies camp, or village where he is quartered. Of
these fifty, fifteen are to advance before the rest, to take some prisoners or
horses: the other thirtiefive shall be in ambush about half a league behind
them, in some place (if it be possible) whence they may see those fifteen: but
if not, then to place two horse between themselves and those fifteen, to give
notice when the said fifteen shall return charged. Whereupon twentiefive (of
these thirtiefive) shall advance, leaving ten of the best mounted at the place,
to let the enemy see there is a greater number of horse. These ten must make
good the retreat, until the other fifty arrive which lay in ambush two
leagues behind, with Sentinells to discover afar off toward the other
thirtiefive, between which (about the midway) two horse were also placed to
discover the motions of the first fifty, and thereof to inform these fifty
which were in ambush behind them. These, seeing the first fifty return
charged, shall let them pass, and then issue out against the enemy: the first
fifty (making their retreat by twelve or fifteen of their best mounted
horsemen) having reunited themselves and taken breath, they must make The word
Alto, or Alte, is used in all languages in Christendom, and signifies to make
a stand. I cannot guess whence it should be derived, unless it should be from
the highdutch word halte, which is (as we say) hold, and with us is used in the
same signification.
Alto, and assist the other, as has been showed. This order is to be observed
when you have certain intelligence (by your discoverers) that the enemy has
no forces thereabout. But when you cannot be assured of that (left the enemy
with a troop of fifty or sixty horse, casually meeting with some of your said
small divisions, should defeat them) there might be twenty or twentiefive
horse first sent out, whereof fifteen to advance to take some booty, the other
staying about half a league behind in some covert place, showing themselves
when those fifteen return charged, so to give suspicion to the enemy, or to
make their retreat. The rest might be in ambush altogether, some two leagues
behind them, demeaning themselves as before has been showed.

In Eil autem optimum instruendi artificium, ut plus inferas adversariis
copiarum, quam primo aspectu ostendas. Aelian. cap. 47.
gross ambushes they must make their number seem as small as may be; Sin
parvum habeas exercitum, plures buccinae sonent, ut magnam multitudinem hostium
venire arbitrentur. Leo Tact. cap. 17. 28.
but in small ones, they are to make show of a greater number then they have:
for which reason, all the horse must not go out of the embuscadoe at once, but
some twelve or fifteen (when their number is small) must remain at the further
part of the wood, to favor the retreat of the rest, (as has been said) and to
cause the enemy to think that there is a greater number of them within the
wood. To this purpose some six horse may be left some league behind the rest, a
little out of the way; but so as they may discover if the rest return charged,
and then show themselves at the end of the wood (as before is showed) to make
the enemy think there is a gross embuscadoe, leaving one horseman further
within the wood then the rest, and he to give fire when the enemy may perceive
or hear him, which the enemy may think was done by a mistake.

CHAP. IV. How to do, meeting the enemy marching.
A Commander, marching with one or more troops, and chancing to meet the
enemy, or otherwise having news of him, must presently resolve either to offer
combat, or to retreat, or to attend the charge of the enemy: and herein he
must govern himself according to the intelligence he has, and the convenience
of the Bonum Ducem convenit nosse magnam partem victoria, ipsum locum, in quo
dimicandum est, possidere. Veg. lib. 3 cap. 13.
place. To get the more certain intelligence, besides his scouts, he shall send
out (a good distance before him) a Corporal with ten or twelve soldiers, who
(pretending to be of the enemy, if the country be at the enemies devotion)
shall discover and take information, etc.

If you meet the enemy near his own quarter, and far from yours, you must
resolve with a generous courage to go and In rebus asperis and tenui spe,
fortissima quaeque consilia tutissima sunt. Livius, lib. 25.
charge him, though inferior in number; it being often seen that valiant
resolutions are seconded with good luck. But being near to your own holds, and
knowing the enemy to be much stronger then your self, it will be prudently
done to Observandum autem est, haud par esse, sine magna nec^ssitate, ut pauca
copy cum magno and instructo exercitu dimicent. Leo Tact. cap. 12. 36.
save your men by the nearest retreat: making your retreat in good order, and
taking heed you spoil not your horses by too much haste, but suffer them now
and then to gather breath, leaving a Lieutenant in the rear with some of the
best mounted soldiers. The retreat shall be by the same way you went, so long
as day continues; but night being come, you must take some other way (though
the longer) to return to your garrison, or quarter. Thus you shall gain time by
turning away from the enemy by the benefit of the night; causing the footing
of your horses to be defaced at the place where you left the way; for it is to
be supposed the enemy will follow you by the direct way. To deface or put out
the footing of the horse, if the way be dustie, two soldiers are appointed to
stay behind all the rest, which draw a great bough between them along the
ground, and so put out the marks of the horses footing. Or if there be a great
number of horse, and the way be broad, then four soldiers with two boughs do
it. But if the way be soft, the Chief commands five or six soldiers to
alight, and with their hands and feet to deface the footings; and in such ways
the horse are commanded to march with doubled files, and closed, for a little
space when they turn out of the usual way, that so they may trample the less.
Besides, you may avoid the danger of being traced by the horse footings
(especially in the night) by turning out of the way at some house, or through
some garden, breaking the hedge on the further side, and going into the way by
ways unthought of: by all which means you gain time, whilst the enemy is
constrained to spend time in discovering of your footing, and taking
information of the way that you took.

CHAP. V. How to receive the charge.
IT has been showed how necessary it is, that the Corporal which is sent out
with the scouts or discoverers, be a very able soldier, to know what to do
upon occasion of unexpected accidents. One or more troops of horse being on
their march, with their discoverers before them, if they shall meet the enemy,
and perceive him to be the stronger, the said Corporal shall presently send a
soldier to certify the gross, that they may retreat: himself with his scouts
also retreating, but by differing ways. For suppose the enemy has received
tidings of his contrary party, it is likely that (having discovered the said
scouts) he will follow them, persuading himself that they fly to their gross:
by which means the gross shall have time to save themselves, while the enemy
is pursuing the said Corporal and his fellows.

When the enemy is much stronger, and the other party have neither time nor
convenience to put themselves into good order; the Chief shall call with a loud
voice, and command every man to Quintus Sertorius pulsus acie a Quinto Metello
pio, ne fugam quidem sibi tutam arbitratus, milites dispersos abire jussit,
admonitos in quem locum vellet convenire. Frontin. Strat. lib. 2. cap. 13.
save himself: whereupon the soldiers disband into many parts, so as the
enemy cannot charge them all: and so (especially in the night) many may
escape. But this course is dangerous, and must be commanded with great
judgment: howsoever, in all retreats, some of the best mounted must be left
behind under a good Commander, to make the retreat.

If passing by or through some village or wood, the first discoverers descrie
the enemy, not being able to discern of what number he is, one of them shall
presently come and certify the Corporal which follows with the other
scouts, whereof the Corporal instantly certifieth the Chief of the troops; who
thereupon puts his men in order, causing them to put their casks on their
heads, (which otherwise in march they carry at their saddle, or hanging on
their left arm) and in some convenient place he makes Alto, and resolves
according to the more certain news which the Corporal shall send him. Which
since it may be such as may Prince Maurice, at the battle of Newport, sent the
messenger (which brought him the news of Count Ernests overthrow) away to sea,
and kept it from the knowledge of his soldiers: commanding away all the ships
(to take away all hope of escape by flight) and caused his forces to march
through the haven, to meet the enemy. Meteren. lib. 22.
discourage the soldiers, the Chief perceiving him coming that brings it,
advances toward him, with one or two or his discreetest soldiers, and
receives his message in private. Having heard his relation, he must presently
resolve, either to retreat or to fight. If he resolve to fight (the enemy
being so strong) he must give such orders as shall be fitting, especially
commanding the troops to go serried close; and if there be diverse troops, that
they intermingle not, but observe good order: for it might so happen, that the
enemy might charge him Qui dispersis sui^, inconsulie insequitur; quam ipse
acceperat, adversario vult dare victoriam. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 26.
so disorderly, as he might make head and endamage the enemy, especially if he
have not one or more troops of reserve following him, well united and in good
order.

CHAP. VI. Of ordering the troops for combat, by single companies.
BEfore we come to show the several forms of battle which may be used among
the Cavallrie, it will be fit to speak of their several kinds of fighting,
which they are to be practiced in apart by themselves, before they be joined
with the gross.

If a company of Lances were to fight against foot, they were not to give
their charge in an united body (neither upon this; nor any occasion
whatsoever) because even the second rank of them hardly does any certain
execution; but they were to charge them rank after rank, wheeling off to the
rear; to that end keeping large distances between rank and rank. The same order
they were to observe, if they fought against horse upon the offensive. For the
defensive, the company (consisting of 64, as before, Part. 1. Chap. 19.) might
order themselves in this manner. Two ranks (of eight in rank) should face to
the front: two to either flank, and two to the rear; leaving an open square
space in the middle, they all standing back toward back, faced every way, to
receive the charge wheresoever the enemy shall give on.

The same manner might be used in greater bodies, as should seem good to the
skillful Commander. If the Lances were to fight against Cuirassiers, Par. 3.
rangs de lances luialler gaillardement donner par les stances: car par ce moyen
ils l'entr' ouuriront. Monsieur de la Noue. Disc. 18.
they were (by two ranks together) to setch their careers, and so to charge
them, especially on the flanks and rear: every second rank forbearing the
shock, till the first had done it, and was wheeled off.

If one company of Cuirassiers be to fight against another, your enemy
charging you in full career, you are to make a So Walhausen would have it.
Carracoll, that is, you divide your body by the half ranks, and so suddenly
open to the right and left; so as the enemy passes through you, and you
(facing inward) charge him on the flanks, as is showed in Figure 6. Part. 4. Or
if two companies fight against two other, then they observe the same manner,
but keeping each company entire, as may be seen in the same figure.

It is also to be done by the Carracoll first, and then (the enemy being
within you) to wheel to the right and left inward, and so to charge him on the
rear, in full career. These forms (in Walhausens opinion) are of So the said
author conceives; but it is very doubtful. For by this opening to the right
and left, you must turn croop, and then make a whole turn again, and so give
advantage to your enemy. It were better therefore to cause three or four
files of each of your wings to advance on the sudden, and so to charge the
adverse troop on either flank. And, to equal your enemies front, you might
cause the half files of your body to double your front to the right and left
by division. All which your troop must be acquainted with beforehand, and are
to do it in a moment of themselves, with all possible dexterity.
special advantage, for the enemy (having charged you in full career while
you went on upon the trot, only on the sudden opening to the right and left)
either (says he) must run through and effect little or nothing, or (staying
himself in the career) The principal strength of Cuirassiers consists in
keeping themselves close sertied together: for this the Germans are commended.
Il faut dire que les Allemans surpassent toutes les autres nations, parce qu'il
ne semble pas seulement qu'ils soient setrez, ains qu'ils soient collez les uns
auec les autres. De La Noue: Discourse 18.
disorder his troop, and loose the force of his charge: as by Figure 7. Part.
4. appears. The Harquebusiers must be exercised to give fire by ranks. The
first rank, having given fire, is to wheel off to the left (unless the ground
will not permit it, but that it must be to the right) making ready and falling
into the rear; the second rank immediately gives fire upon the wheeling away of
the first, and so the rest successively. Walhausen would have them also give
fire by files, the outward file toward the enemy (whether right or left)
advancing before the body, in full career, and so firing; the rest
successively to do the same, and in this manner to fight against Infanterie
that might charge them on the flanks. But others do utterly reject it, as too
much exposed to inevitable danger. In their firing by ranks, the first rank
advances some thirty paces before the body, first on the gallop, then in
career (as some direct) and so to give fire: the second does the same, and so
the rest. The Dragoniers being a kind of Infanterie, and doing their chief
services on foot, (as has been showed Part. 1. Chap. 31.) it will be needless
here to show how they are to be exercised for skirmish; partly in regard there
is no want of books for the So far as concerns the exercising of the foot
in their postures and motions, I suppose Pr. Maurice his book, and Captain
Binghams notes upon Aelian (with the appendix) sufficient alone: But I wish
some body would go on, and fully handle that which belongs to the Infanterie.
practicing of the foot (though I dare say they exceed rather in number then in
weight) and principally, because I desire to confine my self to that which
properly belongs to the Cavallrie. How they are to dispose of their horses in
fight, has been showed ibid. cap. 31.

Fig:

6. Cap: 6.

Par: 4.

woodcut depicting cavalry movements

Fig: 7.

Par: 4.

Cap: 6.

woodcut depicting cavalry movements

set of two woodcuts depicting cavalry movements

CHAP. VII. How the Cavallrie are to fight against foot.
A Commander having intelligence of some gross of the enemies Infanterie, and
resolving to set upon them, he must principally aim to encounter them in a
place of advantage for the Cavallrie, that is, in an Si equitatu gaudemus,
campos debemus optare; si pedite, loca deligere angusta, fossis; paludibus, vel
arboribus impedita. Veg. lib. 3 cap. 9.
open champain. He must also use all possible diligence to charge them, before
they can be ordered for battle, though they exceed him much for number.

But if the said Infanterie be put in good order at his approach, (if the ground
be champain, and the number equal) yet may they be charged by the horse: First
by some troops of Harquebusiers (or rather Dragons, because they do execution
at a larger distance) which shall give on on their front, flanks, and rear.
These were to be seconded by the Lances (in small divisions) when they were in
use; but now by the Cuirassiers, who shall make their benefit of such overtures
or disorders as shall be caused by the said Dragons and Harquebusiers.

If the Infanterie exceed in number, and so be serried in a gross body, it
will be hard for the Cavallrie to rout them, as has been found by experience
by the Swisses, which still had the better of the horse, by the reason of their
gross bodies of pikes.

If the Infanterie be ordered into several battaillons, the horse are to
charge them where they perceive them most open and naked. But if the foot have
possessed themselves of some place of advantage, as some wood, trench, or
covert way, then the horse are not to charge them; though equal, or somewhat
superior to them in number, in respect of such advantage.

CHAP. VIII. Of ordering the Cavallrie in battle.
THe forms of battle used among the horse (presupposing such as are made by
election, in a free and spacious champain, and not such as are forced through
discommoditie of place, or other respects) Ordinaturus aciem, solemn and ventum
ante prospictat. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 14. Una aciei bellicae forma non est, sed
multa and diversa, pro varutate armorum, militum, hostium, locorum, temporum.
Leo Tact. c. 20. 182.
are many; and do vary according to the ground and strength both of your own
side and the enemies, accidents, and occasions. In all forms a principal care
must be had, that the troops be drawn up from an even front, that so they may
be free from disturbing each other in the retreat.

Basta reduces these forms to four sorts, and Melzo to three, (making the
second and third to be as one and the same) which are these:

The first is, when the troops are ordered as in one file, every troop
following each other in a single order: which form is utterly disallowed,
because it brings but few hands to fight, and the disordering of the first
troop must needs endanger all the rest.

The second is, when all the troops are placed as in Si nimium fuerit acies
attenuata, cuo ab adversariis facta impressione perrumpitur, and nullum postea
potest esse remedium. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 16.
one rank, or one front; the one troop being placed on the flank of the other
in a single order or straight line. Which form is also disapproved, because in
it all the Cavallrie is engaged at once, the one not being able to succor the
other, and having no troops of The Grecians had their troops of reserve, and
herein the Carthaginians imitated them, and these the Romans also followed.
Veg. ibid. cap. 17.
reserve.

The third is, when the troops are ordered checquer-wise, in squadrous,
enterchangeaby placed one behind another: so as three or four squadrons being
in front, such distances are left between each, as others behind them may come
up to the front, without hindering the former. Exercitus contractus and
quadratus, aut non ita multum oblongus, ad omnem occasionem atque eventum
firmus, utilis, atque tutus est. Leo Tact. cap. 9. 34. The Grecians had three
kinds of horse-battels; The Square, the Wedge, and the Rhombe (which is as the
diamond battle.) The Square was held the best for the defensive, the other two
for the offensive. Of these the Wedge is preferred, because it brings most
hands to fight; the rear division of the Rhombe being of little use. Aelian.
cap 18.
This form may well be allowed of, and is retained by the best Commanders in
the present wars of Christendom: yet the forenamed authors have this
exception to it, because the Harquebusiers having taken up the said distances
would hinder the Lances then in use. And if they should be drawn from those
intervalles, and placed on the wings, they must be exposed to the first
assaults of the enemy.

The fourth kind of forms, they make the Lunarie, resembling a half moon: but
in this they differ from each other in the manner. That which they call single,
must needs be weak, their double form is better. But both these last forms (the
Checquer, and the Lunarie form) shall be more fully represented in figure.

Walhausen makes six sorts of battles: namely, 1. The Lunarie. 2. The
checquer. 3. The Broad-fronted. 4. The Embowed. 5. The Sharp-pointed. 6. The
Divided.

The Lunarie (as he makes it, and the figure, Fig. 8. Part 4. cap. 8. shows
it) is good, and indeed better then that of Basta; but is improperly called the
Lunarie form: for it is rather a Hollow, or Open-fronted wedge, like Aelians De
instruend. acieb. cap. 36
Coelembolos.

His Checquer is as the forementioned; and allowable.

His Broad-fronted is also not to be rejected.

His Embowed (which by the name should be a Unequal half moon, like Which the
Latin translation terms Acies incurva; Aelian. cap. 47.
Aelians Cyrte) he makes a mere wedge. The form is not the worse, though the
name be not so proper.

The Sharp-pointed (in regard there is but one troop in front, and that
seconded but by two troops on the rear angles; then but one troop again,
seconded as the first) seems not to be so good as the former, because it
brings few hands to fight, and is very subject to be Whereof Aelian shows
the inconveniences, cap. 50.
overwinged or overfronted by the enemy, and so to be charged on the flanks.

The Divided, especially at so large a distance, I hold to be dangerous. True
it is, that here the Dragons are used as foot, but whether so single and so
extended an order be the best for them to be placed in, I refer to the
judicious.

Now concerning these six kinds of battles, they are in deed and in effect but
two: that is, the Checquer and the Lunarie, as he calls them; and from these
grounds the rest be formed.

But these forms being only imaginary, and withal wanting that perfection
(in many respects) which is required in real battles, I shall now (to give
fuller satisfaction to such as are lovers of military knowledge) communicate
some forms of embattelings, which never yet were published by any.

These are true delineations of diverse battles really ordered and performed by
the absolutest Commanders of our times, according to the exactest rules of art;
and such as experience has approved to be fittest for the modern wars.

For the better understanding whereof, I have thought fit first to put down
these directions following.

All the forces of the whole army (both horse and foot) are usually
distinguished and divided into So did the Romans; the Vanguard they called
Cornu dexirum, the Battle Acies media, and the Rear Cornu sinistrum; as is
showed by Sir Cl. Edmonds, upon Caesar's Com. lib 1. cap 7. Observe. 1. out of
Lipsius de milit. Romans lib. 4. and is handled at large by Leo the Emperor,
Tact. cap. 18.
three parts; namely, the Vanguard, Battle, and Rear. (as has been showed Part
2. Chap. 3.) Each of which parts is governed by its particular Officer or
Chief; yet so as the absolute command belongs to the General. These
distinctions are always so understood, in the order of marching, to avoid
disputes about precedencie; so as they which march foremost are said to have the
Vanguard, they which march in the middle, the Battle, and they which come last
the rear. And these divisions alter their names according to the place they
march in, wherein they observe a diurnall change, as has been showed in the
chapter above mentioned. But if we shall take the meaning of these words
(according to their propriety and usual acceptance) in matter of fight or
battle, conceiving that that part of the army which is called the Vanguard
shall give the first charge; and that which is called the Battle, shall give
the second charge, and the Rearward, the last; it will prove a mere mistake.
For we are to know that the first charge must be given by the first troop, or
foremost orders of companies which are in front placed as in one rank, extended
from the one front-angle of the whole army, to the other: and so it were
impossible for them to be commanded or directed by one Commander, or Chief of
one particular squadron of the army, by reason of the large extent thereof:
for we see that the front of the army embattelled before Dornick. Figure 14.
(which was far inferior to that of late, employed at the siedge of the
Bossch) took up Six foot make a fathom, 100 fathomes a furlong, seven furlongs
and a half, a mile. Five foot make a pace, 10^0 paces make a mile.
6380 foot of ground (being in their close order prepared for fight) which is
above a mile and a quarter of our measure.

Besides, if the Vanguard (as it is called) should give the first charge, the
Battle (which then must second them) may chance to be of a nation not only
differing from the Vanguard, but at variance with them, or else some grudge or
disgust between the Chiefs. And in that respect they might either neglect or
slacken the seconding or relieving of those of the Vanguard, and not use that
diligence which is required. In consideration therefore of these and other
inconveniences, it is best that every squadron of the army be so ordered as
each of them may have their first second, and third troops: by which means
every division shall both be commanded by their own Chiefs, and shall also be
seconded by those of their own squadron, or division, which will give them the
more courage and assurance. The manner therefore for the ordering of an army
for battle, is as follows; That squadron which is called the Battle, is
placed in the middle, the Vanguard on the right hand of it, and the Rear on the
left: and all these (usually) in one front and single order; one regiment (or
sometimes one company, especially among the horse, as Figure 10.) flanking the
other, as in Figure 12.

From hence the first troop of every division is drawn up, and placed in an
even front or straight line, from one angle of the body to the other. At a
convenient Usually 300 foot.
distance behind these, the second troop of every squadron is placed, in an
even rank, as the former; but so as the The Romans also ordered their battles
in three divisions, or troops: viZ. their Hastati, Princip^s, and T^^tarit. The
first were called Acus prima, and these were the Hastati which were to give the
first charge. At a distance behind them were the Principes placed, which were
called Acies secunda: these were so ordered with spaces or intervalles, that
the Hastati (being put to retreat) might fall back into these spaces, and the
Principes might advance to give the second charge without disturbing each
other. The third troop (Acies tertia) were the Triarii, which were placed
behind the Principes, observing therein such intervalles as before mentioned.
Vide Livium lib. 8. and Lipsium de milit. Romans lib. 4. ubi etiam Aci^i
Iconismus.
first troop (which are to give the first charge) being to retreat, and this
second troop to advance, they disturb not each other: for which reason,
convenient spaces are left in the first order or troop, for the second to come
up into. The third troop is placed just behind the first, but at twice as large
a 600 foot.
distance from the second, as the second is from the first; that so the first
troop retreating behind the second, they may have convenient room to make their
retreat in good order. All this will appear in the figures following, among the
rest in Figure 9.

If the Infantery and Cavallry be joined together, the manner is to place half
the horse on the right flank of the foot, and the other half on the left, as
appears in Figure 12. 14, and 15. But upon occasion either of the enemy his
ordering of horse within the body of foot, whereby he might annoy your
Infantery; or for other respects of moment, some of the horse may be placed
within the body of the army, as is showed in Figure 16.

Figu: 8

Cap: 8

Par: 4

woodcut depicting cavalry movements

What distances be observable between Regiment and Regiment, between Squadron
and Squadron, between each Troop, the second from the first, and the third from
the second, the figures will sufficiently show, and especially the scales of
measure in every figure. For the more easy understanding of them, observe that
every body of pikes is single hatched, thus small figure demonstrating how to
chart different types of soldiers on maps and the musketeers crosse-hatched,
thus small figure demonstrating how to chart different types of soldiers on
maps, the horse are left white or void, as in Figure 12. by which the other
forms may be easily understood.

CHAP. IX. Of certain ceremonies before fight.
HAving showed by these former rules and examples, how the horse are to be
ordered for fight, not only by themselves, but also when they shall be joined
with foot: that which Quid superest nisi pugna^ quae jam manuum est, non
verborum. Lips de milit. Rom lib. 4.
now remains seems rather to require action then words. Indeed with
antiquity, when the army was embattelled and ready for combat, it was usual
for the General to deliver some set speech, either from some higher place of
turf or stone, or at the head of the troops, and riding amongst the Maniples to
encourage his soldiers. And they either with an acclamation, lifting up of
their hands, or clashing of their arms, used to manifest their assenting
resolution. Unto which kind of Cesars army, being so dismayed through fear as
they were almost brought to desperation, (tantus subito rimor omnem exercitum
occupavit, etc.) was by a elegant oration of his suddenly revived. Hac oratione
habita, mirum in modum conversa sunt omnium mentes, summaque alacritas and
cupiditas belli gerendi innata est. Caesar de bello Gal. lib. 1. cap. 9.
allocutions the ancient Sages use to ascribe a mavelous efficacy, not only
amongst the Grecians or Romans, but also those whom they then accounted
barbarous, as the Britons, Gauls, Germans, etc. as the histories of those
times sufficiently testify. Next to this, they sounded the Classicum (that is)
a general charge; and this was seconded by a general shout of the soldiers,
or a concussion of their arms. Moreover, a Tun^^a ^ussa, punicea, vel coccinea.
Some resemblance hereof there is in the bloody flagge at sea.
scarlet, red, or a carnation colored coat or cassock was hung out upon the
top of the Generals tent: and a countersigne, or a word of distinction was
given to the soldiers, as, Veg. lib. 3. c. 5.
Victoria, palma, virtus, or the like, to know each other by. The Grecians used
also to sing the Poean, before the fight to Mars, and after battle to Apollo,
etc.

Of all which ceremonies (which they duly observed, as found to be of very good
use, and which were much graced by the solemn and stately manner of performing
them) our times have retained very few. For as the actions of the modern wars
consist chiefly in sieges, assaults, sallies, skirmishes, etc. and so afford
but few set battles; so the practice of delivering public speeches is almost
grown out of use and esteem amongst our chief Commanders. Yet the late Meteren.
lib. 12 J. Petit. lib. 15.
Prince of Orange at the battle of Newport before the conflict, delivered a
pithy short speech to his soldiers: adding to his public Oratory, public
Orisons, and riding up and down, gave courage to his soldiers. The Classicum
is still retained (that is,) to sound a general charge, namely amongst those
troops which are to give on. And sometimes the Clamor militaris, or shout of
the soldiers, which was not only an acclamation or assent unto the Generals
speech, but also a This by the Grecians was called (...) and by the Latins
Barri^us (the original of which words, is showed by Lip (ubi supra) yet
afterward when the Empire was become Christian, they used (when they were
ready for conflict) to cry, (...), that is, the victory of the Cross: as
appears by Leo the Emperor (who reigned in the Fast from the year of our,
Lord 886. to 903.) Tact. cap. 12. 69. Cum ad conflictationem movet exercitus,
consueta Christianis vox usurpanda est, (...). And after this, in the very
charge they were to make their shout, as it follows there 106.
Conflict^tionis tempore post vocem Victoriae crucis, mignos atque altos
clamores ^dere oportet.
loud and dreadful kind of noise which they used to make when they gave the
charge, thereby to encourage one another, and to strike a terror into the
enemies: as the Turks cry, Bre, Bre, Bre; the Irish, Pharro, Pharro; the
French, Sa, Sa, Sa; the Dutch, Vall aen, Vall aen, etc. But as for the
countersigne or word of distinction, that is seldom used now adays, unless
upon occasion of some Camisado, or other exploits in the night, when the
soldiers may easily miss those means to know each other by, which in the day
time the light, the sight of the ensign or cornet, their skarfs (required
among the Cavallry) or long acquaintance, may afford them.

But these being but ceremonies (as I called them in the title of this chapter)
I willingly withdraw my self from them. Neither should I have been desirous to
have meddled with them at all, but that the example of others Lips. de milit.
Romans Reusner. de art stratagem.
(who have writ in this kind) led me unto it; and the respect unto my Reader
(in common civility) required it at my hands; whom I could not well leave
(after the sight of so many dumb figures) without a word or two at the parting.

There remains only now, that every one (according to his office, rank, and
ability) strive for honor and victory; propounding to himself the goodness
of the cause, and authority of the Prince, the command of the Leaders, the
virtue of the soldiers, the honor of the conquest, and the disgrace and
damage of the defeat. Above all, lifting up his eyes and heart unto Almighty
God, from whose hands victory, and the means to obtain it, is especially to be
expected. Psalm. 18.32.34
It is God that girdeth me with strength of war, and makes my way perfect.
He teaches my hands to fight, etc. Psalm. 144.1.
Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches mine hands to war, and my
fingers to fight. Psalm. 44.5, 6, 7.
Through thee will we overthrow our enemies, and in thy name will we tread them
under that rise up against us. For I will not trust in my bow, it is not my
sword that shall help me. But it is thou that savest us from our enemies, and
put them to confusion that hate us. And to this purpose we may (not
unfitly) apply that which Hezekias spoke to his Captains and soldiers (by way
of encouragement) after that he had fortified himself against the power of the
Assyrians, 2. Chro. 32.7, 8
Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the King of Assyria,
nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there be more with us then with
him. With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to help us,
and to fight our battles. Conformable to this was that admonition of Alphonsus,
King of Arragon and Sicily, given to his son Ferdinand, when he sent him with
an army in aid of the Venetians against the Florentines, in these words, Cited
by Reusnerus out of Panormit. lib 3. de rebus gesti^ Alphonsi, and Marineus
lib. 11. rerum Hispanicarum. Omne robur corporum, omnis equitatus, armorumque
app^ratus, Deo non adjuvante, ab agmine formicarum prorsus nihil differt.
Niceph. Gregor. Byzantinae Histor. lib. 3. -- non me tua fervida terrent
Dicta ferox: Dii me terrent, and Jupiter hostis. Turnus ad Aeneam, apud Virg.
Aeneid. l. 12.

Nunc maxim te admoneo, fili, ne tantum aut tuae, aut commilitonum audaciae
tribuas, ut putes absque Dei auxilio victoriam ullam haberi posse. Victoria
(mihi creed) non hominum consilio and industria paratur; sed Dei Opt. Max.
benignitate atque arbitrio. Scientia igitur rei militaris ita demum profutura
est, si Deum nobis pietate atque innocentia pacatum propitiumque habuerimus.
Deum igitur inprimis cole, in eum confide, a quo tum victorias omnes and optima
quaeque provenire non dubium est. Quem si quando tibi iratum suspicaberis, cave
contendas; imo quicquid ab eo tibi accidisse videbitur, been consule, and
patientia atque poenitentia eum placa. Solet enim Deus, quos diligit, interdum
malis afficere: and quos constantes in adversis videt, rursus in meliorem
fortunam restituere. And now for a conclusion (in stead of an Omen) I will add
that ejaculatory prayer of the Psalmist, Psalm. 90.17.
The glorious majesty of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper thou the work of
our hands upon us, O prosper thou our handy work.

THus have I briefly (according to my weak ability) run through that part of
the Art military, Witness those f^equent and sharp reprehensions, expressed in
his Majesty's letters, from time to time: among others, that of the 21. of
September ^ 1628 from Windsor: and the continual and serious callings upon for
reformation, by the letters from the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Counsel, and the right honorable the Lords Lieutenants of every County.
which principally concerns the Cavallry: Which subject I have the rather
chosen to treat of, because it is so little and so sparingly handled by those
that have given us directions for war, and less observed in our ordinary
practice, especially in the exercise of our trained troops here at home.
Wherein yet I do not presume to have attained unto that maturity which is
required for the perfect knowledge and instruction of it; much less do I take
upon my self to teach others (as I doubt not but there are many thousands that
are a great deal better able then my self) but only in hope that these my
collections may serve either as a manuduction to those, that are desirous to be
instructed in the first rudiments or confused knowledge of this Art: or else as
an occasion to the judicious Masters of it, friendly and favorably to correct
or supply what they shall find here to be amiss, or wanting. For my self, I
shall account it a sufficient reward of my poor endeavors, if by my untunable
jangling I may chance to toll and call in better ringers. But it is too late
now (and at all times least of all expected in this kind of subject) to labor
for apologies, or with Rhetorical colors to varnish or dawb over the wants
and imperfections of this discourse. 2. Mace. 15.38
If I have done well, and as the matter required, it is that which I desired:
but if slenderly and meanly, it is that which I could attain unto.

FINIS.
The Pr: of Orange his Cavallrie Ordered for Battle before Gulick 1610
Fig: 9.

Par: 4.

Cap: 8.

chart showing battle formation

The form of the Duke of Brunswycks horse Battle in the plain of Elton.
The 5th of September 1623.
Fig: 10

Par: 4

Cap: 8

chart showing battle formation

The Embattailing of 37 Troops of horse before, R^ees the 23 of September Ao.
1614.

Fig: 11.

Par: 4.

Cap: 8.

chart showing battle formation

The Cavallrie Embattailed by his Excellence, Prince Maurice before Rees in
Octobr: 1621
The whole fron Contains 3895 foot of ground

The Form of Battle of Horse and foot, as it was ordered by his Excellence
Prince Maurice before Domick the jjth of Sept: 1621

The whole front contains 6380 foot.

Fig: 13

Par: 4

Cap: 8

chart showing battle formation

The Infantrie and Cavallrie Embattailed by the Pr: of Orange near
Vorstenburgh toward Gulick Aug: 22: 1610
Fig: 15

Par: 4

Cap: 8

chart showing battle formation

The form of Battle Ordered near vorstenburgh in the march toward Gulick
the: 22: of August 1610 Differing from figure 19 in that some of the horse are
here placed with in the body.
chart showing battle formation


