THE Churches Plea FOR THE Divine Presence To Prosper HUMANE FORCE.

IN A SERMON Preached, June 5. 1689. Being the Day appointed for a General
Fast, and to Implore the Blessing of Almighty God upon Their Majesty's Arms.

By T. CRVSO.

DEUTER. 33.7. Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah, and bring him unto his people;
let his hands be sufficient for him, and be thou an Help to him from his
Enemies.

LONDON, Printed by J.R. for John Salusbury, at the Rising Sun, near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, 1689.

THE PREFACE.
IF ever it were Seasonable, since we were a people, to sanctify a Fast, and
call a solemn Assembly, we must acknowledge it to be Eminently so, when the
Wisdom and Piety of our Governors lately put us upon that work. What King
(says our Savior) going to make War against another, sits not down first,
Luke 14.31.
and consulteth whether he be able to meet him that comes against him? But the
consultation in such cases may be either Prudential, or Religious; and when the
mere Politician upon the prospect of some visible advantages on his own side,
is ready to cry out (with those forward Sons of Zebedee) We are able, Mat.
20.22.
the serious Christian stops a while, and looks higher than any thing here
below, that the strong God may be united with him, before he adventures to
contend with the weakest Adversary.

How far the external strictness in most places upon this occasion, was
accompanied with internal Zeal, the searcher of hearts only can determine;
whether there was an awe upon men's spirits, suitable to the reverence of their
Behavior, is not known to us; Romans 14.6.
But if they who regarded that day, regarded it to the Lord, (and not as an
Humane ordinance imposed against their wills) we need not doubt of an happy and
prosperous event. A Fast which God has chosen, (that is, when our observation
is according to his Institution) is a fast which God will bless: a day of the
aflicting of souls, ushers in a day of salvation to Kingdoms: though on the
other hand, all appearances of Repentance (if they are no more than
appearances) make our sin the greater, and consequently may make our
destruction the swifter: men's burning in unmortified lusts, while they are
covering themselves with ashes turns the solemn meeting it self into Iniquity:
Isa. 1.13.
such a people will be brought lower for their pretended Humiliation, and their
formal Abstinence shall fatten them for Judgment.

There is nothing which will more betray the insincerity of that day's
services, than the total discontinuance of them now; certainly the work, which
we were then called to, could not be well done, by those who thought it the
work of a day; great congregrations are not the only places wherein the people
of God are to pour out their hearts before him: nor is prayer at any time to be
restrained, till God's favorable Answers stir us up to the offering of praise.
Isa. 62.6.
You that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence, should be a continual
remembrance to us of our continual duty; that as we have mourned together
publicly, we may now privately mourn apart, and follow God as close with our
Single Petitions, while the cause remains, as we did for a few hours with our
Joynt-Requests. So might the Kingdom of heaven suffer violence (as it were)
from us, and neither the Gates of Hell, nor any Enemies upon earth be able to
stand before us.

To this end, I very willingly bore a small part in the late General solemnity,
and should be most glad, if I could contribute any thing further, by the
unwilling publication of the following Sermon; for I must own my averseness to
this, as well as my readiness to the other; but if that which the urgent
entreaties of some (whose undeserved affection to my person, may I hope,
procure them some good by my ministry) have extorted from me, should issue in
the awakening of any to their present duty, in seeking the Lord and his
strength upon so great and important an occasion, Psalm. 105 4.
I shall rejoice on their behalf, and be encouraged to displease my self more
for the profiting of others, as well as to run the hazard of those Imputations
which Ill will is always apt to cast.

I have nothing more to detain the Reader in this place with, but to beg, that
the Unaccurate manner of handling may not prejudice him against the matter it
self, and that he would not be offended with the thing for want of acceptable
words: let all the weaknesses here discovered, be attributed to the man, and if
there be any thing truly Edifying and instructive, let the honor of it be
given to God, who has taught me to account my self as one of

The meanest of his Servants, though in the Noblest Employment. T. C.
June 19. 1689.
The Churches Plea for the Divine Presence to Prosper Humane Force.
PSALM 108.10, 11. Who will bring me into the strong City? Who will lead me
into Edom?

Wilt not thou, Oh God, who have cast us off? And wilt not thou, Oh God, go
forth with our Hosts?


THis whole Psalm, with very little variation of Words, and without the least
variation of Matter, is borrowed from two preceding Psalms. The former part of
it is composed of the latter part of the 57th. Psalm, from the 7th. verse to
the end; the latter part is taken out of the 60th. Psalm, from the 5th. verse
to the end. But whereas that (last mentioned) Psalm is introduced with a most
sad and mournful Preface, holy David begins here in a more cheerful strain, as
more suited to the present dispensation, under which he was. When that Psalm
was penned, David seems to have been in actual danger, at the writing of this
he is thought to have received the Mercy, which he prayed for before; and he
now records his own Experience of God's Goodness to him, and powerful
appearance for him in former difficulties and straits, not only as a standing
encouragement to himself, and other beleivers then, but as a Typical pledge,
Dickson on the Psalms Vol. 3. p. 94.
and earnest of that glorious final victory which should be obtained by the
true Militant Church over all her intestine and foreign Enemies under the
conduct of Christ her exalted Head and Savior in the Gospel Times.

What David's particular Case was, we may easily collect from other Scriptures.
Before the Death of Saul, he had the promise from God, of succeeding in the
Throne, and of the prosperity and flourishing of his Kingdom; when he had the
possession of it, many of the neighboring Princes and Nations set themselves
to oppose him; among the rest, the Philistines did so, Psalm. 83.6, 7, 8.
and the Syrians, the Ammonites, Moabites, and Edomites, of whose Confederacy
and conjunction in that accursed Cause, the Holy Ghost gives us a distinct
account. David's engagement in these just and necessary Wars against his, and
Israel's Adversaries (which were continued in some measure till the very birth
of Solomon) was the reason why God did not expect from him the building of the
Temple; but however, God did not leave him alone in the carrying of them on,
and the conquests which he made, were very considerable, according to the hope
and desire of his own Heart. Moab (says he, verse 9. of this Psalm) is my
wash-pot, and over Edom will I cast out my shoe, (expressions of great
Contempt, and of the meanness and servitude of that state, which they should be
brought into) over Philistia will I triumph. So he proceeds in the words of the
Text, who will bring me, etc.

Some conceive, that by the [strong City] here, in the 10th. verse is meant
Rabbah, the Royal City of the Children of Ammon, which was so long besieged,
and at last taken by Joab. Others think, 2 Samuel 12.26.
that the Psalmist speaks to the same subject both in the former and latter
part of the verse, and therefore apply it to the Fortifyed places in [ Edom's]
Country, who boasted much of invincible strength; as we may learn from the
Prophet, who foretelling the destruction of Edom, says, Obad. 3.
The pride of thy heart has deceived thee, thou that dwell in the clefts of
the rock, whose habitation is high, that say in thy heart, who shall bring
me down to the ground? These Edomites, as they were lofty and insolent, so they
were old and inveterate Enemies to the seed of Jacob; but David was led (as he
wished) by a mighty hand of Providence to vanquish and subdue them; 2 Samuel 8.14.
so that throughout all Edom he put garrisons, and they all became David's
Servants.

The Time which he refers to, in the 11th. verse wherein God [had cast them
off] was in the Reign of Saul, when the sins of the Israelites were justly
punished, both by his Arbitrary practices, whom they foolishly courted, and by
God's abandoning of them, whom they sinfully despised. David's Subjests could
not but say, that it was better with them now in all respects, than heretofore;
as they now lived under a more gentle and Righteous Government, so they enjoyed
more of the smiles and blessings of Heaven.

The words contain in them two principal things. 1. An earnest enquiry after
some effectual succor. Who will bring me into the strong City? Who will lead
me into Edom? Not that David was ignorant, whence such succor might be had,
like the blind world whose common cry is, Psalm. 4.6.
who will show us any good? (for he had an Eye which was always open, to the
Everlasting Hills) but to intimate, that he depended not upon any Military
preparations, not upon any skill and courage of his own, nor upon the numbers
and union of his people. The like passage we meet with elsewhere; Psalm. 94.19.
Who will rise up for me against the evil doers? Or who will stand up for me
against the workers of Iniquity? Implying, that he wanted and sought after some
further help, beyond what he had already, in the concurrence of his Subjects
and Allies, whose service, though valuable and useful in its place, was not
sufficient. 2. An Humble expostulation with God about it. Wilt not thou, Oh
God, who have cast us off? And wilt not thou oh God, go forth with our Hosts?
David forms his Petition into a Question, which he puts up to God with a
becoming reverence, and yet with a warrantable boldness; as in other places
also, Psalm. 85.6.
after the same manner; wilt not thou revive us again, that thy people may
rejoice in thee? Which was no argument of any distrust, or doubt whether God
would or no, but rather on the other hand signified an hopeful confidence that
he would. I will only add, that this is such a way of Address to God, as the
due modesty of Creatures and Sinners does not forbid, but the Liberty granted
to beleivers does very much encourage.

There are several Truths included in this Text, which are worthy to be opened,
and seasonable at this Day.

In Cases of public Commotion, by the attempts which Enemies make against us,
and we against them, it behooves us to be very sollicitous about the issue of
them.

Former rejection by God should not damp all comfortable expectation of future
assistance from him.

God's favorable help is of greatest consequence to be desired and obtained
for the making of our Arms Victorious.

I propose to handle these points severally, and conclude with an Application
which may be suitable to them all, and to the design of this days Assembly.

I.
The First Thing, which I shall endeavor to show, is that In cases of public
commotion, when our Enemies and we are making mutual attempts against each
other, we ought to be very sollicitous, that it may have an happy and
successful end. This truth is grounded upon the passionate working of David's
Spirit, when his Forces were bent against bloody Edom, he seems to be zealously
inquisitive about the matter, Who will bring me into the strong City? etc.

We should not, like Jonah, sleep in the midst of Storms, but rowse our selves
into a serious thoughtfulness, as to what will become of us and of our
Country. We know how sharp the Disciples were upon our Savior, when the waves
beat into the Ship, and he lay upon a pillow in the hinder part of it; Mark
4.38.
Master carest thou not that we perish? What censure then can be too severe for
those, who in the greatest distress of Nations, do scarcely manifest the least
concern? Though perhaps more than a Kingdom lies under the hazard of perishing,
there are multitudes of such a slothful and careless temper, that they will not
put themselves to the trouble of considering; but sit at case, till almost
every thing about them is not only shaken but removed. How many, as if they
were strangers in our Jerusalem, or worse, have no sense of the common
difficulties to be encountered, nor of the miseries to be escaped; but at the
same time, when all good men are ready to stand with their hands upon their
Loins, or to fall upon their Knees, they are perfectly stupid and secure, and
shake off all fear of wrath in this World as well as that which is to come!
Surely this is not a Christian, but a brutish frame; a frame most unfit to be
found in now, when such probable dangers look us in the face, when both the
rage and confidence of our Enemies is grown so high, and our own unthankfulness
for fresh deliverances is so notorious. To be regardless of our present
circumstances, or indifferent about them, argues an Heart woefully hardened, and
is a sin which has various sins in it. I shall mention Three which are very
evident.

contempt of Providence. For there is the finger of God in every Hand which is
lifted up against us; no Dog can move his Tongue against an Israelite, if God
think fit to tie it; no man can so much as desire our Land, Exodus 34.24.
if he would restrain and bridle their Affections. God can chain up the
ambition, or the cruelty, the pride or the fury, which is in the hearts of
Tyrants, tho he never intend to purge it out. Satan and all his Instruments,
being God's prisoners, are limited and confined by him, according as he
pleases; and therefore if they be in any measure let loose, it is a special
dispensation which calls us to bethink our selves. Neither the roaring Lion,
nor any other Beasts of prey can go about, seeking whom they may devour, much
less could they actually devour, if God would hedge them in. Without his
permission, the waster cannot find in his heart to destroy, nor lay his design,
Isa. 54.16.
nor do any thing in order to its accomplishment; for God has created the
waster, as such. It is in his power, when he will, to seal up the hand of every
man; therefore, Job 37.7.
when wicked men are suffered to disturb our peace, and we are put to defend
our selves by force, it is an awakening summons to serious consideration. He
that could prevent Balaam from cursing his people, can as easily hinder other
Adversaries from assaulting them; he that moved the Officers in the Syrian Army
to depart from Jehoshaphat, after they had surrounded him, 2 Chro. 18.31.
is as able to keep them from coming nigh. The God, who gathers the wind in his
fists, could block up the most threatening Fleets on their own shores;
undoubtedly then, if he fill their Sails, and give them the opportunity of
advancing toward ours, it ought to seize and affect our minds. It Is good to
take heed, lest in despising the oposition of man sometimes, we despise the
Providence of God.

Compassion to our Brethren. We know that the War now undertaken, is designed
for the relief of our Fellow-Protestants, as well as our own safety: so that if
this should fail and miscarry, we cannot without horror reflect upon the fatal
consequences of it, with respect to them, as well as our selves. If the unclean
Spirit be not cast-out he will torment those poor creatures so much the more,
which are already under his power. If our Enemies should have the success
which we pray against, it would make their little fingers thicker and heavier
than their loins have yet been: and woe be to those whom God shall give up to
fall under half that weight. When Moses and Aaron did but intercede with
Pharaoh: that the people of Israel might go and sacrifice to God in the
wilderness, Exodus 5.7.
he presently increas't their task, and multiplied their burdens; what do we
then suppose, that he would have done, if he could have overtaken them in his
pursuit of them, and brought them back into his Land? It is a double
destruction which our Brethren must look for, if God should blast our attempts
to save them. And besides, they are our Brethren also, who adventure and expose
their lives in this Cause, whether in the field, or the deep: they are many of
them (as the tribes of Israel said to David) our bone and our flesh, 2 Samuel 5.1.
and their Death should be precious in our sight upon that account. How does
every man, that really engages in this great Expedition, carry his soul in his
hand, and throw himself upon the sensible brink of Eternity? Not one of those
many Thousands knows, but that the price of his blood may be written upon the
mercy which is brought forth: should we not therefore be very thoughtful about
the gaining of that mercy, which multitudes may pay so dearly for? Is it
nothing to us, that in all likelihood, the sword must cut off so many of our
Friends, before we are fully delivered from our Enemies? where is our Humanity
and the sounding of our bowels? are they all shut up?

zeal for the interest of Christ. There is a great deal more which lies at
stake this day, than perhaps we are all aware of at the first sight: according
as God shines upon our counsels, or overthrows them, according as he blesses,
or defeats what is now doing, for ought we know, it may fare well or ill with
the Protestant Religion, and with all that adhere to it: (at least, all in
these parts of the world.) God himself only is able to tell, how far the
consequence of this present action may extend, as to the raising or ruining,
the Supporting or Extinguishing of the Reformed profession. There is manifestly
that upon the wheel, which as God is pleased to order and determine it, may
turn the scale very much as to the fall of Sion or Babylon, the upholding of
the Kingdom of Christ, or Antichrist, in Europe. The issue of it, is likely to
be very glorious, or very dismal: the Gospel will either get or lose much
ground: Truth will be quite Eclips't and Swallowed up by Strong delusions, or
else prevail and triumph over them. Some where (Either in the Land of Judah,
Isa. 26.1.
or in the land of her Enemies) that Song will be sung, We have a strong City.
If our Adversaries should be permitted to lift up their heads now, how will
they trample our Holy faith under their feet? what havoc and desolations will
they make, wheresoever the name of Christ is duly called upon? how would the
Conquest of these Kingdoms, and of those Provinces that have so seasonably
assisted us (which God in mercy forbid) let them in like a flood upon the rest
of the true Christian world? They would no longer say, let us break their bands
in sunder, but conclude, that they had broken them, and bid us in derision, to
flee as a bird to our mountain. Psalm. 11.1.
This in the judgment of reason must follow, if God should cast the lot of
Victory on their side: and therefore, is there not a cause for the deepest
concernment? must we not be (like the Idols of our Enemies,) stocks and stones
in deed, if we sit still and consider nothing, when the All of our Religion
seems Embarked in this bottom?

II.
The Second thing, which I am to prove, is that Former rejection by God should
not discourage all Comfortable expectation of future assistance. The God that
has cast us off heretofore (as we see here in the text) may stand by us, and
join with us afterward. We are not to think that the stream of adverse
Dispensations will never turn, or that he who seems to forget our misery a
while, will forget it always. If God has been angry, we must not therefore
fancy, that he is Implacable; if his fury has burnt like fire, it is no
argument, that this fire cannot be quenched. Such conclusions are very absurd
and irrational upon several accounts. I shall instance in five Particulars.

Providence in this world are very various. This is a changeable state; the
face of the Sky is not constantly alike, but sometimes clear, and sometimes
lowering: it is neither always free from Clouds, nor always Covered with them.
The Church from the beginning had her mixture of prosperous and afflictive
days. As Job rebuk't his wife with saying, shall we receive good at the hands
of God, Job 2.10.
and not evil? so on the other hand we may comfort our selves with this, Have
we received evil at Gods hands, and shall we not also receive good? (though
there be this disparity, that the one is freely bestowed, and the other justly
inflicted.) As it is groundless presumption, when our mountain stands strong,
to say, we shall never be moved; so it is unreasonable despair, when our
Mountain has been shaken, to say, we shall never be settled. Tho God is of one
mind, and has one general end, which is, to order and dispose all things for
the best, yet his Infinite wisdom does not constantly observe one and the same
method: sometimes he glorifies himself, and does us good by our distresses, and
at other times by our deliverance. The Beauty of Divine Providence consists
partly in their Variety: the work of God would be less admirable, Eccles. 3.11.
and his glory less visible, if His people were continually either under
Smiling, or frowning Dispensations.

set times of Executing judgment, and of showing compassion. There is a time to
correct, and there is likewise a time to favor: Psalm. 102.13.
as Solomon says that there is a time of War, Eccl. 3.8.
and a time of peace. God observes the proper seasons of giving rest, and
causing trouble, of exercising us with Enemies, and rescuing us from them; and
this he is as careful to do, as to maintain and keep up the succession of day
and night, of the Summers heat, and the Winters cold. Our Heavenly Father knows
that we have need of both, and he knows when we need them; so that our
Tranquillity shall not be lengthned out too far, nor the rod of the oppressor
remain too long, but these things shall take their turns, as God sees most
convenient for us. 1 Cor. 15.23.
What the Apostle says with respect to the Resurrection, every man in his own
order, may be accommodated to this case, every thing falls out in its own
order; when one work is accomplished, God begins another; when we have been
kept low long enough in the midst of difficulties and straits, he Commands
enlargement to arise. Therefore, it is no strange thing for God to remember
mercy in wrath, and make light to shine out of darkness, Amos. 5.8.
and to turn the shadow of death into the morning.

Thirdly, It is no unusual thing for mercy to contract a peoples sufferings,
and overrule the arguments which are brought by Justice. Though we cannot say,
that God is ever really divided against himself, yet when he condescends to
speak of himself after our manner, and in compliance with our infirmity, we
read of a kind of struggling and contention between one Attribute and another.
Hos. 11.8, 9.
How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? (says God by the Prophet) how shall I
deliver thee, Israel? (as if he were vehemently press't to do it, and yet could
not comply.) etc. My heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together; I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to
destroy Ephraim, etc. The Righteousness and the Goodness of God seemed here to
be at variance, and after some dispute (as it were) the Goodness of God
resolved to cease that controversy, which his Righteousness might have
continued; the people were bent to back sliding from God, v. 7.
and therefore Justice was inclined to punish them still; but mercy (like the
Angel which held Abraham's hand, when he was going to sacrifice his Son) urged
their forbearance, and prevailed. God is often provoked by a Nations sins to
prolong those calamities, which he uses his Prerogative of Grace in cutting
short. We generally deserve that God should pluck us down, and root us up, when
on the contrary, it is his good pleasure to build and to plant us. Indeed he
never yet wrought any Salvation for his Church, but that at the same time, when
he did so, he might have gone on in the way of his Judgments.

final, when the causes of them are in some measure removed. Perhaps, God cast
us off before, for the sake of some National wickednesses, which are at this
day purged. It could not be expected, that God should upon any occasion fight
for us, when the body of the people in the same manner which Gamaliel spoke of,
were fighting against God. Acts 5.39.
While the Word of God (in a sense) was bound, I mean, while the preaching of
it was restrained, no wonder that God was as a man astonished, Jerem. 14.9.
and as a mighty man that could not save. It is in vain to hide that which is
too publicly known, and calls for solemn Repentance; the sin of Persecution
(that mischief framed by a Law) was for many years, like Achan's accursed thing
in our Camps; but God having now by the hands of our Senators opened a door for
the free progress of the Gospel among our selves, one great obstacle of our
Success against Foreign Enemies is taken out of the way. A Legal Indulgence to
Tender Consciences was as fit a preparative to this Fast, as this Fast is to
the following War. I might add, that it may be, sometimes God went not forth
with our Hosts, because they went forth, not against our Popish, but our
Protestant, Neighbors; when we were joining with our Enemies against our
Friends it was in Mercy to us, that God did not prosper us; when we have been
helping those who sought our ruin, and weakening those that were always our
refuge in distress, the assistance of his Providence would have argued his
displeasure; but blessed be God, that now they who are United with us in one
Faith, are also joined in one Interest and Cause, and therefore we may somewhat
better expect God's Conjunction with us now than heretofore.

bitter things which God has formerly written against us, we may read a great
deal of comfort in, upon our return to God. The Wine of astonishment which we
have tasted, may now be made a refreshing Cordial. For Executions of
Treatenings (as One well observes) should be taken as pawns of the performance
of promises; the same unalterable Truth which binds to the one, will secure the
other. We may be confident, that God was not more ready to forsake us during
our Impenitency, than he is to receive us, when we repent. Past calamities
while we were in our sins, should be improved to strengthen our Faith of future
mercies, when we turn from our sins. If God has in faithfulness afflicted us,
Psalm. 119.75.
why should we question his Faithfulness in releiving us? We that have felt the
lashes of his angry rod, when we were running from him, shall undoubtedly
experience the succors of his mighty Arm, when we come back to him. Sinners,
whose Transgressions have been visited, are of all others the most likely to be
pitied, when they become penitents. The remembrance of former wounds, seems to
be an encouraging motive to the Church to look for a gracious Cure; Come, and
let us return unto the Lord, Hos. 6.1.
for he has torn, and he will heal us; q. d. he will heal the rather, because
he has torn us. If God had not cast us off before, we should have more reason
to be jealous, that he would do it now.

III.
The Third Thing which I undertook to show, is that God's favorable help is of
most importance to be desired and obtained for the making of our Arms
Victorious.

It Is true, that second Causes have their proper Sphere to Act in, but the
first is infinitely above them. God does not accustom himself in these days to
render means unnecessary by Miracles, but he renders them efficacious by the
concurrent exercise of his own power. As God does not raise up children to
Abraham from the stones, but propagates an holy Seed in an ordinary way; so he
does not defend us merely by Invisible Legions of Angels, when there are Men to
be employed for such a purpose. When God was about to make David King, in spite
of all his opposers, he so turned the hearts of the Tribes of Israel, 1 Chro.
12.22.
that they came to him to help him day by day, till it was a great Host, like
the Host of God. He that rules in the Armies of Heaven, makes use of Armies
upon Earth too, and manages their military acts for the fulfilling of his own
ends. God speaks of commanding, Isa. 13.3, 4, 5.
and calling his sanctified ones, and mustering them for the battle, and
making them the weapons of his indignation to destroy the Land of Babylon.
Josh. 5.14.
Jesus Christ appeared as chief Captain of the Host of the Lord, when Joshua
was their visible Leader. The sword of the Lord had the pre-eminence, Judge.
7.18.
when the sword of Gideon was drawn also. Though David went as Champion against
Goliath, he gives the glory of those Titles to God, the Lord of Hosts, the God
of the Armies of Israel. 1 Samuel 17.45.
Therefore he cries out here in the Text to God, Wilt not thou go forth with
our Hosts? alluding (as some conceive) to God's marching before the Israelites
in the cloudy Pillar, Psalm. 68.7.
which was an Emblem and Token of his presence. Indeed, it is the presence or
absence of God, which makes the event of all Warlike Expeditions either good or
bad; Deborah animates Barak with this, that Sisera would certainly fall into
his hand, Judge. 4.14.
because the Lord was gone out before him; and on the other side, the Psalmist
complains, that God made them turn back from the Enemy, Psalm. 44.9, 10.
because he went not along with them. Creatures like our selves, have their
part to perform but Almighty Aids are the principal thing. Upon this account,
Moses was not contented with the guidance of an Angel, without the presence of
God himself; If thy presence go not with me, Exodus 33.15.
carry us not up hence; implying, that it was to no purpose for them to move,
if they left their God behind them. God's going forth with Armies, is eminently
advantageous to them in several respects; which I shall reduce to these four
Heads.

skill and prudence for their proper work. Multitudes of persons are called to
this service, that were never trained up (it may be) by tedious discipline, nor
have had opportunity of improving themselves by frequent practice, according to
the methods and rules of Art, whom God (nevertheless) can instruct to
discretion in this employment, as he does the Husbandman in his. Isa. 28.26.
He who is wonderful in Counsel, v. 29.
as well as excellent in working, does therefore many times choose even in this
case, the foolish things of the World to confound the wise; men that have but
little experience, and as little wisdom of such a sort, to foil the greatest
Commanders with. 1 Samuel 17.33.
What was David but a raw stripling, that ran from the Sheepfold to the Camp;
c. 18.5.
and in a little while, he was set over the men of War, and made himself so
famous, that the slaying of ten thousands was ascribed to him, v. 7.
and but thousands to Saul; the true cause of which is mentioned afterward, v.
12.
the Lord was with him. And David himself makes a particular acknowledgment of
it, Psalm. 144.1.
Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight. He that understood only how to handle a Crook, or play upon a
Harp, must needs be taught of God, when he came to meddle with weapons of War.
God can make those men considerable Helpers in a victorious Battle, whose Folly
and Ignorance we might rather suspect to hinder it.

Inspiring them with Courage. That God who has put such a Nature into the
Horse (which being a Brute, is not capable of the same impressions as a Man)
that He mocketh at fear, Job 39.22, etc.
and is not affrighted, neither turns he back from the sword, etc. What a
vigor can he easily diffuse by his unseen influence into the spirits of
reasonable Creatures? It is thought, that Balaam refers to this, when he says
concerning Jacob and Israel, Number. 23.21.
the Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King is among them. The
Presence of God with a People creates such an extraordinary cheerfulness and
joy, as when a Just and Gracious Prince comes into the Field, and is received
by his Subjects and Soldiers with Universal Acclamations; it fills them with
such Life, that they can look innumerable Deaths in the face, without paleness,
or dejection; they value nothing that stands in their way, having the
Encouragement of such a Leader. There is no such fortitude in the World, as
that which proceeds from this very cause; the undaunted Christian Soldier does
far exceed the Roman; for a Divine Principle and Motive must needs carry men a
great deal further than a Moral. What hardships will he rejoice to endure, what
dangers will he prepare to meet, who feels an Immanuel, God with him! How does
this strengthen men's Hearts and Hands, and raise them to a more than Heroic
pitch! This quickened Jael (one of the feebler sex) to do execution upon the
mighty Sisera; and has often prompted small Handfuls of men to be the bold
Assailants of the most unequal numbers.

prevention of Enemies from making any remarkable resistance. This God does,
where he is present, two ways; viz. in blinding, and terrifying of them.

blinding of Enemies. I do not mean Literally, as God did to the Sodomites, who
would have offered violence to Lot, and to the King of Syria's Troopers that
were sent to apprehend Elisha; but in confounding and perplexing of all their
Counsels and Designs, and bereaving them of the use of that Wisdom and cunning
which they have. When Absalom's Conspiracy was grown strong against his Father,
God secured David by turning the subtle and politic advices of Achitophel into
foolishness; 2 Samuel 15.31.
and this was the way of Escape which David himself sought for; because if
Absalom had followed that course which Achitophel chalk't out, David in all
probability had lost the Kingdom. God first infatuates those, whom he intends
to overthrow; he shuts their Eyes that they may not find their hands; he throws
their reason and judgment into a dead sleep, and so hurries their distracted
thoughts, that they cannot think one thought to their advantage. If God be on
our side, he will make those that are against us to take those methods, whereby
they shall destroy themselves.

terrifying of them. There are many Instances of this in Scripture. The
Egyptians had their Chariot wheels taken off in the Red Sea by Gods troubling
of them, Exodus 14.24, 25.
and the dreadful apprehension of his fighting for Israel. And so it was
prophesied many years after this, that Egypt should tremble, Isa. 19.16.
because of the shaking of the hand of the Lord of hosts. The Philistims were
scared with the sense of Gods coming into the Israelitish camp, 1 Samuel 4.7.
when they shouted at the arrival of the Ark. Saul was perfectly disanimated,
and lost the Spirit which he once had, when God was departed from him; chap.
31.4.
and in the end became his own murderer, for fear of dying by another. So easy
a matter is it, for God to change the very tempers of men from the greatest
Courage, to the most sordid and shameful cowardice; as is said in the Prophet,
the mighty men of Babylon have forborne to fight, Jer. 51.30.
they have remained in their holds, their might has failed, they became as
women. An Omnipotent God can in a moment take away the hearts of the stoutest
Enemies; and by that means dis-able them from making that opposition which they
would.

Ordering and Governing of those things which appear most casual and contingent
unto us. Those things which are wholly out of our power, God can make to serve
his and our purpose. As the same Waters which stood up like a Wall for the
Israelites of old, and fell down again for a Grave to the Egyptians; so God can
now cause the same Sea to bear our Ships, and to bury theirs. A storm, when he
pleases, can bring about his end, and our desire; and with this breath of his
mouth, in the twinkling of an eye, he can do that, which many united hands
cannot in the compass of weeks or months. Every bullet that is shot, shall enter
where God directs it, and the steadiest aims of men signify nothing in
comparison of the Eye of God.

He that covers the heads of his Friends and Favorites, can lay open the bodies
of his Enemies, as an appointed mark for Instruments of Cruelty. The Man that
drew a bow at a venture, smote the King of Israel, though in a disguise, 1
King. 22.34.
between the joints of the Harness, because it was God that guided the Arrow.
So when the stone out of David's sling sunk into Goliah's forehead, which
proved his mortal wound, and the routing of the whole Host of the Philistims,
we read, it was God that gave him into his peoples Hands. 5 Sam. 17.47.
Accidents seemingly most uncertain, as well as minute and inconsiderable,
carry a great stroke in determining of Victories, when God goes forth with our
Armies.

Well might therefore the Psalmist conclude this Psalm after such a manner;
ver. 12, 13.
Give us help from trouble, for vain is the help of man; (not vain in
conjunction with God, but vain without him). Through God we shall do valiantly
(we are the immediate Agents, but he furnishes with the active power, and
brings forth the happy effect) for he it is that shall tread down our Enemies.

Use.
Having thus finished the Doctrinal matter contained in these words, I come now
to make some Practical Improvement of it, with a special reference to the
Occasion of this Day. This may be best done in the Answering of Two Questions;
one of which tends to inform us of our present Duty, the other will supply us
with Arguments to back it.

Quest. I.
The first Question is, What shall we do, that our Pleadings with God in such a
Case, for his Conduct of us into Edom, and his Presence with our Hosts, may be
effectual? Answ. In six particulars.

seek first the pardon of our past sins, and Reconciliation to our offended
God. This is the inlet and introduction to all other Mercies, which are Mercies
indeed; therefore the Psalmist does not only take notice of God's bringing
back the captivity of Jacob, Ps. 85.1, 2, 3.
but that he had forgiven the iniquity of his people, and taken away all his
wrath. There is no true temporal Blessing, but what is the fruit of this
spiritual one. A displeased God may providentially deliver an unpardoned
People, but it is a Curse to them, rather than a Blessing; their escape out of
Calamity is a greater snare, than if they had fallen into it. Job 19.29.
Wrath brings the punishment of the Sword; if wrath therefore abides, after the
Sword is put up, the Nation will be miserable still; if sin (the cause of
Wrath, as Wrath is of the Sword) lie at our doors, we are in a woeful condition,
though our houses be safe from the fear of Enemies. But peace with God, is the
foundation of abundance of Comfort in the most troublous times, and causes the
soul to return unto its rest, though the Ears be filled with the Alarms of War;
for if God heal the Iniquities of a Land, we may confidently pray for the
healing of its breaches, and having regained his favor, we are entitled to his
protection.

Put away those Sins, which would continue or revive the Enmity betwixt God and
you. Remission is begged and hoped for in vain, where Reformation is not both
resolved and practiced. All your pleadings with God will be insignificant,
while your sins do so loudly plead against you; their cry will be heard, and
make God absolutely deaf to yours. Complain not that your Enemies are lively,
while your Lusts are so; If you would be delivered from the one, you must not
deliver your selves up to the other. So long as the Idols are standing in your
hearts, your Idolatrous Adversaries are not like to be blown down by your
prayers. It is a faithful saying, that God neither hears a sinner for himself,
nor for the community, which he belongs to. Sin will make both our
supplications and swords to return empty. Therefore Moses warns the Jews, Deuteronomy.
23.9.
When the host goes forth against thine Enemies, then keep thee from every
wicked thing; i. e. then especially, above all other times.

Link your pleas by Faith to the Intercessions of Jesus Christ. Faith ought to
be found in all our wrestlings with God, and fightings with men; or else we
shall only beat the air in both. This is that which has subdued Kingdoms,
Heb. 11.33, 34.
and dispersed whole Armies of the Aliens. Unbelief will spoil the good effects
of our Repentance, and of all our other Duties and endeavors to pacify God, or
defend our selves. Indeed we affront God more by distrusting him, than we can
any other way. Now the best way to support our Faith, and to secure the return
of our Prayers, is to engage Christ as our Advocate with the Father. He is that
Angel who pleaded for Judah and Jerusalem, Zech. 1.12.
at the end of the Captivity in Babylon, and whom God immediately answered with
good and comfortable words. Zech. 1.13.
If the hands of this Moses be held up in the Mount for our English Israel, we
shall certainly prevail against the Popish Amalek here in the Valley.

private Revenge, nor personal Safety in your Requests, but the Glory of God. A
single Eye, and a pure intention in the pouring out of Prayer upon such public
occasions, is the most material Circumstance. Jam. 4.2, 3.
As men may lust and have not, or fight and war, and yet have not, so they may
ask and receive not, because they ask amiss. God will not work to gratify our
Malice and hatred of others, or to indulge our Love of Carnal Ease, but for the
advancing of his own name. Let this worthy end be designed by us, and God will
be very ready to listen to what we say, and to forward what we do: but if
instead of being stirred up by unfeigned Zeal for God, we are transported with
heat of Passion, and thirst after Blood; we may justly look for a
disappointment. The Temper of David, when he prayed with respect to his
Enemies, is very imitable; slay them not, Psalm. 59.11.
but scatter them, and bring them down, O Lord our shield. He did not desire
the death of these sinners, but only the subversion of their power: so should
we be very well contented, though God do give our Enemies a longer space of
Repenting, if he cut off their further opportunities of sinning. Self must not
be too much concerned in any of our Petitions; we should not aim so much at our
own rescue from fear and danger, as that the name of God may be lifted up above
Blasphemy and Reproach. Plead therefore for Victory with him, that you may be
able to Triumph in his Praise.

positive and peremptory, as to the time and manner of Deliverance from those
Enemies, whom our Hosts do go against. For this is not pleading with God, but
prescribing to him. If we are supplicants for mercy, we ought not to be the
chusers of our own methods for receiving and enjoying it. Such things should be
freely left and submitted to God, who is best able and has most right to order
and appoint them. To say, we would have Salvation just now, and in such a way,
whether God judge it expedient or no, is not to entreat with Humility, but to
dictate with Confidence. If God Refuse to join with some Instruments, and will
have others put up in their room, we are not to murmur with impatience, but
acquiesce with thankfulness. If God do not give in the Victory at the first
Assault, but will make us wait for it, and hold out our expectations, till we
are almost ashamed, we should be satisfied, and look upon the Divine will as
the fittest rule and measure of our own. Particular Events perhaps many times
may not be answerable to our desires, but yet the final issue may. Heb. 11.30.
By Faith (says the Apostle) the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were
compassed about seven days.

forfeit the benefit of Assistance and succor from God, by sinful trusting in
man. There is a vast difference between making use of Armies and Navies, and
placing our confidence in them. Ships and Soldiers must not be made our Gods;
for this will provoke the true God to leave us to them, and withdraw himself;
and, whoever they are that unite with us, or stand up for us, it may be truly
said, Woe unto us, Hos. 9.12.
if he departs from us. When we make Creatures the Objects of our Faith, they
become the occasions of our Misery; and when we set them up as the Pillars of
our Hope, they are turned into the Means of our ruin. It is the wretched folly
of Mankind, that they know not how to keep Creatures in their due place; they
cannot employ them, without depending on them. Isa. 31.1.
Woe to them (says God) that stay on horses, and trust in horsemen, but look not
to the Holy one of Israel, neither seek the Lord; perhaps they seek him in
appearance, while they are observing such days as these, but indeed they only
mock him; their applications to God are only a formality, because they solely
expect their deliverance from other hands. So commonly do we lose the advantage
of the Arm of the Lord, and break or wither our Arms of flesh, by leaning too
much upon them. The oftener we have committed this error heretofore, the more
let us beware of it now.

Quest. II.
The Second Question which I proposed to answer, (and close this subject with)
is, what encouragements have we to hope, that God may go forth with our hosts,
and bring us into the strong Cities of our Enemies, upon our taking of such a
course, as has been before directed? I shall mention three things to this
purpose, and Conclude.

first ground of hope which we have, is this, that the people are God's, for
whom this War is undertaken; the body of them are his by Profession, and many
(I doubt not) among them are his in reality. Our Enemies cannot say so much;
for they are not of the Church of God, but of the Synagogue of Satan; as they
themselves are bad, so their very profession is Antichristian. We may take
with us the words of the Jews in reference to their Enemies, we are thine, Isa.
63.19.
thou never barest rule over them. They have put themselves under another head,
who exalts himself above all that is called God; they make mention of the
names, of Saints and Angels, and not of Gods only. They are the open Enemies of
the true Faith of Christ, while we are (at least) the visible Asserters and
maintainers of it. Hence we can plead a relation to God, which they cannot, and
we have large experience of His Affection to us, beyond most people in the
World. There are many things which confirm this truth, that the Lord loves our
Nation; and therefore we may hope, that he will deliver us, because he delights
in us; so that these Kingdoms which have been his rest so long, may be his rest
for ever. This is David's argument in this very Psalm, ver. 6.
That thy beloved may be delivered, etc.

second thing which we may take some comfort in, is that the Cause is God's. It
is not like the unjust and usual Quarrels among Neighboring Princes, where
great injuries are oftentimes falsely pretended, but the enlarging of their
Empire and Dominion is chiefly aimed at, and in order to it, the Lives of their
innocent Subjects are sacrificed by heaps. Here we may justly say, that the
Honor of God and the welfare of his Church, besides other lesser matters of
common Equity, are concerned; and for this reason we may the better expect,
that the Battle will be the Lords, and that he will manage it to his own glory,
and our advantage. The bloody Tyrant against whom this War is declared, and our
Arms are levelled, has made it his business and scope for many years upon that
Throne of iniquity where he sits, to blot out the name of a Reformed Church
from under Heaven; and therefore God (whose work it is to protect and vindicate
the Church from and against her great Oppressors) must needs be interested in
this affair. Psalm. 7.13.
He ordains his arrows against the Persecutors. Surely then so great a
persecutor as that Nimrod has been, should receive the largest portion in
God's Quiver. While Protestant Princes and States (together with others) are
provoked by his most barbarous violences to pour out their Vials of deserved
wrath upon him, we then may also hope, that at the same time Heaven will
inflict the vengeance of the Temple.

third and last thing (which I shall hint) from whence we may gather some
encouragement, is this, that the work already begun, is God's. What the Prophet
says, is applicable to this time, Zech. 2.13.
the Lord is raised up out of his Holy habitation. The great things which he
has done for us, may embolden us to believe, that (as Christ told Nathaniel)
we shall see greater things then these; John 1.50.
and that this is but a day of small things in comparison of what we have yet
to come, (unless our wretched folly and ingratitude prevent.) I would hope,
that in our late Deliverance God laid the foundation of a glorious structure,
and that our Adversaries (who perhaps yet think to cause the work to cease)
shall never be under any temptation to say, he began to build, but was not able
to finish. When God saved us a few months since, Revel. 11.11, 12.
we were (like the rising Witnesses) set upon our feet; but there is a voice of
Providence to follow, which will call us up to heaven, i. e. into a more
triumphant state, though upon Earth still. It is not very probable, that he who
excites us so often to the perfecting of holiness, will desist himself from the
perfecting of Mercy. Though our goodness too often is like the morning Cloud,
which scatters a few drops (it may be) and rowls away, yet God's it not so;
therefore as he rested not till he had completed the whole Host of Creatures
at the first, so now we may have some comfortable expectation of his going on,
till he has fully restored the peace and prosperity of his people. He that
has hitherto so remarkably prevented our destruction, is the same God, whom we
at this day seek unto for the working out of our Salvation.

THE END.
Advertisement.
Books Printed for John Salusbury.
THE Period of Humane Life, determined by the Divine Will, by T. Cruso.

The Mighty Wonders of a Merciful Providence, in a Sermon Preached on January
the 31th. 1688. Being the day of public Thanksgiving to God for the great
Deliverance of this Kingdom, by His Highness the Prince of Orange, by T. Cruso.

The Usefulness of Spiritual Wisdom with a Temporal Inheritance. By the same
Author.

A Rational Defense of Nonconformity, wherein the practice of Non-Conformists
is vindicated from promoting Popery, and Ruining the Church, by Dr. Rule.


