A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, At WESTMINSTER,
March 31. 1647. By R. CUDWORTH, B. D.

(...) CAMBRIDGE. Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the UNIVERSITIE. 1647.

To THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS.
THe Scope of this Sermon, which not long since exercised your Patience (
Worthy Senators) was not to contend for this or that Opinion; but only to
persuade men to the Life of Christ, as the Pith and Kernel of all Religion.
Without Which, I may boldly say, all the several Forms of Religion in the
World, though we please our selves never so much in them, are but so many
several Dreams. And those many Opinions about Religion, that are every where
so eagerly contended for on all sides, where This does not lie at the Bottom,
are but so many Shadows fighting with one another: so that I may well say, of
the true Christian, that is indeed possessed of the Life of Christianity, in
opposition to all those that are but lightly tinctured with the Opinions of it,
in the language of the Poet, (...) Wherefore I could not think any thing else,
either more Necessary for Christians in general, or more Seasonable at this
time, then to stir them up to the real Establishment of the Righteousness
of God in their hearts, and that Participation of the Divine Nature, which the
Apostle speaks of. That so they might not content themselves, with mere
Phancies and Conceits of Christ, without the Spirit of Christ really dwelling
in them, and Christ himself inwardly formed in their hearts. Nor satisfy
themselves, with the mere holding of right and Orthodox Opinions, as they
conceive; whilst they are utterly devoid within of that Divine Life, which
Christ came to kindle in men's Souls; and therefore are so apt to spend all
their zeal upon a violent obtruding of their own Opinions and Apprehensions
upon others, which cannot give entertainment to them: which, besides its
repugnancy to the Doctrine and Example of Christ himself, is like to be the
Bellows, that will blow a perpetual Fire of Discord and Contention, in
Christian Commonwealths: whilst in the mean time, these hungry, and starved
Opinions, devour all the Life and Substance of Religion, as the Lean Kine, in
Pharaohs Dream, did eat up the Fat. Nor lastly, Please themselves, only in the
violent Opposing of other men's Superstitions, according to the Genious of the
present times; without substituting in the room of them, an inward Principle of
Spirit, and Life, in their own Souls: for I fear many of us that pull down
Idols in Churches, may set them up in our Hearts; and whilst we quarrel with
Painted Glass, make no scruple at all, of entertaining many soul Lusts in our
Souls, and committing continual Idolatry with them.

This in general, was the Design of this following Discourse, which you were
pleased (Noble Senators) not only to express your good Acceptance of; but
also to give a Real Signification of your great undeserved Favor to the
Author of it. Who therefore cannot, but as the least Expression of his
Thankfulness, humbly devote it to you; presenting where again to your Eye, in
the same Form, in which it was delivered to your Ear. Desirous of nothing
more, then that it might be some way useful to You, to kindle in you, the Life
and Heat of that, which is endeavored here, to be described upon Paper: that
you may express it, both in your private Conservations, and likewise in all
your Public Emploiments for the Commonwealth. That you may, by your kindly
Influence, effectually encourage all Goodness: and by virtue of your Power and
Authority (to use the Phrase of Solomon) scatter away all evil with your eye,
as the Sun by his Beams scatters the Mists and Vapors. That from you,
Judgment may run down like Waters, and Righteousness like a mighty Stream,
to refresh this whole Land, that thirsts after them. Which, whilst You
distribute them plentifully to others, will bestow, both Strength and Honor to
Your selves. For Justice and Righteousness are the Establishment of every
Throne, of all Civil Power, and Authority; and if these should once forsake it,
though there be Lions to support it, it could not stand long. These, together
with a good Peace, well settled in a Commonwealth, are all the outward Felicity
we can expect, till that happy Time come, which the Prophet foretells, and is
therefore more then a Platonicall Idea; When, the Wolf shall dwell with the
Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid; and the Calfe, and the young
Lion, and the Fatling together, and a little Child lead them: When, the sucking
Child shall play on the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned Child shall put his
hand on the Cockatrice den: When, they shall not hurt nor destroy in all Gods
holy Mountain; for the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as
the waters cover the sea.

I have but one Word more, if You please to give me leave; That after your Care
for the Advancement of Religion, and the Public Good of the Commonwealth, You
would think it worthy of You, to promote Ingenuous Learning, and cast a
Favorable Influence upon it. I mean not, that only, which furnishes the
Pulpit, which you seem to be very regardfull of; but that which is more remote
from such Popular use, in the several kinds of it, which yet are all of them,
both very subservient to Religion, and useful to the Commonwealth. There is
indeed a (...) as the Philosopher tells us, a Bastardly kind of Literature, and
a (...) as the Apostle instructs us, a knowledge falsely so called; which
deserve not to be pleaded for. But the Noble and Generous Improvement of our
Understanding Faculty, in the true Contemplation of the Wisdom, Goodness, and
other Attributes of God, in this great Fabric of the Universe, cannot easily
be dismanaged, without a Blemish cast upon the Maker of it. Doubtless, we may
as well enjoy, that which God has communicated of himself to the Creatures, by
this Larger faculty of our Understandings, as by those narrow and low faculties
of our Senses; and yet no body counts it to be unlawful, to hear a Lesson
played upon the Lute or to smell at a Rose. And these raised Improvements of
our Natural understandings, may be as well subservient and subordinate, to a
Divine Light in our Minds, as the Natural use of these outward Creatures here
below, to the Life of God in our Hearts. Nay, all true knowledge, does of it
self naturally tend to God, who is the Fountain of it: and would ever be
raising of our souls up, upon its wings Thither, did not we (...) detain it,
and hold it down, in unrighteousness, ^^ the Apostle speaks. All Philosophy
to a Wise man, to a truly sanctified Mind, as he in Plutarch speaks, is but
(...) Matter for Divinity to work upon. Religion is the Queen of all those
inward Endowments of the Soul, and all pure Natural knowledge, all virgin and
underflowred Arts and Sciences are her Handmaids, that rise up and call her
Blessed. I need not tell you, how much the skill of Toungues and Languages,
besides the excellent use of all Philology in general, conduces to the right
understanding of the Letter of Sacred Writings, on which the spiritual Notions
must be built; for none can possibly be ignorant of that, which have but once
heard of a Translation of the Bible. The Apostle exhorts Private Christians,
to whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there
be any virtue, if there be any praise, to think on those things; and therefore
it may well become you, ( Noble Gentlemen) in your Public Sphere, to
encourage so Noble a Thing as Knowledge is, which will reflect so much Luster
and Honor back again upon your selves. That God would direct you in all your
Counsels, and still bless you and prosper you, in all your sincere Endeavors,
for the Public Good, is the hearty Prayer of

Your Most humble Servant, RALPH CUDWORTH.

I. JOHN ii. 3, 4. And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a
liar, and the truth is not in him.
WE have much enquiry concerning knowledge in these latter times. The sons of
Adam are now as busy as ever himself was, about the Tree of Knowledge of good
and evil, shaking the boughs of it, and scrambling for the fruit: whilst, I
fear, many are too unmindfull of the Tree of Life. And though there be now no
Cherubims with their flaming swords, to fright men off from it; yet the way
that leads to it seems to be solitary and untrodden, as if there were but few
that had any mind to taste of the Fruit of it. There be many that speak of new
glimpses, and discoveries of Truth, of dawnings of Gospel Light; and no
question, but God has reserved much of this for the very Evening and Sunset
of the World, for in the latter days knowledge shall be increased: but yet I
wish we could in the mean time see that day to dawn, which the Apostle speaks
of, and that day star to arise in men's hearts. I wish whilst we talk of
light, and dispute about truth, we could walk more as children of the light.
Whereas if S. John's rule be good here in the Text, that no man truly knows
Christ, but he that keeps his Commandments; it is much to be suspected, that
many of us which pretend to light, have a thick and gloomy darkness within
over-spreading our souls. There be now many large Volumes and Discourses
written concerning Christ, thousands of controversies discussed, infinite
problems determined concerning his Divinity, Humanity, Union of both together;
and what not? so that our bookish Christians, that have all their religion in
writings and papers, think they are now completely furnished with all kind of
knowledge concerning Christ; and when they see all their leaves lying about
them, they think they have a goodly stock of knowledge and truth, and cannot
possibly miss of the way to heaven; as if Religion were nothing but a little
Book-craft, a mere paper-skill. But if S. John's rule here be good, we must not
judge of our knowing of Christ, by our skill in Books and Papers, but by our
keeping of his Commandments. And that I fear will discover many of us
(notwithstanding all this light which we boast of round about us) to have
nothing but Egyptian darkness within upon our hearts. The vulgar sort think
that they know Christ enough, out of their Creeds and Catechismes, and
Confessions of Faith: and if they have but a little acquainted themselves with
these, and like Parrets conned the words of them, they doubt not but that they
are sufficiently instructed in all the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven.
Many of the more learned, if they can but wrangle and dispute about Christ,
imagine themselves to be grown great proficients in the School of Christ. The
greatest part of the world, whether learned or unlearned, think, that there is
no need of purging and purifying of their hearts, for the right knowledge of
Christ and his Gospel; but though their lives be never so wicked, their hearts
never so foul within, yet they may know Christ sufficiently out of their
Treatises and Discourses, out of their mere Systems and Bodies of Divinity;
which I deny not to be useful in a subordinate way: although our Savior
prescribes his Disciples another method, to come to the right knowledge of
Divine truths, by doing of Gods will; he that will do my Fathers will (says
he) shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God. He is a true Christian
indeed, not he that is only book-taught, but he that is God-taught; he that
has an Unction from the holy one (as our Apostle calls it) that teaches him
all things; he that has the Spirit of Christ within him, that searches out
the deep things of God: For as no man knows the things of a man, save the
spirit of man which is in him, even so the things of God knows no man but the
Spirit of God. Ink and Paper can never make us Christians, can never beget a
new nature, a living principle in us; can never form Christ, or any true
notions of spiritual things in our hearts. The Gospel, that new Law which
Christ delivered to the world, it is not merely a Letter without us, but a
quickening Spirit within us. Cold Theorems and Maxims, dry and jejune Disputes,
lean syllogisticall reasonings, could never yet of themselves beget the least
glympse of true heavenly light, the least sap of saving knowledge in any heart.
All this is but the groping of the poor dark spirit of man after truth, to
find it out with his own endeavors, and feel it with his own cold and benumbed
hands. Words and syllables which are but dead things, cannot possibly convey
the living notions of heavenly truths to us. The secret mysteries of a Divine
Life, of a New Nature, of Christ formed in our hearts; they cannot be written
or spoken, language and expressions cannot reach them; neither can they ever be
truly understood, except the soul it self be kindled from within, and awakened
into the life of them. A Painter that would draw a Rose, though he may flourish
some likeness of it in figure and color, yet he can never paint the sent and
fragrancy; or if he would draw a Flame, he cannot put a constant heat into his
colors, he cannot make his pensil drop a Sound, as the Echo in the Epigramme
mocks at him -- si vis similem pingere, pinge sonum. All the skill of cunning
Artizans and Mechanics, cannot put a principle of Life into a statue of their
own making. Neither are we able to enclose in words and letters, the Life,
Soul, and Essence of any Spiritual truths; and as it were to incorporate it in
them. Some Philosophers have determined, that (...) is not (...) virtue cannot
be taught by any certain rules or precepts. Men and books may propound some
directions to us, that may set us in such a way of life and practice, as in
which we shall at last find it within our selves, and be experimentally
acquainted with it: but they cannot teach it us like a Mechanic Art or Trade.
No surely, there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty gives
this understanding. But we shall not meet with this spirit any where, but in
the way of Obedience: the knowledge of Christ, and the keeping of his
Commandments, must always go together, and be mutual causes of one another.

Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments.

He that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him.

I Come now unto these words themselves, which are so pregnant, that I shall
not need to force out any thing at all from them: I shall therefore only take
notice of some few observations, which drop from them of their own accord, and
then conclude with some Application of them to our selves.

First then, If this be the right way and method of discovering our knowledge
of Christ, by our keeping of his Commandments; Then we may safely draw
conclusions concerning our state and condition, from the conformity of our
lives to the will of Christ. Would we know whether we know Christ aright, let
us consider whether the life of Christ be in us. Qui non habet vitam Christi,
Christum non habet; He that has not the life of Christ in him, he has nothing
but the name, nothing but a fancy of Christ, he has not the substance of
him. He that builds his house upon this foundation; not an airy notion of
Christ swimming in his brain, but Christ really dwelling and living in his
heart; as our Savior himself witnesses, he builds his house upon a Rock;
and when the floods come, and the winds blow, and the rain descends, and beats
upon it, it shall stand impregnably. But he that builds all his comfort upon an
ungrounded persuasion, that God from all eternity has loved him, and
absolutely decreed him to life and happiness, and seeks not for God really
dwelling in his soul; he builds his house upon a Quicksand, and it shall
suddenly sink and be swallowed up: his hope shall be cut off, and his trust
shall be a spiders web; he shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand,
he shall hold it fast but it shall not endure. We are no where commanded to pry
into these secrets, but the wholesome counsel and advise given us, is this; to
make our calling and election sure. We have no warrant in Scripture, to peep
into these hidden Rolls and Volumes of Eternity, and to make it our first thing
that we do when we come to Christ, to spell out our names in the stars, and
to persuade our selves that we are certainly elected to everlasting happiness:
before we see the image of God, in righteousness and true holiness, shaped in
our hearts. Gods everlasting decree, is too dazeling and bright an object for
us at first to set our eye upon: it is far easier and safer for us to look upon
the rays of his goodness and holiness as they are reflected in our own
hearts; and there to read the mild and gentle Characters of Gods love to us, in
our love to him, and our hearty compliance with his heavenly will: as it is
safer for us if we would see the Sun, to look upon it here below in a pale of
water; then to cast up our daring eyes upon the body of the Sun it self, which
is too radiant and scorching for us. The best assurance that any one can have
of his interest in God, is doubtless the conformity of his soul to him. Those
divine purposes, whatsoever they be are altogether unsearchable and unknowable
by us, they lie wrapped up in everlasting darkness, and covered in a deep
Abyss; who is able to fathom the bottom of them? Let us not therefore make
this out first attempt toward God and Religion, to persuade our selves
strongly of these everlasting Decrees: for if at our first flight we aim so
high, we shall happily but scorch our wings, and be struck back with lightning,
as those Giants of old were, that would needs attempt to invade and assault
heaven. And it is indeed a most Giganticall Essay, to thruft our selves so
boldly into the lap of heaven; it is the pranck of a Nimrod, of a mighty Hunter
thus rudely to deal with God, and to force heaven and happiness before his
face whether he will or no. The way to obtain a good assurance indeed of our
title to heaven, is not to clamber up to it, by a ladder of our own ungrounded
persuasions; but to dig as low as hell by humility and self-denial in our own
hearts: and though this may seem to be the furthest way about; yet it is indeed
the nearest, and safest way to it. We must (...) and (...) as the Greek
Epigramme speaks, ascend downward, and descend upward; if we would indeed come
to heaven, or get any true persuasion of our title to it. The most gallant and
triumphant confidence of a Christian, rises safely and surely upon this low
foundation, that lies deep under ground; and there stands firmly and
steadfastly. When our heart is once tuned in, to a conformity with the word of
God, when we feel our will, perfectly to concur with his will, we shall then
presently perceive a Spirit of adoption within our selves, teaching us to cry
Abba. Father. We shall not then care for peeping into those hidden Records of
Eternity, to see whether our names be written there in golden characters: no,
we shall find a copy of Gods thoughts concerning us, written in our own
breasts. There we may read the characters of his favor to us, there we may
feel an inward sense of his love to us, flowing out of our hearty and unfeigned
love to him. And we shall be more undoubtedly persuaded of it, then if any of
those winged Watchmen above, that are privy to heavens secrets, should come
and tell us; that they saw our names enrolled in those volumes of eternity.
Whereas on the contrary; though we strive to persuade our selves never so
confidently, that God from all eternity has loved us, and elected us to life
and happiness, if we do yet in the mean time entertain any iniquity within our
hearts, and willingly close with any lust; do what we can, we shall find many a
cold qualme ever now and then seizing upon us at approaching dangers; and when
death it self shall grimly look us in the face, we shall feel our hearts even
to die within us, and our spirits quite faint away, though we strive to raise
them and recover them never so much, with the Strong Waters and Aqua vitae of
our own ungrounded presumptions. The least inward lust willingly continued in,
will be like a worm, fretting the Gourd of our jolly confidence, and
presumptuous persuasion of Gods love, and always gnawing at the root of it:
and though we strive to keep it alive, and continually besprinkle it with some
dews of our own; yet it will always be dying and withering in our bosoms. But
a good Conscience within, will be always better to a Christian, then health to
his navell, and marrow to his bones; it will be an everlasting cordial to his
heart: it will be softer to him then a bed of down, and he may sleep securely
upon it, in the midst of raging and tempestuous seas; when the winds bluster,
and the waves beat round about him. A good conscience, is the best
looking-glass of heaven; in which the soul may see God's thoughts and purposes
concerning it, as so many shining stars reflected to it. Hereby we know that
we know Cbrist, hereby we know that Christ loves us, if we keep his
Commandments.

Secondly, If hereby only we know that we know Christ, by our keeping his
Commandments; Then the knowledge of Christ does not consist merely in a few
barren Notions, in a form of certain dry and saplesse Opinions. Christ came not
into the world to fill our heads with mere Speculations; to kindle a fire of
wrangling and contentious dispute amongst us, and to warm our spirits against
one another with nothing but angry and peevish debates, whilst in the mean time
our hearts remain all ice within toward God, and have not the least spark of
true heavenly fire to melt and thaw them. Christ came not to possess our
brains only with some cold opinions, that send down nothing but a freezing and
benumming influence upon our hearts. Christ was Vitae Magister, not Scholae:
and he is the best Christian, whose heart beats with the truest pulse toward
heaven; not he whose head spinneth out the finest cobwebs. He that endeavors
really to mortify his lusts, and to comply with that truth in his life, which
his Conscience is convinced of; is nearer a Christian, though he never heard of
Christ; then he that believes all the vulgar Articles of the Christian faith,
and plainly denies Christ in his life. Surely, the way to heaven that Christ
has taught us, is plain and easy, if we have but honest hearts: we need not
many Criticismes, many Schooldistinctions, to come to a right understanding of
it. Surely, Christ came not to ensnare us and entangle us with captious
niceties, or to pusle our heads with deep speculations, and lead us through
hard and craggie notions into the Kingdom of heaven. I persuade my self, chat
no man shall ever be kept out of heaven, for not comprehending mysteries that
were beyond the reach of his shallow understanding; if he had but an honest and
good heart, that was ready to comply with Christ's Commandments. Say not in
thins heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? that is, with high speculations to
bring down Christ from thence: or, Who shall descend into the abyss beneath?
that is with deep searching thoughts to fetch up Christ from thence: but lo,
the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart. But I wish, it were
not the distemper of our times, to scare and fright men only with opinions,
and make them only solicitous about the entertaining of this and that
speculation, which will not render them any thing the better in their lives, or
the liker unto God; whilst in the mean time there is no such care taken about
keeping of Christ's Commandments, and being renewed in our minds according to
the image of God, in righteousness and true holiness. We say, Lo, here is
Christ; and Lo, there is Christ, in these and these opinions; whereas in
truth, Christ is neither here, nor there, nor any where; but where the Spirit
of Christ, where the life of Christ is. Do we not now adays open and lock up
heaven, with the private key of this and that opinion, on of our own according
to our several fancies as we please? And if any one observe Christ's
Commandments never so sincerely, and serve God, with faith and a pure
conscience, that yet happily skils not of some contended for opinions, some
darling notions; he has not the right Shibboleth, he has not the true
Watchword; he must not pass the Guards into heaven. Do we not make this and
that opinion, this and that outward form, to be the Wedding Garment, and boldly
sentence those to outer darkness, that are not invested therewith? Whereas
every true Christian, finds the least dram of hearty affection toward God, to
be more cordial and sovereign to his soul; then all the speculative notions,
and opinions in the world: and though he study also to inform his understanding
aright, and free his mind from all error and misapprehensions; yet it is
nothing but the life of Christ deeply rooted in his heart which is the
Chymicall Elixer that he feeds upon. Had he all faith that he could remove
mountains (as S. Paul speaks) had he all knowledge, all tongues and languages;
yet he prizeth one dram of love beyond them all. He accounts him that feeds
upon mere notions in Religion, to be but an aerie and Chamelion-like Christian.
He finds himself now otherwise rooted and centred in God, then when he did
before merely contemplate and gaze upon him: he tastes and relisheth God
within himself, he has quendam saporem Dei, a certain savor of him; whereas
before he did but rove and guess at random at him. He feels himself safely
anchored in God, and will not be dissuaded from it; though perhaps he skill not
many of those subtleties, which others make the Alpha and Omega of their
Religion. Neither is he scared with those childish affrightments, with which
some would force their private conceits upon him; he is above the superstitious
dreading of mere speculative opinions; as well as the superstitious reverence
of outward ceremonies: he cares not so much for subtlety, as for soundness and
health of mind. And indeed, as it was well spoken by a noble Philosopher,
(...), that without purity and virtue God is nothing but an empty name; so it
is as true here, that without obedience to Christ's Commandments, without the
life of Christ dwelling in us, whatsoever opinions we entertain of him, Christ
is but only named by us, he is not known. I speak not here against a free and
ingenuous enquiry into all Truth, according to our several abilities and
opportunities, I plead not for the captivating and enthralling of our
judgments to the Dictates of men, I do not disparage the natural improvement
of our understanding faculties by true Knowledge, which is so noble and gallant
a perfection of the mind: but the thing which I aim against is, the
dispiriting of the life and vigor of our Religion, by dry speculations, and
making it nothing but a mere dead scheleton of opinions, a few dry bones
without any flesh and sinews tied up together: and the misplacing of all our
zeal upon an eager prosecution of these, which should be spent to better
purpose upon other objects. Knowledge indeed is a thing far more excellent
then riches, outward pleasures, worldly dignities, or any thing else in the
world besides Holiness, and the Conformity of our wills to the will of God:
but yet our happiness consists not in it, but in a certain Divine Temper and
Constitution of soul which is far above it: But it is a piece of that
corruption that runs through humane nature, that we naturally prize Truth,
more then Goodness; Knowledge, more then Holiness. We think it a gallant
thing to be fluttering up to Heaven with our wings of Knowledge and
Speculation: whereas the highest mystery of a Divine Life here, and of perfect
Happiness hereafter, consists in nothing but mere Obedience to the Divine
Will. Happiness is nothing but that inward sweet delight, that will arise from
the Harmonious agreement between our wills and Gods will. There is nothing
contrary to God in the whole world, nothing that fights against him but
Self-will. This is the strong Castle, that we all keep garrisoned against
heaven in every one of our hearts, which God continually lays siege unto: and
it must be conquered and demolished, before we can conquer heaven. It was by
reason of this Self-will, that Adam fell in Paradise; that those glorious
Angels, those Morning-starres, kept not their first station but dropped down from
heaven like Falling stars, and sunk into this condition of bitterness,
anxiety, and wretchedness in which now they are. They all entangled themselves
with the length of their own wings, they would needs will more and otherwise
then God would will in them: and going about to make their wills wider, and to
enlarge them into greater amplitude; the more they strugled, they found
themselves the faster pinioned, and crowded up into narrowness and servility;
insomuch that now they are not able to use any wings at all, but inheriting the
serpents curse, can only creep with their bellies upon the earth. Now our
only way to recover God and happiness again, is not to soar up with our
understandings, but to destroy this Self-will of ours: and then we shall find
our wings to grow again, our plumes fairly spread, and our selves raised aloft
into the free Air of perfect liberty which is perfect Happiness. There is
nothing in the whole world able to do us good or hurt, but God and our own
Will; neither riches nor poverty, nor disgrace nor honor, neither life nor
death, nor Angels nor Devils; but Willing or Not-willing as we ought to do.
Should Hell it self shoot all its fiery darts against us, if our will be right,
if it be informed by the Divine Will; they can do us no hurt; we have then, (if
I may so speak,) an enchanted Shield that is impenetrable, and will beat off
all. God will not hurt us, and Hell cannot hurt us, if we will nothing but
what God wills. Nay, then we are acted by God himself, and the whole Divinity
flows in upon us; and where we have cashiered this Self-will of ours, which
did but shackle and confine our souls, our wills shall then become truly free,
being widened and enlarged to the extent of Gods own will. Hereby we know that
we know Christ indeed, not by our Speculative Opinions concerning him, but by
our keeping of his Commandments.

Thirdly, if hereby we are to judge whether we truly know Christ, by our
keeping of his Commandments; so that he that says he knows him, and keeps
not his Commandments, is a liar; Then, This was not the Plot and design of the
Gospel, to give the world an indulgence to sin, upon what pretense soever.
Though we are too prone, to make such misco^structions of it: as if God had
intended nothing else in it, but to dandle our corrupt nature, and contrive a
smooth and easy way for us to come to happiness, without the toilsome labor
of subduing our lusts and sinful affections. Or, As if the Gospel were nothing
else but a Declaration to the World, of Gods engaging his affections from all
eternity, on some particular persons, in such a manner, as that he would
resolve to love them, and dearly embrace them, though he never made them
partakers of his Image in righteousness and true holiness: and though they
should remain under the power of all their lusts, yet they should still
continue his beloved ones, and he would notwithstanding, at last bring them
undoubtedly into heaven. Which is nothing else, but to make the God that we
worship, the God of the new Testament, a (...), an accepter of persons: and one
that should encourage that in the world which is diametrally opposite to Gods
own Life and Being. And indeed nothing is more ordinary, then for us to shape
out such monstrous and deformed Notions of God unto our selves, by looking upon
him through the colored Medium of our own corrupt hearts, and having the eye
of our soul tinctured by the suffusions of our own lusts. And therefore,
because we mortals can fondly love and hate, and sometimes, hug the very
Vices, of those to whom our affections are engaged, and kiss their very
Deformities; we are so ready to shape out a Deity like unto our selves, and to
fashion out such a God, as will in Christ at least, hug the very wickedness of
the world: and in those that be once his own, by I know not what, fond
affection, appropriated to himself, connive at their very sins, so that they
shall not make the least breach betwixt himself and them. Truly, I know not
whether of the two, be the worse Idolatry, and of the deeper stain; for a man
to make a god out of a piece of wood, and fall down unto it and worship it, and
say, Deliver me, for thou art my God, as it is expressed in the Prophet Isaiah;
or to set up such an Idol-god of our own Imagination as this is, fashioned out
according to the similitude of our own fondness and wickedness: and when we
should paint out God with the liveliest Colors, that we can possibly borrow
from any created being, with the purest Perfections that we can abstract from
them; to draw him out thus with the blackest Coal of our own corrupt hearts;
and to make the very blots and blurs of our own souls, to be the Letters, which
we spell out his name by. Thus do we that are Children of the Night, make black
and ugly representations of God unto our selves, as the Ethiopians were wont to
do, copying him out according to our own likeness; and setting up that unto
our selves for a god, which we love most dearly in our selves, that is, our
Lusts. But there is no such God as this any where in the world, but only in
some men's false imaginations, who know not all this while, that they look upon
themselves instead of God, and make an Idol of themselves, which they worship
and adore for him; being so full of themselves, that whatsoever they see round
about them, even God himself, they color with their own Tincture: like him
that Aristotle speaks of, that wheresoever he went, and whatsoever he looked
upon, he savv still his own face, as in a glass, represented to him. And
therefore it is no vvonder if men seem naturally more devoutly affected tovvard
such an Imaginary God, as we have now described, then to the True Real God,
clothed with his own proper Attributes; since it is nothing but an Image of
themselves, which Narcissus-like they fall in love with: no wonder if they
kiss and dandle such a Baby-god as this, which like little children, they have
dressed up out of the clouts of their own fond Phancies, according to their own
liknesse, of purpose that they might play and sport with it. But God will ever
dwell in spotless light, howsoever we paint him and disfigure him here below:
he will still be circled about, with his own rays of unstained and immaculate
glory. And though the Gospel be not God, as he is in his own Brightness, but
God Veiled and Masked to us, God in a state of Humiliation, and Condescent, as
the Sun in a Rainbow* yet it is nothing else but a clear and unspotted Mirror
of Divine Holiness, Goodness, Purity; in which Attributes lies the very Life
and Essence of God himself. The Gospel is nothing else, but God descending into
the World in Our Form, and conversing with us in our likeness; that he might
allure, and draw us up to God, and make us partakers of his Divine Form. (...)
(as Athanasius speaks) (...) God was therefore incarnated and made man, that he
might Deifie us, that is, (as S. Peter expresses it) make us partakers of the
Divine nature. Now, I say, the very proper Character, and Essential Tincture
of God himself, is nothing else but Goodness. Nay, I may be bold to add, That
God is therefore God, because he is the highest and most perfect Good: and Good
is not therefore Good, because God out of an arbitrary will of his, would have
it so. Whatsoever God does in the World, he does it as it is suitable to the
highest Goodness; the first Idea, and fairest Copy of which is his own
Essence. Virtue and Holiness in creatures, as Plato well discourses in his
Euthyphro, are not therefore Good, because God loves them, and will have them
be accounted such; but rather, God therefore loves them because they are in
themselves simply good. Some of our own Authors, go a little further yet, and
tell us; that God does not fondly love himself, because he is himself, but
therefore he loves himself because he is the highest and most absolute
Goodness: so that if there could be any thing in the world better then God,
God would love that better then himself: but because he is Essentially the most
perfect Good; therefore he cannot but love his own goodness, infinitely above
all other things. And it is another mistake which sometimes we have of God, by
shaping him out according to the Model of our selves, when we make him nothing
but a blind, dark, impetuous Self will, running through the world; such as we
our selves are furiously acted with, that have not the Ballast of absolute
goodness to poize and settle us. That I may therefore come nearer to the thing
in hand: God who is absolute goodness, cannot love any of his Creatures and
take pleasure in them, without bestowing a communication of his Goodness and
Likeness upon them. God cannot make a Gospel, to promise men Life and
Happiness hereafter, without being regenerated, and made partakers of his
holiness. As soon may Heaven and Hell, be reconciled together, and lovingly
shake hands with one another; as God can be fondly indulgent to any sin, in
whomsoever it be. As soon may Light and Darkness be espoused together, and
Midnight be married to the Noonday; as God can be joined in a league of
friendship, to any wicked Soul.

The great Design of God in the Gospel, is to clear up this Mist of Sin and
Corruption, which we are here surrounded with: and to bring up his creatures,
out of the shadow of death, to the Region of Light above, the Land of Truth and
Holiness. The great Mystery of the Gospel, is to establish a God-like frame
and disposition of spirit, which consists in Righteousness and true Holiness,
in the hearts of men. And Christ, who is the great and mighty Savior, he came
on purpose into the World; not only to save us from Fire and Brimstone, but
also to save us from our Sins. Christ has therefore made an Expiation of our
sins, by his death upon the Cross, that we being thus delivered out of the
hands of these our greatest enemies, might serve God without fear, in holiness
and righteousness before him, all the days of our life. This grace of God
that brings salvation, has therefore appeared to all men, in the Gospel,
that it might teach us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we
should live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present world: looking
for that blessed hope, and glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, Zealous of good works.
These things I write unto you (says our Apostle a little before my text) that
you sin not: therein expressing the end of the whole Gospel, which is, not
only to cover sin, by spreading the Purple Robe of Christ's death and
sufferings over it, whilst it still remains in us with all its filth and
noisomnesse unremoved; but also, to convey a powerful and mighty Spirit of
holiness, to cleanse us, and free us from it. And this is a greater grace of
Gods to us, then the former, which still go both together in the Gospel;
besides the free remission and pardon of sin in the blood of Christ, the
delivering of us from the power of sin, by the Spirit of Christ dwelling in
our hearts. Christ came not into the world only, to cast a Mantle over us, and
hide all our filthy sores, from Gods avenging eye, with his merits and
righteousness; but he came likewise, to be a Surgeon, and Physician of
souls, to free us from the filth and corruption of them; which is more grievous
and burdensome, more noisome to a true Christian, then the guilt of sin it
self: Should a poor wretched, and diseased creature, that is full of sores and
ulcers, be covered all over with Purple, or clothed with Scarlet; he would take
but little contentment in it, whilst his sores, and wounds, remain upon him:
and he had much rather be raied in rags, so he might obtain but soundness and
health within. The Gospel is a true Bethesda, a pool of Grace, where such
poor, lame, and infirm creatures, as we are, upon the moving of Gods spirit
in it, may descend down, not only to wash our skin and outside, but also to be
cured of our diseases within. And what ever the world thinks, there is a
powerful Spirit that moves upon these waters, the waters of the Gospel, for
this new Creation, the Regeneration of souls; the very same Spirit, that once
moved upon the waters of the universe at the first Creation, and spreading its
mighty wings over them, did hatch the newborn World into this perfection: I
say, the same Almighty spirit of Christ, still works in the Gospel, spreading
its gentle, healing, quickening wings, over our souls. The Gospel, is not like
Abana and Pharphar, those common Rivers of Damascus, that could only cleanse
the outside; but it is a true Jordan, in which such leprouse Naamans, as we all
are, may Wash and be clean. Blessed indeed are they, whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
will not impute sin: but yet, rather Blessed are they, whose sins are
removed like a Morning-cloud, and quite taken away from them: Blessed, thrice
blessed, are they, that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall
be satisfied: Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God. Our Savior
Christ came (as John the Baptist tells us) with a Fan in his hand, that he
might thoroughly purge his floor and gather his wheat into his garner: but the
chaff he will burn up, with unquenchable fire. He came (as the Prophet Malachy
speaks) like a Refiners fire, and like Fullers sop; to sit as a Refiner and
Purifier of silver, and to purify all the sons of Levi, and purge them as
gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in
righteousness. Christ came not only, to write Holiness to the Lord upon
Aarons forehead, and to put his Urim and Thummim upon his Breast Plate, but
This is the Covenant, says the Lord, that I will make with them in those
days; I will put my Law into their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
and then I will be their God, and they shall be my people: they shall be all
Kings and Priests unto me. God sent his own son (says St. Paul) in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and by a sacrifice for sin, condemned sin in
the flesh: that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. The first Adam, as the
Scripture tells us, brought in a real defilement, which like a noisome
Leprosy, has overspread all mankind: and therefore the second Adam must not
only fill the World with a conceit, of Holiness, and mere Imaginary
Righteousness; but he must really convey, such an immortal seed of Grace into
the hearts of true Believers, as may prevail still more and more in them, till
it have at last, quite wrought out that poison of the Serpent. Christ, that was
nothing, but Divinity dwelling in a Tabernacle of flesh, and God himself
immediately acting a humane nature; he came into the World to kindle here that
Divine life amongst men, which is certainly dearer unto God, then any thing
else whatsoever in the World; and to propagate this Celestial fire, from one
heart still unto another, until the end of the World. Neither is he, or was he
ever absent from this Spark of his Divinity, kindled amongst men, wheresoever
it be, though he seem bodily to be withdrawn from us. He is the standing,
constant, inexhausted Fountain, of this divine Light and Heat; that still
touches every soul that is enlivened by it, with an outstretched Ray, and
freely lends his Beams, and disperseth his influence to all, from the beginning
of the World to the end of it. We all receive of his fullness, grace for grace,
as all the Stars in heaven, are said to light their Candles at the Suns
flame. For though his body be withdrawn from us, yet by the lively and virtuall
Contact of his Spirit, he is always kindling, cheering, quickening, warming,
enlivening hearts. Nay, this Divine life begun and kindled in any heart,
wheresoever it be, is something of God in flesh; and, in a sober and qualified
sense, Divinity incarnate; and all particular Christians, that are really
possessed of it, so many Mystical Christ's. And God forbid, that Gods own Life
and Nature here in the World, should be forlorn, forsaken, and abandoned of God
himself. Certainly, wherever it is, though never so little, like a sweet,
young, tender Babe, once born in any heart; when it cries unto God the father
of it, with pitiful and bemoning looks imploring his compassion; it cannot
choose but move his fatherly bowels, and make them yerne, and turn toward it,
and by strong sympathy, draw his compassionate arm to help and relieve it.
Never was any tender Infant, so dear to those Bowels that begat it, as an
Infant newborn Christ, formed in the heart of any true believer, to God the
father of it. Shall the children of this World, the sons of darkness, be
moved with such tender affection, and compassion, toward the fruit of their
bodies, their own Natural offspring; and shall God who is the Father of
lights, the fountain of all goodness, be moved with no compassion toward his
true Spiritual Offspring, and have no regard to those sweet Babes of Light,
ingendered by his own beams in men's hearts, that in their lovely countenances,
bear the resemblance of his own face, and call him their father? Shall he see
them lie fainting, and gasping, and dying here in the World, for want of
nothing to preserve and keep them, but an Influence from him, who first gave
them life and breath? No; hear the language of Gods heart, hear the sounding
of his bowels toward them: Is it Ephraim my dear son? Is it that pleasant
child? since I spoke of him I do earnestly remember him, my bowels, my bowels
are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. If
those expressions of goodness and tender affection here amongst creatures, be
but drops of that full Ocean that is in God; how can we then imagine, that this
Father of our spirits, should have so little regard to his own dear Offspring, I
do not say our souls, but that which is the very Life and Soul of our souls,
the Life of God in us; which is nothing else but Gods own Self communicated to
us, his own Son born in our hearts; as that he should suffer it to be cruelly
murdered in its Infancy by our Sins, and like young Hercules in its very
cradle, to be strangled by those filthy vipers; that he should see him to be
crucified by wicked Lusts, nailed fast to the cross by invincible Corruptions;
pierced and gored on every side with the poisoned spears of the Devils
temptations, and at last to give up the Ghost; and yet his tender heart not at
all relent, nor be all this while impassionated with so sad a spectacle?
Surely, we cannot think he has such an adamantine breast, such a flinty nature
as this is. What then? must we say that though indeed he be willing, yet he is
not able, to rescue his crucified and tormented Son, now bleeding upon the
cross; to take him down from thence and save him? Then must Sin be more
powerful then God: that weak, crasie, and sickly thing, more strong then the
Rock of ages: and the Devil the Prince of Darkness, more mighty, then the God
of Light. No surely, there is a weakness and impotency in all Evil, a
masculine strength and vigor in all Goodness: and therefore doubtless the
Highest Good, the (...) as the Philosophers call it, is the strongest thing in
the World. Nil potentius Summo Bono. Gods Power displaied in the World, is
nothing but his Goodness strongly reaching all things, from height to depth,
from the highest Heaven, to the lowest Hell: and irresistibly imparting it self
to every thing, according to those several degrees in which it is capable of
it. Have the Fiends of Darkness then, those poor forlorn spirits, that are
fettered and locked up in the Chains of their own wickedness, any strength to
withstand the force of infinite Goodness, which is infinite Power? or do they
not rather skulk in holes of darkness, and fly like Bats and Owls, before the
approaching beams of this Sun of Righteousness? Is God powerful to kill and to
destroy, to damn and to torment, and is he not powerful to save? Nay, it is
the sweetest Flower in all the Garland of his Attributes, it is the richest
Diamond in his Crown of Glory, that he is Mighty to save: and this is far
more magnificent for him, then to be styled Mighty to destroy. For that, except
it be in the way of Justice; speaks no Power at all, but mere Impotency, for
the Root of all Power, is Goodness. Or must we say lastly, that God indeed is
able to rescue us out of the Power of sin and Satan, when we sigh and groan
toward him, but yet sometimes to exercise his absolute Authority, his
uncontrollable Dominion, he delights rather in plunging wretched souls down
into infernal Night, and everlasting Darkness? What shall we then make the
God of the whole World? Nothing but a cruel and dreadful Erynnis, with curled
fiery Snakes about his head, and Firebrands in his hands, thus governing the
World? Surely this will make us either secretly to think, that there is no God
at all in the World, if he must needs be such, or else to wish heartily, there
were none. But doubtless, God will at last, confute all these our
Misapprehensions of him, he will unmask our Hypocritical pretenses, and
clearly cast the shame of all our sinful Deficiencies, upon our selves, and
vindicate his own Glory from receiving the least stain or blemish by them. In
the mean time, let us know, that the Gospel now requires, far more of us, then
ever the Law did; for it requires a New Creature, a Divine Nature, Christ
formed in us: but yet withal, it bestows a quickening Spirit, an enlivening
Power, to enable us, to express that, which is required of us. Whosoever
therefore truly knows Christ, the same also keeps Christ's Commandments. But,
he that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, he is a liar, and
the truth is not in him.

I Have now done with the First part of my Discourse, concerning those
Observations, which arise naturally from the Words, and offer themselves to us:
I shall in the next place, proceed to make some general Application of them,
all together.

NOw therefore, I beseech you, Let us consider, whether or no we know Christ
indeed: Not by our acquaintance with Systems and Modells of Divinity; not by
our skill in Books and Papers; but by our keeping of Christ's Commandments. All
the Books and writings which we converse with, they can but represent
spiritual Objects to our understandings; which yet we can never see in their
own true Figure, Color, and Proportion, until we have a Divine light within,
to irradiate, and shine upon them. Though there be never such excellent truths
concerning Christ, and his Gospel, set down in words and letters; yet they will
be but unknown Characters to us, until we have a Living-spirit within us, that
can decypher them: until the same Spirit, by secret Whispers in our hearts, do
comment upon them, which did at first endite them. There be many that
understand, the Greek and Hebrew of the Scripture, the Original Languages in
which the Text was written, that never understood the Language of the spirit.
There is a Caro and a Spiritus, a Flesh and a Spirit, a Body and a Soul, in
all the writings of the Scriptures: it is but the Flesh, and Body, of Divine
Truths, that is printed upon Paper; which many Moths of Books and Libraries, do
only feed upon; many Walking Scheletons of knowledge, that bury and entombe
Truths, in the Living Sepulchers of their souls, do only converse with: such
as never did any thing else, but pick at the mere Bark and Rind of Truths, and
crack the Shells of them. But there is a Soul, and Spirit of divine Truths, that
could never yet be congealed into Ink, that could never be blotted upon Paper,
which by a secret traduction and conveiance, passes from one Soul unto
another; being able to dwell and lodge no where, but in a Spiritual being, in
a Living thing; because it self is nothing but Life and Spirit. Neither can it,
where indeed it is, express it self sufficiently in Words and Sounds, but it
will best declare and speak it self in Actions: as the old manner of writing
among the Egyptians was, not by Words, but Things. The Life of divine Truths,
is better expressed in Actions then in Words, because Actions are more Living
things, then words; Words, are nothing but the dead Resemblances, and Pictures
of those Truths, which live and breath in Actions: and the Kingdom of God (as
the Apostle speaks) consists not in Word, but in Life, and Power. (...)
(says the Moral Philosopher) (...) Sheep do not come, and bring their Fodder
to their Shepherd, and show him how much they eat, but inwardly concocting and
digesting it, they make it appear, by the Fleece which they wear upon their
backs, and by the Milk which they give. And let not us Christians affect only
to talk and dispute of Christ, and so measure our knowledge of him by our
words; but let us show (...), our knowledge concocted into our lives and
actions; and then let us really manifest that we are Christ's Sheep indeed, that
we are his Disciples, by that Fleece of Holiness, which we wear, and by the
Fruits that we daily yield in our lives and conversations: for herein (says
Christ) is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my
Disciples. Let us not (I beseech you) judge of our knowing Christ, by our
ungrounded Persuasions that Christ from all Eternity has loved us, and given
himself particularly for Us, without the Conformity of our lives to Christ's
Commandments, without the real partaking of the Image of Christ in our hearts.
The great Mystery of the Gospel, it does not lie only in Christ without us,
(though we must know also what he has done for us) but the very Pith and
Kernel of it, consists in Christ inwardly formed in our hearts. Nothing is
truly Ours, but what lives in our Spirits. Salvation it self cannot save us, as
long as it is only without us; no more then Health can cure us, and make us
sound, when it is not within us, but somewhere at distance from us; no more
then Arts and Sciences, whilst they lie only in Books and Papers without us;
can make us learned. The Gospel, though it be a Sovereigne and Medicinal thing
in it self, yet the mere knowing and believing of the history of it, will do us
no good: we can receive no virtue from it, till it be inwardly digested and
concocted into our souls; till it be made Ours, and become a living thing in
our hearts. The Gospel, if it be only without us, cannot save us; no more then
that Physicians Bill, could cure the ignorant Patient of his disease, who, when
it was commended to him, took the Paper only, and put it up in his pocket, but
never drunk the Potion that was prescribed in it. All that Christ did for us in
the flesh, when he was here upon earth; From his lying in a Manger, when he was
born in Bethlehem, to his bleeding upon the Cross on Golgotha; it will not
save us from our sins, unless Christ by his Spirit dwell in us. It will not
avail us, to believe that he was born of a Virgin, unless the power of the
most High overshadow our hearts, and beget him there likewise. It will not
profit us, to believe that he died upon the Cross for us; unless we be
baptized into his death, by the Mortification of all our lusts; unless the old
man of sin be crucified in our hearts. Christ indeed has made an Expiation
for our sins upon his Cross; and the Blood of Christ is the only sovereign
Balsame to free us from the guilt of them: but yet besides the sprinkling of
the blood of Christ upon us, we must be made partakers also of his spirit.
Christ came into the World, as well to redeem us from the power and bondage of
our sins, as to free us from the guilt of them. You know (says S. John) that
he was manifested, to take away our sins; whosoever therefore abides in him,
sins not, whosoever sins, has not seen nor known him. Lo the end of
Christ's coming into the World, Lo a design worthy of God manifested in the
flesh. Christ did not take all those pains; to lay aside his Robes of Glory,
and come down hither into the World; to enter into a Virgins womb; to be born
in our humane shape, and be laid a poor crying infant in a Manger; and having
no form nor comeliness at all upon him, to take upon him the Form of a servant;
to undergo a reproachful and ignominious life, and at last to be abandoned to a
shameful death, a death upon the Cross; I say, he did not do all this, merely
to bring in a Notion into the World, without producing any real and
substantial effect at all, without the changing, mending, and reforming of the
World: so that men should still be as wicked as they were before, and as much
under the power of the Prince of Darkness; only, they should not be thought
so: they should still remain as full of all the filthy sores, of sin and
corruption as before; only, they should be accounted whole. Shall God come
down from heaven, and pitch a Tabernacle amongst men? Shall he undertake such a
huge Design, and make so great a noise of doing something, which, when it is
all summed up, shall not at last amount to a Reality? Surely, Christ did not
undergo all this to so little purpose; he would not take all this pains for
us, that he might be able at last, to put into our hands, nothing but a Blanck.
He was with child, he was in pain and travel, and has he brought forth nothing
but wind, has he been delivered of the Eastwind? Is that great design that
was so long carried in the Womb of Eternity, now proved abortive, or else
nothing but a mere windy birth? No surely, The end of the Gospel is Life and
Perfection, it is a Divine nature, it is a Godlike frame and disposition of
spirit; it is to make us partakers of the Image of God in Righteousness and
true Holiness, without which, Salvation it self were but a Notion. Christ came
indeed into the World, to make an Expiation and Atonement for our sins, but
the end of this was, that we might eschew sin, that we might forsake all
ungodliness and worldly lusts. The Gospel declares pardon of sin to those,
that are heavy laden with it, and willing to be disburdened, to this end, that
it might quicken and enliven us to new obedience. Whereas otherwise, the Guilt
of sin might have detained us in horror and despair, and so have kept us
still more strongly under the Power of it, in sad and dismal apprehensions of
Gods wrath provoked against us, and inevitably falling on us. But Christ has
now appeared, like a Day Star with most cheerful beams; nay, he is the Sun
of Righteousness himself; which has risen upon the World with his healing
wings, with his exhilarating light, that he might chase away all those black
despairing thoughts from us. But Christ did not rise, that we should play, and
sport, and wantonize with his light; but that we should do the works of the day
in it: that we should walk (...) (as the Apostle speaks) not in our
Night-clothes of sinful Deformity, but clad all over with the comely Garments
of Light. The Gospel is not big with child of a Phancie, of a mere Conceit of
righteousness without us, hanging at distance over us; whilst our hearts
within, are nothing but Cages of unclean birds, and like Houses continually
haunted with Devils, nay the very Rendezvous of those Fiends of Darkness.
Holiness, is the best thing, that God himself can bestow upon us, either in
this World, or the World to come. True Evangelicall Holiness, that is, Christ
formed in the hearts of believers, is the very Cream, and Quintessence of the
Gospel. And were our hearts sound within, were there not many thick and dark
fumes, that did arise from thence, and cloud our understandings, we could not
easily conceive the substance of Heaven it self, to be any thing else but
Holiness, freed from those encumbrances, that did ever clog it, and accloy it
here; neither should we wish for any other Heaven, besides this. But many of us
are like those Children, whose Stomachs are so vitiated by some disease, that
they think, Ashes, Coal, Mudwall, or any such trash, to be more pleasant, then
the most wholesome food: such sickly and distempered Appetites have we about
these spiritual things, that hanker after I know not what vain shows of
happiness, whilst in the mean time we neglect that which is the only true
food of our souls, that is able solidly to nourish them up to everlasting life.
Grace is Holiness Militant, Holiness encumbred with many enemies and
difficulties, which it still fights against, and manfully quits it self of: and
Glory is nothing else, but Holiness Triumphant; Holiness with a Palm of
Victory in her hand, and a Crown upon her head. Deus ipse, cum omni suaa
bonitate, quatenus extra me est, non facit me beatum; sed quatenus in me est:
God himself cannot make me happy, if he be only without me; and unless he
give in a participation of himself, and his own likeness into my soul.
Happiness is nothing, but the releasing and unfettering of our souls, from all
these narrow, s^ant, and particular good things; and the espousing of them to
the Highest and most Universal Good, which is not this or that particular
good, but goodness it self: and this is the same thing that we call Holiness.
Which, because we our selves are so little acquainted with; being for the most
part ever courting a mere Shadow of it; therefore we have such low, abject, and
beggarly conceits thereof; whereas it is in it self, the most noble, heroical,
and generous thing in the World. For, I mean by Holiness, nothing else but God
stamped, and printed upon the Soul. And we may please our selves, with what
conceits we will; but so long as we are void of this, we do but dream of
heaven, and, I know not what, fond Paradise; we do but blow up and down an airy
Bubble of our own Phancies, which rises out of the froth of our vain hearts;
we do but court a painted Heaven; and woo happiness in a Picture: whilst in
the mean time, a true and real Hell will suck in our souls into it, and soon
make us sensible of a solid woe, and substantial misery. Divine wisdom, has
so ordered the frame of the whole Universe, as that every thing should have a
certain proper Place, that should be a Receptacle for it. Hell is the Sink of
all sin and wickedness. The strong Magic of Nature, pulls and draws every
thing continually, to that place which is suitable to it, and to which it does
belong; so all these heavy bodies press downwards, toward the Center of our
earth, being drawn in by it: In like manner Hell wheresoever it is, will by
strong Sympathy pull in all sin, and Magnetically draw it to it self: as true
Holiness, is always breathing upwards, and fluttering toward Heaven,
striving to embosome it self with God: and it will at last undoubtedly be
conjoined with him, no dismal shades of darkness, can possibly stop it in its
course, or beat it back; (...) Nay, we do but deceive our selves with names;
Hell is nothing but the Orb of Sin and Wickedness, or else that Hemisphear
of Darkness, in which all Evil moves: and Heaven, is the opposite Hemisphear
of Light, or else, if you please, the Bright Orb of Truth, Holiness, and
Goodness: and we do actually in this life, instate our selves in the
possession of one or other of them. Take Sin and Disobedience out of Hell,
and it will presently clear up, into Light, Tranquillity, Serenity, and shine
out into a Heaven. Every true Saint, carries his Heaven about with him, in his
own heart; and Hell that is without him, can have no power over him. He might
safely wade through Hell it self, and like the Three children, pass through
the midst of that fiery Furnace, and yet not at all be scorched with the flames
of it: he might walk through the Valley of the shadow of death, and yet fear no
evil. Sin, is the only thing in the World, that is contrary to God: God is
Light, and that is Darkness: God is Beauty, and that is Ugliness and
Deformity. All sin is direct Rebellion against God; and with what Notions
soever, we may sugar it, and sweeten it, yet God can never smile upon it, he
will never make a truce with it. God declares open war against sin, and
bids defiance to it; for it is a professed enemy to Gods own Life and Being.
God which is infinite Goodness, cannot but hate sin, which is purely Evil.
And though sin be in it self, but a poor, impotent, and crazy thing, nothing
but Straitness, Poverty, and Nonentity; so that of it self it is the most
wretched and miserable thing in the world, and needs no further punishment
besides it self; yet Divine Vengeance, beats it off still further and further
from God, and wheresoever it is, will be sure to scourge it, and lash it
continually. God and Sin can never agree together.

That, I may therefore come, yet nearer to our selves. This is the Message,
that I have now to declare unto you, That God is Light, and in him is no
darkness at all: if we say that we have Fellowship with him, and walk in
Darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. Christ, and the Gospel are light, and
there is no darkness at all in them; if you say that you know Christ and his
Gospel, and yet keep not Christ's Commandments, but dearly hug, your private
darling corruptions; you are liars, and the truth is not in you; you have no
acquaintance with the God of Light, nor the Gospel of Light. If any of you say,
that you know Christ, and have an interest in him, and yet (as I fear, too many
do) still nourish Ambition, Pride, Vainglory within your breasts; harbor
Malice, Revengfulnesse, and cruel Hatred to your neighbors in your hearts;
eagerly scramble after this worldly Pelf, and make the strength of your parts
and endeavors serve that blind Mammon, the God of this World; If you wallow
and tumble in the filthy puddle of flleshly Pleasures; or if you aim only at
your selves in your lives, and make your Self the Compass by which you sail,
and the Star by which you steer your Course, looking at nothing higher, and
more noble then your selves; deceive not your selves, you have neither seen
Christ, nor known him; you are deeply incorporated, (if I may so speak) with
the Spirit of this World, and have no true Sympathy with God and Christ, no
fellowship at all with them. And (I beseech you) let us consider; Be there not
many of us, that pretend much to Christ; that are plainly in our lives, as
Proud, Ambitious, Vainglorious as any others? Be there not many of us, that are
as much under the power of unruly Passions; as Cruel, Revengefull, Malicious,
Censorious as others? that have our minds as deeply engaged in the World, and
as much envassalled to Riches, Gain, Profit, those great admired Deities of the
sons of men, and their souls as much overwhelmed, and sunk with the cares of
this life? Do not many of us, as much give our selves to the Pleasures of the
flesh, and though not without regrets of Conscience, yet ever now and then
secretly soke our selves in them? Be there not many of us that have as deep a
share likewise, in Injustice and Oppression, in vexing the fatherless and the
widows? I wish, it may not prove some of our Cases, at that last day, to use
such pleas as these unto Christ in our behalf; Lord, I have prophesied in thy
name; I have preached many a zealous Sermon for thee; I have kept many a long
Fast; I have been very active for thy cause in Church, in State; nay, I never
made any question, but that my name was written in thy book of Life; when yet
alas, we shall receive no other return from Christ, but this, I know you not;
Depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity. I am sure, there be too many of us, that
have long pretended to Christ, which make little or no progress in true
Christianity, that is, Holiness of life: that ever hang hovering in a Twilight
of Grace, and never seriously put our selves forwards into clear Daylight, but
esteem that glimmering Crepusculum which we are in, and like that faint
Twilight, better then broad open Day: whereas, The Path of the just (as the
Wiseman speaks) is as the shining light, that shines more and more unto the
perfect day. I am sure, there be many of us, that are perpetual Dwarfs in our
spiritual Stature; like those silly women (that S. Paul speaks of) laden with
sins, and led away with diverse lusts, that are ever learning, and never able
to come to the knowledge of the truth: that are not now one jot taller in
Christianity, then we were many years ago; but have still as sickly, crazy, and
unsound a temper of soul, as we had long before. Indeed we seem to do
something, we are always moving and lifting at the stone of Corruption, that
lies upon our hearts, but yet we never stir it notwithstanding, or at least
never roll it off from us. We are sometimes a little troubled with the guilt of
our sins, and then we think we must thrust our lusts out of our hearts, but
afterward we sprinkle our selves over, with I know not what Holy Water, and so
are contented to let them still abide, quietly within us. We do every day truly
confess the same sins, and pray against them, and yet still commit them as
much as ever, and lie as deeply under the power of them. We have the same Water
to pump out in every prayer, and still we let the same, leake in again upon us.
We make a great deal of noise, and raise a great deal of dust with our feet;
but we do not move from off the ground on which we stood, we do not go forward
at all: or if we do sometimes make a little progress, we quickly loose again,
the ground which we had gained: like those upper Planets in the Heaven, which
(as the Astronomers tell us) sometimes move forwards, sometimes quite
backwards, and sometimes perfectly stand still; have their Stations and
Retrogradations, as well as their Direct Motions. As if Religion were nothing
else, but a Dancing up and down, upon the same piece of ground and making
several Motions and Friskings on it; and not a sober Journying, and Traveling
onwards toward some certain place. We Do and Undo; we do Penelopes telam
texere, we weave sometimes a Web of Holiness, but then we let our lusts come,
and undo, and unravell all again. Like Sisyphus in the Fable, we roll up a
mighty Stone with much ado, sweating and tugging up the Hill; and then we let
it go, and tumble down again unto the bottom: and this is our constant work.
Like those Danaides which the Poets speak of, we are always filling water into
a Sive, by our Prayers, Duties, and Performances; which still runs out as fast
as we pour it in. What is it that thus cheats us and gulls us of our Religion?
That makes us, thus constantly to tread the same Ring, and Circle of Duties,
where we make no progress at all forwards; and the further we go, are still
never the nearer to our journeys end? What is it that thus starves our
Religion; and makes it look like those Kine in Pharaohs Dream, illfavoured and
lean fleshed; that it has no Color in its face, no Blood in its veins, no
Life nor Heat at all, in its members? What is it that does thus bedwarfe us in
our Christianity? What low, sordid, and unworthy Principles do we act by, that
thus hinder our growth, and make us stand at a stay, and keep us always in the
very Porch and Entrance, where we first began? Is it a sleepy, sluggish
Conceit, That it is enough for us, if we be but once in a State of Grace, if we
have but once stepped over the threshold, we need not take so great pains to
travel any further? Or is it another damping, choking, stifling Opinion, That
Christ has done all for us already without us, and nothing need more to be
done within us? No matter, how wicked we be in our selves, for we have
holiness without us; no matter, how sickly and diseased our souls be within,
for they have health without them. Why may we not as well be satisfied, and
contented, to have Happiness without us too to all Eternity, and so our selves
forever continue miserable? Little Children, let no man deceive you: he that
does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous: but, he that
commits sin is of the Devil. I shall therefore exhort you in the wholesome
words of S. Peter; Give all diligence, to add to your faith, virtue; and to
virtue, knowledge; to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; to
patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly
kindness, charity; For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you
that ye shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. The Apostle still goes on, and I cannot leave him yet; But he
that lacks these things is blind, and cannot see far off, and has forgotten
that he was once purged from his old sins. Wherefore the rather Brethren,
give diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if ye do these
things, ye shall never fall. Let us not only talk and dispute of Christ, but
let us indeed put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Having those great and precious
promises, which he has given us, let us strive to be made partakers of the
Divine Nature, escaping the corruption that is in the world through lust: and
being begotten again to a lively hope of enjoying Christ hereafter, let us
purify our selves as he is pure. Let us really declare, that we know Christ,
that we are his Disciples, by our keeping of his Commandments: and amongst the
rest, that Commandment especially which our Savior Christ himself commends
to his Disciples in a peculiar manner; This is my commandment, That ye love one
another, as I have loved you: and again; These things I command you, that you
love one another. Let us follow peace with all men, and holiness, without
which, no man shall see God. Let us put on as the Elect of God, holy, and
beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
longsuffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave us: And above all these
things let us put on Charity, which is the bond of perfectness. Let us in
meekness, instrust those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give
them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth, that they may recover
themselves out of the snares of the Devil, that are taken captive by him at his
will. Beloved, Let us love another, for Love is of God, and whosoever loves is
born of God and knows God. O Divine Love! the sweet Harmony of souls! the
Music of Angels! The Joy of Gods own Heart, the very Darling of his Bosom!
the Sourse of true Happiness! the pure Quintessence of Heaven! That which
reconciles the jarring Principles of the World, and makes them all chime
together! That which melts men's Hearts into one another! see how S. Paul
describes it, and it cannot choose but enamour your affections toward it: Love
envieth not, it is not puffed up, it does not behave it self unseemly, seeks
not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in
iniquity; bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures
all things: I may add in a word, it is the best natured thing, the best
complexioned thing, in the World. Let us express this sweet harmonious
Affection, in these jarring times: that so if it be possible, we may tune the
World at last, into better Music. Especially, in matters of Religion, let us
strive with all meekness to instruct and convince one another. Let us
endeavor to promote the Gospel of Peace, the Dove-like Gospel with a Dove-like
Spirit. This was the way by which the Gospel at first, was propagated in the
world: Christ did not cry, nor lift up his voice in the streets, a bruised reed
he did not break, and the smoking flax he did not quench and yet he brought
forth judgment into victory. He whispered the Gospel to us from Mount Sion, in
a still voice, and yet the sound thereof went out quickly throughout all the
earth. The Gospel at first came down upon the world gently and softly, like the
Dew upon Gideons fleece, and yet it quickly soaked quite through it: and
doubtless this is still the most effectual way to promote it further.
Sweetness, and Ingenuity, will more powerfully command men's minds, then
Passion, Sowrenesse, and Severity: as the soft Pillow sooner breaks the Flint,
then the hardest Marble. Let us (...) follow truth in love: and of the two
indeed, be contented rather, to miss of the conveying of a Speculative Truth,
then to part with Love. When we would convince men of any error by the
strength of Truth, let us withal pour the sweet Balm of Love upon their
heads. Truth and Love, are two the most powerful things in the world, and when
they both go together, they cannot easily be withstood. The Golden Beams of
Truth, and the Silken Cords of Love, twisted together, will draw men on with a
sweet violence, whether they will or no. Let us take heed we do not sometimes
call that Zeal for God, and his Gospel, which is nothing else, but our own
tempestuous and stormy Passion. True Zeal is a sweet, heavenly and gentle
Flame, which makes us active for God, but always within the Sphere of Love.
It never calls for Fire from Heaven, to consume those that differ a little from
us in their Apprehensions. It is like that kind of Lightning, (which the
Philosophers speak of) that melts the Sword within, but sings not the
Scabbard: it strives to save the Soul, but hurts not the Body. True Zeal is a
loving thing, and makes us always active to Edification, and not to
Destruction. If we keep the Fire of Zeal within the Chimney, in its own proper
place, it never does any hurt; it only warmeth, quickens, and enliveneth us:
but if once we let it break out, and catch hold of the Thatch of our Flesh, and
kindle our corrupt Nature, and set the House of our Body on fire, it is no
longer Zeal, it is no heavenly Fire, it is a most destructive and devouring
thing. True Zeal is an Ignis lambens, a soft and gentle Flame, that will not
scorch ones hand; it is no predatory or voracious thing: but Carnal and
fleshly Zeal, is like the Spirit of Gunpowder set on fire, that tears and blows
up all that stands before it. True Zeal is like the Vital heat in us, that we
live upon, which we never feel to be angry or troublesome; but though it gently
feed upon the Radical Oil within us, that sweet Balsame of our Natural
Moisture; yet it lives lovingly with it, and maintains that by which it is fed:
but that other furious and distempered Zeal, is nothing but a Fever in the
Soul. To conclude, we may learn what kind of Zeal it is, that we should make
use of in promoting the Gospel, by an Emblem of Gods own, given us in the
Scripture, those Fiery Tongues that upon the Day of Pentecost, sat upon the
Apostles; which sure were harmless Flames, for we cannot read that they did
any hurt, or that they did so much as singe an hair of their heads. I will
therefore shut up this, with that of the Apostle: Let us keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace. Let this soft and silken Knot of Love, tie our
Hearts together; though our Heads and Apprehensions cannot meet, as indeed they
never will, but always stand at some distance off from one another. Our Zeal
if it be heavenly, if it be true Vestall Fire kindled from above, it will not
delight to tarry here below, burning up Straw and Stubble, and such combustible
things, and sending up nothing but gross earthy fumes to heaven; but it will
rise up, and return back, pure as it came down, and will be ever striving to
carry up men's hearts to God along with it. It will be only occupied, about the
promoting of those things, which are unquestionably good; and when it moves in
the irascible way, it will quarrel with nothing but sin. Here let our zeal
busy and exercise it self, every one of us beginning first at our own hearts.
Let us be more Zealous then ever we have yet been, in fighting against our
lusts, in pulling down those strong holds of Sin and Satan in our hearts.
Here let us exercise all our Courage and Resolution, our Manhood and
Magnanimity. Let us trust in the Almighty Arm of our God, and 'doubt not, but
he will as well deliver us, from the Power of Sin in our hearts, as preserve
us from the wrath to come. Let us go out against these uncircumcised
Philistines, I mean our Lusts, not with Shield or Spear, not in any confidence
of our own strength, but in the name of the Lord of Hosts, and we shall
prevail: we shall overcome our Lusts, for greater is he that is in us, then he
that is in them. The Eternal God is our refuge, and underneath are the
everlasting arms: He shall thrust out these enemies from before us, and he
shall say, Destroy them. We shall enter the true Canaan, the good Land of
Promise, that flows with milk and honey, the Land of Truth and Holiness.
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that you may be able to
withstand: let your loins be girt about with truth; have on the brestplate of
righteousness; and let your feet be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace. Above all take the shield of faith, whereby you shall be able to quench
all the fiery darts of the Wicked, and take the helmet of salvation, and the
sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. And lastly, be sure of this,
That ye be strong only in the Lord, and in the power of his might. There be
some that dishearten us in this spiritual warfare, and would make us let our
weapons fall out of our hands, by working in us a despair of Victory. There be
some evil Spies, that weaken the hands and the hearts of the children of
Israel: and bring an ill report upon that land that we are to conquer, telling
of nothing but strange Giants, the sons of Anak there, that we shall never be
able to overcome. The Amalekites, (say they) dwell in the South, the Hittites,
Iebusites, Amorites in the Mountains, and the Canaanites by the Seacoast: huge
armies of tall invincible Lusts: we shall never be able to go against this
people, we shall never be able to prevail against our Corruptions. Hearken not
unto them (I beseech you) but hear what Caleb and Ioshuah say; Let us go up at
once, and possess it, for we are able to overcome them: not by our own
strength, but by the power of the Lord of Hosts. There are indeed Sons of
Anak there, there are mighty Gyantlike Lusts, that we are to graple with; nay
there are, Principalities, and Powers too, that we are to oppose: but the great
Michael, the Captain of the Lords Host is with us; he commands in chief for us,
and we need not be dismayed. Understand therefore this day, That the Lord thy
God is he, which goes before thee, as a consuming fire, he shall destroy these
enemies, and bring them down before thy face. If thou will be faithful to him,
and put thy trust in him; as the fire consumes the stubble, and as the flame
burns up the chaff, so will he destroy thy Lusts in thee: their root shall be
rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust. But let us take heed that
we be not discouraged, and before we begin to fight, despair of Victory: but
to believe and hope well in the power of our God and his strength, will be half
a Conquest. Let us not think, Holiness in the hearts of men here in the World,
is a forlorn, forsaken, and outcast thing from God; that he has no regard of.
Holiness wherever it is, though never so small, if it be but hearty and
sincere, it can no more be cut off, and discontinued from God; then a Sunbeam
here upon Earth can be broken off, from its intercourse with the Sun, and be
left alone amidst the mire anddirt of this World. The Sun may as well discard
its own Rays, and banish them from it self, into some Region of darkness, far
remote from it, where they shall have no dependence at all upon it; as God can
forsake and abandon Holiness in the World, and leave it a poor Orphane thing,
that shall have no influence at all from him to preserve and keep it. Holiness
is something of God, wherever it is; it is an Efflux from him, that always
hangs upon him, and lives in him: as the Sunbeams though they guild this lower
World, and spread their golden wings over us; yet they are not so much here,
where they shine, as in the Sun, from whence they flow. God cannot draw a
Curtain betwixt himself and Holiness, which is nothing, but the Splendour and
Shining of himself: He cannot hide his face from it, he cannot desert it, in
the World. He that is once born of God, shall overcome the World, and the
Prince of this World too, by the Power of God in him. Holiness is no solitary
neglected thing; it has stronger Confederacies, greater Alliances then Sin
and Wickedness. It is in league with God, and the whole Universe; the whole
Creation smiles upon it: there is something of God in it, and therefore it must
needs be, a victorious and triumphant thing. Wickedness is a weak, cowardly,
and guilty thing, a fearful and trembling Shadow. It is the Child of Ignorance
and Darkness; it is afraid of Light, and cannot possibly withstand the power
of it, nor endure the sight of its glittering Armor. It is allianced to none,
but wretched forlorn and apostate Spirits, that do what they can, to support
their own weak and tottering Kingdom of Darkness: but are only strong, in
Weakness and Impotency. The whole Polity and Commonwealth of Devils, is not
so powerful, as one Child of Light, one Babe in Christ: they are not all able
to quench the least smoking flax, to exstinguish one spark of Grace. Darkness
is not able to make resistance against Light, but ever as it comes, flies
before it. But if wickedness, invite the Society of Devils to it, (as we learn
by the sad experience of these present times, in many examples of those that
were possessed with Malice, Revengfulnesse, and Lust) so that those cursed
Fiends do most readily apply themselves to it, and offer their service to feed
it and encourage it; because it is their own Life and Nature, their own
kingdom of Darkness, which they strive to enlarge, and to spread the
Dominions of: shall we then think that Holiness, which is so nearly allied
unto God, has no good Genius at all in the World, to attend upon it, to help
it and encourage it? Shall not the Kingdom of Light, be as true to its own
Interest, and as vigilant for the enlarging of it self, as the Kingdom of
Darkness? Holiness is never alone in the World, but God is always with it,
and his loving Spirit, does ever associate, and join it self to it. He that
sent it into the World, is with it, as Christ speaks of himself, the Father
has not left me alone, because I do always those things that please him.
Holiness is the Life of God, which he cannot but feed and maintain wheresoever
it is; and as the Devils are always active to encourage evil, so we cannot
imagine, but that the heavenly Host of blessed Angels above, are as busily
employed, in the promoting of that which they love best, that which is dearest
to God whom they serve, the Life and Nature of God. There is joy in heaven at
the conversion of one sinner, Heaven takes notice of it; there is a Quire of
Angels that sweetly sings the Epithalamium of a Soul divorced from Sin and
Satan, and espoused unto Christ. What therefore the Wiseman speaks concerning
Wisdom, I shall apply to Holiness: Take fast hold of Holiness, let her not
go, keep her for she is thy Life: Keep thy heart with all diligence for out of
it are the issues of Life, and of Death too. Let nothing be esteemed, of
greater consequence and concernment to thee, then what thou do and actest,
how thou live. Nothing without us can make us either happy, or miserable;
nothing can either defile us, or hurt us, but what goes out from us, what
Springs and Bubbleth up, out of our own hearts. We have dreadful
apprehensions, of the Flames of Hell without us; we tremble and are afraid,
when we hear of Fire and Brimstone, whilst in the mean time, we securely
nourish within our own hearts, a true and living Hell, -- Et caeco carpimur
igni: the dark fire of our Lusts, consumes our bowels within, and miserably
scorcheth our souls, and we are not troubled at it. We do not perceive, how
Hell steals upon us, whilst we live here. And as for Heaven, we only gaze
abroad, expecting that it should come in to us from without, but never look for
the beginnings of it to arise within, in our own hearts.

But lest there should yet happily remain any prejudice against that, which I
have all this while heartily commended to you; True Holiness, and the Keeping
of Christ's commandment; as if it were a Legal and Servile thing, that would
subject us to a State of Bondage, I must here needs add a Word or two, either
for the Prevention or Removal of it. I do not therefore mean, by Holiness,
the mere performance of outward Duties of Religion, coldly acted over as a
task, not our habitual Prayings, Hearings, Fastings, multiplied one upon
another (though these be all good, as subservient to an higher end) but I mean
an inward Soul and Principle of Divine Life, that spiriteth all these; that
enliveneth and quickens, the dead carcass, of all our outward Performances
whatsoever. I do not here urge, the de^d Law of outward Works, which indeed if
it be alone, subjects us to a State of Bondage; but the inward Law of the
Gospel, the Law of the Spirit of Life, then which nothing can be more free and
ingenuous: for it does not act us by Principles without us, but is an inward
S^lf-moving Principle, living in our Hearts. I do not urge the Law written upon
Tables of stone without us (though there is still a good use of that too) but
the Law of Holiness written within, upon the Fleshly Tables of our hearts. The
first, though it work us into some outward Conformity to Gods Commandments, and
so has a good effect upon the World; yet we are all this while, but like dead
Instruments of Music, that found sweetly and harmoniously, when they are only
struck, and played upon from without, by the Musicians Hand, who has the
Theory and Law of Music, living within himself. But the Second, the living Law
of the Gospel, the Law of the Spirit of Life within us, is as if the Soul of
Music, should incorporate itself with the Instrument, and live in the Strings,
and make them of their own accord, without any touch, or impulse from without,
dance up and down, and warble out their Harmonies. They that are acted only
by an outward Law, are but like Neurospasts; or those little Puppets that skip
nimbly up and down, and seem to be full of quick and sprightly motion, whereas
they are all the while moved artificially by certain Wiers and Strings from
without, and not by any Principle of Motion, from themselves within: or else,
like Clocks and Watches, that go pretty regularly for a while, but are moved by
Weights and Plummets, or some other Artificial Springs, that must be ever now
and then wound up, or else they cease. But they that are acted by the new Law
of the Gospel, by the Law of the Spirit, they have an inward principle of life
in them, that from the Center of it self, puts forth it self freely and
constantly into all obedience to the will of Christ. This New Law of the
Gospel, it is a kind of Musical Soul, informing the dead Organ of our Hearts,
that makes them of their own accord delight to act harmoniously according to
the Rule of Gods word. The Law that I speak of, it is a Law of Love, which is
the most powerful Law in the World; and yet it freeth us in a manner from all
Law without us, because it makes us become a Law unto our selves. The more it
prevails in us, the more it eats up and devoureth, all other Laws without
us; just as Aarons Living Rod, did swallow up those Rods of the Magicians, that
were made only to counterfeit a little Life: Quis Legem det amantibus?
Major lex Amor est sibi.
Love is at once a Freedom from all Law, a State of purest Liberty, and yet a
Law too, of the most constraining and indispensable Necessity. The worst Law in
the World, is the Law of Sin, which is in our members; which keeps us in a
condition of most absolute Slavery, when we are wholly under the Tyrannical
commands of our lusts: this is a cruel Pharaoh indeed, that sets his hard
taskmasters over us, and makes us wretchedly drudge in Mire and Clay. The Law
of the Letter without us, sets us in a condition of a little more Liberty, by
restraining of us from many outward Acts of Sin; but yet it does not
disenthrall us, from the power of sin in our hearts. But the Law of the
Spirit of life, the Gospel-Law of Love, it puts us into a condition of most
pure and perfect Liberty; and whosoever really entertaines this Law, he has
thrust out Hagar quite, he has cast out the Bondwoman and her Children; from
henceforth, Sarah the Free woman, shall live forever with him, and she shall be
to him, a Mother of many children; her seed shall be as the sand of the
seashoar for number, and as the stars of heaven. Here is Evangelicall
liberty, here is Gospel-freedome, when the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus, has made us free, from the Law of sin and death: when we have a
liberty from sin, and not a liberty to sin: for our dear Lord and Master
has told us, that Whosoever commits sin, he is the servant of it. He that
lies under the power, and vassallage of his base lusts, and yet talks of
Gospel-freedome; he is but like a poor condemned Prisoner, that in his sleep
dreams of being set at liberty, and of walking up and down wheresoever he
pleases; whilst his Legs are all the while locked fast in fetters and Irons.
To please our selves with a Notion of Gospel-liberty, whilst we have not a
Gospel-principle of Holiness within us, to free us from the power of sin, it
is nothing else, but to gild over our Bonds and Fetters, and to fancy our
selves to be in a Golden Cage. There is a Straitness, Slavery, and Narrowness
in all Sin: Sin crowds and crumples up our souls, which if they were freely
spread abroad, would be as wide, and as large as the whole Universe. No man is
truly free, but he that has his will enlarged to the extent of Gods own will,
by loving whatsoever God loves, and nothing else. Such a one, does not fondly
hug this and that particular created good thing, and envassal himself unto it,
but he loves every thing that is lovely, beginning at God, and descending down
to all his Creatures, according to the several degrees of perfection in them.
He injoyes a boundless Liberty, and a boundless Sweetness, according to his
boundless Love. He inclaspeth the whole World within his outstretched arms,
his Soul is as wide as the whole Universe, as big as yesterday, to day, and
forever. Whosoever is once acquainted with this Disposition of Spirit, he never
desires any thing else: and he loves the Life of God in himself, dearer then
his own Life. To conclude this therefore; If we love Christ, and keep his
commandments, his commandments will not be grievous to us: His yoke will be
easy, and his burden light: it will not put us into a State of Bondage, but of
perfect Liberty. For it is most true of Evangelicall Obedience, what the wise
man speaks of Wisdom; Her ways, are ways of pleasantness, and all her
paths are peace; She is a tree of Life to those that lay hold upon her, and
happy are all they that retain her.

I will now shut up all with one or two Considerations to persuade you further,
to the keeping of Christ's Commandments.

First, from the desire which we all have of Knowledge; If we would indeed know
Divine Truths, the only way to come to this, is by keeping of Christ's
Commandments. The Grossness of our apprehensions in Spiritual things, and
our many mistakes, that we have about them, proceed from nothing, but those
dull and foggy Stemes, which rise up from our foul hearts and becloud our
Understandings. If we did but heartily comply with Christ's commandments, and
purge our hearts, from all gross and sensual affections, we should not then
look about for Truth wholly without our selves, and enslave our selves to the
Dictates of this and that Teacher, and hang upon the Lips of men; but we should
find the Great Eternal God, inwardly teaching our souls, and continually
instructing us more and more, in the mysteries of his will: and out of our
bellies should flow rivers of living waters. Nothing puts a stop and hinderance
to the passage of Truth in the World, but the Carnality of our hearts, the
Corruption of our lives. It Is not wrangling Disputes and Syllogisticall
Reasonings, that are the mighty Pillars, that underprop Truth in the World; if
we would but underset it with the Holiness of our Hearts and Lives, it should
never fail. Truth is a prevailing and conquering thing, and would quickly
overcome the World; did not the Earthinesse of our Dispositions, and the
Darkness of our false hears hinder it. Our Savior Christ, bids the Blind
man, wash off the Clay that was upon his eyes, in the Pool of Siloam, and then
he should see clearly; intimating this to us, that it is the Earthinesse of
men's Affections, that darkens the Eye of their understandings in Spiritual
things. Truth is always ready, and near at hand, if our eyes were not closed
up with Mud, that we could but open them, to look upon it. Truth, always waits
upon our souls, and offers it self freely to us, as the Sun offers its beams,
to every Eye, that will but open, and let them shine in upon it. If we could
but purge our Hearts, from that filth, and defilement, which hangs about
them, there would be no doubt at all of Truths prevailing in the World. For,
Truth is great, and stronger then allthings; all the Earth calls upon Truth,
and the heaven blesses it, all works shake and tremble at it. The Truth
endures, and is always strong, it lives and conquereth for evermore. She is
the Strength, Kingdom, Power and Majesty of all ages. Blessed be the God of
Truth.

Last of all, if we desire a true Reformation, as we seem to do; Let us begin
here in reforming our hearts and lives; in keeping of Christ's Commandments. All
outward Forms and Models of Reformation, though they be never so good in their
kind; yet they are of little worth to us, without this inward Reformation of
the heart. Tin, or Lead, or any other baser Metal, if it be cast into never
so good a Mold, and made up into never so elegant a Figure; yet it is but Tin,
or Lead still, it is the same Metal, that it was before. And if we be Molded
into never so good a Form of outward Government, unless we new mold our Hearts
within too; we are but a little better, then we were before. If adulterate
Silver, that has much Allay or Dross in it, have never so current a Stamp put
upon it, yet it will not pass notwithstanding, when the Touchstone tries it.
We must be reformed within, with a Spirit of Fire, and a Spirit of Burning, to
purge us from the Dross, and Corruption of our hearts; and refine us as Gold
and Silver; and then we shall be reformed truly, and not before. When this once
comes to pass, then shall Christ be set upon his Throne indeed, then the Glory
of the Lord shall overflow the Land; then we shall be a People acceptable unto
him, and as Mount Sion, which he dearly loved.

Finis.
Die Mercurii ultimo Martii. 1647.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament: That Sr Henry Mildmay, do from
this House give thanks unto Mr Cudworth, for the great pains he took, in the
Sermon he preached on this day at Margarets Westminster, before the House of
Commons (it being a day of Public Humiliation) and that he do desire him to
print his Sermon. Wherein be is to have the like Privilege in printing
thereof, as others in like kind usually have had.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


