A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE TRVE NOTION OF THE LORDS SVPPER.

By R. C.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Cotes. 1642.

The Chapters of the following TREATISE.
CHAP. I. THat it was a Custom among the Jews and Heathens, to Feast upon
things Sacrificed; and that the Custom of the Christians, in Partaking of the
Body and Blood of Christ, once Sacrificed upon the Cross, in The Lords Supper,
is Analogicall hereunto. Page 3. CHAP. II. An Objection taken from the
Passover, Answered, Proved, that The Passover was a True Sacrifice, and The
Paschall-Feast, a Feast upon a Sacrifice. From Scripture, and Jewish Authors.
page 16. CHAP. III. An Answer to some Objections against the Passeovers being a
Sacrifice. And the Controversy about the Day, upon which the Jews kept the
Passover, about the time of Our Saviors death, Discussed. Proved against
Scaliger and others of that Opinion, that no Translations of Feasts, from one
Feria to another, were then in use. page 33. CHAP. IV. Demonstrated, that the
Lords Supper in the Christian Church, in reference to the True Sacrifice of
Christ, is a Parallel to the Feasts upon Sacrifices, both in the Jewish
Religion, and Heathenish Superstition. page 52. CHAP. V. The Result of the
former Discourse. That the Lords Supper is not a Sacrifice, but a Feast upon a
Sacrifice. page 54. CHAP. VI. The further Improvement of that General Notion.
How The Lords Supper is a Federall Rite between God and us, at large.
Concluded with a memorable Story out of Maymonides and Nachmanides. page 56.
THE TRVE NOTION OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
ALL great Errors have ever been intermingled with some Truth. And indeed, if
Falsehood should appear alone unto the world in her own true Shape and native
Deformity, she would be so black and horrid, that no man would look upon her;
and therefore she has always had an Art to wrap her self up in a Garment of
Light, by which means she passes freely disguised and undiscerned. This was
elegantly signified in the Fable thus; Truth at first presented her self to
the world, and went about to seek enter ainment, but when she found none,
being of a Generous nature, that loves not to obtrude her self upon unworthy
spirits, she resolved to leave earth, and take her flight for Heaven, but as
she was going up, she chanced, Eliah-like, to let her Mantle fall, and Falsehood
waiting by for such an opportunity, snatched it up presently, and ever since
goes about disguised in Truths attire.

Pure Falsehood is pure Nonentity, and could not subsist alone by it self,
wherefore it always twines up together about some Truth (...), In Orat. De
Resurrect. Mort.
as Athenagoras the Christian Philosopher speaks, like an Ivy that grows upon
some Wall, twining her self into it with wanton and flattering embraces, till
it have at length destroyed and pulled down that which held it up. There is
always some Truth which gives Being to every Error: Est quaedam Veritatis
Anima, quae Corpus omnium Errorum agitat and informat: There is ever some Soul
of Truth, which does secretly Spirit and Enliven the dead and unweildy Lump of
all Errors, without which it could not move or stir.

Though sometimes it would require a very curious Artist, in the midst of all
Errors Deformities, to descry the defaced lineaments of that Truth which first
it did resemble: Lib. De Iside and Osiride.
as Plutarch spoke sometime of those Egyptian Fables of Isis and Osiris, that
they had (...), certain weak apparences and glimmerings of Truth, but so as
that they needed (...), some notable Diviner to discover them.

And this I think is the case of that Grand Error of the Papists, concerning
the Lords Supper being a Sacrifice: which perhaps at first did rise by
Degeneration from a Primitive Truth, whereof the very Obliquity of this Error
yet may bear some dark and obscure intimation. Which will best appear when we
have first discovered the True Notion of the Lords Supper, whence we shall be
able at once to convince the Error of this Popish Tenet, and withal to give a
just account of the first Rise of it:

Veritas Index sui and obliqui.

CHAP. I.
THe Right Notion of that Christian Feast called The Lords Supper, in which we
eat and drink the Body and Blood of Christ, that was once offered up in
Sacrifice to God for us; is to be derived (if I mistake not) from Analogy to
that ancient Rite amongst the Jews of Feasting upon things Sacrificed, and
eating of those things which they had offered up to God.

For the better conceiving whereof, we must first consider a little, how many
kinds of Jewish Sacrifices there were, and the Nature of them. Which although
they are very well divided, according to the received opinion, into four,
(...): The Burnt-offering, the Sinne-offering, the Trespasse-offering, and the
Peace Offering. Yet perhaps I may make a more Notionall Division of them, for
our use, into these three species.

First, such as were wholly offered up to God, and burnt upon the Altar, which
were the Holocausts, or Burnt-offerings.

Secondly, such wherein besides something offered up to God upon the Altar, the
Priests had also a part to eat of. And these are subdivided into the
Sinne-offerings, * Concerning the difference between these two, see Petite in
his Variae Lectiones.
and the Trespasse-offerings.

Thirdly, such, as in which, besides Something offered up to God, and a Portion
bestowed on the Priests, The Owners themselves had a share likewise: and these
were called (...), or Peace Offerings, which contained in them, as the Jewish
Doctors speak, (...), a Portion for God, and the Priests, and the Owners also;
and thence they use to give the Etymon of the Hebrew word Shelamim (...),
Because these Sacrifices brought Peace to the Altar, the Priests, and the
Owners, in that every one of these had a share in them.

Now for the first of these, although (perhaps to signify some special
Mystery concerning Christ) they were themselves wholly offered up to God, and
burnt upon the Altar; yet they had ever Peace Offerings regularly annexed to
them when they were not (...), Offerings for the whole Congregation, but for
any particular persons, that so the Owners might at the same time when they
offered up to God, feast also upon the Sacrifices.

And for the second, although the Owners themselves did not eat of them, the
reason whereof was, because they were not perfectly reconciled to God, being
for the present in a state of guilt, which they made atonement for in these
Sacrifices, yet they did it by the Priests who were their Mediators unto God,
and as their Proxies, did eat of the Sacrifices for them.

But in the Peace Offerings, because such as brought them had no uncleanness
upon them, ( Levit. 7. 20.) and so were perfectly reconciled to God, and in
covenant with him; therefore they were in their own persons to eat of those
Sacrifices, which they had offered unto God, as a Federall Rite between God
and them, which we shall explain at large hereafter.

So then, the Eating of the Sacrifices, was a due and proper appendix unto all
Sacrifices, one way or other, and either by the Priests, or themselves, when
the person that offered was capable thereof. Wherefore we shall find in the
Scripture, that Eating of the Sacrifices, is brought in continually as a Rite
belonging to Sacrifice in general, Which we will now show in diverse instances.
Exodus 34. 15. God commands the Jews, that when they came into the Land of
Canaan, they should destroy the Altars, and Images, and all the Monuments of
Idolatry among those Heathens, giving the reason thus. Lest thou make a
Covenant with the Inhabitants of the Land, and they go a whoring after their
Gods, and do Sacrifice unto their Gods, and one call thee, and thou EAT of
their Sacrifice: Which indeed afterward came thus to pass, Numb. 25. 2. They
called the people to the Sacrifice of their Gods, and the people did EAT, and
bow down to their Gods; or as it is cited in Psalm. 106. they joined themselves
unto Baal-peor, and ATE the Sacrifice of the dead. When Iethro, Mose's Father
in Law came to him, Exodus 18. 12. He took a Burnt-offering and Sacrifices for
God, and Aaron came, and all the Elders of Israel TO EAT BREAD before the
Lord; by Sacrifices there, are meant Peace Offerings, as Aben-Ezra, and the
Targum, well expound it, which we said before were regularly joined with
Burnt-offerings: So Exodus 31. When the Israelites worshipped the golden Calfe,
the Text says that Aaron built an Altar before it, and made a Proclamation,
saying, To morrow is a FEAST unto the Lord, (see how the Altar and the Feast
were a kin to one another) And they rose up early in the morning, and brought
Burnt-offerings and offered Peace Offerings, and the people SAT DOWN TO EAT
AND DRINK. Which passage Saint Paul makes use of, being about to dehort the
Corinthians from eating things sacrificed to Idols, 1 Cor. 10. Neither be you
Idolaters as some of them were, as it is written, The People SAT DOWN TO EAT
AND DRINK: for this was no common Eating, but the Eating of those Sacrifices
which had been offered up to the golden Calfe.

The first of Sam. 1. It is said of Elkanah, that he went up out of his City
yearly to worship, and to Sacrifice to the Lord of Hosts in Shiloh: and when
the time was come that he offered; he gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her
Sons and Daughters PORTIONS, and unto Hannah he gave a double PORTION: that is,
Portions to eat, of those Sacrifices that had been offered up to God, as R.
David Kimchy notes. And in the eight Chapter of the same book, when Saul was
seeking Samuel, going toward the City, he met some maidens, that told him,
Samuel was come to the City, for there was a Sacrifice for the people that day
in the High-place: As soon ( say they) as you come into the City you shall
find him before he go up to the High-place TO EAT, for the people will not
EAT until he come, because he does bless the Sacrifice: Where though the
word Bamah properly signify a High-place, or place of Sacrifice, whence the
Greek word (...) is thought to be derived. Yet it is here rendered by the
Targum, as often elsewhere, (...) Domus Accubitus, A house of feasting, because
feasting and sacrificing were such general Concomitants of one another. So
again in the 16. Chap. Samuel went to Bethlehem to anoint David: I am come (
says he) to sacrifice to the Lord, sanctify your selves, and come with me to
the Sacrifice; but when he understood that Iesse's youngest son was absent,
he says to Iesse, Send and fetch him, for we will not SIT DOWN until he
come. So I understand that of the Sichemites, according to the judgment of the
Jewish Doctors, Judge. 9. They went into the house of their God, and did EAT
and DRINK, and cursed Abimelech; that is, they went into the house of their
God to Sacrifice, and did eat and drink of the Sacrifice: which perhaps was
the reason of the name by which they called their God, whom they thus
worshipped, BERITH, which signifies a Covenant, because they worshipped him by
this Federall Rite of eating of his Sacrifices, of which more hereafter. Thus
likewise the Hebrew Scholiasts expound that in the 16. Chapter of the same
Book Verse 23. concerning the Philistims when they had put out Sampsons eyes.
They met together to offer a great Sacrifice unto Dagon their God, and TO
REJOICE, that is, in Feasting upon the Sacrifices.

Hence it is that the Idolatry of the Jews in worshipping other Gods, is so
often described synecdochically under the Notion of Feasting. Isa. 56. 7. Upon
a lofty and high mountain have thou SET THT BED, See Casaub. Exercit, Eccles.
16. 22.
and thither wentest thou up to offer Sacrifice; for in those ancient times
they were not wont to sit at feasts, but lie down on beds or couches. Ezekiel.
23. You sent for men from far, Sabeans from the Wilderness, (i. e.
Idolatrous Priests from Arabia) and lo they came, Of Saba see Salmasius in
Plinianis Exercitat. p. 497. and 500.
for whom thou did wash thy self, and satest upon a stately BED, with a
TABLE prepared before thee. Amos 2. verse 8. They laid themselves down upon
clothes laid to pledge by every Altar: i. e. laid themselves down to eat of
the Sacrifice that was offered on the Altar. And in Ezekiel. 18. 11. Eating upon
the Mountains seems to be put for Sacrificing upon the Mountains, because it
was a constant appendix to it. He that has not done any of these things, but
has even EATEN upon the Mountains, (...) i. e. Has worshipped Idols upon the
Mountains, so the Targum renders it. Lastly, Saint Paul makes Eating of the
Sacrifice a general Appendix of the Altar, Heb. 12. We have an Altar, whereof
they have no right TO EAT that serve the Tabernacle. I will observe this one
thing more, because it is not commonly understood, that all the while the Jews
were in the Wilderness, they were to Ear no meat at all at their private
Tables, but that whereof they had first sacrificed to God at the Tabernacle.
For this is clearly the meaning of that place, Levit. 17. verse 4, 5.
Whatsoever man there be in the house of Israel that kills a Lamb, or a Goat,
or an Ox, within the Camp, or without the Camp, and brings it not to the
door of the Tabernacle, to offer an offering to the Lord, blood shall be
imputed to him. And so Nachmanides there glosses according to the mind of the
Ancient Rabbines, (...) i. e. Behold God commanded at first that all which the
Israelites did Eat should be Peace Offerings. Which command was afterward
dispensed with, when they came into the land, and their dwellings were become
remote from the Tabernacle, so that they could not come up every day to
sacrifice; Deuteronomy. 12. 20, 21. If the place which the Lord thy God has chosen,
be too far from thee, then thou shall kill of the Heard and of the Flock, and
thou shall eat within thy gates whatsoever thy soul lusts after. Only now
there were instead thereof, three constant and set times appointed in the
year, in which every male was to come up and See God at his Tabernacle, and
eat and drink before him: and the Sacrifice that was then offered, was wont
to be called by them (...) A Sacrifice of Seeing.

Thus I have sufficiently declared the Jewish Rite of joining Feasting with
Sacrificing: and it will not be now amiss, if we add as a Mantissa to that
discourse something of the custom of the Heathens also in the like kind, the
rather because we may make some use of it afterward. And it was so general
amongst them in their idolatrous Sacrifices, that Isaak Abravanel, a learned
Jew, observed it, in Pirush Hattorah, (...) (...) Diebus antiquis quisquis
Idolis sacrificabat, statim convivium instruebat de sacrificiis: and the
Original of it amongst them was so ancient, that it is ascribed by their own
Authors to Prometheus, as Salmasius in his Solino-Pliniane Exercitations notes.
P. 129. a.
Hunc Sacrificii morem a Prometheo originem duxisse vol^nt, quo partem hostiae
in ignem conjicere soliti sunt, partem ad suum victum abuti. Which Prometheus,
although according to Eusebius his Chronicon^* and our ordinary Chronologers,
his time would fall near about the 3028. year of the Julian Period, which was
long after Noah. Yet it is certain that he lived far sooner, near about
Noah's time, in that he is made to be the son of Iaphet, Note that (...) the
Islands of the Nations, is commonly used in Scripture as a Proper Name to
express Europe by.
which was Noah's son, from whom the Europaeans descended, ( Genesis 10. 5.)
called therefore by the Poet Iapeti Genus. For there is no great heed to be
given to the Chronology of Humane writers concerning this age of the world,
which Censorinus from Varro calls (...) Although I rather subscribe to the
judgment of the learned Vossius, Lib. 1. de Idol.
that this Prometheus was no other then Noah himself, the Father of Iaphet,
and not his son; because the other things do so well agree to him, and we
may easily allow the Heathens such a mistake as that is, in a matter of so
remote antiquity: and then if this be true, the whole world received this Rite
of Feasting upon Sacrifice, at first, together with that of Sacrifice, at the
same time. Instances of this custom are so frequent and obvious in Heathen
Authors, that Homer alone were able to furnish us sufficiently.

In the (...) of the Iliads, he brings in a description of a
Hecatomb-Sacrifice, which Agamemnon prepared for Apollo by his Priest Chryse,
and a Feast that followed immediately after it: In (...) the same Agamemnon
offers up an Ox to Jupiter, and inviteth diverse of the Grecian Captains to
partake of it: In the (...) of the Odyssees, Nestor makes a magnificent
Sacrifice to Neptune of eighty two Bullocks, with a Feast upon it, on the
shore: In (...), Alcinous offers up a Bullock unto Jupiter, and then
immediately follows, -- (...)
(...) --


Plato in his second De Legibus, acknowledges these Feasts under the name of
(...), Feasts after Divine worship offered up to the Gods. Among the Latins,
that of Lycus in Plautus his Poenulus belongs to this purpose, Convivas volo
Reperire vobis commodos qui una sient,
Interibi attulerint exta.


And that of Gelasimus in Stichus, Iamne exta cocta sunt? quot agnis fecerat?

After this manner he in Virgils Eclogs invites his Friend. Cum faciam vitula
pro frugibus, ipse venito.

And thus Evander entertaines AENEAS in the eighth Aenead, Tum lecti juvenes
certatim, araeque Sacerdos,
Viscer a tosta ferunt taurorum --


Plutarch somewhere observes it as a strange and uncouth Rite, in the worship
of the Goddess Hecate, that they which offered Sacrifice unto her did not
partake of it. And the same Author reports of Cataline and his Conspiratours,
(...), that sacrificing a man, they did all eat samewhat of the flesh, using
this Religious Rite as a Bond to confirm them together in their Treachery. But
Strabo tells us of a strange kind of worship used by the Persians in their
Sacrifices, where no part of the flesh was offered up to the Gods, but all
eaten up by those that brought it, and their Guests, they supposing in the
mean while, that whilst they did eat of the Flesh, their God which they
worshipped, had the Soul of the Sacrifice that was killed in honor to him.
The Authors own words are these in his fifteenth Book (...) -- Sua quisque
accepta abeunt, nulla part diis relata, dicunt enim Deum nihil velle praeter
hostiae Animam: quidam tamen (ut fertur) omenti partem igni imponunt.

From this Custom of the Heathens of Feasting upon Sacrifices, arose that
Famous Controversy among the Christians in the Primitive Times, sometime
disputed in the New Testament, Whether it were lawful (...)* To eat things
sacrificed to Idols.

These Gentile Feasts upon the Sacrifices, were usually kept in the Temple
where the Sacrifice was offered; as may be gathered from that passage of
Herodotus in Clio, where speaking of Cleobus and Bithene, and what happened to
them after that prayer which their Mother put up to the Gods for them, (...)
(says he) (...), etc. As soon as they had sacrificed and feasted, lying down
to sleep in the same Temple, they dyed there, and never rose more. But it is
very apparent from that of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 8. If any man see thee which have
knowledge, sit at meat, (...), that is, not as Erasmus translates it, In Epulo
simulacrorum, but as Beza, and from him our Interpreters, In the Idols Temple;
for so both the Syriack Metaphrast expounds it (...) and the Arabic (...) In
the house of Idols.

If any thing were left when these Feasts were ended, they were wont to carry
Portions of them home to their Friends; So that learned Scholiast upon
Aristophanes in Plutus tells us, (...) Whence Petite in that excellent
Collection of Attick Laws, inserted this for one, viz. That they that go home
from a Sacrifice should carry part of it to their friends. And that Greek
Comedian himself alludeth there to it, in these words: -- (...)
(...).


Theocritus in his Bucoliastes, does express it fully: -- (...)
(...)


And Plautus in Miles, -- Sacrificant?
Dant inde partem majorem mihi quam sibi.


These Portions which they carried home, were called commonly by the Greeks
(...) and in the Umbrian Language, as Festus tells us, Strobula. Theophrastus in
his Characters uses the word (...) in this sense (...)* ad sacrificantes and
epula concelebrantes accedit, (...).
ut inde Portionem auferat.

And because they thought they did receive some blessing from the Gods with it,
therefore it was sometime called (...) as we find in Hesychius upon that word.
(...).

But otherwise if there were any thing yet remaining, it belonged to the
Priests, as we learn from that Scholiast, which we have already commended,
upon Vespae; (...) i. e. It was an ancient Law among the Athenians, that the
Priests should have the remainder. Which is not only to be understood of the
skin and such like parts, but of the flesh of the Sacrifice it self, as we
learn from Saint Austine in his exposition upon Romans 2. who tells us also that
these relics were sometimes sold for them in the Market, whence that speech
of Paul, 1 Corin. 10. Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, Eat, asking no
question for conscience sake.

I will shut up all, with this one observation more, that as we said of the
Jews, that in the Wilderness they did eat no meat, but of that which they
had first sacrificed: In like manner the Heathens were wont to Sacrifice before
all their Feasts: Whence it is that Athenaeus observes, Feasts among the
ancient Heathens were ever accounted Sacred and Religious things. And thus we
must understand that speech of Paul in the 27. verse of the forenamed Chapter.
If any one that believes not, invite you, and you be disposed to go,
whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake.
Nay, it was accounted a profane thing amongst them, to eat any meat at their
private tables, whereof they had not first Sacrificed to the Gods, as appears
by that Greek Proverb, (...), used by Anacreon, and others, as a Brand of a
notorious wicked man, viz. one that would eat meat whereof he had not
sacrificed.

Now having thus shown, that both amongst the Jews under the Law, and the
Gentiles in their Pagan worship, (for Paganism is nothing but Iudaisme
degenerate) it was ever a Solemn Rite, to join Feasting with Sacrificing, and
to EAT of those things which had been offered up; The very Concinnity and
Harmony of the thing it self, leads me to conceive, that that Christian Feast
under the Gospel, called THE LORDS SUPPER, is the very same thing, and bears
the same Notion, in respect of the true Christian Sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross, that those did to the Jewish and Heathenish Sacrifices: and so is
EPULUM SACRIFICIALE, a Sacrificiall Feast, I mean, a Feast upon Sacrifice; or
EPULUM EX OBLATIS, A Feast upon things offered up to God. Only this difference
arising in the Parallel, that because those Legal Sacrifices were but Types
and Shadows of the true Christian Sacrifice, they were often repeated and
renewed, as well as the Feasts which were made upon them: But now the True
Christian Sacrifice being come, and offered up once for all, never to be
repeated; we have therefore no more Typical Sacrifices left amongst us, but
only the Feasts upon the True Sacrifice still Symbolically continued, and
often repeated, in reference to that ONE GREAT SACRIFICE, which is always as
present in Gods sight, and efficacious, as if it were but now offered up for us.

CHAP. II.
BUT me thinks I hear it objected to me, Object.
that the true Notion of the Lords Supper is to be derived rather from the
Passover among the Jews: It being the common opinion of Divines, that the
Jews had but two Sacraments, viz. Circumcision and the Passover, that answer
to those two amongst us, Baptism, and The Lords Supper: But the Jewish
Passover had no relation to a Sacrifice, being nothing else but a mere FEAST,
and therefore from Analogy to the Jewish Rites, we cannot make the Lords
Supper, to be EPULUM SACRIFICIALE, a Feast upon Sacrifice.

To which I answer, First, That I know not what warrant there is for that
Divinity so magisterially imposed upon us by some, that the Jews had but two
Sacraments, Circumcision and the Passover, and that it should thence follow by
inevitable consequence, that the Lords Supper must (...), answer only* to the
Jewish Passover; Sure I am, the Jews had many more, for not to instance in
that of Paul, Our Fathers were all BAPTIZED unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the
Sea, like our Christian Baptism; And did all EAT the same Spiritual Meat,
(viz. The Manna) and did all DRINK the same Spiritual drink, (viz. The Water
of the Rock that followed them) like the Bread and Wine in the Christian Lords
Supper: Nor to Examine all the other Sacramental Ceremonies which they had,
that were almost as many Sacraments as Ceremonies; These Feasts upon the
Sacrifices, which we have all this while insisted on, were nothing else but
true and proper Sacraments See Cloppenburg in Schol^ Sacrif. and of the right
Notion of the word Sacrament, Vossius in These. Theolog.
joined with Sacrifices.

But secondly, I will grant that the Jewish Passover, has a special
resemblance to the Christian LORDS SUPPER, although upon other grounds; For I
say undoubtedly, the Passover was a true and proper Sacrifice, and therefore
the Pascall-Feast, a Feast upon a Sacrifice; So that this shall still advance
and improve our former Notion.

For the better conceiving whereof, we must understand, that besides those
four General kinds of Sacrifices among the Jews before mentioned, The
Burnt-offering, The Sin-offering, The Trespasse-offering, and the
Peace-offfering; there were some other Peculiar kind of Sacrifices, as the
Masters tell us, viz. these three, (...) The Firstlings of Cattle, and the
Tenth, and the Passover; And the reason why these in the Distribution of
Sacrifices, are thus distinguished by them from all the other General kind of
Sacrifices, is thus given by the famous Maymonides upon the Misna of the
Talmud, in Massecheth Zebachim, the sixth Chap. (...): Because those four
fourenamed, were such kind of Sacrifices as that a private person was often
bound to each of them in several cases, and the whole Congregation in several
seasons, but these three were not of that nature, being peculiarly restrained
to some one case or season. Now, these three kind of Peculiar Sacrifices, were
in their nature, all nearest of kin to the Peace Offerings, and are therefore
called by the Jewish Doctors, (...) like to Peace Offerings, because they were
not only killed in the same place, being all (...) Light Holy things, and had
the (...) or inward parts thereof to be burnt likewise upon the Altar; but also
in that part of them was to be eaten by the Owners. In so much that the
Talmudists put many cases, in which a Lamb that was set apart for a Passover,
and could not be offered in that Notion, was to be turned into a
Peace Offering, as that which was near of kin to it.

But yet these Masters tell us, there were three precise differences between
the Pascah, and the ordinary Peace Offering: (...) First, in that there was no
laying on of hands upon the Passover in the killing of it, for this was no
where commanded as in all the Peace Offerings; Secondly, that there was no
Mincah, or Meat Offering, nor Libamen, or Drink Offering to be joined with it,
(for so they use to include both in the word Nesachim) Thirdly, that there was
no waving of the Breast and Shoulder for the Priests Portion; the reason whereof
was, because the Priests were bound always to have Passeover-offerings of
their own, as it is expressed, Ezra 6. and so needed not any Wave-offering.

But that the Passeovers were in other respects, of the same nature with the
Peace Offerings, and therefore true and proper Sacrifices; because it is a
thing generally not so well understood, and therefore opposed by diverse, I
shall labor the more fully to convince it. I say, That the Passeovers were
always brought to the Tabernacle or the Temple, and there presented and
offered up to God by the Priest, as all Sacrifices were: That the blood of them
was there sprinkled upon the Altar, of which the Hebrew Doctors well observe,
(...) the very Essence of a Sacrifice, is in the sprinkling of the blood: and
also that the Imurim (as they call them) that is, the Fat and Kidneys were
burnt upon the Altar; All this I shall endeavor to demonstrate.

Only first I must premise this, that when I say the Passover was brought to
the Tabernacle, and offered by the Priests, I do not mean that the Priests
were always bound to kill the Passeovers: For I grant that the people were
wont to kill their own Passeovers, and so I find it expressly, in the Misna
of the Talmud. Massech. Zebach. Cap. 5.. 6. (...), All Israel killed the
Passover, and the Priests received the blood: Which Talmudicall Expression
alludes to that place, Exodus 12. 6. The whole assembly of the Congregation of
Israel shall kill it in the Evening: Where this seems to be commanded by God.
And the Practice consonant hereunto, I find intimated at least, in Scripture,
in Hezekiahs Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. 17. There were many in the Congregation
that were not sanctified, therefore the Levites had the charge of killing the
Passover for every one that was not clean to sanctify it unto the Lord:
Where R. Solomon writes thus: (...): Wonder not why the Owners themselves did
not kill them, for it follows that many in the Congregation had not
sanctified themselves, therefore the Levites were appointed in their place to
sanctify the Work unto the Lord. And R. D. Kimchy to the same purpose: Though
many of them did eat the Passover in uncleanness, it being a case of
necessity, in that they had no time to purify themselves, yet for them to come
into the Court and kill the Passeovers, this was not needful, when it might be
done as well by the Levites. And therefore the same is to be thought likewise
of the Priests and Levites killing the Passover, Ezr. 6. because the people
returning newly from Captivity, were not yet purified, as it is there also
partly intimated.

But this does not at all hinder our proceeding, or evince the Passover not to
be a Sacrifice; For it is a great Mistake in most of our learned Writers, to
think that the killing of every Sacrifice was proper to the Priest, whereas
indeed there was no such matter, but as we have already granted that the people
commonly killed their own Passeovers, so we will affirm, that they did the
same concerning any of the other Sacrifices. Levit. 1. 4, 5. It is said
concerning the Burnt-offering: If any man bring a Burnt-offering to the Lord,
he shall lay his hand upon the head of the Burnt-offering, AND HE SHALL KILL
the Bullock before the Lord, and the Priests Aarons sons shall take the
blood: So concerning the Peace Offerings, Chap. 3. HE shall lay his hand on the
head of his offering, and KILL it at the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation: And concerning the Sinne-offering, Chap. 4. 24. HE shall lay his
hand on the head of the beast, and KILL it at the place, where they kill the
Burnt-offering before the Lord. We see then what incompetent Judges our own
Authors are, in Jewish Customs and Antiquities. The Jewish Doctors and
Antiquaries, (which are so much contemned by some of our Magisteriall Dictators
in all Learning) would have taught us here another Lesson. For thus Maimonides,
in Biath Hammik. speaks to this point, (...) that is, The killing of the Holy
things may lawfully be done by strangers, yea of the most holy things, whether
they be the Holy things of a private person, or of the whole Congregation: as
it is said, ( Levit. 1.) And He shall kill the Bullock; and the Priests Aarons
sons shall take the blood. The same is avouched again afterward by the same
Author in Maaseh Korban. Chap. 5. But if any one would therefore feign know
what were properly the Priests actions about the Sacrifice, which might not be
done lawfully by any stranger; the same Jewish Authors have a Trite Rule
amongst them concerning it: (...), The Receiving of the blood and the other
parts that were to be offered up, and all that follows after that, belongs
to the Priests office. And Isaak Abrabanel will teach us more particularly, in
his Comment on Leviticus, that there were five things to be done by the Owners
of the Sacrifice that brought it, and Five, things by the Priest that offered
it; the first Five, were Laying on of hands, Killing, Flaying, Cutting up, and
Washing of the inwards; the other Five were, the Receiving of the blood in a
Vessel, the Sprinkling of it upon the Altar, the Putting Of this vide
Magistrorum Placita.
of fire upon the Altar, the Ordering of the wood upon the fire, and the
Ordering of the pieces upon the wood. Hence it is, that upon the forequoted
place of the Misna, which I brought to show, that the People did kill the
Passeovers, Rabbi Obadiah of Bartenora thus glosseth, (...). i. e. The people
of Israel might all kill the Passeovers themselves, if they pleased, because
the KILLING OF ANY SACRIFICE might be done lawfully by strangers, but the
Priests Received the blood.

Now I come to prove what I have undertaken. And first, That the Passover was
always brought to the Tabernacle or the Temple, and there offered unto God as
the other Sacrifices were, is clear enough, from Deuteronomy. 16. Thou shall not
Sacrifice the Passover within any of the gates which the Lord thy God gives
thee, but at the place which the Lord thy God chooses to place his Name there,
there thou shall sacrifice: And that this is to be understood, not of Jerusalem
in general, but of the Tabernacle or Temple, appears, both because the same
expressions are used of the other Sacrifices, Deuteronomy. 12. ver. 5, 6. 11. 14,
Where it is clearly meant that they were to be brought to the Temple: And
because it is certain that every thing that was killed amongst the Jews, was
either to be killed at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, or else
might be killed indifferently in any part of the whole Land. Let us now see how
the Jewish Doctors Comment upon this place, men better skilled in these Rites
then our own Authors are. R. Moses BEN MAIMON, in Halachah Pesach, Cap. 1.
(...) etc. They kill not the Passover but in the Court, as the rest of the
Holy things, yea in the time when High Places were permitted, they sacrificed
not the Passover in a private High-place, for it is said (Deuteronomy. 16.) Thou
may not sacrifice the Passover in any of thy gates: We have learnt, that
this is a Prohibition to kill the Passover in any private High-place, although
it be in a time when High Places are permitted. From which excellent gloss of
theirs, it appears that there was more preciseness to be observed in
bringing of the Passover to the place where Gods name was put, and offering of
it at the Tabernacle, or the Temple, then of any of the other Sacrifices. And
this was the reason as was before intimated out of KIMCHI, why in Hezekiahs
Passover the Levites had the charge of killing: because the Passeovers were to
be killed in the Court of the Temple, whither the people being unclean could
not enter; for otherwise if it had been done without the Court, they might as
well have killed their own Passeovers as have eaten them. And this may be
further confirmed, in that the Passover is called a Korban: Numb. 9. 7. When
certain men were defiled by a dead body, that they could not keep the
Passover, They came to Moses and said: Wherefore are we kept back that we may
not OFFER an OFFERING of the Lord in his appointed season: And again, ver. 13.
If any one be clean and forbeareth to keep the Passover, even that Soul
shall be cut off, because he brought not an OFFERING (or a KORBAN) to the Lord
in his appointed season. Nothing was called an OFFERING, or a KORBAN, but that
which was brought and offered up to God at the Tabernacle or Temple, where his
Name was put.

That the Blood of the Passeovers was to be Sprinkled by the Priest, and the
Fat to be burnt upon the Altar, although this must needs follow from the
former, yet I prove it more particularly, thus, Exodus 23. 18. Thou shall not
offer the blood of my Sacrifice with leavened Bread; Neither shall the Fat of
my Feast remain until the morning: For by the general consent of the Jewish
Scholiasts, and all those Christian interpreters that I have seen, this place
is to be understood only of the Passover; and therefore ONKELOS that famous
Chalday Paraphrast for (...) the blood of my Sacrifice, made no question but to
read it (...) the Blood of my Passover. But it appears undoubtedly, from a
Parallel Place in the 34. Chap. of the same Book, ver. 23. 25, 26. Where
those 17, 18, and 19. verses of the 23. Chap. are again repeated; Thrice in
the years shall all your men-children appear before the Lord. -- Thou shall
not offer the blood of my Sacrifice with leaven, neither shall the Sacrifice of
the Feast of the Passover be left unto the morning: The first of the first
fruits of thy land, thou shall bring into the House of the Lord thy God: Thou
shall not sees a Kid in its Mothers Milk. Here, what was wanting in the
former, is supplied. Neither shall the Sacrifice of the Feast of the PASSOVER
be left unto the morning. And I have set down the whole Context with it,
because it will be needful for the better clearing of it, to consider its
coherence with other verses, which is the very same in both Chapters; and Isaak
Abrabanel has set it down excellently in this manner. First therefore, says
he, when God had spoken of the Jews appearing thrice before him every year,
viz. at The Feast of the Passover or of Unleavened bread, The Feast of Weeks
or Pentecost, The Feast of Tabernacles or In-gathering, (...). i. e. When he
had spoken of these three Feasts, he subjoynes immediately some Rule Concerning
every one of them in particular: First, for the Passover in those words, Thou
shall not offer the blood of my Sacrifice with leaven, neither shall the
Sacrifice of the Feast of the Passover be left until the morning: Secondly,
for the Feast of Pentecost, in those, The first of the first fruits of the
Land thou shall bring into the house of the Lord thy God. Thirdly, for the
Feast of Tabernacles, or Ingathering, Thou shall not sees a Kid in his mothers
Milk: which words, for want of this Light of the Context, were never yet
sufficiently explained by any of our Interpreters. And the thread of this
Coherence alone, led Abrabanel very near the true meaning of them, ere he was
aware: (...). i. e. It seems most probable, that this command was occasioned
from a custom amongst the Idolatrous Heathons, that at the time of their
gathering in of fruits, they were wont to boil a Kid in the Dammes milk,
thinking that by this means, they were made acceptable to their gods, and did
procure a blessing by it. To confirm which Gloss, he tells us of a custom
somewhat like to this, used in his time in some parts of Spain. But because
Abrabanel does not tell his tale so handsomely as he should, I will help him
out a little from an ancient Karraite, whose Comment I have seen upon the
Pentateuch, MSS. (For the Monuments of these Karraite Jews were never yet
Printed, and are very rarely seen in these European Parts) And it is thus. It
was a custom of the ancient Heathens, when they had gathered in all their
fruits, to take a Kid and boil it in the Dammes Milk, and then (...) in a
Magical way, to go about and besprinkle with it, all their Trees, and Fields,
and Gardens, and Orchards: thinking by this means they should make them
fructify, and bring forth fruit again, more abundantly the following year.
Wherefore God forbad his people the Jews at the time of their Ingathering to
use any such superstitious or Idolatrous Rite. And I produce this the rather,
because Abrabanel, toward the end of his Comment on this place, mentions a
gloss of some KARRAITISH Author upon it, although it be altogether unlike to
this which we have here related. (...), Scribunt Sapientes KARRAEORUM, Ne
coquas hoedum in lacte matris suae: Hoc est, Ne commisceatur Germen cum
Radicibus. But to return; As from the coherence of the whole Context thus
cleared, it is manifest that this verse in both places, is to be understood
only of the Passover: so it may be further confirmed from the Talmudists, who
ever expound it in this sense, as appears by the Misna in Zebachin, Chapter
the 6. (...), He that kills the Passover with leaven, sins against a
Negative Command, (which is more amongst the Jews, then to sin against a
Positive) viz. That in these places already quoted, Thou shall not offer the
blood of my Sacrifice with leaven: From whence they Collected, as Maymonides
tells us, that they were to put away Leaven the foureteenth day, a day before
the killing of the Passover, Nay, this place cannot possibly be understood in
any other sense, as of Sacrifices in general, because Leaven was sometimes
commanded with Sacrifices, as Levit. 7. 13.

But that the Blood of the Passeovers was sprinkled, may be demonstrated
further, not only from that of Hezekiahs Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. 16. The
Priests sprinkled the blood, which they received from the hand of the Levites:
For there were many in the Congregation that were not sanctified, therefore the
Levites had the charge of killing the Passeovers: but also from Iosiahs, chap.
35. ver. 11. which can no ways be evaded: They, that is, The Levites, killed
the Passover, and the Priests Sprinkled the Blood from their Hands, and the
Levites Flayed them* Now the Sprinkling of the Blood is the Essence of a
Sacrifice, as before we noted from the Jewish Doctors. And therefore the
Passover must needs be a Sacrifice, (...).

For a Confirmation of all this, I will describe punctually the whole manner of
the PASCHAL SACRIFICE, from the Misna of the Jewish Talmud, a Monument of such
antiquity as cannot be distrusted in these Rites. Nothing (say they) was killed
before the morning Sacrifice, and after the Evening Sacrifice, nothing but the
Passover: The Evening Sacrifice was usually killed between the eighth and
ninth hour; that is, half an hour after two in the afternoon, and offered
between the ninth and tenth, that is, half an hour after three: But in the
Evening of the Passover, the daily Sacrifice was killed an hour sooner, and
after that, began the killing of the Passover, which was to be done between
the two Evenings, whereof the first began at Noone from the Suns declination
toward the West, the Second at Sunne-set: yet the Pascha might be killed before
the Daily Sacrifice, if there were but one to stir the blood, and keep it
from coagulating, till the blood of the Daily Sacrifice were Sprinkled, for
that was always to be sprinkled first: The Passeovers were always killed by
three several Companies: When the Court was once full, they shut the doors,
and the Priests stood all in their ranks with round vessels in their hands to
receive the blood, those that were of Gold in a rank by themselves, and those
that were of silver, all without bottomes, lest they should be set somewhere on
the ground, and the blood congeale in them. And they killed the Passeovers, as
the Peace Offerings, in any part of the Court, because they were (...) The
less holy things, as the (...), The Holy of Holies, were always to be killed
at the Northside of the Altar. The Priests then took the blood, and gave it
from one to another, till it came to him that stood next the Altar, and he
sprinkled it all at once toward the Bottom of the Altar: which was a Square of
32. Cubits, save that the South-East Home had no bottom. After the blood was
sprinkled, the Lamb was flayed, and cut up, the Imurim, or inwards taken out
and laid upon the Altar, then the Owner took up the Lamb with the Skin of
it, and carried it to his own home, The First company having ended, then the
Second came in, and afterward the Third; and for every Company they began
anew the HALLEL, and sang all the while the Passeovers were killing; but it was
never known that they had sung out the HALLEL quite, or came any further then
(...) before the Priests had done.

But because, besides these Talmudisticke Jews, there is another Sect of
KARRAITES, mentioned before, (that reject all Talmudicall Traditions which are
not grounded upon Scripture) though little known amongst us, yet famous in the
Orient: I will produce one Testimony of theirs also, froman ancient Manuscript,
that so it may appear we have the full consent of all Jewish Antiquity for
this Opinion. The Authors name to me is uncertain, because the Papers have
lost both their beginning and end. But they contain in them, diverse large and
complete Discourses upon several Arguments in the Karraite way, as about the
Jewish year, The Sabbath, The Passover, etc. Concerning the Passover, he
divides his Discourse into several Chapters, whereof the Title of one is this:
(...), Concerning the Place where the Passover was to be Offered and Eaten:
Where he thus begins. (...) i. e. Know, that the Offering of the Passover
was always in the place which God had chosen, (to put his Name there) as it is
Written, Thou shall not sacrifice the Passover within any of thy gates, and
the place of the killing of the Passover was in the Court called HESRA, and
the blood of it was powered out toward the bottom of the Altar, and the Imurim,
or inward parts of it were burnt upon the Altar, etc.

Hence it was that when Cestius once demanded what the number of the Jews was
that resorted to Jerusalem at the time of their solemn Feasts, The Priests
made answer, and told him exactly, how many Lambs and Kids were sacrificed at
the Passover, (...), twenty five Myriads, five thousand and six hundred;
Which they could not have done, had not they sacrificed them at the Temple.

But what need have we of any more dispute? when the Passover was first kept
in Egypt, were not the Paschall-Lambs there killed in a Sacrificiall and
Expiatory way, When the blood thereof was to be sprinkled upon the houses, for
God to look upon, and so pass over them? It is true, they were killed in
every private house, but the reason of that was, because there were then
Priests in every Family, viz. The Vide Claris. Seldenum. De Succes. in
Pontificat. Hebraeo. c. 2. and de Succes. ad Leges Heb. 1. c. 5.
Firstborn, which were afterward redeemed when the children of Israel gave up
the whole Tribe of Levi to God for his service. Such Priests as these were
those whom Moses sent to sacrifice, Exodus 24. 4. called there young men. Moses
sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered Burnt-offerings and
sacrificed Peace Offerings to the Lord; Where Onkelos the Chaldee Paraphrast
reads it (...) He, sent the Firstborn: to which agrees the Arabic
Translation of R. Saadiah, and the Persian of Tawasius as Master Seldom notes,
whom I cannot without honor mention, as the Glory of our Nation for Oriental
Learning.

And was not the killing of the Passover a special Type of the death of
Christ, the true Sacrifice of the world? Give me leave to note one thing to
this purpose, upon the credit of Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue with Trypho:
That in the ancient Hebrew Copies of the Bible, there was in the Book of Ezra
a speech of his which he made before the Passover, Expounding the Mystery
thereof concerning Christ, which because it favored the Christians, was timely
expunged by the Jews. The speech was this; (...), i. e. Et dixit Esdras
populo, Hoc Pascha Salvator noster and Perfugium nostrum. Et si in animim
induxeritis and in Cor vestrum ascenderit, quod humiliaturi eum simus in signo,
and postea speraturi in eum, non desolabitur locus iste in omne tempus, Dicit
Deus exercituum. Sin in eum non credideritis, neque audieritis annunciationem
ejus, deridiculum eritis gentibus. Remarkable it is, if it be true; and the
Author deserves the better credit in it, because he was Samaritane, and
therefore might be the better skilled in Jewish Writings. But however, I am
sure the Apostle tells us, not only that the Passover was a Type of Christ in
respect of his death, but also that the Proper Notion of the Paschall-Feast,
was, to be a Feast upon Sacrifice, in those words, 1 Cor. 5. 7. Christ our
Passover is Sacrificed for us, Therefore let us keep the Feast: (that is, The
Paschall-Feast upon this sacrificed Christ) with the Unleavened Bread of
sincerity and truth. Where alluding to that common Jewish Custom of Feasting
upon Sacrifices, of which we have before spoken; he implies that the Paschall
Supper was a Feast of the same nature, A Sacrificiall Feast.

CHAP. III.
BUT yet we will not dissemble, what there is of any moment either in Antiquity
or Reason, against our own opinion, ere we let this discourse pass: But
subject all to an impartial view.

And first, the Authority of Philo, who in his third Book, De Vita Mosis,
speaks thus concerning the Passover: (...). i. e. In qua non ut alias plebeii
homines victimas adducunt ad altar mactandas, a sacerdotibus, sed jubente
lege, tota gens sacrificat, dum pro se quisque mactat hostiam suis manibus.
Tunc universus populus exultabat, unoquoque existimante, se Sacerdotii
dignitate honoratum. And again in his Book De Decalogo, (...). Quando
populariter singuli sacrificant non expectatis sacerdotibus, ipsi permissu
legis fungentes Sacerdotio, quotannis per unum diem destinatum huic negotio.
But to this we answer; That Philo does not here deny the Passover to be a
Sacrifice, but confirm it rather, in that he calls it often here and elsewhere
(...), and says that they did (...), bring it to the Altar; and that the
people did (...), Sacrifice it; and does only distinguish this
Paschall-Sacrifice from all the other Sacrifices, in this, that here according
to his opinion, every one of the people was (...), honored with the
Priestly-office, and that the Law did (...), make every one a Priest for that
time to offer up their own Passover: But moreover, it is well known, that
Philo though he were a Jew by Nation, yet was very Scalig. Elench. Trihaer.
cap. 25. circa finem. ltem in Emend. Temp. De Cyclo Iudaeorum Karraim. and Hug.
Grotius in Mat. 26.
ignorant of Jewish customs, having been borne and bred up at Alexandria: and
we have a Specimen of his mistakes here, in that he seems to make this
difference between the Passover and the other Sacrifices, that they were
only killed by the Priest, but the people themselves killed their own
Passeovers (...), according to the Law; where he means doubtless, that in
Exodus 12. 6. The whole Assembly of the Congregation of Israel shall kill it; For
this is that Solenne delirium of our late Authors also, which we have chastized
before. But if he mean moreover, that the people did not only kill their
Passeovers, but do all other Priestly offices concerning them; when he says
they were (...), this, as it has no ground from Scripture, and I think will
hardly find a Patron now to defend it, so it does not prejudice our opinion of
the Passeovers being a Sacrifice, but still much confirm it.

Secondly, it may seem to some, a kind of impossibility to conceive, How so
many Sacrifices as there must be at every Passover, could all be offered upon
one Altar, since there was no more by the Law permitted. To which nevertheless
I need not answer any thing but this, that there was nothing but the Fat, and
some of the Inwards, burnt upon the Altar, and that the Bigness of the Altar
was greater then perhaps is ordinarily conceived; for under the second Temple,
the Area thereof upon the Top, was a Square of twenty eight Cubits, as the
Talmudists constantly relate, to which Josephus also agrees very near, if the
difference of those Cubits which he uses be allowed. Only, they may please to
learn from the Instance of Josias Passover, which was said to be so great,
that there was no Passover like to that kept in Israel from the days of
Samuel the Prophet unto that time; that this was possible to be done: For it
either is, or must be confessed, that then they were all offered upon the Altar.

But lastly, we must confess ingenuously, that there is one Great Difficulty
yet behind, concerning our Saviors last Passover, which according to the
General Consent of our best Divines, Critics, and Chronologers, was kept a
Day before the Jews kept their Passover: Whether therefore his Paschall-Lamb
which he with his Apostles did then Eat, were first Sacrificed at the Temple,
and How that could be?

Where not to engage our selves any more then needs we must, in that nice and
perplexed, but Famous Controversy, concerning the time of the Jewish Passover
about our Saviors death. It will not be amiss, first to take notice, that the
Latin Church ever maintained the contrary opinion against the Greeks, viz. that
the Jews kept the Passover on the same night which our Savior did: and
though it be true that of later times, most of our Best-Learned Authors have
quitted that opinion of the Latins, and closed altogether with the Greeks, as
Paulus Burgensis, Munster, Scaliger, and Casaubon, yet notwithstanding, our
Countryman Master Broughton, understanding perhaps better then they did, that
the Jewish Passover was a true and proper Sacrifice, and first, according to
Gods command, was to be offered up to God, before Feasted on; he espied a
difficulty here concerning our Saviors Passover, (which they took no notice
of) that could not easily be solved; and therefore he thought good Scindere
nodum, as Alexander did, to cut the knot, which he could not loose, and
absolutely to deny that the Jewish Passover and our Saviors were then
celebrated on two several Nights. And he is of late seconded by Johannes
Cloppenburg a Belgic Divine, [in a learned Epistle written upon this Argument
to Ludovicus De Dieu] insisting upon the very same ground, because the
Paschall-Lamb, which Christ with his Disciples did eat, could not have been
sacrificed at the Temple, unless it had been, at the same time when the
Jewish Passover was solemnly celebrated. His words to this purpose expressing:
fully Master Broughtons sense, are these. Non potuit mactars Agnus Paschalis
extra Templum Hierosolymitanum: In temple mactari non potuit citra generalem
populi consensum; Quare neque Dies mactationis potuit anticipari: It follows,
Vel ergo d^cendum Christum comedisse agnum mactatum in Templo, atque hoc facto
(quod absit) Legem violasse; juxta legem enim agnus privatim Comedendas, e
Templo deferendus domi erat in aedes privatus, post igne absumptum in Templo
adipem, and sanguinem delatum ad altar.

But I must confess, although I am as much addicted to that Hypothesis, of the
Passeovers being a Sacrifice, and as tender of it, as Master Broughton could
be, or any body else; yet I cannot but yield my self captive to Truth, on
which side soever it present it self, and though it be (...) (as Aristotle
says a Philosopher should do) to the destruction of our own Phenomenon. And
indeed those two Places especially, brought out of Saint John's Gospel, to prove
that the Jews kept their Passover, the day after our Savior did his, seem
to me to be unanswerable, nor any way cured by those (...), which are applied
to them. The first is Chap. 19. ver. 14. where, the next day after Christ had
kept his Passover with his Disciples, when Pilate delivered him up to the
Jews to be crucified, it is said, that it was then, (...), The Preparation of
the Passover, where they tell us, that by The Preparation of the Passover; is
meant, The Preparation of the Sabbath on which the Second day of the Feast of
the Passover fell. But En Iecur Criticum! as Scaliger sometimes cries out: and
what a farre-fetcht conceit is this? The second is that in Chap. 18. verse. 28.
when Jesus was led into Pilates Judgement-Hall, early in the morning, it is
said, that the Jews themselves went not into the Iudgement-Hall, lest they
should be defiled, but that they might eat the Passover. Here we are told,
that by Eating of the Passover, is meant the eating of the Chagigah, that was
killed the day before with the Passover, whereof something perhaps remained
till the day following. And this gloss is little better then the former: for
although they appeal to that place in Deuteronomy. 16. 2. to prove that the Chagigah
was sometimes called by the name of Passover; which indeed if our English
Translation were authenticke, would make something for them; Thou shall
therefore Sacrifice the Passover unto the Lord thy God, of the flock, and the
Heard, as if there had been a Passover of Oxen, as well as Sheep. Yet in the
Hebrew the words run thus, (...) which according to a several Punctation,
and a several supplying of something that must be understood, may be expounded
several ways; any of which is far better, then that which our English
Translators unhappily pitched upon. Onkelos in his Paraphrase (which seldom
merits that name, being indeed commonly nothing but a Rigid Version) reads it
thus: (...) i. e. And thou shall sacrifice the Passover before the Lord thy
God, of the sons of the Flock, and the Peace Offerings (thereof) of Oxen:
which interpretation is followed by R. Solomon, and Aben-Ezra, (...), i. e.
Sheep for the Passover, and Oxen for the Peace Offerings, or the Chagigah.
And it may be confirmed from that of Hezekiabs Passover, 2 Chronicles. 35. v. 7.
Josiah gave to the people, of the Flock, Lambs, and Kids, all for the
Passeover-offerings to the number of thirty thousand; and three thousand
Bullocks: where the Bullocks or the Heard, are divided from the
Passeover-offerings, because they served for the Peace Offerings, or the
Chagigah, as appears from v. 13. They roasted the Passeovers with fire
according to the ordinance, but the OTHER HOLY OFFERINGS (that is, the
Peace Offerings or Chagigah) sod they in Pots, and Cauldrons, and Pans.
Nachmanides has another interpretation of it, to this purpose, (...), i. e. He
commands here the Passover, which was a Lamb as he had said before, (making
the Pause there) and (...), The Flock and the Heard, or the Sheep and the
Kids, and the young Bullocks, for the Chagigah. Giving other instances in which
the Conjunctive Particle Vau, which he does here supply, is in like manner to
be understood. And this Exposition is rather approved then the former, not
only by Abrabanel, but also by the Karraite, which I have so often commended,
who quoting one R. Aaron for the Author of it, does express it thus, (...), i.
e. The word (...) (thou shall Sacrifice) is to be repeated, (...) before, THE
FLOCK AND THE HEARD, thus, And thou shall Sacrifice the Passover to the Lord
thy God, and thou shall Sacrifice Sheep and Oxen, or the Flock and the Heard;
as in like manner, Prove. 30. 3. the Particle (...) non, is to be repeated
(...), From the former verse. So that it cannot hence be proved that the
Peace Offerings offered with the Passover, were ever called by the name of
Passover.

There is another place in the same Evangelist, that has not been observed by
any one to this purpose, which if it were rightly understood, would be as
clear a Testimony as any of the rest. And it is in the 19. Chapter, v. 31.
(...), For that Sabbath day was a great Day. (...), in the Greek of the
Hellenists, is used for the first or the last day of every solemn Feast, in
which there was a Holy Convocation to the Lord. This appears from Esaias 1. 13.
Your Newmoones, and Sabbaths, the Calling of Assemblies (which was the first
and last day of the Feast) I cannot away with. Which the Septuagint renders
thus, (...), Your Newmoones and Sabbaths, and your GREAT DAYS. For the last
day of the Feast, we have it used by our Evangelist, Chap. 7. ver. 37. In the
last Day, the GREAT DAY of the Feast, (...). And doubtless by the same
Evangelist, for the First day of the Feast, in this place: and therefore the
Jews did not Eat their Passover, till the night before, which was the same
night that our Savior was crucified.

Which may be strengthened further by this Argument. That if the Jews had
celebrated their Passover the same night which our Savior did his, it is
certain they would never have gone about immediately, with swords and staves
to have apprehended him, and then have brought him to the Highpriests Hall,
and afterward have arraigned him, at Pilates Judgment seat, and lastly have
crucified him, all the same day. For the Frist day of unleavened Bread, was by
the Law an Holy Convocation to the Lord, on which it was not lawful to do any
work: And we know the Jews were rigid enough in observing these Legal
Ceremonies.

If then it must be granted that our Savior with his Disciples kept the
Passover the night before the vulgar Jews did celebrate it, Our next Work
is, to show how it might be probable, that our Saviors Passover was first
Sacrificed at the Temple.

And here perhaps I might run for shelter to that story in Suidas upon the
Word (...), that Christ was enrolled into the number of the two and twenty
Legal Priests that served at the Altar; from the pretended Confession of an
ancient Jew in Justinians time; and then he might possibly Sacrifice his own
Passover at the Temple, though the Jews had not solemnized theirs till the
day after. But that I hold this to be a mere Fable, and that not only
ridiculous, but impious.

Or, I might take up the opinion of the Greeks, that Christ did not keep a
true Legal Passover, but a Feast of Unleavened Bread in Imitation of it. Or
as the learned Hugo In Annot. ad Matthew. cap. 26.
Grotius, who has lately asserted this opinion, expresses it, not (...), but
(...), such as the Jews at this day keen, because the Temple being down,
their Sacrifices are all ceased. But this opinion has been exploded by most
of our late Authors, and indeed I can no way satisfy my self in it, and
therefore will not acquiesce in this answer.

But before we be able to give a true account of this Quaere, We must search a
little deeper into the true ground of this difference between our Saviors
Passover and the Jews.

The common opinion is, that the Jews in our Saviors time were wont to
translate their Festivals from one Feria to another upon several occasions, as
when ever two Festivals were immediately to follow one another, to join them
into one, and therefore when any fell upon the sixth Feria, to put it over to
the next Feria, or the Sabbath, to avoid the concurrence of two Sabbaths
together: in the same manner as the Jews use to do in their Calendar at this
day, where they have several Rules to this purpose, expressed by Abbreviatures
thus, Adu Badu, Gahaz, Zabad, Agu. Whereof each Letter is a Numerall for some
Feria; The Rule for the Passover is (...) Badu: that is, that it should not be
kept on the Second, Fourth, or Sixth Feria. (There is an Extract of a
Rabbinicall Decree to this purpose under the name of R. Eliezer: in Munster
upon Matthew. cap. 26.) And therefore at this time when our Savior was
crucified, the Passover falling upon the sixth Feria, or Friday; was (say
they) by the Jews translated, according to this Rule, to the next Feria, and
kept on Saturday, or the Sabbath; but our Savior not regarding these
Traditions, observed that day precisely which was commanded in the Law, (...)
Luke 22. 7. that is, as they expound it, Upon which the Passover OUGHT to have
been killed, which was Friday, the day before.

But, under favor, I conceive that all these Decrees, together with that
Ratiocinium or Calendar, to which they do belong, were not then in use in our
Saviors time, although it be so confidently averred by the incomparable Joseph
Scaliger, but long since invented by the Jews. Which I shall make appear,
First, in that the ancient Jews, about, and since our Saviors time, often
solemnized as well the Passeovers, as the other Feasts upon the Feria's next
before, and after the Sabbaths, and those other Feria's, which have been made
Rejectitious since, by that Calendar: In the Talmudicall Title Succoth, Chap.
the last, we read of (...): that is, A Feast going immediately before, or
following immediately after the Sabbath. And in Betzah, c. 1. (...) And, (...):
A Feast that falls to be on the evening of the Sabbath, or the day after the
Sabbath. In Chagigah, the second Chapter, (...), which is to the same purpose
with the former. More particularly concerning the Passover. Pesachim chap. 7.
Sect. 10. Ossa, nervi, and omne residuum Agni Paschalis cremantor sexto decimo.
Si is dies SABBATUM, decimo septimo. From this and diverse the like places of
the Talmud, Aben Ezra, on Levit. 23. ver. 4. observes, (...), There be diverse
instances in the Misna, and the Gemara, of the Passeovers being kept in BADU.
That is, on those days which were made Rejectitious in the late Calendar, the
Second, Fourth, and Sixth Feria. Therefore these Translations were not in use,
when the Doctors of the Misna and Gemara lived. Secondly, In that the Jews
ever while the Temple stood, observed their New-Moones and Feasts according to
the (...) or Appearance of the Moon, and therefore had no Calendar for their
Rule to sanctify their Feasts by, but they were then sanctified by the Heavens,
as the Misna speaks. This is so clearly delivered by R. Moses Ben Majemon in
that excellent Halachah entitled KIDDUSH HACCHODESH, that I wonder so many
learned men, that are well skilled in these Authors, should miss of it. For
having spoken of the Rules of observing the (...), he then adds, that these
were never made use of since the Sanhedrin ceased in the Land of Israel, after
the destruction of the Temple; since which time they have used a Calendar,
calculated according to the middle Motion of the Moon, (...). Et haec erat
Traditio Mosis in Monte Sinai, quod omni tempore quo duraret Sanhedrin,
constituerent Neomenias juxta (...). Hoc vero tempore quo jam cessavit
Sanhedrin, constituerent secundum Calculum hunc Astronomicum quo nos hodie
utimur; nec ullo modo jam ad (...) nos astringimus, cum saepe contingat ut dies
Legitimus secundum nostrum calculum, vel concurrat cum Lunari (...), vel
antevortat eam unica die, vel etiam subsequatur. And again a little after most
punctually, (...). Quando primum coeperunt omnes Israelitae computare secundum
hunc calculum? A Fine doctorum Talmudicorum, quando jam desolata erat Terra
Israel, neque erat Consistorium aut Synedrium quod determinaret; Nam per omnes
dies Doctorum Misnae and Doctorum Gemarae, usque ad Abaeum and Rabbaeum,
acquiescebant omnes Iudaei in Sanctione Terrae Israelis. And those Rules
forementioned of not keeping the several Feasts upon such and such Feria's,
were made together with this Calendar, as the same Author there also
avoucheth, (...). i. e. In this account, they never constituted the New Moon of
Tisri upon Adu, because this Account was made according to the Conjunction of
the Sun and Moon, in the middle Motion, therefore now they constituted some
Legitimate and other Rejectitious days, which they could not do before, when
the New Moon (and therefore all the other Feasts) were determined according to
the (...).

But the Talmud was not completely finished, till about the 500. year of the
Christian Era, therefore this Jewish Calendar, and these Rules concerning the
Translation of Feasts were not in being, till about that time: and so could be
no reason of this difference between the time in which our Savior solemnized
the Passover, and the other Jews.

For further confirmation hereof, we may observe that the Karraites, which have
rejected the fond Traditions of the Pharisees, retain still the ancient
custom of reckoning their New Mons, (...), as Emend. Temp. p. 149. 150.
Scaliger himself has well observed: though in this he were mistaken, that he
thought they had assumed it of late, merely out of hatred to the other Jews,
whereas they have kept it in a constant succession from antiquity, and hold it
still, as necessary by Divine Right. (...) (says my Author) (...). This is
confessed by all Israel, that from the time of the Kingdom, they were ever
wont to consecrate the New-moones by the (...); and the very Etymon of the word
Chodesh implies so much, for it signifies The Renewing of something, so that it
is denominated from the Change of the Moon, or Phasis, as the Epoch and
beginning of it. And this is one of the Great Controversies to this day,
between those two Sects of the Jews the (...) or Karraei, and (...) or
Rabbanaei: which is grown at length to such a height, that the Karraites,
decyphering the conditions of those witnesses, whose Testimonies might be
accounted valid for the (...), make this for one, that they should no way
belong to the Sect of Rabbanists: which perhaps to observe in the Authors own
words, would not be unpleasing (...), i. e. A second condition is, that they be
not such as hold an opinion concerning the Sanctification of the New-Moone
different from the opinion of Our Wisemen. And therefore in this regard, we may
receive the Testimony of the Ishmaelites (that is, the Turks and Saracens)
because they follow the opinion of Our Wisemen Concerning the Phasis, and in
most of their appointed times they agree with us: But we may not receive the
testimony of any one that is of the Sect of the Rabbis, because they are
divided from us in this; And although they be our brethren and our flesh, yet
herein they have rebelled and grieved his holy Spirit.

Having thus disproved the common and received opinion, and removed the false
Ground of this Difference of time, between our Saviors Passover and the
Jews, we come in the next place to lay down the True, which must be derived
from that way of reckoning the months, and of determining the (...), the Head
or Beginning of the month, which was in use in our Saviors time, which as we
have showed already in general, was by the (...), so it will be expedient to
describe the whole manner of it more particularly from authentic Authors.
Talmud. Babyl. in Rosh. Hashanah. and Maimon. in Kiddush Hachod.


In the great or outer Court of the Temple, there was a House called
Beth-Iazek, where the Senate sat all the thirtieth day of every Month, to
receive the Witnesses of the Moons appearance, and to examine them. And here
they always had a Feast provided for the entertainment of those that came, to
encourage men to come the more willingly. In ancient times, they did admit of
strangers, and receive their Testimony, if it were approved upon examination.
But when the Heretics (that is, the Christians) afterward grew up, by whom,
they say, they were sometimes deluded, they began to grow shy, and to admit of
none but such as were approved of, to be of the Jews Religion. If there came
approved Witnesses upon the thirtieth day, of the (...) seen, then the chief
man of the Senate stood up and pronounced MEKUDDASH, it is sanctified: and the
people standing by, caught the word from him, and cried out, MEKUDDASH,
MEKUDDASH. Whereupon there was notice presently given to all the Country: which
was done at first by Torches from Mountain to Mountain, till at length the
Christians (they say) abused them in that kind also with false fires: wherefore
they were feign to send Messengers from place to place, over the whole Land to
give intelligence of the New-Moone. But if, when the Consistory had sat all
the thirtieth day, there came no approved Witnesses of the (...), then they
made an intercalation of one day in the former Month, and decreed the
following, one and thirtieth day, to be the Calends. And yet notwithstanding,
if after the fourth or fifth day, there should come some Witnesses from afar,
that testified, they had seen the (...) in its due time, nay, though they came
toward the end of the Month, ((...)) The Senate, when they had used all means
by affrighting them from that Testimony, that so, if it were possible, they
might decline a New Consecration; (after they had already made an Embolisme in
the former Month) if the Witnesses remained constant, were then bound to alter
the beginning of the Month, and reckon it a day sooner, to wit, from the
thirtieth day.

Here we see the True Ground of the Difference of a day, that might arise
continually about the Calends of the Month, and so consequently about any of
the other Feasts which did all depend on them, viz. Between the true Time of
the Moons (...), upon the thirtieth day, and that of the Senates Decree a day
after. For since it appears out of their own Monuments, how unwilling they
were, having once made a Consecration of the Neomenia, to alter it again; it
may be probably conceived that in those degenerated times, the Senate might
many times refuse to accept the Testimony of undoubted Witnesses: And then it
seems they had such a Canon as this: (...) That whatsoever Time the Senate
should conclude of for the Calends of the Month, though it were certain they
were in the wrong, yet all were bound to order their Feasts according to it:
Which I cannot think was approved of by our Savior, and the most pious Jews.
And therefore I conceive it most probable, that this was the very case between
our Saviors Passover and the Jews, in that he followed the True (...),
confirmed by sufficient and assured Witnesses; but the other Jews
superstitiously observed the Pertinacious Decree of the Senate or Sanhedrin,
which was for the day after.

And now at last, we are come again to the Acme of the Question, that was
first propounded; How our Saviors Passover, notwithstanding all this, might
be sacrificed the day before those of the other Jews were.

To which I answer, that upon this Ground, not only, our Savior and his
Apostles, but also diverse others of the most religious Jews, kept the
Passover upon the fifteenth day from the true (...) of the Moon, and not from
the Senates Decree; which I may confirm from the Testimony of Epiphanius, that
reports, there was at this time (...), In Panario Har. ll.
a Tumult, and contention amongst the Jews about the Passover; and so we may
easily persuade those other Evangelists, that intimate Christ's Passover to
have been solemnized, when many others kept it, to agree with Saint John, who
assures us, that it was also by diverse Jews kept the day after. Now it was a
Custom among the Jews, in such doubtful cases as these, which oftentimes
fell out, to permit the Feasts to be solemnized, or Passeovers killed, on two
several days together. Maymonides affirms, that in the remoter parts of the
Land of Israel, they always solemnized the Feast of the New-Moones two days
together, nay, in Jerusalem it self where the Senate sat, they kept the
New-Moone of Tisri, which was the beginning of the year, twice, lest they
should be mistaken in it. In the Talmud we have an instance, of the Passeovers
being kept two days together, because the New-Moone was doubtful, in Gemara
Rosh Hashanah. cap. 1. Hence the Karraites who still keep the ancient custom
of observing the Moons (...), retain it as a Rule to this day, (...),
Observare duos dies propter dubium. Nay, the Rabbinicall Jews themselves since
they have changed the Phasis, for the Synod or Conjunction of the Moon in the
middle motion, in imitation hereof still observe to keep the Passover two
days together, iisdem ceremoniis, as the learned Author of the Jewish
Synagogue reports: and Scaliger himself, not only of that, but also of the
other Feasts. Iudaei post institutionem hodierni computi, eandem solennitatem
celebrant biduo: propterea quod mensem incipiant a medio motu Lunae: itaque
(...) propter dubium Conjunctionis Luminarium, Pascha celebrant 15. and 16.
Nisan. Pentecosten 6. and 7. Sivan. Scenopagiam. 15. and 16. Tisri. idque
vocant (...) Festum Secundum Exiliorum.

Now then we see that nothing hinders but that the Passover might be a
Sacrifice. And thus we have hitherto cleared the way.

CHAP. IV.
BUT lest we should seem all this while, to Set up Fancies of our own, and
then Sport with them; We come now to Demonstrate and Evince that the Lords
Supper in the proper Notion of it, is EPULUM EX OBLATIS, or, A FEAST UPON
SACRIFICE; in the same manner with the Feasts upon the Jewish Sacrifices under
the Law; and the Feasts upon (...) (things offered up to Idols) among the
Heathens: And that from a place of Scripture where all these three shall be
compared together, and made exact Parallels to one another.

1 CORIN. 10. 14. Wherefore my dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry.

15. I speak as to wise men, judge you what I say.

16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood
of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of
Christ?

18. Behold Israel after the flesh, are not they which ear of the Sacrifices
partakers of the Altar?

20. Now I say the things which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice to
Devils and not to God; and I would not that you should have Fellowship with
Devils.

21. Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils: ye cannot be
partakers of the Lords Table, and the Table of Devils.

Where the Apostles Scope being to convince the Corinthians of the
unlawfulness of Eating things Sacrificed to Idols; He does it in this manner:
Showing, that though an Idol were truly Nothing, and things Sacrificed to
Idols were Physically, Nothing, as different from other Meats; [as it seems
they argued, and Saint Paul confesses, ver. 19.] Yet Morally and
Circumstantially, to Eat of things Sacrificed to Idols, in the Idols Temple,
was to consent with the Sacrifices, and to be guilty of them: Which he does
illustrate, First, from a Parallel Rite, in Christian Religion. Where the
Eating and Drinking of the Body and Blood of Christ, offered up to God upon the
Cross for us, in the Lords Supper, is a Real Communication in his Death and
Sacrifice, ver. 16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the blood of Christ? etc.

Secondly, From another Parallel of the same Rite among the Jews. Where,
always they that Eat of the Sacrifices, were accounted partakers of the
Altar, that is, Of the Sacrifice offered up upon the Altar, ver. 18. Behold
Israel after the flesh, are not they which Eat of the Sacrifices partakers of
the Altar? In veteri Lege quicunque admittebantur ad Edendum de Hostiis
Oblatis, censebantur ipsius Sacrificii tanquam pro ipsis Oblati, fieri
Participes, and per illud Sanctificari: As a Late Commentator fully expresses
it.

Therefore, as to Eat the Body and Blood of Christ in the Lords Supper, is to
be made partaker of his Sacrifice offered up to God for us; as to Eat of the
Jewish Sacrifices under the Law, was to partake in the Legal Sacrifices
themselves: So to Eat of things offered up in Sacrifice to Idols, was to be
made partakers of the Idoll-Sacrifices: And therefore was unlawful.

For, the things which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice to Devils, but
Christ's Body and Blood was offered up in Sacrifice unto God, and therefore they
could not partake of both together; the Sacrifice of the true God, and the
Sacrifice of Devils. Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of
Devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and the table of Devils. S.
Paul's Argument here, must needs suppose a perfect Analogy between these three,
and that they are all Parallels to one another, or else it has no strength.
Wherefore I conclude from hence, that the LORDS SUPPER is the same among
Christians, in respect of the Christian Sacrifice, that among the Jews the
Feasts upon the Legal Sacrifices were, and among the Gentiles, the Feasts upon
the Idoll-Sacrifices: and therefore EPULUM SACRIFICIALE, or, EPULUM EX OBLATIS:
(...).

CHAP. V.
THUS having Declared and Demonstrated The True Notion of The Lords Supper: We
see then, How that Theological Controversy, which has cost so many Disputes,
Whether the Lords Supper be a Sacrifice, is already decided; for it is not
SACRIFICIUM, but EPULUM EK (...): Not A SACRIFICE, but A Feast upon Sacrifice:
or else in other Words, Not OBLATIO SACRIFICII, but as Tertullian excellently
speaks, PARTICIPATIO SACRIFICII: Not the Offering of something up to God upon
an Altar, but the Eating of something which comes from Gods Altar, and is set
upon Our Tables. Neither was it ever known amongst the Jews or Heathens, that
those Tables upon which they did eat Their Sacrifices, should be called by the
Name of Altars. Saint Paul speaking of the Feasts upon the Idoll-Sacrifices,
calls the places upon which they were eaten, The Tables of Devils, because the
Devils meat was eaten on them, not the Altars of Devils: and yet doubtless he
spoke according to the true Propriety of speech, and in those Technicall Words
that were then in use amongst them. And therefore keeping the same Analogy, he
must needs call the Communion Table, by the name of the Lords Table: i. e. The
Table upon which Gods Meat is eaten, not his Altar, upon which it is offered.
It is true, an Altar is nothing but a Table, but it is A Table upon which GOD
himself eats, consuming the Sacrifices by his Holy Fire: but when the same
Meat is given from GOD unto Us to Eat of, the relation being changed, the
place on which WE Eat, is nothing but a Table.

And because it is not enough in any Discourse, as Aristotle well observes in
his Ethics, to confute an Error, unless we can also show (...), The Cause of
that Error; Having thus Discovered The True Notion of the Lords Supper, we may
easily from hence discern also, How that mistake grew up, and that by the
Degeneration of this Truth. There is a Sacrifice in the Lords Supper
Symbolically, but not there as Offered up to God, but Feasted on by us; and so
not a Sacrifice, but a Sacrificiall Feast: Which began too soon to be
misunderstood.

CHAP. VI.
I Should now come, to make some further improvement of this General Notion of
the Lords Supper: By showing what these Feasts upon the Sacrifices did
signify, under the Law; and then applying the same in a more perfect manner to
the Lords Supper under the Gospel; being warranted thereunto by that Analogy
which is between them. But because there may be diverse glosses and
Interpretations of These Feasts upon the Sacrifices, which are obvious to every
common understanding; We will decline them all, and pitch only upon one, which
is not so vulgarly understood. And it is this, that, The Eating of Gods
Sacrifices was a FEDERALL RITE, between God and those that offered them,
according to the Custom of the Ancients, and especially in those Oriental
Parts, to Confirm and Ratify their Covenants, by Eating and Drinking together.

Thus when Isaak made a Covenant with Abimelech the King of Gerar, the Text
says, He made him and those that came with him a Feast, and they did eat and
drink, and rose up betimes in the morning and swear to one another. When Laban
made a Covenant with Jacob, Genesis 21. ver. 44. Now therefore come (says Laban)
let us make a Covenant, I and thou, and let it be for a witness between me
and thee; Then it follows in the Text, They took stones, and made a heap,
and did eat there upon the heap, and Laban called it JEGARSAHADUTHA, in his
Chalday Tongue, but Iakob (in the Hebrew Language) GALEED, i. e. A heap of
witness. Implying that those stones upon which they had eaten and drunk
together, should be a witness against either of them that should first violate
that Covenant. R. Moses Bar Nachman in his Comment, thus glosseth upon this
place, (...) i. e. They did eat there, a little upon the heap, for a
Memorial: Because it was the manner of those that entered into Covenant, to
eat both together of the same Bread, as a Symbol of love and friendship: And
Isaak Abrabanel much to the same purpose, (...) i. e. It was an ancient custom
amongst them, that they which did eat Bread together upon the same Table,
should be accounted ever afterward as entire Brethren. And in this sense he
conceives, that place, Lamentations 5. v. 6. may be expounded: We have given
the hand to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians by fullness of Bread, i. e. We
have made a Covenant with them.

Joshua 9. verse 14. When the Gibeonites came to the Israelites, and desired
them to make a league with them, it is said; The Men of Israel took of their
victuals and asked not counsel of the mouth of the Lord: that is, they made a
Covenant with them, as Kimchy learnedly expounds it, (...), Acceperunt de
Viatico ipsorum, and comederunt cum illis per modum foederis. For so it
follows afterward in the Text, And Ioshuah made peace with them. Hence also
was that Emphaticall expression, Psalm. 41. 10. spoken literally by David of
Achitophel, Mine own familiar friend, that did eat of my Bread, has lift up
the heel against me: but seeming prophetically, to glance at Judas, that
dipping with Christ in the same dish, betrayed him. The Singular Emphasis of
which speech, we that are unacquainted with this Custom of the Oriental
Nations, cannot easily perceive; neither can we any where better learn it,
then from that passage of Celsus in Origin, who carping at that History of
Judas his betraying Christ, in the Gospel, as an incredible thing; made in the
mean while, an excellent Comment upon this Prophecy, when he little thought of
it. (...). i. e. Si homini nemo insidiaretur, ejusdem mensae particeps, multo
minus Deo. And Origens Reply to him, which shows that though this were an
unusual thing, yet it sometime came to pass, is very pregnant also for our
purpose: (...). i. e. Quis ignorant multos ad Communionem Salis and Mensae
adhibitos, insidiatos tamen suis contubernalibus? Plena est Historia tam
Graecorum, quam Barbarorum, exemplis ejusmodi. Et Parius ille Iamborum
Scriptor, exprobrans Lycambae violatum foedus, quod Sal and Mensa
conciliaverat, sic eum alloquitur. Sacramentum irritasti magnum, Salem atque
Mensam. All which makes manifest, what an heinous offense it was accounted
anciently, to be guilty of the breach of a Covenant, which had been confirmed
by Eating and Drinking together. In the seventh verse of Obadiah, that Prophet
speaks to Edom in this manner, All the men of thy confederacy have brought
thee to the border, the men that were at peace with thee have deceived thee,
they that eat thy Bread, have laid a wound under thee. In the New Testament,
that place, John the fourth, verse the ninth, is well observed by Heinsius in
his Aristarchus to carry this notion: How is it that thou being a Jew ask
drink of me, being a Woman of Samaria? Suavissime dictum (says that forenamed
Critic) ex eorum more qui cum peregrini essent, aut alieno fuissent animo,
animis conciliandis cibum mutuo a^potum alter alterius gustabant.

Wherefore I think from all these instances, I may conclude that this is the
true Etymon of that Hebrew word (...), which signifies a Covenant, or any
Federall Communion betwixt parties, from (...) Comedere, because it was the
constant custom of the Hebrews and Oriental Nations, to establish Covenants
by eating and drinking together, as has been showed.

And, as the Jews, so likewise did the Heathens in the same manner use to
Ratify their Covenants, between Parties, by Eating together. Lucian in
Toxaris, reports it of the Scythians, That when any one was injured and
could'not revenge himself, the manner was, that he should kill and Ox, and
cut it into small pieces, which being boiled, he was to sit down by them, with
his hands behind him, (which was a gesture of earnest supplication amongst
them) and then whosoever was minded to help him, came, and did Eat a piece of
his flesh, and so, with this Ceremony promised to assist him. And this was
counted a sacred and inviolable Covenant of mutual defense between them,
whence that Greek Proverb, (...), In tergore bovis desedit, of which Erasmus
in his Adagies.

Herodotus reports of the Persians, that they made their Leagues and
Covenants at Feasts: and of the Nasamones a People of Lybia, that they composed
Peace, by stretching out a Cup full of Wine to each other, and pledging one
another in it.

Alexander ab Alexand. relates this of the Thracians and Egyptians, that,
Ecornibus boum (quae veteribus poculorum loco erant) Vina sibi invicem
propinantes, id firmissimum contracti foederis vinculum esse putabant. Curtius*
Reports of the Macedonians, Quod patrio ritu foedus quod sanctissimum vellent
haberi, sic inibant, Ut panem gladio divisum uterque libaret. And therefore
Alexander when he fell in love with Roxana, commanded Bread forthwith to be
brought before him, which when he had divided with his sword, and they had both
tasted together of, he took her presently to himself as his Wife. And there
remains a Custom to this day, something like this, at Weddings in many
Countries; That when the Bridegroom and Bride are come from Church, they have
a piece of Cake brought them, which when the Bridegroom has tasted, he gives
it to the Bride to taste of likewise, in token of a Covenant between them.

The Germans still use to conclude of Bargains, and Ratify Friendship
between Parties by drinking together, as appears by that phrase which they
have Den Friden Trinchen, Pacem bibere.

The Emperor of Russia to this day, when he would show extraordinary Grace and
favor unto any, sends them Bread and Salt from his Table. And when he invited
Baron Sigismond, the Emperor Ferdinands Ambassador, he did it in this form,
Sigismunde comedes sal and panem nostrum nobiscum: as Sigismond himself
relates it in his Muscovian Commentaries. It is an Axiom in the Civil Law,
that if a man drink to one, against whom he has an Accusation of slander, or
other Verbal injury, he loses his Action, because it is supposed he is
reconciled to him.

In like manner, I say, the Eating of Sacrifices, which were Gods meare, was a
Federall Rite, between God and those that did partake of them, and signified
that there was a Covenant of Friend-ship between him and them.

For the better conceiving whereof, we must observe, that Sacrifices, beside
the Nature of expiation, had the Notion of Feasts, which God himself did, as
it were, feed upon. Which I explain thus: When God had brought the Children of
Israel out of Egypt, resolving to manifest himself in a peculiar manner
present among them, He thought good to Dwell amongst them in a visible and
External manner: And therefore while they were in the Wilderness and
sojourned in Tents, he would have a Tent or Tabernaole built, to sojourne with
them also. This Mystery of the Tabernacle was fully understood by the Learned
Nachmanides, who in few words, but pregnant, thus expresses it: (...): And
again, (...): That is, The Mystery of the Tabernacle, was this, that it was to
be a Place for the Shechinah, or Habitation of Divinity to be fixed in: And
this, no doubt, as a special Type of Gods future Dwelling in Christ's humane
Nature, which was the TRUE SHECHINAH. But when the Jews were come into their
Land, and had there built them Houses, God intended to have a fixed
Dwelling House also, and therefore his Moveable Tabernacle was to be turned
into a Standing Temple. Whence by imitation came came all those Temples among
the Heathens, which they apprehended as so many places of Peculiar Residence or
Habitation, for their Deities next the Heavens to dwell in. As appears by that
of Silius amongst many others, -- Tarpeie Pater, qui Templa secundam
Incolis a Coelo sedem --
Now the Tabernacle or Temple, being thus as a House for God to Dwell in
visibly, to make up the Notion of Dwelling or Habitation complete, there must
be all things suitable to a House, belonging to it. Hence in the Holy Place,
there must be a Table and a Candlestick; because this was the ordinary
furniture of a room, as the fore-commended Nachmanides observes, (...). i. e.
He adds a Table and a Candlestick, because these suite the Notion of a
Dwelling House. The Table must have its Dishes, and Spoones, and Bowls, and
Covers belonging to it, though they were never used, and always be furnished
with Bread upon it. The Candlestick must have its Lamps conninually burning.

Hence also there must be a Continual Fire kept, in this House of Gods, upon
the Altar, as the Focus of it; to which Notion, I conceive, the Prophet Esaias
does allude Chap. 31. ver. 9. (...): which I would thus translate, Qui habet
ignem suum in Sion, and focum suum in Jerusalem. And besides all this, to carry
the Notion still further, there must be some Constant Meat and Provision
brought into this House, which was done in the Sacrifices, that were partly
consumed by Fire upon Gods own Altar, and partly eaten by the Priests which
were Gods Family, and therefore to be maintained by him; That which was
consumed upon Gods Altar, was accounted GODS MESS, as appears from the first
chap. of Malachy; Where the Altar is called GODS TABLE, and the Sacrifice upon
it GODS MEAT; You say the Table of God is polluted, and the fruit thereof his
Meat is contemptible: and often in the Law, the Sacrifice is called Gods (...),
that is, his Bread or Food. Whence in that Learned Hebrew Book Cozri, The King
Haber objects to the Jew Cozar against his Religion, that it seemed to place
Corporeity in God, in making him to feed upon the Flesh of Beasts in these
Sacrifices: to which the Jewish Doctor replieth Cabalistically in this manner:
That as in men, Corporeal meat is a means to unite and continue the Soul
(which is a Spirit) to the Body: So in the Land of Israel, the Blood of Beasts
offered up in Sacrifice, had an Attractive power to draw down Divinity, and
unite it to the Jews. And methinkes this may be a little further convinced
from that passage in the 50. Psalm. If I were hungry, I would not tell thee, for
the world is mine, and the fullness thereof: Will I eat the Flesh of Bulls, or
Drink the the Blood of Goats? For though it be here denied that God did
really feed upon the Sacrifices, yet it is employed there was some such Allusive
Signification in them.

Wherefore it is further observable, that beside the flesh of the beast offered
up in Sacrifice, there was a Mincah or Meat Offering, made of Flower and Oil,
and a Libamen, or Drink Offering, that was always joined with the daily
Sacrifice. As the Bread and Drink which was to go along with Gods Meat.

It was also strictly commanded, that there should be Salt in every Sacrifice
and oblation: Because all Meat is unsavory without Salt, as R. Moses Bar
Nachman has here also well observed, (...). i. e. Because it was not
honorable, that Gods Meat should be unsavory, without Salt.

Lastly, all these things were to be consumed on the Altar, only by the Holy
Fire that came down from Heaven, because they were Gods Portion, and therefore
to be eaten or consumed by himself, in an extraordinary manner. And this the
Devil sometime imitated, in some Sacrifices offered up to him. For so I
understand that Passage of Pindar in his Obympiacks, Ode 7. speaking of the
Rhodians, That when they had prepared, and were come to offer Sacrifice to
Jupiter, they had by chance forgotten to bring Fire with them: But Jupiter
being conscious of their good intentions, rained down upon them A GOLDEN
SHOVVRE, that is, (as I understand it) A SHOVVRE of Fire. A pure imitation of
the Sacred Story. Take it in that elegant Poets own words.

(...)
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
That is, according to Benedictus his Metaphrase: Etenim Rhodii ascenderunt,
quamvis non habentes ardentis semen ignis. Verum dum instruunt Sacrificiis igni
carentibus, aram in aroe, illis quidem flavam adducens nebulam, multum pluit
[Iupiter] aurum.

And Solinus reports it of the Vulcanian Hill in Sicily, that they which
offered Sacrifice upon it, never put fire to it, but expected it should be
kindled from Heaven. His Words according to Salmasiu's Edition, are these, Nec
long inde Collis Vulcanius, in quo qui divinae rei operantur, ligna vitea
super aras struunt: nec Ignis adponitur in hanc congeriem. Cum prosicias
intulerunt, si adest Deus, si sacrum probatur, Sarmenta licet viridia, sponte
concipiunt, and nullo inflagrante halitu, ab ipso mimine fit accendium. Ibi
Epulantes adludit flamma, quae flexuosis excessibus vagabunda, quem contigerit
non adurit: nec aliud est qua^ imago nuncia perfecti rite Voti. The place is
very remarkable; and where he says thus, Epulantes adludit f^amma; he alludeth
to that custom of Feasting on the Sacrifices, which was before explained.

I will add to all this, the words of a late learned Author, that sometime
stumbled unawares upon this very Notion, which we are now about, and yet
expressed it happily in this manner, Deus ad suam cum populo Iudaeorum
familiaritatem significandam, sibi ab illo carnes, sanguinem, asque fruges, in
ALTARI atque NENSA offerri voluit, ut ostenderet se quasi COMMUNEM in illo
populo Habere MENSAM, esse illius CONVIVAM perpetuum, atque it a familiariter
cum illis habitare.

And as it was thus among the Hebrews, so it seems that Sacrifices had the
Notion of Feasts likewise among the ancient Persians, that worshipped the Fire:
of whom Maximus Tyrius thus relates (...), i. e. Bringing in the Sacrifices to
the Fire, which was their God, they were wont to say, Ignis Domine Comede.

The Sacrifices then being Gods Feasts, they that did partake of them, must
needs be His CONVIVAE, and in a manner EAT and DRINK with him. And that this
did bear the Notion of a Federall Rite, in the Scriptures account, I prove from
that place, Levit. 2. 13. Thou shall not suffer the SALT OF THE COVENANT of thy
God to be lacking, with all thine offerings thou shall offer Salt. Where the
Salt that was to be cast upon all the Sacrifices, is called THE SALT OF THE
COVENANT, to signify, that as men did use to make Covenants by Eating and
Drinking together, wh^re Salt is a necessary Appendix, so God by these
Sacrifices and the Feasts upon them, did Ratify and Confirm his Covenant with
those that did partake of them, in as much as they did in a manner EAT and
DRINK with him.

For Salt was ever accounted amongst the ancients, a most necessary Concomitant
of Feasts, and Condiment of all Meats: (...), says the Jewish Proverb, in
Berachoth; Own Convivium in quo non est salitum non est convivium. And
therefore, because Covenants and Reconciliations were made by Eating and
Drinking, where Salt was always used, Salt it self was accounted among the
ancients, AMICITIAE SYMBOLUM; (...), Sal and Mensa, was used proverbially among
the Greeks to express friendship by; (...), in the words of Origin before
quoted, out of Archilochus, Sal and Mensam transgredi, was to violate the most
Sacred League of friendship. Aeschines in his Oration De perperam habita
Legatione, has a Passage very pertinent to this purpose, (...). Etenim
Civitatis Sales and communem mensam, ait, se plurimi facere debere. Thus I
understand that Symboll of Pythagoras, (...), (by Erasmus his leave) for
friendship and hospitality. There is a pregnant instance of this very Phrase in
the Scripture, Ezra 4. 14. Where our Translatours read it thus, Because we have
maintenance from the Kings Palace. But the words in the Chaldee run after
this manner, (...) i. e. Quod Sale Palatii Salivimus, Because we have eaten of
the Kings ^alt, [that is, because we have engaged our selves in a Covenant of
Friendship to him, by eating of his Meate] therefore it is not meet for us to
see the Kings dishonor. That Proverb mentioned in Tully makes to this purpose,
Multos modios Salis simul Edendos esse ut amioitiae munus completum sit. Which
was, because that Federall Symboll had been so often abused. Nay, hence there
remains a Superstitious custom amongst us and other Nations, to this day; To
count the Overturning of the Salt upon the Table Ominous, as betiding some
evil to him toward whom it falls: Quia Sal amoris and amicitiae Symbolum. And
by this time I think, I have given a sufficient Comment upon (...), The Salt
of the Covenant in the Text.

Only I must not forget, that as in Gods Sacrifices, there was ever Salt to be
used; So the like was generally observed in the Heathen Sacrifices; as that one
place out of Pliny, amongst many, shall sufficiently testify, Maxima Salis
authoritas e Sacris veterum intelligitur, apud quos nulla sacra sine mola salsa
conficiebantur. And the reason of it also is thus given by that famous
Scholiast, upon Il. a. (...), Because Salt is a Symboll of friendship: which is
the same with that reason given by God, why he would always have Salt in his
Sacrifices, because it was (...), that is, Sal Symbolum foederis, as before was
shown. And this Phrase being thus explained, will clearly expound that other
Phrase, about which Critics have labored so much in vain, where the same
words are used, but inverted, and a Covenant is called A covenant of Salt, as
Salt is here called The Salt of the Covenant, Numb. 18. 19. and 2 Chronicles. 13. 5.
viz. Because Covenants were established by Eating and, Drinking together, where
Salt was always a necessary Appendix.

Now therefore, that we may return; As the Legal Sacrifices, with the Feasts
upon those Sacrifices, were ^^^ERALL RITES between God and Men: In like manner
I say The Lords Supper under the Gospel, which we have already proved to be
EPULUM SACRIFICIALE, A Feast upon Sacrifice, must needs be EPULUM FOEDERALE, A
Feast of Amity and Friendship, between God and Men. Where by Eating and
Drinking at Gods own Table, and of his Meat, we are taken into a sacred
Covenant, and inviolable League of friendship with him.

Which I will confirm from that fore-commended place, whence I have already
proved that the Lords Supper is A Feast upon Sacrifice. For there the Apostle
thus deliorts the Corinthians from Eating of the Feasts upon Idoll-Sacrifices,
which are a Parallel to the Feast upon the Christian Sacrifice, in the Lords
Supper, Because this was to have Fellowship, and Federall Communion with
Devils; The things that the Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice to Devils, and
not to God, and I would not Brethren, that you should have FELLOWSHIP (or
COMMUNION, (...)) with Devils. Where the Comment of Saint Chrysostom is
excellent to our purpose: (...) That is, if among men to communicate of Bread
and Salt, be a token and Symboll of friendship; it must carry the same Notion
between men and Devils, in the Idoll-Feasts. If therefore to Eat the
Sacrifice of Devils be to have Federall Communion with those Devils, to whom it
was offered; then to Eat of the Sacrifice of Christ, once offered up to God,
in the Lords Supper, is to have Federall Communion with God.

There is an excellent Story in Maimonides his Moreh Nevochim, concerning an
ancient custom of the Zabii: Of Feasting together with their Gods in this
Federall way, which will much illustrate this Notion. For going about to give
the reason, why the Eating of Blood was forbidden in the Law, he ferches it
from that Idolatrous use of it then in Moses time among the Zabii; according to
his Principles, who thought the reason of all the Ceremonial Precepts was to be
fetched from some such accidental Grounds, because those Laws were not Prim^,
but Secundae intentionis in God. Multarum legum rations and causae (says he)
mihi innotuerunt ex cognitione fidei, rituum, and cultus Zabierum.

By these Zabii, he means the ancient Chaldeans; the Word in the Original
Arabicke, according to the Copy of Joseph Scaliger, being thus written, (...);
A Vento Apeliote sic dicti, (as he In Epist. 62. ad Isacium Casaubonum.
observes) quasi dicas Orientales. And that Book which Maymonides so often
quoteth, concerning that Nation, their Rites, and Religion, is still extrant
among the Mahumetane Arabians, as the same Scaliger avoucheth. The Story then
is this, according to the Hebrew Translation of R. Abben Tibbon, Lib. 3. cap.
46. (...). i. e. Licet Sanguis impurus and immundus admodum fuerit in oculis
Zabiorum, tamen ab illis comestus fuerit, eo quod existimarunt CIBUM HUNC ESSE
DAEMONUM, and quod is qui eum comedit, hac ratione COMMUNICATIONEM aliquam cum
Daemonibus haberet: ita ut familiariter cum illo conversentur, and futura ei
aperiant. But because others of them did abhor the eating of blood, as a
thing repugnant unto Nature, they performed this service in a little different
manner; (...) i. e. Mactantes Bestiam aliquam, Sanguinem in circulo sedentes
comedebant: imaginantes sibi in hoc opere, ipsis CARNEM COMEDENTIBUS, Daemones
ILLUM SANGVINEM COMEDERE, and hunc esse IPSORUM CIBUM, hocque medio AMICITIAM,
FRATERNITATEM and FAMILIARITATEM inter ipsos contrahi, quia omnes in una mensa
edunt, uno consessu accumbunt.

As for the former part of this Story, I find it also in R. Moses Bar Nachman,
upon Deuteron. 12. 23. Where he goes about to give the reason why blood was
forbidden in the Law, as Maymonides did, although in the first place, he says,
it was because Blood served in the Sacrifices for expiation, otherwise then
Maymonides; (for there was a great Controversy between these two Doctors,
about the Nature of Sacrifices) but yet in the Second place, he brings in this
also; Because it was used superstitiously by the Heathens in the Worship of
their Idoll-Gods, (...) i. e. They performed their Superstitious Worship, by
eating of Blood in this manner; They gathered together Blood for the Devils
their Idoll-Gods, and then they came themselves, and did eat of that blood
with them: As being the Devils GUESTS, and INVITED to EAT at the TABLE of
Devils, and so were JOINED in Federall Society with them. And by this kind of
Communion with Devils, they were able to Prophecy, and foretell things to come.

FINIS.

