CATHEDRAL NEVVES FROM CANTERBVRY: SHOWING, The Canterburian Cathedral to be
in an ABBEY-LIKE, Corrupt, and rotten condition, which calls for a speedy
Reformation, or Dissolution: Which Dissolution is already foreshowne, and
begun there, by many remarkable passages upon that place, and the Prelates
there; Amongst which passages of wonder is, The Archbishop of Canterburies
Passing Bell, Rung miraculously in that Cathedral.

Recorded, and Published by RICHARD CVLMER, Minister of Gods Word, dwelling in
Canterbury: heretofore of Magdalen College in Cambridge, Master of Arts.

Luke 19. 40. If I should hold my peace, the stones would immediately cry out.
Printed at London by Rich. Cotes, for Fulk Clifton, 1644.

Imprimatur,

John White.

I Have perused this Relation of Cathedral News, and therein observe, that
the hand of providence has, indeed, wrought a new thing in our Israel, worthy
to be looked upon by all, with a due mixture of wonder, and thankfulness and
therefore conceive it necessary to be published to the view of all.

Joseph Caryll.

TO THE HONORABLE COMMITTEE OF THE HOUSE OF Commons Assembled in Parliament,
Concerning plundered Ministers.
Worthy Sirs,
FInding that the Honorable House of Commons assembled in Parliament has
referred to your consideration, and examination, some matters touching the
Reformation of the Cathedral in Canterbury: out of my zeal to that work, I
have presumed to hold the Candle to you (Physicians of value) a little to
further your discovery of that Cathedralls corrupt constitution, that you may
more perfectly cure the malignant disease, called the Cathedral evil. The
work is begun, the numerous Idols, (dunghill-gods, as the Scripture calls
them) which defile the worship of God there, are sweeping out apace. And Oh
that you would further cleanse that Augean stable, by removing the Idol
Shepherds; Let not the oil of the fat revenues of that Cathedral Covent any
longer feed such dark Lamps, and Lanthornes, but let it supply burning, and
shining lights, to enlighten those many miserable adjacent Parishes, which have
a long time sat in darkness, under that huge, dry, flintie Rock, called a
Cathedral. I have the ensuing History (for the most part) from mine own
observation, and have been punctual in examining the truth of what I have by
information. My aim is to further the downfall of Babylon, and that Sion,
which dwells with this daughter of Babylon, may deliver her self. So most
humbly entreating your acceptance of this my obliged service, I remain

Yours to be commanded, RICHARD CVLMER.

CATHEDRAL NEWS FROM CANTERBVRY.
HAving seen books of news from several places, as news from Hell, news
from Rome, news from Court, news from Ipswich, etc. I have made this
following historical Essay of news from the Cathedral in Canterbury,
presented with what brevitie I could, hoping that others will impart Cathedral
news from York, London, etc.

The Cathedral, called Christ-Church, in Canterbury, being a Covent of Monks,
at the time of the dissolution of Abbeys, in the reign of The Cathedral of
Canterbury once a Convent of Monks.
King Henry the eight, it was then (in stead of Prior, and Covent) turned into
Deane, and Chapter, that is, a Deane, and twelve Prebendaries, or Canons; to
which were added Pettie-Canons, Substitutes, Lay-Clerkes, Vesterers, etc. These
Prelaticall successors of the Idolatrous, proud, lazy, covetous Monks, as
they succeeded them in place, so they followed them in practice, whereby they
have a long time caused the godly near them to groan under their tyranny,
superstition, and scandal. For remedy whereof, the ensuing Petition (being
subscribed by very many well affected Citizens of Canterbury) was exhibited in
Parliament, against those Cathedral Prelates, in the year 1640. The Citizens
of Canterbury petition the Parliament against the Cathedral there.


To the Honorable House of Commons assembled in Parliament; The humble Petition
of the Inhabitants in, and about the City of Canterbury.
Showing,
THat whereas under the Tyrannous government of Archbishops, Bishops,
Episcopal government tyrannous.
Deanes, Archdeacons, etc. the said Inhabitants are pressed with grievances, as
follows.

1. The Canons, or Deane and Prebendaries, besides their rich Prelacies,
Cathedral Canons, Deane, Prebends.
bold (each of them) diverse Benefices with Cures of souls, which Cures they
cast off to poor Curates, allowing them a small stipend, and living themselves
in ease, and excess, to the hinderance of Gods Word, and the great prejudice
of painful Ministers, and their Families.

2. The Petty Canons, and Singingmen there, sing their Cathedral Cathedral
Peticanous, Singingmen, Pricksong-Service.
Service in Prick-song after the Romish fashion, chaunting the Lords Prayer,
and other Prayers in an unfit manner, in the Chancell or Quire of that
Cathedral; at the East end whereof they have placed an Altar (as they call it)
dressed after the Romish fashion, with Candlesticks and Tapers, etc. for which
Altar they have lately provided a most Idolatrous costly Cathedral High Altar
dressed, crouched to.
GLORY-CLOTH or Back-Cloth; toward which Altar they crouch and duck three
times at their going up to it, to read there part of their Service apart from
the Assembly.

3. The Cathedral Prelates to maintain their Quire Consort, do get their
Singingmen into the Ministry, and provide them Benefices with
Cathedrallmeete-Service-booke-Priest,; Weavers, Tobaccopipe-makers, Tailors,
Butlers, Servingmen.
Cures of souls in diverse Parishes, in and about the said city, they being
many of them only reading-Priests, as Mr. etc. late Weaver, now reading-Priest,
and Parson of St. Mary Bredman, and Peticanon of that Cathedral, Mr. etc. late
Tobaccopipe-maker, and reprieved from the Gallows, now reading-Priest and
Parson of St. Martins, and Peticanon of that Cathedral. Mr. etc. late Tailor,
Servingman and Butler to the Deane of that Cathedral, now reading Priest and
Curate of St. Mary Bredin, and also of St. Mary Magdalen, and Peticanon of that
Cathedra'l. Mr. etc. late Serving-man, now reading-Priest, and curate of St.
John's, and Parson sine cura, and Peticanon of that Cathedral; Besides
Seldomepreaching Priests.
diverse seldome-preaching Priests Peticanons of that Cathedral, which to give
their attendance upon their Cathedral Service, do huddle over Prayers and
Sermons (if any be) in their Parishes at unseasonable hours; Huddle-Service,
and currycure a Cathedral Priest.
whereby the people (far the most part resting themselves content with what
they find at their own Parish Church) are kept in woeful ignorance, and
profane the Lords day, to the prejudice of their souls, scandal of our
Religion, dishonor of God, and the disgrace of the Ministry, and Churches of
England. The Cathedral Sermon removed from the Sermon-house to the Popish
Quire, and why? to get people to their Altar-worship, and Piping-Service.


4. Whereas near that Cathedral there is a large, warm, and welseated
Sermon-house, where (time out of mind) Sermons have been made upon Lords
days, and Festival days: Of late there has been a Pulpit set up in the
Quire of that Cathedral, which is a very cold and inconvenient place, and
there only the Sermon is preached on those days, and hemd in with their Quire
Service, that all that will partake of the Sermon, should of necessity partake
of their Cathedrall-Ceremonious-Altar-Service, whereby many are driven away
from hearing the Word of God, as also for want of seats, that room not being
capable of half that Auditory, which might, and did hear in the Sermon-House.

5. All the Communion Tables in the said City, have lately been removed,
Communion Tables turned into Altars.
and set up to the East end of the Chancells, and railed in. And whereas in the
two chief Churches of that City, there were decent and ancient Seats for the
Mayor and Aldermen; of late those seats have been pulled down to make Room
for the Altars on the East of those Churches; to the Seats and Galleries pulled
down to set up Altars.
great hinderance of the Assemblies; and all this was done at the command of
Doctor etc. -- Parson of Hithe, Parson of Ickham, Parson of W^ll, Parson of
Saltwood, Prebend of Canterbury, Archdeacon, etc.

6. In that Cathedral there has been lately erected a Superstitious Font,
with three Ascents to it, paled about with high gilded and painted A new
Cathedral Font adorned with Images, and consecrated by a Lord Bishop, who went
round about it, reading in a Book, and went up the three steps, and put his
head into the Font.
iron bars, having under the Cover of it, a carved Image of the Holy Ghost, in
the form of a Dove, and round about it are placed carved Images of the twelve
Apostles, and four Evangelists, and of Angels, and over it a Carved Image of
Christ; so that none can look up in prayer there, but he shall behold those
tempting Images in the place of Divine Worship; against the Law of God, and the
Doctrine of the Church of England. And all this is done at the costs of Doctor
etc. -- late Prebend there, now Parson of Back-Church in London; Parson of
Barham in East-Kent, near Dover; Parson of Bishops Bourn; Lord Bishop of
Rochester, etc. And that Font was consecrated by the Lord Bishop of Oxford; as
it testified by a Proctor of the Archbishops Ecclesiastical Court in
Canterbury; in a Book lately Printed and dedicated to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and adorned A Book called the Antiquities of Canterbury.
with the Pictures of his Miter, and Coat-Armes, and of many Altars, and
Idolatrons Monuments, and of that New Cathedral Font.

7. From the over-awing greatness of those Cathedral Prelates, and of the
Archbishops Ecclesiastical Courts there, Preaching and Lectures are much
decayed in that City; so, that two Public Lectures are put down; and diverse
able (though conformable) Ministers, have been hindered from Preaching there:
And many scandalous and unable Priests, have been, and now are beneficed and
upheld there, by the Archbishop and Prelates are Enemies to Preaching.
Cathedral Prelates; and lewd persons admitted to the Lords Table; to the
great dishonor of God, and Offense of the Godly. Besides many other heavy
grievances in matters of Religion, common to the whole Kingdom.

The most humble and hearty Petition of the said Inhabitants, is, that the
premised soule-pressing grievances, may be taken into the comideration of this
Honorable Assembly.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
This Petition confirms this Character, or description of a Cathedral
Corporation. A Cathedral is a nest of Non-Residents; an Epicurean A Character,
or description of a Cathedral.
College of riot and voluptuausnesse; A School for Complement in Religion;
but a scourge upon the life and practice thereof; A refuge for superstition;
but the bane of true peity: The shame of the Clergy, and the scorn of the
Laity.

But this Petition, and Character is no Cathedral news, to those that live
near the Canterburian Cathedral; the vast revenues whereof Cathedral
Revenues grossly abused.
(which might advance Religion, Learning, and an able Ministry) have been so
long time abused, to the maintenance of Ignorance, Superstition, Pride,
Luxury, etc. Cathedral carding, dicing, dancing, swearing, drunkenness, and
drabbing too, are no news: No wonder to see the Sacke-bottles keep rank, and
file in their Studies; besides Tavern tospotting, and smoking.

It is no news to tell you, that Prince Ruperts health was drunk A Cathedral
Health drunk to Prince Rupert.
lately in that Cathedral. It is attested to the Honorable Committee
concerning plundered Ministers; that Mr. etc. -- upon the Fast day in the
afternoon, at the Tavern with other Gentlemen, drunk about ten healths, and
continued there until night, where he was left with the Deane of Canterbury. A
Tavern-haunting Cathedral Doctor, is no wonder; reeling after a Malignant
meeting, and being beholding to a supporter.

How did the Cathedral Prelates bestirre themselves for their brave female
Cathedralist; who was lately delivered of a child alone, A Cathedral Less
beguiled by a Singing Man.
secretly in a vault in that Cathedral, calling no help; and a few days
after, she being discovered to have had a Child; (after search) the child was
found dead in the Vault; there wanted Pope Gregory's Fish Pond. She was
arraigned at the Sessions for the murder; but Malignant and She is Arraigned
for the dea h of her Child.
Prelaticall Justices (left the Cathedral should suffer with her, at the
gallows) so bestirred themselves, that she was acquitted; though the Learned,
and well-affected Judge said in open Sessions; that nothing but the Kings
pardon could save her: And another Noble and valiant Patriot then sitting on
the Bench, openly protested against that verdict, at her Trial. How flaunting
is the garb of those Cathedral Prelates, and Prelatesses, all Lady-like (at
least) in all accoutrements of House, Cathedrall' flaunting pride.
habits, etc. So that I have heard it often averred upon experience, that the
Cathedral pride and bravery, has infected City, and Country, by marriages,
and otherwise.

A most proud Cathedral Dame there, being to go to a great meeting, her Maid
could not please her, in Starching her Ruff, though she did it often in one
day: The Maid brought it to her again at night, but she, in a rage, threw it
down, and stamped it under her feet, and beat her Maid; charging her to sit up
and starch it; but it being late, and the Maid out of hope to please her, went
to bed, leaving the Ruff flapt together, as her Mistress had stamped it: The
next morning the Ruff was found starch't, none knew how; she then brought it
to her The Devil the Cathedral Landresse.
Mistress; who said, I marry! could you not have done it so before? This
matter was most strictly examined, and it could not be found that any knew of
the starching of it; though her husband bestir'd himself much to find out the
truth: whereupon, in conclusion, he threw the Ruff into the Fire, out of which
itleap'd; until he held it in the Fire, with the Tongues, and so consumed it
in the flame; so that it is famous in City and Country, that the Devil was the
Cathedral Landresse.

On All Saints day, 1639. a Cathedral Prelate, being at a Feast there, was
asked if he would eat of such a dish? Tush said he, do you No Butchers meat
will go down with a Cathedral Prelate on All Saints Day-Many Cathedral
Praachers, but few Sermons.
think I Will eat any Butchers meat on All-Saintsday?

How often have Ministers left whole Parishes unprovided, on Sabbath days, and
Fast days to preach in that Cathedral, for Lazy Prelates, who were sleepy
Auditors, when they should have been the Preachers themselves? The Sabbath
enjoyed but one Sermon in that Cathedral, amongst all those Cathedral
preachers.

An able Orthodox Divine could not have a Living in those parts, until every
Cathedral Canon or Prebend, had two or three, and every The Prelates Tyrannous
Patronage of Livings, maintains their Kingdom of darkness.
Petti-Cannon one, though a meer-Reading-Service-Booke-Priest: This is one
fruit of the Prelates Tyrannous Patronage of Livings; whereby they so much
advanced Popery and Prelacy, and their Kingdom of darkness. There are but seven
Parishes in the fruitful and pleasant Isle of Thanet, in Kent; and three of
these seven, the now Archbishop bestowed upon His Graces young Chaplain,
beside a Prebendship of Canterbury: And all this, (no question) for his
professed forwardness in the Archbishops pious designs, which he put in
execution with what speed he could: But his Parishioners at Mynster
courageously opposed his Innovations there; yet he cut and defaced the Seats,
and Cathedral Prelates strive to show the Archbishop their forwarduesse in
Popish Innovations.
set up his Altar and Railes, and fell to Ducking; and threatened them with the
Archbishop, and High Commission, if they would not come up and receive the
Communion, kneeling before the Altar, at the Rail; and when they told him it
grieved them that he should make their Parith a President to all others, of
Popish Innovations: the Young Cathedral Doctor replied, and said, that he was
the Archbishop of Canterburies Chief Chaplain; and therefore would show his
GRACE his forwardness in those things. All which, (and more too) diverse
Witnesses have testified to the Honorable Committee of Parliament for
Plundered Ministers.

In the Year 1633. The Romish dressing, and bowing toward the High Altar,
began in that Cathedral; and a while after, the Plague was The Prelates usher
in Idolatry. Idolatry ushers in the Plague.
very bot there, in many Cathedral Houses; so that the Prelates were driven
from their Altar, and Cathedral too, which was left (in a manner) desolate.

Their Cathedrall-Altar-Glory-cloth, before mentioned, was lately found out,
where they had laid it in that Cathedral, and is now The Cathedral
Altar-Glory, which is then shame.
in the hands of the Honorable Committte, of Parliament for demolishing of
Idolatrous monuments. That Glory, which is the shame of their Cathedral, is
made of very rich Imbroydery of Gold and Silver, the name Jehovah on the top,
in Gold, upon a cloth of Silver, and below it a semicircle of Gold, and from
thence glorious rays and clouds, and gleames and points of rays, direct and
waved, stream downwards upon the Altar, as if Jehovah (God himself) were
there present in glory, in that Cathedral at the Altar; and all this to draw
the people to look and worship toward the Altar, and thereby to usher in the
breaden god of Rome, and Idolatry. The large pattern of that superstitious
GLORY (being made of papers pasted together, which is now kept with the Glory)
Cathedral Prelates consultabout erecting Monuments of superstition, and
Idolatry.
has written on it, thus; Is not this circle too large? if so, it may best be
mended (as we conceive) by enlarging the golden circle at the extremities of
it, and by enlarging it inward. What think you of working the rays without
clouds? If you can conceive it fitting, it will much lessen the charge: our
fear is, the Clouds will not be well wrought, and then the rays will show
far better without them. W. B. This was written on the pattern at London by a
Cathedral Doctor of Canterbury, as John Rowell the Imbroiderer that made that
Glory, has lately testified upon his examination taken before the truly
religious Sir Robert Harley, who, being in the Chair of that Committee, has
(beside that Glory) such Idolatrous Popish Pictures, and other Popish trinkets
taken out of the Kings Chapel, and from the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
elsewhere, that a true Protestant would be astonished to behold them, they are
so abominable; but they are all appointed to the fire. And the said John Rowel
testifies that after the pattern was so written on, at London, it was carried
to the Cathedral at Canterbury, and there the Prebendaries met and consulted
about that Glory, and then the pattern was written on there, in answer to the
former writing, thus: We conceive this Ovall-forme would do better in a
semicircle, and extend the Glory more on either side: These Clouds well
shadowed, and well wrought, and pierced with rays will be most proper. We
conceive also, that the Field should be more Azure, then Silver, which will
soon tarnish. And the Imbroiderer further testifies, that all the
Prebendaries did approve of the making of that Glory for the Altar.

It is not long since our Queens Mother was led by these Prelates, to Our
Queens mother led to Traitor Archbishop Beckets stone in that Cathedral.
Archbishop Thomas Beckets stone, in that Cathedral (the stone on which he
fell when he was cast down headlong in that Cathedral, when he was executed
for his treason and rebellion) and she came out of her Sedan, and bowed
toward it; some say she kissed it, as thousands of Papists have done before her,
and it was then said to her, look on the crack in that stone, that mouth
calls to heaven for vengeance on those that shed this holy Martyrs blood (a
Traitor Martyr, I wis) a Saint fit for a Roman Calender, and a Cathedral
shrine. When Queen Mary (her daughter) came to that Cathedral in her late A
Cathedral Orator tells out Queen Mary that that Cathedral is the gate of
Heaven
journey to Dovor, when she went beyond Sea into Holland, she being
entertained in that Cathedral, a Cathedral Prelate there said in his courting
Oration to her, that that Cathedral Church (whatsoever some said to the
contrary) was the gate of beaven. I saw the Deane and Prebendaries, (then the
Archbishops Commissioners) sitting in plena curia, in the Archbishops
Consistory Court in that Cathedral; when diverse Cathedral Prelates persecutors
of their Brethren.
Kentish Ministers were brought to the Bar before them, and sentenced for
refusing to publish the Profane Book for Sabbath Sports and Dancings, which is
now justly contradicted, and condemned to the fire, by a late Sacred Ordinance
of Parliament, for the better Observation of that Day. They urged the reading
of the profane Book for Sabbath Sports.


The Nimrod of that Cathedral, a mighty Hunter, and Hawker too, was wont (very
often) to hunt Hares, and Foxes on week days; but he hunted the GRAY, or
Badger, on the Sabbath Day, about five years since. In plain terms thus: The
Deane of Canterbury hearing that one Mr. GRAY, (a Godly and able Minister, now
living in A Cathedral Nunrod hunting the GRAY on the Lords Day.
Effex) had Preached against the Prelates Popish proceedings, then on foot; and
being informed that he was to Preach again (being a Stranger in those parts)
the next Sabbath: the Deane, that Sabbath morning, rode out to find him, and
Hunted from Shoulden to Ham, from Parish to Parish, at last (toward night) he
came to Sandwich, where he had almost caught the Game he pursued, and
persecuted: but the GRAY was crept through a secret Muse; whereupon the Deane
caused the Town Gates to be shut, and Watchmen were set with Halbards at every
corner; but the Preacher escaped them all: The persecuted Preacher went beyond
the Bridge by the Windmill, and escaped the wrath of that Cathedral Levi, who
had a Simeon with him, in that Spanish Inquisition; The Preacher may say,
Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their wrath, for it was cruel.
But the Prelate caused diverse Godly men to be brought into the Town Hall at
Sandwich, where they were questioned, and spoken against by him, in his
Prelaticall outrageous fury. Mr. Thomas Foach was bound over to the High
Commission: Because the GRAY took earth or burrow in his Ground: But the
Minister (having on a colored Suite of Mr. John Foaches now living near Magnes
Church at London Bridge) escaped along the Sea Coast, by the conduct of Mr.
Anthony Oldfield, to Lid, and so to Tenterden, and so to London.

Many other Ministers have (within few years) been persecuted in that
Cathedral, or by some of those Cathedral Prelates; as, Mr. Huntley, Mr.
Gardener, Mr. Partridge, Mr. Player, Mr. Hieron, and others; both Ministers and
People, and especially Religious Churchwardens.

How often was the Bishops railing prayer, (or rather execration) against the
Scots (when they stood up for their Religion, and Liberties, Cathedral prayers
against the Scots.
against the Tyrannous Prelates) read in that Cathedral, with a hundred
Cathedral Bellowing and Bawling A-A-Amens, after that Prelaticall Prayer? Some
Soldiers being Listed to serve in the Bishops Wars against the Scots, they
being Mustered at Barham-downe in East-Kent, near Canterbury, on the fifth of
April, 1639. I heard the Grandee, or Deane of that Cathedral encourage them
in the open Field, at the Muster; and (amongst the rest) he said to them, Ha
Blades! Cathedralists foment the Prelaticall War against the Scots.
I hope to see you return every Man bravely, with Blew Scots Caps on your
Heads, etc. And their Colonel said, you shall not need to ^^^ht a stroke; but
only to show your selves a little: he said also, that the King would make the
Scots glad to take Bishops, and Archbishops, and Popes too; at which the
Cathedralist laughed exceedingly.

Their Cathedral Sermons, what have they been (for the most part) these many
years, but kickings against the power of Godliness, and Religion, and the
advancing of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Profaneness, etc? So Cathedral
Sermons.
that good Men have long since, altogether abhorred, and deserted their
Cathedral Preachments; and thereby we are deprived of much evidence against
their strange Cathedral Sermonizings. And had it not been for one of that
Society, (who though misled, yet now returned) has been a constant Preacher,
and (in that respect) their Cathedral Salt; that Cathedral Nest of Prelates
had wholly stunke and sunk long before this time.

A Religious and well-affected Alderman of Canterbury, gave me lately a
Transcript of a passage written with his own hand, in a spare leaf in his
great Bible, which passage I have often read, its this: Christ-tide, 1633. was
the first day of the High Altar, and Candlestickes on it, and Candles in them,
and other dressings very brave, in Christ-Church, Canterbury: Doctor, etc. --
did preach us such a conjuring Sermon, as I never heard before; his Text was,
Mat. 2. 2. For we have The real presence Preached for there.
seen his Star in the East, and are come to worship him: He told us the
Names of the Wise Men, and their profession, Conjuring: And in the end told the
people, that if they would find Christ, they must come to the ALTAR, and there
they should find him really present, if any where. This is written in the
Aldermans Bible; but in the Transcript he writ further to me, thus; But the
Cathedral Doctor did so conjure, that I went away with my hair an end, and
came no more to the Cathedral in eight years after, and I never could be in
tune, till the coming of the Noble Scots: And the Parliament coming on, set
me right again.

Another of those Cathedral Doctors, Preaching there, in the Quire, The Scots
and Gun-powdertraytours compared together in a Cathedral Sermon.
on the fifth of November 1639. compared the Scots to the Gunpowder Traitors,
because (as I conceive) they had blown the Bishops, and Popery out of
Scotland: He said, The Gun-powder-Traytors had their powder in the barrels,
but these in the Bandeleers; those would blow up, these would blow out, etc.
These were the fire-hot fumes of a Cathedral Oven, yet their cake is dough.

The persecuting Speech of the Archbishop of Canterbury, made at Westminster,
in Star Chamber, against Englands three Worthies, Mr. The Arch bishops Speech
in Star Chamber, ecchoed in the Cathedral at Canterbury.
Burton, Dr. Bastwicke, and Mr. Prynne, did presently echo very many passages
of it, in the Cathedral at Canterbury, where they were called in a Cathedral
Sermon, black-mouth'd-railing-Rabshakes, etc.

An ordinary Cathedrall-turne-Preacher, who in his morning service (as is
directed in the Mass Book) used to sing, Psalm. 43. And when they sung, Then
will I to thine Altar go, he presently went out of his seat, and did go up,
ducking, to the Altar, to read Service there. This Altar-Priest Preached in that
Cathedral (which I heard) word for word thus: His name Jesus was given him by
an Cathedral Doctrine, that a Pope gave Christ his name
Angel, his name Christ was given him by a Bishop, an Archbishop, Pontisex
Maximus, as we say in English, a Pope, the first of all Popes, Saint Peter;
thou art Christ: Its no marvel, if such men now malignantly side with
Cavaleeres, Bapists, and Prelates, against the proceedings of Parliament.

Another Cathedrall-turne-Preacher, who being questioned why he Altar Railes
made of Consecrated wood.
made not new Chancell railes for the Communion Table, he replied, that those
Railes were made of old Church wood, and Seats, which was consecrated stuff.
This Cathedral Preacher, in his Visitation Bishops Visitations stuff.
Sermon, Preached on the three and twentyeth day of April 1639. Added to the
Archbishops usual titles, calling him Our Good Lord, and Master, as they of
old said of the Pope, Dominus Deus noster Papa; he then Preached in Folio
Diocesan Bishops to be jure divine, affirming the Presbyterian government to
be a Gemmy, a toy, or Gu-gaw; by Gemmy The Scots tailed on at the Archbishops
Visitation.
meaning the Scots (as was conceived) against whom he expressly inveyed, and
(amongst the rest) said, Regi inimica meo, gens inimica Deo, A Nation at enmity
with my King, a Nation at enmity with my God. The Busitaking-Sermon being
ended, the Archdeacon (being Prebend of that Cathedral) made an Oration to
the Churchwardens, and then I heard him say, Is your Communion Table set up to
the East end of the Chancell, and rayled in? Let it beset up in the highest
place in the Church, its fit Almighty An Arch deacons Visitation speech, for
Altars, as Gods sent at Church
God should have the highest room there; as if one invite a great man to his
house, he will give him the chiefest room or seat.

One of those Cathedral Doctors, (Preaching there before the Kings Majesty,
when he went with the Queen to Dovor) in his Sermon, cursed all those that went
about to take away the Episcopal Government, and to bring in the Presbyterian;
he affirmed then the Episcopal Government to Cathedral cutting in the Kings
presence
be from Heaven, as was that of old, by the High Priests, etc. but (said he) I
know not from whence the Presbyterian is, unless from Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram.

Another Cathedral Doctor Preaching there, said, that there was now in this
Land, a conspiracy against the King, to take away his life: and he compared
those whom he called conspirators to Corah, Dathan, and Abiram: affirming that
those that dyed at Keinton Battle, being of this Conspiracy, were the children
of the Devil, and their blood was on their own heads; and that he hoped the
people of the Land (though the City would not) would rise up and stay those
Conspirators: But the People of the Land Cathedral Incendiaries.
presently rose up (out of zeal to God, the King, Parliament, and Kingdom)
against that Cathedral Incendiary: And although the Cathedrall-gates were shut
a day or two for his rescue, and defense against the Magistrate, and people;
yet forces so increased round about the Cathedral, and did Peake and watch so
closely; and the Posterne Bridge between the Cathedral, and he Abbey of Austin
the Monk, being broken down; the Cathedralists themselves, (for fear of
their own ruin) did in the night by Torch-light, deliver up their most
Malignant Cathedral Brother, Into the hands of Justice, where he yet
remains. This Prelate before that time Preached there, a whole Cathedral
Prelates plead for Tyranny, and blind obedience.
Sermon, for absolute and blind Obedience; which Sermon began with Odi profanum
Vulgus, that is, I hate the profane common People: He then published, that if
the King command it, we must put to Sea in a Tempest, in a rotten Ship,
without Masts, Sails, or Anchors: this was Preached at the Archbishops of
Canterburies first Metropoliticall Visitation. If that, and all other
Prelaticall and Cathedral Sermons were extant, all England would see (though
now (...) enough) how little our Laws and Liberties are beholding to Tyrannous
Prelacy, and Cathedralls; which may be seen also in a Printed Prelaticall
Sermons, Preached by a Grandee of that Cathedral at Westminster, not long
before the long sad Eclipse of Parliaments, Laws, and Liberties in England.

On Ascension Thursday (as they call it) 1642. Another Cathedral Doctor
Preached there, that it was a duty of the Text, that all that have Knees should
bow them at the Name of Jesus. This Prelate that pleaded so for bowing,
(hearing that some of the Parishioners of Andrews in Canterbury did not kneel
at the Communion) came and administered it there himself, and was so punctual
for their Kneeling, that he looked very low, to see if the Females kneeled.
That Learned, Religious, Good Society (as they style their Cathedral in their
Prelaticall Prayer) had a Sermon Preached on Trinity Sunday (as they call it)
1642. The Text was, and the Seraphinis cried one Prelaticall pleading for
Cathedral piping and Quiretossed Service.
to another, Holy, etc. Upon which the Grandee, or Prior of that Cathedral
Covent Preached, saying, hence is justified our Cathedral singing of Psalms
from one side of the Quire to the other: And then he proceeded, upon that
occasion, to a large Discourse in the behalf of Church Music and Organs: I
never heard more pleading for Cathedral Piping; he was so vehement in his
Discourse for Organes, that he was almost out of breath: It seems he feared
the fall of Cathedral Quire-Service, and Organs, he was so earnest to uphold
them, but in vain, as the event proves.

And this puts me in mind of a very little witty Girl in that Cathedral: The
Cathedral Collicke, or belliach.
who being with her mother lately, where a sick man lay groaning very loud:
Mother, said she, why groans this man so? It was answered, It is because he
has a pain in his belly: This Girl being a little after with her mother, at
their Cathedrall-Quire-Service: and hearing the Deane roaring out the Base, in
the Quire-Consort: Mother (said she) Has Mr. Deane a pain in his belly he
roares so? It was a few months since preached in that Cathedral, That all
were revolted from the King, and must come, as Benhadads servants did, with
ropes about their necks. A volume would not contain the Malignant passages
preached in that Cathedral, More strange Malignant Cathedral preaching.
since the Parliament began. These following passages have been vented there
after last Michael-tide 1643. O Lord give the King more hands to fight for him,
Uriah was a generous Cavalier: Another preached there since; Men will excuse
their sins; so pride is called handsomnesse; so an impious and rash vow, is
called a holy Covenant; dethroning of Majesty, is called setting up Christ in
his Throne; Fomenting of an unnatural civil War, is called advancing of the
true Religion. Another since that, Bad zeal is a work of the flesh; such
zeal have they who would pull down Bishops, Because (like the Heretic of
old) they cannot attain to that place themselves: Like that of the
Anabaptisticall Reformers in Germany, who under pretense of Reformation, robbed
and plundered. This (said he) is but a Jesuiticall Prelates allow consecrated
Snuffers, but no Extinguishers, for bad Church Lights.
trick of those, who pretend to be most contrary to Jesuits. Another since
that, preached there: saying, Priests are lights: If the Candle burn dim,
men use to snuff it, not to put it out; those that are intoxicated, use to put
out the Candle while they go about to snuff it: and the snuffs were
consecrated too. And since that, a Cathedral Doctor preached there, of
counterfeiting the Kings Great Seal, when the New great Seal legally came
forth by authority of the Parliament, for the good of the Kingdom. And when
some notorious Malignants and Incendiaries, both Priests and others, were
secured in Canterbury. the same Cathedral Prelate preached at that time of
some that were great Professors of Religion, yet were most forward to persecute
their Brethren, and hale them to prison. And since that, when the Images in
that Cathedral began to be demolished, the same Cathedralist preached the next
Sabbath of Rifling, and Pillaging Churches, telling the people that such were
worse then Jews and Turks, or Infidels, which (as is conceived) More
Incendiary Cathedral preaching, and malignant stuff.
was a cause of the mutiny in Canterbury the next day. This man preached to his
Parishioners after the Communion, saying, Those that came up to the Railes,
should meet Christ in the Clouds; but those that came not up, Christ would say
to them, Depart from me ye cursed etc.

And another passage of a Cathedral Sermon there, was this: There is a people
come on shore, which think their own fancies to be the holy Spirit, and
doubtless they will plead at the last day, We have defaced Churches and
Chapels, O God, in thy name, we have robbed, and plundered in thy name, we
have kept Conventicles in thy name, we have undervalued Superiorities and
dignities in thy name.

The last vapor vented in that Cathedral, was, that it is Intemperate zeal,
and fiery fury to reform before the enemy be subdued: The Prayer was, that God
A Cathedral Cooler.
would make us sober Protestants. It seems the view of the Reformed Idolatrous
Windows of the Sermon-house did offend, or strange-cooling came in by the
breaches in them. But it is hoped the burning of that rich Altar- Glory, will
produce a result, that will begin the reparations there, to keep out such
chilling vapors. To which may be added the (now discovered) rich silver Basin
and Ewer, and other sumptuous common Plate of that Cathedral Corporation, used
at Cathedral Feasts: and the Altar-Basin, and Candlesticks (if they be not
conveyed to Oxford) will help that work. And as the Cathedral Sermons were
none of the best, so those Cathedral Prelates kept godly Preachers far from
them, A good preacher near a Cathedral, a Miracle.
by combined caution. The famous Rogers of Essex was wont to say; You talk of
miracles: Is it not a miracle that Master Thomas Wilson of Canterbury should
continue preaching so near the Throne of the Beast there? but all know they
persecuted him, and railed on him, and accused him, but God found great means
for his support in the Lions den.

But this is no Cathedral news; and if they be such now, being under a cloud,
what were they in their High Cathedral splendour, when they swayed all by their
PRELATIC ALL WILL? And if they be so malignant in public against the King and
Parliament, and Kingdom, joining with Papists, bloody Irish Rebels, Damnee
Ruffians, and plundering Cavaliers, and other common enemies of our Religion,
Laws, and Liberties, what have been the private Counsels, and Actions of those
Cathedral Prelates, to support Popery, Prelacy, and Tyranny?

Why then should any stomach the fall of Prelacy and Cathedrals? After the
Cathedral Babels sins, follow her plagues.
especially of the Canterburian Cathedral Babell? of whose sins you have
heard a little, (and may see ten times more upon Record in this present
Parliament) you shall now hear the Beginning of her plagues.

And here I shall begin with strange Cathedral news: yet such as is most
true, and well known to all that live in, or near Canterbury: And, which the
Cathedrallists themselves cannot deny: though living like boares in a paddock,
or stie, they may grunt at the noise of it.

The Cathedral Prelates at Canterbury, hearing a rumor (though false)
Cathedral joy at false news for Prelacy.
that the Scots had yielded to entertain Bishops, at the Pacification in the
North, in the year 1639. they were overjoyed at that news, being before in a
quaking fear, that having on each shoulder a steeple or two, and a Cathedral
on their head, they should be eased of their beloved burden, by a Reformation,
which they feared might reach from Edenborough in Scotland, to Canterbury in
England: well knowing, that Prelacy and Cathedralls Prelacy built on a sandy
foundation.
were built upon the sandy foundation of Ignorance, Superstition, Ambition, and
Covetousness, and had only custom, and humane power to uphold them.

And to express their great triumph, at that news, they did then, in the
Summer time, in the height of their Prelaticall glory, set up, upon the four
Flags of triumph on the Cathedral steeple.
Pinacles of their highest Cathedral steeple, called Bell-harry steeple, 4
great iron fanes, or flags, on which the Coate-Arms of the King, Prince,
Church, and Archbishop of Canterbury were severally gilded, and painted: But
in the end of December following, in the midst of their Cathedral Iovialities,
and Christmas Gamballs, there was a Gamball played by the flag, which A
Prelaticall fall at Canterbury.
had the Archbishops arms on it, which had a tumbling cast from the top of the
steeple, being stricken down by a stroke from heaven, in a fearful tempest,
on Innocents day early in the morning: And the Archbishops arms Heaven points
at Innocents, at the blood of Innocents, when it Prikes at Bishops and
Cathedralls,
pulld down the top of the pinnacle, which upheld them, and were carried (partly
against the wind) a good distance from the steeple, on which they stood, and
fell upon the roof of the Cloister, in which Cloister, the Arms of the
Archbishopric of Cant. were carved, and painted on the lower side, or concave
of the Arch, or seeling of the Cloister; which Arms in the Cloister, were
dashed in pieces by the Arms which fell from the pinnacle of the steeple; The
Arms of the present Archbishop of Canterbury, brake down Prelates pull down
their upholders. The Archbishop ruins his Archbishopric. The Bish. new
canons shot against heaven, the bullet falls back on his own head.
the Arms of the Archbishopric, or Sea of Canterbury: The fall was so
violent, that it brake through the leads, plancks, timbers, and stone-Arch of
the Cloister, and made an impression in the pavement of the Cloister, as if it
had been done with Canon shot, which impression is partly to be seen at this
day, though repaired. And this prodigious fall of the Archbishops Arms, was
very near the place, where that proud Prelate, Thomas Becket, Archbishop of
Canterbury. and Arch Traitor, was cast down headlong in that Cathedral, for
his Treason and Rebellion; And very near the unparalled Idolatrous window in
that Cathedral. But the Prelates bestir'd themselves in the morning, and took
away, in all smoking have, the broken Arms, and rabbish, and swept all
clean, that less notice might be taken of that lamentable ruin; And to hide
the deformity of the crop-ear'd steeple, and to take away the observation, and
remembrance of that downfall, which concerned their gracious Diocesan, and
great Cathedral so much; they would not suffer the Arms of the King Prince,
and Church to stand any Prelates. pull down King, Prince, and Church.
longer, on the other three pinacles, but took them all three down instantly:
Those Arms of King, Prince, and Church, being untouched with the tempest, and
standing all three firm, and glorious, on the other pinacles of the steeple,
without the help, or company of that tottering Prelate, who had The King and
Church can stand without a Bishop.
left them at a pinch of need.

And the Cathedral men repaited the broken Cloister, gilding, and painting the
Arch over head, as it was before: but they have made other Coate-Armes in the
room of the Arms of the Archbishopric, because they would conceal that
strange ruin of those Arms. Cathedral Quire rent and broken at a Consecration


And they have repaired the roof of their Idolatrous Quire, which, a little
before the Archbishops Arms fell down, was terribly rent, and broken also,
in a wondrous tempest: That very night the Bishop of Oxford came to that
Cathedral, to consecrate their new, brave, Cathadrall Font: And they mended
the top of the broken pinnacle, but never hunge out their flaggs any The
Prelates hang out no more flags.
more since. Alas poor Cathedral.

And because the new repaired pinnacle was white, diffring in color from the
other three, they were at great cost to raise a huge Scaffold, only to white
over the top of one other pinnacle: that their Arch-Prelate might not be pointed
at, as singular, but they were deceived for the two new whited Pinacles
Prelates abhor singularity. Lawn sleeves.
were seen, and pointed at a far off, and were said to have a pair of white
lawne sleeves drawn over them, as a perpetual monument of their Arch-Prelates
two broken Arms, and downfall. And it was then observed, as The Arch Bishops
ominous fall noted.
wonderfully ominous, foreshewing the utter downfall: and ruin of Prelicie, as
these verses, then made thereupon, declare;

Cathedral Church at Canterbury,
Has taken mortal harms:
The Quire and Cloister do want a plaster,
And so do the Archbishops Arms.
The heavens just stroke, the Prelates Arms broke
And did Cathedral maule;
2. 6. 3. 9. Brought forth this sign,
Heaven foretells Prelates fall.
I have lately seen the Arch Bishop of Canterburies diary written with More
falls near the Archbishop in that tempest He notes them in his Diary.
his own hand, as he, and his Secretary have confessed in the Lords house in
Parliament, which book Mr. Prynno found in his pocket in the Tower of London,
some months since, and has been often read in that House, since the Bishops
trial, in which book the Archbishop writes verbatins thus;

1639. December. 27. Friday, being St. John's day at night, between 12. and 2. of
the clock the next morning, the greatest wind that ever I heard blow: many of
the watermen at Lambeth had their boats tumbled up and Lambeth fall.
down, and broken to pieces as they lay on the land: out of my servants went
to London, and durst not come home that evening the weather was so foul: that
night the shafts of two chimneyes as Lambath were beat down upon the roof of
his chamber, and beat down both the lead and the rafters upon his bed, where
had he been that night, he must have perished.

At Croydon one of the pinacles fell from the steeple, and burst down the
Croydon fall.
lead, and roof of the Church, (...) 20. foot square.

1633. September. 19. Thursday, I was translated to the Arch-Bishopprick of
Canterbury. 18. The day before, when I went to Lambeth, my Coach-horses and
men suncke to the bottom of the Thames in the Ferryboat, which was overladen.

1639. Tuesday Simon and Judes Eve, I went into my upper Study to see some
Manuscripts, which I was sending to Oxford: in that Study hung my picture,
taken by the life, and coming in, I found it fallen down upon the face, The
Archbishops hanged picture falls.
and lying on the floor, the string being broken by which it was hanged
against the wall: I am almost everyday threatened with my ruin, in Parliament,
God grant this be no Omen. This the Archbishop has written, and if any He
fears his own ruin.
doubt of it, he may see the Book, which is now in Mr. Prin's custody. I read
in Duplessis Mystery of iniquity, that when the Prelacie of Rome began to be
^^aken, by Luther's thundering, and some Princes joining with him against the
Pope, the Image of St. Peter (whose Successor the Pope falsely pretends to be)
standing aloft with keys in his hand, the keys were struck out of the Images
hand in a Tempest. And Sir Francis Bacon in his History of Henry the 7th, tells
us, that Philip the young King of Spain, who bare the Spread-Eagle in his
Arms, being in London, the Gilded Eagle (a lane in form of an Eagle, standing
on the (then) Spired Steeple of the Cathedral, called Paul's in London) fell
down in a Tempest, and in the fall brake down the sign of the Eagle, hanging
at a door in Paul's Churchyard, which was then much noted, as Ominous to that
Prince, who not many days after fell from his Life and Kingdom: And not long
after this Parallel fall of the Archbishops Arms, the Archbishop himself
fell from as high as Lambeth, nay The Archbishop falls as low as the Tower of
London. 12. Bishops fall after him.
from the Lords House in Parliament, as low as the Tower of London, for no
less crime, then High Treason. And twelve other Bishops being high flowne,
above the high Court of Parliament, in their proud Protestation, did fall as
low as that Tower also for their just deserts. And a little after that,
Episcopacie it self began to fall, by that noble Act of Parliament against the
High Commission Court, by which Act the iron teeth of the Beast were The high
Commission Court felts.
knocked out, and the Sting of abused Excommunication was plucked out of his
Tail. And since that (which makes the fore recited fall at Canterbury more
observable, as predigious, and betokening the ruin of Prelacie, as Prelaticall
excommunication falls.
proud Welsey, Cardinal, and Archbishop said of the fall of his Crosier
staff at York, a little before his own fall, and deserved death, malum omen,
that is, ani'l token.) The Kings Majesty casually passing through Canterbury,
The first fall of Episcopacy was at Canterbury, there the Bill against the
votes of Bishops in Parliament was signed.
in his Journey with the Queen to Dover, staying a little at Canterbury, did at
Canterbury, and no where else in all England, sign the Bill against the Votes
of Bishops in Parliament, which Act threw down our Lofty Lordly Prelates from
the Pinnacle of their ambition.

And this Bill was not only signed at Canterbury, where the Arms of the
Primat, or prime Prelat of al England were so demolished, in the Metropolitan
Cathredral, or prime Seat, or Throne of the Beast, called a Cathedral; but
(which is most observable) it was signed at arained Abbey adjoining to that
Cathredrall. And that Abbey, in which the very first Bill, and And signed at
arained Abbey. Signed at the house of the first Archbishop of Canterbury that
ever was, and where he was buried.
Act of Parliament against Bishops was signed by his Majesty, was the Abbey of
Austin the Monk, who was the very first Archbishop of Canterbury that ever
was, and a most superstitious persecutor, and bloody Incendiary of Church, and
State; which is Recorded to his Little LAUD; and was buried at Canterbury, in
that Abbey, where Episcopacy it self has now received a deadly wound, by the
Royal assent to that Bill. And since that Bill was signed, another Bill has
passed Both Houses of Parliament, whereby all that cursed prelaticall Hierarchy
of Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, The final fall, and ruin of Prelacie.
Archdeacons etc. is cut down root and branch, and has its final Doom and
Downfall: Prelate remember the Pincale. And as for the Canterburian
Arch-Prelate, whose Coate-Armes, (Badges of Honor) were so cast down, his
charge and Impeachment of high Treason now brings him to a dishonorable low
posture, at the Bar of the highest Court of Justice, where it will shortly
appear what these prodigious falls portended: a sparrow not falling to the
ground without the divine providence.

I find in the recited Diary, or day-booke written with the Archbishops The
Arch-Biships ominous dreams. The Bishops Rochet is lost.
own hand, word for word, thus.

1628. Ian. 31. Saturday night, I lay in Court, I dreamed that I put off my
Rochet all save one steeve, and when I would have put it on again I could not
find it.

1638. Feb. 12. Tuesday night, I dreamed that K. C. was to be married to a
Ministers Widow, and that I was called up to do it: no Service-booke could be
found, and in mine own book, which I had, I could not find the order The
service-booke is lost.
for Marriage.

1639. Ianu: 24. Friday at night, I dreamed that my father, (who dyed The
Archbishops dead Father comes for him.
46. years since) came to me, and to my thinking he was as well, as ever I saw
him: he asked me what I did here, and after some speech, I asked him how long
he would stay with me, he answered, he would stay till he had me away with
him: I am not moved with dreams, yet I thought fit to remember this.

All this may now be seen written with the Archbishops own hand, in that
book of his, now in Mr. Prinns custody. And the Archbishop himself being at
White Hall in his jollity, and Ruff, about 5. years since, told the Right
Honorable the Earl of Pembrocks, and Earl of Monmouth, that when he was in
Oxford, he dreamed that he should come to the highest, and greatest preferment
in Church and State, that ever any Clergy man did, and The Arch Bishop dreams
how he should live, and what death he should dye.
that he should be in great favor, power, and authority, and make great
changes and alterations in the Church, for sundry years, but yet, after all this, he should be hanged at last. At which the said Lords falling into a great
laughter: His Majesty that now is, hearing it, came into the room and demanded
of them the cause of their mirth, that he might have a share of it: whereunto
the truly noble Earl of Pembrooke answered, that the reason of their laughter
was, at a dream which the Archbishop of Canterbury had newly told them;
Whereupon the King demanded what the dream was, to which the Earl replied,
that it was the Archbishops own dream, and he was best able to relate it to
his Majesty; upon which, the King (calling the Archbishop to him) caused him
in their presence, to tell the dream over again to the King himself.

But to return to my Cathedral news, to tell you what has followed those
observable alarums in that Cathedral. On their Candlemas day at Cathedral
Images fall.
night, 1641. Those Consecrated Images about their new Cathedral Font were all
demolished, and taken away, they knew not how, nor by whom that purification
was observed, without Candles: But a few days after, some of Images put into a
cathedral pulpit, and why.
those Idols were found in that Cathedral, in a Pulpit, where a Sermon had not
bin preached near 20. years before: But were not those Images put into that
Pulpit, to preach in that Cathedral, touching wooden Priests, and
Idol-Shepheards? but of that business, the Prelates made no dumb complaint to the
King himself, when he was last there, in his Journey with the Q(...) to Dovor:
they carried him to the Font, and showed him the lamentable condition, The
Prelates complain to the King for their Idols.
and ruin of their new consecrated Font, and where those Images had stood
about it. And indeed they could better endure the late felling of about 300.
Episcopal and Cathedral Oaks in one year, for their own gain: then they
could endure the pulling down of those 18. Idols of wood and stone: But the
truth is, the Citizens of Canterbury had first complained of them in the
rehearsed Petition, which lies heavier on their stomachs, then 3. Parish
Churches, and a Cathedral. And besides that Petition, and pulling down their
puppets: those Cathedrallists have been much crossed in their Popish, and
idolatrous designs, (the Prelates pions work in hand) when some welaffected
The godly cross the Prelates of Canterbury in their Popish designs.
Citizens of Canterbury beheld, how those Cathedral Priests bowed, and
crowched toward their Altar, although they did not serve the Priest, as he
deserved, as the Arch Prelate of St. Andrews in Scotland was served, when they
hurled creckets, and stools and sticks at him, when he first read the new
Scots Service-booke in his Pontificabilus; But they cried out aloud in the time
of the Cathedral Service, many Sabbath days; Leave your idolatry, leave your
idolatry there. And one Sabbath day, when after the Sermon was ended in that
Cathedral Quire, and the Psalm after Sermon was begun: the High Priest or
Canon went before, and the low Priest, or Petti-canon behind him, and the
Vergerer, or Usher before both: all three ducking, The Cathedral popish
progres to the Alter in Service (...)
ducking, ducking, like wilde-geese, head to rail, as they went from their
seats in the Quire, up to the High Altar, where the Priests stood until the
Organs, and Quire had ceased: and then the Altar-Priest began to read out of
the Service-booke, the Cathedral third Service, or Alter-Sermon-service: But
the people sung on still, (the Organist having casually called the first part
of the 119. Psalm:) Whereupon the Altar-Priest called the Petti-canon, a
Priested Weaver that waited on him at the Altar, him the grand Priest sent
down drom the Altar to bid the people leave A heavy stir about Altar service.
singing. The Petti-canon called out aloud, leave your singing, leave your
singing: but they sung on: then the Petti-canon called out to the Priest at the
Altar, Sir they do it for the nonce, they do it for the nonce; then one pulled
the Petti-canon by the Surplice behind, and cried out, you are a Weaver;
another cried out, leave your Idolatry: but still the people sung on: All this
time the Priest stood dumb at the Altar, with his Service-booke, in his
Surplice, Hood, and Tippet, and had lost his dinner, if he had not come down
from the Altar, and gone home without reading any more The Altar-priest like to
lose his dinner.
Altar Service at that time, and left the people singing, who when the Priest
was gone from the Altar, and the Quire risen, did all depart home quietly: and
after that time the Cathedrallists would preach no more in the Quire, but in
the Sermon-house, as before.

One of the great Canons, or Prebends, in the very act of his low congying
toward the Altar, as he went up to it, in Prayer time, was (not long since)
resaluted A huge Massif resalutes a congying Altar Priest before the Altar.
by a huge mastiffe dog, which leapt upright on him, once and again, and pawed
him, in his ducking saluting progress, and posture to the Altar, so that he
was fain to call out aloud, take away the dog, take away the dog.

At the election of Burgesses for Canterbury, upon the summons of the
Parliament, in the year 1639. The Proctors, Fiddlers, Papsters, and other
friends of the Cathedral, and Prelaticall party, at Canterbury, were for the
Archbishops Secretary to be Burgess there, who came down before the day of
election for that purpose, and prepared his foresaid friends to vote for him:
and at the day of election, he came into the Guild Hall of Canterbury, and
there produced to the Citizens, letters written to them in his behalf, The
Prelates stickle for Burgesses in Parliament of their own choosing. The Arch
Bishops Secretary no Burgess.
from his Lord and Master the Arch Bishop, and from the then Lord Keeper: and
then the Secretary made a Speech to the Citizens to choose him Burgess; in
which Oration he said, there is a picture hanging before you, of a great
Benefactor to this City, the same man was the founder of the College in Oxford
where I lived. The Citizens (heating this) cried out aloud: no pictures, no
Images, no Papists, no Archbishops Secretary, we have too many Images and
pictures in the Cathedral already: and after that they would not hear him
speak a word more, but hist him down: and presently cried up others, whom
they then chose Burgesses for that City. And a Petti canon of that Cathedral,
being voting there, for the Archbishops A Priested Cathedral Weaver votirg
with Proctots, and Fiddlers, etc. for the Archbishops Secretary to be Purges in
Parliament.
Secretary, one told him he was no Free man, and therefore could have no Vote
there: He replied, I am a Freeman, I have my coppie in my pocket; then one
said, it is true indeed, he is a Weaver, he is free of that trade: Then there
arose a loud cry amongst them, a Weaver, a Weaver, a Weaver, a Priested Weaver,
in a Canonical coat.

The Grandes of that Cathedral, about two years since, having feasted some
Malignants that came from the Downs, at Deal, where they would have seized on
the Parliaments ships: after dinner, he, having accompanied them out of Town,
in his Coach: at his return, his Coach overthrew into the Common sewer, or
broad stinking ditch, between the three Kings Tavern, A soul Prelaticall fall,
though Kings be near.
and Kings bridge, in Canterbury: the great Cathedrallist crying out, help
me, help me; The people laughing at their Land Shipwreck, and filthy pickle,
and bedaub'd white Satin gown of the Famale Cathedrallist: The people said
also, that the Prelates would have a greater fall, they hoped.

And since that, there was Cathedral news from Canterbury in print, in a
letter, written by a Master of a College, an Archdeacon, two Pretends, and
three Parsons, and yet but one man, a Canterburian Cathedrallist: which printed
news some called the Cathedral lamentation for Dagon's downfall. The news
was, that the Troopers sought with God himself in the Cathedral Quite at
Canterbury. But the truth is, that on the 26. of August, 1642. Some zealous
Troopers, after they had (by command) Cathedral Gods, Altars, Images,
Service-bookes, Prick-songbookes, Surplices.
taken the powder and ammunition out of that Malignant Cathedral, they fought
(it seems) with the Cathedral Gods, named in that printed letter: namely
Altars, Images, Service-booke, Prickesong-booke, Surplisse, and Organs; for
they hewed the Altar-ratles all to pieces, and threw their Altar ever, and
ever, and ever, down the three Altar-stops, and left it lying with the heeks
upward: they slasht some Images, Crucifixes, and Prickesong books, and one
greasy Service Book, and a ragged smock of the where of Rome, called a
Surplisse, and began to play the tune of the zealous soldier, on the Organs,
or case of whistles, which never were in tune since: But the Cathedrallists
cried out for their great Diana and ran to the Commander in chief with all
speed, who presently called off the S^uldiers, who afterward Pipes and
Cathedral prick-song keep consort.
sung Cathodrall Prick-song, as they rode over Barham-downe toward Dover, with
Prick-song leaves in their hands, and lighted their tobacco-pipes with them:
such pipes, and Cathedral Prick-song did consort well together. But after this
Cathedral Camisado, their Quire, which before had all the Pipes, both Service
and Sermon, has never since that time had once Service, or Sermon in it to
this day. There are no Cathedral Seraphims heard tossing their Quire Service
from one side of the Quire to the other, only plain Service-booke Service is
read in the Sermon-House. And they have never set up their Altar any more since
that dismal overthrow. They had removed it of themselves, not long after the
Parliament began, according to the pious Order of Parliament; but they set it
up again Altarwise that day the Sermon was preached there, before the King,
when he staid at Canterbury in his late journey with the Queen to Dover: and
so their Altar stood until those Reforming Troopers removed it with a
vengeance. The Cathedral high Altar removed with a vengeance.
And as for their Altar-trinkets, their silver Basin and Candlesticks, the
Prelates had hid them from the Troopers, but afterward sold them to a Merchant
in Canterbury, for fear they should be seized on for the public defense of
the Kingdom. But when they heard that a sack posset was eaten A Sack posset
in a consec^aetd Cathedral Basin.
out of their Cathredrall Altar-Basin, they were much offended, that a
consecrated Basin should be so profaned, and thereupon bought again their
Basin and Candlesticks, which some affirm, had tallow-candles in them while
the sack-posset was in eating. But this was but a forerunner of a more orderly
and through Reformation in that Cathedral, which (according An orderly
Reformation begun in the Cathedral o^ Canterbury.
to another pious Ordinance of Parliament for demolishing of Monuments of
Idolatry) began upon the thirteenth day of December last, that very day in
which the neck of the Hoptonians advance into Kent was broken, by that utter
defeat given the Lord Crafords whole Regiment, at Alton, by the Religious
Idols pulled down and enemy vanqushed the same day.
and Valiant Sir William Waller, which defeat given on that day, made way for
his taking of Arundel Castle, and for the absolute repulse of the enemy. Gods
providence fitted that day to begin that Deliverance, when that most idolatrous
Cathedral first began to be purged of those abominable Images of jealousy.
The Cathedral men would not execute that Ordinance themselves, they loved
their Cathedral Jezabel, the better because she was painted, which painted
Cathedral Jezabel the recited Proctours Cathedral painted Iesabell Mother of
Harlots.
Book calls Mother Church. But the worthy Major, and Recorder of Canterbury
put on that blessed work of Reformation with their speedy warrant, according
to that ORDINANCE. When the Commissioners entered upon the execution of that
Ordinance, in that Cathedral, they knew not where to begin, the Images and
Pictures were so numerous, as if that Superstitious Cathedral had been built
for no other end, but to be a stable for Idols, At last they resolved to begin
with the window on the East, of the high Altar, beyond that Sainted-Traytor,
Archbishop Beckets shrine, at which shrine to this day may be seen, how the
stones of the pavement on the sides, and ends of that shrine, were worn with
the kneeling of the Idolatrous people, which came on Pilgrimage, to offer
there, to that Pope-holy Saint. But the Commissioners knew not what pictures
were in that Eastmost window of that Cathedral and coming to it, the first
picture they found there, was of Austin the Monk, who (as is said before) was
the first Archbishop of Canterbury that ever was, and The first Archbishop
of Canterbury his Image first casually demolished.
so it casually fell out, that the Image of this Arch-Prelate of Canterbury
was the first that was demolished in that Cathedral; many window-Images or
pictures in glass were demolished that day, and many Idols of stone, thirteen
representing Christ, and his twelve Apostles, standing over the West door of
the Quire, were all hewed down, and 12. more at the North door of the Quire,
and 12. Mytred-Saints sat aloft over the West door of the Quire, which were
all cast down headlong, and The Bishops Myter breaks his neck.
some fell on their heads, and their Myters brake their necks: While this work
was in hand, in comes a Prebends wife, and pleaded for the Images there, and
jeered the Commissioners viraginously: but when she A viraginous She
Cathedrallist.
saw a picture of Christ demolished, she skreekt out, and ran to her husband,
who (after she was gone) came in, and asked for their Authority to do those
things: and being answered that there was the Ordinance of the KING and
PARLIAMENT, he replied, not of the King, but of the Parliament if you will, he
also pleaded for the Images Prelates plead for Baal.
there, and spoke in justification of his bowing toward the Altar, yea he
would maintain his bowing three times that way, because there were three
Persons in the Trinity; a poor argument for a Cathedral Doctor, he might as
well have argued, because he did give thanks for the three parishes or steeples
he enjoyed. But after he had disputed a while with the A Cathedral qualme.
Ministers, that assisted the Commissioners in that work: the grand Priest
complained for want of breath, saying he was ready to faint, and desired to be
let out: And indeed he looked very ill; it is true, he stood very near the
place where Archbishop Becket was cast over headlong; but this man had no
cause of fear, not a distasteful, or disrepective word: and was quietly let
out, as he desired. And then that work of Reformation went on; the
Commissioners fell presently to work on the great Idolatrous The grand
Idolatrous Cathedral window defaced.
window, standing on the left hand, as you go up into the Quire: for which
window (some affirm) many thousand pounds have been offered by Outlandish
Papists. In that window was now the picture of God the Father, and of Christ,
besides a large Crucifixe, and the picture of the Holy Ghost, in the form of a
Dove, and of the 12. Apostles; and in that window were seven large pictures of
the Virgin Marie, in seven several glorious appearances, as of the Angels
listing her into heaven, and the Sun, Moon, and Stars under her feet, and every
picture had an inscription under it, beginning with gaude Maria: as, gaude
Maria sponsa dei, that is, Rejoice Mary thou Spouse of God. There were in this
window, many other pictures of Popish Saints, as of St. George, etc. But their
prime Cathedral Saint-Arch-Bishop Thomas Becket, was most rarely pictured in
that window, in full proportion, with Cope, Rochet, Miter, Crosier, and all his
Pontificalibus. And in the foot of that huge window, was a title, intimating
that window to be dedicated to the Virgin Mary. In laudem and honorem
beatissimae Virginis Mariae matris dei, etc. But you have a register of the
Cathedral Idols in a late book mentioned in the recited Canterbury Petition:
In that Prelaticall book, thanks are given to the piety of these times, that
the Altar in that Cathedral was so richly adorned, The Proctors book a help
to discover demolisht Images against his Will.
there is a project for a discovery to what Saint every parish Church is
dedicated: that Church- Ales, and wakes, and parish- feasts may be better kept:
This book was a card and compass to sail by, in that Cathedral Ocean of
Images: by it many a Popish picture was discovered, and demolished. It Is sure
working by the book: But here is the wonder, that this book should be a means
to pull down Idols, which so much advances Idolatry. But as that window was
the superstitious glory of that Cathedral; as it was wholly superstitious, so
now it is more defaced then any window in that Cathedral. Whilst judgment was
executing on the Idols in that window: the Cathedrallists cried out again for
their great Diana, The Cathedrallists cry out for their great Diana.
hold your handss, holt, holt, heers Sir, etc. A Minister being then on the top
of the City ladder, near 60. steps high, with a whole pike in his hand rattling
down proud Beckets glassy bones, (others then present, would not adventer so
high) to him it was said, it is a shame for a Minister to be seen there; the
Minister replied, Sir, I count it no shame, but an honor, My Mr. whipped the
living buyers and sellers out of the Temple; these are dead Idols, which
defile the worship of God here, being the fruits and occasions of Idolatry:
Some wished he might break his neck, others said it should cost blood. But he
finished the work, and came down well, and was in very good health when this
was written. Many other Images were defaced in other windows there, several
pictures of God the Father, of Crucifixes More abhomina^le monuments of
Idolalatry.
and men praying to Crucifixes, and to the Virgin Marie, and Images lay on the
tombs, with eyes and hands lifted up, and right over them was pictured God the
Father, embracing a Crucifix, to which the Image seemed to pray. There was a
Cardinall's hat as red as blood, painted in the highest window in that
Cathedral within Bell-Harry steeple, over the Quire door, covering the
Archbishops Arms, which Hat had not so much respect showed it, as Cardinal
Wolseys hat had at Court, A Cardinals Hat.
it was not bowed too, but ratled down: There were also many huge Crosses
demolished, which stood without the Cathedral, four on Bell-Arundell Crosses
did Images, without the Cathedral, demollished.
steeple: and a great Idol of stone, which stood on the top of the roof of
that Cathedral, over the South door, under Bell-Harry steeple, was pulled down
by 100. men with a rope: in the fall it buried it self in the ground, it was
so heavy, and fell so high. This Image held a great brazen Cross in his hand:
it was the Satue of Michael the Archangel, looking straight to a lane right
over against it, in Cantrrburie, called Angell-lane. There was demolished also,
a very large stone Image of Christ, over which was the Image of the holy Ghost,
in the form of a Dove: this Idol stood right over the great Cathedral
South-gate next the Bull stake: this Image was pulled down with ropes: at first
the head began to shake and nod to and fro, a good while: at last it fell off
two hours before the body, which was rivetted to the wall with iron bars.
The Papists report it was a miracle, that the Image nodded the head to A
supposed miracle of an (...) nodding at (...) demolishers.
reprove those that pulled it down, one said then, it was a shame they should
pull it down in such a base manner. This Image (amongst the rest) was the
means of much Idolatry; men, now living, testify, that they have seen
travelers kneel to it in the street, as they entered the Cathedral, Idolatry
da(...) committed in that Cathedral.
which is continually visited by Outlandish Papists, who daily commit Idolatry
in that Cathedral; And yet how many that profess love to true Religion, and
hatred of Idolatry are now zealous for these Images, which are Monuments, and
instruments, and occasions of Idolatry, the continuance whereof has bin our
great sin, shame, and misery.

But (say some) the Windows and Monuments are precious: but we read, Deuteronomy. 13.
6. If any, (though never so near or dear unto us) move us to Idolatry, A caveat
to those ignorant and superstitious people that cry out against the defacing of
monuments of Iolatry.
we are commanded by God himself, to stone them to death, our eye must not
pity them: Must we not spare a living man, made little inferior to the Angels,
but must rend, and maul him with stones, and shall we stomach the battering
and defacing of dead Images, that are not only monuments of, but inticements to
Idolatry? shall we glamour and clamor as they, that shall lament the final
fall of Babylon, Rev. 18. 16. Alas, alas, that great City, that was clothed
in fine linen, purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones,
shall we say alas that great Cathedral, oh the goodly painted windows, oh the
golden Tabernacle work, oh the Glorious Glory cloth, oh the costly Copes,
Basins, and Candlesticks, oh the rich Hangings, oh the Archbishops consecrated
Chair; Such clamours were heard when the Abbyes were defaced, but we read,
Acts 19. 19. That they which believed, did quite abolish their superstitious
devices, how curious and costly soever, though they were worth 50000. pieces of
silver: let those that cry out against this Reformation, read these (and the
like) places of Scripture, Exodus 24. 24. Number. 33. 52. Deuteronomy. 7. 5. 1 Kings 15.
12. 2 King. 18. 4. Isa 30. 22. 1 John 5. 21. The last execution against the
Idols in that Cathedral, was done in the Cloister, diverse Crucifixes and Mytred
Saints were slattered in pieces there: St. Dunstans Image pulling the Devil by
the nose with a pair of tongs, was pulled down. Devil and all. When the
Cathedral men heard that Ordinance of Parliament, against Idolatrous The
Devil and St. Dunstan demolished.
Monuments, was to be put in execution, they covered a complete Crucifixe in
the Sernion-house windows, with thin boords, and painted them, to preserve the
Crucifix, but their juggling was found out, and the Crucifix demolisht. And as
the monuments of Idolatry are in great part taken out of that Romish
Cathedral. So that Cathedral nest of Prelaticall Hornets, is almost dispersed
and gone; God has scattered the proud. Their old Deane is dead above a year
since, and their new Dean (chosen at Oxford) dyed at Cathedral ceveat dispersed
Oxford; And a young Cathedral Doctor too, who first recanted here, and went
to Oxford and dyed lately there: and many other of those Prelars being
Incendiaries, and Delinquents, are kept in safe custody. Thus a vial is now
powered out upon this Cathedra, or seat, or Throne of the Beast, and though
they gnaw their tongues for pain, yet I do not hear that they Cathedra
signifies a seat or chiar: A Cathadrall Church is a seat-Church or a
chaire-Church: it being a seat, or, throne of a Romish-Beast: called a
Diocesan Bishop, with his Prelaticall crew.
repent them of their Prelaticall and Malignant ways, to give God the glory,
Revel. 16. 10.

And now to end (with very good Cathedral news from Canterbury) the
Honorable House of Commens has begun to settle an able and Orthodox Ministry
in that Cathedral, where 2 Sermens are now preached every Lords day, besides
the week days preaching there: light comes in there through the windows, where
the painted Images stood, and kept it out: now there is no such heterodex, and
Malignant Cathedral stuff heard there, as before this blessed Reformation, now
so happily begun there, by the care and labor of the Parliment, amidst so many
difficulties: they remove the old rubbish, and build the Temple apace, though
with the sword in one hand, and the Good Cathedral news from Canterbury.
Trowell in the other. And now the godly flock to that Cathedral again, in
such numbers, that had not the Idolatrous windows in the Sermon-house bin
demolished as they are, the numerous Cathedral auditors would be much annoyed
with extremity of heat. Thus we see the Canterburian Babel falls a pace: and
Christ-Church Cathedral in Canterbury begins to be Christ-Church indeed: as
that blessed Martyr Ridley wished (or rather prophesied) long ago, in a letter
of his, which is recorded in the book of Martyrs. Cathedrallists may be
packing, (...) Babell is fallen, (...) fallen, Alleluya.


And now least that Cathedral Abbey should prove another Lichfield, or Lincoln
Cathedrall-Close: for the enemy to fortify, and roost in: The huge Citie-like
gates of that Cathedral Corporation are all taken down and laid aside, which
was done when the Kentish Malignants began to rise against the King, Parliament
and Kingdom: So that now when an act, or Ordinance of Parliament, or the Bill
for the extirpation of Prelacy already passed both Houses of Parliament, being
signed by the King, (which God grant) shall shortly root out all Prelacy, and
Cathedral Covents, then all the Cathedral rabble at Canterbury, may (without
knocking up their Cathedral Porter) pack away with all their Cathedral Bagg
and Baggage, and Prelaticll Popish Trinkets, to Lambeth Fair.

FINIS.

